 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on  
Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
Chapter 1 
Introduction and audit framework 
Solid Waste Management 1.1 1 
Sewerage Management 1.2 3 
Organisational set-up 1.3 4 
Audit Objective 1.4 5 
Audit Criteria 1.5 5 
Scope of Audit 1.6 6 
Audit Methodology 1.7 7 
Best Practices 1.8 7 
Acknowledgement  1.9 8 
Constraints in Audit 1.10 8 
Chapter 2 
Solid Waste Management 
Introduction 2.1 9 
State policy and strategy of SWM    2.2 9 
Absence of SWM plan at ULB level 2.3 9 
Not-framing bye-laws 2.4 10 
Non-assessment of waste generated 2.5 11 
Gap Analysis not done 2.6 12 
Non-integration of the Informal Sector  2.7 14 
Framing of bye-laws prescribing criteria for levy of spot fine for 
littering 
2.8 16 
Preparation of Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Report 2.9 17 
Progress of ULBs in developing infrastructure for effective SWM 2.10 17 
Segregation of Waste 2.11 19 
Collection of Wastes 2.12 24 
Transportation 2.13 29 
Processing and treatment of MSW 2.14 31 
Disposal of Waste 2.15 36 
Disposal of Legacy Waste 2.16 41 
Information, Education and Communication activities 2.17 44 
Capacity Building 2.18 46 
Monitoring of Solid Waste activities 2.19 47 
Contract Management of SWM activities by ULBs 2.20 53 
Recommendations 2.21 66 

ii 
 
Chapter 3 
Management of Sewage 
Introduction 3.1 69 
Planning of Sewerage Network 3.2 69 
Faecal Sludge Management 3.3 78 
Monitoring and Quality Control 3.4 81 
Programme Implementation  3.5 84 
Recommendations 3.6 91 
Chapter  4 
Special waste 
Plastic Waste 4.1 93 
E-waste 4.2 107 
Construction and Demolition Waste 4.3 111 
Recommendations 4.4 117 
 
  Appendices 
Appendix 
number Title Page 
number 
Appendix 1.1 Statement showing the Regulatory framework governing the 
management of solid waste 119 
Appendix 1.2 Three-tier administrative set up of ULBs 120 
Appendix 1.3 Organisational structure of the ULBs pertinent to SWM and 
Sewerage Management 121 
Appendix 1.4 List of selected ULBs 122 
Appendix 2.1 Statement showing necessary involvement of stakeholders at 
several stages of SWM 123 
Appendix 2.2 Seven-step process of MSW management services 124 
Appendix 2.3 Target audience and the type of awareness required as per 
MSWM Manual, 2016 125 
Appendix 2.4 
Various capacity building approaches and training 
programmes, which could be adopted for different 
stakeholders 
127 
Appendix 2.5 ULB wise summary of air quality monitoring by SPCB 128 
Appendix 2.6 ULB wise summary of water quality monitoring by SPCB 129 
Appendix 3.1 Statement showing untreated urban sewage merged into the 
local water bodies 130 
Appendix 3.2 Non-functional Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant 134 
Appendix 3.3 Excess payment to contractor due to non-deployment of 
specific machinery 136 
Appendix 3.4 Excess payment due to execution of lesser thickness 140 
Appendix 3.5 Statement showing payment on account of excavated earth 141 

iii 
  Appendices 
Appendix 
number Title Page 
number 
Appendix 3.6 Non-deduction of royalty charges 142 
Appendix 3.7 Non-levy of penalty for delay 143 
Appendix 3.8 Statement showing non-recovery of cost of Hard rock 144 
Appendix 3.9 Statement showing incorrect adoption of rate for filling 145 
Appendix 3.10 Statement showing lumpsum payment and varied cost per 
MLD on construction of STPs 146 
 Glossary of Abbreviations 147 
 

 
v 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for 
the year ended 31st March 2022 has been prepared for submission 
to the Governor of Madhya Pradesh under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India, for being laid before the Legislature of the 
State. 
The Report contains significant results of Performance Audit on 
Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies, covering the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those which 
came to notice in the course of test audit.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation and assistance 
extended by the State Government, UADD, all the audited ULBs 
and MPPCB in conducting the performance audit. 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The ultimate objective of  solid waste management is to reduce the quantity of solid waste 
disposed of on land by  recovery of materials and energy from solid waste. Similarly, the 
objective of the sewerage system is to ensure that the sewage discharged by the community is 
properly collected, transported and treated to safe levels  and disposed of or  reused without 
causing any health or environmental problems.  The State Government has prepared a State  
Level Policy in the year 2017 for Waste Water Recycle and Faecal Sludge Management (FSM) 
to provide sustainable sanitation  services and protection of environment.  Considering the 
importance of the issue of management of wastes in addressing the environmental and aesthetic 
concerns of the State , a Performance Audit (PA) on the topic ‘Waste Management in U rban 
Local Bodies’ was taken up. The audit covered a period of five years from 2017 -18 to 2021-
22. The performance audit was carried out during July 2022 to February 2023 in 34 ULBs out 
of 413 ULBs and collection of relevant information from the Urban Development and Housing 
Department. The objective of this performance audit was to seek assurance about  
effectiveness of the process of planning, collection, transportation and disposal of solid 
waste, sewage & special wastes and adequacy of the existing monitoring system.  
Chapter 1 
Local authorities were required to prepare a solid waste management plan as per the State 
policy after making a realistic assessment of different kinds of waste generated in the city to 
determine various options that could be adopted for the collection, processing and disposal of 
waste. However, 15 test checked ULBs had not assessed the quantity of various type of waste 
generated during the year 2017 -22 and 15 test checked ULBs adopted per capita estimate of 
waste generation without conducting any survey during the audit period 2017-22. We observed 
that this method had low level of reliability. No study had been conducted so far to access the 
quantity and composition of waste generated in the ULBs. Further, underestimation of 
quantum of waste generated may lead to construction of facilities with inadequate capacities 
to meet performance standards. No gap analysis of infrastructures and financial sustainability 
of operation and maintenance was done by 23 ULBs. Integration of informal sector would not 
only help in reducing the burden on ULBs but also contribute to the social and economic 
upliftment of the informal sector. The PA revealed that action for integration of informal sector 
(i.e., rag pickers and kabadiwalas) for Solid Waste Management was not taken by the ULBs 
(except ULB Indore, where persons involved in informal sector were engaged in various stages 
of SWM). Eighty-eight per cent (30 ULBs) of the test checked ULBs had identified site for 
setting up solid waste processing facilities  out of which 28 ULBs have acquired the site and 
41 per cent (14 ULBs) have started enforcing the waste generators to segregate waste at source. 
Door-to-door collection of waste was ensured by all the 34 test-checked ULBs, 56 per cent of 
the test checked ULBs had set up waste processing facilities , only 15 per cent of the test 
checked ULBs had either bio -remediated or capped their  old and abandoned dumpsites . 
Segregation of waste at source ensures that the waste is less contaminated and can be collected 
and transported for further processing. The practice of enforcing waste generators to segregate 
waste though followed by 15 ULBs, the purpose of segregation could not be achieved due to 
Executive Summary 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
viii 
dumping the mixed  waste at landfill site . Physical verification of the Material Recovery 
Facilities revealed that most of these were not operational, leading to dumping of waste at 
landfill. The claim of al l the test checked ULBs to have achieved 100 per cent collection of 
wastes generated under their jurisdiction was not verifiable as records to substantiate the claim 
were not maintained. Further, absence of realistic data of waste generated and weighbridges in 
the test checked ULBs, raised doubts on the veracity of the claim. In 29 ULBs sanitary landfills 
had not yet been constructed and 24 ULBs confirmed that they had not developed a buffer zone 
of no development around their solid waste processing and disposal facility. In 23 test-checked 
ULBs, substantial legacy waste is yet to be disposed of and only 12 ULBs out of these have 
prepared DPR for disposal of legacy waste.  
Only three meetings of the State Level Advisory Body constituted in October 2017 had  been 
conducted since the date of its constitution against the required nine meetings during the last 
five years. No action has been initiated by M adhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board against 
the ULBs operating their waste processing facilities without obtaining the statutory 
‘Authorization/ Consent to Operate’.  
Some ULBs had engaged private parties for the activities under Solid Waste Management. 
Audit observed inadequate contract management which led to  issues such as non-payment of 
royalty by the concessionaire amounting to  ₹ 7.11 crore (ULB Indore ₹ 4.63 crore and ULB 
Jabalpur ₹ 2.48 crore); irregular payment of tipping fee (ULB Satna) amounting to ₹ 4.76 crore 
to a contractor; unfruitful expenditure (ULB Bhopal) of ₹ 1.51 crore due to termination of 
agreement for which exorbitant payment of ₹ 2.9 9 crore was made to supervising agency ; 
irregular  payment (ULB Bhopal) of ₹ 2.64 crore  (₹ 0.83 crore + ₹  1.81 crore)  without 
augmentation of the processing capacity of plant ; and two works , already covered  under the 
scope of existing work of contract was given to other agencies (at ULB Gwalior) for which 
additional payment of ₹ 5.74 crore (₹ 4.49 crore + ₹ 1.25 crore) were made to these agencies. 
Chapter 2 
Urban Local Bodies are also responsible for management of sewage. Government of India 
(GoI) had given directions to states and cities for adoption of National Urban Sanitation Policy, 
2008. The Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) has 
published a Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems that was introduced in 
November 2013 to achieve the objectives as envisaged in the National Urban Sanitation Policy. 
To avoid any conflicts in developing the city in future, City Sanitation Plan is required to be 
prepared. Audit noted that 32 ULBs had not prepared City Sanitation Plan. City Sanitation 
Task Force was also not constituted in the 32 out of 34 tests checked ULBs. The planning of 
sewerage system was deficient as DPRs relating to sewerage systems were prepared by 11 
ULBs without considering the sewage generated by the institutions like commercial/ public 
institutions, industries and commercial buildings . Further, works of 11 sewerage networks in 
nine ULBs were completed by the contractors after a delay of eight to 44 months . Sewage 
treatment facility was not available in 22 ULBs, partially functional or was under trial run in 
the six ULBs, at Operation & Maintenance stage in three ULBs and construction works were 
ongoing at three ULBs.  Due to non -availability of sewage treatment facility , approximately 
2,09,726.13 ML of sewage merged into the water bodies through various drains during the 

 Executive Summary 
ix 
years 2017-22. Audit observed that sewerage network and Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs) 
have been constructed in nine ULBs. The ULBs had not made it mandatory for all households 
to obtain household sewage connections as required under CPHEEO manual. Thus, only 36.84 
per cent (1,42,746 households out of 3,87,437) households in seven ULBs were covered by the 
sewage network, defeating the very purpose of constructing sewerage system. The ULBs were 
to frame its own policy for a sanitation service at the micro level within the framework of the 
guidelines established in the macro policy formulated by the State Government. However, there 
was lack of proper strategy for safe disposal of septage as 26 ULBs had not prepared F aecal 
Sludge and Sewage Management Policy (FSSM). Also, Faecal Sludge Treatment Plants 
(FSTP) were functional in only 10 ULBs and F aecal Sludge Treatment Plants constructed by 
other 14 ULBs were not functional . Further, 33 ULBs had neither imparted training for 
cleaning of septage nor, prepared a Manual of Practices to be followed for cleaning of septage. 
In six out of nine ULBs where sewerage network system was available, no complaint redressal 
mechanism was in place. Joint physical verification of 10 STPs of three ULBs revealed that 
Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring Systems to monitor the parameters like  Potential of 
Hydrogen (pH), Total Suspended Solids (TSS) , Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) , 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)  was not installed which was against the instruction given 
by M adhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board. Audit o bserved instances of inadmissible 
payment of GST of ₹ 15.45 crore (ULB Morena) to contractors; excess payment of ₹ 4.88 crore 
(ULB Bhind ₹ 4.15 crore, ULB Gwalior ₹ 0.55 crore and ULB Morena ₹ 0.18 crore) due to 
short carry forward of amount paid in the previous running account bill; excess payment of ₹ 
14.39 crore (in eight ULBs) due to non-deduction of the prescribed amount ; excess payment 
of ₹ 6.35 crore (ULB Gwalior) to a contractor without executing the item as per specifications; 
excess payment of ₹ 5.73 crore (ULB Morena) for incidental work.  
 Chapter 3 
Special waste requires special handling and disposal due to its quantity, concentration, physical 
and chemical characteristics, or biological properties etc., to protect human health, environment 
and also to exploit its potential for recycling . Audit observed that 26 ULBs had not prepared 
any bye -laws for plastic waste management  though required  under the Plastic Waste 
Management Rules 2016, consequently these wastes were being dumped in landfill sites along 
with other wastes. The joint physical verification of landfill revealed stray cattle feeding on 
such wastes, which could be a health hazard for them. The ULBs did not have processing and 
recycling facilities for disposal of plastic waste nor had agreement with the recyclers for 
recycling and disposal of plastic waste.  Further, 29 ULBs did not implement the system for 
registration of the shopkeepers and street vendors using plastic carry b ags. Thus, a control on 
use of plastic bags was absent. In 11 ULBs, instructions for prohibiting storage, distribution, 
sale and utilisation of plastic carry bags of less than 50 microns in thickness  were not issued. 
Though some ULBs had completely banned single-use plastic items like plates, glass, plastic 
sticks used in balloons, ice -cream and candy etc., strict implementation of the ban was not 
observed as these banned items were easily available for sale in the jurisdiction of these ULBs. 
Moreover, only three ULBs had made some efforts to encourage the use of unrecyclable plastic 
waste for road construction works after complying with the stipulated standards and 28 ULBs 
were yet to act in this regard . This resulted  in use of miniscule quantity of plastic waste , 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
x 
generated during the year 2018-22, in road works. Further, 22 ULBs did not have any policy/ 
plan for segregation, collection and channelization of E-waste to its authorised dismantler or 
recycler. In its absence, ULBs could not implement the e-waste Rules in an effective manner, 
consequently these wastes were either dumped at landfill site or huge quantity of such wastes 
were occupying spaces in office buildings of ULBs. 
Micro plastics can have serious threat to human, animal and environment. The study conducted 
by M/s AMPRI in two water bodies and two filtration plants in Bhopal and one water body and 
one filtration plant of Indore revealed that the water bodies are highly contaminated with micro-
plastics. The treated water supplied from the water treatment plan ts of both these cities also 
contained traces of micro -plastics and could be hazardous for human health in long run. The 
study justifies the need for proper collection, segregation, transportation and scientific disposal 
of plastic waste.  
Government of India has formulated Construction and Demolition (C&D) Waste Rules, 2016 
for disposal of C&D wastes like building materials, debris, rubble  etc., generated during  the 
process of construction, re -modelling, repair and demolition of civil structures etc., by 
individuals or organisation or authorities.  Audit observed that the State had not prepared any 
policy in this regard.  Only 16 ULBs had issued notification to make waste generators 
responsible for collection and segregation of C&D waste generated and to ensure that other 
waste (such as solid waste) does not get mixed with this waste and is stored and disposed 
separately. Nineteen ULBs had not notified the charges for collection, transportation, 
processing and disposal of C&D waste under their jurisdiction, 11 ULBs though notified the 
C&D charges, did not provide information on the amount of such charges realised by them on 
this account. Further, 24 ULBs had not identified the site required for establishing collection 
and processing facilities for C&D waste despite elapse of the specified period for its 
establishment. 
Chapter 4 
Recommendations 
I  Solid Waste Management 
• The ULBs may ensure availability of baseline data of wastes generated in their 
jurisdiction to properly assess the quantity of waste generated and prepare action plans 
for its adequate management.  
(Recommendation 1) 
• The State Government may ensure segregation of waste at source by devising a system 
for incentivising waste generators and collectors for segregation of waste and should 
prevent mixing of segregated waste during various stages of Solid Waste Management. 
(Recommendation 2) 
 
• ULBs may ensure collection and segregation of wastes from all Resident Welfare 
Associations, Market Associations, Gated Communities, Institutions, Hotels and 

 Executive Summary 
xi 
Restaurants and as far as possible process bio -degradable waste through composting 
or bio-methanation within the premises itself. 
(Recommendation 3) 
 
• ULBs may put in place a robust system for monitoring of vehicles engaged in door-to-
door collection and transportation of wastes to ensure that all areas under their 
jurisdiction are covered.  
(Recommendation 4) 
 
• ULBs may ensure creation of all facilities essential for effective and safe operation of 
the processing plants and the landfill sites.   
(Recommendation 5) 
 
• GoMP may strengthen monitoring of waste management activities through State level 
Advisory Body by ensuring its regular meetings and prescribing corrective actions in 
cases of irregularities noticed.  
(Recommendation 6) 
 
• MPPCB may put in place an adequate monitoring system to ensure compliance of 
provisions of Solid Waste Management Rules in all the ULBs. 
(Recommendation 7) 
 
• The Government may examine and fix responsibility in the cases where excess/ 
irregular payments were made to contractors.  
(Recommendation 8) 
II  Management of Sewage 
• ULBs may prepare City Sanitation Plan in line with CPHEEO manual and ensure that 
all Municipal Corporation areas and all households are connected to the sewerage 
network. 
(Recommendation 9) 
• GoMP may consider putting in place an institutional mechanism for ensuring 
coordination of all line departments in implementing sewage systems. 
(Recommendation 10) 
• ULBs may ensure management of sewage accordingly and optimise the reuse of treated 
water and converting sludge into manure. 
(Recommendation 11) 
 
•  MPPCB may invariably ensure that OCEMS is installed at all STPs to ensure quality 
of sewage treatment. 
(Recommendation 12) 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
xii 
• Government may examine and fix responsibility for making excess/ irregular payments 
in contracts for works under sewerage projects and put in place a system to ensure 
adherence to the conditions of Contract and as per ISSR rates, before making final 
payments. 
(Recommendation 13) 
III  Special waste 
•  Department may put in place an effective mechanism to ensure prohibition on the usage 
 of single use/ banned plastic products to prevent contamination of water bodies due to 
 micro plastics. 
(Recommendation 14) 
•  The ULBs may establish the plastic waste processing and disposal facilities as per the 
 PWM Rules. 
(Recommendation 15) 
•  The MPPCB may ensure that all plastic waste processing industries had obtained 
 necessary authorisation for their functioning and are adhering to the prescribed 
 standards. 
(Recommendation 16) 
•  The ULBs of the state may enforce the E -Waste Rules by forming effective policy/ 
 plan/ action plan and establish the adequate facilities for proper segregation, collection 
 and channelization of e-waste as per E-Waste Rules. 
(Recommendation 17) 
•  The MPPCB may evolve an effective monitoring mechanism to monitor the compliance 
 of provisions of E -Waste Rules by all the industries engaged directly or indirectly in 
 generation and disposal of e-waste.  
(Recommendation 18) 
•  The State Government may enforce the PWM Rules and  C&D Waste Management 
 Rules in an efficient manner and monitor its implementation process effectively by 
 adequately strengthening the monitoring mechanism. The Government may expedite 
 approval of policy for management of C&D waste. 
(Recommendation 19) 
 
 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
AND AUDIT 
FRAMEWORK 

 
 
 
 

 
 Chapter 1 
Introduction and audit framework 
  
As per Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, the solid waste includes solid or semi -solid 
domestic waste, sanitary waste, commercial waste, institutional waste, catering and market  
waste and other non-residential wastes, street sweepings, silt removed or collected from the 
surface drains, horticulture waste, agriculture and dairy waste, treated bio -medical waste  
excluding industrial waste, bio-medical waste and e-waste, battery waste, radio-active waste 
generated in the area under the local authorities. 
The management of municipal solid waste is one of the main functions of all Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) in the country. All ULBs are required to meticulously plan, implement and 
monitor all systems of urban service delivery especially that of municipal solid waste.  The 
objective of solid waste management is to reduce the quantity of solid waste disposed of  on 
land by  recovery of materials and energy from solid waste. The process of Solid Waste 
Management is depicted below: 
Chart 1.1: Showing the process of Solid Waste Management 
 
(Source: Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2016) 
Urban India is facing an ever-increasing challenge of providing for the incremental 
infrastructural needs of a growing urban population. With this increasing population, municipal 
solid waste management in the country has emerged as a challenge not only because of the 
environmental and aesthetic concerns, but also because of the huge  quantities of municipal 
solid waste (MSW) generated every day. The status of generated,  collected, treated, and 
disposed of solid waste in India during the year 2017-18 to 2020-21 is given in Table 1.1: 
 
 
1.1 Solid Waste Management 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
2 
Table 1.1: Status of generated, collected, treated, and disposed of solid waste in India 
during 2017-18 to 2020-21 
(in Ton Per Day) 
S.N. Year Solid 
waste 
generated 
Solid 
waste 
collected 
Percentage of 
collected 
waste w.r.t. 
waste 
generated 
Solid 
waste 
treated 
Percentage 
of treated 
waste w.r.t. 
waste 
generated 
Landfilled solid 
waste 
1 2017-18 54,417 45,082 82.85 15,387 28.28 22,905 
2 2018-19 1,52,077 1,49,749 98.47 55,760 36.67 50,161 
3 2019-20 1,50,847 1,46,054 96.82 70,973 47.05 40,863 
4 2020-21 1,60,039 1,52,749 95.44 79,956 49.96 29,427 
(Source: Reports of Central Pollution Control Board on SWM) 
The percentage of waste collection, w.r.t. waste generation, had reduced from 98.47 to 95.44 
during the year 2018 -19 to 2020 -21, whereas the percentage of treated waste, w.r.t. waste 
generated, had increased from 36.67 to 49.96 during the same period. Further, as per the Report 
of CPCB for the year 2020-21, the per capita solid waste generation in country had  decreased 
marginally from 132.78 gm. per day (during 2016-17) to 119.07 gm. per day (during 2020-21). 
To improve solid waste management in India, it is important to adopt a multi-pronged approach 
that includes waste segregation at the source; waste collection and transportation;  waste 
processing and disposal; public education and awareness. 
Several initiatives and programs such as the Swachh Bharat Mission (Clean India Mission) have 
been implemented by Government of India (GoI) to improve solid waste management in the 
country. 
(a) Regulatory framework for governing management of solid waste 
The various waste management rules which were framed during 2016 under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, provide a legal framework for disposal and management of waste. 
Guidelines for preparation of comprehensive plan for the prevention,  control or abatement of 
pollution by using scientific waste management have been issued  by GoI from time to time. 
The regulatory framework governing the management of different types of  waste is indicated 
in Appendix 1.1. 
(b) Municipal solid waste in Madhya Pradesh 
The details of solid waste generated, collected, treated and dumped in landfill in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh during the years from 2017-18 to 2021-22 are given in the following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Chapter 1: Introduction and audit framework 
3 
Table 1.2: Generation, collection/transportation1, treatment and landfilling of solid 
waste in Madhya Pradesh during 2017-18 to 2021-22 
(in Ton Per Day) 
S.N. Year Solid 
waste 
generated 
Solid waste 
collected/ 
transported 
Percentage 
of collected 
waste w.r.t. 
waste 
generated 
Solid 
waste 
treated 
Percentage 
of treated 
waste w.r.t. 
waste 
generated 
Solid 
waste 
landfilled 
1 2017-18 7,212 6,537 90.64 2,272.5 31.51 4,264.5 
2 2018-19 8,000 7,500 93.75 6,100 76.25 1,400 
3 2019-20 7,980 7,193 90.14 6,431 80.59 762 
4 2020-21 8,022 7,235.5 90.20 6,472 80.68 763.5 
5 2021-22 7,115 6,132 86.18 6,059 85.16 76.10 
(Source: Reports of Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board (MPPCB) 
It is evident from the above table that during 2017-18 to 2020 -21, the percentage of waste  
collection in the State was stagnant (between 90.14 per cent in 2019-20 and 93.75 per cent in 
2018-19) but it decreased to 86.18 per cent in the year 2021 -22. However, there was an  
increasing trend in the treatment of waste with respect to the total waste generated during  the 
year 2017-18 to 2021-22. However, the target of 100 per cent collection and treatment of waste 
was still to be  achieved. Further, it was also noticed that the waste collected was either not 
segregated or segregated but was ultimately dumped together in the same landfill site except 
Indore and Satna  ULBs (refer Paragraph 2.11 .2). This made the process of segregation a 
wasteful exercise. Also, there was non-availability of weighbridge at landfill site as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.12.2, as a result Audit cannot vouch for the accuracy of the data in Table 1.2. 
 
Sewerage and sewage treatment is a part of public health and sanitation and according to the 
Indian Constitution, the subject falls within the purview of the State List. Since this is an 
essential service, the responsibility for providing the services lies within the public domain. 
Sewage is a type of wastewater that is produced by a community of people. It is characterized 
by volume or rate of flow, physical condition,  chemical and toxic constituents, and its 
bacteriological status. The status of sewage generation,    installed treatment capacity and actual 
treatment in India (as on 30 June 2020) is depicted in Chart 1.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  As per the reply of the Department (17th August 2023) the data of waste collected and transported is same.  
However, the figures intimated were different from data of the MPPCB. Therefore, Audit has considered the 
quantity of collection as shown by MPPCB as transported quantity. 
1.2 Sewerage Management 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
4 
Chart 1.2: The Sewage Generation, Installed Treatment Capacity and Actual 
Treatment in India 
 
(Source: Report of CPCB on National Inventory of Sewerage Treatment Plant, March 2021) 
The objective of the sewerage system is to ensure that the sewage discharged by the community 
is properly collected, transported and treated to safe levels, and disposed of or  reused without 
causing any health or environmental problems. Insufficient infrastructure leads to discharge of 
partially treated and untreated sewage into nearby water bodies of cities  and towns.  
For this purpose, GoMP prepared a State Level Policy (2017) for Waste Water Recycle and 
Faecal Sludge Management (FSM) to ensure improved health status of urban population,  
especially the poor and under privileged, through the provision of sustainable sanitation  
services and protection of environment. 
 
The Urban Development and Housing Department (UDHD), headed by the Principal Secretary, 
is the nodal department for the governance of all ULBs. The Urban Administration and 
Development Directorate (UADD) functions as an interface between the State Government 
and ULBs, which functions directly under UDHD. The UADD is headed by a Commissioner, 
who is assisted by nine Joint Directors at division level.  Commissioner of  each Municipal 
Corporation and Chief Municipal Officer of each Municipal Council/ Nagar      Parishad are the 
administrative heads of the ULBs and are responsible for solid waste and sewage management. 
The MPPCB is engaged in implementation of the various rules under Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986, in the State. The MPPCB is the  principal agency for monitoring and  controlling 
waste management. Chart 1.3 depicts the role of various authorities at all levels in planning, 
execution and monitoring of  MSW management. 
 
 
 
 
1.3 Organisational set-up 

 Chapter 1: Introduction and audit framework 
5 
Chart 1.3: Role of authorities in planning, execution and monitoring at various levels 
 
The three-tier administrative set up of ULBs is given in Appendix 1.2 and the organisational 
structure of the ULBs pertinent to SWM and Sewerage Management is given in Appendix 1.3. 
 
The objectives of the performance audit were to ascertain whether: 
• The management of solid waste was effective with respect to its planning, collection, 
segregation, storage, transportation, disposal and social inclusion of informal waste 
workers, solid waste management projects established for disposal of solid waste were 
effective and economic and an adequate monitoring system existed for monitoring of 
solid waste activities and other social and environmental aspects; 
• The management of sewerage was effective and adequate with respect to its planning, 
collection, transportation and treatment and a suitable monitoring mechanism existed 
for monitoring the sewerage system; 
• The management of special waste viz. plastic waste, e-waste and construction and 
demolition waste was proper and effective with respect to their planning, collection, 
transportation and their disposal as per the regulatory framework and various 
environmental norms/ parameters. 
 
The criteria for evaluating performance of SWM were derived mainly from: 
• Manual of Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2016 issued by GoI in April 2016 and 
The Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016; 
• Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956; and Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961; 
• Madhya Pradesh Financial Rules, Madhya Pradesh Works Department (WD) Manual; 
• Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) 
Manual, Guidelines of AMRUT Mission; 
• GoMP State Level Policy, 2017 for waste water recycle and reuse and Faecal Sludge 
1.4 Audit Objective 
1.5 Audit Criteria 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
6 
and Septage Management (FSSM) Policy; 
• Budget and Administrative Report of UADD; 
• Survey Reports and DPRs, Integrated Standard Schedule of Rates (ISSR); 
• Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
• Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016; 
• Performance parameters set out in Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) Guidelines; 
• The Environment (Protection) Act and Rules, 1986; 
• Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; 
• National Urban Sanitation Policy, 2008; and 
• Instructions, guidelines, policies issued by Central Pollution Control Board, State 
Pollution Control Board, Government of India/ State Government on waste 
management (Solid and Sewage wastes) from time to time. 
 
The Performance Audit of “Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies” was carried out during 
July 2022 to February 2023 covering a period of five years  from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22. It 
involved examination of the records relating to Solid Waste,  Plastic Waste, Construction and 
Demolition Waste (C&D Waste), e-waste and Sewerage in the 34 selected ULBs (Table 1.3).  
The records related to the above were also examined in offices of Urban Administration and 
Development Directorate (UADD), Madhya Pradesh  Pollution Control Board (MPPCB). The 
list of selected ULBs is given in Appendix 1.4. 
Table 1.3: Number of ULBs selected for test-check 
S.N. Category of ULBs Number of ULBs in the 
state 
Number of ULBs test 
checked 
1 Municipal Corporation 16 8 
2 Municipal Council 99 11 
3 Nagar Parishad 298 15 
Total 413 34 
(Source: UADD Administrative Report for the year 2021-22) 
The ULBs selected for audit have been depicted in Map 1.1:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.6 Scope of Audit 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

 Chapter 1: Introduction and audit framework 
7 
Map 1.1: Showing selection of ULBs for Test-Check  
 
The ULBs were selected for test-check through simple random sampling method (Division- 
wise2) using IDEA application software. 
 
An Entry Conference was held on 3 October 2022 with the Principal Secretary, Urban  
Development and Housing Department (UDHD) to explain the audit methodology, scope,  
objectives and criteria. The audit methodology involved document analysis, responses to audit 
queries, joint physical verifications (JPV) with municipal staff and collection of photographic 
evidence. Testing of water bodies in two ULBs Bhopal and Indore was also  done to observe 
the presence of micro plastics in them. The Exit Conference with the concerned Department 
was held in May 2023, wherein the major Audit findings and other issues were discussed. The 
views of the Departments are suitably incorporated in the Report.  
 
The Madhya Pradesh state was awarded with the title of India’s Cleanest State under the 
Swachh Survekshan 2022, and 30 cities of the State ha ve found place in the list of top 100 
cleanest cities in the country, under the category of cities having more than one lakh population. 
 
2  From each tier of ULBs (Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council and Nagar Parishad) available in each 
Division, samples are drawn in such a manner that equal representation to each Division is ensured. One 
Municipal Corporation, 10 per cent (approx.) of its Municipal Councils and five per cent (approx.) of its Nagar 
Parishads from each Division, were selected in such a manner that the coverage of population of sampled units 
is not less than 25 per cent of entire urban population. Total urban population of ULBs covered under audit 
was 85.01 lakh whereas the total urban population of the State was 1.92 crore as per the Census, 2011.  
1.7 Audit Methodology 
1.8  Best Practices 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
8 
Indore city of the State has bagged six consecutive Cleanest City titles, under this category for 
the years 2017 to 2022. 
Further, the Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC), is serving as an inspiration for other cities 
in the country, after establishment (February 2022) of the Asia’s first Bio -CNG plant of 550 
TPD capacity at Indore on public private partnership (PPP) model, un der the Centre’s  
‘waste-to-wealth’ concept and generating 17,500 kg bio-CNG gas per day.  
 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State Government, 
UADD, all the audited ULBs and MPPCB in conducting the performance audit. 
 
Absence of complete set of records and non-providing of information called for in Audit in the 
offices of the UADD, Bhopal and ULBs of Bhopal, Gwalior, Vidisha and Bhind (commented 
at various places in the report) hampered audit analysis. Hence, the findings of the joint 
physical inspections documented in the form of photographs formed the basis for highlighting 
the impact of insufficient solid waste management. The findings have also been substantiated 
with references to study conducted by Barkatullah University, Bhopal, and Media Reports.  
1.9 Acknowledgement 
1.10 Constraints in Audit 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT 

 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 
Solid Waste Management  
 
Improper management of solid waste could have harmful effects on both life and ecosystems. 
Therefore, it is important that solid wastes are properly managed and disposed.  
The framework for administration and management of Solid Waste Management (SWM) in 
India is broadly divided into three tiers - Central, State and Local Bodies. Other stakeholders 
that play a crucial role are households, businesses, industries, informal sector, non -
governmental organizations (NGOs), community -based organizations (CBOs), self -help 
groups (SHGs), etc. Involvement of all these stakeholders is necessary at several stages of 
SWM, as shown under Appendix 2.1. 
Audit observed deficiencies in planning, policy making and other issues like assessment, 
collection, segregation, disposal, monitoring and contract management as discussed in 
paragraphs below. 
 
Rule 11 of SWM Rules , 2016 stipulated that Secretary -in-charge, Urban Developm ent 
Department shall prepare a S tate policy and SWM strategy for the state in consultation with 
stakeholders including representatives of waste pickers, self -help and similar groups working 
in the field of waste management consistent with these rules, National Policy on SWM and 
National Urban Sanitation Policy of the Ministry of Urban Development, in a period not later 
than one year from the date of notification of these Rules i.e. 08 April 2016.  
The Urban Development and Housing Department of the State Government has notified  
“Solid Waste Management Policy-2018” on 05 September 2018 under Rule 11(1)(a) of SWM 
Rules, 2016. Thus, there was a delay of one year in notifying the State Policy, indicating laxity 
on the issue of solid waste management in the State  and risk of unsystematic solid waste 
management during the time. 
Urban Development and Housing Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh (Government) 
accepted (August 2023) the fact and stated that the delay was attributable mainly to the time 
consumed in preparing the State SWM policy and its approval by the State Cabinet. 
 
Rule 15(a) of SWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that the local authorities shall prepare a SWM plan 
as per state policy and strategy on SWM within six months from the date of notification of State 
Policy and strategy and submit a copy to respective departments of State Government or agency 
authorised by the State Government. Section 1.3 of Municipal Solid Waste Management 
(MSWM) Manual 2016 stipulated that planning for the MSW management services should 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 State policy and strategy of SWM  
2.3 Absence of SWM plan at ULB level 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
10 
follow a seven-step process (Appendix 2.2), to ensure compliance with SWM Rules, 2016 and 
other guidelines issued by the Government of India and respective state governments.  
The MSWM plan is a long-term strategy spanning 20-25 years, with multiple short-term plans 
(five years) incorporated into it. These short -term plans will be assessed every 2 -3 years to 
ensure their effectiveness.  The National Green Tribunal (NGT) had also reiterated (orders in 
case number 606/2018), that action plan for solid waste management should be prepared by 
each ULB till 31 October 2018 and implement it by 31 December 2019. 
State Government had notified the SWM policy in September 2018, thus , the ULBs had to 
prepare and submit their SWM plan, within six months ( up to March 2019). Audit observed 
that 251 out of 34 ULBs had not prepared any long term and short term MSWM Plan up to July 
2022 to deal with the MSW issues even after elapse of more than three years from the date of 
notification of the State Policy.  
Further, three ULBs2 had intimated that SWM plan had been prepared by them. However, copy 
of the plan prepared by them was not provided, so the date of its preparation and the period of 
delay if any in preparing the plan could not be ascertained. Five ULBs3 had not provided any 
reply to the audit enquiry. Only one ULB , Piplanarayanwar indicated that they ha d prepared 
the SWM plan in the year 2012-13 much before the implementation of the SWM Rules, 2016.  
Non preparation of SWM Plan resulted in ineffective implementation of SWM Rules in these 
ULBs.  
Government stated (August 2023) in reply that SWM action plan of 378 ULBs has been 
published in August 2017 which was further revised in October 2020.  
However, no documents were furnished in support of the reply . Further, the Department had 
sought the stated action plan from all the heads of ULBs by March 2023.  
 
Rule 15 (e) of SWM Rules, 2016 stipulated that ULBs shall frame bye-laws incorporating the 
provisions of these Rules within one year from the date of notification of these Rules (i.e. by 
April 2017) and ensuring timely implementation. 
Audit noticed that 234 out of 34 ULBs had not framed any bye-laws incorporating the provisions 
of these Rules. Further, seven ULBs 5 intimated that they ha d prepared the SWM bye-laws, 
however, except ULB Indore, no other ULB could provide copy of the bye-laws or the date of its 
preparation, for verification. Four ULBs6 have not provided any reply to the audit enquiry. 
 
1  Akodia, Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, 
Shahdol, and Uchehara.  
2  Dhar, Shivpuri and Vidisha. 
3  Barghat, Bhind, Bhopal, Kukshi and Satna. 
4  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanaraynwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, 
Shahdol and Uchehara. 
5  Dhar, Indore, Maihar, Mandsaur, Pichhore, Shivpuri and Vidisha. 
6  Bhind, Bhopal, Kukshi and Satna. 
2.4 Not framing bye-laws 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
11 
Non-framing of bye-laws can lead to improper disposal of waste and inadequate management 
of waste, leading to the accumulation of waste in public spaces, creating unsanitary conditions 
and aesthetic problems. Waste management could also become a haphazard and disorganized 
process, leading to inefficiencies and waste of resources. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that as per data submitted by the ULBs on the 
Swachhatam portal of MoHUA all test checked 34 ULBs have prepared bye -laws related to 
provisions of SWM rules and furnished documents in support of the reply. 
The reply is not acceptable as the bye laws have not been adopted by the ULBs (except ULB 
Indore) and the supporting document provided to Audit pertains to collection of user charges 
for waste management and notification for levy of penalty  /spot fines for non -compliance of 
SWM Rules 2016. Further, the reply did not indicate Government approval/ gazette publication 
of the Byelaws. 
 
A reliable assessment of different kinds of waste generated in the city limit is essential for 
planning and effective implementation of SWM. The quantity and composition of MSW 
generated in the ULB determines the collection, processing, and disposal options that could be 
adopted. They are dependent on the population, demographic details, principal activities in the 
city or town, income levels, and lifestyle of the community. 
Para 1.4.3.3 of MSWM Manual 2016 stipulated that as an essential requirement, each ULB 
should assess the quantity and composition of waste generated to plan for and design MSWM 
systems effectively. Thus , the quantity of waste generated in the city needs to be assessed 
realistically to establish adequacy of existing systems and to plan for augmentation of treatment 
and disposal facilities.  
Para 1.4.3.3.2 of MSWM, Manual stipulated that multiple samples at multiple locations need 
to be taken to determine waste composition as daily, seasonal and temporal fluctuations are 
usually observed within a ULB. Further,  para 1.4.5.1 states that estimating future waste 
generation quantities and composition is also critical for developing MSWM plan. Thus, factors 
like (1) Future population forecasts; (2) anticipated lifestyle changes and (3) changes in socio-
economic profile of the ULB were also to be considered. 
Audit noticed that 157 out of 34 ULBs had not assessed the quantity of various type of waste 
generated during the years 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, and 15 ULBs8 had assessed the quantity of 
waste. Four ULBs9 have not provided reply to the audit enquiry.  However, almost all of these 
ULBs (except ULB Indore) were making the assessment on per capita waste generation basis10, 
instead of making a realistic assessment based  on actual weighment. The estimate of waste 
 
7  Akodia, Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Jabalpur, Kareli , Malanpur , Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, 
Orchha, Pichhore, Sagar, and Shahdol. 
8  Barghat, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Khirkiya, Maihar, Mandsaur, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan Ratlam, 
Sanchi, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
9  Bhind, Bhopal, Kukshi and Satna. 
10  The Handbook on Service Level Benchmarks issued by Ministry of Urban Development Government of India 
gave the highest level of priority for waste generation estimates based on quarterly surveys/samples of 
statistically significant and representative number of households and establishments and gave lowest level of 
reliability on waste generation estimates based on empirical standards of per capita waste generation based on 
the size of the city. 
2.5  Non-assessment of waste generated 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
12 
generation on the basis of per capita assessment may lead to overestimation or underestimation 
of the actual amount of waste generated, resulting in inappropriate planning like selection of 
landfill site and inadequate allocation of resources for waste management. Thus, there was no 
baseline data available in the ULBs to properly assess the quantity of waste generated. 
Government stated (August 2023) that all the ULBs follow SBM guidelines for assessment of 
per capita waste generation and are regularly or fortnightly doing the weighing of all their door-
to-door collection vehicles at weighbridge either owned by them or privately owned and  are 
maintaining the weighing receipts properly. Weighing receipts of ULBs Jabalpur, Damoh, 
Ratlam and Satna were attached as evidence. 
The reply is not acceptable as the ULBs had not followed a systematic procedure of estimation 
of average amount of waste generated based on the provisions as stated in the para 1.4.3.3.2 of 
MSWM Manual. Further, under estimation of quantum of waste generat ed may lead to 
construction of facilities with inadequate capacity to meet performance standards. 
 
Para 1.3 of MSWM 2016 provides that the municipal authority should carry out a critical 
assessment of the current status of SWM in the city as per the SWM Rules, 2016. The 
assessment should clearly identify deficiencies or gaps that need to be bridged to meet legal 
obligations.  
To carry out gap analysis of equipment, vehicles, manpower and the operation and maintenance 
requirements for putting in place a proper solid waste management system the Government of 
India, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) issued (November 2017) a template 
for Gap Analysis of Municipal Solid Waste Management Infrastructure and Services in ULBs. 
The template included gap analysis of infrastructures related to door-to-door garbage 
collection, storage and transportation, processing and disposal, manpower, IEC strategy and 
financial sustainability of operation and maintenance.  
Only four ULBs (Dhar, Gwalior, Mandsaur and Ratlam) had intimated that they have conducted 
the required gap analysis, but no documents were submitted for verification of their claim. On 
the other hand, 23 ULBs11 had intimated that they have not conducted gap analysis of 
infrastructures and financial sustainability of operation and maintenance. Additionally, seven 
ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal, Indore, Kukshi, Sagar, Satna and Shivpuri) had not provided any reply 
to the audit enquiry. Thus, conducting the gap analysis by the ULBs could not be ascertained. 
Conducting gap analysis is crucial for ULBs to identify the gaps in their infrastructure and 
financial sustainability. This would enable ULBs to identify the gaps and take appropriate 
measures to address them. It would also help in improving the overall service delivery and 
operational efficiency of ULBs.  
Government intimated that the State ha s conducted a gap analysis of the availability of basic 
infrastructures like vehicles, processing plants, machineries, etc. in the ULBs with the help of 
 
11  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, 
Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.6  Gap Analysis not done 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
13 
the administrative set up of the Department and provided the necessary design, drawings, 
specifications, and funds for the procurement of the same. 
However, no records pertaining to the conduct of gap analysis were furnished to Audit. Further, 
the test-checked 23 ULBs replied to Audit that no gap analysis of infrastructures and financial 
sustainability of operation and maintenance were conducted by them so far.  
Audit also observed the following: 
 
Rule 15(f) of SWM Rules, 2016 provides that ULB shall prescribe a user fee as deemed 
appropriate to cover the cost of providing solid waste services like collection, transportation, 
processing and disposal. The fee could be collected from the waste generators by ULBs on their 
own or through any authorised agency.  
The test checked ULBs could not provide the information as required regarding levy of user 
fee, due to which an analysis of the demand and revenue realised on this account could not be 
ascertained. However, the status of levy of user fee for SWM services a s provided by the test 
checked ULBs were as given below: 
• Out of 15 test checked Nagar Parishads (NPs) only NP Niwari collected user fee for SWM 
during the years 2017 -22. Seven NPs 12 had not levied any user fee for SWM till March 
2022. Three NPs (Khirkiya, Piplanarayanwar and Sanchi) were collecting it from the years 
2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively. Further three NPs (Barghat, Mandleshwar and 
Uchehara) have started collecting user fee from the year 2021 -22. One NP (Kukshi) did 
not provide reply to the audit enquiry. 
• Out of 11 test checked Municipal Councils (MCls) only four MCls13 collected user fee for 
SWM during the years 2017-22. MC Shivpuri intimated that no separate user fee for SWM 
was being collected, it is included in Samekit Kar. Two MCls (Balaghat and Vidisha) had 
not levied any user fee for SWM till March 2022. Two MCls (Maihar and Shahdol) were 
collecting user fee from 2020 -21 and  MC Damoh from  2021-22. MCl Bhind did not 
provide reply to audit enquiry. 
• All the test checked Municipal Corporations (MCs) except Gwalior collected user fee for 
SWM during the years 2017-22. While MC, Gwalior was collecting it from the year 2019-
20. 
 
The 14th Finance Commission recommended the Basic Grant and Performance Grant to ULBs 
as a percentage of divisible pool 14 account. On the recommendation of 14 th Finance 
 
12  Akodia, Beohari, Malanpur, Nalkheda, Orchha, Pichhore and Polaykalan. 
13  Betul, Dhar, Kareli and Mandsour. 
14  The net tax revenue of the State is known as divisible fund. The net tax revenue is arrived at after deducting 
the share of State Government in Central taxes, 10 per cent amount as a collection charge and assigned revenue. 
2.6.1   Levy and collection of user fee for solid waste management 
2.6.2  Non-receipt of Performance Grant under 14th Finance Commission 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
14 
Commission, the state Government fixed the following conditions for distribution of 
Performance Grant among ULBs: 
1. The Municipality will have to submit audited accounts that relate s to the year, not earlier 
than two years preceding the year, in which the Municipality seeks to claim the 
Performance Grant. 
2. The Municipality will have to show an increase in its own revenue over the preceding year 
as reflected in the audited accounts. 
3. The Municipality must ensure and publish the Service Level Benchmarks to basic urban 
services each year for the period of the award and make it publicly available. 
Audit noticed that 298 out of 378 ULBs and 329 out of 378 ULBs had qualified for receiving 
Performance Grant respectively in the year 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 but the eligible amount of 
grant ₹ 602.55 crores15 was not received till the year 2021 -22 and the ULBs were deprived of 
availing the said grant. 
The above para was also included in the Performance Audit of Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India’s report, for the year 2022, on the subject “Implementation of 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh”  and the said grant had still not been 
released by the Government of India. 
 
As per Rule 11(c) and 11(m) of SWM Rules, 2016 the State Government had to prepare the 
State policies and strategies duly acknowledging the role of the informal sector (includes 
kabadiwalas or scrap dealers/ rag pickers/ waste pickers) in SWM activities and start a scheme 
for registration of these waste pickers and waste dealers. Further , Rule 15 (c) of the SWM 
Rules, 2016 stipulated that the ULBs  shall establish a system to recognise organisations of 
waste pickers or informal waste collectors and establish a system for their integration to 
facilitate their participation in solid waste management including door -to-door collection of 
waste. 
State Government in its State Policy for Solid Waste Management 2018 also mandated for 
starting a scheme of registration of rag pickers in the State and ensuring livelihood of the 
workers engaged in formal and informal sectors and facilitate their working in good  
environment.  
Information regarding initiation of any scheme for registration of rag pickers in the State, was 
called for from UADD, however reply to the same has not been provided. In its absence, Audit 
could not conclude whether the State Government had made any scheme for ensuring livelihood 
of the workers engaged in informal sectors and facilitate their working in good environment.  
During physical inspection of M aterial Recovery Facility (MRF)  operated by Indore 
Municipal Corporation (IMC), Audit noticed that waste pickers were deployed by the firm 
for sorting of reusable materials from dry wastes brought to site. Further, as per information 
provided by MPPCB approx imately 443 waste pickers ha d been involved in the MRF 
 
15  ₹ 602.55 crore (₹ 260.91 crore for 2018-19 and ₹ 341.64 crore for 2019-20). 
2.7  Non-integration of the Informal Sector  

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
15 
operated by M/s NEPRA under Public-Private Partnership model. These rag pickers were 
working as contractual workers with M/s NEPRA and were getting benefits of government 
schemes. A large chunk of other rag pickers was also deployed for the work of garden 
composting for treating garden waste or household waste into compost, or working as Safai 
Mitra for sweeping roads/ pavements, collecting garbage and also at transfer stations. They 
are employed with a fixed term contract and getting salary into their account.  
Image 2.1: Waste pickers engaged in automated MRF of IMC 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
This is a positive step towards empowering the informal sector and integrating them into the 
formal waste management system. 
However, 20 ULBs16 (except nine ULBs Betul, Dhar, Indore, Maihar, Mandsaur, Ratlam, 
Sagar, Shivpuri and Vidisha) stated that they did not have any scheme of registration of rag 
pickers. Five ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Kukshi and Satna) were yet to provide related 
information.  
Non-involvement of rag pickers/ informal waste collectors ( informal sector) in the primary 
(door-to-door) collection of waste by these ULBs resulted in non -compliance of provisions of 
the SWM Rules, 2016 and the solid waste management process could not be optimised.  
It is recommended that these ULBs also take similar steps as taken by IMC to engage waste 
pickers in solid waste management and provide them with better working conditions and fair 
wages. This will not only help in reducing the burden on ULBs but also contribute to the social 
and economic upliftment of the informal sector. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the State had prepared Jyotirmay Scheme in 2018 with 
the aim to identify the unauthorised rag pickers available in the survey and engage them in 
further segregation of waste in different categories at material recovery facilities by forming 
SHGs and providing them with PPE kits and identity cards. This scheme is implemented by all 
the ULBs of the State. 
The reply is not acceptable as except the nine ULBs stated above, none of the ULBs had any 
scheme of registration of rag pickers, and only ULB Indore had actually engaged these rag 
pickers for activities under solid waste management. 
 
 
16  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, and Uchehara.  


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
16 
 
Rule 15 (zf) of SWM Rules, 2016 provides that it is the duty of the local body to frame bye -
laws and prescribe criteria for levying of spot fine for persons who litters or fails to comply 
with the provisions of these Rules and delegate powers to officers or local bodies to levy spot 
fines as per the bye laws framed. 
It was noticed that GoMP had issued gazette notification (28 September 2020) prescribing 
various fines to be levied on spot for violation of the SWM Rules, 2016, after a lapse of more 
than four years from the date of issue of SWM Rules, 2016. 
The test checked ULBs had not framed bye-laws of criteria for levy of spot fine for littering in 
accordance to Rule 15 (zf) of SWM Rules 2016. However, 25 test-checked ULBs 17 had 
intimated that they have issued notification for levy of spot fines in newspapers, however bye- 
laws has not been framed by the test checked ULBs. Only seven of the 25 ULBs as detailed in 
Table 2.1 intimated that they had recovered an amount of ₹ 2.16 crore as spot fine, during last 
five year, i.e., 2017-18 to 2021-22.  
Table 2.1: Showing details of amount recovered as spot fine by the test checked ULBs 
S.N. Name of ULB Amount recovered during five years (in ₹) 
1 Niwari 200 
2 Betul 89,050 
3 Damoh 64,900 
4 Ratlam 39,38,321 
5 Jabalpur 1,60,04,927 
6 Sagar 14,57,650 
7 Shivpuri 90,000 
Total 2,16,45,048 
(Source: Information provided by respective ULBs) 
Out of 2 5 ULBs where notification was stated to have been issued , 18 ULBs18 could not 
intimate the amount of spot fines recovered by them, despite publication of notification in this 
regard. 
Five test-checked ULBs19 have intimated that they had not framed any bye-laws for levying of 
spot fines for littering or failure to abide by the SWM Rules, 2016. Four ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal, 
Kukshi and Satna) did not provide any reply to the audit enquiry.  Non-issue of notification or 
inaction of the ULBs in levy of spot fines despite publication of notification, failed to curb the 
citizens from littering and abiding with the SWM Rules, 2016.  
Government replied (August 2023) that ULBs had already initiated the process of notifying 
charges for spot fines and indicated its intent to issue directives to those ULBs that had not yet 
 
17  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Khirkiya, Maihar, Mandleshwar, 
Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol, 
Shivpuri and Vidisha. 
18  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Khirkiya, Maihar, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena,  
Nalkheda, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Sanchi, Shahdol and Vidisha. 
19  Beohari, Kareli, Malanpur, Polaykalan and Uchehara. 
2.8   Framing of Bye-laws prescribing criteria for levy of spot fine for littering  

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
17 
provided data on the spot fines collected by them over the past five years, to provide the same. 
It was also mentioned that four20 ULBs have collected spot fines. 
 
Guidelines issued by Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in December 2013 (Notified 
again by MoEF in March 2020) has classified all MSW projects under B1 category and had to 
obtain prior Environment Clearance from State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
(SEIAA).  
Five ULBs (Dhar, Pichhore, Sagar, Sanchi and Shivpuri) intimated that they have prepared EIA 
report, without providing evidence for verifying the same. Further, 24 ULBs21 intimated that 
they have neither prepared EIA Report nor obtained any EIA Clearance from SEIAA for the 
land fill site and the facilities created at landfill site. ULB Indore intimated that preparation of 
EIA was not required as the sites of MSW projects are 60 years old. Four ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal, 
Kukshi and Satna) did not offer any reply to the audit observation. 
Non preparation of EIA reports by these 24 ULBs indicate that these ULBs had not made any 
effort for assessing the risks from Municipal Solid Waste to human health and environment in 
their jurisdiction, prior to the commencement of the MSWM activities. The reply of ULB 
Indore is not acceptable as all MSWM projects were classified under B1 category and thus had 
to obtain prior environment clearance from SEIAA before setting it up. Thus, the environmental 
impact of the MSWM projects was not rolled out by most of the ULBs. 
Government stated (August 2023) that a plan to construct 45 clustered landfills and appointing 
a consultant at State level is under consideration. This consultant would assist ULBs in the 
preparation of EIA reports for these 45 clustered landfill sites. Consequently, individual ULBs 
would not be required to prepare their own EIA reports. Additionally, it was mentioned that 
instructions would be issued to ULB Indore to expedite the process of obtaining the 
environment clearance for SEIAA.  
 
Rule 22 of the SWM Rules, 2016 stipulated that necessary infrastructure for implementation of 
these Rules shall be created by the local bodies and other concerned authorities, as the case 
may be, on their own directly or by engaging agencies within the specified timeframe. Hence, 
the ULBs were required to identify the infrastructures required for implementation of Solid 
Waste Management, and also prepare an action plan for timely completion of necessary 
infrastructure as per the requirement of the SWM Rules, 2016.  
The progress made by the test-checked ULBs in creation of infrastructures for SWM has been 
shown in Table 2.2. 
 
 
20  ULBs- Bhopal ₹ 235.38 lakh, Polaykalan ₹ 0.23 lakh, Satna ₹ 15.15 lakh and Ucheh ara ₹ 3,300. 
21  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Shahdol, 
Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.9 Preparation of Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Report 
2.10  Progress of ULBs in developing infrastructure for effective SWM 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
18 
Table 2.2: Showing the progress made by test-checked ULBs in creation of SWM 
infrastructures 
S. 
N. 
Activity Time limit 
from the date 
of notification 
of rules 
ULBs 
achieving the 
requirement 
ULBs yet to 
achieve the 
requirement 
1 Identification of site for setting up solid waste 
processing facilities 
1 year 30 3 ULB22 (reply of 
ULB Bhopal 
awaited) 
2 Procurement of site  2 years 28 5 (reply of ULB 
Bhopal awaited) 
3 Enforcing segregation of waste at source 2 years 14 12 (reply of 8 ULBs 
awaited) 
4 Ensuring door-to-door collection 2 years 34 0 
5 Ensuring separate storage, collection and 
transportation of C onstruction and Demolition 
waste 
2 years 19 11 (reply of 4 ULBs 
awaited) 
6 Setting up solid waste processing facilities for 
ULBs having population 1 ,00,000 or more/ 
below 1,00,000 
2/3 years 19 12 (reply of 3 ULBs 
awaited) 
7 Setting up common or standalone sanitary 
landfill by ULBs having five lakh or more 
population (four ULBs – Bhopal, Indore, 
Gwalior and Jabalpur, under the criteria) 
3 years 1 2 (reply of ULB 
Bhopal awaited) 
 
8 
Setting up common or regional sanitary landfill 
by ULBs having population below five lakh 
(remaining 30 ULBs under the criteria) 
3 years 4 21 (reply of 5 ULBs 
awaited)  
9 Bioremediation or capping of old and 
abandoned dump sites 
5 years 5 23 (reply of 6 ULBs 
awaited) 
The Table 2.2 above provides information on the progress made by ULBs in various activities 
related to solid waste management. Thirty (88 per cent) of the test checked ULBs had identified 
site for setting up solid waste processing facilities. Out of these 30 ULBs, 28 had acquired the 
site. Thus, the Audit could ascertain about availability of landfill site in  28 out of the selected 
34 ULBs. Fourteen (41 per cent) of the test -checked ULBs ha d started enforcing the waste 
generators to segregate waste at source. A ll the test-checked ULBs had ensured door-to-door 
collection of waste. Fifty-Six per cent of the test-checked 34 ULBs had set up waste processing 
facilities. Only 15 per cent of the test checked 34 ULBs had stated that they had set up common 
or standalone sanitary landfill. Similarly, only 15 per cent of the test checked ULBs had stated 
that old and abandoned dumpsites under them had been either bio-remediated or capped.  
Thus, it is evident that while progress had been made in some areas of solid waste management, 
there is still significant work to be done in others. The ULBs that ha d not yet achieved the 
requirements for each activity need to take necessary steps to ensure proper solid waste 
management in their respective areas.  
Government in its reply stated (August 2023) that as per the Swachhatam portal’s data all the 
test checked ULBs have achieved the activities listed under serial numbers 1 to 5 in the table 
2.2. It was also stated that the variation against the activity under serial number 2 of table may 
be attributed to delays in transfer of land ownership title to some ULBs. Against activity under 
 
22  The ULB Pichhore was yet to identify the site for setting of solid waste processing facilities. The ULB Satna 
was part of Rewa MSW cluster and the ULB Jabalpur had set up waste to energy plant, due to which 
requirement of site did not exist. 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
19 
serial number 3 it was clarified that all ULBs had enforced segregation of waste at source and 
acknowledged that the percentage of waste segregation at source may be lower in some ULBs. 
In case of activity number 8, the Government stated that, as per the State strategy of preparing 
clustered landfills, these 30 ULBs are planned to be covered under 13 proposed clustered 
landfills.  
Audit is of the view that delays in transfer of land ownership title to ULBs to establish landfills 
would contribute to unscientific and non -sustainable disposal of waste. Additionally, the 
proposed State strategy of preparing clustered landfills needs to be closely monitored for its 
successful execution. 
 
The SWM Rules, 2016 defines segregation as sorting and separate storage of various 
components of solid waste namely biodegradable wastes including agriculture and dairy waste, 
non-biodegradable wastes including recyclable waste, non -recyclable combustible waste, 
sanitary waste and no n-recyclable inert waste, domestic hazardous wastes, and construction 
and demolition wastes. 
Segregating waste at source ensures that waste is less contaminated and can be collected and 
transported for further processing. Segregation of waste also optimises waste processing and 
treatment technologies. It results in high proportion of segregated material that could be reused 
and recycled, leading to less consumption of virgin material.  
The SWM Rules, 2016 mandated the implementation of waste segregation within two years of 
their introduction.  
The deficiencies observed in the process of segregation are discussed in paragraphs below. 
 
Rule 4 (a) of the SWM Rules, 2016 stipulated that every waste generator shall segregate and 
store the waste generated by them in three separate streams namely bio -degradable, non -
biodegradable and domestic hazardous wastes in suitable bins and handover these to authorised 
waste pickers or waste collectors as per the direction or notification by the local authorities 
from time to time. Waste collectors were entrusted with the responsibility of not only collecting 
waste, but also ensuring that the waste they collect is segregated properly. According to Section 
2.2.1 of MSWM Manual 2016, ULBs are required to give the highest priority to waste 
segregation at source.  
Thirteen test checked  ULBs23 stated that they had neither provided guidelines nor made 
arrangement for waste segregation at source by waste generators or waste collectors during the 
collection of waste. Eighteen test checked ULBs24 intimated that instructions regarding waste 
segregation had been issued to waste generators.  
 
23  Akodia, Barghat Beohari, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Niwari, Orchha, Polaykalan 
and Sagar. 
24  Balaghat, Betul, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Maihar, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Pichhore, 
Piplanarayanwar, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
2.11 Segregation of Waste 
2.11.1 Guidelines/ instructions for source segregation 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
20 
Government stated that the State has been sharing guidelines, instructions, and IEC materials 
like street play scripts, mike announcement scripts, banner/  poster designs, slogans , etc. to 
ULBs during the last five years. Government admitted that the level of source segregation is 
not that high in all the ULBs and stated that the State is taking steps to increase the level of 
segregation in the ULBs. 
Audit is of the view that the level of source segregation needs to be improved in a time bound 
manner at ground level, for facilitating proper segregation at source.  
 
Rule 22 of SWM rules, 2016 provides a time limit of two years from the date of notification of 
the rules, to ULBs for enforcing waste generators to practice segregation of biodegradable, 
recyclable, combustible, sanitary waste, domestic hazardous and inert solid wastes at source.  
• Thirteen25 out of 34 test checked ULBs intimated that they have not enforced waste 
generators to practice segregation of waste at source. All these ULBs (except ULB, Sagar 
and ULB, Jabalpur where unsegregated wastes were being taken directly to waste 
processing facilities) were dumping wastes in their landfill site.  
• Fifteen26 ULBs had intimated that they are enforcing waste generators to practice 
segregation of wastes at source. Audit , however, observed that in nine 27 out of these 15 
ULBs segregated wastes were being dumped  together in the landfill sites of these ULBs, 
defeating the very purpose of segregation. Of the remaining six ULBs, ULB Dhar intimated 
that they are following the concept of zero landfill, however dumping of wastes w as also 
observed in this ULB. In three ULBs Khirkiya, Mandleshwar and Mandsaur, wastes were 
also found dumped. ULB Satna was a part of Rewa cluster as such wastes were being 
transported to the project site at Rewa. Proper segregation of wastes and its processing was 
observed in ULB Indore only. Images 2.2 to 2.9 depicts dumping of wastes by the ULBs. 
• The remaining six28 ULBs did not offer any information on the issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  Akodia, Damoh, Jabalpur, Malanpur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, 
Sagar, Sanchi, and Vidisha. 
26 Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Khirkiya, Maihar, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Ratlam, 
Satna, Shahdol and Uchehara. 
27  Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Gwalior, Maihar, Ratlam, Shahdol and Uchehara. 
28  Bhind, Bhopal, Kareli, Kukshi, Pichhore and Shivpuri. 
2.11.2 Failure of ULBs to enforce segregation of wastes by waste generators 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
21 
Images 2.2 to 2.9: Wastes found dumped at landfill sites 
 
Image 2.2: Waste dumped at ULB, Ratlam 
 
Image 2.3:Waste dumped at landfill site at ULB, 
Dhar 
Image 2.4: Unsegregated waste dumped at 
landfill site at ULB, Betul 
Image 2.5: Unsegregated waste being dumped at 
landfill site at ULB, Balaghat 
Image 2.6: Waste found dumped at landfill site at 
ULB, Mandleshwar 
Image 2.7: Waste found dumped at landfill site at 
ULB, Khirkiya 
Image 2.8: Waste found dumped at landfill site at 
ULB, Mandsaur 
Image 2.9: Waste found dumped at landfill site at 
ULB, Uchehara 
(Photo: Audit Team) 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
22 
Government stated that penalties were being levied and given wide publicity through 
newspapers, social media and other means of communication, to enforce waste generators to 
practice segregation of waste at source.  
Audit is of the view that the segregation at source needs to be enforced at ground level, for 
effective waste management. 
 
Material recovery begins at the household level where recyclable materials such as newspapers, 
cardboard, plastics, bottles, etc. are separated from waste and sold to the kabadi system (scrap 
dealers or haulers) or local recyclers. Any items that cannot be sold to the kabadi system are 
discarded and becomes part of MSW M. In cases where source segregation is absent or 
deficient, it is essential to ensure segregation of waste before it reaches the processing / landfill 
site.  
As per clause 15(h) of the SWM Rules, 2016, it is the duty and responsibility of local authorities 
to set up MRFs with sufficient space for sorting of recyclable materials, to enable informal or 
authorised waste pickers and waste collectors to separate recyclables from the waste and 
provide easy access to waste pickers and recyclers for collection of segregated recyclable waste 
such as paper, plastic, metal, glass, textile from the source of generation or Material Recovery 
Facilities (MRFs).  
Audit observed that 20 ULBs had constructed MRFs , but physical verification revealed that 
these were not in operation  (Images 2.10 to 2.13). Eleven ULBs29 out of these intimated that 
expenditure of ₹ 96.65 lakh was incurred on construction of these MRFs, and remaining ULBs 
could not provide the expenditure incurred on its construction. In nine ULBs 30, MRFs were in 
operation. ULB Morena did not have MRF, and three ULBs ( Sagar, Satna and Jabalpur) had 
adopted other methods of disposal. ULB Bhopal did not provide reply to the audit enquiry.  
Images 2.10 to 2.13: MRFs lying un-operated 
Image 2.10: Unoperated MRF at ULB Orchha Image 2.11: Unoperated MRF at ULB Betul 
 
 
29  Akodia, Barghat, Betul, Bhind, Kareli, Kukshi, Malanpur, Orchha, Polaykalan, Sanchi and Shahdol.  
30  Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Khirkiya, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Ratlam and Shivpuri.  
2.11.3  Operational challenges in Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) created 
for waste segregation 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
23 
Image 2.12: Unoperated MRF at ULB Polaykalan 
 Image 2.13: Unoperated MRF at ULB Akodia 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Due to non -operation of MRFs , the wastes collected were being dumped at landfill sites as 
indicated in Paragraph 2.11.2.  
Government replied (August 2023) that in most of the ULBs, MRFs are not maintained properly 
due to lack of manpower and space availability to store the segregated waste properly, and due 
to this reason, these MRFs are non -operational or un -operated. Government also stated that 
MRF at Betul is fully operational and an agency has been engaged to run it. 
The reply does not provide any assurance regarding the scope of utilisation of the MRF for the 
purpose envisaged. Further, during physical verification (September 2022), MRF at Betul was 
found un-operational. 
 
As per Para 2.2.2 of CPHEEO MSW Manual , 2016, it is recommended that ULB staff hold 
regular meetings with representatives of Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs), market 
associations, NGOs, SHGs, and other stakeholders until the community fully adopts the 
practice of segregation of wastes. 
However, during audit, it was found that out of the 34 test checked ULBs, 19 ULBs31 did not 
hold such meetings with stakeholders, and four ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal, Indore and Satna) did 
not provide the required information. 11 ULBs32 intimated that the meetings had been organised 
during the five years , but details thereof were not provided for verification . The failure to 
conduct meetings resulted in lack of community participation in waste segregation by the 
ULBs.  
Government stated (August 2023) that Department is putting its best effort for community 
participation and supporting ULBs to hold meetings with representatives of RWAs, market 
associations, etc. for community participation in waste segregation . It further  stated that 
campaigns like Swa-Sahayta Samuh Swachhta Abhiyan (Door-to-door segregation campaign), 
Swachh toilet campaign, Swachhata Sewa Pakhwada were organised for this purpose. Online 
 
31  Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Morena, Nalkheda, 
Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi and Shahdol.  
32  Akodia, Barghat, Dhar, Maihar, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Ratlam, Sagar, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.11.4 Lack of community participation in waste segregation due to non -
conduct of meetings 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
24 
meetings were conducted at ULB level with NGOs, RWAs  and SHGs from time to time for 
best practices of segregation of waste.  
The reply is not convincing as 19 test checked ULBs replied to Audit that no such meetings 
with stakeholders were held.  
 
According to Rule 4(4) of the SWM Rules, 2016 any event or gathering of more than one 
hundred persons at an unlicensed place must be intimated to the local body.  
However, during audit it was found that out of the 34 test checked ULBs, 2 7 ULBs33 did not 
receive any application from organisers of such events. Further , three ULBs (Damoh, 
Mandleshwar and Ratlam) had received application s for such events but monitoring of 
segregation of wastes was being done by two ULBs (Damoh and Mandleshwar) . Four ULBs 
(Bhind, Bhopal, Indore and Satna) did not provide the required information. Additionally, the 
ULBs did not have information about events organised at unlicensed places within their 
jurisdictional area. This lack of information prevented the ULBs f rom properly monitoring 
whether organisers were segregating and handing over the wastes generated at these events to 
waste collectors.  
The SWM Rules, 2016 defines segregation as sorting and separate storage of various 
components of solid waste namely biodegradable wastes including agriculture and dairy waste, 
non-biodegradable wastes including recyclable waste, non -recyclable combustible waste, 
sanitary waste and non -recyclable inert waste, domestic hazardous wastes, and construction 
and demolition wastes. Segregation of wastes was to be done within two years of the 
introduction of SWM rules. 
Audit noticed instances of non -compliance with various provisions of SWM rules relating to 
segregation of waste such as non -framing of guidelines, non-issue of instructions for 
segregation of waste at source, failure of ULBs to enforce segregation of waste-by-waste 
generators, operational challenges in MRFs set up for segregation of waste, lack of community 
participation in waste segregation and lack of monitoring for waste segregation at unlicensed 
events.  
Due to these reasons 100 per cent segregation of waste was not ensured by the test-checked 
ULBs (except ULB Indore), even after elapse of almost six years of introduction of the SWM 
Rules. Consequently, the ULBs were dumping unsegregated waste at landfill sites as shown in 
Images 2.2 to 2.9 and 4.1 to 4.4. 
 
Para 2.3.2 of MSWM Manual, 2016 stipulated that collection of segregated municipal waste is 
an essential step in MSWM. Inefficient waste collection services have an impact on public 
health and aesthetics of towns and cities. Collection of wet, dry and domestic hazardous waste 
 
33  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Dhar, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, 
Malanpur, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar, 
Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.11.5  Lack of monitoring for waste segregation at unlicensed places 
2.12 Collection of Wastes 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
25 
separately ensures maximum recovery of recyclables. It also enhances the potential of cost -
effective treatment of such wastes which can then easily meet the minimum quality criteria 
defined for different products, e.g., production of compost from pure organic waste.  
Waste collection service is divided into primary and secondary collection.  Primary collection 
refers to the process of collecting, lifting and removal of segregated solid waste from source of 
its generation like households, shops, offices, markets, hotels, institutions and other residential 
or non-residential premises and taking the waste to a storage depot or transfer station or directly 
to the disposal site. Secondary collection includes picking up waste from community bins, 
waste storage depots, or transfer stations and transporting it to waste processing sites or to the 
final disposal site.  
Audit scrutinised the efficacy of ULBs in waste collection and found out deficiencies like 
absence of weighbridges, inadequate collection of waste from households and resident welfare 
associations, non-issue of instructions to sweepers not to burn leaves,  lack of personal 
protection equipment kits for workers, etc, as discussed below: 
 
The Handbook of Service Level Benchmarks (SLBs) issued by GoI gave least level of priority 
to waste generation estimates based on per capita waste generation based on the population of 
the ULB. The quantum of waste generated and collected in the State during the period 2017 -
18 to 2021-22 is shown in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: The quantity of waste generated and collected in the State (in tons per day) 
S.N. Period Waste Generated Wastes Collected Collection Percentage 
1 2017-18 7,212 6,537 90.64 
2 2018-19 8,000 7,500 93.75 
3 2019-20 7,980 7,193 90.14 
4 2020-21 8,022 7,235.50 90.20 
5 2021-22 7,115 6,132 86.18 
Total  38,329 34,597.5 90.26 
(Source: Reports of MPPCB) 
From Table 2.3, it can be seen that the percentage of waste collected in the State, ranges from 
86.18 per cent to 93.75 per cent over the five-year period. The highest percentage was in 2018-
19 when 93.75 per cent of waste generated was collected, while the lowest percentage was in 
2021-22 when only 86.18 per cent  of waste generated was collected. Although all the test 
checked ULBs claimed to have collected 100 per cent  of wastes generated, this statement 
cannot be verified as the ULBs did not have any records to substantiate the claim. Additionally, 
as mentioned in the following paragraph, the ULBs did not have a weighbridge to measure the 
quantity of waste generated and collected, further casting doubt on the veracity of the claim. 
  
According to Para 1.4.3.3.1 of the MSWM Manual, 2016, it is necessary to quantify the waste 
generated from households, markets, and other commercial establishments and institutions. 
Furthermore, all waste collected from the city should be weighed at weighbridges located at 
transfer stations or en-route to processing and disposal facilities. 
2.12.1 Status of waste collection in the state 
2.12.2 Absence of weighbridge 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
26 
However, during the audit, it was found that weighbridges were not installed in 2 334 out of 34 
test-checked ULBs. The weighbridge installed at ULB Betul was found un -operational during 
physical verification of site. Only seven ULBs 35 had weighbridges in operation. Information 
about availability of weighbridges from three ULBs (Bhopal, Gwalior and Satna) was awaited. 
On physical verification of transfer station (Govindpura Transfer Station, Bhopal), and MRFs 
at Bhanpur and Adampur at Bhop al, Audit observed that facilities  for weighing the capsules 
used for transporting wastes from transfer stations to trenching ground was not available. 
Further, the data of weighbridge installed at Adampur Chawni MRF, Bhopal was being deleted 
after recording the entries in an excel sheet. Weighment entries were also found made manually 
at the MRF site and sample check of  manual entries with the data in the excel sheet  revealed 
differences in the quantity of wastes. Thus, the reliability on the data entered in the excel sheet 
could not be ensured. Since, payment to the contractor for processing of wastes is made on the 
basis of quantity of waste received /recorded at MRF, preserving of weighbridge data  is 
mandatory.  
The absence of weighbridges for weighing of wastes collected in a majority of the test checked 
ULBs is a matter of concern. Without proper quantification, it is difficult to assess the efficiency 
and effectiveness of waste management practices in these ULBs. This also raises questions 
about the accuracy of the ULBs’ claims of collecting hundred per cent of the waste generated. 
It is imperative that ULBs prioritize the installation of weighbridges at transfer stations or en -
route to processing and disposal facilities to ensure accurate measurement  and monitoring of 
the waste collected.  
Government stated that most of the test checked ULBs do not have weighbridges ; installation 
and maintenance of weighbridge is very costly since these ULBs ha ve less population and 
quantity of waste generation is less. It was also stated that the Department has appointed 
division wise consultants for the preparation of Solid Waste Management DPRs (Detailed 
Project Report) for each ULB and the work is in progress.  
Audit while agreeing with the statement of the Government w ith respect to the  ULBs having 
less population, is of the opinion that a foolproof system for ascertaining and recording the data 
of waste particularly where it forms basis for payment needs to be strictly ensured. 
 
Rule 15 (b) of SWM Rules, 2016 stipulated that ULBs were required to make arrangement for 
DTDC of segregated solid waste from all households including slums and informal settlements, 
commercial, institutional and other non-residential premises.  
Status of DTDC facility in the ULBs of the state during the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 is 
shown in Table 2.4. 
 
 
34  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, 
Shivpuri and Vidisha.  
35  Dhar, Indore, Khirkiya, Mandsaur, Ratlam, Sagar and Uchehara.  
2.12.3 Door-to-Door Collection (DTDC) of waste 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
27 
Table 2.4: Statement showing the status of DTDC facility in the ULBs in the State 
S.N. Year Total no. of 
ULBs 
No. of ULBs covered under 
DTDC 
Percentage of ULBs covered 
under DTDC 
1 2017-18 378 274 72.49 
2 2018-19 378 364 96.30 
3 2019-20 378 372 98.41 
4 2020-21 378 372 98.41 
5 2021-22 406 406 100.00 
(Source: Reports of MPPCB) 
The above Table 2.4 shows the percentage of ULBs in the State that are covered under door-
to-door Collection (DTDC) of waste for the years 2017 -18 to 2021-22. The data reveals that 
the percentage of ULBs covered under DTDC has been steadily increasing over the years. In 
the year 2017-18, only 72.4 9 per cent of ULBs had DTDC, whereas in the year 2021 -22, all 
406 ULBs have implemented DTDC. This indicates a positive trend towards better waste 
management practices in the State  as DTDC is an effective way to ensure proper waste 
collection from households and commercial establishments.  
 
According to Rule 4 (6,7 and 8) of the SWM Rules 2016, Resident Welfare Associations, 
Market Associations, Gated Communities, Institutions, Hotels and Restaurants are required to 
ensure segregation of waste at source within a year of notification of this Rule. This should be 
done in partnership with the local body and  should include facilitating the collection of 
segregated waste in separate streams. Bio-degradable waste shall be processed, treated and 
disposed of through composting or bio-methanation within the premises as far as possible. The 
residual waste should be given to the waste collectors.  
However, test check revealed that compliance with Rule 4 was not ensured by 14 test checked 
ULBs36 out of 34 ULBs. Three ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal and Satna) were yet to furnish a reply to 
the audit enquiry. 
Government stated (August 2023) that in most of the test checked ULBs , Resident Welfare 
Associations are not available as population of these ULBs are very less and there are not much 
gated society in these ULBs. Hence the provision of RWA need not be complied. 
Audit is of the view that, absence of RWAs under jurisdiction of ULBs does not exempt other 
entities like hotels, and restaurants from their obligations  of segregation of waste as provided 
in the SWM Rules.  
 
According to Rule 15 (zd) of SWM Rules, 2016, it is the duty of local authorities or facility 
operators to ensure that Personal Protection Equipment  (PPE), including uniform fluorescent 
jacket, hand gloves, raincoats, appropriate foot wear and masks are provided to all workers 
 
36  Akodia, Barghat, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, 
Polaykalan and Uchehara. 
2.12.4 Collection of wastes from Resident Welfare Associations 
2.12.5 Issue of Personal Protection Equipment kits to workers handling solid 
waste 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
28 
handling solid waste. Moreover, it is imperative that these PPEs are used by the workforce to 
protect their health and safety.  
However, out of 34 test -checked ULBs, four ULBs (Akodia, Balaghat, Khirkiya and Ratlam) 
did not provide personal protection equipment to their workforce handling solid waste, and 
three ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal and Satna) did not respond to the audit enquiry. Moreover, even in 
ULBs where PPE kits were issued to the workforce handling solid waste, the workers in some 
ULBs were observed working without the necessary PPE kits, as shown in Images 2.14 and 
2.15. This is a severe risk to their health and safety, and it is crucial to take appropriate measures 
to rectify this issue. It is imperative that the local authorities and facility operators enforce strict 
guidelines to ensure that workers handling solid waste wear their PPE kits at all times. This 
will not only ensure their safety but also prevent any hazardous waste from contaminating the 
environment.  
Images 2.14 and 2.15: Workers found working without safety equipment 
Image 2.14: Workers found on duty without 
safety equipment at ULB, Gwalior 
Image 2.15: Worker without safety equipment at 
waste plant at ULB, Beohari 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Non-provision or non-use of PPE by workers handling solid waste can have adverse effects on 
their health. Appropriate measures need to be taken to ensure that workers handling solid waste 
are provided with the necessary PPE kits and also ensure its use by the workforce.  
Government replied (August 2023) that the department has issued directions to all the ULBs to 
provide personal protective equipment.  
 
As per the gap analysis template issued by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in 
November 2017, ULBs were required to assess the number of bins needed for placing along 
the main roads based on the population density in the area and the availability of space.  
Audit however, noticed that in five test -checked ULBs ( Akodia, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar 
Ratlam and Satna), the bins procured for community places on public roads were lying idle in 
store rooms or other places and getting damaged/ rusted without use as shown in Images 2.16 
to 2.19. 
 
 
 
 
2.12.6  Idling of bins due to improper assessment of requirement  

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
29 
Images 2.16 to 2.19: Dustbins lying idle in various ULBs 
Image 2.16:Dustbins lying in store of ULB 
Ratlam 
Image 2.17: Steel dustbins lying idle in ULB 
Piplanarayanwar 
Image 2.18: Dustbins dumped at Pushkarni 
Park Satna 
Image 2.19: Dustbins lying idle in Akodia 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
The ULB, Akodia intimated that these dust bins were installed, but removed later on  as 
pedestrians were littering wastes around these dust bins. The ULB Orchha intimated that the 
dustbins would be installed when required.  
Lack of utilisation of resources not only results in wastage of funds but also hampers the proper 
functioning of waste collection services. It is essential that ULBs assess their requirements 
carefully and procure them only as per their need. Additionally,  these ULBs must ensure that 
these bins are put to use promptly and maintained regularly to avoid damage or rusting. This 
will help in improving waste collection services and maintaining a clean and healthy 
environment for all. 
Government replied (August 2023) that additional 20 per cent  of equipment for any 
infrastructure is generally procured and stored in store rooms as a common practice, and they 
may not have been used due to lack of requirement. In respect of ULBs Akodia and Orchha, it 
was stated that they are small ULBs and installation of bins on the roadside leads to easy theft 
and misuse of facilities therefore it is installed as and when required.  
 
As per Para 2.3.3 of SWM Manual 2016, primary collection of segregated MSW from 
individual households and establishments (door -to-door collection) is accomplished through 
the use of containerised pushcarts, tricycles or small mechanised vehicles, compactors, or 
tipping vehicles depending on the terrain of the locality, width of streets, and building density. 
In cramped neighbourhoods, handcarts or pushcarts, or tricycles or small mechanised vehicles 
may be used for door -to-door collection of waste, which may then be t ransferred to a larger 
2.13 Transportation 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
30 
vehicle in the vicinity. Where access to individual houses or establishments is difficult, 
handcarts or rickshaws could be made to stand at designated spots. 
Audit scrutinised the efficacy of ULBs in transportation of wastes and found issues like absence 
of separate compartment for collection of special wastes, and lack of monitoring mechanism in 
vehicles used for transportation as discussed in paragraphs below: 
 
As per the SWM Rules, 2016, it is mandatory to collect different types of waste such as sanitary, 
plastic, and domestic hazardous waste separately to prevent their mixing with other waste 
streams. 
Audit noticed that all ULBs had transportation vehicles with partitions for wet and dry waste. 
However, in 14 ULBs37 the vehicles were not found equipped with separate compartments for 
carrying special wastes like e-waste, bio-medical waste, domestic hazardous and plastic wastes. 
This was evident from Images 2.20 and 2.21. 
Images 2.20 and 2.21: Vehicles without compartments for collection of special wastes 
Image 2.20: Vehicles without separate boxes for 
collecting domestic hazardous waste in ULB, 
Shivpuri 
Image 2.21: Collection vehicle without separate 
boxes for special wastes ULB, Gwalior 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Lack of separate compartments for special wastes increases the risk of cross-contamination and 
can compromise the safety and health of the workers involved in waste management. Therefore, 
it is recommended that the concerned authorities equip the transportation vehicles with separate 
compartments for special wastes to ensure proper segregation and safe transportation.  
Government stated that through rigorous monitoring the State has tried to ensure that four 
compartments are available in the vehicles  and stated that some ULBs use sack bags for 
collection of domestic hazardous and sanitary waste.  
Audit is of the view that proper labelling of bags and handling procedures by ULBs may be 
implemented for appropriate management of waste. 
 
According to para 6.1.3 of CPHEEO MSW Manual , all cities are required to establish a basic 
Management Information System (MIS), either manually or electronically. However, using 
 
37  Balaghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Gwalior, Khirkiya, Malanpur, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Orchha, 
Piplanarayanwar, Ratlam and Shivpuri. 
2.13.1 Use of vehicles without separate space/compartment for collection of 
different wastes  
2.13.2  Monitoring of transportation vehicles 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
31 
advanced technologies such as Geographic Information Systems (GIS), G lobal Positioning 
System (GPS), etc. could result in the development of integrated and comprehensive solutions 
for MSWM. 
Audit observed that the vehicles used for waste transportation in 14 ULBs 38 did not have GPS 
technology integrated with  the GIS system.  Twelve ULBs39 did not provide the required 
information. Two ULBs, Sagar and Jabalpur were operating under the PPP mode, hence, 
monitoring of vehicles were being done by the concessionaire. Six ULBs 40 had GPS in 
transportation vehicles; however, out of these, only ULB Indore had an integrated command 
and control centre (ICCC) to monitor vehicles engaged in transportation of wastes, as shown 
in Image 2.22.  
Image 2.22: Showing the ICCC set up by ULB Indore 
 
(Source: Website of Smart City Indore) 
In absence of GPS integrated with the GIS system, real-time monitoring of vehicles’ movement 
was not possible.  
Government stated (August 2023) that State had issued instructions to ULBs to install GPS in 
all vehicles of the ULB that is engaged in waste management service and monitor them 
regularly. It was also stated that the State would ensure that GPS remains active in all the 
vehicles on all days and in all the ULBs. 
 
As per Para 4.1 of MSWM Manual, 2016 (Volume I), the selection and adoption of MSW 
processing technologies should be based on defined selection criteria and subject to a detailed 
due diligence study. The technology selected should be appropriate to the prevailing conditions 
of the respective ULB. Treatment and processing of segregated waste streams not only reduces 
operational costs but also increases the efficiency of the process.  
 
38  Akodia, Bhind, Damoh, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Sanchi and Shivpuri. 
39  Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Bhopal, Dhar, Gwalior, Maihar, Mandleshwar, Morena, Shahdol, Vidisha and 
Uchehara. 
40  Betul, Indore, Niwari, Pichhore, Ratlam and Satna. 
2.14 Processing and treatment of MSW 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
32 
The processing and treatment facilities of municipal solid waste typically consist of four 
components: recycling, composting, disposal, and  waste-to-energy via incineration. Section 
4.3 of the manual further provides that the integrated solid waste management (ISWM) 
framework should be used as a guide for selecting the most appropriate technologies for 
managing MSW. 
Organic waste is typically composted aerobically to produce manure or processed anaerobically 
(in the absence of air) to produce energy. Recyclables are separated and sent to wholesalers for 
further supply to recycle facilities. High calorific wastes are baled or processed and can be used 
as fuel or co-processed in cement plants.  
Adopting appropriate MSW processing technologies and incorporating them into the integrated 
solid waste management framework can help minimise waste and environmental pollution 
while also generating revenue streams. Implementation of Solid waste management plan 
includes identification of land for SWM processing, treatment and disposal, obtaining statutory 
clearances, requirement of E IA for SWM facilities, preparation of action plans and DPRs for 
major infrastructure, tendering and contract management for co nstruction and operation of 
SWM processing and treatment facilities.  
Audit found out inadequacies like action plan not prepared by ULBs, lack of recycling facilities, 
non-adopting process of composting or bio-methanation for disposal of bio -degradable waste 
and not testing compost produced from solid waste. These have been discussed in detail in 
paragraphs below.  
 
As per Para 5.2 of Part -2 of the SWM Manual 2016, the short -term five-year plan should be 
detailed into task specific actions plans (e.g., road sweeping and transportation for service 
provision) or DPRs for major infrastructure -related services such as transfer stations, 
processing or treatment facilities, and scientific waste disposal facilities.  
24 ULBs41, out of total 34 test checked ULBs, neither had any action plan for creating 
infrastructure nor prepared DPRs for major infrastructure related services. Only seven ULBs42 
intimated that they had prepared DPR and action plan for SWM.  However, in all these cases 
(except ULB Indore) the DPR and action plan were not provided for verification. No reply was 
offered by three ULBs (Bhind, Bhopal and Kukshi).  
Non preparation of action plan and DPR for creation of infrastructures required for SWM 
indicates lack of preparedness, focus and prioritization among a majority of the ULBs. I t also 
suggests that there may be challenges in ensuring effective and sustainable infrastructure 
development and management in these ULBs. The reasons for this lack of preparedness need 
 
41  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, 
Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi and Shahdol. 
42  Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Satna, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.14.1  Non-Preparation of Action Plan and Detailed Project Reports for  
creation of infrastructure for SWM 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
33 
to be assessed and steps  be taken to address any institutional or capacity gaps that may be 
hindering progress in this area. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the State had empanelled division -wise consultants for 
the preparation of DPRs for solid waste, legacy waste and landfills for all the ULBs. The work 
of solid waste and landfill DPRs is in progress and legacy waste DPRs are complete. 
 
The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016 define recycling as “the process of 
transforming segregated solid waste into a new product or a raw material for producing new 
products”. The Rule further state that arrangements must be made to provide segregated 
recyclable material to the recycling industry through waste pickers or any other agency engaged 
or authorised by the urban local body for the purpose. 
Twenty-three43 out of 34 test-checked ULBs intimated that they do not have any agreements 
with the recyclers for recyclable waste. Eight ULBs44 either intimated that they have agreement 
with the recyclers or were part of SWM cluster and wastes were being sent for processing there. 
Two ULBs (Damoh and Ratlam) stated that they have the facility but details thereof were not 
provided. The ULB, Bhopal did not offer any reply to the audit enquiry.  
As majority of the ULBs (2 3 out of 34) did not have any agreements with recyclers for the 
management of recyclable waste, it indicates that there is a significant gap in the waste 
management practices of these ULBs, which could lead to increased environmental degradation 
and health hazards. However, it is encouraging to note that eight ULBs have agreements with 
recyclers or are part of a Solid Waste Management (SWM) cluster and are sending their waste 
for processing. This indicates that some ULBs are taking steps towards more sustainable waste 
management practices.  
Thus, there is a need of improving waste management practices across all ULBs to promote a 
cleaner and healthier environment. 
Government replied (August 2023) that ULBs have been instructed to make contracts with 
locally available “kabadi wallas” for purchase of segregated waste of different categories from 
them. 
 
Para 1.4.5.8.1 of MSWM Manual, 2016 states that  decentralised waste management systems 
can reduce the burden of handling large volumes of MSW at a centralised location. The SWM 
Rules, 2016 (Rule 4 and 15) provides that bulk waste generators such as resident welfare and 
market associations, gated communities and institutions, hotels and restaurants must ensure that 
bio-degradable waste is processed, treated and disposed of through composting or bio 
 
43  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Dhar, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, 
Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, and 
Vidisha. 
44  Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Maihar, Mandsaur, Sagar, Satna and Uchehara. 
2.14.2 Compliance with Recycling requirements under SWM Rules, 2016 not 
made  
2.14.3  Non adoption of composting or bio -methanation process by Bulk Waste  
Generators 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
34 
methanation, within their premises in partnership with the local body within one year from the 
date of notification of these Rules.  
Audit observed that: 
• Seven ULBs45 had large residential complexes, out of which only ULB, Indore intimated 
that they have established decentralised processing plants at 77 complexes. Three ULBs 
(Balaghat, Gwalior and Morena) intimated that they have not promoted establishment of 
decentralised processing plants in large residential complexes under their jurisdiction. 
Further due to establishment of waste to energy plant in ULB, Jabalpur, integrated regional 
solid waste management project in ULB, Sagar and ULB, Satna being part of Integrated 
solid waste management project of Rewa cluster, no action for establishment of 
decentralised processing plants was taken by these ULBs. Four ULBs ( Bhind, Bhopal, 
Kukshi and Maihar) did not offer any reply. Twenty three46 ULBs intimated that there were 
no large residential complexes in their jurisdictional area.  
• Five ULBs 47 intimated that they have established decentralised compost plants in the 
vicinity of markets. Out of these ULBs - Betul  and Indore have intimated that they have 
established two and 206 decentralised compost plants respectively at the premises of bulk 
waste generators (BWGs), and remaining three ULBs (Damoh, Mandsaur and Shivpuri) 
did not intimate the number of such plants established by them. 25  ULBs48 intimated that 
they have not set up decentralised compost plants in the vicinity of markets, and replies of 
four ULBs (Bhopal, Bhind, Kukshi and Satna) were awaited. 
 
According to Schedule -I (h) and (i) of the SWM Rules, 2016 compost produced from solid 
waste management should meet the standards prescribed under Fertilizer Control Order 
including requirements for arsenic, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, zinc, pH, moisture , etc. 
among others. This is essential to ensure safe application of compost.  
Eleven49 out of test checked 34 ULBs intimated that they have established NADEP50 or 
compost pit to manage organic waste at home or on a larger scale, such as in agricultural fields 
or community gardens. Only six ULBs51 out of these were actually utilising these for producing 
compost. ULB Indore had established Bio-CNG plant (compressed natural gas) which is used 
to produce biogas and organic compost from organic waste . However, ULB Indore did not 
intimate whether testing of composts were being done  by them. W hile ULB Sagar intimated 
that they were testing the quality of composts. ULB Gwalior intimated that they have 
 
45  Balaghat, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Morena, Sagar and Satna.  
46  Akodia, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Kareli, Khirkiya, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, 
Uchehara and Vidisha. 
47  Betul, Damoh, Indore, Mandsaur and Shivpuri.  
48  Akodia, Barghat, Balaghat, Beohari, Dhar, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, 
Sanchi, Shahdol, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
49  Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Kareli, Mandsaur, Niwari, Ratlam, Sagar and Shivpuri.  
50  Narayan Deorao Pandharipande (NADEP) is a method of organic composting.  
51  Damoh, Gwalior, Indore, Mandsaur, Ratlam, and Sagar.  
2.14.4  Non-testing of compost produced from organic waste 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
35 
established composting plant for disposal of legacy waste, however, only negligible quantity 
of compost is generated due to which they are not accounting it. Remaining three ULBs were 
not testing the quality of composts.  
Absence of testing of compost could lead to its unsafe application, with potential health and 
environmental risks. It is recommended that ULBs ensure compliance with the quality 
standards specified under the SWM Rules, 2016 and take necessary steps to ensure safe 
application of compost. 
Initiatives taken by ULBs for disposal of various types of wastes as observed during 
audit are indicated below: 
(1) ULB Indore has established a 55 0 TPD capacity of Bio -CNG Plant at Devguradia, on 
PPP mode, to use bio-degradable waste for generating Bio-CNG gas. The plant was 
operational from 27 May 2022. Image 2.23 depicts the picture of the plant. 
Image 2.23: Bio-CNG Plant of IMC for processing of Bio-degradable Waste 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
(2) ULB Gwalior had established Waste to Compost plant of 390 TPD capacity at landfill 
site in village Kedarpur for disposal of its legacy waste, by making compost. The plant was 
operational from April 2022. Image 2.24 depicts the W to C plant established by ULB 
Gwalior.  
Image 2.24: Waste to Compost plant of GMC for processing Legacy Waste 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
36 
Government replied (August 2023) that some ULBs might not have agreement with Lab or 
agriculture colleges to check the quality of compost produced and its further usage. 
 
According to Rule 15 (zh) of SWM Rules, 2016, it is the responsibility of local bodies to cease 
land filling or dumping of mixed waste soon after the timeline as specified in Rule 23 for the 
establishment and operation of sanitary landfills (i.e., two years from the notification of Rules). 
Additionally, according to Rule 15 (zi), only non -usable, non-recyclable, non-biodegradable, 
non-combustible and non -reactive inert waste and pre -processing rejects and residues from 
waste processing facilities should be sent to sanitary landfills. These sanitary landfill sites must 
meet the specifications outlined in Schedule –I, but every effort must be made to recycle or 
reuse the rejects to achieve the goal of zero waste going to landfills.  
Furthermore, Rule 15(w) of the SWM Rules , 2016 mandates that ULBs should construct, 
operate, and maintain sanitary landfills and associated infrastructure within three years of 
notification of these Rules. It is the responsibility of the local bodies to undertake this task 
themselves or through another agency. 
Twenty-nine ULBs52 out of 34 test-checked ULBs, failed to construct a sanitary landfill despite 
the passage of more than three years since the notification of the SWM Rules, 2016. Only three 
ULBs (Indore, Sagar and Khirkiya ) intimated that sanitary landfill ha d been constructed by 
them. No reply was provided by the ULB, Bhopal. The ULB, Satna intimated that sanitary 
landfill was not required as they were part of Rewa SWM cluster.  
Government replied (August 2023) that State has decided to construct Sanitary Landfill (SLF) 
at district headquarters on a regional landfill concept in all remaining ULBs by forming clusters. 
DPRs are under preparation for construction of 45 such SLFs and would be operational by the 
end of March 2024.  
It is crucial that all ULBs take concrete steps towards improving their solid waste management 
infrastructure to ensure a clean and healthy environment for their residents. 
Audit further noticed deficiencies in issues such as availability of land for landfill, 
establishment of buffer zone around solid waste processing and disposal facilities, selection of 
landfill site and absence of basic facilities in landfills. These have been discussed below: 
 
As per Rule 22 of the SWM Rules, 2016, local authorities with a population of 0.5 million or 
more are required to set up common regional sanitary landfill facilities or standalone sanitary 
landfill facilities within three years of the Rules’ notification. Additionally, local authorities 
with a population under 0.5 million must identify suitable sites for setting up common regional 
sanitary landfill facilities for suitable clusters of local authorities within a year.  
Moreover, according to Rule 11 (f) and 12 (a) of SWM Rules 2016, state and District authorities 
 
52  Akodia, Barghat, Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, 
Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.15  Disposal of Waste 
2.15.1 Availability of land for setting up landfills 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
37 
must assist local authorities in identifying and allocating suitable land for solid waste 
processing and disposal facilities within one year of the Rules’ notification.  
Twenty-eight53 out of 34 test -checked ULBs intimated that district authorities ha ve allotted 
separate land for solid waste activities. Two ULBs (Malanpur and Mandleshwar) had identified 
the land but the land has not been transferred to these ULBs by the district administration so 
far, while ULB Pichhore was yet to identify the land required for the purpose, thus these ULBs 
did not have the required land. The ULB, Satna were part of Rewa MSW cluster, and the ULB 
Jabalpur had set up waste to energy plant  due to which requirement of landfill did not exist.  
The ULB, Bhopal did not provide any information regarding allotment of land for SWM. 
Thus, majority of the ULBs (2 8 out of 34) have been allotted separate land for solid waste 
activities by the district authorities. This is a positive development as having a dedicated landfill 
site is crucial for proper solid waste management. 
Government replied (August 2023) that based on land availability and distance between the 
ULBs, a total of forty -five number of lands have been identified for setting up of Sanitary 
Landfill on a regional landfill concept at District Headquarters under SBM (U) 2.0. Three ULBs 
(Pichhore, Malanpur and Mandleshwar) have been considered under SBM 2.0. 
The reply is in line with audit observation. 
 
According to Schedule I of SWM Rules 2016, landfill sites and processing plants must have 
the following facilities available:  
• Fencing or hedging with proper gate to monitor incoming vehicles and prevent the entry 
of unauthorised persons and stray animals. 
• A concrete or paved approach and internal road to avoid generation of dust particles due 
to vehicular movement. It should be designed to ensure free movement of vehicles and 
other machinery. 
• A waste inspection facility to monitor waste brought in for landfilling, an office facility for 
record keeping, and shelter for keeping equipment and machinery, including pollution 
monitoring equipment. The operator is responsible for maintaining a record of waste 
received, processed and disposed of. 
• Provisions of weighbridge to measure quantity of waste brought to the landfill site, fire 
protection equipment, and other facilities required. 
• Drinking water and other sanitary facilities, including lighting arrangements for easy 
landfill operations during night hours. 
• Provisions for parking, cleaning, washing of transport vehicles carrying solid waste should 
be provided. 
 
53 Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Kareli, Khirkiya Kukshi, 
Maihar, Mandsaur Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, 
Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
2.15.2  Absence of basic facilities in landfills site 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
38 
These facilities are essential to ensure that landfill sites and processing plants operate 
effectively, safely and efficiently. 
As discussed in Parag raph 2.10, only 28  out of 34 ULBs had procured landfill site, and in 
respect of two ULBs  (Mandleshwar and Malanpur), though land has been identified, transfer 
of land is yet to be made.  In the remaining four ULBs, one ULB (Pichhore) has not identified 
the site, one ULB (Satna) was part of Rewa MSW cluster, one ULB (Jabalpur) had set up waste 
to energy plant (due to which there is no requirement for landfill) and one ULB (Bhopal) did 
not furnish any information.  Physical verification of land fill sites in  28 test checked ULBs 
revealed that 23 ULBs54 were utilising the land for dumping waste as shown in Images 2.2 to 
2.9 under paragraph 2.11.2. Audit also observed that the concessionaire of Rewa cluster was 
utilising the landfill sites of ULBs Maihar and Uchehara for dumping wastes as pointed out in 
paragraph 2.20.1.2. The ULBs Piplanarayanwar and Khirkiya received land in February 2022 
and March 2022 respectively, due to which wastes were being dumped at a temporary landfill. 
Dumping of wastes on daily basis was not observed in ULBs Indore, Mandsaur and Sagar.  
Following basic facilities were also not available at the landfill sites of these 28 ULBs.  
• Fencing or hedging with proper gate: Eighteen ULBs55 did not have fencing and 2 ULBs 
(Orchha and Niwari) had fencing but were found broken at various places. Fencing work 
was in progress in ULB Piplanarayanwar. ULB Balaghat had fencing but out of two gates 
only one gate was in place.  Only six ULBs (Betul, Gwalior, Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Sagar 
and Shivpuri) had proper fencing.  
• Concrete or paved approach and internal road: Twenty four ULBs56 did not have 
concrete or paved approach and internal road at the landfill site. Only three ULBs (Beohari, 
Indore and Ratlam) had concrete road within the premises of landfill site.  One ULB 
(Mandsaur) had concrete road at some patches. 
• Waste Inspection facility:  Twenty-two ULBs57 did not have facility for inspection of 
waste. This facility was available only with six ULBs (Barghat, Gwalior, Khirkiya, 
Mandsaur, Ratlam, and Sagar). 
• Availability of weighbridge: Twenty-three ULBs58 did not have weighbridge facility for 
weighing wastes brought to landfill site. Four ULBs (Gwalior, Indore, Mandsaur and 
Ratlam) had facil ity of weighbridge. The ULB, Betul had weighbridge but was not in 
working condition. 
 
54  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
55  Akodia, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, 
Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
56  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and 
Vidisha. 
57  Akodia, Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, Nalkheda, 
Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
58  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and 
Vidisha. 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
39 
• Drinking water facility: Eighteen ULBs59 did not have drinking water facility at landfill 
site. This facility was available only with ten ULBs (Balaghat, Betul, Dhar, Gwalior, 
Indore, Mandsaur, Ratlam, Sagar, Shivpuri and Vidisha). 
• Sanitary facility: Twenty-one ULBs60 did not have sanitary facilities at the landfill site. 
This facility was available only with seven ULBs (Betul, Dhar, Indore, Ratlam, Sagar, 
Shivpuri and Vidisha). 
• Lighting arrangement: Sixteen ULBs61 did not have lighting arrangement at the landfill 
site. This facility was available only with 1 2 ULBs (Balaghat, Damoh , Dhar, Gwalior, 
Indore, Khirkiya, Mandsaur, Morena, Ratlam, Sagar, Shivpuri and Vidisha). 
• Parking, Cleaning and washing facility for vehicles: Twenty-four ULBs62 did not have 
parking, cleaning and washing facility for vehicles entering the landfill site. This facility 
was available only with four ULBs (Betul, Gwalior, Mandsaur and Sagar). 
As a result of these shortcomings , stray cattle were observed inside the landfill (Images 2.25 
to 2.28) which can be a health hazard to the cattle due to consumption of plastic waste as stated 
in paragraph 4.1.1. These stray cattle could also become carriers of pathogens and cause of 
release of harmful gases or other pollutants due to digging of the waste materials in the landfill. 
Further, absence of inspection facility and weighbridge facility at landfills, also led to non -
compliance by ULBs in maintaining records of waste brought to the site and keeping track of 
vehicles entering the site.  
Images 2.25 to 2.28: Stray animals found inside landfill site in various ULBs 
Image 2.25: Stray animals inside landfill site at 
ULB, Balaghat 
Image 2.26: Stray animals inside landfill site at 
ULB, Betul 
 
59  Akodia, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, 
Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol, and Uchehara. 
60  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Gwalior, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Mandsaur, 
Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol an d Uchehara. 
61  Akodia, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Sanchi, Shahdol and Uchehara. 
62  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi,  Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara 
and Vidisha. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
40 
Image 2.27: Stray animals inside landfill site at 
ULB, Satna 
Image 2.28: Stray animals inside landfill site at 
ULB, Shivpuri 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
It is important to ensure that the required facilities are in place to ensure proper management 
of solid waste and prevent any adverse impacts on the environment and public health. 
Government replied (August 2023) that the State has empanelled consultants for preparation of 
DPRs, transaction advisory and Project Management Consultancy services at the division level 
to undertake projects under SBM 2.0 and it will be ensured that all the ULBs have basic  
facilities required for the proper operation of plants. 
 
Waste management sites encompass waste processing/disposal facilities, which become 
sources of pollution in terms of air, water, land and noise besides emitting foul smell. Therefore, 
provision of buffer zone around these facilities is essentially required  to protect people living 
in the surroundings from exposure/impacts of such pollutants but also to ensure continued safe 
operations in the waste management facility. According to Schedule -I A (IX) of the SWM 
Rules, 2016, a buffer zone of no development was required to be maintained around solid waste 
processing and disposal facilities exceeding five tonnes per day of installed capacity. This 
buffer zone would be established within the total area of the facility and would be determined 
on case-to-case basis by the local body in consultation with concerned State Pollution Control 
Board. 
Schedule I (A) of SWM Rules, 2016 also specified the criteria for selection of sites for landfills. 
According to which, a landfill site should be at least 100 meters away from a river, 200 meters 
away from a pond, highway, habitation, public parks, and water supply wells and 20 km away 
from Airports or Airbase. 
Only ULB, Shivpuri had intimated about establishment of a buffer zone, though documents to 
support the claim were not provided. Meanwhile, 24 ULBs 63 confirmed that they had not 
developed a buffer zone of no development around their solid waste processing and disposal 
facility. Two ULBs, Bhopal and Indore did not provide any reply. ULBs Maihar and Satna 
intimated that they were part of Rewa cluster, and ULBs Sagar and Jabalpur intimated that their 
projects are working on PPP mode as such they did not have landfill consequently the necessity 
 
63  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Kareli, Khirkiya Kukshi, Mandsaur 
Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sanchi, Shahdol, Uchehara and 
Vidisha. 
2.15.3  Non-establishment of buffer zone 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
41 
of buffer zone did not exist. Three ULBs (Mandleshwar, Malanpur and Pichhore) were yet to 
receive land for solid waste processing facilities.  
Physical verification of sites of two ULBs (Betul and Morena) revealed habitations near the 
landfill of ULB Betul, and at the banks of river (Quanri river) at Morena.  
It is imperative that all ULBs adhere to the buffer zone mandate outlined in the SWM Rules. 
Failure to do so not only pose a significant threat to the environment but also jeopardizes the 
health and well-being of the public. To mitigate these risks, ULBs m ust prioritise establishing 
a no-development buffer zone surrounding their solid waste processing and disposal facility, 
thereby preventing any adverse impacts on the environment and the health of the community. 
Government replied (August 2023) that landfill sites are selected as per the distance limits 
prescribed from the airport, river, pond highways, habitats public parks and water supply wells. 
It was further stated that DPRs for setting up fresh waste processing plants for 22 ULBs is under 
consideration under SBM 2.0, where DPR is under finalisation and while site selection a buffer 
zone around these solid waste processing and disposal facilities will be considered.  
 
The most prevalent method to dispose of waste in ULBs has been open dumping. These 
dumpsites were the major source of air and ground water pollution. As per clause ‘J’ of schedule 
I of the SWM Rules, 2016, solid waste dumps which have reached their full capacity or those 
which will not receive additional waste after setting up of new and properly designed landfills 
should be closed and rehabilitated by bio mining, waste processing or other methods s uitable 
for reducing environmental impact to acceptable level.  
CPCB Guidelines for disposal of legacy waste provides that for disposal of legacy waste the 
ULBs conduct contour survey and drone mapping  to determine the volume of waste before 
starting the process of disposal of legacy waste.  
UADD intimated that out of 34 test checked ULBs, 23 ULBs had 22.77 lakh tons of legacy 
waste which were awaiting disposal. UADD also intimated that 12 ULBs out these 23 ULBs 
have prepared DPR for clearance of legacy waste and the implementation timeline is in the year 
2023. However, copies of the DPRs were not made available to audit, due to which Audit could 
not confirm whether the work of clearance of legacy waste was a part of the DPR. Remaining 
11 ULBs were yet to prepare DPR for disposal of the legacy waste. 
  
2.16  Disposal of Legacy Waste 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
42 
Harmful effects on Human health and environment due to dumping of wastes at 
landfill site of ULB Bhopal as revealed in a case study published in International 
Journal and media reports 
SWM Rules, 2016 mandates that urban local bodies (ULBs) stop dumping mixed waste in 
landfills after two years from the date of notification of rules (i.e., by April 2018) and to 
recycle or reuse as much waste as possible and only wastes that cannot be used , recycled, 
should go to landfills. ULBs should also investigate old and existing dumpsites to see if they 
could be "biomined" or "bio -remediated" (cleaned up using biological methods), and if the 
dumpsite couldn't be cleaned up that way, then as it should  be capped to prevent further 
damage to the environment. 
However, Audit found that many ULBs were still dumping mixed waste in landfills, even 
though they weren't supposed to. The reason could be assigned to non -preparation of plans 
to create the necessary infrastructures required for waste processing and recycling, and non-
availability of facilities to handle the waste properly  as discussed in paragraphs 2.14 .1 to 
2.14.3. This went against the goal of zero waste going to landfills. I mages 2.29 and 2.30  
show the status of landfills in test checked ULBs. 
Images 2.29 and 2.30: Dumping of wastes at landfills 
Image 2.29: Dumping of wastes by ULB 
Balaghat 
Image 2.30: Dumping of wastes by ULB Betul 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
According to a study published in the International Journal of Geography, Geology and 
Environment in December 2021, the environmental and community health impacts of 
municipal solid waste at two dumpsites Bhanpur and Adampur Chhawani, Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh were assessed by Barkatullah University, Bhopal. The study revealed that residents 
surrounding the operational dumpsite of Adampur Chhawni experienced more health 
problems {like typhoid (58 per cent), chest related illness (24 per cent), cholera and diarrhea 
(34 per cent), malaria (22 per cent), and skin infections (16 per cent)} compared to residents 
residing around the capped Bhanpur dumpsite. 
The study concluded that dumpsites should be properly managed and cared for to minimize 
their effects on the environment. In addition to the health problems, other problems such as 
flies, rats, bad odour, and contamination of groundwater due to high bacter ia content in 
leachates, which percolate into groundwater through cracks in membranes, were also 
observed as shown in Chart 2.1. 


Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
43 
Chart 2.1: Various environmental problems observed at landfill site 
MSWM Manual states that under natural conditions, the organic fraction of waste continually 
decomposes, accompanied by a strong foul odour and production of gases, which are 
predominantly methane. Methane is highly inflammable and can cause landfill fires,  which 
can also release harmful chemicals and gases into the air, which can be a health hazard for 
nearby communities. During the field visit of landfill sites of test checked ULBs instances of 
fumes emerging from landfill sites were observed as shown in Images 2.31 and 2.32. 
Image 2.31 and 2.32: Fumes at landfill site 
Image 2.31: Fumes emerging at landfill site of 
ULB, Gwalior 
Image 2.32:Fumes emerging at landfill site of 
ULB, Shahdol 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Adampur landfill site of ULB Bhopal had recently caught fire which had also gained media 
attention as shown in Image 2.33. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
44 
Image 2.33: Newspaper report on fire at Adampur landfill, Bhopal 
 
Incidences of fire in waste in open dumpsite could result in air pollution and increase 
greenhouse gas emission which has been known to contribute to climate change. Therefore, 
dumpsites should be properly managed and cared to minimize its effects on the environment. 
Government intimated that 16 ULBs have prepared DPR and floated tender for legacy waste 
remediation. Remaining ULBs are having less quantity of waste which will be processed from 
the proposed fresh waste processing facilities. 
 
The SWM Rules, 2016 mandates ULBs to create public awareness through IEC campaigns and 
educate the waste generators to minimise waste and prohibit littering. ULBs were also 
responsible for sensitising citizens to the associated environmental and health haz ards of 
improper waste management. Citizens should be made aware of the need to pay user fees or 
charges to ensure sustainability of the MSWM services.  
The IEC campaign should target all stakeholders, including households, shops, commercial and 
institutional premises, municipal officials, elected representatives, schools, non -government 
organisations (NGOs), the informal sector and the media. The MSWM Manual, 2016 (Para 
1.4.5.13.1) specifies the target audience and the type of awareness required as shown in 
Appendix 2.3. The active participation of all stakeholders is essential to effectively manage 
city waste and discharge their role effectively. 
The SBM Guidelines (2017) mandates that at least 50 per cent of the IEC fund in each annual 
plan as approved by State HPC, must go to the ULB’s for IEC activities at the grass root level. 
Status of funds provided for IEC activities and funds transferred to ULBs for IEC activities is 
shown in Table 2.5.  
 
2.17  Information, Education and Communication activities 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
45 
Table 2.5: Status of funds earmarked for IEC activities and the funds transferred to 
ULBs for IEC activities 
(₹ in crore) 
S.N. Budget 
Year 
Provision of 
funds for IEC 
Funds to be transferred 
to ULBs for IEC (50 per 
cent of IEC funds) 
Funds actually 
transferred to 
ULBs 
Shortfall in 
funds 
transferred 
1 2017-18 15.73 7.87 15.15 (-) 7.28 
2 2018-19 9.83 4.92 8.63 (-) 3.71 
3 2019-20 15.90 7.95 14.64 (-) 6.69 
4 2020-21 9.07 4.54 0.32 4.22 
5 2021-22 25.85 12.92 10.58 2.34 
 Total 76.38 38.20 49.32 (-) 11.12 
The Table above indicates that during the years 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, UADD has transferred 
more than 50 per cent of amount provided for IEC to ULBs. However, the amount transferred 
to ULBs during the years 2020-21 to 2021-22 was found below the required 50 per cent. UADD 
intimated that less amount has been transferred to ULBs during these years as excess amount 
was provided in the years 2017-18 to 2019-20.  
Audit observed that:  
• Conduct of IEC activities for all SWM issues not ascertainable 
Twenty-four64 ULBs had intimated that awareness campaigns such as Anand Utsav  (two 
ULBs), Nukkad Natak (12 ULBs), Swatchta Pakhwada (two ULBs), Amrit Mahotsav (two 
ULBs), Jan jagrukta (12 ULBs), Jingle bell (one ULB), wall painting (four ULBs), rally (three 
ULBs), waste segregation (three ULBs), display of hoarding (two ULBs) has been conducted 
by them. However, in absence of document ation, Audit could not ascertain whether all the 
activities shown in Appendix 2.3 (referred above) has been carried out by the ULBs. 
Remaining 10 ULBs (Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Bhind, Mandsaur, Niwari, Barghat, 
Piplanarayanwar, Malanpur  and Nalkheda) did not provide information regarding IEC 
activities conducted by them during the last five years.  
There is a lack of comprehensive documentation of IEC activities conducted by the ULBs, due 
to which assessment of efforts made by ULBs towards IEC programs was not possible. It is 
therefore recommended that ULBs adopt a more holistic and comprehensive approach towards 
IEC programs, and maintain proper documentation of the activities conducted.  
Government stated (August 2023) that under the Swachh Bharat  Mission and Swachhta 
Survekshan, various IEC campaigns were launched on themes like source segregation, home 
composting, 3R concept, littering, single use plastic and plastic ban, open defecation, etc. With 
the rigorous and continuous efforts of these campaigns the percentage of segregated waste is 
increasing every year in ULBs. 
Audit is of the opinion that proper documentation of IEC activities is crucial for transparency, 
accountability, evaluation, and continuous improvement and it would provide a solid 
foundation for evidence -based decision-making for achieving the goals of cl eanliness, waste 
 
64  Akodia, Balaghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Maihar, Mandleshwar, 
Morena, Orchha, Pichhore, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi , Satna, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and 
Vidisha. 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
46 
management, and environmental sustainability in ULBs. 
 
Para 1.4.5.5 of MSWM Manual, 2016 provides that there is an urgent need to train and enhance 
the capacities of staff in MSWM activities. Professionalising the MSW sector will not only 
build the capacities of workers to perform more effectively and efficien tly in the existing 
conditions but will also inculcate a sense of responsibility and pride towards their profession. 
Various capacity building approaches and training programmes, which could be adopted for 
different stakeholders are given in Appendix 2.4. 
Rule 11(k) and 15 (zc) of SWM Rules, 2016, required UADD and ULBs to arrange training 
and capacity building of staff (including contract workers)  engaged in managing solid waste, 
segregation and transportation or processing of such waste at source. 
Observations noticed in respect of capacity building programs are as under: 
 
Government of India issued (December 2017) instructions65 for implementation the Integrated 
Capacity Building Program (ICBP). The ICBP was to be organized by merging various 
training programmes/workshops provided under different urban schemes run by the GOI such 
as AMRUT, SBM, Smart City Mission, NULM, Housing f or All, Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana and HRIDAY.  
UADD intimated that eight training programmes / workshops had been arranged under ICBP 
in the year 2021-22 as shown in Table 2.6.  
Table 2.6: Details of training programmes conducted under ICBP by UADD 
S.N. No. of training programmes/ 
workshops conducted 
Name of 
programme 
Targeted group 
1 5 Swachhta ki 
Pathshala 
Master trainers, administrative officers, 
SBM nodal, Sanitary inspector, computer 
operator and technical staff 
2 2 Social Media All ULB staff 
3 1 3R workshop All ULB staff 
No training under ICBP was conducted during the years 2019-21. 
 
Para 9.6 of the SBM guidelines stipulated that States and ULBs should identify relevant 
officials (both senior level officials and field -level functionaries) for training and draw up a 
calendar of training for them (as shown in Appendix 2.4). It will be the responsibility of the 
State Mission Director to ensure that identified officials undergo adequate capacity building / 
training to ensure the success of SBM (Urban) in the state. 
Audit observed from the information provided by test checked ULBs that training to senior 
officials has been given by 19 ULBs, to collection staff by 21 ULBs, to transportation staff by 
 
65  Letter No. K-14012/101(25)/2017-CBUD dated 29 December 2017. 
2.18  Capacity Building 
2.18.1  Failure in ensuring training to the Officers and staff of ULBs under 
Integrated Capacity Building Program (ICBP) 
2.18.2  Prescribed training program for all stakeholders not conducted by ULBs 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
47 
18 ULBs, to NGOs/CBOs by 11 ULBs, to elected representatives by eight ULBs and training 
to staff at processing site has been given by 12 ULBs. However, the number of persons 
nominated for these training has only been provided by 10 ULBs 66. Nine ULBs (Gwalior, 
Morena, Malanpur, Kareli, Sagar, Piplanarayanwar, Khirkiya and Pichhore) had not imparted 
training to any officials, while two ULBs Bhind and Bhopal did not provide reply to the audit 
enquiry.  
It is essential to prioritize training for officials engaged in SWM activities, and ULBs should 
ensure that adequate and regular training is provided to all personnel. Regular monitoring and 
evaluation of the training program should also be carried out to ensure its effectiveness.  
 
Para 6.1 of the MSWM Manual, 2016 stipulates that a comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system should be adopted for proper implementation of the MSWM plan 
and for assessing progress toward meeting the targets of the plan. As per SWM Rules and 
Manual, the monitoring of SWM activities is required to be done at various level. The 
performance of local bodies with respect to implementation of SWM Rules, 2016, State Policy 
and Strategy on SWM are to be monitored and reviewed at district level and state level whereas 
the responsibility of environmental monitoring lies with the State Pollution Control Board.  
Observations on monitoring of SWM activities in the State, District and ULB level are 
discussed in paragraphs below: 
 
The SWM Rules, 2016 specifies the monitoring and review of SWM activities performed by 
the ULBs through State Level Advisory Body and monitoring of long-term progress of MSWM 
service provision in ULBs through reporting of achievements of Service Level Benchmarking67 
(SLBs). The deficiencies in monitoring of SWM activities at State level are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
2.19.1.1 Irregular and inadequate monitoring by State Level Advisory Body  
Para 23 of the SWM Rules, 2016 specify that every Department in -charge of local bodies of 
the concerned State Government or Union Territory administration shall constitute a State 
Level Advisory Body within six months from the date of notification ( i.e., 08 April 2016) of 
SWM Rules, 2016. The State Level Advisory Body was required to meet at least once in every 
six months to review the matters related to implementation of these Rules, state policy and 
strategy on solid waste management and give advice to State Government for taking measures 
that are necessary for expeditious and appropriate implementation of these Rules. 
Audit noticed that the Urban Development and Housing Department, GoMP had constituted 
the State Level Advisory Body on 13 October 2017 with a delay of almost one year. It was 
further noticed that State Level Advisory Body had held only three meetings from the date of 
constitution (13 October 2017) to 31 March 2022 to review the matters related to 
 
66  Balaghat, Betul, Dhar, Kukshi, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Pichhore, Satna, Shahdol, and Shivpuri.  
67  Indicators stipulated by the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) for benchmarking MSWM service 
provision. 
2.19 Monitoring of Solid Waste activities 
2.19.1  Monitoring at State level 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
48 
implementation of the SWM Rules, 2016 as against the total nine meetings required to be 
conducted as per the provisions of the SWM Rules, 2016. 
Thus, the delay in constitution of State Level Advisory Body and holding of inadequate meeting 
shows the inadequate monitoring and review of the matters related to implementation of SWM 
Rules, 2016 along with the violation the provisions contained in the S WM Rules, 2016 in this 
regard. Reasons for delay in constitution of this body and holding of inadequate meeting were 
not found on records.  
Government stated (August 2023) that the reasons for inadequate meetings during the tenure 
was the State elections in 2019 and security and health risk related reasons during the two waves 
of Covid-19.  
 
As per Rule 12 (b) of SWM Rules, 2016, the District Magistrate / Deputy Commissioner will 
review the performance of local bodies at least once in a quarter on waste segregation, 
processing, treatment and disposal. 
20 Test checked ULBs did not have any information of such reviews conducted by the District 
Magistrate. Four ULBs68 were yet to provide information regarding conduct of review meetings 
by District Magistrate. Whereas only 10 ULBs 69 have intimated that DM had conducted the 
review meetings. However, it cannot be ascertained that the review was done quarterly.  
Though Government stated (August 2023) that District Magistrate is conducting regular 
meetings with their ULBs to check and monitor the performance of waste segregation, 
processing, treatment and disposal,  no documentary evidence for the same was furnished to 
Audit.  
 
As per the Para 6.1 of the SWM Manual, 2016, the monitoring system adopted should facilitate 
or include the following:  
• Regular collection of data by the identified staff, e.g., ward-wise collection of waste;  
• Analysis of collected information to assess the efficacy of the overall system, e.g., reasons 
for not reaching 100 per cent collection in an area;  
• Reporting of data and its analysis to senior officials; and  
• Mechanisms for proposing corrective action as needed, e.g., contingency plan for extra 
efforts wherein lagging, rerouting or changing the timings for collection in a particular 
ward so that 100 per cent collection can be achieved. 
The deficiencies observed in monitoring of SWM activities at ULB level are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
2.19.3.1 Delayed/ non submission of Annual Reports 
Rule 15 (za) and (zb) of SWM, Rules 2016 specifies that the local body shall prepare and submit 
annual report in Form IV on or before the 30th April of the succeeding year to the Commissioner 
 
68  Bhopal, Indore, Maihar, and Uchehara. 
69  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Dhar, Ratlam, Satna, Mandsaur, Mandleshwar, Shivpuri and Vidisha. 
2.19.2  Monitoring at District level 
2.19.3  Monitoring of MSW at ULB level 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
49 
or Director, Municipal Administration or designated Officer. The annual report shall then be 
sent to the Secretary -in-Charge of the State Urban Development Department or village 
panchayat or rural development department and to the respective State Pollution Control Board 
or Pollution Control Committee by the 31st May every year. 
Audit noticed that 15 ULBs70 had not submitted the annual reports required to be submitted as 
per the Rules. Only 15 ULBs71 were regular in submitting the required report. Information from 
four ULBs were awaited. 
As the report contains information regarding various activities of solid waste management such 
as quantity of waste generated, collected, transported, processed and other facilities available 
in the ULB, due to non -submission of the same the UADD and MPPCB  were deprived of 
information required for monitoring the activities for solid waste management by the ULB. 
 
As per Rule 16 of SWM Rules, 2016, the State Pollution Control Board of the concerned state 
was responsible to enforce the SWM Rules, 2016 in their State through local bodies, monitor 
environmental standards and adherence to conditions as specified under the Schedule I and 
Schedule II for waste processing and disposal sites, issue authorisation to the local body or an 
operator of a facility, suspend or cancel the authorization and renew the authorisation issued.  
The deficiencies/ shortcomings noticed in monitoring of SWM activities by SPCB are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:  
• Shortfall in monitoring of air quality at waste processing / landfill site at ULBs 
Rule 16.1.b of SWM Rules, 2016 provides it is the duty of State Pollution Control Board 
(SPCB), to monitor the standards and adherence to conditions as specified under the Schedule 
I and Schedule II of the Rule for waste processing and disposal sites. Rule 16.4 further provides 
that monitoring of ambient air quality around the waste processing and disposal sites of ULBs 
should be done at least once in a year.  
Scrutiny of the details of monitoring of ambient air quality at waste processing/landfill sites of 
ULB as provided in the Annual Report of Solid Waste Management submitted to Central 
Pollution Control Board by SPCB during 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, revealed that air quality 
monitoring in 34 test-checked ULBs were not carried out as per frequency prescribed in Rules. 
The ULB wise summary of monitoring is given in Appendix 2.5. 
Audit noticed that the SPCB had conducted 95 tests against the required 170 tests for measuring 
the air quality at waste processing/landfill sites, during the last five years (2017-18 to 2021-22) 
in test checked 34 ULBs. It was also observed that the SPCB had conducted air quality testing 
every year at ten 72 test checked ULBs during the last five years. Further, no air quality tests 
were conducted at waste processing/landfill sites of ten73 test checked ULBs during the last five 
 
70  Akodia, Barghat, Betul, Beohari, Dhar, Khirkiya, Mandleshwar, Malanpur, Morena, Maihar, Niwari, Orchha, 
Polaykalan, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
71  Balaghat, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Kukshi, Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, 
Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol and Shivpuri. 
72  Damoh, Indore, Maihar, Mandsaur, Morena, Piplanarayanwar, Sagar, Satna, Shahdol and Vidisha.  
73  Akodia, Beohari, Gwalior, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha and Polaykalan.  
2.19.4  Monitoring of Municipal Solid Waste by State Pollution Control Board 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
50 
years from 2017-18 to 2021-22. SPCB intimated that nine of these ULBs did not have identified 
landfill site and SPCB also intimated that regular testing at five ULBs (Gwalior, Bhind, 
Shivpuri, Balaghat and Kareli) could not be done in absence of permanent electricity 
connection. As a result, there was a shortfall of 44.12 per cent in conducting the testing of air 
quality in test checked ULBs.  
The MPPCB replied (May 2023) that the provision of air quality monitoring as per SWM Rules 
2016, were applicable to sanitary landfill sites only. There were only five sanitary landfills sites 
in these 34 ULBs and the monitoring (minimum once in a year) of air quality in these landfill 
sites was being done regularly during last five years except in sanitary landfill at Jabalpur 
during the year 2017-18. Further, the monitoring of air quality at dump sites of other ULBs was 
being done regularly twice in a year. 
The reply of the MPPCB is factually incorrect as the monitoring of air quality on these sanitary 
landfills was 84 per cent during the last five years as per the annual report submitted by MPPCB 
to CPCB. 
• Shortfall in monitoring of water quality at waste processing/ landfill site at ULBs 
Schedule-I (E) of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 provides the criteria for water quality 
monitoring by SPCB. According to these criteria, the ground water quality within 50 meters of 
the periphery of landfill site shall be periodically monitored covering different seasons in a year 
that is summer, monsoon and post -monsoon period to ensure that the ground water is not 
contaminated. 
Scrutiny of the details of monitoring of Water Quality at waste processing/landfill site of test 
checked ULBs as provided in the Annual Report of Solid Waste Management submitted to 
CPCB by SPCB during 2017-18 to 2021-22 revealed that the Water Quality monitoring in test 
checked ULBs were not carried out as per frequency prescribed in Rules, details have been 
shown in Appendix 2.6.  
Audit noticed that the SPCB had conducted total 202 testing against the required 510 tests 
(frequency of three tests in a year as per the SWM Rules, 2016) for measuring the water quality 
at waste processing/landfill sites in 34 test-checked ULBs during 2017-18 to 2021-22. Further, 
the MPPCB had not conducted testing of water quality in a systematic manner as it had not 
conducted any testing of water quality at waste processing/landfill sites at nine 74 test checked 
ULBs during the year 2017-18 to 2021-22. As a result, there was a shortfall of 60.39 per cent 
in conducting the testing of water quality , which showed an inadequate and unsystematic 
monitoring of water quality by MPPCB.  
The MPPCB replied (May 2023) that the provision of water quality monitoring as per SWM 
Rules 2016, were applicable to sanitary landfill sites only. There were only five sanitary 
landfills sites in these 34 ULBs and the monitoring (minimum three times in a year) of water 
quality in these landfill sites was being done regularly during last five years except in sanitary 
landfill at Jabalpur during the year 2018 -19. Further, the monitoring of air/ water quality at 
dump sites of other ULBs was being done regularly twice in a year. 
 
74  Akodia, Beohari, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha and Polaykalan. 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
51 
The reply of the MPPCB is factually incorrect as the monitoring of water quality on these 
sanitary landfills was 60 per cent during the last five years as per the annual report submitted 
by MPPCB to CPCB. Further, the monitoring of water quality at dump sites of other ULBs was 
also not being done regularly. 
Government intimated (August 2023) that instructions will be issued to ULBs so that 
compliance with monitoring of water quality at waste processing site is ensured. 
• Non-initiation of penal action by MPPCB against the ULBs operating the waste  
processing facilities without obtaining the ‘Authorisation/Consent to Operate’ 
The SWM Rules, 2016 specify environmental monitoring requirements for designing, disposal, 
treatment and processing facilities, to ensure pollution prevention and environmentally sound 
operation of these facilities. These specifications are detailed out in  Para 3.2.1, 3.2.12, 3.3.13, 
3.5.9, 3.6 and 4.1 of Part II of MSWM Manual. As per requirement of the SWM Rules, 2016, 
the operator of solid waste processing and disposal facilities was required to obtain the 
“Consent to Establish and Operate” these facilities before establishing and starting of operation. 
MPPCB provided view authorisation access to XGN (Extended Green Node) data. Verification 
of the data available on the website as on 28 January 2023, revealed that out of 34 sampled 
ULBs only four ULBs (Bhopal, Jabalpur, Indore and Sagar) have applied for o r got the 
Combined Consent Authorisation (CCA)/ Consent to Establish (CTE) the waste processing 
operating facilities. SW processing facilities at Jabalpur (Jabalpur MSW Pvt Ltd. Kathonda) 
and Sagar (Sagar MSW solutions Pvt. Ltd, Maswasi) were having valid CCA. Out of four 
processing facilities at Indore, only two (Indo -Enviro Integrated Solutions Ltd. for Bio -CNG 
plant and Nepra Resource Management Pvt. Ltd. for MRF) had valid CCA.  
The CCA of one processing facility (Trenching Ground at Devguradia, Indore) was not 
renewed after its expiry and another processing facility (Bio methanation plant, Kabitkhedi) 
had obtained CTE but did not have CCA, but both these processing facilities were being shown 
as operational in XGN.  Out of seven processing facilities in Bhopal, one (Saurashtra Enviro 
Projects Pvt. Ltd., Bhanpur) had valid CCA. Further, CCA of two processing facilities (Garbage 
Transfer Stations at Arif Nagar and Danapani), were not  found renewed after its expiry in 
December 2022. Three processing facilities (Dead Animal Crematorium at Adampur 
Chhawani, Bhopal , Green Gas Pvt Ltd Adampur Chhaw ani and NVVN Ltd . Adampur 
Chhawani) were being operated without CCA.  
Further, CTE of one Processing facility (M/s Green Resources Solid Waste Management Pvt. 
Ltd. Adampur Chhawni) was rejected due to non-obtaining of Environment Clearance, but the 
XGN data shows the facility was under operation.  
The XGN data, however, did not have any information regarding the CTE/CCA obtained for 
the processing facilities set up in the remaining 30 test checked ULBs.  
The MPPCB, while accepting the audit observation, replied (May 2023) that it had already 
initiated necessary action on all the defaulting ULBs and also filed court cases against 13 ULBs 
out of sampled 34 ULBs, which were under process.  

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
52 
• Non submission of online monthly testing report by Industries under Municipal Solid 
Waste  
MPPCB grants Consent to Operate (CTO) under section 25 of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, under Section 21 of the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 and Registration as Manufacturer/Producer and Brand Owner under Rule 
13 of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016. As per the conditions of consent, the applicant 
had to take samples and measurements for analysis of pollutants, to meet the monthly 
requirement specified in the consent order and report the results online through XGN software.  
Audit generated the report from the Module which generates the report for grant of 
Consent/Renewal of Consent in respect of Industries under Solid Waste Management Sector 
for the period from 1 April 2017 to 24 January 2023. 
From the view authorisation for ‘CCA module for SWM (Solid Waste Management)’ of XGN 
software provided by MPPCB to Audit. Audit observed that 17 industries were classified under 
the solid waste sector, out of which 15 industries were falling under the red category. Review 
of these 15 red category units revealed that 14 out of these were not uploading monthly test 
reports and one industry was fou nd irregular in complying with the requirement. The 14 
industries, which were not submitting the monthly returns included Indo -Enviro Integrated 
Solutions (operator of Bio -CNG plant) and Hoswin Incin erator Pvt. Ltd. (firm engaged for 
incineration of Sanitary Waste) at Indore and Sagar MSW solutions P vt. Ltd. , Sagar 
(Implementing ISWM project) at Sagar, and two Garbage Transfer Stations of Arif Nagar and 
Danapani, Bhopal and Saurashtra Enviro Projects Private Ltd. (engaged in bioremediation of 
legacy waste) at Bhopal, and Jabalpur MSW Pvt. Ltd. (engaged in Waste to Energy plant).  
Further, CPCB had directed (December 2019) all SPCBs to inspect all red category industries, 
preferably at the frequency of 6 months for environmental surveillance. Audit observed that 
inspections of these industries were not carried out as per the prescribed frequency.  
In 15 industries, 39 instances were observed where inspections were done after a gap of more 
than six months as detailed in Table 2.7.  
Table 2.7: Showing number of instances, where inspections of industries under Solid 
Waste Sector were done after a gap of more than six months in sampled industries 
S. 
N. 
Sector PCB ID Name of Industry District No. of 
instances of 
monitoring 
frequency 
not adhered 
1 SWM 137331 Indo Enviro Integrated Solutions Limited Indore 1 
2 SWM 111895 Katni MSW Management Pvt.Ltd Katni 3 
3 SWM 114800 Sagar MSW Solutions Pvt. Ltd. Sagar 3 
4 SWM 145908 Citadel Iswm Project Singrauli Pvt Ltd Singrauli 1 
5 SWM 19526 Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Limited (Bulk 
Drug Unit) 
Dewas 5 
6 SWM 86511 Ujjain Waste Management Private Limited Ujjain 5 
7 SWM 136464 Habibganj Railway Station Bhopal 2 
8 SWM 142991 Municipal Corporation Bhopal, Danapani 
Garbage Transfer Station 
Bhopal 1 
9 SWM 142876 Municipal Corporation Bhopal, Arif Nagar 
Garbage Transfer Station 
Bhopal 1 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
53 
S. 
N. 
Sector PCB ID Name of Industry District No. of 
instances of 
monitoring 
frequency 
not adhered 
10 SWM 120695 Saurashtra Enviro Projects Pvt. Ltd. Bhopal 1 
11 SWM 112196 Hoswin Incinerator PVT. Ltd. Indore Indore 3 
12 SWM 128753 Rewa Waste 2 Energy Project Limited (A 
Subsidiary Company of Rewa MSW Holding Li 
Rewa 2 
13 SWM 118133 Nagar Palika Parisad Chhatarpur Chhatarpur 1 
14 SWM 32483 Mangla Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. Dewas 6 
15 SWM 28396 Jabalpur MSW Pvt. Ltd., Jabalpur Jabalpur 4 
Total   39 
(Source: XGN data of Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board) 
Thus, compliance to the orders of CPCB was not made by these processing units and also by 
MPPCB. MPPCB intimated that industries/facilities are instructed to maintain necessary 
records for the same for acting as a guide/aid during inspection. MPPCB also intimated that as 
per office order no. 867 dated 20 April 2015 routine inspection practice has been eliminated 
and practice of random inspection has been adopted. Adoption of the practice of random 
inspection approach, may result in the key areas of non -compliance remaining unnoticed, and 
thereby increasing the likelihood of environmental damage and posing a risk to public health.  
The MPPCB replied (May 2023) that initially the consent was granted to industries to discharge 
the effluent at the outfall of the industry premises, but at present practice the water consent has 
mandatory condition to implement zero discharge outside the premises, hence, the condition of 
monthly testing reports for discharge of effluent has become an advisory condition and not 
mandatory. Further, the red and  highly polluting industries were also being inspected by 
Regional Officer and his team for regular c ompliances and inspection reports were being 
processed in hardcopy in office files and not processed in XGN software. 
Reply is not acceptable as the red and highly polluting industries are still required to submit the 
monthly testing reports for discharge of effluent. Further, no evidence in support of submission 
of inspection report in hard copy was provided by the MPPCB. 
 
Management of contracts related to municipal solid waste should be guided by transparency, 
accountability, and a commitment to ensuring that the waste is collected, transported, and 
disposed of in an environmentally sound and cost -effective manner. Observa tions noticed in 
management of SWM contracts are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Waste to Energy (WtE ) refers to the process of generating energy in the form of heat or 
electricity from MSW. As per the CPCB letter dated 30 July 2020, the cluster based Integrated 
Solid Waste Management model based on waste to energy concept is under various stages of 
implementation in three clusters (Jabalpur, Rewa, and Gwalior), and it is currently operational 
in one cluster (Jabalpur). 
2.20 Contract Management of SWM activities by ULBs 
2.20.1  Contracts for Waste to Energy 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
54 
A review of the compliance to the contractual provisions of Waste to Energy plants revealed 
the following deficiencies: 
2.20.1.1 Waste to Energy production in ULB, Jabalpur 
An agreement between Jabalpur Municipal Corporation (JMC) and Essel Jabalpur MSW 
Private Limited was executed on 5 th February 2013 for establishment of processing plant for 
conversion of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) into energy at Kathonda, Jabalpur, for a 
concession period of 20 years.  
• As per article 5.1 of concession agreement, the project was designed to receive 
unsegregated Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generated by households, public services, 
agricultural activities, commercial establishments and industries located within the 
jurisdiction of JMC excluding biomedical waste, C&D waste, dead remains and hazardous 
wastes. It was however noticed that neither at the primary nor at the secondary stage, 
segregation of bio medical waste and hazardous waste from MSW was being done (Image 
2.34 and 2.35), which was in violation of the terms of the contract.  
Image 2.34 and 2.35: Mixed waste being collected and transported  
Image2.34: Mixed waste collection 
 Image2.35: Mixed waste collection 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
• Non deposit of royalty by concessionaire  
Article 5.3 of the concession agreement provides that JMC shall provide 450 TPD as assured 
waste quantity for processing to the concessionaire. Further, Article 8 of the contract, provides 
that the concessionaire was to pay royalty to JMC at the rate of ₹ 20.70 per ton of MSW supplied 
by JMC to the Developer. In case JMC fails to deliver the requisite quantity of MSW, then the 
concessionaire shall be entitled to get the operating and maintenance cost incurred on the 
project facilities for non -treatment of M SW, the amount of which was to be determined 
mutually. The price schedule of the agreement further specifies that the concessionaire has to 
deposit the revenue share to JMC at the start of every year, which shall be deposited or adjusted 
on the basis of actual waste supplied in the respective years.  
It was noticed that JMC has been demanding royalty from 2014 -15 onwards, but the 
concessionaire was not depositing the amount. Audit observed that till April 2021 total amount 
of royalty demanded by JMC had accumulated to ₹ 2.20 crore. Further JMC had not demanded 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
55 
royalty after April 2021. Audit worked out the total outstanding amount of royalty as ₹ 2.48 
crore from 2014-15 to 2021-22, as detailed in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Details of Year wise royalty to be deposited by concessionaire 
(₹ in crore) 
S.N. Year Quantity of 
MSW 
supplied to 
project site 
(in MT) 
Rate per 
MT (in ₹) 
Revenue 
share 
(Royalty) 
raised  
Revenue share 
(Royalty) 
deposited by 
concessionaire 
Differences if 
any 
1 2014-15 1,43,446.365 20.70 0.30 Nil 0.30 
2 2015-16 1,45,803.531 20.70 0.30 Nil 0.30 
3 2016-17  98,548.616 20.70 0.20 Nil 0.20 
4 2017-18 1,04,467.815 20.70 0.22 Nil 0.22 
5 2018-19 1,61,921.174 20.70 0.34 Nil 0.34 
6 2019-20 1,91,273.004 20.70 0.40 Nil 0.40 
7 2020-21 1,51,589.645 20.70 0.31 Nil 0.31 
8 2021-22 1,51,317.000* 20.70 0.31* Nil 0.31* 
 Total 2.48  2.48 
*Amount calculated by audit on the basis of Quantity of MSW provided by JMC and at the determined rate  
On being pointed out, JMC stated that notice for depositing royalty has been issued to the 
concessionaire. The reply was not acceptable as Article 9 of the agreement stipulates that action 
for declaring the concessionaire as defaulter and terminating the agreement was to be taken by 
JMC. 
Government replied (August 2023) that the Department would seek information from the ULB 
regarding non-deposit of royalty by the concessionaire, and will ensure that all the terms and 
conditions of contract are met by both ULB and concessionaire. 
2.20.1.2 Waste to Energy production in ULB, Rewa 
Agreement for setting up ISWM - Waste to Energy project on PPP mode was executed in 
February 2017 between Rewa MSW Holding and Commissioner, NN Rewa. The concession 
agreement was for a period of 21 years, of which 19 years was for operation and maintenance 
of ISWM project. The project included 28 ULBs coming under three districts of Rewa, Sidhi 
and Satna. These 28 ULBs included three test checked ULBs i.e. Satna, Maihar and Uchehara. 
Article 7 of the agreement provided that concessionaire would be paid monthly tipping fees of 
₹ 1,746 per MT. Forty per cent of the tipping fee was payable for the collection, transportation, 
and disposal of existing waste and freshly generated waste that has not been processed and 
disposed of as per the MSWM Rules. The remaining sixty per cent of the fee was payable only 
when the waste is processed and disposed of as per the MSW M rules after the commissioning 
of the Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) facility. The work of construction of 
ISWM project at Rewa was still in progress.  
Audit observed that: 
• ULB Satna made payment of ₹ 5.97 crore for 85,496.55 MT waste pertaining to the period 
February 2018 to February 2021 to the contractor @ ₹ 698.40 per MT. For the period from 
March 2021 to September 2022, an amount of ₹ 7.93 crore was paid for 45 ,409.71 MT 
waste @ ₹ 1,746/- per MT. Payment of tipping fees, for the period March 2021 to Dec 
2022 during which the ISWM facility was not commissioned; for the quantity of 45,409.71 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
56 
MT waste at full rate of ₹ 1,746/- per MT in place of ₹ 698.40 per MT resulted in irregular 
payment of ₹ 4.76 crore (45,409.71 MT x 1,047.6) to the concessioner,. 
Government stated that presently waste is being collected by concessionaire and processed 
at processing facility and after processing compost is sold to farmers or fertilizer companies 
and RDF is stored in plant area which will be disposed in waste to ener gy plant after it 
becomes operational. 
The reply of the Government, however, does not address on payment of the full tipping fee 
for the period from March 2021 to December 2022. 
• ULB, Maihar made payment of ₹ 65.35 lakh as tipping fee for door-to-door collection and 
transportation of waste for the period June 2019 to January 2021(₹ 9.19 lakh for the period 
June 2019 to September 2019, ₹ 11.91 lakh for the period October 2019 to February 2020, 
and ₹ 44.26 lakh for the period March 2020 to January 2021). No further payment was 
made to the concessionaire. Audit observed that the concessionaire instead of transporting 
the collected waste to the project site, was actually dumping them at the trenching ground 
at Maihar and was also irregular in collection of wastes from all the wards under the ULB. 
• ULB, Uchehara also paid ₹ 23.93 lakh as tipping fee for door -to-door collection and 
transportation of waste for the period May 2019 to November 2021(₹ 1.28 lakh for the 
period May 2019 to June 2019, ₹ 9.41 lakh for the period July 2019 to March 2020, and ₹ 
13.24 lakh for the period January 2021 to November 2021). Payment made by the ULB for 
the intervening period April 2020 to December 2020 was not available on records 
maintained by the ULB. No further payment was made to the concessionaire after 
November 2 021. Audit observed that the concessionaire instead of transporting the 
collected waste to the project site, was actually dumping them at the trenching ground at 
Uchehara. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the Department would seek information from both 
the ULBs and would direct them to ensure that concessionaire collect, process and dispose 
waste at processing facility in a scientific manner. 
 
Jabalpur Municipal Corporation (JMC) issued LOA to M/s Essel Infra Projects Ltd. on 11 
August 2016 for the work of Collection and Transportation of Municipal Solid Waste, under 
Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer Model. The concessionaire was asked to sign the 
agreement within 15 days and submit the required amount of performance guarantee. Audit 
observed that the firm formed a Special Pur pose Vehicle (SPV), named Jabalpur Waste 
Collection and Transportation Management Private Limited (on 29 August 2016) to implement 
the project. The agreement was signed in November 2016 between JMC  and Jabalpur Waste 
Collection & Transportation Management Private Ltd. and M/s Essel Infra Projects Ltd. for a 
period of 10 years.  
Audit observed that: 
• The newly formed SPV did not fulfill the criteria given in para 3 (c) of instructions to the 
bidders, which requires that the selected firm should have three years’ experience in the 
field of MSW sector. On being pointed out, it was stated that the tender was issued to  
2.20.2 Collection and Transportation of MSW under Design, Build, Finance, 
Operate and Transfer Model  

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
57 
M/s Essel Infra Projects Ltd. which had the required experience. The reply was not 
acceptable as the actual execution was being done by a firm which had no experience in 
the MSW sector. 
• The concession agreement provides that fully covered vehicles were to be used for 
transportation of waste collected from secondary transfer points to eliminate spillage and 
minimize the foul odour. It was noticed that transportation of MSW was  being done in 
open dumpers by concessionaire (Image 2.36 and 2.37), which was against the contractual 
conditions.  
Image 2.36 and 2.37: Uncovered vehicles used for transportation in ULB, Jabalpur 
Image2.36: Transportation of waste in uncovered 
vehicle 
Image2.37: Transportation of waste in uncovered 
vehicle 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
• The waste collected from the streets was being dumped in the city drain by the 
concessionaire, in spite of several warnings issued by JMC directing him to improve the 
work. Media has also been publishing the plight of solid waste management in Jabalpur as 
shown in Image 2.38 and 2.39. 
Image 2.38 and 2.39: Dumping of street waste in drains and media report thereon in JMC 
Image 2.38: Media Report 
 
Image 2.39: Dumping of waste in drains 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
While accepting the observation, JMC, stated that a proposal to terminate the contract was 
under consideration in the Member in Council. The fact remains that due to lack of experience 
of the SPV in MSW work, the cleaning work was not being done properly.  
• As per Schedule-2 of concession agreement, the concessionaire had to submit a Detailed 
Project Report for approval to JMC. It was however noticed that the DPR had not been 
approved by JMC. JMC agreed to the audit observation. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
58 
• The concessionaire had to submit Performance Bank Guarantee (BG) of ₹ 238.14 lakh at 
the time of agreement for due performance of its obligations under the contract (Article 
5.1a of agreement). The BG was to be kept valid throughout the term of the agreement. 
The Contractor submitted two BGs for the same at the time of agreement – one BG of  
₹ 100.00 lakh valid upto 28 October 2020; and the other BG of ₹ 138.14 lakh valid up to 
27 March 2021. Validity period of both these BGs has expired, due to its non -renewal 
before expiry.  
As per the terms of agreement, the BG if not renewed within one month prior to its validity 
period, the BG was to be invoked in its favour by the ULB, which was not done. JMC 
replied that the amount would be recovered from the bills of concessionaire. The fact 
remains that both the BGs  had expired and JMC had not taken action as per agreement 
clause. 
• As per the scope of work (Article 2.1) of agreement the concessionaire had to install semi-
underground waste collection bins at 200 identified locations. It was noticed that the 
concessionaire had not execute d this component. JMC later got this work done at 50 
locations under the Jabalpur Smart City Project,  by incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.99 
crore. JMC confirmed the facts and stated that the proposal to terminate the contract with 
the concessionaire was under consideration in MIC.  
• As per Part (c) of Appendices of Volume 1 of RFP documents, the bidder was responsible 
for conducting a campaign for disseminating the best practices in waste collection and 
disposal activities amongst the residents, the cost of which was to be borne by 
concessionaire. It was however noticed that JMC hired a separate agency ( M/s Human 
Matrix Security) for conducting IEC activity and paid an amount of ₹ 75.60 lakh to the 
firm. As IEC was already included in the scope of work of the concessionaire, award of 
same work to another agency and incurring expenditure on it was irregular.  
Government replied (August 2023) that the Department would seek information from the 
ULB regarding the work of waste collection awarded to the firm and ensure that the ULB 
will properly manage the contract and its terms and conditions through transparency,  
accountability and commitment to ensure waste is collected and transported to processing 
facility. 
 
The work of setting up the Integrated Regional Solid Waste Management Project for Sagar 
Cluster was awarded to M/S Ramky Enviro Engineers Limited for tipping fee @ ₹1,692/MT 
vide agreement dated 27 March 2015. The concession period was 19 years after Commercial 
Operation Date. The project was to be executed under PPP model. 
• As per RFP document, the ISWM project of Sagar Cluster was to be established in village 
Hafsili. The collection and transportation of MSW was started by concessionaire from 
April 2016 and collected wastes were being dumped in village Hafsili. Amid protests from 
villagers of village Hafsili, the ULB asked the concessionaire to use land at Amaouni 
2.20.3 Undisposed legacy waste at temporary site allotted for Sagar Cluster 
Project Site 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
59 
village temporarily, till a separate land is made available for the project. Separate land for 
the project was allotted on 30 November 2016 at village Maswasi. During the intervening 
period large quantity of wastes got accumulated at the temporary land at Amaouni village. 
As per terms of the agreement the concessionaire was required to process the wastes 
collected by him. Howeve r, the concessionaire did not take  any step for processing of 
accumulated wastes at the temporary site, despite several reminders from the ULB Sagar.  
During joint physical verification, it was found that the wastes dumped in Amaouni village had 
taken a shape of a mountain (Image 2.40). Further, some habitations were also found near the 
dumping place, hence the possibility of it posing health problems to the people residing nearby 
areas could not be ruled out.  
Image 2.40: The wastes dumped in Amaouni village took a shape of a mountain 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
In reply, ULB Sagar stated that the concessionaire has not taken any action to dispose of the 
waste dumped at Amaouni village despite several correspondences, oral instructions and 
monitoring committee meetings with the concessionaire. The fact remains that huge quantity 
of waste was lying undisposed at the temporary site. 
• As per the scope of work, the concessionaire was responsible for primary collection of 
MSW in a segregated manner in compliance with MSW M Rules. During joint physical 
verification of project site at Sagar, audit noticed unsegregated wastes at transfer station as 
well as project site, indicating that segregated waste was not being collected by the 
concessionaire (Image 2.41 and 2.42) during primary collection, which was in violation 
of the conditions of the contract. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
60 
Image 2.41 and 2.42: Unsegregated wastes at transfer station as well as project site in 
ULB, Sagar 
Image 2.41: Unsegregated waste Image 2.42: Unsegregated waste 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
In reply, the ULB, Sagar confirmed the fact that segregation of waste was not being done by 
concessionaire. 
• Non-disposal of combustible waste by concessionaire  
According to Schedule 2A(d) of SWM Rule, 2016, pre-process and post-process rejects was to 
be removed from the processing facility on regular basis and should not be allowed to pile at 
the site. Recyclables shall be routed through appropriate vendors. The non -recyclable high 
calorific fractions having minimum calorific value exceeding 1500 kcal/ kg to be segregated 
and sent to waste to energy or for RDF production, co-processing in cement plants or to thermal 
power plants. Only rejects from all processes shall be sent for sanitary landfill site. From th e 
test reports of the lab, it was noticed in audit that combustible wastes having calorific value 
more than 1500 kcal/ kg, was available at site and piles of these waste were lying undisposed 
as shown in Image. 2.43. 
Image 2.43: Combustible waste found lying undisposed in ULB, Sagar 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
 
The ULB, Bhopal awarded work order to a concessionaire (M/s Essel Group) for implementing 
ISWM Project in Bhopal at a tipping fee of ₹ 1,260 per ton. As per provision in Clause 2.2(b) 
(vi) of the Concession Agreement (16 November 2016), the ULB, Bhopal had committed to 
purchase the electricity generated from waste to energy plant at a levelized tariff of ₹ 6.39 per 
unit. As per the electricity regulations, the tariff rate was required to be adopted by Madhya 
Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC). The petition for adoption of tariff rate 
2.20.4 Unfruitful expenditure on “Regional Integrated Solid Waste 
Management Project Bhopal Cluster involving eight ULBs 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
61 
was rejected by MPERC with the reason that the rate of ₹ 6.39 is applicable for projects which 
does not involve government grants. Due to rejection of the petition the concession agreement 
was terminated. Audit observed that: 
• During the intervening period, the ULB, Bhopal had paid an amount of ₹ 1.51 crore to the 
concessionaire for construction of waste to energy plant. Due to termination of the 
agreement the payment made to M/s Essel Group remained unfruitful.  
• Further, up to the date of foreclosure of the work, the ULB, Bhopal had paid ₹ 1.51 crore 
to the concessionaire for work done up  to that date. However, the payment made to the 
Independent Engineer engaged for supervision of work done by the concessionaire was ₹ 
2.99 crore as detailed in Table 2.9. 
Table 2.9: Showing amount paid to Independent Engineer for supervision of 
work done by concessionaire 
S.N. Invoice Number Amount (in ₹) 
1 RA01 25,67,500 
2 RA02 30,39,783 
3 RA03 30,39,783 
4 RA04 30,39,783 
5 RA05 30,39,783 
6 RA06 30,39,783 
7 RA07 30,39,783 
8 RA08 30,39,783 
9 RA09 30,39,783 
10 RA10 30,39,783 
 Total 2,99,25,547 
This exorbitant payment for supervision of work done by the concessionaire i.e., 198 per cent 
of the value of work done by him was doubtful as value of work done by concessionaire was 
only ₹ 1.51 crore. Further, details of engineers deployed by the Independent Engineer (M/s 
M.V.S. International) and supporting documents to justify the payment for supervision work 
were not made available to audit. 
Government replied (August 2023) that since the project work was in continuation, payment 
was made to the independent engineer. 
The reply is not acceptable because till the termination of agreement the concessionaire had 
executed works valuing ₹ 1.51 crore, and the independent engineer engaged for supervising the 
work done by concessionaire was pai d an exorbitant amount of ₹ 2.99  crore. Justification for 
the same was not provided. 
 
The work of preparation of compost/ manure by organic method from wet waste at transfer 
stations/ garbage stations of the city and Adampur Chhawani for Urban Solid Waste 
Management at Bhopal,  was allotted to M/s National Federation of Farmers Procurement 
Processing and Retailing Cooperative of India (NACOF) for processing of 400 ton of waste per 
2.20.5 Irregular payment for processing of wastes during the period of 
establishment of project 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
62 
day @ ₹ 786 per tonne (September 2018), for a period of one year. According to Clause 12.14 
the duration of contract was one year and three months (three months for establishing the 
project and one year for regular operation) from the date of signing of the agreement.  
• Audit observed that though work order was issued on 27 September 2018, payment of ₹ 
82.68 lakh for processing of waste for the period October 2018 to November 2018, was 
made to the contractor. This payment is doubtful as records (note sheet dated 25 May 2019) 
reveal that the concessionaire had not initiated the civil works for establishing the four 
transfer stations at site. It was further noticed that the work was terminated on 15 December 
2020 due to an increase in the quantity of wastes from 400 tonnes to 800 tonnes.  
• The work was meanwhile awarded to the same contractor for processing of 800 tonnes of 
waste per day vide work order number 312, dated 23 November 2020 @ ₹ 333 per ton. 
Audit observed that the contractor was paid an amount of ₹ 1.81 crore for processing of 
800 tons of wastes from the second day of agreement i.e., 24 November 2020 to 24 January 
2021. This payment also seems doubtful as the existing capacity of old plant was 400 MT/ 
per day and processing of extra quantity (double capacity) just a day after the date of issue 
of work order was not possible. Further, records to prove that the contractor had enhanced 
the processing capacity by purchasing and installation of new plant was also not there. 
• The scope of work included disposal of five lakh MT legacy waste along with, processing 
of new waste and complete management of landfill site. Audit however noticed that an 
amount of ₹ 58.08 lakh was paid to another firm (M/s Odedra Construction Co.) for hiring 
of nine Pokelen machine for the site (Adampur) for the period from 5 November 2020 to 
30 November 2020. This payment was irregular as tender for complete management 
(disposal of legacy waste and processing of new waste) of Adampur land fill site was 
accepted before the hiring of these machines i.e., on 29 October 2020. 
• As per the DPR, contractor had to develop the Green Belt at Adampur landfill site at a cost 
of ₹ 87.50 lakh but specific area and number of plants were not mentioned. Audit observed 
that payment of ₹ 52.50 lakh was made to the contractor towards development of Green 
Belt but during the field visit, very few number of plants alongside road to landfill site 
were observed as shown in Image 2.44 and 2.45. 
Image 2.44 and 2.45: Landfill site where green belt was to be developed 
Image 2.44: Negligible plantation at landfill site Image 2.45: Negligible plantation at landfill site 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Government intimated (August 2023) that BMC floated tender for processing fresh daily MSW 
of 800 TPD capacity in which M/s NACOF offered L1 rate i.e. ₹ 333/MT and work order was 
issued. Since the existing capacity of old plant was 400 MT/day working at eight hours shift. 


 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
63 
After the work was awarded to concessionaire, the processing work of MSW was carried out 
in two shifts (i.e. eight hours each) for the daily MSW coming at site. Thus, the contractor was 
paid for daily processing of MSW. 
Reply is not acceptable as the capacity of old plant was 400 TPD and to process 800 TPD the 
firm had to augment its existing capacity and develop other infrastructures for which four 
months’ time was provided to the concessionaire in the Pre-bid meeting. The condition of eight 
hours per shift which was stated in reply was not supported by any documents. Thus, claim of 
the concessionaire and payment for 800 TPD immediately from the second day of agreement 
i.e., 24 November 2020 is not justified.  
Government needs to examine the matter and  fix responsibility for making payment to 
contractor for processing higher quantity of wastes from the second day of the agreement and 
negligible survival of plantations alongside road to landfill site. 
 
Clause 2.1(a) of the concession agreement (04 December 2017) with M/s Ecogreen (Gwalior) 
envisaged that the concessionaire shall be responsible for complete management of MSW 
generated in the whole project area, including residential, commercial, institutional, hotels, 
restaurants, markets, marriage  garden, parks, dead animals, non -hazardous industrial waste, 
treated biomedical waste, etc. 
• Audit observed that the ULB, Gwalior had paid an amount of ₹ 4.49 crore to other agency 
(Sh. Rakesh Singh Jadon) for collection and transportation of dead animals from different 
locations of Gwalior Municipal Corporation and dispose it off by burying it in land near 
Kedarpur landfill site, during the period from 29 December 2017 to 09 June 2020 as shown 
in Table 2.10.  
Table 2.10: Amount paid to separate agency for collection, transportation  
and disposal of dead animals 
S.N. Payment Period Amount (in lakh) 
1 29/12/2017 to 28/02/2018 24.33 
2 01/03/2018 to 30/04/2018 27.46 
3 01/05/2018 to 30/06/2018 28.78 
4 01/07/2018 to 30/08/2018 32.52 
5 01/09/2018 to 30/11/2018 50.86 
6 01/12/2018 to 31/01/2019 35.69 
7 01/02/2019 to 31/03/2019 31.52 
8 01/04/2019 to 31/08/2019 82.86 
9 01/09/2019 to 09/06/2020 135.40 
Total  449.42 
Payment made for the work of disposal of bodies of dead animals to a separate agency was 
irregular, as the concessionaire was responsible for its execution as well as installation of 
incinerator (Estimated cost ₹ 3.00 crore) as per scope of work. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the concessionaire of ISWM project Gwalior was not 
performing its duties, eventually the contract was terminated and there is no duplicity of 
expenditure. 
2.20.6 Avoidable expenditure due to non -performing the duties by the 
concessionaire 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
64 
The reply is not acceptable as the expenditure of ₹ 4.49 crore (besides cost of incinerator) shown 
in the Table 2.10 above pertains to the period of currency of agreement of M/s Ecogreen and 
no details of recovery made on this account has been produced to verify the claim of non -
duplicity in payment. Further, the dead animals were buried instead of being incinerated. 
 
According to Clause 2.1 (P) and schedule-7 of the Concession Agreement for Integrated Solid 
Waste Management (ISWM) Project Gwalior Cluster (consisting 16 ULBs) the concessionaire 
(M/s Ecogreen Energy Gwalior Private Limited ) was responsible for carrying out IEC 
campaign to sensitize citizens about their role in achieving the objectives of the Project. 
However, during scrutiny of records, Audit observed that the ULB, Gwalior had spent an 
amount of ₹ 1.25 crore during the year  2018-19 for conducting various IEC activities through 
other agencies, during Swachh Bharat Mission Survey 2019 as detailed in Table 2.11. 
Table 2.11: Expenditure for conducting various IEC activities in 2018-19 
(₹ in lakh) 
S.N. Name of the Firm Activity Bill Amount  
1 M/s Om Sai Vision 
Bhopal 
Production of TV/ theatre spots, video 
documentary films, etc. 
11.04 
2 M/s Ascent Brand 
Communication P vt. L td. 
Indore 
Video, documentary films under IEC activities 10.03 
3 M/s Ascent Brand 
Communication P vt. L td. 
Indore 
Wall writing 42.20 
4 M/s Ascent Brand 
Communication Pvt. L td. 
Indore 
Promotion through different types of hoarding, bus 
panels LED displays and various medium at IEC 
activities under SBM 
61.27 
Total 124.54 
As per the agreement, all the activities mentioned above were to be carried out by the 
concessionaire. The reasons for conducting IEC activities through other agencies, and action 
taken against the concessionaire for not conducting above activities was not made available to 
Audit. Further, information pertaining to the years 2017 -18, 2019-20 and 2020 -21 were also 
not made available to audit by the ULB, Gwalior despite repeated pursuance by the audit party.  
Government stated (August 2023) that the concessionaire of ISWM project Gwalior was not 
performing its duties, eventually the contract was terminated and there is no duplicity of 
expenditure. 
The reply is not acceptable as the expenditure of ₹ 1.25 crore shown in the Table 2.11 pertains 
to the year 2018 -19 and the agreement was terminated in November 2020 and no details of 
recovery made from the concessionaire has been provided to verify non-duplicity in payment.  
 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, GoI, vide notification dated 28th June 2017 (No. 
12/2017-Central Tax (Rate)), had exempted pure services provided to a municipality in respect 
of functions entrusted to it under article 243W of the Constitution f rom the purview of GST. 
2.20.7 Avoidable expenditure on conduct of IEC activities through agencies 
other than the concessionaire  
2.20.8  Unwarranted payment of GST to the private party 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
65 
Thus, services of outsourced labours provided to the municipalities was exempted from the 
purview of GST. Audit observed that: 
• Contrary to the above order, Nagar Palika Parishad Betul, irregularly made unwarranted 
payment of GST amounting to ₹ 25.84 lakh to the contractor for the work of supply of 50 
labours for Daily sweeping of roads, footpaths, public places, etc. 
ULB, Betul intimated that payment of GST on labour contract was made as per provisions 
of GST Act, 2017. 
• Similarly, Nagar Palika Parishad, Damoh irregularly made unwarranted payment of GST 
amounting to ₹ 19.56 lakh  to four agencies for the work of supply of 143 outsourced 
skilled/semi-skilled /unskilled workers for SWM activities.  
Government stated (August 2023) in reply that the department has no information about the 
terms of contract as the contract was executed at ULB level. 
 
NPP Betul awarded the work of “collection, transportation and IEC awareness activities for 
Municipal Solid Waste and Biomedical Waste” to a private firm in July 2019 (25 July 2019) 
Audit observed that: 
• As per condition no. 5.1 of the contract the contractor had to maintain regular record of 
wastes collected and transported and submit the same to ULB, Betul officials. However, 
these records were neither available in file nor was it produced to audit. ULB, Betul replied 
that the contracted agency provided geo -tagged photo booklet along with their monthly 
bills as evidence. The reply is not acceptable as compliance to the contractual condition 
was not made. 
• Payment of ₹ 6.49 crore has been made to the contractor for this work since the date of 
award of work, on the basis of monthly salary of the employees deployed for the work. 
This system was not in accordance with the provisions of the Guidebook on Swachh Bharat 
which stated that payment for collection and transportation of MSW should have been on 
the basis of maximum allowed weight per vehicle volume. The system of payment of 
remuneration to the contractor was not proper as it did not encourage the contract or to 
collect and transport waste in large quantities. NPP Betul, while accepting the audit 
observation, assured to take corrective measures in future. 
On being pointed out, no reply was offered by the Government (February 2024). 
 
The ULB, Indore awarded (October 2018) the work of supply, installation and commissioning 
of 300 TPD capacity of Automated Material Recovery Facility for Dry Municipal Waste 
processing on PPP model to a firm.  
As per the Article 5 “Annual Operating Fee” of the agreement, for the first contract year and 
each subsequent contract year, concessionaire had to pay to employer an annual fee of  
2.20.9  Contract for collection, transportation and IEC awareness activities  
2.20.10  Non-payment of royalty by concessionaire of the work of installation and 
commissioning 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
66 
₹ 1.41 crore payable on quarterly basis ( ₹ 35.25 lakh per quarter) for intake of 300 MT/ Day 
dry waste after commencement of commercial operations. The annual fee in the second year 
and subsequent years thereafter was subject to escalation at the rate of 5 per cent per annum on 
previous year amounts. Further, as per section 3.1(b), till the start of commercial operation of 
300 TPD, the existing MRF (MRF -1) of the ULB, Indore was handed over to concessionaire 
on as is where is basis, from the date of work order, and the contractor had to pay for this facility 
on pro-rata basis of amount approved for 300 TPD plant (MRF -2). Section 5.2 “Payments by 
the contractor” of the agreement further provides that delay in the payment of royalty by the 
concessionaire shall attract an interest of 12 per cent per annum. 
Audit noticed that the concessionaire started its commercial operations from 14 November 
2019. Therefore, for the period starting from 1 October 2018 to 13 November 2019, the 
Contractor had to pay for operation of manual MRF -1 facility at ₹ 6.08 lakh for each quarter 
and after 1 3 November 2019 at the rate quoted by contractor on quarterly basis. But the 
contractor has deposited only of ₹ 67.09 lakh till September 2022 against the required amount 
of ₹ 4.63 crore (as detailed in the Table 2.12). 
Table 2.12: Detail showing royalty payable by the Contractor  
(₹ in crore) 
S.N. Period Royalty to be paid by Contractor  
1 01/10/18 to 30/09/19 (04 Qtrs.) 0.24 
2 01/10/19 to 13/11/19 (44 days) 0.03 
3 14/11/19 to 31/12/19 (48 days) 0.19 
4 01/01/20 to 24/03/20 (84 days) 0.32 
5 01/04/20 to 31/03/21 (04 Qtrs.) 1.48 
6 01/04/21 to 31/03/22 (04 Qtrs.) 1.55 
7 01/04/22 to 30/09/22 (02 Qtrs.) 0.82 
Total 4.63  
The ULB, Indore had issued several notices to the contractor for depositing the amount of 
outstanding royalty. Audit further noticed that the ULB, Indore had not demanded the interest 
component for delay in payment of royalty. Thus, an amount of ₹ 3.96 crore (4.63 crore - 67.09 
lakh) excluding interest was pending for recovery against the royalty charges from the 
concessionaire. The ULB, Indore intimated that the issue related to outstanding amount of 
royalty will be resolved soon. 
On being pointed out, no reply was offered by the Government (February 2024). 
 
Audit recommends that: 
1. The ULBs may ensure availability of baseline data of wastes generated in their jurisdiction 
to properly assess the quantity of waste generated and prepare action plans for its adequate 
management.  
2. The State Government may ensure segregation of waste at source by devising a system for 
incentivising waste generators and collectors for segregation of waste and should prevent 
mixing of segregated waste during various stages of Solid Waste Management. 
2.21 Recommendations 

 Chapter 2: Solid Waste Management 
67 
3. ULBs may ensure collection and segregation of wastes from all Resident Welfare 
Associations, Market Associations, Gated Communities, Institutions, Hotels and 
Restaurants and as far as possible process b io-degradable waste through composting or 
bio-methanation within the premises itself. 
4. ULBs may put in place a robust system for monitoring of vehicles engaged in door-to-door 
collection and transportation of wastes to ensure that all areas under their jurisdiction is 
covered.  
5. ULBs may ensure creation of all facilities essential for effective and safe operation of the 
processing plants and the landfill sites.   
6. GoMP may strengthen monitoring of waste management activities through State level 
Advisory Body by ensuring its regular meetings and prescribing corrective actions in cases 
of irregularities noticed.  
7. MPPCB may put in place a n adequate monitoring system to ensure compliance of 
provisions of Solid Waste Management Rules in all the ULBs. 
8. The Government may examine and fix responsibility in the cases where excess/ irregular 
payments were made to contractors.  

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
MANAGEMENT 
OF SEWAGE 

 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3 
 
Management of Sewage 
 
 
Management of sewage undertake the task of sewerage and sewage treatment service delivery, 
with its own staff, equipment, and funds, or in some cases by engaging private enterprises.  
Being of a local nature, it has been entrusted to the ULBs. The main cause of water pollution 
is the unintended disposal of untreated, partly treated and non-point sources of sewage and 
more important is its effect on human health and environment.  To tackle this problem, the 
Government of India  (GoI) had given policy directions  to states and c ities by adoption of 
National Urban Sanitation Policy, 2008. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organisation1 Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems (CPHEEO Manual on 
SSTS) was introduced (November 2013) to achieve the objectives as envisaged in the National 
Urban Sanitation Policy. 
Audit test checked the record of 34 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in respect of aspects related 
to sewage management.  Observations on the  sewage management issues like, planning, 
collection and treatment of sewage, monitoring and quality c ontrol as well as programme 
implementation observed in the audited ULBs are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Proper planning for the collection, treatment and disposal is necessary for the functioning of 
an effective sewerage system. It is most essential to collect, treat and dispose of all the waste 
products of the city in such a way that it may not cause any hazardous effects on people residing 
in town as well as the environment.  
Planning aspects related to sewage management i.e., existence of City Sanitation Plan, planning 
of sewerage network with respect of sewage generation  were checked during  the audit.  
Findings based on the test checks are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
A City Master Plan (CMP) guides development, conservation and capital improvement projects 
to improve the quality of life in the community. The CMP includes the City’s goals and 
objectives, land use plan, urban design, housing, infrastructure, parks, open  space, 
transportation, economic development and preservation of historical monuments.  
The City Sanitation Plan (CSP) shall also mandatorily form part of the CMP. As per Paragraph 
2.4.10 of the CPHEEO Manual on SSTS, 2013, all local bodies are  required to prepare CSP 
 
1  Involved in  preparation of Technical Guidelines in the form of Manuals in the field of Public Health & 
Environmental Engineering which are used as basic documents by the State PHEDs / State Water Boards / 
UTs/ Urban Local Bodies in their functions of planning, designing, construction and O&M of water supply 
and sanitation schemes in the above sectors. 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Planning of Sewerage Network 
 
3.2.1 Non preparation of City Sanitation Plan 
 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
70 
for a period of 30 years considering future development and city development in line with CMP 
to avoid any conflicts in developing the city in future.  
The CSP involves close collaboration with other planning agencies at local, State and National 
levels to ensure better coordination in allocation of priorities and resources. The collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal aspects, facilities, augmentation and replacement of the 
equipment and sites, allocation of priorities and resources should invariably be decided keeping 
in view the design period of the CSP. 
Audit noticed that out of the audited 34 ULBs, only Indore ULB had prepared the CSP,  32 
ULBs had not prepared CSP while ULB, Bhopal did not furnish information in this regard.  
Although construction of sewerage syst em is already in progress in 11 2 out of 34 ULBs. In 
absence of such Plan, overall sewage management of the se 32 ULBs for identification, 
collection, treatment and disposal in systematic and planned manner had remained incomplete. 
Government stated (August 2023) that 133 out of 34 audited ULBs are under AMRUT 2.0 and 
have prepared and uploaded their City Water Balance Plan (CWBAP) to Government of India, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) Portal. 
While considering the reply of Government, the fact remains that the majority of ULBs have 
not yet prepared CSP.  
 
Paragraph 10.5.2.2.1 of CPHEEO Manual on SSTS, 2013  envisages constitution of a multi -
stakeholder City Sanitation Task Force (CSTF) comprising representatives from Agencies 
directly responsible for sanitation, including the different Divisions and Departments of the 
ULBs, Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), etc. for (a) Launching the City 100 per 
cent Sanitation Campaign (b) Generating awareness amongst the Citizens and stakeholders (c) 
Approving materials and progress reports provided by the implementing agency, other public 
agencies, NGOs or private parties contracted for different aspects of implementation  (d) 
Approving the CSP for the City prepared by the Sanitation Implementation Agency after 
consultations with Citizens (e) Undertaking field visits from time to time to supervise progress 
(f) Issue briefings to the press/  media and State Government about progress (g) Providing 
overall guidance to the Implementation  Agency (h) Recommend to the ULB fixing of 
responsibilities for city-wide sanitation on a permanent basis. 
Audit noticed that CSTF was not constituted in the 324 out of audited 34 ULBs while ULBs, 
Bhopal and Satna did not furnish information in this regard. Thus, in its absence the aforesaid 
activities as envisaged in CPHEEO Manual  for the CSTF could not be accomplished which 
raised doubts about successful implementation of the CSP in these 32 ULBs. 
 
2  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Mandleshwar, Morena, Ratlam, Sagar, Shahdol, and Vidisha .  
3  Betul, Bhind, Bhopal, Damoh, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Morena, Ratlam, Satna, Sagar, Shivpuri and Vidisha. 
4 Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, 
Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, 
Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
3.2.2 City Sanitation Task Force not constituted  
 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
71 
Government stated (August 2023) that CSTF had been constituted in ULB Bhopal, Indore, 
Ratlam and Satna only and remaining ULBs are in process of setting up their CSTF. 
Audit is of the opinion that CSTF may be constituted in a time bound manner in all the ULBs. 
 
According to paragraph 3.7 of the CPHEEO Manual, sewage from commercial public 
institutions, industries and commercial buildings often use water other than the municipal 
supply and may discharge their liquid waste into the sewers. Thus , estimates of such flows 
should be made separately considering the needs of their potabl e water as indicated in  
Table 3.1. 
 Table 3.1: Showing the type of Institutions and their needs of potable 
S.N. Types of institutions Water Supply (in liters)  
1 Hospitals including laundry and beds not exceeding 100 340 per bed 
2 Hostels/ boarding schools & colleges, nursing homes and medical quarters 135 lpcd 
3 Restaurants per seat 70 per seat 
4 Day Schools/ colleges, offices, factories, duty staffs 45 lpcd 
5 Cinema, concerts and theaters 15 lpcd 
6 Train and bus stations, alighting and boarding person 15 lpcd 
(Source: CPHEEO Manual on SSTS, 2013) 
During scrutiny of Feasibility Report/ Detailed Project Reports ( DPRs) relating to sewerage 
systems, Audit observed that no provision was made in 115 ULBs for the treatment of sewage 
generated by these institutions. Preparation of DPR without considering the sewage generated 
by these institutions, possibility of improper collection, treatment and disposal of sewage 
cannot be ruled out. 
In reply, the  ULBs stated that DPR of the sewe rage system was prepared by consultants 
keeping in mind the household sewerage system only.  Replies indicate deficient planning 
process for Institutional sewage discharge.  
Government stated (August 2023) that at the time of preparation of DPR, the assessment of 
sewage flow is made @ 80 per cent of total waste supply (@ 70 -135 lpcd) along with 10 per 
cent additional water infiltration. Also , the quantity of sewerage during initial year is far less 
than design capacity therefore any additional flow from commercial public institutions, 
industries and commercial building upto 5 to 10 per cent is easily accommodated. 
The Reply substantiates the fact that the provisions of manual was not followed during planning 
and may adversely impact the bearing capacity of the system.  
 
The sewerage project is envisioned with a view to dispose of the sewer water after its treatment 
so that this water may not pollute the soil and water bodies of the State. As this task was of 
prime importance, its timely execution was equally important so that the intended purpose be 
achieved at the earliest. 
 
5  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Morena, Ratlam, Sagar, Satna, Shahdol and Vidisha. 
3.2.3  Non-inclusion of Institutes/ Public Toilets in the sewerage system 
 
3.2.4 Non-completion of projects in scheduled time period 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
72 
In 11 works of nine  ULBs, the contractor had failed to complete the work within stipulated  
time period as detailed in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Details of delayed project 
S.
N. 
ULB Project name Date of 
Work 
order 
Period  Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual Date 
of 
completion 
Delay 
period (up 
to 3/2023) 
1 Gwalior Gwalior-Morar 
Sewerage 
25/09/17 24 months 24/09/19 31/03/22 30 months 
2 Gwalior Gwalior-Laskar 
Sewerage 
04/10/17 24 months 03/10/19 02/02/22 31 months 
3 Morena Morena Sewerage 12/07/16 24 months 11/07/19 30/12/21 32 months 
4 Bhind Bhind Sewerage 08/12/17 24 months 07/12/19 not 
completed 
33 months 
5 Satna Satna Sewerage 05/12/16 36 months 04/12/19 Foreclosed 
on 28/05/21 
34 months 
6 Vidisha Vidisha Sewerage 20/04/17 24 months 19/04/19 not 
completed 
44 months 
7 Indore Nalla tapping of city 24/01/18 24 months 23/01/20 not 
completed 
36 months 
8  Indore Indore Sewerage  28/12/17 24 months 27/12/19 not 
completed 
37 months 
9 Sagar Sagar Sewerage  08/07/16 36 months 06/07/19 not 
completed 
36 months 
10 Mandleshwar Mandleshwar 
Sewerage 
06/01/18 24 months 05/01/20 not 
completed 
39 months 
11 Jabalpur Jabalpur Sewerage 23/07/21 12 months 22/07/22 not 
completed 
8 months 
Thus, due to delay of projects the generated sewage is merging in nearby water bodies. Some 
Images 3.1 to 3.3 of merging of untreated water in nearby water bodies are as under: 
Image 3.1 to 3.3: Untreated sewage merging in water bodies due to delay of projects 
 
 
Untreated 
sewage water 
merging in 
River 
Narmada at 
Mandleshwar 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
73 
 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Government stated (August 2023) that the sewage treatment facility was under trial in six ULBs 
(ULBs Bhind, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Ratlam, Sagar and Vidisha), at O&M stage in three ULBs 
(ULBs Gwalior, Indore and Morena) and under construction stage in three ULB s (ULBs 
Mandleshwar, Satna and Shahdol).  
Audit is of the opinion that the department needs to strengthen the monitoring mechanism for 
timely completion of projects to avoid further pollution of water bodies. 
 
According to section 2.2.2 to 2.2.4 of handbook of service level benchmarking issued by 
ministry of urban development of GOI, 100 per cent of the households, commercial, industrial 
and other institutions of the service area of body shall be covered by underground sewage 
network and 100 per cent sewage emitted under the service area of the local body shall be 
collected and treated. 
Audit noticed that during the period 2017-22, sewage treatment facility was partially functional 
and was under trial run in the six ULBs6, O&M stage in three ULBs7 and construction was 
ongoing at three  ULBs8. Sewage treatment facility was not available in  remaining 22 ULBs 
(March 2023) and the generated sewage was merging eventually into the local water bodies 
 
6  Bhind, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Ratlam, Sagar and Vidisha. 
7  Gwalior, Indore and Morena. 
8  Mandleshwar, Satna and Shahdol. 
3.2.5 Non-Development of infrastructure for sewage management 
 
Untreated 
sewage water 
merging in 
River Satna at 
Satna 
Untreated 
sewage 
water 
merging in 
River 
Narmada 
through 
Kandhari 
Nalla at 
Jabalpur 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
74 
through different open nalas. Thus, due to non -availability of sewage treatment facilities in 
ULBs, approximately total 2,09,726.13 ML (Appendix 3.1) of sewage had merged into water 
bodies through various nalas during 2017-22. Five such instances of sewage flowing through 
open nalas have been depicted in Images 3.4 to 3.8. 
Image 3.4 to 3.8: Sewage flowing through open nalas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sewerage 
flowing into 
Budi Talab, 
Balaghat 
Umriha 
Taalab, 
Ward 
No. 10, 
Beohari 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
75 
 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Government stated (August 2023) that in 22 ULBs, one STP is under trial in Shivpuri (PHE), 
LOA has been issued for sewerage project in Maihar and Sanchi under ADB scheme. In Betul, 
Damoh and Mandsaur ULBs sewerage projects have been proposed under AMRUT 2.0 and for 
remaining ULBs, projects have been proposed under SBM 2.0. In Vidisha, 22.25 MLD STP is 
operational since 2021. It was further stated that water quality testing report of river Betwa at 
Vidisha shows satisfactory results. 
Reply is not convincing as it lacks timeline to prevent merging of untreated sewerage in water 
bodies. Further, in Vidisha due to non -connection of 100 per cent households and nallas with 
sewerage network, untreated water is merging in the river Betwa, which shows deficient 
planning.  
Shankar 
talkies nala 
merging in 
River 
Murna at  
Railway 
crossing 
Shahdol 
 
Chorghat 
nala 
merging in 
Betwa 
River at 
Vidisha 
Nala 
merging in 
Shivna 
River at 
Mandsaur 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
76 
 
Paragraph 2.11 of CPHEEO Manual, regarding Guidelines on house sewer connections  
envisages to: 
• Amend the Municipal Byelaws to make it compulsory for the population to avail house 
service connection wherever public sewer is provided, otherwise, the local authority shall 
affect the house sewer connection and initiate revenue recovery proceedings.  
• Include house-service sewer connections as part of the sewerage project itself. 
ULBs had not made it mandatory for the households to take sewerage connection. Sewerage 
network and STPs have been constructed in nine out of total 34 ULBs. Out of these nine ULBs, 
household connections were not given adequate importance and number of connected 
households was very low in seven ULBs. At Mandleshwar, Satna and Shahdol sewage projects 
are under construction stage, while ULB Gwalior did not provide any information in this 
regard. Total households and connected households with sewerage line are detailed in Table 
3.3. 
Table 3.3: Details of connections obtained by households 
S.N. Name of ULBs Date of 
completion 
of project 
Total 
number of 
households 
as per DPR 
Number of 
households connected 
to sewerage 
connection 
Percentage of 
connection 
1 Bhind 07/12/19 13,585 7,735 56.94 
2 Bhopal (ADB 
Project) 
04/05/20 60,921 8,798 14.44 
3 Jabalpur 27/06/20 1,46,900 58,244 39.65 
4 Morena 28/07/18 26,585 20,100 75.61 
5 Ratlam 27/12/19 53,273 29,103 54.63 
6 Sagar 06/07/19 60,173 4,738 7.87 
7 Vidisha 19/04/19 26,000 14,028 53.95 
 Total  3,87,437 1,42,746 36.84 
(Source: Information provided by ULBs) 
It would be seen from Table 3.3 above that only 1,42,746 out of 3,87,437 households i.e. 36.84 
per cent in these ULBs had taken sewerage connections. Thus, purpose of laying of sewerage 
line i.e. treatment and disposal of sewer water to save the water bodies and soil from pollution, 
was not achieved due to the failure of the ULBs to connect the residential sewer waste with the 
sewer network. Therefore, this may result in unabated flow of the pollutant in the soil and water 
bodies, defeating the very purpose for which this scheme was envisaged.  
Government stated (August 2023) that it is mandatory for the contractor to do House Service 
Connection (HSC) wherever the sewer network is laid. ULBs Vidisha, Morena, Bhind and 
Bhopal (where sewerage projects has been completed) the revised HSC target given under 
AMRUT 1.0 has been fully achieved. 
The reply is not convincing as even after stated completion of projects, all households as shown 
in the DPR have not been connected in ULBs Vidisha, Morena, Bhind and Bhopal, defeating 
the very purpose of the project.  
 
3.2.6 Absence of mandatory provision for obtaining sewerage connection 
 

Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
77 
Paragraph 2.2.8 of GoI’s Handbook of Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) envisages that all 
operating costs should be recovered through a combination of user charges, fees and taxes, etc. 
Further, Urban Development and Housing Department (UDHD) , GoMP  had amended 
(September 2020) the Madhya Pradesh Municipality (User charges for Water supply, Sewerage 
and Solid Waste Management Services) Rules, 2020. Accordingly, fixation of user charges for 
Water Supply, Sewage and Solid Waste management services shall be done in such a manner 
so that annual expenditure incurred on the services can be recovered fully. 
Audit, however, observed that nine ULBs9 (where sewerage system is completed)  did not 
implement orders for levy of  user charges , fees, taxes, due to which the ULBs have to 
separately provide for the funds for maintenance of the existing sewage system, from their own 
limited resources.  
The ULBs are already working with scare resources . Hence, non-levy of user charges will 
further impact development and maintenance of various other schemes. 
Government stated (August 2023) that Government of Madhya Pradesh has issued Gazette no. 
360 dated 28  September 2020 for the collection of user charges. It was further stated that 
adoption of this Gazette notification and implementation of user charges by ULBs is being 
pursued. 
Method of treatment or disposal of sewage should be decided at the stage of preparing the 
detailed project report.  
Audit scrutinized the DPR and noticed in ULBs, Bhopal, Indore, Morena and Vidisha that the 
sewerage schemes were prepared to protect the water bodies of ULBs and use of treated water 
for the purpose of agriculture, gardening, washing of roads , etc. Further, the treated and 
untreated sewage of these ULBs were being discharged into the local drains by the ULB itself 
as shown in Images 3. 9 to 3.14. 
Image 3.9 and 3.10: Treated water of Char Imli STP discharged in Panchsheel Nala by 
ULB, Bhopal
(Photo: Audit Team) 
9  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Morena, Ratlam, Sagar and Vidisha. 
3.2.7 Non-levy of user charges for sewerage service connection 
3.2.8 Lack of planning for use of treated wastewater 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
78 
Image 3.11 and 3.12: Treated water of Shirin River STP discharged in Upper Lake by 
ULB, Bhopal 
  
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Image 3.13 and 3.14: Treated water of STP discharged in Sarswati River, Indore and 
Nala No.1, Morena which finally merges into the Quwanri River at Morena 
  
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Government stated (August 2023) that treated effulent from STP is reused in Agriculture and 
Horticulture if they are in closed proximity to parks and fields. STP at Char Imli and Shirin in 
Bhopal are located within the city and due to lack of reuse possibilities most of treated effulent 
is discharged in water bodies. But planning for their potential reuse is in process. 
Reply is not tenable as all these schemes were prepared with the view to protect the nearby 
water bodies of the ULBs. 
 
Collection and treatment of sewage is the most integral part of sewage management. Audit 
scrutinised the issues relating to this aspect and found many deficiencies such as lack of training 
on cleaning of septage, preparation of manual of practice on septage management as well as 
proper strategy for faecal sludge and septage management, inadequate de-sludging of septic 
tanks/ collection of septage and non-functional Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant. These have 
been discussed below: 
Faecal Sludge is raw or partially digested, in slurry or semisolid form, the collection, storage 
or treatment of combinations of excreta and black water, with or without grey water. It is the 
solid or settled contents of pit latrines and septic tanks. The effluents from the septic tank can 
be collected in a network of drains and/  or sewers and treated in a treatment plant designed 
appropriately. The accumulating sludge at the bottom of the septic tanks, however, must be 
removed also and treated once it has reached the designed depth or at the end of the designed 
3.3 Faecal Sludge Management 
 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
79 
de-sludging frequency whichever occurs earlier. However, such a removal is possible only by 
vacuum emptier trucks. Procedure of collection and treatment of faecal sludge is depicted in 
the following Image 3.15: 
Image 3.15: The procedure of collection, transportation and treatment
 
(Source: Ministry of Urban Development, GoI) 
The issue was checked at ULB level through various aspects, i.e., strategy for Faecal Sludge 
and Septage Management (FSSM), collection, transport, treatment, monitoring of faecal sludge 
generation and disposal, etc. 
Findings on above are discussed in detail in succeeding Paragraphs: 
(a) Lack of proper strategy for Faecal Sludge and Septage Management in ULBs 
GoMP State Level Policy (2017) for Wastewater Recycle and Reuse and FSSM states that 
prime responsibility for installing and operating a sanitation service lies with the individual 
Municipal Bodies. Each Municipal Government should determine its own policy  for a 
sanitation service at the micro level within the framework of the guidelines established in the 
macro policy formulated by the State Government. 
Audit observed that out of selected 34 ULBs, only Indore had prepared FSSM Policy, 26  
ULBs10  had not prepared any FSSM Policy. ULBs, Maihar, Nalkheda, Pichhore, Shivpuri, 
Uchehara did not offer any specific reply while ULBs, Bhopal and Satna did not provide any 
information in this regard. Thus there is  lack of proper strategy for safe disposal of septage 
under jurisdiction of these ULBs. 
The ULBs had accepted the facts of non -preparation of FSSM policy, however, the replies of 
ULBs do not account for not formulating the Policy for a sanitation service at the micro level. 
Further, no strategy for safe disposal was formulated in the ULBs.  
Government stated (August 2023) that the State has drafted an FSSM policy which is in process 
of approval and will be launched soon. 
(b) Non-functional Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant  
Faecal Sludge Management (FSM) is the collection, transport and treatment of faecal sludge 
from pit latrines, septic tanks or other sanitation system. FSM is necessary in densely populated 
 
10  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Betul, Beohari, Bhind, Damoh, Dhar, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, 
Morena, Mandsaur, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, 
Sanchi, Shahdol and Vidisha. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
80 
area where a part of the population is not connected to a sewerage network, and covering and 
rebuilding of pit latrines is not possible. 
Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant  (FSTP) is a vermi  filtration based comprehensive and 
sustainable technological solution developed to manage faecal sludge effectively. FSTP can 
separate solid and liquid wastes to convert them into vermi compost and water for non-potable 
uses such as gardening, flushing and farming with appropriate treatment. 
Audit had test checked the records of 34 ULBs , out of these, FSTPs were functional in 10 
ULBs11  and in 14 ULBs12  FSTP were not functional though an expenditure of ₹ 1.06 crore 
(Appendix 3.2) had been incurred  during 2017 -22 on construction of these FSTPs, while 
FSTPs were  under construction  stage at Barghat, Niwari and Pichhore and FSTPs are not 
required at Ind ore, Bhopal and Vidisha, while  Gwalior, Jabalpur, Ratlam and Sagar did not 
provided any information. Hence, expenditure incurred on these FSTPs could not be utilised 
for converting sludge into useful products such as vermi-compost and non-potable water. Two 
examples of non-functional FSTPs are depicted in Images below: 
Image 3.16 and 3.17: Non-functional FSTPs 
 
 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Government stated (August 2023) that as per the guidelines issued by MoHUA under SBM for 
ODF+/ODF++ certification for any ULB to be certified as ODF++, functional treatment plant 
are mandatory. On the same line, out of these 34 ULBs inspected, 31 ULBs have been certified 
as ODF++ or higher by the MoHUA vide third party based validation and field inspection. 
 
11  Balaghat, Betul, Damoh, Khirkiya, Mandleshwar, Morena, Nalkheda, Piplanarayanwar, Satna and 
Shivpuri.  
12  Akodia, Beohari, Bhind, Dhar, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, Mandsaur, Orchha, Polaykalan, Sanchi, 
Shahdol, and Uchehara. 
Non-
functional 
FSTP at 
Dhar ULB 
Non-
functional 
FSTP at 
Akodia 
ULB 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
81 
However, the reply does not address the audit observation on the functionality of FSTPs. 
(c) Training on cleaning of septage and preparation of manual of practice on septage 
management 
Paragraph 9.2 of advisory note on Septage Management in Urban India, issued (January 2013) 
by Ministry of Urban Development, GoI,  states that it is obligatory on the part of every local 
body to collect, transport and properly dispose of septage as well as sewage generated in the 
area under  their respective jurisdictions. This required training on matters like technical, 
financial, regulatory, field visit, monitoring and evaluation, etc. to achieve this objective. 
Further, paragraph 5.3 of this advisory note states that it is best that a Manual of Practices for 
septage be prepared by the septage program managers by reviewing the operating procedures 
for specific equipment and then documenting all aspects of the day-to-day procedures like (a) 
scheduling and routing for trucks (b) locating tanks and cleanouts (c) proper pumping 
equipment operation and worker safety (d) site control, i ncluding post-pumping clean-up (e) 
disposal procedures at the treatment facility (h) recordkeeping for all tanks pumped and wastes 
discharged at the disposal facility. Manual of Practices was an important document to provide 
guidance for the equipment operators and for new employees. 
Audit noticed that during the last five years neither training programmes for cleaning of septage 
was arranged nor a Manual of Practices on septage management was prepared by the 33 out of 
34 test checked units while ULB, Bhopal did not furnish any information in this regard. 
In reply, 33 ULBs admitted that no training programme for labourers engaged in septage 
management was imparted/ or, organized during last five years and, Manual of Practices was 
also not prepared. 
 
Audit scrutinised monitoring and quality control under the sewerage management and found 
out that SLB cell not constituted, absence of mechanism for complaint redressal, non-testing 
of major parameters at STPs, etc, were observed inadequacies in issues, these have been 
discussed below: 
 
Section 2.2.7 of the H andbook on Service Level Benchmark issued by Ministry of Urban 
Development, GoI  states that, systems for receiving and logging in -complaints should be 
effective and easily accessible to the citizens. Points of customer contact should include 
common phone numbers, written complaints at ward offices, collection centres, drop boxes, 
online complaints on the website, etc. Further, in cases of satisfactory resolution of sewage 
related complaints, a satisfactory resolution of the compliant duly endorsed by the person 
making the compliant in a format or proforma should be used to track complaints. 
3.4 Monitoring and Quality Control 
 
3.4.1 Absence of Complaint Redressal mechanism for complaints relating to 
sewage 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
82 
Audit noticed that no complaint redressal mechanism was been established in six ULBs13 out 
of nine ULBs having a sewerage system. 
On being pointed out no specific reply was provided to audit. 
 
• Coverage of sewage network  
As per paragraph 2.2.2 of SLB Handbook, this indicator denotes the extent to which the 
underground sewerage network has reached out to individual properties across the service area. 
The benchmark value for this indicator was 100 per cent. 
Audit noticed that in two  out of nine ULBs (where sewerage network completed) the 100 per 
cent households were not connected with sew er network, but they have shown 95 to 100 per 
cent achievement against this indicator (as of March 2022). 
Table 3.4: Details of connections obtained by households 
S.N. Name of ULBs Total number 
of households 
as per DPR 
Number of households 
connected to sewerage 
connection 
Percentage 
of 
connection 
Percentage of 
achievement as 
per SLB 
1 Vidisha 26,000 14,028 53.95 95 
2 Indore 4,77,421 4,74,826 99.56 100 
Thus, the achievement of performance indicato r as shown by the above ULBs were  incorrect 
and the exaggerated achievement was shown to show the better performance. 
Government stated (August 2023) that comprehensive DPRs were made for covering 100 per 
cent HSC within the city under its sewerage project. But due to fund constraints, phase wise 
implementation was done under AMRUT 1.0. Leftover network will be taken up under 
AMRUT 2.0 to achieve 100 per cent coverage. 
• Efficiency in collection of sewage charges 
Paragraph 2.2.9 of SLB handbook indicates the efficiency in collection is defined as current 
year revenues collected, expressed as a percentage of the total operating revenues, for the 
corresponding time period. The benchmark value for this indicator was 50 per cent. 
Audit noticed that two ULBs had not levied sewerage charges yet, but achievement in this 
regard was shown ranging 20 to 50 per cent (Table 3. 5). Thus, the reported efficiency in 
collection as detailed below, was not only incorrect but also misleading. : 
Table 3.5: Details of connections obtained by households 
S.N. Name of ULBs Total 
number of 
households 
as per DPR 
Number of households 
connected to sewerage 
connection 
Percentage of 
achievement for user 
charges 
1 Indore 4,77,421 4,74,826 50 
2 Vidisha 26,000 14,028 20 
(Source: ULBs) 
 
13  Gwalior, Jabalpur, Morena, Ratlam, Sagar and Vidisha. 
3.4.2 Exaggeration of SLB (Service Level Benchmark) targets to show better     
performance 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
83 
Government stated (August 2023) that Government of Madhya Pradesh has issued Gazette no. 
360 dated 28  September 2020 for the collection of user charges. Adoption of this Gazette 
notification and implementation of user charges by ULBs is being pursued. 
However, the reply of the Government is silent about the incorrect data of achievement shown.  
 
As per Section 33 A of the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, MPPCB had 
issued following directions for strengthening the monitoring mechanism for effective 
compliance through self-regulatory mechanism: 
• All the STPs being operated in Million Plus Cities and remaining cities/ towns by Indore 
Nagar Nigam, Municipalities or the concerned body in the State shall install Online 
Continuous Effluent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) for the parameters namely pH, TSS, 
BOD, COD before 31 January 2021 and for remaining Cities it was to be installed before 
31 July 2021. 
• The STP operating authority shall connect and upload the online effluent monitoring data 
with the servers of the MPPCB at Environment Surveillance Centre (ESC) at Bhopal in a 
time bound manner but not later than timelines as mentioned above and shall ensure regular 
maintenance and operation of the OCEMS with temper proof mechanism with facilities 
for calibration. 
On the basis of above-mentioned direction issued by the MPPCB, the eligible ULBs were 
required to install OCEMS at STPs coming under their jurisdiction before 31  January 2021. 
During the Joint Physical Verification of STPs in three ULBs14, the OCEMS were not found 
installed at 10 STPs which was in violation of MPPCB directions. 
Government stated (August 2023) that installation is complete for 19 out of 39 STPs and work 
awarded for 15 STPs in ULBs Indore, Gwalior and Morena. 
 
Note 10 of Chapter-12 of the Integrated Standard Schedule of Rate (ISSR) of UADD provides 
that, sulphur resistant cement should be used for manufacture of RCC Pipes used in sewerage 
works. Chapter 3  of CPHEEO Manual for Sewerage Engineering also provides for use of 
Sulphate resistant pipes in sewage network. 
Audit noticed that, in five ULBs15, sulphur resistant RCC pipes (NP -2, NP-3 and NP-4) were 
not found used. Non-use of sulphur resistance pipes could result in depletion of pipes at a higher 
pace, thereby shortening the life of entire project. 
Government stated (August 2023) that use of Sulphide-resistant pipes will be mandatory in 
upcoming AMRUT 2.0 projects. 
 
14  Gwalior (4), Indore (5), and Morena (1).  
15  Bhopal, Jabalpur, Morena, Ratlam, and Vidisha. 
3.4.3  Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring Systems was not installed at       
STPs 
3.4.4  Non-use of Sulphur resistant pipes sewage 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
84 
 
Audit scrutinised records relating to various Sewerage Projects and found instances of excess 
payments, extra cost, irregularities in execution of works and other deficiencies in maintaining 
records. A few such instances are highlighted in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Irregularities in implementation of Sewerage Projects 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
1 Excess/ 
inadmissible 
payment of GST 
15.45 Clause 25.1 of section 3, Part-1 - conditions of contract under General 
conditions of contract (GCC) provides that ‘the rate quoted by the 
contractor shall be deemed to be inclusive of the sales and other levies, 
duties, cess, toll, taxes of central and State government, local bodies 
and authorities. Further, the clause 25.3 provides that ‘Any changes in 
the taxes due to change in legislation or for any other reason shall not 
be payable to the contractor’.  Therefore, no additional payment on 
account of taxes including GST was to be paid to the contractor.  
Audit, however, observed that in Nagar Nigam Morena, an amount of 
₹ 15.45 crore was additionally paid against above contractual 
provisions to the contractor towards GST component @12 per cent on 
the value of work done16 after 1 July 2017 (effective date of GST). This 
additional payment of GST was over and above the payment due for the 
work as per agreement. This has resulted in excess payment of ₹ 15.45 
crore to the contractor. 
Government stated (August 2023) that through  letter no.  
F1-22/2015/18-3 dated 05  April 2015 it has authorised  
Mayor-in-Council (MIC) to take decision regarding AMRUT scheme. 
Hence MIC of ULB Morena authorised ULB through Resolution no. 77 
dated 15 November 2019 to pay 12 per cent GST from Municipal Fund.  
Reply is not acceptable as no explanation was provided w.r.t the audit 
observation on account of admissibility of separate payment towards 
GST for works taken prior to the implementation of GST. Further, the 
resolution No. 77 dated 15 November 2019 of MIC Morena has not 
explicitly approved for such a payment, which was in fact not due to 
the contractor.  
2 Excess payment due 
to short accounting 
of previous payment 
in Running Bill 
4.88  To calculate the actual value of work done in current running bill, value 
of previous bill should be mentioned correctly on the bill. 
Audit noticed that in three works the value of work done of previous 
work was incorrectly carried forward in next bill, which has resulted in 
excess payment of ₹ 4.88 crore17 to the contractors. 
The ULB, Bhind stated that the said amount has been removed from the 
17th RA Bill. ULB Gwalior had not submitted any reply and the ULB, 
 
16  The estimated value of work considered for computation was based on the rate of ISSR, 2012 i.e. prior to 
implementation of GST. 
17  
S.N. Name of ULB PAC ( ₹ in 
crore) 
Actual value of work done as per 
previous bill 
Upto date value of work done 
taken in next bill 
Excess payment 
(in ₹) 
Bill No. Value (in ₹) Bill No. Value (in ₹) 
1 Bhind 70.80 17th 80,63,25,009 18th 76,48,72,900 4,14,52,109 
2 Gwalior 
(Murar) 
204.90 18th 1,53,43,65,383 19th 1,52,88,74,851 54,90,532 
3 Morena 125 7th 22,48,11,109 8th 22,30,03,253 18,07,856 
       4,87,50,497 
 
3.5  Programme Implementation 
 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
85 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
Morena stated that after verification of records excess will be 
recovered/ adjusted. 
Government stated (August 2023) that short accounting of previous 
payment in running bill will be corrected after reconciliation. 
3 Irregularities in road 
restoration work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.39 
  
 
As per section 2 of Instructions to bidders contained in the Agreement 
for the work of laying of sewerage network, the contractor was required 
to reconstruct roads to its original conditions.  
Audit had noticed the following irregularities in road restoration work: 
  
(a) According to item 6.2 ( Dry Lean Concrete -DLC) of Integrated 
Standard Schedule of Rate (ISSR) (Vol-III 2012) for Roads and Bridges 
published by UADD, an amount of ₹ 319 per cum, ₹ 329 per cum and 
₹ 335 per cum in execution of M: 20, M: 30 and M:40 pavement quality 
concrete respectively and ₹ 190 per cum in DLC were recoverable if 
electronic sensor paver is not used during laying and compaction. 
Further, for execution of item 4.1 Granular Sub Base (GSB), 4.2 and 
4.3 Water Bound Macadam (WBM) of ISSR, if motor grader and 
vibratory roller is not used in the work, deduction at the rate of ₹ 51 per 
cum shall be made. 
In 12 sewerage projects of eight ULBs, contractors had executed DLC, 
M:20, M:30, M40 Pavement Quality Concrete (PQC), GSB and WBM 
without using required electric sensor paver/ vibratory roller/  motor 
grader in road restoration works but full amount were released. This not 
only resulted in poor restoration work s but also resulted in excess 
payment of ₹ 14. 39 crore to the contractors, as detailed in Appendix 
3.3. 
ULB Morena stated that all the necessary machinery were used in the 
project hence no recovery is required. The ULB, Indore stated that non-
use of specific machinery will be scrutinized and deduction will be 
made in final bills. The ULB, Bhind accepted the audit observation and 
replied that necessary recovery will be made in final bill of contractor. 
The ULB, Bhopal stated that the use of machinery had been done with 
the approval of competent authorities. 
Reply of ULB Bhopal and Morena is not convincing as operation of 
required essential machinery was not possible in the narrow width of 
pipe trenches. 
6.35 (b) In ULB Gwalior, the work of construction of comprehensive 
Sewerage Project System in Lashkar was awarded to M/s Envirad 
Projects Pvt. Ltd. for ₹ 173.32 crore against the estimated cost of ₹ 
195.11 crore The work order to commence the work was issued on 04  
October 2017 to complete the work within stipulated period of 24 
months i.e. 03  October 2019. Work is incomplete and payment of ₹ 
177.84 crore was made to the contractor. 
Similarly, the Sewerage Project work of Morar was awarded to M/s 
Jyanti Super Construction Pvt. Ltd. for ₹ 207.96 crore against the 
estimated cost of ₹ 204.90 crore The work order to commence the work 
was issued on 25  September 20 17 to complete the work within 
stipulated period of 24 months i.e. 24  September 2019. Work was 
completed on 31 March 2022 and payment of ₹ 177.87 crore was made 
to the contractor. 
Audit noticed that in both the projects , the items of road restoration 
were derived in per Sqm. At the time of execution of work, the 
contractor had executed these items in lesser thickness, in compared to 
estimates, but payment at full rate was made to the contractor. Thus, 
execution of work in lesser thickness had resulted in excess payment of 
₹ 6.35 crore, as detailed in Appendix 3.4. 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
86 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
Government stated (August 2023) that payment of road restoration 
items will be reconciled after final measurement.  
 
1.03 
 
(c) In ULB Sagar, the work of construction of Sewerage Project System 
was awarded to M/s Lakshmi Civil and Khilari Infrastructure, Kolhapur 
for ₹ 299.10 crore against the estimated cost of ₹ 282.61 crore. The 
work order to commence the work was issued on 08  July 2016 to 
complete the work within stipulated period of 36 months i.e. 06  July 
2019. Work was in progress and payment of ₹ 247.22 crore was made 
to the contractor. 
Audit noticed that in above project the road restoration works was 
initially proposed with items of Chapter -6 of ISSR 2012 for Road and 
Bridge work. In DPR item No. 6.3 of M-40 Cement Concrete at the rate 
of ₹ 4,792 per cum was proposed, but road restoration work was 
executed with M-20 concrete for which payment under item 15.18a (iii) 
(item for bridge work) at the rate of ₹ 4,778 in place of item no. 6.11 of 
ISSR at the rate of ₹ 4,557 cum was made. Thus, incorrect application 
of item resulted in excess payment of ₹ 1.03 crore18. 
Government stated (August 2023) that payments of road restoration are 
done after approval of competent authority.  
Reply is not acceptable as incorrect item was paid to the contractor. 
 
0.67 (d) In road restoration work of sewerage network of Lashkar area in the 
ULB Gwalior, the items for road restoration work was proposed as a 
clubbed item by including the works of Bituminous Macadam (BM), 
Bituminous Concrete and Seal Coat @ ₹ 1,487 per sqm. 
Audit noticed that the Contractor did not execute the item ‘Seal Coat’, 
despite that full payment was made to the contractor by the ULB, 
Gwalior. Thus, payment of ₹ 0.42 crore {(81,116.05x58)  less 11.165 
per cent} was made for the work not done by him. 
Similarly, in road restoration work of sewerage network of Morar 
(Gwalior), the item of seal coat was not executed by the contractor, but 
payment at full rate was made by the ULB, Gwalior. This resulted in 
excess payment of ₹ 0.25 crore {(42,681.84x58) plus 1.50 per cent} on 
account of work not done.  
Government stated  (August 2023)  that payment of road restoration 
items will be reconciled after final measurement. 
 
7.34 
 
(e) In ULB Vidisha, the work of construction of Sewerage Project 
System was awarded to M/s Ankita Construction for ₹ 91.00 crore. 
against the estimated cost of ₹ 85.20 crore The work order to commence 
the work was issued on 20  April 2017 to complete the work within 
stipulated period of 24 months i.e. 19 April 2019. Work was in progress 
and payment of ₹ 89.03 crore was made to the contractor up to 27th 
R.Bill. 
Audit noticed that, an amount of ₹ 2.27 crore was paid to the contractor 
for transportation of 3,35,753.55 cum earth (from working area to dump 
site and back) as an extra item to ensure public convenience during 
execution of work. However, the payment for this item was not in 
accordance with Clause 17.2 of contract,  which provided that  the 
Contractor was responsible for all the arrangements to carry out the 
work with minimum possible public inconvenience. Further, as per 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) the Contractor had to visit the site before 
 
18  Executed quantity 41,490 cum, excess payment = 1,02,69,605{41,490 x221(4,778-4557)}+12%(GST) 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
87 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
quoting his offer, so that he gets aware with the site condition. Thus, 
the payment of ₹ 2.27 crore to the contractor was for item already 
covered under contractual obligations, resulting in excess payment. 
Similarly, in three projects of ULB, Bhopal, an amount of ₹ 5.07 crore 
(Appendix 3.5) was paid to the contractors for transportation of 
4,37,458.60 cum earth to ensure public convenience during the work. 
Government stated (August 2023) that  due to densely populated area, 
excavated earth was transported and brought back to avoid public 
inconvenience.  
Reply was not acceptable as contractor was required to be aware of the 
working condition and was to quote the rate accordingly.  
5.52 
 
(f) Department of Mining vide its order dated 04 March 2016 has issued 
direction for deduction of royalty, for the materials consumed in the 
works, from the bills of contractors and to deposit the same to the 
treasury on quarterly basis.  
In three contracts ( Appendix 3.6) in ULBs - Indore, Gwalior and 
Morena, no deduction on account of royalty charges towards utilisation 
of sand and metal was made from contractor’s running bills. This had 
resulted in undue financial advantage of ₹ 5.52 crore to the Contractors.  
Government stated (August 2023) that  in ULB Indore royalty charges 
will be deducted in the final bill of the contractor and in ULB Gwalior 
and Morena royalty charges will be deducted after final measurement. 
 
134.98 
 
(g) As per Clause 15.1 of the GCC, the time allowed for carrying out 
the work shall be strictly observed by the contractor. Failure of the 
contractor to adhere to the timelines and/ or milestones shall also attract 
such liquidated damage (LD) at the rate of 0.5 per cent per day. 
In nine works of seven ULBs, the Contractors had failed to achieve 
milestones within the scheduled period. Due to the delay in completion 
of the works, the sewage treatment was consequentially delayed. 
Further, against the leviable maximum penalty of ₹ 134.98  crore 
(Appendix 3.7) for such abnormal delay, no action was initiated by 
ULBs.  
Government stated (August 2023) that LD is levied for completed 
projects (Gwalior, Indore and Morena ) as per contract agreement and 
LD on ongoing projects will be imposed at the time of finalisation of 
work. Satna sewerage project is terminated and Bank Guarantee (BG) 
of contractor was forfeited. 
However audit observed that order regarding imposition of penalty in 
terms of contract (for completed projects) was not produced to audit. 
 
4.15 
 
(h) According to Clause 9 of Section 3 - Special Condition of Contract 
- all useful materials like hard rock excavated by the contractor at site 
shall be the property of employer and shall be issued to the contractor 
at the issue rate of ₹ 200/cum. It shall be binding on the contractor to 
use it as rubble, metal aggregate , etc. after breaking into the required 
size for concrete work and as directed by the engineer. 
In four works of two ULBs, though the Contractor had excavated 
2,29,296.33 cum of hard rock, but recovery as per terms of contract was 
not made. This had resulted in undue financial aid of ₹ 4.15 crore 
(Appendix 3.8) to the Contractors.  
Government stated (August 2023) that applicable amount will be 
deducted in the succeeding/ final bills of contractor. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
88 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
Nil (i) The work of Sewerage Project of the ULB, Satna was awarded to a 
firm (M/s KK Span Pvt.  Ltd.) at a cost of ₹ 191.56 crore. The work 
order was issued ( 05 December 2016) to complete the work within 36 
months including rainy season i.e., up to 04 December 2019. However, 
due to slow progress and execution of substandard work, the Contract 
was foreclosed on 06 April 2021. Up to the date of termination of the 
Contract the contractor was already paid an amount of ₹ 39.36 crore 
upto his 22 nd RA Bill paid on 28 May 2021.  Out of ₹ 39.36 crore,  ₹ 
11.52 crore was made for road restoration works.  Audit noticed that 
while finalising the incomplete final bill of the contractor 50 per cent 
of the amount already paid to the contractor for road restoration works 
amounting to ₹ 5.76 crore was proposed to be deducted due to execution 
of substandard work. This deduction on account of sub -standard work 
at the time of finalising the incomplete final bill, shows laxity on the 
part of the departmental officials who failed to notice the sub -standard 
work till the payment of 22nd RA bill to the contractor. 
Government stated (August 2023) that since contract is terminated, the 
works executed by the contractor was re -measured during preparation 
of final bill with deduction of ₹ 5.76 crore.  
Reply is not acceptable as the quality of work was to be ensured by the 
departmental officials  before making payments and in this case the 
substandard work was noticed after payment of 22 nd RA Bill.  
4 Excess payment on 
account of 
barricading in 
pipeline work 
5.73 According to Clause 1.7 of Chapter-2 of Contract- During the progress 
of work, till filling of the trenches after pipes are laid and jointed, the 
lighting, barricading, guarding of the trenches and the maintenance of 
watchman shall be done by the contractor at his own cost. 
In ULB Morena, the work of construction of Sewerage Project System 
was awarded to M/s Standard Infratech India Pvt. Ltd. Hyderabad for ₹ 
128.07 crore against the estimated cost of ₹ 125 crore. The work order 
to commence the work was issued on 12 July 2016 to complete the work 
within stipulated period of 24 months i.e. 11 July 2018. Work was 
completed and payment of ₹ 154.96 crore was made to the contractor 
vide 28th and pre-final bill. 
Audit noticed that an amount of ₹ 5.73 crore was paid for barricading 
1,57,985 running meters of sewer lines (at the rate of ₹ 363.30 per 
running meter including tender percentage i.e., 2.456 per cent above), 
as an extra item which was not payable being in cidental to work. This 
has resulted in excess payment of ₹ 5.73 crore. 
Government stated (August 2023) that final bill of contractor is 
pending. The case will be re -examined and in case of excess payment, 
amount will be recovered. 
5 Excess payment to 
contractor in 
construction of STP  
resulted in locking 
of fund 
2.78 In Vidisha ULB, the scope of work of sewerage project included 
construction of three STPs of 6.75 MLD (Near Haripura Peria nala ), 
7.75 MLD (Near Arihant Colony) and 7.75 MLD (Near Gaushala) at a 
total cost of ₹ 17.81 crore (as per price breakup schedule).  
Audit noticed that the scope of work was changed during execution, 
and one STP of 22.25 MLD was constructed in place of the proposed 
three STPs. Although, Department was aware of the fact of one STP in 
lieu of three STPs , cost difference in construction was not calculated/ 
adjusted (₹ 2.78 crore).  The contractor was paid ₹ 18.07 crore (March 
2021) on account construction of one STP and only ₹ 46.27 lakh was 
recovered instead of ₹ 3.24 crore.  The ULB stated (March 2023) that 
the entire cost difference would be recovered in the final bill. 
Thus, the lack of prudence by the ULB resulted in excess payment of ₹ 
2.78 crore to the contractor and locking of funds for more than two 
years. Hence, responsibility is to be fixed against the erring officials. 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
89 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
Government stated (August 2023) that there is no provision for 
deduction of interest in contract agreement. 
Reply is not tenable as excess  payment to the contractor had provided 
liquidity to the contractor  to that extent.  Hence interest on objected 
amount should be recovered and suitable action should be taken against 
the responsible officials. 
6 Excess payment due 
to transportation of 
excess quantity of 
excavated material 
0.82 Audit noticed that in Sewage Project of the ULB, Morena, the 
contractor had dismantled 1,50,847 cum quantity of existing flexible 
pavement, structure and concrete pavement for laying of sewerage 
pipeline. 
However, payment for transportation was made for 2,29,616 cum for a 
lead up to 5 km. Thus, payment for transportation in excess of quantity 
actually dismantled had resulted in excess payment of ₹ 0.82 crore 
(78,769 x 104.51) to the contractor.  
Government stated (August 2023) that the work was executed as per 
site requirement. 
Reply is not tenable as quantity of transported material was in excess 
of the quantity of dismantled material. 
7 Excess payment on 
account of filling 
0.36 In Sewage Project of the ULB , Morena, the contractor had excavated 
the 4,96,817.43 cum quantity of earth for trenches required for laying 
of pipes, which was refilled using 5,56,330 cum of earth (item 2.25 of 
Building ISSR). Thus, quantity refilled was in excess by 59,512.57 
cum. Payment for filling quantity more than the quantity excavated had 
resulted in excess payment of ₹ 0.36 crore (59512.562x60.45) to the 
contractor. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the work was executed as per 
site requirement. 
Reply is not tenable as the quantity of refilling was in excess of the 
quantity excavated from trenches. 
8 Irregular inclusion 
of maintenance cost 
in the operation and 
maintenance 
(O&M) for Defect 
Liability Period 
----- According to the provisions of the contract  for sewerage works after 
successful completion of the project the contractor had to do O&M for 
a period of 10 years. Out of these 10 years the period first five years 
was the defect liability period, wherein the entire responsibility of all 
repair and maintenance was of the contractor.  
Audit noticed that, the ULB, Sagar had awarded the work of 
construction of sewage network to a firm (M/s Laxmi Civil and Khilari 
Infrastructure, Kolhapur) and provision for maintenance for civil works 
at the rate of ₹ 33.28 lakh per year, maintenance of pipelines at the rate 
of ₹ 74.73 lakh per year and maintenance of pumping stations of STP 
at the rate of ₹ 193.90 lakh per year for initial five years was also made 
in Agreement, which was irregular as first five years was defect liability 
period and all the  repair and maintenance was to be carried out by 
contractor at his cost. This could lead to undue financial aid of ₹ 15.09 
crore (33.28 lakh*5+74.73 lakh*5+193.90 lakh*5) to the Contractor if 
paid in future according to the provisions of DPR. 
Government stated (August 2023) that the construction work is not 
completed. Therefore, the work of O&M not started yet. 
Reply is not tenable as suitable amendments should be made by the 
Department in payment schedule of the contractor. 
 
9 Irregular payment 
on account of filling 
foundation 
0.94 Work of Sewage project of Kolar area under the jurisdiction of the 
ULB, Bhopal was awarded to M/s Ankita Construction Co. 
Audit noticed that the contractor had claimed an extra item (item no. 
2.27.3 of ISSR) for filling foundation work in construction of Sewerage 
network and STP in South Zone-3 of above project. Further, the PDMC, 
WAPCOS Ltd. (firm responsible for ensuring quality of work and 
endorsing the bills of the Contractor)  had conducted the test of filling 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
90 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
material and raised the objection regarding the rates (item no. 2.27.3 of 
ISSR @570-10% = 513) for the filling work because material used in 
filling work was sand mix soil instead of Moorum/ Hard Copra. 
WAPCOS also recorded that it appears that the material obtained from 
the excavation of the pipeline trenches had been used in the filling work.  
Despite the above objection by the PDMC, an amount of ₹ 1.14 crore 
(22,160.062 cum @ ₹ 513 = ₹ 1,13,68,399) was paid to the contractor 
towards filling-up the foundation. Thus in reference to the PDMC letter 
this payment is  quite irregular as only carriage charges @ 87.70 per 
cum was only payable to the contractor. This has resulted in irregular 
payment of ₹ 94,24,246{22160 X(513-87.70)}to the contractor. 
Government stated (August 2023) that payment was done as per on site 
filling material. 
The reply is not acceptable as payment for ordinary excavated soil (and 
not moorum) was to be made as recommended by the consultant of the 
ULB.  
10 Avoidable 
expenditure due to 
incorrect 
application of unit 
rate for the item 
“filling” 
1.71 UADD had separate ISSR for Building works and Water supply, 
Sewerage and tube well works. Both ISSR has separate rates for works 
of ‘Excavation of earth in all kinds of soil’, and ‘Filling by available 
excavated earth (excluding rock) in trenches’. The rat e of the second 
item i.e., ‘Filling available excavated earth in trenches…’ is higher by 
₹ 30 in the ISSR for building works, as detailed in Appendix 3.9. 
In the agreement of sewerage system of Morena Town, the rate of 
excavation was adopted from the ISSR of Water Supply and Sewerage 
and Tube Well works but item of filling was adopted from the ISSR of 
Building works (which is more by ₹ 30). Thus, adopting of higher rate  
item resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.71 crore19.  
Government stated (August 2023) that refilling rate was taken from 
section-4 (Bill Of Quantity) of contract agreement. 
Reply is not acceptable as rate of the item of filling with excavated 
material as available in ISSR of Sewerage works of UADD was to be 
applied in the Agreement. Such provision of rates of other ISSR in the 
Agreement/ BOQ resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.71 crore. 
11 Not recording the 
detailed 
measurement of 
STP 
537.17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to paragraph 4.017 of MPWD Manual - the measurement 
Book is a most important record. It is the basis of all accounts of 
quantities of work done, purchase made and it must contain such a 
complete record of facts as to be conclusive evidence in court of law. 
The description of the work/  materials must be lucid, and such as to 
admit of easy identification and check. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that in 11 works of seven ULBs, lump 
sum payment of ₹ 537.17 crore ( Appendix 3.10) was made to the 
contractors for the work of construction of STPs for which detailed 
measurement as stated above was not maintained and cannot be 
vouchsafed by audit. Further, royalty chargeable on materials like 
metal, sand, etc. consumed on the work also could not to be ascertained.  
Government stated (August 2023) that measurement of STPs are 
recorded in register. Works are recorded in Measurement Book  (MB) 
as per approved payment schedule. 
 
19  
Executed 
Quantity till 
28th RA Bill 
(in cum) 
Rate Payable rate as per 
ISSR of Sewerage i/c 
tender per cent (in cum)  
Rate as per ISSR of 
Building i/c tender 
per cent (in cum)  
Rate difference 
(in cum)  
(C-B) 
Total excess 
payment 
(₹) 
 (AxD) 
A B C D E 
5,56,330 29.71 (29+.71) 60.45 (59+1.45) 30.74 1,71,01,584 
 

 Chapter 3: Management of Sewage 
91 
S.N. Brief of 
Observation 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Audit Comments 
Reply is not acceptable as during field audit no MB/Register of detailed 
measurement of STPs were produced to audit. 
 
12 Improper adoption 
of rates for 
construction of 
STPs 
 Audit noticed that the rate of items for construction of STP was not 
provided in the ISSR of the UADD. In its absence, the ULBs or the 
PDMC arbitrarily adopted the rates available in SORs of different 
States/ Institutions for estimation of the cost of cons truction of STPs. 
Non-adoption of a uniform rate resulted in cost variation ranging from 
₹ 0.73 crore to ₹ 2 crore per MLD in the various STP works as shown 
in Appendix 3.10. 
Government stated (August 2023) that estimates were prepared as per 
the prevailing ISSR and guidelines and tenders were floated. 
Reply is not tenable as there was no uniformity in rates adopted for the 
said work and for such similar works, rates of different SORs were 
adopted from other state arbitrarily.  
 
 
Audit recommends that: 
9. ULBs may prepare City Sanitation Plan in line with CPHEEO manual and ensure that all 
Municipal Corporation areas and all households are connected to the sewerage network. 
10. GoMP may consider putting in place an institutional mechanism for ensuring coordination 
of all line departments in implementing sewage systems. 
11. ULBs may ensure management of sewage accordingly and optimise the reuse of treated 
water and converting sludge into manure.  
12. MPPCB may invariably ensure that OCEMS is installed at all STPs to ensure quality of 
sewage treatment. 
13. Government may examine and fix responsibility for making excess/ irregular payments in 
contracts for works under sewerage projects and put in place a system to ensure adherence 
to the conditions of Contract and as per ISSR rates, before making final payments. 
3.6 Recommendations 
 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 4 
SPECIAL WASTE 

 
 
 
 

Chapter 4 
Special waste  
Special waste comprises of any solid waste or a combination of solid wastes that requires 
special handling and disposal because of its quantity, concentration, physical and chemical 
characteristics, or biological properties, to protect human health, as wel l as the environment 
and to exploit its potential for recycling.  
Special waste mainly consists of plastic waste, e-waste, construction and demolition  (C&D) 
waste, and bio-waste. Under special waste, three wastes i.e. plastic waste, e-waste, C&D waste 
have been selected for audit. The shortcomings in management of these three wastes  are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs-  
 
Today, plastic is present in almost everything, from our money to electronic appliances, and it 
is used across multiple sectors, including packaging, building, construction, transportation, 
industrial machinery and health among others. Plastic waste has numerous implications on the 
environment and health. Hence, the lack of sustainable plastic waste management (PWM) 
poses a serious threat to our environment and natural ecosystem globally. 
As per the annual report of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) for the year 2019 -20, 
estimated plastic waste generation in India (all 35 States/UTs), during the year 2019 -20, was 
34,69,780 MTPA1 approximately. Further, the per capita plastic waste generation was almost 
doubled over the last five years (from 2015-16 to 2019-20). Percentage wise distribution of 
plastic waste generation in different States/UTs and per capita plastic waste generation during 
the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 is illustrated in Charts 4.1 and 4.2.  
Chart 4.1: Percentage of plastic waste generated by 
States/ UTs of India 
Chart 4.2: Per capita plastic waste generation 
during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
  
(Source: Annual Report of CPCB on Plastic Waste Management for the year 2019-20) 
The contribution of Madhya Pradesh in plastic generation, was only three per cent during the 
year 2019-20. The status of plastic waste generated and recycled in the Madhya Pradesh during 
the year 2017-22 is given in Table 4.1. 
 
1  Metric Tonnes Per Annum. 
4.1 Plastic Waste 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
94 
Table 4.1: Status of plastic waste generated and disposed in the Madhya Pradesh during 
the year 2017-22 
(Qty. in MTPA) 
S.N. Year  Plastic 
waste 
generated 
Plastic waste disposal 
(through recycling, co -
processing, road 
construction, etc.) 
Percentage of plastic 
waste recycled w. r.t 
plastic waste 
generated (in 
Percentage) 
Plastic waste 
remained 
unrecycled  
1 2017-18 61,037.00 48,155.26 78.89 12,881.74 
2 2018-19 72,327.39 72,065.35 99.64 262.04 
3 2019-20 1,21,079.00 1,16,898.00 96.55 4,181.00 
4 2020-21 1,38,483.58 1,18,988.62 85.92 19,494.96 
5 2021-22 1,32,955.40 2,85,902.102 215.04 NIL 
(Source: Reports of MPPCB submitted to CPCB) 
From Table 4.1 , it c an be seen that generation of plastic waste has increased from 61,037 
MTPA to 1,38,483.58 MTPA during the period from 2017-21 registering an increase of 226.88 
per cent even after the introduction of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016. The generation 
of plastic waste, however, has slightly decreased during the year 2021-22 but still it was 217.83 
per cent of the waste generated during the year 2017 -18. Further, the percentage of plastic 
waste recycled was ranged between 78.89 to 99.64 per cent  during the year 2017 -18 to  
2020-21.  
Regulatory Framework for Management of Plastic Waste 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  (MoEFCC), GoI, notified (February 
2011) the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 ( PW Rules, 2011). It was 
amended by the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 (PWM Rules, 2016), as notified  
(18 March 2016) by Government of India. These rules were applicable to every waste 
generator, local body, manufacturer, importer and producer.  
During the course of audit, Audit noticed  deficiencies on  various issues including non-
compliances of PWM Rules, 2016 by the sampled ULBs on framing bye-laws, establishing 
plastic waste processing and disposal facilities, seeking assistance of producers in setting up of 
PWM system, prohibiting the usage of banned plastic , using plastic in construction of roads/ 
energy recovery and constitution of SLAC for PWM and working out of modalities for waste 
collection based on Extended Producer Responsibility. Audit also noticed some deficiencies in 
monitoring, required as per the PWM Rules, 2016. The shortcomings noticed by the Audit are 
discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
 
As per rule 6 (4) of the PWM Rules, 2016, each L ocal Body (LB) was required to frame bye-
laws for management of plastic waste incorporating the provisions of these Rules. Further, Rule 
6 (1) of PWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that every LB shall be responsible for development and 
 
2  The data of plastic generation and disposal has been taken from the annual reports of MPPCB for the year 
2016-17 to 2021-22, submitted to CPCB. In the Annual Report of MPPCB for the year 2021 -22, the disposal 
of plastic waste (2,85,902.10 MTPA) was shown o ver and above the waste generation (1,32,955.40 MTPA) 
due to recycling of plastic waste collected by the local kabadies from the legacy waste sites.  
4.1.1  Preparation of bye-laws for management of plastic wastes, their waste 
processing and disposal facilities 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
95 
setting up of infrastructure for segregation, collection, storage, transportation, processing and 
disposal of the plastic waste either on its own or by engaging agencies or producers. 
Audit noticed that only three3 out of total 34 test checked ULBs had prepared the bye-laws for 
management of plastic waste, however, no evidence had been produced by Dhar and Pichhore 
ULBs in this regard. Audit noticed that 264 ULBs had not prepared any bye-laws for the same 
whereas the remaining five5 ULBs had not furnished any information with regard to f raming 
of bye-laws. As a result- 
• The ULBs could not implement the r ules in efficient manner and the plastic waste 
generated in the ULBs was lying mixed with the municipal solid waste  at landfill sites as 
shown in Images 4.1 and 4.2. 
Images 4.1 and 4.2: Plastic waste found mixed with the municipal solid waste 
Image 4.1: Plastic waste found mixed with other 
Municipal waste at landfill Site in Morena 
Image 4.2: Plastic waste found mixed with other 
Municipal waste at landfill Site in Nalkheda 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
• The plastic waste was lying mixed with the other municipal waste at the landfill site. The 
animals were found consuming the waste that include the plastic waste  as shown in  
Images 4.3 to 4.6. 
Image 4.3 to 4.6: Plastic waste being consumed by animals 
 
Image 4.3: Plastic waste was being consumed by 
animals at Shivpuri Landfill Site 
 
Image 4.4: Plastic waste was being consumed by 
animals at Bhind Landfill Site 
 
3  Dhar, Indore and Pichhore. 
4  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, 
Sanchi, Shahdol, Uchehara and Vidisha.  
5  Bhind, Bhopal, Maihar, Shivpuri and Satna. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
96 
Image 4.5: Plastic waste was being consumed by 
animals at Bhind Landfill Site 
Image 4.6: Plastic waste was being consumed by 
animals at Kukshi Landfill Site 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
• Audit further noticed that 26 6 ULBs had neither any processing and recycling/ disposal 
facilities for safe recycling/ disposal of plastic waste nor any agreement with the waste 
recycling agencies/ producers for recycling or disposal of plastic waste. Only five 7 ULBs 
had the recycling facilities but these ULBs had not provided any evidence with this regard 
and remaining three8 ULBs had not furnished any reply in this regard. As a result, the huge 
quantity of un-recycled plastic waste was lying at waste processing site/ landfill site  and 
near water bodies (Images 4.7 to 4.12) causing harms to human health and ecosystems.  
Images 4.7 to 4.12: Unrecycled plastic waste found lying at processing /landfill  
sites and near water bodies 
Image 4.7: Plastic Waste found lying 
dumped/unprocessed at Kareli  landfill site 
Image 4.8:Plastic Waste found lying 
dumped/unprocessed at  Ratlam landfill site 
 
6  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Mandsaur, 
Malanpur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar, Sanchi, 
Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
7  Dhar, Indore, Mandleshwar, Ratlam and Satna. 
8  Bhind, Bhopal and Maihar. 


 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
97 
Image 4.9 :Plastic waste lying dumped/unprocessed 
near water bodies at Damoh  
 
Image 4.10: Plastic waste lying dumped/ 
unprocessed near water bodies at Shivpuri. 
Image 4.11: Plastic waste lying 
dumped/unprocessed near water bodies at Ratlam 
Image 4.12: Plastic waste lying dumped/ 
unprocessed near water bodies at Khirkiya 
(Harda) 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
The Government stated (August 2023) that all 34 ULBs had prepared their Municipal bye-laws 
on Municipal Solid Waste as per the Gazette Notification (No.05 -F 1 -02/2021/18-3) of 
Government of Madhya Pradesh , which also covered the provisions of plastic waste 
management. It was further stated that all 34 ULBs had Material Recovery Facilities (MRF) 
for segregation, collection and processing of dry waste in different compartments. 
Reply is not acceptable as each ULB was required to frame bye-laws for management of plastic 
waste incorporating the provisions of PWM Rules. The Gazette Notification dated 22 March 
2021 as r eferred in the reply , is of the plastic waste bye -laws of ULB Indore only while no 
evidence with regards to the bye-laws prepared by other 33 ULBs was furnished to substantiate 
the reply. Further, the reply is also not supported by any evidence on the existence of facilities 
for processing and recycling/ disposal or any agreement with the waste recycling agencies/ 
producers.  
 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
98 
 
Rule 15 of PWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that: 
• The shopkeepers and street vendors willing to provide plastic carry bags to customers for 
dispensing any commodity shall register with local body. The local body shall, within a 
period of six months from the date of final publication of the PWM Rules, 2016 shall make 
provisions for such registration on payment of plastic waste management fee determined 
by the concerned ULB; 
• Only the registered shopkeepers or street vendors shall be eligible to provide plastic carry 
bags for dispensing the commodities; and  
• The local body shall utilize the amount paid by the customers for the carry bags exclusively 
for the sustainability of the waste management system within their jurisdictions. 
Audit noticed that the 29 9 ULBs did not have any system for registration of the shopkeepers 
and street vendors who were willing to provide plastic carry bags to the costumers to carry the 
commodities. This system was implemented only in Dhar ULB but no evidence was provided 
to audit whereas four10 ULBs had not furnished any reply in this regard. 
Thus, in the absence of such system, the ULBs not only lost their control over the shopkeepers 
and street vendors providing plastic carry bags to carry the commodities but also deprived 
themselves in recovery of plastic waste management fee from such shopkeepers and street 
vendors for utilising that for the sustainability of the waste management system within their 
jurisdictions.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that all 34 ULBs were registered and created an 
account in Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) Monitoring Module for compliance of 
Single Use Plastic (SUP) . The entities of plastic waste are being added on the portal by the 
ULBs and over 1000 entities are already registered across the State and is a continuous process. 
The registered entities are allotted to the field Inspection Officer appointed by the ULB and the 
entity is being inspected as per latest norms of PWM. 
Reply is not acceptable as all the shopkeepers and street vendors willing to provide plastic carry 
bags to customers for dispensing any commodity, were to be registered with ULBs as per rule 
15 of PWM Rules 2016, within a period of six months from the date of final publication of the 
Rules. Further, the stated registration of entities is being done only after operationalisation 
(February 2022) of CPCB portal.  
 
Rule 6 (3) of PWM Rules, 2016, stipulates that the local body shall seek assistance of producers 
for setting up of system for plastic waste management and such system shall be set up within 
one year from the date of final publication of these Rules in the Official Gazette of India. 
 
9  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, 
Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan , 
Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Satna, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
10  Bhind, Bhopal, Indore and Maihar. 
4.1.2  Non-registration of shopkeepers and street vendors willing to provide 
plastic carry bags 
4.1.3  Not seeking assistance of producers in setting up of system for PWM 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
99 
Audit noticed that the 2911 ULBs had neither sought any assistance of producers for setting up 
of system for PWM nor made any such system for PWM . Only ULB , Dhar had sought 
assistance of producers in setting up of system for plastic waste management , however, no 
evidence with regard to  seeking assistance had been produced to audit. Further, four12 ULBs 
had not furnished any information in this regard. Thus, it is evident that  no plan had been 
prepared by these ULBs with the assistance of producers for management of plastic generated 
by them. This indicated negligence on the part of ULBs on proper management of plastic waste. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the assistance/ suggestions were taken from 
producers at State level Meetings. Apart from producers , there were members of the Plastic 
Waste Producer’s Association, NGOs and experts in the matter. 
However, no documentary evidence was produced by the Government in this regard. 
 
As per Rule 4 (1) (c) of PWM Rules, 2016, the manufacture, importer stocking, distribution, 
sale and use of carry bags, plastic sheets or like, or cover made of plastic sheet and multi layered 
packaging, shall be made of virgin or recycled plastic which is not less than 50 microns in 
thickness.  
During the audit of sampled ULBs, it was observe d that the 11 13 ULBs had not issued any 
directions prohibiting the storage, distribution, sale and utilisation of carry bag made of virgin 
or recycled plastic, less than 50 microns in thickness to restrict the usage of the same. Further, 
1914 ULBs had issued such directions and  four15 ULBs had not furnished any information in 
this regard. Thus, the deterrent to reduce use of plastic less than 50 microns was not applied by 
majority of test checked ULBs. 
It was further noticed that GoMP imposed complete ban only on production, storage and use 
of plastic carry bag vide Gazette Notification (May 2017). During the audit, it was noticed in 
selected 34 ULBs that 4.74 lakh kg plastic carry bags were seized and ` 1.81 crore  was 
recovered as penalty. However, Audit noticed that the complete ban on SUP was imposed in 
the State from July 2022 only. Evidently, the production, sale and use of other plastic items 
such as plastic sheets, plates, sticks of less than 50 microns were not completely prohibited in 
the State up to July 2022. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that it had made its best efforts to comply with the 
PWM Rules and also done significant work to control the uses of SUP. 
 
11  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, 
Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Satna, Shahdol, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
12  Bhind, Bhopal, Maihar and Shivpuri.  
13  Akodia, Beohari, Damoh, Gwalior, Kareli, Khirkiya, Morena, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar and 
Uchehara. 
14  Balaghat, Barghat, Betul, Dhar, Jabalpur, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Niwari, 
Orchha, Pichhore, Ratlam, Sanchi, Satna, Shahdol, Shivpuri and Vidisha.  
15  Bhind, Bhopal, Indore and Maihar. 
4.1.4  Prohibition on the usage of banned plastic not implemented 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
100 
The fact remains that out of 34 ULBs selected for audit, 11 ULBs have not issued any order 
restricting the uses of SUP. Moreover, the items made of prohibited SUP were openly traded 
in the market under Municipal Corporation, Jabalpur as shown below- 
Sale of SUP despite being banned 
As per Rule 4 (1) (c) of the PWM Rule, 2016, carry bags made of virgin or recycled plastic 
were not to be less than fifty microns in thickness. The Municipal Corporation , Jabalpur 
completely banned (November 2021) the use of single-use plastic including items like plates, 
glass, plastic sticks used in balloons, ice -cream and candy from July 2022. During the visit 
in Jabalpur city, it was found that these banned items were being sold in the market as shown 
in images:  
Image 4.13 and 4.14 showing banned items were being sold in the market 
 
 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
It was clear from above that the order regarding prohibition of single use plastic was not 
being followed in ULB, Jabalpur and no action was being taken by the corporation. 
 
 
Rule 5(1)(b) of PWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that local bodies shall encourage the use of plastic 
waste (preferably the plastic waste which cannot be further recycled) for road construction as 
per Indian Road Congress Guidelines or energy recovery or waste to oil , etc. complying the 
4.1.5  Use of Plastic Waste in construction of roads 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
101 
standards and p ollution control norms specified by the prescribed authority for these 
technologies.  
Audit noticed that 2816 ULBs had not initiated any action to encourage the use of plastic waste 
(plastic waste which cannot be further recycled) for road construction  except three 17 ULBs 
which had made efforts in this regard. The Bhind, Maihar and Bhopal ULBs had not furnished 
any reply in this regard. 
As a result, the usage of plastic in construction of roads remained extremely low ranging 
between 0.29 per cent and 1.72 per cent of total plastic waste generated during the year 2018-
19 to 2021 -22 whereas, it was 14.45 per cent during the year 2017-18. Also, the recycling 
process of the hazardous plastic could not be optimised for better and safer ecosystems.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that the ULBs of Madhya Pradesh had made a 
significant stride in re -using, co -processing, recycling and utilisation of plastic in road 
construction.  
The fact remains that the utilisation of plastic in road construction has been 0.61 per cent of 
the Plastic Waste Generated during the audit period, as per the data provided by the 
Government.  
 
As per Rule 16 of PWM Rules 2016, state should constitute a State Level Advisory Committee 
(SLAC), comprising total ten members from different Departments of State Government, a 
Chairman18 and Convener19 for the purpose of effective monitoring of implementation of PWM 
Rules. The SLAC shall meet at least once in six months and may invite experts, if it considers 
necessary. 
Audit noticed that the State Government had constituted the SLAC in November 2016 for the 
purpose of effective monitoring of implementation of PWM Rules with a delay of two months. 
It was further noticed that SLAC had held its three meetings only during the years 2017-18 to 
2021-22 as against total 10 meetings required to be held as per the PWM Rules from the date 
of constitution (November 2016) of SLAC.  
The Government, while accepting the audit observation, replied (August 2023) that adequate 
meetings of SLAC could not be held due to some unforeseen events such as legislative 
assembly election in the State, Covid-19 situation, change in administrative setup, etc. 
The fact remains that conducting of inadequate meetings of SLAC, defeated the very purpose 
of formation of such Committee. 
 
16  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, 
Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol, Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
17  Dhar, Ratlam and Satna. 
18  The Secretary, Department of Urban Development.  
19  Director, Municipal Administration. 
4.1.6  Delay in constitution of State Level Advisory Committee for PWM and 
holding of its inadequate meetings 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
102 
 
Extended producer’s responsibility (EPR) means the responsibility of a producer for the 
environmentally sound management of the product until the end of its life.  
As per Rule 9 (1) and 9 (2) of PWM, Rules 2016, the producers,  importers and brand owners 
(PIBOs), within a period of six months from the date of publication of these Rules, were 
required to work out modalities for waste collection system based on EPR and involving Urban 
Development Departments, either individually or collectively and to submit the same to the 
State Pollution Control Boards while applying for consent to establish or operate or renewal.  
Audit noticed that waste producers,  importers and brand owners  had not worked out the 
modalities for waste collection system based on EPR with the involvement of State Urban 
Development Departments as the UADD, GoMP had not furnished any modalities worked out 
by the waste generators stating that monitoring and supervision of EPR was being done by the 
CPCB through Centralised EPR Portal for plastic packaging. 
In the absence of such working plan/ modalities for waste collection system , it would not be 
possible to have an effective control over the producers, importers and brand owners of plastic 
waste in making them responsible to meet their EPR obligations and thereby mitigating the 
plastic waste and its scientific disposal in the State. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the modalities for plastic waste collection system, 
on the basis of EPR, had already been worked out by the PIBOs and plastic waste producers 
identified by the MPPCB in the state through EPR portal developed by CPCB. 
However, CPCB has developed the EPR portal after the amendment in PWM Rules in February 
2022 only and the ULBs as well as State Government have not worked out the modalities for 
waste collection system based on EPR with the involvement of waste producers, importers and 
brand owners as per the PWM Rules, 2016, for the audit period. 
 
The MPPCB monitors various stakeholders involved in the management of plastic waste, e-
waste and municipal solid waste in the State through its Extended Green Node (XGN) software. 
The Consolidated Consent and Authorisation (CCA) module for plastic  waste, e-waste and 
solid waste of the XGN Software generates the report for grant of consent/ renewal of consent 
during the defined period in respect of industries under plastic  waste, e-waste and solid waste 
management. 
Audit extracted the data relating to plastic sector industries by generating reports from CCA 
module of XGN software and found that total 543 plastic sector industries had granted consent/ 
renewed consent during the period from April 2017 to January 2023. Out of these 543 plastic 
sector industries, audit selected total 66 red category plastic sector industries having investment 
above ₹ 0.45 crore  as sampled industries for audit. In respect of plastic industries,  Audit 
observed the following deficiencies- 
 
4.1.7  Extended Producer’s Responsibility 
4.1.8  Deficiencies in monitoring by MPPCB 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
103 
• Functioning of plastic waste processing industries without CCA Validity 
As per Rule 13 of PWM Rules, 2016, each producer, recycler and manufacturer should obtain 
registration from the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) prior to the commencement of 
production. The registration so obtained is to be got renewed after its expiry.  
From the data extracted from the XGN software, Audit noticed that seven plastic waste 
processing industries had obtained consent to establish (CTE), out of which only four had 
obtained CCA whereas rest three20 plastic waste processing industries had not obtained CCA. 
Audit further noticed that out of the aforesaid four industries which had obtained CCA earlier, 
the CCA of three21 industries had expired between March 2019 and June 2021.  
Hence, total six plastic waste processing industries (i.e., three industries had not obtained CCA 
and three industries did not renew their CCA) were functioning without having CCA/ valid 
CCA as all the six industries were shown as ‘in operation’ in XGN. However, initiation of any 
action by MPPCB against these industries was not found on record. This shows an inadequate 
monitoring by MPPCB which is a hinderance in management of plastic wastes in the State.  
• Inadequate inspections of industries 
The CPCB directed (December 2019) the SPCBs, that the other red category22 industries should 
be inspected preferably at the frequency of six months for environmental surveillance.  
The audit has reviewed the 66 red category plastic sector industries, having capital investment 
of ₹ 0.45 crore and noticed that the MPPCB had co nducted the inspection in all 66  industries 
after a gap of more than six months at 219 occasions and failed in adhering with the directions 
of CPCB. This indicated deficient monitoring leading to inadequate control over the activities 
of red category industries.  
• Non submission of online monthly testing report by industries 
MPPCB accords consent to operate (CTO) under Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, under section 21 of the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 and register them as manufacturer/ producer and brand owner under Rule-
13 of PWM Rules, 2016. 
As per the conditions of consent, compilation of monitoring data includes samples and 
measurements taken to meet the monitoring requirements, promulgation of guidelines, 
establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants. Accordingly, the applicant shall take 
samples and measurements to meet the monthly requirements specified above and report these 
online through XGN to the MPPCB and maintain online records of all information resulting 
from monitoring activities.  
 
20  Chitrakoot Cement Pvt. Ltd., Satna, Karan Stampings Private Limited, Gwalior and Sarthak Samudayik Vikas 
Evam Jankalyan Sanstha, Berasiya Road, Bhopal. 
21  Arihant Industries, Ujjain. Environment Care Solution, Satna and Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jankalyan  
Sanstha, Vidisha Road, Bhopal.  
22  As per the directions issued by CPCB on 7 March 2016, the Red Category Industries are those industries which 
have the pollution index score of 60 and above. 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
104 
Audit noticed that only three23, out of 66 red category Industries were regular in submission of 
monthly returns, whereas 22 24 industries were irregular in submission of monthly returns and 
41 industries had not furnished any monthly testing report to the MPPCB violating with the 
condition of consent. Despite this, the MPPCB had not taken any action on the defaulting 
industries. Such minuscule compliance indicated poor control by the MPPCB over adherence 
to the conditions of consent by the industries leading to inadequate waste management. 
 
Microplastics are very small pieces of plastic that  pollute the environment  by entering the 
natural eco -system from a variety of sources, including cosmetics, clothing and industrial 
processes. Micro plastics are not a specific kind of plastic, but rather any type of plas tic 
fragment that is less than five  millimetre in length according to the United State s National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The source and impact of m icroplastic is 
depicted in Chart 4.3. 
Chart 4.3: Chart depicting the source and impact of microplastic on  
human health and environment 
 
(Source: Report of National Centre for Biotechnology Information) 
The toxicity assessments of micro plastics on human are mainly focusing on gastrointestinal 
and pulmonary toxicity, which involve oxidative stress, inflammatory reactions, and 
metabolism disorders. 
Due to inadequate facilities for proper collection, segregation, transportation and scientific 
disposal of plastic waste and inadequate facilities for treatment of sewerage in most of the cities 
 
23  Jay Pee Rewa Plant, Panasonic Energy India Co. Ltd. and Trident Corporation Ltd.  
24  Delite Dairy Ltd., Gulshan Polyols Ltd., Hindustan Coca -Cola Beverage Pvt. Ltd., KJS Cement (1) Ltd., 
Living Foods India Pvt. Ltd., Nagori Cement Ltd., Oasis Distilleries Ltd., Shivpuri, Oasis Distilleries Ltd., 
Dhar, Oyster Exim Pvt. Ltd., Parle Agro Pvt. Ltd., Pavan Shree Food International Pvt. Ltd., M/s Prism Jonson 
Ltd. (Cement Div.-I), M/s Prism Jonson Ltd. (Cement Div.-II), Satguru Industries, Shakti Sugar Mill Pvt. Ltd., 
Som Distilleries and Breweries Ltd., Sterling Agro Industries Ltd., The Panch  Mahal District Cooperative 
Milk Product, Udaipur Beverage Ltd., Ultratech Cement Ltd., Vacmet India Ltd. and VRS Foods Ltd.  
4.1.9  Micro Plastics contamination in water bodies 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
105 
and towns of Madhya Pradesh a large part of the plastic waste goes in to water bodies (rivers, 
ponds, reservoirs, etc.) situated near these cities and towns through drainage networks, rain 
water or winds which further generates and release the micro particles in the water bodies and 
cause a possible serious threat to human, animal and environment. 
This office engaged  the ‘Advanced Materials and Processes Research Institute (AMPRI)’ , a 
constituent laboratory of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi to 
detect, study and analyse the presence of microplastic particles in the water supply sources of 
Bhopal and Indore cities at different locations . The AMPRI collected samples from six 
locations of two 25 water bodies and two 26 filtration plants in Bhopal whereas in Indore,  it 
collected samples from one27 water body and one28 filtration plant.  
The results of testing of raw water and treated water , conducted by the agency revealed the 
presence of micro-plastic particles in all the samples collected from all the different locations 
as detailed below- 
Results of water samples taken from water bodies  
The results of testing revealed the presence of micro -plastic particles in all the samples 
collected from all the different locations. The average micro-plastic abundance in the Upper 
Lake of Bhopal varied from 1,480 to 2,050 particles/ cum and in the Lower Lake  (Chhota 
Talab), Bhopal, it varied from 2,160 to 2,710 particles/ cum. In Pipaliyapala lake, Indore, 
the level of micro plastic varied from 1,765 to 2,175 particles/ cum. In Bhopal the highest 
quantity of micro plastics  was observed in the Lower Lake and lowest quantity of micro 
plastics was observed in the treated water sample of Kerwa Dam treatment plant having 
abundance of 330 particles/ cum. The abundance of micro plastics in water bodies of Bhopal 
and Indore districts were as depicted in Charts 4.4 and 4.5: 
Charts 4.4 and 4.5: Micro plastic in water bodies of Bhopal and Indore ULBs 
 
 
 
 
25  Bhoj Tal (Upper Lake) and Chhota Talab (Lower Lake). 
26  Water Treatment Plant, Birla Mandir and Water Treatment Plant, Kerwa Dam.  
27  Pipaliyapala Lake. 
28  Water Treatment Plant, Dev Dharam Jal Shodhan Sayantra. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
106 
 
Results of Water samples taken from Water Treatment Plants  
The results of testing of intake and filtered water samples of two Water Treatment Plants 
(WTPs, Birla Mandir and Kerwa Dam) of Bhopal revealed the presence of micro -plastic 
particles ranging from 790 particles/ cum (Birla Mandir) and 820 particles/ cum (K erwa 
Dam) in intake samples and between 330 particles/ cum (Kerwa Dam) to 450 particles/ cum 
(Birla Mandir) in treated water. Similarly, in intake and filtered water sample of WTP, Dev 
Dhara, Indore also revealed presence of micro plastics was 1,150 particles/ cum (intake) and 
600 particles/ cum (filtered water). The presence of micro plastics in the samples of water 
taken from water treatment plants of Indore and Bhopal were as shown in Chart 4.6: 
Chart 4.6: Presence of micro plastics (MPs) in water treatment plants in Bhopal and Indore  
 
Most of the particles observed are in the shape of fibres. Some other types of particles 
observed are fragment, films and pellets. The final results have been depicted in Chart 4.7: 
Chart 4.7: Various types of micro plastics particles present in water 
 


 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
107 
Conclusion 
The agency, i.e., CSIR-AMPRI in its study report concluded that the water bodies of Bhopal and 
Indore city are highly contaminated with micro-plastics. Further, the study based on the analysis 
of water sample of water treatment plants concluded that the raw as well as treated water contains 
traces of micro-plastics. Thus, the treated water being supplied to the city may be very hazardous 
for human health in long run.  
As the water bodies have also been found contaminated, there are very high chances that the 
micro-plastic may have been ingested by almost every living organism (like fish, snails, worms, 
turtles, frogs, marsh birds, molluscs, etc.) in the water bodies.  
Recommendations 
The agency i.e. CSIR-AMPRI, in its study report, recommended for reducing the demand of 
plastic by the consumers, replacing the single used products with reusable products, promoting 
reusable products, replacing the existing plastic products with the bio plastic pro ducts and 
recovering the already leaked Micro-plastics in to the system. 
The Indore and Bhopal ULBs had facilities for proper collection, segregation, transportation 
and scientific disposal of plastic waste and ahead in plastic waste management than the other 
cities of the State. Despite the fact, the presence of micro -plastic particles in all the samples 
collected, is a matter of concern  and raises serious doubts about  situation of water bodies in 
other Local Bodies where the management of plastic waste has not been started so far.  
Further, due to presence of micro plastic particles in the water bodies, as mentioned in the 
above test report, it can be concluded that the water bodies of Bhopal and Indore cities are 
highly contaminated with micro plastic and the possibilities of causing its impact on human 
health and resultant water born deceases  such as  gastrointestinal, pulmonary toxicity and 
metabolism disorders may not be ruled out. 
On being pointed out, the Government replied (August 2023) that the matter would be 
discussed with AMPRI. 
It is recommended that the State Government may enforce the PWM Rules in the state within 
the time frame prescribed in the PWM rules and develop adequate mechanism to monitor the 
implementation of the R ules ibid. T he ULBs of the S tate may establish the plastic waste 
processing and disposal facilities as per the PWM Rules and put in place  an effective 
mechanism to ensure prohibition on the usage of banned plastics. The MPPCB may ensure that 
all plastic waste processing industries obtain necessary authorisation for their functioning and 
adhere to the prescribed standards. 
 
E-waste is a popular, informal name for electronic products nearing the end of their ‘useful 
life’. Computers, televisions, stereos, copiers, and fax machines are common electronic 
products. Many of these products can be reused, refurbished, or recycled. When ele ctronics 
end up in landfills, toxins like lead, mercury and cadmium, etc., used in parts of the electronic 
products leach into the soil and water causing harm to life and ecosystems. 
4.2 E-Waste 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
108 
The e-waste is one of the fastest growing waste streams in the world. It is estimated that in the 
developed countries, the e-waste generation is about one per cent  of total solid waste 
generation. 
Regulatory Framework for e-waste management 
MoEFCC, GoI notified (23rd March 2016) E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 which came in 
to force from 1 October 2016. These Rules apply to every manufacturer, producer, consumer, 
bulk consumer, collection centres, dealers, e -retailer, refurbisher , dismantler and recycler 
involved in manufacture, sale, transfer, purchase, collection, storage and processing of e-waste 
or electrical and electronic equipment listed in Schedule -I, including their components, 
consumables, parts and spares which make the product operational.  
During the course of audit, Audit noticed various issues of non-compliances of E-Waste Rules, 
2016, by the sampled ULBs on  formation of policy/ plan/action plan for collection of 
segregated e-waste and segregation, collection and channelization of e-waste, etc. Audit also 
noticed some deficiencies in monitorin g, required as per the E-Waste Rules. The above 
shortcomings noticed in implementation of these Rules by sampled ULB and MPPCB are 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
 
Schedule-IV under section of E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016, stipulated that each ULB 
would ensure that e-waste if found to be mixed with Municipal Solid Waste was properly 
segregated, collected and was channelized to authorised dismantler or recycler. In order to 
ensure the above, each ULB was required to prepare a policy/ plan/ action plan.  
Audit noticed that 22 29 ULBs have not prepared any such  policy/ plan/ action plan in this 
regard. Audit further noticed that two ULBs i.e. Mandleshwar and Indore, in their reply stated 
that they had prepared the policy/ plan/ action plan for management of e-waste, however, ULB, 
Mandleshwar had not furnished any evidence with regard to such policy/ plan. Further, 1030 
ULBs had not furnished any reply in this regard.  
In the absence of such policy/ plan/ action plan, these ULBs could not implement the E-Waste 
Rules in an effective manner resulting in non -segregation, collection and channelisation of  
e-waste in these ULBs as discussed below. 
 
As per Schedule-IV ibid Rule-17 of E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016, each ULB has to 
ensure that e-waste if found to be mixed with Municipal Solid Waste is properly segregated, 
collected and is channelized to authorised dismantler or recycler.  
 
29  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Jabalpur, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, 
Mandsaur, Morena, Niwari, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Shahdol, Shivpuri and Vidisha.  
30  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Khirkiya, Nalkheda, Orchha, Sagar, Sanchi, Satna and Uchehara. 
4.2.1  Non-formation of policy/ plan/action plan for collection of segregated e -
waste 
4.2.2   Collection and channelization of segregated e-waste not ensured 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
109 
Audit noticed that 2431 ULBs were not collecting the segregated e-waste whereas three32 ULBs 
were collecting the segregated e-waste and seven 33 ULBs had not furnished any reply in this 
regard. Further, in some test checked ULBs, no separate box was found fixed in the waste 
collection vehicle for collection of e-waste separately as shown in images: 
Images 4.15 and 4.16: Collection vehicles without having separate box for e-waste 
Image 4.15:Collection vehicles without having 
separate box for e-waste at Nagar Parishad, 
Piplanarayanwar, Distt.-Chhindwara 
Image 4.16:Collection vehicles without having 
separate box for e-waste at Nagar Palika, 
Mandsaur 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Thus, due to non-provision of separate box in collection vehicles for putting e-waste, the same 
was found mixed with the municipal solid waste at landfill site in some ULBs  as shown in 
Images 4.17 to 4.20:  
Images 4.17 to 4.20: e-waste found mixed with other wastes  
Image 4.17: e-waste mixed with other Municipal 
waste at Damoh  Landfill Site 
Image 4.18:e-waste mixed with other Municipal 
waste at  Ratlam Landfill Site 
 
31  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Kukshi, Maihar, Malanpur, Mandsaur, 
Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Shahdol, Shivpuri, 
Uchehara and Vidisha. 
32  Dhar, Indore and Mandleshwar. 
33  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Khirkiya, Orchha, Sanchi and Satna. 


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
110 
Image 4.19: e-waste found dumped within the 
premises of ULB, Bhopal  
Image 4.20: e-waste found dumped within the 
premises of ULB, Kareli 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
Thus, due to lack of proper disposal of e-waste such as lead, mercury, and cadmium, the 
ecosystems such as land and water bodies continued to have a hazardous impact  of these 
materials.  
 
The MPPCB, through its XGN software, monitors various stakeholders involved in the 
management of plastic waste, e-waste and municipal solid waste in the state. The CCA module 
for plastic, e-waste and SWM of the XGN Software generates the report for grant of consent/ 
renewal of consent during the defined period in respect of industries under plastic, e-waste and 
solid waste management. 
Audit extracted the data relating to e-waste sector industries by generating reports from CCA 
module of XGN software and found that total 18 e-waste sector industries were granted 
consent/ renewed consent during the period from April 2017 to January 2023. Out of these 18 
e-waste sector industries, audit checked total 16 red category e-waste sector industries in audit. 
Audit scrutinised various reports of sampled industries involved in e-waste for the period from 
for the period from April 2017 to January 2023 from CCA module of XGN software of MPPCB 
and observed the following deficiencies. 
• Functioning of e-waste processing industries without CCA Validity 
Rule 13 of E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016 stipulates that every manufacturer, consumer, 
bulk consumer, collection centres, dealers, e -retailers, refurbisher, dismantler, and recycler 
involved in manufacture, sale, transfer, purchase, collection, storage and processing of e-waste 
or electrical and electronic equipment listed in Schedule -1 of E-Waste (Management) Rules, 
2016, including their components, consumables, parts and spares which make the product 
operational should obtained authorisation from the c oncerned State Pollution Control Board 
within the period specified in the Rules. 
Audit noticed from the data relating to e-waste, extracted from XGN software of MPPCB that 
out of total 21 e-waste processing industries, seven 34 industries had not obtained CCA, 
however, these industries were shown as ‘in operation’ in XGN. Thus, the seven e-waste 
 
34  Arihant Marketing, Shivpuri, Asar Green Kabadi Pvt. Ltd., Bhopal, Jabalpur E -Waste Cleaners, Jabalpur, 
Sehore and JS Care, Ujjain, Shradha Sales, Bhopal, Techno craft, Bhopal and Taruna E -Waste Industries. 
4.2.3  Deficiencies in monitoring by MPPCB 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
111 
processing industries were functioning without obtaining CCA. However, initiation of any 
action by MPPCB against these industries was not found on record. This showed an inadequate 
monitoring on the part of MPPCB and the industries were continuously operat ing without 
regulations. 
• Non-adherence to directions of CPCB in respect of inspections of Industries 
The CPCB directed (December 2019) the SPCBs , to carry out inspections of the other red 
category industries preferably at the frequency of six months for environmental surveillance. 
Audit reviewed the 16 35 red category i ndustries under e-waste sector and noticed that the 
MPPCB had conducted the inspection in five industries after a gap of more than six months at 
14 occasions and failed in adhering with the directions of CPCB. 
• Non submission of online monthly testing report by Industries 
MPPCB grants Consent to Operate (CTO) under section 25 of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, under section 21 of the Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1981 and Registration as Manufacturer/Producer and Brand Owner under Rule -13 of E- 
Waste (Management) Rules, 2016. 
As per the condition of consent, compilation of monitoring data includes samples and 
measurements taken to meet the monitoring requirements, promulgation of guidelines, 
establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants. Accordingly, the applicant shall take 
samples and measurements to meet the monthly requirements specified above and report these 
online through XGN to the MPPCB and maintain online records of all information resulting 
from monitoring activities.  
Audit reviewed 1636 sampled red category industries  (including one hospital)  under e-waste 
sector and noticed that two 37 out of above 16  red category Industries, were regular in 
submission of monthly return, whereas five38 industries had not furnished any monthly returns 
to the MPPCB violating the conditions of consent. Despite this, the MPPCB had not taken any 
action on the defaulting industries. 
 
In India, the average generation of Construction and Demolition  (C&D) waste is about 12 
million tonnes per year , i.e., 20-25 per cent of total MSW generation in country. Large scale 
construction projects of housing, industry and infrastructure development are under 
implementation across the country. Development of economic zones, industrial corridors, 
 
35 Civil Hospital, DK Electronics, Excellent Services, Gayatri Incorporation, Moon Star Enterprises Ltd., M/s 
Arihant Marketing, Pooja Mobile and Electronics, Smart Services, Muskan Customer Care, Prometheus 
Recycling Pvt. Ltd., Satguru system, Star Mobile Se rvice Centre, Surya Roshni Ltd., Techno Minds, Unique 
Eco-recycle and Yash Enterprises. 
36  Civil Hospital, DK Electronics, Excellent Services, Gayatri Incorporation, Moon Star Enterprises Ltd., M/s 
Arihant Marketing, Pooja Mobile and Electronics, Smart Services, Muskan Customer Care, Prometheus 
Recycling Pvt. Ltd., Satguru system, Star Mobile Se rvice Centre, Surya Roshni Ltd., Techno Minds, Unique 
Eco-recycle and Yash Enterprises. 
37  Civil Hospital, Gwalior and Surya Roshni Ltd., Malanpur. 
38  Moon Star Enterprise Pvt.  Ltd., Indore, M/s Arihant Marketing, Prometheus Recycling Pvt. Ltd., Satguru 
System and Unique Echo recycle. 
4.3 Construction and Demolition Waste 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
112 
redevelopment & rehabilitation works, besides repairs & renovation contributes to the 
magnitude of C&D waste. 
With the growing importance of C&D waste, Government of India has deemed it appropriate 
to formulate a separate regulation for construction and demolition waste namely Construction 
and Demolition  (C&D) Waste Rules, 2016 describing  the roles and responsibilities of the 
different stakeholders as well as the compliance criteria for the management of the construction 
and demolition waste. 
C&D waste includes bricks, tiles, stone, soil, rubble, plaster, drywall or gypsum board, wood, 
plumbing fixtures, non -hazardous insulating material, plastics, wallpaper, glass, metal (e.g., 
steel, aluminium), asphalt, etc. The composition of C&D waste in India is depicted in  
Chart 4.8: 
Chart 4.8: Composition of C&D Waste in India 
 
(Source: Report of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, GoI published in June 2021) 
The Rules apply to every waste resulting from construction, re -modelling, repair and 
demolition of any civil structure of individual or organisation or authority who generates 
construction and demolition waste such as building materials, debris, rubble.  
Benefits of C&D waste management 
Through the scientific management of C&D waste, the following  (Table 4.2 ) economic & 
social benefits and environmental benefits can be achieved- 
Table 4.2: Benefits of C&D Waste Management 
Economic and 
Social Benefits 
• Scientific C&D waste management prevents mixing of C&D waste into MSW stream . 
This reduces processing cost and increases efficiency of MSW.  
• C&D waste management prevents clogging of drains and water bodies therefore avert 
flooding in urban areas. 
• Proper management and recycling of C&D waste leads to saving of precious land by 
reduction in volume of inert going to landfill. 
• C&D waste processing and recycling generates employment through new enterprises .  
• Use of C&D recycled products help in reducing the demand and requirement of virgin 
material and natural resources. 
Environmental 
Benefits 
• Scientific C&D waste management supresses dust generation.  This significantly reduces 
air pollution.  
• Prevention of unauthorized dumping of C&D waste in drains and hydrological channels 
reduces chances of flooding. 
• Utilization of recycled products from processed C&D waste helps in reducing 
environmental impacts of mining. 
(Source: Report of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, GoI published in June 2021) 


 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
113 
During the course of audit, Audit noticed various issues of non -compliances of C&D rules, 
2016, by UADD, GoMP and the sampled ULBs on framing of policy for management of C&D 
waste, issue of notification for the waste generators, submission of waste management plan by 
the waste generators, fixation/notifying and realisation of charges for C&D waste, issue of 
detailed directions for proper management of C&D waste, identification of site required for 
establishing collection and processing facility for C&D wast e and commissioning and 
implementation of facilities for C&D waste. 
The above shortcoming noticed by audit are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Rule 9 (1) and schedule -III under Rule 13 of the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, 
stipulate the Secretary in -charge of development in the State Government or Union territory 
administration shall prepare their policy document within one year from date of final 
notification of these rules. 
Audit noticed that UDHD had not prepared any policy for management of C&D waste in the 
state till March 2023 even after elapse of six years from the schedule date for preparation of 
policy i.e. one year from the date of publication of C&D waste rules.  
Thus, due to non - preparation of policy by the State Government in this regard, the State 
Government could not enforce rules regarding management of C&D waste with full intensity 
and also violated with the subject rules.  Further, the non/ partial implementation of 
management of C&D rules, also deprived in availing the benefits of scientific management of 
C&D waste as discussed in Table 4.2 above.  
The Government, while accepting the audit observation, replied (August 2023) that the UDHD 
had recently prepared the draft policy for management of C&D waste in the state which was 
under review and would be published after approval from the Department. 
The fact remains that the Government  is yet to have an approved policy  for management of 
C&D waste. 
 
As per Rule 4 (1) of the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, Every waste generator shall 
prima-facie be responsible for collection, segregation of concrete, soil and others and storage 
of construction and demolition waste generated, as directed or notified by the concerned local 
authority in consonance with these Rules. Further, as per Rule 4(2) of these Rules, every 
generator has to ensure that other waste (such as solid waste) does not get mixed with this waste 
and is stored and disposed separately. 
Audit noticed that 1439 ULBs had not issued any notification making responsible to generator 
for collection, segregation of concrete, soil and others and separate storage of construction and 
 
39  Akodia, Beohari, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Nalkheda, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, 
Polaykalan, Sagar and Sanchi. 
4.3.1  Non-framing of policy by State Government for management of C&D 
waste 
4.3.2  Non-issue of notification for the waste generators 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
114 
demolition waste generated by them, however, 1640 ULBs stated to have issued notification in 
this regard whereas four41 ULBs had not furnished any reply.  
As a result, the C&D waste generated in these ULBs was not being segregated, collected, stored 
properly and disposed scientifically as shown in Images 4.21 and 4.22: 
Images 4.21 and 4.22: C&D waste lying mixed with other waste 
Image 4.21:C&D Waste found on the roadside in the 
ULB, Jabalpur 
Image 4.22:C&D Waste found on the roadside in 
ULB, Nalkheda 
(Photo: Audit Team) 
The Government replied (August 2023) that there was no bulk generators of C&D waste in the 
State and the ULBs had issued notifications of differential user charges in the cases of non -
bulk C&D waste generators which involved open dumping of unprocessed C&D waste. 
Reply is not acceptable as 14 test checked ULBs had not issued any notification for collection, 
segregation of concrete, soil and others and for separate storage of construction and demolition 
waste generated by non-bulk C&D waste generators. 
 
Rule 4 (3) of the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, stipulates that waste generators who 
generate more than 20 tons or more in one day or 300 tons per project in a month shall segregate 
the waste into four streams such as concrete, soil, steel, wood and plasti cs, bricks and mortar 
and shall submit waste management plan and get appropriate approvals from the local authority 
before starting construction or demolition or remodelling work and keep the concerned  
authorities informed regarding the relevant activities  from the planning stage to the 
implementation stage and this should be on project to project basis.  
Audit noticed that 2442 ULBs had not identified the waste generators who generate more than 
20 tons or more in one day or 300 tons per project in a month, however , ULB, Satna had 
 
40  Balaghat, Barghat, Betul, Dhar, Indore, Mandleshwar, Mandsaur, Morena, Niwari, Pichhore, Ratlam, Satna, 
Shahdol, Shivpuri, Vidisha and Uchehara. 
41  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior and Maihar. 
42  Akodia, Barghat, Betul, Damoh , Dhar, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, 
Mandsaur, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, 
Shivpuri, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
4.3.3  Non-submission of waste management plan by the waste generators. 

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
115 
identified the waste generator. Further, five 43 ULBs had not furnished any information in this 
regard and the provision was not applicable on four44 ULBs.  
As a result, no plan was submitted by the waste generators of these ULBs and the ULBs could 
not implement the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016 effectively, thus, deprived in availing 
the possible benefits of scientific management of C&D waste as discussed in Table 4.2. 
The Government in its reply stated (August 2023) that there was no bulk generator of C&D 
waste in all 24 ULBs identified by the audit except ULB Jabalpur. Hence, it was not applicable 
to submit the waste management plan by waste generators.  
Reply is not acceptable as the 24 test checked ULBs have replied to Audit that they have not 
initiated any process for identification of bulk generators.  
 
As per Rule 4 (5) of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, every waste generator shall pay 
relevant charges for collection, transportation, processing and disposal as notified by the 
concerned authorities; Waste generators who generate more than 20 tons or more in one day or 
300 tons per project in a month shall have to pay for the processing and disposal of construction 
and demolition waste generated by them, apart from the payment for storage, collection and 
transportation. The rate shall be fixed by the concerned local authority, or any other authority 
designated by the State Government. 
Audit noti ced that 19 45 ULBs had not notified the charges for collection, transportation, 
processing and disposal of C&D waste under  their jurisdiction  and four 46 ULBs had not 
submitted any information regarding notifying the charges for waste generators. However, 1147 
ULBs had notified the C&D charges but no evidence with regard to realisation of such charges 
had been produced by these ULBs.  
As a result, any of the  test checked ULBs could not realise any C&D charges from the 
consumers defeating the 100 per cent cost recovery on management of C&D waste as per the  
provisions of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that all the 34 ULBs had notified the charges for 
collection, transportation, processing and disposal of C&D waste.  However, no documentary 
evidence with respect to the notification for levy of the charges for collection, transportation, 
processing and disposal of C&D waste, was furnished to audit. 
 
 
 
43  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore and Maihar.  
44  Balaghat, Beohari, Morena and Shahdol.  
45  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, Nalkheda, 
Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Sagar, Sanchi, Uchehara and Vidisha. 
46  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior and Maihar.  
47  Betul, Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Mandsaur, Morena, Niwari, Ratlam, Satna, Shahdol and Shivpuri.  
4.3.4 Non-fixation/notifying and realisation of charges for collection,     
transportation, processing and disposal of C&D waste 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
116 
 
As per rule 6 (1) of the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, each ULB has to issue detailed 
directions with regard to proper management of construction and demolition waste within its 
jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of these rules and the local authority shall seek 
detailed plan or undertaking as applicable, from ge nerator of construction and demolition 
waste.  
Audit noticed that 20 48 ULBs had neither issued any directions with regard to proper 
management of C&D waste within its jurisdiction in accordance with the above rules nor 
sought detailed plan or undertaking as applicable, from generator of construction and 
demolition waste. Further, nine49 ULBs had issued such directions whereas five 50 ULBs had 
not furnished any information in this regard.  
In the absence of detailed directions for proper management of C&D waste, these ULBs could 
not implement the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016 effectively under their jurisdiction. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that all 34 ULBs had proper management of C&D 
waste with dedicated plant in the ULBs. 
The reply is not relevant as the audit observation relates to the directions to be issued by the 
ULBs with regard to proper management of C&D waste. Further, the Government did not 
furnish any documentary evidence on dedicated plant for management of C&D waste in 34 
ULBs. 
 
As per schedule-III under rule 13 of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, each ULB has to 
identify the site for establishing collection and processing facilities for collection and 
processing of C&D waste within a period of 18 months, i.e., up to September  2017 from the 
date of publication, i.e., March 2016 of these rules. 
Audit noticed that 24 51 ULBs had not identified the site for establishing the collection and 
processing facilities for C&D waste till March 2022 even after elapse of 54  months after 
notification of these Rules. No ULB could identify the site for C&D waste within the timeline. 
However, six52 ULBs had identified the site after the specified timeline. Further, four53 ULBs 
had not furnished any information regarding identification of such site.  
 
48  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandsaur, Morena, 
Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar and Sanchi.  
49  Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Mandleshwar, Pichhore, Satna, Shahdol, Shivpuri and Vidisha.  
50  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Maihar and Uchehara.  
51  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandleshwar, 
Mandsaur, Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, 
Sanchi, Shahdol and Vidisha.  
52  Damoh, Dhar, Indore, Satna, Shivpuri and Uchehara. 
53  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior and Maihar.  
4.3.5  Non-issue of detailed directions for proper management of C&D waste 
4.3.6   Non-identification/ delay in identification of site required for establishing 
collection and processing facility for C&D waste  

 Chapter 4: Special Waste 
117 
Thus, due to non-identification of site, 24 ULBs could not establish the facilities for collection 
and processing of C&D waste. As a result, these ULBs were unable to effectively manage the 
C&D waste to eliminate its hazards as per the C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that all ULBs had identified the sites for establishing 
collection and processing facilities for C&D waste. 
The reply is not acceptable as the same is not supported by relevant documents or facts. 
 
As per schedule-III under Rule 13 of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, the ULBs with 
population of one million and above, population between 0.5 -01 million and population less 
than 0.5 million have to commission and implement the facilities required for processing of 
C&D waste within a period of 18 months, 24 months and 36 months respectively from the date 
of publication of these rules.  
Audit noticed that 2454 ULBs could not commission and implement the facilities for processing 
of C&D waste and five 55 ULBs had not submitted any information regarding commissioning 
and implementation of C&D waste.  Further, five56 ULBs stated to have commissioned and 
implemented these facilities. However, no evidence in this regard were furnished to audit by 
these ULBs.  
Thus, due to non- commissioning and provision of the facilities for processing of C&D waste, 
these ULBs were unable to adequately manage the C&D waste as observed in paragraph 4.3.2. 
This consequently impacted management of C&D wastes.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that all ULBs had commissioned and implemented the 
facilities for C&D waste for collection and processing of C&D waste. 
Reply is not acceptable as no documentary evidence was produced either by ULBs or 
Government in this regard.  
 
Audit recommends that: 
14. Department may put in place an effective mechanism to ensure prohibition on the usage 
of single use/ banned plastic products to prevent contamination of water bodies due to 
micro plastics. 
15. The ULBs may establish the plastic waste processing and disposal facilities as per the 
PWM Rules. 
16. The MPPCB may ensure that all plastic waste processing industries had obtained necessary 
authorisation for their functioning and are adhering to the prescribed standards. 
 
54  Akodia, Balaghat, Barghat, Beohari, Betul, Damoh, Jabalpur, Kareli, Khirkiya, Kukshi, Malanpur, Mandsaur, 
Morena, Nalkheda, Niwari, Orchha, Pichhore, Piplanarayanwar, Polaykalan, Ratlam, Sagar, Sanchi, Shahdol 
and Vidisha.  
55  Bhind, Bhopal, Gwalior, Maihar and Mandleshwar. 
56  Dhar, Indore, Satna, Shivpuri and Uchehara. 
4.3.7  Non-commissioning/ delay in commissioning and implementation of 
facilities for C&D waste  
4.4 Recommendations 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
118 
17. The ULBs of the state may enforce the E -Waste Rules by forming effective policy/
plan/action plan and establish the adequate facilities for proper segregation, collection and
channelization of e-waste as per E-Waste Rules.
18. The MPPCB may evolve an effective monitoring mechanism to monitor the compliance
of provisions of E -Waste Rules by all the industries engaged directly or indirectly in
generation and disposal of e-waste.
19. The State Government may enforce the PWM Rules and C&D Waste Management Rules
in an efficient manner and monitor its implementation process effectively by adequately
strengthening the monitoring mechanism. The Government may expedite approval of
policy for management of C&D waste.
Bhopal 
The 24 June 2024 
(PRIYA PARIKH) 
Accountant General (Audit-II) 
Madhya Pradesh 
  Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 27 June 2024 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDICES 

 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.1 (a)) 
Statement showing the Regulatory framework governing the management of solid waste 
S.N. Type of Waste  Regulatory framework  
1 Solid Waste  (1) Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
(2) Manual of Municipal Solid Waste Management, 
2016 issued by GoI in April 2016. 
2 Plastic Waste  Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
3 E-Waste  E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016 
4 Bio-Medical Waste Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules 2016 
5 Construction and Demolition Waste  Construction and Demolition Waste Management 
Rules, 2016 
6 Hazardous Waste  Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
120 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3) 
Three-tier administrative set up of ULBs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chief Secretary 
 
Principal Secretary, UDHD 
Commissioner, UADD 
Chief Municipal Officers, 
NPs 
Commissioners, 
NNs 
Chief Municipal Officers, 
NPPs 
Elected Member Level 
NN  NP NPP 
Mayor Chairman Chairman 
President Vice Chairman Vice Chairman 
Elected Members of NN  Elected Members of NPP Elected Members of NP 

 Appendices 
121 
Appendix 1.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3) 
Organisational structure of the ULBs pertinent to SWM and Sewerage 
Management 
 
 
 
 
  


Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
122 
Appendix 1.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6) 
List of selected ULBs 
S.N. Division District Name of ULBs Category of the ULB 
1 Bhopal Bhopal Bhopal Municipal Corporation 
Vidisha Vidisha Municipal Council 
Raisen Sanchi Nagar Parishad 
2 Chambal Morena Morena Municipal Corporation 
Bhind Bhind Municipal Council 
Bhind Malanpur Nagar Parishad 
3 Gwalior Gwalior Gwalior Municipal Corporation 
Shivpuri Shivpuri Municipal Council 
Gwalior Pichhore Nagar Parishad 
4 Indore Indore Indore Municipal Corporation 
Dhar Dhar Municipal Council 
Dhar Kukshi Nagar Parishad 
Khargone Mandleshwar Nagar Parishad 
5 Jabalpur  Jabalpur Jabalpur Municipal Corporation 
Balaghat Balaghat Municipal Council 
Narsinghpur Kareli Municipal Council 
Chhindwara Piplanarayanwar Nagar Parishad 
Seoni Barghat Nagar Parishad 
6 Narmadapuram Betul Betul Municipal Council 
Harda Khirkiya Nagar Parishad 
7 Rewa Satna Satna Municipal Corporation 
Satna Maihar Municipal Council 
Satna Uchehara Nagar Parishad 
8 Sagar Sagar Sagar Municipal Corporation 
Damoh Damoh Municipal Council 
Niwari Niwari Nagar Parishad 
Niwari Orchha Nagar Parishad 
9 Shahdol Shahdol Shahdol Municipal Council 
Shahdol Beohari Nagar Parishad 
10 Ujjain  Ratlam Ratlam Municipal Corporation 
Mandsaur Mandsaur Municipal Council 
Agar Malwa Nalkheda Nagar Parishad 
Shajapur Akodia Nagar Parishad 
Shajapur Polaykalan Nagar Parishad 
 
  

 Appendices 
123 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1) 
Statement showing necessary involvement of stakeholders at several stages of SWM 
Central Government (MoEFCC, 
MoUD and CPCB) 
Laws and Rules; Policies and Norms; Guidelines, Manuals, and 
Technical Assistance; Financial Support; Monitoring implementation of 
laws and rules. 
State Government (UADD headed by 
ACS and MPPCB headed by 
Chairman) 
Monitoring implementation of laws and rules in metropolitan cities; 
State Policy and SWM Strategy; Guidelines, Manuals, and Technical 
Assistance; Financial Support; Reporting on Service Level Benchmarks 
to the MoUD; Capacity Building of local bodies; Granting consent to set 
up treatment and disposal activities. 
District (District Collector) Review the performance of ULBs on waste management process; 
Facilitate identification and allotment of suitable land for solid waste 
processing and disposal facilities. 
ULBs (headed by Commissioner, 
Chief Municipal Officer) 
Providing MSWM services; Preparation of SWM plan; Framing 
byelaws; Levy and collection of fees; Financing SWM system; Creating 
public awareness; Involvement of informal sector in SWM.  
Informal Sector (waste recyclers, 
NGOs, CBOs and private partners) 
Resource recovery and recycling at different stages; Providing support 
to the local recycling industry; Involvement of community; Creating 
awareness; Collection and transportation of waste; Technology 
providers.  
(Source: Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual 2016) 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
124 
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference: paragraph 2.3) 
Seven-step process of MSW management services  
Serial of Step Main step Sub steps 
Step 1 Policies, programmes and legal 
framework  
Identify National and State Strategies/Policies 
Policies/Strategies and their Goals 
State Level/Regional/District SWM 
Identify Overall Goals for ULBs 
Role of Central/State and Local Government 
Institutions and Stakeholders Involved in MSWM 
Planning 
Step 2 Assessment of current situation 
and gap analysis  
Legal & Policy Framework,  
Institutional and Financial Set Up  
Technical Aspects 
Community Participation 
MSW Generation, Collection and Transportation 
Availability & Suitability of Land for Processing & 
Disposal 
MSW Processing, Treatment and Disposal 
Current Status of Dump Sites and Environmental Concerns 
Step 3 Stakeholder consultation for 
MSWM planning  
 
Step 4 Preparation of draft MSWM 
plan   
Future Projections  
Population Forecast  
Anticipated Lifestyle Changes 
Change in Socio-economic Status 
Rules, Regulations and Municipal Byelaws 
Community Participation/IEC 
Institutional and Financial Structuring 
Storage, Collection (Door-to-Door and Street Sweeping), 
Transportation 
Identification of Land and Inclusion in City Master 
Plan/City Development Plan 
Selection of Process and Best Available Technology for 
Processing and Disposal 
Step 5 Schedule for implementation  Timeline  
Manpower Requirement 
Financial Viability 
Step 6 Stakeholder consultation for 
MSWM plan validation 
 
Step 7 Municipal council approval for 
MSWM plan and plan 
implementation including PPP  
 
(Source: Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual 2016) 
  

 Appendices 
125 
Appendix 2.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.17) 
Target audience and the type of awareness required as per MSWM Manual, 2016 
MSWM issue Targeted audience Awareness to be generated 
Generation All waste generators in the city 
including informal settlements 
and floating population 
• Reduce amount of waste generated  
• Promote reuse and recycling 
Littering Community • Prevent open littering by communicating       
penalties for littering 
Burning of waste ULB staff, community, floating 
population (focus on informal 
workers, low-income group 
localities) 
• Prevent burning of waste as a disposal option 
• Dissuade and prevent open burning of waste for 
heating (in cities with harsh winters) 
Waste segregation All waste generators: 
households, commercial 
establishments, institutions, 
ULB staff 
• Communicate importance of waste segregation in 
ensuring sustainable management of waste, 
performance of processing and treatment systems, 
and health and environmental aspects 
Door-to-door 
collection 
• Waste generators serviced by 
door-to-door collection (e.g., 
households, commercial 
establishments, markets, 
institutions, etc.)  
• ULB staff, NGOs, RWAs, etc. 
responsible for door -to-door 
collection 
• Provide information on level of segregation 
required 
• Provide information on waste collection schedule 
for different waste fractions (where applicable) 
• Provide information on timings of collection 
Secondary 
collection 
• Agencies involved in  
transportation of waste 
• Sanitary inspectors and other 
MSWM department staff 
• Ensure segregated transportation of waste as per 
MSWM plan 
• Ensure adoption of best practices, efficient 
transportation of waste to avoid illegal dumping 
and malpractices 
Transportation • Agencies involved in transport 
of waste, sanitary inspectors 
and other solid waste 
management department staff 
involved in providing or 
monitoring these services 
• Ensuring segregated transportation of waste as 
per MSWM Plan 
• Ensuring adoption of best practices to ensure 
efficient transportation of waste, avoiding illegal 
dumping and malpractices in waste transportation 
Waste 
treatment or 
processing 
•    Community 
•    MSWM department staff 
•     Agencies, NGOs, and formal 
and informal recyclers 
• involved in solid waste 
processing of treatment 
• Dissemination the following: 
• Information on need for segregation for improved 
efficiency of waste treatment and processing 
• Information on planned treatment and processing 
facilities 
• Information on environmental safeguards in 
MSWM treatment and processing 
• Information on monitoring requirements 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
126 
MSWM issue Targeted audience Awareness to be generated 
• Periodic information on analysis of monitoring 
data 
Waste disposal • Community 
• MSWM department staff 
• Agencies, NGOs, and  formal 
and informal  recyclers 
involved in solid  waste 
disposal 
Disseminate the following: 
• Information on waste disposal plans of the ULB 
• Information on environmental safeguards in 
MSWM disposal facilities 
• Information on monitoring requirements 
• Periodic information on analysis of 
monitoring data 
(Source: Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual 2016) 
 
  

 Appendices 
127 
Appendix 2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.18) 
Various capacity building approaches and training programmes, which could be 
adopted for different stakeholders 
S.N. Post of trainees Role in SWM 
1 Senior Officers  1. Field level implementation  
2. Monitoring field Activities  
3. Onsite supervision  
4. Welfare of field Staff  
5. Feedback or reporting innovations 
6. Capacity building of field and administrative staff 
2 Collection Staff 
 
1. Door to door collection  
2. Collection of segregated waste separately  
3. Regular and timely collection  
4. Use of pipes 
5. Co-operation to ULBs 
3 Transportation Staff 
 
1. Transportation of segregated waste  
2. Synchronization between secondary collection and transportation 
3. Vehicle routing  
4. Preventive maintenance  
5. Safe and hygienic waste 
4 NGOs / CBOs 
 
1. Community mobilization  
2. Community capacity building through IEC.  
3. Capacity building of collection crew and waste generators 
5 Elected 
Representatives 
 
1. Policy formation, plan preparation and legislation 
2. Infrastructure development 
3. Supervision and monitoring 
4. Continuous improvement  
5. Human resource development 
6. Budgeting and finance 
7. Ensure co-operation of citizens 
6 Staff at Processing  
Plant 
 
1. Quantification of waste received at plant  
2. Analysis of waste received 
3. Process design  
4. O&M of plant machinery 
5. Disposal of waste that is not being proceed 
6. Fire, health, safety and environment 
 
Detail of training programmes 
  
(Source: Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual 2016) 
S.N. Training 
programmes 
Details of training program 
1 Special training The following should be trained: 
(i) Unqualified staff and sanitation workers;  
(ii) Ground level staff like sanitary supervisors (or equivalent); and  
(iii) Sanitary inspectors, junior engineers, and senior officers.  
All officers and supervisors must be trained in skills required for an effective and efficient 
MSWM sector including instructing the sanitation workers. Best practices adopted by 
different cities in the state, country, and internationally should be made known to senior staff. 
2 Refresher courses for 
supervisory staff 
Refresher courses should be conducted for officers and supervisors at least once every 5 
years. 
3 Study visits Learnings can be enhanced by visiting institutions or places where good practices have 
already been well established 
4 Professional growth 
opportunities 
Adequate professional growth opportunities should be built into the MSWM hierarchy to 
encourage supervisory staff members to remain in the department and hence avoid attrition.  

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
128 
Appendix 2.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.19.4) 
ULB wise summary of air quality monitoring by SPCB 
S.N. Name of ULBs Number of samples taken for air quality 
monitoring  
Number of instances 
where atleast one test 
done during last 5 
years 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Akodia 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Balaghat 5 0 4 4 1 4 
3 Barghat 0 0 2 1 1 3 
4 Beohari 0 0 0 0 0 0 
5 Betul 1 2 0 2 4 4 
6 Bhind 2 0 5 2 1 4 
7 Bhopal 0 2 0 1 1 3 
8 Damoh 2 8 4 2 3 5 
9 Dhar 2 1 2 8 0 4 
10 Gwalior 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 Indore 2 6 4 22 20 5 
12 Jabalpur 0 2 6 1 2 4 
13 Kareli 1 0 2 0 1 3 
14 Khirkiya 0 0 3 0 0 1 
15 Kukshi 0 0 0 0 0 0 
16 Maihar 1 1 1 1 2 5 
17 Malanpur 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 Mandleshwar 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Mandsaur 1 4 21 2 2 5 
20 Morena 3 2 3 3 3 5 
21 Nalkheda 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 Niwari 0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 Orchha 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Pichhore 3 1 0 0 0 2 
25 Piplanarayanwar 1 2 2 4 4 5 
26 Polaykalan 0 0 0 0 0 0 
27 Ratlam 2 5 12 0 4 4 
28 Sagar 3 2 2 2 6 5 
29 Sanchi 0 2 2 0 0 2 
30 Satna 1 1 1 1 2 5 
31 Shahdol 3 4 4 3 1 5 
32 Shivpuri 0 2 0 1 1 3 
33 Uchehara 0 1 1 1 2 4 
34 Vidisha 1 2 1 1 1 5 
No. of ULBs where 
Monitoring was done at 
least once in a year 
17 19 20 19 20 95 
Total number of tests to be done in 34 ULBs during 5 years (1*34*5)    170 
Shortfall in testing (in No.)  75 
Shortfall in testing  (in %)  44.12 
(Source: Annual Reports on SWM Rule 2016 submitted to CPCB by MPPCB) 
  

 Appendices 
129 
Appendix 2.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.19.4) 
ULB wise summary of water quality monitoring by SPCB 
S.N. Name of ULBs Number of samples taken for water quality 
monitoring 
Number of instances 
of Monitoring @ three 
times during the last 5 
years (three or more 
considered as three) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Akodia 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Balaghat 4 2 2 0 1 8 
3 Barghat 3 2 2 2 1 10 
4 Beohari 0 0 0 0 0 0 
5 Betul 3 0 0 6 3 9 
6 Bhind 1 1 4 3 3 11 
7 Bhopal 0 0 1 1 1 3 
8 Damoh 4 2 4 4 2 13 
9 Dhar 0 0 2 6 0 5 
10 Gwalior 3 1 1 0 0 5 
11 Indore 36 36 39 41 17 15 
12 Jabalpur 4 2 9 2 4 13 
13 Kareli 4 1 2 0 2 8 
14 Khirkiya 2 0 4 0 0 5 
15 Kukshi 0 0 0 0 0 0 
16 Maihar 1 1 1 1 1 5 
17 Malanpur 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 Mandleshwar 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Mandsaur 0 3 2 0 1 6 
20 Morena 3 1 5 2 2 11 
21 Nalkheda 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 Niwari 0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 Orchha 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Pichhore 2 1 2 1 1 7 
25 Piplanarayanwar 1 2 2 2 4 10 
26 Polaykalan 0 0 0 0 0 0 
27 Ratlam 1 1 1 1 1 5 
28 Sagar 4 2 4 4 4 14 
29 Sanchi 0 1 3 0 0 4 
30 Satna 4 1 1 1 1 7 
31 Shahdol 3 2 3 5 1 12 
32 Shivpuri 1 2 1 2 1 7 
33 Uchehara 0 1 1 1 1 4 
34 Vidisha 1 1 0 2 1 5 
Number of instances of tests done in 34 ULBs @ 3 test per year  202 
No. of tests at each selected ULBs @ 3 test per year (5 year x 34 ULB x 3 
samples) 
510 
Shortages where 3 water tests were not carried out 308 
Shortage (in %) 60.39 
(Source: Annual Reports on SWM Rule 2016 submitted to CPCB by MPPCB) 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
130 
Appendix 3.1  
(Reference: Para 3.2.5) 
Statement showing untreated urban sewage merged into the local water bodies 
S.N. Particulars Years 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 ULB, Balaghat 
Projected population 91,645 92,758 93,886 95,026 96,181 
Sewage generation per year 2,073.93 2,099.11 2,124.64 2,150.44 2,176.58 
Treatment of sewage through Sewerage 
Treatment Plants (STPs) 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2 ULB, Shahdol 
Projected population   98,143 99,900 1,01,688 1,03,508 1,05,361 
Sewage generation per year 2,220.98 2,260.74 2,301.20 2,342.39 2,384.32 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
3 ULB, Beohari 
Projected population   28,701 29,350 30,013 30,692 31,385 
Sewage generation per year 649.50 664.19 679.19 694.56 710.24 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
4        ULB, Mandleswar 
Projected population 14,823 15,215 15,619 16,033 16,457 
Sewage generation per year 335.44 344.32 353.46 362.83 372.42 
Treatment of sewage through Sewerage 
Treatment Plants (STPs) 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
5 ULB, Barghat 
Projected population of ULBs 14,531 14,916 15,311 15,717 16,134 
Sewage generation per year 328.84 337.55 347.45 355.68 365.11 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
6 ULB, Dhar 
Projected population of ULBs 1,12,883 1,15,874 1,18,945 1,22,097 1,25,332 
Sewage generation per year 2,554.53 2,622.23 2,699.09 2,763.05 2,836.27 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7 ULB, Vidisha 
Projected population of ULBs 1,87,284 1,92,247 1,97,342 2,02,571 2,07,939 
Sewage generation per year 4,238.24 4,350.55 4,478.08 4,584.19 4,705.67 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
8 ULB, Niwari 
Projected population of ULBs 28,491 29,246 30,021 30,816 31,633 
Sewage generation per year 644.74 661.83 681.23 697.37 715.85 

 Appendices 
131 
S.N. Particulars Years 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22  
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
9 ULB, Orchha 
Projected population of ULBs 13,824 14,190 14,566 14,952 15,348 
Sewage generation per year 312.83 321.12 330.53 338.37 347.33 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10 ULB, Betul 
Projected population of ULBs 1,24,091 1,27,379 1,30,755 1,34,220 1,37,776 
Sewage generation per year 2,073.93 2,099.11 2,130.46 2,150.44 2,176.58 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
11 ULB, Khirkiya 
Projected population of ULBs 27,305 28,029 28,772 29,534 30,317 
Sewage generation per year 617.92 634.29 652.88 668.36 686.07 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
12 ULB, Piplanarayanwar 
Projected population of ULBs 10,322 10,595 10,876 11,164 11,460 
Sewage generation per year 233.58 239.77 246.80 252.65 259.35 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
13 ULB, Damoh 
Projected population of ULBs 1,67,601 1,72,042 1,76,602 1,81,282 1,86,086 
Sewage generation per year 3,792.81 3,893.32 4,007.44 4,102.40 4,211.12 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
14 ULB, Sanchi 
Projected population of ULBs 10,089 10,356 10,631 10,912 11,202 
Sewage generation per year 228.31 234.36 241.23 246.95 253.49 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
15 ULB, Malanpur 
Projected population of ULBs 15,674 16,090 16,516 16,954 17,403 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
132 
S.N. Particulars Years 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22  
Sewage generation per year 354.71 364.11 374.78 383.66 393.83 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
16 ULB, Kukshi 
Projected population of ULBs 52,636 54,031 55,463 56,933 58,441 
Sewage generation per year 1,191.16 1,222.72 1,258.56 1,288.38 1,322.53 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
17 ULB, Mandsaur 
Projected population of ULBs 75,795 77,803 79,865 81,981 84,154 
Sewage generation per year 1,715.23 1,760.69 1,812.30 1,855.24 1,904.40 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
18 ULB, Akodia 
Projected population of ULBs 13,993 14,364 14,745 15,135 15,536 
Sewage generation per year 316.66 325.05 334.58 342.51 351.59 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
19 ULB, Polaykalan 
Projected population of ULBs 14,733 15,123 15,524 15,935 16,358 
Sewage generation per year 333.40 342.24 352.27 360.62 370.17 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
20 ULB, Kareli 
Projected population of ULBs 35,942 36,895 37,872 38,876 39,906 
Sewage generation per year 813.37 834.93 859.40 879.76 903.08 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
21 ULB, Nalkheda 
Projected population of ULBs 20,043 20,574 21,120 21,679 22,254 
Sewage generation per year 453.58 465.60 479.25 490.60 503.60 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0 0 0 0 0 
22 ULB, Pichhore 

 Appendices 
133 
S.N. Particulars Years 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22  
Projected population of ULBs 14,921 15,317 15,723 16,139 16,567 
Sewage generation per year 337.67 346.62 356.78 365.23 374.91 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
23 ULB, Shivpuri 
Projected population of ULBs 2,16,137 2,21,865 2,27,744 2,33,780 2,39,975 
Sewage generation per year 4,891.19 5,020.80 5,167.97 5,290.43 5,430.63 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
24 ULB, Satna 
Projected population of ULBs 3,36,523 3,45,441 3,54,595 3,63,992 3,73,638 
Sewage generation per year 7,615.52 7,817.33 8,046.47 8,237.14 8,455.42 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
25 ULB, Uchehara 
Projected population of ULBs 22,147 22,734 23,337 23,955 24,590 
Sewage generation per year 501.19 514.47 529.56 542.10 556.47 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
26 ULB, Maihar 
Projected population of ULBs 48,267 49,546 50,859 52,207 53,591 
Sewage generation per year 1,092.29 1,121.23 1,154.10 1,181.45 1,212.75 
Treatment of sewage through STPs  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total Sewage generation 39,921.56 40,898.30 41,999.71 42,926.79 43,979.77 
Total sewage treated 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total of Urban sewage merged into the local 
water bodies 
39,921.56 40,898.30 41,999.71 42,926.79 43,979.77 
(Source: Information provided by the ULBs, and projected population data taken from the United Nations World 
Population Prospects) 
1  Sewage generation at the rate of 114 litres per capita per day (80% of 135 lpcd water supply + six 
lpcd for fire etc.) x 365days. 
2 Sewage generation at the rate of 62 litres per capita per day (80% of 70 lpcd water supply + six lpcd 
for fire etc.) x 365days. 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
134 
Appendix 3.2  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3 (b)) 
Non-functional Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
PAC (in ₹) Work order No. 
and date 
Stipulated 
Period (in 
month) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Date of 
Completion 
Payment 
made to 
contractor 
FSTP 
Working 
or not 
(Yes/No) 
Quantity 
of sludge 
brought at 
FSTP 
Quantity 
of treated 
faecal 
sludge (in 
KLD) 
1 Bhind 2,43,393.86 975, 22/02/21 3 21/05/21 During Joint 
physical 
inspection it 
was found 
completed, 
final bill not 
paid 
97,211 No Nil Nil 
2 Dhar 27,43,390 5866, 19/11/18 4 18/03/19 01/02/2021 21,55,850 No Nil Nil 
3 Kareli 27,76,897 2582, 06/10/20 5 05/03/21 05/03/21 21,12,000 No 170 KLD   
4 Mandsaur 10,30,708 23, 05/09/19 1 04/10/19 21/12/2020 8,48,544 No     
5 Shahdol 22,77,016 4220, 22/11/21 3 21/02/22 Not complete 
till April 22, 
(sludge bed 
only) 
8,39,336 No - 0 
6 Akodia 7,33,000  895, 29/01/19 3 28/04/19 29/12/2020 8,91,663 No 1,07,450 L   
7 Beohari 7,33,688 931, 29/09/20 1 28/10/20 Work is 
completed but 
final bill not 
prepared 
4,54,682 No - 0 

 Appendices 
135 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
PAC (in ₹) Work order No. 
and date 
Stipulated 
Period (in 
month) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Date of 
Completion 
Payment 
made to 
contractor 
FSTP 
Working 
or not 
(Yes/No) 
Quantity 
of sludge 
brought at 
FSTP 
Quantity 
of treated 
faecal 
sludge (in 
KLD) 
8 Kukshi 6,63,000 2860, 10/09/2020 1 09/10/20 10/10/2020, 7,99,936 No Nil   
9 Maihar 5,70,513 1739, 06/12/19 2 05/02/20 16/11/2021, 1,80,528 No Nil Nil 
10 Malanpur 7,10,571 180, 28/01/22 20 days 15/02/22 15/02/2022 3,07,678 No     
11 Polaykalan 7,33,636 177, 29/01/2019 1 28/02/19 03/2020 , 2,52,714 No 36,000 L   
12 Sanchi 6,02,734 750, 20/11/2020 6 19/05/21 01/02/2022 4,94,687 No Nil   
13 Orchha  8,30,000 699, 02/12/2019 3 01/03/20 24/12/19 7,19,748 No Nil Nil 
14 Uchehara 6,98,487 1528, 17/11/21 2 16/01/22 04/01.2022, 4,87,023 No Nil Nil 
Total     
 
    1,06,41,598       

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
136 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(a)) 
Excess payment to contractor due to non-deployment of specific machinery 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
Project 
name/area 
PAC Item 
No. 
Particular Quantity 
executed (in 
cum)  
Recove
ry rate 
for the 
respect
ive 
items 
per 
cum 
Contractor 
Percentage 
Amount (in 
₹) 
1 
  
  
  
Bhind Sewage   6.1 Construction 
of DLC 
7,342.85 190 12.29% 15,66,604 
  6.5 Construction 
of PQC M-30 
grade 
14,274.69 329 12.29% 52,73,557 
  4.1 GSB 1,842 51 12.29% 1,05,487 
  4.3 WBM GR-III 1,557 51 12.29% 89,166 
2 
  
  
  
  
  
Gwalior Sewage 
network of 
Lashkar 
  4.3 WBM GR-III 32,446.46 
(81,116.15*0.4) 
51 (-)11.165% 14,70,014 
 
  6.1 Construction 
of DLC 
12,022.90 
(60,114.54x0.2) 
190 (-)11.165% 20,29,303 
 
  6.5 Construction 
of PQC M-30 
grade 
12,022.90 
(60,114.54x0.2) 
329 (-)11.165% 35,13,899 
Sewage 
network of 
Morar 
  4.3 WBM GR-III 17,072.73 51 1.50% 8,83,770 
 
  6.1 Construction 
of DLC 
6,675.754 190 1.50% 12,87,419 
 
  6.5 Construction 
of PQC M-30 
grade 
6,675.754 
(33,378.77x0.2) 
329 1.50% 22,29,268 
3 
  
  
  
  
Indore Sewage 
(M/s N.P. 
Patel) 
96.21 4.1 GSB 34,144.67 51 (-)6.71% 16,24,532 
  6.3 Construction 
of PQC M-40 
grade 
558.49 335 (-)6.71% 1,74,540 
  6.11 Construction 
of PQC M-20 
grade 
2,864.59 319 (-)6.71% 8,52,249 

 Appendices 
137 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
Project 
name/area 
PAC Item 
No. 
Particular Quantity 
executed (in 
cum)  
Recove
ry rate 
for the 
respect
ive 
items 
per 
cum 
Contractor 
Percentage 
Amount (in 
₹) 
  
  
  
  
  
96.21 4.1 GSB 8,305.93 51 (-)6.71% 3,95,178 
  6.3 Construction 
of PQC M-40 
grade 
873.39 335 (-)6.71% 2,72,952 
Sewage 
(M/s 
Laxmi 
constructio
ns) 
183.6 4.1 GSB 42,150.37 51 11.84% 24,04,190 
  6.3 Construction 
of PQC M-40 
grade 
2,437.91 335 11.84% 9,13,397 
  6.11 Construction 
of PQC M-20 
grade 
14,727.88 319 11.84% 52,54,460 
183.6 4.1 GSB 3,062.03 51 11.84% 1,74,660 
  6.11 Construction 
of PQC M-20 
grade 
875.97 319 11.84% 3,12,533 
4 
  
  
  
  
  
Vidisha Vidisha 
Sewage 
89.61 4.1 GSB 31,760.96 51 6.79% 17,29,794 
  4.3(i)(b) WBM  4,391.56 51 6.79% 2,39,177 
  4.3(ii)(b) WBM  14,032.9 51 6.79% 7,64,272 
  4.3(iii) 
(b) 
WBM  2,063.98 51 6.79% 1,12,410 
  6.1 DLC 17,049.63 190 6.79% 34,59,387 
  6.5 PQC M-30 16,042.32 329 6.79% 56,36,294 
5 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Bhopal Bhoj 
Wetland 
and ADB 
145 4.1 GSB 15,913.07 51-
10%=4
5.9 
38.97% 
(+12%GST) 
11,36,857 
  6.1 DLC 9,863.01 190-
10%=1
71 
38.97% 
(+12%GST) 
26,25,093 
  6.3 PQC M-40 254.67 335-
10%=3
01.5 
38.97% 
(+12%GST) 
1,19,510 
  6.5 PQC M-30 616.17 329-
10%=2
96.10 
38.97% 
(+12%GST) 
2,83,974 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
138 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
Project 
name/area 
PAC Item 
No. 
Particular Quantity 
executed (in 
cum)  
Recove
ry rate 
for the 
respect
ive 
items 
per 
cum 
Contractor 
Percentage 
Amount (in 
₹) 
  
  
  
  
  
  6.11 PQC M-20 14,973.19 319-
10%=2
87.10 
38.97% 
(+12%GST) 
66,90,932 
Kolar 
Sewage 
135.14 4.1 GSB 22,200.01 51-
10%=4
5.9 
19.87%(+12
%GST) 
13,68,026 
  6.1 DLC 18,838.8 190-
10%=1
71 
19.87%(+12
%GST) 
43,24,918 
  6.3 PQC M-40 309.64 335-
10%=3
01.5 
19.87%(+12
%GST) 
1,23,109 
  6.11 PQC M-20 29,377.9 319-
10%=2
87.10 
19.87%(+12
%GST) 
1,13,23,547 
Shapura 
Sewage 
105.35 4.1 GSB 31,205.12 102-
10%= 
91.8 
31.93%(+12
%GST) 
42,32,823 
  6.1 DLC 13197 
 
190-
10%=1
71 
31.93%(+12
%GST) 
29,77,247 
  6.5 PQC M-30 202.32 329-
10%=2
96.10 
31.93%(+12
%GST) 
88,519 
  6.11 PQC M-20 19,877.33 319-
10%=2
87.10 
31.93%(+12
%GST) 
84,32,432 
6 
  
  
  
Morena Sewage   4.3(ii)(a) WBM  49,968 102 2.45% 52,21,606 
  4.3(iii) 
(a) 
WBM  22,411 102 2.45% 23,41,927 
  6.1 DLC 32,886.01 190 2.45% 64,01,426 
  6.11 PQC M-20 64,139.66 319 2.45% 2,09,61,835 
7 
  
Sagar Sewage 282.61 6.1 DLC 30,365.94 190 5.83% above 61,05,892 
282.61 6.3 PQC-M40 7,736.61 335 5.83% above 27,42,864 
8 Ratlam Sewage 120.54 4.1 GSB 17,419.23 51 13.38% 10,07,246.07 

 Appendices 
139 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
Project 
name/area 
PAC Item 
No. 
Particular Quantity 
executed (in 
cum)  
Recove
ry rate 
for the 
respect
ive 
items 
per 
cum 
Contractor 
Percentage 
Amount (in 
₹) 
  
  
  
  
  
  4.3(i)(b) WBM 13,506.58 51 13.38% 7,81,001.78 
  4.3(ii)(b) WBM 13,452.33 51 13.38% 7,77,864.84 
  4.3(iii) 
(b) 
WBM 4,762.36 51 13.38% 2,75,377.75 
  6.1 DLC 12,608.79 190 13.38% 27,16,210.76 
  6.5 PQC M-20 
  
21,644.41 329  13.38% 80,73,802.15 
Total        14,39,02,552 
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
140 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(b)) 
Excess payment due to execution of lesser thickness 
S.N. 
 
Name 
of 
Project 
Name 
of 
items 
Thickness 
as per 
DPR  
Thickness/item 
executed  
Length 
(in M) 
Width 
(in M) 
Depth 
(in 
M) 
Qty (in 
Cum) 
SOR 
rate 
(in ₹) 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
Amount per Sqm 
(in ₹) 
Add/Deduct 
tender % 
Amount 
in Sqm. 
Qty (in 
Cum) 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  
(5-4) 
9 
(6*7*8) 
10 
 
11 
(9*10) 
12 
(11/6) 
13 14 15 16 
1 
Gwalior 
Lashkar  
BM 75 mm 50 mm 15 1 0.025 0.375 5,565 2,087 2,086.87/15=139.125 (-)11.165% 123.6 81,116.15 1,00,25,956 
2 BC 75 mm  SDBC 25mm 15 1 0.05 0.75 8,223 6,167.25 6,167.25/15=411.15 (-)11.165% 365.25 81,116.15 2,96,27,674 
3 
Gwalior 
Murar 
BM 75 mm 50 mm 15 1 0.025 0.375 5,565 2,087 2,086.87/15=139.125 1.50% 141.21 42,681.84 60,27,103 
4 BC 75 mm  SDBC 25mm 15 1 0.05 0.75 8,223 6,167.25 6,167.25/15=411.15 1.50% 417.31 42,681.84 1,78,11,559 
Total               27,576           6,34,92,291 
 
 
 

 Appendices 
141 
 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(e)) 
Statement showing payment on account of excavated earth 
S.N. Name of Project Lead Qty of 
transported 
earth 
rate Tender % Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 Kolar Project Upto 5 Km 1,55,993.9 87.70 19.87 1,63,99,013 
  Upto 1 km 92,254.71 54.90 19.87 60,71,156 
2 Shahpura Project Upto 5 Km 72,546.42 87.7 31.93 83,93,810 
3 Bhoj wetland /ADB Upto 5 Km 1,10,951.1 87.3 38.97 1,34,60,672 
  Upto 10 km 5,712.51 123 38.97 9,78,839 
  4,37,458.6   4,53,03,491 
        12% GST 54,36,419 
Total 5,07,39,909 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
142 
Appendix 3.6  
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(f)) 
Non-deduction of royalty charges 
S.N. Name of 
ULB 
Project PAC  
(in crore) 
Work Order 
date 
Period 
of 
Contract 
(In 
months) 
Item 
ITEM Ex. Qty Sand Metal Royalty 
rate 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
Gwalior Lashkar Sewage 195.11 28/09/2017 24 BM 4,055.8 0 3,853.01 120 4,62,361 
          SDBC 1,622.32 0 1,541.2 120 1,84,944 
          WBM 32,446.46 0 32,446.46 120 38,93,575 
  Morar Sewage 204.90 25/09/2017 36 BM 2,134.09 0 2,027.38 120 2,43,286 
          SDBC 853.63 0 810.94 120 97,313 
          WBM 17,072.73 0 17,072.73 120 20,48,728 
2 
  
  
  
Morena  Morena Sewage 125.00 12/07/2016 24 Construction of 
DLC (Metal 
0.725/cum and 
Sand 0.363/cum) 
32,886 11,938 23,842 100 35,78,000 
          CC M-20 (Metal  
0.856/cum and 
Sand  0).471/cum) 
64,243 30,258 54,992 100 85,25,000 
          WBM Gr-II (Metal 
0.67/cum) 
49,968 0 33,479 100 33,47,900 
          WBM Gr-III 
(Meatal .67/cum) 
22,411 0 15,015 100 15,01,500 
3 
  
  
Indore Sewage 96.21 24/01/2018 24 GSB 46,223.69 7,412.73 6,964.83 120/125 82,73,068 
    183.60 28/12/2017 24 GSB 42,980.14 33,210.78 58,156.76 120/125 1,52,07,427 
    230.50 25/07/2018 36 Stone dust 56,245.98 2,079.16 4,000.99 120/125 78,46,824 
Total 5,52,09,926 
 
  

 Appendices 
143 
Appendix 3.7 
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(g)) 
Non-levy of penalty for delay 
S.N. Name of ULB Project name Contract value Date of 
Work order 
Period (in 
months) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual Date 
of 
completion 
Delay 
period (in 
months) 
Penalty to be 
levied (in ₹) 
1 Gwalior Gwalior-Morar 2,07,96,79,485 25/09/2017 24 24/09/2019 31/03/2022 30 20,79,67,948 
2 Gwalior Gwalior-Laskar 1,73,32,61,508 04/10/2017 24 03/10/2019 02/02/2022 31 17,33,26,150 
3 Morena Morena 1,25,00,00,000 12/07/2016 24 11/07/2019 30/12/2021 32 12,50,00,000 
4 Bhind Bhind 79,50,00,000 08/12/2017 24 07/12/2019 not 
completed 
33 7,95,00,000 
5 Satna Satna 1,91,56,81,218 05/12/2016 36 04/12/2019 Foreclosed 
on 
28/05/2021 
34 19,15,68,122 
6 Indore Nalla tapping 89,75,00,000 24/01/2018 24 23/01/2020 not 
completed 
36 8,97,50,000 
 
  Sewage 1,83,60,00,000 28/12/2017 24 27/12/2019 not 
completed 
37 18,36,00,000 
7 Sagar Sewage 2,99,10,56,000 08/07/2016 36 06/07/2019 not 
completed 
36 29,91,05,600 
Total 134,98,17,820 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
144 
Appendix 3.8 
(Reference: Para 3.5(3)(h)) 
Statement showing non-recovery of cost of Hard rock 
S.N. Name of ULB Qty. of 
excavated 
hard rock   
(in cum) 
 (A) 
Qty. of Hard 
rock for 
which 
recovery has  
been done 
 (B) 
Balance 
quantity of 
Hard rock 
(A-B) 
Recovery 
rate/cum 
(in ₹) 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 Sagar 1,31,366.82 0 1,31,366.82 200 2,62,73,364 
2 Bhopal (Kolar Project) 28,473.33 0 28,473.33 200 56,94,666 
3 Bhopal (ADB Project) 10,715.89 0 17,890.89 200 35,78,178 
4 Bhopal (Shahpura 
Project) 
29,548.31 0 29,548.31 200 59,09,662 
Total 4,14,55,870 

 Appendices 
145 
Appendix 3.9 
(Reference: Para 3.5(10)) 
Statement showing incorrect adoption of rate for filling 
As per  ISSR of Water Supply, Sewerage and Tube well  
works 
As per ISSR of building works 
Particular of item Item No/Rate Particular of item Item 
No/Rate 
Earth work in excavation for pipe trenches 
in all kinds of soil 
15.1/129.10 Earth work in excavation by 
mechanical/manual means in 
foundation trenches or drain 
2.8/129.00 
Filling available excavated earth in 
trenches, plinth side of foundation in layer 
not exceeding 20cm in depth i/c 
consolidation of each layer 
15.8/29.00 Filling available excavated earth in 
trenches, plinth side of foundation in 
layer not exceeding 20cm in depth i/c 
consolidation of each layer 
2.25/59.00 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
146 
Appendix 3.10 
(Reference: Para 3.5(11) & 3.5(12)) 
Statement showing lumpsum payment and varied cost per MLD on construction of STPs 
S.N. Name 
of ULB 
Project PAC 
(in 
crore) 
Tender 
% 
No. of 
STP 
Location  Capacity 
of STP 
(in 
MLD)  
Cost of 
STP as 
per 
estimate(₹ 
in crore) 
Payment 
towards 
STP   
(₹ in 
crore) 
Estimated 
Cost Per 
MLD 
(Col.8/Col.9) 
(₹ in crore) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
1 Vidisha Vidisha 86.9 6.79 1 Jatrapura 22.25 17.8 18.16 0.80 
2 Bhopal Bhoj 
Wetland 
ADB  
145 38.97 1 Professor Colony 2 3.17 4.94 1.59 
  
  
1 Sireen River 5 6.47 10.08 1.29 
  
  
1 MaholiDamkheda 35 30.75 47.86 0.88 
Kolar 135.15 19.87 1 Misrod (Maksi) 20.5 21.5 28.86 1.05 
  
  
1 Sankhedi 32 28.2 37.86 0.88 
Shahpura 105.35 31.93 1 Jamunia 3.5 7 6.42 2.00 
  
  
1 Bansal Hospital 9.5 10.5 15.51 1.11 
  
  
1 Char Imli 4.5 5.5 8.13 1.22 
  
  
1 Neelbad 6 7 10.35 1.17 
3 Sagar AMRUT 282.61 5.83 1 Pathariya Hat 43 38.7 43.34 0.90 
4 Morena AMRUT 125 2.456 1 Jauri 25 22.55 26.47 0.90 
5 Indore AMRUT 164.16 11.845 5 Pratiksetu 8 8.14 8.14 1.02 
  
   
Bilalpur 7 7.12 7.12 1.02 
  
   
Radhaswami 6 6.11 6.11 1.02 
  
   
Naharbhandara 11 11.19 11.19 1.02 
  
   
Zoo 35 27.34 27.34 0.78 
ABD 230.5 3.03 1 ABD Area 10 10.37 10.37 1.04 
6 Gwalior Lashkar 195.11 -11.165 2 Jalalpura 145 105.79 93.99 0.73 
  
   
Near NRI college 4 3.37 29.99 0.84 
Morar 204.9 1.49 2 Shatabadipuram 8 5.8 5.89 0.73 
  
   
Lalitpura 65 54.75 55.57 0.84 
7 Bhind Bhind 70.8 12.29 1 Ratnupura 12 12 13.48 1.00 
Total 
 
537.17 
 
 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GLOSSARY OF 
ABBREVIATIONS 

 
 
 

 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
S.N. Abbreviation Description 
1  3Rs Reduce, Reuse and Recycle 
2  ADB Asian Development Bank 
3  AMPRI Advanced Materials and Processes Research Institute 
4  AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
5  BG Bank Guarantee 
6  Bio-CNG Bio-compressed natural gas 
7  BM Bituminous Macadam 
8  BOD Biological oxygen demand 
9  BT Bituminous 
10  C&D Waste Construction and Demolition Waste 
11  CB Capacity Building 
12  CBOs Community-based organizations 
13  CC Cement concrete 
14  CCA Combined Consent Authorisation 
15  CMP City Master Plan 
16  COD Chemical Oxygen Demand 
17  CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
18  CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation 
19  CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
20  CSP City Sanitation Plan 
21  CSTF City Sanitation Task Force 
22  CTE Consent to Establish 
23  CTO Consent to Operate 
24  DI  Ductile Iron 
25  DM District Magistrate 
26  DPRs Detailed Project Reports 
27  DTDC Door-to-Door Collection 
28  EIA Environment Impact Assessment 
29  EPR Extended producer’s responsibility 
30  FSM Faecal Sludge Management 
31  FSSM Faecal Sludge and Septage Management 
32  FSTP Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant 
33  GCC General conditions of contract 
34  GIS Geographic Information Systems 
35  GMC Gwalior Municipal Corporation 
36  GoI Government of India 
37  GoMP Government of Madhya Pradesh 
38  GPS Global Positioning System 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
148 
S.N. Abbreviation Description 
39  GSB Granular Sub-base 
40  GST Goods and Service Tax 
41  HDPE High Density Polyethylene 
42  HPC High Powered Committee 
43  HRIDAY Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana 
44  ICBP Integrated Capacity Building Program 
45  ICCC Integrated Command and Control Centre 
46  IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis  
47  IEC Information, Education & Communication 
48  IMC Indore Municipal Corporation 
49  ISSR Integrated Standard Schedule of Rates 
50  ISWM Integrated Solid Waste Management 
51  JMC Jabalpur Municipal Corporation 
52  JPV Joint Physical Verifications 
53  LD Liquidated Damages 
54  LOA Letter of Acceptance 
55  LPCD Litres per capita per day 
56  M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
57  MC Municipal Corporation 
58  MCl Municipal Council 
59  MIC Mayor in Council 
60  MIS Management information system 
61  MLD Million litres per day 
62  MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests 
63  MoEFCC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
64  MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
65  MPERC Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission 
66  MPPCB Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
67  MPs Micro plastics 
68  MPWD Madhya Pradesh Public Works Department 
69  MRF Material Recovery Facility 
70  MSW Municipal Solid Waste 
71  MSWM Municipal Solid Waste Management 
72  MT Metric Tonne 
73  MTPA Million Tonnes per Annum 
74  NACOF M/s National Federation of Farmers Procurement Processing and 
Retailing Cooperative of India 
75  NARC National Advisory and Review Committee 
76  NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations 
77  NGT National Green Tribunal 
78  NIT Notice Inviting Tender 

 Glossary 
 
 
149 
S.N. Abbreviation Description 
79  NN Nagar Nigam (Municipal Corporation) 
80  NOAA United State National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
81  NPP Nagar Palika Parishad  
82  NULM National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
83  NVVN Ltd NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited 
84  O&M Operation and Maintenance 
85  OCEMS Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring Systems 
86  PDMC Project Development Management Consultant 
87  pH Potential of Hydrogen 
88  PHED Public Health Engineering Department 
89  PPE Personal Protection Equipment 
90  PQC Pavement Quality Concrete 
91  PWM Rules, 
2016 
Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
92  R. Bill Running bill 
93  RA Bill Running Account bill 
94  RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete 
95  RDF Refuse Derived Fuel 
96  RFP Request for proposal 
97  RWAs Resident Welfare Associations 
98  SBM Swachh Bharat Mission 
99  SBM (U) Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 
100  SEIAA State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
101  SHGs Self-help groups 
102  SLAC State-level advisory committee 
103  SLBs Service Level Benchmarks 
104  SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
105  SOR Schedule of Rates 
106  SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
107  SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
108  Sqm Square Metre 
109  SSTS Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems 
110  STPs Sewage Treatment plants 
111  SW Solid Waste 
112  SWM Solid Waste Management 
113  SWM Rules Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 
114  TPD Tonnes Per Day 
115  TSS Total Suspended Solids 
116  UADD Urban Administration and Development Directorate 
117  UDD Urban Development Department 
118  UDHD Urban Development and Housing Department 

Performance Audit Report on Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
150 
S.N. Abbreviation Description 
119  ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
120  UTs Union Territories 
121  W to C Waste to Compost 
122  w.r.t with reference to 
123  WBM Water Bound Macadam 
124  WtE Waste to Energy 
125  WTPs Water Treatment Plants 
126  XGN Extended Green Node 
 