 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on the Working of Madhya Pradesh  
State Agro Industries Development 
Corporation Limited 
for the year ended 31 March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
(Performance Audit-Commercial) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
Performance Audit on the “Working of The Madhya Pradesh State Agro 
Industries Development Corporation Limited”  
(Horticulture and Food Processing Department) 
Chapter-1: Overview 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Activities of the Company 1.2 1 
Organizational setup 1.3 2 
Audit objectives 1.4 2 
Audit criteria 1.5 2 
Scope and methodology of Audit 1.6 2 
Acknowledgement 1.7 3 
Chapter-2: Achievements against objectives of the Company 
Accelerate and increase agricultural production 2.1 5 
Production and supply of supplementary food 2.2 5 
Increasing the availability of supplies of food in the 
State 
2.3 5 
Contributing to the agro -industrial development of 
Madhya Pradesh 
2.4 6 
Conclusion 2.5 7 
Recommendation 2.6 8 
Chapter-3: Procurement 
Introduction 3.1 9 
Trading in reserved items/beyond the objectives of the 
Company 
3.2 9 
Loss due to non -receipt of commission against the 
supply of drips and sprinklers 
3.3 10 
Selection of ineligible bidders 3.4 12 
Discrepancies noticed in supplies from the suppliers 3.5 13 
Lapses in quality control mechanism 3.6 14 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Non-forfeiture of security deposit in case of delayed 
supply 
3.7 16 
Conclusion   3.8 16 
Recommendations 3.9 17 
Chapter-4: Financial Management 
Introduction 4.1 19 
Fixed Deposits (FDs) 4.2 21 
Loss due to adopting incorrect valuation method 4.3 22 
Non-utilization of advances/subsidies received from 
Government 
4.4 24 
Non-disbursement of subsidy to entitled beneficiaries of 
bio-gas programme 
4.5 25 
Non-accounting of interest in Scheme fund 4.6 25 
Non- availing the beneficial option for saving income 
tax, ` 1.72 crore 
4.7 26 
Conclusion 4.8 27 
Recommendations 4.9 28 
Chapter-5: Production and supply of Ready-to-Eat Products 
Introduction 5.1 29 
Non receipt of supervision charges 5.2 29 
Non receipt of payment for supply of RTE products  5.3 30 
Excess deduction   5.4 31 
Loss of business and interest due to delay in receipt of 
payment 
5.5 31 
Undue benefit to vendor of plant and machinery 5.6 32 
Non-compliance of clause regarding reservation of 30 
per cent of required quantity from SC/ST entrepreneurs 
5.7 34 
Conclusion 5.8 34 
Recommendations 5.9 34 
Chapter – 6: Performance of Mechanized Agriculture Farm, Babai 
Introduction 6.1 35 
Financial performance of MAF Babai 6.2 35 

Table of contents 
iii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Non implementation of recommendations of the expert 
committee 
6.3 36 
Under-utilization of land 6.4 38 
Poor performance of nursery 6.5 38 
Irregularities in auction/tendering of trees and orchard 6.6 39 
Non-compliance of norms regarding gap between two 
plants 
6.7 39 
Non availability of Horticulturist at Babai farm 6.8 40 
Conclusion 6.9 40 
Recommendation 6.10 40 
Chapter-7: Implementation of National Biogas Programme 
Introduction 7.1 41 
Turnkey job work 7.2 42 
Publicity and promotion of the programme 7.3 43 
Warranty cards not provided 7.4 43 
Completion certificates were not in prescribed format 7.5 44 
Training not conducted 7.6 44 
Joint physical verification 7.7 44 
Conclusion 7.8 46 
Recommendation 7.9 46 
Chapter-8: Performance of Bio Fertilizer Plant 
Introduction 8.1 47 
Decline in production 8.2 47 
Conclusion 8.3 48 
Recommendation 8.4 48 
Chapter-9: Internal Control System 
Introduction 9.1 49 
No system to monitor supply 9.2 49 
Deficient internal audit system 9.3 49 
Corporate Governance  9.4 50 
Deficient physical verification 9.5 50 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Human Resource Management 9.6 51 
Conclusion 9.7 52 
Recommendation 9.8 53 
Chapter-10: Conclusion 
Conclusion  55 
Appendices 59 
 

v 
PREFACE 
This Report f or the year ended March 202 2 has been prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Madhya Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of India  for being laid 
before the Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of Performance Audit on the "Working of Madhya 
Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited " pertaining to 
Horticulture and Food Processing  Department, Madhya Pradesh, covering the period from 
April 2017 to March 2022.  The Audit has been c onducted under the Comptroller and 
Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those which came to notice in the course o f test 
audit.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with th e Auditing Standards issued by  
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Executive Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vii 
Executive Summary 
 
1.  Overview 
Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited  (Company) was 
incorporated in March 1969 to promote, develop, establish, execute, operate, and otherwise 
carry on projects, schemes, industries, business and activities which accelerate and increase 
agriculture production, contribute to the production of subsi diary and supplementary food, 
increase the availability of supplies of food  in Madhya Pradesh and contribute to the agro-
industrial development of the State. 
We conducted t he Performance Audit to assess  whether the business activities of the 
Company were planned and implemented efficiently, effectively and in line with the 
objectives of the Company and the internal control systems were effective. We audited the 
records of the Company for the period from April 2017 to  March 2022 by test checking 
records of Company headquarters, three Regional Offices (out of seven) and nine Branch 
Offices (three from each selected Regional Offices), Mechanised Agricultural Farm, Babai, 
Hoshangabad and Bio Fertilizer Plant, Bhopal. The Regional Offices and Branch Offices 
were selected on the basis of highest, lowest and average five years' total turnover during 
2017-22. We also conducted joint physical verification of 90 bio -gas plants to verify 
installation and functioning of the bio -gas plants.  The significant findings of the  
Performance Audit are given below: 
2.  Achievements against objectives of the Company 
The Company did not utilize the M echanized Agricultural Farm (M AF), Babai  for 
production and distribution of quality seed s and demonstration of latest agriculture 
machinery/implements and cultivation methods to farmers or as a training centre for farmers. 
Further, t he Company did not explore possibilities of producing and supplying 
supplementary food products in the market. Besides, the Company did not take up activities/ 
initiatives for development of agro -logistics and cold storage/godowns  to increase 
availability of supply of food. The Company failed in contributing to the agro -industrial 
development in the State as the Company did not take any step to accelerate/ promote 
agricultural production or contribute to the agro -industrial development in the State. Thus, 
the core objectives of the Company remained unachieved.  
Audit recommends that the Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) and the Company 
should jointly prepare short term, medium term and long term plans in sync with the 
objectives of the Company and jointly work for the achievement of such objectives. 
3.  Procurement 
The Company floats Rate Contract Offers (RCOs) for procurement of requisite item for 
supply of agricultural and other items to Horticulture and Food Processing Departmen t, 
Farmer Welfare and Agriculture Development Department (FWADD) etc. of GoMP. The 
Memorandum of Association allowed the Company to undertake activities which are related 
to development and promotion of agriculture in the State. Audit of selected 56 RCOs 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
viii 
revealed that the Company , in violation of MP Store Purchase Rules and Service 
Procurement Rules, 2015 traded in water tankers (reserved item for Madhya Pradesh Laghu 
Udyog Nigam). During April 2017 to September 2018, Branch Officers of selected nine 
branch offices procured 864 wat er tankers valuing ` 10.29 crore in violation of the Rules.  
We further noticed that the Company traded in items such as pre -fabricated bus shelters, 
gym equipment, swagat dwars etc. which were not related to the objectives of the Company. 
Further, the Comp any incurred loss of ` 11.79 crore due to non -receipt of commission 
against the supply of drips and sprinklers. Audit scrutiny further revealed that the Company 
procured water tankers of ` 1.22 crore from suppliers who did not have required certificate 
regarding approved design and registered two firms of same person (in one case proprietor 
of firm and in another one partner) in violation of Rate Contract Offer conditions. These two 
firms supplied water tankers valuing ` 3.68 crore. We also noticed instances of irregular 
payment of ` 13.84 lakh against a cancelled order and supply of items before issue of 
purchase order.  
Audit recommends that GoMP should fix responsibility for trading in reserved items and 
ensure that the Company wor ks primarily towards its core objectives . GoMP should 
intervene to get resolved the issue of commission payment to the Company against the 
supply of drips and sprinklers and the Company should fix responsibility for supply of water 
tankers of un -approved design and for accepting supply against the cancelled orders and 
supply before the issue of purchase orders. 
4.  Financial Management 
The financial management and operational performance of the Company was not sound as 
the operational profit of the Company was continuously falling during 2015 -20 and the 
Company suffered operational loss of ` 17.36 crore in financial year 2019-20. Further, the 
operating margin ratio, return on equity ratio a nd return on total as sets ratio had declined 
during 2011 -20 which indicated operational inefficiency . We noticed that  the Company  
invested the funds in a routine manner resulting in loss of interest of ` 1.17 crore on FDs.  
Further, the Company adopted incorrect valuation meth od for valuation of three joint 
venture companies leading to loss of ` 1.59 crore. The Company kept idle fund of ` 5.60 
crore received (upto 2013) from government departments  during 2012 -13 for almost 10 
years. We further noticed that  Biogas subsidy of ` 3.35 crore was not disbursed to the 
beneficiaries even after lapse of five to 29 years. Further, the Company did not account for 
interest amount of ` 49.43 lakh in scheme fund in violation of GoI guidelines. Audit scrutiny 
further revealed that the Company was eligible to pay tax at the lower rate as per Section 
115BAA.   
However, the Company did not avail the option to pay lesser income tax resulting in 
avoidable tax burden of ` 1.72 crore.  
Audit recommends that GoMP should take corrective actions to strengthen the operational 
efficiency of the Company and ensure that the Company invests its fund in beneficial option 
by obtaining interest rates from different banks. Further, GoMP should fix responsibility for 
non-utilization of fund for intended purposes and ensure that the Company returns back idle 

Executive summary 
ix 
unspent fund to the Government immediately and fix responsibility for delay in payment of 
subsidy and ensure immediate payment to the entitled beneficiaries. 
5.  Production and supply of Ready-to-Eat Products 
Scrutiny of records relating to production and supply of ready -to-eat (RTE) food revealed 
that the Company failed in executing any MOU/Agreement with State Rural Livelihood 
Mission (SRLM) with clear terms and conditions for supervision charges which resulted in 
non-receipt of supervision charges of ` 32.38 crore. We further noticed that  the Company 
continued supply of Ready-to-Eat products despite pending payment since September 2020 
which resulted in blockage of ` 2.14 crore. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Company could 
not recover ` 4.34 crore from M adhya Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation  Limited 
(MPSCSCL) even after lapse of five years. Tender condition for registration of vendors 
provides for procurement of minimum 30 per cent RTE products from SC/ST entrepreneurs. 
However, we noticed that the Company did not ensure compliance to this tender condition.  
Audit recommends that the Company should pursue the issue of supervision charges 
vigorously in respect of SRLM plants and make effective efforts to recover margin money 
from MPSCSC immediately. Further, the Company should procure at least 30 per cent items 
from SC/ST entrepreneurs. 
 6.  Performance of Mechanized Agriculture Farm, Babai 
Audit of records of Mechanized Agriculture Farm, Babai revealed that t he Company failed 
in utilizing the MAF for intended objectives . Further, the Company did not impl ement the 
recommendations of expe rt committee constituted for  turnaround of the farm activities . 
During 2017-22, nine to 69 per cent land of MAF remained unutilized. We further noticed 
that the Company could not ensure recognition of nursery developed at M AF, Babai from 
the National Horticulture Board resulting in no sale from the nursery due to want of 
recognition.  
Audit recommends that the GoMP and the Company should jointly ensure optimum 
utilization of MAF for the intended purposes. 
7.  Implementation of National Biogas Programme 
Audit of records relating to National Biogas Programme and j oint physical verification of 
the plants revealed that 23 out of 90 bio gas plants were not functional which indicates that 
required maintenance was not done for the bio gas plants. Further, we noticed that the 
Company did not effectively publicize the bio gas programme which resulted in shortfa ll 
(ranged between 33 and 68 per cent) in achieving the target during 2017-21.  
Audit recommends that the GoMP and the Company should jointly ensure regular inspection 
of bio gas plants and make necessary efforts to publicize the New National Biogas and 
Organic Manure Programme. 
8.  Performance of Bio Fertilizer Plant 
Scrutiny of records of bio fertilizer plant revealed that t he plant was running in loss during 
2016-17 to 2019-20 as the sale declined from ` 197.96 lakh in 2015-16 to ` 64.12 lakh in 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
x 
2019-20. The Company took three years in taking decision to upgrade the bio fertilizer plant 
from powder based to liquid based bio fertilizer. Further, the Company delayed the repair/ 
maintenance work which resulted in new machineries remaining idle for one year.  
Audit recommends that the GoMP and the Company should jointly review the plant 
regularly to ensure its functioning effectively. 
9.  Internal Control System 
The internal control system of the Company was deficient as the Company did n ot monitor 
the timely supply of material which resulted in delay in supply by the suppliers. We noticed 
that in 15 cases, the department had cancelled the order due to delay in supply of items. The 
Company did not have any manual to regulate the scope, rep orting and action taken on the 
findings of internal audit. The significant observations of internal audit of br anch offices 
were not brought to the notice of the MD for effective monitoring and compliance. Thus, 
the Company undermined the importance of the  Internal Audit. We further noticed that 
GoMP did not appoint Independent Director in BOD/Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee, women Director in BOD and did not ensur e required BOD meetings resulting  
in non-compliance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Further, the Company 
had acute shortage of officers/officials ranging between 59 per cent and 87 per cent across 
all the cadres. Despite acute shortage and even after lapse of three years f rom the decision 
of BOD to appoint 76 officials, the Company is still in process of recruitment indicating 
weak human resource management in the Company.  
Audit recommends that the GoMP  and the Company should jointly develop a Standard 
Operating Procedure for procurement and ensure regular board meetings. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Chapter-1 
 
Overview 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
Chapter-1 
 
Overview 
 
1.1 Introduction 
The Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited, Bhopal 
(Company) was incorporated on 21st March, 1969 as a joint venture company with paid up 
capital of ` 3.29 crore contributed by Government of Madhya Pradesh  (` 2.09 crore) and 
Government of India  (` 1.20 crore).  The Company is under administrative control of 
Horticulture and Food Processing  Department (HFPD), Government of Madhya Pradesh 
(GoMP). The main objectives of the Company are to promote, develop, establish, execute, 
operate, and otherwise carry  on projects , schemes, industries, business and activities 
which: 
(a) accelerates and increases agriculture production; 
(b) contributes to the production of subsidiary and supplementary food; 
(c) increases the availability of supplies of food whether principal, ancillary 
supplementary or substitute, in particular in the State of Madhya Pradesh; and 
(d) contributes to the agro-industrial development of Madhya Pradesh. 
1.2 Activities of the Company  
The Company performs the following functions: 
(a) Acting as a facilitating agency for supply of agricultural and other items to 
Horticulture and Food Processing Department, Farmer Welfare  and Agriculture 
Development Department and other departments of the GoMP for which the 
Company floats Rate Contract Offers (RCOs)  and makes contract with successful 
bidders. 
(b) Operation and maintenance of Ready to Eat Material  plants for supply of RTE food 
to the beneficiaries of Woman and Child Development Department. 
(c) Implementation of New National Bio  Gas and Organic Manure Programme  of the 
GoI in the State. 
(d) Operation and maintenance of Mechanised Agricultural Farm. 
(e) Operation and maintenance of Bio-Fertiliser Plant. 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
2 
1.3 Organizational setup 
The m anagement of the Company is vested in a Board of Directors (BoD). As on  
31 March 2022, the BoD comprised seven directors, of whom GoMP appointed six 
directors (including a Chairman and a Managing Director ) and remaining one Director 
was appointed by the GoI. 
The Managing Director is the Chief E xecutive of the Company who is  assisted by five 
General Manager s, 13 Deputy General Manager s, 22 Managers and five Executive 
Engineers. The Headquarters of the Company is situated at Bhopal. Be sides, the Company 
has seven Regional Offices and 49 Branch Offices  spread across the S tate. Further, the 
Company owns a Mechanized Agricultural Farm (MAF) at Babai, Hoshangabad, a Ready 
to Eat (RTE) production unit at Baadi, Raisen and a Bio-fertilizer Plant (BFP) at Bhopal. 
1.4 Audit objectives 
We conducted the Performance Audit to assess whether: 
(a) The business activities of the Company were planned and implemented  efficiently, 
effectively and in line with the objectives of the Company; and 
(b) Internal control systems were effective. 
1.5 Audit criteria 
To achieve the audit objectives, audit criteria was derived from the following sources: 
(a) General Financial Rules  (GFR), MP Stores Purchase Rules and  Services 
Procurement Rules, 2015  and n otifications, circulars, instructions issued by the 
Company/GoI/GoMP from time to time; 
(b) Memorandum and Articles of Association, a genda and minutes of the  BoD 
meetings of the Company and shareholders’ agreement; 
(c) Guidelines for National Biogas and Organic Manure Programme (NBOMP); and 
(d) Tender documents, agreement, supply orders, quality evaluation reports, 
monitoring reports, Annual Financial Statements. 
1.6 Scope and methodology of Audit  
We conducted audit by test -checking records of the Company headquarters  and further 
selected three Regional Offices (out of seven) and nine Branch Offices (three from each  
selected Regional Office) based on highest, lowest and average five years’ total tur nover 
for the period from April 2017 to March 2022 to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of 
the Company in performing its activities . Besides, we also examined records of  
Mechanised Agricultural Farm, Babai, Hoshangabad and Bio Fertiliser Plant, Bhopal. The 
sample selection is detailed in Appendix-1.1.  

Chapter-1 
3 
Moreover, we jointly surveyed 90 bio-gas plants (10 in each selected Branch Office) with 
the representatives of the Company to verify installation and functioning  of the bio-gas 
plants. 
We conducted (October 2022) Entry Conference with the Additional Chief Secretary, 
HFPD, GoMP to discuss the audit objectives, scope, criteria and  methodology. The draft 
report was communicated to the Government in May 2023.  Further, the Exit Conference 
was conducted (July 2023) with the Additional Chief Secretary, HFPD, GoMP to discuss 
the audit findings . The Government furnished (July 2023) para -wise replies which have 
been suitably incorporated in the report.  After incorporating Govern ment replies/ 
comments and suitable modifications, the revised draft report was re -issued to 
Government in May 2024. However, the Government did not furnish reply/comment. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation extended by the Company for condu cting the 
Performance Audit. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-2 
 
Achievements against 
objectives of the 
Company  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
Chapter-2 
 
Achievements against objectives of the Company 
We assessed the performance of the Company with respect to its established objectives and 
Audit findings are discussed below: 
2.1 Accelerate and increase agricultural production 
The Company established Mechanized Agriculture Farm (MAF), Babai, Hoshangabad in 
1971 with the objectives of production and distribution of quality seeds to the farmers, use 
of latest agriculture machiner ies/implements in farming, demonstration of cultivat ion 
methods and functioning as a training centre for the farmers.  
However, we noticed that the Company did not utilize MAF for production and 
distribution of quality seeds to farmers. The Company did not use latest agriculture 
machineries/implements and t he land of MAF was being used for  traditional farming 
activities such as cultivation of crop of wheat and paddy and maintaining orchards of 
mango, jackfruit, amla, chiku, guava and lemon. We further noted that the Company did 
not use MAF for demonstration of cultivation methods or as a training Centre for farmers. 
Thus, the Company failed to utilize MAF for the intended objectives and resultantly, the 
objective of the Company to accelerate and increase agriculture production remained 
unachieved. 
Government did not offer comments on the audit observation. 
2.2 Production and supply of supplementary food 
The Company established (1995) Ready to Eat (RTE) material production plant at Baadi 
and three plants under joint venture arrangement between 2006 to 2009 to p roduce and 
supply supplementary nutrition food of specified quality to the Woman and Child 
Development ( WCD) Department for children aged six months to three years, pregnant 
women and lactating mothers and adolescent girls. The Company had exercised the exit 
route from all the joint ventures in 2019. 
We noticed that the Company was solely dependent on the State Government for procuring 
its RTE material and did not make effort to expand its market.  
Government did not offer comments on the audit observation. 
2.3 Increasing the availability of supplies of food in the State  
In the Union Budget 2018 -19, GoI launched “Operation Greens” to promote farmer 
producers’ organizations, agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional management 
and to protect the growers of eligible crops from making distress sale and to reduce  
post-harvest losses. The Company had applied to become Project Implementing Agency  
and proposed (April/July 2019) to set up plants for processing Potato and Onion at Indo re 
with estimated cost of ` 80.29 crore with expected subsidy of ` 32.68 crore. Later on, the 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
6 
Company dropped (December 2019) the proposal as the Company did not have required 
infrastructure at targeted places. 
Similarly, i n December 2019, the Company considered to set up a Project Management 
Unit (PMU) in order to increase production of horticulture items and their processing. The 
Company also floated Request for Proposal (RFP) to appoint consultant and requested the 
Commissioner, HFPD to reimburse the expenses of the proposed PMU. However, the 
proposal was dropped as the GoMP turned down the proposal to reimburse the expenses of 
the PMU to the Company.  
Apart from these failed efforts, the Company did not take up any other activities/initiatives 
like development of agro -logistics and godowns to increase availability of supplies of 
food.  
Government did not offer comments on the audit observation. 
2.4 Contributing to the agro-industrial development of Madhya Pradesh 
2.4.1 Non-development of agro-industries in the State 
As per the latest available data 1 of Horticulture and Food Processing Department , GoMP, 
Farmer Welfare and Agriculture Development Department, GoMP and National 
Horticulture Board (NHB),  Madhya Pradesh stands at top in the country in production of 
Soyabean, Gram, Uraad, Tur, Massor, L inseed, Tomato, Garlic, second in production of 
Green Peas, Sesame, Ramtil, Moong, Onion, Maize, third in production of Wheat, Barley, 
Coriander, Dry C hillies, fourth in Orange  and fifth in production of Potato and 
Pomegranate. Evidently, the State has immense scope for development of agro -industries. 
However, we noticed that the Company did n ot take initiative for development of agro -
industries in the State.   
Further, Industrial Promotion Policy, 2014 of GoMP also provides for specific financial 
assistances i.e. Sales Tax relaxation (up to 100 per cent  as a set off for a period of  
10 years), reimbursement for promotion of Research  and D evelopment ( ` 5 lakh per 
patent), assistance on electricity consumption (at the subsidised rate of ` 1 per unit for five 
years from the date of commencement of productio n), reimbursement of transportation  
cost to encourage export (30 per cent of the transportation cost to inland container depot 
with a ceiling limit of ` 10 lakh per annum ), capital subsidy (at the rate of 25 per cent of 
investment in Plant and Machinery wi th a ceiling limit of ` 2.50 crore) to set up Food 
Processing Industries based on the size of the project. 
However, the Company did not take any step during 2017 -22 to accelerate/ promote 
agricultural production or contribute to the agro i ndustrial development of the S tate by 
developing food processing units despite huge potential in the food processing sector and 
having huge surplus fund.  
Government did not offer comments on the audit observation. 
 
                                                           
1   Data taken from website of the departments and NHB in April 2023. 

Chapter-2 
7 
2.4.2 Comparison of functioning of similarly placed Companies of other States 
We compared the activities of the Company with the similar organizations of other States 
and noticed that Maharashtra Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited (MAIDC) 
expanded its operations and was running Food Processing Division at Nagpur under the 
brand name “NOGA” . The MAIDC  was processing mangoes, pine -apples, tomatoes and 
oranges.  MAIDC also sells its processed food products to Canteen Stores of Army and 
Navy, Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation, Air Caterers, Hotels, 
Government Bodies and also in Gulf, U.K . and Nepal. Further,  the MAIDC also 
manufactures cattle feeds for animals like cows and buffaloes, poultry feeds, chicks, other 
feeds such as horse feeds, pig feeds etc. 
Similarly, the Kerala Agro Industries Corporation Limited  (KAICL) had fruit processing 
unit i .e. Kerala Agro Fruit Products which produces Mango Juice, Pickles, etc. and also 
created infrastructure facilities  at Waynad  for post -harvest management including value 
addition such as godown with modern facilities for storing of pepper and value addition of 
pepper by production of white pepper. 
The Company did not take initiativ e for development of agro -industries in the State. 
Further, the activities of the Company were confined only to traditional areas i.e.  supply of 
RTE food to the Woman and Child Development Department, supply of agricultural 
equipment such as drips, sprinklers, plant protection equipment, small garden tools, tractor 
and power drawn implements, items useful in allied sector such as plastic crates, vermi -
compost bed etc. and implementation of Bio-gas scheme of GoI. The Company’s activities 
could have  included following areas  to perform in line with the set objectives of the 
Company. 
• Value addition to agriculture/horticulture produce through quality seed 
cultivation, utilization of latest agriculture machinery/ implements, demonstrate 
cultivation methods and impart training on modern cultivation methods; 
• Development of agro -logistics, godowns to increase availability of supplies of 
food and post-harvest management like proper grading, pre-cooling or setting up 
cold storages; 
• Promotion of agro-industries, setting up of food processing and packaging units 
and domestic as well as overseas marketing of agricultural produces; and  
• Contract farming (integrated approach of creating linkages for lab, farm, factory 
and market under a single umbrella) and organic cultivation. 
Government did not offer comments on the audit observation. 
2.5 Conclusion 
The Company was established with objectives to promote, develop, establish, execute and 
operate projects, schemes, industries, business and activities which accelerate and increase 
agricultural production, contribute to the production of subsidiary food, i ncreases the 
availability of supplies of food and contributes to the agro industrial development of the 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
8 
State. However, the Company did not utilize the MAF for production and distribution of 
quality seed and demonstration of latest agriculture machinery/im plements and cultivation 
methods to farmers. Further, the Company did not explore to produce and supply 
supplementary food products in the market. Besides, the Company did not take up 
activities/ initiatives for development of agro -logistics and cold stora ge/godowns to 
increase availability of supply of food. The Company also failed in contributing to the 
agro-industrial development in the State as the Company did not take any step during 
2017-22 to accelerate/ promote agricultural production or contribute to the agro -industrial 
development in the State. 
2.6 Recommendation 
• GoMP and the Company should jointly prepare short term, medium term and 
long term plans in sync with the objectives of the Company and jointly work for 
the achievement of such objectives.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-3 
 
Procurement 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9 
Chapter-3 
 
Procurement 
 
3.1 Introduction  
The Company acts as a facilitating agency for supply of agricultural and other items to 
Horticulture an d Food Processing Department (HFPD), Farmer Welfare and Agriculture 
Development Department ( FWADD) and other government departments  of GoMP.  The 
Company floats Rate Contract Offers (RCOs) for procurement of requisite items as per 
specifications and terms and conditions of the requiring departments. The Company 
charges commission on the supplies . MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement 
Rules, 2015 is applicable on the Company. 
After finalization of RCO, the Company circulates the finalized rates and name of 
suppliers to Regional Offices and Branch Offices. On receipt of demand from the 
departments, the Branch Offices forward the demand to the respective Regional Office 
which places supply order to the appointed supplier. The quantum of procurement through 
RCOs during 2017-22 is detailed in Table-3.1. 
Table- 3.1 Quantum of procurement during 2017-22 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total 
number 
of RCOs  
Total 
operational 
revenue (Net) of 
the Company 
Total Revenue 
through  RCOs 
Percentage of revenue 
generated through RCOs 
vis-a-vis total operational 
revenue 
1 2017-18 19 966.69 154.01 15.93 
2 2018-19 7 356.79 201.79 56.56 
3 2019-20 27 504.23 321.81 63.82 
4 2020-21 11 824.31 250.57 30.40 
5 2021-22 24 1,188.63 588.52 49.51 
Total 88 3,840.65 1,516.70  
Source: Data provided by the Company 
During 2017-22, the Company floated 88 RCOs out of which we examined 56 RCOs1. The 
audit findings are discussed below: 
3.2 Trading in reserved items/beyond the objectives of the Company 
3.2.1 Trading in water tankers in violation of MP Store Purchase Rules and Service 
Procurement Rules, 2015 
As per MP Store Purchase Rules and S ervice Procurement Rules, 2015,  water tanker2 was 
a reserved  item for Madhya Pradesh Laghu Udyog Nigam ( MPLUN). Further, GoMP 
                                                           
1  Audit examined those RCOs in which total turnover during 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 was more than rupees 
one crore. 
2  Annexure A of Rule 6 of the Rules 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
10 
revoked (September  2018) the reservation of water tankers from the items reserved for 
MPLUN. 
We noticed that the Company irregularly traded (upto September 2018) in water tankers in 
violation of MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement Rules, 2015. During April 
2017 to September 2018, Branch Officers of selected nine branch offices procured 864  
water tankers valuing ` 10.29 crore in violation of the Rules.  
Government stated (July 2023) that as per incidental objects laid down in the 
Memorandum and Articles of Association to meet out the main objectives of the 
Company, point no. (8) said that "to carry on the business of drilling engineers company in 
all its branches and to sink wells, tube -wells and install pumping sets, shafts and to make, 
construct, lay down and maintain reservoirs, water works, mains and other pipes and 
appliances and to do all other acts and things necessary for obtaining, storing, delivering, 
measuring and dealing with water ”. Hence, supply of water tanker does not amount to an 
irregular trading. 
The reply is not acceptable as MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement Rules, 
2015 reserved supply of water tanker only for MPLUN up to September 2018. Further, the 
objectives of the Company allow the Company only to undertake activities which are 
related to development and promotion of agriculture. No documentary evidences to verify 
that the water tankers were used for agricultural purposes were furnished along with the 
reply for verification by audit.  
3.2.2 Trading beyond the objectives of the Company  
The Memorandum of Association allowed the Company to undertake activities which are 
related to development and promotion of agriculture in the State.  
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that in September 2016, t he Company  
decided to trade in other items (except reserved items for MPLUN) in addition to 
traditional trade. During 2017-22, the Company traded in pre-fabricated bus shelters, gym 
equipment, Swagat Dwar  etc. which were not at all related to the objectives of the 
Company. The objectives of the Company clearly provided for development and 
promotion of agriculture in the State. Further, the Company diversified its business and 
started trading of items which were not related to development and promotion of 
agriculture without amending the Memorandum of Association. 
Government did not provide specific reply on the audit observation.  
3.3 Loss due to non-receipt of commission against the supply of drips and sprinklers 
The Company finalized (during 2013-14 and further in S eptember 2019) RCOs for supply 
of ISI marked drips and sprinklers  to HFPD. Supply was also made to FWADD. As per 
conditions of the RCOs, the Company was entitled to charge five per cent margin from the 
suppliers. Further, the representatives of the Company and HFPD jointly decided (August 
2019) that the C ompany would not charge any margin  in case of supplies of Drips and 
Sprinklers under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana  (PMKSY) to HFPD. In turn, 

Chapter-3 
11 
the HFPD would share 40 per cent of administrative expenditure receivable 3 (2 per cent) 
from GoI. Accordingly, the Company suspended the condition to charge margin from  the 
suppliers. Further, the Company floated (August 2021) new RCO for the same purpose by 
removing the condition to charge margin. 
During October 2019 to March  2022, the Company supplied Drips and Sprinklers to the 
beneficiaries of the HFPD and FWADD, GoMP to the tune of ` 590.91 crore as detailed in 
Table 3.2.  
Table 3.2 Details of supply of Drips and Sprinklers during 2019-20 to 2021-22 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Amount of supply Total  supply of drips and 
sprinklers Drips Sprinklers 
1 2019-20 70.79 46.12 116.91 
2 2020-21 70.76 21.35 92.11 
3 2021-22 220.72 161.17 381.894 
Total 362.27 228.64 590.915 
Source: Data taken from annual accounts/ERP portal of the Company  
We noticed that the Company did not get any commission on supplies made to HFPD 
amounting to ` 589.73 crore. As committed by the HFPD, the Company would get  
` 11.79 crore6 against the supplies made during 2019 -22. We, however, noticed that the 
Company did not get any amount in lieu of commission for supply of drips and sprinklers 
under PMKSY from HFPD. We further noted that the Company entered (October 2016) 
into agreement with the HFPD for operating and maintaining Farmer Subsidy Tracking 
System (FSTS) portal7 for which the HFPD would pay 20 per cent of amount received for 
administrative expenses under PMKSY from GoI. In August 2019, the A dditional Chief 
Secretary (ACS), HFPD decided that the HFPD would pay only 20 per cent  of 
administrative expenses to the Company for both i.e. commission against the supplies of 
drips and sprinklers and operating and maintaining FSTS portal. 
We further noticed that t he Company deci ded (March 2022) to charge  two  
per cent  commission in lieu of supplies of drips and sprinklers supplied to departments 
other than HFPD  from the suppliers . The suppliers agreed to provide two per cent  
commission to the Company on rates on which the supplie s were made to the HFPD. The 
suppliers supplied drips and sprinklers valuing ` 1.18 crore to FWADD and accordingly 
the Company received the commission at the rate of two per cent from the suppliers.  
Thus, the Company failed in convincing the HFPD to provi de the agreed commission of  
` 11.79 crore. 
                                                           
3    GOI provides administrative charges (five per cent of total expenditure under PMKSY) to HFPD.  
4   Includes sale of ` 1.18 crore to FWADD, GoMP  
5   Includes sale of ` 1.18 crore to FWADD, GoMP and rest of ` 589.73 crore to the beneficiaries of HFPD. 
6   At the rate of t wo per cent of total supplies of drips and sprinklers amounting to ` 589.73 crore to the 
beneficiaries of HFPD. 
7    A Portal for implementation of PMKSY Scheme 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
12 
Government stated (July 2023) that the Company has incurred loss due to non -receipt of 
commission. The reply further stated that the Company was regularly requesting the HFPD 
to remit the balance one per cent margin. 
The reply confirms the audit observation. However, the reply is not convincing as the 
Company is claiming one per cent instead of agreed two per cent commission.   
3.4 Selection of ineligible bidders 
The Company floated  Rate Contract Offers (dated 1 9.08.2019 and 14.10.2021) for 
registering suppliers for supply of water tankers. As per eligibility criteria 8 prescribed for 
the bidders, the bidders should have approved  design of tendered items from S tate 
Transport C ommissioner. The Company rejected one of the suppliers 9 on the ground of 
unapproved design and unavailability of trade certificate in context of RCO (19.08. 2019). 
Further, RCOs 10 had a condition 11 that only one bid will be accepted from one 
applicant/firm. If any individual participates in the bid, representing more than one firm in 
one or different names and it comes to the notice of the Company at any time, all such bid s 
will not be entertained and shall be liable for rejection. 
Scrutiny of these RCOs revealed that: 
(a) the Company registered 40 12 bidders out of whi ch 10 13 bidders did not have  
required certificate regarding approved design of tendered items from State 
Transport Commissioner. In selected nine branches, eight suppliers supplied 82 
water tankers valuing ` 1.22 crore while the d esigns of the supplied water tankers 
were not approved by the State Transport Commissioner.  
(b) An applicant had applied as proprietor of a firm 14 and also applied through a 
partnership firm15 with other partner. We noticed that the Company registered both 
the firms and ente red (October 2019  and again in February 2022 ) into agreement 
with both suppliers. We also noticed that these two suppliers also did not have 
required certificate regarding  approved design of tendered items from State 
Transport Commissioner. These two suppl iers supplied 238 water tankers valuing  
` 3.68 crore.  
Thus, the Company while finalizing the RCOs overlooked the eligibility of the suppliers. 
This resulted in undue benefit to ineligible suppliers. 
Government stated (July 2023) that initially agreement was executed with 10 suppliers. 
Out of these 10 suppliers nine suppliers were registered with the transport commissioner 
for capacity 5500 lit res. During review when the fact was noticed that M/s True Vision is 
                                                           
8  under Annexure-IV of the RCO NIT dated 19.08.19 and 14.10.21 
9  Hindustan pre-fabricators was rejected due to unapproved design. 
10   RCO dated 19.08.19 and 14.10.21 
11  Under clause 1.2 
12   Registered 19 bidders in RCO dated 19.08.2019 and 21 bidders in RCO dated 14.10.2021 
13   Eight out of 19 bidders and two ( except bidders who were also included in RCO dated 19.08.2019) out of 
21 bidders did not have required certificate. 
14  New Malwa Agro and fabricators (certificate issued by NSIC, Sl. No 0000607). 
15  National Engineering Works (certificate issued by NSIC, Sl. No 108166). 

Chapter-3 
13 
not authorized by transport commissioner for the capacity beyond 5000 lit res, RCO was 
not renewed in the next year. Mistake committed at the initial stage in the year 2019 -20 
was corrected in the year 2020 -21. Further , in case of registration of applicant applied 
through proprietor and partnership firm, the Government stated that it is true that the 
applicant was the proprietor of M/s New Malwa Agro and Fabricators as well as partner of 
National Engineering Works. But since the main partnership of  M/s National Engineering 
works is vested with the other partner, the Company considered both the RCOs. 
Government accepted the audit observation in respect of one out of 10 suppliers. However, 
along with the reply it did not provide documentary evidence t o verify that remaining nine 
suppliers had required certificate of approved design. Further, in respect to submission of 
two offers by the bidder (one as proprietor and another as partner firm), both the 
applications were to be rejected as per the conditions of the RCOs.  
3.5 Discrepancies noticed in supplies from the suppliers 
3.5.1 Irregular payment against cancelled order 
The Company had adopted rates/suppliers of MP State Cooperative Marketing Federation 
(MARKFED) for supply of Napsack Hand Sprayer - 16 Litre (Plant Protection  
Equipment).  
Scrutiny of records in Vidisha Branch  Office revealed that Regional Manager , Bhopal 
issued (February 2019) a supply order for supply of 1000 Napsack Hand Sprayer - 16 Litre 
to M/s Padgilwar  Agro. However,  due to delay in supply, Regional Manager  cancelled  
(8 March 2019) the supply order and issued order for supply of same material to anot her 
supplier (M/s Satish Agro ) on the same day. We noticed that M/s Padgilwar Agro, whose 
supply order was cancelled, supplied 1000 sprayer s on 29 March 2019 that too of different 
specification. However, instead of rejecting, the Company accepted the suppl y and made 
irregular payment of ` 13.84 lakh to the supplier in April 2019. Thus, the officials of the 
Branch Office, Vidisha accepted supply of items of different specification and against a 
cancelled order which indicates undue favour to the supplier.   
Government stated (July 2023) that due to urgent demand the order was cancelled and 
other supplier was directed to supply the material and the supply was completed through 
alternate source.  
The reply is not acceptable as acceptance of supply against a cancelled order and of 
different specification indicat ed that the officials of the Company had extended undue 
favour to supplier.     
3.5.2 Supply of items before issue of purchase order 
The supplier should supply the item after issue of p urchase order. Scrutiny of records of 
selected Branch Offices revealed that in two instances the supplier dispatched the ordered  
item (Yatri Pratikshalay ) even before the issue of purchase order in two out of selected  
nine Branch Offices. The details are given in Table-3.3. 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
14 
Table 3.3: Details of supplies made before the issue of purchase order 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Branch Office  
Purchase 
order no. and 
date 
Name of the 
supplier 
Date of Dispatch/ 
installation of 
product 
Value of the 
supply 
(` in lakh) 
1 Biaora Order no 1075 
dated 29 -02-
2020 
M/s Fabricon 
Industries 
25-02-202016 
 
15.14 
2 Vidisha Order no 1045 
dated 23 -03-
2021 
M/s Mahalaxmi 
Industries 
Supplied and 
installed between 
09-03-2021 and 13-
03-2021 
29.17 
Total 44.31 
Source: Data provided by the Company  
The supply of items before issue of purchase order indicates collusion between suppliers 
and officials of the Company. 
Government stated (July 2023) that parallel action was taken due to exigency of execution 
of orders. 
The reply is not acceptable as no time limit was mentioned in the administrative approval 
given by the requiring entity. Further, documentary evidence indicating exigency of work 
was not submitted along with the reply for verification by Audit.  
3.6 Lapses in quality control mechanism 
3.6.1 Supply of item of requisite specification not ensured 
The Company adopted (January 2016) rates/suppliers which was circulated by MP State 
Cooperative Marketing Federation ( Markfed) for supply of living earthworm  
(species: ESSENA PHOETADA ). The Company forwarded the rates of Markfed to 
Regional/Branch offices. The rate order issued by Markfed stated that the species of live 
earthworm should be clearly m entioned in supply orders so that supply of prescribed  
species could be ensured.  
Scrutiny of records of Branch Office, Balaghat revealed that during 2019 -20, supplier  
(M/s Navbharat Agro)  supplied living earthworm costing ` 1 crore. We noticed that 
Regional Manager, Jabalpur Region did not mention the species of the living earthworm in 
the supply order. Further, no documentary evidence indicating supply of requisite species 
were found in the records submitted to audit. Thus, supply of living earthworm of requisite 
species could not be verified.  
Government replied (July 2023) that the Regional Manager did not mention the species of 
living earthworm in purchase order and further stated that the order issued by the Regional 
Manager had the reference of the order issued by Markfed. 
The reply is not acceptable as the rate order issued by Markfed explicitly stated that the 
species of live earthworm should be clearly mentioned in supply orders. 
 
                                                           
16  Out of six dispatches, two dispatches were dated and supplied on 25 -02-2020 and four were undated 

Chapter-3 
15 
3.6.2 No mechanism to verify the quality parameter 
The Company floated (March 2020) RCO for living earthworm which had a condition that 
the supplied quantity should have 1000 earthworm per kg and at least 60 per cent should 
be adult population. However, we noticed that the Company had no mechanism to verify 
that the supplied living earthworm had 1000 earthworm per kg and at least 60 per cent was 
adult population. During 2020-22, the Company supplied living earthworm of ` 3.26 crore  
without verifying the quality of the supplied material. 
Government stated (July 2023) that Agriculture Department had the expertise in knowing 
the species of the earthworm and no complaints were received.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company should have some quality check mechanism to 
verify supply of requisite quality of materials.  
3.6.3 Irregularities in inspection by third party inspection agency  
Rule 19.1 of the MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement Rules 2015 provides 
that to ensure quality of items to be procured, the procurement agencies will ensure 
inspections of items before the supply of the item. Further, Clause 36 (ii) of the RCOs for 
supply of  water tanker s, pre-fabricated bus shelter s and Swagat Dwar  provided that  all 
material supplied under the RCO s would be compulsorily inspected by third party 
approved by the Company for this purpose . At the time of payment, the bidder should  
submit inspection report along with bills . The cost of inspection would be born e by the 
respective suppliers. In the purchase orders for water tankers, the Company had mentioned 
M/s IR Class Systems and Solutions Private Limited (IR Class) as agency for third party 
inspection. However, we noticed that IR Class was approved by the Comp any for 
inspection of drips and sprinklers only. 
Further, as per purchase orders  of pre-fabricated bus shelters and Swagat Dwars  placed to 
the supplier, the inspection of the product was to be carried out before the supply of the 
product. However, in thre e out of selected nine branch offices, we noticed that IR Class 
conducted the inspection of 99 products 17 after supply of the products. Further, as the 
inspection cost is paid by the supplier, the possibility of biased inspection reports cannot 
be ruled out as can be seen that no irregularity was found in inspection of these 99 cases.  
Thus, the Company allowed IR Class which was s elected only for inspection of d rips and 
sprinklers for inspection of water tankers . Further, the  inspection agency violated the  
conditions of inspection as mentioned in the purchase order by not inspecting the product 
before supply. 
Government stated (July 2023) that the bus shelter was pre -fabricated item and 
permanently fixed in the ground. Therefore, third party inspection report after completion 
of the work had been considered.  
The reply is not acceptable as the condition of purchase order provided for inspection of 
the product before the supply. Further, the inspection carried out after installation may be 
                                                           
17  Supplied through ten orders, the inspection of the products were carried out by IR Class  

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
16 
biased as shortcomings found in inspection (after installation) may lead to uninstallation/ 
damage of the product.   
3.6.4 Violation of the payment clause 
Clause 19 of the RCO (June 2019) for supply of h ybrid vegetable seeds  stated that   
80 per cent  payment would be made to supplier after receipt of the amount from the 
beneficiary department and receipt of the verified bill . Rest 20 per cent payment would be 
made after receipt of the satisfactory report from the beneficiary department. 
Scrutiny of records of Branch Office, Vidisha revealed that Branch Manager made  
(during April 2021 to March 2022) full payment of ` 7.52 lakh to two 18 suppliers without 
receipt of the satisfaction report from the beneficiary department. Thus, suppliers were 
irregularly paid ` 1.50 lakh (being 20 per cent) without receipt of satisfactory report. The 
satisfactory report was not received from the beneficiary department as of January 2023. 
Government stated (July 2023) that if no complaint was received in 30 days from the field 
office, then 100 per cent payment was released. In future proper inspection will be ensured 
before payment.  
Government accepted the audit observation and was taking corrective action. 
3.7 Non-forfeiture of security deposit in case of delayed supply  
RCO document provides penal conditions for bidders. As per the penal condition, the 
Security deposit of the supplier will be forfeited in case of failure of supply/delay in supply 
of material. We noticed that i n 15 cases, five suppliers did not supply the ordered items 
and the beneficiary department cancelled the order due to non -receipt of intended goods. 
However, the Company d id not forfeit the security deposit of these suppliers valuing  
` 5 lakh. 
Government stated (July 2023) that due to delay in supply by five suppliers, orders were 
cancelled and supply was made through other suppliers. Action is being taken against the 
defaulter suppliers.  
Government accepted the audit observation and was taking corrective action. 
3.8 Conclusion   
Scrutiny of RCOs floated for procurement of different items revealed that the Company in 
violation of MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement Rules, 2015 traded in 
water tankers (reserved item for MPLUN). The Company traded in items such as pre -
fabricated bus shelters, gym equipment, swagat dwars etc. which were not at all related to 
the objectives of the Company. The Company incurred loss of ` 11.79 crore due to non -
receipt of commission against the supply of drips and sprinklers. Further, the Company 
procured water tankers of ` 1.22 crore from suppliers who did not have required certificate 
regarding approved design. The Company registered two firms of same person (in one case 
proprietor of firm and in another one partner) in violation of RCO conditions. These two 
                                                           
18  M/s Indo US (` 1.96 lakh) and M/s Asmi enterprises (` 5.56 lakh) 

Chapter-3 
17 
firms supplied water tankers valuing ` 3.68 crore. We noticed instances of irregular 
payment of ` 13.84 lakh against a cancelled order and supply of items before issue of 
purchase order. Supply of requisite specification of items could not be ensure d due to 
lapses in quality control mechanism . The Company did not have mechanism to verify 
quality parameter. 
3.9 Recommendations  
• GoMP should fix responsibility for trading in reserved items and ensure that the 
Company works primarily towards its core objectives. 
• GoMP should intervene to get  resolved the issue of commission payment to the 
Company against the supply of drips and sprinklers. 
• The Company should fix responsibility for supply of water tankers of  
un-approved design and for accepting supply against the cancelled orders and 
supply before the issue of purchase orders. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-4 
 
Financial 
Management 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19 
Chapter-4 
 
Financial Management 
 
4.1 Introduction  
Financial Management is the management of financial resources of the organization. The 
outcomes of the business activities of an organization are reported through Annual Financial 
Statements of the organization. As per the Companies Act 2013, every Company  should 
prepare its Annual Financial Statements within six months of the end of every financial year. 
As of December 2022, the Company had finalized Annual Financial Statements for financial 
years up to 2019 -20 and Annual Financial Statements for 2020 -21 and 2021-22 were in 
arrears. The detailed financial position and working results of the Company during 2017-20 
are given in Table 4.1.    
Table 4.1: Financial position and working results of the Company 
  (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars As per Annual Financial Statements for 
the year 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1. Profit Before Tax (PBT) 35.76 25.25 11.31 
2. Other Incomes of the Company    
 (i) Other Income from Interest on Fixed Deposits  17.93 23.10 25.19 
(ii) Other Income from other than interest on Fixed 
Deposits (dividend, interest on IT refund etc.) 
1.38 1.60 3.48 
2. Total Other Income 19.31 24.70 28.67 
3. Operational profit (PBT-Total Other Income) 
= ( 1-2) 
16.45 0.55 (-) 17.36 
4. Fixed Deposits at the end of year 306.55 365.51 425.52 
Source: Annual financial Statements of the Company for the respective years 
From Table 4.1, it can be clearly seen that the profitability of the Company sharply declined 
over the years and it suffered substantial operational loss of ` 17.36 crore during financial 
year 2019-20. Decline in profitability during 2018-19 and 2019-20 were due to operational 
loss in Bio -Fertilizers Plant and declined sale of Pesticides, Manure etc. due to 
implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer by Agriculture Dep artment. The Profit Before 
Tax (PBT) looked high due to interest earned on fixed deposits (FDs).  
The interest earned on FDs during the years 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 was  
50.14 per cent , 91.49  per cent  and 222.72 per cent respectively of the PBT. Duri ng  
2019-20, the Company incurred operational loss of ` 17.36 crore and the loss was met from 
the interest earned on FDs. This indicates that on the operations side, the performance of the 
Company was falling year after year.  
The Company kept huge amount ranging between ` 306.55 crore and ` 425.52 crore in FDs 
during 2017-20. However, the management of FDs were casual as we noticed loss of interest 
on FDs as discussed in paragraph 4.2. 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
20 
4.1.1 Analysis of financial statements 
We analysed financial statements i.e. balance sheet s and profit and loss accounts of the 
Company for 2011 -12 to 2019 -20 to assess the overall operational efficiency of the 
Company. The financial position and working results of the Company  for 20 11-12 to  
2019-20 are detailed in Appendix-4.1 and graphically depicted in Chart-4.1 below.  
 
Our scrutiny of financial position and working results of the Company are discussed below: 
• The Company had no borrowing from any financial institution during the period. 
• The Company had operational  profit during 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. Thereafter, the 
operational profit declined continuously and the Company incurred operational loss 
of ` 17.36 crore during 2019-20. The decline in operational profit may be attributed 
to decline in operational revenue which declined from ` 1250.13 crore in 2011-12 
to ` 504.23 crore in 2019-20. 
• During 2011-12 to 2019-20, the Company invested funds ranging ` 171.86 crore to 
` 425.52 crore in fixed deposits instead of investment in activities of the Company 
to generate operational revenue.  
Thus, the above factors reflect adversely on the financial management and operation al 
performance of the Company. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2024), however, the reply 
was awaited. 
4.1.2 Analysis of financial ratios 
We analysed financial ratios viz Operating margin ratio (compares the operating profit of a 
company to its net sales from core operations), Return on equity (Shareholders’ equity/Net 
worth) ratio (measures how efficiently a company is using its net worth/shareholders’ equity 
to generate profit) and Return on total assets (measures how efficiently a company is using 
its assets to generate profit)  ratio using financial position and working results of the 
Company for 2011-12 to 2019-20. These ratios are detailed in Appendix-4.2 and graphically 
depicted in Chart-4.2 below: 
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 4.1: Trend of Operational and Net Profit
Operating Income/Profit Net profit

Chapter-4 
21 
  Analysis of financial ratios revealed the following: 
• Operating margin ratio continuously declining from 2015 -16. This shows declining 
operating efficiency (less Operating Profit was generated in comparison to its sales). 
• Return on equity ratio is continuously declining from 2011-12. This indicates lower 
efficiency of the Company in using its equity to generate profit. 
• Return on total assets ratio continuously declining from 2013-14. This shows lower 
efficiency of the Company in using its assets to generate profit. 
Thus, operating margin ratio, return on equity ratio and return on total assets ratio were 
declining year after year which indicates towards operational inefficiency and weak 
financial management of the Company. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2024), however, the reply 
was awaited.  
4.2 Fixed Deposits (FDs) 
The Company kept surplus funds in FDs. The position of fund invested in FDs (except FDs 
created through auto sweep at Branch Offices) during financial years from 2017-18 to 2021-
22 (as on 31 March) are given in Table 4.2.   
Table 4.2: Position of Fixed Deposits        
(` in crore)    
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year  
Number of 
new FDs 
Number of FDs 
renewed during 
the year 
Total number of 
FDs 
Fund invested in FDs 
1 2017-18 149 86 FDs 235 FDs 213.15 
2 2018-19 07 179 FDs 186 FDs 241.21 
3 2019-20 01 167 FDs 168 FDs 183.77 
4 2020-21 01 167 FDs 168 FDs 194.15 
5 2021-22 56 140 FDs 196 FDs 250.04 
Source: Information collected from the records of the Company 
-0.10
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 4.2: Trend of financial ratios
Operating margin ratio = Operating income / Net sales
Return on equity ratio = Net income / Shareholder’s equity
Return on assets ratio = Net income / Total assets

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
22 
Scrutiny of records relating to investments/FDs of the Company revealed the followings: 
• The Company had no monitoring mechanism to review the surplus fund invested 
and surplus fund available for investment. The management of the Company invested the 
surplus fund in a routine manner through renewal facility as seen in the above table. 
• The Company did not have any investment policy for managing and investing its 
spare fund. Further, neither the MD nor the BoD ever reviewed the position of investment 
in FDs for purpose of monitoring or effective management. 
4.2.1 Loss of interest 
As a prudent practice, at the time of renewal or formation of FD, every entity should seek 
prevailing interest rates from various banks in order to avail competitive interest rates.  
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that the Company did not have any practice of 
seeking interest rates from various banks for formation/renewal of FDs. Thus, the Company 
could not reap benefits of probable higher interest rates as it never invited interest rate 
quotations from the Banks. Moreover, the fix ed deposits made prior to the year 2013 were 
being renewed with the same bank. Thus, the management had an indifferent attitude 
towards investment of surplus funds leading to financial losses to the company as discussed 
below: 
➢ In 94 cases pertaining to 2017-18 to 2021-22, the company lost ` 35.72 lakh as the 
FDs were formed /renewed at lower rates whereas same bank/other bank was 
offering higher rates on the same day for the same duration.  
➢ In 18 cases pertaining to 2019-20 to 2021-22, the Company lost ` 81.11 lakh as the 
FDs were formed/renewed for denomination more than ` 2.00 crore whereas the 
Banks were offering higher rate of interest on FDs having denomination less than  
` 2.00 crore.   
Thus, the Company did not adopt practice to seek interest rates from different banks to invest 
fund in banks offering higher interest rates resulting in loss of interest of ` 1.17 crore. 
Government stated (June 2023) that in most of the cases FDRs were ren ewed in the same 
bank on maturity. While taking the proposals from other banks adequate care was taken for 
safety and security of the funds. In some cases to avoid delay in decision, investment was 
made in auto renewal mode, due to this lesser rates were r eceived. However, we will take 
care in future to maximize the return with the safety.  
Government agreed with the audit observation and assured to take necessary action. 
4.3 Loss due to adopting incorrect valuation method  
The Company made agreement (between 2006 and 2012) and invested ` 1.441 crore in three 
joint venture companies viz. MP Agro Nutri Foods Limited (MPANFL), Indore, MP Agro 
Food Industries Limited (MPAFIL), Mandide ep and MP Agrotonics Limited (MPAL), 
Mandideep. The shareholders’ agreement with the private parties had an “Exit clause” which 
                                                           
1   ` 48.00 lakh in each joint venture. The Company had 30 per cent shareholding in these joint ventures. 

Chapter-4 
23 
envisaged that the joint venture companies shall become liable to purchase all the equity 
shares held by the Company after 31st March 2017 on the wish of the Company. The criteria 
for valuation of the shareholding was also laid down in the shareholders’ agreement. As per 
the shareholders’ agreement, the Company shall offer to sell its stake, giving three months’ 
notice in writing, to the joint ventures who shall indicate acceptance or otherwise within that 
time. The co-promoters shall purchase shares within next three months. 
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that the Company decided (September 2018) 
to opt the exit route as per shareholders’ agreement on the basis of audited annual financial 
statements of the JVs for the year 2018 -19. The Company issued (b etween June 2019 and 
September 2019) notices to the joint ventures for exit. In December 2019, the Company 
worked out valuation of its shares as ` 52.662 crore for all three JVs and accordingly 
intimated (December 2019) the values to the co -promoters of the joint ventures and 
demanded the valued amounts. The General Manager, Finance apprised (December 2019) 
the BoD that the Company had issued notices to joint venture companies to deposit dues and 
the BoD instructed the management to receive the share value by January 2020. Further, the 
BoD instructed (June 2020) to expeditiously recover the amount. Accordingly, the Company 
sent final notice (July 2020) to MPANFL, MPAFIL and MPAL to pay ` 52.66 crore stating 
that the valuation was uncontroverted and true, correct and acceptable to all the parties. 
We noticed that the Managing Director, w ithout informing BOD, appointed (July 2020)  
M/s Piyush Bindal3 for valuation of shares of these JV companies as per exit route available 
in shareholders’ agreement (Average Net Yield method). However, M/s Piyush Bindal  
submitted (July 2020) valuation Report based on Profit Earning Capacity Value Method as 
per which the valuation of shares of these joint ventures were ` 51.144 crore reduced by  
` 1.52 crore in comparison to earlier valuation (` 52.66 crore). We further noticed that the  
co-promoters of all three joint ventures paid ` 51.14 crore during August 2020 to September 
2020 to the Company. 
The General Manager (Accounts) apprised (September 2020) the BoD that all the three JVs 
deposited the due amounts as worked out by M/s Piyush Bindal. However, the Board decided 
(September 2020) to form a four-member committee with directions that report of the 
committee may be sent to Finance Department for decision. Accordingly, a committee was 
constituted which submitted (September 2020) that BoD was competent to decide such 
matters and there was no need to seek approval from the Government. 
We noticed that the BoD again instructed (July 2021) that a share valuer should be appointed 
in such a manner which did not arise any conflict of interest and the matter should be 
presented to the Board soon. The Company after carrying out tendering process appointed 
(September 2021) M/s Resurgent Valuers Private Limited as an independent valuer.  
M/s Resurgent Valuers Private Limited submitted (September 2021) valuation adopting the 
method as provided in exit route of agreement ( Average Net Yield method) of shares at  
                                                           
2  ` 20.29 crore, ` 17.35 crore and ` 15.02 crore respectively for MPANFL, MPAFIL and MPAL 
3  Registered Valuer with Insolvency Bankruptcy Board of India - Securities of Financial Assets 
4  ` 18.77 crore, ` 17.58 crore and ` 14.79 crore respectively for MPANFL, MPAFIL and MPAL 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
24 
` 52.735 crore. The valuation was increased by ` 1.59 crore in comparison to valuation done 
by M/s Piyush Bindal. 
We noticed that the matter was neither submitted to the Board in next two meetings6 nor any 
member of BOD raised any concern in these two meetings. The Company did not transfer 
shares to the co-promoters of the Joint Ventures even after lapse of more than two years of 
receipt of due amount. Eventually, the private co -promoters (in respect of MPANFL) filed 
a writ petition in the Hon'ble High Court in September 2022 to seek refund of their paid 
amount with interest. 
Thus, the Managing Director of the Company accepted the incorrect valuation report of M/s 
Piyush Bindal and received share value of ` 51.14 crore from the co-promoters of the joint 
venture companies led to loss of ` 1.59 crore.  
Government while verifying the figures stated (July 2023) that the matter was sub -judice 
and already been taken seriously. The matter was placed before the BoD and also sought  
advices of advocate general of MP and other professionals too. As per the decision of the 
BoD, action will be taken.  
Government accepted the audit observation. 
4.4   Non-utilization of advances/subsidies received from Government  
The Company receives advances/subsidies from Government on various counts. Scrutiny of 
books of accounts of the Company for 2017 -22 revealed that as of March 2022 the 
accounting records were showing ` 5.60 crore as subsidy or advances received from 
Government departments and thes e advances/subsidies pertained to the period 2012 -13 or 
earlier. The Company did not provide sanction letters for these advances, therefore, we 
could not ascertain the purpose and period of sanction. The Company neither adjusted nor 
refunded (except in one case discussed below) the advances and the fund was kept idle with 
the Company for almost 10 years. Further scrutiny of these cases revealed that:    
• The Company kept ` 1.80 crore received prior to 2012-13 as advances for assistance 
to food park (Horticul ture) idle for eight years and returned back (March 2020) to the 
Government without any interest. This indicates that the Company did not use the 
Government funds for the specified purpose and invested the unutilised funds in FDs and 
earned interest. This defeated the purpose of the funds. 
•  Out of advances of ` 30.24 lakh and ` 60.26 lakh received from Government  for 
EDP programme (Horticulture) and food processing seminar respectively, the Company 
released ` 29.85 lakh and ` 24.10 lakh to twelve Government and non -Government 
institutions as advance during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.  However, till date no utilisation 
certificates or bills have been received from these institutions. The Company in March 2021 
adjusted these advances against advances received from Government without seeking 
approval of the Board and without ensuring utilization of fund for the intended purpose. As 
                                                           
5  ` 20.29 crore, ` 17.35 crore and ` 15.09 crore respectively for MPANFL, MPAFIL and MPAL  
6  194th Meeting of BOD conducted on 24.03.2022 and 195th Meeting of BOD conducted on 23.08.2022 

Chapter-4 
25 
per delegation of power approved by Board 7, the Managing Director was empowered to 
write off maximum ` 5 lakh in a year. Thus, the Managing Director irregularly adjusted the 
fund without receipt of utilization certificate and also without approval of the BoD.    
This indicated that the financial management of the Company was deficient. 
Government stated (July 2023) that the Company had no intention to use Government funds 
but due to non-receipt of project completion certificate, payment to beneficiaries were kept 
pending. As and when confirmation is received from concerning authorities, the Company 
would reimburse the subsidy amount to beneficiaries. In this regard, process regarding 
reconciliation is in progress and in case if any unutilized amount is found it will be refunded.  
The reply is not acceptable as the payments were pending since 10 years. Further, the 
Company did not furnish details wherein the payment was pending due to non-completion. 
4.5  Non-disbursement of subsidy to entitled beneficiaries of bio-gas programme  
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), GoI implemented (1981 -82) National 
Biogas and Manure Management Programme (NBMMP). The Company was the 
implementing agency in the State  and MNRE released subsidy to the Company. The 
Company was responsible for release of bio gas subsidy to the entitled beneficiaries after 
successful commissioning of the Bio Gas plants of the beneficiaries. 
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that the Company did not disburse biogas 
subsidy of ` 3.66 crore (as on 31st March 2022) to the beneficiaries of which subsidy amount 
of ` 3.35 crore was pertaining to 1993 -94 to 2016 -17 and was not disbursed to the 
beneficiaries even after lapse of five to 29 years.   
Further scrutiny in selected branch offices revealed that in 285 cases involving subsidy of  
` 11.85 lakh, the branch offices did not issue cheques to the beneficiaries whereas in other 
cases involving ` 65.60 lakh, cheques were issued to the beneficiaries, however, the 
beneficiaries did not present the cheques in the bank in stipulated time resulting in reversal 
of these cheques.  
Thus, due to laxity of officials of the Company ` 3.66 crore of biogas subsidy was lying 
with the Company for decades and the beneficiaries remained deprived.  
Government stated (July 2023) that amount shown under biogas s ubsidy payment was 
showing delay due to non updation of KYC details of beneficiary. Hence, the Company will 
disburse subsidy as and when KYC details are updated. 
The reply is not acceptable as the reason attributed for delay did not justify the delay of five 
to 29 years.   
4.6  Non-accounting of interest in Scheme fund  
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and 
Farmer’s Welfare, GoI launched Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) in 2007-08. GoI 
                                                           
7  188th Meeting of BoD held on 27-09-2019 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
26 
released fund to FWADD, GoMP which further extended the released fund to HFPD, 
GoMP. HFPD further transferred the fund to the Company. 
During 2017-22, the Company received funds from HFPD for implementation of RKVY as 
detailed in Table 4.3.  
Table 4.3: Year-wise receipt and expenditure of RKVY scheme 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Fund sent from 
HFPD to the 
Company 
(As per records of 
the Company) 
Expenditure incurred 
out of the Amount 
provided to the 
Company 
Amount unspent 
with the Company 
at the year end 
(Cumulative) 
1. 2017-188 0 0 0 
2. 2018-19 10.00 0 10.00 
3. 2019-20 18.71 10.17 18.54 
4. 2020-21 12.35 14.49 16.40 
5. 2021-22 19.71 8.40 27.71 
Source: Data taken from the records/Tally/ERP software of the Company 
The fund received was not spent in the year of receipt and the unspent amount was carried 
forward to the next years. At the time of revalidation (April 2019 and April 2020) of unspent 
balance of financial year 2018-19 and 2019-20, GoI revalidated the unspent balance along 
with the bank interest earned. Thus, the interest earned on unspent balance of the scheme 
should have been included in the scheme fund.   
However, we noticed that the Company not only earned interest 9 by investing the unspent 
balances in FDs to the tune of ` 15.88 lakh and ` 33.55 lakh during 2018-19 and 2019-20 
respectively but also booked such interest as its own income against the spirit of GOI 
directions. Thus, the Company irregularly treated interest income on unspent fund as income 
of the Company. 
Government stated (July 2023) that the Company had spent more amount than received from 
Government such as PMKSY etc. In some cases, the Company has spent own funds on 
behalf of Horticulture Department. 
The reply is not specific to the audit observation.  
4.7 Non- availing the beneficial option for saving income tax, ` 1.72 crore 
The Company was paying income tax on profit earned for the financial years from 2017-18 
to 2020-21 at the rate of 30 per cent10 of profit. In the year 2021-22 the Company suffered 
loss of ` 6.13 crore11, therefore, it was not liable to pay income tax for the year. 
Section 115BAA of the Income Tax Act 1961 stipulated that the income -tax payable in 
respect of the total income of a person, being a domestic company, for any previous year 
                                                           
8  No fund was received during 2017-18. 
9  During 2018-20, the interest rates on FDRs were ranged between 5.15 per cent and 7.50 per cent. However, 
we worked out interest conservatively at the rate of four per cent per annum on the unspent fund.  
10  Plus applicable surcharge and Health and Education Cess 
11  As worked out by the Company for Income Tax purpose 

Chapter-4 
27 
relevant to the assessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2020, shall, at the 
option of such person, be computed at the rate of twenty -two per cent 12. Further, certain 
conditions were prescribed for availing the option. 
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that the Company was eligible to pay tax at 
the lower rates as per Section 115BAA as it was satisfying all the prescribed conditions.  
However, despite being entitled, the Company did not avail the option to pay lesser income 
tax under section 115BAA, and paid income tax as per earlier prevailing rates as detailed in 
Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Comparison of Income Tax actually paid and payable as per new option 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total taxable 
income  
Income tax 
paid at 
prevailing 
rates 
Income tax 
calculated 
under section 
115BAA 
Comparative loss due 
to non-availing of 
option 
A B C D E F=D-E 
1 2019-20 13.16 4.60 3.31 1.29 
2 2020-21 5.25 1.75 1.32 0.43 
3 2021-22 (-) 6.13 0 0 0 
Total 1.72 
Source: Income tax returns of the Company for respective years. 
Thus, due to non-availing the beneficial option available under Section 115BAA of Income 
Tax Act 1961, the Company had to bear avoidable tax burden of ` 1.72 crore. 
Government stated (July 2023) that the Company had filed returns on th e basis of 
provisional accounts due to non-finalization of books of accounts and delay in audit status 
was not clear at that time. Due to these, the Company has not availed the option.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company could have availed exemption of income tax on 
the basis of provisional accounts also.  
4.8   Conclusion  
The financial management and operational performance of the Company was not sound as 
the operational profit of the Company was continuously falling during 2015 -20 and the 
Company suffered operational loss of ` 17.36 crore in financial year 2019-20. Further, the 
operating margin ratio, return on equity ratio and return on total assets ratio had declined 
during 2011-20 which indicates operational inefficiency. The management of the Company 
invested the funds in a routine manner resulting in loss of interest of ` 1.17 crore on FDs. 
The Company adopted incorrect valuation method for valuation of three joint venture 
companies which led to loss of ` 1.59 crore.  The Company kept idle fund of ` 5.60 crore 
received from government departments as advances/subsidies for almost 10 y ears. Biogas 
subsidy of ` 3.35 crore was not disbursed to the beneficiaries even after lapse of five to  
29 years. The Company did not account for interest amount of ` 49.43 lakh in scheme fund 
in violation of GoI  guidelines. Further, the Company failed in opting beneficial option for 
saving income tax of ` 1.72 crore. 
                                                           
12   plus applicable surcharge and Health and Education Cess 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
28 
4.9   Recommendations 
• GoMP should take corrective actions to strengthen the operational efficiency of 
the Company. 
• GoMP should ensure that the Company invests its fund in beneficial option by 
obtaining interest rates from different banks.  
• GoMP should fix responsibility for non -utilization of fund for intended purposes 
and ensure that the Company returns back idle unspent fund to the Government 
immediately.  
• GoMP should fix responsibility for delay in payment of subsidy and ensure 
immediate payment to the entitled beneficiaries. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-5 
 
Production and 
supply of Ready-to- 
Eat Products 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
Chapter-5 
 
Production and supply of Ready-to-Eat Products 
 
5.1 Introduction 
The Company entered (December 2011) into an agreement with W omen and Child 
Development (W CD) Department incorporating conditions to supply supplementary 
nutrition food of specified quality for children aged between six months and three years, 
pregnant and lactating women and adolescent girls under Sabla Scheme. WCD would 
provide wheat and rice to the Company  at subsidized rate through Madhya Pradesh State 
Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (MPSCSCL) and the rate of supplementary nutrition 
food per beneficiary per day shall be decided by the WCD Department in consultation 
with the Company subject to ceiling limit set by the GoMP/GoI. 
To supply Ready to Eat (RTE) product, the Company had a production plant at Baadi, set 
up in 1995 with initial capacity of 6,600 MT of supplementary nutrition food which was 
subsequently augmented to 18,000 MT (2010) and further to  20,500 MT (2014). Further, 
additional capacity of 400 MT per month of Khichadi premix was also created in 2019-20.  
The Company also managed the operation and maintenance of the seven new RTE plant of 
the State Rural Livelihood Mission (SRLM) for the period March 2020 to March 2022 
entrusted (January 2020)  by Panchayat and Rural Development Department (PRDD), 
GoMP.  An Inter-Departmental Committee1 was also constituted (March 2020) by General 
Administration Department, GoMP which was the final authority to decide on the matter 
pertaining to recipes, rates, and quality of the RTE products. 
5.2 Non-receipt of supervision charges 
We noticed that the Company took over (February 2020) the operation and management of 
seven plants from SRLM without executing any Memorandum of Understanding or 
Agreement and firming up the supervision charges to be received.   
In the meetings of I nter Departmental Committee held in June and July 2021, the 
Company demanded payment of three per cent commission on actual expenses incurred on 
operation of these RTE plants.  In the meeting held in July 2021, it was decided that the 
Company would submit a proposal of three per cent  commission calculated on actual 
expenditure incurred along with audited accounts of all the seven plants to the Chief 
Executive Officer, SRLM, who in consultation with Finance Department, GoMP would 
get the same approved.  
The Company submitted (July 2021) proposal for payment of three per cent  service 
charges amounting to ` 16.06 crore to Chief Executive Officer, SRLM. Meanwhile, the 
committee of the ministers decided (September 2021) that operation and maintenance of 
                                                           
1 Principal Secretary, HFPD as a chairman, PS, PRDD, PS, WCD, PS, Finance  Department as member and 
MD, Company as coordinator. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
30 
all the seven SRLM plants would be returned back to the SRLM. Accordingly, the plants 
were handed over back between December 2021 and February 2022 to the SRLM. 
We noticed that the Company has not got the accounts for the financial years 2020-21 and 
2021-22 of the seven plants of SRLM audited (as on 31 January 2023) which led to delay 
in submission of the proposal to the committee for arriving at decision in respect of these 
charges. Meanwhile, the Managing Director requested (December 2021) to Chief 
Executive Officer, SRLM for making budget provision of ` 32 crore for payment of 
supervision charges for the period March 2020 to March 2022. We noticed that the 
Company worked out supervision charge of ` 32.38 crore recoverable from SRLM. 
Thus, failure of the Compa ny in executing any MOU/Agreement with SRLM with clear 
term and condition for supervision charges resulted in non -receipt of supervision charges 
of ` 32.38 crore. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that the decision is yet to be taken by the  
Inter-Departmental Committee. 
However, the fact remains that Inter -Departmental Committee had asked the Company to 
submit the audited accounts (2020-21 and 2021-22) of the plants which were not finalized 
till date (January 2023). 
5.3 Non-receipt of payment for supply of RTE products  
As per clause 15 of the agreement (December 2011) with the WCD Department, payment 
of the bills raised against supply of RTE products  should be generally made within  
30 days from the date of receipt of the bill.  
The Company submitted consolidated bill of ` 48.85 lakh on 25 August 2020 against 
supplies made during March 2020 from its Baadi Plant which was to be paid by 
24.09.2020 (within 30 days). However, WCD Department did not pay the bills. We 
noticed that the Company did not pursue the issue of non-payment of outstanding bills and 
continued to supply till May 2021. As a result, ` 2.14 crore was outstanding against WCD 
Department for supply of RTE products for adolescent girls during March 2020 to May 
2021 from the Baadi Plant. The Managing Director of the Company requested (September 
2021 and February 2022) WCD Department for payment of outstanding amount stating 
that payment to suppliers of raw materials had already been made by the Company from 
its own fund.  H owever, the Company did not receive payment against the outstanding 
bills and the WCD Department intimated (February 2023) that the grant in respect of 
above scheme had been demanded from the GoI and same would be paid as and when the 
grant is received.  
We noticed that the Company continued supply and inordinately delayed in requesting 
payment despite knowing that the bills were pending since September 2020. This resulted 
in blockage of ` 2.14 crore of the Company fund.  
The Government stated (July 2023) t hat the Sabla Scheme was closed since 2019 and it 
was continuously requesting WCD to release the amount.  

Chapter-5 
31 
The reply is not acceptable as blockage of fund for such long period will adversely effect 
the financial position of the Company. Further, supplies ma de after discontinuation of 
Sabla Scheme (i.e. after 2019) ultimately led to non -receipt of payment/blockage of funds 
of the Company and also raise doubts on internal control mechanism of the Company. 
5.4  Excess deduction   
In a meeting (September 2015) between MPSCSC L, WCD Department and the Company 
regarding redetermination of margins pertaining to supply of BPL wheat and rice by 
MPSCSCL it was decided that MPSCSC L will supply wheat and rice at Central Issue 
Price of ` 415 and ` 565 per quintal respectively to the Company for schemes of poshan 
aahar and scheme for adolescent girls who would lift the above items directly from 
MPSCSCL godowns.  
During the year 2016 -17, rates of subsidized wheat and rice were reduced by the GoI and 
communicated (March 2017) to the Company. The new rates of wheat and rice for 
Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) were ` 247 and ` 347 per quintal 
respectively.  
The Company had made payment of wheat and rice at old rates leading to extra payment 
of ` 8.01 crore to MPSCSCL (during 2016-17). We noticed that while WCD Department 
adjusted (February 2017) ` 8.01 crore from the bills of the Company, the company could 
get a refund of only ` 3.67 crore from MPSCSC L and the balance ` 4.34 crore was 
adjusted by MPSCSCL against margin money recoverable from the Company. The matter 
was pursued by the Company against WCD through arbitration but same was decided 
against the Company (23.10.2017). Post arbitration decision, the Company could n ot 
recover the amount from WCD/MPSCSCL. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that process was underway to recover the amount from 
MPSCSCL. 
The fact remains that the Company could not recover the amount even after lapse of more 
than five years. 
5.5  Loss of business and interest due to delay in receipt of payment 
As per clause 15 of the agreement (December 2011) between WCD Department and the 
Company, WCD Department would pay for the supply of Ready to Eat product, within 
one month from the submission of the consolidated bills by the Company. Further, as per 
GoMP order ( October 2009), WCD Department would pay 60 per cent in advance to the 
Company. 
The WCD Department issued 42 supply orders for supply of Ready to Eat product to the 
Company during 2018 -222. As per above GoMP order, 60 per cent  advance against the 
total amount of ordered quantity should be given at the time of issue of supply order itself 
                                                           
2 The data for 2017 -18 was not included because in this year bill payment was made district -wise on 
different dates and further consolidated supply was made from all four plants (one own and three JVs) to 
districts and hence the value and date of supply from Baadi Plant could not be ascertained.   

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
32 
and remaining 40 per cent should be paid within month from the date of submission of 
consolidated bill by the Company. 
We noticed that advance was given when partial or complete quantity was delivered 
against the supply order as detailed in Appendix 5.1 . Further, as per cabinet decision 
(January 2020), the WCD Department would provide advance to the Company which 
should be the average of three-month supply order and same shall be adjusted against the 
bills issued in each month. We noticed that WCD Department provided only one-time 
advance of ` 50 crore in May 2020 and thereafter no advance was given for 18 orders 
placed by WCD during 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
We noticed delay in payment of remaining bill amount as WCD Department failed to clear 
consolidated bill submitted by the Company within prescr ibed time. We also noticed that 
there was delay in payment of bills of 28 supply orders ( Appendix 5.2) out of 42 orders 
ranging from one to 96 days beyond the prescribed time limit. This resulted in: 
(a) Blockage of company working capital led to interest loss of ` 26.74 lakh. 
(b) Payment to raw material suppliers were delayed ranging from four to six months 
instead of 30 days maximum period allowed for payment as per terms of tender. In 
turn suppliers quote higher rates for supply of raw material as they consider interest 
cost for delayed pe riod while providing quotation and such quotations have to be 
accepted by the Company owing to the fact that payments are delayed by the 
Company. 
(c) Schedule of delivery of RTE product was extended beyond one month from th e 
prescribed time limit of one month which ranged between one and 97 days. Such 
delays resulted in extension of Poshan Aahar cycle which consist of one order of 
RTE products each month. Audit observed that during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 only 
eight and ten orders were given respectively instead of 12 orders in each financial 
year.  
The Government accepted (July 2023) the observation  and stated that mechanism in 
consultation with WCD department would be developed to ensure timely payment.  
5.6  Undue benefit to vendor of plant and machinery  
The Company proposed to construct a new supplementary nutrition food plant for 
production of khichdi premix at Baadi. The work of construction of plant was divided in 
two packages consisting of (i) construction of factory building and (ii) installation of plant 
and machinery respectively. 
The work of construction of factory building was awarded (June 2018) to contractor  
M/s Girish Goswami with time period for completing construction of building in three 
months and total time allotted for completing civil works were five months i.e. by 
18.11.2018 including rainy period. However, the Building was handed over to the 
Company after completion on 26.06.2019. The delay in construction of building was 
attributable to:- 

Chapter-5 
33 
i. Company failed to provide plant layout for construction of platform for installation of 
machinery within due time. 
ii. Company took lot of time in finalization o f color of sheet to be installed on roof and 
quality of electrical installation. 
iii.  Non-availability of proper storage for storing construction material. 
iv.  Heavy water clogging at the site in rainy season obstructing the filling of foundation of 
building. 
The Company issued (June 2018) tender for fully automatic plant for production of  
400 MT Khichadi every month at Baadi, Raisen with the following conditions:  
(a)  As per time schedule all the materials and equipment were to be supplied at the 
destination within 90 days from the date of order and further 60 days were allowed 
for installation i.e. total 150 days were allowed for a trial run from the date of order. 
(b) On submission of bank guarantee of 50 per cent of order value equivalent advance 
was to be paid along with order to supply the plant. 
(c) M/s Hindustan Equipment Pvt. Ltd, Indore (vendor) was selected as the lowest 
bidder and awarded (July 2018) the work for a total cost of ` 2.30 crore. The work 
of supply and erection of plant was to be completed by  December 2018. Further as 
per above condition, the Company provided (August 2018) 50 per cent advance of 
total order value amounting to ` 1.15 crore to the vendor. 
(d) Since civil works of the plant could not be completed timely, management revised 
(July 2019) the deadline for completion of erection work of plant as 15.08.2019. 
Actual production from the plant finally started from 13.12.2019. Audit noticed 
following shortcomings in completion of the work: - 
• While the Building construction was completed on 26.06.2019, the Company 
paid advance to the vendor for installation of plant and machinery in August 
2018 without verifying the progress of civil work resulting in blockage of fund 
of the Company and consequent interest loss of ` 2.68 lakh3. 
• The Company also lost the opportunity of earning approximately ` 26 lakh of 
profit per month due to the delay of 10 months in civil works. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that the Company has charged penalty of ` 3.35 lakh 
from the civil contractor for the delay and ` 7 lakh from supplier of plant and machinery.  
The reply is not acceptable as the penalty was imposed for the delay as per agreement.  
Further, the Government did not offer any comment on the advance released for supply 
and installation of plant without assessing the progress of the civil work.  
 
  
                                                           
3  (` 1.15 crore *4%*7 months - During September 2018 to March 2019  as per prevailing interest rates 
during the period). 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
34 
5.7 Non-compliance of clause regarding reservation of 30 per cent  of required 
quantity from SC/ST entrepreneurs 
The tender documents issued for registration of vendors (November 2018 and March 
2020) for supply of 12 raw material items for RTE product for 2018 -22 included clause 
that “As per the policy of the State Government in respect of purchase of items for the use 
of the Company, purchase preference, minimum to the extent of 30 per cent of the required 
quantity s hall be given to those manufacturing units of M.P. belonging to the SC/ST 
entrepreneurs and registered with the company. A self-certified copy of certificate issued 
by the District Trade Industries Center (D.T.I.C.) in this regard should be attached”.  
We noticed that in the tenders issued during 2017-22 the Company did not mention the 
category of suppliers who were issued supply orders for supply of RTE products. Thus, 
the General Manager ( Poshan Aahaar ) neither ensure d that the specific percentage of 
orders were issued to the SC/ST category suppliers nor any record was available with the 
Company having these details. Thus, the Company did not ensure compliance to the tender 
conditions. 
Government stated (Ju ly 2023) that  due to non -receipt of offers from SC/ST category , 
purchases have been made from other categories and care will be taken in future.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company did not maintain the data with regard to 
different categories of suppliers including SC/ST suppliers. 
5.8 Conclusion 
The Company did not adequately pursue its financial interest which led to non-recovery of 
supervision charges from SRLM, and deduction of margin money from MPSCSC L. 
Further, the Company did not have any system to ensure procurement of at least  
30 per cent items from SC/ST entrepreneurs as envisaged in the tender for procurement of 
raw material for RTE items. 
5.9 Recommendations 
•  The Company should pursue the issue of supervision charges vigorously in 
respect of SRLM plants. 
• The Company should make effective efforts to recover margin money from 
MPSCSCL immediately. 
• The Company should maintain data of different categories of suppliers including 
SC/ST so that procurement of at least 30 per cent items from SC/ST 
entrepreneurs could be ensured. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-6 
 
Performance of 
Mechanized 
Agriculture Farm, 
Babai 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
Chapter - 6 
 
Performance of Mechanized Agriculture Farm, Babai 
 
6.1  Introduction 
GoMP allotted (in 1971) 3,251.28 acres land at Babai, Hoshangabad  to the Company for 
establishment of Mechanized Agriculture Farm (MAF). The objectives of establishment of 
MAF were production and distribution of quality seeds to the farmers, use of latest 
agriculture machinery/implements in farming, demonstration of cul tivation methods and 
functioning as a training Centre for the farmers.  
However, the Company did not earn profit from MAF ( except in the years 1988-89,  
2011-12 and 2012-13) and as on 31 March 2022 the accumulated loss was ` 12.981 crore. 
As a result, GoMP transferred (2012) 1,678.73 acres land of MAF to Commerce, 
Industries and Employment (CI&E) Department. The Collector, Hoshangabad acquired 
(February 2018) 1.75 ac res land for establishment of Poshan Aahar Plant and transferred 
(September 2020) 1,034.30 acres of land to Commerce, Industries and Employment 
Department for development of medical equipment park. As of March 2022, MAF 
possessed total area of 536.5 acres out of which 157.5 acres were developed for cultivation 
of wheat and paddy, 277.63 acres for orchards and remaining 1 01.37 acres were occupied 
by Madhya Pradesh  Warehousing & Logistics Corporation (MPWLC), one temple 
premises, office building, godown, road etc. 
6.1.1 Non-fulfillment of objectives of MAF 
The Company was utilizing the MAF for farming activities such as cultivation of crop of 
wheat and paddy and maintaining orchards of mango, jackfruit, amla, chiku, guava and 
lemon and other activities. Thus , the Company did not utilize the MAF against the 
objective. 
Government did not furnish reply. 
6.2  Financial performance of MAF Babai 
Details of sales of agricultural and orchard produces from MAF and profit/loss on sales 
during years 2017-18 to 2021-22 are detailed in Table-6.1.  
Table 6.1: Profit and loss from sale of produce from the farm                                          
 (` in lakh) 
Years Sales from 
agricultural 
produces 
Sales from 
orchard 
produces 
Sales 
from 
Nursery 
Total Sales Total cost 
incurred 
Profit/loss on 
sales 
2017-18 100.55 21.54 0 122.09 131.90 -9.81 
2018-19 79.62 48.37 0 127.99 129.66 -1.67 
2019-20 71.14 21.91 0 93.05 130.50 -37.45 
2020-21 40.01 34.34 0 74.35 136.93 -62.58 
2021-22 56.01 53.39 0 109.40 128.57 -19.17 
Total 347.33 179.55 0 526.88 657.56 -130.68 
Source: Data taken from records of the Company 
                                                           
1 Accumulated loss during 1971 to 2016 -17 - ` 11.67 crore (as per Company records)  and loss during  
2017-22 - ` 1.31 crore totaling to ` 12.98 crore. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
36 
It may be seen from Table-6.1 that the Company had incurred losses during the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22 on sale of agriculture and orchard produces. The reason for the same 
are discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
6.3  Non implementation of recommendations of the expert committee  
The Company constituted (November 2017) an expert committee 2 for providing an action 
plan for turnaround of the farm activities. The expert committee reviewed the records of 
production of crops and orchards, sta ff position and all the expenditure incurred for 
maintaining the farm for last 15 years and also conducted physical inspection of the farm 
to get first -hand experience of situation. Audit analysis of recommendations  (November 
2017) of expert committee and their implementation revealed the following:    
(a)  The expert committee recommended that tenders for sale of orchard produces 
should be called for a longer period i.e. for 5 to 10 years instead of one year. 
Though efforts were made in May 2018 to implement t he recommendation, it has 
not been implemented till date. One year tenders as previously practiced were 
floated which deprived the Company of benefits of turning around of orchards over 
a period with high yielding crop, elimination of gap, replacement of 
dead/deteriorated/damaged trees with new sapling s as envisaged in tender 
condition.   
(b) The expert committee recommended that due to the sandy nature of land 
agricultural related activities would not be beneficial, therefore it would be 
appropriate to conduct  horticulture related activities in the entire area of 1,570.8 
acres. However, we noticed the management continued with the traditional farming 
of growing crop of wheat and paddy during the audit period and suffered loss of  
` 22.83 lakh (Appendix – 6.1) during 2019-20 and 2020-21.  
(c) The expert committee recommended for utilization of pesticides and proper 
manuring for increasing the yield of the orchard. The expert committee highly 
recommended for planning schedule of nutrition for various orchards as pe r their 
age. However, we noticed that for purchase of pesticides and manure, the in-charge 
of Babai farm raised demand of fund on yearly basis as per requirement. However, 
the Company did not provide fund on time which caused infestation of trees. We 
conducted joint physical inspection of the MAF, Babai and noticed that most of the 
trees of mangoes and guavas were infected with termites (Photo 1 & Photo 2)  to a 
great extent resulting in early decay of the fruit bearing trees and loss of 
production.  
                                                           
2 (1) Joint director  Horticulture, Hoshangabad (2) Deputy D irector Horticulture, Ho shangabad,  
(3) representative, Deputy D irector Agriculture, Hoshangabad (4) Dean Agriculture College, 
Pawankheda, Hoshangabad (5) DGM, Babai HO, MP Agro (6) DGM, Babai Project MP  Agro  
(7) Olympic Bio Agritec Pvt. Ltd, Indore, Consultant Horticulture. 

Chapter-6 
37 
 
 
Photo 1 (Guava Tree) Photo 2 ( Mango Tree) 
(d) The expert committee also recommended for plantation of Bamboo and Moringa 
plant for utilization of spare land for generating annual income as the same require 
less care and lesser cost. We, however, observed tha t the Company did not plant 
bamboo and moringa plants resulting in loss of potential revenue.  
(e) The committee also suggested various measures 3 for fencing of the farm to avoid 
entry of stray animals in the farms and prevent damage of farm produces. 
However, none of the measures were carried out by the management. We also 
observed that in absence of proper fencing, in one instance 10 acres of crop were 
damaged/lost due to grazing by cattle in December 2019. 
(f) The expert committee had recommended that since agri culture crops were not 
performing up to the standard, land should be offered to private party for 
developing various new high value orchards like custard apple, Litchi, Jamun, 
Tamarind, Bael etc. However, the management did not take initiative to develop 
new orchards during 2017 -18 to 2021 -22.  We also observed that no new 
plantation was done in last eight years. 
Thus, the Company failed to implement any of the recommendations of the committee. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that earl ier report submitted by the expe rt committee 
was made on the then circumstances and environmental conditions prevailing at that time, 
now the climatic conditions have changed and meanwhile many agricultural technologies 
have advanced. Therefore, the Company is in the  process of constituting a new expert 
committee to submit a fresh report based on the present circumstances.   
The reply is not acceptable as the Company was to implement the recommendation of the 
expert committee immediately after the receipt of the report.  
                                                           
3  Plantation of Gooseberry and S hikakai in the first row on the boundary/ridge in the entire field. Bamboo 
should be planted in the second row  and in the third row, plantation of Moringa (drum stick) should be 
done. 


Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
38 
6.4  Under-utilization of land  
MAF had 435 acres of land available for cultivation (units 1+2+3) during  
2017-20. The cultivation area was reduced to 157.5 acres (unit 1) during  
2020-22. We observed that land utilization for cultivation of kharif and rabi crops ranged 
from 31 to 44 per cent and 68 to 91 per cent respectively during 2017 -20. Thus, during 
2017-20, the available land was under -utilized ranging between nine per cent  to 69 per 
cent due to non-availability of proper irrigation facility in the farm and non -availability of 
sufficient manpower for supervision. We further noticed that as on November 2017 total 
36 tube wells (nal -kup) were established in the farm out of which  10 tube wells were in 
non-working condition. Thus, failure of Company in improving the irrigation facility and 
insufficient manpower resulted in under-utilization of the available land. 
Government stated (July 2023) that constitution of new expert committee is under process. 
Based on the recommendation of the committee irrigation facility will be developed for 
better utilization of the land.  
Government accepted the audit observation.  
6.5    Poor performance of nursery 
MAF Babai developed (October 2006) a  nursery with total area of 9.88 acres through the 
one-time grant of ` 18 lakhs received from the Horticulture and Food Processing 
Department with the condition that the nursery shall produce four lakh saplings each year 
and would recoup recurring cost through the sale of the saplings produced.  
For sale of saplings the nurse ry should be recognized by the National Horticulture Board 
(NHB). In -charge of MAF submitted (December 2015) an application to NHB for 
recognition. After few postponements (as facilities and new plants were not developed as 
required for the model nursery) on the request of the Company, the assessment team from 
NHB finally visit ed the nursery in October 2021 and reported that the nursery was not 
eligible for any rating as the marks obtained were below the qualifying marks. The 
assessment team gave some sugge stions for further improvement of nursery like spraying 
of micronutrient to the mother plants, developing infrastructure for propagation work, 
keeping the nursery area free from weeds and maintaining registers for pedigree records of 
mother plants and preparation of flow chart/calendar of operation.  
We noticed that the management of MAF, Babai did not ensure compliance to the 
suggestions of the assessment team.  Resultantly, the nursery was not recognized till 
March 2022. We further noticed that the model nursery had 54,850 plants in 2015 -16 and 
there was no sale from the nursery due to want of recognition.  
Government stated (July 2023) that in view of the suggestions and observations, necessary 
instructions for improvement of the nursery were being issued. 
Government accepted the audit observation and is taking corrective action.   
 
 

Chapter-6 
39 
6.6  Irregularities in auction/tendering of trees and orchard 
MAF developed orchards of fruits and vegetables on 436.50 acres of land and sold the 
produces by inviting offers through tenders. During 2017-22, the produce of orchards were 
sold for ` 1.80 crore ( Appendix 6.2) through tendering. Scrutiny of records pertaining to 
sale of produce of orchards revealed the following shortcomings: 
(a) According to tender conditions, the tenderer should give the actual information 
about weight of daily removed/collected fruits from the orchards to the  
field-in-charge so that he can prepare yearly production report of each orchard for 
future, which will form the basis of next year valuation report. We observed that the 
management did not have its own weighbridge to fulfill this condition and the 
tenderer also did not provide the daily report about weight of removed fruits to  
unit-in-charge during 2017-22. We noticed that the in -charge of the orchard did not 
take action against the tenderer for non -compliance of the tender condition. Thus, 
the MAF did not have records for yearly production.  
(b) The reserved price of the tender was to be based on the valuation reports and 
previous year sales. As per one of the recommendations of the committee, proper 
potential report of various orchards should be prepared and should be marketed, so 
that high rates  can be fetched. As the MAF did not have previous year production 
data, therefore, the valuation report prepared was just an estimation of production.  
Government stated (July 2023) that at present for weighing the agriculture produce, 
weighing machine was installed with maximum capacity of 150 kg. Production record has 
been called from the in-charge MAF, Babai for purpose of future tendering.  
Government accepted the audit observation and is taking corrective action.  
6.7    Non-compliance of norms regarding gap between two plants 
National Horticulture Board provide s that suitable gaps should be kept between the two 
trees. In this connection we noticed following points: 
(a) As per norms of National Horticulture Board the ideal gap between two guava plants 
should be 6*6 meter (110 plants in one acre). We noticed that the MAF, Babai had a 
25 acres orchard and as per norms there should be 2750 guava plant. However, the 
orchard had only 1201 guava plants as on 30 September 2017 (44 per cent) and there 
was shortfall of 1549 plants. Thus, the MAF, Babai failed in fully utilizing the land 
resulting in under-utilization of the land as well as loss of revenue.  
(b) Similarly, as per norms of National Horticulture Board the ideal gap between two 
mango plants should be 10*10 me ter (63 trees in one acre). We noticed that MAF, 
Babai had a mango orchard in 324 acres land and number of mango trees in the 
orchard was 4,400 (September 2017) against the required 20,412 mango trees as per 
norms. Thus, there was a shortfall of 16,012 trees which resulted in under-utilization 
of the land as well as loss of potential revenue. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
40 
We noticed that the expert committee had also recommended for planting trees for filling 
the gaps in the orchards, however, the Company failed to take suitable measures.   
Government stated (July 2023) that efforts would be made to plant wherever possible the 
horticulture plants so that the vacant spaces in the orchard farm would be utilized in better 
way and increase the profit of MAF, Babai. 
Government accepted the audit observation and is taking corrective action. 
6.8    Non availability of Horticulturist at Babai farm 
As per sanctioned strength, only one horticulturist is sanctioned for the Company, that too, 
at its headquarters. Since MAF, Babai had orchards of fruits and vegetables, requirement 
of horticulturist as specialist for the maintenance of the farm was a necessity. We observed 
that the MAF was headed by an official with accounts background. This resulted in 
deprival of valuable technical advice of a Horticulturist.  
Government stated (July 2023) that efforts were being done to take the services of the 
M.Sc Hor ticulturist on outsourcing basis. Proposal is being placed before the BoD for 
approval. 
Government accepted the audit observation and is taking corrective action. 
6.9  Conclusion 
The Company failed in utilizing the MAF for intended objectives. This resulte d in the very 
purpose of MAF being not achieved. Further, the Company did not implement the 
recommendations of expert committee constituted for turnaround of the farm activities. 
During 2017 -22, the utilization of land of MAF, Babai ranged between 31 to  
91 per cent leading to underutilization of land. MAF, Babai  developed a nursery in 2006, 
but the nursery was not recognized as of March 2022. We noticed instances of 
irregularities in auction/tendering of trees and orchards and non -compliance of norms 
regarding gap between plants. 
6.10  Recommendation  
• The GoMP and the Company should jointly ensure optimum utilization of MAF 
for the intended purposes.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-7 
 
Implementation of 
National Biogas 
Programme 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
Chapter-7 
 
Implementation of National Biogas Programme 
 
7.1   Introduction 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), GoI implemented (1981 -82) 
National Biogas and Manure Management Programme  (NBMMP) nationwide. The 
Company was the State Nodal Agency for implementation of NBMMP in the State since 
1985-86. Upto 2017 -18, the NBMMP was implemented as per NBMMP guidelines and 
thereafter, with effect from 01.04.2018 as per revised guidelines i.e. N ew National Biogas 
and Organic Manure Programme (NNBOMP).   
The main objectives of the Programme were (i) providing clean fuel for cooking and other 
domestic purposes, (ii) providing bio -fertilizer/organic manure to reduce usage of 
chemical fertilizers, (i ii) mitigating drudgery of rural women, (iv) reducing pressure on 
forest, (v) accentuating social benefits and (vi) mitigating climate change by preventing 
black carbon and methane emissions. 
MNRE set the annual targets for State and the Company (State Nodal Agency) set district 
wise targets after approval from the Farmer Welfare  and Agriculture Development  
Department (State Nodal Department). The Farmer Welfare and Agriculture Development 
Department identified the beneficiaries through its district level functionaries in the State. 
The district level functionaries identified the probable beneficiaries and approached the 
Company for installation of bio -gas plant. The Company got the construction  of the 
Biogas plant completed and transferred the subsidy to the beneficiary after successful 
commissioning of the plant at the site of the beneficiary. 
MNRE provided financial assistance to the Company towards the administrative charges 
(based on number of bio -gas plants actually constructed) for implementation of the 
scheme and turnkey job fee (for construction, supervision, commissioning and free 
operation and maintenance warrantee for five years of the constructed plants). MNRE also 
provided financial assistance to the Company for communication and publicity of the 
Programme and for training courses (construction cum maintenance training, turnkey 
workers and management training courses, staff training courses). 
During 2017-18 to 2020-21, the actual achievement against the target set for the State and 
the central financial assistance (including turnkey fee, publicity support etc.) are detailed 
in Table-7.1. 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
42 
Table 7.1: Details of target, achievement and claims received from MNRE 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year 
 
 
 
Target 
of 
biogas 
plants 
in 
number  
Achieve-
ment of 
Bio-gas 
plant in 
number  
(in per cent) 
Central 
subsidy 
Adminis
-trative 
charges 
Turnkey 
fees 
Additional 
subsidy for 
toilet 
attachment 
Training Communi
-cation 
and 
publicity 
Total 
1 2017-18 8,500 5,230  
(61.53) 
495.66 18.31 78.45 3.37 10.41 0.88 607.08 
2 2018-19 6,000 1,905  
(31.75) 
233.04 8.22 47.63 1.79 0 0 290.68 
3 2019-20 5,800 3,614  
(62.31) 
443.41 12.65 90.35 1.58 4.70 0.07 552.76 
4 2020-21 4,600 3,104  
(67.48) 
380.65 10.86 77.60 0.58 1.75 0 471.44 
5 2021-221 Nil Nil (Nil) Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Total  24,900 13,853       1921.95 
Source:  Data received from the Company 
During course of audit, we found following irregularities in implementation of the New 
National Biogas and Organic Manure Programme:  
7.2  Turnkey job work 
The guidelines envisaged turnkey job fee 2 to be paid to the Company for construction, 
supervision, commissioning and free operation and maintenance warrantee for five years 
trouble free operation of plants including quality control at all levels. The turnkey job 
worker was required to inspect the plants twice every year. 
Audit noticed that out of 49 branches, the Company employed turnkey workers in  
21 branches (during 2017 -18), 18 branches (during 2018 -19), 17 branches (during  
2019-20) and 19 branches (during 2020-21) and in rest of the branches, the Company itself 
was doing turnkey job.  
Scrutiny of records of selected nine Branch Offices revealed that the Company installed 
4,202 bio gas plants in the selected Branch Offices from 2017 -18 to 2020 -21. However, 
joint physical survey of 90 bio gas p lants (10 plants per selected branch) revealed that in 
case of 80 bio gas plants (except 10 plants in Balaghat), the Company did not conduct any 
inspection of the installed bio -gas plants either through its employees or through turnkey 
job workers to ensure smooth operation.  
We further noted that the Company claimed and received ` 78.45 lakh, ` 47.63 lakh,  
` 90.35 lakh and ` 77.60 lakh towards turnkey job fee against biogas plants installed for 
2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively from MNRE, GoI.  
The Government replied (July 2023) that the Company engaged the workers on contract 
basis (turn-key/self-employed) and at the places where such contractual workers were not 
available, the work was being inspected/supervised by the staff of the Company.  
                                                           
1  The programme was not implemented during 2021-22. 
2  ` 1500 per plant for the year 2017-18 and ` 2500 per plant from 2018-19 onwards. 

Chapter-7 
43 
The reply is not acceptable as biogas plant inspections were not conducted at any of the 
selected branches (except Balaghat) either by contractual workers or staff of the Company. 
Further the Department did not provide any records in support of inspections carried out. 
7.3    Publicity and promotion of the programme 
The programme guidelines envisaged to provide financial s upport to the Company for 
communication and publicity on the basis of actual expenditure incurred. Accordingly, the 
Company was entitled to incur upto a maximum of ` 4 lakh per annum. However, the 
Company incurred and claimed only ` 88,385 and ` 7,000 for publicity during 2017 -18 
and 2019-20 respectively. 
This indicates that the Company did not effectively publicize the bio gas programme.  
It may be noted that the Company could not achieve the target for installation of bio -gas 
plants and the achievement against the target ranged between 3 2 per cent and 67 per cent 
during 2017-18 to 2020-21 as given in Table-7.1. 
In order to ensure 100 per cent achievement of the target for installation of bio -gas plants, 
the Company had a policy to provide ` 75 per plant to encourage young villagers/  
Sarpanches/Panches/staff of the Agriculture Department to motivate villagers for 
installation of bio -gas plants since long. We noticed that the Company did not pay the 
dues of the entitled encouragers and the Compa ny had an outstanding amount of  
` 9.21 lakh at the end of March 2018 towards encouragers which increased to ` 9.88 lakh 
as on March 2022.  
The Government accepted (July 2023) the observation and stated to have instructed the 
Branches to make the payment at the earliest. 
7.4  Warranty cards not provided 
As per programme guidelines, each biogas beneficiary would be provided five years ' free 
warranty services. Further, the Company should also give warranty cards and  
10 complaint cards for the use of beneficiary to lodge complaint in the event the biogas 
plant becomes non -functional during the warranty period of five years. The payment o f 
turn-key job fee was to be made in three parts i.e. at the time of plant installation ( ` 1500) 
and balance (` 1000) was to be paid in two equal installments after proper verifications of 
the services at the end of third year and fifth year. This was also  subject to visit of plant 
twice in a year. However, during joint inspection of plants in the selected branches, we 
noticed that the Company had not provided warranty cards. Thus, the beneficiaries were 
deprived of the services in case of need. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that warranty cards are made available by the branch 
offices and the beneficiaries are also contacted through mobile. Action is being taken to 
make available the warranty cards. 
The reply is not acceptable as joint survey of 90 selected beneficiaries revealed that 
warranty cards were not issued to any of the beneficiaries.  
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
44 
7.5    Completion certificates were not in prescribed format 
The guidelines of the programme  prescribed format for the Completion Certificate which 
was to be used after successful commissioning of the plant and the completion certificate 
was to be signed by two independent witnesses including one neighbour of the 
beneficiary. The subsidy was to b e released to the beneficiary after issue of completion 
certificate. However, we noticed that the Company did not adopt the prescribed format of 
completion certificate and had no place for signature of independent witnesses and unique 
ID of the Plant (embo ssed on the components of the plant) was also not mentioned in the 
Certificates. The unique ID is crucial to avoid duplication/wrong reporting and false 
claims. 
The Government replied (July 2023) that on completion certificate the signature of 
beneficiaries, Village Sarpanch, Branch Manager, officers of Agriculture Department were 
available.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company was not adhering to the prescribed format. 
7.6  Training not conducted 
The guidelines provided target for training courses such as construction-cum-maintenance 
(CCM), user  courses, biogas turn -key workers course, staff training courses and skill 
developments courses to the Company. The trainings were to be provided at designated 
institute (Biogas Development and Traini ng Centres -BDTC) and the training exp enses 
charged by the institute were reimbursable to the Company at prescribed rate3 by MNRE.  
We noticed that the Company did not conduct prescribed number of trainings . The 
Company trained only 82 users (42 per cent) against 197 users, two against four turnkey 
workers, 28 CCMs against 43 CC Ms and further no staff was trained against the target of 
two trainees during 2017 -18 to 2020-21. The Company did not conduct required trainings 
despite the training charges being rei mbursable from MNRE. Thus, not only the 
beneficiaries were deprived of getting acquainted with proper usage and benefits of  
bio-gas plants but it also impacted development of skilled worker.  
The Government replied (July 2023) that the targets could not be completed due to covid 
in 2019-20 and care will be taken to achieve the targets.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company did not meet its training targets prior to the 
covid pandemic period during 2017-20. 
7.7  Joint physical verification 
We conducted joint physical verification of 90 randomly selected biogas plants with the 
representatives of the Company in nine 4 selected branches. We noticed following 
discrepancies in joint physical verification: 
                                                           
3  Users course ` 4,000/- per candidate, ` 10,000 each for staff course, ` 50,000 each for  CCM and  
` 75,000 each for turn -key workers and Management course/skill development for 
TKWs/RETs/SHGs/official of SND. 
4   Biaora, Panna, Vidisha, Balaghat, Chhatarpur, Dindori, Katni, Bhopal and Sagar 

Chapter-7 
45 
a) We noticed that 23 out of 90 plants were in non -functional condition due to stealing 
of gas pipe, shortage of water, non -receipt of stoves etc. in seven branches (except 
Balaghat and Bhopal branches) . We further noticed the following discrepancies in 
these 23 non-functional plants: 
i. The completion certificate in respect of the plant of one beneficiary 5 of Sagar 
Branch office  was issued on 01 .05.2021. However, during joint physical 
verification the construction of the plant was found incomplete. 
ii. One beneficiary6 was not using the biogas pl ant and converted the structure into 
toilet. It indicates that the Company was neither making timely inspections nor it 
took proper steps to spread awareness. 
b) As per guidelines, subsidy to eligible beneficiary was to be paid immediately after 
commissioning of the biogas plant and issue of completion certificate. Audit noted 
that the completion certificate for plants of three 7 beneficiaries and one 8 beneficiary 
of Katni and Dindori branches respectively were issued on 14.07.2021, 04.06.2021, 
10.07.2021 and 04.11.2019. However, the beneficiaries were not given their subsidy 
amount till date (December 2022).  
c) Out of the 10 selected beneficiaries of the Bhopal Branch: 
i. Branch offices provided the subsidy for three9 Biogas plants whose completion 
certificates were not signed by the Deputy Director, Agriculture and the branch 
manager of the Company. However, subsidy in all these cases was paid to the 
concerned beneficiaries. This indicates that the Company was releasing subsidy 
without ensuring completion of the bio-gas plant. 
ii. In respect of four 10 bio-gas plants, Branch Manager, Bhopal did not produce 
the completion certificate. Although, the bio gas plants were complete and 
subsidies had been released, it  could not be ascertained whether the subsidy 
was provided before or after completion of works. 
d) As per the programme guidelines, each plant should be serialized by giving unique 
ID number to avoid duplication/wrong reporting and false and fake claims and this 
Unique ID should also be  recorded in the Master Biogas registers. However, we 
noticed that none of the 90 inspected plants were marked with unique identification.  
The Government accepted the observation and stated (July 2023) that necessary 
instructions have been issued to all B ranch Managers and Regional Managers to make all 
the plants functional. 
                                                           
5   Mr. Deshraj Lodhi having bio gas master register serial no. 12 of year 2020-21 (under Sagar Branch) 
6   Mrs. Bagwati Bai Ahirwar having bio gas master register serial no. 29 (2017-18), Vidisha branch 
7   Mr. Arjun Singh Lodhi, Mr. Jawahar Lal Lodhi and Ms. Jayanti Bai having   bio gas master register serial 
no. 6, 7 and 8  of year 2020-21 respectively (Katni branch) 
8   Mr. Dhaniya Singh having bio gas master register serial no. 03 of year 2018-19 (Dindori branch) 
9  Mr. Mohar Singh Meena (2019-20), Mr. Pritam Singh (2019-20) and Mr. Chhgan Lal (2020-21) 
10  Mr. Bapu Lal Vishwakarma, 2017 -18, Mr. Bhagwan Singh, 2017 -18, Mr. Omnarayan, 2017-18 and  
Ms. Reshma Bai, 2017-18 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
46 
7.8  Conclusion 
The Company did not ensure regular inspections of bio gas plants which led to plants 
remaining defunct. Further, the Company was also indifferent in making proper publicity 
of the programme which resulted in shortfall (ranged between 33 and 6 8 per cent ) in 
achieving the target during 2017-21 and training the concerned parties. 
7.9  Recommendation  
• The GoMP and the Company should jointly ensure regular inspection of bio gas 
plants and make necessary efforts to publicize the New National Biogas and 
Organic Manure Programme. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-8 
 
Performance of Bio 
Fertilizer Plant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
Chapter-8 
Performance of Bio Fertilizer Plant 
8.1  Introduction 
The Company owns a Bio Fertilizer Plant (BFP) at Inderpuri , Bhopal. The bio fertilizer 
plant was functional since 1987 with a capacity to produce 1000 MT of powder based bio 
fertilizers annually. The BFP was closed during January 2020 to August 2022 due to 
repair/upgradation work.  
8.2  Decline in production  
The bio fertilizer plant had capacity to produce 1000 MT of powder based bio fertilizer 
annually. However, during 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 the plant produced bio fertilizer ranging 
between 125.08 MT to 395.91 MT as detailed in Table-8.1. 
Table 8.1: Details of production, sales and net profit/loss of the plant 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Production 
(powder 
based bio 
fertilizer) 
(in MT) 
Dispatch/ 
Sale 
(powder 
based bio 
fertilizer) 
(in MT) 
Gross 
sale/ 
Dispatch 
value 
(` in lakh) 
Manpower 
posted 
Expense on 
Pay and 
allowance  
(` in lakh) 
Net 
Profit or 
loss (-)  
(` in 
lakh) 
1 2015-16 395.91 354.92 197.96 NA 91.09 22.32 
2 2016-17 255.64 269.26 145.17 NA 80.10 -6.81 
3 2017-18 133.79 139.53 78.80 14 75.62 -32.07 
4 2018-19 127.99 122.07 66.33 16 94.14 -62.88 
5 2019-20 125.08 117 64.12 13 99.28 -71.47 
6 2020-21 0 0 0.21 12 96.75 -114.56  
7 2021-22 0 0 0 10 88.64 -103.40  
Source: Data taken from the records/Tally/ERP software of the Company 
It may be noted from the Table that the plant was running in loss during 2016 -17 to  
2019-20 due to decline in sale. Thereafter, the Company decided (September 2019) to 
close the plant for repair and upgradation of the plant to produce liquid based  
bio-fertilizer. 
8.2.1 Delay in taking decision for upgradation of the plant 
In view of decline in popularity of powder based  bio fertilizers, the Company decided 
(September 2019), to shift from production of powder based bio fertilizers to liquid based 
bio fertilizer. Though the bio fertilizer plant produced bio fertilizer ranging  from  
125.08 MT to 395.91 MT (12.50 per cent  to 39.59 per cent  of the capacity) during  
2015-20 and was also running in loss since 2016 -17, the Company took three years in 
taking decision to upgrade the bio fertilizer plant from powder based to liquid based bio 
fertilizer.   
Government stated (July 2023) that efforts were made to find consultant from the 
government organizations/u niversities etc. since 2016. However, the production as per 
demand was made by the plant. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
48 
The reply is not acceptable as the reason sta ted for delay of three to five years in taking 
decision of upgradation is not convincing.     
8.2.2 Delay in repair/upgradation work 
Plant-in-charge, BFP requested (June 2016) the management to get the dilapidated BFP 
building and staff quarters repaired and also sent two reminders 1. The Company wrote a 
letter (July 2016) to Public Works Department (PWD), Bhopal to provide cost estimation 
for required renovation, repair and maintenance work at BFP. PWD quoted (between May 
and October 2017) an esti mated cost of ` 214.54 lakh for repair and maintenance work. 
We noticed that the Company submitted (June 2019) the matter to BoD after a delay of 
two years. The Company also verbally sought estimates from Capital Project 
Administration, Bhopal (CPA) for th e above work. CPA informed (November 2019) the 
Company an estimate of ` 197.19 lakh for the work. The BoD decided (December 2019) 
to carry out the above work through CPA. CPA made agreement with a contractor 2 who 
commenced the work in September 2020 and th e work was scheduled to be completed in 
six months (by March 2021). However, the work was not completed in the scheduled time 
limit i.e. by March 2021 due to slow progress of the work. 
The Company without ensuring completion of repair and maintenance work invited 
(January 2020 and June 2020) tender for purchase of machineries for conversion of plant 
for production of liquid bio fertilizer. The supplier firm supplied (August 2020 and August 
2021) required machineries to BFP. Thus, all the machineries were re ceived in the BFP by 
August 2021 but could not be installed as the repair and maintenance work of the plant 
was also going on. These machineries were finally installed in March 2022 but have not 
been made operational till August 2022. The plant started pro duction of liquid bio 
fertilizer from 14.09.2022 on pilot basis. 
Thus, delay in taking decision resulted in delay in commencement of repair and 
maintenance work for four years and further new machineries remained idle for one year.   
Government stated (Jul y 2023) that civil work estimate were taken from PWD as well as 
from CPA to ensure the work to be done at lowest price. CPA quoted lowest price which 
saved ` 17.35 lakh.   
The reply is not acceptable as the Company took two years in taking rates from CPA.  
8.3    Conclusion 
The plant was running in loss during 2016 -17 to 2019 -20 due to decline in sale. The 
Company took three years in taking decision to upgrade the bio fertilizer plant from 
powder based to liquid based bio fertilizer. Further, the Company also delayed the repa ir/ 
maintenance work. Resultantly, the new machineries remained idle for one year.  
8.4    Recommendation  
• The GoMP and the Company should jointly review the plant regularly to ensure 
its functioning effectively. 
                                                           
1   dated 06.08.2016 and 26.04.2019 to carry out repair work at BFP 
2   M/s R.K Construction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-9 
 
Internal Control 
System 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
Chapter-9 
 
Internal Control System 
 
9.1  Introduction 
Internal controls are procedures and processes put into place by a Company to prevent 
fraud, promote accountability and ensure the integrity of financial data. Internal controls 
are unique to every Company and designed according to the Company's size and structure. 
Effective and efficient internal controls aim to meet company's objectives and protect 
company's interests. Internal controls not only address risks of the company but also 
reduce in currences of unnecessary cost or effort. We observed deficiencies indicating 
deficient internal control system in the Company as detailed in succeeding paragraphs. 
9.2  No system to monitor supply 
RCO document of the Company provided that on receipt of dem and from the beneficiary 
department, the branch would send demand to respective regional office/head office. The 
Regional Office would issue purchase order to the selected supplier. 
Scrutiny of records of the Company revealed that the Company did not issue  instructions 
to regional offices for monitoring of supplies by the suppliers to ensure timely supply. The 
Regional Offices (at division level) issued purchase order while the supplier supplied the 
material in branch office (at district level) or directly to the beneficiary. The Regional 
Offices issuing purchase order did not have an established system to track the timely 
supply of ordered material. We noticed that in 15 cases, the department had cancelled the 
order due to delay in supply (discussed in Paragraph 3.7). Thus, the Company did not lay 
down effective system to monitor the timely supply of material. 
Government stated (July 2023) that regional managers had been directed to keep close 
watch on timely supplies. In case of any delay they are also empo wered to change the 
supplier.  
The reply is generic as the Company did not lay down the procedure to monitor the timely 
supply of material in spite of facing delays in supplies previously.  
9.3  Deficient internal audit system 
The Company did not have any manual to regulate the scope, reporting and action taken on 
the findings of internal audit. We noticed that the findings of internal auditor in respect to 
audit of branches/ regional offices were not being submitted to Managing  Director instead 
the findings rest with the Head of the Finance Section only. Non -submission of findings to 
the MD for effective monitoring and compliance to the observations of the internal audit 
report undermines the importance of the internal audit system.  
Government stated (July 2023) that audit reports of serious nature were placed before the 
Managing Director and sometimes to the BoD also.  
The reply is not acceptable as no documentary evidences are provided along with the reply 
for verification by Audit. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
50 
9.4  Corporate Governance 
The Companies Act, 2013 together with the Companies Rules provide a robust framework 
for Corporate Governance. The shortcomings noticed in this regard are as below: 
• Section 149(6) of the Companies Act, 2013  read with rule 5 of the Companies 
(Appointment and Qualification of Directors) Rules, 2014 prescribes that a company 
should appoint an independent Director if the Paid up share capital exceeds ₹ 10 crores or 
turnover exceeds ₹ 100 crores or an aggregate of outstanding loan s, debentures and 
deposits exceed ₹ 50 crores. The Company should have independent directors in its Board 
as its turnover exceed ed ₹ 100 crores during the review period. However, we noticed that 
the Company did not have independent Director in BOD. Further, due to this, the 
Company did not have mandatory independent Director in the Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee. 
• Section 14 9(1) of the Companies Act, 2013  read with Rule 3 of the Companies 
(Appointment and Qualification of Directors) Rules 2014 prescribes that a company 
should appoint at least one Woman Director in the Board for every listed Company and 
every other Public Company having paid –up share capital  of ₹ 100 crore or more; or 
turnover of ₹ 300 crore or more. During the review period, t he Company had turnover 
exceeding ₹ 300 crores. However, it did not have requisite Woman Director in the Board. 
• Section 173(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 envisages that every company should hold 
atleast four meetings of BoD in every financial year. However, during 2017 -22, the  
Company held 15 BoD meetings as against the required 20 meetings. Shortfall in BoD 
meetings led to delay in decisions on significan t issues such as exit from JVs, timely 
review of business activities, which eventually turns into economic loss to the Company. 
Responding to observation on holding lesser number of Board Meetings, Government 
stated (July 2023) that due to covid -19 and som e other disturbance, in place of holding 
BOD meetings, the decisions were taken through circular agenda.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company violated the Act provision by not conducting 
the required meetings. Further, it held only three and two mee tings of the Board during 
2018-19 and 2021-22 respectively when covid-19 was not in prevalence. 
9.5  Deficient physical verification  
The Company issued orders (May 2018, March 2019, September 2020, March 2021 and 
March 2022) for conducting physical verification of the branches by an officer of a 
different branch during 2017 -22. As per the order the physical verification was to be 
completed by 20.05.2018 (for 2017 -18), 15.04.2019 (for 2018 -19), 30.09.2020  
(for 2019-20), 15.04.2021 (for 2020-21) and 15.04.2022 (for 2021-22). We noticed that the 
Company issued orders for physical verification in respect of the financial years  
2017-18 and 2019-20 with delay ranging from two to six months which defeated the very 
purpose of physical verification. We noticed that physical verification of the branches was 

Chapter-9 
51 
conducted with delays upto 259 days. Further, in Vidisha branch the officers 1 conducted 
the physical verification for the years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 in the very same month  
i.e. June 2021 which made the physical verification superfluous although the orders were 
issued with a gap of six months. Further, physical verification of the Vidisha branch for the 
year 2021 -22 was not conducted till February 2023. We further noticed that physical 
verification report regularly pointed out the issue of disposal of old unused stock lying 
with the branches. However, the Company did not take corrective action le ading to the 
very purpose of physical verification being defeated. 
Government stated (July 2023) that for quick disposal of old stock, we were conducting 
physical verification on regular basis and based on the reports , decisions were taken in 
time bound manner but due to Covid-19 some verification were delayed.  
The reply is generic as the Company issued order for conducting physical verification with 
delay ranging two to six months and the Company did not take correcti ve action on old 
unused stock. 
9.6    Human Resource Management 
The Administrative Department viz. Horticulture and Food Processing  Department had 
approved (December 2008) organization structure consisting of 836 posts of different 
cadre for the Company. Scrutiny of human resource management of the Company revealed 
acute shortage of officers/officials in the Company. We noticed that as of November 2022, 
the Company had 2462 officers/officials (29.43 per cent) against the sanctioned strength of 
836 officers/officials as detailed in Table-9.1. 
Table-9.1: Status of sanctioned strength, person-in-position and shortfall  
(as of November 2022) 
(In number) 
Sl. 
No. 
Category Sanctioned 
strength 
Person-in-position Shortfall of 
officer/official (in 
per cent) 
1 First class 56 11 45 (80.36) 
2 Second class 72 09 63 (87.50) 
3 Third class 528 153 375 (71.02) 
4 Fourth class 180 73 107 (59.44) 
 Total  836 2463 590 (70.57) 
Source: Data provided by the Company 
It may be noticed from above Table that the Company had acute shortage of human 
resource across all the cadre ranging between 59 per cent and 87 per cent. We noticed that 
due to shortfall of staff, the Company had to cl ose down its fertilizers’ Sales Centre at 
Balaghat Branch and many other employees at various levels had additional charges of 
other posts/office. 
                                                           
1  designated for conducting the physical verification 
2  224 regular employees , 3 employees on deputation and 19 contract basis employees (total 246 
employees). Further, in view of scarcity of staff, the Company outsourced 88 employees.  
3  In addition to these, the company also had 88 outsourced staff. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
52 
Further analysis of deployment of human resource in selected nine branches  revealed 
shortfall of human resource ranging between two and 10 employees . We also noticed 
instances of  employees having  additional charge of other offices /posts. The details are 
given in Table 9.2. 
Table 9.2: Status of sanctioned strength and deployment of staff in selected nine branches  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Branch 
Total 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Total deployment as 
on 31.03.2022 
Shortfall Staff having 
additional 
charge of other 
unit 
1 Bhopal 16 12 4 1 
2 Biaora 16 6 10 0 
3 Vidisha 13 6 7 0 
4 Balaghat 8 5 3 1 
5 Sagar 8 5 3 1 
6 Panna 8 5 3 0 
7 Katni 8 3 5 1 
8 Chhatarpur 8 6 2 0 
9 Dindori 8 2 6 1 
Source: The total sanctioned strength of the unit has been worked out on the basis of categorization of the 
units done by the Company in 2019 (Administrative department’s order dated 15-12-2008). 
We noticed that the MD placed  (September 2019) the issue of shortage  of staff in BOD 
meeting4. BOD decided to appoint 76 officials of different cadre  and bring the matter to 
the notice of GoMP . The Managing Director  was authorized to take further action.  
We further noticed that the Company did not have approved services rules and after a lapse 
of more than 20 months  from BOD decision , the Company sent (July  2021) draft service 
rules to the Administrative Department for approval. The Department suggested certain 
modifications in the draft rule s and the management submitted the revised rules to BOD 
(in the 194 th Meeting held on 24.03.2022) for approval and sent  (September 2022)  the 
revised rules to the Administrative Department. The Administrative Department approved 
the rules in December 2022. Further steps to recruit personnel were yet to be taken 
(December 2022). Thus, despite acute shortage of officers/officials and even after lapse of 
three years from decision of BOD (September 2019), the Company is still in process to 
recruit 76 officials which indicated deficient human resource management in the 
Company. 
The Government accepted (July 2023) the observation and stated that after approval of the 
service rules from the administrative department, the recruitment process is going on. 
9.7  Conclusion 
The internal control system of the Company was deficient as the Company did not lay 
down effective system to monitor the timely supply of material resulted in non -supply and 
delay in supply by the suppliers. The Company did not have any manual to regulate the 
scope, reporting and action taken on the findings of internal audit. The significant 
observations of internal audit of branch offices were not brought into the notice of the MD 
                                                           
4  188th Board meeting (held on 27th September 2019) 

Chapter-9 
53 
for effective monitoring and compliance. Thus, the Company undermined the importance 
of the Internal Audit. GoMP did not appoint independent Director in BOD/Corporate 
Social Responsibility Committee, women Director in BOD and did not ensure required 
BOD me etings resulting  in non -compliance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 
2013. The Company did not take corrective action on observations of physical verification 
which defeated the very purpose of the physical verification.  Further, the Company had 
acute shortage of offic ers/officials ranging between 59  per cent and 87 per cent across all 
the cadres. Despite acute shortage and even after lapse of three years from the decision of 
BOD to appoint 76 officials, the Company is still in process of recruitment indicating weak 
human resource management in the Company. 
9.8  Recommendation 
• The GoMP  and the Company should jointly develop a Standard Operating 
Procedure for procurement and ensure regular board meetings. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-10 
 
Conclusion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
Chapter-10 
 
Conclusion 
 
The Company was established (March 1969) with objectives to promote, develop, 
establish, execute and operate projects, schemes, industries, business and activities which 
accelerate and increase agricultural production, contribute to the production of subsi diary 
food, increases the availability of supplies of food and contributes to the agro industrial 
development of the State. However, the Company did not utilize the Mechanized 
Agricultural Farm (MAF) for production and distribution of quality seed s and 
demonstration of latest agriculture machinery/implements and cultivation methods to 
farmers. Further, the Company did not explore to produce and supply supplementary food 
products in the market. Besides, the Company did not take up activities/initiatives for 
development of agro-logistics and cold storage/godowns to increase availability of supply 
of food. The Company also failed in contributing to the agro -industrial development in the 
State as the Company did not take any step during 2017 -22 to accelerate/ pr omote 
agricultural production or contribute to the agro-industrial development in the State. 
Scrutiny of RCOs floated for procurement of different items revealed that the Company in 
violation of MP Store Purchase Rules and Service Procurement Rules, 2015 t raded in 
water tankers (reserved item for MPLUN). The Company traded in items such as  
pre-fabricated bus shelters, gym equipment, swagat dwar s etc. which were not at all 
related to the objectives of the Company. The Company incurred loss of ` 11.79 crore due 
to non -receipt of commission against the supply of drips and sprinklers. Further, the 
Company procured water tankers of ` 1.22 crore from suppliers who did not have required 
certificate regarding approved design. The Company registered two firms  of same person 
(in one case proprietor of firm and in another one partner) in violation of RCO conditions. 
These two firms supplied water tankers valuing ` 3.68 crore. We noticed instances of 
irregular payment of ` 13.84 lakh against a cancelled order , and supply of items before 
issue of purchase order. Due to lapses in the quality control mechanism , the supply of 
items of requisite specification s could not be ensured /confirmed. The Company did not 
have mechanism to verify quality parameter. 
The financial management and operational performance of the Company was not sound as 
the operational profit of the Company was continuously falling during 2015 -20 and the 
Company suffered operational loss of ` 17.36 crore in financial year 2019 -20. Further, the 
operating margin ratio, return on equity ratio and return on total assets ratio also declined 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation  
56 
during 2011 -20 which indicated  operational inefficiency . The management of the  
Company invested the funds in a routine manner resulting in loss of interest of ` 1.17 crore 
on FDs. The Company adopted incorrect valuation method for valuation of three joint 
venture companies which led to loss of ` 1.59 crore.  Further, the Company kept idle fund 
of ` 5.60 crore received from government departments  as advances/subsidies during  
2012-13 for almost 10 years . Biogas subsidy of ` 3.35 crore was not disbursed to the 
beneficiaries even after lapse of five to 29 years. The Company did not account for interest 
amount of ` 49.43 lakh in scheme fund in violation of GoI  guidelines. Further, the 
Company failed in opting beneficial option for saving income tax of ` 1.72 crore. 
Failure of the Company, in executing MOU/Agreement with State Rural Livelihood 
Mission (SRLM) with clear terms and condition for supervision charges  resulted in  
non-recovery of supervision charges of ` 32.38 crore. The Company continued supply of 
Ready-to-Eat products despite the payment was pending since September 2020 which 
resulted in blockage of ` 2.14 crore. Further, the Company did not have any  system to 
ensure procurement of at least 30 per cent items from SC/ST entrepreneurs as envisaged in 
the tender for procurement of raw material for RTE items. 
The Company failed in utilizing the MAF for intended objectives. This resulted in the very 
purpose of MAF being not achieved. Further, the Company did not implement the 
recommendations of expert committee constituted for turnaround of the farm activities. 
During 2017 -22, the utilization of land of MAF, Babai ranged between 31 and  
91 per cent leading to underutilization of land. The Company could not ensure recognition 
of nursery developed at MAF, Babai from the National Horticulture Board. We noticed 
instances of irregularities in auction/tendering of trees and orchards and non-compliance of 
norms regarding gap between plants. 
The Company did not ensure regular inspections of bio gas plants which led to plants 
remaining defunct. Joint physical verification of bio gas plants revealed that 23 out of  
90 bio gas plants were not functional indicat ing thereby that the Company failed in 
maintaining the bio gas plants.  Further, the Company did not effectively publicize the  
bio gas programme which resulted in shortfall (ranged between 33 and 6 8 per cent ) in 
achieving the target during 2017-21. 
The bio fertilizer plant was running in loss during 2016 -17 to 2019 -20 due to decline in 
sales. The Company took three years in taking decision to upgrade the bio fertilizer plant 

Chapter-10 
57 
from powder based to liquid based bio fertilizer. Further, the Company also delayed the 
repair/maintenance work which resulted in new machineries remaining idle for one year. 
The internal control system of the Company was deficient as the Company did not monitor 
the timely supply of material resulting in delay in supply by the suppliers. The Company 
did not have any manual to regulate the scope, reporting and action taken on the findings 
of internal audit. The significant observations of internal audit of branch offices were not 
brought into the notice of the Managing Director for effective monitoring and compliance. 
GoMP did not appoint independent Director in BOD/Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee, women Director in BOD and did not ensur e required BOD meetings resulting  
in non-compliance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Further, the Company 
did not take any corrective action on the observations of physical verification.  
The Company had acute shortage of officers/officials ranging between 59 per cent  and  
87 per cent across all the cadres. Despite acute shortage of manpower, the Company is still 
in process of recruitment even after lapse of three years from the decision of BOD to 
appoint 76 officials which indicated weak human resource management in the Company.  
 
 
 
Bhopal 
The 27 October 2024 
(PRIYA PARIKH) 
Accountant General (Audit-II) 
Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The 29 October 2024 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Appendices 

 

 
59 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Para No.  1.6, Page No. 2) 
Detail of sampled Regional offices and Branch Offices of the Company 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the selected 
ROs (basis of 
selection) 
Total turnover of 
the selected ROs 
during 2017-22 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
selected BOs (basis 
of selection) 
Total turnover of 
the selected BOs 
during 2017-22 
1. Bhopal (on the basis of 
Highest turnover in 
State) 
564.33 1 Bhopal ( Highest 
turnover in Bhopal 
Region) 
127.54 
2 Vidisha (on the basis 
of closest average 
turnover in Bhopal 
Region) 
62.75 
3 Biaora ( Lowest 
turnover in Bhopal 
Region) 
30.21 
2. Jabalpur (on the basis 
of closest average 
turnover in State) 
364.54 4 Balaghat ( Highest 
turnover in Jabalpur 
Region) 
59.74 
5 Dindori (on the basis 
of closest average 
turnover in Jabalpur 
Region) 
47.23 
6 Katni ( Lowest 
turnover in Jabalpur 
Region) 
25.24 
3. Sagar (on the basis of 
Lowest turnover in 
State) 
 
209.90 7 Sagar (Highest 
turnover in Sagar 
Region) 
70.97 
8 Chhatarpur (on the 
basis of closest 
average turnover in 
Sagar Region) 
42.63 
9 Panna ( Lowest 
turnover in Sagar 
Region) 
24.10 
Total  1138.77   490.41 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
60 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Para No. 4.1.1, Page No. 20) 
 Financial data of the Company for the years from 2011-12 to 2019-20 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars Financial year 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1 Authorized Share Capital 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 
2 Paid Up Capital 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 3.29 
3 Reserve and Surplus 33.42 56.77 93.56 117.77 147.70 172.89 188.46 202.51 208.67 
4 Net Worth/Shareholders’ equity 
(Row-4=Row-2+ Row-3) 
36.71 60.06 96.85 121.06 150.99 176.18 191.75 205.8 211.96 
5 Loans /Borrowings from Financial 
Institutions/Banks 
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 
6 Total Assets 459.27 433.20 441.16 555.30 646.68 829.87 634.58 545.82 753.22 
7 Other long-term liabilities  
(includes advances) 
48.60 78.44 62.60 60.58 74.24 161.41 162.11 110.13 2.37 
8 Current Liabilities 371.81 286.92 275.86 373.65 421.44 492.28 280.72 229.90 538.89 
9 Net Sales (Revenue from 
operations) 
1250.13 1226.38 1294.99 1162.76 1305.22 1340.79 966.69 356.79 504.23 
10 Total Expenses 1212.66 1203.57 1255.50 1132.37 1266.42 1310.77 949.41 356.08 521.56 
11 Sales to Expenses Ratio 1.03 1.02 1.03 1.03 1.03 1.02 1.02 1.00 0.97 
12 Other Income 8.82 12.48 16.67 18.28 20.77 22.49 19.31 24.70 28.67 
13 Interest Income on Fixed Deposits 
included in Other Income (Row-12) 
8.63 12.03 16.07 17.79 20.45 19.77 17.93 23.10 25.19 
14 Percentage of interest on fixed 
deposit to PBT (Row -13/Row-16 * 
100) 
18.65 34.10 28.64 36.72 34.28 37.51 50.14 91.49 222.72 

Appendices 
61 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars Financial year 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
15 Total Revenue 
(Row 9 + Row 12) 
1258.95 1238.86 1311.66 1181.04 1325.99 1363.28 986.00 381.49 532.90 
16 Profit Before Tax 46.27 35.28 56.12 48.45 59.66 52.70 35.76 25.25 11.31 
17 Operational Income/Profit 
(Row 16 - Row 12) 
37.45 22.80 39.45 30.17 38.89 30.21 16.45 0.55 (-) 17.36 
18 Net profit 30.60 23.40 36.85 32.34 39.12 33.53 20.83 16.69 7.74 
Source: Annual Financial Statements of the Company for the respective years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
62 
Appendix 4.2 
(Reference: Para No. 4.1.2, Page No. 20) 
Financial ratios of the Company for the years from 2011-12 to 2019-20 
(` in crore) 
Year Operating 
Profit 
Net 
profit 
Net 
sales 
Shareholder’s 
equity1 
Total assets Financial Ratios 
Operating margin 
ratio = Operating 
profit / Net sales 
Return on equity 
ratio = Net profit / 
Shareholder’s equity 
Return on total assets 
ratio = Net profit / Total 
assets 
2011-12 37.45 30.6 1250.13 36.71 459.27 0.03 0.83 0.07 
2012-13 22.80 23.4 1226.38 60.06 433.2 0.02 0.39 0.05 
2013-14 39.45 36.85 1294.99 96.85 441.16 0.03 0.38 0.08 
2014-15 30.17 32.34 1162.76 121.06 555.3 0.03 0.27 0.06 
2015-16 38.89 39.12 1305.22 150.99 646.68 0.03 0.26 0.06 
2016-17 30.21 33.53 1340.79 176.18 829.87 0.02 0.19 0.04 
2017-18 16.45 20.83 966.69 191.75 634.58 0.02 0.11 0.03 
2018-19 0.55 16.69 356.79 205.8 545.82 0.00 0.08 0.03 
2019-20 (-) 17.36 7.74 504.23 211.96 753.22 (-)0.03 0.04 0.01 
Source: Financial statements of the Company for respective years. 
 
 
 
                                                           
1  Paid up capital + Free Reserves – Accumulated Loss – Deferred Revenue Expenditure. 

Appendices 
63 
Appendix- 5.1 
(Reference: Para No. 5.5, Page No. 32) 
Detail of cases wherein the Company supplied without collecting advances 
(Quantity in MT) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Sl. 
No. 
Order no.  Ordered 
Quantity 
Order date Scheme Status of 
receipt of 
60% 
advance 
Quantity 
supplied for 
60% 
payment 
Percentage quantity 
supplied for payment of 
60 % advance 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 = 9/5*100 
2018-19 
1 2018-19 1 36 1738.836 03-04-2018 Other Yes 1738.836 100 
2 2018-19 3 2584 1042.892 06-06-2018 Other Yes 532.092 51 
3 2018-19 4 3186 1160.439 30-06-2018 Other Yes 1092.66 94 
4 2018-19 5 4184 1075.112 30-07-2018 Other Yes 972.156 90 
5 2018-19 6 4953 834.078 28-08-2018 Other Yes 814.38 98 
6 2018-19 7 5498 1038.940 27-09-2018 Other Yes 1009.38 97 
7 2018-19 8 5919 990.262 23-10-2018 Other Yes 962.13 97 
2019-20 
8 2019-20 1 1598 1087.438 28-03-2019 Others Yes 1061.646 98 
9 2019-20 2 2178 939.898 29-04-2019 Others Yes 912.54 97 
10 2019-20 3 2659 954.203 30-05-2019 Others Yes 909.045 95 
11 2019-20 4 3242 1204.487 27-06-2019 Others Yes 1106.364 92 
12 2019-20 5 4072 940.131 27-07-2019 Others Yes 902.793 96 
13 2019-20 6 4208 940.131 13-08-2019 Others Yes 902.793 96 
14 2019-20 7 5208 971.616 28-09-2019 Others Yes 941.352 97 
15 2019-20 8 6246 886.906 31-10-2019 Others Yes 863.163 97 
16 2019-20 9 5717 1459.413 30-11-2019 Others Yes 1421.754 97 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
64 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Sl. 
No. 
Order no.  Ordered 
Quantity 
Order date Scheme Status of 
receipt of 
60% 
advance 
Quantity 
supplied for 
60% 
payment 
Percentage quantity 
supplied for payment of 
60 % advance 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 = 9/5*100 
17 2019-20 10 6242 1208.500 27-12-2019 Others Yes 1158.152 96 
18 2019-20 11 578 1143.160 28-01-2020 Others Yes 1103.163 97 
19 2019-20 12 1315 15027.479 02-03-2020 Others Yes 15027 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
65 
Appendix-5.2 
(Reference: Para No. 5.5, Page No. 32) 
 Detail of cases wherein payment delayed after the stipulated time of one month 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Order No. Order date Supply date Amount Bill date Payment date Delay in payment 
(in days) 
Loss of interest @ 
3.15% per annum 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
2018-19 
1. 4953 28-08-2018 29-09-2018 12,06,427 27-12-2018 28-01-2019 2 208 
 4953 28-08-2018 29-09-2018 2,13,56,223 27-12-2018 28-01-2019 2 3,686 
2. 5498 27-09-2018 28-10-2018 2,64,65,162 28-12-2018 30-01-2019 3 6,852 
 5498 27-09-2018 28-10-2018 18,09,823 28-12-2018 28-01-2019 1 156 
3. 7109 26-11-2018 21-12-2018 2,44,03,923 27-02-2019 30-03-2019 1 2,106 
4. 424 29-01-2019 20-02-2019 2,11,56,603 16-04-2019 27-05-2019 11 20,084 
 424 29-01-2019 20-02-2019 15,20,733 16-04-2019 27-05-2019 11 1,444 
Total 34,536 
2019-20 
5. 1598 28-03-2019 25-04-2019 15,84,325 24-06-2019 03-08-2019 10 1,367 
 1598 28-03-2019 25-04-2019 2,78,26,460 24-06-2019 03-08-2019 10 24,015 
6. 2178 29-04-2019 27-05-2019 16,78,614 16-07-2019 28-08-2019 13 1,883 
 2178 29-04-2019 27-05-2019 2,39,28,599 16-07-2019 28-08-2019 13 26,846 
7. 2659 30-05-2019 25-06-2019 27,55,300 20-08-2019 26-09-2019 7 1,665 
 2659 30-05-2019 25-06-2019 2,38,42,954 20-08-2019 26-09-2019 7 14,404 
8. 3242 27-06-2019 25-07-2019 26,33,598 16-09-2019 17-10-2019 1 227 
 3242 27-06-2019 25-07-2019 2,90,36,521 16-09-2019 17-10-2019 1 2,506 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
66 
Sl. 
No. 
Order No. Order date Supply date Amount Bill date Payment date Delay in payment 
(in days) 
Loss of interest @ 
3.15% per annum 
9. 4072 27-07-2019 22-08-2019 22,79,457 17-10-2019 20-12-2019 34 6,688 
 4072 27-07-2019 22-08-2019 2,36,80,218 17-10-2019 20-12-2019 34 69,484 
10. 4208 13-08-2019 22-09-2019 22,79,457 13-12-2019 23-01-2020 11 2,164 
 4208 13-08-2019 22-09-2019 2,36,80,774 13-12-2019 25-02-2020 44 89,922 
11. 5208 28-09-2019 24-10-2019 18,51,851 13-01-2020 25-02-2020 13 2,078 
 5208 28-09-2019 24-10-2019 2,46,82,658 13-01-2020 25-02-2020 13 27,692 
12. 6246 31-10-2019 24-11-2019 14,56,042 13-01-2020 25-02-2020 13 1,634 
 6246 31-10-2019 24-11-2019 2,26,41,318 13-01-2020 25-02-2020 13 25,402 
13. 5717 30-11-2019 30-12-2019 23,01,637 11-06-2020 29-07-2020 18 3,575 
 5717 30-11-2019 30-12-2019 3,70,51,206 11-06-2020 29-07-2020 18 57,556 
14. 6242 27-12-2019 27-01-2020 30,51,467 16-06-2020 29-07-2020 13 3,423 
 6242 27-12-2019 27-01-2020 3,01,74,415 16-06-2020 29-07-2020 13 33,853 
15. 578 28-01-2020 28-02-2020 24,19,000 11-06-2020 15-10-2020 96 20,041 
 578 28-01-2020 28-02-2020 2,87,41,524 11-06-2020 29-07-2020 18 44,648 
16. 1315 02-03-2020 02-06-2020 69,40,265 25-08-2020 15-10-2020 21 12,578 
Total 4,73,651  
2020-21 
17. 2295 22-05-2020 30-07-2020 14,15,78,678 16-10-2020 27-11-2020 12 1,46,621 
18. 3410 10-08-2020 22-10-2020 5,85,15,494 18-11-2020 20-01-2021 33 1,66,649 
19. 3965 16-09-2020 20-11-2020 7,42,42,698 30-12-2020 26-02-2021 28 1,79,403 
20. 101 08-01-2021 16-02-2021 6,18,88,586 09-04-2021 21-06-2021 43 2,29,666 
21. 923 11-02-2021 08-04-2021 6,42,70,321 24-06-2021 23-08-2021 30 1,66,399 

Appendices 
67 
Sl. 
No. 
Order No. Order date Supply date Amount Bill date Payment date Delay in payment 
(in days) 
Loss of interest @ 
3.15% per annum 
22. 1496 09-03-2021 31-05-2021 6,61,89,489 02-08-2021 20-09-2021 19 1,08,533 
Total 9,97,271  
2021-22 
23. 3517 11-06-2021 27-08-2021 6,19,66,571 22-10-2021 08-12-2021 17 90,913 
24. 1315 27-04-2021 07-07-2021 6,58,13,228 09-09-2021 16-11-2021 38 2,15,831 
25. 3924 02-07-2021 30-09-2021 6,27,83,706 24-11-2021 15-02-2022 53 2,87,171 
26. 6285 11-11-2021 09-02-2022 6,33,67,680 05-05-2022 04-08-2022 61 3,33,592 
27. 3507 10-01-2022 11-03-2022 6,62,81,961 05-08-2022 12-10-2022 38 2,17,369 
28. 611 11-02-2022 07-06-2022 6,72,87,531 19-10-2022 22-11-2022 4 23,228 
Total  
1 to 96 days 
11,68,104 
Grand total 26,73,562 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Working of MP State Agro Industries Development Corporation 
68 
Appendix-6.1 
(Reference: Para No. 6.3, Page No. 36) 
Details of income and expenditure from farming of Wheat, Paddy and  
Moong during 2017-22 
 (` in lakh) 
Year Income Expenditure Profit  Loss 
2017-18 100.55 72.46 28.09 -- 
2018-19 79.62 63.05 16.57 -- 
2019-20 71.14 85.05 -- 13.91 
2020-21 40.01 48.93 -- 8.92 
2021-22 56.01 38.77 17.24 -- 
TOTAL 347.33 308.26 61.90 22.83 
Note- Expenditure incurred on salary is not included. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
69 
Appendix-6.2 
(Reference: Para No. 6.6, Page No. 39) 
Detail of income received from sale of orchards produce 
(` in lakh) 
Year Income Expenditure Profit 
2017-18 21.54 13.12 8.42 
2018-19 48.37 11.12 37.25 
2019-20 21.91 8.82 13.09 
2020-21 34.34 12.79 21.55 
2021-22 53.39 12.82 40.57 
Total 179.55 58.67 120.88 
Note- Expenditure incurred on salary is not included . Further, expenditure of unit 2 and unit 3 for 2020-21 and 
2021-22 is also not included. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 