Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

Performance Audit on Solid Waste

Management in urban areas of Union
Territory of Puducherry

for the year ended March 2022

Government of the Union Territory of Puducherry
Report No. 1 of 2024


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Reference to

paragraph
Preface v
Executive summary Vii
CHAPTER - 1
INTRODUCTION

Introduction 1.1 1
Solid Waste Management in Union Territory of Puducherry 1.2 1
Organisational setup 1.3 2

Responsibilities of different departments and agencies 1.3.1 3
Audit Objectives 1.4 3
Audit Criteria 1.5 4
Audit Scope, Methodology and Sampling 1.6 4
Acknowledgement 1.7 5

CHAPTER - 2

PLANNING AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

Planning and Strategy for Solid Waste Management 21 7
Non-assessment of waste generation 2.1.1 7
Absence of comprehensive State Policy for Solid Waste 2.1.2 8

Management



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Reference to

paragraph
Preparation of Action Plan as required under legal 10
framework
Non-inclusion of mandatory activities under 21.4 11
Construction and Demolition Waste in Action Plan
Non-availability of strategies for waste reduction, reuse 2.1.5 12
and recycling
Financial Management 2.2 13
Allocation and utilisation of funds 2.2.1 13
Non-availing of Gol funds under SBM-U 2.2.2 14
Collection of user fee 2.2.3 15
Non-execution of works under Smart City Project 2.2.4 16
Conclusion 2.3 16
Recommendations 24 17

CHAPTER - 3

SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTA’

Segregation of waste 3.1 20
Non-segregation of wastes 3.1.1 20
Non-utilisation of services rendered under Corporate 3.1.2 22
Social Responsibility

Collection of waste 3.2 24

Transportation 3.3 26

Non-provision of Personal Protection Equipment 3.4 26



Table of contents

Reference to

paragraph

Conclusion

Recommendations

CHAPTER - 4

3.5

3.6

PROCESSING AND TREATMENT OF SOLID WASTE

Processing and Treatment
Bio-Mining

Non-clearance of legacy waste at Karuvadikuppam
dumpsite in Puducherry

Non-clearance of legacy waste at Karaikal and Yanam
dumpsites

Recycling and Recovery
Non-setting up of material recovery park in PUAA

Delay in setting up of Material Recovery Facility in
Yanam

Composting
Bio-Methanation
Sanitary Landfill
Status of dumpsites
Improper disposal of Construction and Demolition Waste
Improper disposal of slaughterhouse waste
Conclusion

Recommendation

4.1

4.1.1

4.13

4.2

4.2.1

4.2.2

43

4.3.1

44

44.1

4.5

4.6

47

4.8

29

31

32

33

34

34

35

37

38

39

40

43

44

45

46

iti


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Reference to

paragraph
CHAPTER -5
MONITORING
Monitoring by Apex Bodies 5.1 47
Monitoring by Local Administration Department 5.1.1 47
Non-functioning of GPS in vehicles used for waste Soil 2 48
transportation
Monitoring by Puducherry Pollution Control Committee 5.2 49
Ineffective enforcement of SWM Rules 5.2.1 49
Non-levying of Environmental Compensation 5.2.2 49
Issue of improper authorisation for Dumpsite in Yanam 5.2.3 50
Deficiencies in monitoring of environmental impacts 5.2.4 50
Inadequate Information, Education and Communication 5.3 53
activities
Conclusion 5.4 54
Recommendation 5.5 55

Glossary of abbreviations 57



PREFACE

This Report for the year ended March 2022 has been
prepared for submission to the Lieutenant Governor
under Section 49 of the Government of Union
Territories Act, 1963.

The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India contains the results of Performance Audit on Solid
Waste Management in urban areas of Union Territory
of Puducherry covering the period from 2017-18 to
2021-22.

The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which
came to notice in the course of Performance Audit
conducted during April 2022 to December 2022.

Matters relating to the periods outside the audit period
have also been reported in places where they were
found necessary.

The audit has been conducted in conformity with the
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

Audit acknowledges the co-operation received from
Department of Local Administration, Municipalities
and Puducherry Pollution Control Committee for
smooth conduct of Audit.



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


EXECUTIVE SUM.

e did this Au

WI

The management of Solid Waste in urban areas has emerged as one of the
biggest challenges faced by the Municipalities throughout the country which is
aggravated by rapid urbanisation. Elimination of dumped wastes and
substantially increasing the recycling of solid waste for safe reuse is one of the
targets set in Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Proper solid waste
management (SWM) presents an opportunity not only to avoid the adverse
impact on public health and environment, but also enable to recover resources,
realise environmental, economic and social benefits. Therefore, scientific
disposal of solid waste through segregation, collection, transportation,
processing and disposal in an environmentally acceptable manner by the
municipalities is the goal that minimises adverse impact on public health and

environment.

Considering the importance of Solid Waste Management to minimise the
adverse impact on public health and environment, CAG took up this
Performance Audit covering the activities of the Department during 2017-22.
The objectives of this Audit were to assess whether: (1) strategy and planning
commensurate with the wastes generated and as per legal framework;
(2) collection, segregation, storage, transportation, disposal and social inclusion
of informal waste workers were effective, efficient and economical; (3)
planning, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of projects
was effective, efficient and financially sustainable (4) monitoring and evaluation
of SWM system including adequacy of awareness was adequate and effective.

What we found?

The quantity and the composition of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generated
in ULBs is the basis which determine the collection, processing and disposal
options that could be adopted for scientific management of solid waste. Audit
found that neither Local Administration Department (LAD) nor the five ULBs
had conducted any survey to assess the quantity of waste generation. The
mandatory State Policy for management of solid waste as required under SWM
Rules, 2016 was prepared in the year 2018 after a delay of one year. But the
Policy was yet to be notified in the official gazette of the Union Territory of
Puducherry. The Policy valid upto the year 2025 did not address the key issues

vii


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

viz., waste reduction, reuse, recycling, etc., so as to minimise the impact of solid
waste on human health and environment.

Neither long term nor short term plan for SWM was prepared by ULBs.
Consequently, there was no realistic plan of action in addressing the gap in
integrated SWM. Besides, there was no separate plan for management of
Construction and Demolition waste. No ULBs except Oulgaret Municipality
had identified and registered informal sector in SWM as envisaged in SWM
Manual, 2016.

The UTP had forgone the opportunity to avail Gol funds to the tune of
र₹ 6.37 crore under Swatch Bharat Mission due to non-finalisation of requisite
projects. The ULBs had a pendency of ® 3.78 crore towards collection of user
fee for SWM. Funds to the tune of ~ 22.13 crore released under Smart City
Mission meant for SWM projects had been parked in bank for more than four
years due to non-finalisation of projects.

The responsibilities of ULBs associated with SWM includes segregation,
collection, transportation, processing and safe disposal. However, in three out

of five ULBs of UT of Puducherry, there was no system for segregation of waste
at the first point of door-to-door collection from the Households and
Commercial establishments.

In Puducherry Municipality, there was a proposal to establish three resource
recovery facility under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding.
However, the one resource recovery facility created was not functional due to
non-diversion of required dry waste and other two facilities were not created till
date which had resulted in 12 TPD of dry waste being dumped into the dumpsite.

During joint physical verification conducted by Audit in PUAA and Yanam, it
was noticed that the handcarts, tricycles, light commercial vehicles (mini trucks)
were utilised for collection of waste. But these vehicles were not suitably
partitioned for collection of segregated wastes.

SWM manual prohibits engagement of work force in handling of Solid Waste
without protection equipments including uniform, fluorescent jacket and hand
gloves etc. However, joint field visit revealed that majority of the work force
involved in manual handling of waste were not using the protective equipment
as required.

The concessionaire engaged for reclamation of land through bio-mining had
been paid हैं 12.27 crore for processing of legacy waste and remediation of the
land. However, the concessionaire has disposed off only the legacy waste of
around 77,916 tonnes but had not done proportionate reclamation of land
thereby got an undue benefit of € 6.27 crore.

viii


Executive Summary

Though, SWM Rules stipulates that ULBs have to analyse the old dumpsite for
the bio-remediation, the 12 acres of land at Karuvadikuppam in which dumping
was stopped in the year 2011 was not bio-remediated till date (March 2023).

Though legacy waste had to be cleared by March 2021, the project for the same
at Karaikal was taken up only in March 2023 after a lapse of two years and in
Yanam, it was still at tender stage.

Due to non-creation of Material Recovery Facility (MRF) in PUAA and Yanam,
fresh waste was continued to be dumped thereby defeating the process of

clearing the legacy waste through bio-mining.

Non-acceptance of lowest tender for creation of MRF at Yanam resulted in
avoidable additional expenditure of = 94.25 lakh. Though the work order for
creation of MRF at Yanam was awarded in December 2021, the land for
establishing the MRF was handed over by the municipality only in March 2023,
thereby extending a wasteful expenditure of < 77.11 lakh towards processing
and also resulted in continued dumping of unsegregated waste.

The bio-methanation plant installed in Puducherry and Karaikal Municipality at
a cost of ¥ 51.16 lakh was not put to use or not functional due to non-purchase
of electrical generator and damages in the equipment.

In UTP, no sanitary landfills were created in any of the ULBs resulting in
dumping of waste in open ground leading to ground water contamination. The
joint inspection at Kurumbapet dumpsite revealed that leachate generated was
allowed to stagnate around the dumpsite and flow over the approach road.

In Puducherry Region, though the land for processing Construction and
Demolition (C&D) waste was identified, the processing facility was yet to be
created. Consequently, the concessionaire continued to dump the C&D waste
along with the other municipal waste at Kurumbapet dumpsite. Similarly, the
waste generated from the slaughtering of animals were dumped along with
municipal solid waste at the dumpsite causing unhygienic conditions.

The State Level Advisory Board for SWM did not review the State Policy and
Strategy on solid waste management resulting in non-implementation of
scientific SWM methods mandated under SWM Rules.

As per the agreement entered into for collection and transportation in PUAA,
concessionaire had installed Global Positioning System (GPS) in all the vehicles
to monitor their movement. However, neither PUDA nor the Municipalities had
verified the log of the vehicles before making the payments to the
concessionaire.

ix


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Due to non-compliance of SWM Rules, the NGT had levied Environmental
compensation amounting to हैं 96 lakh for the period April 2020 to
December 2022. PPCC had issued improper authorisation to Yanam dump yard
which was located on water channel. No air quality monitoring was done in

Yanam dumpsite.

The analysis of quality of ground water in the dumpsites by Audit through
Pondicherry University revealed that the water quality was poor and parameters
such as TDS, chloride, iron, lead, etc., were beyond permissible limits. Due to
inadequate Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities, there
were no community participation and behavioural change towards segregation
of waste in PUAA and Yanam.

What we recommend?

We have made recommendations to ensure scientific disposal of municipal solid
waste through proper planning, segregation of waste at source level, creation of
required infrastructure for processing of waste, awareness and monitoring as
required under Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and Solid Waste
Manual, 2016.

PLANNING AND FINANCIAL MANAGEM

T
The Government should assess the quantum of actual waste generated in the UT
of Puducherry to estimate and create appropriate facilities for waste management.

The Government should prioritise the ‘3Rs’ viz., reduction, reuse, recycling of
waste for implementing preferential order of solid waste management.

The Government should ensure engagement of informal sector in SWM as
required in SWM Rules, 2016.

The Government should evolve a mechanism for periodical collection of user fee

from commercial establishments.

The Government should take immediate steps for identification and
implementation of projects for which funds have been sanctioned under SBM-U
and Smart City Projects.

SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF
WASTE

The Government should fix responsibility on the concerned officials of LAD for
omission of Terms of Reference in the agreement entered with the concessionaire

regarding the role on segregation of waste at source level.



Executive Summary

The Government should ensure segregation of waste at source level and prevent
mixing of waste till its disposal, in order to comply with the SWM rules and NGT
orders.

The Government should ensure transporting of waste to the existing facility
created under CSR fund and take further action to set up remaining two facilities.

The Government should ensure vehicles used for collection and transportation of
waste must be partitioned and covered.

The Government should include penal provisions in the agreement (in line with
Para 3(23) of the SWM Rules, 2016) entered with the concessionaire for non-
compliance with the rules on collection, transportation and disposal of wastes.

PROCESSING AND TREATMENT OF SOLID WASTE

The Government should ensure collection of segregated waste and establish
Material Recovery Facility in PUAA and Yanam to avoid dumping of fresh
waste.

The Government should ensure clearance of legacy waste at Puducherry, Yanam
and Karaikal dumpsite.

The Government should ensure functioning of the bio-methanation plant
installed at Puducherry and Karaikal.

The Government should ensure establishment of sanitary landfill and leachate
management facility to avoid ground water contamination.

MONITORING

The Government should ensure that PPCC installs a system of continuous
monitoring of water and air in and around the dumpsites so as to take remedial

action.

The Government should encourage community participation and strengthen IEC
activities to ensure proper segregation and disposal of waste.

xi


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION


1.1. Introduction

Solid waste as defined by the “Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016
(SWM Rules)” includes solid or semi-solid domestic waste, sanitary waste,
commercial waste, institutional waste, market waste and other non-residential
wastes, such as silt removed from the surface drains, agricultural and
horticulture waste, etc. Based on the characteristics, solid waste is further
classified as biodegradable, non-biodegradable, combustible, dry and inert
wastes.

The management of Solid Waste in urban areas has emerged as one of the
biggest challenges faced by the Municipalities throughout the country which is
aggravated by rapid urbanisation. Elimination of dumped wastes and
substantially increasing the recycling of solid waste for safe reuse is one of the
targets set in Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Proper solid waste
management (SWM) presents an opportunity not only to avoid the adverse
impact on public health and environment, but also enable to recover resources,
realise environmental, economic and social benefits. Therefore, scientific
disposal of solid waste through segregation, collection, transportation,
processing and disposal in an environmentally acceptable manner by the
municipalities is the goal that minimises adverse impact on public health and

environment.

te Management in Union of Puducherry

The Union Territory of Puducherry (UTP) consists of four geographically
unconnected regions viz., Puducherry, Karaikal (Tamil Nadu), Mahe (Kerala)
and Yanam (Andhra Pradesh). The population of UTP as per 2011 Census
was 12.48 lakh. In urban areas, the responsibility of management of solid
waste is vested with Urban Local Bodies viz., Municipalities. There are five
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the UTP with a population of 7,28,761
(approximately 60 per cent of the total population) viz., Puducherry
Municipality, Oulgaret Municipality, Karaikal Municipality, Mahe
Municipality and Yanam Municipality. Among the five Municipalities,

Puducherry and Oulgaret are adjacent to each other and hence these two

The terms and abbreviations used in this Report are listed in the Glossary at
Page No. 57.



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

municipal areas along with certain urbanised pockets of Ariyankuppam and
Villianur Commune Panchayats are called Puducherry Urban Agglomeration
Area (PUAA). The five ULBs together generated approximately 500 tonnes!
of municipal solid waste every day.

The Secretary to the Government, Local Administration Department (LAD) is
the administrative head of the Department. The Director, LAD is the next

level officer in the hierarchy who oversees the implementation of Solid Waste
Management in UTP. Puducherry Urban Development Agency (PUDA an
autonomous body) functioning under LAD and headed by the Project Officer
is the implementing authority of the work relating to SWM in UTP. The
Municipalities headed by the Commissioners are in charge of the field level
implementation of SWM. The Organisational Setup is depicted in Chart 1.1.

Chart 1.1: Organisational Setup

Secretary (Local
Administration Department)

Project Officer
(PUDA)

Director (Local
Administration
Department)

Deputy Director
(Municipal
Administration )

Mahe
Municipality

Yanam
Municipality

Karaikal
Municipality

Puducherry
Municipality

Oulgaret
Municipality

Source: Solid Waste Management Action Plan 2021 prepared by Local
Administration Department, Puducherry.



Chapter 1: Introduction

1.3.1 Responsibilities of different departments and agencies

The Puducherry Municipalities Act, 1973 and Solid Waste Management
Policy, 2018 of UTP mandate management of solid waste as an obligatory
function of the ULBs. The Puducherry Pollution Control Committee (PPCC)
functioning under the Department of Science, Technology and Environment
will enforce these rules in UTP through local bodies. It reviews
implementation of these rules at least twice a year and also monitors
environmental standards and adherence to conditions as specified under
Rule 16 of SWM Rules, 2016 for waste processing and disposal sites.

The departments and agencies involved in waste management in the UTP and
the roles assigned to them are as given in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1: Roles of various Departments

Puducherry Urban Development An autonomous body functioning under LAD, which
Agency (PUDA) facilitates implementation of various schemes viz.,

National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), Swachh

Bharat Mission-Urban (SBM-U), etc.

Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) Responsible for solid waste management, levy and
collection of user fee along with property tax/trade
licence, making of bye laws and publication of
regulations.

1.4 _ Audit Objectives

The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether:

> strategy and planning of solid waste management in ULBs is
commensurate with the wastes generated and concurrent with the
prevailing legal framework;

> municipal tasks associated with solid waste management including
collection, segregation, storage, transportation, disposal and social



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

inclusion of informal waste workers were effective, efficient and

economical;

> planning, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of
solid waste management projects in ULBs was effective, efficient and

financially sustainable;

> monitoring and evaluation of solid waste management system
including adequacy of awareness creation, citizen engagement for
effecting behavioural change, complaint redressal mechanism for
citizens and assessment of environmental impacts and implementation
of the internal control and monitoring mechanism was adequate and
effective.

1.5 Audit Criteria

The observations in the report were benchmarked against criteria derived

from:

> The Government of India’s Manual of Municipal Solid Waste
Management, 2016 and Solid Waste (Management and Handling)
Rules, 2016;
Construction and Demolition (C&D) Waste Management Rules, 2016;
Guidelines for Swachh Bharat Mission 1 and 2.0 issued by Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affairs;

> Tender Transparency Act and Rules, 1998;

> The Environment (Protection) Act and Rules, 1986;

> Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974;

> The Puducherry Municipalities Act, 1973;

> Instructions, guidelines, policies issued by Central Pollution Control

Board, Puducherry Pollution Control Committee, Government of
India/UTP on solid waste management from time to time.

1.6 Audit Scope, Methodology and Samp

The Performance Audit examined the efficacy of the management of solid
waste by ULBs covering the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22. Since the
SWM Rules also prescribes Standards/Rules for the management of C&D
Waste by ULB, the same was also covered in the present Performance Audit.



Chapter 1: Introduction

The Entry Conference was held with the Secretary (Local Administration) on
24 June 2022 in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria
were explained and agreed upon. The audit methodology involved scrutiny of
records at Secretariat, LAD, PUDA, PPCC and five Municipalities. The Audit
methodology involved seeking responses to Audit enquires, joint physical
verifications of project sites with municipal staff and collection of
photographic evidences. Audit methodology also involved collection of
samples of soil and water around the dump yards of Puducherry and Oulgaret
and testing the same through the Centre for Pollution Control and
Environmental Engineering, Pondicherry University to ascertain the levels of
contamination of ground water in the dump yard.

On completion of the Audit, an Exit Conference was conducted with Secretary
(Local Administration) on 03 April 2023 and reply of the Government has
been incorporated in the report.

All the five Municipalities in the UT of Puducherry were selected for Audit.
There are 127 wards in urban areas of UTP (PUAA-81, Karaikal-18,
Mahe-14 and Yanam-14). Survey of 25 households in each wards was
conducted in 33 out of 127 wards. Further out of 1,728 sanitary workers
deployed by the concessionaire, 433 (25 per cent) sanitary workers were
randomly selected and surveyed to assess the levels of performance of the
sanitary workers.

3 Acknowledgment

Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the UT
Government, Local Administration Department, Puducherry Urban
Development Agency, all the Municipalities, Puducherry Pollution Control
Committee in the smooth conduct and timely completion of Audit. Audit also
acknowledges the assistance extended by Pondicherry University in conduct
of test on water samples.

2 Puducherry, Oulgaret, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam.



CHAPTER 2

PLANNING AND
FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT


ER 2: PLANNING AND FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT

Assessment of waste to determine the collection, processing and
disposal options was not carried out either by LAD nor the five ULBs.
Though the DPRs prepared by Puducherry and Oulgaret
Municipalities projected an estimated quantity of 527 TPD of waste
generated for the year 2020, the actual quantity of waste collected
ranged between 320 and 371 TPD during 2017-22 thereby making the
projections unrealistic.

The mandatory State Policy for management of solid waste as
required under SWM Rules, 2016 was prepared in the year 2018 after
a delay of one year. But the Policy was yet to be notified in the official
gazette of the UTP. The Policy which is stated to be valid upto the
year 2025 did not address the key issues viz., waste reduction, reuse,
recycling, etc., so as to minimise the impact of solid waste on human
health and environment.

Neither long term nor short term plan for SWM was prepared by
ULBs. Consequently, there was no realistic plan of action in
addressing the gap in Integrated Solid Waste Management. Besides,
there was no separate plan for management of Construction and
Demolition waste. No ULBs except Oulgaret Municipality had
identified and registered informal sector in SWM as envisaged in
SWM Manual, 2016.

Out of = 18.93 crore released during 2017-22 for SWM projects,
= 14.36 crore was not utilised till date (March 2022) besides foregoing
central assistance of ~ 6.37 crore due to non-finalisation of requisite
projects.

Similarly, funds of € 22.13 crore sanctioned in 2017 was not drawn as
the works relating to SWM under Smart City Project were yet to be
taken up.

2.1 Planning and Strategy for Solid Waste Management
2.1.1 Non-assessment of waste generation

As per Section 1.4.3.3 of SWM Manual 2016, each ULB should assess the
quantity and composition of waste generated for effective planning and



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

designing of requisite solid waste management facilities. The quantity and
composition of municipal solid waste (MSW) generated in the ULB determine
collection, processing and disposal options that could be adopted. The SWM

Manual envisages the methods required for quantification of waste generated.

In this regard, the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in its consolidated
annual review report for the year 2013-14, had estimated the quantum of waste
generated in PUAA as 430 Tonnes per Day (TPD). However, no estimation was
done subsequently by PCB/ULBs to arrive at the actual quantum of waste
generated in PUAA. Based on the above quantum of waste arrived by CPCB,
GoP had projected the quantum of waste generated in PUAA as 527 TPD for the
year 2020. However, it was noticed that during 2017-22, the actual waste
collected by the concessionaire in PUAA varied between 320 and 371 TPD only.

Further, in respect of Yanam, the DPR prepared in October 2019 for creation of
infrastructural facilities for waste processing, the quantum of waste was
estimated as 16 TPD. However, on engagement of the concessionaire, the actual
waste collected was around 25 TPD. Thus, it was evident that the estimated
quantum of waste was incorrect since there was a difference between the
assessed and collected waste. Due to absence of assessment of actual waste
generated, the Government was not in a position to arrive upon the actual
requirement of facilities for waste management.

In respect of Mahe Municipality, no assessment of waste generation was made
till date (March 2023).

Though, the Government had prepared policy framework for SWM in UTP and
an Action Plan in 2021, in the absence of assessment of actual waste generation,
the efficiency on collection of municipal waste in all these ULBs could not be

ascertained in Audit.

In reply, Government stated that the assessment of actual quantum of waste
generated would be conducted for the upcoming years through the
concessionaire identified for the waste collection.

2.1.2 Absence of comprehensive State Policy for Solid Waste
Management

Rule 11(a) of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 (SWM Rules),
mandates the preparation of State Policy for Municipal Solid Waste
Management (MSWM) by the State or the Union Territory in consultation with
stakeholders within a period not later than one year from the date of notification
of these rules i.e., 2016.

In UTP, the State Policy for SWM was notified by Local Administration
Department (LAD) in August 2018 after a delay of one year from the period



Chapter 2: Planning and Financial Management

specified under SWM Rules. The validity of this policy was stated to be ten
years from the date of notification. However, it was noticed that the State Policy
was yet to be notified in the official gazette of UTP for implementation. In the
absence of the legal status to the policy, enforcement of the policy by the line
departments concerned for carrying out mandatory activities of SWM
viz., segregation of waste at source, collection and transportation of segregated
waste, processing and scientific disposal, as required under the SWM Rules
could not be ensured by the Government.

As per Rule 11(b) of the SWM Rules, the State Policy and Strategy on solid
waste management should lay emphasis on waste reduction, reuse, recycling,
recovery and optimum utilisation of various components of solid waste to
ensure minimisation of waste going to the landfill and minimise impact of solid

waste on human health and environment.

As per Rule 11(c), State Policies and Strategies should acknowledge the primary
tole played by the informal sector of waste pickers, waste collectors and
recycling industry in reducing waste.

In addition, the ‘National Action Plan for MSWM’ prepared by CPCB based on
the order of National Green Tribunal (NGT) dated 5 February 2015, stated that
the State may follow the waste management policy with the hierarchy (i) Waste
prevention or minimisation (ii) Waste utilisation (iii) Waste recycling
(iv) Waste processing (v) Waste-to-Energy and (vi) Landfilling.

Chart 2.1: Hierarchy of Integrated Solid Waste Management

At source reduction and Reuse

© Composting ae

Landfills Least preferred

Despite the mandatory Guidelines provided by SWM Rules and National Action
Plan, the Policy prepared by LAD, did not include the preferential order of waste
management which would comprise the strategy for management of solid waste.



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Though the Reduce, Reuse and Recycling concepts were considered as one of
the objectives, the methodology to achieve the same was not indicated in the
Policy.

In reply, Government stated that action will be taken to prepare a comprehensive
State Policy and Action Plan for solid waste management incorporating the
reduction, reuse and recycle strategies mentioned in the SWM Rules, 2016.

2.1.3 Preparation of Action Plan as required under legal
framework

Sections 1.4.5 and 1.4.6 of SWM Manual, 2016 and Rule 15(a) of SWM Rules
mandate for preparation and implementation of a strategic and detailed solid
waste management plan by every ULB. The Action Plan is to be prepared as

given below:

> Long term planning horizon of 20-25 years embedding short term

implementation plans covering 5 years each for implementation.

> A short term plan to cover the aspects of institutional strengthening,
community mobilisation, waste minimisation initiatives, waste
collection and transportation, treatment and disposal and financial
outlay.

Though the SWM Rules and Manual came into force from April 2016,
LAD/ULBs had not prepared short-term or long-term plans for adopting a
systematic approach for SWM in UTP. Later, based on the instruction of
Hon’ble NGT in February 2017, LAD had prepared Action Plans in April 2018
and April 2021 and a State Policy in October 2018. But it was noticed that no
long-term plan i.e., for 20-25 years embedded with short term plans (five years)
was prepared as required under SBM Manual.

Further, as per Rule 22 of SWM Rules, the required infrastructure for
implementation of these rules shall be created by the local bodies within the
time frame specified below. However, Audit noticed that there were no
strategy/plan included in the action plan for creating the required infrastructure
for Integrated Solid Waste Management as detailed below:

10


Chapter 2: Planning and Financial Management

(Source:

Table 2.1: Status of implementation of mandatory activities

Mandatory activity as required Timelines f implementation
under legal framework given in
SWM 2 रु
Rules, | 2 = डे 2
2016 3 डर
5०5 ४
Procurement of site for sanitary April Yes Yes Yes No
landfill. 2018
Enforcing waste generators to April No No Yes Yes
practice segregation of bio- 2018
degradable, recyclable, combustible,
sanitary waste, domestic hazardous
and inert solid wastes at source.
Ensure door-to-door collection of April No No Yes Yes
segregated waste. 2018
Transportation in covered vehicles April No No No NA
to processing or disposal facilities. 2018
Ensure separate storage, collection April No No No No
and transportation of construction 2018
and demolition wastes.
Setting up solid waste processing April No No Yes Yes
facilities. 2018
Setting up Sanitary Landfill. No No No No

Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016)

From the above, it could be seen that the above facilities were yet to be created
even after a lapse of six years from the date of notification of SWM Rules. The
impact of non-implementation of mandatory activities for SWM are discussed
under various paragraphs in the Chapters III and IV of the Report.

2.1.4 Non-inclusion of mandatory activities under Construction
and Demolition Waste in Action Plan

As per SWM Rules, 2016, the local bodies were to ensure that construction and
demolition wastes had to be separately collected, stored, processed and safely
disposed. Further, the Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules,
2016 (C&D Rules) state that a separate policy for management of C&D waste
to be formulated by the UTP within 12 months from the date of notification.
The site for processing C&D waste has to be identified and the facility has to be

commissioned within 18 months.

11]

No

No

No

No

No

No


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

However, the above mandatory activities were not included in the Action Plan
for implementation. As such the said facilities were yet to be created even after
a lapse of six years from the notification of the said rules.

In reply, Government stated that strenuous efforts are being taken to create the
required infrastructure for SWM and the projects are in different stages of

implementation.
2.1.5 Non-availability of strategies for waste reduction, reuse and
recycling

As per the SWM Manual 2016, Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM)
is closely linked to the 3R approach (reduce, reuse and recycle), which
preliminarily emphasises the importance of waste reduction, reuse and recycling
over other forms of waste processing or management. As per Rule 15(zg) of
SWM Rules, the ULB should create public awareness for minimising waste
generation and reusing waste to the extent possible. The various waste
reduction strategies as narrated in SWM Manual are (i) Extended Producer
Responsibility! (EPR), (ii) Decentralised waste management systems and
(iii) Integration of informal sector.

However, it was observed that the above strategies were not included either in the
State Policy or Action Plan of the UTP. Thus, the absence of management policy
incorporating the ‘3Rs’ was a critical omission. Controlling the generation of
waste at source was needed to ensure optimal usage of SWM facilities.

2.1.5.1 Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)

Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) is a policy approach wherein a

producer is held responsible for the post-consumer stage of a product, typically
for defined tasks of separate collection (e.g., for e-waste or hazardous waste
components), reuse (e.g., disposal-refund systems for bottles), recycling
(e.g., for used cars) and storage and treatment (e.g., for batteries).

As per Action Plan on elimination of single use plastic prepared in
September 2021, there were 24 plastic production units and 15 plastic waste
processing units functioning in UT of Puducherry. However, no policy/plans
were made by the Government to implement EPR in the UT of Puducherry.

In reply, Government stated that considering the complexity of different grades
of plastic being available in the market, CPCB has to devise a system to bind
the plastic manufacturers under EPR and to find a strategy to reduce the waste.

“Extended Producer Responsibility” (EPR) means responsibility of any producer of
packaging products such as plastic, tin, glass and corrugated boxes, etc., for
environmentally sound management, till end-of-life of the packaging products.

12


Chapter 2: Planning and Financial Management

Further, waste pickers will be integrated and engaged in solid waste
management in future.

2.1.5.2 Non-integration of informal sector in waste management

Section 1.2.4 of the SWM Manual, 2016 envisages integration of the informal
sector such as Self-help Groups or Co-operatives in the solid waste management
to capacitate them to work as entrepreneurs in a business entity.

As per Section 2.3.7 of SWM Manual, 2016 the Municipalities are required to
engage authorised waste pickers in solid waste management including
door-to-door collection and segregation of waste in material recovery facility or
secondary storage facility.

The Audit examination of engagement of informal sector including waste
pickers in SWM in UTP revealed the following deficiencies.

> The ULBs are yet to fully identify and engage informal sector in SWM
as required under the SWM Manual, 2016.

> Though Oulgaret Municipality had registered 62 waste pickers, they
were not engaged in door-to-door collection or in segregation of waste.
In contrary, it was observed that the waste pickers were collecting
recyclable articles from unsegregated waste dumped at Kurumbapet
dump yard. As a result neither there was reduction of recyclable wastes
reaching the dumpsite nor upgradation of the livelihood of the waste

pickers, which was the main aim of utilisation of their services.

A waste picker was crushed to death by the garbage vehicle in April 2019 at
Kurumbapet dumpsite. The Waste pickers working within the dumpsite of
Kurumbapet dump yard wherein unsegregated wastes were being dumped
would only result in health hazards to the waste pickers.

In reply, Government stated that waste pickers would be integrated and engaged
in solid waste management in future.

2.2 __ Financial Management
2.2.1 Allocation and utilisation of funds

In UT of Puducherry, the funds for recurring expenditure towards collection and
transportation of solid waste are met from the budget provision of LAD and
capital expenditure towards creation of SWM projects are met from Swachh
Bharat Mission - Urban (SBM-U). The details of funds received and expended
during the period 2017-2022 are given in Table 2.2.



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Table 2.2: Fund allocation and utilisation
@ in crore)

Amount
released
under budget

of LAD

2018-19

2020-21 38.90

* Funds released from 2015-16 to 2017-18
(Source: Local Administration Department, Puducherry)

2.2.2 Non-availing of Gol funds under SBM-U

Swachh Bharat Mission - Urban (SBM-U) is a centrally sponsored scheme
launched in October 2014 with an objective to improve the level of cleanliness
in urban areas with a mission period upto March 2021. Modern and scientific
solid waste management was one of the components under SBM-U. This
included systematic process of waste segregation at source, primary collection,
storage, secondary segregation, processing, treatment and final disposal of solid
waste. The projects under SBM-U would receive Gol incentive of 35 per cent
and the remaining 65 per cent would be borne by the UT.

Accordingly, out of the total outlay of ¥ 49.40 crore earmarked for 2015-21
under SBM, (Gol Share - हैं 17.30 crore; UTP Share - हैं 32.10 crore) for SWM
projects, UTP had availed हैं 10.93 crore of Central share. As against the
proportionate UTP share of हैं 20.32 crore, the UTP had released only
% 8 crore as of March 2022. The UT Government had to identify the projects

relating to scientific disposal of wastes. However, except Bio-mining at
Kurumbapet dumpsite, no other project was taken up under SBM. In spite of
the need for other SWM projects viz., Material Recovery Parks, Sanitary
Landfills, etc., and despite availability of funds, the said projects were still under
DPR stage (March 2023).

As the Mission period ended in March 2021 and the UTP could not finalise the
requisite projects within the Mission period, the UTP had to forgo the
opportunity to avail Gol funds to the tune of हैं 6.37 crore. Further, non-
execution of projects had resulted in unspent balance of हैं 14.36 crore as of
March 2022.

14


Chapter 2: Planning and Financial Management

In reply, the Government stated that as the SWM projects are under various
stages of implementation, funds allocated for that purpose are utilised in phased
manner.

2.2.3 Collection of user fee

As per Rule 4(3) read with Rule 15(f) of SWM Rules, 2016, the ULBs should
prescribe from time-to-time user fee as deemed appropriate and collect the fee
from the waste generators. Further, as per Section 1.4.5.6.3(b) of SWM Manual
“User charges’ were to be levied for collection and safe disposal of waste from
those responsible for waste generation. The variable rate may be prescribed for
different categories of waste generators in proportion to the quantity of waste
generated viz., households, commercial/industrial waste generators and bulk
waste generators such as hotels, function halls and large commercial
establishments, etc.

Accordingly, the ULBs had notified (February 2019) orders for levying the user
charges for generating solid waste. Accordingly, the user charges were
calculated based on the floor area and incorporated in the demand raised for
Property tax in case of residential buildings and demand raised for fees to be

paid for grant or renewal of Trade licences for the commercial activities carried
out in the commercial establishments. It was observed that the ULBs did not
collect user fee on a regular basis from households and institutions in their
jurisdiction. The collection efficiency of user fee against the actual demand in
respect of residential building by ULBs ranged from one to 64 per cent during
the year 2021-22 as depicted in Table 2.3.

Table 2.3: Collection of User Fee

Percentage

Number of

Demand | Collection Balance of
assessments

collection

Municipality

Oulgaret 57,066 261.10 166.61 94.49 64
9,321 49.06 0.66 48.40

(Source: Local Administration Department, Puducherry)
In respect of the commercial establishments, it was observed that the ULBs did
not have any mechanism in place to ensure that user fees were raised and

collected. On this being pointed out, it was stated that the user fee were being
collected only during the grant or renewal of Trade licence. However, no

information as to how much user fees were collected from these establishments



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

under the respective ULBs was produced to Audit. As such the amount of user
fee collected through grant or renewal of trade licence could not be quantified.

In reply, the Government stated that ULBs are taking sincere efforts to collect
the pending amount from the public and suitable mechanism will be evolved to
collect user fee from commercial establishments.

2.2.4 Non-execution of works under Smart City Project

Under the Smart City Project of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the
Puducherry Municipal Area was selected (March 2017) for enhancement of
quality of life by improving smart civic infrastructure. The Puducherry Smart
City Development Limited (PSCDL) established (September 2017) for this
purpose, proposed various schemes which included SWM projects at an
estimated cost of ¥ 22.13 crore as depicted in Table 2.4.

Table 2.4: Projects proposed under Smart City
@ in crore)

0. Name of the project nctioned
Cos

2. ICT on solid waste management (sensor-based bins)

eT

(Source: Smart City DPR, 2017)

However, even after lapse of more than five years of formation for creation of
various infrastructure projects which included the above SWM projects, the
projects are yet to be taken up till date (December 2022). As such, funds
released against the sanctioned amount of € 22.13 crore meant for these SWM
projects had been parked in bank by the PSCDL for more than four years
resulting in deprival of facilities identified under Government of India funding.

In reply, the Government stated that the issue will be taken up with Smart City
Mission and necessary action will be taken to avail the funds for implementation
of the projects.

2.3 Conclusion

The policy framework for SWM and the Action Plan prepared in 2021, lacked
actual assessment of wastes generated and hence, the objective of strategy and
planning of solid waste management in ULBs commensurating with generation
of waste stands defeated. The State Policy prepared for SWM did not include

16


Chapter 2: Planning and Financial Management

the preferential order of waste management. Further LAD/ULBs had not
prepared short-term or long-term plans for adopting a systematic approach for
SWM. Even after a lapse of six years of notification of SWM Rules, mandatory
infrastructures for SWM are yet to be created. The UTP is yet to implement
Extended Producer Responsibility and integrate informal sector in SWM. The
UTP had forgone the opportunity to avail Gol funds to the tune of % 6.37 crore
due to non-finalisation of requisite projects. Non-execution of projects had
resulted in unspent balance of % 14.36 crore as of March 2022. The ULBs had
a pendency of % 3.78 crore towards collection of user fee for SWM. Funds to
the tune of % 22.13 crore released under Smart City Mission had been parked in
bank account for more than four years due to non-finalisation of projects.

2. Recommendations

. The Government should assess the quantum of actual waste generated
in the UT of Puducherry to estimate and create appropriate facilities for
waste management.

. The Government should prioritise the ‘3Rs’ viz., reduction, reuse,
recycling of waste for implementing preferential order of solid waste
management.

. The Government should ensure engagement of informal sector in SWM
as required in SWM Rules, 2016.

. The Government should evolve a mechanism for periodical collection

of user fee from commercial establishments.

. The Government should take immediate steps for identification and
implementation of projects for which funds have been sanctioned under
SBM-U and Smart City Projects.



CHAPTER 3

SEGREGATION,
COLLECTION AND
TRANSPORTATION OF
WASTE


R 3: SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND

WAST

The ULBs were entrusted with SWM activities viz., segregation,
collection, transportation, processing and safe disposal. However, it
was found that in three out of five ULBs of UT of Puducherry, there
was no system for segregation of waste at the first point of door-to-
door collection from the households and commercial establishments.

In Puducherry Municipality, there was a proposal to establish three
resource recovery facility under Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) funding. However, the one resource recovery facility created
was not functional due to non-availability of dry waste and other two
facilities were not created till date which had resulted in 12 TPD of
dry waste being dumped in the dumpsite.

During joint physical verification conducted by Audit in PUAA and
Yanam, it was noticed that the handcarts, tricycles, Light commercial
vehicles (mini trucks) utilised for collection of waste were not suitably
partitioned for collection of segregated wastes.

SWM Manual mandates that the work force involved in handling of
Solid Waste should utilise personnel protection equipment viz., masks,
hand gloves etc. However, joint field visit revealed that majority of the
work force involved in manual handling of waste were not using the
protective equipment as required.

The responsibility of ULBs associated with solid waste management includes
various municipal tasks viz., segregation, collection, transportation, processing
and safe disposal of wastes. The successful implementation of solid waste
management requires that all the waste generated should be properly and fully
collected at source. Thereafter, the collected waste should be transported an
scientifically processed in accordance with the principles of reduce, reuse and
recycle. The inert material remaining after processing has to be safely disposed.
In all the five ULBs in UT of Puducherry, door-to-door collection an
transportation of solid wastes were entrusted to private concessionaires. As per
the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), the concessionaire shall bring al
the necessary equipment and deploy required manpower at his own cost to carry
out the services in an effective and efficient manner. The effectiveness of

implementation of various municipal tasks analysed in Audit are discusse

below:

19



PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

n ite

3.1 Segrega'

The Rule 4(a) of SWM Rules states that it is the duty of the waste generator to
segregate and store the waste generated by them in three separate streams
namely bio-degradable, non-biodegradable and domestic hazardous wastes in
suitable bins and handover segregated wastes to authorised waste pickers or
waste collectors. Further, as per Rule 15 of SWM Rules, the ULB is responsible
for arranging door-to-door collection of segregated solid waste from all
households, including multi-storied buildings, large commercial complexes,
malls, housing complexes, etc.

During the audit period, from 2017-18 to 2021-22, out of the five Municipalities
only in two Municipalities viz., Karaikal and Mahe, the segregation of waste at
source was done. In Karaikal, segregation at source was carried out through an
elaborate Information, Education and Communication (IEC) action plan which
forms the part of their contract. In Mahe Municipal area, all the bio-degradable
wastes were used by the households themselves for kitchen garden manure and
only non-biodegradable wastes were collected by the concessionaire. In the
remaining three Municipalities viz., Puducherry, Oulgaret and Yanam, the
mixed municipal wastes were dumped at dumpsite without segregation as

discussed in the following paragraphs.
3.1.1 Non-segregation of wastes

In order to improve the solid waste management service in PUAA, a concession
agreement with a concessionaire viz., M/s Swachatha Corporation was entered
on 20 May 2015 by PUDA for a period of 10 years. As per the agreement, the
concessionaire was to collect Municipal Solid Waste within the PUAA from
households, community dustbins and open waste collection sites in the
concession area and to transfer it to the designated site at Kurumbapet.
The tipping fee! for collection and transportation of solid waste was fixed as
% 1,782 per tonne with an increase of five per cent every year. The
concessionaire started the collection of waste from September 2015. In this
connection, Audit observed the following:

> As per Rule 4(1) and 7(1) read with Schedule II of MSW Rules, 2000,
segregation of waste at source was the responsibility of the ULBs/LAD.

Accordingly, the Terms of Reference forming part of the Tender for
Concessional agreement stipulated that the role and responsibilities of
the concessionaire would include ‘segregation of solid waste

Tipping fees shall mean the amount payable per tonne of waste collected and
transported in compliance with the terms and conditions of this agreement to
designated site.

20


Chapter 3: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste

Vv

(Bio-degradable and non-biodegradable, etc.) at source, wherever
possible, at the points of primary and secondary storage’. However, the
clause fixing the responsibilities for segregation of solid waste at the
source level was not included in the final agreement entered with the
concessionaire. The reason for such an omission was not kept on record.

In the meantime, Gol revised the SWM Rules in April 2016, with an
emphasis for segregation of wastes at the time of door-to-door collection
of Solid waste from the households and commercial establishments
within two years from the date of notification i.e., April 2018 onwards.
Despite the same, segregation of waste was yet to be carried out in
PUAA even after a lapse of five years (March 2023).

In 2018, NGT suggested that all States/UTs shall mandatorily comply
with the SWM Rules regarding segregation of solid waste at source. In
spite of the above developments, the State Policy (August 2018) and
Action Plan (2021) did not contain any methodology to ensure collection
of segregated wastes by ULBs. Further, PUDA had not taken any
concrete action for collection of segregated waste by amending the
agreement with concessionaire. Hence, the concessionaire continued to
collect the unsegregated waste and dumped the same at Kurumbapet
dumpsite since September 2015 to till date (March 2023).

Meanwhile, as per the request of LAD (November 2019), the
concessionaire agreed and deployed five vehicles exclusively for
collection and transportation of segregated waste wherever possible.
However, it was observed that even the minimum collected segregated
waste was again dumped along with the mixed waste, as there were no
processing facilities available at the dumping yard.

Based on the results of analysis of water sample collected by PPCC from
four places in and around the dumpsite at Kurumbapet in October 2020,
PPCC instructed the Puducherry and Oulgaret Municipalities to take
appropriate action for segregation of solid wastes as the parameters of
the water samples were above the prescribed limit due to leachate”
formation. However, ULBs/LAD/PUDA did not take any action for
segregating the waste before transportation to dumpsite, even after a
lapse of more than two years.

During the joint field survey conducted by Audit in the selected wards

of PUAA, it was noticed that 74 per cent of households did not carry out

“Leachate” means the liquid that seeps through solid waste or other medium and has
extracts of dissolved or suspended material from it.

21


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

segregation of waste. Similarly, in Yanam source segregation was not
carried out by 56 per cent of households surveyed.

Pictures 3.1 and 3.2: Unsegregated waste dumped at Kurumbapet dumpsite

> Similarly, in Yanam, though a concessionaire was engaged for waste
collection, no source segregation was done. Consequently,
unsegregated waste was dumped in the dumpsite as there were no
processing facilities as discussed in paragraph 4.2.2 of this report.

Thus, due to non-emphasising of segregation of wastes, the first and foremost
activity in the hierarchy of integrated solid waste management was not
implemented in PUAA and Yanam evenafter the lapse of four years from the
deadline specified for stoppage of collection of unsegregated waste.

In reply, Government stated that action is being taken to setup Material
Recovery Facility’ (MRF) in Puducherry and Yanam region through
concessionaires. On setting up of MRF, segregation of waste would be insisted
on the public. The reply was not acceptable as it is enforced by SWM Rules to
insist on segregation at source. The contamination of ground water at
Kurumbapet is a pointer for the necessity to insist on segregation of waste
immediately and not wait for MRF to be setup.

3.1.2 Non-utilisation of services rendered under Corporate
Social Responsibility

The Godrej Consumer Products Limited, under its Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) initiative proposed to establish an Integrated Solid Waste
Management model in Puducherry Municipal Region. The project envisaged,
diverting of dry waste resource to Material Recovery Facility, thereby reducing
the waste ending up at landfills. Accordingly, PUDA along with Puducherry

Material Recovery Facility means a facility where non-compostable solid waste can be
temporarily stored to facilitate segregation, sorting and recovery of recyclable waste.

22


Chapter 3: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste

Municipality entered into a tripartite agreement with Recity Network Pvt. Ltd.,
Mumbai in November 2020. As per the agreement, Recity Network Pvt. Ltd.
prepared a DPR and projected that out of the 170 TPD waste generated in
Puducherry Municipality, 12.92 TPD was dry/non-biodegradable waste and
hence proposed for installation of three Sanitation Parks of each 4-5 TPD at
different locations at an estimated cost of < 1.34 crore. The land for the same
would be provided by the Municipality. The project after completion would be
handed over to the Puducherry Municipality for its continued operation.

As a pilot project, Recity Network Pvt. Ltd. established a 5 TPD Recovery Park
at Vambakeerapalayam in June 2021 at the land provided by Municipality. The
project required segregated waste collected by the existing facilitator
(Swachatha Corporation) in Puducherry Municipality to be diverted to the
Recovery Park for the processing. While the segregated high value plastic

would be sold to recyclers, the low value plastic would be diverted to end-life
solutions, viz., cement kilns/incinerators.

However, Audit noticed that the waste required for processing could not be
supplied to Recity Network Private Limited as only unsegregated waste was
collected at source level. As such the facility created in June 2021 could not
achieve its intended objectives and same is being operated through waste
procured from recyclers. Further, the PUDA had also not taken efforts to
establish the two other recovery parks. As a result, 12 TPD of dry waste was
being dumped in the dumpsite, besides payment of tipping charges of
& 2,507/Tonne to Swachatha Corporation. This would also result in further
expenditure of हैं 770/Tonne to M/s Zigma Global Environ Solution Private
Limited, towards clearance of legacy waste through Bio-Mining as discussed in
paragraph 4.1.1. Thus, non-diversion of dry waste to the facility created and
non-establishment of two other facilities had resulted in avoidable liability of
% 50.54 lakh* for bio-mining.

In reply, Government stated that action is being taken to identify suitable site
for setting up the other two processing plant and on setting up the same, plastic
waste will be processed, thereby reducing and recycling the waste. However,
the fact remains that even after a lapse of more than two years from entering
into agreement with the concessionaire, the objective of setting up of processing
facility could not be achieved, besides inability of the Government to take
advantage of the CSR funding.

4 = 770 x 547 days x 12 tonnes.

23


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

३.2 Collection ० ste

The SWM Manual states that containerised handcarts are suitable for door-to-
door collection of solid wastes from households, shops and establishments from
narrow lanes and also for collection of street sweepings. Handcarts should have
provision for collecting segregated waste i.e., containers with green for wet
waste and blue for dry waste.

During joint physical verification conducted by Audit in PUAA and Yanam, it
was noticed that the handcarts, tricycles, light commercial vehicles
(mini trucks) were utilised for collection of waste. However, it was noticed that

the above vehicles were not suitably partitioned for collection of segregated
wastes.

Pictures 3.3 and 3.4: Transportation of waste in unpartitioned vehicles

Thus, it was evident that only unsegregated wastes were being collected and
transported to dumpsite. Even if segregated wastes were collected, the same
could not be transported separately which resulted in dumping as mixed waste.

Picture 3.5 and 3.6: Segregated waste transported together in Puducherry

As per Rule 15(b) of SMW Rules, the Municipality shall arrange for door-to-
door collection of segregated solid waste from all households including slums

and informal settlements, commercial, institutional and other non-residential

24


Chapter 3: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste

premises. As per provision 1.4.5.6.3(d) of SWM Manual, the Municipality
should collect waste from residential and non-residential areas on day-to-day
basis and from bulk generators on demand basis.

In Mahe, bio-degradable waste was disposed by the households through their
own compost facilities. The other commercial establishments like hotels,
disposed food waste through tie-ups with nearby pig farms. As such only the
non-biodegradable wastes were being collected once in a month through a
concessionaire and the same was processed and disposed through MRF located
at Palloor.

As per Rule 4(1)(b) of SWM Rules, 2016, every waste generator shall wrap
securely the used sanitary waste like diapers, sanitary pads, etc., in the pouches
provided by the manufacturers of these products or in a suitable wrapping
material as instructed by the local authorities and shall place the same in the bin
meant for dry waste. Further as per Rule 4(2), no waste generator shall throw,
burn or burry the solid waste generated by him.

In order to ascertain the SWM by commercial bulk producers viz., Hotels and
Convention centres operated in the Mahe Municipal Area, a Joint Inspection
was conducted by Audit. During the inspection, it was noticed that, since the
non-biodegradable waste was collected only once in a month, the commercial
operators resorted to burning of waste in their open yards or dumped in the back
yards.

Further, during household survey conducted by Audit in Mahe, it was observed
that the Municipality did not collect the sanitary wastes from the household and
hence majority of the surveyed households (86 per cent) burnt the sanitary
wastes. This resulted in emission of toxic gases which would cause hazardous

impact on environment.

Pictures 3.7 and 3.8: Waste dumped and burnt in the back yards in Mahe

25


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

3.

on

‘anspor

Section 2.3.2 of SWM Manual stipulates for maintaining a well synchronised
collection and transportation system, with regular and well communicated
intervals of operation to avoid overflow/spillage and littering of waste. For this
purpose, vehicles need to be covered and provided with two separate containers

or a single container with an effective partition.

However, it was observed during Joint Physical Verification in PUAA, that the
vehicles used for transportation, except compactors, did not have covering
facility while transporting the waste to dumping yard leading to spillage of
waste. In Yanam, only open vehicles were used for transportation of wastes to
dumping yards.

|
|

Picture 3.9 and 3.10: Waste transported in uncovered vehicles in PUAA and Yanam

In reply, Government stated that action will be taken to ensure partition and

cover the vehicle used for collection and transportation of waste.

As per Rule 15 (zd) of SWM Rules, the ULB has to ensure that the operator of
a solid waste management facility provides personal protection equipment
including uniform, fluorescent jacket, hand gloves, raincoats, appropriate foot

wear and masks to all workers handling solid waste and ensure that the same
are used by the workforce. As per SWM Manual, manual handling of wastes is
prohibited. However, if unavoidable due to constraints, manual handling should
be carried out under proper precautions with due care for health and safety of
workers. They should be subject to periodic health checks and should be
provided with social security benefits including health insurance.

It was observed during Joint field visit in PUAA, that though the majority
of the work force were involved in manual handling of waste, they
were not using protective equipment particularly mask, gloves and boots.

26


Chapter 3: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
Further, during joint field survey, the 29 per cent of public surveyed stated that
the sanitary workers did not use protective equipment. Thus, the non-utilisation
of protective equipment had put the workers at risk with the possibility of being
exposed to health hazards especially in view of collection of non-segregated
domestic hazardous waste.

FQeiGoTHAM to

cae wart

PR Beariza

Picture 3.11 and 3.12: Sanitary workers without protective equipment in PUAA

Conclusion

Out of the five Municipalities, only in two Municipalities viz., Karaikal and
Mahe, the segregation of waste at source was done. Though segregation of
waste was mandatory as per extant rules, PUAA and Yanam Municipality
continued to collect unsegregated waste. Non-establishment of two waste
processing facilities through CSR fund and non-diversion of dry waste to the
existing facility, had resulted in avoidable liability of ¥ 50.54 lakh for clearance
through bio-mining. The vehicles used for transportation of solid waste were
not suitably partitioned for collection of segregated wastes and were not
covered, In Mahe, since the non-biodegradable waste was collected only once
ina month, the households resorted to burning of waste. Though the work force
of SWM were involved in manual handling of waste, they were not using
protective equipment particularly mask, gloves and boots, thereby exposing
them to serious health hazards.

Re

mmendat

. The Government should fix responsibility on the concerned officials of
LAD for omission of Terms of Reference in the agreement entered with
the concessionaire regarding the role on segregation of waste at source

level.

27


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducheri

. The Government should ensure segregation of waste at source level and

prevent mixing of waste till its disposal, in order to comply with the
SWM tules and NGT orders.

. The Government should ensure transporting of waste to the existing
facility created under CSR fund and take further action to set up

remaining two facilities.

. The Government should ensure vehicles used for collection and
transportation of waste must be partitioned and covered.

. The Government should include penal provisions in the agreement
(in line with Para 3(23) of the SWM Rules, 2016) entered with the
concessionaire for non-compliance with the rules on collection,

transportation and disposal of wastes.

28


CHAPTER 4

PROCESSING AND
TREATMENT OF SOLID
WASTE


CHAPTER 4: PROCESSING AND TREATMENT OF
SOLID WASTE

As per SWM Rules, ULBs have to set up sanitary landfills by
April 2019 and bio-remediation of old dumpsite by April 2021. The
concessionaire engaged for reclamation of land through bio-mining
had been paid हैं 12.27 crore for processing of legacy waste and
remediation of the land. However, the concessionaire has disposed of
only the legacy waste of around 77,916 tonnes but had not done
proportionate reclamation of land thereby got an undue benefit of
% 6.27 crore.

Though, SWM Rules stipulates that ULBs have to analyse the old
dumpsite for the bio-remediation, the 12 acre of land at
Karuvadikuppam in which dumping was stopped in the year 2011 was
not bio-remediated till date (March 2023).

The bio-methanation plant installed in Puducherry and Karaikal
Municipality at a cost of € 51.16 lakh was not functional due to non-
purchase of electrical generator and damages in the equipment.

The joint inspection at Kurumbapet dumpsite revealed that leachate
generated was allowed to stagnate around the dumpsite and flow over
the approach road thus the conditions of the dumpsite posed a threat
to the environment and human health.

In Puducherry Region, though the land for processing C&D waste was
identified, the processing facility was yet to be created. Consequently,
the concessionaire continued to dump the C&D waste along with the
other municipal waste at Kurumbapet dumpsite.

Similarly, the waste generated from the slaughtering of animals was
dumped along with Municipal Solid Waste at the dumpsite. This
practice poses a health hazard in that area.

4.1 Processing and Treatment

As per Rule 15(v) of SWM Rules, the ULB has to facilitate construction,
operation and maintenance of solid waste processing facilities and associated
infrastructure on their own or with private sector participation. As per SWM
Manual 2016 further reiterited that, the ULBs should adopt suitable technology

29


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducheri

for processing viz., recycling and recovery! for non-biodegradable, composting”

and Waste to energy* projects e.g. Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF), bio-
methanation’, incineration, etc., for treating biodegradable waste. The timeline
given for setting up solid waste processing facilities was two years from the
notification of SWM Rules, 2016 i.e., before 30 April 2018.

Further, in the matter of compliance of SWM Rules, 2000, NGT in its order
dated 5 February 2015 stated that UTP had failed to submit the requisite project
reports on establishment of municipal waste management plants despite
repeated orders. Further, in its order dated August 2018, NGT had directed all
the States to submit the Action Plan by October 2018 for compliance of all
mandatory activities listed in SWM Rules, 2016 and execute the same by
31 December 2019. However, it was noticed that there were no requisite waste
treatment facilities created in three® out of five ULBs in UT of Puducherry as
discussed below.

As against the total collected waste of 350 Tonnes per day (TPD), Puducherry
and Oulgaret Municipality (PUAA) had only one bio-methanation plant with
one TPD capacity as discussed in the succeeding paragraph 4.3.1. In Yanam,
no waste processing facility is available till date (March 2023). In Karaikal,
Resource Recovery Park (RRP) were created for recycling of non-
biodegradable waste and vermicomposting, windrows and bio-methanation for
treating biodegradable wastes. In Mahe, one MRF was created for recycling
non-biodegradable waste.

Though the ISWM hierarchy indicates that landfilling of municipal solid waste
is the least preferred option for solid waste, it was observed that entire waste of
366 TPD generated in PUAA and Yanam were being dumped in the dumpsite
resulting in clearance of the legacy waste through bio-mining as discussed in
subsequent paras.

In reply, Government stated that action was being taken to setup MRF along
with processing facilities in Puducherry and Yanam region through

concessionaires.

iodegradable waste to recover commercially valuable materials (e.g, plastic,
e-waste recycling).

Processing non-b
paper, metal, gl

Processing organic waste to recover compost (e.g. windrow composting, in-vessel composting,
vermi composting).
Recovering energy before final disposal of waste.

Process entailing enzymatic decomposition of organic matter by microbial action to produce
methane rich biogas.
Puducherry, Oulgaret and Yanam.

30


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

4.1.1 Bio-Mining

According to SWM Rule 15(zj), the ULB should investigate and analyse all old
open dumpsites and existing operational dumpsites for their potential of
bio-mining and bio-remediation and take necessary actions to bio-mine or
bio-remediate the sites. Further, as per Rule 15(zh) of SWM Rules notified in
April 2016, dumping of mixed waste has to be stopped by setting up of sanitary
landfills by April 2019 and bio-remediation of old dumpsite should be carried
out by April 2021.

It was noticed that NGT in its order dated August 2018, in the matter of non-
compliance of SWM Rules, 2016 and earlier rules, ordered that bio-mining of
legacy waste was to be carried out by March 2021 in the sites wherein

unsegregated wastes were dumped. Subsequently, the NGT in January 2019,
issued another order for creation of SWM facilities without any further delay.
Thereafter, the DPR for bio-mining of Kurumbapet dumpsite was finalised in
August 2020 and the work was awarded to M/s Zigma Global Environ Solution
Private Limited in June 2021.

4.1.1.1 Reclamation of Land through Bio-remediation and
Bio-mining at Kurumbapet dumping site

In the PUAA, mixed municipal solid waste of about 350 TPD was being
dumped at Kurumbapet Dumpsite to an extent of 23.6 acres in Puducherry from
July 2011. As of March 2020, legacy waste of 4,97,932 MT was accumulated
in the 21 acres of the dumpsite.

A Request For Proposal was floated in August 2019 for Reclamation of Land
and the work was awarded in June 2021 to M/s. Zigma Global Environ
Solutions, Erode at the rate of € 770 per tonne. As per the agreement conditions,
the payment has to be made based on weighment system of waste processed and
the release of payment shall be linked to the achievement of land reclamation.
The concessionaire commenced the work in December 2021. As of July 2022,
the concessionaire had processed 2,23,841 tonne and disposed 77,916 tonne of
waste, for which he was paid an amount of € 12.27 crore as of August 2022.

It was observed that, the concessionaire had disposed only 77,916 tonne of
waste for which he was eligible only for a payment of % 6 crore®, as the
processed waste of 1,45,925 tonnes was yet to be disposed from the dump yard.
This implies that the concessionaire had only processed the waste, but was yet
to reclaim the land as per the terms of the contract. Thus, the concessionaire was

6 77,916 tonnes x हैं 770.

31


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

extended an undue benefit of ¥ 6.27 crore towards un-disposed waste and un-

reclaimed land.

Pictures 4.1 and 4.2: Bio-mining at Kurumbapet dumpsite

Further, the dumping of segregated ignitable materials in the dumpsite would
be hazardous as it may cause fire accident which already occurred in
December 2016 and January 2018 at the dumpsite.

In reply, Government stated that suitable instructions would be issued to the
contractor for reclamation of the land as per the contract.

4.1.2 Non-clearance of legacy waste at Karuvadikuppam
dumpsite in Puducherry

As per Rule 15(zj) and (zk), ULB has to investigate and analyse all old
dumpsites for their potential of bio-mining or bio-remediation or it shall be
scientifically capped to prevent further damage to the environment.

Earlier, GoP had allotted (June 2002) 12 acres of land at Karuvadikuppam for
dumping the municipal solid wastes collected in PUAA. However, as per the
directions of the Hon’ble High Court, Chennai dated 24 July 2011, ULBs
stopped dumping waste at Karuvadikuppam and started dumping the waste at
Kurumbapet dumpsite from July 2011. Audit noticed that the old dump yard at
Karuvadikuppam is not capped or bio-remediated scientifically till date
(March 2023).

In March 2016, based on orders of NGT, a technical team from PPCC inspected
the site and observed that the land was dumped to the level of four meter depth
and approximately one lakh tonne of municipal solid waste was accumulated.
Further, on examination of the dumped wastes, it was noticed that almost all
bio-degradable wastes have been decomposed due to natural process and only
dried plastic wastes combined with few inert materials like glass and ceramic
pieces were present throughout the site. As there were possibility of
contamination of ground water by leachate formation, based on NGT orders

32


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

5 April 2016, PPCC directed (April 2016) LAD to clean the Karuvadikuppam
dump yard within two months’ time.

Pictures 4.3 and 4.4: Old dumpsite at Karuvadikuppam

However, LAD had not taken any action to clear the site as directed by NGT
even after a lapse of more than six years. It was noticed that the impact of the
leachate formation was not analysed by PPCC. Further, it was noticed that the
Public Works Department (PWD) was operating a Sewerage Treatment Plant
(STP) adjacent to the dump yard and the sludge from the STP were being
unloaded in this site. Thus, contamination of dumpsite was allowed to be
continued by PUDA for more than 10 years without any remedial action.

In reply, Government stated that the issue will be looked into and necessary
action will be taken. The Government and the Local Body need to execute
remedial action on the lines suggested by PPCC.

4.1.3 Non-clearance of legacy waste at Karaikal and Yanam
dumpsites

In Karaikal, the unsegregated municipal solid waste is being dumped in
approximately 10 acre dump yard facility located at Paravaipet, Karaikal for the
past 30 years. Approximately 40 TPD is being dumped in the yard thereby
accumulating legacy waste, which was yet to be cleared. Though, as per NGT
orders, legacy waste has to be cleared by March 2021, the work order for the
same was issued only in March 2023 after a delay of two years.

Similarly in Yanam, unsegregated waste are dumped for the last 14 years at the
site identified in UKV Nagar, Yanam which is situated on Government
poramboke land categorised as water channel. Approximately 16 TPD was
being dumped in the yard thereby accumulating legacy waste and the proposal
for clearing the legacy waste was still at DPR stage (March 2023).

In reply, Government stated that it has been proposed to clear the legacy waste
through the concessionaire who will be operating the MRF facility at Yanam.

33


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

The reply was not tenable as bio-mining was not part of the agreement entered
with the concessionaire and the said work cannot be carried out through them.

4.2 Recycling and Recovery

As per SWM Rule 15(h), the ULB shall setup material recovery facilities or
secondary storage facilities with sufficient space for sorting of recyclable
materials such as paper, plastic, metal, glass, textile. Section 3.1.1 of SWM
Manual states that recycling diverts a significant fraction of municipal,
institutional and business waste from disposal and thereby, reduces
environmental impacts like climate change and the burden on public authorities
to manage waste. Recycling can generate revenues, which result in reducing
overall costs for MSWM. According to the ISWM hierarchy, recycling is a
preferred waste management strategy after source reduction and reuse. Hence,
recycling systems should be adopted before planning for any waste processing
or treatment facilities.

However, out of the five municipalities, only in two municipalities viz., Karaikal
and Mahe, the MRF were created in January 2017 and October 2018
respectively. The non-creation of MRF in other Municipalities are discussed

below:
4.2.1. Non-setting up of material recovery park in PUAA

As per Rule 22 of SWM Rules, the timeline given for setting up solid waste
processing facilities was two years from the notification of SWM Rules, 2016
i.e., before 30 April 2018. In respect of PUAA, the unsegregated waste load
being dumped at Kurumbapet dumpsite as discussed in preceding paragraph
3.1.2. Moreover, no material recovery facility was created for recovering the
teusable/recyclable materials before dumping into the dumpsite.

In this connection, it was observed that, out of the 23.6 acres of dumpsite, waste
was filled in 21 acres. As such, an area of 2.6 acres was readily available with
PUDA for establishing processing unit and landfill. Despite, commencement
of bio-mining to dispose the legacy waste, the processing unit and landfill were
still at tender stage, due to which fresh waste was continued to be dumped over
the existing waste.

Further, as per the orders of NGT dated August 2018, in the matter of non-
compliance of Solid Waste Management Rules 2000 and 2016, the Solid waste

processing facilities were to be established by December 2019. Despite,
allocation of Gol grants under Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban (SBM-U) for
Solid Waste Management Projects, the processing facility was yet to be

34


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

established (March 2023). Further, as per NGT orders, the ULBs were liable
to pay a penalty of = 1 lakh for every month of delay, thereby implying a
potential liability of € 39 lakh till March 2023.

Pictures 4.5 and 4.6: Waste overflowing at Kurumbapet dumpsite

It was further observed that the clearance of legacy waste through bio-mining
was also not done as the fresh wastes were not treated and safely landfilled,
resulting in environmental deterioration. Further, there would be additional
financial burden of % 29.51 crore’ to the Government towards the expenditure
on clearing the fresh waste through bio-mining.

In its reply, Government stated that the tender for creation of MRF at
Puducherry is under finalisation. The fact, however remained that the same was
not finalised till date (March 2023).

4.2.2 Delay in setting up of Material Recovery Facility in Yanam

(i) In Yanam, approximately 16 TPD of unsegregated solid waste was being
collected door-to-door by engaging a concessionaire viz. Yanam Peoples
Voluntary Service Organisation for the period from April 2017 to
November 2021. The concessionaire was paid a flat rate of = 13.18 lakh per
month irrespective of quantum of waste collected. The scope of work was only
collection and transportation of unsegregated solid waste to the dumpsite
situated at UKV Nagar, Yanam.

Audit noticed that in September 2015, the State High Powered Committee had
decided to take-up the project for source segregation and composting.
Accordingly, the DPR for the project was approved in October 2019 for
% 3.32 crore and an amount of % 58 lakh was released for implementation of the
project.

The RFP for the project was called for thrice (January 2020, April 2020 and
May 2020). In the last tender floated in May 2020, out of the two tenderers

7 Quantity of wastes dumped from January 2020 to December 2022 = 350 TPD x 1,095 days x
हैं 770 5 हैं 29.51 crore.

35


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

participated, only one tenderer was qualified (September 2020) for financial bid
who quoted % 4,950 as tipping and processing fee per tonne and the same was
negotiated to = 3,903 per tonne (March 2021). However, LAD had opined that
the rate of = 3,903 was still on the higher side and hence cancelled the tender
(May 2021).

Subsequently, fresh tenders were called for in August 2021. Out of the three
tenderers, the lowest rate of हैं 4,969 per tonne quoted by M/s HR square,
Hyderabad was reduced to हैं 4,721 by negotiation (September 2021). The same
was accepted and the agreement with the lowest bidder was entered in
November 2021 for a contract period of 15 years. The scope of work included
collection, segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of waste at a flat
rate of = 4,721 per tonne as tipping fee, construction of sanitary landfill site for
र₹ 24 lakh, civil structures for हैं 47.63 lakh and Bio-methanation Plant for
% 80 lakh. The concessionaire had to develop these facilities within six-month
time from signing the agreement. The work of collection of waste and
transportation commenced from 08 December 2021. In this connection, Audit
observed the following:

> Though the technically qualified tenderer had quoted % 3,903 per tonne
during September 2020, the LAD had rejected the bid stating that the
tate was on higher side without any comparitive study of rates that

prevailed in neighbouring/adjoining municipalities. This failure had
resulted in accepting the higher rate of हैं 4,721 per tonne in the
subsequent tender which led in avoidable additional expenditure of
% 818 per tonne and this failure resulted in accepting additional
expenditure of = 94.23* lakh for the period from December 2021 to
March 2023 and would result an expenditure of = 10.60° crore to the

concessionaire at the end of contract period.

(ii) The work of ‘Integrated Municipal Solid Waste Processing Project on
Design, Build, Operate and Transfer (DBOT) basis at Yanam’ was awarded to
the concessionaire in December 2021 and the required processing facilities were
to be established by the concessionaire within six months i.e., June 2022.
However, the land for developing the project was identified by Yanam
Municipality belatedly in March 2023 due to which the processing facility was
not created. During the household survey conducted by Audit, it was observed
that majority of the households (56 per cent) were giving segregated waste to
the concessionaire, but the segregated waste was mixed with unsegregated

8 16 months x 24 TPD x 30 days x हें 818 (₹ 4,721-% 3,903).
° 15 years x 12 months x 30 days x 24 TPD x % 818.

36


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

waste and dumped together at the dumpsite thereby making the efforts of
segregation at the source level futile.

This forced the Department to pay हैं 1,190 additionally per tonne for the work
of collection and transportation, due to which the concessionaire is receiving
the entire payment, but without carrying out processing and scientific disposal
of waste as required under this agreement. Due to this omission, the
Municipality incurred wasteful expenditure of = 77.11 lakh'®, being the
difference in the cost of collection and transportation of waste with and without
processing for the past nine months i.¢., from July 2022 to March 2023.

&

4

Pictures 4.7 and 4.8: Dumpsite at UKV Nagar, Yanam

Delay in handing over the land for development of processing facilities would
also result in unsegregated wastes being dumped in the dumpsite and additional
financial burden of = 49.90 lakh!! towards excavating the legacy waste through
bio-mining.

As per NGT order, the Municipality was liable to pay a penalty of = 1 lakh per
month for dumping the waste without processing. Thus, delay in handing over
of land and developing processing facilities had resulted in avoidable
expenditure of % 56.45 lakh (for six months).

In reply, Government stated that the land for setting up of MRF at Yanam has
been identified and handed over to Municipality with instructions to commence

the work immediately.

3 Com

Rule 15 (v) of SWM Rules 2016 envisages that bio-degradable waste be
processed, treated and disposed of through suitable technologies viz.,

10 9 months x 30 days x 24 TPD x % 1,190 (₹ 4,721-% 3,531) (rate adopted for without
processing).
un 9 months x 24 TPD x 30 days x हैं 770.

37


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

composting, bio-methanation, conversion of waste to energy ete. Composting is
controlled decomposition of the organic matter.

In this connection, it was observed that though 181.24 TPD of bio-degradable
waste is generated in PUAA and Yanam, no facility has been created for
composting the same. In Karaikal, facilities viz, windrow and vermi compost
were established at MRF and the same is operational. In Mahe, bio-degradable
waste is used as compost by the households themselves. The other green waste
is collected by ULB and is processed through their compost plant.

Good Practice
In Karaikal and Mahe, the facilities created for vermicomposting were functional and
the public.
छा "

Pictures 4.9 and 4.10: Vermicompost Sheds at Karaikal and Mahe

4.3.1 Bio-Methanation

As per SWM Manual 2016, Bio-methanation is one of the most technically
viable options for Indian municipal solid waste due to the presence of high
organic and moisture content. As per Rule 15(m) of SWM Rules, the ULB has
to collect waste from vegetable, fruit, flower, meat, poultry and fish market on
day-to-day basis and set up of decentralised compost plant or Bio-methanation
plant at suitable locations in the markets or in the vicinity of markets ensuring
hygienic conditions.

4.3.1.1 Non-functioning of Bio-Methanation plants

The Puducherry Pollution Control Committee (PPCC) extended
(February 2017) financial assistance of = 20 lakh each to Oulgaret Municipality
and Karaikal Municipality for installation of one TPD capacity Bio-methanation
plant. The project proposed for the disposal of the vegetables waste from the
markets, thereby reducing the quantity of waste to be transported to the
dumpsite. The processing of one tonne of vegetable waste in the plant would
generate 60-80 cu m of Methane gas which can illuminate 60 street lights
(150 w) for 10 hours.

38


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

Accordingly, the above two Municipalities decided to setup the plants at
Resource Recovery Park at Kurumbapet, Puducherry and Paravaipet, Karaikal.
Based on the same, bids were called for in June 2017 and work was awarded
(August and September 2017) to M/s. Alter Energy System, Madurai for an
amount of हैं 22.38 lakh and हैं 28.78 lakh for Puducherry and Karaikal
respectively to complete the works in 4 months. Due to delay in obtaining
electricity and water connection, the plants at Puducherry and Karaikal were
commissioned in June 2018 and October 2018 respectively.

Audit noticed that though the plant was commissioned in June 2018, the
Oulgaret Municipality had purchased the electrical generator required for
conversion of gas into electricity only in January 2022 after a delay of four
years. Further, street lights to be illuminated by the electricity produced from
the plant were yet to be installed in the yard. During the joint inspection made
by the Audit, it was seen that the Bio-methanation plant was in a damaged
condition and hence was not operational. As such the Municipality had
foregone an electricity savings of € 9.23 lakh”? (from June 2018 to March 2023).

Pictures 4.11 and 4.12: Bio-Methanation plant at Puducherry and Karaikal

In respect of Karaikal Municipality, the plant was also not functional due to
damages in the equipment which was confirmed during the joint inspection by
the Audit. Due to non-operation, both the plants installed at a cost of
र₹ 51.16 lakh were infructuous.

In reply, Government stated that the proposal for illumination of the dumpsite
through energy produced from the plant in Puducherry is under process and
same will be implemented in due course.

4.4 Sanitary landfill

As per Rule 3(40) SWM Rules, ‘sanitary landfilling’ means the final and safe
disposal of residual solid waste and inert wastes on land in a facility designed
with protective measures against pollution of ground water, surface water and
fugitive air dust. Further, as per Rule 22 of SWM Rules, ULB should stop

a 57 months x 30 days x 90 kw x % 6.

39


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducheri

landfilling or dumping of mixed waste within three years of the notification of

SWM Rules, i.e., April 2019 and only the non-usable, non-recyclable, non-
combustible wastes from waste processing facilities were to be filled in sanitary
landfill. The landfills are designed to minimise the impact of the waste on the

environment by containment of the waste.

However, in UT of Puducherry, no sanitary landfills was created in any of the
ULBs. In respect of PUAA and Yanam, there were no processing facilities set
up and the solid wastes were dumped in the open dumpsite without any sanitary
landfill. In Karaikal, though segregation and processing of waste was carried
out from November 2016 onwards, the residual inert waste was dumped over

the legacy waste due to non-availability of sanitary landfill. This would result
in avoidable additional expenditure of 2.03 crore! towards clearance of inert
waste through bio-mining.

In Mahe, only non-biodegradable wastes were collected and processed and no
sanitary landfill was available.

Thus, due to non-availability of sanitary landfill sites in any of ULBs, all the
ULBs disposed the waste in open grounds which was violation of SWM rules
and would also lead to ground water contamination due to leachate generation.

4.4.1 Status of dumpsites

As per Rule 3(20), ‘dumpsites’ means a land utilised by local body for disposal
of solid waste following the principles of sanitary land filling. The SWM Rules,
2016 stipulate that waste processing facilities were to be created and only the
inert wastes to be landfilled and the old dumpsites were to be rehabilitated by
bio-remediation or bio-capping within five years from the date of notification
of the Rules. In UT of Puducherry, there were three dumpsites in operation viz.,
in Puducherry, Karaikal and Yanam and no dumpsite was available at Mahe as
detailed below:

Table 4.1: Details of dump yards in UTP

Name of the Mu:
Puducherry

350 23.6
Oulgaret
Karaikal 40 10
Mahe 8 न
Yanam 34 1.5

18 Inert waste dumped during 2017-22: 26,427 tonne x = 770= @ 2.03 crore.

40


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

4.4.1.1 Present conditions of dumpsites in UT of Puducherry

As per Section 4.5.7 of SWM Manual, open solid waste dumpsites without an
engineered liner system, leachate collection system or an appropriately designed
cover system should be immediately closed to minimise their impact on land,
groundwater and surface water quality and on air quality in the vicinity of the
dumpsite. In this regard, Audit observed the following:

(9 Dumping of mixed waste in Kurumbapet dumpsite,
Puducherry

The dumping of solid wastes collected in PUAA was done at Kurumbapet
dumpsite in an extent of 23.6 acres for the past eleven years since July 2011
without segregation. As such, 1,27,750 tonne (350 tonne x 365 days) of
municipal solid waste are being dumped in the said dumpsite every year. In
December 2021, the department commenced the clearance of dumped legacy
waste and reclaim the land through bio-mining. Though bio-mining was to be
carried out as an onetime measure, fresh waste was continued to be dumped
over the legacy waste, thereby making the bio-mining a futile exercise.

Pictures 4.13 and 4.14: Dumpsite at Kurumbapet, Puducherry

(ii) Poor management of leachate in dumpsites at Puducherry
and Karaikal

As per Rule 16(4) read with Schedule I (D) (iii) of SWM Rules, provisions for
management of leachates including its collection and treatment shall be made.
In no case, leachate shall be released into open environment.

Pictures 4.15 and 4.16: Leachate flow from dumpsite at Puducherry

41


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

However, during the joint inspection of dumpsite at Kurumbapet, Puducherry it
was observed that the leachate generated was allowed to stagnate around the
dumpsite and flow over the approach road and around the dumpsite.
At the dumpsite in Paravaipet, Karaikal, though unsegregated wastes were

dumped for decades together, no leachate management facilities were available.

Further, the results of analysis of water sample collected from in and around the
dumpsite at Kurumbapet and Paravaipet in October 2020 by PPCC had revealed
that the parameters of the water samples were above the prescribed limit due to

leachate formation. Thus, it was evident that leachate had contaminated the

ground water and environment at the dumpsites of Puducherry and Karaikal.

(iii) Non-formation of buffer zone at dumpsites in Puducherry
and Karaikal

As per Rule 11(1) and Schedule I of SWM Rules, the ULB has to notify buffer
zone" for the solid waste processing and disposal of more than five tonnes per
day in consultation with the State Pollution Control Board. The guidelines
issued by CPCB clarified that as the practice of dumping of crude waste in the
dump yard is still being followed, maintenance of green belt of minimum
10 metres around the dumpsite is essentially required to protect people living in

the surroundings from exposure and impacts of pollutants.

Accordingly, in respect of PUAA, UTP had notified (February 2020) the buffer
zone by demarcating the area along the periphery of the existing dump yard in
Kurumbapet with the approval of PPCC. However, the required green belt with
necessary plants viz., babul, neem, etc., has not been created till date
(December 2022).

In respect of Karaikal, the required buffer zone is yet to be notified thereby

putting the nearby residents at risk of exposure to pollutants.

4 “Buffer zone” means zone of no development to be maintained around solid waste processing

and disposal facility, exceeding 5 TPD of installed capacity.

42


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

Picture 4.17: Aerial view of dumpsite at Kurumbapet, Puducherry

(iv) Dumping mixed wastes in water channel at Yanam

As per Schedule I (A) (vii), the dumpsite should be 100 metres away from river,
200 metres from a pond, Highways, habitations, public parks and water supply
wells.

In Yanam, the dumpsite was in Government poramboke land. Consequent on
the implementation of SWM Rules, the Yanam Municipality approached the
Revenue Department for transfer of land for setting up of the required solid
waste management facilities. The Revenue Department declined the request as
the same was categorised as water channel. However, Yanam Municipality
continued the dumping of waste for the past 14 years and dumped a quantity of
approximately 90,000 tonnes of mixed solid waste in the land categorised as
water channel. Audit noticed that PPCC had also issued annual authorisation
as a matter of routine for the dumpsite without ascertaining the ground reality.

In reply, Government stated that it has been proposed to clear the legacy waste
through the concessionaire who will be operating the MRF facility at Yanam.
The reply was not tenable as bio-mining was not part of the agreement entered

with the concessionaire and the said work cannot be carried out through them.

Improper disposal of Construction and Demolition V

As per Rule 15(s) of SWM Rules 2016 and Rule 6(4) C&D Rules 2016, the
construction and demolition waste were to be handled separately without
mixing up with municipal solid waste. The local bodies were to identify land
for collection and processing C&D waste within 18 months and establish and
make C&D waste processing plant functional within 24 months for cities from
the date of notification of the Rules.

43


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

However, it was noticed that UTP had not prepared separate policy for C&D
waste management even after a lapse of more than six years from the date of
notification of these rules.

In Puducherry region, it was noticed that the C&D waste was collected by the
concessionaire engaged for collecting the municipal solid waste. Though the
land for setting up of C&D waste processing facilities was notified
(January 2019), the concessionaire was not given suitable instruction for
dumping the C&D waste at the designated place. Consequently, the
concessionaire continued to dump the C&D waste along with other municipal
wastes in Kurumbapet dump yard. During the period covered in Audit,
230.25 tonnes of C&D waste was collected and dumped in the Kurumbapet

dumpsite. Ifthe wastes were dumped separately, the same could be utilised in
a profitable manner for construction purposes.

It is pertinent to note that, as the bio-mining is being carried at हैं 770 per tonne,
dumping of C&D waste along with the municipal waste would only result in
additional cost in disposing the same.

In respect of other ULBs, though land for setting up of processing facility for

C&D waste were earmarked, the same was yet to be notified and hence the C&D
waste processing facility could not be established so far.

Picture 4.18: Identified place for C&D at Picture 4.19: C&D Waste dumped at
Mettupalayam Kurumbapet
In its reply, the Government stated that a separate land has been identified for
dumping of C&D waste and facilities required as under the SWM Rules will be
created in due course.

ughterhouse w

As per Section 7.6 of SWM Manual, 2016, scientific processing and disposal of
slaughterhouse waste is essential to recover useful fractions and for safe
disposal of residual pathogenic biological waste. In absence of a proper

44


Chapter 4: Processing and Treatment of solid waste

slaughterhouse waste processing or disposal facility, ULBs could practice deep

burial of carcasses with adequate precaution.

It was observed that, except in Karaikal, slaughterhouse was not functional in
any of the ULBs and the slaughtering of animals for food were done in the
respective retail mutton/chicken/fish shops. The waste generated from these
shops were collected by the concessionaire and dumped along with the
municipal solid waste, thereby making unhygienic disposal of slaughterhouse

waste.

Thus, the ULBs, except Karaikal, failed to manage slaughterhouse waste
effectively, causing unhygienic conditions and contamination of environment,
besides possible threat to human health.

4.7__ Conclusion

As against the total collected waste of 350 TPD in PUAA, the Municipality had
created only one TPD waste processing facility and in Yanam no waste
processing facility was made available. The concessionaire deployed for
Bio-mining at Kurumbapet was extended an undue benefit of € 6.27 crore as he
was paid for undisposed waste and unreclaimed land. The old dump yard at
Karuvadikuppam was not capped or bio-remediated scientifically despite orders
of NGT, for more than six years. Though legacy waste had to be cleared by
March 2021, the project for the same at Karaikal was taken up only in
March 2023 and in Yanam the same was still at tender stage. Non-creation of
Material Recovery Facility in PUAA and Yanam, fresh waste was continued to
be dumped thereby defeating the process of clearing the legacy waste through
bio-mining. Though the work order for creation of MRF at Yanam was awarded
in December 2021, the land for establishing the MRF was handed over by the
municipality only in March 2023, resulting in wasteful expenditure of

र₹ 77.11 lakh towards processing and also resulted in continued dumping of
unsegregated waste. The Bio-methanation plants of 1 TPD each installed at
Puducherry and Karaikal at cost of ¥ 51.16 lakh were not functional. In UTP,
no sanitary landfills were created in any of the ULBs resulting in dumping of
waste in open ground leading to ground water contamination. Leachate
management facility and buffer zone were not available in any of the dumpsites.
Thus, non-compliance of SWM Rules, despite orders of NGT resulted in
continued dumping up of unsegregated waste in the dumpsite which coupled
with non-operation of the treatment plants had defeated the objective of
effective processing and treatment of the solid waste.

45


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

4.8 Recommend:

ons

° The Government should ensure collection of segregated waste and
establish Material Recovery Facility in PUAA and Yanam to avoid

dumping of fresh waste.

. The Government should ensure clearance of legacy waste at Puducherry,

Yanam and Karaikal dumpsite.

. The Government should ensure functioning of the bio-methanation plant

installed at Puducherry and Karaikal.

° The Government should ensure establishment of sanitary landfill and

leachate management facility to avoid ground water contamination.

46


CHAPTER 5

MONITORING


CHAPTER 5: MONITORING

The State Level Advisory Body (SLAB) constituted (November 2016)
as per SWM Rules conducted periodical meetings. However, SLAB
did not review the State Policy and strategy on SWM.

As per the agreement entered into for collection and transportation of
solid waste in PUAA, concessionaire had installed Global Positioning
System (GPS) in all the vehicles to monitor their movement. However,
neither PUDA nor the Municipalities had verified the log of the
vehicles before making the payment to the concessionaire.

Due to non-compliance of SWM Rules, the NGT had levied
Environmental compensation amounting to हैं 96 lakh for the period
April 2020 to December 2022. However, the amount was not claimed
by PPCC from the municipalities.

The analysis of quality of ground water in the dumpsites by Audit
through Pondicherry University revealed that the water quality was
poor and parameters such as TDS, chloride, iron, lead, etc., were

beyond permissible limit.

Monitoring by Apex Bodies

Section 6.1 of the SWM Manual stipulates that institutionalising appropriate
quality assurance systems is essential to ensure a continuous and efficient
Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) system. The performance of all
components of MSWM system, from collection to processing and disposal

should be monitored on a daily basis.
5.1.1 Monitoring by Local Administration Department

As per Rule 23 of SWM Rules, a State Level Advisory Body (SLAB) should be
constituted within six months from the date of notification of these Rules i.e.,
April 2016 by the Department in-charge of local bodies. The SLAB shall meet
at least once in every six months to review the matters related to implementation
of these rules, state policy and strategy on solid waste management and give
advice to State Government for taking measures that are necessary for

expeditious and appropriate implementation of these rules.

47


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

The SLAB was constituted in November 2016 and meetings were conducted
regularly and issues viz., management of plastic wastes, conducting awareness

programmes on segregation of wastes, etc., were discussed.

However, the State policy/action plan prepared by UTP for SWM did not
contain any strategy for implementation of their mandatory activities viz.,
segregation of waste at source, collection and transportation of segregated

waste, processing and scientific disposal as required under the SWM Rules.

Thus, though the State Policy was not comprehensive and the mandatory
activities were not carried out even after the lapse of timelines, the SLAB had
not seriously reviewed these issues and report to Government and PPCC for

taking necessary corrective action.

5.1.2 Non-functioning of GPS in vehicles used for waste
transportation

As per Clause 2(1)(15) of Agreement for collection and transportation of Solid
Waste in PUAA, the concessionaire has to make sure that all the vehicles
deployed for collection and transportation of Solid Waste has to be fitted with
Global Positioning System (GPS) to monitor their movement and generation of
Management Information System (MIS) reports on daily basis, failing which

suitable penalty will be imposed.

In this connection, it was noticed that the Swachatha Corporation engaged in
PUAA since 2015 had deployed 34 vehicles (compactors, tippers and trucks)
which were fitted with GPS. On scrutiny of the real-time log of the GPS
monitoring system, it was seen that GPS log could be viewed only for the latest
62 days and the log for previous period were not available for review. It is
pertinent to note that neither PUDA nor the Municipalities had verified the log
before passing the bills for payment to the concessionaire. On a further scrutiny
of the log for the period from 15 November 2022 to 10 January 2023, it was
seen that the GPS in respect of 12 vehicles were not functional and hence no log

was available.

This proved that the GPS fitted with vehicle were either not functional or even
if functioning, the date was not used for verification and payment of transport

charges to the concessionaire.

48


Chapter 5: Monitoring

The above instance shows lack of monitoring in the operation of the vehicles by
the competent authority, thereby defeating the very purpose of installing GPS

in these vehicles.

5.2 Monitoring by Puducherry Pollution Control Committee

5.2.1 Ineffective enforcement of SWM Rules

As per Rule 16 of SWM Rules, the Puducherry Pollution Control Committee
has to enforce these rules in UT of Puducherry through local bodies in their
respective jurisdiction and review implementation of these rules at least twice a
year in close co-ordination with concerned Directorate of Municipal
Administration or Secretary-in-charge of State Urban Development

Department.

However, it was noticed that even after a lapse of more than six years, the
required activities for compliance of SWM Rules in UT of Puducherry remained
unexecuted especially in three out of five Municipalities viz., Puducherry,
Oulgaret and Yanam. But PPCC failed to review and monitor the inaction of
LAD and the municipalities. To a specific query regarding the mechanisms
adopted for enforcing and reviewing implementation of SWM Rules, it was
replied by PPCC that SLAB was constituted in November 2016 and periodical
convening of meetings was reviewed. However, it was observed that SLAB
had not taken any concrete action for implementation of SWM Rules as
discussed in paragraph 5.1. Thus, the monitoring activities by the authorities

remained ineffective.
5.2.2 Non-levying of Environmental Compensation

Due to non-compliance of SWM Rules and directions of NGT even after the
expiration of the statutory timelines, NGT ordered all State/UT Pollution
Control Boards/Committees to levy Environmental Compensation (EC) for
continued failure after 31 March 2020. Accordingly, every Local Body was
liable to pay compensation at the rate of हैं 1 lakh per month from
01 April 2020 for non-compliance of SWM Rules and directions of NGT.

49


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Consequently, PPCC had levied EC of € 36 lakh' on ULBs of UT for non-
compliance of SWM Rules for the period from April 2020 to December 2020.
Out of these, only हें 9 lakh from one ULB was recovered by PPCC. Moreover,
the EC had to be levied on ULBs till compliance of SWM Rules. However,
though the ULBs had not complied with the requisite provisions till date
(December 2022), the PPCC had not levied EC for the period from January 2021

to December 2022 which worked out to an amount of % 96 lakh’.

Thus, the non-execution of requisite activities for solid waste management was

viewed seriously by NGT, but there were no significant change in complying

the provisions of SWM Rules due to laxity and ineffective monitoring.
5.2.3 Issue of improper authorisation for Dumpsite in Yanam

As per Schedule I (A)(vii) and (viii), the landfill site shall be 200 metres away
from water bodies. As per 16(1)(e) of SWM Rules, the PPCC shall issue
authorisation to the local body or an operator of a landfill facility stipulating
compliance criteria and environmental standards as specified in Schedules I and
Il of SWM Rules.

In Yanam, unsegregated waste were dumped for the last 14 years at the site
identified in UKV Nagar, Yanam which was situated on Government
poramboke land categorised as water channel. Despite the same, PPCC had
issued authorisation for operation of dumpsite, which was not in order.
Dumping of unsegregated waste on water bodies would only result in further

environmental deterioration.
In reply, Government stated that it has been proposed to clear the legacy waste
through the concessionaire who will be operating the MRF facility at Yanam.

5.2.4 Deficiencies in monitoring of environmental impacts

As per Rule 16 (1) (b) read with Schedule I and II of SWM Rules, the PPCC
has to monitor environmental standards for waste processing and disposal sites
maintained by the ULBs.

हें 1 lakh per month for nine months on four ULBs viz., Puducherry, Oulgaret,
Karaikal and Yanam.
रू 1 lakh per month for 24 months on four ULBs viz., Puducherry, Oulgaret,
Karaikal and Yanam.

50


Chapter 5: Monitoring

5.2.4.1 Ground water quality

As per Schedule I (E) (i) of SWM Rules 2016, before establishing any landfill
site, baseline data of ground water quality in the area shall be collected and kept
in record for future reference. The ground water quality within 50 metres of the
periphery of landfill site shall be periodically monitored covering summer,
monsoon and post-monsoon period to ensure that the ground water is not
contaminated. Usage of groundwater in and around landfill sites for any purpose
(including drinking and irrigation) shall be considered only after ensuring its
quality.

In UT of Puducherry, there are three sites’ for dumping of solid wastes. In Mahe

no dumpsite was available, as only non-biodegradable waste was collected and

processed through MRF.

In respect of PUAA and Karaikal, it was noticed that PPCC had not maintained
any baseline data of ground water quality of the dumpsites. Audit further
noticed that from 2017-22, the base line data was collected once in a year in
respect of one dumpsite viz., Kurumbapet (shared by Puducherry and Oulgaret
Municipalities). In respect of dumpsite in Karaikal, ground water quality was
analysed only once in September 2020. Thus, the maintenance of base line data
of water quality by UTP was not in conformity with the criteria fixed in SWM

Rules.

5.2.4.2 Ground water analysis by Audit

As stated in the previous para, the PPCC had not conducted periodical analysis
of quality of ground water in the dumpsites as required. Audit collected samples
of ground water from the dumpsites at Kurumbapet, Karuvadikuppam in
Puducherry and at Paravaipet in Karaikal and tested them through the Centre
for Pollution Control and Environmental Engineering, Pondicherry University.

The results of the same are as given below:

5 Each one at Puducherry (shared by Puducherry and Oulgaret Municipalities),
Karaikal and Yanam.

51


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

Table 5.1: Results of ground water analysis

‘pam लओ

2 Chloride (as Cl) 250 1,000 256.85 100.59 1,023.13
Total Hardness 348.33 1,036.67
(as CaCOs) mg/L
Total Arsenic (as < 0.05 < 0.05
As) mg/L
Total Chromium
(as Cr) relaxation

10. E.coli Shall not be Not detected Not 4 MPN

detected detected

Permissible Limit Beyond permissible limit

Based on the results, it could be observed that the ground water quality at
Paraivaipet, Karaikal was poor as the parameters viz., TDS, Chloride, Hardness,
Tron, Lead and Chromium were beyond the permissible limits. There was
presence of coliform and E. coli in the sample at Paravaipet dumpsite making
the water unfit for human consumption. Thus, it was evident that the continued
dumping of unsegregated waste had polluted the ground water around the
dumpsite, but the same was not monitored by the PPCC.

5.2.4.3 Ambient Air quality

As per the Schedule I (F) (iv) of SWM Rules, ambient air quality at the landfill

site and at the vicinity shall be regularly monitored. However, it was noticed

52


Chapter 5: Monitoring

that during the period covered in Audit, only in Kurumbapet dumpsite air
quality was regularly monitored. In respect of Karaikal dumpsite, the same was
monitored in 2020-21. In Yanam dumpsite, the air quality was not monitored
as prescribed in SWM Rules.

The Rule 15(zg) of the SWM Rule, stipulates that the ULBs have to create

public awareness through information, education and communication campaign
and educate the waste generators on various issues viz., (i) not to litter;
(ii) minimise generation of waste; (iii) reuse the waste to the extent possible;
(iv) practice segregation of waste into bio-degradable, non-biodegradable
(recyclable and combustible), sanitary waste and domestic hazardous wastes at
source; (v) handover segregated waste to waste pickers and (vi) pay monthly
user fee or charges to waste collectors or local bodies for sustainability of solid
waste management. ULBs should therefore plan for effective Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) campaign to minimise waste generation,

etc., and bringing of behavior change among public for waste management.

Regarding PUAA, as per the agreement with the concessionaire identified for
collection and transportation of solid wastes, the concessionaire should organise
and conduct public awareness programs. It was noticed that during the period
covered under Audit the concessionaire had conducted IEC activities on source
segregation, coordinating the residential welfare associations in four wards out

of 81 wards under PUAA. In Yanam, no IEC activities were conducted.

During Joint household survey conducted by Audit in PUAA and Yanam, all

the households covered in the survey replied that no IEC was carried out in their

locality.

Thus, due to inadequate IEC activities, intended benefits of IEC activities on

community participation and behaviour change could not be availed.

53


PA on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of UT of Puducherry

SWACTH BHARAT
॥॥॥॥ ROEM
"aH

Cia ६ पाक
कि tee

॥॥

Picture 5.1: Incorrect usage of bins for wet waste and dry waste

In reply, the Government stated that necessary IEC programmes will be carrie
out to ensure segregation of waste at source through behavioral change among
the public.

Good Practice

In Karaikal, the agreement included door-to-door collection of segregated
wastes and conduct of IEC activities for inculcating behaviour change among
public. Accordingly, the concessionaire had conducted awareness
programmes every month covering all kinds of waste generators. During the
survey conducted, 95 out of 125 persons (76 per cent) surveyed had informed
that regular awareness meetings were conducted in effective manner by the

concessionaire on source segregation.

Conclu:

mn

The State Level Advisory Board for SWM did not review the State policy and
strategy on solid waste management resulting in non-implementation of
scientific SWM methods mandated under SWM Rules. As such, the ULBs
became liable to pay ¥ 1 lakh per month towards environment compensation.
Payments were made to the concessionaire for transportation of waste without
verifying the GPS log of the vehicles. Even though, the Yanam dump yard was
located on water channel, PPCC had issued authorisation for the same which
was irregular. The ground water quality analysis near the dumpsites in
Puducherry and Yanam revealed presence of heavy metals and drinking water
parameters were beyond permissible limits. No air quality monitoring was done

in Yanam dumpsite. Due to inadequate IEC activities, there were no community

54


Chapter 5: Monitoring

participation towards segregation of waste in PUAA and Yanam. Thus,
non-compliance to the SWM Rules defeated the objective of effective

monitoring and evaluation of solid waste management system.

Recommendations

. The Government should ensure that PPCC installs a system of
continuous monitoring of water and air in and around the dumpsites so
as to take remedial action.

° The Government should encourage community participation and
strengthen IEC activities to ensure proper segregation and disposal of
waste.

Cop
Chennai (K.P. ANAND)
The 08 July 2024 Principal Accountant General (Audit-ID,
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry
Countersigned
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU)
The 24 July 2024 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

55


Glossary of abbreviations
Abbreviations Full form

C&D Construction & Demolition

CPCB Central Pollution Control Board

CSR Corporate Social Responsibility

DBOT Design, Build, Operate and Transfer
DPR Detailed Project Report

EC Environmental Compensation

EPR Extended Producer Responsibility

Gol Government of India

GPS Global Positioning system

IEC Information, Education and Communication
ISWM Integrated Solid Waste Management
LAD Local Administration Department

MIS Management Information System

MOU Memorandum of Understanding

MRF Material Recovery Facility

MSW Municipal Solid Waste

MSWM Municipal Solid Waste Management
NGT National Green Tribunal

NULM National Urban Livelihood Mission
EEC Puducherry Pollution Control Committee
PUAA Puducherry Urban Agglomeration Area
PUDA Puducherry Urban Development Agency

57


PSCDL Puducherry Smart City Development Limited
PWD Public Works Department
RDF Refuse Derived Fuel

RFP Request For Proposal

RRP Resource Recovery Park

SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SBM-U Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban
SLAB State Level Advisory Board
STP Sewage Treatment Plant

SWM Solid Waste Management

TDS Total Dissolved Solids

TPD Tonne per day

ULB Urban Local Body

UTP Union Territory of Puducherry