 
 
 
 
  
SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTION OF INDIA 
लोकिहताथŊ सȑ िनʿा 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Information Technology Audit of  
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha 
for the year ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 1 of the year 2025 
 
 
 
  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Information Technology Audit of  
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha 
for the year ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 1 of the year 2025  
  

 
 i 
 
Table of contents 
 Page 
 Number  
Table of contents ............................................................................ i 
Preface  ................................................................................... v 
Executive Summary .................................................................... vii 
Chapter I - Introdution 
1.1 Introduction .............................................................................................. 1 
1.2  System information and workflow ......................................................... 2 
1.3 Organisation Set Up................................................................................. 3 
1.4 Audit Objectives ....................................................................................... 4 
1.5 Scope of Audit .......................................................................................... 4 
1.6 Audit Sampling ........................................................................................ 5 
1.7 Audit Criteria ........................................................................................... 5 
1.8 Audit methodology ................................................................................... 6 
Chapter II - Project Management and Execution 
2.1 Absence of Agreement/ MoU with NIC for implementation of 
e-Procurement system ............................................................................. 7 
2.2 Non-implementation of key Modules of GePNIC ................................. 7 
2.3 Partial implementation of the e-tendering module ............................... 8 
2.4 Absence of master data management functionality for 
contractors, in e-Procurement system ................................................. 11 
2.5  Absence of integration with Works and Accounts 
Management Information System ........................................................ 12 
2.6 Absence of executive instructions to revise the threshold value 
for mandatory e-procurement .............................................................. 13 
2.7 Absence of functionality in the system to manage privileged 
bidders..................................................................................................... 15 
2.7.1 Wrongful selection of bidder .................................................... 15 
2.7.2 Awarding contract at a higher price ....................................... 16 
Chapter III - User Management 
3.1 Inadequate validation controls during registration of users .............. 17 
3.1.1 Registration of incorrect DSC/ mapping of same DSC 
with multiple bidders ................................................................ 17 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
 
 ii 
 
3.1.2 Absence of application control to verify the validity 
period of DSC used by bidders ................................................ 18 
3.2 Deficiencies in application control to correctly record PAN 
for registered bidders ............................................................................ 18 
3.2.1 Recording invalid PAN during registration of bidders ......... 18 
3.2.2  Mapping the same PAN to multiple user IDs during 
bidder registration .................................................................... 19 
3.2.3  Manual entry of incorrect PAN by bidders during 
submission of bids ..................................................................... 20 
Chapter IV - Tender Creation and Submission 
4.1  Deficiencies in the workflow for tender creation ................................ 23 
4.2  Absence of application control to enforce minimum period for 
submission of bids .................................................................................. 23 
4.3  Absence of application control to enforce two-cover process 
for tenders with value more than ₹50 lakh.......................................... 25 
4.4 Loss of tender fees due to absence of mapping of fees based on 
the tender value ...................................................................................... 26 
4.5 Deficiencies in computation of tender value ......................................... 27 
4.5.1 Deficiency in validation controls in BoQ template 
published in tenders .................................................................. 28 
4.5.2 Deficiency in processing controls to compute tender 
value based on BoQ ................................................................... 29 
Chapter V - Bid Creation and Submission 
5.1 Deficiencies in the workflow for creation/ submission of bids ........... 31 
5.1.1 Absence of application controls to prevent submission 
of bids after expiry of tender closing time .............................. 31 
5.1.2 Absence of validation controls to enforce chronological 
sequencing of actions ................................................................ 32 
5.2 Absence of application controls to prevent mapping of same 
mobile number to multiple bidders ...................................................... 32 
Chapter VI - Bid Opening and Evaluation 
6.1  Packet opening and bid decryption ...................................................... 35 
6.1.1  Risk of change in bid openers through manual 
intervention at the back end of the system ............................. 36 
6.1.2  Risk of modification of decrypted bid data through 
manual intervention at the back end of the system ............... 37 
Chapter VII - Award of Contract 
7.1  Award of Contract ................................................................................. 39 

Table of contents 
 
 iii 
 
7.1.1 Awarded value more than quoted amount ............................. 39 
Chapter VIII - Timestamp Management and Application 
Security 
8.1  Gap in sequential numbers in database tables .................................... 41 
8.2. Unreliable and incomplete user logs .................................................... 42 
8.3 Use of SHA1 instead of minimum SHA2 ............................................. 42 
8.4  Absence of provision for verification of digital signatures of 
bidders..................................................................................................... 43 
8.5  Maintenance of logs ............................................................................... 43 
8.5.1 Missing logs ................................................................................ 44 
8.5.2  Non Maintenance of DBA Logs ............................................... 46 
Chapter IX - Conclusion  
9.1 Conclusion .............................................................................................. 48 
Appendices 
Appendix-1 
Sampling   Methodology .................................................................... 51 
Appendix – II 
Statement showing discrepancy or missing logs of various 
datesin the events of record creation where there were 
missing sequences (gap) between two consecutive ID 
numbers of a table ..................................................................... 57 
Glossary of Abbreviations ........................................................................... 59 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
  

 
 v 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Information Technology Audit of e-Procurement System in Government 
of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Odisha under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India and under provisions of Section 19A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971, as amended from time to time, for being laid before 
the Legislature of the State.  
The audit was conducted to assess whether the e-procurement system has 
been effectively implemented and utilised to achieve the objectives of 
promoting competition, transparency and accountability; business rules 
have been adequately mapped onto the system; completeness, integrity, 
and reliability of data in the system was being maintained; and adequate 
controls have been built into the system. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 vii 
 
Executive Summary 
 
The State Government implemented online tendering during the year 2008 by 
using Government e-Procurement System developed by NIC (GePNIC). The 
audit of this application was conducted to assess whether the e-procurement 
system has been effectively implemented and utilised to achieve the objectives 
of promoting competition, transparency and accountability.  Further, Audit also 
assessed whether business rules have been adequately mapped onto the system; 
completeness, integrity, and reliability of data in the system was being 
maintained and adequate controls have been built into the system. 
The major Audit findings are as under: 
1. Government has not signed any service level agreement with NIC for 
development and implementation of the GePNIC. NIC could not 
complete the implementation of modules such as Vendor Management, 
Indent Management, Contract Management and Catalogue 
Management. In the absence of any agreement, no action could be 
intiated to reap the intended benefits of the system. 
2. Significant business processes such as tender evaluation (both technical 
and financial), negotiation with vendors, and award of contract are still 
being carried out manually, instead of through the e-Procurement 
system. As a result, the objective of eliminating human interface for 
these key processes has not been achieved. In the absence of application 
controls for these processes carried out manually, Audit noticed 
instances where Tender Inviting Authorities (TIAs) had manually 
increased the bid amounts submitted by bidders after downloading the 
financial bid (Bill of Quantities) from e-Procurement portal and 
excluded the L1 bidder from consideration at the time of award of 
contract.  
3. Business rules have not been fully mapped into the e-Procurement 
application. Provisions for enforcing the prescribed minimum period 
for submission of bids from the time of publication of tender, defining 
threshold limits for two-cover tendering system, preventing and 
detecting splitting of works by TIAs have not been implemented in the 
system. 
4. There are deficiencies in key application controls implemented in the 
e-Procurement system. These deficiencies have resulted in instances 
where bids are being submitted after closing time, bids being decrypted 
by users other than those designated for the purpose, violation of 
chronological and logical sequencing of timestamps for creation and 
updating data in the system, BoQ awarded not matching the BoQ 
specified in the tender, and contract value awarded being higher than 
the L1 bid amount. 
5. There are significant lapses in user access management at the front end 
and in the maintenance of logs to record user actions at the back end of 
the application due to which, Audit was unable to rule out unauthorised 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
 
 viii 
 
modification of data and derive assurance on the completeness and 
correctness of the data in the system. 
The objective of the e-Procurement system was to eliminate human interface; 
bring transparency in the functioning of tendering activities; facilitate faster 
dissemination and easy access to information related to tenders; and provide a 
fair, competitive platform that would safeguard authenticity and enhance 
efficiency in procurement. Owing to the deficiencies as pointed out by Audit, 
in this Report, there was a material risk of commission of errors, deliberate 
irregularities like irregular increase in value of work by exclusion of eligible 
L-1 bidder and accepting higher bids by the Tender Inviting Authorities and 
Tender Evaluation Committees when carrying out these processes manually.  
Deficiencies in input controls in the system resulted in registration of bidders 
with invalid/incorrect PAN and Digital Signature Certificates (DSCs).  During 
the course of audit, instances of mapping of multiple user IDs with same 
PAN/DSCs were also noticed making the system prone to manipulations by 
submission of multiple bids by same bidder.  Lack of sufficient system security 
resulted in submission of bids after expiry of tender closing dates. Deficient 
system security exposed it to the risk of manual intervention in modification of 
bid data and change in bid openers, and defeated the very purpose of 
implementation of e-Procurement System.  
Recommendations 
Considering the audit observations, it is recommended that:  
Government may  
 Ensure execution of Agreement/ MoU with NIC, to ensure clarity on 
timelines, deliverables and service levels. 
 Implement the remaining Modules of the e-Procurement system and fully 
map all the relevant business rules into the system, to ensure that technical 
and financial evaluation and award of contract is only carried out through 
the system.  
 Integrate WAMIS and CDMS with e-Procurement system, to minimise 
the risk of manual errors/ deliberate irregularities.  
 Adopt the revised threshold value of ₹1 lakh for mandatory e-
Procurement as prescribed by Department of Commerce, Government of 
India. 
Government may implement appropriate validation controls for user 
access management during the registration of bidders, to ensure that 
 Valid DSCs, PAN, dates etc., are entered into the system in compliance 
with executive instructions. 
 The essential attribute of non-repudiation is upheld in the system. 
Government may consider to 
 Implement mapping of business rules for minimum period for submission 
of bids, mandatory two-cover process for tenders with value more than 
₹50 lakh and computation of tender fees based on tender value;  
 Implement validation controls to ensure correct recording of bids in the 
BoQ template and processing controls for correct computation of tender 
value based on BoQ in the system; 

Executive Summary 
 
 ix 
 
 Enforce application controls to prevent submission of bids after tender 
closing time; 
 Implement validation controls to enforce chronological and logical 
sequencing of user actions in the system; 
 Implement application controls to prevent mapping of the same mobile 
numbers to multiple users in the system, and enquire into cases where the 
same mobile numbers had been mapped to Departmental users and 
bidders;  
 Minimise manual interventions at the back end of the system, by adopting 
formal change management process to implement required functionality 
for users at the front end of the application;  
 Ensure mandatory maintenance of application and DBA logs to record all 
user actions at the front and back end of the system; 
 Adopt standard operating procedures for patch management, version 
control and documentation of scripts used in the system; 
 Enquire into the reasons for the gaps in the sequence of IDs in the major 
tables of the database;  
 Implement appropriate application controls to enforce chronological and 
logical sequencing for user actions in the system; 
 Ensure maintenance of web, application and DBA logs for the system; 
 Adopt relevant standards specified by Ministry of Electornics and 
Information Technology, Government of India from time to time. 
Government should  
 Map the full business requirements for bid evaluation and award of 
contract into the system, through implementation of appropriate 
application controls to ensure compliance and minimise errors/ 
irregularities. 
 
 

 
 xi 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction  

 
 
 
  

 
 1 
 
Chapter I 
 
Introduction and Audit Framework 
 
1.1 Introduction  
The State Government introduced online tendering during the year 2008 by 
using the e-Procurement system/ portal developed by National Informatics 
Centre (NIC). The objective of the e-Procurement system was to eliminate 
human interface; bring transparency in the functioning of tendering activities; 
facilitate faster dissemination and easy access to information related to tenders; 
and provide a fair, competitive platform that would safeguard authenticity and 
enhance efficiency in procurement. Initially, tenders costing more than ₹50 
lakh were floated through e-Procurement portal from July 2008 in four major 
engineering departments i.e., Works, Rural Development, Water Resources 
and Housing & Urban Development Department. From January 2009, all 
tenders costing ₹20 lakh and above, and from April 2009, all tenders costing 
₹10 lakh and above, were made compulsory to be floated through e-
Procurement portal. The e-tendering for all tenders costing ₹5 lakh and above 
except for Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) were started from August 2015. For 
ULBs the ceiling was fixed at ₹1 lakh and above for mandatory adoption of e-
tendering through e-Procurement portal, which was subsequently (03 January 
2018) enhanced to ₹2 lakh. Online receipt of tender paper cost and Earnest 
Money Deposit (EMD) was implemented from December 2017. 
During the period from 2011-12 to 2016-17, NIC extended support as part of 
Government e-Procurement (GePNIC) Mission Mode Project (MMP) under 
National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) funded by Government of India (GoI). 
The cost for 2017-18 was borne by NIC using its own resources. Later, 
Government of Odisha (GoO) paid1 project cost of ₹402.15 lakh to NIC for 
implementation and maintenance of GePNIC for three years from April 2018 
to March 2021. Further, Works Department in GoO paid ₹388.26 lakh 
(September 2021) to NIC for extension of GePNIC roll out services for further 
period of three more years from April 2021 to April 2024. 
As of 31 March 2022, total 3,74,806 tenders with tender value of ₹3,31,908.51 
crore were floated through e-Procurement portal. 2,637 officials were 
registered as Departmental Users and 27,359 were registered as Bidders. Out 
of 40 Departments of GoO, 29 Departments2 along with PSUs under these 
Departments were using the e-Procurement system and remaining 11 
 
1  27 December 2018 – ₹183.71 lakh and May 2019 – ₹218.44 lakh  
2  Housing and Urban Development Department, Rural Development Department, Department of Water Resources, 
Works Department, ST and SC Development Department, Agriculture Department, Department of Home, 
Department of School and Mass Education, Industries Department, Department of Steel and Mines, Food Supplies 
and Consumer Welfare Department,  Department of Energy, Department of Tourism and Culture, Forest and 
Environment, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Handlooms Textiles  and Handicrafts, 
Department of Co-operation, Commerce and Transport Department, Odia Language literature and Culture 
Department, Department of Law and Justice, General Administration Department, Fisheries and Animal 
Resources Development Department, Skill Development and Technical Education, Revenue and Disaster 
Management Department,  Department of Social Security and Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, 
Department of Higher Education, IT Department, Sports and Youth Services Department, Department of Finance 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
2  
 
departments3 have not used e-Procurement system and have been using other 
channels like e-NIVIDA, Government e-Marketing (GeM) and manual 
tendering for procurements. 
1.2  System information and workflow   
The System has been developed by NIC using the following platforms: 
 Operating System: Linux 
 Web Server: Apache Tomcat 
 Database: PostgreSql 
 Front End:  Java/J2EE 
The software and the data are held in servers at National Data Centre, New 
Delhi with disaster recovery site at Hyderabad maintained by NIC.  
The web-based application contains the following modules:  
Registration Module: Registration/Enrolment of Government officials and 
bidders with/without Digital Signature Certificate (DSC).  
Publishing of tender: Tender creation and publishing, publishing of 
corrigendum, publishing of pre-bid meeting documents, clarification on the 
tenders published. 
Bid submission: Online bid submission/re-submission as many times as 
required, freezing of bids, facility for online payment collection through bank 
payment gateway, encryption of bids submitted by the bidder, facility for 
single/multiple cover bid system. 
Tender opening: Tender opening online. 
Technical evaluation: Provision of automatic technical evaluation available. 
Financial bid opening: Opening of financial bid online. 
Financial evaluation: Evaluation of the financial bid through automatic 
comparison of Bill of Quantity (BoQ) and selection of L1 bidder. 
Award of contract (AOC): Module for awarding to contract to selected 
bidder(s).  
A schematic diagram showing the various modules available on the e-tendering 
portal / GePNIC is shown in Figure No.1. 
 
3  Excise, Information & Public Relations, Labour & Employees' State Insurance, Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprise, Panchayati Raj & Drinking Water, Parliamentary Affairs, 
Planning & Convergence, Public Enterprises, Science & Technology, Women & Child 
Development and Mission Shakti 
 

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Framework 
 3 
 
Figure No 1:  Schematic diagram showing various modules available on 
the e- tendering portal/GePNIC 
The GePNIC system is certified by STQC, MEITY in compliance with 
Guidelines for Compliance to Quality requirement of e-Procurement System 
(GCQE) dated 31 August 2011 issued by Department of Electronic & 
Information Technology, New Delhi (DEITY) and the certification is current 
and valid for three years from 21 December 2020. 
 
1.3 Organisation Set Up 
With the objective of supervision of the full roll out of the e-Procurement in 
four Engineering Departments and PSUs, State Government constituted (May 
2008) the “State Procurement Cell” under the administrative control of Works 
Department with EIC4 (Civil) Odisha as the Chief Procurement Officer and 
with officers from Law, Finance, IT and Engineering Departments as members 
to act as an umbrella organisation to sustain, manage, and carry forward the 
changes. A help desk has been made operational to give technical solutions to 
tender-related issues of departments and bidders. 
 
4 Engineer-in-Chief (Civil) 
Source : System Requirement Specification (SRS) Document 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
4  
 
Figure No 2:  Organisation Chart of E-Procurement Cell 
 
 
1.4 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the audit were to assess whether: 
 the e-procurement system has been effectively implemented and 
utilised to achieve the objectives of promoting competition, 
transparency and accountability 
 business rules have been adequately mapped onto the system 
 completeness, integrity, and reliability of data in the system was 
being maintained  
 adequate controls have been built into the system. 
 
1.5 Scope of Audit  
The audit focussed on analysing the implementation and utilisation of the e-
Procurement portal for procuring goods, works and services from the date of 
roll-out up to 2021-22. Audit examined the portal with reference to general 
controls, system and network security, application controls, change 
management controls, disaster management and business continuity plan. 
Besides, analysis of the database and the data / information uploaded onto the 
portal by departmental offices and bidders was also done. Data samples, 
wherever required, were verified through field audit in the respective 
departmental offices to substantiate the audit findings.  
EIC (Civil)-cum-Chief Procurement OfficerChief Engineer-cum-Chief Manager (Tech)Senior Manager (LAW)Senior Manager (Finance)SE (e-Procurement)Manager (Admin)Dy. Manager (Procurement)IT Support TeamHelpdesk-e-Procurement Helpdesk-ICICI BankHelpdesk-CDMS

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Framework 
 5 
 
1.6 Audit Sampling  
For sample selection of tenders, the tenders published during the last five years 
i.e., from 2017-18 to 2021-22 were taken as universe. 105 out of 296 user 
departments were selected through stratified random sampling using risk-based 
assessment scores (Appendix-I). From amongst the 10 selected departments, a 
total of 48 out of 678 (seven per cent) departmental offices or tender-inviting 
authorities (TIAs) were selected through stratified random sampling based on 
population proportionate to size. 10 tenders from each selected TIA were 
selected through stratified random sampling based on risk scores. Total 4867 
tenders amounting to ₹943.89 crore were selected out of 1,68,178 tenders 
valuing ₹1,68,517.00 crore  for field verifications. 
1.7 Audit Criteria  
The criteria for audit were derived from the following sources –  
 Technical documentation including Software Requirement 
Specification of each application/ module;  
 Relevant acts, rules and policies i.e., IT Act 2000 and subsequent 
amendments, National e-Governance policies and standards, etc., 
 Service level agreements (SLAs), Request for Proposals (RFPs), etc.;  
 Odisha Public Works Department Code;  
 e-Procurement implementation guidelines of GePNIC;  
 Guidelines for Compliance to Quality Requirements of e-Procurement 
System;  
 Guidelines issued by Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), 
Government of India on e-Procurement system;  
 Odisha General Financial Rules (OGFR) 
 
5 Housing and Urban Development Department, Rural Development Department, Department of Water Resources, 
Works Department, Industries Department, Department of Steel and Mines, Forest and Environment Department, 
Odia Language literature and Culture Department, Fisheries and Animal Resources Development Department 
6  Housing and Urban Development, Rural Development Department, Department of Water Resources, Works 
Department, ST and SC Development Department, Agriculture Department, Department of Home, Department of 
School and Mass Education, Industries Department, Department of Steel and Mines, Food Supplies and Consumer 
Welfare Department,  Department of Energy, Department of Tourism and Culture, Forest and Environment 
Department, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Handlooms Textiles  and Handicrafts, 
Department of Co-operation, Commerce and Transport Department, Odia Language literature and Culture 
Department, Department of Law and Justice, General Administration Department, Fisheries and Animal 
Resources Development Department, Skill Development and Technical Education Department, Revenue and 
Disaster Management Department,  Department of Social Security and Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, 
Department of Higher Education, IT Department, Sports and Youth Services Department, Department of Finance 
7    Six additional tenders selected based on finding of data analysis 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
6  
 
1.8 Audit methodology 
Audit objectives, criteria, scope, sample and methodology of audit were shared 
with GoO through an Entry Conference on 18 July 2022.  
Field audit in the selected departments and offices (TIAs) was conducted 
involving scrutiny of sample selected files, and collection of documentary and 
electronic evidence from the e-Procurement portal. Analysis of data, log files, 
and other electronic documents in the e-Procurement portal database as 
received from NIC was done using computer-assisted audit techniques 
(CAATs) like VB Script, JAVA, Python, PostgreSQL, Burp suite, IDEA etc.  
The audit report contains detailed findings arranged in various chapters: 
Introduction, Project Management and Execution, User Management, Tender 
Creation and Publication, Bid Creation and Submission, Bid Opening and 
Evaluation, Award of Contract, Timestamp Management & Application 
Security, and other issues. The exact names of tables and columns as in the 
system database have not been used in view of system security. 
Exit meeting was conducted on 25 May 2023 with the Departments to discuss 
the findings. The replies of Department were considered while finalising the report. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter II 
Project Management  
and Execution 

 
 
 

 
 7 
 
Chapter II  
Project Management and Execution 
 
 
  
2.1 Absence of Agreement/ MoU with NIC for implementation of e-
Procurement system 
  
A service level agreement (SLA) is a contract between a 
service provider and the end user that defines the level of 
service expected from the service provider. The roles and 
responsibilities, timelines, and deliverables along with 
penalties for under or non-performance are clarified by executing the SLA 
between both the parties for smooth implementation of Project.  
Government of Odisha (GoO) decided (May 2006) to sign a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with NIC for implementation of the e-Procurement 
project which was funded under National e-Governance Plan upto 2017. After 
which, the GoO had paid ₹790.41 lakh to NIC for implementation and 
maintenance of GePNIC from April 2018 to March 2024.  
Audit, however, observed that agreement or Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) for customization/ implementation of the e-Procurement System had 
not been entered into with NIC.  
Due to the absence of Agreement/ MoU, the roles and responsibilities, 
timelines, deliverables and service level metrics for performance of the system 
had not been clearly defined between both the parties, for smooth 
implementation of the project.  
In reply the Department stated (December 2023) that initially the portal was 
handled by the IT Department, GoO and the same was handed over to Works 
Department GoO in 2010. Agreement had not been entered into and NIC has 
been requested to process the MoU, which is awaited.  
The fact remained that GoO had implemented the e-Procurement system 
without an Agreement or MoU defining the roles and responsibilities of NIC, 
and as a result, it had no legal basis to approach NIC in case of any lapses 
noticed in implementing the application.  
 
The e-Procurement application software envisaged modules 
such as Vendor Management, Indent Management, e-
Tendering, e-Payment, Contract Management, e-Auction 
and Catalogue Management.  
However, in the first phase it was decided to implement only the e-Tendering 
module, while the modules relating to pre-tendering and post-tendering stages 
were to be implemented in the second phase. 
 
2.2 Non-implementation of key Modules of GePNIC 
 
General Control 
General Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
8  
 
During August 2012, NIC informed the State Government regarding 
engagement of consultant 
to carry out required 
study for preparation of 
As-Is and To-Be 
documents for 
implementation of pre 
and post tendering 
modules and contractor 
database modules etc. 
The final study report of 
As-Is and To-Be 
documents were 
submitted during April 2013.  
However, Audit observed that no action was taken after preparation of As-Is 
and To-Be documents for development of pre and post modules and modules 
like Vendor Management, Indent Management, e-payment, Contract 
Management, and Catalogue Management.  
Though the e-Auction module was developed by NIC in 2012, it was not used 
by the Government of Odisha as of March 2022. Due to non-implementation 
of pre and post modules of the e-Procurement system, the objective of full-
automation / elimination of human interface in the tendering process could not 
be achieved. 
Department agreed (December 2023) about non-development of the modules 
by NIC. As a result, the pre and post tendering modules of the e-Procurement 
system are yet to be developed. 
  
2.3 Partial implementation of the e-tendering module  
  
The e-tendering module was designed to have the following 
processes: 
Figure No 4:  E-tendering module 
 
General Control 
Figure No 3: Modules of e-Procurement 
Activities from Technical Evaluation to Award of contract were still being conducted manually 

Chapter II: Project Management and Execution 
 9 
 
Departmental users, having creator roles, could log on to the portal and create 
online tenders. Authorised departmental users having publisher roles could 
verify the created tenders and publish them online. Registered bidders/ 
contractors could submit online bids and upload required documents till the 
time defined in the notice inviting tenders. On the bid opening date, 
departmental users responsible for bid opening could open/ decrypt the bids. 
The bid opening consisted of four stages i.e., Technical Bid Opening, Technical 
Evaluation, Financial Bid Opening, and Financial Evaluation, followed by 
Award of Contract (AoC). Once the comparative statement of bids was 
generated through the system and L1, L2, L3…identified, L1 could be called 
upon for negotiation or sample checking. The last stage of e-tendering was the 
Award of Contract, where the departmental user could upload the award of 
contract mentioning the final rate finalised with the selected bidder.  
As shown in the schematic diagram above, critical functions such as technical 
evaluation, financial evaluation, negotiation, award of contract were still being 
carried out manually, outside the e-Procurement system. However, the details 
of such manual processing viz. technical evaluation minutes, financial 
evaluation minutes, negotiation minutes with L1 bidder, and award of contract, 
were required to be uploaded onto the e-Procurement portal, as part of the 
workflow for the application. 
Audit noticed that the details of manual processes for technical and financial 
evaluation and award of contract were being uploaded onto the e-Procurement 
portal with significant delays (even up to four years). Thus, the e-Procurement 
portal did not reflect the real-time, actual status of various tenders in its MIS 
reports. 
Analysis of the stages of tenders revealed that out of 3.75 lakh tenders that were 
published during 2008-09 to 2021-22, and excluding 22,329 tenders that were 
cancelled, details of only 0.66 lakh tenders (18.75 per cent) had been entered 
in the Award of 
Contract process. 
Out of the 
remaining 2.86 
tenders, 1.30 lakh 
tenders were 
depicted at “To be 
opened” stage, 
1.00 lakh tenders 
at “Technical bid 
opened” stage, 
0.20 lakh tenders 
at “Technical bid 
evaluated” stage, 
0.22 lakh tenders 
at “Financial bid 
opened” stage and 
0.14 lakh tenders at “Financial bid evaluated” stage. In 2.74 lakh out of these 
2.86 lakh tenders, the delay after expiry of bid validity from the date of bid 
Chart No 1:  Stages of Tender 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
10  
 
opening to 31 March 2022 ranged between one to 5005 days, as depicted in the 
Chart-2.  
 
Audit test checked 486 sample tenders at 48 selected TIAs to verify whether 
the status of the tender depicted on the e-Procurement system was correct, and 
noticed that Award of Contract (AoC) had been completed in 434 tenders as 
per manually maintained physical records. However, the e-Procurement system 
reflected the status of these tenders incorrectly, with 326 tenders depicted as at 
AoC stage while in the remaining 108 (25 per cent) tenders, the AoC details 
had not been uploaded into the system even after delays ranging up to 1773 
days from the actual date of AoCs. Similarly, the details of tenders which had 
completed the Technical Evaluation and Financial Evaluation stages had not 
been uploaded into the system.   
Further, in 248 out of the 486 test-checked tenders, portable document format 
(pdf) versions of unrelated/ irrelevant documents (documents containing 
designations of committee members who evaluated the technical and financial 
bids, Detailed Notice Inviting Tenders, etc.) had been uploaded into the system, 
instead of the actual minutes of proceedings of technical and financial 
evaluation committees. This indicated lack of due diligence by the users 
responsible for correct uploading of documents. 
In the absence of online processing of technical and financial evaluation and 
award of contract through the system with the required application controls, 
there was avoidable risk of commission of errors/ deliberate irregularity on the 
part of the Tender Inviting Authorities (TIA) when carrying out these processes 
manually. One such example, where Audit noticed that the TIA had irregularly 
extended undue benefits to bidders during tender processing, is discussed in the 
case study below. 
Chart No.2: Delay in uploading of AOC 
Source: Database analysis 
7448642078479102813563619171575020000400006000080000100000120000140000160000180000200000One to 30daysOne tothreemonthsFour to sixmonthsSix monthto one yearOne to twoyearsThree tofive yearsMore thanfive years
Number of tendersDelay range 

Chapter II: Project Management and Execution 
 11 
 
  
 
 
  
2.4 Absence of master data management functionality for contractors, 
in e-Procurement system   
  
NIC was to develop the Contractor Database Management 
System (CDMS) as part of the e-Procurement System, as per 
the As-Is and To-Be document prepared in 2012. However, 
NIC did not develop this module.  
The CDMS was intended to provide functionality for master data management 
of contractors and was therefore essential to automate the processes of 
technical evaluation, financial evaluation and award of contract through the e-
Procurement system.  
As a result of non-implementation of the same by NIC and in the absence of a 
formal Agreement/ MoU to enforce the same, GoO decided (November 2017) 
that Works Department would develop the Contractor Database Management 
System (CDMS) through a different software vendor and to implement the 
same by April 2018.  
 
Project Management 
Case study 
During test check of tenders Audit noticed that two TIAs- Bhubaneswar 
Municipal Corporation and Jeypore Municipality- had extended undue 
benefits to bidders in 30 tenders. This undue benefit was extended either 
through irregular increase of the value of bids submitted by the bidders 
or through irregular exclusion of the eligible L1 bidder and award of 
contract to other bidders with higher bids. Details are tabulated below:  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Number 
of 
tenders 
Total 
Tender 
amount 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Total 
Amount 
quoted by 
lowest bidder 
 (₹ in lakh) 
Total 
Amount 
Awarded  
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Total 
Amount 
irregularly 
increased 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Manually 
increased the 
quoted value of 
bids 
29 299.59 282.76 301.78 19.02 
2 Excluded the 
eligible L1 bidder 
from the 
comparative 
statement 
1 7.05 6.52 6.90 0.38 
 Total 30 306.64 289.28 308.68 19.40 
The total amount quoted by the Lowest (L1) bidders in these 30 tenders 
was ₹2.89 crore. However, the actual total amount awarded in these 30 
tenders was ₹3.07 crore. This irregular increase would not have been 
possible, had the processes for technical and financial evaluation of bids 
and award of contract been carried out through the e-Procurement 
system, with the required application controls to ensure compliance with 
the executive instructions. In the absence of the use of the system for 
these processes, the TIAs had extended undue benefits as above.  
Response of the concerned department is awaited (December 2024) 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
12  
 
Works Department, GoO approved (February 2018) the proposal amounting to 
₹3.84 crore and requested the authorised GoO agency, M/s IDCOL Software 
Ltd (ISL) to initiate the tender process. ISL finalised (31 March 2018) the 
vendor M/s CSM Technologies Pvt Ltd for Development, Implementation, 
Maintenance and Support Services of web-based Contractor Database 
Management System at a cost of ₹3.58 crore and for Operating System and 
RDMBS (Operational) at ₹63.60 lakh. The project was to be completed within 
six months from date of award, in three phases.  
In Phase II, there was provision for integration with e-Procurement portal for 
master data management for contractors. The Department issued (July 2019) 
User Acceptance Test (UAT) certificate for the developed CDMS software 
Phase-I, Phase II and Phase III.  
However, Audit noticed that even as of December 2023, the integration of 
CDMS with e-Procurement had not been implemented, and the User 
Acceptance Test certificate had been issued by the Department without 
verifying the actual status of implementation. Such issue of the UAT certificate 
without exercising due diligence resulted in extension of a significant undue 
favour to the vendor.  
Due to non-integration of e-Procurement system with CDMS, the processes of 
technical and financial evaluation and award of contract continued to be carried 
out manually outside the system, with the material risk of commission of errors/ 
deliberate irregularities.  
Accepting the facts, the Department stated (December 2023) that the UAT 
certificate had been issued by the Department, but later it was found that the 
assigned works had not been completed. As a result, an amount of ₹2.86 lakh 
had been withheld as payment to the vendor.  
The response was not tenable, since the fact remained that due to the absence 
of master data management functionality for contractors in the e-Procurement 
system, key business processes continued to be carried out manually and the 
Department had not fixed any responsibility for the delay in implementation of 
CDMS or for the incorrect issue of the UAT certificate.  
2.5  Absence of integration with Works and Accounts Management 
Information System  
 
Works and Accounts Management Information System 
(WAMIS) was developed by Center for Development of 
Advanced Computing (C-DAC) for different Engineering 
Departments like Rural Development, Roads & Building, 
Water Resources and Housing & Urban Development in Government of 
Odisha  and implemented (May 2009) the application through Rural 
Development Department. Along with other functionalities, WAMIS has a 
facility for pre-tender activities such as Administrative Approvals, Technical 
Sanctions, preparation of BoQ, Tendering, Quotations, Awarding, Negotiation 
and Execution of Works.  
General Control 

Chapter II: Project Management and Execution 
 13 
 
To minimise human intervention, introduce automated tendering process and 
bring transparency in procurement, Government decided (May 2016) for end-
to-end integration of e-Procurement system with WAMIS, so that the 
inputs such as BoQ, e-Estimates could be transmitted from WAMIS to the e-
Procurement system, and inputs on award of contract (contractor identity, 
contract value etc.,) from the e-Procurement system could be transmitted to 
WAMIS. The integration was to be completed in three phases. 
 In Phase I, the scope of work included sharing of pre-tendering 
information such as BoQ from WAMIS to the e-Procurement portal, for 
creation and publication of tender.   
 In Phase II, General Technical Evaluation (GTE) was to be enabled 
using information available from WAMIS and comparative statement 
of bidders for technical evaluation was to be auto-generated in the e-
Procurement system.   
 In Phase III, the scope of work included sharing of post-tender 
information such as letter of acceptance (e-LoA), Award of Contract/ 
Agreement (e-AOC/e-Agreement) from the e-Procurement system to 
WAMIS.  
The target date for completion of the above integration process was 01 June 
2021. However, Audit observed that end-to-end integration of e-Procurement 
system with WAMIS had not been completed as of December 2023, despite 
the lapse of more than 2 years after the scheduled completion date.   
In reply the Department stated (December 2023) that the integration with 
WAMIS would be completed after implementation of the new version of 
GePNIC. 
The absence of the intended integration with WAMIS also contributed to the 
continued use of manual, offline processing of technical and financial 
evaluation of bids and award of contracts, which carried the significant risk of 
commission of errors/ deliberate irregularities. 
2.6 Absence of executive instructions to revise the threshold value for 
mandatory e-procurement  
 
Department of Commerce, Government of India (GoI) vide 
their letter 17 March 2015 suggested that all States/UTs 
irrespective of service provider may bring down the threshold 
value for e-Procurement to ₹1 lakh in a time bound and 
phased manner by 31 March 2016. All the Departments/Divisions/Rural 
Bodies/PSUs /Autonomous bodies would be brought under the purview of e-
procurement by 30 September 2015. The above objectives regarding e-
Procurement would be mandated through Legislation/Executive Orders. 
Audit observed that despite implementation of e-Procurement since 2008 and 
GoI instructions in 2015, out of 40 Departments of Government of Odisha, only 
29 Departments had registered in the e-Procurement system and the remaining 
11 Departments had not registered themselves. Thus, these 11 Departments had 
General Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
14  
 
continued to use other channels for procurement for their Departmental 
requirements, even after 14 years of implementation of the e-Procurement 
system. 
Further, the threshold value in respect of procurements by Departments of 
Government of Odisha had remained at ₹2 lakh for ULBs under the H&UD 
Department, and at ₹5 lakh for all other Departments, even after 6 years from 
the target date for revising the threshold value down to ₹1 lakh. This meant that 
there was avoidable risk of non-compliance with the applicable Rules for 
procurement in offline mode for values between ₹1 lakh and ₹5 lakh for 
Departments.  
As per OPWD Code, contract for works having estimated cost up to ₹5 lakh 
may be awarded with or without invitation of open tenders, at the discretion of 
the Divisional Officer. Audit noticed that in the absence of executive 
instructions mandating the use of e-Procurement system for contract value of 
more than ₹1 lakh and in view of the provision to not opt for open tender in 
cases where contract value was less than ₹5 lakh, there were instances of TIAs 
splitting works to this range of contract value. One such example is described 
as a case study below. 
 
Thus, in the absence of executive instructions to mandate e-procurement for 
contract value above ₹1 lakh, there remained avoidable scope for TIAs to opt 
for offline procurement with attendant risks, as well as the material risk of 
splitting of works to avoid escalation to the competent authority.  
In reply, the Department stated (December 2023) that the e-Procurement portal 
has been designed as per the provisions laid down in the OPWD Code. 
Necessary changes to the system will be made on revision of the Code. The 
response was not tenable, as the revision of the threshold value for mandatory 
e-procurement was required to have been implemented in a phased manner by 
Case Study 
Splitting up of works to bypass e-tendering. 
For preparation of detailed architectural design and structural grid of 
various floors and areas of the 300-bed new building of District 
Headquarter Hospital at Bhadrak, the Executive Engineer Bhardak R&B 
Division had submitted estimates splitting the original work into 22 works. 
The concerned Superintending Engineer had approved (June 2021) all the 
22 split works limiting the amount in each case to below ₹5 lakh. Each of 
these 22 split works was awarded (21-24 May 2021) to the same 
contractor, for a total contract amount of ₹70.52 lakh across the 22 works. 
If e-procurement had been mandated with threshold value revised to ₹1 
lakh, the risk of such splitting of works could have been mitigated, as the 
system could have had application controls implemented to detect such 
instances of splitting of works (using the combination of data fields such 
as head of account, Division, contractor identity etc.,) and report the same 
to senior Officers of the Department. 

Chapter II: Project Management and Execution 
 15 
 
March 2016 itself, as per communication issued by Government of India and 
the same was to be incorporated in the OPWD code through revision.  
2.7 Absence of functionality in the system to manage privileged bidders 
 
 OPWD Code provides for special privileges8 to ‘B’ class 
SC/ST contractors, Engineer Contractors who are 
Graduates and Diploma holders, physically handicapped 
‘D’ and ‘C’ class contractors, Micro and Small Enterprises 
(MSEs) and Start-ups. Accordingly, the SRS had also provided for 
functionality in the system to define and manage such privileged bidders.  
Audit, however, noticed that no functionality had been implemented in 
GePNIC to define, create and manage such categories of privileged bidders, 
except MSE category.  
In the absence of such functionality, the TIAs had to adopt manual evaluation 
of technical bids when such privileged bidders participated in tenders.  
Audit noticed that during such manual evaluation in three out of 48 test checked 
TIAs, there were errors in evaluation and award of contract as discussed below: 
2.7.1 Wrongful selection of bidder 
In two test checked cases Audit noticed that contractors were selected due to 
incorrect calculation of 10 per cent price preference manually. 
 The work “Construction of Drain near proposed Poura Bhawan, ward 
No 15” was put to tender (June 2021) by Executive Officer (EO), Barbil 
Municipality with estimated rate of ₹4.46 lakh. Seven bidders 
participated and all were technically qualified by the committee. In the 
financial evaluation summary, it was seen that the L1 bidder had quoted 
₹4.01 lakh being 9.99 per cent less than the amount put to tender. The 
ST Contractor had quoted ₹4.46 lakh (0 per cent) and other five bidders 
had quoted 9.9 per cent excess than the amount put to tender. The EO 
awarded the work to the ST contractor at ₹ 4.01 lakh by incorrectly 
calculating the price preference of 10 per cent on the quoted amount 
instead of calculating 10 per cent on the lowest quoted bid. The EO 
admitted (November 2022) the error.  
 The tender for work “Construction of Chemical Laboratory Building at 
Kurmitar Iron Ore Mines in the District of Sundargarh” was floated by 
Odisha Mining Corporation with tender value ₹40.01 lakh. Two bidders 
 
8  (a)  SC/ST contractors: Tender of the individual registered contractors belonging to 
SC/ST within 10 per cent of the rate quoted by the lowest tenderer for any work, would 
be considered for award to him/her at the lowest tendered rate.  
 (b) Engineer Contractor: Graduate and Diploma Holder Engineer contractors would 
pay deposit the security deposits (EMD, Security Deposit, Performance Security) at half 
the usual rate against the prescribed percentage.  
 (c) Physically Handicapped (deaf or orthopedically handicapped upto 40 per cent 
disability) class D and C contractors are exempted for paying EMD and ISD and would 
be given 3 per cent price preference in the rate quoted in their tenders. The preference 
will be allowed upto a prescribed limit. 
 
System  Design 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
16  
 
had submitted their bids in response to this tender. One bidder quoted 
at ₹34.01 lakh being 14.99 per cent less than the estimated cost and the 
other bidder as an SC contractor quoted ₹38.01 lakh being five per cent 
less than the estimated cost. The price preference to SC bidder was 
₹37.41 lakh (₹34.01+10 per cent). Hence, the quoted amount of SC 
bidder was not within the price preference and the other bidder should 
have been declared the L1 bidder. Contrary to this, the TIA incorrectly 
conducted a lottery between those two bidders and awarded the work to 
the SC bidder. 
2.7.2 Awarding contract at a higher price  
In one out of the test checked tenders involving privileged bidders, Audit found 
that DFO, Bargarh floated tender for “Construction of Boundary Wall at 
Kamgaon Forest Section of Bargarh Range” with estimated cost of ₹4.00 lakh. 
Five bidders had submitted bids out of which three bidders had quoted ₹3.04 
lakh being 14.99 per cent less than estimated cost, one SC Contractor bid ₹3.32 
lakh being seven per cent less than estimated cost and other one had quoted at 
estimated cost.  As the price preference of SC contractors was within 10 per 
cent of price quoted by the lowest bidder, the evaluation committee conducted 
lottery among four of the five bidders and the work was awarded to the SC 
contractor at an incorrect amount of ₹3.32 lakh instead of ₹3.04 lakh quoted by 
L1 bidder. This resulted in an extra obligation of ₹0.28 lakh on the Government 
exchequer. These errors in tender evaluation could have been prevented if the 
technical and financial evaluation and award of contract had been conducted in 
the e-Procurement system, with necessary functionality implemented in the 
system to fully map the business rules related to definition and management of 
privileged bidders.  
In reply the Department stated (December 2023) that the functionality to define 
and manage privileged bidders had now been made available as a configuration 
option for TIAs. The response was not tenable, as the requirement of full 
mapping of business rules to ensure that the e-Procurement system generated 
comparative sheet of financial bids by taking into account the details of the 
privileged bidders in order to determine L1 through the system itself, had not 
yet been implemented.  
Recommendations 
Government may  
 Ensure execution of Agreement/ MoU with NIC, to ensure 
clarity on timelines, deliverables and service levels. 
 Implement the remaining Modules of the e-Procurement system 
and fully map all the relevant business rules into the system, to 
ensure that technical and financial evaluation and award of 
contract is only carried out through the system.  
 Integrate WAMIS and CDMS with e-Procurement system, to 
minimise the risk of manual errors/ deliberate irregularities.  
 Adopt the revised threshold value of ₹1 lakh for mandatory e-
procurement as prescribed by Department of Commerce, 
Government of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter III 
User Management  

 
 
 
  

 
 17 
 
Chapter III 
 
User Management 
3.1 Inadequate validation controls during registration of users 
 
The online bidder enrollment form had provision for enrolling 
suppliers of goods and services, and assigning them login ID/ 
password for logging into the application software. The system 
generates unique user ID for each user. For two factor 
authentication, the user has to register his Digital Signature Certificate (DSC) 
with the system. On expiry of the DSC, the user must again register the new 
DSC in the system. In this process, the DSC details like username, user id, 
serial number of DSC, thumbprint, public key hash, validity date etc., are 
recorded by the system.  
3.1.1 Registration of incorrect DSC/ mapping of same DSC with 
multiple bidders 
 
Audit analysed the names of the bidders and the names of the 
holders of the DSC which the bidders had registered, and 
noticed that out of 1,751 bidders, in 1,120 cases the names did 
not match and the same DSC had been mapped to multiple 
bidders. This indicated that the name of the bidder had not been validated at 
the time of registration of DSCs used by the bidder.   
Due to the absence of this validation control (verification by a Departmental 
user in the system), the DSC used by the bidders did not have the essential 
attribute of non-repudiation. A bidder could potentially disown any bids or 
inputs submitted into the system on the grounds that the action had not been 
performed by him, since the DSC used to digitally sign off on such actions was 
not registered in the name of the bidder or was mapped to multiple bidders in 
the system. This was a major deficiency in the e-Procurement system, given 
the nature of its functions.  
Department replied (December 2023) that since Certifying Authorities issue 
DSC to individuals with different alias names and since individuals authorised 
to bid on behalf of a company may change over a period, mapping the names 
of the bidders and the names of the DSC holders was not feasible.  
However, the fact remains that matching the DSC details with the bidder’s 
identity is crucial to prevent impersonation or unauthorised actions.The system 
should not permit registration of DSC without first validating that the name of 
the bidder matches the name of the DSC holder, to uphold the essential attribute 
of non-repudiation.  
 
 
 
Input  Control 
Input Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
18  
 
  
3.1.2 Absence of application control to verify the validity period of 
DSC used by bidders 
  
DSCs were mapped to bidders and each DSC has a defined 
validity period, as specified by the DSC Certifying Authorities. 
In order to uphold the essential attribute of non-repudiation, the 
e-Procurement system should have had application control to 
verify the validity of the DSC, when a bidder sought to digitally sign inputs 
into the system.   
Audit noticed that such an application control had not been implemented in e-
Procurement system. This was evidenced by the fact that the database had 23 
instances in which bidders had uploaded bids/ submitted inputs into the system 
after the date of expiry of validity of their DSCs. This was a major deficiency 
in the application controls implemented in the system. 
In response, Department admitting the fact, stated (December 2023) that 
validity checking of DSCs was being carried out at the time of user logging 
into the system. The response was not tenable as the instances noticed by Audit 
clearly showed that the validity of the DSC had not been verified by the system.  
 
  
3.2 Deficiencies in application control to correctly record PAN for 
registered bidders 
  
 As per functional requirement specification of the system, 
the online user registration forms shall clearly indicate which 
fields are mandatory and validation controls shall be 
implemented to ensure that all the mandatory fields are filled 
with valid and relevant data by the user.  Bidders should be registered with 
correct Permanent Account Number (PAN) issued by the Income Tax 
Department, Government of India and system should ensure that each unique 
PAN recorded in the system is mapped to the concerned bidder only, and not 
to multiple bidders registered in the system. 
  
3.2.1 Recording invalid PAN during registration of bidders 
  
As per design of the PAN, the fourth character of PAN 
represents the status of the PAN holder. C stands for 
Company, P for Person, H for Hindu Undivided Family 
(HUF), F for Firm, A for Association of Persons (AOP), T 
for AOP (Trust), B for Body of Individuals (BOI), L for Local Authority, J for 
Artificial Juridical Person and G for Government. If any other letter presents 
in fourth character of PAN, it is invalid. Further, as PAN was a mandatory field, 
the data field should not be permitted to be left blank at the time of registration 
of the bidder. 
Input Control 
General Control 
Input  Control 

Chapter III: User Management 
 19 
 
Audit analysed the tenderer/ corporate tenderer profile table of the system and 
noticed that there were 80,3049 users registered. Out of these 80,304 users, the 
PAN of 154 users as recorded in the table was either blank or invalid, as fourth 
character of the PAN did not belong to the set of permissible letters.  
Out of these 154 users having blank/ invalid PAN, 39 users had been irregularly 
permitted to submit bids in 600 tenders and in 11 tenders, had even been 
irregularly awarded the contract.  
Thus, GePNIC had deficiencies in validation controls to mandate entry of PAN 
and to verify the correctness of the PAN data entered in the concerned data 
field, during registration of the bidders.  
This deficiency resulted in the material risk of participation of the same bidder 
with multiple bids in the same tender, and consequent risks of award of contract 
on the basis of competitive bids which had all been submitted by a single bidder 
using different user IDs. 
 
 
  
3.2.2  Mapping the same PAN to multiple user IDs during bidder 
registration 
  
Permanent Account Number (PAN) is a unique number 
issued by the Income Tax Department to various persons like 
individuals, HUF, company, BoI, Government etc. 
Therefore, each bidder in the user master table should have 
only one PAN and multiple bidders should not be registered with the same 
PAN.  
Out of 80,304 bidders registered in the system, Audit analysed the bidder data 
and their PAN and noticed that in case of 25,109 bidders, the PAN number was 
not unique, i.e., the same PAN number was also found mapped to other bidders 
(ranging from 2 to 212) in the database.  
Out of these 25,109 bidders having non-unique PAN,  
 10,124 bidders had submitted 2,82,229 bids for 1,55,235 tenders.  
 1,156 bidders had been awarded contract for 4,347 tenders valued at 
₹ 11,694.36 crore.  
 The above included 29 bidders with the same PAN (but different user 
IDs) who had submitted 88 bids (ranging between 2 to 4 bids) in the 
same tender, on 39 occasions. Due to lack of validation controls to 
prevent duplicate PAN mapped to multiple bidders, these 29 bidders 
had submitted 2 to 4 bids in the same tender, as illustrated in an example 
below:  
 
9  There are 80,304 bidders in the bidder profile tables against 80,310 bidder users in the 
user master table because 6 bidder users did not have records of their profile data. 
Input  Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
20  
 
  
The Department had not conducted any review to identify and eliminate such 
user IDs which had been mapped incorrectly to PAN not belonging to the user. 
There was no application control to flag and prevent mapping of an already 
registered PAN to a new user at the time of bidder registration. 
This deficiency in the application control to prevent mapping of same PAN to 
multiple users resulted in the material risk of participation of the same bidder 
with multiple bids in the same tender, and consequent risks of award of contract 
on the basis of competitive bids which had all been submitted by a single bidder 
using different user IDs. 
 
  
3.2.3  Manual entry of incorrect PAN by bidders during submission of 
bids  
  
As per system design, a copy of profile of bidder details like 
company name, business nature, mobile number, PAN, 
registration number, created date and address of bidder is 
captured in a separate bidder profile table against each bid 
during bid submission by the bidder. 
Input  Control 
Case Study 
Multiple bidders mapped to the same PAN and participating in 
the same tender 
1. A total of 13 bids were submitted for the tender “Expression 
of Interest for selection of authority engineer for construction 
of four lane dedicated coal corridor from Bankibahal (coal 
mines) to Bhedabahal (Sh-10) from 0/000 to 30/811 km”. In 
these 13 bids, two bids were submitted by bidders having 
different user IDs but the same PAN. However, without 
rejecting the bids received from the common bidder, the TIA 
considered the bids as valid and awarded the contract to one 
of the two bids, which was determined to be L1. The reason 
for considering the two bids from different user IDs but 
having the same PAN as valid during evaluation of bids, was 
not found on record.   
2. A total of three bids were received for “Engagement of 
transport contractor for transportation of different seeds for 
the period from 01 January 2022 to 31 December 2023 for 
Bhubaneswar zone”. In these three bids, two bids were 
submitted by bidders having different user IDs but the same 
PAN. However, without rejecting the bids received from the 
common bidder, the TIA considered one of the two bids as 
valid and went ahead with the bid evaluation process. The 
reason for considering one of the two bids from different user 
IDs but having the same PAN as valid during evaluation of 
bids, was not found on record.  

Chapter III: User Management 
 21 
 
Audit noticed that instead of auto-populating the PAN from the master data for 
the user as recorded during bidder registration, the system permitted manual 
entry of PAN once again during the time of submission of bids.  
This deficiency in the system design had resulted in 244 bidders having 
manually entered different PAN numbers during bid submission in the different 
tenders that they had participated in.  
Department accepted these above observations and stated (December 2023) 
that integration of Goods and Services Tax Number (GSTN) with e-
Procurement system is being planned, and that validation controls for PAN will 
be implemented once that integration is in place.  
 
  
 
Recommendation 
Government may implement appropriate validation controls for user 
access management during the registration of bidders, to ensure that 
 Valid DSCs, PAN, dates etc., are entered into the system in 
compliance with executive instructions. 
 The essential attribute of non-repudiation is upheld in the system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Tender Creation and Publication 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 23 
 
Chapter IV 
 
Tender Creation and Publication 
 
4.1  Deficiencies in the workflow for tender creation  
As per system design, the tender creator was required to complete the tender 
publishing process by providing information like basic details such as notice 
inviting tender, work 
details, fee details, critical 
dates, and Bill of Quantity 
(in MS Excel format) etc. 
The tender documents were 
required to be uploaded into 
the e-Procurement system. 
According to the BoQ 
template, the bidders were 
required to submit their bids 
in the system by digitally 
signing, encrypting and 
uploading the technical and 
financial bid documents. 
After opening of the bids, 
details of the opened bids such as bid documents, decryption date, file names, 
uploaded dates, file sizes against each bid were required to be stored in the 
system.  
Audit analysed the dataflow in the system for the above processes and observed 
the following inconsistencies: 
 
  
4.2  Absence of application control to enforce minimum period for 
submission of bids 
  
As per OPWD Code Vol-II, Annexure XI as amended on 
19.01.2004, time limit between issue/publication/sale and 
receipt of bids is stipulated as follows: 
 
Table No. 1:  List showing threshold limit of time limit between issue/ 
publication/sale and receipt of bids 
Estimated cost put to tender Minimum 
number  
of days 
Maximum 
number  
of days 
Not exceeding ₹50 lakh  10  15  
More than ₹50 lakh but not 
exceeding ₹3 crores   
15  21  
More than ₹3 crores   15  30  
Very large and complex 
project   
21  45  
(Source: OPWD Code) 
 
System Design 
Figure No 5: Tender process flow 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
24  
 
Further, in case of corrigendum issued to the tenders, minimum seven days’ 
time is to be provided for bid submission from the date of publication of 
corrigendum. 
Data analysis revealed that out of 3,74,806 tenders published up to 31 March 
2022, fewer days than stipulated were provided for submission of bids in 
82,994 tenders. The fewer days provided for submission of bids ranged 
between 1 and 14 days as follows: 
Table No. 2 : List showing deviations in threshold limit of time limit 
between issue/publication/sale and receipt of bids 
Tender value Minimum 
permissible days 
Number of 
tenders where 
fewer days 
provided 
<=5000000 10 64,199  
>5000000 and <=30000000 15 16,604  
>30000000 15 2,191  
Total   82,994  
(Source: Database analysis) 
Further, in 421 out of 69,163 corrigenda, the time given from date of 
publication of corrigendum to date of bid submission closing date was less than 
seven days. The fewer days given ranged between one to six days. 
During the test check of tenders, Audit found that in 168 out of 486 tenders, 
fewer days were allowed than prescribed for bid submission ranging between 
one to nine days. There was no reason for giving fewer days to bidders for 
submission of bids. 
Audit concluded that the business rule specifying the minimum period for 
submission of bids had not been mapped into the system in the form of 
application control to enforce the minimum period for submission of bid based 
on tender value.  
Department stated (December 2023) that while OPWD Code has provisions for 
different time periods for submission of bids based on tender value, TIAs can 
reduce the time prescribed.  
The response was not tenable, since lack of this application control meant that 
the possibility of prospective bidders being deprived from participation in the 
tendering process due to lack of adequate time and the possibility that TIAs 
could favour certain selected bidders by giving them the tender details in 
advance of the tender publication date on the system, could not be ruled out. 
The lack of compliance with the minimum prescribed time period for 
submission of bids adversely impacts the objectives of transparency and 
fairness in the procurement process and hence, this is a major control failure in 
the system. 

Chapter IV: Tender Creation and Publication 
 25 
 
 
  
4.3  Absence of application control to enforce two-cover process for 
tenders with value more than ₹50 lakh 
  
OPWD Code provided for two cover process for tenders 
costing above ₹50 lakhs - one cover containing technical bid 
and other containing financial bid. 
Data analysis revealed that out of 3,74,806 tenders, single 
cover process had been followed in 4,045 tenders despite the tender value 
ranging between ₹50.10 lakh and ₹752.00 crore, instead of following the two 
cover system. The year wise details of number of tenders with single cover with 
minimum and maximum value of tender is given as below: 
Table No.3: Statement showing year-wise number of tenders invited with single cover 
instead of double cover with minimum and maximum value of tenders 
Year Number of 
tenders 
Minimum tender value  
(₹ in crore) 
Maximum tender value   
(₹ in crore) 
2008-09  4  0.90  3.77  
2009-10  25  0.50  141.20  
2010-11  68  0.51  138.87  
2011-12  189  0.50  181.35  
2012-13  101  0.51  11.23  
2013-14  736  0.50  187.06  
2014-15  670  0.50  224.13  
2015-16  377  0.50  752.00  
2016-17  334  0.50  221.88  
2017-18  431  0.50  116.17  
2018-19  432  0.50  9.57  
2019-20  221  0.50  13.00  
2020-21  210  0.50  22.23  
2021-22  247  0.50  22.23  
Total  4045  0.50   752.00 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 
Audit noticed that the number of tenders irregularly following single cover 
process instead of the applicable two cover process had been increasing over 
the above period.  
Audit test checked 486 tenders for detailed scrutiny and found that out of 129 
tenders with tender value more than ₹50 lakh, in case of seven tenders, single 
cover process had been irregularly followed, without recording any reasons for 
the non-compliance with the Code.  
Audit concluded that the business rule for following two cover process for 
tenders having value more than ₹50 lakh had not been mapped as an application 
control in the e-Procurement system. The workflow permitted the 
Departmental user to opt for single cover process even when the tender value 
was more than ₹50 lakh.  
 
General Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
26  
 
The Department accepted (December 2023) that NIC had not implemented the 
application control to make two cover process mandatory for tenders with value 
more than ₹50 lakh.  
  
4.4 Loss of tender fees due to absence of mapping of fees based on 
the tender value 
  
As per Rule 15 to Appendix IX of OPWD  Code Vol-II, the 
tender fees is based on the value of tender, as follows: 
Table No.4: Statement showing cost of tender papers 
according to tender value 
Tender Value Tender 
Fees 
Tenders costing up to ₹ 10,000  ₹200  
Tenders costing over ₹10,000 but below ₹1.00 lakh  ₹400  
Tenders costing over ₹1.00 lakh but below ₹2.00 lakh  ₹600  
Tenders costing over ₹2.00 lakh but below ₹5.00 lakh  ₹2,000  
Tenders costing over ₹5.00 lakh but below ₹10.00 lakh  ₹4,000  
Tenders costing over ₹10.00 lakh but below ₹50.00 lakh  ₹6,000  
Tenders costing over ₹50.00 lakh and above   ₹10,000  
(Source : OPWD Code) 
In the “As-is and To-be” document the same was also considered for 
development of software.   
Data analysis revealed that out of the 3.75 lakh tenders published up to 31 
March 2022, in 10,152 tenders the Tender Inviting Authority (TIA) had invited 
tender with less than the prescribed and applicable tender fees. The shortfall in 
tender fees ranged between ₹75 and ₹9,999. In eight tenders, the tender fees 
had been fixed as ₹1 instead of ₹10,000. On verification with the DTCN, Audit 
noticed that these had arisen due to manual computation by users and 
subsequent data entry errors.  
Hence, due to non-mapping of the business rule for computation of tender fees 
based on tender value in the system as a processing control, incorrect data had 
been manually entered into the system by users, resulting in non-compliance 
and loss of revenue for the Government.   
The tender value wise number of tenders and number of bids for which less 
tender fees was collected was as follows:   
System Design 

Chapter IV: Tender Creation and Publication 
 27 
 
Table No.5: Statement showing tender value wise number of tenders and 
number of bids for which less tender fee was collected 
Sl 
No    
Tender value range   Number 
of 
tenders    
Number 
of bids    
Tender fees 
applicable 
based on 
tender value    
(₹ in lakh)  
Tender 
fees 
actually 
paid by 
bidders   
 (₹ in 
lakh)   
Shortfall 
in tender 
fees paid 
by 
bidders   
(₹ in 
lakh)   
1   Tenders costing over 
₹50.00 lakh and above   
13 23 0.09 0.06 0.03 
2   Tenders costing over 
₹10.00 lakh but below 
₹50.00 lakh   
742 1550 9.30 7.19 2.11 
3   Tenders costing over 
₹5.00 lakh but below 
₹10.00 lakh   
1061 3434 206.04 151.65 54.39 
4   Tenders costing over 
₹2.00 lakh but below 
₹5.00 lakh   
2008 4866 97.32 34.19 63.13 
5   Tenders costing over 
₹1.00 lakh but below 
₹2.00 lakh   
1798 5168 206.72 111.73 94.99 
6   Tenders costing over 
₹10,000 but below 
₹1.00 lakh   
366 1862 186.20 110.01 76.19 
    Total   5,988 16,903 705.67 414.83 290.84 
 (Source: e-Procurement database) 
The above finding was verified during test-check of tenders in selected TIAs, 
wherein it was found that in 16 tenders, tender fees of ₹2.13 lakh was collected 
against the applicable fees of ₹3.46 lakh resulting in shortfall of ₹1.33 lakh.  
The Department accepted (December 2023) the Audit observation and stated 
that the business rule would be mapped into the system. 
4.5 Deficiencies in computation of tender value   
As per para 3.5.6 of OPWD code and Appendix IX of OPWD Code volume -
II, tender for works should be invited only after a detailed estimate showing 
quantities, rates and amounts of various items of works and specifications to 
be adopted are prepared and sanctioned by competent authority. The tender 
documents comprise (i) the notice inviting tenders (NIT) in the prescribed 
form, (2) the schedule of quantities of works, (3) complete specifications of the 
work to be done, (4) a set of complete drawings and (5) the form of tenders be 
used along with a set of special conditions.  
In the notice inviting tender, the BoQ is also required to be uploaded by the 
Tender Inviting Authority (TIA). The amount put to tender (tender value) in 
the Notice Inviting Tender should match the total estimated amount in the BoQ.   
 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
28  
 
  
4.5.1 Deficiency in validation controls in BoQ template published 
in tenders 
  
As per system design, the BoQ template (in MS Excel format) 
containing details of various items, quantities, rate and amount 
for the work and NIT was to be uploaded by the TIA while 
creating the tender.  
After submission of bids as per BoQ template and during financial evaluation, 
comparative statement is generated by the system, with the total amount of the 
BoQ computed as tender value.   
Analysis of the e-Procurement system data revealed that in four out of 3.75 
lakh tenders, the total amount of the BoQ were stored as ‘NaN’, instead of the 
correct numerical tender value.  
Further, in 257 tenders, the items in the BoQ had been irregularly recorded 
more than once in the database, resulting in mismatches between the tender 
value stored in the system and the total amount of the BoQ. The year wise 
details of such tenders were as follows:   
Table No.6 : Statement showing discrepancy between figures of BoQ and database 
Year   Number 
of 
tenders  
Total amount put 
to tender  
(₹ in crore) 
Total BoQ amount 
of tenders (₹ in 
crore) 
Difference between 
tender value and BoQ 
amount (₹ in crore) 
2010-11  12  3.94 7.87 3.94 
2011-12  5  2.07 4.13 2.07 
2012-13  8  14.54 29.09 14.54 
2013-14  70  81.97 163.93 81.97 
2014-15  81  30.2 60.41 30.2 
2015-16  24  6.88 13.76 6.88 
2016-17  3  2.66 5.32 2.66 
2017-18  1  0.04 0.07 0.04 
2018-19  14  27.83 55.67 27.83 
2019-20  2  0.09 0.19 0.09 
2020-21  1  11.1 22.2 11.1 
2021-22  36  265.64 531.28 265.64 
Total   257  446.96 893.92 446.96 
(Source : e-Procurement database) 
Due to irregular recording of BoQ items more than once by bidders and the 
storage of such data in the database, the total BoQ amount did not match the 
tender value declared in the published documents. This mismatch had occurred 
due to deficiencies in the validation controls implemented for recording inputs 
from bidders in the published BoQ templates. 
In the absence of automated processes within the system for technical and 
financial evaluation and award of contract, this deficiency created material risk 
of errors/ deliberate irregularities during manual processes for bid evaluation 
in these tenders. 
Input Control 

Chapter IV: Tender Creation and Publication 
 29 
 
 
   
4.5.2 Deficiency in processing controls to compute tender value 
based on BoQ 
  
The tender value, i.e., the amount put to tender in the Notice 
Inviting Tender should match with that of the total estimated 
amount in the BoQ for which tender was invited, as tender 
fee and Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) amount to be 
deposited is dependent on the tender value.    
Analysis of database revealed that in 1.34 lakh out of 3.75 lakh tenders, the 
BoQ amount did not match the tender value.  
The year wise details of the number of tenders in which tender value and BoQ 
amount differed were as follows: 
  Table No.7 : Statement showing year-wise discrepancy between figures 
of BoQ and tender amount in database (₹ in crore) 
Year Number of 
tenders 
Total amount 
put to tender 
Total BoQ 
amount of 
tenders 
Difference 
between 
tender value 
and BoQ 
amount 
2010-11  2,899  976.77 970.94 5.83 
2011-12  7,598  5,336.83 5,306.57 30.26 
2012-13  10,125  6,420.57 6,335.26 85.31 
2013-14  14,487  7,365.23 7,147.65 217.58 
2014-15  11,393  5,009.27 4,877.33 131.94 
2015-16  11,697  5,049.20 4,872.79 176.42 
2016-17  13,095  4,651.51 4,402.66 248.85 
2017-18  15,677  12,897.30 7,430.40 5,466.92 
2018-19  15,264  9,514.87 9,500.49 14.38 
2019-20  8,979  3,203.64 3,180.55 23.09 
2020-21  9,074  5,016.01 4,153.16 862.85 
2021-22  14,018  8,198.88 7,892.92 305.96 
Total   1,34,306  73,640.08 66,070.72 7,569.39 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 
Audit noticed that these differences had arisen because the Departmental users 
were expected to manually enter the tender value into the concerned data field, 
instead of the system computing the same based on the details entered in the 
BoQ.  The absence of this processing control resulted in material risk of 
incorrect manual entry of tender value, and consequent shortfalls in collection 
of tender fees and Earnest Money Deposit.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that the responsibility of entering the 
correct tender value was that of the concerned TIAs.  
Input  Control 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
30  
 
The response was not tenable, as it only reflected the fact that the responsibility 
for ensuring compliance remained on the individual users instead of shifting to 
the system through the implementation of necessary controls.  
 
 
  
Recommendation 
Government may consider to 
 Implement mapping of business rules for minimum period for 
submission of bids, mandatory two-cover process for tenders 
with value more than ₹50 lakh and computation of tender fees 
based on tender value;  
 Implement validation controls to ensure correct recording of 
bids in the BoQ template and processing controls for correct 
computation of tender value based on BoQ in the system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Chapter V 
Bid Creation and Submission 
 
 


 
 
 
 

 
 31 
 
Chapter V 
 
Bid Creation and Submission 
 
5.1 Deficiencies in the workflow for creation/ submission of bids 
As per system design, while creating tender, the tender creator enters the 
critical dates like published date, document sale start date, document sale end 
date, seek clarification start date, seek clarification end date, bid submission 
opening date, bid submission closing date and bid opening dates for the tender 
published. During bid submission by the bidder, the bid submission date 
timestamp is stored in bids table. As per system requirement, the system shall 
not accept any bids after bid submission end date and time. System shall also 
terminate all bid submission process related to those tenders where bid 
submission has started before bid submission end date and time and reached 
the deadline. 
 
 
  
5.1.1 Absence of application controls to prevent submission of bids 
after expiry of tender closing time 
  
As per system workflow, no bids should be permitted to be 
submitted after tender closing time. 
Data analysis revealed that there were 228 bids relating to 
224 tenders where bids had been submitted after bid closing 
time, ranging between 0.026 fraction of seconds to 3 days 3 hours 37 minutes.  
The year wise details of the number of bids submitted after bid submission 
closing time was as follows:  
Table No.8: Year-wise submission of bids after tender closing time  
Year Number of 
bids 
Number 
of tenders 
Minimum time after bid 
submission closing time 
( in days HH:MM:SS) 
Maximum time after bid 
submission closing time 
(in days HH:MM:SS) 
2007-08 1 1 2 days 01:47:44.252 2 days 01:47:44.252 
2008-09 15 12 00:00:41.868 3 days 03:37:30.351 
2009-10 16 16 00:00:01.052 00:03:18.619 
2010-11 45 44 00:00:00.168 00:05:02.318 
2011-12 25 25 00:00:00.946 00:02:00.4 
2012-13 65 65 00:00:00.363 00:18:47.57 
2013-14 37 37 00:00:00.026 00:02:56.201 
2014-15 7 7 00:00:00.062 00:00:44.045 
2015-16 3 3 00:00:00.415 00:39:32.234 
2019-20 1 1 00:00:00.137 00:00:00.137 
2021-22 13 13 00:00:00.368 00:01:27.23 
Total  228 224   
(Source : extracted from e-Procurement database) 
This significant and material irregularity had arisen due to either absence of 
application controls to prevent submission of bids after tender closing time or 
due to manual intervention at the back end of the system. 
 
System Security 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
32  
 
Audit noticed that the Department had not conducted a detailed review of this 
data from the system and determined the root causes for such discrepancy, 
which created doubts on the integrity of the procurement process.       
The Department stated (December 2023) that minor differences in bid 
submission time and tender closing time could take place due to latency issues 
in the application server, and such latency and performance issues had been 
addressed and fixed in September 2021.  
The response was not tenable, as the data above shows that the differences 
between bid submission time and tender closing time ranged up to three days, 
which cannot be the result of any server latency issue but is strongly indicative 
of application controls not functioning at the front end or manual intervention 
at the back end of the system.  
 
  
5.1.2 Absence of validation controls to enforce chronological 
sequencing of actions 
  
As per system workflow, bids could be created only after 
document sale start date of a work item put to tender, and bids 
could only be updated after they were created.  
However, Audit analysed the e-Procurement database and 
observed that  
 A total of 14 bids pertaining to 12 tenders had been recorded as created 
before the tender document sale start date, with the difference in time 
ranging from 16 hours to 15 days. 
 A total of 2,192 bids had bid update time recorded as before the bid 
creation time. 
 A total of 6,26,115 bids had bid uploaded time recorded as before the 
bid creation time, with differences ranging up to 60 days. 
The above findings indicated that there were inadequate validation controls to 
enforce correct recording of time and enforcement of chronological sequencing 
of user actions in the system, and hence there was absence of timestamping 
integrity in the system.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that this issue had been fixed in April 
2016.  
The response was not tenable, since no patch management reports were 
furnished to Audit and the issue of inconsistent/ illogical timestamps persisted 
in 2022. 
 
  
5.2 Absence of application controls to prevent mapping of same 
mobile number to multiple bidders 
  
As per system design, bidder details such as company name, 
mobile number, PAN, registration number, created date and 
address of bidder is recorded in the system during bidder 
registration.  
Processing Control 
Input Control 

Chapter V: Bid Creation and Submission 
 33 
 
There was provision in the system to intimate registered bidders through SMS 
on their mobile numbers about tender publication, corrigenda published after 
tender publication, status of technical evaluation and financial evaluation, and 
status of award of contract. Hence, the mobile number plays a significant role 
in the e-Procurement system for sending SMS intimation on various events. 
Audit analysed the data on registered bidders in the system and noticed that 
 Out of the 80,310 registered bidders, 1,385 bidders had invalid mobile 
numbers and hence, could not receive any SMS intimations at all.  
 Of the remaining 78,925 registered bidders with valid mobile numbers, 
27,069 registered bidders had been mapped to 10,571 mobile numbers, 
with the same mobile number being mapped to multiple registered 
bidders. The number of registered bidders mapped to the same mobile 
number ranged between two and 296.  
 A total of 106 mobile numbers which were registered by Departmental 
officials were found to be mapped to 1,264 registered bidders. 
 During bid submission, instead of auto populating the mobile number 
data field from the master data for registered bidders, the bidders were 
expected to once again enter their mobile numbers manually. As a 
result, there were instances of the same mobile number being entered 
by multiple bidders during the bid submission, which were different to 
the one that they had used during bidder registration. 
The above circumstances indicated that the absence of application controls to 
prevent the mapping of the same mobile number to multiple bidders, and lapses 
in the process of authentication of the mobile numbers through OTP, at the time 
of registration. The mapping of the same mobile numbers to Departmental 
officials and registered bidders indicated material risk of either lack of due 
diligence during data entry or probable collusion. This material risk should 
have been mitigated through implementation of necessary application controls 
to prevent duplication in mapping of the mobile numbers.  
During field verification by Audit of 486 test checked tenders, it was seen that 
in 11 tenders, 18 bidders had submitted bids with the same mobile number. 
Scrutiny of tender documents revealed that they were close relatives of one 
another (siblings, father-son, mother-son, husband-wife). The Tender Inviting 
Authority had technically qualified these bidders without any investigation, 
indicating either lack of due diligence or collusion between the bidders and the 
department officers. In such six cases, such bidders had also been awarded the 
contract. 
The Department stated (December 2023) that as certain organizations require 
two login IDs and may have the same mobile number mapped, it is not possible 
to impose unique constraint for mobile numbers. However, verification of the 
mobile number through OTP at the time of registration would be considered. 
The response was not tenable, in view of the nature of risks as outlined above. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
34  
 
  
 
Recommendation 
Government may consider to   
 Enforce application controls to prevent submission of bids 
after tender closing time; 
 Implement validation controls to enforce chronological and 
logical sequencing of user actions in the system; 
 Implement application controls to prevent mapping of the 
same mobile numbers to multiple users in the system, and 
enquire into cases where the same mobile numbers had been 
mapped to Departmental users and bidders.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter VI 
Bid Opening and Evaluation 

 
 
 
 

 
 35 
 
Chapter VI 
 
Bid Opening and Evaluation 
 
6.1  Packet opening and bid decryption 
As per SRS, the system shall support encryption of bids submitted by the 
bidder, using the Public Key of the Bid Opening Authority. Encryption shall 
be done at the client side, and the encrypted bid shall be time locked by the 
system, till the time of bid opening. Only the Bid Opening Authority shall be 
able to decrypt the submitted bids only at the bid opening time, using the 
Private Key of the Bid Opening Authority. There were two types of processes 
for bid opening- single cover and two-cover.  
In case of two-cover process, stage wise bid opening and decryption is to be 
followed, with the financial bid cover remaining encrypted till the completion 
of technical evaluation. Financial bid cover would be decrypted only for those 
bidders who have qualified in the technical evaluation. 
Figure 6: Flowchart showing processes of bid submission and bid opening 
 
In the bid opening process, the designated bid openers first opens the cover 
packet (Step 7 in above picture). The date of opening is recorded in the 
database. After that, each bid of the tender is decrypted by the authorised 
departmental user one by one (Steps 8 and 9) and the date of bid decryption is 
recorded in the database.  
The e-Procurement system was implemented in Odisha in July 2008. A total of 
3,22,897 tenders were published up to 31 March 2022 against which 17,42,000 
bids were received. Audit analysed the database tables with data related to 
opening and decryption of bid packets, and found the following 
inconsistencies. 
 


Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
36  
 
  
6.1.1  Risk of change in bid openers through manual intervention at 
the back end of the system  
  
As per system design, at the time of creation of tender, the 
tender creator selects the bid openers. The system allows 
configuring any four bid openers out of which any two or three 
can open the bid at the actual bid opening time. The details of 
bid openers is recorded in the database. At the time of 
submission of bid documents by bidders, the documents are digitally signed by 
the bidder and encrypted using the bid openers’ public key. The details of bids, 
bid openers, and the random encryption key data are stored in the key store 
table of the system in parts, thereby ensuring that nobody can open or decrypt 
the bid.   
  
At the time of tender opening, the tender is opened online by the authorized bid 
openers who have been configured at the time tender creation. Any two, three 
or four officials as configured can open the bids once the bid opening date and 
time is reached. The decryption key is updated in the key store at the time 
opening of tender. Then the encrypted bid documents are decrypted and opened 
one by one by the bid opener. As the decryption key is updated at the time of 
opening of tender, the bid opener should be same as defined at the time of 
creation of tender.   
Audit analysed the data in the bid openers master table and the key store table 
in the system and noticed that in three tenders, the bid openers as per the key 
store table were not the ones recorded in the bid openers master table, as 
follows:   
Table No.9 : List showing undesignated tender openers 
Sl. 
No  
Tender ID  Bid opener id in key store table not 
matching bid openers master table   
1  7687  2793  
2  7691  884  
3  87361  18037  
 (Source: e-Procurement database) 
At the time of bid submission by the bidder, the symmetric key was encrypted 
using the public key of the bid opener as defined in the bid opener master table. 
However, the system recorded that decryption of the symmetric key had been 
carried out by another user’s private key. This indicated that in these cases, the 
bids had been opened by users other than the designated bid openers and raised 
doubts on the integrity of the procurement process.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that at the early stage of the 
application, there was a deficiency in the process of changing bid openers, 
which had resulted in this anomaly and had been subsequently fixed.  
The response was not tenable, as Audit noticed that in one of the three tenders, 
there was evidence of another bid opener having been added to the bid opener 
master table through manual intervention at the back end of the system. As a 
result, Audit was unable to derive assurance that integrity of the process of 
 
System Security  

Chapter VI: Bid Opening and Evaluation 
 37 
 
designating bid openers in the absence of a clear and verifiable trail of user 
actions in the system. 
  
  
6.1.2 Risk of modification of decrypted bid data through manual 
intervention at the back end of the system 
  
As per system flow, after opening of submitted bids against a 
particular tender, the bids are decrypted and stored in the ‘bid 
decrypted’ table. The ‘bid decrypted’ table had columns like bid 
identity number, packet identity number, date of decryption, the 
user id of the user who decrypted the bid and the tender ID. Hence, for every 
bid decrypted, the corresponding tender ID should have been populated in the 
decrypted table and there should not be any null value in the tender ID data 
field against any decrypted bid, otherwise the link between the tender and the 
decrypted bid will be lost. 
Audit analysed the ‘bid decrypted’ table and noticed that 
 A total of 15.39 lakh bids pertaining to 2.61 lakh tenders published up 
to 31 March 2022 had been decrypted. Out of these, 1.79 lakh decrypted 
bids pertaining to 50,627 tenders had tender ID recorded as ‘NULL’, 
which was highly irregular.  
As bid decryption was an automated process in the system and since 
every bid has to have referential integrity with respect to a particular 
tender, the recording of the tender ID as ‘NULL’ indicated the material 
risk that these values had arisen as a result of manual intervention at the 
back end of the system by the Data Base Administrator, bypassing the 
application controls for the decryption process.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that there had been an error in 
the object relational mapping in the system which had led to ‘NULL’ 
value in the tender ID field in the bid decrypted table, and this issue had 
been resolved.  
The response was not tenable, since it did not explain how the tender 
ID field could be populated as ‘NULL’ in case the process had been 
carried out through the application front end. The Government also did 
not furnish the details of the resolution process or patch management in 
this regard.  
 
 In a total of 77,554 tenders involving 2,45,521 decrypted bids, the time 
of decryption of bids was recorded as before the time recorded for 
opening of the bids. The difference between the bid decryption time 
being earlier than bid opening time ranged from 55 minutes to 2,252 
days, which was highly irregular. This broken chronology and logical 
sequencing of actions in the system indicated the risk of manual 
intervention at the back end of the system. 
 
System Security 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
38  
 
 There were 1,89,141 decrypted bids having exactly the same bid 
decryption start time and end time, which again indicated the risk of 
manual intervention at the back end of the system. 
 There were 342 bids pertaining to 120 tenders in the system, which were 
recorded as not having been decrypted. Out of these 120 tenders, 48 
tenders had either been revoked, retendered or cancelled. However, 
there was no explanation as to why the bids in the remaining 72 tenders 
were recorded as not having been decrypted. Out of these bids which 
were recorded as not decrypted, contracts had been awarded in the case 
of five bids. This discrepancy indicated the material risk that these bids 
pertaining to the 72 tenders had been entered into the system through 
manual intervention at the back end.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that the ‘bid decrypted’ table 
was implemented at a later stage and that during initial deployment, the 
data had been populated from other tables using deployment scripts 
which had resulted in the above discrepancies. 
 
The response was not tenable, as these discrepancies had taken place 
even after the implementation of the ‘bid decrypted’ table in 2017-18 
and details of the deployment scripts previously used were not provided 
to Audit for verification.  
 
 
  
Recommendation 
 
Government may consider to  
 Minimise manual interventions at the back end of the system, by 
adopting formal change management process to implement required 
functionality for users at the front end of the application;  
 Ensure mandatory maintenance of application and DBA logs to 
record all user actions at the front and back end of the system; 
 Adopt standard operating procedures for patch management, version 
control and documentation of scripts used in the system. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter VII 
Award of Contract 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 39 
 
 
Chapter VII 
 
Award of Contract 
 
7.1  Award of Contract  
As described earlier in this Report, the processes of technical and financial 
evaluation of bids and award of contract are being carried out manually, outside 
the e-Procurement system. This section of the Report describes deficiencies in 
application controls in the functionality to record the details of award of 
contract in the system. 
 
After Award of Contract (AOC) through manual process outside the system, 
details of the same are entered by the TIA into the system, so that EMD may 
be refunded to the unsuccessful bidders.  
The completion of this workflow is essential for correct update of the status of 
the tender in the system, and hence for correct generation of the MIS Reports 
for that purpose. 
 
 
  
7.1.1 Awarded value more than quoted amount 
  
OPWD Code stipulates that the price quoted by the lowest 
bidder (L1) should be accepted followed by negotiation if 
required.  Therefore, the quoted amount in the Financial Bid 
i.e., Bill of Quantity (BoQ) should always be equal to or more 
than the awarded amount. 
Database analysis revealed that 
out of 66,407 tenders which 
were awarded with contract, in 
6,128 tenders the awarded 
value was shown more than the 
value quoted by the bidders. 
The excess amount awarded in 
these tenders ranged between 
₹10 and ₹1,24,298.50 crore.  
As an example, in one work 
where the work was shown 
awarded at an abnormal cost of 
₹1,24,298.50 crore, there was 
data entry error. The BoQ 
amount and actual awarded 
value as per documents was 
₹12.42 lakh only. This had 
happened due to lack of input 
validation in the system to compare the AOC value with the bid values. 
 
Input  control 
Figure No. 7: Process flow diagram from 
invitation of bids to award of 
contract 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
40  
 
Further, analysis revealed that in 11 bids of 11 tenders, the amount furnished 
in the BoQ by the bidder had been recorded as zero, due to deficiency in the 
input validation controls implemented for the BoQ template used to submit 
bids. The system generated comparative sheets in these cases and showed that 
all the bidders were qualified and deemed to be L1.  
As a result, the tender evaluation committee had to manually calculate the 
correct bid amount for each bidder, based on inputs submitted on per cent rates 
from the bidders and create revised comparative sheets to identify the actual 
L1 bidder. This example demonstrated that the deficiencies in the e-
Procurement system related to the technical and financial evaluation and AOC 
processes had contributed to the continued use of manual evaluation and AOC 
outside the system for these processes.  
Audit test checked 486 tenders for detailed scrutiny and noticed that there were 
errors/ irregularities in 125 tenders. These included data entry errors in 46 
tenders, irregular inclusion of GST amount in AOC value in 30 tenders, and 
irregular increase of the AOC value due to either increase in BoQ beyond the 
tender published or increase in bid amount of L1 in 49 tenders. These errors/ 
irregularities could have been avoided/ minimised if the bid evaluation and 
AOC processes had been followed within the system with implementation of 
the application controls required to correctly map the business requirements.   
Accepting the observation, the Government stated (December 2023) that all 
TIAs have been intimated to use the e-Procurement portal cautiously while 
inviting tenders.  
The response was not tenable, as it only indicated that the responsibility for 
ensuring compliance with executive instructions remained on the individual 
users instead of shifting to the system through the implementation of the 
required application controls.  
 
Recommendation 
Government should map the full business requirements for bid 
evaluation and award of contract into the system, through 
implementation of appropriate application controls to ensure 
compliance and minimise errors/ irregularities. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VIII 
Timestamp Management and 
Application Security 
 
 
  


 
 
 
 

 
 41 
 
Chapter VIII 
 
Timestamp Management and Application Security 
 
8.1 Gap in sequential numbers in database tables 
During analysis of database design of e-Procurement system, 
Audit observed that each table of the database contained a data 
field named “ID”, which is a system generated sequential 
number10 to each record in the tables to maintain uniqueness. 
As it is a system generated sequential number, there should not be any gaps 
between any two consecutive ID numbers except in the event of deletion of 
records, sequence failures due to server shutdowns/ restarts or transaction 
rollbacks.  
Audit analysed the sequence of ID columns in ten important tables out of the 
total 742 tables in the database and found that there were 6.06 lakh records 
(IDs) missing in these tables. The numbers of missing records from these tables 
were as follows:  
Table No. 10: List showing gaps in IDs in various tables 
Sl 
No 
Table description Last ID in 
table 
Total 
number of 
records 
Number of 
times the gaps 
occurred 
Number of 
missing serial 
numbers 
1 User Master 87,621 87,105 186 516 
2 User Certificate 
Master 
1,75,307 1,73,718 805 1,589 
3 User Login Logs 44,54,352 44,29,771 21,037 24,581 
4 Tender Basic  84,384 79,588 3,287 4,796 
5 Tender Master 
(Work items) 
3,96,156 3,81,968 9,954 14,188 
6 Bids details 18,24,643 18,22,882 1,508 1,761 
7 Bank Transaction 
Details 
6,66,989 6,66,766 70 223 
8 History of Bank 
Transactions 
27,01,771 21,91,022 21,238 5,10,749 
9 Tender Fee Details 18,43,314 18,24,425 15,298 18,889 
10 Decryption of bids 19,95,857 19,67,589 19,056 28,268 
 Total 1,42,30,394 1,36,24,834 92,439 6,05,560 
(Source: extracted from e-Procurement database) 
The gaps between the sequential IDs of these ten tables ranged between 1 to 
827. Gap of one in sequential ids can be explained due to server shutdowns / 
restarts; however, larger gaps indicated manual intervention at the back end of 
the system to delete records. The Department had not conducted a review of 
such deletion, and identified the root causes for the missing IDs. The existence 
of these sequential gaps raised doubts on the integrity of the database. 
 
10  Starting from one and incremented by one i.e., if ID of first record is one, then ID of 
second record is two and so on. 
 
System security  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
42  
 
In reply, Department stated (December 2023) that gaps had occurred during 
transaction failures in the events of network issues, users cancelling 
transactions, logical errors etc.  
The response was not tenable, as the gaps were larger in size than would be 
expected with transaction failures. Audit examined these larger gaps and found 
that application logs were also missing for those periods (details in Appendix-
II), which indicated the material risk of manual intervention to modify data at 
the back end of the system. 
 
8.2 Unreliable and incomplete user logs 
As per SRS, every user is required to login to the e-Procurement portal using 
their username, password and Digital Signature for carrying out different 
activities. Therefore, the activities of users like tender creation, tender 
publishing, bid creation and submission by bidder, tender opening, and 
decryption and downloading of bids by department users etc., should have 
corresponding user log record in the session login table. As both the login and 
logout time of the user were captured for all the user login session from 01 May 
2017, Audit analysed the login records in the user login session tables for the 
period from May 2017 to March 2022 and observed that the above activities 
were carried out by the users where the log record about their logins were not 
available in the user login session table.  
The major user actions which did not have associated user logs included the 
following: 
1. Creation of tenders without log 
2. Creation of bids without log 
3. Submission of bids without log 
4. Opening of bids without log 
5. Decryption of bids without log 
6. Absence of/ incorrect recording of IP addresses of users 
These missing logs indicated the material risk of modification/ deletion of 
records through manual intervention at the back end of the system, and hence 
raised doubts on the integrity of the database and the procurement process as a 
whole. 
  
8.3 Use of SHA1 instead of minimum SHA2 
  
As per ‘IT (Intermediary guidelines and digital media ethics 
code)– Rule 2021, Digital signature End Entity Rules 2015 – 
Rule 7, SHA2 was prescribed as the hashing algorithm for use 
in Digital Signature. Further, in view of the detected collisions 
in SHA1 algorithm, SHA2 should be used in the e-Procurement application.  
 
During scrutiny of the application, Audit noticed that different hashes like 
password hashes, file name hash, file date hash, document hashes etc., are 
calculated using SHA1 or MD5 algorithm. Even the digital signature process 
System Security  

Chapter VIII: Timestamp Management and Application Security 
 43 
 
in e-Procurement (GePNIC) is still using the SHA1 with RSA instead of 
SHA2.   
Department stated (December 2023) that they are planning to use SHA512 hashing 
mechanism. The fact remained that there was lack of security in hashes. 
 
 
  
8.4  Absence of provision for verification of digital signatures 
of bidders 
  
IT Act 2000 Chapter-II Para 3 provides that in case of a person 
who authenticates an electronic record by affixing digital 
signature, any person by user of a public key of the person can 
verify the electronic record. This implies that important 
electronic records of an e‐Procurement application, like – Tender Notice, 
Corrigenda, Tender Documents, Addenda, Clarifications to Tender 
Documents, Bids, etc., should not only be electronically signed, there should 
also be provision in the e‐Procurement application to verify the electronic 
signatures.  
 
Audit noticed that in compliance to a query raised (November 2019) by STQC 
during their audit of the e-Procurement system, it was commented that 
electronic record can be verified using public key.  
However, Audit noticed that NIC had not provided for verification of digital 
signatures by stakeholders anywhere in the application. Further, Audit 
observed during testing of e-Procurement system that during uploading of bid 
documents by the bidders, the system mandated digital signature by bidders. 
Audit downloaded bid documents submitted against 48 tenders from the e-
Procurement system and observed that there was no digital signature affixed 
on any of the bid documents.   
It was explained by NIC that the digital signatures were detached and stored 
separately in the system and there was no provision for Departmental users to 
verify these digital signatures of the bidders.  
The absence of this provision resulted in non-compliance with the IT Act 2000.  
 
The Department stated (December 2023) that the provision to verify the digital 
signatures would be implemented in future versions of the system. 
 
  
8.5  Maintenance of logs 
  
As per System Requirement Specification, a secure central 
logging server should be deployed for recording all the events 
in system and access to such central logging server shall be 
completely restricted for the system administrators. The server 
was to be synced with the International Time zone server and a log of these 
time synchronization details was to be maintained in the server. Logs shall be 
enabled for access methods of the servers (especially for production servers) 
and audit and log of activities referring to the operating system, access to the 
System Security  
System Security  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
44  
 
system shall be maintained. Therefore, among other security logs, web logs11, 
application logs12, and DBA logs13 are important. 
Department had furnished two types log data i.e., web log (January 2016 to 
December 2022) and application log from (Jan 2016 to April 2022). 
Application logs collected during the whole day were taken to a file named 
after the same date with prefix ‘xxxxx.out’. As an example, the log of 01 
January 2016 is collected in the file “xxxxx.out2016-01-01 which is collected 
normally at the day end at 23.59 hours each day. Similarly, the web logs 
(apache web logs) collected were stored in log store in a folder named after the 
server address like ‘xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx’ which was in a date wise folder and the 
date wise folders were kept within a month wise folder named with year and 
month like ‘201601’ for January 2016.   
Figure 8: Extracted data from log files furnished by NIC 
Application Log storage in file system 
 
 
 
 Web log storage in log 
store 
 
 
 
Analysis of these logs revealed the following:  
8.5.1 Missing logs 
Application logging ensures that each application’s logging verbosity is set to 
an appropriate level in order to provide appropriate information when needed 
for security review. Web logs captures visitors browser agent, date time of 
access, method, IP address etc., for analysis in case of forensic investigation. 
Analysis of web logs revealed that out of 2,556 days period i.e., (from 01 Jan 
2016 to 31 Dec 2022), log for 1,087 days were not provided to Audit as follows:  
 
11  Web logs contain traces regarding the activity of users while accessing the web pages like 
date and time, IP address, method, name of page (URL endpoint), browser agent, etc. 
12  Application logs contain traces of activity of user in the system like IP address, User ID, 
Module Name executed, timestamp of activity, other details like bid id, tender id etc. 
13  DBA logs record details of all back-end activities of the DBA user like modification, 
deletion, insertion of transaction or master records in the backend or changing the definition 
of table structures, functions, procedures, other configurations etc., by using SQL 
statements or scripts. 


Chapter VIII: Timestamp Management and Application Security 
 45 
 
Table No.11: Table showing Period of missing web logs 
From Date  To date  Missing days  
10-Nov-2018 16-Jun-2019 219  
18-Jun-2019 25-Jun-2019 8  
05-Aug-2019 26-Aug-2021 753  
27-Mar-2022 10-Jul-2022 106  
12-Jul-2022 12-Jul-2022 1  
Total Missing days   1,087  
(Source: Apache Logs provided by NIC) 
Similarly, in the application log, it was found that out of 2,311 days period, 
there were missing logs for 27 days as follows:  
Table No.12: Table showing Period of missing application logs 
From date  To Date Missing records 
24-Feb-2016 24-Feb-2016 1 day 
28-Sep-2016 28-Sep-2016 1 day 
29-Jan-2017 29-Jan-2017 1 day 
31-May-2017 31-May-2017 1 day 
07-Jun-2017 07-Jun-2017 1 day 
12-Jun-2017 12-Jun-2017 1 day 
16-Jun-2017 16-Jun-2017 1 day 
19-Jun-2017 19-Jun-2017 1 day 
24-Jun-2017 24-Jun-2017 1 day 
27-Jun-2017 27-Jun-2017 1 day 
01-Jul-2017 01-Jul-2017 1 day 
04-Jul-2017 04-Jul-2017 1 day 
09-Jul-2017 09-Jul-2017 1 day 
14-Jul-2017 14-Jul-2017 1 day 
04-Feb-2018 04-Feb-2018 1 day 
23-Apr-2020 24-Apr-2020 2 days 
26-Apr-2020 26-Apr-2020 1 day 
03-May-2020 03-May-2020 1 day 
31-May-2020 31-May-2020 1 day 
03-Aug-2020 03-Aug-2020 1 day 
02-Mar-2021 02-Mar-2021 1 day 
21-Mar-2021 21-Mar-2021 1 day 
08-Jun-2021 08-Jun-2021 1 day 
05-Sep-2021 07-Sep-2021 3 days 
Total  27 Days 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 
This indicates that these logs were deleted. Due to missing logs, the objective 
to provide appropriate information when needed for security review could not 
be achieved and reliability of system was compromised.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
46  
 
In reply, Department stated (December 2023) that Apache web logs only 
contains the URL ends points with the client IP and browser agent. Application 
logs are critical. Due to technical glitch, few times application logs may not be 
generated and subsequently by the end of day (EOD) the problems were 
resolved and logs were generated. However, the fact remained that there are 
losses of critical logs to both application and web logs. It is pertinent to mention 
here that further audit process is hindered due to absence of logs as pointed out 
in Appendix-II. 
Further, Department stated (December 2023) that CERT-ln recommendation is 
180 days for ICT logs retention period. In addition to that, few times back 
Odisha e-Procurement was running under the Odisha NIC Data centre. The 
reply is not acceptable as CERT-In recommended the minimum period 180 
days for log retention and the logs generated during the period when application 
was hosted in Odisha server could have been maintained separately.   
8.5.2  Non Maintenance of DBA Logs  
As per infrastructure administration policy, all internal servers deployed at 
National Informatics Centre must be owned by an operational group (e.g. data 
centre) and/or administrators who shall be responsible for System 
Administration of these servers. Operational group or administrators should 
monitor implementation and compliance of policy tailored to their 
environment.  All servers not under the direct ownership of the respective data 
centre, must be identifiable to a particular group and/or administrator. A secure 
central logging server should be deployed for recording all the events in system 
and access to such central logging server shall be completely restricted for the 
system administrators. 
Audit requisitioned (August 2022) the DBA logs to the Department. As the 
system did not preserve DBA logs, the same could not be provided to Audit for 
analysis. In the absence of DBA logs, unauthorised access and modification of 
the data at the back end of the system could not be ruled out.  
  

Chapter VIII: Timestamp Management and Application Security 
 47 
 
In reply, Government stated (December 2023) that the server log has been 
maintained for last 3 years but the transaction log is not maintained beyond a 
week due to shortage of space.  
 
Recommendation 
Government may consider to 
 Enquire into the reasons for the gaps in the sequence of IDs in 
the major tables of the database;  
 Implement appropriate application controls to enforce 
chronological and logical sequencing for user actions in the 
system; 
 Ensure maintenance of web, application and DBA logs for the 
system. 
 Adopt relevant standards specified by Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology, Government of India from time to 
time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IX 
Conclusion 
  

 
 48 
 
Chapter-IX 
 
Conclusion 
9.1 Conclusion  
The State Government implemented the Government e-Procurement System 
developed by NIC (GePNIC) in 2008. In the absence of a formal Agreement/ 
MoU with NIC, there was lack of clarity on the timelines, deliverables, roles 
and responsibilities and service levels for this IT application. Further, there was 
no recourse for the State Government when key Modules (Indent Management, 
Vendor Management, Contract Management) of the application remained 
unimplemented even after 14 years. Even in the e-Tendering Module, key 
functionalities such as master data management for contractors, integration 
with the Works and Accounts Management Information System and Contractor 
Database Management System had not been implemented. These missing 
functionalities and the key dependencies had resulted in continued manual 
processes outside the system for bid evaluation and award of contract, which 
were the most crucial business processes intended to be covered by the e-
Procurement application.  
In the e-Tendering Module, the full mapping of business rules into appropriate 
application controls had not been completed. This had resulted in the absence 
of enforcement of the minimum period for submission of bids, absence of 
enforcement of two-cover process based on tender value, absence of 
functionality in the system to manage privileged bidders. These missing 
business rules had contributed to instances of incorrect selection of bidders, 
incorrect computation of tender fees and award of contract at amounts higher 
than bid amounts during the continued manual processes for bid evaluation and 
award of contract. 
There were deficiencies in the validation controls to verify inputs submitted 
during the bidder registration process, with discrepancies such as mapping of 
incorrect/ duplicate Digital Signature Certificates (DSC), Permanent Account 
Numbers (PAN) and mobile numbers to the registered bidders. There were 
deficiencies in the processing controls for computation of total tender value 
based on BoQ entered by TIAs and computation of total bid value based on 
BoQ entered by bidders. There were also deficiencies in the application 
controls to prevent the submission of bids after expiry of tender closing time 
and to enforce chronological and logical sequencing of user actions in the 
system. 
There was a material risk of access to and modification of data, including 
decrypted bid data, at the back end of the system without maintaining database 

 
 49 
 
 
  
Appendices 
 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
 
 50 
 
 
 

 
 51 
 
Appendix-1 
(Refer paragraph 1.6  at page 5) 
Sampling Methodology 
There were 3,74,823 tenders published since inception of the system upto 31 
March 2022 with tender value ₹3,32,021.41 crore (except records for test type 
of tenders). Out of these published tenders, 1,77,593 tenders with tender value 
₹1,74,019.46 crore was published during last five years i.e., between 01 April 
2017 to 31 March 2022 by 29 Departments out of 40 departments under 
Government of Odisha. Audit will verify the sampled tenders published during 
last five years i.e., from 2017-18 to 2021-22 at field level.   
The following risk assessment is considered for selection of sample tenders for 
physical verification during audit of e-Procurement taken up by field audits. 
Stratification 
Tenders are stratified on the basis of types of tenders 
- Limited Tenders 
- Open Tenders/ National competitive bid/ Global Tenders 
Parameters for risk assessment: 
Parameter-1. Number of Bids Received per tender.   
Count of bids received against each tender prepared. The higher 
number of bids received means lower the risk. The lowest 
number of bid received for tender was ‘1’ and the highest 
number of tenders received was ‘350’. The average number of 
bid received was 6. Further, the stata for number of bids 
received with tender count is as follows :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Range of number of Bids  Tender Count  
1-5 1,04,515 
6-10 27,084 
11-20 18,246 
21-30 5,568 
31-40 2,177 
41-50 1,083 
51-60 527 
61-70 393 
71-80 159 
81-90 92 
91-100 66 
101-200 119 
201-400 8 
Nil bids 17,440 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
52  
 
As maximum number of tenders received one to 5 number of 
bids for tenders, tenders more than 5 bids are not allocated any 
score and tenders received 5 and less than 5 bids were inverse 
normalised using the following formula. 
𝑧௜ = 1 −  (𝑥௜−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥)) (𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥)−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥))⁄  
  Where- 
𝑥௜ =𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑑 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 
min(𝑥)=𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑑,𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑎𝑠 1 
max(𝑥)
=𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑑,𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑎𝑠 5 
Parameter-2. Tenders cancelled/ retendered  
The tenders cancelled /retendered is marked as 1 , otherwise 0.  
Parameter-3. Last bid being accepted.   
If the condition is true the score is 1, otherwise 0. 
Parameter-4. Difference of Time remaining (for close of tender) w.r.t. time 
of submission of accepted bid. If such difference is greater than 
24 hours, no risk score was allocated. Where difference is less 
than 24 hours, the lowest difference allotted more score and 
the highest difference allotted less score. The normalised 
formula is  
𝑧௜ = 1 − (min (1,𝐵−𝐶)) 
  Where- 
𝐵= Last date of submission of bid 
𝐶= Time of submission of bid  
  and if B-C >1 then minimum 1 is taken, E.g.,  
Tender-
Id 
Last date of 
submission of bid 
Time of submission of bid 
that was accepted 
Difference Normalised 
Score 
A B C D = 
Min(1,B-C)  
E 
T-1 31-01-2022 15:00 31-01-2022 14:45 0.010417 1 
T-2 31-03-2022 15:00 30-03-2022 15:00 1 0 
T-3 20-01-2022 15:00 20-01-2022 05:00 0.416667 0.589474 
T-4 15-02-2022 15:00 11-02-2022 17:00 1 0 
T-5 20-02-2022 15:00 18-02-2022 15:00 1 0 
Parameter-5. Same set of bidders bidding for similar work types. 
Top-5 set of bidders who bid together identified. Tenders having 
those sets of bidders given risk score 1 and other tenders are 
allocated 0. 
Parameter-6. Tenders having at least one bid submitted from the IP 
address of department.   
If the tender has at least one bid submitted from the same IP as 
that of department, but the L-1 bid was submitted from a 
different IP – the score is 0.5, if the bid approved (L-1) has been 
submitted from the same IP as that of department, the score is 
1, otherwise 0. 
 

Appendices 
 
 53 
 
Parameter-7. Tenders having two or more bids submitted from 
suspected collusion.  
i. Same IP address 
ii. Same PAN 
iii. Same mobile number 
iv. Same GSTN Number 
If the condition is true the score is 1, otherwise 0. 
Parameter-8. Estimated Financial Value of tender 
The tender value range wise tender count is as follows: 
Range of tender value  Number of tender  
0-5 lakh 43,665 
5-25 lakh 78,555 
25-50 lakh 22,623 
0.5 -1 crore 13,674 
1-5 crore 14,534 
5-10 crore 2,649 
10-50 crore 1,615 
50-100 crore 102 
100-200 crore 73 
200-500 crore 85 
500 crore and above 18 
 
Quaratile range and upper and lower limit calculated in excel sheet 
taking tender value for calculation  
1st quartile  3rd quaratile  Inter Quaratile 
Range (IQR) 
Upper Bound  Lower 
Bound 
=QUARTILE 
(D2:D177594,1) 
=QUARTILE 
(D2:D177594,3) 
=Quaratile3- 
Quaratile1 
=Quaratile 3 + 
1.5*IQR 
=Quaratile1-
1.5*IQR 
5,00,000 34,86,920 29,86,920 79,67,300 -39,80,380 
 
Hence the upper bound is rounded as 79,67,300 = 80,00,000. As higher value 
of tender means higher risk, the tenders with tender value more than 80,00,000 
allotted score 1 and for tender value less than 80,00,000, the  score was 
calculated using the following formula. 
𝑧௜ = 1 − ((8000000 −𝑥௜) 8000000)⁄  
  Where- 
𝑥௜ =𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟  
Parameter-9. Time allowed for bidding 
The difference of time of publishing tender and last date/time 
of submission of bid is calculated and (inverse) normalised. 
Bid submission period minimum 10 days with tender value 
less than Rs. 50 lakh, minimum 15 days with tender value 
between 50 lakh and  6 crore and minimum 21 days with tender 
value equal to or more than  ₹6 crore is taken for calculation 
of time allowed for bidding. If such difference is greater than 
the minimum days specified, no risk score was allocated as  per 
following formula.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
54  
 
𝑧௜ =  (𝑥−𝑥𝑖) 𝑥⁄  
  Where- 
𝑥௜ =𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 
           
𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑖𝑑 
 𝑥
=𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑥
> 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑥>𝑥𝑖 
and when x>xi then zi= 0 
Parameter-10. Time taken from opening of bids to signing of contract  
As per OPWD code the time taken from opening of bid to award 
of contract should not exceed more than 90 days. The difference 
of date of signing the contract/ 31 March 2022 and date of 
opening of bids is taken and normalised as follows : 
𝑧௜ =(𝑥௜−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥)) (𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥)−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥))⁄  
Where- 
𝑥௜
=𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑏𝑖𝑑 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡/ᇱ31𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ 2022′ 
min(𝑥)=𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑢𝑐ℎ 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡,𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑎𝑠 90 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠  
max(𝑥)=𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑢𝑐ℎ 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡,𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑎𝑠 180 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠  
All tenders having time gap less than 90 days between opening of bids and 
award of contract/contract not awarded as of 31 March 2022 was given score 0 
and time gap more than 180 days have been allotted score 1.  
Parameter-11. Per cent difference between L1 and L2.  
The difference of price quoted by L-1 and L-2 calculated and 
per cent difference calculated. If such difference is more than 2 
per cent, no risk score is allocated.  If the per cent difference 
less than 2 per cent it was normalised as  
𝑧௜ =(2 −𝑥௜) 2⁄  
  Where- 
𝑥௜ =𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝐿1 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐿2 𝑏𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑟  
 
Parameter-12. Tenders where financial limits specified, have been breached. 
As per GFR the tender value below ₹25 lakhs was to be limited 
tender and ₹25 lakh to ₹200 crore to be open tender and above 
₹200 crore to be Global tender. The tenders falling in any of 
such exception category is allocated risk score 1 and otherwise 
0.  

Appendices 
 
 55 
 
Weight Matrix 
The following weightage for these parameters for open tender and limited 
tender is considered for arriving the risk score .  
No. Parameter Open 
Tender 
Limited 
Tender 
1. Number of Bids Received per tender 10 0 
2. Number of times a tender has been cancelled 
earlier and now re-awarded 
10 10 
3. Last Bid being accepted 10 10 
4. Difference of Time remaining (for close of 
tender) w.r.t. time of submission of accepted bid. 
10 10 
5. Same set of bidders  10 0 
6. Tenders having IP of department 10 10 
7. Tenders having two or more bids submitted from 
same IP addresses/ suspected collusion 
10 10 
8. Financial Value of bids 5 10 
9. Time allowed for bidding 5 10 
10.Time taken in award of Contract 5 10 
11.Per cent difference between L1 and L2 5 10 
12.Exception cases/ breach of financial limits 10 10 
 Total 100 100 
Population Frame  
There were 3,74,823 tenders published since inception of the system upto 31 
March 2022 with tender value 3,31,911.77 crore (except records for test type 
of tenders ). Out of these published tenders, 1,77,593 tenders with tender value 
₹ 1,74,019.46 crore was published during last five years i.e between 01 April 
2017 to 31 March 2022 by 29 Departments out of 40 departments under 
Government of Odisha.  
Sample selection  
For the purpose of sample selection, the tenders published during last five years 
i.e., from 2017-18 to 2021-22 will be considered involving 1,77,593 tenders as 
sample universe with tender value  ₹ 1,74,019.46 crore.  
Selection of Departments  
Department wise sum of risk scores of 29 Departments were ranged between 
13 to 11,78,243. Based on risk scores, the Departments were stratified as high, 
medium, and low category and 10 departments out of 29 (35 per cent) are 
selected by stratified random sampling as given below: 
 
 
 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
56  
 
Sl 
No 
Range of 
risk 
parameter 
Category 
of risk  
Number of 
Departments  
Number of  
Departments 
selected  
Percentage 
of 
selection  
Departments 
Selected  
01  0 to 
5,000 
Low 
Risk 
14 2 14.29 (i) Odia 
Language 
Literature 
and Culture 
(ii) FA&RD 
02 5001 to 
1,00,000 
Medium 
Risk 
15 04 26.66  i. Forest and 
Environment  
ii. Steel and 
Mine 
iii. Industry  
vi. Home  
03 1,00,001 
and 
above  
High 
Risk 
04 04 100.00 i. H&UD 
ii.RD  
iii. WR  
iv. Works.  
Selection of Tender Inviting Authority   
The TIA has been arranged in descending order of total risk score of each 
selected department. 48 TIAs were selected by stratified random sampling 
based on population proportionate to size of the selected Departments. Where 
there is population less than one then minimum one TIA has been selected. 
Where there is less than 5 as population in Department, one stratum is 
considered for selection of TIA.  
Selection of Tenders  
10 tenders from each selected TIA will be selected by stratified random 
sampling based on risk scores after forming 2-3 strata on risk score of tenders.  
  

Appendices 
 
 57 
 
Appendix – II 
(Refer paragraph 8.1 at page 42 and 8.5.1 at page 46) 
Statement showing discrepancy or missing logs of various dates in the events of record creation where there were missing 
sequences (gap) between two consecutive ID numbers of a table 
 
Sl 
No 
Name of the table where 
there were gaps in sequential 
ID data 
Gap in consecutive ID 
data Gaps 
Time stamp of IDs 
Remarks 
First ID Consecutive 
Second ID First ID Consecutive 
second ID 
1 Tender basic master 63258 63289 32 2019-08-27 
17:13:00.571 
2019-08-27 
18:31:35.591 
Log not available from 2019-08-27 
17:46:31.813 
2 Tender basic master 86448 68519 32 2020-05-19 
22:57:47.899 
2020-05-20 
09:39:35.63 
Log not available from 2020-05-20 
06:32:08.596 
3 Tender basic master 72389 72420 32 2020-12-29 
15:44.48.788 
2020-12-29 
15:48:39.384 
Log not available from 2020-12-29 
13:30:38.236 
4 Tender basic master 73375 73406 32 2021-02-03 
08:05:58.415 
2021-02-03 
07:12:49.432 
Log not available from 2021-02-03 
05:24:14.568 
5 Tender basic master 76428 76459 32 2021-06-08 
21:12:13.482 
2021-06-09 
07:59:16.046 
Log not available for 2021-06-08 
6 Bid master  638084 638115 32 2017-01-29 
10:03:54.548 
2017-01-29 
12:47:04.004 
Log not available for 2017-01-29 
7 Bid master  1463256 1463287 32 2021-02-03 
05:18:38.231 
2021-02-03 
05:57:01.97 
Log not available from 2021-02-03 
05:24:14.568 
8 Bid master  1562730 1562761 32 2021-06-08 
22:16:04.345 
2021-06-08 
22.30.05.616 
Log not available for 2021-06-08 
9 Bid decryption 1583676 1583857 182 2021-02-10 
19:45:49.01 
2021-02-11 
10:26:11.983 
Tender was revoked after bid 
decryption deleting records from bid 
decrypted table 
10 Bank transaction history 
details 
526551 527377 827 2018-10-31 
17:08:33.951 
2018-11-01 
07:58:12.936 
The transaction details were not 
available in the log of that day. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of 
Abbreviations 
 
  
 
 
  
 

 
 


 
59   
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
AOC Award of Contract 
AOP Association of Persons 
BoQ Bills of Quantity 
CAAT Computer Assisted Audit Technique 
CDAC Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing 
CDMS Contractor Database Management 
System 
CE Chief Engineer 
CPPP Central Public Procurement Portal 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
DBA Database Administrator 
DPI & Roads Design Planning and Investigation 
and Roads 
DSC Digital Signature Certificate 
DTCN Detailed Tender Call Notice 
e-AOC Electronic Award of Contract 
EIC Engineer-in-Chief 
e-LoA Electronic Letter of Acceptance 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
EO Executive Officer 
G2B Government to Business 
GCQE Guidelines for Compliance to 
Quality requirement of e-
Procurement System 
GEMS Government e-Marketplace 
GePNIC Government e-Procurement System 
developed by National Informatics 
Centre 
GoI Government of India 
GoO Government of Odisha 
GSTN Goods and Services Tax Network 
GTE General Technical Evaluation 
H&UD Housing and Urban Development 
HUF Hindu undivided family 
ID Identity Number 
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and 
Analysis 
IP Internet Protocol 
ISL IDCOL Software Limited 
IT Information Technology 
JAR Java Archive 
L1 Lowest one 
MCL Mahanadi Coal Fields Limited 
MD5 Message Digest Algorithm 5 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Information Technology Audit of     
e-Procurement System in Government of Odisha for the year ended March 2022 
60  
 
 
MEITY Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology 
MIS Management Information System 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MSE Micro and Small Enterprises 
NaN Not a Number 
NeGP National e-Governance Plan 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
OGFR Odisha General Financial Rules 
OPWD Odisha Public Works Department 
OTP One Time Password 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PDF Portable Document Format 
PKI Public Key Infrastructure 
R&B Roads and Building 
RFP Request for proposal 
SHA Simple Hashing Algorithm 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SPC State Procurement Cell 
SQL Structured Query Language 
SRS System Requirement Specification 
STQC Standardisation Testing and Quality 
Certification 
TIA Tender Inviting Authority 
ULB Urban Local Body 
WAMIS Work Accounts Management 
Information System 
XLS Microsoft Excel file extension 
 

 
 
 

Chapter I: Introduction 
62i 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/odisha/en 
 
 
 
