 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on  
Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
for the year ended 31 March 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttarakhand 
Report No. 4 of 2024 

 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Sl. No. Contents Paragraph  Page No.  
1.   Preface  iii 
2.   Executive Summary  v 
Chapter-1: Introduction 
3.   Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 1.1 1  
4.   Hierarchy and Process of waste management 1.2 1 
5.   Regulatory framework governing management of Waste  1.3 3 
6.   Municipal Solid Waste in Uttarakhand 1.4 4 
7.   Administrative control and monitoring of Solid Wast e 
Management 1.4.1 4 
8.   Organisational set up 1.4.2 5 
9.   Funding for Urban Local Bodies 1.5 5 
10.   Sources of funds 1.5.1 6 
11.   Expenditure on SWM against total available funds 1 .5.2 6 
12.   Audit Framework 1.6 7 
13.   Audit Objectives  1.6.1 7 
14.   Scope and Methodology of Audit 1.6.2 7 
15.   Audit Criteria 1.6.3 7 
16.   Sampling  1.6.4 8 
17.   Acknowledgement  1.7 8 
18.   Structure of the report 1.8 9 
Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) in Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) 
19.   Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) and 
Contingency Plans 2.1 12 
20.   MSWM Plan 2.1.1 12 
21.   Contingency Plan 2.1.2 12 
22.   Data regarding generation, collection and disposal of 
Domestic Hazardous Waste not maintained 2.2 14 
23.   Management of Construction & Demolition (C&D) 
Waste 2.3 14 
24.   Framing of Byelaws 2.4 15 
25.   Shortcomings in the preparation of DPRs 2.5 16 
26.   Ineffective Baseline waste analysis 2.5.1 16 
27.   Doubtful conduct of Waste Analysis 2.5.2 16 
28.   Duplication of critical parameters in DPRs 2.5.3 1 7 
29.   Photograph of one ULB was used for another ULB 
(Description of the Environment) 2.5.4 18 
30.   Status of Projects against approved DPRs 2.5.5 18 
31.   Case studies of DPRs of test checked ULBs 2.5.6 19  
32.   Poor achievement against timelines in creation of 
infrastructure projects 2.6 20 
33.   Bioremediation/Capping of old and abandoned waste 
dump sites 2.7 23 
34.   Recommendations 2.8 24 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
ii 
Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of 
Municipal Solid Waste 
35.   Collection of Municipal Solid Waste 3.1 25 
36.   Door-to-door collection of Solid Waste 3.1.1 26 
37.   Personal protection equipment not used by workers 
handling solid waste 3.1.2 28 
38.   No system established for inclusion of Informal was te 
workers 3.1.3 29 
39.   Segregation of Municipal Solid Waste 3.2 30 
40.   Storage of Municipal Solid Waste 3.3 31 
41.   Establishment of Transfer stations 3.3.1 31 
42.   Unavailability of Sanitary Landfill sites resulted in 
Municipal Solid Waste stored at Open Dumping sites 3.3.2 33 
43.   Inefficient collection of MSW resulted into dumping  at 
roadside 3.3.3 35 
44.   Transportation of Municipal Solid Waste 3.4 36 
45.   Uncovered vehicles used for transportation of MSW 3.4.1 36 
46.   Use of transportation vehicles without authorisati on 3.4.2 37 
47.   Monitoring of transportation vehicles 3.4.3 37 
48.   Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste 3.5 38 
49.   Construction, operation and maintenance of Sanitary  
Landfill Site 3.5.1 38 
50.   Targets and achievement against Service Level 
Benchmarks (SLBs) 3.6 40 
51.   Recommendations 3.7 44 
Chapter-4: Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System 
52.   Inactive approach of Pollution Control Board regard ing 
review of implementation of SWM Rules 2016 4.1 45 
53.   Regional Offices, Pollution Control Board ignorant of the 
inter state movement of waste 4.1.1 48 
54.   Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board’s directions no t 
complied by the Private Concessionaire  4.1.2 48 
55.   Submission of incomplete Annual Reports to CPCB 4. 1.3 49 
56.   Complaint Redressal System 4.2 50 
57.   Initiatives for promoting Public Awareness through 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 4.3 51 
58.   Deficiency in the post of Supervisory level resulte d in 
weakness in monitoring and evaluation processes 4.4 52 
59.   Recommendations 4.5 52 
Appendices  
Appendix-1.1 Processing Technologies 55 
Appendix-1.2 Details of allotment and expenditure i n test checked ULBs 59 
Appendix-2.1 Contingency Plan not prepared 60 
Appendix-2.2 Status of project work in test checked  ULBs 61 
 

iii 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2022 has been prepared for submission to t he Governor of the State of 
Uttarakhand under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Solid Waste Management 
in Urban Local Bodies’, covering the period 2017-22. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

Executive Summary 
  

 
v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Why CAG did this Audit? 
Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) in urban ar eas has emerged as one of 
the biggest challenges today. The situation is aggr avated by rapid urbanisation. 
Inadequate management of waste has significant nega tive externalities in terms of 
public health and environmental outcomes. Besides, it has an adverse impact on the 
aesthetic appearance of the surroundings. The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 
2016 provide a legal framework for the disposal and  management of Solid waste and 
entrusts responsibilities at the State level, ULBs and on the generators of waste. Audit 
was taken up to assess the implementation of these rules by ULBs. 
Major Audit Observations 
The Detailed Project Reports (DPR) of SWM projects were not prepared by following 
the guidelines. Baseline waste analysis was ineffec tive and outdated, instances of 
duplication of DPRs was found. Planning was virtually absent, as it is evident from the 
fact, that none of the test checked ULBs had prepar ed MSWM plan and Contingency 
plan. Audit observed poor management of domestic ha zardous waste (DHW) and 
construction and demolition (C&D) in most of the ULBs. 
Even though DPRs was approved and funds were availa ble, the infrastructure projects 
were not created, in any of the test checked ULBs, in the given time limit, prescribed 
under SWM Rules. In two ULBs, the preliminary step of identification/ procurement of 
suitable sites for the project was yet to be done. Bioremediation or capping of old and 
abandoned dump sites were done only in one, out of five ULBs, resulting in 
accumulation of legacy waste and consequent environmental issues. 
On an average, five to eight per cent of waste generated was not collected in the State 
and eight to 16 per cent in the test checked ULBs. Only 3.13 per cent (0.09 per cent  at 
source, 0.81 per cent  at transfer stations and 2.23 per cent  at processing sites)  of the 
collected waste was segregated. Ragpickers were not  recognized and integrated in 
waste management process in most of the ULBs. Sixty  four per cent  of the vehicles 
used for waste transportation were not covered, uni forms and personal protection 
equipment were not being given/used by workers hand ling solid waste in majority of 
ULBs.  
Secondary Storage/transfer stations were set up nea r the residential areas, National 
Highways, Canals and in open grounds of the ULBs. Sanitary Landfill (SLF) sites were 
available in only two ULBs. In absence of SLF, the maximum waste was dumped in 
open sites. There were 13 dumpsites covering 75,074  sq. meter area and having 
3,63,019 tons of waste which were lying in an open dumpsite area of the ULBs. Physical 
verification of the dumping sites revealed instances of waste was seen flowing in river, 
burning of waste, and dumping in agricultural land.  
The standard of environment, maintained by the ULBs , was very poor, which was 
noticed by the audit during the physical inspection of dump sites of the ULBs. The State 
Pollution Control Board (SPCB) failed to ensure com pliance of provisions of SWM 
Rules from ULBs.  In last five years, 88 per cent  of the ULBs were not reviewed even 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
vi  
once by SPCB. Inter-State movement of waste was underway in two out of 13 test check 
ULBs without intimation to SPCB. Complaints relatin g to lack of daily picking up of 
municipal waste or improper picking up were observed in audit.  
What CAG Recommends? 
• The State Government needs to devise systems to ass ist ULBs in preparation 
of Solid Waste Management plans/action plans for ef fective implementation 
of waste management and monitor their effective implementation. 
• The State Government should ensure timely creation of the infrastructure of 
Solid Waste Management projects to avoid adhoc appr oaches adopted in the 
collection, storage, transportation, and disposal of the solid waste to save the 
damaging environment. Responsibility must be fixed at all levels for 
inordinate delays in preparation, approval, and est ablishment of SWM 
projects. 
• The State Government should encourage segregation o f waste at source by 
devising a system and should prevent mixing of segr egated waste during 
various stages of SWM. 
• The ULBs should ensure that the vehicles procured f or waste transportation 
are covered and comply with the statutory requirements.  
• The State Government may draw a time-bound plan for  ULBs to achieve the 
preferred level of reliability of Service Level Benchmark (SLB) data. 
• The State Pollution Control Board needs to ensure t hat all concerned, 
involved in Solid Waste Management functioning, obt ain necessary 
authorisation for their functioning and should enfo rce adherence to 
prescribed standards by reviewing implementation as per norms. 
• The State Government may scientifically assess work load of each ULB and 
accordingly sanction/deploy human resources. 
Management’s response to audit recommendations 
During the ‘Exit conference’ (September 23), the dr aft material and recommendations 
made there in, were discussed with concerned Additional Secretary in detail and it was 
assured that the Department will take needful actio n, wherever it is required. An 
updated and revised draft performance report was again issued to the State Government 
Department in March 2024 to seek their views/input.  However, no response had been 
received till April 2024. 

Chapter-1 
Introduction 
  

 
1 
CHAPTER-1 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1  Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
Wastes are materials that the generator has no furt her use in terms of his/her own 
purposes of production, transformation or consumpti on, and of which he/she wants to 
dispose. Wastes are generally classified into municipal solid waste (MSW), bio-medical 
waste (BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) wast e, e-waste, plastic waste, 
slaughterhouse waste, industrial waste and hazardou s waste by virtue of their nature. 
They are also classified as biodegradable, non-biod egradable, combustible, dry and 
inert based on their characteristics.  
Municipal solid waste management (MSWM) in urban areas has emerged as one of the 
biggest challenges. The situation is aggravated by rapid urbanisation. Although MSWM 
is an essential service and a mandatory function of  municipal authorities across the 
country, it is still being managed inefficiently re sulting in significant negative 
externalities in terms of public health and environ mental outcomes. Besides, it has an 
adverse impact on the aesthetic appearance of the surroundings.  
1.2 Hierarchy and Process of waste management 
Solid waste management covers hierarchy of– 5Rs (Re duce, Reuse, Recycle, Recover 
and Remove).  
Reduce:  The first choice of measures in waste management i s avoidance and waste 
reduction. This step aims for goods to be designed in a manner that minimises their 
waste components. Also, the reduction of the quanti ty and toxicity of waste generated 
during the production process is important.  
Reuse: Re-using an article removes it from the waste stre am for use in a similar or 
different purpose without changing its 
form or properties.  
Recycle:  Recycling is process of 
transforming materials into secondary 
resources for manufacturing new 
products. Promotion of waste recycling 
sector and providing it with an 
institutional support can motivate all the 
stakeholders to segregate at source of 
generation. The recycling of waste 
involves separating articles from the 
waste stream and processing them as 
products or raw materials. This approach 
seeks to recycle a product when it 
reaches the end of its life span.  
Chart-1.1: The Hierarchy and Process of waste 
management 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
2 
Recover:  Recovery involves reclaiming components or materials or using the waste as 
a fuel. Material recovery involves a variety of mec hanical or biological processes that 
remove a variety of materials from the waste stream.  
Remove:  Remove refers to residuals management or the manag ement of materials 
which remain after the previous 4Rs have been appli ed. The last step of the waste 
management is wherein the quantity of waste cannot be reduced during production. The 
purpose of implementing the waste management hierarchy is to use waste as a resource 
and divert these potential resources from dumpsites/landfill.  
The integrated process of solid waste management is depicted in Chart-1.2 below:  
 
 
 
Processing Technologies 
Integrated solid waste management (ISWM) plants typ ically have pre-processing 
facilities to separate organics from recyclables an d other high calorific waste. The 
organic waste is usually composted aerobically to p roduce manure or processed 
anaerobically (in absence of air) for production of  energy. Recyclables are separated 
and sent to wholesalers for further supply to recyc ling facilities. High calorific wastes 
are then baled or processed and can be used as fuel  or co-processed in cement plants. 
The processing technologies are detailed in Appendix-1.1 . 
Chart-1.2: Integrated Solid Waste Management  

Chapter-1: Introduction  
3 
1.3  Regulatory framework governing Management of Waste  
The Solid waste management (SWM) rules 2016, provid es a legal framework for 
disposal and management of solid waste and entrusts responsibilities at State level and 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) level. Apart from above, the Constitution (seventy fourth 
amendment) Act 1992, which came into effect on 1 June 1993, provided a constitutional 
status to Urban Local Bodies.  Article 243 w of the  Constitution of India provides that 
the legislature of the state may by law endow the m unicipalities with such powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to fun ction as institutions of self-
governance. The twelfth schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions 
to be devolved to Urban Local Bodies . The State Government devolved the function 
“Solid Waste Management” to the Urban Local Bodies. 
The solid waste management rules 2016, places certa in duties and responsibilities on 
the generators of waste. 
(i)  Waste generators are responsible for segregating an d storing waste in three 
separate streams - biodegradable or wet waste, non- biodegradable or dry 
waste and domestic hazardous wastes (DHW), to be ha nded over to waste 
collectors.  
(ii)  Waste generators are not 
allowed to burn, bury or 
throw waste in street 
drains and water bodies.  
(iii)  All resident welfare 
associations, gated 
communities and 
institutions with more 
than 5,000 sq. meter area 
and market associations 
are required to ensure 
segregation of waste at 
source in biodegradable 
and non-biodegradable 
and treat bio-degradable 
waste through 
decentralized treatment 
process within their 
facility as far as possible. 
(iv)  Construction and 
demolition waste are to be 
stored separately and 
disposed in accordance with construction and demoli tion waste management 
Rules 2016. 
(v)  Biodegradables are to be processed through composti ng/ bio-methanation, 
while residual are to be handed over separately. 
Chart-1.3: Flow Chart of Municipal Solid Waste 
Management Chain  
 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
4 
1.4  Municipal Solid Waste in Uttarakhand  
As per the annual reports of Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKPCB) the MSW 
generated, collected and processed by the ULBs duri ng the years 2017-18 to 2021-22 
in the State is depicted in Table -1.1: 
Table-1.1: Municipal solid waste generated, collected & treated by the ULBs  
Solid Waste Ton per Day 
(TPD)  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Generated in the State 1,099.00 1,527.46 1,610.94 1,458.46 1,585.39  
Collected in the State 1,099.00 1,437.40 1,481.06 1,378.99 1,451.59  
Percentage  of waste collection 
in comparison to generation 100 94 92 95 92 
Treated in the State Nil 524.00 716.64 779.85 1,050.00  
Percentage  of waste treated in 
comparison to collection Nil 36 48 57 72 
Source: Annual Reports of UKPCB . 
As evident from above, on an average 95 per cent  of the waste was collected and 43  
per cent  was processed during the years 2017-18 to 2021-22 and a major portion of the 
remaining MSW was dumped at landfills/dumping groun ds which would have a 
harmful impact on health and environment.  
1.4.1  Administrative control and monitoring of Solid Waste Management 
The role of various authorities at all levels in pl anning, execution and monitoring of 
municipal solid waste management is depicted in the Table-1.2  below: 
Table-1.2: Roles of Authorities 
Level 
Planning, 
Execution and 
Monitoring 
Authority Role of Authorities 
State 
Policy framing, 
Monitoring & 
Evaluation 
Urban 
Development 
Department 
• Framing policies & draft Action-Plans, 
Handholding of ULBs in preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), Request for 
Proposals (RFPs) & other statutory 
compliances related to SWM Projects 
Uttarakhand 
Pollution 
Control Board 
• Authorisation to the operator of a facility or 
urban local authority, or any other agency 
responsible.  
• Enforcement of SWM Rules in the State 
through local bodies in their respective 
jurisdiction and review implementation of 
these rules in close coordination with 
Directorate or Secretary-in-charge of State 
Urban Development Department. 
• Monitor environmental standards and 
adherence to conditions as specified under 
the Schedule-I and Schedule-II for waste 
processing and disposal sites. 
District 
Implementation Urban Local Bodies- Nagar Nigam, Nagar Palika Parishads and 
Nagar Panchayats 
Monitoring & 
Evaluation Regional Pollution Control Offices 

Chapter-1: Introduction  
5 
1.4.2  Organisational set up  
The Organisational Set-up of Solid Waste management is given in the Chart below: 
 
 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKPCB) has bee n entrusted with the 
responsibility of enforcing Acts and Rules of munic ipal solid waste. The Member 
Secretary, UKPCB at State level and four Regional O fficers at regional level are 
responsible for enforcing/reviewing the implementation of SWM Rules 2016 at ULBs 
level. 
1.5 Funding for Urban Local Bodies  
The sustainable financing is paramount to ensure di scharge of any function. The 
management of solid waste can be carried out effectively by the ULBs only when they 
are supported with sufficient financial resources. 
Principal Secretary/ Secretary, 
Urban Development 
Director, Urban Development 
Municipal Commissioner 
Additional Municipal 
Commissioner/Deputy Municpal 
Commissioner/Assistant Municipal 
Commissioner/Municipal Health 
Offiecer/Executive Engineer (SWM) 
Zonal Sanitary Officer 
Chief Sanitary Inspector 
Sanitary Inspector 
Paryavaran 
Parvayekshak 
Paryavaran Mitra 
Executive 
Officer 
Chief Sanitary 
Inspector/Assistant 
Engineer/Junior 
Engineer 
Sanitary 
Inspector 
Paryavaran 
Parvayekshak 
Paryavaran 
Mitra 
Executive Officer 
Sanitary 
Inspector/Junior 
Engineer 
Paryavaran 
Parvayekshak 
Paryavaran 
Mitra 
Nagar Panchayat Nagar Palika Parishad Nagar Nigam 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
6 
1.5.1 Sources of funds  
The ULBs execute MSWM activities using grants relea sed by the Central and State 
Governments, as well as revenue from their own sour ces. Paragraph 1.4.5.6.2 of the 
SWM 2016 manual states that SWM services must be fi nancially viable on a stand-
alone basis for sustainability. Therefore, assessing financial viability is crucial in SWM 
planning. Following the recommendations of the 15th  Central Finance Commission, 
grants (Tied-(60 per cent ) and Untied-(40 per cent )) needs to be allocated to Local 
Bodies for cities with populations less than a mill ion. Tied Grants are distributed for 
Drinking Water (50 per cent ), including rainwater harvesting and recycling, and Solid 
Waste Management (50 per cent ).  The various source of funds received by the ULBs 
for management of solid waste are indicated in the Table-1.3 below:  
Table-1.3: Sources of finance in ULBs for waste management  
Sl. No.  Source  Particulars  
1 Central Grants 
• 14 th  Finance Commission  
• 15 th  Finance Commission  
• Swachh Bharat Mission 
• Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment  
2 State Grants • State Finance Commission  
3 Own Resources  
(Municipal Fund) 
• SWM user charges, 
• Sale of products and by-products (compost, etc .), 
• Sale of recyclables  
• Penalties 
Source: Information provided by the Department. 
1.5.2 Expenditure on SWM against total available fu nds 
Rule 15(x) of the SWM Rules 2016 mandates Urban Loc al Bodies (ULBs) to allocate 
sufficient funds in their annual budget for capital  investment, as well as for the 
operation and maintenance of Solid Waste Management  (SWM) services. This 
requirement ensures that funds for discretionary functions of local bodies are allocated 
only after fulfilling the necessary funding requirements for SWM and other obligatory 
functions. The details of total expenditure incurre d on solid waste management 
vis-à-vis total expenditure against total available  fund of the test checked ULBs is 
shown in the Table-1.4  below: 
Table-1.4: Details of expenditure under SWM of test checked ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year  
Total 
available 
fund  
Total 
Expenditure  
Expenditure on 
SWM  
Percentage of expenditure on 
SWM over Total expenditure  
2017-18  434.91  298.15  111.09  37.26 
2018-19  538.64  329.25  128.54  39.04 
2019-20  650.47  334.59  144.89  43.30 
2020-21  783.46  471.20  174.68  37.07 
2021-22  744.58  528.04  192.68  36.48 
Total   1,961.23  751.88  38.34 
Source: Information provided by the test checked ULBs. 

Chapter-1: Introduction  
7 
The table shows that the expenses on solid waste management activities accounted for 
38.34 per cent  of total expenditures between 2017 and 2022, among the sampled ULBs. 
The details of total allotment and expenditure incurred from various sources during the 
period 2017-18 to 2021-22 by the test checked ULBs is given in Appendix 1.2.  
1.6 Audit Framework  
1.6.1 Audit Objectives  
This performance audit was conducted to assess whether:  
• “Strategy and Planning” of solid waste management i n ULBs was effective in 
dealing with the wastes generated and concurrent wi th the prevailing legal 
framework; 
• Municipal tasks associated with solid waste managem ent including collection, 
segregation, storage, transportation, and disposal were effective, efficient and 
economical;  
• Planning, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of solid waste 
management projects in ULBs was effective, efficient and financially sustainable; 
• Monitoring and evaluation of solid waste management  system were adequate and 
effective. 
1.6.2 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The 
performance  audit covered management of municipal solid waste for the period  
2017-18 to 2021-22. Audit collected data and inform ation available with the Urban 
Development Directorate, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and Uttarakhand Pollution 
Control Board (UKPCB). Joint physical inspection of  solid waste management sites 
was also conducted along with the officials of ULBs. 
An entry conference with the Additional Chief Secre tary, Urban Development 
Department (UDD) was held on 12 October 2022 in whi ch the audit objectives, 
criteria, scope and methodology were discussed. An exit conference to discuss the 
draft observations was held on 06 September 2023 with Additional Secretary, UDD 
and Member Secretary, UKPCB. The views expressed by  the concerned officers 
during the exit conference have been included, wherever necessary. 
1.6.3 Audit Criteria  
The criteria for evaluating the performance of SWM was derived mainly from:  
• Manual of municipal solid waste management, 2016.  
• The solid waste (Management and Handling) rules, 2016.  
• Construction and demolition waste management rules, 2016. 
• Performance parameters set out in service level b enchmarking (SLB) guidelines;  
and 
• Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKPCB) guidelines. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
8 
1.6.4 Sampling  
The waste is managed in the State by 102 ULBs (nine Nagar Nigams, 42 Nagar Palika 
Parishads and 51 Nagar Panchayats). In each tier of ULBs (Nagar Nigams, Nagar Palika 
Parishads and Nagar Panchayats)- two Nagar Nigams, 10 per cent  Nagar Palika 
Parishads and five per cent  Pagar Panchayats from each region had been selected. The 
audit units were selected by applying simple random  sampling (region wise) using 
IDEA application software. 
Apart from above, one Nagar Palika Parishad and one  Nagar Panchayat of char dham 
route were also selected to check the management of solid waste in these areas. Further, 
apart from ULBs, Regional Offices of UKPCB of both the regions had also been 
selected. Overall, 17 units, 13 ULBs 
1 and four regional offices 2 of State Pollution 
Control Board were selected for performance audit. Selected ULBs are depicted in the 
map below: 
Photo-1.1: Map of Selected ULBs 
 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation of the Governmen t of Uttarakhand (GoU), 
Member Secretary, Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board and appreciates the assistance 
provided by the field functionaries of these depart ments for smooth conduct of the 
audit.  
                                                           
1 Four Nagar Nigams: Dehradun, Haridwar, Haldwani & Rudrapur; Five Nagar Palika Parishads: 
Mussoorie, Khatima, Barkot, Nainital & New Tehri; F our Nagar Panchayats: Dineshpur, Naugaon, 
Swargashram Jonk & Augustmuni. 
2 Dehradun, Roorkee, Haldwani & Kashipur.  


Chapter-1: Introduction  
9 
1.8 Structure of the report 
This performance audit report has been structured k eeping in mind the major 
components of solid waste management i.e. collectio n, segregation, transportation, 
storage and disposal of waste, human resources, fun ctioning of regulatory bodies in 
respect of relevant acts and rules. 
Audit findings relating to the deficiencies and gap s noticed in the test-checked Urban 
Local Bodies have been discussed in detail in the respective chapters. 
 

Chapter -2 
Planning and Operationalization of 
Projects under Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) in Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs)   

11 
CHAPTER-2 
 
Planning and Operationalization of Projects under S olid Waste Management 
(SWM) in Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) 
 
Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) is essentia lly a municipal function 
and it is mandatory for all municipal authorities t o provide this service efficiently 
to keep the cities and towns clean, process the was te and dispose of the residual 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) in an environmentally a cceptable manner. Audit 
noticed in the test checked ULBs that, the Detailed  Project Reports (DPRs) were 
prepared without adherence to guidelines and accura te baseline data. MSWM 
plans and Contingency plans (CPs) were not prepared . Except for Nagar Nigam 
Dehradun, ULBs did not establish waste deposition c enters for Domestic 
Hazardous Waste (DHW). Similarly, test checked ULBs , except Nagar Nigam 
Dehradun did not have information on Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste. 
The sampled ULBs did not establish infrastructure p rojects within the prescribed 
time frame, and many projects are yet to be complet ed. Only one out of five ULBs 
carried out bioremediation of capping of old and ab andoned dump sites. Despite 
DPR approval and fund transfers, the test checked U LBs remained pending in 
initiating project establishment. 
 
Solid waste management projects are infrastructure projects necessary for processing 
and disposal of collected waste. Nature of projects  differ according to the nature of 
waste generated in an urban local body (ULB). For e xample, projects to be set up are 
for Composting, Material Recovery Facility, Waste t o Energy, Biomethanation and 
Refused Derived Fuel etc. MSWM manual, 2016 prescribe conduct of a baseline study 
to understand the nature of waste, to ensure set up  of right kind of projects and to 
prepare the Detailed Project Report (DPR) by ULB. F urther, to ensure timely 
completion of projects, timelines are prescribed in  the SWM Rules 2016 as per 
Table-2.1  below: 
Table-2.1: Prescribed Timelines for activities to be done as per SWM Rules 
Sl. 
No. Activity Time limit  
1. Identification of suitable sites for setting up sol id waste processing 
facilities   01 year 
2 
• Procurement of suitable sites for setting up solid waste processing 
facility and sanitary landfill facilities.  
• Enforcing waste generators to practice segregation of wastes at source.  
• Ensure door to door collection of segregated waste and its 
transportation in covered vehicles to processing or disposal facilities. 
• Ensure separate storage, collection and transportat ion of construction 
and demolition waste. 
02 years 
3 Setting up solid waste processing facilities by a ll local bodies. 03 years 
4 Bioremediation or capping of old and abandoned du mp sites.  05 years 
The status of detailed project reports (DPRs) of solid waste management in 102 Urban 
Local Bodies of Uttarakhand was as per the Table-2.2 below:  

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
12 
Table-2.2: Status of Detailed Project Reports 
Particulars Total DPRs Number of ULBs covered 
Total DPRs prepared  65 92 
DPRs approved 62 89 
DPRs at different stage of approval 03 03 
Source: Information provided by the department. 
DPRs for 10 newly formed ULBs were yet to be prepared. 
Audit observed various lacunae in the activities re lated to SWM Planning and timely 
completion of Projects in the test checked ULBs as discussed in the following sections.  
2.1 Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) and Con tingency Plans  
 
2.1.1 MSWM Plan  
Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 {Para 15 (a)}and MSWM Manual 2016 (Section 
1.4.6) emphasised the need for ULBs to prepare a de tailed SWM plan with short term 
 (five years) and long-term (20-25 years) actions. The short-term plan should lead to 
the achievement of the long-term plan. Each short-term plan should be reviewed every  
2-3 years, to ensure higher success of implementing all plan activities. Short-term plan 
should cover aspects of institutional strengthening , community mobilisation, waste 
minimisation initiatives, waste collection and tran sportation, treatment and disposal. 
The responsibility for preparation and implementati on of the plan lies with Municipal 
Commissioner/Executive Officer of the respective ULB. 
Audit noticed that none of the sampled units prepar ed the Municipal Solid Waste 
Management Plans. The State Government in its reply  stated (December 2023) that it 
has currently formulated the Solid Waste Management Action Plan 2022-25. The reply 
itself clarifies that no Solid Waste Management Act ion Plan was implemented for the 
audit period.  
2.1.2 Contingency Plan 
MSWM Manual, 2016 (Section 5.4) stipulated that ULB s should prepare contingency 
plans for appropriate storage of waste, to tide ove r situations of non-performance of 
processing, treatment and disposal facilities. The Municipal Commissioner/Executive 
Officer of the respective ULBs were responsible for  the plan preparation and 
implementation. 
In test checked 13 ULBs, records revealed that none  of the ULBs had prepared 
contingency plans. The impact of not-preparing of c ontingency plan was reflected in 
adoption of adhoc approach as illustrated through two case studies below:  
Nagar Palika Parishad (NPP) Mussoorie: 
Records of NPP Mussoorie revealed that:  
• NPP Mussoorie was disposing its MSW in sanitary lan dfill site at Nagar Nigam 
(NN) Dehradun till July 2022. Thereafter, NN Dehrad un denied receiving and 
disposing MSW of NPP Mussoorie.  

Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
13 
• In the absence of a contingency plan, NPP Mussoorie contracted (November 2022) 
a firm to dispose of its MSW. However, the details of site where the firm was 
disposing off the municipal solid waste were not av ailable with the Palika. On 
enquiry, the NPP Mussoorie stated that the firm was disposing MSW in Ghaziabad 
and that the firm will provide relevant certificate  after six months. The reply 
confirms that the Palika was unaware about the actual disposal of MSW and relied 
solely on the firm for such information.  
• As per Rule 16 (6) of solid waste management rules 2016, the duties of State 
Pollution Control Board (SPCB) were to regulate int er-state movement of waste. 
However, SPCB was not intimated about transferring of MSW from one State to 
another by the NPP Mussoorie. In Exit conference (September 2023), the Member 
Secretary, Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKP CB) stated that ULBs had 
not informed Pollution Control Board (PCB) regarding transfer of waste. However, 
the matter will be investigated.  
Nagar Panchayat Dineshpur: 
The Nagar Panchayat Dineshpur faced a challenge in disposing of MSW as it didn’t 
have its own land for the purpose. To address this, it rented four sites for dumping MSW 
between 2017-18 and 2021-22. However, due to the absence of a contingency plan, the 
Panchayat had to repeatedly change the rented land in response to public protests. The 
details of land taken during the period on rent wer e as per Appendix-2.1. The aerial 
view of dumping of MSW in rented lands is shown in the photographs 2.1 & 2.2 below. 
 
Photo-2.1: Aerial view of dumping of MSW 
in Anandkheda (03 February 2023)  
Photo-2.2: Aerial view of dumping of MSW in 
Ramkot (03 February 2023)  
During Exit Conference (September 2023), the Additi onal secretary assured that 
instructions will be issued to all the urban local bodies to prepare a contingency plan 
and the issues of NPP Mussoorie and Nagar Panchayat  Dineshpur will be looked into. 
Further, the State Government emphasized (December 2023), that in situations where 
land is not readily accessible for solid waste management (SWM) purposes, alternative 
measures have been implemented. Specifically, 630 N ADEP 1 Pits and 73 plastic 
                                                
1 NADEP (National Agribusiness Development Programme ) composting is a natural process by 
which biomass wastes, soil wastes and animal wastes  are biologically degraded and decomposed 
into an organic compost. 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
14 
compactors have been strategically installed or constructed across multiple urban local 
bodies (ULBs) within the State. These installations  serve as decentralized resources 
facilitating the efficient disposal of both organic waste and plastic waste. 
While appreciating recent initiatives by the Government, the Audit re-affirms the need 
for immediate preparation of Contingency Plan by all ULBs in the State.  
2.2 Data regarding generation, collection and dispo sal of Domestic Hazardous 
Waste not maintained 
Rule 15 (i) of Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 pr escribes to establish waste 
deposition centres for domestic hazardous waste 2 and to give direction for waste 
generators to deposit domestic hazardous wastes at this centre for its safe disposal. Such 
facility shall be established in a city or town in a manner that one centre is set up for 
the area of twenty square kilometres or part thereo f and the timings of receiving 
domestic hazardous waste at such centres should be notified. It was the responsibility 
of the Sanitary Inspector/Medical Health Officer (M HO) to maintain data and 
Municipal Commissioner/Executive Officer were respo nsible for establishment of 
deposition centre of the respective ULBs.   
None of the test checked ULBs had maintained record s/data relating to generation, 
collection and disposal of domestic hazardous waste .  Further, no waste deposition 
centres were established by the test checked ULBs e xcept Nagar Nigam Dehradun, 
which established it in 2020-21. 
While accepting the facts, the Additional Secretary  stated in the Exit Conference 
(September 2023) that instruction will be issued in  this regard and timely review will 
also be done. The State Government further stated ( December 2023) that the 
establishment of deposition centres for domestic ha zardous waste is under process. 
Instructions have been issued to all the ULBs for c ollection and disposal of domestic 
hazardous waste along with bio medical waste.  
2.3 Management of Construction & Demolition (C&D) W aste 
The Construction & Demolition  ( C&D) waste normally contains inert material, but 
some harmful materials could also be present which can be detrimental to its immediate 
surroundings. C&D waste also leads to air pollution  as it may carry dust, particulate 
matter like PM10, asbestos and other pollutants that may get mixed with air. To prevent 
air pollution the C&D waste should be kept in containers and its timely removal should 
be ensured. 
Rule (6) of construction and demolition waste manag ement Rules, 2016 describes the 
duties of local authority (Municipal Commissioner/E xecutive Officer). The local 
authority shall issue detailed directions regarding  proper management of C&D waste,  
shall make arrangements and place appropriate containers for collection of waste,  shall 
get the collected waste transported to appropriate sites for processing and disposal, shall 
                                                
2 “Domestic Hazardous Waste” means discarded paint d rums, pesticide cans, CFL bulbs, tube lights, 
expired medicines, broken mercury thermometers, use d batteries,  used needles and syringes and 
contaminated gauge, etc., generated at the household level. 

Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
15 
keep track of the generation and establish a data b ase and update once in a year and 
shall create a sustained system of information, education and communication for C&D 
through collaboration with expert institutions and civil societies and also disseminate 
through their own website .  
Records of the test checked ULBs revealed that- 
• Byelaws were not framed for C&D waste, resulting in absence of the legal authority 
to enforce penalties or fines by ULBs.  
• Appropriate sites were to be identified/demarcated for processing & disposal. 
However, it was noticed that the site for C&D waste  was available only in Nagar 
Nigam Dehradun. In rest of the 12 test checked ULBs, there were no sites available 
for C&D waste. 
• Data regarding C&D waste generated, collected and disposed was available only in 
Nagar Nigam Dehradun (from November 2020). No data was available in rest of 
12 test checked ULBs.  
• A sustained system of information, education and co mmunication for C&D waste 
through collaboration with expert institutions and civil societies was neither created 
nor disseminated through their own website.  
In the absence of appropriate collection, transport ation, processing and disposal of 
C&D waste in most ULBs, the adverse consequences on environment and human health 
cannot be ruled out. Further, ULBs even failed to keep track of the generation of C&D 
waste within their jurisdiction.  
The State Government replied (December 2023) that t hree C&D waste processing 
plants are being proposed in National Clean Air Pro gram Cities viz. Dehradun, 
Rishikesh & Kashipur. The facilities established in  the said cities can be used by the 
nearby ULBs.  The reply is self-explanatory that these facilities are yet to be installed. 
 
2.4 Framing of Byelaws 
Rule 15 (e) of the Solid Waste Management Rules 201 6, stipulate to frame byelaws 3 
incorporating the provisions of these rules within one year from the date of notification 
of these rules. Timely implementation must be ensur ed, as one of the duties and 
responsibilities of local authorities. It was the r esponsibility of the Municipal 
Commissioner/Executive Officer of the respective ULB for preparation and Municipal 
Board for approval of Byelaws. 
Records revealed that only five 4 out of 13 ULBs test checked had framed and notifie d 
byelaws. Thus, the failure of ULBs in framing byela ws showed non-compliance with 
the SWM Rules 2016.  
The State Government stated (December 2023) that By elaws have been prepared in 
92 municipal bodies of the State and the process of  preparing byelaws in 10 newly 
formed municipal bodies is in progress. 
                                                
3 "Byelaws" means regulatory framework notified by l ocal body, census town and notified area 
townships for facilitating the implementation of these rules effectively in their jurisdiction. 
4 NN-Haldwani, NPP-Mussoorie, NPP-Barkot, NPP-Tehri,  NP-Augustmuni. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
16 
2.5 Shortcomings in the preparation of DPRs 
 
2.5.1 Ineffective Baseline waste analysis  
Clause 1.4.3 of Municipal Solid Waste Management Ma nual (MSWM) 2016, V ol. II 
states the main objective of a baseline study 5 is to understand the existing solid waste 
system as accurately as possible and utilise that i nformation for further planning, 
implementation and monitoring processes. Local conditions are to be considered while 
assessing the inadequacy of existing service and pl anning for the future. The baseline 
data is the critical aspect of DPRs as type of MSWM  systems to deploy depend on 
composition, quantity and seasonality of waste. 
Section 1.4.3.3.1 of Manual on MSWM 2016, stipulate d that for the purpose of  
long-term planning, the average amount of waste dis posed by a specific class of 
generators may be estimated only by averaging data from several samples. These 
samples were to be collected continuously for a per iod of seven days at multiple 
representative locations within the jurisdiction of  the ULB, in each of the three main 
seasons viz. summer, winter and rainy season.  
In none of the test checked ULBs, the samples were collected continuously for a period 
of seven days at multiple representative locations within the jurisdiction of the ULB. 
Hence, the baseline study conducted for the said purpose was not based on actual waste 
generated in the ULBs. 
2.5.2 Doubtful conduct of Waste Analysis  
Waste analysis involves determining the exact compo sition of a waste product. This 
process includes conducting several tests to identify determinants such as water content, 
pH levels, presence of heavy metals and bacterial content. It is essential for each ULB 
(Urban Local Body) to assess the quantity and compo sition of waste generated to 
effectively plan and design municipal solid waste management (MSWM) systems. The 
quantity and composition of MSW generated in the UL B determine the collection, 
processing and disposal options that could be adopted. They depend on factors such as 
the population, demographic details, principal acti vities in the city or town, income 
levels and lifestyle of the community. 
The examination of the DPRs of four 
6 ULBs for waste analysis revealed the following 
shortcomings: 
• ULBs did not base DPRs on actual waste generated since they did not document 
or have specific data sheets or supporting records available. 
• Weighbridges were unavailable in these ULBs during the period 2017-22, so 
the collected waste could not have been weighed. Co nsequently, an inflated 
assumption of waste generation was made in the preparation of DPRs. 
                                                
5 The study is for assessment of the current situati on or status and gap analysis and to analyse system 
deficiencies with due consideration of local demogr aphy, physical location, growth objectives as 
well as social and environmental conditions. 
6 NPP-Barkot, NPP-Tehri, NP-Naugaon, NP-Augustmuni. 

Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies  
17  
• DPRs were prepared using data from the Central Poll ution Control Board's 
waste survey in 2004-05 in selected Indian cities a nd population figures from 
Census 2001 and hence clearly outdated.  
2.5.3 Duplication of critical parameters in DPRs 
MSW composition and characteristics vary considerab ly, not only between ULBs but 
also within a ULB. The DPRs are to be prepared keep ing the local conditions and 
geography in mind. The Municipal Commissioner/Executive Officer is responsible for 
preparation and Director UDD is responsible for scrutiny of DPRs.  
The schematic layout of the proposed processing cum disposal site of NPP Vikas Nagar 
(Garhwal region) and that of NPP Khatima were the s ame. Similarly, environmental 
conditions of two different cities, namely Naugaon and Barkot were shown as the same 
in DPRs of said cities. These deficiencies raise do ubts over the quality of the DPRs. 
The poor quality of DPRs in turn has serious implications for the implementation of the 
SWM projects.  
Photo-2.3: The Schematic layouts of the proposed processing cum disposal sites of NPP Vikas Nagar 
and NPP Khatima are depicted in below: 
 
 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
18  
2.5.4 Photograph of one ULB was used for another UL B (Description of the 
Environment) 
 
 
 
Photo-2.4: Description of Environment photo given 
in the Draft DPR of Nagar Palika Parishad Barkot  
 
Photo-2.5: The same picture (Photo-2.2) is also given 
in the Draft DPR of Nagar Panchayat Naugaon  
 
Photo-2.6: Description of Environment chart given 
in the Draft DPR of Nagar Palika Parishad Barkot  
 
Photo-2.7: The same picture (Photo-2.4) is given in 
the Draft DPR of Nagar Panchayat Naugaon  
The duplication of DPRs indicate that the most impo rtant aspect of planning MSWM 
systems is not undertaken responsibly. 
In Exit conference (September 2023), the Additional  Secretary assured that the points 
observed by the audit will be looked into and corre ctive measures will be taken as per 
projects requirement.  The State Government further stated (December 2023) that Solid 
Waste generation changes in Uttarakhand in differen t months and waste generation 
increase/decreases/fluctuate as per Char dham yatra , kanvar, different Snan etc. 
Besides, every effort is made by ULBs to procure la nd for SWM processing and 
disposal facility. As the forest cover is more than  72 per cent , getting land for SWM 
purpose is a big challenge. The reply itself confirms that no action plan is either in place 
or available with the government to mitigate the problems.  
2.5.5  Status of Projects against approved DPRs  
Status of projects in test checked ULBs revealed th at though the DPRs were approved 
and the funds were transferred to the ULBs, the main work of establishment of projects 
were yet to be initiated in 11 out of 13 projects. The status of project work of test 
checked ULBs as of March 2022 was as per the Appendix-2.2. 
The following points were noticed in the test checked ULBs- 
• DPRs were prepared and approved without availabilit y of land in two ULBs at 
NPP Khatima and NP Augustmuni.  


Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
19 
• Work was under progress in four ULBs at Mussoorie, Nainital, Dineshpur and 
Barkot. 
• Processing plant was running but Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) & mixed waste was 
being dumped at SLF sites in two ULBs at Haridwar and Dehradun. 
• Processing plant (MRF centre, compost pits) was est ablished but sanitary landfill 
yet to be established at NPP Barkot. 
• In NP Dineshpur, no action initiated after demise o f contractor engaged for the 
work.  
While accepting the facts it was stated by the Additional Secretary in the exit conference 
(September 2023) that the matter will be examined. The State Government further 
replied (December 2023) that 62 solid waste management action plans/DPRs have been 
approved by the Government of India covering 89 municipal bodies of the State, out of 
which seven solid waste management plants have been completed and in the remaining 
works are in progress.  
2.5.6. Case studies of DPRs of test checked ULBs 
(a)  Nagar Palika Parishad Nainital 
A DPR titled as “A multidimensional remediation and  innovative tailoring of 
materialistic waste (AMRITAM) was prepared jointly by Municipal Board Nainital and 
Kumaon University with an innovative approach 
7 for the collection, segregation and 
upcycling of solid waste”. The DPR was approved by the National Mission of 
Himalayan Studies, Almora (NMHS) which sanctioned (October 2019) a grant of ₹ 3.50 
crore to be utilized within a period of three years . The land about 0.884 acres was 
selected at Narayan Nagar, Nainital for setting up a waste processing plant. 
Audit observed the following deficiencies: 
• The daily generated waste was 15 tons per day. Howe ver, the DPR prepared for 
processing plant of the capacity of five tons per day. This showed that the DPR was 
not based on realistic figures. 
• Out of total sanctioned amount of 
₹ 3.50 crore, an amount of ₹ 3.30 crore  
(94 per cent  of total grant) had been incurred by the ULB, but no work has been 
initiated at the proposed site for setting up the p rocessing plant due to hindrance 
made by general public.  The expenditure was incurred on- procurement of four out 
of six equipments8, consumables, manpower & contingencies etc. 
 
                                                
7 The key objective of the project was “Waste to Wea lth”, where an advance “Universal waste 
upcycling machine” had to be developed for the effective disposal of the solid waste and be a revenue 
generator for the municipality. In addition to this , the concept of Micro-bio-composting plants for 
the bio-degradable waste was thought to enhance the  ecology of the project site; thereby also helps 
to maintain the biodiversity of the project site. 
8 The equipments (four out of six) procured  were installed in the laboratory of the Department of 
Chemistry, Kumaon University, instead of at the proposed site. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
20 
• Further, for remaining two equipment which were to be procured as per sanctioned 
DPR, the ULB invited tenders for five equipment 9. It was also noticed that the funds 
were not available in project head for the new work order.   
On this being pointed, the Executive Officer agreed with the facts and stated that since 
the DPR was prepared by Kumaon University on an exp erimental basis with the 
capacity of five TPD, but at the time of construction it will be installed with the capacity 
of 25-30 TPD, considering the requirement of the NP P Nainital. Further, it was also 
intimated that to meet the actual demand, a proposa l for the remaining amount will be 
prepared and sent to the Government/ District Magistrate. 
The Additional Secretary stated in the exit conference (September 2023) that the matter 
will be examined. 
(b)  Nagar Panchayat Agustmuni 
Government of Uttarakhand gave financial and admini strative approval for setting up 
of processing plant and waste disposal site develop ment in NP Agustmuni 
 on 
17 June 2019 amounting to ₹ 97.53  lakh 10 .  
Records revealed that the construction work of the waste processing plant was yet to be 
started due to unavailability of suitable land. Further, the proposal for allotment of land 
was sent in August 2020 i.e., after more than a yea r of approval of DPR (June 2019). 
Thus, the DPR was prepared without availability/acquiring of land which was the basic 
requirement.  
Against sanctioned amount of 
₹ 77.38 lakh, an expenditure of ₹ 15 .58 lakh was incurred 
on procurement of vehicle, preparation of DPR and construction of shed 11 .   
The Additional Secretary stated in the exit conference (September 2023) that an enquiry 
will be set up in this case.  
Thus, the department’s easy approach towards establ ishment of projects, failed to 
ensure appropriate processing and waste reduction in dumping sites. 
2.6 Poor achievement against timelines in creation of infrastructure projects 
As per rule 22 of SWM Rules 2016, the necessary infrastructure for implementation of 
these rules shall be created by the local bodies an d other concerned authorities, as the 
case may be, on their own directly or by engaging a gencies within the time frame 
specified.  
The status of Solid Waste Management (SWM) infrastr ucture given as per Table-2.3  
below: 
                                                
9 These equipment were not included in the sanctione d DPR. Work orders for procurement of above 
equipment worth ₹ 4.03 crore including running and operating cost of  processing plant for a period 
of three year were issued in December 2021. 
10  Against the sanctioned cost, ₹ 33.15 lakh was to be borne from Swachh Bharat Miss ion,  
₹ 60.81 lakh from 4th  State Finance Commission and ₹ 3.57 lakh from Panchayat Nidhi. An amount 
of ₹ 77.38 lakh (79 per cent ) was released to the panchayat up to July 2020. 
11  Payments to the tune of ₹ 7.13 lakh for preparation of DPR and construction of shed were irregular 
as these items were not included in the sanctioned DPR. 

Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
21 
Table-2.3: Status of SWM infrastructure  
Sl. 
No. Activity 
Time limit 
from the 
date of 
Notification 
of SWM 
Rules 2016 
Status in Test checked ULBs 
Implem 
-ented 
Not 
imple-
mented 
Not 
appli- 
Cable 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. 
Identification of suitable 
sites for setting up solid 
waste processing facilities 
01 year 11 02  -- Sites not identified in NP 
Augustmuni & NPP Khatima 
2 
Identification of suitable 
sites for setting up 
common regional sanitary 
landfill facilities for 
suitable clusters of local 
authorities under 0.5 
million population and for 
setting up common 
regional sanitary landfill 
facilities. 
01 year 05 12 - 08 
Common SLF site identified 
as clusters in five ULBs. 
In rest of eight ULBs 
individual site 
3 
Procurement of suitable 
sites for setting up solid 
waste processing facility 
and sanitary landfill 
facilities. 
02 years 11 02  -- Sites not procured in NP 
Augustmuni & NPP Khatima 
4 
Enforcing waste 
generators to practice 
segregation of bio- 
degradable, recyclable, 
combustible, sanitary 
waste, domestic 
hazardous and inert solid 
wastes at source. 
02 years 13 -- -- Partially implemented as 
discussed in para 3.2 
5 
Ensure door to door 
collection of segregated 
waste and its 
transportation in covered 
vehicles to processing or 
disposal facilities. 
02 years 13 -- -- 
Partially implemented as 
transportation was not being 
done in covered vehicles in 
all the ULBs as discussed in 
para 3.4.1 
6 
Ensure separate storage, 
collection and 
transportation of 
construction and 
demolition waste. 
02 years 01  12 -- 
Separate storage, collection 
and transportation of C&D 
Waste ensured only in NN 
Dehradun as discussed in 
para  2.3 
7 
Setting up solid waste 
processing facilities by all 
local bodies having 
03 years 04  - 09 
 NN Dehradun and NN 
Haridwar have processing 
facilities (SLF). 
                                                
12  Cluster- NN Haldwani, NN Rudrapur (NPP Kichha, NPP  Bhawali, NP Lalkuwa, NP Bhimtal non-
test checked ULBs), Cluster- NP Dineshpur (NP Gular bhoj non-test checked ULB), Cluster-NPP 
New Tehri (NPP Chamba non-test checked ULB), Cluste r- NP Swargashram Jonk  (NN Rishikesh, 
NPP Doiwala non-test checked ULBs). 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
22 
Sl. 
No. Activity 
Time limit 
from the 
date of 
Notification 
of SWM 
Rules 2016 
Status in Test checked ULBs 
Implem 
-ented 
Not 
imple-
mented 
Not 
appli- 
Cable 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1,00,000 or more 
population. 
 SLF construction under 
process in NN Haldwani 
and NN Rudrapur 
8 
Setting up solid waste 
processing facilities by 
local bodies and census 
towns below 1,00,000 
populations. 
03 years 07 13 02 14 04 15 
 Under process in seven 
ULBs 
 Land not finalised in two 
ULBs. 
 Not applicable in four 
ULBs as population is 
more than 1,00,000. 
9 
Setting up common or 
stand-alone sanitary 
landfills by or for all local 
bodies having 0.5 million 
or more population for the 
disposal of only such 
residual wastes from the 
processing facilities as 
well as untreatable inert 
wastes as permitted under 
the Rules. 
03 years NA NA NA -- 
10 
Setting up common or 
regional sanitary landfills 
by all local bodies and 
census town under 0.5 
million population for the 
disposal of permitted 
waste under the rules. 
03 years 05  - 08 As given in point no. 02 
11 
Bioremediation or 
capping of old and 
abandoned dump sites. 
05 years 01 16 04 17 08 As discussed in para 2.7 
Source: Information obtained from test checked ULBs. 
As can be seen from the above table: 
• The infrastructure was not created in any of the sa mpled units in the given time 
frame of SWM 2016.  
• In two out of 13 test checked ULBs, identification/procurement of suitable sites for 
setting up solid waste processing facilities was yet to be done.  
                                                
13  NPP Mussoorie, NPP Nainital, NPP New Tehri, NPP Ba rkot, NP Dineshpur, NP Swargashram 
Jonk, NP Naugaon. 
14  NPP Khatima, NP Augustmuni. 
15  NN Dehradun, NN Haridwar, NN Rudrapur and NN Haldw ani. 
16  Capping done in NPP Mussoorie. 
17  Bioremediation or capping not done in NN Dehradun,  NN Haridwar, NPP Khatima, & NPP 
Barkot. 

Chapter-2: Planning and Operationalization of Projects under Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
23 
• Separate storage, collection and transportation of construction and demolition waste 
was ensured only in Nagar Nigam Dehradun. 
• Bioremediation or capping of old and abandoned dump sites were done only in one 
out of five ULBs. 
Thus, the failure to create the necessary infrastru cture resulted in dumping of waste in 
open areas and effecting the environment and health of the public.  
While accepting the facts it was stated by the Additional Secretary in the exit conference 
(September 2023) that as per SWM Rules 2016 all the activities were to be done within  
five years i.e., till 2021-22. However, the work is in progress and will be completed by 
December 2024. Further, the State Government stated  (December 2023) that for 
covering 92 municipal bodies, 65 sites have been se lected for construction of waste 
management projects. As per the progress of solid w aste management in the State, a 
target of December 2024 has been set to complete do or-to-door collection, source 
segregation and processing. 
2.7  Bioremediation/Capping of old and abandoned waste dump sites  
Rule 15 (zk) of SWM Rules 2016 mentions that in the absence of bio-mining and 
bioremediation of dumpsite , the local authorities shall scientifically cap dumpsite as 
per landfill capping norms to prevent further damage to the environment. 
Rule 22 (11) provides five years time for bioremediation of old and aband oned dump 
sites and for starting the process of capping them. 
The Municipal Commissioner/Executive Officer was responsible for preparation, Director 
UDD for scrutiny and State Level Technical Committe e/ High Power Committee, 
Municipal Board was responsible for approval  of DPR of the respective ULB.  
Records of the test checked ULBs revealed that  there were old and abandoned waste 
dumpsites in four out of 13 ULBs in which bioremedi ation/capping of old dumpsites 
was yet to be done, as depicted in the Table-2.4  below: 
Table-2.4: Status of Bioremediation/Capping of old dump sites in test checked ULBs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB  
Old Legacy Waste 
Dumpsite Location  
Quantity of 
Legacy Waste at 
Dumpsite  (Lakh 
Status of DPR for 
disposal of Legacy 
Waste Dumpsites by 
1 Nagar Nigam 
Dehradun 
Danda Laukhand, 
Sahastradhara, 
Dehradun   
6.24 
Prepared and sent to 
Government for 
approval. 
2 Nagar Nigam 
Haridwar 
1. Sarai Dump site 
2. Chandi ghat 
dumpsite, 
4.21 
Prepared and sent to 
Government for 
approval. 
3 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad 
Khatima 
Aath taar, Lohia ghat 
Road, Khatima  0.33 
Prepared and sent to 
Government for 
approval. 
4 Nagar Palika 
Parishad Barkot 
Shastri Nagar, Tiladi 
Road   0.02 
Under preparation at 
ULB level 
 
Total  10.80  
Source: Information provided by the ULBs. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
24 
As can be seen from the above table: 
• The quantity of 10.80 lakh metric tons of legacy waste was lying unprocessed.   
• Three DPRs were pending for approval at Government level while one DPR is 
under preparation stage at ULB level. 
While accepting the facts it was stated by the Additional Secretary in the exit conference 
(September 2023) that after audit DPRs of Nagar Nigam Dehradun and Haridwar have 
been approved and remaining DPRs will also be appro ved at the earliest. The State 
Government further replied (December 2023) that the work of bioremediation of legacy 
waste is in progress. Out of the total legacy waste of 18.82 lakh metric tons in the State, 
3.6 lakh metric tons of legacy waste have been disp osed of, with the remaining being 
processed at various levels.  
2.8 Recommendations 
• The State Government needs to devise systems to ass ist ULBs in preparation of 
Solid Waste Management plans/action plans for effec tive implementation of 
waste management and monitor their effective implementation ; 
• The State Government should ensure timely creation of the infrastructure of 
Solid Waste Management projects to avoid adhoc appr oaches adopted in the 
collection, storage, transportation and disposal of  the solid waste to save the 
damaging environment. Responsibility must be fixed at all levels for inordinate 
delays in preparation, approval and establishment of SWM projects. 

Chapter -3 
Collection, Segregation, Storage, 
Transportation and Disposal of 
Municipal Solid Waste 
  

 
25 
CHAPTER-3 
 
Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation an d Disposal of Municipal 
Solid Waste 
 
On an average, five to eight per cent of the waste generated statewide and eight to  
16 per cent in the sampled ULBs remained uncollecte d. Only 3.13 per cent of the 
collected waste was segregated in the sampled ULBs.  Transfer stations were 
situated near residential areas, highways, canals, or open grounds. The roles of rag 
pickers were not officially recognized, and registr ation processes had not 
commenced. Only two Sanitary Landfill (SLF) sites w ere operational, leading to 
waste being dumped in open sites, primarily located  near highways, rivers, or 
agricultural lands. Sixty four per cent of waste co llection vehicles were left 
uncovered. Analysis of the Service Level Benchmark (SLB) indicators stipulated by 
the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) showed that in majority of the 
test checked ULBs, the achievement of the performance indicators was significantly 
below the fixed targets.   
 
3.1 Collection of Municipal Solid Waste  
The unattended waste lying around attracts flies, r ats, and other creatures that in turn 
spread disease. Further, wet waste decomposes and releases a bad odour. This leads to 
unhygienic conditions and to the health problems. T he Sanitary Inspector, Supervisor, 
Executive Officer, Medical Health Officer/Municipal  Commissioner of the respective 
ULBs were responsible for monitoring of collection and unattended Municipal Solid 
Waste. 
The quantum of waste generated and collected during the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 in 
the State and in the test checked Urban Local Bodie s (ULBs) was as shown in the  
Table-3.1 below: 
 
Table-3.1: The status of quantum of waste generated & collected per day in the State and in the 
test checked 13 ULBs (in Tons Per Day) 
Period 
In Uttarakhand State  Test checked 13 ULBs 
Generated Collected Uncollected 
(Percentage) Generated Collected Uncollected 
(Percentage) 
2017-18 1,099.00 1,099.00 00 511.00 428.00 83.00 (16)  
2018-19 1,527.46 1,437.40 90.06 (06)  792.00 681.00 111.00 (14)  
2019-20 1,610.94 1,481.06 129.88 (08)  833.00 757.00 76.00 (09)  
2020-21 1,458.46 1,378.99 79.47 (05)  845.00 762.00 83.00 (10)  
2021-22 1,585.39 1,451.59 133.80 (08)  895.00 823.00 72.00 (08)  
Source: Information provided by the Department and Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board. 
As can be seen from the above table, on an average,  five to eight per cent of waste 
generated was not collected in the State and eight to 16 per cent in the test checked 
ULBs.  
It was stated by the Additional Secretary in the Exit Conference (September 2023) that 
a plan is being prepared for 100 per cent collection of MSW and it’s execution will be 
ensured in future. The State Government further int imated (December 2023) that  

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
26  
door-to-door collection of solid waste is being done in all 1,242 wards of 102 municipal 
bodies in the State and source segregation is being done in 1,055 wards. 
3.1.1 Door-to-door collection of Solid Waste 
Rule 15 (b) of Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 envisages that the local authorities 
shall arrange door-to-door collection of segregated solid waste from households etc.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that in 11 out of 13 t est checked ULBs 1, private 
concessionaires conducted door-to-door collection of solid waste for most of the period 
during 2017-18 to 2021-22. Review of the functionin g of Private Concessionaire 
revealed following deficiencies:  
A)  Lack of Source Segregation : Across multiple concession agreements, a common 
issue was the failure to segregate waste at the sou rce into biodegradable and  
non-biodegradable waste. Instead, mixed solid waste  was collected undermining 
recycling efforts and overall waste management proc esses. The same was also 
confirmed during joint physical verification of door-to-door collection of waste in 
different ULBs. This can be  seen in the following photographs- 
 
Photo-3.1: Door-to-door collection of waste in Nagar 
Palika Parishad Mussoorie (11 October 2022)  
Photo-3.2: Door-to-door collection of waste in Nagar 
Palika Parishad Tehri Garhwal (03 March 2023)  
 
Photo-3.3: Door-to-door collection of Mixed waste 
in NN Rudrapur, U.S. Nagar (16 January 2023)  
Photo-3.4: Collected door-to-door waste unloaded in 
dumping ground of NN Rudrapur (16  January 2023)  
B)   
                                                           
1 NP-Naugaon and NP-Agustmuni the collection of waste was done by the ULB officials.  


Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
27 
 
Photo-3.5: Collected door-to-door waste 
unloaded in vehicle in Nagar Panchayat 
Swargashram Jonk (11 January 2023)  
 
Photo-3.6: Collected door-to-door waste unloaded 
in dumping ground of Nagar Panchayat 
Swargashram Jonk (11 January 2023)  
 
B)  Deficient Monitoring and Reporting : In various agreements, shortcomings in 
monitoring and reporting mechanisms were noticed. P roject Engineers of  
NN Haldwani and Dehradun were tasked with overseein g operations. However, 
Project Engineer of NN Haldwani often failed to pro duce monthly reports, 
hindering effective oversight. In addition, irregul arities such as incomplete 
household mapping, lack of vehicle weighing, incons istent user charge collection 
and door-to-door collection discrepancies were repo rted but inadequately address 
in all test checked ULBs. 
C)  Misuse of Funds : In the case of the MSWM services agreement with t he private 
concessionaire of Nagar Palika Parishad Mussoorie, user charges collected 
amounting to ₹ 87.46 lakh were not deposited as stipulated in the  agreement. 
Instead, the private concessionaire diverted these funds to address its own financial 
liabilities, specifically related to Employees Provident Fund (EPF) and Employee 
State Insurance (ESI). 
The above showed that the Private Concessionaires a ppointed for door-to-door 
collection of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)  were not working as per the terms of 
Concession agreements and the waste was being trans ported to the landfill/dumping 
sites without segregation. 
During Exit Conference (September 2023), the Additi onal Secretary informed that 
interface has been developed with ULBs in last thre e months to ensure coverage of  
100 per cent  wards and notices have been issued to 36 ULBs for failing to cover all 
wards in door-to-door collection. Further, segregat ion of MSW was a challenge and 
efforts will be made to improve the current situati on. The State Government further 
stated (December 2023) that door-to-door collection  of 8.7 lakh (95 per cent ) and 
source segregation of 6.3 lakh (69 per cent ) is being done against a total of 9.07 lakh 
households/ shops/ institutions/ schools etc. in th e ULBs. Third party verification of 
solid waste management works of some selected bodie s is proposed to be initiated in 
the next two-three months to validate the said works being done by the bodies.  


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
28  
While acknowledging government initiatives, the Aud it underscores the need for full 
compliance with SWM Rules and effective enforcement of concession agreements. 
3.1.2 Personal protection equipment not used by wor kers handling solid waste 
Rule 15 (zd) of SWM Rules 2016 mandates that the operator of a facility shall provide 
personal protection equipment including uniform, fl uorescent jacket, hand gloves, 
raincoats, appropriate footwear and masks to all wo rkers handling solid waste. It was 
the responsibility of the Sanitary Inspector, Supervisor and Medical Health Officer for 
providing personal protection equipment to workers handling solid waste. 
Records in the test checked 13 ULBs revealed as under: 
• As of March 2022, uniforms to only 3,647 out of 6,0 09 persons engaged in waste 
management had been provided.  
• Three ULBs 2 did not provide any uniform and one ULB 3 did not provide any 
footwear to the waste handlers.  
The above findings were corroborated in joint physi cal verification where workers 
handling solid waste were found not to be using per sonal protection equipment except 
in isolated cases. Results of physical verification can be seen in following photographs:  
 
Photo-3.7: Nagar Palika Parishad Khatima, U. 
S. Nagar (13 December 2022)  
Photo-3.8: Ward No. 08, Nagar Palika 
Parishad, Mussoorie (13 October 2022)  
Photo-3.9: Nagar Palika Parishad-Barkot 
(02 March 2023)  
Photo-3.10: Nagar Palika Parishad Tehri  
(03 March 2023)  
                                                           
2 NPP-Badkot, NPP-Nainital and NP-Naugaon. 
3 NPP-Nainital. 


Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
29 
While accepting the facts, the Additional Secretary in the Exit Conference (September 
2023) stated that instructions will be issued in this regard. The State Government further 
replied (December 2023) that it is being ensured th at Personal Protection Equipment 
(PPE) kit will be made available to Paryavaran Mitras of all the ULBs. 
3.1.3  No system established for inclusion of Informal wa ste workers  
Rule 15 (c) of SWM Rules 2016 describes to establis h a system to recognise 
organisations of waste pickers or informal waste co llectors and promote and establish 
a system for integration of these authorised waste- pickers and waste collectors to 
facilitate their participation in solid waste manag ement including door-to-door 
collection of waste. The responsibility for  recognition of informal waste workers lies 
with Sanitary Inspector, Supervisor and Medical Hea lth Officer. Executive Officer, 
Medical Health Officer/ Municipal Commissioner were  responsible for authorisation 
of waste collectors in the respective ULB. Records of test checked ULBs revealed that 
in two 5 out of 13 ULBs the Self-Help Group (SHG) were regi stered and waste pickers 
of these SHGs were involved in segregation of MSW at transfer stations/dump sites. In 
rest of the 11 test checked ULBs, neither the roles  of rag pickers were recognised nor 
the registration process had been started.  
During physical verification of the transfer 
station/dump site in ULBs where waste pickers 
were involved, the waste pickers were working 
without using safety equipment. (Photo 3.11).  
While accepting the facts, the Additional 
Secretary said in the Exit Conference 
(September 2023) that efforts will be made for 
inclusion of informal waste workers within a 
year and instructions will be issued in this 
regard.  
                                                           
4 A rag picker is a person who collects wastes in a bag from the dumpsite, street and locality such as 
polythene bags, toothbrushes, used plastic items, empty tins, bottles, papers etc.  
5 NPP-Mussoorie, NN- Haldwani. 
Rag picker’s 4 role in Waste Management  -   
i.  Role of rag pickers in collection of recyclable and  reusable material from  
source to dumping site reduces the burden of space in dumping site and 
passively reduces the amount of carbon and resources in undesirable shape. 
ii.  The removal of waste material from roads and other localities makes a clean 
neighbourhood. 
iii.  These wastes can be reused for other purposes or th ey can be melted and 
recycled into something new. 
iv.  Rag picker checks on the accumulation of wastes in an area, thus having a 
check on it becoming the breeding ground for diseas e-causing such as 
mosquito, flies etc. 
v.  Rag pickers separate the biodegradable & non-biodegradable wastes.  
Photo-3.11: Rag pickers in dumping site of Nagar 
Nigam Haldwani (14 December2022) 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
30  
The State Government further stated (December 2023)  that it is being ensured that rag 
pickers are identified in Urban Local Bodies and formally included in the Solid Waste 
Management Action Plan.  
While acknowledging recent governmental initiatives , the Audit emphasizes the 
urgency of streamlining the recognition and registration process for rag pickers. 
3.2 Segregation of Municipal Solid Waste 
"Segregation" means sorting and separate storage of various components of solid waste 
namely biodegradable wastes including agriculture and dairy waste, non-biodegradable 
wastes including recyclable waste, non- recyclable combustible waste, sanitary waste 
and non-recyclable inert waste, domestic hazardous wastes and construction and 
demolition wastes. 
SWM Rules 2016 envisage that every waste generator shall segregate and store 
the waste generated by them in three separate strea ms namely bio-degradable, 
non-bio-degradable and domestic hazardous wastes and handover segregated wastes to 
authorised waste pickers. Further, the Service Level Benchmarks (SLB) recommended 
by GoI envisage that the extent of segregation of M unicipal Solid Waste should be  
100 per cent . The Sanitary Inspector, Supervisor, Executive Off icer and Medical 
Health Officer/Municipal Commissioner of the respec tive ULB were responsible for 
monitoring of segregation 
 at source and transfer station of Municipal Solid Waste. 
The details of total waste collected and waste segregated at various stages for the period 
from 2017-18 to 2021-22 in test checked ULBs is shown in the Table-3.2 below: 
Table-3.2: Details of Segregation of MSW in test checked ULBs (in MT) 
Year Collected 6 
Segregated Mixed Waste 
deposited in Landfill/ 
dumping site 7 
At 
source 
At transfer 
station 
At 
processing/ 
landfill site 
Total 
2017-18 1,56,106 18  2,190  2,346  4,554  1,51,552  
2018-19 2,48,529  59  1,460  6,381  7,900  2,13,433  
2019-20 2,76,269  164  2,154  4,783  7,100  2,07,176  
2020-21 2,78,276  219  2,154  8,455  10,828  2,25,686  
2021-22 3,00,286  697  2,193  6,111  9,001  2,36,119  
Total 12,59,466 1,157 
(0.09)  
10,151 
(0.81)  
28,076 
(2.23)  
39,382  
(3.13) 10,33,966 
Source: Information provided by the ULBs. 
It is clear form above Table that only 3.13 per cent  (0.09 per cent  at source, 
0.81 per cent  at transfer station, 2.23 per cent  at processing station) of collected waste 
was segregated in test checked ULBs against the requirement of 100 per cent. 
While accepting the facts, the Additional Secretary  stated in the Exit Conference 
(September 2023) that segregation is a big challenge for them and efforts will be made 
to improve the current situation. Further, the State Government stated (December 2023) 
                                                           
6 Collected Waste was of 13 test checked ULBs. Howev er, Segregated Waste- 0.39 lakh MT, Mixed 
Waste-10.34 lakh MT includes data of three non-test  checked ULBs i.e. NPP-Herbertpur, NPP-
Vikas Nagar & NP-Selaqui which was received at SLF Dehradun for disposal. SLF Dehradun shows 
2.35 lakh MT of waste as Dries. 
7 Mixed waste shown in above table includes 2.23 lak h MT of Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) of Nagar 
Nigam Dehradun, which was dumped at the landfill site. 

Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
31 
that to validate their efforts done by the ULBs a t hird-party verification of solid waste 
management works of some selected bodies is propose d to be initiated in the next 
2-3 months. Extensive publicity is constantly done for public participation and public 
co-operation for source segregation. 
3.3 Storage of Municipal Solid Waste 
Rule 15 (h) SWM Rules 2016 describes to setup mater ial recovery facilities or 
secondary storage facilities with sufficient space for sorting of recyclable materials to 
enable informal or authorised waste pickers and waste collectors to separate recyclables 
such as paper, plastic, metal, glass and textile fr om the waste. For identification, 
procurement and setting up of transfer stations in the respective ULB the Municipal 
Commissioner, Executive Officer and District Magistrate were responsible.  
3.3.1 Establishment of Transfer stations  
Records revealed that there were Secondary Storage 
8/transfer stations 9 in only four 10  
out of 13 test checked ULBs. The physical verificat ion of the transfer stations in said 
four ULBs revealed as under:  
• Transfer stations were set up near the residential areas, National Highways, Canals 
and in open grounds of the ULBs (Photo 3.12 to 3.19). 
• Weigh bridge machine was available only in NN Dehradun for small vehicles.  
Photo-3.12 Secondary Storage facility in open 
place near National Highway at Kargi, Nagar 
Nigam Dehradun (29 October 2022)  
Photo-3.13: Geo tagging of Secondary Storage 
facility in open place near National Highway in 
Kargi, NN Dehradun (27 March 2023)  
                                                           
8 "Secondary storage" means the temporary containment of solid waste after collection at secondary 
waste storage depots or MRFs or bins for onward tra nsportation of the waste to the processing or 
disposal facility. 
9 “Transfer station” means a facility created to receive solid waste fro m collection areas and 
transport in bulk in covered vehicles or containers to waste processing and, or disposal facilities.  
10  Three in NN Dehradun, Four in NN, Haridwar, Seven in NN Haldwani and one in NPP Mussoorie.  


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
32  
 
Photo-3.14: Secondary Storage facility in 
residential area at Shyam Nagar, Haridwar 
(02 February 2023)  
 
Photo-3.15: Aerial view (Geo tagging) of 
Secondary Storage facility at Shyam Nagar, 
Haridwar in residential area (02 February 2023)  
 
 
Photo-3.16: Secondary Storage facility in 
open area near new developing residential 
colony at Bairagi Camp, Haridwar 
(03 February 2023)  
Photo-3.17: Aerial view (Geo tagging) of 
Secondary Storage facility in open area near new 
developing residential colony at Bairagi Camp, 
Haridwar (03 February 2023)  
Photo-3.18: Secondary Storage facility NPP, 
Mussoorie near residential building 
(10 October 2022)  
 
Photo-3.19: Aerial view of Secondary Storage 
facility NPP, near residential building  Mussoorie 
(29 March 2023)  
The Geo tagged pictures clearly indicate that the T ransfer Stations/Secondary Storage 
were located near the residential areas, National Highways, Canals and in open grounds 
of the ULBs. 


Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
33 
3.3.2 Unavailability of Sanitary Landfill sites res ulted in Municipal Solid Waste 
stored at Open Dumping sites  
Open dumps can cause soil and water contamination, plant and wildlife habitat damage. 
Engineered liner systems in regulated landfills pro tect soil and water from 
contamination when waste is disposed of properly. Unsightly waste piles can spoil the 
aesthetic appeal of landscape, decrease community quality of life, lower property values 
of surrounding homes, negatively affect tourism and  cost municipalities money for 
clean-ups. Municipal Commissioner, Executive Office r and District Magistrate were 
responsible for identification, procurement of land  and monitoring of Open dumping 
sites in respective ULB. 
Audit noticed that-  
• Only two Sanitary Landfill 
11  (SLF) sites were available in the State 12 . In the absence 
of SLF the maximum waste was dumped in open sites available with the concerned 
ULBs. 
• In nine out of 13 test checked ULBs, MSW was dumped  in open sites 13 . Scientific 
Landfill sites were available only in two ULBs (NN-Dehradun and NN- Haridwar). 
• Most of the dump sites were located near the Nation al Highways or rivers or in 
agriculture lands etc. 
The Status of dump sites of the test checked ULBs d uring the period 2017-18 to 
2021-22 was as in the Table-3.3 below: 
Table-3.3: Status of Dump sites in Test checked ULBs during the period 2017-22 
Name of the ULB 
Number of 
dump sites 
during the 
period 
Size of the 
Land (in 
sq. meter)  
Landowner (If the 
Land is not owned 
by the ULB) 
Waste deposited during 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
Mixed 
waste (MT)  Period  
NN, Rudrapur 01 6,070  Nagar Nigam 
Rudrapur 1,20,815 Till 2021-22 
 
NPP, Khatima 02 
1,500  Electricity 
Department  6,570 2020-21 
 
8,094  Public Associate Pvt. 
Ltd  6,570 2021-22 
 
 
NP, Dineshpur 
 
05 
300  NP, Dineshpur 
6,570 2017-22  
2,023  Raj Singh  
1,394  Ritik  
2,023  Ajit Singh  
3,000  Vijay Munjal 
NPP, Badkot 01 890  NPP Badkot 2,191  Till 2021-22  
NP, Naugaon 01 280  NP Naugaon 2,920 2017-22  
                                                           
11  Nagar Nigam, Dehradun and Nagar Nigam, Haridwar. 
12  It was further found that the MSW was transported by the Nagar Palika Parishad, Nainital to the 
dump site of Nagar Nigam, Haldwani and Nagar Palika  Parishad, Mussoorie at Sanitary Landfill-
Nagar Nigam, Dehradun. 
13  Dump sites means a land utilised by local body for  disposal of solid waste without following the 
principles of sanitary land filling.  

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
34  
Name of the ULB 
Number of 
dump sites 
during the 
period 
Size of the 
Land (in 
sq. meter)  
Landowner (If the 
Land is not owned 
by the ULB) 
Waste deposited during 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
Mixed 
waste (MT)  Period  
NN, Haldwani 
01 40,000 Forest land  
1,72,500 2017-22  
NPP, Nainital 27,375 2017-22  
NPP, Tehri 01 1,500 NPP Tehri 14,823 2017-22  
NP, 
SwargashramJonk 01 8,000 NP Swargashram Jonk 2,685 2017-22 
 
Total 13 75,074  3,63,019  
Source: Information provided by the test checked ULBs. 
It is clear from above Table that 3.63 lakh tons of waste (equivalent to 36,302 trucks 14 ) 
was lying in dumpsites measuring 75,074 sq meter (e quivalent to 17 football fields 15 ) 
during 2017-22 causing risk to public health. The physical verification of the dumping 
sites revealed instances of burning and flowing of waste into nearby river (Photo 3.20, 
3.21 and 3.22). Some dumping sites were on agricult ural land (Photo 4.3 and 4.4). 
Further, 54 per cent  of dumping sites were taken on rent raising doubts over long term 
sustainability of those sites.  
• Burning of waste 
When household waste, like wood and leaves, are bur ned, they produce smoke, 
which contains vapours and particulate matter (soli d and liquid droplets suspended 
in the air). Air pollution from smoke 
can impact human health. Other 
chemicals released while burning 
plastic include benzo(a) pyrene 
(BAP) and polyaromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs), which have 
both been shown to cause cancer. If 
agricultural bags or containers are 
contaminated with pesticides or 
other harmful substances, those will 
also be released into the air. 
People exposed to these air 
pollutants can experience eye and 
nose irritation, difficulty breathing, coughing and  headaches. People with heart 
disease, asthma, emphysema or other respiratory dis eases are especially sensitive to 
air pollutants. Other health problems aggravated by burning include lung infections, 
pneumonia, bronchiolitis and allergies. Burning tra sh can cause long-term health 
problems. 
  
                                                           
14  TATA 22 feet (size-  22 L x 7.5 W x 7 H)  truck carry maximum of 10 tons. 3.63 lakh tons equivalent 
to 36,302 trucks. 
15  The surface area of a football field is 4,462.3 m 2. 
 
Photo-3.20: Burning of Municipal Solid Waste in Dumping 
site of Nagar Nigam Haldwani (14 December 2022)   


Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
35 
Thus, as can be seen from above instances, open dum ps were causing soil and water 
contamination and damaging plant & wildlife habitat. 
During Exit Conference (September 2023) the Additio nal Secretary stated that the 
matter will be looked into and the Government was t rying to prepare Detailed Project 
Reports of such waste lying in the Open dump sites by treating it as legacy waste.  
3.3.3 Inefficient collection of MSW resulted into d umping at roadside 
Failure to enforce efficient and effective door-to- door collection resulted in 
littering/dumping of Municipal Solid Waste/food waste on roadside. Roadside dumping 
effects the environmental conditions of the area leading to negative effect on health of 
local people besides attracting the stray animals, as can be seen in the pictures below 
taken during physical verification:  
• Municipal Solid Waste dumped near the rivers 
When the garbage is 
dumped into the 
rivers or water 
bodies, they cannot 
be degraded and get 
accumulated in the 
bodies. The 
degradation of these 
materials results in 
the release of toxic 
compounds which 
kill the plants and 
aquatic animals. The 
water becomes 
polluted and is not fit 
for drinking. The 
inlets of the fresh 
water and the 
sources of ground 
water gets blocked 
which results in the 
accumulation of 
contaminants in the 
same water body and 
lack of water 
resources.  
Photo-3.21: Dumpsite near the river at Nagar Nigam Rudrapur 
(12 January 2023) 
 
Photo-3.22: Aerial view (Geo tagged) of dumpsite at 
 NP-Naugaon near river (16 March 2023) 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
36  
Photo-3.23: Roadside dumping of waste in 
Nagar Palika Parishad Khatima  
(13 December 2022) 
Photo-3.24: Roadside dumping of waste in 
Nagar Nigam Rudrapur  
(16 January 2023) 
During Exit Conference (September 2023), the Additi onal Secretary stated that a plan 
is being prepared for 100 per cent collection of Municipal Solid Waste. The execution 
of such plan will be ensured.  
The State Government replied (December 2023) that U ttarakhand being a hilly state 
(about 72 per cent  forest land), land selection for Solid Waste Manag ement plants is a 
major problem, however, every effort is being made to set up waste transfer stations 
away from residential areas. Further, 781 Garbage Vulnerable Points (GVPs) have been 
removed in the State and efforts are being made that again new GVPs are not developed.  
30 cities/ULBs have been declared as Bin Free City. 
However, the response evidently failed to address c rucial issues, such as the failure to 
acquire land even after seven years since the notification of the SWM rules in 2016. 
3.4 Transportation of Municipal Solid Waste 
 
3.4.1 Uncovered vehicles used for transportation of  MSW  
MSW Manual (Part-II), Para 2.3.2- General Principles, describes that the vehicles used 
for transportation should be covered and waste should not be visible to public. It should 
have a facility to prevent spillage of waste and le achate en-route to the processing or 
disposal facility. Sanitary Inspector, Supervisor, Executive Officer, Medical Health 
Officer/Municipal Commissioner of the respective UL B were responsible for 
monitoring of transportation of vehicles in the respective ULB. 
It was noticed in the test checked ULBs that out of 425 vehicles, 272 (64 per cent ) used 
for door-to-door collection were uncovered. This co nfirmed in Joint Physical 
Verification as well (photos 3.25 to 3.28).  
 
Photo-3.25: Municipal Solid Waste transported 
by uncovered vehicle in Nagar Nigam 
Dehradun(29 October 2022) 
Photo-3.26: Municipal Solid Waste transported by 
uncovered vehicle in Nagar Nigam Rudrapur  
(16 January 2023) 
 


Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
37 
 
Photo-3.27: Uncovered vehicle used for 
transportation of Municipal Solid Waste, 
Nagar Nigam Haldwani (14 December 2022)  
Photo-3.28: Uncovered vehicle used for 
transportation of Municipal Solid Waste, Nagar 
Palika Parishad, Nainital (30 November 2022)  
Thus, ULBs failed to monitor the private concession aries and ensure covered vehicles 
for transportation of MSW. 
The Additional Secretary stated in the Exit Confere nce (September 2023) that notice 
will be issued to the respective ULBs. Further, the  State Government stated 
(December 2023) that every effort is being made to use covered vehicles for 
transportation of solid waste. 
3.4.2 Use of transportation vehicles without author isation 
The ULBs should ensure that the vehicles procured c omply with the statutory 
requirements of registration, obtaining authorisation, insurance, etc .  
Records of test checked ULBs revealed that out of 5 73 vehicles used for waste 
transportation in the test checked 13 ULBs, 45 (08 per cent ) and 109 (19 per cent ) 
vehicles were running without registration and insurance respectively.  
Thus, ULBs were using the vehicles for SWM purposes  without adhering to the 
statutory requirements. 
The State Government stated (December 2023) that remedial measures are being taken. 
3.4.3 Monitoring of transportation vehicles 
Transportation of MSW from source of generation to the authorised destination is 
important to ensure its proper disposal. MSWM Manua l, 2016 stipulates that 
communication technologies such as Global Positioni ng System (GPS) are to be 
integrated as part of monitoring of SWM system. Thi s also helps in tracking of the 
vehicles.  
Records revealed that in test checked 13 ULBs, no G PS system installed in 228  
(54 per cent ) vehicles of eight ULBs used for collection of doo r-to-door MSW. Thus, 
in absence of GPS, the ULBs failed to adopt an effective tracking mechanism. 
The Additional Secretary stated in the Exit Confere nce (September 2023) that notice 
will be issued to the respective ULBs. Further, the  State Government stated 
(December 2023) that as on date, GPS has been installed in 701 vehicles against a total 
of 915 vehicles in the State. 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
38  
3.5 Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste 
{{{{ 
3.5.1 Construction, operation and maintenance of Sa nitary Landfill Site 
Rule 15 (w) of SWM Rules 2016 undertake on their ow n or through any other agency 
construction, operation and maintenance of sanitary  landfill and associated 
infrastructure as per Schedule 1 for disposal of re sidual wastes in a manner prescribed 
under these rules. For identification, procurement and setting up of Scientific Landfill 
(SLF) Disposal sites in respective ULB Municipal Co mmissioner, Executive Officer 
and District Magistrate were responsible. 
There were two Scientific Landfill (SLF) Disposal s ites in the State. The following 
points relating to construction, operation and maintenance of scientific landfill disposal 
system at Sheeshambada, Dehradun is illustrated below: 
Nagar Nigam Dehradun decided to set up a Solid Wast e Processing and Disposal 
system at Sheeshambada, Dehradun on Built, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis. A 
Concession Agreement between Nagar Nigam Dehradun a nd the concessionaire, 
RAMKY Enviro Engineers Ltd. was signed in August 2016 for the period of 15 years. 
The project was operationalised in December 2017 an d Consent to Operate was given 
by Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board in March 201 8. As per Para 4.1 (a) of 
Concession agreement NND shall appoint an Independe nt Project Engineer. The 
project engineer monitors the Operation & Maintenan ce (O&M) activities undertaken 
by the Concessionaire so as to ensure compliance wi th the O&M requirements. The 
project engineer certified the quantity of MSW coll ected, processed in the processing 
facility and at landfill site by the Concessionaire.  
Reports submitted by the Project Engineer’s revealed that: 
• The Sheeshambada plant received a total of 5,14,268 .05 MT of MSW from 
December 2017 to March 2022. The by-products of the  MSW were: 2,23,117 MT 
of Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), 19,163 MT of Compost, and 33,799.85 MT of Inert 
waste. 
• The concessionaire was shifting the waste from the tipping floor directly to the 
landfill site, including unprocessed waste being dumped there. 
• Applying soil cover on the waste is essential to pr event wind blow, odors, deter 
scavengers, birds, and vermin, and improve the site 's visual appearance. However, 
the concessionaire is violating the Concession agreement and MSW Rules 2016 by 
not applying the soil cover on the waste daily. 
• The sanitary landfill has already reached a height of around 20-25 meters within the 
first five years of plant operation. If the same practice continues, the lifespan of the 
landfill will be shorter than proposed. The sanitar y landfill site is designed for 
15 years as per the concession agreement. 
• The leachate generated at all stages during waste p rocessing/storage in the plant is 
not being treated and disposed of according to the terms and conditions of 
Environmental Clearance (EC). Additionally, it may degrade groundwater/surface 
water and create foul smells in the surrounding area of the processing plant. 

Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
39 
No serious action was taken by the Nagar Nigam Dehr adun (NND) except issuing 
letters time to time for non-compliance of the Concessionaire agreement and directing 
to take necessary actions in above matters. Instead  of complying with the directions 
given by the Nigam, the Concessionaire gave a preli minary notice of termination 
(June 2022) to NND and the agreement was finally te rminated in the month of 
November 2022. 
Dumping of Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) in Landfill site 
Para 5.13.6 of the Concessionaire agreement stipula ted that the concessionaire must 
ensure the removal of all processed waste products from the waste processing facility 
within six months through sales. However, records r evealed that 2.23 lakh MT of 
Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) was not disposed of and was instead dumped in the 
landfill site. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) al so noted this dumping of RDF at 
the plant and highlighted in December 2018 that "RA MKYs running the SWM plant 
were not dispatching the RDF to the Cement Units as  prescribed by Central Public 
Health & Environmental Engineering Organisation (CP HEEO) guidelines; instead, it 
was being dumped at the landfill." The NGT further remarked that there was a 
functional cement plant of CCI in Sirmaur District of Himachal Pradesh, just 60 km 
away from Dehradun. 
As no action was initiated by the concessionaire fo r disposal of RDF, NND finally 
decided to withhold an amount equivalent to 20 per cent from monthly tipping fee till 
concessionaire ensured, disposal of RDF as per the terms of concession agreement. An 
amount of 
₹ 4.01 crore was hold by NND till June 2022 in this regard. 
Joint Physical Verification of SLF at the Sheeshambada plant: 
A joint physical verification of the plant site was conducted by the Audit team along 
with Project Engineer nominated by Nagar Nigam Dehr adun and Manager, 
Sheeshambada Processing Plant on 29 October 2022. D uring Physical verification 
the following points were noticed which also authen ticated the lacunas and lapses 
discussed in the report: 
i.  Mixed Municipal Solid Waste was being received at Processing Plant.  
ii.  RDF was dumped at Landfill site.  
iii.  In landfill site only inert material was allowed to  be dumped but RDF, plastic 
materials were also being dumped which was gross vi olation of concession 
agreement terms and MSW Rules, 2016. 
iv.  Only four out of installed 21 cameras were functional. 
v.  Leachate Water was accumulated around the Processing Shed flooring and near 
Sanitary Landfill Site area which affects the surro unding environment by 
creating foul smell in the area. 
vi.  It was also seen that Medical Waste (Sanitary Napki n/Diaper) was also mixed 
with MSW. 
vii.  The boundary wall of Processing Plant was partially damaged. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
40  
Photo-3.29: RDF at processing plant 
(29 October 2022)  
 
 
Photo-3.31: Aerial View (Geo tagged) of SLF Dehradun (27 February 2023)  
 
 
While accepting the facts it was informed by the Ad ditional Secretary in the Exit 
Conference (September 2023) that an estimate for re moval of RDF from the Landfill 
site has been prepared and after approval of the same RDF will be removed. The State 
Government further replied (December 2023) that 62 Solid Waste Management Action 
Plans/ DPRs have been approved by the Government of  India covering 89 Municipal 
Bodies of the State, out of which seven Solid Waste  Management Plants have been 
completed and in the remaining works are in progress.  
3.6 Targets and achievement against Service Level B enchmarks (SLBs) 
As per MSWM Manual, 2016- Part I, Para 7.1-Monitori ng of Municipal Solid Waste 
Management Plan Implementation envisaged the assess ment of Service Level 
Benchmarks (SLBs). Targets and achievement in test checked Urban Local Bodies 
against the SLB indicators stipulated by the Minist ry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) were as below- 
Photo-3.30: RDF and inert at SLF   
(29  October 2022) 

Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
41 
• Household level coverage of Solid Waste Management Services:  
As per SLB, the Household level coverage of SWM ser vices should be 100 per cent . 
Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 revea led that the household level 
coverage percentage is more than 90 per cent  in 11 out of the 13 ULBs which is 
commendable as shown in the Chart-3.1  below. However, coverage in the large  
ULB – NN Dehradun, is very poor. 
 
• Efficiency of Collection of Municipal Solid Waste  
As per SLB, the Efficiency of Collection of Municip al Solid Waste should be 
100 per cent . Records of test checked ULBs ending March 2022 re vealed that the 
efficiency of collection ranged is 100 per cent in 11 out of 13 ULBs which is 
commendable as shown in the Chart-3.2 below: 
 
85 
62 
100 
100 
100 
100 
93 
100 
91 
100 
100 
100 
100 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
Year 2021-22 
Chart-3.1: Household level coverage of Solid Waste Management 
Services (100 per crnt )
NP Swargashram Jonk NP Agustmuni NP Naugaon NP Dineshpur 
NPP Barkot NPP Nainital NPP Tehri NPP Khatima 
NN Rudrapur NN Haldwani NN Haridwar NN Dehradun 
NPP Mussoorie 
100 
87 
90 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
2021-22 
Chart-3.2: Efficiency of Collection of Municipal Solid Waste (100 per cent )
NP Swargashram Jonk NP Agustmuni NP Naugaon NP Dineshpur 
NPP Barkot NPP Nainital NPP Tehri NPP Khatima 
NN Rudrapur NN Haldwani NN Haridwar NN Dehradun 
NPP Mussoorie 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
42  
The efficiency of collection of municipal solid was te in two out of 13 test checked 
ULBs were not as per the service level benchmark i.e., 100 per cent.   
• Extent of Segregation of Municipal Solid Waste: 
As per SLB, the extent of segregation of municipal solid waste should be 100 per cent . 
Records of test checked ULBs ending March 2022 reve aled that the extent of 
segregation was not as per SLB in the test checked ULBs.  While in two ULBs namely 
in in NPP Barkot it was 67 per cent and in NN Haridwar it was 0.05 per cent . In rest of 
the 11 16  ULBs there was no source segregation. 
• Extent of Municipal Solid Waste Recovered: 
As per SLB, the extent of municipal solid waste rec overed should be 80 per cent . 
Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 revealed that the extent of municipal 
solid waste recovered was minuscule as per the SLB as shown in the Chart-3.3  below: 
 
During 2021-22 out of 13 test checked ULBs, while in six 17  ULBs there were no MSW 
recovered, it was mere one to 12 per cent  in rest of the seven ULBs as can be seen from 
the above chart. 
• Extent of Scientific disposal of Municipal Solid Waste:  
As per SLB, the extent of scientific disposal of mu nicipal solid waste should be 
100 per cent . Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 revealed that the extent 
of scientific disposal of municipal solid waste was  nil in all the test checked ULBs 
except NN Dehradun where it was four per cent . 
                                                           
16  NN Dehradun, NN Rudrapur, NN Haldwani, NPP Mussoor ie, NPP Khatima, NPP Tehri, NPP 
Swargshram Jonk, NPP Nainital, NP Dineshpur, NP Augustmuni, NP Naugaon. 
17  NN Haridwar, NN Haldwani, NPP Khatima, NP Dineshpu r, NP Naugaon & NPP Nainital. 
1
4
2
1
2
11 
12 
2021-22 
Chart-3.3: Extent of Municipal Solid Waste Recovered (80 per cent )
NPP Mussoorie NN Dehradun NN Rudrapur NPP Tehri 
NPP Barkot NP Agustmuni NP Swargashram Jonk 

Chapter-3: Collection, Segregation, Storage, Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste  
43 
• Efficiency in redressal of customer complaints:  
As per SLB, the efficiency in redressal of customer complaints of municipal solid waste 
should be 80 per cent . Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 rev ealed that 
the efficiency in redressal of customer complaints of municipal solid waste was 
achieved by only five out of 13 test checked ULBs. Rest of the eight 18  ULBs did not 
maintain data regarding customer complaints as shown in the Chart-3.4 below: 
 
• Extent of cost recovery in Solid Waste Management (SWM) services: 
As per SLB, the extent of cost recovery in SWM serv ices should be 100 per cent . 
Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 revea led that the cost recovery in 
SWM services ranged between one to 12 per cent as shown in the Chart-3.5 below: 
 
                                                           
18  NPP Khatima, NPP Tehri, NPP Swargshram Jonk, NP Di neshpur, NP Augustmuni, NP Naugaon, 
NPP Barkot and NPP Nainital. 
78 
96 100 93 
80 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
2021-22 
Chart-3.4: Efficiency in redressal of customer complaints (80 per cent )
NPP Mussoorie NN Dehradun NN Haridwar NN Haldwani NN Rudrapur 
5
3
1
3
3 1
5
1 3 2 2
12 
7
0
2
4
6
8
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
2021-22 
Chart-3.5: Extent of cost recovery in SWM services (100 per cent )
NPP Mussoorie NN Dehradun NN Haridwar NN Haldwani 
NN Rudrapur NPP Khatima NPP Tehri NPP Nainital 
NPP Barkot NP Dineshpur NP Naugaon NP Agustmuni 
NP Swargashram Jonk 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
44  
• Efficiency in collection of SWM charges:  
As per SLB, the efficiency of collection of solid waste management charges should be  
90 per cent . Records of test checked ULB ending March 2022 rev ealed that the 
efficiency in collection of SWM charges ranged between one to 33 per cent except  NPP 
Mussoorie 19  as shown in the Chart-3.6  below . 
 
Analysis of the service level benchmark (SLB) indicators stipulated by the Ministry of 
Urban Development showed that in the test checked U LBs, the achievement of the 
majority performance indicators was significantly below against the fixed targets. 
The State Government intimated (December 2023) that  in view of the available 
resources, efforts are being made to achieve the set targets as much as possible. 
 
3.7 Recommendations 
• The State Government should encourage segregation o f waste at source by 
devising a system and should prevent mixing of segregated waste during various 
stages of SWM; 
• The State Government should ensure setting up of Processing & Disposal sites of 
Municipal Solid Waste at each ULB; 
• The ULBs should ensure that the vehicles procured f or waste transportation are 
covered and comply with the statutory requirements; 
• It should be ensured that waste is not dumped or st ored in open area or near 
residential areas/canals/highways; 
• The State Government may draw a time-bound plan for  ULBs to achieve the 
preferred level of reliability of Service Level Benchmark (SLB) data.  
                                                           
19  All user charges were retained by the private conc essioner against the agreement  
(Refer para 3.1.1 (C)). 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
99 
19 
1
3
16 12 
5 3
33 
13 11 7
14 
Chart-3.6: Efficiency in collection of SWM charges (90 per cent )
NPP Mussoorie NN Dehradun NN Haridwar NN Haldwani 
NN Rudrapur NPP Khatima NPP Tehri NPP Nainital 
NPP Barkot NP Dineshpur NP Naugaon NP Agustmuni 
NP Swargashram Jonk 

Chapter -4 
Monitoring and evaluation of Solid 
Waste Management System   

 
45 
CHAPTER-4 
 
Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System 
 
 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKPCB) was to enforce SWM Rules in the 
State. However, UKPCB did not review implementation of SWM Rules in all Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) as per mandated frequency durin g the period 2017-22. There 
was inter state movement of waste in two test check ULBs without intimation to both 
the State Pollution Control Boards of origin and de stination states. ULBs were not 
submitting the annual reports timely and regularly. Complaints registration records 
were maintained only in five out of 13 test checked ULBs. 
 
4.1 Inactive approach of Pollution Control Board re garding review of 
implementation of SWM Rules 2016 
As per Rule 16 (1) (a) of SWM Rules, State Pollutio n Control Board was to enforce 
said SWM Rules in its jurisdiction. Accordingly, it  was to review implementation of 
said SWM Rules in each ULB at least twice a year. 
Table-4.1 below gives status of review of ULBs by four regional offices of Uttarakhand 
Pollution Control Board during 2018-22. 
Table-4.1: Details of Reviews conducted 
Name of the 
Regional 
Pollution 
Control Board 
Number of 
ULBs 
under the 
RO, PCB 
Number of 
ULBs 
reviewed 
Number of 
ULBs not 
reviewed 
Number of 
Reviews to be 
conducted 
during 
2018-22 
Actual 
Number of 
Reviews 
conducted 
(in per cent ) 
Dehradun 46 05 41 460  07 (02)  
Roorkee 14 02 12 140  05  (04)  
Haldwani 25 01 24 250  03 (01)  
Kashipur 17 04 13 170  05 (03)  
Total 102 12 90 1020 20  (02) 
Source: Information provided by the department. 
The above table indicates: 
• Eighty-Eight per cent  of the ULBs were not reviewed even once in last five years. 
• The percentage of review conducted in last five yea rs was minuscule i.e. ranged 
between one to four per cent . 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) issued (January 2020)
 directions for effective 
compliance of SWM Rules, 2016. It also laid down in terim compensation scale 1 for 
violation of said SWM Rules. Now in compliance to N GT directives, Regional Office 
of the Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board at Haldw ani reviewed implementation of 
SWM Rules in five ULBs and imposed (April 2020) a penalty of ₹ 1.20 crore ( ₹ 24 lakh 
                                                           
1 Any such continued failure will result in liabilit y of every local body to compensation at the rate o f 
` 10 lakh per month per Local Body for population of  above 10 lakhs, ` five lakh per month per 
Local Body for population between five lakhs and 10 lakhs and ` one lakh per month per other Local 
Body from 01 April 2020. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
46  
each ULB). However, its head office was yet to appr ove proposed penalty (till 
December 2022). 
The inactive approach of the Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board was also 
corroborated in joint physical inspections. During these physical inspections, Audit 
observed instances of dumping of mixed waste in for est land,  dumping of waste near 
highways, rivers, water bodies and agricultural lan d.(Photographs below may be 
referred to). 
(A)The mixed waste was dumped in the forest land in Khatima, U.S. Nagar  
 
Photo-4.1: Aerial view (Geo tagged) of dump in forest land (14 January 2023), NPP Khatima  
 
Photo-4.2: Photograph taken at the time of Joint Physical verification of Dumping site  
(14 January 2023), NPP Khatima 
 


Chapter-4: Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System  
47 
 
(B) The mixed waste was dumped in the agriculture land in Nagar Panchayat Dineshpur, U.S. 
Nagar  
 
Photo-4.3: Aerial view (Geo tagged) of the Dumping site (31 January 2023), NP Dineshpur 
 
Photo-4.4:  Photograph taken at the time of Joint Physical verification of Dumping site 
(31 January 2023), NP Dineshpur  
 
The Member Secretary, Uttarakhand Pollution Control  Board (UKPCB) stated  
(December 2023) that due to manpower shortage lesse r reviews were conducted. The 
draft service rules for appointment to various cadr es/vacant posts in UKPCB has been 
sent to State Government for approval. Action regar ding pending penalty proposal is 
under consideration and action will be initiated after replies of the ULBs are received. 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
48  
The inactive approach of the UKPCB towards review of implementation of SWM Rules 
can also be seen from the following events- 
4.1.1  Regional Offices, Pollution Control Board ignorant of the inter state 
movement of waste  
As per Rule 16 (6) of solid waste management rules, 2016, the duties of State Pollution 
Control Board were to regulate inter state movement  of waste. Rule 18 (3) of the 
hazardous and other wastes (Management 
and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 
2016 provides that in case of transportation 
of hazardous and other waste for final 
disposal to a facility existing in a State 
other than the State where the waste is 
generated, the sender shall obtain ‘No 
objection certificate’ from the State 
Pollution Control Board of both the States. 
Further, to regulate inter state movement 
of waste the Municipal Commissioner, 
Executive Officer, Member Secretary and 
Regional Officers Pollution Control Board 
were responsible. 
The regional offices of the State Pollution Control Board informed audit that no ULB/ 
other agency has intimated Pollution Control Board, regarding inter state movement of 
waste under their jurisdiction. 
However, during audit of the test checked ULBs, it was noticed that inter state 
movement of waste was undergoing in two 
2 out of 13 test checked ULBs without 
intimation to the State Pollution Control Board of both the States.  
While accepting the facts Member Secretary, UKPCB s tated (December 2023) that 
urban local bodies had not informed Uttarakhand Pol lution Control Board regarding 
transfer of waste, however, the matter will be inve stigated. Board has issued letters to 
Director, Urban Development and all ULBs for compliance. 
4.1.2  Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board’s directions no t complied by the 
Private Concessionaire  
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board gave (March 201 8) consolidated consent to 
Dehradun Waste Management Pvt. Ltd. to establish an d operate solid waste 
management facility. Subsequently, based on various inspections and complaints 3, the 
board noticed violations of SWM rules /environmenta l laws and imposed certain 
                                                           
2 Nagar Palika Parishad Mussoorie and Nagar Nigam Haridwar. 
3  PCB inspected the site thrice (01 August 2019, 23 J anuary 2020 & 19 February 2020) in the year 
2019-20, apart from this, the PCB also inspected th e site on complaint basis (03 April 2018,  
12 July 2018 & 17 February 2022).  
Photo-4.5: Waste transported through Trucks 
in NPP Mussoorie (10 October 2022)  

Chapter-4: Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System  
49 
penalty. However, the same could not be collected till December 2022 due to ineffective 
pursuance of the matter, as detailed below: 
• The Pollution Control Board (PCB) calculated enviro nmental damages at 
₹ 0.16 lakh per day from 01 August 2018 due to non-compliance with standards. 
However, the PCB did not follow up on the issued le tter. Further, the firm had 
also not paid any environmental damage. After audit  pointed out in  
September 2022, a letter was sent to the Municipal Commissioner, Dehradun, in 
October 2022, indicating that PCB consent should be  obtained before finalizing 
financial/ administrative case of the firm. The firm submitted a bank guarantee of 
₹ five lakh in lieu of compliance with environmental  standards. However, the 
same had expired in March 2021 and the PCB did not initiate any action to renew 
the bank guarantee. 
• A case was lodged against the firm in the designate d court, Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate (ACJM) Dehradun, on 02 Septembe r 2022 for 
non-compliance with environmental standards. Howeve r, the case was lodged 
after the process of termination of the concessiona ire agreement was initiated 
(June 2022) between the firm and the Nagar Nigam Dehradun. 
While accepting the facts it was informed by the Me mber Secretary, UKPCB 
(December 2023) that earlier imposed penalty was no t followed up due to shortage of 
staff, however, notice of  ₹ 1.57 crore penalty has been issued to the firm by the 
Pollution Control Board. The recovery will be done at the earliest. 
4.1.3  Submission of incomplete Annual Reports to CPCB 
Rule 24 (3) of SWM Rules states that each State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) shall 
prepare and submit the consolidated annual report to the Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB) and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on  the implementation of the said 
Rules and action taken against non-complying local body by the 31 st  day of July of each 
year in prescribed form. The responsibility for pre paration/review/submission of 
Annual Reports lies with the Municipal Commissioner/ Medical Health Officer (MHO), 
Executive Officer of the respective ULB and Member Secretary/Regional Officer 
Pollution Control Board. 
It was noticed that the SPCB was compiling the repo rts received from regional 
offices/ULBs and furnishing the annual reports to C PCB in the prescribed time limit. 
However, cross verification of the annual reports w ith the individual reports furnished 
by the regional offices/Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) revealed following deficiencies: 
• All the ULBs did not submit Annual reports to the SPCB. 
• SPCB submitted consolidated annual report to the CPCB in time. Accordingly, data 
in respect of ULBs which submitted their annual report after due date could not be 
incorporated in consolidated annual report of the SPCB. 
In respect of 13 test checked ULBs, Audit observed that:  
• The annual report was submitted by five ULBs after the due date.  

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
50  
• No records regarding submission/non-submission of a nnual reports to SPCB was 
available in 10 ULBs (2017-18), six ULBs (2018-19),  three ULBs (2019-20) and 
one ULB each (2020-21 & 2021-22). 
• No action was taken by the SPCB against ULBs for no t submitting their annual 
reports.  
On this being pointed out, the regional offices of SPCB replied that the annual reports 
were not submitted timely by the ULBs, and regional office submitted Reports to SPCB 
after receiving it from ULBs. Further, letters will  be issued to ULBs for timely 
submission of annual reports. 
While accepting the facts Member Secretary, UKPCB s tated (December 2023) that 
annual reports will be furnished to Central Polluti on Control Board after receiving 
reports from all the ULBs. Instructions will be iss ued to all the ULBs for timely 
submission of Annual Report. 
4.2 Complaint Redressal System 
A complaint redressal system 
4 creates a platform for citizens to voice  their complaints 
and grievances regarding provision of Municipal Sol id Waste Management services  
and also helps in promoting efficiency and transpar ency at the ULB  level. The ULB, 
through an analysis of the complaints or grievances  it  receives, is able to identify 
lacunae and bridge gaps in service delivery.  The time taken for resolution of grievances 
and the action taken are  also monitored and recorded through this system. Mu ltiple 
channels or a combination of different channels may  be adopted for receiving 
complaints (phone calls to a centralised customer s ervice or complaint number, SMS 
messages to notified mobile numbers, automated gene rated complaints sent to 
commissioners for their records, walk-in complaint registration, online complaint 
registration). The Sanitary Inspector & Supervisor were responsible for record 
maintenance & compliance and Municipal Commissioner /Executive Officer. Regional 
Officers Pollution Control Board were responsible f or assessment of Complaint 
Redressal System for SWM. 
Scrutiny of the records related to compliant redressal system revealed as under: 
• Complaints registration records were maintained only in five out of 13 test checked 
ULBs. 
• In these five ULBs, 78 to 91 per cent  registered complaints were attended. In 
remaining nine to 22 per cent  cases of complaints, the complaint’s disposal 
comments were not mentioned in the Complaint registers. 
• All six channels 
5 were not being used to receive complaints from stakeholders 
                                                           
4 Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual, 2016 - Pa rt II, Para 6.4-.A complaint redressal system 
is an effective tool which facilitates effective co mplaint management and expedites the redressal 
process in a Transparent manner.  
5 In Nagar Nigam Dehradun five channels (CM portal, e-mail, by post, DM Office and 
Telephone/SMS), in Nagar Nigam Haridwar two channel  (Telephone and DM Office),  in Nagar 
Nigam Rudrapur three channels (Walk-in, CM portal a nd e-mail), in Nagar Palika Parishad 
Mussoorie two channels (Telephone, Walk-in), and  i n Nagar Nigam Haldwani two channels 
(telephone and CM portal) were adopted. 

Chapter-4: Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System  
51 
While accepting the facts the Additional Secretary stated that instructions will be issued 
to all the ULBs for maintaining the records. The St ate Government further replied 
(December 2023) that CM Helpline, CPCB's Single Use  Plastic (SUP) Grievance 
Portal, Swachhata Portal under Swachh Bharat Missio n were available for complaints 
related to Solid Waste Management.  However, the fact remains that test checked ULBs 
were not using /adopted multiple channels or a comb ination of different channels for 
receiving complaints as per Manual.  
4.3 Initiatives for promoting Public Awareness thro ugh Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC)  
Rule 15 (zg) SWM Rules 2016 envisages creation of p ublic awareness through 
information, education and communication campaign a nd education of waste 
generators on SWM practices and behaviours 6. The responsibility of public awareness 
through IEC lies with Municipal Commissioner/Medica l Health Officer, Executive 
Officer of the respective ULB. 
All 13 tests checked ULBs conducted IEC activities,  encouraging waste generators to 
‘segregate waste into wet and dry’ and ‘not to litter’ by issue of bills, banners, stickers, 
wall paintings, etc.  
The status of various modes of communication used in the test checked ULBs were as 
per the Table -4.2 below. 
Table-4.2: Modes of communication used in the test checked ULBs 
Sl. No. Modes of communication used Number of ULBs 
Yes  No  
1. Audio 13 0 
2. Video 04 09 
3. Mass communication 10 03 
4. Wall Paintings 11 02 
5. Schools 11 02 
6. Hoardings 11 02 
7. Pamphlets 11 02 
8. Other mode of communication (Nukkad Natak, Meetings, 
Banner etc) 12 01 
Source: Information provided by the test checked ULBs. 
The Additional Secretary stated in the Exit Confere nce (September 2023) that 
instructions will be issued to all the ULBs for reg ular and effective IEC activities in 
their ULBs . The State Government further replied (December 2023 ) that the IEC 
programmes prescribed by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of 
India are being implemented at the ULB level. A mega cleanliness drive was organized 
                                                           
6 Not to litter; minimise generation of waste; reuse  the waste to the extent possible;  practice segregation of waste 
into bio–degradable, non-biodegradable (recyclable and combustible), sanitary waste and domestic hazar dous 
wastes at source;  practice home composting, vermi- composting, bio-gas generation or community level 
composting;  wrap securely used sanitary waste as a nd when generated in the pouches provided by the br and 
owners or a suitable wrapping as prescribed by the local body and place the same in the bin meant for non- 
biodegradable waste;  storage of segregated waste a t source in different bins; handover segregated was te to 
waste pickers, waste collectors, recyclers or waste collection agencies; and  pay monthly user fee or charges to 
waste collectors or local bodies or any other person authorised by the local body for sustainability of solid waste 
management. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
52  
with the active participation of the High Court, Na inital between 12th to 18th 
June 2023. 
Though tests checked ULBs were taking initiatives f or promoting public awareness, 
however, the same was not so effective on the groun d as mixed waste were being 
handed over to the waste pickers, monthly user fee or charges were not paid by the 
households on regular basis etc. 
4.4 Deficiency in the post of Supervisory level res ulted in weakness in monitoring 
and evaluation processes 
Rule 15 of Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 envisa ges the duties and 
responsibilities of local authorities in relation to SWM activities. The Municipal Solid 
Waste Management Manual, 2016 describes that the Ch ief Executive of the ULBs 
(Municipal commissioner, Secretary, or Executive Of ficer) was responsible for 
implementing the MSWM plan. The head of the SWM dep artment is responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed that there was zer o to 100 per cent vacancies in 
supervisory cadres of SWM activities in  test checked 13 ULBs, as detailed in Table-4.3 
below:  
Table-4.3: Sanctioned strength & Men in Position of Supervisory level in test checked ULBs  
(As on March 2022) 
Designation Sanctioned 
Strength Men-in-position Vacant  
(in per cent ) 
Sahayak Nagar Ayukt (SNA)  06 06 0 
Executive Officer 11 10 01 (09)  
Mukhya Nagar Swasthya Adhikari 02 02 0 
Zonal Sanitary Officer 06 00 06 (100)  
Chief Sanitary Inspector/ Sanitary Inspector 46 17 29 (63)  
Environment Supervisor (Safai Nayak) 135 97 38 (28)  
Source: Information provided by the ULBs. 
While, there was 100 per cent  vacancy at the level of Zonal Sanitary Officer, 63 per cent  
in Chief Sanitary Inspector/Sanitary Inspector and 28 per cent  in Environment 
Supervisor. Due to vacancy in supervisory level, ef fective implementation of Solid 
Waste Management in ULBs was lacking i.e. Waste Man agement Plans were not 
prepared, segregation at source was done partially and recovery of material etc. was 
partially done.  
The State Government replied (December 2023) that t he recruitment process is 
underway for 515 posts against a total of 816 vacancies in 102 bodies. 
4.5 Recommendations 
• The State Government should ensure frequent Informa tion, Education & 
Communication activities and create awareness in pu blic about the harmful 
effects of ineffective SWM management on health and environment; 

Chapter-4: Monitoring and evaluation of Solid Waste Management System  
53 
• The State Pollution Control Board needs to ensure that all concerned, involved 
in Solid Waste Management functioning, obtain necessary authorisation for 
their functioning and should enforce adherence to prescribed standards by 
reviewing implementation as per norms; 
• The State Government may scientifically assess workload of each ULB and 
accordingly sanction/deploy human resources. 
 
 
 
Dehradun 
The 
(PRAVINDRA YADAV) 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), 
Uttarakhand 
 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi 
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 
 
 
  

Appendices 

55 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.2 , page 02) 
Processing Technologies 
• Material Recovery Facility 
A material recovery facility (MRF) is a place where  non-biodegradable or recyclable 
solid waste collected from the doorstep is segregat ed, sorted and various components 
of recyclable waste recovered from it for resale. T he MRF accepts mixtures of waste 
fractions (non-biodegradable or recyclable) and its configuration depends on the several 
factors like the type, quantity and quality of incoming waste materials. Here the material 
is basically segregated into different streams of w aste fractions (paper, plastic, 
packaging paper, bottles etc.) which is further sol d to intermediaries who supply bulk 
material to the recycling industries. MRFs also req uire large storage spaces to 
temporary store sorted recyclables which can be made available to recyclers in bulk for 
improved resale value. Depending on the scale of op erations and the level of 
mechanization in the facility, MRFs may be classified as manual or mechanized. Small 
scale units employ manual MRFs wherein manual sorting process is being carried and 
it’s typically owned, operated and managed by the i nformal sector. Large scale units 
have mechanized MRFs with sophisticated systems and equipment that enable efficient 
separation of large quantity of material into different fractions.  
Material Recovery Facility 
  
Grinder Machine Bailer Machine, 
• Composting 
After waste minimisation and recycling systems, the  ISWM hierarchy indicates 
adoption of resource recovery strategies and compos ting as the third preferred waste 
management practise, ensuring that waste is processed appropriately to facilitate further 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
56  
use of the material. Composting is a controlled aer obic process of biologically 
“digesting” the MSW, so it may be recycled for othe r purposes—plant nutrient, 
stabilization of soil in remediation process, or so il amendment for recovery of poor 
soils. Compost production can be carried out at the  decentralised level (home 
composting, bin composting, box composting, vermicomposting, in vessel composting) 
or at a centralised level (windrow composting, in vessel composting, aerated static pile), 
depending on the feasibility of implementation. Both processes require significant pre-
processing, and only segregated organic matter can be composted. Compost produced 
should meet with quality criteria specified by the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 2009 
and 2013. A market for the compost should be ascert ained before sizing the compost 
plants. 
• Waste to Energy 
Where material recovery and composting from MSW is not possible or desirable due 
to local conditions or because of the nature of waste, recovery of energy from MSW is 
suggested as a feasible alternative. When high 
calorific value fractions of MSW are either 
incinerated (thermal process) or biodegradable 
fraction of MSW is processed anaerobically 
(biomethanation), the resultant energy, either as 
heat (incineration) or biogas (methane) can be 
reused either directly or converted to electricity 
using appropriate generators. Sale of this energy 
should result in the financial viability of waste to 
energy systems. Where the tariff of power is not 
high enough to ensure financial sustainability of t he plant, a tipping fee may be 
considered by the ULB. Appropriate care should be t aken to ensure continued and 
stable supply of the waste for achieving requisite economies of scale. Proper 
environmental checks should also be in place to mee t with stringent norms for 
incineration. 
• Incineration 
Incineration is a waste treatment process that 
involves combustion of waste at very high 
temperatures in the presence of oxygen, resulting 
in the production of ash, flue gas, and heat. It is  
feasible for unprocessed or minimally processed 
refuse besides the segregated fraction of the high 
calorific waste. The potential for energy 
generation depends on the composition, density, 
moisture content, and presence of inert in the 
waste. About 65-80 per cent  of the energy 
content of the organic matter can be recovered as heat energy, which can be utilized for 
thermal applications. Incineration is an option to be considered only after implementing 
suitable material recycling and recovery systems, o r where other better options for 


Appendices  
57  
processing are not feasible and land availability i s a problem. Typically, only cities 
which are able to supply at least 1,000 tonnes per day (TPD) of waste should venture 
to install waste-to-energy plants. However, incinerator plants have the potential to cause 
significant environmental impacts through emissions  and fly ash if plants are not 
operated efficiently and if appropriate emission co ntrol measures are not adopted. 
Therefore, due care should be taken to comply with operating and emission standards 
as prescribed under revised SWM Rules, 2016 along w ith adoption of emission 
abatement technologies. 
• Biomethanation 
Biomethanation is the anaerobic (in the absence of air or, more specifically, free 
oxygen) digestion of biodegradable organic waste in 
an enclosed space under controlled conditions of 
temperature, moisture, pH, etc. It is considered on e 
of the most technically viable option for the India n 
MSW due to MSW’s high organic and moisture 
content. Biomethanation plant requires a consistent  
source of degradable organic matter free from inert  
material as well as a sustainable demand for the 
generated biogas at appropriate economic 
conditions. biomethanation plant can be operated at  
decentralised level (up to 5 TPD) or centralised level 
depending on the feasibility of the implementation 
and waste inflow. The overall performance of the 
biomethanation plant is greatly influenced by the 
input feed specification, and the plant requires se gregated biodegradable MSW (e.g., 
hotel and restaurant waste, market waste) for optim al plant performance. The 
homogeneity of the feed material is an important pa rameter from the efficiency 
viewpoint. 
• Refuse Derived Fuel 
Refuse-derived fuel (RDF) refers to the high calori fic non-recyclable combustible 
fraction of processed MSW, which is used either as a fuel for steam and electricity 
 


PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
58 
generation or as alternate fuel in industrial furna ces and boilers. The composition of 
RDF is a mixture that has higher concentrations of combustible materials than those 
present in the parent mixed MSW. RDF should prefera bly be co-processed in cement 
plants. Co-processing of RDF in steel industry and for power generation is also 
indicated, but yet to be proven in India. Internati onally, the co-processing of RDF for 
power generation is technically proven and widely p ractised as a part of their waste 
management strategy; however, not much information is available for co-processing of 
RDF in steel sector. 
  

Appendices  
59 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.5.2, page 07) 
 
Details of allotment and expenditure in test checked ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year OB 
Fund received from Total 
available 
fund 
Exp. Closing 
Balance Central State Own Others 1 Total 
2017-18 52.54 56.19 247.81 78.12 0.25 382.37 434.91  298.15 136.76 
2018-19 136.76 53.54 258.80 79.51 10.03 401.88 538. 64 329.25 209.39 
2019-20 209.39 89.32 247.28 95.16 9.32 441.08 650.4 7 334.59 315.88 
2020-21 315.88 106.73 259.55 80.12 21.18 467.58 783 .46 471.20 312.26 
2021-22 312.26 48.92 267.61 85.29 30.50 432.32 744. 58 528.04 216.54 
Total  354.70 1,281.05 418.20 71.28 2,125.23  1,961.23  
Source: Information provided by the test checked ULBs. 
 
  
                                                
1 Chardham Yatra, Covid-19, Kavad Mela, Daiviye Aapd a, Kumbh Mela, Swachh Bharat Mission, 
Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment etc. 

PA Report on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies for the year ended 31 March 2022  
60 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.2 , page 13  
Contingency Plan not prepared 
Location 
Size of the 
Land (in 
sq. meter) 
Landowner 
Mixed Waste 
dumped during 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
(MT) 
Audit view 
Ward no-03, Chandangrah, 
Dineshpur 
300.00 sq. 
meter 
Nagar 
Panchayat, 
Dineshpur 
2,190 Ton-Approx  
The lenient view 
of the Panchayat 
not only resulted 
in dumping of 
the Municipal 
Solid Waste in 
open localities 
of the Panchayat 
jurisdiction but 
also causing 
threat to the 
environment. 
Panchayat 
which was 
responsible for 
maintaining 
environment 
standards in the 
area was itself 
damaging the 
environment by 
dumping the 
MSW in 
different open 
area of the 
Panchayat. 
Ramkot no-06, Barirai, 
Dineshpur 
2,023.43 
sq. meter 
or 0.5 acre  
Raj Singh 
s/o shri 
Amar Singh  
1.  352 Ton- 
Approx. (Hired 
for period 
December 2019 
to March 2020)  
2.  1,825 Ton- 
Approx. for the 
year 2020-21 
(Hired for period 
March 2020 to 
February 2023)  
Gram- Ramkot No-06, Tehsil-
Gadarpur 
1,393.54 
sq. meter 
or 15,000 
sq. foot  
Ritik s/o 
shri 
Ravindra  
1,825 Ton- Approx. 
for the year 2021-22 
(Hired for period 
February 2021 to 
February 2022)  
Gram- Anandkheda, Tehsil-
Gadarpur 
2,023.43 
sq. meter 
or 0.5 acre 
Ajit Singh 
s/o 
Chandan 
Singh 
300 Ton- Approx 
Operated only for 
02-months (Hired 
for period May 
2022 to May 2023) 
Bura Nagar, Tehsil-Gadarpur, 
(Mahtosh Moad) 
3,000 sq. 
meter or 
0.30 
hectare  
Vijay 
Kumar 
Munjal  
900 Ton- Approx. 
(Hired for period 
July 2022 to July 
2023)  
 
  

Appendices  
61 
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.5, page 18) 
Status of project work in test checked ULBs 
Name of the 
ULB 
DPR prepared 
under scheme 
Name of the Project 
to be established 
Land 
owned or 
not 
Status of the work 
NPP Mussoorie 
National 
Mission on 
Himalayan 
Studies 
Biomethanation plant 
and Pyrolysis plant Yes Yet to be established, 
process is underway. 
NPP Nainital 
National 
Mission on 
Himalayan 
Studies 
For collection, 
segregation and 
upcycling of solid 
waste (Processing 
plant) 
Yes Yet to be established, 
process is underway. 
NN Haldwani 
Jawaharlal 
Nehru National 
Urban Renewal 
Mission 
(JnNURM) 
(Cluster Based) 
Establishment of 
processing plant, 
scientific landfill site. 
Yes 
The processing plant & 
scientific landfill site 
was not established yet. 
Tender yet to be 
finalised. 
NPP Khatima 
Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
Compost plant & 
desegregation hall to 
be established 
Not yet Land yet to be 
occupied 
NN Dehradun 
Jawaharlal 
Nehru National 
Urban Renewal 
Mission 
Processing plant & 
sanitary land fill site Yes 
Processing of waste 
done; RDF dumped at 
the site 
NP Dineshpur Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
Centralised processing 
facility (establishment 
of desegregation hall) 
Yes 
No action initiated after 
demise of contractor’s 
engaged for the work. 
NN Rudrapur Included in Haldwani cluster 
NN Haridwar 
Jawaharlal 
Nehru National 
Urban Renewal 
Mission 
Processing plant & 
sanitary land fill site Yes 
Processing plant 
running, RDF dumped 
at the SLF site. 
NPP 
Swargshram 
Jonk 
Swachh Bharat 
Mission  
(Cluster based) 
Included in Rishikesh cluster 
NPP Barkot Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
MRF centre, compost 
pits, sanitary landfill Yes 
MRF centre, compost 
pits set up. Sanitary 
landfill yet to be set up. 
NP Agustmuni Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
Processing plant, 
sanitary landfill site. Not yet Land yet to be 
occupied 
NPP Tehri Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
Processing Plant, 
Sanitary Landfill site. Yes Project yet to start due 
to residents’ agitation. 
NP Naugaon Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
Processing plant, 
sanitary landfill site. Yes 
Agreement made for 
disposal facility 
including sanitary 
landfill 
Source: Information provided by the ULBs.  
 