 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 7 of 2024 
(Performance Audit - Civil) 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Welfare of Building and Other  
Construction Workers 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
on 
 
 
 Welfare of Building and Other  
Construction Workers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 7 of 2024 
(Performance Audit - Civil)

 
 i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Description Paragraph 
No. 
Page No. 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
Chapter I - Introduction 
Organisational setup 1.1 2 
Audit objectives 1.2 4 
Audit criteria 1.3 4 
Audit scope, methodology and sampling 1.4 5 
Acknowledgement 1.5 5 
Structure of the Report 1.6 6 
SECTION - I- Realisation of Labour Cess 
Chapter II - Registration of Establishments and Assessment of Labour 
Cess 
Registration of establishments 2.1 7 
Non-compliance to provisions relating to 
assessment of cess 
2.2 10 
Delay in assessment of cess 2.3 11 
Conclusion 2.4 12 
Chapter III - Collection and Remittance of Labour Cess 
Non-realisation of interest for delayed 
remittance of cess 
3.1 13 
Miscredited cess amount pending realisation 3.2 14 
Payment of charges in excess of permissible 
limit 
3.3 15 
Short collection of cess 3.4 15 
Non-crediting of Cheques/ DDs drawn for the 
purpose of Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Cess 
3.5 16 
Conclusion 3.6 17 
SECTION - II - Utilisation of Labour Cess 
Chapter IV - Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
Welfare Schemes implemented by the Board 4.1 19 
Irregularities in d isbursement of COVID -19 
benefits 
4.2 26 
Irregular refund of beneficiary contribution on 
retirement  
4.3 28 

 
 ii 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Description Paragraph 
No. 
Page No. 
Mission Mode Project 4.4 28 
Registration of workers 4.5 29 
Conclusion 4.6 32 
Chapter V  - Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Board 
Receipts and Payments of the Board 5.1 34 
Budget of the Board 5.2 35 
Delay in submission of statutory reports 5.3 36 
Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund 5.4 37 
Cheques/ DDs pending for revalidation 5.5 38 
Non-utilisation of vacant space in the 
BOCWWB Ernakulam District office building 
5.6 39 
Blocking up of funds on land purchased for 
Kerala Construction Academy 
5.7 40 
Loss of ₹ 20.40 crore towards deduction of 
income tax due to non-availing of exemption 
5.8 41 
Functioning of State Advisory Committee and 
Expert Committee  
5.9 42 
Lapses in monitoring 5.10 43 
Shortcomings in inspection of establishments 5.11 44 
Failure to ensure safety at workplaces 5.12 45 
Lack of effective grievance redressal 
mechanism 
5.13 50 
Conclusion 5.14 50 
 
  

 
 
 Table of Contents  
iii 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Description Page 
No. 
5.1 Status of Separate Audit Reports of the Board as on  
31 March 2024 53 
5.2 Details of joint physical verification 54 
5.3 Violations of safety norms noticed during joint physical 
verification at incident sites 60 
5.4 List of complaints received in District Labour Offices 
during 2018-23 63 

 
 v 
P R E F A C E  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2023 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the State 
of Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India. 
This Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘ Welfare of 
Building and Other Construction Workers’ covering the period 2018-23. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

 
 
  
EXECUTIVE 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Why we did this audit? 
The Kerala Building and Construction Workers’ Welfare Board (the Board) was 
formed in 1990, to provide welfare assistance to the construction workers in the 
State of Kerala. Welfare schemes executed by the Board include assistance to 
the workers in the case of accidents, payment of pension to those who completed 
the age of 60 years, sanctioning of loans and advances for construction of 
houses, payment of premia for group insurance schemes of beneficiaries, giving 
financial assistance for the education of children, meeting medical expenses for 
treatment of major ailments, granting maternity benefits to female beneficiaries 
and provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and facilities as 
may be prescribed. 
The Performance Audit (PA) on the Welfare of Building and Other Construction 
Workers aimed at assessing the efficacy of activities initiated by the 
Government/ Board for the welfare of building and other construction workers 
and effective management of col lection, assessment and utilisation of cess for 
carrying out welfare activities of these workers. The findings of the PA have 
been grouped under Section I on Realisation of Labour Cess and Section II on 
Utilisation of labour Cess. 
What we found? 
Details of all establishments which employ building workers were not entered 
in Labour Commissionerate Automation System (LCAS), a registration portal. 
Only 10,113 establishments across the State were entered in the LCAS as on 
March 2023. The Advanced Information Interface System ( AIIS) database 
system for the beneficiaries was not fully utilised by the Board to keep proper 
records of the beneficiaries. Of the total 7,312 buildings constructed in the 
selected Local Self Government Institutions (LSGIs) which were eligible for 
assessment, the Taluk offices under Revenue Department collected details of 
4,294 buildings only. Of these 4,294 buildings, the details of only 679 buildings 
were seen entered in LCAS. There was delay ranging from one to five years  in 
conducting assessment of cess in 282 cases. 
The Labour Department failed to accrue interest of ₹11.39 crore due to delays 
in cess payments across 1,319 cases, with delays extending up to four years. 
Additionally, cess amounting to ₹1.56 crore, collected by various authorities, 
was incorrectly credited to the Restructuring and Internal Audit Board (RIAB). 
Of this, ₹84.87 lakh remains to be transferred back to the Board. 
Among the 2,82,998 buildings assessed for cess collection by the Labour 
Department in the State, payments were reali sed for only 1,26,446 buildings 
(44.68 per cent). This resulted in a shortfall of cess collection amounting to 
₹542.17 crore (53.83 per cent). In selected districts, the Board exceeded the one 

 
 
 viii 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
per cent limit in payment of ₹1.66 crore as staff salaries and postage expenses 
to the Labour Department.  
In five test-checked PH Divisions of the Kerala Water Authority, cheques/ DDs 
for cess totalling ₹48.52 lakh were not deposited into the Board’s account. 
There was no central repository for tracking the number of beneficiaries and 
expenditure related to the various welfare schemes administered by the Board 
in the State. Due to the lack of a centralized data system at the State office, the 
Board relied on information collected from District Offices to determine fund 
requirements for implementing district-level schemes. 
Applications for various welfare benefits including pensions, marriage 
assistance, support for illness, fatal diseases, maternity benefits, death benefits, 
scholarships and cash awards were pending due to insufficient funds. 
Irregularities were observed in the disbursement of COVID -19 benefits due to 
unreliable beneficiary data. 
Limited awareness among construction workers led to under-registration under 
the scheme, with registration often based on Trade Union certificates. Migrant 
workers in the State were not registered under the Act, depriving them of its 
benefits. Furthermore, the Department failed in enforcing safety regulations at 
worksites, even after accidents or incidents. 
District Labour Offices lacked a system to monitor the receipt of Form IV from 
employers or to enforce fines as required by regulations. The Board’s cash 
balance steadily declined from ₹910.06 crore in March 2019 to ₹13 5.16 crore 
in March 2023. The disbursal of welfare benefits also showed a decreasing trend 
since 2020-21. This consistent drop in cash reserves over the five -year audit 
period indicated that annual expenditures had been funded from the Board’s 
cash reserves, leading to significant depletion and necessitating additional loans. 
There were delays ranging from 11 to 24 months in submitting the Board’s 
accounts to the Accountant General for audit. Out of the ₹10 crore corpus fund 
allocated for the Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund, only ₹1.69 crore was spent 
on workers' welfare between 2018-19 and 2022-23. Audit noticed inadequacies 
in the constitution as well as functioning of advisory bodies. Statutory State 
Advisory Committee was not constituted within the stipulated period and the 
Expert committee was not convened with adequate participation. In the districts 
test-checked, Labour Officers did not conduct the prescribed number of monthly 
inspections as mandated by the Labour Commissioner. The grievance redressal 
mechanism did not function effectively as envisaged.  
 
 

` 
 
 ix 
Executive Summary 
What CAG recommends: 
• The Government should ensure that all establishments are registered 
and brought under the cess net  by the Board , so as to enable broad 
based assessment of cess. 
(Recommendation 1) 
• The Government should ensure that an effective data validation 
system is enforced thereby making the database self-contained so that 
details on all cess remitting institutions/ establishments are correctly 
captured. 
(Recommendation 2) 
• The Government should ensure that details of all constructions 
permitted by LSGIs are collected and captured in the LCAS software , 
so that correct assessment of cess can be made by the Government. 
(Recommendation 3) 
• The Government should direct the LSGIs to develop a robust 
mechanism for ensuring that cess assessments are correctly made and 
initiate efforts for prompt collection of cess. 
(Recommendation 4) 
• The Government should direct the Board to strengthen its internal 
control mechanism to check leakage of revenue and also to ensure that 
cess due from all possible sources is realised. 
(Recommendation 5) 
• The Government should ensure that the Board maintains a database 
of beneficiaries with complete details of benefits availed, complete 
banking details , etc. thereby facilitating adherence to eligib ility 
criteria for financial assistance. 
(Recommendation 6) 
• The Government should ensure that the Board  incorporates multiple 
verification levels to ensure genuineness of membership forms issued 
by Trade Unions so as to safeguard the transparency of registration 
process.  
(Recommendation 7) 
• The Government should ensure that t he Board conduct s adequate 
campaigns and advertisements to increase awareness amongst 
workers about procedures of registration, and its benefits in the form 
of various welfare schemes.  
(Recommendation 8) 
• The Government should ensure that a s the funds for annual 
expenditure of the Board were being sourced out of its cash reserves, 
the Board should step up the rate of cess collection on war foot basis 
so that recourse to borrowings can be avoided. 
(Recommendation 9) 

 
 
 x 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
• The Government should ensure that required  number of inspections 
of establishments are conducted as prescribed in the Act and Rules 
and that deficiencies in grievance redressal system are rectified. 
(Recommendation 10) 
• The Government should ensure that utmost priority is given to the 
safety of workers in construction sites.  Officials responsible for 
oversight in the adherence to safety norms by the establishments may 
be held accountable. 
(Recommendation 11) 
 

 
 
  
  


 
 
  

 
1 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Building and other construction workers are one of the most numerous and 
vulnerable segments of unorganised labour in India. Their work is characterised 
by its casual nature with uncertain working hours, lack of basic amenities, 
inadequate welfare facilities, temporary relationship between the employer and 
employee and involves risk to life and limb. 
The Building and other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act  ((BOCW (RECS) Act) framed in 1996, aims to 
regulate the employment and conditions of service of building and other 
construction workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare 
measures. The Building and other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 
1996 (Cess Act) provides for the levy, assessment and collection of cess, at such 
rates not exceeding two per cent but not less than one per cent of the cost of 
construction incurred by the employer, with a view to augmenting the resources 
of the Building and Other Construction Workers ’ Welfare Boards constituted 
under the BOCW (RECS) Act. 
In line with the enactment of the BOCW  (RECS) Act by Government of India 
(GoI), the Government of Kerala (GoK) framed the Building and other 
Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Kerala Rules (Kerala Rules) in 1998. The Cess Act, 1996 and the Building and 
Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 (Cess Rules) framed by 
GoI, provided for the levy, assessment and collection of welfare cess which is 
to be utilised for providing safety, health and welfare measures to the building 
and other construction workers. 
The Labour and Skills Department (the Labour Department) is entrusted with 
the responsibility of facilitating harmonious industrial relations in the State and 
enforcing various labour laws aimed at ensuring the welfare of labourers. The 
aims and objectives of the Labour Department include d maintenance of 
peaceful atmosphere in the labour sector as a whole, providing decent working 
conditions and improved quality of life to the workers, ensuring co -operation 
and healthy relation between the employers and the  employed, systematic 
implementation of various labour laws of both Centre and State and enhancing 
social security coverage of workers through better policies and programmes.   
The Kerala Building and Construction Workers’ Welfare Board (the Board) was 
formed in 1990, to provide welfare assistance to the construction workers in the 
State of Kerala. Welfare schemes executed by the Board include assistance to 
the workers in the case of accidents, payment of pension to those who completed 
the age of 60 years, sanctioning of loans and advances for constru ction of 
houses, payment of premia for Group Insurance Schemes of beneficiaries, 
giving financial assistance for the education of ch ildren, meeting medical 
expenses for treatment of major ailments, granting maternity benefits to female 

 
 
 2 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
beneficiaries and provision and improvement of such other welfare measures 
and facilities as may be prescribed. 
The Performance Audit (PA) on the ‘Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ aimed at assessing the efficacy of activities initiated by 
the Government/  Board for the welfare of building and other construction 
workers and effective management of collection, assessment and utilisation of 
cess for carrying out welfare activities of these workers. The findings of the PA 
have been grouped under Section I on Realisation of Labour Cess and Section 
II on Utilisation of Labour Cess. 
1.1. Organisational setup 
The charts below present the organisational setup of the Labour Department and 
the Board depicting the duties entrusted to the officers responsible for 
implementing welfare activities for building and other construction workers. 
Chart 1.1: Organisational setup  
A. Labour and Skills Department - Government of Kerala 
 
Additional Labour Commissioner (Enforcement), Additional Labour Commissioner 
(Industrial Relations), Additional Labour Commissioner (Welfare) 
 
Collection 
of cess, 
transfer of 
cess 
collected 
to the 
Board and 
periodical 
review of 
cess 
collection 
Principal Secretary to Government, Labour and Skills Department  
 
Labour Commissioner 
Regional Joint Labour Commissioners 
Deputy Labour Commissioners 
District Labour Officers 
Deputy Labour Officers 
Assistant Labour Officers (Grades I and II) 
 

 
3 
 
Introduction 
The administrative control of the Labour Department was vested with the 
Principal Secretary and that of the Labour Commissionerate with the Labour 
Commissioner. The Additional Labour Commissioner (Industrial Relations) 
dealt with industrial relations, Additional Labour Commissioner (Enforcement), 
with the enforcement of Labour Laws and Additional Labour Commissioner 
(Welfare), with the implementation of various welfare schemes under the 
different Welfare Boards. However, the Board had autonomy with regard to the 
implementation of schemes. 
Three Regional Offices functioned at Kollam, Ernakulam and Kozhikode under 
the respective Joint Labour Commissioners. These offices are vested with the 
responsibility of resolution of labour disputes and other duties on a sectoral basis 
and coordinating and controlling the work of the Labour Department including 
enforcement of laws. Eight offices  of Deputy Labour Commissioners also 
functioned at Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Ernakulam, Kottayam, Thrissur, 
Palakkad, Kozhikode and Kannur districts. 
The Assistant Labour Officers (Grade I)/ Deputy Labour Officers in the District 
Labour Offices assess ed the cess to be levied on the constructions in each 
District. The District Labour Officers (Enforcement) were in charge of periodic 
monitoring of levy, assessment and collection of cess. The District Labour 
Officers (General) were the Appellate Officers with regard to levy, assessment 
and collection of cess as per the Kerala Rules.  
B. Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Governing body of the Board 1 consisted of a Chairperson appointed by 
GoK, a member nominated by GoI, not more than five members representing 
the building and other construction workers nominated by GoK, not more than 
five persons from among the employers nominated by GoK and not more than 
five members representing GoK, of whom one shall be the Chief Inspector of 
Inspection of Building and Construction, and one representative each of 
Finance, Law and Labour Departments, as envisaged in Rule 266 of the Kerala 
 
1  Sections 18 and 19 of the BOCW (RECS) Act. 
Registration of 
beneficiaries, 
payment of 
pension and 
other welfare 
benefits, 
management 
of the Fund,  
submission of 
annual budget 
and reports, 
etc.
 
Governing Body 
 
Secretary 
 
District offices 
headed by District 
Executive Officers 

 
 
 4 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Rules. The term of office of the Chairperson and that of the members of the 
Board other than official members is three years. 
1.2. Audit objectives 
The PA was conducted to assess whether; 
• an effective mechanism was available for enumeration and registration 
of all establishments to facilitate  assessment of cess and for its 
collection and remittance into the Board’s fund; 
• an efficient and effective system was in place  for estimation, 
identification and registration of all construction workers and to ensure 
that the fund was managed properly; and  
• monitoring and internal control mechanisms were effective and all 
employers in the construction sector fulfil their statutory obligations 
concerning the utilisation of funds for the welfare of employees. 
1.3. Audit criteria 
The criteria against which the audit findings were benchmarked, were derived 
from the following sources; 
• Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 19962 
• Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service), Kerala Rules, 1998 
• Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess Act 1996 and Cess 
Rules, 1998 
• Model Welfare Scheme for Building and Other Construction Workers 
and Action Plan for Strengthening Implementation Machinery, 2018 
• Part 7 of National Building Code of India, 2016 titled ‘Construction 
Management, Practices and Safety’ 
• Inspection Policy notified by Government of Kerala, 2015 
• Orders of Government of Kerala related to levy, assessment and 
collection of cess and welfare schemes for the ‘Building and other 
Construction Workers’ 
 
2 The Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020  enacted on  
28 September 2020 is an Act to consolidate and amend the laws regulating the occupational safety, 
health and working conditions of the persons employed in an establishment employing 10 or more 
workers. The Act subsumes 13 labour laws and Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 is one among them. Kerala has not yet 
implemented the Code.  
 

 
5 
 
Introduction 
1.4. Audit scope, methodology and sampling 
Audit was conducted from July 2022 to January 2023 and from July 2023 to 
December 2023 covering the period from 2018 -19 to 2022-23. Three districts, 
Ernakulam, Kozhikode and Malappuram were selected based on quantum of 
cess collection and amount of welfare benefits disbursed.  Ten welfare schemes, 
viz., pension, marriage assistance, death benefit, scholarship and cash award, 
assistance to fatal disease, maternity allowance, voluntary retirement scheme, 
minor deposit, house building advance and tool advance were selected based on 
Stratified Random Sampling for detailed verification.  
Audit scrutinised files and documents at the Labour Commissionerate, Board, 
district offices of Labour Department/ Board, selected Taluk Offices and Local 
Self Government Institutions (LSGIs). In addition, eight offices3 of Public 
Works Department (PWD) and six offices4 of Kerala Water Authority (KWA) 
from the test-checked districts were  chosen, wherein cess was deducted from 
the work bills and deposited to the Board’s account. Audit verified 300 cases of 
assessment selected by random sampling, for ascertaining the correctness of 
assessment. Further, six LSGIs and connected village offices were also selected 
from the selected districts for cross verifying the electronic data on buildings 
constructed, uploaded on the Labour Commissionerate Automation System 
(LCAS). Audit also analysed data obtained from Advan ced Information 
Interface System (AIIS) pertaining to  all Welfare Boards , managed by the 
Labour Commissionerate. Further, survey of beneficiaries and joint physical 
verification of establishments were also conducted during audit.   
The Entry Conference was conducted with the Secretary to Government,  the 
Labour Department on 01 June 2022, wherein the objectives, criteria, sampling 
and methodology were discussed with and agreed upon. The Exit Conference 
was conducted on 19 July 2024, in which the audit findings were discussed with 
the Secretary to Government, the Labour Department.  
1.5. Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the Labour Department, the 
Labour Commissionerate, Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers ’ 
Welfare Board and their subordinate offices at district level and selected Local 
Self Government Institutions, offices of Kerala Water Authority/ Public Works 
Department and Taluk Offices in the smooth and timely conduct of audit. 
 
3  Buildings Sub-Division, Roads Division and Electrical Division  (Kozhikode); Roads Division  
(Muvattupuzha), Roads Division  (Ernakulam); Buildings Division  (Edapally); Roads Division  
(Manjeri); NH Division (Malappuram) 
4  PH Division and Project Division  (Kozhikode); PH Division  (Edappal); PH Division (Malappuram); 
Project Division (Kochi); Project Division (Perumbavoor) 

 
 
 6 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
1.6. Structure of the Report 
The Audit findings based on the scrutiny of records at the Head Offices of the 
Boards and the field offices are given in the following chapters: 
 
Section I: Realisation of Labour Cess 
 
❖ Chapter 2 - Registration of Establishments and Assessment of Labour Cess. 
❖ Chapter 3 - Collection and Remittance of Labour Cess. 
 
Section II: Utilisation of Labour Cess 
 
❖ Chapter 4 - Implementation of Welfare Schemes. 
❖ Chapter 5 - Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction  
  Workers’ Welfare Board. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
  
 
  

 
17 
 
  
  
REGISTRATION OF 
ESTABLISHMENTS AND 
ASSESSMENT OF 
LABOUR CESS 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 7   
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND 
ASSESSMENT OF LABOUR CESS  
Details of all establishments which employ building workers were not entered 
in the registration portal LCAS. Only 10,113 establishments across the State 
were entered in LCAS as o f March 2023. The AIIS database system for the 
beneficiaries was not fully utilised by the Board to keep proper records of the 
beneficiaries. Of the total 7,312 buildings constructed in the selected LSGIs 
which were eligible for assessment, the Taluk offices under Revenue 
Department collected details of 4,294 buildings only. Of the se 4,294 
buildings, the details of only 679 buildings were seen entered in LCAS. There 
was delay ranging from one to five years in conducting assessment of cess in 
282 cases. 
2.1. Registration of establishments  
According to Section 7 of BOCW (RECS) Act, every employer shall make an 
application to the registering officer (District Labour Officer) of that area for 
the registration of such establishment5 within a period of 60 days from the date 
of commencement of establishment. The application6 shall be made in triplicate 
in Form I7 to the registering officer accompanied by the fees for the registration 
of the establishment. The registering officer, after receiving application shall 
register the establishment and issue a certificate of registration (Form II) to the 
applicant within 15 days of receipt of application.  
2.1.1. Registration through  Labour Commissionerate Automation 
System (LCAS) 
The delivery of services by the Labour Department was being dispensed through 
a web enabled software application namely “Labour Commissionerate 
Automation System” (LCAS) which was developed by Kerala State Electronics 
Development Corporation Limited (KELTRON), the Total Solutions Provider. 
As part of the phase-wise development and integration of various services such 
as grant of registration/ licence under the enabling labour legislations, inventory 
management, dispute redressal, gratuity, call centre monitoring , etc., a n 
agreement for revamping LCAS was entered into (March 2018) with 
KELTRON by t he Labour Department  at a cost of ₹10.40 lakh.  The Labour 
 
5 Establishment belonging to, or under the control of Government, any Body , corporate or firm, an 
individual or association or other body of individuals which or who employs building workers in any 
building or other construction work; and includes an establishment belonging to a contractor, but does 
not include an individual who employs such workers in any building or construction work in relation to 
his own residence, the total cost of such construction not being more than ₹10 lakh. 
6  Rule 25 of the Kerala Rules 
7  Form I contains Name of Establishment, Registration Number under BOCW(RECS) Act, 1996, 
Registering Authority, address, name of work, number of workers employed, date of commencement of 
work, estimated period of work, estimated cost of construction, details of payment of cess (viz., advance, 
deduction at source, final, etc.), name of employer, etc. 

 
 
8        
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Commissioner issued (December 2018) a  Circular directing all units and sub 
offices of the Labour Department to complete the procedures of registration/ 
renewal, licence/ renewal and amendments as per all Acts related to the Labour 
Department through online mode only. All the inspections conducted by the 
Labour Officers were also to be processed through LCAS. 
In Kerala, the Revenue D epartment was authorised to levy one -time building 
tax on all categories of buildings except those exempted under Sections 3 and 
3A8 of the Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975. According to the data pertaining to 
one-time building tax accessed from the Revenue Department, it was seen that 
the total number of constructions during the period 2021 -23 w as 2, 57,104.  
However, o nly 10,11 3 establishments were seen registered in LCAS  as of 
March 2023. The comparison of number of constructions in the data obtained 
from Revenue Department with that of LCAS software of Labour Department 
is given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Comparison of number of constructions in the data obtained 
from Revenue Department with LCAS software for the selected districts 
District No. of constructions 
as per Revenue 
Department 
No. of constructions 
as per LCAS 
Kozhikode 24,436 622 
Malappuram 35,611 406 
Ernakulam 25,809 574 
Total 85,856 1,602 
(Source: Data obtained from Revenue Department  and software of Labour 
Department) 
 
This points to the significant variance between the actual number of existing 
establishments as per revenue records vis-à-vis those registered under LCAS , 
thereby establishing the ineffectiveness of online mode of registration. It was 
also observed that for the purpose of collection of cess, the Labour Department 
maintained a separate set of data containing 2,82,998 establishments during the 
last five years which points towards contradiction in the data sets maintained by 
the Labour Department. 
Audit noticed that procedures such as inventory management, dispute redressal, 
gratuity, call centre monitoring as well as conduct of inspections were not being 
routed through LCAS. 
Government stated (July 2024) that the low rate of registration was primarily 
due to the fact that the Assistant Labour Officers in the districts were overloaded 
with an array of tasks and hence could not find sufficient time to register the 
building and other construction workers . Audit is of the opinion that 
 
8  Buildings owned by the Government of Kerala or the Government of India or any local authority and 
buildings used principally for religious, charitable or educational purposes or as factories or workshops 
or any such buildings as notified by the Government. 

 
9 
Registration of Establishments and Assessment of Labour Cess 
Government should revamp the registration process by collecting data on 
buildings to be registered, directly from LSGIs.  
2.1.2. Advanced Information Interface System   
As part of digitalising the data of all workers registered in 19 Welfare Boards 
under the Commissionerate, KELTRON proposed (Ju ly 2019) a project 9 viz., 
Upgradation/ enhancement in Advanced Information Interface System (AIIS) 
for Labour Commissionerate to map the functions of all the Welfare boards 
under the Labour Department, costing ₹1.39 crore. Go K sanctioned (March 
2021) the proposal for ₹1.39 crore and allot ted ₹25 lakh from the budget to 
update AIIS software, as the initial phase of the project.  In September 2021, the 
Labour Department decided to opt for a shortened version of the project 
consisting of limited functionalities like registration of beneficiaries, 
nomination management and search facility amongst the registered 
beneficiaries of all Welfare Boards under the Labour Department at a cost of 
₹25 lakh.  The software used for the project facilitated capturing of beneficiary 
details including name, address, Aadhaar number, date of birth, caste status, 
address of establishment, registration number of establishment, name of Trade 
Union which recommends the registration of beneficiary, bank details, period 
of service, etc.  Audit observed that the Board ha d ceased to utilise even the 
limited version of the software. The benefits were disbursed based on details 
directly furnished by beneficiaries and not through the details entered in AIIS. 
The database created using the limited version software was used only  for 
verifying whether a beneficiary who ha d applied for new membership in the 
Board was a member of any other Welfare Board under the Labour Department.   
Audit analysis of data pertaining to the Board comprising 5,54,294 beneficiaries 
in the above database revealed that: 
a) In 15,396 cases, same bank account number was entered  against more 
than one beneficiary.   
b) In 127 cases, the Aadhaar number s entered against the beneficiaries 
were found to be invalid. 
c) In 83 cases, there was duplication of the beneficiary id. 
It is, therefore, evident that the database contained erroneous details and there 
was no system for validating the data, as a result of which, this shortened version 
was of no use to the Board and therefore, was discontinued. Since the benefits 
were being extended based on  the information collected from the respective 
beneficiaries and not through this software on which ₹25 lakh was already spent, 
the entire expenditure had, thus, become unfruitful. The Government reply was, 
however, silent on this aspect. 
 
9  The project included modules like membership management, nomination management, Identity card 
generation, subscription management, pension, other welfare benefits management, digital 
documentation, Government fund management, establishment management and  various reporting 
facilities 

 
 
10        
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Recommendation 1 : The Government should ensure that all establishments 
are registered and brought under the cess net  by the Board , so as to enable 
broad based assessment of cess. 
Recommendation 2 : The Government should ensure that an effective data 
validation system is enforced thereby making the database self -contained so 
that details on all cess remitting institutions/ establishments are correctly 
captured. 
2.2. Non-compliance to provisions relating to assessment of cess 
According to Rule 6 of the Cess Rules 10, every employer, within 30 days of 
commencement of his work or payment of cess, shall furnish to the Assessing 
Officer information viz., name of establishment, number of workers, estimated 
cost of construction, etc., in Form I. Rule 7(1) of Cess Rules stipulates that on 
receipt of information in Form I, the Assessing Officer11, on scrutiny of such 
information and if satisfied, shall make an order of assessment within a period 
not exceeding six months indicating the amount of cess payable by the 
employer. Rule 4 stipulates that cess levied can be paid within 30 days of 
completion of construction or within 30 days on which assessment is finalised, 
whichever is earlier. 
In the course of audit, it was observed that there was  no system in place in the 
Labour Department to monitor the receipt of Form I as per Rule 6 mentioned 
above. Consequently, the assessing officer could not perform his duties  as per  
Rule 7(1), wh ich in turn contributed to non -compliance with the provisions 
related to the levy of cess as per Rule 4, by the Labour Department. The LSGIs 
were authorised to issue occupancy certificates for buildings in their 
jurisdiction.  However, the District Labour Officers (DLOs) of selected districts 
collected data on completed constructions which were liab le for assessment of 
cess, from the Taluk offices under Revenue Department  instead of LSGIs.   
Audit also observed that the data collected from the Revenue Department was 
not comprehensive. 
Audit attempted a comparison of year -wise details of number of constructions 
available at three different sources, viz., selected LSGIs, Taluk Offices and 
Labour Commissionerate Automation System (LCAS) of Labour Department 
for the selected local bodies, the details of which are given in Table 2.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  The Building and other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 , framed by the Central 
Government  
11   Deputy Labour Officer and Assistant Labour Officer (Grade I) 

 
11 
Registration of Establishments and Assessment of Labour Cess 
Table 2.2: Details of number of constructions available at LSGIs, Taluk 
offices and LCAS software  
Year Number of constructions as per data available at 
LSGIs Taluk offices LCAS software 
2018-19   2,828 986 85 
2019-20 1,300 967 469 
2020-21 1,191    437 124 
2021-22 1,240 866 1 
2022-23 753 1,038 0 
Total 7,312 4,294 679 
(Source: Data obtained from LSGIs, Taluk offices and software of Labour Department)  
Of the total 7,312 buildings constructed in the above LSGIs which were eligible 
for assessment, the Taluk offices under Revenue Department  collected details 
of 4,294 buildings only. Of these 4,294 buildings, the details of only 679 
buildings were seen entered in LCAS for further assessment.  
Thus, a meagre 9.29 per cent  of the constructions for which details were 
available with LSGIs were assessed by the Labour Department.  
Audit observed that the Labour Commissioner had directed (October 2020) the 
DLOs to collect details of all buildings registered under LSGIs concerned in 
previous months and to record a certificate in this connection in assessment 
registers. However, the same has not been complied with (December 2023). 
Thus, laxity on the part of DLOs in obtaining comprehensive details of 
constructions liable to be assessed for cess from LSGIs resulted in buildings 
escaping assessment of cess. 
The Labour Commissioner stated (June 2024) that the work of collection of cess 
has been entrusted to LSGIs vide orders dated 14 February 2024.  The 
Government did not offer any remarks in this regard. 
Recommendation 3: The Government should ensure that details of all 
constructions permitted by LSGIs are collected and captured in the LCAS 
software, so that correct assessment of cess can be made by the Government. 
2.3. Delay in assessment of cess  
According to Rule 6(1) of the Cess Rules, every employer shall furnish 
information in Form I within 30 days of commencement of his work or payment 
of cess, as the case may be.  Further according to Rule 7 of the said rules, the 
Assessing Officer shall make an order of assessment within a period not 
exceeding six months from the date of receipt of Form I and in case Form I has 
not been furnished, the assessment shall be made based on available records.  
Audit analysed 300 assessment cases in selected districts, and it was seen that 
Form I was not submitted in any of these cases. Therefore, the Assessing Officer 

 
 
12        
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
relied on the data from Taluk and Village offices on completed establishments 
for calculating the cess amount based on plinth area and year of completion12.  
An analysis of the assessment cases revealed that there was delay ranging from 
one to five years in conducting assessment  of cess in 282 cases as shown in 
Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Time period between completion of the building and issue of first 
notice 
Sl. 
No. 
Time period between the 
completion of the building and issue 
of first notice 
No. of instances 
1. Less than 1 year 99 
2. Between 1-3 years 84 
3. Between 3-5 years 51 
4. Five years and above 48 
Total 282 
(Source: Assessment orders from DLOs) 
The BOCW(RECS) Act provided for a time frame of six months for conducting 
the assessment in cases where the employer has furnished information in  
Form I. In cases where the employer failed to comply with the above, the Cess 
Rules empower ed the Assessing officer to make assessment on the basis of 
available records, and other information incidental thereto. However, no time 
frame was seen fixed in this regard for the assessing officer to make the 
assessment. Delay in assessment of cess resulted in delay in remittance of c ess 
and conse quent delay in disbursement of benefits.  The Government did not 
furnish any reply till September 2024.   
2.4. Conclusion 
Audit observed that the d etails of establishments which employ ed building 
workers were not entered in the registration portal LCAS. The AIIS database 
system for the beneficiaries was not fully utilised by the Board.  Of the total 
7,312 buildings constructed in the selected LSGIs which were eligible for 
assessment, the Taluk offices under Revenue Department collected details of 
4,294 buildings only. Of these, details pertaining to only 679 buildings were 
entered in LCAS , revealing the slackness in the functio ning of the system of 
registration. 
 
 
12 GoK orders dated 14 July 2017 

 
 
 
  
COLLECTION AND 
REMITTANCE OF 
 


 
 
 
 

 
 13 
CHAPTER III 
COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE OF LABOUR CESS 
The Labour Department failed to accrue interest of ₹11.39 crore due to delays 
in cess payments across 1,319 cases, with delay extending up to four years. 
Additionally, cess amounting to ₹1.56 crore, collected by various authorities, 
was incorrectly credited to the R estructuring and Internal Audit Board 
(RIAB). Of this, ₹84.87 lakh remains to be transferred back to the Board. 
Among the 2,82,998 buildings assessed for cess collection by the Labour 
Department in the State, payments were realised for only 1,26,446 buildings 
(44.68 per cent). This resulted in a shortfall of cess collection amounting to 
₹542.17 crore (53.83 per cent). In selected districts, the Board exceeded the 
one per cent limit by paying ₹1.66 crore as staff salaries and postage expenses 
to the Labour Department. 
In five test -checked PH Divisions of the Kerala Water Authority,  
cheques/ DDs for cess total ling ₹48.52 lakh were not deposited into the 
Board’s account. 
Section 3 of BOCW(RECS) Act  stipulates that there shall be levied and 
collected a cess at such rate not exceeding two per cent, but not less than one 
per cent of the cost of construction incurred by an employer, as the Central 
Government may specify from time to time. The cess levied shall be paid by an 
employer, within 30 days of completion of the construction project or within 30 
days of the date on which assessment of cess payable is finalised, whichever is 
earlier. Further, the assessment orders issued by DLOs required the assessee to 
remit cess as DD/ Cheque in favour of the Board within 20 days from the receipt 
of Assessment Notice.  
The proceeds of cess collected under sub-section (2) shall be paid by the local 
authority or the State Government collecting the cess to the Board after 
deducting the cost of collection of such cess not exceeding one per cent of the 
amount collected. Government Departments/ Organisations deduct cess from 
work bills and remit the amount to the Board. 
3.1. Non-realisation of interest for delayed remittance of cess  
According to Section 8 of the Cess Act, the employers are liable to pay interest 
on the cess amount at the rate of two per cent per month in case of delay in 
payment of cess. On analysis of LCAS data for the period from 2018 -19 to 
2022-23, it was seen that the Labour Department did not realise interest for 
delay in payment of cess 13 in 1,319 cases. The extent of delay that occurred in 
payment of cess for which interest was to be collected ranged from less than one 
month to over four years, as shown in Table 3.1.  
 
13  Delay was calculated from 20 days of the issue of the assessment notice, as the date of completion of 
construction project was not readily available. 

 
 
 14 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Table 3.1: Delay in payment of cess and amount of interest to be collected 
Delay No. of cases of 
assessment 
Interest to be collected* 
(₹ in crore) 
Between 1 and 30 days 346 4.34 
Between 31 days and 90 days 291 1.27 
Between 91 days and 365 days 381 3.62 
Between 1 year and 2 years 172 0.57 
Between 2 years and 4 years 127 1.59 
More than 4 years 2 0.0035 
Total 1,319 11.39 
* Position as of October 2023 
(Source: Data extracted from LCAS and remittance details at the Board) 
It was further observed that while issuing notice for remittance of cess, penal 
provision as per Section 8 of the Act was not mentioned. Failure to collect 
interest on belated payment of cess led to loss of ₹11.39 crore to the Board. 
The Labour Department stated (October 2022) that the parties approached the 
Government seeking permission to remit the cess in instalments. Also, during 
the course of Adalats14, Government decided to give exemptions for remitting 
cess, which included full waiver of interest for residential buildings and 50 per 
cent reduction for commercial buildings. The reply is not tenable,  as for 
allowing exemptions, the amendment in Act and Rules are required to be done 
either in the Parliament or in the State Legislature. Government orders for 
exemption of cess without legislative exercise is, therefore, not in order. The 
Government did not furnish any reply till September 2024. 
3.2. Miscredited cess amount pending realisation 
According to Rule 4(3) of the Cess Rules, Government or Public Sector 
Undertakings shall deduct or cause to be deducted , the cess from construction 
works payable at the notified rates from the bills paid for such works. Rule 5 
stipulates that the proceeds of the cess so collected shall be transferred by such 
Government, Public Sector Undertakings etc. , to the Board.  During the Audit 
of Restructuring and Internal Audit Board (RIAB) 15, it was seen that  cess 
amounting to ₹1.56 crore for the period 2016-17 to 2021 -22 was  wrongly 
transfer credited by various cess collecting authorities into the Special TSB 
account of RIAB instead of the designated account of the Board. The Secretary 
of the Board requested (May 2022) the Secretary,  Labour Department and 
Additional Chief Secretary, Finance Department to direct RIAB to credit back 
₹1.56 crore along with interest to the account of the Board. Since no adequate 
mechanism to monitor/ verify the details of remittance of cess exists, other short 
collections, if any, cannot be ruled out. 
 
14  The period of Adalat extended up to 31 December 2022 
15    A Public Sector Undertaking under the Industries Department 

 
 
 15 
Collection and Remittance of Labour Cess 
The Government replied (December 2022) that ₹71.18 lakh was credited to the 
account of the Board. However, the remaining ₹84.87 lakh was still pending 
transfer from RIAB’s account, along with interest. 
3.3. Payment of charges in excess of permissible limit 
Cess collecting authorities like State Government Departments/  Autonomous 
bodies/ Local Self Governments remit the cess amount to the Board after 
deducting one per cent of the amount as administrative expenses in accordance 
with Section 3 of the Cess Act.  During the audit period, the Labour Department 
claimed reimbursement of salary paid to the staff of the Board deputed on 
working arrangement to the District Labour offices, as well as postage expenses.  
Audit observed that the amount thus claimed was over  and above the 
permissible one per cent limit already deducted from the cess amount.  During 
the audit period 2018-23, in the selected districts, the Board paid ₹1.66 crore16 
as salary to the staff and postage expenses to the Labour Department in excess 
of the one per cent limit, which was irregular.  
The Labour Commissioner replied (June 2024) that when cess Adalat started in 
the State on 01 November 2021, there arose need for more postage stamps and 
other office expenses in connection with printing notices, paper for printing etc. 
The reply is not acceptable as any amount incurred in excess of admissible limit 
is a violation of provisions in the Act, which is irregular.   
3.4. Short collection of cess  
The District Labour Officer shall ensure that the Assessing Officer collects the 
details of buildings constructed under his jurisdiction from the Local Self 
Government Institutions  and take s further necessary action for collection of 
cess17. As per the information furnished by the  Labour Department, details of 
buildings assessed, cess collected and cess pending collection were as shown in 
Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Details of buildings assessed for cess by Labour Department, 
cess collected and balance pending collection  
for the period 2018-23 
(Source: Data furnished by the Labour Department) 
 
16  ₹1.35 crore as salary and ₹0.31 crore as postage expenses 
17  Circular No. 06/2020 dated 12 October 2020 issued by the Labour Commissioner 
Year Buildings assessed Cess collected Cess pending collection 
Number Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Number Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Number Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
2018-19 54,857 194.92 23,008 89.20 31,849 105.72 
2019-20 70,181 285.66 6,722 95.99 63,459 189.67 
2020-21 11,965 87.30 8,531 31.77 3,434 55.53 
2021-22 35,098 167.68 27,655 99.41 7,443 68.28 
2022-23 110,897 271.62 60,530 148.65 50,367 122.97 
Total 282,998 1007.18 126,446 465.02  156,552 542.17 

 
 
 16 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
From the above, it can be seen that out of 2 ,82,998 buildings assessed for 
collection of cess by the Labour Department in the State, amount was realised 
only in respect of 1 ,26,446 buildings (44.68 per cent)  and this led to short 
collection of cess to the tune of ₹542.17 crore (53.83 per cent). 
Further, the private constructions did not duly register and file proper returns to 
the Labour Department leading to a very low cess base  and fewer collections. 
Hence steps were to be  taken urgently to collect the details of building 
constructions from LSGIs to create a comprehensive database of new 
constructions and to enable cess collection through LSGIs.   
Government stated (July 2024) that it has been  decided to shift the onus of 
collecting cess from the Labour Department to LSGIs from January 2024. Audit 
observed that despite instructions to this effect having been issued in October 
2020 itself by the Labour Commissioner, the DLOs continued to collect basic 
data from Taluk Offices, resulting in several constructions escaping assessment 
and resultant shortfall in cess collection.  
Recommendation 4: The Government should direct the LSGIs to develop a 
robust mechanism for ensuring that cess assessments are correctly made and 
initiate efforts for prompt collection of cess. 
3.5. Non-crediting of Cheques/ DDs drawn for the purpose of 
Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess  
In respect of Government works, cess is being collected from the work bills at  
the rate of one per cent of the gross amount of the bill. The amount so deducted 
is either converted as cheques/ DDs and forwarded to the Board for realisation 
or transferred to the account of the Board maintained in the treasury.  
Audit checked the details of deduction of cess from work bills of six offices 
each of LSGIs, Kerala Water Authority (KWA) and Public Works Department 
(PWD) from the three selected districts. The test -checked LSGIs and PWD 
offices were found to remit cess deducted from the work bills at the treasuries , 
when the payments were made.  In the offices of KWA, cess was deducted from 
the work bills and Cheques/ DDs drawn and sent to the Board. These Cheques/ 
DDs were remitted by the Board to the bank account created for the purpose.  
While comparing the Cheques/ DDs drawn in six KWA offices with amount 
credited to the bank account of the Board, Audit noticed that the following 
amounts pertaining to five offices deducted during the audit period were not 
credited to the bank account as detailed in Table 3.3. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 17 
Collection and Remittance of Labour Cess 
Table 3.3: Details of Cheques/ DDs drawn by selected KWA offices but 
not credited to the bank account of the Board  
Sl. 
No. Name of office 
Total No. of 
Cheques/ DDs 
drawn by 
KWA 
Total amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
cheques/ DDs 
not credited to 
bank account 
of the Board 
Amount not 
credited to 
bank account 
of the Board 
(₹ in lakh) 
1.  Project Division, 
Perumbavoor 
56 20.87 1 3.81 
2.  PH Division, Kozhikode 33 96.52 1 0.35 
3.  PH Division, Edappal 136 50.52 14 27.58 
4.  Project Division, Ernakulam 123 69.62 2 0.23 
5.  PH Division, Malappuram 214 76.18 75 46.70 
Total 562 313.71 93 78.67 
(Source: Details obtained from Board and KWA offices) 
In the absence of KWA intimating the Board about the quantum of cess being 
deducted or Board seeking such information from KWA, there was no check to 
ensure that the entire amount deducted by KWA was credited to the accounts of 
the Board18. This was indicative of the inadequacy of internal control 
mechanism in the Board leading to possible leakage of revenue. 
The GoK replied (December 2022) that out of 104 Cheques/ DDs (₹80.19 lakh), 
19 Cheques/ DDs (₹31.67 lakh) were located and found to be credited to the 
account of the Board. Further, it was stated that a comprehensive software was 
being developed, on the completion of which the difficulties faced in this regard 
would be resolved. The reply of the Board however failed to explain the status 
of the remaining Cheques/ DDs amounting to ₹48.52 lakh. 
Government also admitted (August 2024) that non -availability of software to 
facilitate cess collection ha d led to inability to assess the correct position of 
credited amount of the Cheques/ DDs and that development of software which 
was on the anvil would prevent such hassles. 
Recommendation 5 : The Government should direct the Board to strengthen 
its internal control mechanism to check leakage of revenue and also to ensure 
that cess due from all possible sources is realised. 
3.6. Conclusion 
Interest amounting to ₹11.39 crore could not be availed due to delay in cess 
payments in 1 ,319 cases. Instances also occurred wherein cess amount was 
miscredited to other accounts, which had to be transferred back to Board. 
Among the 2,82,998 buildings assessed for cess collection by the Labour 
Department in the State, payments were reali sed for only 1,26,446 buildings , 
which led to short collection of cess. By expending higher amounts in staff 
salary, postage, etc., the Board exceeded the prescribed limit. 
  
 
18  The Board operates four bank accounts for crediting Cheques/ DDs (as of October 2022) 

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
 

 
    
 
 
 

 
 19   
CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTATION OF WELFARE SCHEMES 
There was no central repository for tracking the number of beneficiaries and 
expenditure related to the various welfare schemes administered by the Board 
in the State. Due to the lack of a centrali sed data system at the State office, 
the Board relied on information collected from District Offices to determine 
fund requirements for implementing district-level schemes. 
Applications for various welfare benefits including pensions, marriage 
assistance, support for illness  and fatal diseases, maternity benefits, death 
benefits, scholarships and cash awards were pending due to insufficient 
funds. Irregularities were observed in the disbursement of COVID -19 
benefits because of unreliable beneficiary data. 
Limited awareness among construction workers led to under -registration to 
the scheme, with registration often based on Trade Union certificates. 
Migrant workers in the State were not registered under the Act, depriving 
them of its benefits. Furthermore, the Labour Department has failed to 
enforce safety regulations at worksites, even after accidents or incidents. 
4.1. Welfare Schemes implemented by the Board 
Section 11 of the BOCW(RECS) Act stipulates that every building worker 
registered as a beneficiary under the Act shall be entitled to the benefits 
provided by the Board  from its Fund.  The Board implement s 20 welfare 
schemes out of which 10 schemes such as a) Pension, b) Marriage Assistance, 
c) Scholarship and Cash Awards , d) Assistan ce to illness and fatal disease , 
 e) Death and Disability Assistance , f) Maternity Allowance , g) Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme, h) Minor deposit scheme , i) Tool Advance  and j) House 
Building Advance were taken up for audit scrutiny . The pension and other 
welfare benefits sanctioned by the Board are transferred to the respective bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfer. 
Expenditure incurred by the Board on the aforementioned welfare schemes  in 
the entire State and the amount pending to be disbursed during the audit period 
is depicted in Charts 4.1 and 4.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
20 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Chart 4.1: Expenditure incurred by the Board on major welfare schemes 
in the State from 2018-23 
(₹ in crore) 
 
(Source: Data obtained from the Board) 
Audit analysed the demand and expenditure pattern against the major wel fare 
schemes which are as under: 
Table 4.1: Demand and Expenditure pattern of major welfare schemes for the 
period 2018-23  
 (₹ in crore) 
Major Welfare Schemes Demand Expenditure Pending 
payments 
Pension and Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme 2508.20 2399.82 108.38 
Marriage Assistance 134.51 91.98 42.53 
Maternity Assistance 10.25 8.11 2.14 
Scholarship and Cash Award 13.26 12.22 1.04 
Assistance for fatal diseases 26.68 24.39 2.29 
Death Assistance 65.71 41.67 24.04 
Total 2758.61 2578.19 180.42 
(Source: Data obtained from the Board) 
It is evident from the table above that the demand raised against the major 
welfare schemes was ₹2758.61 crore , whereas the actual expenditure was 
₹2578.19 crore (93.45 per cent). It is also necessary to mention here that despite 
having a budget provision of ₹742.60 crore in 2022-23, the actual allocation of  
₹582.07 crore was far below the estimates (78.38 per cent), which is indicative 
of paucity of funds for implementation of the welfare schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
Pension, 
2,399.31 
(93.06%)
Marriage and 
Maternity 
Assistances, 
100.09 (3.88%)
Scholarship and 
Cash Award, 
12.22 (0.47%)
Treatment of illness, Death 
Assistances and VRS, 66.57 
(2.58%)

 
21 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
Chart 4.2: Payment pending by the Board under various welfare schemes  
(₹ in crore) 
(Source: Data obtained from the Board) 
There was no central repository of data regarding the number of beneficiaries 
availing benefits and expenditure incurred under the various welfare schemes 
operated by the Board in the State. In the absence of a centralised data source at 
the State office of the Board, the possibility of benefits not reaching the eligible 
beneficiaries could not be ruled out , besides failure to effectively monitor the 
implementation of welfare measures. It was observed that  the Board collected 
details from the District Offices to fi nalise the fund requirements for 
implementing various schemes in the districts. Thus, the Board had to depend 
largely on the District Offices rather than having its own monitoring mechanism 
to oversee the effective implementation of the welfare schemes. 
Scrutiny of records at offices of the Board in test-checked districts revealed that 
despite various welfare schemes being implemented by the Board, the benefits  
of these schemes did not effectively accrue to the beneficiaries, as envisaged. 
Audit observations in this regard are listed below: 
4.1.1. Pension Schemes 
According to Rule 289 of the Kerala Rules, a worker is entitled to monthly 
pension from the first day of the month succeeding the month in which he 
completes 60 years of age.  
4.1.1.1. Non-disbursal of monthly pension 
Monthly pensions provide a reliable and consistent source of income  to cover 
the essential expenses at regular intervals during the post -retirement years. 
Audit noticed that though pension benefits were being paid to the registered 
workers, the payment was being made on quarterly basis and not on monthly 
basis.   
Pension, 108.22 
(59.98%)
Marriage and 
Maternity 
Assistances,
44.67 ( 24.76%)
Scholarship and 
Cash Award,
1.04 (0.58%)
Treatment of illness, Death Assistances 
and VRS, 26.49 (14.68%)

 
 
22 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
It was observed that 1,35,977 pensioners did not receive pension amounting to 
₹108.22 crore in the entire State (31 March 2023).  In the selected districts, 
pension arrears19 amounting ₹12.03 crore was pending disbursement to 10,024 
pensioners (March 2023), as shown in Table 4.2.   
Table 4.2: Year-wise pendency in disbursement of pension 
District Year 
No. of pensioners 
to whom payment 
was pending 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Kozhikode 2022 505 0.44 2023 (upto March 2023) 
Ernakulam 
2021 785 1.06 
2022 2,660 2.06 
2023 (upto March 2023) 603 0.70 
Malappuram 
2021 2,212 4.26 
2022 2,717 2.94 
2023 (upto March 2023) 542 0.57 
Total 10,024  12.03  
  (Source: Data obtained from the Board) 
The pendency in payment of pension was attributable to shortage of funds  as 
already mentioned in para graph 4.1. Further, the Board was not resorting pro -
actively to measures to realise cess from unassessed  sources, as detailed in 
paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3 of this Report. The Government did not furnish any reply 
till date.  
4.1.1.2. Pension paid to ineligible beneficiaries 
According to Rule 283 of the Kerala Rules, a worker who is a member of any 
other welfare fund established under any law for the time being in force is not 
eligible to be a member of the Board which in turn implies that a person who 
receives pension from the Board is not eligible to draw pension from any other 
Board. 
GoK ordered (July 2013) that Aadhaar identification  record was to be 
mandatorily produced for obtaining all social welfare pensions. The Board 
issued directions on 09 May 2018 permitting the pensioners for submission of 
life certificate in which Aadhaar number was recorded, within  20 May 2018. 
The new pensioners were to produce copy of Aadhaar along with the application 
for pension. It was also directed by the Board not to disburse pension to those 
beneficiaries whose names did not figure in the Sevana Pension software20.   
Linkage of Aadhaar number enabled identification of pensioners receiving 
multiple pensions in the selected districts in 2017-18, as detailed in Table 4.3.  
 
19    The arrears comprise the pension amount due from the date from which one becomes eligible till actual 
payment of regular pension or due from delay in submission of yearly life certificate by the pensioner 
to the Board. 
20   A web-based application developed and supported by Information Kerala Mission for distribution of 
social security pensions to the beneficiaries in Kerala. 

 
23 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
Table 4.3: Cases of pensioners receiving multiple pensions in the selected 
districts 
District No. of cases Excess pension paid (₹ in lakh) 
Kozhikode 718 91.96 
Ernakulam 10 0.56 
Malappuram 288 46.06 
Total 1,016 138.58 
(Source: Details obtained from District offices of the Board) 
The GoK replied (December 2022) that steps would be taken to recover the 
pension amount paid in excess to the beneficiaries.   
4.1.1.3. Denial of pension to the beneficiaries from the month due 
According to Rule 289 of the Kerala Rules, 1998, a worker is entitled to monthly 
pension from the first day of the month succeeding the month in which he 
completes 60 years of age. Audit observed that GoK issued orders in April 2022 
directing the pension to be disbursed from the date on which the officer 
concerned digitally  signed the order sanctioning pension. Though the above 
order, which was not in line with  Rule 289 of Kerala Rules was suspended by 
GoK in January 2023, it resulted in denial of disbursal of pension amounting to 
₹2.28 crore to 3489 pensioners during the intervening period from May 2022 to 
December 2022 in the selected districts, as shown in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Denial of eligible pension from the month due in selected districts  
Sl. 
No. District No. of pensioners 
Total amount of 
pension denied 
(₹ in lakh) 
1.  Ernakulam 1,644 107.46 
2.  Kozhikode 1,753 115.58 
3.  Malappuram 92 6.11 
     Total 3489 229.15 
             (Source: Details obtained from District offices of the Board) 
It was further observed that the information furnished by the Board did not 
contain details of the date s of submission  of application for pension by the 
beneficiaries, in the absence of which the actual time taken for settlement of 
pension cases could not be ascertained by Audit. However, it was observed from 
the available information that the actual time taken between the pensioner 
attaining the age of 60 and date of disbursement of pension ranged from one 
month to 34 months.  Audit noticed that though the instruction which was 
violative of the Rule was suspended by GoK with effect from January 2023, the 
short-disbursed pension was still pending payment to these beneficiaries  
(May 2024). Government reply was silent on this aspect. 
4.1.2. Marriage Assistance 
According to Rule 300 of the Kerala Rules, the workers having continuous 
membership for three years shall be eligible to get financial assistance for the 
marriage of two children. A female member of the Board is also eligible for this 

 
 
24 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
assistance for her own marriage. The amount of assistance was fixed at ₹10,000 
each for two children per beneficiary.  The pendency in this connection in 
respect of selected districts as on 31 March 2023 is shown in Table 4.5.  
   
Table 4.5: Pendency in disbursement of Marriage Assistance in selected districts 
District No. of applications 
pending 
Amount pending 
disbursal (₹ in lakh) 
Kozhikode 4,934 493.40 
Malappuram 7,327 732.70 
Ernakulam 1,912 191.20 
Total 14,173 1,417.30 
         (Source: Data obtained from District offices of the Board) 
It was also seen that 42,535 applications amounting to ₹42.54 crore w ere 
pending in the entire State. The Board cited paucity of funds as the reason for 
non-payment of the assistance. The reply of the Board is not acceptable as at the 
end of 2022 -23, Board had an unspent cash balance of ₹13 5.16 crore  
(paragraph 5.1), which could have been utilised for payment of assistance. The 
Government did not furnish any reply till date. 
4.1.3. Scholarship and cash award 
In accordance with Rule 299 of the Kerala Rules, amount ranging from ₹1,000 
to ₹3,000 was being provided as educational assistance for higher education of 
children of the members of the Board . In addition, an amount of ₹1,000 as 
educational allowance for SSLC 21 and cash award of ₹3,000 for excellence in 
SSLC examination was also being provided to eligible children of the members. 
The pendency in this regard as on 31 March 2023 related to 4,587 applications 
worth ₹55.89 lakh in respect of selected districts, as given in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Pendency in disbursement of scholarship and cash awards in 
selected districts 
District No. of applications 
pending 
Amount pending 
disbursal (₹ in lakh) 
Kozhikode 1,194 15.74 
Malappuram 2,947 33.32 
Ernakulam 446 6.83 
Total 4,587 55.89 
 (Source: Data obtained from District offices of the Board) 
Audit observed that there were 8,208 pending applications amounting to  
₹1.04 crore in the State. The Board cited paucity of funds for non -payment of 
the assistance. The reply of the Board is not acceptable for reasons mentioned 
in paragraph 5.1. The Government did not furnish any reply till date. 
4.1.4. Assistance for treatment of illness/ fatal disease 
According to Rule 298 of the Kerala Rules, the Board may sanction financial 
assistance to the beneficiaries who are hospitalised for five or more days due to 
 
21 State School Leaving Certificate 

 
25 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
accident or any disease. The assistance currently provided to victims of  
accidents ranged from ₹ 800 to ₹5,000 and an amount upto a maximum of                    
₹50,000 was being provided for fatal diseases.   The pendency as on 31 March 
2023 in respect of selected districts was as given in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Pendency in disbursement of assistance for treatment for 
illness/ fatal disease in selected districts 
District No. of 
applications 
pending 
Amount of assistance 
involved (₹ in lakh) 
Kozhikode 416 23.78 
Malappuram 177 21.03 
Ernakulam 103 29.12 
Total 696 73.93 
               (Source: Data obtained from District offices of the Board) 
In the entire State, 1,647 applications for assistance amounting  to ₹2.29 crore 
were pending to be disbursed. The Board cited paucity of funds for non-payment 
of the assistance. The reply of the Board is not acceptable for reasons mentioned 
in paragraph 5.1. The Government did not furnish any reply till date. 
4.1.5. Death benefit  
According to Rule 29 5 of the Kerala Rules, an  amount of ₹25,000 was to be 
paid to the nominee/ dependent of the active member towards death benefit in 
case of death and an amount of ₹three lakh was to be provided to the nominee/ 
dependent of the member towards death benefit in the event of death in an 
accident during the course of employment.   
Audit observed that the pendency of cases in this regard in the entire State 
related to 2,234 cases amounted to ₹2.40 crore.  The pendency in respect of the 
selected districts as on 31 March 2023 is as given in Table 4.8. 
Table 4.8: Pendency in disbursement of Death benefit 
District No. of 
applications 
pending 
Amount of assistance 
involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Kozhikode 258 128.50 
Malappuram 298 160.99 
Ernakulam 161 290.80 
Total 717 580.29 
               (Source: Data obtained from District offices of the Board) 
The Board cited paucity of funds for non -payment of the assistance. The reply 
of the Board is not acceptable for reasons mentioned in paragraph 5.1. The 
Government did not furnish any reply till date. 
4.1.6. Maternity assistance 
According to Rule 288 of the Kerala Rules, the women employees who are 
beneficiaries of the fund shall be given maternity benefit amounting ₹15,000 
during the period of maternity, provided that this benefit shall not be allowed 

 
 
26 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
more than twice. The pendency in payment in respect of selected districts as on 
31 March 2023 was as given in Table 4.9 below.  
Table 4.9: Pendency in disbursement of maternity assistance in                    
selected districts 
District No. of applications 
pending 
Amount of assistance 
involved (₹ in lakh)  
Kozhikode   21  3.15 
Malappuram 424 63.60 
Ernakulam    2  0.30 
Total 447 67.05 
        (Source: Data obtained from District offices of the Board) 
The pendency of applications in the State stood at 14,268 worth ₹2.14 crore as 
on 31 March 2023. 
Audit also observed that GoK had not re-imbursed the amount disbursed by the 
Board as maternity benefit as detailed below:   
The scheme “Maternity benefit scheme for women labourers in unorganised 
sector 2012” with the Labour Commissioner as the Administrator , was 
introduced by GoK in March 2012 . The Guidelines of the scheme enabled the 
women workers to be provided with a maternity benefit of ₹15,000, of which 
the Board would contribute ₹3,000 and GoK would pay the remaining amount. 
As per the guidelines of the scheme , the Board was to  incur the expenses 
initially and subsequently seek re -imbursement on a monthly basis from the 
Labour Commissioner. However, the Board claimed for re -imbursement on a 
yearly basis only and GoK had not re -imbursed ₹6.81 crore as on 3 1 March 
2023, details of which are given in Table 4.10. 
Table 4.10: Details of maternity benefit pending reimbursement from GoK 
Year No. of beneficiaries 
to whom maternity 
benefit was 
disbursed 
Amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount            
reimbursed 
by GoK 
(₹ in lakh) 
Balance to be 
reimbursed 
including that of 
previous years  
(₹ in lakh) 
2018-19 1,947 233.64 36.00 644.22 
2019-20 1,016 121.92 48.00 718.14 
2020-21 538 64.56 0.00 782.70 
2021-22 721 86.52 0.00 869.22 
2022-23 32 3.84 192.00 681.06 
 (Source: Details provided by the Board) 
The Government stated (December 2022) that the process of transferring this 
amount to the Board, was in progress.   
4.2. Irregularities in disbursement of COVID-19 benefits 
In order to tide over the difficulties faced by the beneficiaries of the Board 
consequent to the COVID-19 lockdown, the Board decided to provide financial 

 
27 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
assistance to the beneficiaries. The Board sanctioned22 ₹1,000 each for the years 
2020 and 2021 to the beneficiaries, the disbursement of which was to be subject 
to fulfilment of certain23  conditions. Further, the Board also sanctioned ₹2,000 
each to all the COVID positive beneficiaries, from January 2021. 
Audit noticed that the Board did not have a comprehensive database consisting 
of date of enrolment as beneficiary, details of renewal of membership, other 
family members who are beneficiaries, etc. In the absence of relevant details of 
beneficiaries, the B oard could neither verify the extent of adherence of 
beneficiaries to any of the prescribed conditions, nor claim that an appropriate 
system was in place to identify the beneficiaries eligible to be disbursed with 
COVID benefits. Consequently, the benefits were disbursed to all beneficiaries, 
disregarding the conditions of eligibility.  
Audit further observed that Government instructed (July 2020) all Welfare 
Boards to refund undisbursed COVID assistance as on 15 August 2020 to 
Government. With reference to the above instruction, the Board instructed  
(08 August 2020) all District Executive Officers to stop payment of special 
assistance on 15 August 2020 and to refund balance amount retained in their 
bank accounts after 15 August 2020. Accordingly, the District officer 
Malappuram returned ₹1.55 crore to the Main office being the unspent balance 
as on 15 August 2020, despite having pending applications worth ₹38.06 lakh 
for assistance on that date.  
Similarly, District Officer Kozhikode returned ₹3.39 crore to the Main office as 
unspent balance, when request for ₹1.89 crore of COVID assistance was 
pending disbursal. These applicants were thus denied the eligible financial 
assistance sanctioned in the wake of the pandemic. 
It was the responsibility of the District Officer s to ensure that the details of 
beneficiaries including the bank details were available. Due to non-availability 
of a proper database of beneficiaries with their bank account numbers and IFSC 
details, the applicants could not be granted assistance.  
Further, analysis of the payment data in Ernakulam district revealed that in 182 
cases, assistance to two different beneficiaries was credited to the same bank 
account, thereby leading to an irregular payment of ₹1.82 lakh. The Government 
did not furnish any reply till September 2024. 
Recommendation 6: The Government should ensure that the Board maintains 
a database of beneficiaries with complete details of benefits availed, complete 
banking details , etc. thereby facilitating adherence to  eligibility criteria for 
financial assistance. 
 
22 Board order No. E4 -4099/20 dated 01 April 2020,  Board Circular No. 14/2021 dated  
18 May 2021 
23   The beneficiary should have atleast two years of service, should have renewed his membership as on 
2018, only one beneficiary from each family to receive assistance, beneficiaries due to retire from 
March to June 2020 and those who applied for assistance for fatal diseases amounting ₹2,000 were not 
eligible 
 

 
 
28 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
4.3. Irregular refund of beneficiary contribution on retirement 
According to Rule 303 of the Kerala Rules, the amount of contribution standing 
to the credit of the beneficiary shall be disbursed to his nominee in case of death 
of the beneficiary.  
However, in violation of the aforementioned rule, beneficiary contribution of 
₹15.53 crore (including interest) was seen refunded to the beneficiaries on 
retirement in the selected districts.  The amount refunded so by the Board to the 
pensioners in the selected districts is as shown in Table 4.11. 
Table 4.11: Details of irregular refund of contribution to beneficiaries who had 
attained the age of 60 years in the selected districts 
District Number of 
beneficiaries 
Contribution 
(₹ in crore) 
Interest 
(₹ in crore) 
Total 
(₹ in crore) 
Kozhikode 10304 4.12 0.32 4.44 
Ernakulam 11169 5.08 0.30 5.37 
Malappuram  9805 5.36 0.36 5.72 
Total 31278 14.56 0.98 15.53 
(Source: Details obtained from the respective District Executive Offices) 
GoK replied (December 2022) that this was done in accordance with the 
decision of the Board (November 2005) taken with the intention to uphold the 
welfare of the workers.  The reply is not acceptable as according to Rule 309, 
the fund shall not, without prior approval of the Government, be expended for 
any purpose other than those mentioned in the Act and Rules.  Since refund of 
contribution to the members at the time of retirement is not covered under the 
said Act/  Rules, prior approval of the Government was  essential before the 
refund, which was also not seen obtained. 
4.4. Mission Mode Project 
In July 2020, GoI launched Mission Mode Project (MMP) so that all the 
construction workers are registered as beneficiaries to avail the entitled benefits 
without any hassles. The MMP envisage d to achieve the objectives by State 
Welfare Boards within three months ’ time-period. MMP comprised of three 
components, viz., (i) Registration of left-out construction workers, (ii) Renewal 
and Portability and (iii) Universalisation of Social Security.  
Audit observed that no project/initiatives to cover the registration of left out 
construction workers were seen launched in the State. The inter -state migrant 
workers were totally excluded from the ambit of the Act as the Board did not 
permit registration of such workers. As regards renewal, portability and 
universalisation of social security, the Secretary  of the Board  informed that 
there was no system existing in the Board relating to the provision for liaison or 
data sharing with other State Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards.  
Thus, Audit observed that the Board did not achieve the objectives of MMP in 
full and lacked ongoing initiatives to implement all components of MMP. 

 
29 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
4.5. Registration of workers 
The BOCW  (RECS) Act24 stipulates that every building worker who has 
completed 18 years of age but not turned 60, and who has been engaged in any 
building or other construction work for not less than 90 days during the 
preceding 12 months shall be eligible for registration as a  beneficiary. Once 
registered as a beneficiary, the building worker shall contribute to the Building 
and other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund (Fund) at rates per month, as 
specified by the State Government. He will also be eligible for availing the 
benefits of welfare schemes from the Fund managed by the Board. The current 
monthly rate of contribution is ₹5025. 
Though registration of workers was the pre -requisite for availing financial 
assistance under various welfare schemes, Audit observed that impediments as 
discussed below, marred the efficacy in registration process of workers. 
4.5.1. Lack of awareness about welfare schemes among construction 
workers 
The Guidelines of Model Welfare Scheme for Building and other Construction 
Workers and Action Plan for strengthening Implementation Machinery issued 
(September 2018) by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, GoI, lay down 
that spreading of awareness of the welfare schemes for building and other 
construction workers should be done by way of grass roots level awareness 
programmes, rather than by advertisements in newspapers or TV channels. The 
Guidelines also stipulate that the State Labour Department/Welfare Board may 
issue directions to workers’ registration authorities (Board), to hold regular 
camps or create facilitation centres at prominent labour chowks/addas for 
enabling registration of workers. Videos broadcast on smart phones, regular  
SMS to inform and update registered/potential workers, painting awareness 
messages in rural areas, involving Urban Local Bodies/Grama  
Panchayats/Grama Sabhas in conducting awareness camps, etc. , may also 
contribute to strengthening awareness regarding welfare activities. 
Audit surveyed 210 beneficiaries 26 registered with the Board, of which 195 
beneficiaries (92.86 per cent ) stated that they did not attend any awareness 
campaigns conducted by the Board. Of these, 134 beneficiaries (63.81 per cent) 
stated that they were not aware of the welfare schemes provided by the Board. 
During the course of the survey of building and other construction workers who 
were not registered with the Board as beneficiaries, Audit noticed that none of 
the 45 unregistered construction workers was aware of the various welfare 
schemes offered by the Board.   
Joint site verification of 26 establishments conducted (September 2023) by 
Audit in the selected districts revealed that, out of a total of 1 ,306 workers 
 
24   Section 12 of the BOCW (RECS) Act, 1996 
25   As per the decision of the Board taken during the meeting held on 19 December 2017. This decision is 
yet to be ratified by GoK 
26   70 beneficiaries each from the three selected districts 

 
 
30 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
engaged in work, only 27 workers (2.07 per cent ) were registered with the 
Board.  
Though the registration was to be done by a worker voluntarily, lack of 
awareness of the welfare schemes of the Board could be the reason for the 
shortfall in registration. The Board replied (August 2023) that it had taken steps 
for conducting campaigns, distribution of pamphlets, etc., among the workers. 
However, interaction with the workers during joint verification of the work sites 
along with officials of the Board/ the Labour Department revealed that, none of 
the 45 unregistered workers was aware of th e Board and its welfare schemes, 
which was indicative of the fact that the campaigns conducted till date were not 
effective enough to enhance the level of awareness among the workers. 
Government assured in reply (August 2024) that the Board would take 
necessary steps to conduct campaigning through various modes so as to ensure 
that the members are aware of the benefits eligible to them. 
4.5.2. Deprivation of benefits under BOCW (RECS) Act to migrant 
workers   
According to the information furnished by the Board, the number of registered 
workers in the State was 20.67 lakh as on 31 March 2023. Audit observed that 
this figure did not include the migrant workers engaged in construction activities 
in the State. These workers could register under another scheme constituting the 
Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund, as mentioned in paragraph 5.4 of this report. 
Government contributed ₹10 crore as corpus fund under the above scheme, for 
meeting expenses of migrant workers in t he State. Despite the BOCW (RECS) 
Act not contemplating any form of discrimination among the workers, 
Government, through constitution of a separate fund, had sidelined the migrant 
labourers from being registered under the Act, thereby denying them the whole 
gamut of welfare benefits covered under the Act.   
On this being pointed out, the Government replied that provisions regarding 
registration of migrant workers were not included  under the ambit of the Act. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Act does not distinguish between an inland 
and migrant worker and all those who satisfy the conditions mentioned under 
Section 12 are eligible to be members under the Act. As such, it was irregular 
on the part of Government to offer differential treatment to the migrant workers 
and not permit them to register under the BOCW(RECS) Act.   
4.5.3. Shortcomings in the process of registration as a member under the 
BOCW(RECS) Act 
Rule 283 of the Kerala Rules provides for conditions of eligibility to be a 
member of the Board. Accordingly, certificate in proof of age and the fact that 
the applicant was a bonafide construction worker, obtained from the employer 
or contractor was to be  submitted to the Board in Form No. XXVI. In the 
absence of such a certificate, the certificate issued by the registered Construction 

 
31 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
Workers’ Trade Union/ Assistant Labour Officer of the area/ Executive Officer 
of the Panchayat could be considered. 
In the Expert Committee meeting of the Board held in July 2023, it was opined 
that a large number of bogus members were seen claiming membership on the 
basis of certificates obtained from Trade Unions declaring them as construction 
workers. During a test -check of applications for registration, Audit confirmed 
that in almost 100 per cent of instances, membership was given on the basis of 
the certificate from registered Construction Workers’ Unions as shown in Table 
4.12 below. 
Table 4.12: Details of number of registrations made with the certificates 
provided by the Trade Unions 
District No. of 
members 
registered 
during 2018-
2023 
No. of 
records 
test - 
checked 
by Audit 
Number of 
registrations 
made based on 
the certificates 
provided by the 
Trade Unions 
Percentage of 
registrations made 
based on the 
certificates issued 
by the Trade 
Unions 
Kozhikode 8,885 489 489 100.00 
Ernakulam 4,281 225 223 99.11 
Malappuram 7,238 354 354 100.00 
Total 20,404 1,068 1,066 99.81 
(Source: Data obtained from District Executive Offices) 
Audit observed that, during 2023, 532 applications for membership (Form 
XXVI) enclosing certificates from the registered Construction Workers’ Unions 
were rejected, following an enquiry conducted by the District Executive 
Officers (DEOs) on the genuineness of these certificates. The enquiry revealed 
that these applicants were not Building and other Construction Workers. This 
confirms that the Trade Unions were issuing fake certificates without 
ascertaining the job status of the applicant. 
Government stated (August 2024) that on receipt of the application for 
registration, if the DEO, after scrutiny of the same, feels satisfied that the 
documents furnished are in proper order, grants registration to the workers. It 
was also stated that defective applications would be summarily rejected and that 
district-wise squads verify the genuineness of the members. 
However, instances as cited in the paragraph ra ise concerns regarding the 
efficacy of the current registration process and underscore the need for a more 
rigorous verification mechanism to ensure that only genuine Building and other 
Construction Workers obtain membership in the Board.  
Recommendation 7: The Government should ensure that the Board 
incorporates multiple verification levels to ensure genuineness of membership 
forms issued by Trade Unions so as to safeguard the transparency of 
registration process.  

 
 
32 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Recommendation 8: The Government should ensure that the Board conducts 
adequate campaigns and advertisements to increase awareness amongst 
workers about procedures of registration, and its benefits in the form of 
various welfare schemes. 
4.6. Conclusion 
In the absence of  a centralized data system at its State office, the Board relie d 
on information collected from District Offices to determine fund requirements 
for implementing district -level welfare schemes. Applications for various 
welfare benefits including pensions, marriage assistance, support for illness and 
fatal diseases, maternity benefits, death benefits, scholarships and cash awards  
were pending due to paucity of funds. Limited awareness among construction 
workers led to short registration under the scheme. Migrant workers in the State 
were not registered under the  BOCW (RECS)  Act, depriving them of its 
benefits.

 
 
 
 
  
FUNCTIONING OF 
KERALA BUILDING AND 
OTHER CONSTRUCTION 
BOARD 

 
 

 
33 
CHAPTER V 
FUNCTIONING OF KERALA BUILDING AND OTHER 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’ WELFARE BOARD 
District Labour Offices lacked a system to monitor the receipt of Form IV 
from employers or to enforce fines as required by regulations. The Board’s 
cash balance steadily declined from ₹910.06 crore in March 2019 to ₹135.16 
crore in March 2023. The disbursal of welfare benefits also showed a 
decreasing trend since 2020-21. This consistent drop in cash reserves over the 
five-year audit period indicated that annual expenditures had been funded 
from the Board’s cash reserves, l eading to significant depletion a nd 
necessitating additional loans. 
There were delays ranging from 11 to 24 months in submitting the Board’s 
accounts to the Accountant General for audit. Out of the ₹10 crore corpus 
fund allocated for the Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund, only ₹1.69 crore was 
spent on workers' welfare between 2018-19 and 2022-23. In the districts test-
checked, the Labour Office rs did not conduct the prescribed number of 
monthly inspections as mandated by the Labour Commissioner. Safety norms 
were not seen adhered to in test -checked construction sites. The grievance 
redressal mechanism did not function effectively as envisaged. 
The Kerala Building and Construction Workers’ Welfare Board was formed in 
1990, to provide assistance to the construction workers in the State of Kerala. 
With the enactment of the Cess Rules , the Kerala Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Board (Board) was constituted as per  
Section 18 of the BOCW (RECS) Act. Section 24 (1) of BOCW (RECS) Act 
and Rule 281 of the Kerala Rules required the Board to constitute the Building 
and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund. All grants, loans or advance s 
made by Government, contribution paid by the beneficiaries and all sums 
received by the Board from other sources shall be credited to this fund. Further, 
Rule 5 of the Cess Rules states that the proceeds of cess collected from 
Government offices, Public Sector Undertakings, local authority or cess 
collector shall be transferred to the Board. Accordingly, the Board constituted 
(August 1998) the Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare 
Fund (Fund). The Fund was parked in savings bank and fixed deposit accounts 
maintained in nationalised banks, treasuries and District Co-operative banks. 
As per Section 24 (2) of the BOCW (RECS) Act, the fund shall be utilised for 
(a) meeting expenses of the Board in discharge of its functions including 
payment of pension to beneficiaries, maternity benefit to female beneficiaries, 
sanction of loans and advances to beneficiaries, etc. (b) payment of salaries, 
allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other 
employees of the Board and (c) incurring expenses on objects and for purposes 
authorised by this Act. The pension and other welfare benefits sanctioned by the 
Board are transferred to the respective bank accounts of the beneficiaries 
through Direct Benefit Transfer. 

 
 34 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
5.1. Receipts and Payments of the Board 
Details of receipt s and payment  relating to the Fund managed by the Board 
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 are given in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Details of Receipts and Payments of the Board for the 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23 
  (₹ in crore) 
Year 
Receipts Payments 
Closing balance 
Opening Balance 
Cess Collection 
Interest 
Total Receipts* 
Capital expenditure 
Welfare Benefits 
Administrative 
Expenses 
Miscellaneous 
Total Payments** 
2018-19 1069.62 242.23 77.83 1473.34 0.19 435.24 14.55 112.85 563.29 910.05 
2019-20 910.05 232.82 67.58 1263.25 0.13 511.60 15.19 5.72 533.35 729.90 
2020-21 729.90 247.97 57.59 1087.85 0.12 724.21 13.59 15.22 753.33 334.52 
2021-22 334.52 285.11 8.34 837.52 0.39 594.19 18.54 28.80 643.52 194.00 
2022-23 194.00 378.18 6.00 639.64 0.29 460.99 15.65 27.55 504.48 135.16 
  (Source: Annual Accounts of the Board) 
*includes workers’ contribution and other receipts 
** includes refund of workers’ contribution 
Though the income of the Board remained more or less steady, the expenditure 
showed an increasing trend till 2020-21. This upward trend in expenditure could 
be attributed to increased rate of monthly pension 27 from ₹1,100 in April 2018 
to ₹1,600 in April 2021.  The number of pensioners also increased from  2.62 
lakh in 2018 -19 to 3.24 lakh in 2022 -23. It was observed that the increase in 
pension expenditure in 2020-21 was due to the payment of the backlog for the 
last quarter of 2019-2028 in April 2020. Audit also noticed that pension due for 
payment for four months in 2021-22 was paid in 2022-23 only, due to shortage 
of funds . Pension payments were made only for four months in the year  
2022-23 due to which there was a decline in the total expenditure, compared to 
previous years.  
Audit observed that the cess collected recorded a gradual increase over the five 
year period from 2018-23. However, the interest received by the Board declined 
sharply from ₹ 77.83 crore in 20 18-19 to ₹six crore in 2022 -23, which is 
commensurate with the reduction in the cash balance of the Board . The 
 
27   From April 2017: ₹1,100, from April 2019: ₹1,200, from April 2020: ₹1,300, from September 2020: 
₹1,400, from January 2021: ₹1,500 and from April 2021: ₹1,600. 
28   Three months pension viz January 2020, February 2020 and March 2020. 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
35 
increasing trend in expenditure, in the absence of proportionate uptick in cess 
collection has forced the Board to take recourse to loan worth ₹150 crore from 
Kerala Motor Transport Welfare Fund Board during 2021 -22. The 
Administrative expenses on staff salary and postage expenses in excess of one 
per cent limit (as pointed out in paragraph 3.3), construction of multi-storeyed 
office complex by utilising cess amount (as pointed out in paragraph 5.6) are all 
in violation to the provisions of the Act, which c oupled with short-assessment, 
short-collection, non-collection of cess etc., had led to dearth in the cash revenue 
thereby depriving full extension of benefits to the beneficiaries. 
Further, as is evident from Table 5.1 , the Government had a closing cash 
balance of ₹13 5.16 crore at the end of 2022 -23 and the pending payments 
against the major welfare schemes was ₹180.42 crore (as already discussed in 
paragraph 4.1 and Table 4.1) at the end of March 2023. In view of the unspent 
balance lying with the Board, the pendency in payments could have been 
reduced to a large extent. Moreover, Audit also noticed that pending pension 
payment upto April 2023 was made only in April 2024, on availing further loan 
amounting to ₹100 crore from Kerala Headload Workers’ Welfare Board . It is 
thus, evident that the Board is heading towards a precarious situation of acute 
shortage of funds to meet its financial obligations.  
Given the constraints in available financial resources to cater to the rising 
demand in welfare benefits , unless total collection of cess improves, the State 
will not be in a position to augment resources to fund various welfare assistance 
schemes for the construction workers. The Government did not furnish any 
reply till September 2024. 
 
Recommendation 9: The Government should ensure that as the funds for 
annual expenditure of the Board were being sourced out of its cash reserves, 
the Board should step up the rate of cess collection on war foot basis so that 
recourse to borrowings can be avoided. 
5.2. Budget of the Board 
The Board prepare s budget every year. During the audit period, the revenue 
receipts under the head ‘Employers’ share (Cess)” varied from 69.15 per cent 
(2018-19) to 56.94 per cent (2022-23) of the budgeted figures. The Board’s 
actual revenue during the audit period w as always below 70  per cent  of the 
budget projections in case of cess collection , which was the largest source of 
income to the Board. The actual receipts under the head ‘Workers’ contribution 
of the Board’ varied from 76.77 per cent (2018-19) to 46.15 per cent (2021-22) 
of the budgeted figures as shown in Table 5.2. 
 
 
 

 
 36 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Table 5.2: Budget and Actual figures of the Revenue Receipts   
         (₹ in crore) 
Year Employers’ share (Cess) Workers’ Contribution 
Budget Actual per cent Budget Actual per cent 
2018-19 360 248.95 69.15 80 61.42 76.77 
2019-20 410 235.26 57.38 90 55.50 61.67 
2020-21 415 248.25  59.82 91 58.82 64.63 
2021-22 415 285.60 68.82 90 41.53 46.15 
2022-23 650 370.10 56.94 90 46.65 51.83 
(Source: Budget documents of the Board) 
Scrutiny of records further revealed that in respect of workers’ contribution, the 
budget provision was fixed arbitrarily between ₹80 crore and ₹9 1 crore during 
the last five years. As per information furnished by the Board, the number of 
workers registered during the five-year period ranged between 18.11 lakh and 
20.68 lakh29. Considering the monthly subscription of ₹50 (₹600 annually), the 
workers’ contribution required to be budgeted as  ₹124.05 crore, whereas the 
provision was made for just ₹90  crore, which is indicative of the fact that the 
budget provisions were not formulated on a realistic basis. The Government did 
not furnish any reply till date. 
5.3. Delay in submission of statutory reports 
According to Rule 277 (1) of the Kerala Rules, the Board shall be responsible 
for submission of annual report on its activities to Government and for  annual 
audit of the accounts of the Board in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 
Rule 311 stipulates that a report on the functioning of the Board during every 
financial year shall be approved by the Board before the 15 th day of June next 
year and submitted to Government before the 31st day of July in that year.  
However, Audit observed that annual reports of the Board pertaining to  the 
period 2018-19 to 2022 -23 were yet to be submitted to Government. The last 
annual report for 2017-18 was submitted only in May 2022, i.e., after a lapse of 
four years. 
Further, Section 27 of BOCW (RECS) Act stipulates that the Board shall 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records to be audited by the CAG 
of India annually and the Board shall furnish to the State Government, its 
audited copy of accounts together with the auditor’s report. The St ate 
Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before 
the State Legislature. 
The details of audit of accounts of the Board presented in Appendix 5.1 
indicated delay ranging from 11 to 24 months in the submission of accounts to 
the Accountant General for audit. Consequently , the duly approved Separate 
Audit Reports on these accounts were sent to the State Legislature only after 
two to three years from the close of the financial year. 
 
29  In 2022-23 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
37 
Government did not furnish reply in this regard. 
5.4. Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund 
Government of Kerala issued (March 2010) guidelines for constitution of 
Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund exclusively for the welfare of migrant workers.  
The fund was to be managed as a separate fund by the Board and utilised for 
meeting the expenses related to the death of a beneficiary, transportation of 
bodily remains to native place, accident relief, medical assistance, terminal 
benefit and education grant of a migrant worker and his dependants.  
As per the scheme guidelines, quantum of funds towards the Migrant Workers’ 
Welfare Fund accrues from three sources (a) contribution from the worker at 
the rate of  ₹30 per year (b) three times the contribution per worker from the 
Government and (c) three times the contribution per worker from the Board. 
GoK allocated ₹10 crore to the fund during 2010 as corpus fund.   
The Board did not have a comprehensive database on the details of construction 
workers migrating into the State. The Board stated that 1.65 lakh  migrant 
workers were registered under the corpus fund of the scheme. During the period 
2018-19 to 2022 -23, the Board had incurred ₹1.69 crore from the Migrant 
Workers’ Welfare Fund towards welfare related expenditure as given in Table 
5.3.  
Table 5.3: Expenses incurred from Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund for 
welfare activities 
Financial Year Amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
2018-19 15.63 
2019-20 31.15 
2020-21 41.08 
2021-22 33.03 
2022-23 48.35 
Total 169.24 
 (Source: Data furnished by the Board) 
The Government did not make any further allocation to the fund since 2010 and 
expenditure on the welfare activities, administrative expenses , etc. were met 
from the accumulated interest of the initial corpus fund of ₹10 crore.  
The guidelines also stipulate that the Annual Accounts of the above fund should 
be finalised by 30 September of the subsequent year. However, Audit scrutiny 
revealed that the accounts were prepared only upto the financial year 2018 -19. 
Non-preparation of accounts of Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund for the last five 
years is indicative of the low priority assigned by Government towards efficient 
implementation of welfare activities for migrant workers.   
Further, the accounts were also not seen examined by an officer of the Labour 
Department not below the rank of Joint Secretary, which was contrary to that 

 
 38 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
stipulated in paragraph 21 of the guidelines.  The Government did not furnish 
any reply till September 2024. 
5.5. Cheques/ DDs pending for revalidation  
According to Rule 5 of the Cess rules, the proceeds of the cess collected shall 
be transferred by Government office s, Public Sector Undertakings, local 
authority, or cess collector, to the Board within 30 days of its collection. The 
Assistant Labour Officer (Grade I)/Deputy Labour Officer assess es the cess 
amount and the employer submits cheques/DDs collected for the cess amount, 
to the DLOs. The DLOs forward these cheques/DDs to the Board by post, which 
in turn submits them to banks for realisation.  
Audit noticed that cheques/DDs worth ₹6.72 crore were not received in the 
Board within one month as mandated, but only after the end of their validity 
period. Hence, these cheques/DDs were returned to the DLOs who in turn 
forwarded them to the assesse e for revalidation. Of these, cheques/DDs 
amounting to ₹1.31 crore (March 2023) were not seen revalidated and credited 
to the Board’s account, details of which are as shown in Table 5.4 below.   
Table 5.4: Delay in revalidation of time-barred Demand Drafts and 
cheques and amount pending realisation 
Year Cheques/ DDs sent for 
revalidation 
Cheques/ DDs 
revalidated 
Cheques/ DDs pending 
revalidation 
No. of 
DDs/ 
cheques 
Amount  
(₹ in 
crore) 
No. of DDs/ 
cheques 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
No. of 
DDs/ 
cheques 
Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
2018-19 312 2.16 233 2.14 79 0.11 
2019-20 175 0.46 133 0.39 42 0.07 
2020-21 380 1.23 263 0.71 117 0.52 
2021-22 136 0.90 105 0.80 31 0.11 
2022-23 289 1.97 182 1.47 107 0.50 
Total 1,292 6.72 916 5.51 376 1.31 
(Source: Data furnished by the Board) 
Scrutiny of the register of cheques/DDs for revalidation maintained by the 
Board revealed that 1292 cheques/DDs received by the Board amounting to 
₹6.72 crore were sent for revalidation during the audit period, due to various 
reasons as shown in Table 5.5.    
Table 5.5: Details of cheques/DDs sent for revalidation due to various 
reasons 
Year Number of cheques/DDs sent for revalidation due to various reasons  
Total 
Outdated 
cheques/ 
DDs 
Variation 
in 
payee’s 
name 
Signature 
not 
matching 
Treasury 
not 
accepting 
Mutilated 
cheques/ 
DDs 
Technical 
errors 
Reasons 
not   
specified 
2018-19 136 0 12 16 0 0 148 312 
2019-20 84 29 19 3 2 0 38 175 
2020-21 249 1 7 2 0 42 79 380 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
39 
Year Number of cheques/DDs sent for revalidation due to various reasons  
Total 
Outdated 
cheques/ 
DDs 
Variation 
in 
payee’s 
name 
Signature 
not 
matching 
Treasury 
not 
accepting 
Mutilated 
cheques/ 
DDs 
Technical 
errors 
Reasons 
not   
specified 
2021-22 51 10 17 0 2 0 56 136 
2022-23 113 49 35 0 5 0 87 289 
Total 633 89 90 21 9 42 408 1292 
(Source: Data furnished by the Board) 
Audit also observed that the Board in its meeting held on 30 September 2014 
had decided to implement online payment system of cess directly to the Bank 
account of the Board. However, the system had not commenced even after nine 
years. Switching over to online payment would have eliminated delay on the 
part of the DLOs in transmitting cheques/DDs to the Board, thereby facilitating 
timely deposit of cess amount in the Board’s account. 
Government stated (December 2022)  that 347 cheques/DDs amounting to 
₹71.51 lakh were still pending revalidation and that earnest efforts were being 
taken to sort out the issue at the earliest. 
5.6. Non-utilisation of vacant space in the BOCWWB Ernakulam 
District office building  
Section 22 of the BOCW(RECS) Act specifically mentions about the utilisation 
of cess fund for welfare measures. Further, Rule 309 read with Rule 310(2) of 
the Kerala Rules stipulates that the fund shall not be expended for any other 
purpose without the previous approval of Government and that amounts 
incurred by the Government for the administration of the fund shall be treated 
as a loan which shall be repaid from the administrative account of the fund.  
Figure 5.2: Floor 3 of BOCWWB Ernakulam District 
Office building, Edappally not rented out and lying 
vacant. Photo taken by Audit Party on 11 October 2023 
Figure 5.1: Floor 2 of BOCWWB Ernakulam District 
Office building, Edappally not rented out and lying 
vacant. Photo taken by Audit Party on 11 October 2023 


 
 40 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Government accorded administrative sanction (December 2010) to the Board 
for construction of a multi-storied office complex, in 18.48 cents of land under 
its ownership at Edappally in Ernakulam district.  Part of the building was 
proposed to be used for the functioning of the office of the Board and the 
remaining area to be let out to other Welfare Boards on rent, to earn revenue. 
The four storied building with a total area of 1,243.84 sq.m was completed at 
an estimate cost of ₹3.41 crore and inaugurated on 31 May 2014.  
Audit observed that the amount spent on construction of the building was not 
treated as a loan and recouped from the administrative account in violation of 
Rules. Furthermore, the said building was not fully utilised even after passage 
of 10 years (July 2024). Only the ground floor and first floor of the bu ilding 
were being utilised30 and the second and third floors of the building were lying 
vacant and unused, resulting in idle investment amounting to ₹61.92 lakh being 
the estimated cost of construction of the two floors . Audit also observed that 
even though the intention of the Board was to rent out the floors of the building 
to earn revenue, the Board had not obtained separate building numbers for 
individual floors till June 2022.  
Audit further noticed that in April 2022, as per orders of the Secretary of the 
Board, District Executive Office, Ernakulam forwarded letters to 11 insurance 
companies/financial institutions and four Welfare Boards seeking their interest 
to occupy the vacant office space. Though response was received only from one 
institution31, the Board has not been able to rent out the vacant floors so as to 
earn rental income. 
Government had informed (December 2022) Audit that the Board in its meeting 
held in November 2022 , decided to rent out the additional floors to any 
institution belonging to the Government or Board/private institutions. However, 
this has not happened till date, as it was stated during the Exit Conference  
(July 2024) that necessary steps were being taken to hand over the vacant space 
to other Welfare Boards within a few months.  
5.7. Blocking up of funds on land purchased for Kerala 
Construction Academy 
 
Government of Kerala (GoK) accorded sanction (August 2009) for constructing 
an Academy under Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers ’ Welfare 
Board.  The Academy was proposed to facilitate modern training in construction 
and other related fields to the construction workers, provide technical training 
as well as various work experience courses, conduct Degree/Master 
Degree/Diploma Courses in Building Technology, Facility Manage ment and 
Construction Management etc. Out of the proposed amount of ₹100 crore for 
construction, 50 per cent was to be borne by Government of India as one time 
grant and 25 per cent each was to be met by the Board and GoK.    
 
30   Ground floor is being utilised as Reception area and the first floor as the district office of the Board at 
Ernakulam. 
31    Kerala Tailoring Workers Welfare Fund Board. 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
41 
The Board purchased (February 2011) 10 acres of Land32 in Meenad Village in 
Kollam District for ₹14.95 crore for establishing Kerala Construction Academy 
(Academy). The Academy was registered under the Travancore Kochi Literary 
Scientific and Charitable Societies’ Act, 1955 and the foundation stone laid in 
March 2011. However, no  progress was made in the construction of the 
Academy since then. 
In January 2017, Government suggested that as the Kerala Academy for Skills 
Excellence has already come into existence, the Board may consider winding 
up the project to establish the Academy. However, in the Board meeting held in 
March 2017, it was decided  to proceed with the construction of the proposed 
Academy in the land purchased. M/s Uralungal Labour Contract Co -operative 
Society was entrusted (December 2018) with the preparation of DPR of the 
project, which was submitted (March 2021) to Government for  approval. 
Government approved (March 2022) the DPR, subject to inclusion of a new 
course, Certificate Programme in Carpentry in the DPR. However, in November 
2022, Government directed to stop all activities related to the Academy 
temporarily, until the financial position of the Board improved. 
Audit observed that the Board has not undertaken any activity in the land 
purchased till date (May 2024). In reply, Secretary (the Board) stated that the 
financial position of the Board was very strong at the time of mooting of the 
project which enabled it to purchase 10 acres of land. As the revenue of the 
Board has now dipped to a level at which it was difficult to disburse 
pension/other welfare benefits to workers, the Board was not in a position to 
proceed with the project.   
The reply is not acceptable as the Board itself had reiterated its stand in 2017 to 
proceed with the project . Lack of initiative and timely action by the 
Government/Board ha d led to non -realisation of objectives of the project, 
besides leading to blocking up of amount worth ₹14.95 crore for the last 13 
years. Further, an alternative arrangement for imparting training on skill 
development to construction workers has not yet been devised by the 
Government/Board till date. 
5.8. Loss of ₹20.40 crore towards deduction of income tax due to 
non-availing of exemption 
According to Section 10 (46) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, in computing the 
total income of a previous year of any person, any income falling within the 
clause “any specified income arising to a Body or Authority or Board or Trust 
or Commission, or a class thereof which (a) has been established or constituted 
by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or constituted by the Central 
Government or a State Government, with the object of regulating or 
administering any activity for the benefit of the general  public; (b)  is not 
engaged in any commercial activity; and (c)  is notified by the Central 
 
32  27.5 cents of land from this plot were subsequently acquired for the expansion of NH 66. 

 
 42 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Government in the Official Gazette for the purposes of this clause” shall not be 
included. 
As per the above clause, the income of the Board was to be exempted from 
income tax. However , Audit observed that the banks were deducting income 
tax on interest earned, since the Board had not submitted the application for 
exemption in time. The details of deduction of income tax during the audit 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23 are as shown in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6:  Details of deduction of income tax  
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 
Year TDS on Interest (₹) 
2018-19 7,89,94,917 
2019-20 5,67,88,683 
2020-21 5,46,15,109 
2021-22 77,01,703 
2022-23 59,15,529 
Total 20,40,15,941 
 (Source: Annual Accounts of the Board) 
Failure on the part of the Board in availing exemption under relevant provisions 
of the Income Tax Act  in time resulted in loss of ₹20.40 crore and subsequent 
increase in financial deficit of the Board. 
Government replied (December 2022) that appeals against all demands were 
pending disposal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) for the 
assessment year, from 2013 -18.  It was also stated that a pplication for 
exemption under Section 10(46) had been moved in December 2015 and the 
same was pending approval and that the Board was unable to take any further 
step in this regard in the absence of written response from Income Tax (IT)  
Department. 
Audit noticed that even after lapse of nine years of moving an application for 
exemption, no serious follow up action was taken by the Board to get approval 
from the IT Department and to obtain refund of the TDS deducted from the 
interest income of the Board, resulting in blocking up of ₹20 .40 crore of the 
Board’s funds.  
5.9. Functioning of State Advisory Committee and Expert 
Committee  
According to Sections 4 and 5 of the BOCW(RECS) Act, the Government shall 
constitute the State Advisory Committee and Expert Committee to advise the 
State Government on such matters arising out of the administration of the Act 
as may be referred to it.  The State Advisory Committee was to be comprised of 
a chairperson, two members of the State Legislature, a member to be nominated 
by Central Government, the Chief Inspector and members33 nominated by State 
Government representing employers, building workers, accident insurance 
 
33  not less than seven and not exceeding 11. 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
43 
institutions, etc. Audit observed that the State Advisory Committee was formed 
in the State only in November 2015. The members of the Committee included 
the Minister of Labour and Skills as Chairman, Members representing State 
Legislature, Central Governme nt nominee, Labour Commissioner and 
representatives of employers and Building and other construction workers. 
However, Audit observed that since the expiry of the three -year tenure of the 
Committee on 09 November 2018, the Committee has not been re -constituted 
(August 2023).   
The BOCW(RECS) Act further envisaged constitution of an Expert Committee 
comprising persons specially qualified in building or other construction works, 
for advising the Government in making rules under the Act.  The Expert 
Committee was constituted in the State on 14 September 2011, with the 
Secretary, Labour and Rehabilitation Department as Chairman, Additional 
Secretary, Law Department, the Chief Engineer Building and Works, Labour 
Commissioner and Secretary, Kerala Building and other Construction Workers’ 
Welfare Board as members.  
Scrutiny of records by Audit revealed that the first meeting of the Expert 
Committee was held on 15 October 2011. The Committee next met, after a 
prolonged interval of 12 years on 05 July 2023, which was attended by the 
Labour Commissioner, Additional Law Secretary, Secretary (Board) and Joint 
Secretary, Labour Department. There was no participation from persons 
qualified in construction works as envisaged in the Act. 
Failure to re -constitute statutory committees and periodically convene these 
committees as per the composition envisaged in Act/Rules would reflect 
adversely upon their stature and functioning as advisory bodies to Government. 
The Government did not furnish any reply till September 2024. 
5.10. Lapses in monitoring 
Provisions of the Rule 29 (1) of the Kerala Rules, require an employer to submit 
to the Inspectors34 before 30 days of commencement of construction work , a 
notice in Form IV, intimating the proposed date of commencement of the work. 
Further, Section 48 of the BOCW(RECS) Act stipulates imprisonment or fine 
amounting ₹2,000 or both, in case of non -filing of Form IV . Section 50 (3) of 
the Act enjoins issue of notice to the employers before imposing penalty. 
Audit noticed that there was no system in place to monitor the receipt of Form 
IV from employers or imposing of fine as stipulated in the rule provisions. As a 
result, neither the Labour Department nor the Board was aware of the number 
of constructions proposed to be commenced as well as the quantum of cess 
leviable on the constructions.  The Government did not furnish any reply till 
September 2024. 
 
34  Regional Joint Labour Commissioners in Ernakulam and Kozhikode and D istrict Labour Officer 
(Enforcement) in Malappuram 

 
 44 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
5.11. Shortcomings in inspection of establishments 
According to Sections 42(2) and (3) of the BOCW(RECS) Act , the State 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Officer to be the Chief 
Inspector of Inspection of Building and other Construction and other officers as 
Inspectors, who shall be responsible for effectively carrying out the provisions 
of this Act in the State and local limits respectively. Sec tion 43 (a) authorises 
an inspector to enter any premises or place where building and other 
construction work was carried on, for the purpose of e xamining any register, 
record or notices required to be maintained under this Act and produced for 
inspection.  
A Circular issued (May 2015) by the Labour Commissioner directed that in six 
districts35 the District Labour Officers must conduct at least 10 inspections per 
month and in other districts the District Labour Officers must conduct at least  
five inspections per month and the same was to be reported to Labour 
Commissioner periodically. 
Table 5.7 gives the number of registered establishments, number of inspections 
to be conducted and actually conducted and number of cases in which penalty  
was imposed.  
Table 5.7:   Year-wise details of number of registered establishments, 
number of inspections to be conducted and actually 
conducted and penalty imposed in the selected districts 
 (Source: Data obtained from Labour and Skills Department) 
It was seen that the DLOs in test -checked districts did not comply with the 
circular issued by Labour Commissioner and failed to conduct the prescribed 
number of monthly inspections. 
Out of the 26 files relating to establishments test -checked by audit in 
Malappuram district, reply to notices issued after inspection was received only 
 
35   Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Ernakulam, Thrissur, Kozhikode and Kannur 
Year 
Ernakulam Kozhikode Malappuram 
No. of registered 
establishments 
No.o f inspections to be 
conducted 
Actual number of 
inspections conducted 
No. of cases in which 
penalty was imposed 
No. of registered 
establishments 
No. of inspections to be 
conducted 
Actual number of 
inspections conducted 
No. of cases in which 
penalty was imposed 
No. of registered 
establishments 
No. of inspections to be 
conducted 
Actual number of 
inspections conducted 
No. of cases in which 
penalty was imposed 
2018 80 120 50 Nil 48 120 15 Nil 17 60 19 Nil 
2019 59 120 39 Nil 244 120 40 Nil 202 60 100 Nil 
2020 30 120 6 Nil 89 120 Nil Nil 20 60 Nil Nil 
2021 48 120 4 Nil 20 120 8 Nil 18 60 Nil Nil 
2022 59 120 1 Nil 21 120 1 Nil 17 60 1 Nil 
Total 276 600 100 Nil 422 600 64 Nil 274  300 120 Nil 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
45 
from one establishment.  In respect of two notices issued after inspection, the 
notices were returned by the Postal Department as the address given by the 
Labour Department was incomplete. Audit observed that, in none of the 
instances a follow up was conducted by DLO to ensure that violations noticed 
during inspections were rectified, ensuring the safety of workers employed. 
In Ernakulam District, out of 27 files test -checked, 25 establishments had 
complied with the direction given in the notices. In Kozhikode District, out of 
the 29 files test -checked, it was seen that no notices were issued to two 
establishments despite noticing violations. Further, 21 establishment s had not 
complied with the instructions of DLO regarding safety norms. 
Audit observed that no penalty was imposed in cases where safety norms were 
found to have been violated. 
Government stated during the Exit Conference (July 2024) that the number of 
inspections ha d been increased and strengthened in the last three months to 
improve the monitoring system of the Labour Department. 
Recommendation 10: The Government should ensure that required number 
of inspections of establishments are conducted as pres cribed in the Act and 
Rules and that deficiencies in grievance redressal system are rectified. 
5.12. Failure to ensure safety at workplaces 
The BOCW (RECS) Act has been enacted to regulate the employment and 
conditions of service of building and other construction workers and to provide 
for their safety, health and welfare measures and for other matters connected 
therewith or incidental theret o. Section 40 of the Act re -iterated the power of 
appropriate Government to make Rules for the safety and health of building 
workers and list ed the provisions which ensure d safety of employees under a 
variety of working conditions36.  
Audit conducted joint verification of 12 registered and 12 unregistered 
establishments in three selected districts. In addition, Audit also visited two 
incident/accident sites in a selected district, where work was in progress. The 
extent of compliance of these establishments, to the safety norms envisaged by 
the Act and Rules is presented in Appendix 5.2. 
It was seen that barricades/ sign boards were not provided in 20 cases and in 21 
cases warning signboards for electrical hazards were not provided. In 18 cases 
safety nets were not provided and in 14 cases no protection from electric lines 
was provided. Non-providing of safety helmets in 11 cases and waterproof boots 
 
36   Provision of suitable and sufficient scaffolding at various stages when work cannot be safely done from 
the ground or from any part of a building or from a ladder or such other means of support; demolition 
of the whole or any substantial part of a building or other structure under the supervision of a competent 
person and the avoidance of danger from collapse of any building or other structure while removing 
any part of the framed building or other structure by shoring or otherwise, the handling or use of 
explosive under the control of competent persons to avoid exposure to the risk of injury from explosion 
or from flying material, the erection, installation, use and maintenance of transporting equipment such 
as locomotives, trucks, wagons, other vehicles and trailers, etc.     

 
 46 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
in 13 cases also came to notice. In addition to these, non -providing of hand 
gloves and waterproof coats in 11 cases and equipment against hazards  of 
falling in 13 cases were also seen.   
Out of the 26 selected establishments, construction works were executed for 
Government institutions in eight establishments. Audit noticed that protection 
from electric lines, safety nets, safety helmets and waterproof boots were not 
provided in five of th ese establishments. Four establishments did not provide 
hand gloves, waterproof coats and equipment against hazards of falling.  
The District Labour Officers were responsible for ensuring the safety norms at 
worksites under their jurisdiction, through inspections. Non-adherence to safety 
norms in registered establishments as well as in those unregistered 
establishments where work was in progress needed to be addressed on priority. 
Audit also conducted joint verification at the following work sites where 
accidents of death/injury of workers while on site were reported: 
5.12.1. Commercial building for M/s Kalyan Silks, Thondayad Junction, 
Kozhikode 
On 26 September 2021, two migrant workers were crushed to death when 
concrete slabs crashed on them. Three migrant labourers were also severely 
injured in the mishap. Though two years had lapsed since the work had 
commenced, an inspection was conducted by the  Labour Department only on 
the next day after the incident occurred.  This was violative of the Government 
notification (May 2015) wherein 10 inspections were required to be conducted 
each month, as detailed  in Table 5. 7. Further, the inspection revealed 14 
violations regarding adherence to safety measures as stipulated in the Act. 
Audit conducted joint physical verification at the above site along with Labour 
Departmental officers two years later, on 20 September 2023 and observed that 
the four safety violations pointed out by the Labour Department in September 
2021 consequent upon the accident, were not rectified by the establishment even 
after a lapse of two years.  

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
47 
Figure 5.3 M/s Kalyan Silks building, Thondayad Junction, Kozhikode. Failure to cover or 
guard suitably and properly every open side, into or through which a building worker,  
 vehicle or lifting appliance may fall. Photo taken by Audit party on 20 September 2023.  
 
Figure 5.4 M/s Kalyan Silks building, Thondayad Junction, Kozhikode. Failure to provide 
quality safety net to prevent accidents. Photo taken by Audit party on 20 September 2023. 
This clearly points to the negligent approach of Government in the enforcement 
of safety norms by resorting to prompt action as laid down in Acts/Rules to 
prevent such occurrences in future. 
The District Labour Officer, Kozhikode  stated in reply (November 2023) that 
as M/s. Kalyan Silks, Kozhikode was a commercial building employing more 


 
 48 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
than 100 workers, permission37 has been sought from Labour Commissioner for 
conducting inspections. The reply is not justifiable, as the DLO chose to seek 
permission only after the violations were pointed out by Audit. Timely 
inspections by authorities  in accordance with the Rules  would have enhanced 
the extent of adherence to safety norms . The Government did not furnish any 
reply till September 2024. 
5.12.2. Hillsinai building, Markaz Knowledge City, Kaithappoyil, 
Kozhikode 
As per Section 47 of the BOCW(RECS) Act, contravention of provisions of any 
Rules made under Section 40, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine up to ₹2,000 or both, and in the 
case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine up to ₹100 every day.  
 
Figure 5.5: M/s Hillsinai building, Markaz Knowledge City, Kaithappoyil, Kozhikode. Work 
ongoing in the site even after issuance of stop memo. Photo taken by Audit party on 21 
September 2023. 
 
 
37  As instructed in Circular issued by Labour Commissioner on 20 September 2023. 


 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
49 
Figure 5.6: M/s Hillsinai building, Markaz Knowledge City, Kaithappoyil, Kozhikode. Failure 
to provide safety net of standard. Photo taken by Audit party on 21 September 2023.  
 
On 18 January 2022, the third floor of the building collapsed during concreting, 
resulting in injury to 21 migrant and two native labourers. 
After conducting an enquiry, the Labour Department issued stop memo to the 
builder on the next day. The Labour Department issued multiple reminders 
followed by show cause notice on 14  July 2022 for compliance, failing which 
prosecution formalities could be initiated under the provisions in the Act/Rules. 
The employer stated that he had rectified five of the eight violations pointed out 
by the Labour Department and requested that all further proceedings against 
him be dropped.  
Audit conducted joint physical verification (September 2023) of the 
construction site  and noticed that the construction activities were ongoing 
despite issuance of stop memo and that several violations38 noticed earlier were 
still persisting at the site as detailed in Appendix 5.3.  
Thus, the Labour Department could not ensure adherence to safety norms at 
worksites by the employers, even after accidents/incidents. The extent of 
inaction and follow-up by Labour Department in the instances mentioned above 
clearly bring out the lackadaisical attitude of authorities to curb threats to safety 
of workers at construction sites. The Government did not furnish any reply till 
September 2024.  
 
38   including three out of the five violations stated to have been rectified 


 
 50 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
 
Recommendation 11:  The Government should ensure that utmost priority is 
given to the safety of workers in construction sites. Officials responsible for 
oversight in the adherence to safety norms by the establishments may be held 
accountable.  
5.13. Lack of effective grievance redressal mechanism 
The Labour Department has a system of monitoring complaints received on all 
labour related issues in the LCAS software. Complaints are received at the call 
centre set up with a toll-free number and the complaints are recorded by the call 
centre agent in LCAS module. The DLOs/ALOs were to act upon the 
complaints received and take steps to resolve them.  
Analysis of the module for processing complaints received from workers39 
State-wide in the LCAS software  as on 09 November 2023 revealed that as 
against 1180 complaints received, 124 complaints alone were shown as settled. 
The Board could not furnish the status of settlement of the remaining complaints 
to Audit. 
Audit sought details of complaints received from building and other 
construction workers at the test -checked District Labour offices and observed 
that of the 12 complaints received, 10 were pending settlement at Kozhikode 
and Malappuram.  Further,  none of the complaints received were seen routed 
through LCAS. The details of complaints received, and status of action taken, 
as furnished by DLOs are presented in Appendix 5.4. 
Lack of effective grievance redressal system would contribute to delay in timely 
settlement of complaints filed by workers and hence needs to be addressed in 
priority. The Government did not furnish any reply till September 2024.  
 
5.14. Conclusion 
The financial position of the Board presented a grim scenario with the cash 
balance of the Board declining steadily from ₹910.06 crore in March 2019 to 
₹135.16 crore in March 2023. The disbursal of welfare benefits also showed a 
decreasing trend since 2020 -21. The Board submitted its accounts to the 
Accountant General for audit after delays ranging from 11 to 24 months. Out of 
the ₹10 crore corpus fund allocated for the Migrant Workers’ Welfare Fund, 
only ₹1.69 crore was spent on workers' welfare between 2018-19 and 2022-23. 
The Labour Office r did not conduct the prescribed number of monthly 
 
39  Data pertaining to all types of workers w ere displayed. Audit could not obtain segregated data 
pertaining to construction workers 

 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board 
51 
inspections in selected districts . Safety norms were not seen adhered to in  
test-checked construction sites, even after occurrence of accidents.  
 
 
            (PREETHI ABRAHAM) 
Thiruvananthapuram,  Accountant General (Audit I), 
The 17 February 2025     Kerala 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi,   (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The 20 February 2025 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 


 
   
Functioning of Kerala Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare BoardAppendices 
 
 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
53 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.1 
Status of Separate Audit Reports (SAR) of the Board as on 31 March 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3, Page No. 36) 
Stages 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Accounts submitted to 
Accountant General 
06.07.2021 14.07.2021 04.04.2022 06.10.2023  
 
Accounts 
not 
submitted 
for audit 
Accounts re-submitted to 
Accountant General after 
revision 
14.03.2022 14.03.2022 21.06.2022 Not yet 
submitted 
Approval of Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India 
22.06.2022 12.07.2022 03.01.2023 
SAR issued 18.07.2022 29.07.2022 09.01.2023 
SAR sent to Legislature 13.01.2023 05.06.2023 03.08.2023 
(Source: Financial and Certification Audit section, Office of the Accountant General (Audit I) Kerala and the Board) 
 
 
 
 
 

  
54 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
Appendix 5.2 
Details of Joint Physical Verification 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.12, Page No. 45) 
(a) Details of employees and status of registration  
District Sl. 
No. 
Name of Institution Registered/ 
Unregistered/ 
Incident 
Total 
workers 
Kerala Migrant Kerala 
Registered 
Kerala 
Unregistered 
Migrant 
Registered 
Migrant 
Unregistered 
Form I 
submitted 
within 
period 
Ernakulam 
1.  Super Speciality Hospital for 
Child Welfare, Kalamassery 
Registered 160 27 133 0 27 0 133 Yes 
2.  Veegaland Springbell, Ernakulam Registered 50 10 40 0 10 0 40 Yes 
3.  Construction of ITI Building, 
Maradu 
Unregistered 14 14 0 0 14 0 0 No 
4.  Mechanical Workshop Building, 
Model Engineering College, 
Thrikkakara 
Unregistered 6 6 0 3 3 0 0 No 
5.  New Block of Govt. Polytechnic 
Women’s College, Kalamassery 
Unregistered 12 3 9 0 3 0 9 No 
6.  Construction of Quarters to 
Judicial Officers, Kadavanthara 
Unregistered 15 5 10 0 5 0 10 No 
7.  Noel Fragranz, Thrikkakara Registered 47 12 35 5 7 0 35 Yes 
8.  Asset Luminance, 
Kollamkudimugal 
Registered 20 5 15 2 3 0 15 Yes 
9.  Cochin Municipal Corporation Incident Construction work completed 
10.  Nest Hi-Tech Park, Kinfra, 
Kalamasseery 
Incident Abandoned 
Malappuram 
11.  Baseline Projects and 
Constructions Ltd, Kottakkal 
Registered 22 4 18 1 3 0 18 Yes 
12.  Ghazal White Fort, 
Parambilangadi, Kottakkal 
Malappuram 
Registered 50 0 50 0 0 0 50 Yes 
13.  AAK Properties, Tirur Registered 135 4 131 0 4 0 131 Yes 
14.  Abida Apartments, Kottakkal Registered 40 20 20 8 12 0 20 Yes 
15.  Anar Constructions, Commercial 
Building, Malappuram 
Unregistered 26 3 23 1 2 0 23 No 
16.  Construction of Classroom at 
Rajas Higher Secondary School 
Kottakkal 
Unregistered 16 8 8 4 4 0 8 No 

 
55 
 
Appendices 
District Sl. 
No. 
Name of Institution Registered/ 
Unregistered/ 
Incident 
Total 
workers 
Kerala Migrant Kerala 
Registered 
Kerala 
Unregistered 
Migrant 
Registered 
Migrant 
Unregistered 
Form I 
submitted 
within 
period 
17.  Commercial Complex of Moosa 
Haji, Kariparambu, Malappuram 
Unregistered 22 2 20 1 1 0 20 No 
18.  Shopping Complex Construction, 
Chemmad 
Unregistered 15 3 12 1 2 0 12 No 
19.  Construction of a residential 
house, Kottala 
Incident Construction work completed 
20.  Snehalaya Agathi Mandiram, 
Vattappontha 
Incident Construction work completed 
Kozhikode 
21.  Rest House PWD, Additional 
Block Construction 
Unregistered 25 5 20 0 5 0 20 No 
22.  Construction of Building for 
Govt. Fisheries UP School, 
Vellayil, Kozhikode 
Unregistered 50 35 15 0 35 0 15 No 
23.  Commercial Building, 
Vaidyarangadi, Ramanattukara 
Municipality 
Unregistered 15 3 12 0 3 0 12 No 
24.  Municipal Office Construction, 
Ramanattukara 
Unregistered 30 0 30 0 0 0 30 No 
25.  Confident Project Residential, 
Chevayur 
Registered 50 0 50 0 0 0 50 Yes 
26.  HiLite Business Park Thondayad 
Bypass 
Registered 150 12 138 0 12 0 138 Yes 
27.  Commercial Building, Kasaba 
Village, Jafferkhan Colony Road, 
Mavoor Road 
Registered 30 5 25 0 5 0 25 Yes 
28.  Landmark Trade Centre NH 
Bypass, Pantheerankavu 
Registered 126 10 116 0 10 0 116 Yes 
29.  Hillsinai Education Institution 
Construction, Kaithapoyil, 
Thamarassery 
Incident 30 1 29 1 0 0 29 No 
30.  Commercial Building for Kalyan 
Silks, Thondayad Junction 
Incident 150 100 50 0 100 0 50 Yes 
TOTAL  1306 297 1009 27 270 0 1009  
 
 
 
 

 
 
56 
 
Report No.7 of the year 2024 
(b) Amenities provided by the employer 
District Name of Institution Registered/ 
Unregistered/Incident 
Canteen Facility (For 
more than 250) 
First aid boxes 
Crèches for children 
Temporary 
accommodation 
Urinal 
latrine 
Washing facilities 
Ernakulam 
Super Speciality Hospital for Child 
Welfare, Kalamassery 
Registered NA No NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Veegaland Springbell, Ernakulam Registered NA Yes NA No Yes Yes Yes 
Construction of ITI Building, Maradu Unregistered NA No NA No NA NA NA 
Mechanical Workshop Building, Model 
Engineering College, Thrikkakara 
Unregistered NA No NA Yes NA NA NA 
New Block of Govt. Polytechnic 
Women’s College, Kalamassery 
Unregistered NA No NA Yes NA NA Yes 
Construction of Quarters to Judicial 
Officers, Kadavanthara 
Unregistered NA Yes NA No NA No NA 
Noel Fragranz, Thrikkakara Registered NA Yes NA No Yes No Yes 
Asset Luminance, Kollamkudimugal Registered NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Malappuram 
Baseline Projects and Constructions Ltd, 
Kottakkal 
Registered NA No NA No NA Yes No 
Ghazal White Fort, Parambilangadi, 
Kottakkal Malappuram 
Registered Yes No NA Yes Yes Yes NA 
AAK Properties, Tirur Registered NA Yes NA No Yes Yes NA 
Abida Apartments, Kottakkal Registered NA Yes NA No Yes Yes Yes 
Anar Constructions, Commercial 
Building, Malappuram 
Unregistered NA Yes NA No Yes Yes Yes 
Construction of Classroom at Rajas 
Higher Secondary School Kottakkal 
Unregistered NA No NA No No No Yes 
Commercial Complex of Moosa Haji, 
Kariparambu, Malappuram 
Unregistered NA No NA No NA No No 
Shopping complex construction, 
Chemmad 
Unregistered NA No NA No NA No No 

 
57 
 
Appendices 
District Name of Institution Registered/ 
Unregistered/Incident 
Canteen Facility (For 
more than 250) 
First aid boxes 
Crèches for children 
Temporary 
accommodation 
Urinal 
latrine 
Washing facilities 
Kozhikode 
Rest House PWD, Additional Block 
Construction 
Unregistered NA No NA No No No No 
Construction of Building for Govt. 
Fisheries UP School, Vellayil, 
Kozhikode 
Unregistered Yes Yes NA No No No Yes 
Commercial Building, Vaidyarangadi, 
Ramanattukara Municipality 
Unregistered NA No NA No Yes Yes Yes 
Municipal Office Construction, 
Ramanattukara 
Unregistered NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Confident Project Residential, Chevayur Registered NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
HiLite Business Park Thondayad 
Bypass 
Registered NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Commercial Building, Kasaba Village, 
Jafferkhan Colony Road, Mavoor Road 
Registered NA Yes NA No Yes Yes Yes 
Landmark Trade Centre NH Bypass, 
Pantheerankavu 
Registered NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Hillsinai Education Institution 
Construction, Kaithapoyil, 
Thamarassery 
Incident NA Yes NA Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Commercial Building for Kalyan Silks, 
Thondayad Junction 
Incident NA Yes NA No Yes Yes Yes 
*NA – Not applicable 
 
  

 
 
58 
 
Report No.7 of the year 2024 
(c) Safety norms  
District 
Name of Institution 
Fenced lifting appliance 
Test certificate for cranes-
hoists 
Lifts are of sound construction, 
material and free from defects 
Debris disposed 
Barricades/sign boards for 
vehicular traffic 
Warning signs for electrical 
hazards 
Hand gloves 
Waterproof coats 
Personal protective 
equipment 
Equipment against hazards of 
falling 
Open side guarded 
Overhead protection 
Protection for electric lines 
Working platform with guard 
rails 
Proper scaffold ensured 
Cement and other materials 
stacked properly 
Safety helmet provided 
Waterproof boots 
Safety-net provided 
Ernakulam  
Super Speciality Hospital for Child Welfare, 
Kalamassery 
Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
Veegaland Springbell, Ernakulam Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Construction of ITI Building, Maradu NA NA NA Yes No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No No No 
Mechanical Workshop Building, Model 
Engineering College, Thrikkakara 
NA NA NA No No No No No NA No NA NA NA NA NA Yes No No NA 
New Block of Govt. Polytechnic Women’s 
College, Kalamassery 
NA NA NA Yes No No No No No NA NA NA No NA Yes No No No NA 
Construction of Quarters to Judicial 
Officers, Kadavanthara 
NA NA NA Yes No No No Yes Yes NA NA No Yes NA Yes Yes No No No 
Noel Fragranz, Thrikkakara No No No Yes No No No Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No 
Asset Luminance, Kollamkudimugal Yes No Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Malappuram 
Baseline Projects and Constructions Ltd, 
Kottakkal 
NA NA NA No No No Yes No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes No No 
Ghazal White Fort, Parambilangadi, 
Kottakkal Malappuram 
No NA NA Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No 
AAK Properties, Tirur Yes No Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No No 
Abida Apartments, Kottakkal No NA NA Yes No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Anar Constructions, Commercial Building, 
Malappuram 
NA NA NA No No No Yes No Yes No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Construction of Classroom at Rajas Higher 
Secondary School Kottakkal 
No NA NA Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No 
Commercial Complex of Moosa Haji, 
Kariparambu, Malappuram 
No NA NA No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No 
Shopping complex construction, Chemmad No No No No No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No No No 

 
59 
 
Appendices 
District 
Name of Institution 
Fenced lifting appliance 
Test certificate for cranes-
hoists 
Lifts are of sound construction, 
material and free from defects 
Debris disposed 
Barricades/sign boards for 
vehicular traffic 
Warning signs for electrical 
hazards 
Hand gloves 
Waterproof coats 
Personal protective 
equipment 
Equipment against hazards of 
falling 
Open side guarded 
Overhead protection 
Protection for electric lines 
Working platform with guard 
rails 
Proper scaffold ensured 
Cement and other materials 
stacked properly 
Safety helmet provided 
Waterproof boots 
Safety-net provided 
Kozhikode 
Rest House PWD, Additional Block 
Construction 
NA NA NA No No No Yes Yes Yes No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No Yes No 
Construction of Building for Govt. Fisheries 
UP School, Vellayil, Kozhikode 
No No Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Commercial Building, Vaidyarangadi, 
Ramanattukara Municipality 
NA NA NA No No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No No No 
Municipal Office Construction, 
Ramanattukara 
NA NA NA Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Confident Project Residential, Chevayur Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
HiLite Business Park Thondayad Bypass Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Commercial Building, Kasaba Village, 
Jafferkhan Colony Road, Mavoor Road 
Yes No Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Landmark Trade Centre NH Bypass, 
Pantheerankavu 
Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Hillsinai Education Institution Construction, 
Kaithapoyil, Thamarassery 
NA NA NA No No No Yes Yes Yes No No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Commercial Building for Kalyan Silks, 
Thondayad Junction 
Yes No Yes Yes No No No No No No No No Yes No Yes Yes No No No 
*NA – Not applicable 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
60 
 
Report No.7 of the year 2024 
 
(d) Miscellaneous 
District Sl. 
No. Name of Institution Register of 
periodical tests Notices 
Safety committee 
in case of 500 or 
more workers 
Abstracts of 
rules 
displayed 
Written statement 
of policy for safety 
and health 
Ernakulam 
1.  Super Speciality Hospital for Child Welfare, Kalamassery Yes NA No No No 
2.  Veegaland Springbell, Ernakulam Yes NA Yes Yes Yes 
3.  Construction of ITI Building, Maradu No NA No No No 
4.  Mechanical Workshop Building, Model Engineering College, 
Thrikkakara 
No NA No No No 
5.  New Block of Govt. Polytechnic Women’s College, 
Kalamassery 
No NA No No No 
6.  Construction of Quarters to Judicial Officers, Kadavanthara No NA No No No 
7.  Noel Fragranz, Thrikkakara Yes NA No Yes No 
8.  Asset Luminance, Kollamkudimugal Yes NA Yes Yes Yes 
Malappuram 
9.  Baseline Projects and Constructions Ltd, Kottakkal No NA No No No 
10.  Ghazal White Fort, Parambilangadi, Kottakkal Malappuram Yes NA No No No 
11.  AAK Properties, Tirur Yes NA No Yes Yes 
12.  Abida Apartments, Kottakkal No NA No No No 
13.  Anar Constructions, Commercial Building, Malappuram No NA No No No 
14.  Construction of Classroom at Rajas Higher Secondary School 
Kottakkal 
No NA No No No 
15.  Commercial Complex of Moosa Haji, Kariparambu, 
Malappuram 
No NA No No No 
16.  Shopping Complex Construction, Chemmad No NA No No No 
Kozhikode 
17.  Rest House PWD, Additional Block Construction, Kozhikode No NA No No No 
18.  Construction of Building for Govt. Fisheries UP School, 
Vellayil, Kozhikode 
No NA No No No 
19.  Commercial Building, Vaidyarangadi, Ramanattukara 
Municipality 
No NA No No No 
20.  Municipal Office Construction, Ramanattukara No NA No No No 
21.  Confident Project Residential, Chevayur Yes NA No Yes No 
22.  HiLite Business Park, Thondayad Bypass, Kozhikode Yes NA No Yes Yes 
23.  Commercial Building, Kasaba Village, Jafferkhan Colony 
Road, Mavoor Road, Kozhikode 
No NA No No No 
24.  Landmark Trade Centre NH Bypass, Pantheerankavu Yes NA No Yes Yes 
25.  Hillsinai Education Institution Construction, Kaithapoyil, 
Thamarassery 
No NA No No No 
26.  Commercial Building for Kalyan Silks, Thondayad Junction No NA No No No 
*NA – Not applicable 

 
61 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.3 
Violations of safety norms noticed during  
joint physical verification at incident sites 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.12, Page No. 49)  
a) Commercial building for Kalyan Silks, Thondayad Junction, Kozhikode 
Sl. 
No. Section/Rule Remarks 
1 Section 34 Separate temporary accommodation with suitable cooking, bathing, washing place 
etc., were not provided 
2 Section 30 (2) Notices prescribed were not provided 
3 Rule 54 R/w 
Rule 72 (2) 
Certificate of initial and periodical test and (a) (ii) examinations of cranes or joists 
and their accessory gears in Form No. VI was not maintained 
4 Rule 45 Suitable barricade/sign boards/lights for the vehicular traffic in the site were not 
provided 
5 Rule 43 (5) Approved hand gloves as per National Standards to those building workers engaged 
in handling sharp objects/materials which may cause hand injury were not provided 
6 Rule 43 (3) Waterproof coat with hat to those building workers who are required to work in rain 
or similar wet conditions were not provided 
7 Rule 42 Suitable personal protective equipment for the protection of eyes of building workers 
engaged in operation like welding, cutting, chipping, grinding etc., were not 
provided 
8 Rule 39 (6) For the building workers who are exposed to the hazards of falling from height while 
employed, adequate equipment or means as per National Standards for saving the 
building workers from falling from height were not provided 
9 Rule 39 (5) Every open side or opening into or through, which a building worker, vehicle or 
lifting appliance, which may fall were not covered or guarded suitably and properly  
10 Rule 38 (1) Overhead protection along the property where construction of the building was going 
on was not erected 
11 Rule 283 (4) A register of periodical tests and examinations in Form No. XXVI was not 
maintained 
12 Rule 248 (5) An abstract of the Act and Rules in English and in language known to majority of the 
workers were not displayed 
13 Rule 240 (1) A written statement of policy in respect of safety and health of construction workers 
employed at the site was not displayed 
14 Rule 192 R/w 
Rule 196 
Suitable working platforms with guard rails were not provided 
15 Rule 46 Safety helmets were not provided 
16 Rule 46 Waterproof boots were not provided 
17 Rule 179 Safety net of standards was not provided 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
62 
 
Report No. 7 of the year 2024 
b) Hillsinai building, Markaz Knowledge City, Kaithappoyil, Kozhikode 
Sl. 
No. 
Section/Rule Remarks 
1 Section 30 (2) Notices prescribed were not provided 
2 Rule 49 Debris as required were not disposed 
3 Rule 45 Suitable barricade/sign boards/lights for the vehicular traffic in the site were not 
provided 
4 Rule 44 (2) Suitable warning signs of electrical hazards at conspicuous places in a language 
understood by majority of the building workers were not provided 
5 Rule 39 (6) For the building workers who are exposed to the hazards of falling from height while 
employed, adequate equipment or means as per National Standards for saving the 
building workers from falling from height were not provided 
6 Rule 39 (5) Every open side or opening into or through, which a building worker, vehicle or lifting 
appliance, which may fall were not covered or guarded suitably and properly  
7 Rule 283 (4) A register of periodical tests and examinations in Form No. XXVI was not maintained 
8 Rule 248 (5) An abstract of the Act and Rules in English and in language known to majority of the 
workers were not displayed 
9 Rule 240 (1) A written statement of policy in respect of safety and health of construction workers 
employed at the site was not displayed 
10 Rule 198 Adequate protection against electric lines endangering safety was not provided  
11 Rule 192 R/w 
Rule 196 
Suitable working platforms with guard rails were not provided 
12 Rule 179 Safety net of standards was not provided 
 
 
 
  

 
63 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.4 
List of complaints received in District Labour Offices during 2018-23 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.13, Page No. 50) 
 
 
District Year Complaints Remarks 
Kozhikode 
2019-20 Non-payment of wages 
₹1.79 lakh 
Letter sent by DLO to summon the contractor, but 
no further action taken. 
2020-21 Non-payment of wages 
₹17,800 
Contractor was directed to pay wages, but since the 
area was beyond the jurisdiction of the ALO no 
further report on the complaint was seen. 
2021-22 Non-payment of wages 
₹1.78 lakh 
The complaint was regarding a central government 
institution which has to be filed in Central Labour 
Department. It was not informed to the complainant 
and no further action taken. 
2022-23 Non-payment of wages 
₹32,400 
ALO reported that contractor was not willing to pay 
the wages, hence directed the complainant to file a 
claim under Payment of Wages Act and no further 
action taken. 
2022-23 Non-payment of wages 
₹79,740 and non-return of 
machinery 
DLO could not contact the contractor and no action 
taken 
2022-23 Non-payment of wages 
₹65,000 
Employer stated that wages were transferred to 
Bank account and if complaint persists can file a 
petition in Labour Court. 
Malappuram 
2021-22 Non-payment of wages The employer reported that the complainant had not 
worked in his establishments. The complainant 
could not be contacted. 
2021-22 Non-payment of wages Arrear of wages paid. 
2021-22 Non-payment of wages DLO reported that the employer could not be 
contacted and asked the complainant to file a 
complaint in the Industries Tribunal. 
2021-22 Denial of labour and arrear 
of wages not paid 
The complainant  was not responding to the 
reminders and is presently working abroad. 
2022-23 Wage arrears pending Arrears were paid 
2022-23 Delayed payment of wages Adalat conducted in which employer intimated that 
arrear wages were paid. But complainant was not 
satisfied and filed a petition in the Labour Court. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 
 
 
 
