i 
Table of Contents 
 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface v 
Executive Summary vii-xv 
Chapter-I: Introduction 
Vision and Planning for health 1.1 1 
Health Services 1.2 5 
Overview of Healthcare Facilities in the State 1.3 6 
Organisational Set-up 1.4 7 
Status of Health Indicators in the State 1.5 8 
Sustainable Development Goals 1.6 9 
Performance of Punjab in National Family Health 
Surveys  1.7 10 
Audit Objectives 1.8 12 
Scope of Audit 1.9 13 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.10 15 
Consideration of Ayushman Bharat in this Report 1.11 16 
Organisation of audit findings 1.12 18 
Chapter-II: Human Resources 
Human resources availability against sanctioned 
strength 2.1 19 
Availability of manpower 2.2 19 
Shortage of technicians and drivers for ambulance 2.3 30 
Availability of Accredited Social Health Activists 
(ASHA) 2.4 30 
Management of human resources in DHs, CHCs, PHCs 
and Medical Colleges 2.5 32 
Future availability of Doctors and Paramedical Staff 2.6 54 
Conclusion 2.7 55 
Recommendations 2.8 56 
Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
OPD Services 3.1 57 
IPD Services 3.2 66 
Emergency Services 3.3 79 
Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness  3.4 86 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
ii 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Maternity Services 3.5 90 
Line and Support Services 3.6 107 
Water Supply 3.7 132 
Power Supply 3.8 134 
Infection Control Management 3.9 135 
Cleaning Services 3.10 136 
Patient Safety 3.11 137 
Working of Drug De-addiction Centre 3.12 141 
Display of Citizen Charter and other boards 3.13 144 
Monitoring mechanism 3.14 146 
Conclusion 3.15 148 
Recommendations 3.16 150 
Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and  
other consumables 
Availability of essential and critical drugs, medicines 
and consumables 4.1 151 
Availability of equipment in selected DHs 4.2 152 
Procurement of drugs/medicines 4.3 155 
Storage of drugs 4.4 166 
Procurement of equipment and their maintenance 4.5 167 
Conclusion 4.6 176 
Recommendations 4.7 176 
Chapter-V: Healthcare Infrastructure 
CHCs have not been upgraded to First Referral Units 
(FRU)  5.1 179 
Inadequate availability of health institutions vis -à-vis 
prescribed norms 5.2 180 
Availability of beds in health institutions 5.3 186 
Health and Wellness Centres 5.4 190 
Creation of Building Infrastructure 5.5 197 
Non-availability and non -maintenance of residential 
accommodation   5.6 202 
Conclusion 5.7 205 
Recommendations 5.8 206 

Table of Contents 
iii 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
Budget allocation and expenditure on Health Sector 6.1 207 
Share of expenditure on Health Sector by GoI and State 
Government 6.2 208 
Expenditure on Health Sector by the State vis -à-vis 
National Health Policy norms 6.3 208 
Application of resources 6.4 209 
Parking of funds outside Government Account 6.5 214 
Irregularities in the payment of concession fee 6.6 218 
Budget and Expenditure for selected districts  6.7 219 
Other points 6.8 220 
Conclusion 6.9 223 
Recommendations 6.10 223 
Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) 7.1 225 
Kayakalp Programme 7.2 227 
Achievement under National Quality Assurance 
Programme 7.3 228 
Implementation of Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
(RBSK) 7.4 229 
Family Welfare Scheme 7.5 232 
National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme (NTEP) 7.6 235 
National Mental Health Programme 7.7 236 
National Programme for Healthcare for the Elderly 
(NPHCE) 7.8 239 
National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) 7.9 240 
National Programme for Control of Blindness 7.10 241 
Janani Suraksha Yojana 7.11 242 
Immunisation of children 7.12 243 
Conclusion 7.13 244 
Recommendations 7.14 244 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
iv 
 
Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
Implementation of the Clinical Establishments Act and 
Rules in the State 8.1 246 
Directorate of Medical Education and Research 8.2 247 
Drug Controller of the State 8.3 250 
Bio-Medical Waste Management   8.4 251 
Conclusion 8.5 256 
Recommendations 8.6 257 
Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
Formulation of State Indicator Framework and District 
Indicator Framework 9.1 260 
Sustainable Development Goals Index Reports 9.2 262 
Planning and mapping budget for SDG-3 9.3 264 
Performance of indicators for SDG-3 9.4 267 
Intervention and coordination 9.5 268 
Conclusion 9.6 270 
Recommendations 9.7 270 
Appendices 273-346 
Glossary of abbreviations 347-351 
 

v 
Preface  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the 
period 2016-17 to 2021-22 has been prepared for submission to the 
Governor of the State of Punjab under Article 151(2) of the Constitution 
of India. 
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit of ‘Public 
Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services’ in the State of 
Punjab. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation and assistance received 
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Department of 
Medical Education and Research, and Punjab Pollution Control Board, 
Government of Punjab
 along with their field functionaries in conducting 
the Performance Audit. 

vii 
Executive Summary 
As per National Family Health Survey (2019-21), health indicators of the State 
are better than the national indicators except  for sex ratio, average out of 
pocket expenditure per delivery in public health facilities , institutional births 
in public facilities and births delivered by caesarean section . National Health 
Policy (NHP), 2017 was adopted to inform, clarify, strengthen and prioriti se 
the role of the Government in shaping health systems in all its dimensions. 
Considering NHP 2017 and experience in COVID -19 pandemic, a 
Performance Audit on “Public Health Infrastructure and Management of 
Health Services” was conducted to assess the adequacy of financial resources  
allocated, availability of health infrastructure, manpower, machinery and 
equipment in the health institutions as well as efficacy in the management of 
health services in the State . The performance audit also covers the efficacy of 
the regulatory framework being enforced by the G overnment to regulate 
private health sector, schemes being implemented by Government of India 
through the State Government and overall linkage with Sustainable 
Development Goal-3. The audit was conducted for the period 2016-2021 but 
wherever feasible, the data has been updated up to 2021-22 or later.  
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India has issued a 
set of uniform  standards called the Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) to 
improve the quality of  healthcare delivery in the country and serve as a 
benchmark for assessing performance of healthcare delivery system. The IPHS 
for District Hospitals (DH), Community Health Centres (CHC), Primary 
Health Centres (PHC) and Sub Centres ( SC) prescribe standards for services, 
manpower, equipment, drugs , building and other facilities. These include 
standards to bring the health institutions to a minimum acceptable functional 
grade (indicated as Essential) with scope for further improvement (indicated as 
Desired).  
In addition to IPHS, various standards and guidelines on healthcare services 
issued by the Government of India  (GoI) such as the Maternal and Newborn 
Health Toolkit; Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance; National 
Quality Assurance Standards for Public Health Facilities; Kayakalp 
guidelines; Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules; Drugs and Cosmetic 
Rules etc. were used to evaluate the healthcare facilities in healthcare 
institutions.  
As far as Ayushman Bharat (AB) is concerned , Audit has  included findings 
related to Health & Wellness Centres  (HWC) and have also considered 
implementation of AB while making recommendations in various areas of the 
Health sector. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
viii 
Analysis of data of Integrated Human Resource Management System 
(iHRMS), which contains information of permanent staff deployed in 
Department of Health and Family Welfare (DH &FW) and Department of 
Medical Education and Research (DMER) revealed that 34,949, i.e.,  
50.69 per cent  of the 68,949 sanctioned posts were vacant. In term s of 
percentage of vacant posts, Director Medical Education and Research, which 
includes sanctioned strength of four medical colleges at Amritsar, Faridkot, 
Patiala and SAS Nagar, has maximum shortage of manpower i.e. 59.19  per 
cent. In the DH &FW, while average vacancies are 49.22 per cent , it ranged 
from 29.14 per cent in Pathankot district to 62.3 per cent  in Hoshiarpur 
district. When post -wise vacancies are analy sed, it makes the status even 
worse. For instance, shortage of doctors against the sanctioned strength varied 
from 12.40 per cent in Pathankot district to 58.58 per cent in Faridkot district. 
Availability of staff nurse s against the sanctioned strength varied widely. It 
was excess by 17.60 per cent in Moga district while  there was a shortage of 
56.76 per cent in M ansa district. Shortage of Maternity Assistants ( ANM) 
against the sanctioned strength varied from 19.23 per cent in Moga district to 
97.19 per cent in Amritsar district. However, in Fazilka district, 40 per cent  
ANM were posted in excess . Audit noticed non availability/shortage of 
specialist doctors, medical officers, nurses, paramedical staff and other staff 
against the sanctioned strength in all DHs, CHCs and PHCs of the State and 
there was also skewed distribution of manpower across health care 
institutions. In the test- checked health institutions, Audit also noticed that 
many health services could not be provided due to non-availability of staff and 
equipment and infrastructure could not be gainfully utilised. The skewed 
distribution also led to uneven patient load per doctor. Further, the sanctioned 
posts were also not as per population as population to doctor ratio ranged from 
one doctor sanctioned for 2,377 people in Rupnagar district to one doctor 
sanctioned for 7,376 people in Moga district.  
The services  that a health institution is expected to provide can be broadly 
classified as out -patient department (OPD), indoor patient department (IPD), 
emergency services, maternity, support and line services. OPD services were 
available in all the test- checked health institutions but ENT OPD service in 
DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, General Medicine in DHs at Fazilka and Sri Muktsar 
Sahib, General Surgery in DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, Ophthalmology in DH 
Malerkotla, Obstetrics & Gynaecology in DHs at Fazilka and Maler kotla, and 
Psychiatry OPD service in DH Amritsar were not available. Dental OPD 
service was not available in GMCH Patiala (RH  Patiala). However, all 
required OPD specialist services were not available in the test-checked CHCs 
except CHCs at Mahilpur, Shamchaurasi and Sudhar. OPD services were 
available in all the test -checked PHCs except PHC Jodhpur Pakhar.  
Moreover, AYUSH services were not available in most of the test -checked 
CHCs/PHCs. The availability of doctors was not ensured as per the patient 

Executive Summary 
ix 
load in the health institutions. Registration and pharmacy counters were also 
not found adequate in DHs  besides non- availability of online registration 
facility in any of the health care institutions. 
All IPD services were available in selected DHs except Psychiatric service in 
DH Bathinda.  Complete IPD services , except for General Medicine, were not 
available in test -checked CHCs. Moreover, IPD services as well as adequate 
beds for IPD were not available in eight and fifteen PHCs  respectively. 
Radiotherapy, Nephrology, Neurosurgery and Neurology IPD services were 
also not available in RH Patiala.  Negative/Positive isolation room was not 
available in test-checked RH/DHs except DH Gurdaspur. Posting of surgeons 
in DHs were not ensured according to surgery load. Moreover, piped suction 
and medical gases, heating, air -conditioning, ventilation, etc. in Operation 
Theatre (OT) was not available in half of the test-checked DHs and OT facility 
was not available in four CHCs and any of the test-checked PHCs. 
The Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) in  all the test- checked DHs was above 
80 per cent except for DHs at Fatehgarh Sahib and  Hoshiarpur. It was 
significantly high in DHs at Moga and Gurdaspur.  Efficiency of the hospital 
as indicated by Bed Turnover Rate (BTR) was found to be on the lower side in 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib and RH Patiala, and on the higher side in DHs Gurdaspur 
and Moga.  Discharge rate was lower in DHs at Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib and 
Hoshiarpur indicating that these hospitals were under -performing.  Referral 
Out Rate (ROR) in DH Gurdaspur was on the higher side which indicated that 
health care facilities were not adequate in this hospital.  Leave against medical 
advice (LAMA) rate in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur and Ludhiana , and 
absconding rate in DH Fatehgarh Sahib was alarmingly high which shows that 
these hospitals could not gain the trust of patients under their care.  
In emergency services, it was noticed that round the clock availability of 
Emergency Operation Theatre for Maternity, Orthopaedic Emergency, Burns 
and Plastic Surgery and Neurosurgery cases was not available in four DHs. 
Congestive Heart Failure service in nine CHCs, Left Ventricular Failure and 
Meningoencephalitis service in 11 CHCs were not available. Facility of  
24 hours m anagement of emergency services such as accident, first aid, 
stitching of wounds , etc. were available only in eight out of 24 test-checked 
PHCs.  
Adequate drugs were not found available in the State during the COVID-19 
pandemic and excess expenditure was also incurred by RH Patiala on purchase 
of oxygen cylinders due to non- renewal of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO)  
storage license timely. 
In maternity services, institutional births in public health facilities  remained at 
50 per cent  during the period 2016- 2022 and deliveries in private health 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
x 
facilities were increasing year by year. Labour room facility was not found 
available in eight PHCs. C-Section deliveries were also seen higher than the 
norms prescribed by WHO. National guidelines for P revention of Parent -to-
Child Transmission of HIV were not adhered to in 18 per cent  cases. Further, 
there was shortfall in conducting review of maternal deaths and neonatal 
deaths during 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
Among line and support services, health institutions up to CHC level were 
performing well in providing some  services, while improvement was needed 
in most of the other services. Out of 23 DHs, ICU services were available only 
in five DHs at Fazilka, Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Sri Muktsar Sahib and SAS 
Nagar. In diagnostic services , radiological service viz.  Radiology (except  
X-ray and ultrasonography), Cardi ology (except ECG) , Endoscopy and 
Respiratory were not available in DHs and Cardiac Investigation (ECG) was 
also not available in half of the test -checked CHCs as required under IPHS 
norms. Complete range of tests under pathology services was not available in 
any of the test -checked health institutions . Blood storage facility was not 
available in any test-checked CHCs except CHC Sudhar. 
Dietary service was not being provided by any test -checked health institution 
to IPD patients except patient s admitted under Janani Shishu Suraksha 
Karyakram (JSSK). Further,  most of the CHCs and PHCs are required to 
improve in all these services especially in adequate supply of quality water 
and power supply. Internal control and monitoring of services were also found 
inadequate. 
Audit assessed availability of drugs against essential drugs  and equipment  
listed in IPHS norms. There was shortage of essential drugs and equipment in 
all test-checked health institutions and there was wide variation in availability 
across same type of institutions. Reasons for the shortage were  non-supply, 
short-supply, and delay in supply of drugs to the warehouses and health 
institutions and non/short procurement of medicines. There were many issues 
in procurement by Punjab Health System s Corporation (P HSC) including  
short-supply of drugs, loss due to expiry of drugs, accepting drugs having less 
shelf life, purchase of drugs and vaccines after expiry of rate contract , etc. In 
the quality assurance aspect, issues such as issuance and consumption of 
substandard medicines, absence of sample testing for local purchase , etc. were 
noticed. Thus, quality control was  compromised at every step, and for short 
delivery or non-delivery, no action was taken against the defaulting suppliers . 
Quality assurance was also compromised by non-testing/failed testing, supply 
of expired drugs and again no action was taken for violation. Further, issues 
such as excess payment of service charges due to incorrect valuation of 
equipment and addition of new equipment on higher value for maintenance, 
non-conducting third party audit for calibration of equipment, 

Executive Summary 
xi 
excess/unfruitful expenditure on procurement of equipment, non-
installation/utilisation of equipment and non- functioning of  cancer treatment 
machine in health institutions were also observed. 
Estimation, planning and creation of requisite infrastructure facilities are 
essential for ensuring the provision of optimum level of healthcare facilities. 
There was inadequate availability of health institutions as compared to the 
prescribed norms. There were shortfalls in the required number of 
CHCs/PHCs/SCs, as compared to the population norms recommended in 
IPHS. The State Government had not made district -wise plan detailing the 
present status of bed availability in public and private sector health institutions. 
Moreover, the existing CHCs/PHCs did not have the required number of beds. 
Although targets of upgradation of HWCs were achieved but some HWCs 
were not operational due to shortage of manpower. Instances of lack of proper 
upkeep and maintenance of the already constructed/available infrastructure and 
shortage of human resources, essential medicines, diagnostic services, furniture 
and fixture, etc. were also noticed in upgraded HWCs. In various construction 
and upgradation works  under NHM and other centrally sponsored schemes, 
there were avoidable delays /non-start of work which had not only resulted in 
the blocking of funds in those works, but also ha d resulted in denial of 
intended benefits to the general public. The sampled health institutions  had 
many shortcomings in building infrastructure and most of the residential 
accommodation of the selected health institutions was not maintained and were 
in dilapidated condition. 
Out of the allotted budget  by the State Government , funds ranging from  
6.5 per cent to 20.74 per cent were not utilised . The State Government could 
spend only 3.11 per cent of its total expenditure and 0.68 per cent of GSDP on 
health services during 2021- 22, which was way below eight  per cent  of the 
budget and 2.50 per cent  of GSDP targeted under NHP 2017.  The State 
Programme Implementation Plans for each year were submitted to GoI with 
delays ranging from 10 to 108 days, which ultimately delayed the approval  
thereof by GoI, thereby resulting in late receipt of funds from them . Huge 
amount of Government money was  lying unutilised outside Government 
account with Punjab Nirogi Society ( ₹4.92 crore) under Punjab Nirogi Yojana 
and under Mukh Mantri Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh Scheme ( ₹76.81 crore) as 
of March 2022. Besides, user charges amounting t o ₹1.94 crore collected by 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala up to 2021-22 and part of concession fee amounting 
to ₹ 85.70 crore transferred to PHSC were also lying with them outside 
Government account, in contravention of codal provisions. 
The implementation of test-checked centrally sponsored schemes like National 
Urban Health Mission, Family Welfare, Kayakalp and Rashtriya Bal Swasthya 
Karyakram (RBSK), etc. in the S tate of Punjab  was not commensurate with 
the targets set for the respective schemes. There were shortfalls in utilisation 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
xii 
of the allotted funds under various schemes. There were cases of non-payment 
of financial assistance/incentives  under Family W elfare scheme  and Janani 
Suraksha Yojana. Health institutions aspiring to achieve Kayakalp status were 
significantly on a lower side and National Quality Assurance Standards  
certified health institutions also did not show steady growth. Under RBSK 
programme, Mobile Health Teams (MHTs)  were functioning with inadequate 
staff strength which adversely affected the s creening of children. No essential 
medicines/drops/ointments except Iron and Folic Acid and Albendazole were 
available with MHTs despite having been prescribed by the GoI. District Early 
Intervention Centres (DEICs) were also inadequately staffed and construction 
of new DEICs was delayed. 
The envisaged regulatory mechanism was not functioning effectively to ensure 
responsible provision of health services to the people.  For registration and 
regulation of the clinical establishments, the State Government adopted 
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act in October 2020 i.e. 
after a gap of ten years from the date when the Clinical Establishments 
(Registration and Regulation) Act was enacted in 2010 by the Union 
Government. Rules under the State Act were yet to be framed. Provisions of 
Punjab Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2020 do not 
bind the private clinics or establishments having capacity upto 50 beds to get 
themselves registered unlike the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2010 passed by the Central Government which provides that 
all the clinics or establishments should be registered. As a result, the 
prescribed minimum standards of facilities and services could not be ensured 
in these unregistered clinical establishments.  Adequacy of infrastructure in 
the medical colleges as per norms was not ensured.  There were cases of 
selling/manufacturing units running without valid/renewed licenses. Some 
Health Care Facilities (HCF) were working without valid authorisation and the 
requisite annual reports were not submitted by most of the HCFs  as required 
under Bio Medical Waste Management, 2016 Rules (BMW Rules). Moreover, 
most of the HCFs did not impart any training to the Health Workers and also 
did not constitute Bio- Medical Waste Management Committees to review and 
monitor the activities related to bio -medical waste management and the 
advisory committee was not actively overseeing the implementation of the 
BMW Rules. These were being poorly implemented in the State posing a 
serious health hazard. 
The State adopted 41 National Indicators Framework which covers 12 out of 
13 targets of SDG -3 in its State Indicator Framework (SIF). In addition, 
55 Punjab Specific Indicators were formulated covering eight  out of 
12 targets. No State Specific Indicators were developed in the SIF in respect of 
four targets. The District Indicator Framework was not formulated. The State 
was able to publish only 10 Indicators covering 7 targets (out of 12) even after 

Executive Summary 
xiii 
lapse of eight years out of 15 years’ timeframe for achievement of SDG. The 
mapping of the existing programmes/schemes with relevant SDGs in the State 
Budget, showing linkages and performance against the planned budget 
expenditure for the SDG targets was not done. Analysis of progress of 
10 indicators for SDG -3 revealed that performance of only three indicators 
(3.2.1, 3.3.2 and 3.c.1) was satisfactory.  
Recommendations 
In view of the above mentioned findings, Audit recommends the following: 
The Government should consider revising the sanctioned strength of Health 
Department at par with the IPHS norms, posting of staff in health institution s 
at par with the sanctioned strength in the primary, secondary and tertiary 
healthcare institutions. Government should bring out a long- term strategy and 
policy to reduce variations in doctor-population ratio across districts.  
The existing staff strength should be rationalised across districts and health 
institutions. While rationalising, it should be ensured that the postings are 
done in such a way that complimentary healthcare professionals i.e. doctors, 
nurses, paramedics, technicians and other support staff are posted in each 
health institution. Availability of infrastructure and other crucial components 
should be considered during such rationalisation. 
The Government should map availability of infrastructure, services and human 
resources against identified benchmark and create a centralised database of 
infrastructure and services available across  Government health institutions  in 
order to  identify gaps, take informed decision with respect to allocation of 
funds and reduce idle infrastructure.  
Government may ensure availability of all OPD services, IPD services, 
emergency services, diagnostic services as prescribed under IPHS norms. 
Steps should be taken to improve and strengthen line  and support services  to 
improve overall healthcare experience. 
The Government may consider putting in place a r obust mechanism for timely 
installation and proper functioning of high value e quipment for obstacle-free 
delivery of health care services to the patients. Suitable steps should be taken 
to address the shortfall of drugs, equipment and other consumables in the 
healthcare institutions. Accountability should be fixed in cases of purchase of 
drugs and vaccine after expiry of rate contract , non-supply/ short supply, 
delayed supply, loss due to expiry of drugs, acce pting drug supply having less 
shelf life , etc. Drug warehouses should be directed for purchasing 
drugs/consumables with longer shelf -life so as to avoid early expiry of drugs 
and consumables. The Government may consider valuation of equipment as 
per codal provisions and terms and conditions of the agreement to avoid 
excess payment . Third-party audit for calibration of equipment should be 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
xiv 
conducted to ensure that equipment function properly. Equipment should be 
maintained to reduce the breakdown time of critical equipment. 
The Government should make a plan for determining the requirements and 
providing the requisite infrastructural facilities in each district, on the basis of 
its population, local epidemiology, health-seeking behaviour of the population, 
contribution of the private sector and the benchmarks set under National 
Health Policy and IPHS. Adequate maintenance and upkeep of the health 
institutions may be ensured in accordance with the IPHS norms. 
The Government may look into the issues of delays in commencement  and/or 
completion of planned infrastructural works, with a view to remove the 
bottlenecks and ensure speedy completion. Residential quarters for medical/ 
para medical staff should be provided and necessary repair and renovation 
should be carried out in time. 
The State Government may consider increasing budget allocation on health 
services in line with the guidelines of the National Health Policy.  The State 
Government should show the share of the GoI and the State on health sector 
separately in the budget provision and the expenditure. 
The Government may take action for timely submission of State Programme 
Implementation Plans to GoI for timely receipt of funds from them; and 
further release of funds to the State Health Society well in time for effective 
utilisation of the funds in programme implementation.   
The State Government may ensure deposit of Government money lying 
outside Government account with various agencies, into the Consolidated 
Fund of the State for its optimum utilisation. 
Monitoring and implementation mechanisms of various centrally sponsored 
schemes/programmes need to be reviewed to ensure that distribution of 
resources (both human and financial) is made as per actual requirements, to 
avoid instances of shortages or excess. The Government may review the data 
collection mechanisms to ensure availability of a reliable monitoring 
mechanism.  
The Government may attempt to increase awareness and outreach through 
various activities, for making the target population aware of the benefits along 
with removal of fears and/or misconception and increase participation.  
The Government may consider expediting framing of rules under the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act and ensure implementation 
thereof at the earliest . Adequate infrastructure at medical colleges may be 
ensured for their smooth functioning. Drug inspectors may be directed to 
conduct inspections of manufacturing and selling units as per extant rules. 

Executive Summary 
xv 
The State Government may also ensure an  adequate monitoring mechanism to 
check selling/ manufacturing units running without valid/renewed licenses and 
take timely action against those units running without valid licenses . It may be 
ensured that all utilities generating bio -medical waste comply with the 
provisions of Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules with  regard to obtaining 
requisite authorisation, submission of annual returns, conducting adequate 
training, constitution of Bio-Medical Waste Management Committees, etc. 
The State Government may take steps to adopt more numbers of indicators in 
Punjab SDG Index Report so as to present a comprehensive picture for 
measuring and monitoring the performance of the State in achievement of 
SDG-3.  State strategic plan with well- defined milestones for measuring and 
monitoring implementation  may be developed on priority basis. The State 
budget should be aligned to the SDGs  and the District Indicator framework 
should be developed in line with the National Indicator Framework.  

1 
Chapter-I 
 
Introduction 
The Health and Family Welfare Department , Punjab is committed to provide 
preventive, promotive and curative health services to the people of the State 
through a good network of medical institutions such as Sub-Centres, Subsidiary 
Health Centres (dispensaries/clinics, etc.), Primary Health Centres (PHC),  
Community Health Centres (CHC), Sub- Divisional and District Hospitals, 
Government Medical and Dental Colleges (attached hospitals).  The Medical 
Education and Research Department aims to  develop medical manpower, 
quality education in the field of medicine and preparation of specialist and super 
specialist doctors in the State to improve the standard of medical education and 
promote research activities in the Medical Colleges of Punjab State.   
The business of the Department of Health and Family Welfare (DH&FW) and 
Department of Medical Education and Research (DMER) are transacted as per 
Government of Punjab, Allocation of Business Rules, 2007 (Appendix 1.1). 
1.1 Vision and Planning for health  
The State of Punjab does not have any specific health policy of its own similar 
to National  Health Policy at the National level. In order to implement the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) adopted by the United Nations General 
Assembly in September 2015 that set out a vision for a world free of poverty, 
hunger, disease and want, the Government of Punjab prepared 
(November 2018) a Vision Document, 2030.  As per the Vision Document, the 
indicator specific target strategies in respect of “SDG -3: Good health and  
well-being: ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all at all ages” 
would be addressed through re -organisation and strengthening of an 
institutional framework as summarised below:  
(i)  Restructuring of Government health institutions: Health institutions 
have been divided into three categories: 
• Primary Care Centres (PCC) - PCCs to cater to clinical services, 
emergency support 24x7 and basic reproductive services. Infrastructure, 
facilities and staff for elementary diagnostic services, emergency and 
medicines needed for regular use to be available at the PCCs. 
• First Referral Units (FRU) - FRUs to be full-fledged diagnostic centres 
with range of specialties. Current PHCs and/or CHCs can be converted 
into FRUs with additional FRUs to be created.  
• Hospitals or Multi-Speciality Hospitals - The third tier of healthcare to 
be at the level of hospitals and multi -specialty hospitals. By 2030, the 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
2 
Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) are to be achieved and the 
numbers of health facilities are to be increased so that the norm of at 
least five beds per 1,000 population is achieved by 2030.  
(ii)  Health Workforce: The Health Department employs a large workforce. 
However, human resource production and management systems are yet to be 
modernised. Admission to medical and allied health professional courses is yet 
to achieve an egalitarian character. Family Medicine, Community Medicine, 
and Public Health special ities have not been able to produce enough human 
resources for health services. The density of health workforce per 1000 
population is still inadequate. The availability of staff in the healthcare  
institutions is to be made as per IPHS norms. 
(iii)  Act to regulate private health service-providers: There are a range of 
healthcare service providers from quacks to private hospitals but there are no 
norms to measure good quality medical services and minimum standards and 
requirements of hospitals, nursing homes and multi-speciality healthcare units.  
Therefore, an Act to register and regulate all clinical establishments was to be 
passed by the State Legislature with a view to prescribe minimum standards of 
facilities and services which may be provided by them so that  the mandate of 
Article 47 of the Constitution for improvement in public health may be 
achieved. 
(iv)  Smart Governance: It is not easy to track every health transaction in 
hundreds of hospitals and health centres spread across every village, town and 
city of Punjab, where thousands of health professionals and support staff require 
supply of vaccines, medicines, and diagnos tics on a regular daily basis to 
perform their assigned duties. Information T echnology (IT) solutions are 
needed for recording and reporting of every health transaction so that an 
appropriate dashboard of indicators can guide decision-making at various levels 
of administration. Online system for storing, distribution, and monitoring of the 
stocks of medicines and other essential supplies has been initiated, which needs 
to be extended to other stores to build an inventory of medical equipment 
availability and functionality.  
(v)  Health Financing: Public expenditure on health is very low in Punjab 
(0.89 per cent  of GSDP in 2016- 17). As per the Vision Document, about 
80 per cent out-patient care and 70 per cent  in-patient care were in private 
sector. Smart governance should aim to produce more health for the allotted 
money. However, large investments are needed to revitalise  the Government 
health sector.  
The Punjab Vision Document , 2030 delineates the milestone -based indicator 
projection for the SDGs and in respect of SDG-3, 29 indicators were projected. 
Out of the total 29 indicators defined in the Vision Document, 16 indicators 

Chapter-I: Introduction 
3 
were not included in the State Indicator Framework (SIF) which monitors State 
Government priorities, schemes, strategy and action plan for achieving SDGs. 
Status of remaining 13 indicators included in SIF and their achievement is 
shown in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Status of indicators included in State Indicator Framework and  
their achievement 
Sr. 
No. 
Indicator Milestone 1 
(2017-20) 
Milestone 2 
(2025) 
Target 
2030 
Achievement 
upto 
2019-20 
1.  Reduce maternal 
mortality ratio to less than 
70 per 1,00,000 live 
births by 2030  
115 85 60 113 
2.  Neonatal mortality rate 
(NNMR) per 1,000 live 
births 
18 13 11 5.7 
3.  HIV infections per 1,000 
uninfected population 
1.5 0.50 0 0.08 
4.  Tuberculosis incidence 
per 1,000 population 
Data to be generated 196 
5.  Malaria incidence per 
1,000 population 
0 0 0 0.037 
6.  Hepatitis B incidence per 
1,00,000 population 
Data to be generated Data not 
available  
7.  Dengue incidence Reduce 
cases by 
35% 
Reduce 
cases by 
50% 
Reduce 
cases by 
75% 
Data not 
available  
8.  Hepatitis B Reduce 
cases by 
25% 
Reduce 
cases by 
50% 
Reduce 
cases by 
75% 
Data not 
available  
9.  Reduce by 1/3 premature 
mortality from NCDs 
through prevention and 
treatment and promote 
mental health and  
well-being 
• Probability of dying by 
70 years due to NCDs 
 
• Prevalence of 
hypertension 
 
• Prevalence of diabetes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduce to 
20% 
 
Reduce to 
37% 
Reduce to 
9.75% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduce to 
15% 
 
Reduce to 
33% 
Reduce to 
9% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduce to 
10% 
 
Reduce to 
30% 
Reduce to 
8% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data not 
available 
10.  Alcohol 
consumption/dependency 
• Men 
• Women 
 
 
17.5% 
0 
 
 
10% 
0 
 
 
Dry State 
 
 
Data not 
available  
11.  Unmet need for family 
planning 
Reduce to 
11.5% 
Reduce to 
8% 
Reduce to 
5% 
5.64 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
4 
Sr. 
No. 
Indicator Milestone 1 
(2017-20) 
Milestone 2 
(2025) 
Target 
2030 
Achievement 
upto 
2019-20 
12.  Strengthen the 
implementation of the 
world health organization 
framework convention on 
tobacco control in all 
countries, as appropriate 
10 Distt. 
COTPA 
compliant 
Tobacco free 
state 
- Data not 
available  
13.  Support the research and 
development of vaccines 
and medicines for the 
communicable and non-
communicable diseases 
1% of the 
budget on 
research 
1.5% of the 
budget on 
research 
2% of the 
budget on 
research 
Data not 
available  
Source: Punjab Vision Document, 2030 and Department of Health and Family Welfare (for achievement) 
It can be seen that relevant data was not available with the Department for seven 
indicators. Further, against the targets of Milestone 1 , achievement was made  
only in case of four indicators (Maternal Mortality Ratio, NNMR, HIV, and 
unmet need for family planning) whereas targets were not achieved in case of 
one indicator (Malaria incidence per 1,000 population) which indicated lack of 
planning. 
Further, some of the major plans outlined by the State Government during the 
presentation of State Budget s for the period 2016- 17 to 2020- 21 included 
opening of new Medical Colleges at Mohali, Kapurthala and Hoshiarpur, State 
Cancer Institute at Amritsar, Tertiary Care Centre at Fazilka, s trengthening of 
existing Government Medical College at Patiala and Amritsar for increasing 
new MBBS and PG seats, setting up of ICUs in all the district hospitals, setting 
up new hospitals at Doraha in Ludhiana and Ghanour  and upgradation of 
existing Civil Hospital Bathinda, recruitment of more manpower to meet all 
requirements and setting up of Health and Wellness Centres (HWC). 
Scrutiny of six test -checked District Hospitals (DH) revealed that  ICUs were 
setup in DH Gurdaspur and DH Ludhiana only. Further, progress made by the 
State Government (as on 31 March 2021) on various fronts, as envisaged in the 
Vision Document and announcements made during presentation of budget was 
examined and status thereof has been incorporated in Paragraphs 2.2 to 2.5.5 of 
Chapter II, Paragraphs 5.4, 5.5.2.1 and 5.5.2.2 of Chapter V and Paragraph 8.1 
of Chapter VIII, etc. 
  

Chapter-I: Introduction 
5 
1.2 Health Services 
Health services provided by the hospitals can broadly be divided in the 
following categories: 
All public health services depend on the presence of basic infrastructure 
including availability of human resources. Every public health program, such as 
immunisation, infectious disease monitoring, cancer and asthma prevention, 
drinking water quality, injury prevention, etc. requires health professionals who 
are competent in synergising their professional and technical skills in public 
health and provide organisations with the capacity to assess and respond to 
community health needs. Public health infrast ructure has been referred to as 
“the nerve centre of the public health system”. While creation of strong 
infrastructure is the responsibility of many organisations, public health agencies 
(Health Departments) are considered primary players. 
The primary objective of the National Health Policy, 2017 is to improve health 
status through concerted policy action in all sectors and expand preventive, 
promotive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative services provided through the 
public sector. The policy also recognises the pivotal importance of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) to ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for 
all at all ages. At the global level, the Sustainable Development Agenda aims to 
ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all at all ages by 2030 as per 
SDG-3. 
Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) are a set of uniform standards envisaged 
to improve the quality of healthcare delivery in the country. IPHS norms were 
revised in 2012 keeping in view the changing protocols of the existing 
programmes and introduction of new programmes , especially for  
Non-Communicable Diseases but the State Government has not adopted IPHS 
norms. 
Line services 
i. Outdoor patient department 
ii. Indoor patient department 
iii. Emergency services 
iv. Super speciality (OT, ICU) 
v. Maternity 
vi. Blood bank 
vii. Diagnostic services 
 
 
 
Support services 
i. Oxygen service 
ii. Dietary service 
iii. Laundry service 
iv. Biomedical waste 
management 
v. Ambulance service 
vi. Mortuary service 
 
Auxiliary services 
i. Patient safety facilities 
ii. Patient registration 
iii. Grievance / Complaint 
redressal 
iv. Stores 
 
 
 
Resource Management 
i. Building Infrastructure 
ii. Human Resource 
iii. Drugs and Consumables  
iv. Equipment 
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
6 
1.3 Overview of Healthcare Facilities in the State 
In the State,  public healthcare is structured into three levels for providing 
primary care, secondary care and tertiary care as indicated in Chart 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Structure of Public Healthcare in the State of Punjab 
 
Sub-Centres ( SC) and Primary Health Centres (PHC) are primary level 
healthcare units which provide initial healthcare services to the people.  Patients 
requiring more serious healthcare attention are referred to the second tier of the 
healthcare system consisting of Community Health Centres (CHC),  
Sub-Divisional Hospitals and District Hospitals, established in each district for 
providing preventive, promotive and curative healthcare services to the 
population. Tertiary healthcare is provided by the hospitals associated with the 
Government Medical Colleges. 
State Government Health Institutes in Punjab include 23 District Hospitals, 
42 Sub-Divisional Hospitals, 150 CHCs, 424 PHCs, 2,952 Sub Centres, three
1 
Government Medical Colleges and one Medical College (Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
State Institute of Medical Sciences) under construction at SAS Nagar, one 
Government Ayurvedic College at Patiala, two 2 Government Dental Colleges 
and Hospitals, two Government Colleges of Nursing at Amritsar and Patiala and 
 
1 (i) Government Medical College, Amritsar; (ii) Government Medical College, Patiala; and  
(iii) Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot. 
2 (i) Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar; and (ii) Government Dental College and 
Hospital, Patiala. 
Three tier 
Healthcare System
Primary
Primary Health 
Centres
Sub Centres
Secondary
District Hospitals
Sub Divisional 
Hospitals
Community Health 
Centres
Tertiary
Medical Colleges 

Chapter-I: Introduction 
7 
six3 Hospitals attached with Medical Colleges. Further, there are  one 
Government Ayurvedic College, five AYUSH Hospitals, 17 Swasthya Kendras 
and 507 Ayurvedic Dispensaries in the State. 
1.4 Organisational Set-up 
The Health and Family Welfare Department consists of the following 
Directorates/Corporation/Agency, as described in the organogram (Chart 1.2). 
Chart 1.2: Organisational structure of Health and Family Welfare Department 
 
 
3 (i) Sri Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, Amritsar; (ii) Rajindera Hospital, Patiala; (iii) Guru Gobind Singh 
Hospital, Faridkot; (iv) Government Ayurvedic Hospital, Patiala; (v) TB Sanatorium, Amritsar; and 
(vi) TB Hospital, Patiala. 
Health and Family 
Welfare Department 
Director, Health & 
Family Welfare
Administers all District Hospitals, 
Community Health Centres, 
Primary Health Centres
Director, Health 
Services
Administers family planning and 
immunisation programmes
Director, Social 
Insurance
Administers Employees Social 
Insurance
Director, Ayurveda
Handles matters related to Indian 
Systems of Medicine & 
Homeopathy (AYUSH)
National Health 
Mission
Administration of Centrally 
sponsored programmes under 
National Health Mission
Punjab Health 
Systems 
Corporation
Procurement and supply of 
medicines and equipment in all 
Health Institutions in the State
Commissioner, Food 
and Drugs 
Administration
Enforces regulations under the 
Food Safety & Standards Act 
2006 and Drugs & Cosmetics 
Act 1940 and Rules 1945
State Health Agency
Regulates Ayushman Bharat -
Mukh Mantri Sehat Bima Yojana 
(AB-MMSBY)

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
8 
The head of health services at the district level is the Civil Surgeon (CS) while 
the District Hospitals (DH) are headed by Senior  Medical Officers  (SMO).  
The Community Health Centres (CHC) and Primary Health Centres (PHC) are 
headed by SMOs  and Medical Officers (MO ) in-charge respectively.  
The National Health Mission headed by a Mission Director , has 23 District 
Health Societies (DHS), located one in each district of the State. The Mission 
implements Central Schemes/Centre -State sharing schemes through DHs, 
CHCs and PHCs.  
The Commissioner, Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) regulates the 
manufacturing of drugs and cosmetics and sale of drugs in the State. 
Responsibility of the FDA includes grant of manufacturing and sales licences 
for Allopathic Drugs (Modern Medicine) through inspection, grant and renewal 
of licenses for operation of blood banks, monitoring of quality of medicines and 
cosmetics through routine and statutory sampling, post marketing surveillance 
and recall of Not of Standard Quality (NSQ) medicines and cosmetics from the 
market, detection of spurious, adulterated and misbranded drugs and cosmetics, 
conducting investigation of complaints and launching prosecution against the 
offenders. There is one Food and Drugs laboratory under the control of 
Commissioner, Food and Drugs Administration, Punjab. 
1.5 Status of Health Indicators in the State 
The healthcare services in a S tate can be evaluated on the basis of  the 
achievements against benchmarks of health indicators. The status of a few 
important health indicators of Punjab vis -a-vis National average are given  in 
Chart 1.3. 
Chart 1.3: Health Indicators in the State and India 
 
Source: SRS Bulletin (2016-2020) 
14.9 14.9 14.8 14.5 14.3
20.4 20.2 20 19.7 19.5
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Birth Rate (per 1,000 population)
Punjab India
6.0
7
6.6 6.6 7.2
6.4
6.3 6.2 6 6
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Death Rate (per 1,000 population)
Punjab India

Chapter-I: Introduction 
9 
 
Source: NFHS-5 (2019-21) 
 
 
Source: SRS MMR Bulletin (May 2018 -
November 2022) and SRS Bulletin (2016-2020) 
Source: NFHS-5 (2019-21) 
It is observed that  the birth rate (per 1 ,000) in the State has decreased from 
14.9 (2016) to 14.3 (2020), which is less than the national figures. Death rate in 
the State has increased from 6 (2016) to 7.2 (2020) which is above the national 
figures. Infant mortality rate has decreased from 29.2 (2015-16) to  
28 (2019-21) which is better than the national figures. In case of total fertility 
rate, it has remained stagnant at 1.6 during the period 2015- 16 to 2019-21 and 
is lower than the national figures. Maternal Mortality Ra tio in the State has 
decreased from 122 (2014-2016) to 105 (2018-2020) which is higher than  the 
national figures during 2016-2020. Sex Ratio of the total population (females 
per 1,000 males) has improved from 905 (2015-2016) to 938 (2019-2021 ) but 
remained below the national figures. 
1.6 Sustainable Development Goals 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 2030 Agenda was adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly in September 2015 to set out a vision for a 
world free of poverty, hunger, disease and want. 
In India, the National Institution for Transforming India (NITI) Aayog is 
responsible for overall coordination of SDGs and the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is responsible for the formulation of the 
29.2 28
40.7
35.2
2015-16 2019-21
Infant Mortality Rate 
(per 1,000 live births)
Punjab India
1.6 1.6
2.2 2
2015-16 2019-21
Total Fertility Rate 
(per woman)
Punjab India
122
122 129
114 105
130
122 113 103 97
2014-16 2015-17 2016-18 2017-19 2018-20
Maternal Mortality Ratio 
(per 1,00,000 live births)
Punjab India
905
938
991
1020
2015-16 2019-21
Sex Ratio of the total population 
(females per 1,000 males)
Punjab India

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
10 
National Indicator Framework (NIF) to monitor SDGs. The Government of 
Punjab had prepared and adopted SDG Vision 2030 in November 2018. 
SDG-3 seeks to ensure health and well-being for all, at every stage of life. The 
goal addresses all major health priorities, including reproductive, maternal and 
child health; communicable, non- communicable and environmental diseases; 
universal health coverage; and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable 
medicine and vaccines.  The performance of the State in respect of SDG -3 has 
been discussed in Chapter-IX. 
1.7 Performance of Punjab in National Family Health Surveys 
The National Family Health Survey conducted in 2015- 16 (NFHS -4) and 
NFHS-5 conducted in 2019-21, provides information on population, health, and 
nutrition for India and each State/Union Territory (UT). Some of the important 
health indicators of Punjab are given in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Performance of Punjab vis-à-vis India in important health indicators 
Indicator 
NFHS-4 NFHS-5 
Punjab India Punjab India 
Sex ratio at birth for children born in the last five 
years (females per 1,000 males) 
860 919 904 929 
Neonatal mortality rate (NNMR)  21.2 29.5 21.8 24.9 
Under-five mortality rate (U5MR)  33.2 49.7 32.7 41.9 
Mothers who had an antenatal check-up in the first 
trimester (%)  
75.6 58.6 68.5 70 
Mothers who had at least 4 antenatal care visits (%)  68.5 51.2 59.3 58.1 
Mothers whose last birth was protected against 
neonatal tetanus4 (%)  
92.9 89 89.7 92 
Mothers who consumed iron folic acid for 100 days 
or more when they were pregnant (%)  
42.6 30.3 55.4 44.1 
Mothers who consumed iron folic acid for 180 days 
or more when they were pregnant (%)  
19.9 14.4 40.5 26 
Registered pregnancies for which the mother 
received a Mother and Child Protection (MCP) 
Card (%)  
95.1 89.3 96.9 95.9 
Mothers who received postnatal care from a 
doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health 
personnel within 2 days of delivery (%) 
87.2 62.4 86.2 78 
Average out-of-pocket expenditure per delivery in 
a public health facility (₹)  
1,890 3197 3,745 2,916 
Children born at home who were taken to a health 
facility for a check-up within 24 hours of birth (%)  
2.8 2.5 1.3 4.2 
Children who received postnatal care from a 
doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health 
personnel within 2 days of delivery (%)  
NA NA 84.7 79.1 
Institutional births (%)  90.5 78.9 94.3 88.6 
 
4 Includes mothers with two injections during the pregnancy for their last birth, or two or more 
injections (the last within 3 years of the last live birth), or three or more injections (the last within 
5 years of the last birth), or four or more injections (the last within 10 years of the last live birth), or 
five or more injections at any time prior to the last birth.   

Chapter-I: Introduction 
11 
Indicator 
NFHS-4 NFHS-5 
Punjab India Punjab India 
Institutional births in public facility (%)  51.7 52.1 53.9 61.9 
Home births that were conducted by skilled health 
personnel5 (%)  
4.5 4.3 2.6 3.2 
Births attended by skilled health personnel (%)  94.1 81.4 95.6 89.4 
Births delivered by caesarean section (%)  24.6 17.2 38.5 21.5 
Births in a private health facility that were 
delivered by caesarean section (%)  
39.7 40.9 55.5 47.4 
Births in a public health facility that were delivered 
by caesarean section (%)  
17.8 11.9 29.9 14.3 
Source: NFHS-4 and NFHS-5 
Colour Code: 
 Health Indicators above National average 
 Health Indicators below National average 
(i)  In NFHS-5 (2019-21), performance of Punjab was below the National 
level in most of the health indicators, as detailed below. 
Sex ratio at birth for children born in the last five years (females per 1,000 
males) was 929 at national level whereas in the State, it was 904. Mothers who 
had an antenatal check-up in the first trimester (%) was 68.5 per cent in the State 
against the N ational level of 70 per cent . Similarly, mothers whose last birth 
was protected against neonatal tetanus was also below the National level by 
2.3 per cent. Average out-of-pocket expenditure per delivery in a public health 
facility in the State was higher than the national average.  Only 1.3 per  cent 
children born at home were taken to a health facility for a check -up within 
24 hours against the National level of 4.2 per cent. Institutional births in public 
facility remained lower than the National figure. Moreover, births delivered by 
caesarean section in Public and Private Health Facility was higher than the 
National level. 
(ii)  Performance of Punjab in NFHS -5 (2019- 21) also deteriorated in 
comparison to previous survey, i.e. NFHS -4 (2015- 16) on many health 
indicators, as detailed below: 
The NNMR went up from 21.2 to 21.8. Mothers who had an antenatal check-up 
in the first trimester came down from 75.6 per cent  to 68.5 per cent . Mothers 
who had at least 4 antenatal care visits declined from 68.5 per cent  to  
59.3 per cent. Similarly, only 89.7 per cent  mothers’ last birth was protected 
against neonatal tetanus against earlier 92.9 per cent . Average out -of-pocket 
expenditure per delivery in a public health facility has risen from ₹ 1,890 to 
₹ 3,745. Only 1.3 per cent children born at home were taken to a health facility 
for a check -up within 24 hours of birth in comparison to earlier 2.8 per cent . 
Home births that were conducted by skilled health personnel declined from  
4.5 per cent to 2.6 per cent. The number of births delivered by caesarean section 
 
5 Doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health personnel.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
12 
in public as well as private health facilities has risen from 24.6 per cent  to 
38.5 per cent. 
1.8 Audit Objectives 
The new National Health Policy (NHP) adopted in 2017 builds on the progress 
made in 14 years since the last NHP came in 2002. The context had changed in 
four major ways: 
 First, although maternal and child mortality have rapidly declined, there 
is growing burden on account of non-communicable diseases and some 
infectious diseases.  
 The second important change is the emergence of a robust healthcare  
industry estimated to be growing at double digit.  
 The third change is the growing incidences of catastrophic expenditure 
due to healthcare costs, which are presently estimated to be one of the 
major contributors to poverty.  
 Fourth, a rising economic growth enables enhanced fiscal capacity.  
Therefore, the new health policy was adopted to respond to these contextual 
changes. The primary aim of NHP 2017 is to inform, clarify, strengthen and 
prioritise the role of the Government in shaping health systems in all its 
dimensions. 
Considering the goals laid down in NHP 2017 and experience in  
COVID-19 Pandemic, it has become crucial to assess the adequacy of financial 
resources, availability of health infrastructure, manpower, machinery and 
equipment in the health institutions , as well as efficacy in the management of 
health services in the State, through existing policy interventions and look at the 
scope for further improvement.  
Thus, to ensure timely and systematic corrections, a performance audit on the 
Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services in the State of 
Punjab was taken up. 
The objective of the Performance Audit (PA) is to provide a holistic view of the 
Healthcare Sector in the State, i.e. a macro picture using State level information 
and data and a micro picture arising from detailed audit analysis/findings on 
maintenance of infrastructure and delivery of healthcare services. This has been 
done by assessing the following: 
• The availability of the necessary human resources at all levels, e.g. 
doctors, nursing, paramedics, etc.; 
• The availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables; 
• The availability and management of healthcare infrastructure; 

Chapter-I: Introduction 
13 
• Adequacy of the funding for healthcare; 
• The funding and spending of various schemes of the Government of 
India; 
• The adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms for 
ensuring that quality healthcare services are provided in the 
public/private healthcare institutions/practitioners; and 
• Whether State spending on health has improved the health and  
well-being conditions of the people as per SDG-3. 
1.9 Scope of Audit 
The audit covering the period 2016-2021 was conducted from September 2021 
to July 2022 and wherever feasible, the data has been updated up to 2021 -226. 
The audit sample is described below. 
 
 
6 The State level data in respect of human resources has been updated up to March 2023. 
•Director, Health and Family Welfare
•Director, Health Services
•Director, Research and Medical Education
•Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration
•Mission Director, National Health Mission
•Punjab Health Systems Corporation
•Punjab Pollution Control Board, Patiala
Coverage of Directorates, Corporation and Board
•All six Civil Surgeons office of selected districts
•All six District Hospitals of selected districts
•12 out of 56 Community Health Centres (CHC)
•24 out of 146 Primary Health Centres (PHC)
•24 out of 883 HWCs
•One Medical College and Hospital at Patiala
Six districts (Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur, 
Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana and Moga) for field study out of
23 districts, selected using Probability Proportional to 
Size Without Replacement method

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
14 
The details of selected Health Institutions in sampled districts are given in 
Appendix 1.2. Apart from sampled districts, statistical data in respect of all 
districts has also been incorporated. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
have been analy sed and mapped with Punjab’s Vision 2030 Document. 
Moreover, the records pertaining to assistance/grants/equipment received  for 
COVID-19 have been scrutinised. Funding by Private Sector and Local Bodies 
on healthcare has been excluded. The regulatory aspects relating to the Punjab 
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2020, Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act ,1940 and Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules , 2016 have 
been reviewed in the Performance Audit. 
Districts for selection of field units in Punjab are depicted in the map below: 
 
A survey of doctors and patients (652 patients7 - IPD/OPD) selected on random 
basis was conducted during performance audit  in the selected healthcare  
institutions in order to get feedback from doctors and patients’ satisfaction.  
The outcomes of the survey have been depicted in Chapter-III. 
 
7 Sample size for the survey was worked out with Unstratified Mean Per Unit (MPU). 


Chapter-I: Introduction 
15 
1.10 Sources of Audit Criteria 
Criteria were adopted for audit from the following sources: 
i. Indian Public Health Standards 2012; 
ii. National Health Mission - Assessors’ Guidebook for Quality Assurance 
in District Hospitals (2013); 
iii. National Health Mission - Assessors’ Guidebook for Quality Assurance 
in Community Health Centres (2014); 
iv.  National Health Mission  - Assessors’ Guidebook for Quality 
Assurance in Primary Health Centres (2014); 
v. National Health Mission other Guidelines (Appendix 1.3); 
vi. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and The National Medical 
Commission Act, 2019; 
vii. Minimum Standard Requirements for The Medical College for 
100/150/200/250 Admission Annually Regulations, 1999, 2010 and 
2020; 
viii. National Health Policy, 2017; 
ix. Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics Regulation, 2002; 
x. The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010; 
xi. The Punjab Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
2020; 
xii. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 
xiii. The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945; 
xiv. Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
xv. Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004; 
xvi. The Punjab Transparency in Public Procurement Act, 2019; 
xvii. Punjab Financial Rules; 
xviii. Manual, Orders, Circulars and Schemes guidelines issued by GoI and 
GoP from time to time; 
xix. Static and Mobile Pressure Vessels (Unfired) Rules, 2015; 
xx. National Disaster Management Guidelines (Hospital Safety), 2016; 
xxi. Punjab Substance Use Disorder Treatment and Counseling and 
Rehabilitation Centres Rules, 2011; 
xxii. Guidelines for Prevention of Parent -to-Child Transmission of HIV 
using Multi-Drug Anti-retroviral Regimen in India (2013) (NACO); 
xxiii. ‘Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi’ Guidelines; 
xxiv. Mukh Mantri Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh Scheme (2015); 
xxv. Punjab Treasury Rules, 1985; 
xxvi. Punjab Vision Document 2030; 
xxvii. SDG National Indicators Framework Baseline Report 2015-16; 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
16 
xxviii. SDG India Index Baseline Report 2018; 
xxix. SDG India Index 2018-21; 
xxx. Punjab SDG Index Analysis Report 2020-21; and 
xxxi. 2nd Voluntary National Review by NITI Aayog. 
The entry conference was held (December 2021) with the Secretary, DH&FW 
and the Principal Secretary, DMER, the Managing Director, PHSC  and the  
Mission Director, NHM, wherein the audit objectives, audit criteria, audit scope 
and methodology were discussed.  
The exit conference was held (December 2022) with the Secretary, DH&FW 
and the Additional Secretary, DMER wherein audit findings were discussed. 
Further, the Secretary, DH&FW appreciated the efforts put in by the audit team 
in preparing the Performance Audit Report and also stated that the Report 
presented an all -round view of the Department and it would certainly help in 
better decision making/monitoring by the executive. 
1.11 Consideration of Ayushman Bharat in this Report  
Ayushman Bharat (AB), the flagship health scheme of the Government of India, 
was launched in the year 2018 to achieve Universal Health Coverage (UHC) as 
recommended in the National Health Policy, 2017. AB adopts a continuum of 
care approach, comprising of two inter-related components, which are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health and 
Wellness Centres 
(HWC) 
•Creation of 1,50,000 HWCs by transforming the existing
Sub Centres and Primary Health Centres in February
2018.
•Aim to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care
(CPHC) covering maternal and child health services and
non-communicable diseases, including free essential
drugs and diagnostic services.
Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Arogya 
Yojana (PMJAY)
•Aims to provide a cover of ₹ 5 lakh per family per year
for secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation across
public and private empanelled hospitals in India.
•Over 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable entitled families
(approximately 50 crore beneficiaries) are eligible for
these benefits.
•Provides cashless access to health care services for the
beneficiary at the point of service, that is, the hospital.
•Benefits of the scheme are portable across the country
i.e. a beneficiary can visit any empanelled public or
private hospital in India to avail cashless treatment.
•Services include approximately 1,393 procedures
covering all the costs related to treatment, including but
not limited to drugs, supplies, diagnostic services,
physician's fees, room charges, surgeon charges, OT,
and ICU charges, etc.
•Public hospitals are reimbursed for the healthcare
services at par with the private hospitals.

Chapter-I: Introduction 
17 
The Government of Punjab (GoP ) had registered the State Health Agency 
(SHA) in December 2018 under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and as 
amended by the Punjab Amendment Act, 1957. In Punjab, AB-PMJAY Scheme 
(Centrally Sponsored Scheme) has been functioning alongside the State 
Sponsored Scheme ‘Ayushman Bharat  - Mukh Mantri Sehat Bima Yojana  
(AB-MMSBY).  The AB-MMSBY was launched in August 2019 and included 
beneficiaries of five more categories ( smart ration card holder families, 
construction workers, small traders, journalists and farmers) whose premium is 
being borne by the State Government. In Punjab, 720 Government medical 
establishments and Private Hospitals
8 were em panelled with  
AB PM-JAY MMSBY and covers both the schemes. 
As per the Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC) 2011, there were  
69.03 lakh beneficiaries under 14.65 lakh families. Thereafter, the National  
Health Authority increased the number of beneficiaries from 69.03 lakh 
beneficiaries to 70.56 lakh beneficiaries and from 14.65 lakh families to  
14.98 lakh families. Out of 70.56 lakh beneficiaries, only 31.91 lakh 
beneficiaries were registered in Punjab State as of January 2023 with 
Beneficiary Identification System ( BIS) under PMJAY on the basis of their 
eligibility as per National criteria, i.e. the SECC database. The total coverage of 
beneficiaries is, therefore, 45.23 per cent during the period August 2019- 
January 2023 in the State. Coverage of beneficiaries across districts varied , as 
detailed in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3: Position of registered beneficiaries as of January 2023 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of District Total No. of 
eligible 
beneficiaries 
under PMJAY 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
registered under 
PMJAY 
Percentage of 
beneficiaries 
registered under 
PMJAY 
1. Amritsar 6,13,015 2,57,560 42.02 
2. Barnala 1,62,475 71,786 44.18 
3. Bathinda 3,65,332 1,58,618 43.42 
4. Faridkot 1,83,996 77,079 41.89 
5. Fatehgarh Sahib 1,53,057 69,588 45.47 
6. Ferozepur 7,09,978 1,37,031 42.73* 7. Fazilka - 1,66,325 
8. Gurdaspur 4,58,565 1,65,237 48.34* 9. Pathankot - 56,447 
10. Hoshiarpur 2,98,856 1,59,758 53.46 
11. Jalandhar 4,59,688 2,31,979 50.46 
12. Kapurthala 1,39,893 48,030 34.33 
13. Ludhiana 10,10,255 4,83,742 47.88 
14. Mansa 2,75,134 1,33,179 48.41 
15. Moga 2,81,846 1,14,890 40.76 
16. Malerkotla - - - 
 
8 Government medical establishments: 209 + Private Hospitals: 511 (Source: Official Website of SHA 
05.02.2024). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
18 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of District Total No. of 
eligible 
beneficiaries 
under PMJAY 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
registered under 
PMJAY 
Percentage of 
beneficiaries 
registered under 
PMJAY 
17. Sri Muktsar Sahib 3,39,060 1,65,336 48.76 
18. Patiala 4,61,742 2,07,914 45.03 
19. Rupnagar 1,16,087 51,115 44.03 
20. S.A.S. Nagar 1,80,716 49,286 27.27 
21. Sangrur 4,81,705 2,40,885 50.01 
22. S.B.S. Nagar 1,10,424 51,424 46.57 
23. Tarn Taran 2,54,147 94,169 37.05 
Total 70,55,971 31,91,378 45.23 
Source: State Health Agency 
Note: The data for PMJAY beneficiaries was not separately available with the agency since the 
districts Fazilka (carved out of Ferozepur), Pathankot (carved out of Gurdaspur) and Malerkotla (carved 
out of Sangrur) were not created at the time of Census 2011. 
* Audit has calculated Percentage of beneficiaries registered under PMJAY in respect of districts 
Ferozepur and Gurdaspur by adding the number of beneficiaries registered in the districts Fazilka and 
Pathankot respectively. 
Colour Code: 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate registration’ 
 Red denotes ‘less registration’ 
An All-India Performance Audit of PMJAY was conducted for the period up to 
March 2021, in which Punjab was one of the sampled S tates. In the current 
Report, we have included findings related to HWCs in a separate chapter and 
have also considered implementation of Ayushman Bharat while making 
recommendations in various areas of health sector . Audit findings relating to 
infrastructure, services and human resource s relating to  HWCs have been 
commented upon in the respective chapters of this Report.  
1.12 Organisation of audit f indings 
The audit findings, conclusions and recommendations relating to audit 
objectives have been reported in the succeeding chapters, as detailed below: 
Chapter-II Human Resources 
Chapter-III Healthcare Services 
Chapter-IV Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other 
consumables 
Chapter-V Healthcare Infrastructure 
Chapter-VI Financial Management 
Chapter-VII Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Chapter-VIII Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
Chapter-IX Sustainable Development Goal-3 
 

19 
Chapter-II 
 
Human Resources 
For an effective and efficient functioning of a District/Sub- District hospital, 
adequate number of motivated, empowered, trained and skilled human 
resource is essential. Human resource planning is a must before investing in 
other components like infrastructure, drugs, diagnostics, equipment , etc. The 
number and type of staff in terms of specialists, medical officers, nurses, allied 
health professionals, administrative and support staff have to be ascertained 
taking into consideration health facility requirements of the people to which 
the health institution s cater to. Availability of manpower and related issues 
have been discussed in the following paragraphs: 
2.1 Human resources availability against sanctioned strength 
Audit analysed the data of Integrated Human Resource s Management System 
(iHRMS) obtained (31.1 2.2022) from the Director, Treasuries and Accounts, 
Punjab. The iHRMS data contains inter  alia information of sanctioned posts 
and employees posted thereagainst in Department  of Health and Family 
Welfare (DH&FW) and Department of Medical Education and Research  
(DMER). 
The data contained sanctioned strength and persons- in-position (permanent 
employees) for all the offices ( Headquarters, Medical Colleges, District 
Hospitals, Community Health Centres , Primary Health Centres , Sub-Centres, 
etc.) and field staff of the above-mentioned Departments. 
2.2 Availability of manpower  
 
2.2.1 Department of Health and Family Welfare 
 
2.2.1.1 Geographical s kewedness in distribution of available manpower 
It is important for the Government to deploy available manpower uniformly 
across the State. However, Audit observed from the iHRMS data that the 
vacant posts in DH&FW  were unevenly distributed. The vacancy position 
varied from as low as  29.14 per cent in Pathankot district to 62.30 per cent in 
Hoshiarpur district as shown in Chart 2.1. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
20 
Chart 2.1: Skewed distribution of manpower across the State under DH&FW  
as on 31.12.2022 (in percentage)  
 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
Data in respect of District Malerkotla was not depicted in iHRMS data (December 2022). District 
Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn through MS 
Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour code: Darker the colour, higher the vacancy position of manpower 
 
2.2.1.2 Post-wise skewedness in distribution of available manpower 
Position of shortage of manpower in different cadres (in percentage ) as on 
31 December 2022 under DH&FW, GoP is given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Availability of staff in Department of Health and Family Welfare 
Category Sanctioned 
Post 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant Posts Vacancy  
Percentage 
Doctor 10,7021 5,6702 5,032 47.02 
Nurse 7,814 4,399 3,415 43.70 
Paramedics 22,858 11,984 10,874 47.57 
Others 17,424 7,804 9,620 55.21 
Total 58,798 29,857* 28,941 49.22 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
*  Additionally, 849 Doctors; 1,371 Nurses; 4,894 Paramedics; and 1,333 other staff were deployed on 
 contractual basis. 
 
1  Includes 3,509 sanctioned posts of Ayurveda, Homeopathy and Unani doctors.  
2  Includes 1,328 posts of Ayurveda, Homeopathy and Unani doctors. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
21 
Table 2.1 shows that in DH&FW, 49.22 per cent of total sanctioned strength, 
i.e. 28,941 posts, were vacant in different categories. 
Further, DH&FW has 323 different types of posts. Shortages in some of the 
important posts are shown in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Shortage in manpower as on 31.12.2022 
Sr. 
No. Post Name Sanctioned 
Post 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Vacancy 
Percentage 
1. Medical Officer* 5,688 3,219 2,469 43.41 
2. Medical Officer 
(Specialist)* 4,991 2,451 2,540 50.89 
3. Staff Nurse# 7,415 4,309 3,106 41.89 
4. Nursing Sister# 331 86 245 74.02 
5. ANM 3,967 1,788 2,179 54.93 
6. Multi-Purpose Health 
Worker (Male) 4,037 2,968 1,069 26.48 
7. Multi-Purpose Health 
Worker (Female) 4,297 2,239 2,058 47.89 
8. Ophthalmic Officer 230 124 106 46.09 
9. Lab Technician 2,259 1,229 1,030 45.60 
10. Pharmacist 2,965 1,765 1,200 40.47 
11. Ward Attendant 3,257 1,279 1,978 60.73 
12. Data Entry Operator 99 44 55 55.56 
13. Clerk 1,072 556 516 48.13 
14. Class IV 1,690 802 888 52.54 
15. Sweeper 2,214 898 1,316 59.44 
16. Operation Theatre 
Assistant 163 73 90 
55.21 
17. Radiographer 542 444 98 18.08 
Total 45,217 24,274 20,943 46.32 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
*  Excluding Senior Residents and Junior Residents. 
#  Excluding Nurses deployed against administrative posts. 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red denotes ‘most shortage’ 
The above 17 posts in DH&FW contribute to 77 per cent  of its total 
workforce. Shortage of manpower in terms of percentage for Medical Officer 
(Specialist), Nursing Sister, ANM, MPHW (Female), Ward Attendant, Data 
Entry Operator, Clerk, Class IV, Sweeper and Operation Theatre Assistant 
was more than the average shortage of important posts in DH&FW 
i.e. 46.32 per cent. Audit noticed that non -availability of manpower in critical 
posts such as Medical Officer (Specialist), Nurse, ANM , Pharmacist, MPHW, 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
22 
Lab Technician, Operation Theatre Assistant, Radiographer, etc. impacted 
provision of essential services in health institutions such as non- operation of 
equipment/machinery, non- functioning of Operation Theatre services and 
Intensive Care Unit services and non -operationalisation of HWCs , as 
discussed subsequently in Chapters III and V. 
Further, it was also noticed that against the sanctioned posts of 10,392 in 
categories, like Trained Dai
3, Computer 4, Information Assistant, etc. only 
166 employees were posted, i.e. 98.4 per cent posts were lying vacant. 
Contrarily, there were posts like Counsellor, Statistical Assistant, Assistant 
Director, etc. where 5,526 employees were posted against 3,534 sanctioned 
posts, i.e. 156.37 per cent employees were posted. 
Moreover, IPHS provide for availability of speciality- wise doctors such as  
Gynaecologist, Anesthetist, Paediatrician, etc. Shortage of availability of 
requisite human resource s against sanctioned strength led to non- availability 
of essential OPD, IPD and Emergency Services , as discussed in related 
Chapters of the Report. 
2.2.1.3 Uneven Sanctioned Strength of Doctors at District Level 
Punjab has a total of 7,193 sanctioned posts of allopathic doctors under 
DH&FW, i.e. one G overnment doctor for 3,857 people. It has been observed 
that sanctioned posts of doctors have no correlation with population, as shown 
in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: District-wise population per sanctioned doctor as on 31.12.2022 
Sr. No Name of District Population of 
District as per 
2011 Census 
Sanctioned 
strength 
One doctor 
sanctioned for 
population of 
1. Amritsar 24,90,656 516 4,827 
2. Barnala 5,95,527 129 4,616 
3. Bathinda 13,88,525 395 3,515 
4. Faridkot 6,17,508 239 2,584 
5. Fatehgarh Sahib 6,00,163 225 2,667 
6. Fazilka 10,26,200 195 5,263 
7. Ferozepur 10,02,874 167 6,005 
8. Gurdaspur 16,21,725 440 3,686 
9. Hoshiarpur 15,86,625 607 2,614 
10. Jalandhar 21,93,590 477 4,599 
11. Kapurthala 8,15,168 291 2,801 
 
3  T raditional birth attendant. 
4  Name of a post. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
23 
Sr. No Name of District Population of 
District as per 
2011 Census 
Sanctioned 
strength 
One doctor 
sanctioned for 
population of 
12. Ludhiana 34,98,739 568 6,160 
13. Mansa 7,69,751 185 4,161 
14. Moga 9,95,746 135 7,376 
15. Pathankot 6,76,598 121 5,592 
16. Patiala 18,95,686 571 3,320 
17. Rupnagar 6,84,627 288 2,377 
18. Sangrur 16,55,169 445 3,719 
19. SAS Nagar 9,94,628 325 3,060 
20. SBS Nagar 6,12,310 244 2,509 
21. Sri Muktsar Sahib 9,01,896 222 4,063 
22. Tarn Taran 11,19,627 254 4,408 
 At Headquarters  154   
Total 2,77,43,338 7,193 3,857 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS and Statistical Abstract, GoP (2022) 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘most sanctioned strength of doctors’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate sanctioned strength of doctors’ 
 Red denotes ‘least sanctioned strength of doctors’ 
As is evident from the above table, one doctor is sanctioned for 2,377 people 
in Rupnagar district whereas one doctor is sanctioned for 7,376 people in 
Moga district. In 11 districts5, fewer doctors are sanctioned than the S tate 
sanctioned average of one doctor for 3,857 people. The adverse impact of 
unevenness in sanctioned strength was clearly observed in the six test -checked 
DHs and CHC s in terms of higher Doctor -Patient Ratio ( Paragraphs 3.1.6 
and 3.2.5).  
 
5  (i) Amritsar; (ii) Barnala; (iii) Ferozepur ; (iv) Jalandhar ; (v) Ludhiana; (vi) Mansa; (vii) Moga ; 
(viii) Pathankot; (ix) Muktsar; (x) Tarn Taran; and (xi) Fazilka. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
24 
Chart 2.2: District-wise population per sanctioned Doctors as on 31.12.2022 
 
 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour code: Darker the colour, higher the district-wise population per sanctioned doctor 
2.2.1.4 Vacancy position of doctors 
In DH&FW, doctors have several designations like Medical Officer, Senior 
Medical Officer, Additional Medical Officer, Dental Surgeon, Senior Dental 
Surgeon, Deputy Civil Surgeon, Civil Surgeon, etc. Overall, DH&FW has a 
total of 4,342 public doctors 6 (Allopathic) available against their total 
sanctioned strength of 7,193. Thus, 39.64 per cent posts of public doctors 
(Allopathic) were lying vacant in the State.  District- wise position is shown in 
Table 2.4. 
 
6 Besides, 300 doctors were deployed on contractual basis. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
25 
Table 2.4: District-wise vacant posts of Doctors as on 31.12.2022 
Sr. No. Name of District Sanctioned Available Shortage Shortage in 
per cent 
1. Amritsar 516 320 196 37.98 
2. Barnala 129 102 27 20.93 
3. Bathinda 395 232 163 41.27 
4. Faridkot 239 99 140 58.58 
5. Fatehgarh Sahib 225 159 66 29.33 
6. Fazilka 195 104 91 46.67 
7. Ferozepur 167 118 49 29.34 
8. Gurdaspur 440 256 184 41.82 
9. Hoshiarpur 607 302 305 50.25 
10. Jalandhar 477 339 138 28.93 
11. Kapurthala 291 184 107 36.77 
12. Ludhiana 568 370 198 34.86 
13. Mansa 185 104 81 43.78 
14. Moga 135 85 50 37.04 
15. Pathankot 121 106 15 12.40 
16. Patiala 571 340 231 40.46 
17. Rupnagar 288 155 133 46.18 
18. Sangrur 445 225 220 49.44 
19. SAS Nagar 325 267 58 17.85 
20. SBS Nagar 244 125 119 48.77 
21. Sri Muktsar Sahib 222 98 124 55.86 
22. Tarn Taran 254 160 94 37.01 
  At Headquarters 154 92 62 40.26 
Total 7,193 4,342 2,851 39.64 
Source: iHRMS data 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red denotes ‘highest shortage’ 
It was observed that posts of doctors were lying vacant in all the districts. 
Vacancies at district level ranged from lowest in Pathankot  (15) to highest in 
Hoshiarpur (305) . In  terms of percentage, 12.40  per cent to 58.58 per  cent 
posts of doctors were lying vacant in the districts of Punjab. This shows a 
skewed distribution of available doctors across districts in Punjab, as depicted 
in the following map: 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
26 
Chart 2.3: District-wise vacant posts of Doctors as on 31.12.2022 (in per cent) 
 
Source: iHRMS data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted  in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour code: Darker the colour, higher the vacancies of doctors (in per cent) 
2.2.1.5 Doctor to population ratio in Punjab 
As per 2011 census, population of Punjab was 2,77,43,338. World Health 
Organisation (WHO) recommended one doctor for 1,000 population. 
Accordingly, the State should have 27,743 doctors.  But the State has a total of 
58,262 registered doctors (public and private) as of March 2022.  So, there is 
one doctor for 500 people which is double the WHO recommendation. 
Further, the State has a total of 4,342 public doctors (Allopathic) available 
against their total sanctioned strength of 7,193. So, there is one public doctor 
for 6,390 people in Punjab S tate. It was found that the availability of public  

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
27 
doctors at district level was  not uniform in all the districts, and it varie d from 
as high as one public doctor for 3,725 people in SAS Nagar  district to as low 
as one doctor for 11,715 people in Moga district, as shown in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5: District-wise doctors posted for population as on 31.12.2022 
Sr. No. Name of District 
Population of 
District as per  
2011 census 
Public 
doctors in 
the district 
One doctor 
posted for 
population of 
1. Amritsar 24,90,656 320 7,783 
2. Barnala 5,95,527 102 5,839 
3. Bathinda 13,88,525 232 5,985 
4. Faridkot 6,17,508 99 6,237 
5. Fatehgarh sahib 6,00,163 159 3,775 
6. Fazilka 10,26,200 104 9,867 
7. Ferozepur 10,02,874 118 8,499 
8. Gurdaspur 16,21,725 256 6,335 
9. Hoshiarpur 15,86,625 302 5,254 
10. Jalandhar 21,93,590 339 6,471 
11. Kapurthala 8,15,168 184 4,430 
12. Ludhiana 34,98,739 370 9,456 
13. Mansa 7,69,751 104 7,401 
14. Moga 9,95,746 85 11,715 
15. Pathankot 6,76,598 106 6,383 
16. Patiala 18,95,686 340 5,576 
17. Rupnagar 6,84,627 155 4,417 
18. Sangrur 16,55,169 225 7,356 
19. SAS Nagar 9,94,628 267 3,725 
20. SBS Nagar 6,12,310 125 4,898 
21. Sri Muktsar Sahib 9,01,896 98 9,203 
22. Tarn Taran 11,19,627 160 6,998 
 At Headquarters  92 0 
Total 2,77,43,338 4,342 6,390 
Source: iHRMS data 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘least doctor to population ratio’ 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate doctor to population ratio’ 
 Red denotes ‘highest doctor to population ratio’ 
The above table clearly shows that the availability of doctors is uneven in the 
districts of Punjab. Higher doctor to population ratio would over -burden the 
doctors and reduce consultation time available to the patient s, as discussed in 
Chapter 3 (Appendix 3.1).  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
28 
Chart 2.4: District-wise doctors posted for population as on 31.12.2022 
 
Source: iHRMS data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour higher the doctor to population ratio 
2.2.1.6 Availability of Staff Nurse and ANM   
The skew edness in availability of manpower across districts becomes even 
more prominent when Audit  analysed the vacancy position against particular 
posts in iHRMS.  For instance: 
(i)  Availability of staff nurse against the sanctioned strength varied 
widely. It was excess by 17.60 per cent in Moga district while there 
was a shortage of 56.76 per cent in Mansa district. 
(ii)  Shortage of ANM against the sanctioned strength varied from 
19.23 per cent in Moga District to 97.19 per cent in Amritsar 
District. However, in Fazilka district, 40 per cent  ANM were posted 
in excess. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
29 
Thus, the shortages in availability of staff need to be catered to either through 
recruitment or through rationalisation of postings. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.2.2 Department of Medical Education and Research (DMER) 
DMER has sanctioned strength of 10,151 posts which includes sanctioned 
strength of four medical colleges. There was 59.19 per cent vacancy in DMER 
as on 31.12.2022, as detailed in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Manpower position under DMER 
Category Sanctioned 
Posts 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Percentage of 
vacant posts 
Professor/Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professor 
932 451 481 51.61 
Medical Officer/Senior 
Resident/Junior Resident 
960 246 714 74.38 
Staff Nurse 3,507 1,500 2,007 57.23 
Paramedics 856 312 544 63.55 
Others 3,896 1,634 2,262 58.06 
Total 10,151 4,143* 6,008 59.19 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
*  Additionally, 16 Professors/Associate Professors; 21 Staff Nurses; and 92 Paramedics were 
deployed on contractual basis. 
As shown in the t able above, 51.61 per  cent posts of Professor/Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professor, 74.38 per cent posts of Medical Officer/Senior 
Resident/ Junior Resident, 57.23 per cent posts of Staff Nurses, 63.55 per cent 
posts of paramedical staff and 58.06 per cent  posts of other staff are vacant in 
DMER. Shortage of manpower for some of the specific posts is shown in 
Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7: Category-wise position of manpower under DMER as on 31.12.2022 
Name of the post Sanctioned Post Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Percentage of 
vacant posts 
Professor 218 106 112 51.38 
Associate Professor 304 110 194 63.82 
Assistant Professor 410 235 175 42.68 
Medical Officer 195 125 70 35.90 
Senior Resident 466 71 395 84.76 
Junior Resident 299 50 249 83.28 
Staff Nurse 3,507 1,500 2,007 57.23 
Demonstrator 22 7 15 68.18 
Clerk 200 82 118 59.00 
Nursing Sister 120 37 83 69.17 
Pharmacist 124 38 86 69.35 
Lab Technician 103 9 94 91.26 
Source: Analysis of data from iHRMS 
Colour Code: 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red denotes ‘most shortage’ 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
30 
As seen from the above: 
i. 51.38 per cent  vacancies of Professor, 63.82 per cent  vacancies of 
Associate Professor and 42.68 per cent vacancies of Assistant Professor 
were lying vacant in different medical colleges under DMER; 
ii. 35.90 per cent vacancies of Medical Officer, 84.76 per cent vacancies of 
Senior Resident and 83.28 per cent  vacancies of J unior Resident were  
lying vacant in different medical colleges under DMER; 
iii. 57.23 per cent  vacancies of Staff Nurse, 69.17 per cent  vacancies of 
Nursing Sister, 91.26 per cent of Lab Technician and 69.35 per cent of 
Pharmacist were lying vacant in different medical colleges under 
DMER; and 
iv. 59.00 per cent vacancies of Clerk and 68.18 per cent per cent vacancies 
of Demonstrator were lying vacant in different medical  colleges under 
DMER. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.3 Shortage of technicians and drivers for ambulance 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, a set of three persons  i.e. two technicians and one 
driver, should be available with each ambulance.  
Audit noticed that: 
 No technician was deployed with ambulances available in the  
test-checked DHs, CHCs and PHCs, except for DH Moga; 
 Only two technicians were deployed against the requirement of eight in 
four ambulances available in DH Moga; 
 Short availability of drivers for ambulance was noticed in DH Gurdaspur 
(one) and DH Ludhiana (two) whereas excess number of drivers were 
deployed in DH Hoshiarpur (one) and DH Moga (two).  
Non-availability of adequate number of human resources for ambulance 
services adversely affects the timely and qualitative referral of patients  to 
higher healthcare institutions, as discussed in Paragraph 3.6.3. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
2.4 Availability of Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) 
One of the key components of the National Rural Health Mission is to provide 
every village in the country with a trained female community health activist, 
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA). Her roles and responsibilities in 
the society are  to create awareness and to provide information to the 
community on determinants of health such as nutrition, basic sanitation and  
hygienic practices, healthy living and working conditions, information on 
existing health services and the need for timely utilisation of health and family 
welfare services. She will also counsel women on birth preparedness, 
importance of safe delivery, breastfeeding and complementary feeding, 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
31 
immunisation, contraception, and prevention of common infections including 
Reproductive Tract Infection/Sexually Transmitted Infection (RTI/STI) and 
care of the young child.  As per role and responsibilities, ASHAs will facilitate 
in Ante -Natal Check -up (ANC), Post -Natal Check -up (PNC), escort/  
accompany pregnant women and children requiring treatment/admission to the 
nearest PHC/CHC/FRU. Further, they will also act as a depot holder for 
essential provisions being made available to every habitation like Ora l 
Rehydration Therapy, Iron Folic Acid Tablet (IFA), Chloroquine, Disposable 
Delivery Kits, Oral Pills, Condoms, etc., as detailed in Paragraph 3.5.1.
 
As per guidelines issued on AS HA by t he Central Government, one AS HA is 
required per thousand population. As per estimated population ( 3,15,97,883 ) 
of Punjab in 2021 (published in Statistical Abstract of Punjab 2023 by the 
Directorate of Statistics,  Department of Planning, Punjab) , there is a 
requirement of 31,598 ASHAs against which there was availability of 20,139 
(shortfall of 36.26 per cent) ASHAs in the State of Punjab.  
District-wise shortfall (in percentage ) in availability of ASHAs as o f 
March 2022 is depicted in Chart 2.5. 
Chart 2.5: Shortfall (in per cent) in availability of ASHA 
60
51 47
38 41 39 39 36 35 34 33 32 30 29 26 25 24 24 24 23 23
14
Shortfall (%)
Source: Information regarding availability of ASHAs  furnished by State Health Society  Punjab and 
shortage calculated as per estimated population of Punjab 
From the above, it is evident that the availability of ASHAs in all districts was 
uneven. The shortage of ASHAs ranged  between 14 per cent in district SBS 
Nagar and 60 per cent in district SAS Nagar. 
As per NFHS-5 ( 2019-21), mothers who had at least four antenatal care visits 
were 59.3 per cent in Punjab. Mothers who consumed iron folic acid for  
180 days or more when they were pregnant were 40.5 per cent, as discussed in 
Paragraph 3.5.1. ASHAs facilitate delivery of health services and  also create 
awareness and popularise health services and family planning methods. Health 
indicators especially related to child and maternal health could have also been 
improved.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
32 
2.5 Management of human resources in DHs, CHCs, PHCs and 
Medical Colleges 
 
2.5.1 District Hospitals 
 
2.5.1.1 Availability of human resources in District Hospitals 
Availability of s taff (regular) against the sanctioned posts in each District 
Hospital is depicted in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Availability of Staff for various posts in each DH as of March 2023 
Name of DH Specialists/Doctors Nurses  Paramedics* Other Staff 
R S P V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
Amritsar 34 58 42 28 90 96 93 3 31 27 24 11 29 44 +52 
Barnala 34 41 27 34 90 68 43 37 31 30 25 17 93 67 28 
Bathinda 34 59 52 12 90 94 82 13 31 37 52 +41 114 106 7 
Faridkot 29 43 43 0 45 54 49 9 22 24 24 0 21 21 0 
Fatehgarh Sahib 29 47 34 28 45 49 39 20 22 31 30 3 0 0 0 
Fazilka 29 35 22 37 45 27 22 19 22 28 21 25 66 52 21 
Ferozepur 34 46 37 20 90 67 62 7 31 31 28 10 114 97 15 
Gurdaspur 34 38 46 +21 90 77 59 23 31 26 24 8 4 2 50 
Hoshiarpur 34 57 55 4 90 80 57 29 31 44 38 14 3 1 67 
Jalandhar 68 75 45 40 225 188 101 46 72 44 35 20 5 3 40 
Kapurthala 34 45 29 36 90 61 39 36 31 28 19 32 61 26 57 
Ludhiana 50 56 44 21 135 78 66 15 47 47 30 36 87 56 36 
Malerkotla 34 25 15 40 90 37 21 43 31 22 15 32 68 45 34 
Mansa 29 38 29 24 45 51 30 41 22 13 19 +46 3 2 33 
Moga 34 46 28 39 90 54 53 2 31 18 26 +44 68 82 +21 
Pathankot 34 63 51 19 90 75 57 24 31 33 29 12 67 66 1 
Patiala 50 72 50 31 135 69 61 12 47 31 32 +3 60 59 2 
Rupnagar 34 47 28 40 90 62 61 2 31 45 34 24 114 59 48 
Sangrur 50 31 29 6 135 52 44 15 47 17 14 18 3 2 33 
SAS Nagar 50 58 48 17 135 65 64 2 47 30 23 23 70 50 29 
SBS Nagar 29 45 26 42 45 47 41 13 22 22 21 5 67 28 58 
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 29 42 19 55 45 58 30 48 22 42 34 19 54 46 15 
Tarn Taran 34 41 32 22 90 59 63 +7 31 35 57 +63 48 59 +23 
Total 850 1,108 831 25 2,115 1,568 1,237 21 764 705 654 7 1,219 973 20 
Shortage against 
IPHS 2012 norms    2    42    14    
Source: DH&FW, Punjab 
R = Required as per IPHS 2012 norms; S = Sanctioned post; P = In position; V = Vacant post; and E = Excess (+) 
* Posts of Storekeeper, EEG Technician, OT Technician, CSSD Assistant, Dermatology Technician, Dental Technician and Rehabili tation 
Therapist as per IPHS norms were not available on the sanctioned strength of DHs.   Further, details of sanctioned strength as well as 
persons-in-position for the posts of ANM (S- 63, P-58) and Laboratory Attendant (S-25, P -18) are not included in paramedical staff as these 
two posts are not defined under IPHS norms 2012. 
Note: Requirement of manpower in respect of other staff could not be compared, as posts related to these categories under IPH S and 
sanctioned posts differed.   
Colour code:  
 Dark green colour denotes ‘excess manpower’ 
 Light green colour denotes ‘least shortage’ (<=20%) 
 Yellow colour denotes ‘moderate shortage’ (<=40%) 
 Red colour denotes ‘most shortage’ (> 40%) 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
33 
From the above Table, it can be seen that in district hospitals, shortages of 
staff in different categories were noticed not only against IPHS 2012 norms 
but also against the posts sanctioned by the Department itself. In case of 
specialist doctors/medical officers, 831 were available against 850  posts 
required under IPHS norms and 1,108 sanctioned posts. Similarly, in case of 
staff nurses, only 1,237 staff nurses were available against 2,115 posts 
required under IPHS norms and 1,568 sanctioned posts.  Against 705 
sanctioned posts and 764 posts under IPHS norms of paramedical staff , only 
654 (excluding ANMs and Laboratory Attendants) paramedics were available. 
As many as 1,219 sanctioned posts of other staff, 973 were available. Thus, 
there was overall shortage of 2 per cent against IPHS norms and 25 per cent  
against sanctioned posts in specialists/doctors, 42 per cent against IPHS norms 
and 21 per cent  against sanctioned posts in staff nurses, 14 per cent  against 
IPHS norms and 7 per cent against sanctioned posts in paramedical and  
20 per cent in other staff against sanctioned posts.  
2.5.1.2 District-wise availability of Specialists 
District-wise details of availability of Specialists in DHs as on 31.03.2023 is  
given in Table 2.9. 
Table 2.9: District-wise availability of Specialists in DHs 
Name of DH 
Specialist 
Required 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
2012 
Total 
Sanctioned 
posts 
Total in 
position 
Shortage/excess 
in percentage as 
per IPHS norms 
2012 
Shortage/excess 
in percentage as 
per sanctioned 
posts 
Sri Muktsar Sahib 17 25 11 35 56 
Jalandhar  43 51 31 28 39 
Malerkotla  20 14 9 55 36 
Rupnagar  20 30 21 +5 30 
SBS Nagar 17 30 21 +24 30 
Amritsar  20 46 33 +65 28 
Patiala  34 53 38 +12 28 
Moga  20 33 24 +20 27 
Barnala  20 29 23 +15 21 
Fatehgarh Sahib  17 33 26 +53 21 
Mansa  17 28 22 +29 21 
Fazilka  17 20 16 6 20 
Kapurthala  20 27 22 +10 19 
Ferozepur  20 31 26 +30 16 
Pathankot  20 39 35 +75 10 
Ludhiana  34 33 31 9 6 
Sangrur  34 24 23 32 4 
SAS Nagar 34 41 41 +21 0 
Tarn Taran  20 23 23 +15 0 
Bathinda  20 36 39 +95 +8 
Faridkot  17 29 32 +88 +10 
Hoshiarpur  20 36 40 +100 +11 
Gurdaspur  20 22 32 +60 +45 
Total 521 733 619 +19 16 
Source:  DH&FW Punjab  
Colour code :  Red depicts ‘most shortage ’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate ’, Light Green depicts ‘least /no 
shortage’ and Dark Green depicts ‘excess’ 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
34 
It is evident from the above table that the maximum shortage was found in 
DHs at Sri Muktsar Sahib, Jalandhar and Malerkotla i.e. 56 per cent,  
39 per cent and 36 per cent against the sanctioned posts and was 35  per cent, 
28 per cent , 55 per cent  and 32 per cent  in DHs at Sri Muktsar Sahib, 
Jalandhar, Malerkotla and Sangrur  respectively against the IPHS norms. 
However, excess Specialists were found posted in DHs at Gurdaspur, 
Hoshiarpur, Faridkot and Bathinda against the sanctioned posts and in all DHs 
except at Sri Muktsar Sahib, Jalandhar, Malerkotla, Sangrur, Fazilka and 
Ludhiana as per IPHS norms. 
2.5.1.3 Speciality/department-wise availability of Specialists 
Specialist-wise posts were sanctioned in DH&FW  and availability of 
specialty-wise doctors such as Gynaecologist s, Anaesthetists, Pa ediatricians, 
etc. in different specialties as on 31.03.2023 is given in Table 2.10. 
Table 2.10: Availability of Specialists in DHs (Specialty wise) 
Name of Specialty Required as 
per IPHS 
norms 
Required 
as per 
sanctioned 
posts 
Available Shortage/ 
Excess (+) 
(In per cent) 
as per IPHS 
norms 
Shortage/ 
Excess (+) 
(In per cent) 
as per 
sanctioned 
posts 
Radiologist 28 26 11 61 58 
Forensic Specialist 5 16 7 +40 56 
Paediatrician 69 112 70 +1 38 
Obstetrician/Gynaecologist 
(O&G specialist) 70 78 55 21 29 
Medical Specialist 53 50 36 32 28 
Anesthetist (Regular/ 
Trained) 52 111 83 +60 25 
Dermatologist/Venereologist 5 29 24 +380 17 
Psychiatrist 23 39 33 +43 15 
Surgery Specialists 52 55 49 6 11 
Microbiologist 5 38 35 +600 8 
Chief Medical 
Superintendent/Hospital 
Superintendent 
0 21 20 0 5 
Dental Surgeon 29 31 34 +17 +10 
Orthopaedician  28 42 47 +68 +12 
Pathologist and Blood Bank 
In-charge 46 35 44 4 +26 
ENT Surgeon 28 25 34 +21 +36 
Opthalmologist  28 25 37 +32 +48 
Total 521 733 619 +19 16 
Source:  Information furnished by DH&FW Punjab  
Colour code: 
 Red depicts ‘most shortage’ 
 Yellow depicts ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Light Green depicts ‘least/no shortage’ 
 Dark Green depicts ‘excess’ 
 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
35 
In terms of IPHS 2012 norms, there was a shortage of critical specialists such 
as Radiologist, Obstetrician/Gynaecologist, and Medical Specialists, whereas 
against the sanctioned posts, critical specialists such as Radiologist, Forensic 
Specialist, Paediatrician, Obstetrician/Gynaecologist, Medical S pecialists, etc. 
were also found short in DHs.  However, some specialists in An aesthesia, 
Dermatology/Venereology, Psychiatry, Microbiology, ENT  and Orthopaedics 
as per IPHS norms and some specialists in Ophthalmology, ENT, Pathology, 
Orthopaedics and Dentistry as per sanctioned posts were found posted in 
excess. Reasons for posting of excess staff were not furnished to Audit. 
The details of non- posting or disproportionate posting of human resources in 
DHs is depicted in Appendix 2.1. Specialist-wise analysis is as under: 
(i) Specialist Doctors/Medical Officers 
 Medical Specialist:  In three DHs (Fazilka, Moga and Sri Muktsar 
Sahib), no Medical Specialist was posted against the six sanctioned 
posts, in another three DHs (Amritsar, Ludhiana and Pathankot), only 
three Medical Specialists were posted against the nine sanctioned posts 
and on the other hand, in four DHs, (Barnala, Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and 
Tarn Taran) against six sanctioned posts of medical specialists, 12 were 
posted i.e. 100 per cent in excess. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
36 
Chart 2.6: Excess/Shortage (in per cent) of Medicine Speciality 
(DHs) as on 31.03.2023 
 
Source: DH&FW data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour, higher the shortage of Medicine Specialty (DH) 
 Surgery Specialist: In DHs at Malerkotla and Sri Muktsar Sahib,  
no surgeon was posted against three sanctioned posts, only one surgeon 
was posted in DH Amritsar against five posts whereas in five DHs 
(Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur, Rupnagar, Sangrur and Tarn Taran), against 
seven sanctioned posts, 13 Surgery specialists were posted. 
 Obstetrician/Gynaecologist Specialist: No Gynaecologist was posted 
in DH Fazilka against sanctioned post; in three DHs (Patiala, Rupnagar 
and Sri Muktsar Sahib), only five G ynaecologists were posted against  
24 sanctioned posts. On the other hand, in five DHs (Barnala, Gurdaspur, 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
37 
Mansa, Sangrur and Ludhiana), 20 O bstetrician/Gynaecologists were 
posted against 13 sanctioned posts. 
Chart 2.7: Excess/Shortage (in per cent) of Specialists in  
Obstetrics & Gynaecology Speciality (DHs) as on 31.03.2023 
 
Source: DH&FW data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour,  higher the shortage of Specialists in Obstetrics & Gynaecology 
 Specialty (DHs) 
 Psychiatrist: No Psychiatrist was posted against four sanctioned posts in 
DHs at Amritsar, Malerkotla and Rupnagar; in six 7 DHs, significant 
shortage of P sychiatrists was there, whereas in four DHs (Bathinda, 
Fazilka, Faridkot and Pathankot), nine psychiatrists were posted against 
the five sanctioned posts. 
 
7  DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib ; (ii)  Hoshiarpur; (iii)  Mansa; (iv)  Moga; (v)  SAS Nagar ; and  
(vi) SBS Nagar. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
38 
 Dermatologist/Venereologist: In DH Jalandhar, only one 
Dermatologist/Venereologist was posted against four sanctioned post s 
whereas in Mata Kaushalya Hospital (MKH) DH Patiala, two 
Dermatologist/Venereologists were posted against one sanctioned post. 
Moreover, in three DHs (Bathinda, Hoshiarpur and Jalandhar), only 
three Dermatologists/Venereologists were posted against eight  
sanctioned posts. 
 Paediatrician: Shortage of Paediatrician was seen in 19 DHs whereas in 
two DHs (Gurdaspur and Pathankot), 11 Paediatrician were posted 
against six sanctioned posts. In five DHs (Barnala, Fatehgarh Sahib, 
Kapurthala, Rupnagar and Sri Muktsar Sahib), significant shortage was 
seen wherein six Paediatricians were posted against 25 sanctioned posts.  
No shortage was seen in DHs at Malerkotla and Fazilka; 
Chart 2.8: Excess/shortage (in per cent) of Specialists  
in Paediatrics Speciality (DHs) as on 31.03.2023 
 
Source: DH&FW data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn 
through MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour, higher the shortage of Specialists in Paediatrics Specialty (DHs) 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
39 
 Anaesthetist: No Anaesthetist was posted in DH Malerkotla and  
DH Sri Muktsar Sahib against three sanctioned posts; in two DHs, 
(Jalandhar and Sangrur), significant shortage of Anaesthetist was seen 
wherein only four Anaesthetists were posted against 13 sanctioned posts 
whereas in two DHs (Ludhiana and Mohali), 13 Anaesthetists were 
posted against 10 sanctioned posts. 
 ENT Surgeon: In DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, no ENT surgeon was posted 
against one sanctioned post whereas in eight
8 DHs, 19 ENT s urgeons 
were posted against nine sanctioned posts. Thus , in all DHs, against 
25 sanctioned posts of ENT surgeon, 34 ENT surgeons were posted 
(36 per cent in excess) except DH Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
 Opthalmologist: In two DHs (Amritsar and Malerkotla), no 
Opthalmologist was posted against two sanctioned posts whereas in 
11
9 DHs, 26 O pthalmologists were posted against 11 sanctioned posts. 
Thus, against 25 sanctioned posts of Opthalmologists in all DHs, 
37 Opthalmologists i.e. 48 per cent were posted in excess. 
 Orthopaedician: In four DHs (Amritsar, Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar and 
Pathankot), only 13 Orthopedicians were posted against 19 sanctioned 
posts whereas in nine
10 DHs, 21 Orthopa edician were posted against 
10 sanctioned posts. 
 Radiologist: In DHs, 58 per cent  Radiologists were short and out of  
23 DHs, no Radiologist was posted in 13 11 DHs against 13 sanctioned 
posts. 
 
8   DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Faridkot; (iii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iv) Hoshiarpur; (v) Moga; (vi) Pathankot; 
(vii) Rupnagar; and (viii) SAS Nagar. 
9    DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii)  Bathinda; (i ii) Faridkot; ( iv) Hoshiarpur; (v)  Mansa; (vi)  Moga; 
(vii) Pathankot; (viii) Patiala; (ix) Sangrur; (x) SAS Nagar; and (xi) SBS Nagar. 
10   DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Faridkot; (iii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iv) Ferozepur; (v) Gurdaspur; (vi) Moga; 
(vii) Patiala; (vii) Rupnagar; and (ix) Sangrur. 
11  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii)  Bathinda; (iii)  Faridkot; (iv)  Fazilka; (v)  Gurdaspur; (vi)  Malerkotla; 
(vii) Mansa; (viii ) Pathankot; (i x) Ludhiana; (x)  Sangrur; (x i) SAS Nagar ; (x ii) SBS Nagar ; and 
(xiii) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
40 
Chart 2.9: Excess/shortage (in per cent) of Radiology Specialists (DHs)  
as on 31.03.2023 
 
Source: DH&FW data 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn through 
MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour, higher the shortage of Radiology Specialist (DHs) 
 Microbiologist: In DH Malerkotla, neither the post of Microbiologist 
was sanctioned nor posted; in three DHs (Barnala, Bathinda and Mansa), 
no Microbiologist was posted against three sanctioned posts , whereas in 
five DHs (Amritsar, Faridkot, Gurdaspur, SAS Nagar and Tarn Taran), 
14 microbiologists were posted against eight sanctioned posts. 
 Medical Officer (General Duty): A huge shortage (46 per cent) of staff 
in Medical Officer (General Duty) cadre was seen in DHs. Moreover, in 
five DHs (Barnala, Faridkot, Kapurthala, Moga and SBS Nagar), 
shortage was more than 73 per cent. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
41 
 Dental Surgeon: No Dental Surgeon was posted in DH Tarn Taran and 
two Dental Surgeons were posted in MKH Patiala against one and four 
sanctioned posts respectively, whereas in four DHs (Amritsar, Bathinda, 
Faridkot and Hoshiarpur), 12 Dental Surgeons were posted against six 
sanctioned posts. 
 Forensic Specialist: In DHs, 56 per cent  Forensic Specialists were short 
and no Forensic Specialist was posted against nine sanctioned posts in 
eight12 DHs.  
 Pathologist: In three DHs (Fatehgarh Sahib, Jalandhar and SAS Nagar), 
only four Pathologists were posted against eight sanctioned posts 
whereas in nine 13 DHs, 26 Pathologists were posted against 
13 sanctioned posts, i.e. 13 Pathologists were posted in excess. 
Thus, it is seen from the above details that in some DHs even a single doctor 
was not deployed in some of the specialities, whereas in some DHs, specialists 
were deployed in excess.  Therefore, specialist doctors  were not posted 
according to requirement. 
(ii) Staff Nurses 
 In DHs, only 1,237 Staff Nurses were available against 1,568 sanctioned 
posts leading to shortage of 331 Staff Nurses (21 per cent ).  In six DHs 
(Barnala, Jalandhar, Kapurthala, Malerkotla, Mansa and Sri Muktsar 
Sahib), significant shortage of Staff Nurses ranging between 36 per cent  
and 48 per cent  was seen. However, in DH Taran Tarn, 63 Staff Nurses 
were posted against 59 sanctioned posts. 
(iii) Paramedical Staff 
 Ophthalmic Assistant/Refractionist: In five DHs (Amritsar, Barnala, 
Fatehgarh Sahib, Fazilka and Malerkotla), no Ophthalmic Assistant was 
posted against five sanctioned posts. In DH Ludhiana, one Ophthalmic 
Assistant was posted against two sanctioned post s and in the remaining 
DHs, adequate number of Ophthalmic Assistant s were available against 
the sanctioned posts.  
 Social Workers: In two DHs (Kapurthala and Ludhiana), only 12 Social 
Workers were posted against 18 sanctioned posts whereas in three DHs 
(Bathinda, Sangrur and Tarn Taran), 24 Social Workers (118 per cent  in 
excess) were posted against 11 sanctioned posts. Moreover, 11 Social 
Workers were posted in two DHs (Mansa, Moga) without any sanctioned 
post. 
 
12  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii) Faridkot; (iii) Ferozepur; (iv) Mansa; (v) Patiala; (vi) Rupnagar;  
(vii) SBS Nagar; and (viii)Tarn Taran. 
13  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Kapurthala; (v) Mansa; (vi) Moga; 
(vii) Pathankot; (viii) Patiala; and (ix) Tarn Taran. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
42 
 ECG Technician:  No ECG T echnician was posted in six DHs 
(Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala, Mansa and SAS 
Nagar) against six sanctioned posts whereas in DH Taran Tarn, one ECG 
Technician was posted without any sanctioned post. In eight 14 DHs, post 
of ECG Technician was not sanctioned. In two DHs (Moga and 
Rupnagar), only four ECG Technicians were posted against six 
sanctioned posts and in the remaining DHs, adequate ECG Technicians 
were available. 
 ECHO Technician: In three DHs (Bathinda, Rupnagar and SAS Nagar), 
no ECHO Technician was available against three sanctioned posts. In the 
remaining 20 DHs, post of ECHO Technician was not sanctioned.  
 Audiometrician: No A udiometrician was posted in six DHs (Barnala, 
Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, Ferozepur , Sangrur and SAS Nagar) against 
six sanctioned posts. No post of Audiometrician was sanctioned for  
14 DHs 15 and in two DHs (Malerkotla and Rupnagar), only eight 
Audiometricians were posted against 12 sanctioned posts. In DH Tarn 
Taran, Audiometrician was available as per sanctioned post.  
 Laboratory Technician: In 10 DHs16, only 112 Laboratory Technicians 
were posted against 140 sanctioned posts (20 per cent  short) whereas in 
five DHs17, 69 Laboratory Technicians (53 per cent  excess) were posted 
against 45 sanctioned posts. In DH Malerkotla, post of Laboratory 
Technician was not sanctioned and in the  remaining seven DHs, 
adequate Laboratory Technicians were available against the sanctioned 
posts. 
 Laboratory Attendant: In three DHs (Jalandhar, Moga and Rupnagar), 
no Laboratory Attendant was posted against seven sanctioned posts 
whereas in two DHs  (SAS Nagar and Tarn Taran) , two Laboratory 
Attendants were posted without any sanctioned post. In ten DHs
18 
including above two, post of Laboratory Attendant was not sanctioned 
and in the remaining 10 DHs, only 16 Laboratory Attendant s were 
available against 18 sanctioned posts. 
 Dietician: In two DHs (Jalandhar and Sri Muktsar Sahib), three posts 
were sanctioned but no Dietician was posted. In 19 DHs, post of 
 
14  DHs at (i) Fazilka; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii)  Gurdaspur; (iv) Malerkotla ; (v)  Pathankot; (vi)  Sangrur;  
(vii) SBS Nagar; and (viii) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
15  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii)  Faridkot; (iii) Fazilka; (iv) Gurdaspur ; (v)  Hoshiarpur; (vi) Jalandhar ;  
(vii) Kapurthala; (viii)  Ludhiana; (ix)  Mansa; (x) Moga ; (xi) Pathankot; (xii)  Patiala; (xiii)  SBS 
Nagar; and (xiv) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
16  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii)  Fazilka; (iii) Ferozepur ; (iv)  Hoshiarpur; (v) Jalandhar; (vi) Kapurthala;   
(vii) Ludhiana; (viii) Pathankot; (ix) Rupnagar; and (x) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
17  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Mansa; (iv) Moga; and (v) Tarn Taran. 
18  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii)  Bathinda; (iii) Ferozepur ; (iv)  Hoshiarpur; (v)  Malerkotla; (vi)  Mansa;  
(vii) Pathankot; (viii) Sangrur; (ix) SAS Nagar; and (x) Tarn Taran. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
43 
Dietician was not sanctioned and in the remaining DHs (Hoshiarpur and 
Patiala), two Dieticians were available against equal sanctioned posts. 
  Maternity Assistant (ANM):  In two DHs (Jalandhar and SBS Nagar), 
no ANM was posted against five sanctioned posts and in DHs at 
Ludhiana and Malerkotla, only 11 ANMs were posted against 
20 sanctioned posts whereas in four DHs (Fazilka, Kapurthala, Sangrur 
and SAS Nagar), 21 ANMs were posted against eight sanctioned posts. 
In ten DHs 19, only 26 ANMs were available against 30 sanctioned posts 
and in the remaining six DHs including SAS Nagar, post of ANM was 
not sanctioned. 
 Radiographer: In seven DHs 20, only 20 Radiographers were posted 
against 30 sanctioned posts whereas in two DHs (Bathinda and Tarn 
Taran), 16 Radiographers (129 per cent  excess) were posted against 
seven sanctioned posts. In the remaining 14 DHs, adequate number of 
Radiographers were available against the sanctioned posts. 
 Dark Room Assistant:  Only six Dark Room Assistants (57 per cent  
short) were available against 14 sanctioned posts for 14 DHs (one post 
for each DH) and no post of Dark Room Assistant was sanctioned for 
remaining nine DHs
21. 
 Pharmacist: In 15 DHs 22, only 68 Pharmacists were available against  
93 sanctioned posts (27 per cent  short) whereas in two DHs (Bathinda 
and Tarn Taran), 23 Pharmacists were posted against 15 sanctioned posts. 
However, in the remaining six DHs, adequate number of Pharmacists 
were available. 
 Physiotherapist: In four DHs (Bathinda, Sangrur, SAS Nagar and SBS 
Nagar), no Physiotherapist was available against eight sanctioned posts 
whereas in DH Patiala, three Physiotherapists were posted without any 
sanctioned post. In three DHs (Jalandhar, Ludhiana and Rupnagar), only 
six Physiotherapists were posted against 12 sanctioned posts (50 per cent 
short). In three DHs (Fazilka, Ferozepur  and Malerkotla), post of 
Physiotherapist was not sanctioned, however, in remaining 12 DHs, 
adequate number of Physiotherapists were available.  
 
19  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii)  Bathinda; (iii) Faridkot; (iv)  Fatehgarh Sahib ; (v)  Ferozepur; 
(vi) Hoshiarpur; (vii) Moga; (viii) Patiala; (ix) Rupnagar; and (x) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
20   DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Ludhiana; (iv) Malerkotla; (v) Rupnagar; (vi) Sangrur; 
and (vii) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
21  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii) Barnala; (iii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iv) Fazilka; (v) Gurdaspur; (vi) Malerkotla; 
(vii) Pathankot; (viii) SAS Nagar; and (ix) Tarn Taran. 
22  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iii) Fazilka; (iv)  Gurdaspur; (v)  Hoshiarpur;  
(vi) Jalandhar; (vii)  Kapurthala; (viii) Ludhiana; (ix) Malerkotla; (x) Mansa; (xi) Moga;  
(xii) Pathankot; (xiii) Patiala; (xiv) Rupnagar; and (xv) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
44 
From the above, it was seen that paramedical staff was not posted as per 
sanctioned posts as well as requirement and in some DHs, the staff was posted 
over and above the sanctioned posts which resulted in disproportionate posting 
of paramedical staff in DHs. 
(iv) Position of other staff  
In all DHs, only 973 persons were available against 1,219 sanctioned posts 
under other staff category, therefore, there was 20 per cent shortage of staff.  It 
was also noticed that in three DHs (Amritsar, Moga and Tarn Tar an) excess 
staff i.e. 185 persons against 145 were posted. Post-wise analysis of other staff 
is as under: 
 Statistical Assistant: In six DHs
23, no Statistical Assistant was posted 
against six sanctioned posts, however, in DH Tarn Tar an, one Statistical 
Assistant was posted without any sanctioned post. In two DHs (Bathinda 
and Malerkotla), only two Statistical Assistants were available against 
four sanctioned posts and in seven DHs 24 including Tarn Tar an, post of 
Statistical Assistant  was not sanctioned. 
 Medical Records Officer/Technician:  No Medical Records Officer/ 
Technician was posted against four sanctioned posts in four DHs 25; and 
in the remaining 19 DHs, post of Medical Record Officer/Technician 
was not sanctioned. 
 Electrician: In DH Hoshiarpur, no Electrician was posted against one 
sanctioned post and on the other hand, one Electrician was posted in DH 
Sangrur without sanctioned post. In six DHs 26 including Sangrur, post of 
Electrician was not sanctioned and in five DHs27, only seven Electricians 
were available against 12 sanctioned posts (42 per cent short). 
 Plumber: In 10 DHs 28, post of Plumber was not sanctioned. Moreover, 
no plumber was posted in five DHs 29 against the five sanctioned posts. 
In five DHs 30, only five Plumbers were available against 10 sanctioned 
posts (50 per cent short).  
 
23  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii)  Ferozepur; (iii)  Hoshiarpur; (iv)  Sangrur; (v) SAS Nagar ; and  
(vi) SBS Nagar. 
24  DHs at (i) Faridkot; (ii)  Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iii)  Gurdaspur; (iv)  Jalandhar; (v)  Pathankot;  
(vi) Sri Muktsar Sahib; and  (vii) Tarn Taran.  
25  DHs at (i) Malerkotla; (ii) Moga; (iii) Rupnagar; and (iv) Sangrur. 
26  DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iii)  Moga; (iv)  Sangrur; (v)  SAS Nagar ; and  
(vi) SBS Nagar. 
27  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Ludhiana; and (v) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
28   DHs at (i) Amritsar; (ii) Barnala ; (iii)  Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iv)  Fazilka; (v) Hoshiarpur; 
(vi) Malerkotla; (vii) Moga; (viii) SAS Nagar; (ix) SBS Nagar; and (x) Tarn Taran. 
29  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Kapurthala; (iii) Mansa; (iv) Pathankot; and (v) Patiala. 
30  DHs at (i) Ferozepur; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv) Ludhiana; and (v) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
45 
 Hospital Workers:  In 15 DHs 31, only 463 Hospital Workers were 
available against 728 sanctioned posts (36 per cent short) whereas in DH 
Amritsar, 15 Hospital Workers were posted without any sanctioned post. 
In the remaining eight DHs including Amritsar, no post of Hospital  
Worker was sanctioned.  
 Sanitary Worker s: In three DHs (Bathinda, Moga and Tarn Tar an), 
126 Sanitary Workers were posted against 31 sanctioned posts. In six 
DHs
32, only 163 Sanitary Workers were posted against 223 sanctioned 
posts (27 per cent  short) and in eight DHs 33, post of Sanitary Worker 
was not sanctioned. 
Non-posting of manpower against the sanctioned posts, shortage of staff and 
excess posting in DHs over and above the sanctioned strength affect ed the 
healthcare services as mentioned subsequently in Paragraphs 3.1.1 and 3.2.1 
of the Report. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.5.2 Community Health Centres 
2.5.2.1 Availability of human resources in Community Health Centres 
Availability of staff (regular) against the sanctioned posts in CHCs is depicted 
in Appendix 2.2 and Table 2.11. 
Table 2.11: Availability of staff for various posts in CHCs as of March 2023  
Number 
of CHCs 
Specialists/Doctors* Nurses Paramedics* Other staff 
R S P V (in 
per 
cent) 
R S P V (in 
per 
cent) 
R S P V (in 
per 
cent) 
S P V (in 
per 
cent) 
150 1,200 1,490 816 45 1,650 1,771 1,202 32 1,050 1,339 990 26 2,198 1,378 37 
Shortage against IPHS 2012 
norms (in per cent) 32    27 
 
  6    
Source: DH&FW, Punjab 
R = Required as per IPHS 2012 norms; S = Sanctioned post; P = In position; and V = Vacant post. 
* Post s of Dental Surgeon, Dental Assistant, Cold Chain & Vaccine Logistic Assistant, Multi Rehabilitation/Community based 
Rehabilitation worker and Counsellor as per IPHS norms w ere not available on the sanctioned strength of CHCs.   Further, details of 
sanctioned strength as well as persons-in-position for the posts of ANM (S-55, P-35) and Dialysis Technician (S-01, P-00) are not included 
in paramedical staff as these two posts are not defined under IPHS norms 2012. 
Note: Requirement of manpower in respect of other staff could not be compared, as posts related to these categories under IPHS norms and 
sanctioned posts differed.   
Colour code:  
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 
31  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii)  Bathinda; (iii) Fazilka; (iv)  Ferozepur; (v) Kapurthala; (vi) Ludhiana;  
(vii) Malerkotla; (viii)  Moga; (ix) Pathankot; (x) Patiala ; (xi)  Rupnagar; (xii) SAS Nagar ;  
(xiii) SBS Nagar; (xiv) Sri Muktsar Sahib; and (xv) Tarn Taran. 
32  DHs at (i) Barnala; (ii) Fazilka; (iii) Ferozepur; (iv) Ludhiana; (v) Malerkotla; and (vi) Rupnagar. 
33  DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv) Kapurthala; (v) Mansa; (vi) Sangrur; 
(vii) SBS Nagar; and (viii) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
46 
The above t able shows that in CHCs, only 816  Specialist Doctors/Medical 
Officers were available against 1,200 posts as per IPHS norms and 
1,490 sanctioned posts; 1,202 Staff Nurses were available against 1,650 posts 
as per IPHS norms and 1,771 sanctioned posts; 990 (excluding ANMs and 
Dialysis Technician) p aramedical staff were available against 1,050 posts as 
per IPHS norms and 1,339 sanctioned posts; and in case of other staff, only 
1,378 persons against 2,198 sanctioned posts were available. Thus, there was 
overall shortage of 32 per cent and 45 per cent in Specialist Doctors/Medical 
Officers against IPHS norms and sanctioned strength; 27 per cent and 
32 per cent in Staff Nurses against IPHS 2012 norms and sanctioned strength; 
6 per cent and 26 per cent  in paramedical staff against IPHS norms and 
sanctioned strength respectively; and 37 per cent  in other staff  against 
sanctioned posts.  
2.5.2.2 A vailability of Specialists in CHCs 
Details of availability of Specialists in CHC s as on 31.03.2023 are given in 
Table 2.12. 
Table 2.12: Availability of Specialists in CHCs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Speciality 
Requirement 
as per IPHS 
2012 norms 
Requirement 
as per 
sanctioned 
strength 
Availability Shortage 
against 
IPHS 
norms 
Shortage 
against 
sanctioned 
strength 
Shortage 
in  
per cent 
(IPHS) 
Shortage in 
per cent 
(SS) 
1. General Surgeon 150 135 40 110 95 73 70 
2. Physician 150 128 29 121 99 81 77 
3. Obstetrician/ 
Gynaecologist 150 169 45 105 124 70 73 
4. Paediatrics 150 164 44 106 120 71 73 
5. Anesthetist 150 62 16 134 46 89 74 
6. Eye Surgeon 0 23 6 +6 17 - 74 
Source: Information furnished by DH&FW Punjab  
Colour code: Red depicts ‘most shortage’ 
There was substantial shortage of critical specialists in CHCs which ranged 
between 70 per cent and 89 per cent against IPHS 2012 norms; and between 
70 per cent and 77 per cent against sanctioned strength.  
The detail s of non- posting/disproportionate posting of human resources in 
CHCs are as under:  
 General Surgeon: In 97 CHCs, no General Surgeon was posted 
against 97 sanctioned posts.  In 38 CHCs, adequate General Surgeons 
were available against sanctioned posts. In the remaining 15 CHCs, 
post of General Surgeon was not sanctioned. 
 Physician: In 99 CHCs, no Physician was posted against 
99 sanctioned posts. In 28 CHCs, adequate number of Physicians were 
available against sanctioned posts. In the remaining 23 CHCs, post of 
Physician was not sanctioned. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
47 
 Obstetrician/Gynaecologist: In 100 CHCs, no Obstetrician/ 
Gynaecologist was posted against 114 sanctioned posts. In 40 CHCs, 
only 45 Obstetricians/Gynaecologists were available against  
55 sanctioned posts. In the remaining 10 CHCs, post of Obstetrician/ 
Gynaecologist was not sanctioned.  
 Paediatrician: In 91 CHCs, no Paediatrician was posted against 
104 sanctioned posts. In 42 CHCs, only 44 Paediatricians were 
available against 60 sanctioned posts. In the remaining 17 CHCs, post 
of Paediatrician was not sanctioned. 
 Anaesthetist: In 47 CHCs, no Anaesthetist was posted against 
47 sanctioned posts. In 15 CHCs, adequate number of Anaesthetists 
were available against sanctioned posts. In  the remaining 88 CHCs, 
post of Anaesthetist was not sanctioned. Moreover, one Anaesthetist 
was posted in CHC Adampur without any sanctioned post. 
 Eye Surgeon:  In 19 CHCs, no Eye Surgeon was posted against  
19 sanctioned posts. In four CHCs, adequate Eye Surgeons were 
available against sanctioned posts. In the remaining 127 CHCs, post of 
Eye Surgeon was not sanctioned. Moreover, two Eye Surgeons were 
posted in CHCs at Verka and Khera without any sanctioned post. 
 Medical Officer: In 10 CHCs, no Medical Officer was posted against 
24 sanctioned posts. In 101 CHCs, only 241 Medical Officers were 
available against 352 sanctioned posts. Further, in 39 CHCs, Medical 
Officers were posted in excess i.e. 150 Medical Officers were posted 
against 68 sanctioned posts. 
 Staff Nurse : Only 1,202 Staff Nurses were available in all CHCs 
against 1,771 sanctioned posts resulting in shortage of 32 per cent. 
 Paramedical staff: Only 1,025 paramedical staff were available in all 
CHCs against 1,395 sanctioned posts resulting in shortage of  
370 paramedical staff (27 per cent ).  Significant shortage of  
49 per cent  and 61 per cent  in cadre of Ophthalmic Assistants and  
OT Attendants respectively was seen. 
 Other staff: Only 1,378 number of other staff were available in all 
CHCs against 2,198 sanctioned posts . T hus, there was shortage of 
37 per cent. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.5.3 Primary Health Centres 
2.5.3.1 Availability of human resources in Primary Health Centres 
Availability of staff (regular) against the sanctioned posts in PHCs is depicted 
in Appendix 2.3 and Table 2.13. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
48 
Table 2.13: Availability of human resources in PHCs as of March 2023 
Number 
of PHCs 
Doctors Nurses Paramedics  Other staff 
R S P 
V (in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V (in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V (in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V (in 
per 
cent) 
424 424 645 442 31 1,272 1,146 575 50 848 1,082 717 34 1,965 1,140 42 
Shortage against IPHS 2012 
norms (in per cent) +4  55    15    
Source: DH&FW, Punjab 
R = Required as per IPHS 2012 norms; S = Sanctioned post; P = In position; and V = Vacant post. 
Note: Requirement of manpower in respect of other staff could not be compared, as posts related to these categories under IPH S norms and 
sanctioned posts differed.   
Colour code:  
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
Scrutiny of information regarding human resources in 424 PHCs  provided by 
Director, Health and Family Welfare revealed that: 
 Medical Officer: Against the IPHS norms, adequate number of 
Medical Officers were available in PHCs but against 645 sanctioned 
posts, only 442 Medical Officers were available, thus, there was a 
shortage of  31 per cent against the sanctioned strength. Moreover, in 
86 PHCs, no Medical Officer was posted against the sanctioned posts. 
 Staff Nurse: Only 575 Staff Nurses were available against 1,272 posts 
as per IPHS norms and 1,146 sanctioned posts resulting into shortage 
of 55 per cent and 50 per cent respectively. Moreover, in 126 PHCs, 
no Staff Nurse was posted against the sanctioned posts. 
 Paramedical staff: Only 717 paramedical staff were available against 
848 posts as per IPHS norms and 1,082 sanctioned posts resulting into 
shortage of  15 per cent  and 34 per cent  respectively. There was 
shortage of Pharmacists (28 per cent ) and Lab Technicians  
(41 per cent). Moreover, in 77 PHCs, no Pharmacist and in 171 PHCs, 
no Lab Technician was posted against the sanctioned posts. 
 Other staff: Only 1,140 staff (which includes Clerk, Health Assistant, 
Driver, Class IV, etc.) were available against 1,965 sanctioned posts, 
thus, there was shortage of 42 per cent. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.5.4 Availability of human resources in Tertiary Care Hospitals 
The details of sanctioned/filled posts of Professors/Associate Professors, 
Assistant Professors, Staff Nurses and p aramedical staff as on 31.03.2023 in 
four tertiary care hospitals are given in Table 2.14. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
49 
Table 2.14: Position of medical and paramedical staff in Tertiary Care Hospitals 
Sr. 
No. 
Cadre Name of Medical College and Hospital 
Rajindra Hospital, 
Patiala 
Guru Nanak Dev 
Medical College and 
Hospital, Amritsar 
Guru Gobind Singh 
Medical College and 
Hospital, Faridkot 
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
State Institute of 
Medical Sciences,  
SAS Nagar 
SS PIP Short
age 
(in 
per 
cent) 
SS PIP Short
age 
(in 
per 
cent) 
SS PIP 
 
Short
age 
(in 
per 
cent) 
SS PIP Short
age 
(in  
per 
cent) 
1. Professor 78 46 41 77 43 44 39 30 23 21 11 48 
2. Associate 
Professor 92 36 61 91 38 58 64 40 38 24 15 38 
3. Assistant 
Professor 160 92 43 162 96 41 97 37 62 37 34 8 
4. Staff Nurse 1200 965 20 1200 1050 13 655 400 39 247 115 53 
5. Paramedical 
staff 454 237 48 357 245 31 192 107 44 151 67 56 
Source: Departmental data 
SS = Sanctioned Strength; PIP = Persons-in-Position 
Colour code:  
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
Chart 2.10: Vacant posts in four Medical Colleges under DMER (in per cent) 
41
44
23
48
61
58
38 38
43 41
62
8
20
13
39
53
48
31
44
56
RH Patiala GND MCH
Amritsar
GGSMCH
Faridkot
AIMS SAS Nagar
Shortfall (%)
Professor
Associate Professor
Assistant Professor
Staff Nurse
Paramedics
  Source: DMER and Medical Colleges 
Scrutiny of information regarding human resources in four tertiary care 
hospitals revealed that: 
 Professor: There was shortage of Professors in Rajindra Hospital, 
Patiala (41 per cent ); GNDMCH Amritsar ( 44 per cent); GGSMCH, 
Faridkot ( 23 per cent); and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar State Institute of 
Medical Sciences, SAS Nagar (48 per cent). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
50 
 Associate Professor: There was shortage of Associate Professors in 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala  (61 per cent ); GNDMCH, Amritsar  
(58 per cent ); GGSMCH, Faridkot ( 38 per cent ); and Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Sciences, SAS Nagar  
(38 per cent). 
 Assistant Professor : There was s hortage of Assistant Professors in 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala  (43 per cent ); GNDMCH, Amritsar  
(41 per cent ); GGSMCH, Faridkot  (62 per cent ); and Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Sciences, SAS Nagar (8 per cent). 
 Staff Nurse: There was shortage of Staff Nurses in Rajindra Hospital, 
Patiala (20 per cent); GNDMCH, Amritsar ( 13 per cent,); GGSMCH, 
Faridkot (39 per cent); Dr. B.R. Ambedkar State Institute of Medical 
Sciences, SAS Nagar (53 per cent). 
 Paramedical staff: There was shortage of paramedical staff in 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala ( 48 per cent ); GNDMCH, Amritsar 
(31 per cent); GGSMCH, Faridkot ( 44 per cent ); and Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Sciences, SAS Nagar  
(56 per cent). 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.5.5 Shortage of staff and its impact on delivery of health services in 
test-checked health institutions 
 
2.5.5.1  DHs, CHCs and PHCs 
The number of sanctioned and filled posts of Medical Officers , Nursing staff, 
and Paramedical staff in the test-checked districts as on 31.03.2023 is given in  
Table 2.15. 
Table 2.15: Position of staff in test-checked districts 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Institution 
Specialists/Doctors 
(Medical Officers) Nursing Staff Paramedical staff* 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
Bathinda 
DH 34 59 52 +53 12 90 94 82 9 13 31 37 52 +68 +41 
CHCs 16 17 6 63 65 22 8 10 55 +25 14 10 9 36 10 
PHCs 4 8 5 +25 38 12 15 8 33 47 8 9 4 50 56 
Total 54 84 63 +17 25 124 117 100 19 15 53 56 65 +23 +16 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 29 47 34 +17 28 45 49 39 13 20 22 31 30 +36 3 
CHCs 16 14 7 56 50 22 25 16 27 36 14 14 9 36 36 
PHCs 4 8 7 +75 13 12 15 12 0 20 8 13 10 +25 23 
Total 49 69 48 2 30 79 93 69 13 26 44 58 49 +11 16 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
51 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Institution 
Specialists/Doctors 
(Medical Officers) Nursing Staff Paramedical staff* 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
R S P 
V/E 
(in per 
cent) 
as per 
IPHS 
norms 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
as per 
S 
Gurdaspur 
DH 34 38 46 +35 +21 90 77 59 34 23 31 26 24 23 8 
CHCs 16 28 21 +31 25 22 28 21 5 25 14 30 28 +100 7 
PHCs 4 11 10 +150 9 12 22 18 +50 18 8 20 17 +113 15 
Total 54 77 77 +43 0 124 127 98 21 23 53 76 69 +30 9 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 34 57 55 +62 4 90 80 57 37 29 31 44 38 +23 14 
CHCs 16 17 10 38 41 22 23 16 27 30 14 8 5 64 38 
PHCs 4 9 5 +25 44 12 20 15 +25 25 8 21 16 +100 24 
Total 54 83 70 +30 16 124 123 88 29 28 53 73 59 +11 19 
Ludhiana 
DH 50 56 44 12 21 135 78 66 51 15 47 47 30 36 36 
CHCs 16 25 14 13 44 22 26 22 00 15 14 24 12 14 50 
PHCs 4 6 6 +50 0 12 12 10 17 17 8 9 8 0 11 
Total 70 87 64 9 26 169 116 98 42 16 69 80 50 28 38 
Moga 
DH 34 46 28 18 39 90 54 53 41 2 31 18 26 16 +44 
CHCs 16 20 5 69 75 22 31 24 +9 23 14 20 14 0 30 
PHCs 4 8 3 25 63 12 14 5 58 64 8 15 10 +25 33 
Total 54 74 36 33 51 124 99 82 7 17 53 53 50 6 6 
Source: DH&FW in respect of test-checked districts 
R= Required as per IPHS 2012 norms; S= Sanctioned post; P= In position; V= Vacant post; E= Excess. 
* Details of sanctioned strength as well as persons -in-position for the posts of ANM (S -17, P -12) and Lab Attendant (S -9, P -7) in  
test-checked DHs and ANM (S -4, P-2) in test-checked CHCs are not included in paramedical staff as these posts are not defined under 
IPHS norms 2012. 
Colour code:  
 Dark green colour denotes ‘excess manpower’ 
 Light green colour denotes ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow colour denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour denotes ‘most shortage’ 
Table 2.15 shows that as per  IPHS norms and sanctioned strength, higher 
shortage in case of Medical Officers was seen in district Moga ( 33 per cent 
and 51 per cent) followed by Fatehgarh Sahib ( 2 per cent and 30 per cent ), 
Ludhiana ( 9 per cent and 26 per cent ) respectively as compared to other  
test-checked districts.  Further, shortage in case of nursing staff was seen in 
districts Hoshiarpur (28 per cent) and  Fatehgarh Sahib (26 per cent) against 
sanctioned strength a s compared to other test-checked districts. However, a s 
per IPHS norms, shortage of nursing staff in all the test -checked districts was 
also seen ranging between 7 and 42 per cent . Similarly, higher shortage in 
case of paramedical  staff was also seen in district Ludhiana  (38 per cent) , 
Hoshiarpur ( 19 per cent ) and Fatehgarh Sahib (16 per cent ) against the 
sanctioned posts. It was also noticed that medical o fficer (21 per cent) in DH 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
52 
Gurdaspur, s taff nurse (25 per cent ) in CHCs of Bathinda district and 
paramedics (44 per cent  and 41  per cent ) in DH Moga  and Bathinda  was 
posted in excess , which represented that available manpower had  not been 
distributed uniformly across the districts. 
The position of availability of requisite staff in the selected 24 PHCs against 
the sanctioned strength as on 31.03.2023 is given in Table 2.16. 
Table 2.16: Position of staff in test-checked PHCs 
Name of PHC Doctor Staff Nurse Pharmacist Laboratory 
Technician 
R SS PIP R SS PIP R SS PIP R SS PIP 
Lehra Mohabbat 1 3 3 3 4 2 1 2 2 1 1 0 
Mandi Kalan 1 2 2 3 4 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 
Bhai Rupa 1 2 0 3 4 4 1 1 1 1 1 0 
Jodhpur Pakhar 1 1 0 3 3 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Nandpur Kalour 1 5 4 3 7 5 1 3 3 1 2 2 
Bhari 1 1 1 3 4 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Nanowal 1 1 1 3 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Sanghol 1 1 1 3 4 5 1 2 2 1 2 1 
Dhianpur 1 1 1 3 5 3 1 1 1 1 3 3 
Ranjit Bagh 1 3 2 3 2 2 1 3 2 1 2 1 
Behrampur 1 2 2 3 7 7 1 4 3 1 2 2 
Dorangala  1 5 5 3 8 6 1 2 2 1 3 3 
Mand Bhander 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 
Possi 1 1 0 3 6 4 1 1 1 1 2 2 
Paldi 1 3 2 3 8 5 1 6 4 1 2 1 
Chakowal 1 3 1 3 5 5 1 4 2 1 3 3 
Sawaddi Kalan 1 1 1 3 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 
Ghawaddi 1 2 2 3 4 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Mansooran 1 2 2 3 7 7 1 3 3 1 1 1 
Otalon 1 1 1 3 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 
Sukhanand 1 1 1 3 3 1 1 2 2 1 1 0 
Thathi Bhai 1 2 0 3 0 0 1 3 3 1 2 2 
Malianwala 1 2 0 3 6 0 1 3 1 1 1 0 
Patto Hira Singh 1 3 2 3 5 4 1 2 2 1 1 0 
Source: DH&FW in respect of test-checked districts 
R= Required as per IPHS 2012 norms; SS= Sanctioned Strength; PIP= Persons-in-Position 
Colour Code: 
 Dark green colour denotes ‘excess manpower’ 
 Light green colour denotes ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow colour denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour denotes ‘most shortage & non-availability’ 
It is evident from the above table that: 
 In five  PHCs (Bhai Rupa, Jodhpur Pakhar, Possi, Thatti Bhai and 
Mallianwala), no Medical Officer was  posted against the sanctioned 
posts as well as IPHS norms;   

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
53 
 In three PHCs  (Jodhpur Pakhar, Otalon and Mallianwala), not even a 
single Staff Nurse was posted against  10 sanctioned posts and against 
9 posts as per IPHS norms  whereas in PHC Sanghol, one excess Staff 
Nurse was posted  against sanctioned posts and two were posted in 
excess against IPHS norms; 
 No Pharmacist was available in PHCs at Jodhpur Pakhar and Nanowal; 
 No Lab Technician was available in nine PHCs; 
 PHC Jodhpur Pakhar was non- functional due to non- availability of 
Doctor, Staff Nurses, Pharmacist and Lab Technician. 
2.5.5.2 Government Medical College and Hospital (Rajindra Hospital, 
Patiala) 
The number of sanctioned/filled posts of Professors/Associate Professor, 
Assistant Professor, Staff Nurse and paramedical staff as on 31.03.2023 in the 
test-checked tertiary care institution is given in Table 2.17. 
Table 2.17: Position of staff in Rajindra Hospital, Patiala 
Sr. 
No. 
Cadre Sanctioned 
Strength 
Persons-in- 
Position 
Excess (+)/ 
Shortage (-) 
Percentage of 
shortage 
1. Professor 78 46 (-)32 41 
2. Associate Professor 92 36 (-)56 61 
3. Assistant Professor 160 92 (-)68 43 
4. Staff Nurse 1,200 965 (-)235 20 
5. Paramedical Staff 454 237 (-)217 48 
Total 1,984 1,376 608 31 
Source: RH, Patiala 
Colour code: 
 Yellow colour denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Green colour denotes ‘least shortage’ 
In RH Patiala, overall shortage of medical and paramedical staff was 
31 per cent, ranging between 20 per cent  and 61 per cent in different cadres, 
as on 31 March 2023. 
Due to shortage of staff, the delivery of health services in the test -checked 
health institutions was hampered as several such cases have been highlighted 
in this Report, as detailed in Table 2.18. 
Table 2.18: Details of services hampered due to shortage of staff 
Sr. 
No. Impacted Service Para reference 
1. Non-availability of speciality OPD services in test- checked 
health institutions due to non-availability of Specialists 
3.1.1, 3.1.2 & 
3.1.3 
2. Number of OPD cases per doctor were uneven in selected health 
institutions 3.1.6 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
54 
Sr. 
No. Impacted Service Para reference 
3. Non-availability of In-Patient services 3.2.1 
4. Operation theatres were not functional in some test -checked 
health institutions 3.2.6 
5. ICU services were not functional in some test -checked District 
Hospitals and Rajindra Hospital, Patiala 3.3.4 & 3.3.4.1 
6. Non/Short implementation of Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha 
Yojana at GMCH Patiala due to shortage of staff 4.5.2.4 
7. Non-installation/functioning of equipment/machinery for 
treatment of cancer patients due to shortage of staff 4.5.2.5 
8. Some Health and Wellness Centres (HWC) were not operational 
due to shortage of staff 5.4 (A)  
9. Shortage of manpower in upgraded HWCs 5.4 (B)(ii) 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
2.6 Future availability of Doctors and Paramedical  staff 
Public health in the State was suffering from persistent shortages of 
Doctors/Specialists, Nurses and Paramedical staff during 2016-2022, as 
discussed in the preceding paragraphs. Therefore, structural policy initiatives  
were required to address the substantial shortages, as suggested in NHM 
Framework 2012-2017. The position of availability of medical seats in the 
State was as below: 
2.6.1 Availability of Undergraduate (UG) and Postgraduate (PG) seats 
in the State 
 
2.6.1.1 Medical seats 
There were 1,650 MBBS seats ( 700 seats  in four Government Colleges and 
950 seats in six private colleges) in the State  as on 31 March 2022.  In 
addition, a total of 678 PG seats were  available in the State ( 379 in four 
Government colleges and 299 seats in four private colleges). The position of 
UG and PG seats during 2016-2022 is shown in Chart 2.11. 

Chapter-II: Human Resources 
55 
Chart 2.11:  Availability of UG and PG seats in the State as of March 2022 
 UG PG
-17 1045 561
-18 1125 666
-19 1125 655
-20 1225 654
-21 1375 677
-22 1650 678
1045 1125 1125
1225
1375
1650
561
666 655 654 677 678
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
UG PG  
Source: Departmental figures 
Despite having 1,045- 1,650 MBBS seats and 561- 678 PG seats during  
2016-2022, there was still a shortage of D octors and S pecialists in all the 
public health institutions, as observed in Paragraph 2.2.1.4.  
Further scrutiny of information related to recruitment of D octors revealed that 
33 per cent D octors who were recruited had not joined the Government 
services, i.e. only 1,988 Doctors joined out of total 2,965 Doctors  recruited 
during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
2.6.1.2 Nursing seats 
Notwithstanding a total 9,384 nursing seats 34 available, shortage of 
3,415 nurses was noticed as on 31 March 2022, as discussed earlier in 
Paragraph 2.2.1.2. 
2.7 Conclusion 
Human resources, an essential resource for health management, witnessed 
persistent shortages in all cadres in the health institutions. Government has not 
ensured availability of  posts in the health  sector considering that the 
sanctioned posts  were not commensurate with the population to be served, 
thereby adversely affecting health services . This shortage was quite high in 
several key posts such as Doctors, S taff Nurses, Radiographers, P harmacists, 
etc. which play a very important role in delivering comprehensive healthcare 
 
34 UG-495 seats in 12 Government nursing colleges and 8,400 in 186 private nursing colleges,  
PG-55 seats in two Government nursing colleges, 434 seats in 24 private nursing colleges. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
56 
to the beneficiaries. Moreover, available manpower including the crucial 
manpower has not been distributed uniformly across the districts.  
2.8 Recommendations 
Government should devise a comprehensive HR Policy for m edical personnel 
of all cadres of D octors, Nurses, P aramedics including recruitment, 
deployment, etc. and accordingly may: 
(i) consider revising the sanctioned strength of Health Departments at par 
with the IPHS norms; 
(ii) consider posting of staff in health institutions at par with the 
sanctioned posts in the primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare 
institutions; 
(iii) consider rationalisation in posting of existing staff across districts and 
health institutions. While rationalising, it should be ensured that the 
postings are done in such a way that complimentary healthcare 
professionals i.e., doctors, nurses, paramedics, technicians and other 
support staff are posted in each health institution. Availability of 
infrastructure and other crucial components should be considered 
during such rationalisation; 
(iv) focus on expediting recruitment process in order to fill vacancies; and 
(v) incentivise Government Doctors to encourage medical students to join 
Government service. 

57 
Chapter-III 
 
Healthcare Services 
Services that a health institution  is expected to provide can be grouped as 
Essential (Minimum Assured Services) and Desirable (which we should aspire 
to achieve). The  services include Outpatient Department (OPD), Indoor and 
Emergency Services. Audit findings related to OPD services have been 
described in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1 OPD Services 
 
3.1.1 Availability of OPD services in hospitals 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, OPD services of ENT, General Medicine, 
Paediatrics, General Surgery, Ophthalmology, Dental, Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, Psychiatry and Orthopaedics are essential and Dermatology & 
Venereology are desirable for District Hospitals (DH). 
Details of availability/non -availability of OPD services in DHs and 
Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH 1) as on 31 March 2023  
are given in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Availability of OPD services in District Hospitals/RH Patiala 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
DH 
Speciality Services (OPD) 
ENT 
General Medicine 
Paediatrics 
General Surgery 
Ophthalmology 
Dental 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
Psychiatry 
Orthopaedics 
Dermatology & 
Venereology 
1. Amritsar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
2. Barnala Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
3. Bathinda Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
4. Faridkot Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
5. Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
6. Fazilka Y N Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y 
7. Ferozepur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
8. Gurdaspur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
9. Hoshiarpur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
 
1 Rajindra Hospital (RH), Patiala. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
58 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
DH 
Speciality Services (OPD) 
ENT 
General Medicine 
Paediatrics 
General Surgery 
Ophthalmology 
Dental 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
Psychiatry 
Orthopaedics 
Dermatology & 
Venereology 
10. Jalandhar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
11. Kapurthala Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
12. Ludhiana Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
13. Malerkotla Y Y Y Y N Y N Y Y Y 
14. Mansa Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
15. Moga Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
16. Pathankot Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
17. Patiala Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
18. Rupnagar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
19. Sangrur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
20. SAS Nagar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
21. SBS Nagar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
22. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 
N N Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y 
23. Tarn Taran Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
 RH Patiala Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y 
Source: Information furnished by DHs/GMCH 
Available Not available 
It is evident from the above t able that most of the required specialty OPD 
services were available in all DHs of the State but ENT OPD service in DH 
Sri Muktsar Sahib, General Medicine in DHs at Fazilka and Sri Muktsar 
Sahib, General Surgery in DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, Ophthalmology in DH 
Malerkotla, Obstetrics & Gynaecology in DHs at Fazilka and Malerkotla, and 
Psychiatry OPD service in DH Amritsar were not available. Dental OPD 
service was also not available in test-checked GMCH Patiala (RH Patiala). 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.2  Availability of OPD services in CHCs  
As per IPHS 2012 norms, General Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics &  
Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Dental and AYUSH Services, Emergency Services, 
Laboratory Services, and National Health Programmes should be available in 
CHCs.  
The availability of OPD services in test-checked CHCs is given in Table 3.2. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
59 
Table 3.2:  Availability of OPD services in test-checked CHCs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of CHC 
General 
Medicine 
General 
Surgery 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
Paediatrics 
Dental 
AYUSH 
Emergency 
Laboratory 
1. Bhucho Mandi A A A NA NA NA A A 
2. Mehraj NA NA NA NA NA NA NA A 
3. Bassi Pathana A NA NA NA A A A A 
4. Amloh A A A A A NA A A 
5. Fatehgarh Churian A A A A A NA A A 
6. Naushera Majja Singh A A A NA A NA A A 
7. Mahilpur A A A A A A A A 
8. Shamchaurasi A A A A A A A A 
9. Sidhwan Bet A NA A A A A A A 
10. Sudhar A A A A A A A A 
11. Bagha Purana A NA A NA NA NA A A 
12. Nihal Singh Wala A NA A NA NA NA A A 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs  
Colour code: Green denotes ‘availability (A)’ and Red denotes ‘non-availability (NA)’ 
From above, it may be seen that General Medicine in one CHC, General 
Surgery in five, Obstetrics and Gynaecology in two, Paediatrics in six, Dental 
OPD in four , AYUSH facilities in seven CHCs and Emergency in one CHC 
were not available. However, no OPD services were available in CHC Mehraj 
except for laboratory services, which was  available in all test- checked CHCs. 
Moreover, General Surgery OPD service in three 2  CHCs, Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology OPD service in four 3  CHCs and Paediatrics  OPD service in 
four4 CHCs were being provided without availability of specialists. Shortage 
of manpower (doctors and paramedical staff)  in CHCs has been  mentioned in  
Paragraph 2.5.5.1 of Chapter II.  
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.1.3 Availability of OPD services in PHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, six hours of OPD services out of which four hours 
in the morning and two  hours in the afternoon for six days in a week are 
required in PHCs. No specific OPD services are prescribed in IPHS for PHCs.   
OPD services were available in all the test -checked PHCs except PHC 
Jodhpur Pakhar  since August 2019. Further, five 5  PHCs without Medical 
 
2 CHCs at (i) Amloh; (ii) Fatehgarh Churian; and (iii) Shamchaurasi. 
3 CHCs at (i) Shamchaurasi; (ii) Sudhar; (iii) Bagha Purana; and (iv) Nihal Singh Wala. 
4 CHCs at (i) Mahilpur; (ii) Shamchaurasi; (iii) Sidhwan Bet; and (iv) Sudhar. 
5 PHCs at (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Bhai Rupa; (iii) Possi; (iv) Thathi Bhai; and (v) Mallianwala. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
60 
Officers and three 6 PHCs without Staff Nurse were operational , as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.5.5.1 of Chapter II. 
As primary healthcare institutions are to provide essential healthcare services 
which are accessible and affordable to the local community, non- availability 
of essential OPD services resulted in denial of such facilities to the 
community. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.1.4 Non-availability of infrastructure for AYUSH services in CHCs 
and PHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, CHCs and PHCs should have AYUSH doctor, 
necessary infrastructure such as consultation room for AYUSH doctor and 
AYUSH drug dispensing area should be made available. 
AYUSH services were available in five 7 out of 12 CHCs. Further, out of 
24 test-checked PHCs, only seven  PHCs ( Mandi Kalan , Nandpur Kalour, 
Sanghol, Dhianpur, Ranjit  Bagh, Mand  Bhandher and Behrampur ) had 
AYUSH services.  The reply of the State Government  was awaited (February 
2024). 
3.1.5 Availability of major, minor and eye surgeries 
As per NHM Assessor’s Gu idebook, 2013 and IPHS 2012 norms , surgeries 
related to General S urgery, Obstetrics &  Gynaecology, Paediatrics, 
Ophthalmology, ENT , Orthopaedics , etc.  should be available at District 
Hospital. In CHCs, surgeries related to General S urgery, Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology and accident and emergency services should be available.  
Chart 3.1: Major, minor and eye surgeries performed in DHs 
during 2016-17 to 2021-22 
 
Source: Information furnished by selected DHs 
Note: No separate records for eye surgeries were maintained in DH Hoshiarpur. Figures mentioned for major/minor  
surgeries include eye surgeries. 
 
6 PHCs at (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Otalon; and (iii) Mallianwala. 
7 CHCs at (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Mahilpur; (iii) Shamchaurasi; (iv)  Sidhwan Bet; and (v) Sudhar. 
11,580
3,238
9,733 10,808
3,948
10,319
2,397 1,999
11,225
8,156 8,555
816
7,392
1,749 2,036
0 1,938 975
DH Bathinda DH Fatehgarh
Sahib
DH Gurdaspur DH Hoshiarpur DH Ludhiana DH Moga
Major Surgery Minor Surgery Eye Surgery

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
61 
Major, minor and eye surgeries were available in all selected DHs.  However, 
out of 12 selected CHCs, two  CHCs8 did not conduct any surgery during 
2016- 2022 due to non-posting of surgeon, as shown in Chart 3.2. 
Chart 3.2: Major and Minor surgeries performed in CHCs  
during 2016-17 to 2021-22 
 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
3.1.6 Average OPD cases per doctor per annum against available OPD 
services 
In test-checked DHs and CHCs, the average OPD cases per doctor per annum 
was highest (26,693) in CHC N. M. Singh and lowest (5,025) in DH Moga, as 
shown in Chart 3.3. 
Chart 3.3: Average OPD cases per annum per doctor during 2016-2022 
 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs and CHCs 
 
8  CHCs at (i) Mehraj; and (ii) Nihal Singh Wala. 
30 0 0
871
2,265
2,731
385
61 243 638
57 0
3,196
0
4,051
2,259
1,963
2,985
1,215
41 110 454
1,044
0
Major Surgery Minor Surgery
8,476
5,286
11,769
7,825 8,774
5,025
7,906
15,628
22,635
10,467
17,681
26,693
10,7728,724
5,793
10,4178,471
13,107
Average OPD case per annum per doctor

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
62 
This shows that the availability of doctors is required to be ensured as per the 
patient load in the health institutions. Such analysis could form the basis for 
the creation of posts for doctors as well as their deployment. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.7 Patients’ registration management  
NHM Assessor ’s Guidebook (Standard E1) provides the process of 
registration and admission in hospitals. It also covers OPD consultation 
processes and the assessor should review the records to verify that details of 
patients have been recorded, and patients have been given unique 
identification number. OPD consultation may be directly observed, followed 
by review of OPD tickets to ensure that patient history, examination details, 
etc. have been recorded on the OPD ticket.  Further, Paragraphs 12.16 and 
12.24 of ‘Hospital Manual’ published by the Directorate General of Health 
Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ( MoHFW), Government of 
India (GoI) provides that in the Outpatient D epartment, every patient is given 
a registration number in the form of a card/  ticket which is returned to the 
patient with the history, examination finding, provisional diagnosis and 
treatment written on it an d for attending special clinics. A  proper follow-up of 
record/file has to be kept in OPD for five years. 
Audit observed that online registration facility was not available in any 
healthcare institution. There was only a rudimentary level of computeris ation 
for registration and patient management in the test -checked DHs. The 
registration of patients was done at the counter and prescription slips were 
provided (valid for 30 days) with registration number in which name, age and 
address of the patients were recorded but the subsequent diagnosis prescribed 
by doctors, results thereof, medicines prescribed and distributed, status of 
patients treated and referred to other institutions were not recorded in the 
registration records of DHs. However, in RH Patiala, CHCs and PHCs, 
registration of patients was being done manually.  
Lack of patient treatment history may prevent provision of proper medical 
care by the doctors during subsequent visits. Further, in absence of the basic 
database of the patients, actual number of patients treated, referred to other 
facility, diagnosis prescribed and conducted at the RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs, 
medicines disbursed could not be ascertained in audit. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.1.7.1 Availability of registration counter and average daily patient load 
per Counter 
As per NHM Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance in health 
institutions, number of counters should be such that there are 12- 20 patients 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
63 
per hour per counter. Total 291 working days and six hours per day OPD have 
been considered during 2020-21.  
Average number of patients per hour per counter in DHs and CHCs during 
2020-21 is depicted in Chart 3.4. 
Chart 3.4: Average number of patients per hour per counter during 2020-21 
 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions 
As can be seen from the above, DH s at  Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, 
Hoshiarpur, Moga, CHCs at Fatehgarh Churian and Naushera Majja Singh had 
more average number of patients per hour per counter than the norms during  
2020-21. Thus, the health institutions having higher patient load against the 
norms should increase the number of counters. The result of higher number of 
patients was visible in long queues in the hospitals as depicted in the 
photographs below: 
  
Long queues of OPD patients at 
registration counters in DH, Hoshiarpur 
OPD patients waiting at registration 
counters in DH, Moga 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
30
71
12
35
13
35
15
7 9 11
39 42
17 14 13 18 11 12
Average daily patient load per counter


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
64 
3.1.8 Availability of seating arrangement, toilet facility and patient 
calling system (Digitalisation)  
As per IPHS 2012 norms, waiting area with adequate seating arrangement 
shall be provided. Main entrance, general waiting and subsidiary waiting 
spaces are required adjacent to each consultation and treatment room in all the 
clinics. Fluorescent fire exit plan/sign shall be displayed at each floor; safety, 
hazard and caution signs should be displayed prominently at relevant places. 
To avoid overcrowding, health institutions should have patient calling system 
with electronic display. The status of provision of the above facilities/services 
in test-checked DHs/CHCs/PHCs is given in Table 3.3.  
Table 3.3: Availability of seating arrangement, toilet facility, etc. 
Name of service District Hospitals  
(6) 
CHCs 
(12) 
PHCs 
(24) 
Display of fluorescent fire exit sign 5 5 4 
Enquiry/‘May I Help ’ Desk with staff fluent in local 
language 2 8 -- 
Directional signage for Emergency, Departments and 
Utilities 5 9 10 
Safety, hazard and caution signs were displayed prominently 
at relevant places 6 9 8 
Important contacts like higher medical centres, blood banks, 
fire department, police and ambulance services were 
displayed 
6 7 7 
Mandatory information (under RTI Act, PNDT Act, etc.) 
was displayed 6 7 11 
Adequate seating facility 6 10 18 
Patient Calling System (Digital) 4 7 -- 
Separate toilets for males and females 6 12 15 
Source: Data furnished by test-checked health institutions 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability in all health institutions’, Yellow depicts ‘availability in most 
of the health institutions’ and Red depicts ‘availability of facility in few health institutions’ 
It is observed from the above table that - 
 Fluorescent fire exit sign was displayed in five DHs, five CHCs and four 
PHCs only. Help desk was available in two DHs and eight CHCs.  
 Directional signage for Emergency, Departments and Utilities were 
displayed in five DHs, nine CHCs and 10 PHCs.  Safety, hazard and caution 
signs were displayed  prominently at relevant places in all  
test-checked DHs, nine CHCs and eight PHCs.  
 Important contacts like higher medical centres, blood banks, fire 
department, police and ambulance services were displayed in all  
test-checked DHs, seven CHCs and seven PHCs. Mandatory information 
(under RTI Act, PNDT Act, etc.) was displayed in all test-checked DHs, 
seven CHCs and 11 PHCs.   
 Further, adequate seating facility was not available in two CHCs and  
six PHCs. Patient Calling System (Digitalisation) was not available in two 
DHs and five CHCs. Separate toilets for males and females w ere not 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
65 
available in nine PHCs. Poor condition of toilets is depicted in the pictures 
below:  
  
Condition of District Hospitals, Moga and Fatehgarh Sahib 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.1.9  Patient satisfaction survey 
As per NHM Assessor’s Guidelines, OPD Patient satisfaction survey has to be 
done on a monthly basis.  
Audit observed that patient satisfaction surveys for out -patients were 
conducted in DH  Bathinda and DH Ludhiana9 only. Thus, other test -checked 
hospitals did not comply with the NHM norms, thereby not availing the 
opportunity of eliciting the views of patients regarding out -patient services in 
respective hospitals. 
Audit conducted a survey of doctors and patient s selected on random basis 
during performance audit to get feedback from doctors and patients’ 
satisfaction. The results are given in Appendix 3.1.
 
For OPD services, 384 patients10 were surveyed in selected health institutions 
(RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs). The results are summarised below: 
i. 54 per cent  patients said that Enquiry/ ‘May I Help ’ desk was not 
available with the competent staff. 
ii. 16 per cent patients stated that seating arrangements were not adequate 
at registration/OPD counter. 
iii. OPD hours for doctors and rate list were not displayed according to  
48 per cent and 61 per cent patients respectively. 
 
9 Only in Gynaecology and Physiotherapy Departments of hospital during 2019-2021. 
10 RH Patiala: 45 patients; six DHs: 164 patients; 12 CHCs: 78 patients; and 24 PHCs: 97 patients. 


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
66 
iv. 25 per cent patients said that number of registration counters were not 
adequate in health institutions. 
v. 35 per cent  patients informed that patient calling system was not 
satisfactory. 
vi. 42 per cent said that prescribed medicines were not made available to 
patients by health institution’s pharmacy. 
vii. 57 per cent  (pathological tests) and 65 per cent  (radiology tests) 
patients said that all test s recommended by the doctors were not done 
by the hospital.  
viii. 63 per cent patients objected that complaint box was not available in 
test-checked health institutions. 
The survey indicates that patient calling system, information display  and 
availability of tests need improvement across the hospitals. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.1.10 Patients’ rights and grievance redressal 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, Citizens’ Charter should be displayed at a proper 
place in the hospitals so that the patients are aware of their rights. For effective 
redressal of grievances of patients, there shall be provision of 
complaints/suggestion box in the hospital and a Hospital Management 
Committee for monitoring the grievance and as a quality assurance 
mechanism. 
Audit noticed that no records of grievance redressal at OPD was maintained in 
any of the test -checked health institutions except in DH, Bathinda. However, 
complaint boxes were available in DHs, Bathinda, Hoshiarpur and Gurdaspur 
(out of six DHs) and four CHCs at Fatehgarh  Churian, Naushera Majja Singh, 
Mahilpur and Shamchaurasi (out of 12 CHCs) during 2016- 2021. Thus, in the 
absence of such records, it could not be verified whether these hospitals 
properly attended to the complaints of the patients. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.2 I PD Services 
Indoor Patients Department (IPD) refers to the areas of the hospital where 
patients are accommodated after being admitted, based on doctor’s/specialist’s 
assessment, from the Out patient Department, Emergency Services and 
Ambulatory Care. In -patients require a higher level of care through nursing 
services, availability of drugs/diagnostic facilities, observation by doctors, etc. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
67 
3.2.1 Availability of In-p atient services  
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe for various IPD services in each type of health  
institution viz. DHs 11 , CHC s 12  and PHC s 13 . Further, minimum standard 
requirement for the Medical College Regulation s, 1999 also provides that the 
IPD services should be available in all the clinical departments. 
Audit observed that - 
 All IPD services were found available in the selected DHs except 
Psychiatric services in DH Bathinda. 
 In 12 selected CHCs, complete IPD services were not found except for 
General Medicine. IPD services in General Surgery was available only in 
CHCs Naushera Majja Singh, Sidhwan Bet and Sudhar. Paediatrics service 
was available in CHCs Sudhar  and Amloh.  However, Gynaecology and 
Obstetrics service was available in 10
14 CHCs. 
 Out of 24 PHCs, IPD services were not available in eight15 PHCs. 
Further, out of 39 departments available in RH Patiala, the following 
OPD/IPD services were not functional: 
(i) Radiotherapy: Despite availability of 30 beds ward , IPD services were 
not started due to shortage of required staff. 
(ii) Nephrology: OPD/IPD and kidney transplantation facilities were not 
available at Rajindra Hospital , Patiala due to non- posting of 
Nephrologists.  T here were 3,919 cases of kidney patients during  
2016-2021 who were provided dialysis services by doctors from the 
Department of Medicine. 
(iii) Neurosurgery: Though s pace for Neuro OPD/IPD ward with 20 beds 
(Image-A) and Operation Theatre equipped with machine for 
neurosurgery facilities were available in super specialty building at 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, the Neurosurgery services were not operational 
due to non- posting of Neurosurgeon. However, one Assistant Professor 
was posted there during the period between August 2019 and 
October 2020 and 1,277 OPD patients were attended to but only three 
surgeries were performed in the old building during the said period. 
 
11 General Medicine; General Surgery; Gynaecology & Obstetrics; Paediatrics; Dental care; 
Orthopaedics; Ophthalmology; and Psychiatry. 
12 General Medicine; General Surgery; Gynaecology & Obstetrics; and Paediatrics. 
13 Six-bedded IPD services. 
14  (i) Bhucho Mandi; (ii) Amloh; (iii) Fatehgarh Churian; (iv) Naushera Majja Singh; (v) Mahilpur; 
(vi) Shamchaurasi; (vii) Sidhwan Bet; (viii) Sudhar; (ix) Bagha Purana; and (x) Nihal Singh Wala. 
15 (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Bhari; (iii)  Nanowal; (iv)  Ranjit Bagh; (v)  Otalon; (vi)  Sowaddi Kalan; 
(vii) Thathi Bhai; and (viii) Malianwala. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
68 
    
 Image-A: Neurosurgery Ward in Super Specialty Building of Rajindra Hospital, Patiala 
(iv) Neurology: Neurology OPD/IPD service were not available, however, 
neurology patients were being attended to in the Medicine Department. 
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
3.2.1.1 Availability of beds in IPD wards in DHs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms  for District Hospitals (DH), IPD bed shall be  
categorised as General Medicine ward, P aediatrics ward, General Surgery 
ward, Ophthalmology ward, Accident and T rauma ward, etc.  (requirement of 
beds in district hospitals varied from  100 to 300  beds). Availability of IPD 
beds in the test-checked DHs is given in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Availability of IPD ward in test-checked DHs 
Name of Ward Requirement of beds as per 
IPHS 
DH Bathinda 
(200 beds) 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib (100 beds) 
DH Ludhiana 
(290 beds) 
DH Gurdaspur 
(110 beds) 
DH Hoshiarpur 
(200 beds) 
DH Moga  
(150 beds) 
For 100 to 
200 beds 
hospital 
For 200 to 
300 beds 
hospital 
General Medicine  30 50 89 30 30 45 
  
50 30 
General Surgery 30 45 50 30 30 58 36 
Ophthalmology 5 10 0 5 5 0 8 6 
Accident & Trauma 10 10 15 10 10 10 8 22 
Paediatrics 10 20 10 10 24 10 10 6 
Others 
 
 36 15 191 45 66 50 
Total 
 
 200 100 290 110 200 150 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
Colour Code: 
 Green depicts ‘adequate number of beds in wards’ 
 Yellow depicts ‘short number of beds in wards’ 
 Red depicts ‘nil number of beds in wards’ 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for DHs, allocation of beds for Ophthalmology ward 
was not made at DHs  at Bathinda and Gurdaspur . In DH Ludhiana, only 
65 beds were available against the requirement of 10 5 beds for General 
Medicine, General Surgery and Ophth almology. Further, DHs Gurdaspur 


Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
69 
allocated only 45 beds against the norms of 60 beds for General Medicine and 
General Surgery ward  and in DH Hoshiarpur, only eight beds were allocated 
against the requirement of ten for Accident and Trauma ward. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.2.2  Availability of six beds in PHCs with Maternal and Child Health 
 Care 
Primary Health Centre is the cornerstone of rural health services  - a first port 
of call to a qualified doctor of the public sector in rural areas for the sick and 
those who directly report or are referred from Sub -Centres for curative, 
preventive and promotive healthcare.  
As per IPHS 2012 norms for PHCs , a typical PHC covers a population of 
30,000 in plain areas with six indoor/observation beds. Intra -natal care:  
(24-hour delivery services both normal and assisted) should be available at 
PHCs. Availability of beds, labour service and o peration theatre (optional) to 
facilitate conduct of selected surgical procedures ( for e.g. vasectomy, 
tubectomy, hydrocelectomy, etc.) in the test-checked PHCs is given in 
Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Availability of labour service with beds and OT in test-checked PHCs 
Name of 
District 
Number of 
PHCs test-
checked 
Availability of 
beds 
Availability of 
labour service 
Availability of OT 
(for vasectomy, 
tubectomy, 
hydrocelectomy, 
etc.) 
Bathinda 4 3 1 3  1 0 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
4 3 1 2 2 0 
Gurdaspur 4 3 1 3 1 0 
Hoshiarpur 4 4 4 0 
Ludhiana 4 2 2 2 2 0 
Moga 4 2 2 2 2 0 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked PHCs 
Colour Code: 
 Green depicts ‘availability in number of PHCs’ 
 Red depicts ‘non-availability in number of PHCs’ 
 
It is evident from the above table that: 
• Out of 24 PHCs, seven  PHCs16 did not have a single bed , nine PHCs had 
the prescribed six beds and the remaining eight PHCs had less than six 
beds, as discussed in Paragraph 5.3.3. Labour service was also not 
available in these eight PHCs. 
• OT facility was not available in any of the test-checked PHCs. 
 
16 (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Nanowal; (iii) Ranjit Bagh; (iv) Otalon; (v) Sowaddi Kalan; (vi) Thathi Bhai; 
and (vii) Malianwala. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
70 
3.2.3 Availability of Isolation wards 
As per IPHS 2012 norms  and NHM Assessors’ guidelines, the clinics for  
infectious and communicable diseases should be located in isolation, 
preferably, in remote corner, provided with independent access. An isolation 
room should be available in D Hs. Ordinarily, negative air pressure isolation 
rooms are used as prevention rooms, while positive air pressure isolation 
rooms are used for protection. For patients who test positive for airborne 
illnesses, negative pressure isolation prevents contaminants from escaping 
from the room.  Av ailability of Isolation rooms in test -checked Government 
Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) and DHs is given in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Availability of Isolation wards 
Name of hospital Positive isolation room Negative isolation room 
DH Bathinda N A N A 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib N A N A 
DH Gurdaspur A A 
DH Hoshiarpur N A N A 
DH Ludhiana N A N A 
DH Moga N A N A 
RH Patiala N A N A 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs 
Colour code: Green/A depicts ‘availability’ and Red/NA depicts ‘non-availability’ 
The above table shows that positive and negative isolation room was not 
available in any test-checked RH/DHs except DH Gurdaspur. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.2.4 Availability of surgeries 
As per NHM Assessor’s Guidebook, 2013 and IPHS 2012 norms for DH , 
surgeries related to General surgery, Obstetrics &  Gynaecology, Paediatrics, 
Ophthalmology, ENT and Orthopaedics should be available at District 
Hospital. Further, a s per IPHS norms for CHCs, CHCs should be able to 
provide care of r outine and e mergency cases in s urgery. This includes 
dressings, incision and drainage, surgery for Hernia, Hydrocele, Appendicitis, 
Haemorrhoids, Fistula and stitching of injuries. It should also be able to handle 
emergencies like Intestinal Obstruction, H aemorrhage, etc. besides fracture 
reduction and putting splints/plaster cast. Further, as per IPHS for PHCs, 
operation theatre (optional) to facilitate conduct of selected surgical 
procedures (e.g. vasectomy, tubectomy, hydrocelectomy, etc. ) should be 
available.  

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
71 
Major, minor and ENT surger ies were available in all test -checked DHs but 
paediatric surgery was not available in four DHs 17.  Availability of specific 
surgery procedures in  the test-checked health institutions is given in 
Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: Availability of surgical procedures in test-checked 
health institutions 
Name of 
procedure  
(as per IPHS) 
District Hospitals Out of 12 
CHCs, 
available 
in 
Bathinda Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
Hernia A A A A A A 6 
Hydrocele A A A A A A 5 
Appendicitis A A A A A A 4 
Haemorrhoids A A A A A A 6 
Fistula A A A A A A 6 
Intestinal 
Obstruction A NA NA A A A 3 
Haemorrhage A A A A NA A 4 
Nasal packing A A A A A A 4 
Tracheostomy A A NA NA A A 2 
Foreign body 
removal A A A A A A 3 
Fracture 
reduction A A A A A A 3 
Putting splints/ 
plaster cast 
A A A A A A 4 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions 
Colour co de: Green/A depicts ‘a vailability’, Yellow depicts ‘availability in some HIs’, Red/NA depicts 
‘availability in few HIs and non-availability’ 
The concerned DHs/CHCs  stated that the specific procedure, as indicated in 
the t able c ould not be provided due to non -availability of specialist 
surgeon/surgeon. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.2.5 Surgery load per surgeon 
(a)  Surgery load per surgeon in test-checked DHs 
Audit analysed surgeries conducted per surgeon available in DHs and 
observed huge variations across hospitals during 2016-17 to 2021-22, as given 
in Table 3.8. 
 
17 DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Hoshiarpur; and (iv) Moga. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
72 
Table 3.8: Average number of surgeries per surgeon 
Name of 
Hospital 
Year General ENT Ortho Eye Total No. 
of 
surgeries 
conducted 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
DH  
Bathinda 
  
2016-17 1 1,013 2 62 3 507 2 703 4,064 
2017-18 2 486 2 92 3 470 3 418 3,820 
2018-19 2 489 2 50 3 631 3 609 4,798 
2019-20 2 358 2 36 3 343 3 464 3,209 
2020-21 2 135 3 17 3 362 3 202 2,013 
2021-22 2 128 3 21 2 239 3 303 1,706 
Total 11 2,609 14 278 17 2,552 17 2,699 19,610 
DH  
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
  
2016-17 2 89 1 15 3 110 2 123 769 
2017-18 2 130 1 25 2 173 2 89 809 
2018-19 2 202 1 87 1 340 1 127 958 
2019-20 2 111 1 4 2 123 2 58 588 
2020-21 2 161 2 0 2 143 2 188 984 
2021-22 2 193 1 117 2 164 3 236 1,539 
Total 12 886 7 248 12 1,053 12 821 5,647 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
  
2016-17 2 NA 1 NA 2 NA 1 NA NA 
2017-18 2 551 1 0 2 243 1 484 2,072 
2018-19 2 509 1 0 2 276 1 466 2,036 
2019-20 2 517 1 56 2 307 1 480 2,184 
2020-21 2 386 1 79 2 191 1 282 1,515 
2021-22 2 392 1 82 2 246 1 324 1,682 
Total 12 2,355 6 217 12 1,263 6 2,036 9,489 
DH  
Hoshiarpur18 
2016-17 6 209 
 
2 505 
  
2,264 
2017-18 6 224 2 572 2,488 
2018-19 6 227 2 627 2,616 
2019-20 6 251 2 730 2,966 
2020-21 6 176 2 768 2,592 
2021-22 6 146 2 591 2,058 
Total 36 1,233   12 3,793   14,984 
DH  
Ludhiana 
  
2016-17 2 233 2 399 2 714 1 519 3,211 
2017-18 2 178 2 360 2 802 1 391 3,071 
2018-19 2 234 1 105 2 1034 1 326 2,967 
2019-20 2 144 1 416 2 934 1 251 2,823 
2020-21 2 37 1 87 2 250 1 110 771 
2021-22 2 51 1 50 2 553 1 383 1,641 
Total 12 877 8 1,417 12 4,287 6 1,980 14,484 
 
18  No separate records for ENT and Eye surgeries were maintained. Figures mentioned for general 
surgeries include ENT and Eye surgeries. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
73 
Name of 
Hospital 
Year General ENT Ortho Eye Total No. 
of 
surgeries 
conducted 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average No. 
of surgeries 
DH  
Moga 
2016-17 2 NA 1 NA 1 NA 1 NA NA 
2017-18 2 NA 1 NA 1 NA 1 NA NA 
2018-19 2 195 1 86 1 438 1 403 1,317 
2019-20 2 178 1 93 1 403 1 300 1,152 
2020-21 2 118 0 6 1 250 1 87 573 
2021-22 2 69 1 9 1 262 1 185 594 
Total 12 560 5 194 6 1,353 6 975 3,636 
Source: Data furnished by test-checked DHs                    NA= Record not available 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘good number of surgeries’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and Red depicts ‘either no surgeries 
or very less’ 
It can be seen from above t able that excess surgeons against the sanctioned 
posts, as already mentioned in Chapter  II, were posted in DH Bathinda which 
led to more surgeries in DH Bathinda than other DHs. In other DHs  also 
except DH Ludhiana, although excess surgeons were posted against the 
sanctioned posts, the number of surgeries per surgeon has shown by and large 
a reducing trend indicating that services of surgeons were not being utilised 
optimally.   
3.2.5(b)   Surgery load per surgeon in test-checked CHCs 
Audit analysed surgeries conducted per surgeon available in test -checked 
CHCs and observed huge variations across hospitals during 2016- 17 to  
2021-22 as depicted in Appendix 3.2.  Further, Audit observed that: 
 In five CHCs (Mehraj, Sham chaurasi, Sidhwan Bet, Bagha Purana and 
Nihal Singh Wala), no surgeon was posted during 2016- 17 to 2021-22, 
in two CHCs (Bhucho Mandi and Bassi Pathana) , no surgeon was 
posted for four years i.e. from 2016-17 to 2019-20. 
 No G ynaecologist was posted in four CHCs (Mehraj, Shamchaurasi, 
Bassi Pathana and Nihal Singh Wala), during 2016- 17 to 2021-22; in 
CHC Bhaga Purana for four years ; in CHC Bhucho Mandi for three 
years; in CHC Sidhwan Bet for two years ; and in CHCs at Naushera 
Majja Singh and Mahilpur for one year.  
 Number of surgeries per surgeon were  by and large showing a 
reducing trend. However, in CHCs at Amloh, Fatehgarh Churian and 
Naushera Majja Singh,  the number of surgeries as well as surgery per 
surgeon were more,  as adequate number of surgeons were posted in 
these CHCs during the entire period.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
74 
3.2.6  Operation Theatre 
3.2.6.1 Availability of OT services in DHs 
Operation theatre (OT) is an essential service that is to be provided to the  
patients. IPHS 2012 norms for DHs prescribe OT for elective major surgery;  
emergency services; and ophthalmology/ENT for district hospitals. As per 
guidelines/Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance for District Hospitals, 
OT should have convenient relationship with surgical ward, ICU, radiology, 
pathology, blood bank and Central S terile Supply Department (CSSD). It 
should have access without any physical barrier , etc. The availability of 
various elements of quality OT services are detailed in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Availability of OT services in test-checked DHs 
Description 
DH Bathinda 
DH  
Fatehgarh Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
OT ha s convenient relationship with surgical ward, 
intensive care unit, radiology, pathology, blood bank 
and CSSD. 
No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Access to facility is provided without any physical 
barrier and friendly to people with disabilities. 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
OT ha s piped suction and medical gases, electric 
supply, heating, air-conditioning, ventilation. 
No* Yes No* Yes Yes No* 
Patient’s records and clinical information is maintained. Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Is defined and established grievance redressal system in 
place? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether all equipment are covered under AMC 
including preventive maintenance? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether the facility has established procedure for 
internal and external calibration of measuring 
equipment? 
Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
*  Except for electric supply. 
Colour code: 
 Yes= Available 
 No=Not available 
From the above, it was  observe d that c onvenient relationship with surgical 
ward, intensive care unit, radiology, pathology, blood bank and CSS D did not 
exist in DHs at Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib and Moga. Disabled friendly access 
and maintenance of patient’s records and clinical information was being 
ensured by all the test-checked hospitals. OT had piped suction and medical 
gases, electric supply, heating, air -conditioning and ventilation in three
19 DHs 
only. Procedure for internal and external calibration of measuring equipment 
 
19    DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Hoshiarpur; and (iii) Ludhiana. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
75 
was established by all the test -checked DHs except DH Hoshiarpur. Other 
facilities mentioned in the table were available in all test-checked DHs. 
3.2.6.2 Availability of OT services in CHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms and Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance in 
CHCs, an operation theatre for providing General Surgery, Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology, Accident and Emergency Services , etc. should be available in a 
CHC. 
Scrutiny of information in respect of OT services in 12 test -checked CHCs 
revealed that: 
• In CHC Bassi Pathana, OT was not available. 
• In CHCs at Mehraj, Bagha Purana and Nihal Singh Wala, OT was 
available but not functional due to non- posting of surgeons. However, 
OT at CHC Shamchaurasi was started from July 2022. 
3.2.6.3 Availability of OT services in PHCs 
IPHS 2012 norms for PHCs provide that to facilitate conducting selected 
surgical procedures (e.g. vasectomy, tubectomy, hydrocelectomy, etc.), an 
operation theatre should be available in a PHC. 
Out of 24 test-checked PHCs, in 22 PHCs OT was not available. However, in 
two PHCs (Dhianpur and Mand Bhander), OT was available but not functional 
due to non- availability of surgeons. Thus, OT services were not available in 
any of the test-checked PHCs. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.2.7 Evaluation of IPD services through Outcome Indicators 
The IPD services can be evaluated through Outcome Indicators viz.  Bed 
Occupancy Rate (BOR) 20, Bed Turnover Rate (BTR) 21, Discharge Rate (DR) 22, 
 
20 BOR is an indicator of the productivity of the hospital services and is a measure of verifying 
whether the available infrastructure and processes are adequate for delivery of health services. As 
per IPHS, BOR of hospitals should be at least 80 per cent. 
21 BTR is the rate of usage of beds in an in- patient department in a given period and is a measure of 
the utilisation of the available bed capacity and serves as an indicator of the efficiency of the 
hospital. High BTR indicates high utilisation of the in -patient beds in a department while low BTR 
could be due to fewer patient admissions or longer duration of stay in the departments. 
22 Discharge rate measures the number of patients leaving a hospital after receiving due healthcare. 
High discharge rate denotes that the hospital is providing healthcare facilities to the patients 
efficiently and on the other hand, low rate of discharge means that the healthcare facilities were not 
adequate. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
76 
Referral Out Rate (ROR) 23, Average Length of Stay (ALoS) 24, Left Against 
Medical Advice (LAMA)25 Rate and Absconding Rate26.  
Bed Occupancy Rate of DHs and CHCs: 
As per IPHS 2012 norms , average BOR of district hospitals should be at least  
80 per cent and the average BOR of CHCs will be 60 per cent.  
Details of BOR of the test -checked DHs and CHCs for the period 2016 -2022 
is shown in Table 3.10. 
Table 3.10: Details of BOR of test-checked DHs 
Name of 
Hospital 
Number of 
beds 
available  
Average Bed Occupancy Rate Average 
of BOR 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
DH Bathinda 200 106 141 149 158 116 91 130 127 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
100 
92 100 83 70 57 65 85 79 
DH Gurdaspur 110 225 217 177 159 104 115 128 161 
DH Hoshiarpur 200 83 83 78 83 69 69 69 76 
DH Ludhiana 290 132 135 76 82 85 89 101 100 
DH Moga 150 240 231 188 164 144 91 105 166 
Source: Information furnished by PHSC  
Colour code: Green depicts ‘good performance’, Yellow depicts ‘poor performance’ and Red depicts ‘High 
BOR (Over-burdened infrastructure)’ 
Table 3.10 shows that BOR of all the test -checked DHs were above 
80 per cent except DHs at Fatehgarh Sahib and Hoshiarpur wherein BOR was 
as per norms. Higher BOR at DHs indicate s inadequate number of beds 
against requirement in these DHs, as pointed out in Paragraph 5.3.2. 
Table 3.11: Details of BOR of the test-checked CHCs 
District Name of CHC Number 
of beds 
available 
Average Bed Occupancy Rate Average 
of BOR 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
 
Bathinda Bhucho Mandi 30 16 13 17 18 15 19 47 21 
Mehraj 19 30 18 48 17 11 3 5 19 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Bassi Pathana 30 27 29 25 27 31 30 36 29 
Amloh 30 84 85 72 70 48 57 70 69 
 
23 ROR denotes referral to higher centres as the facilities for treatment were not available in the 
hospital. 
24 ALoS is an indicator of clinical care capability and to determine effectiveness of interventions. 
ALoS is the time between the admission and discharge/death of the patient. 
25 LAMA is the term used for a patient who leaves the hospital against the advice of the doctor. 
26 Absconding Rate refers to patients who leave the hospital without informing the hospital 
authorities. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
77 
District Name of CHC Number 
of beds 
available 
Average Bed Occupancy Rate Average 
of BOR 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
 
Gurdaspur Fatehgarh Churian 30 93 90 96 100 89 77 86 90 
N M Singh 30 25 16 23 33 32 37 42 30 
Hoshiarpur Mahilpur 24 57 58 50 67 65 72 62 62 
Shamchaurasi 24 20 18 17 19 15 25 50 23 
Ludhiana Sidhwan Bet 30 54 47 80 70 65 67 64 64 
Sudhar 30 67 53 51 44 37 51 31 48 
Moga Bagha Purana 25 24 38 17 24 13 15 27 23 
Nihal Singh Wala 25 46 51 52 68 77 13 25 47 
Source: Information furnished by PHSC  
Colour code:  Green depicts ‘good performance’, Yellow  depicts ‘poor performance’ and Red depicts ‘High BOR  
(Over-burdened infrastructure)’  
The above t able shows that in eight CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, Mehraj, Bassi 
Pathana, N M Singh, Shamchaurasi, Sudhar, Bagha  Purana and Nihal Singh 
Wala), BOR was much below than 60 per cent  which indicated poor 
productivity of these CHCs. However, in CHC Fatehgarh Churian, BOR was 
significantly high which represents that 30 beds were also inadequate. 
The performance of IPD services through Outcome Indicators in  
the test-checked DH/RH is detailed in Table 3.12. 
Table 3.12: Outcome indicators of IPD services at DHs/RH 
Name of 
Hospital 
Average 
Bed Turn 
Over 
Rate 
Discharge 
Rate 
(%) 
Average 
Referral Out 
Rate (%) 
Average 
length of stay 
(No. of Days) 
LAMA 
Rate 
(%) 
Absconding 
Rate (%) 
DH Bathinda 6.84 57.91 5.93 3.39 7.49 5.88 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
1.83 59.39 5.76 3.92 14.30 15.95 
DH Gurdaspur 11.31 88.18 10.24 3.74 12.06 2.09 
DH Hoshiarpur 7.10 51.41 4.07 3.40 4.00 1.05 
DH Ludhiana 7.45 72.52 6.02 2.73 13.15 3.09 
DH Moga 11.91 86.58 5.33 3.14 6.47 2.23 
RH Patiala 3.94 NA NA 8.47 8.14 0.56 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs  NA= Information not made available 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘good performance’, Yellow ‘moderate performance’ and Red 
depicts ‘poor performance’ 
It was observed that:  
 Efficiency of the hospital as indicated by BTR was found on lower side 
in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib and RH Patiala and higher side in  
DHs Gurdaspur and Moga. 
 Discharge rate varied between 51  per cent  and 88 per  cent and was 
lower in DHs at Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib and Hoshiarpur indicating 
that these hospitals were under-performing.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
78 
 ROR in DH Gurdaspur was on the higher side which indicated that 
healthcare facilities were not adequate in this hospital.  
 LAMA rate varied between 4  per cent  and 14 per cent  and was 
alarmingly high in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur and Ludhiana , 
whereas absconding rate varied between 1 per cent and 16 per cent and 
was alarmingly high in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib.  
The performance of the IPD services through Outcome Indicators in  
test-checked CHCs is detailed in Table 3.13. 
Table 3.13: Outcome indicators of IPD services at CHCs 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Health Facility 
(CHC) 
Average 
Bed Turn 
Over Rate 
Discharge 
Rate 
(%) 
Average 
Referral 
Out Rate 
(%) 
Average 
length of stay 
(No. of Days) 
LAMA 
Rate 
(%) 
Absconding 
Rate (%) 
Bathinda Bhucho Mandi 12.96 95.00 4.04 1.44 2.88 0.00 
 Mehraj 2.91 100.00 0.00 1.83 0.00 0.00 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib Bassi Pathana 1.42 51.98 20.94 3.49 9.62 16.21 
 Amloh 4.30 72.83 5.63 6.66 0.82 1.73 
Gurdaspur Fatehgarh 
Churian 4.74 82.79 6.45 3.83 2.25 0.78 
 N M Singh 3.71 95.39 5.13 2.54 0.36 0.00 
Hoshiarpur Mahilpur 4.67 61.95 19.22 2.57 11.80 10.07 
 Shamchaurasi 2.33 90.63 0.00 2.24 0.00 0.26 
Ludhiana Sidhwan Bet 2.47 83.81 8.47 2.27 8.63 0.00 
 Sudhar 2.59 69.91 12.08 4.05 6.82 1.76 
Moga Bagha Purana 3.95 95.85 2.37 1.29 3.16 0.00 
 Nihal Singh 
Wala 2.60 84.16 7.53 2.72 8.30 0.00 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions  
Colour code: Green depicts ‘good performance’, yellow depicts ‘moderate performance’ and red depicts ‘poor performance’ 
It was observed that:  
 BTR in six 27 CHCs was very poor as it was only between one and 
three.  This represented that the productivity of these CHCs was much 
below the norms. 
 However, BTR in CHC Bhucho Mandi was 13 which implied strain on 
resources of CHC. 
 Out of 12 CHCs, discharge rate varied between 52 per cent  and  
100 percent and was substantially low in CHCs Bassi Pathana 
(52 per cent), Mahilpur (62 per cent), Amloh (73 per cent) and Sudhar 
(70 per cent ) against the benchmark of 82 per  cent which indicated 
that these CHCs were under-performing. 
 
27 (i) Mehraj; (ii) Bassi Pathana; (iii) Shamchaurasi; (iv) Sidhwan Bet; (v) Sudhar; and  
(vi) Nihal Singh Wala. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
79 
 Amongst 12 CHCs, ROR 28 varied between zero and  21 per  cent and 
was substantially high in CHCs Bassi Pathana 
(21 per cent) and Mahilpur (19 per cent ) which indicated that the 
healthcare facilities were not adequate in these CHCs. 
 Average Length of Stay (ALoS) 29 in CHCs varied between one and 
seven days and was high in CHCs Amloh (seven days) and Sudhar 
(four days), whereas that of Bhucho Mandi (one), Bagha Purana (one) 
and Mehraj (two) was very low. 
 In test-checked CHCs, Leave Against Medical Advice (LAMA) varied 
between zero and 12 per  cent and Absconding Rate was between zero 
and 16 per cent . The rates were substantially high in CHCs Bassi 
Pathana and Mahilpur (LAMA: 10  per cent and 12 per cent ; and 
Absconding Rate: 16 per cent and 10 per cent), during 2016-2021. 
Performance of the test -checked CHCs was not satisfactory in respect of the 
above outcome indicators, which could be attributed to shortage of specialist 
doctors, equipment, pathology services, OT services  and complete IPD 
services, as pointed out in Paragraphs 2.5.2.1, 3.2.1, 3.2.6.2, 3.6.2.2 and 
4.2.2 respectively.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
3.3 Emergency Services 
Emergency Department is the first point of contact for any critically ill patient 
needing immediate medical attention. Due to the unplanned nature of patient 
attendance, the Department  must provide initial treatment for a broad 
spectrum of illnesses and injuries, some of which may be life -threatening and 
require immediate attention. Flow chart of Emergency Department is given 
below: 
 
28 Referral Out Rate: Total patients referred during the month x 100/total patients admitted. 
29 Average Length of Stay (ALoS): Total patient bed days in the month excluding newborn/discharges 
in the month including death, LAMA and absconding. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
80 
 
3.3.1  Availability of emergency services 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for DHs, 24x7 operational emergency with dedicated 
emergency room shall be available with adequate manpower. Emergency  shall 
have dedicated triage, resuscitation and observation area. Separate provision 
for examination of rape/sexual assault victim should be made available  in the 
emergency as per guidelines of the Supreme Court. 
Emergency should have mobile X -ray/laboratory, side labs/plaster room  and 
minor OT facilities. Besides, separate emergency beds may be provided. 
Sufficient separate waiting areas and public amenities for patients and relative 
should be  located in such a way that it does not disturb functioning of 
emergency services.  
As per NHM Assessor ’s Guidebook 2013, t he hospital should provide 
orthopaedics s ervices by ensuring availability of e mergency orthopaedic 
procedures. Further, there should be an established procedure for admission of 
patients and emergency department should be aware of admission criteria to 
critical care units like ICU, SNCU, burn cases, etc.  Emergency protocols  
should be defined and implemented for head injury, snake bite, poisoning, etc. 
The facility should have disaster management plan in place. 
During test-check of records, it was noticed that emergency care services were 
available in all six test-checked DHs and RH, Patiala. The status of emergency 
services in test-checked hospitals is given in Table 3.14. 


Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
81 
Table 3.14: Availability of emergency services in test-checked hospitals 
Particulars 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 
Ludhiana 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH Moga 
Availability and functioning of 
Emergency OT Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of infrastructure 
hospital (Emergency Ward) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of infrastructure relating 
to Trauma Ward such as bed 
capacity, machinery & equipment, 
etc. 
Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes 
Availability of triage procedure to 
sort patients No Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes 
Availability of surgical facilities for 
emergency Appendectomy Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability to diagnose and to treat 
Hypoglycemia, Ketosis and Coma Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of assault injuries/bowel 
injuries/head injuries/stab injuries 
/multiple injuries/ 
perforation/intestinal obstruction 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of emergency 
laboratory services Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of blood bank in close 
proximity to emergency department Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of mobile X-ray/ 
laboratory, side labs/plaster room in 
accident and emergency service 
Yes Yes Yes Yes/only X-
ray & Lab Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of emergency operation 
theatre for maternity, orthopaedic 
emergency, burns and plastic 
surgery and neurosurgery cases 
round the clock 
Yes* No Yes* Yes* No No No 
Availability of facilities for 
accidents and emergency services 
including poisoning and trauma care 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of separate provision of 
emergency ward for examination of 
rape/sexual assault victim 
No Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Availability of sufficient separate 
waiting areas and public amenities 
in emergency ward for patients and 
relatives 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of emergency protocols 
in emergency ward Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of disaster management 
plan in emergency ward No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked GMCH/DHs 
*  Except for Neurosurgery. 
Colour Code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
82 
3.3.2 Availability of routine and emergency care in CHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for CHCs, CHCs should provide care of r outine and 
emergency cases in medicine. Specific mention is made of handling of 
emergencies like dengue haemorrhagic f ever, cerebral malaria and others like 
dog and snake bite cases, poisonings, congestive heart failure, left ventricular 
failure, pneumonias, meningoencephalitis, acute respiratory conditions, status 
epilepticus, burns, shock, a cute dehydration, etc. Further, essential and 
emergency obstetric care including surgical interventions like caesarean 
sections and other medical interventions should be available. 
The availability of care of routine and emergency cases in Medicine in CHCs 
is detailed in Table 3.15. 
Table 3.15: Availability of routine and emergency cases in Medicine in CHCs 
Name of district Bathinda Fatehgarh Sahib Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
Name of Routine 
and Emergency 
care service 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
No. of test-
checked 
CHCs(02) 
Dengue 
haemorrhagic fever 0 0 1 2 0 2 
Cerebral malaria 0 1 1 1 0 0 
Dog and snake bite 
cases 1 2 2 2 2 2 
Poisonings 0 2 2 1 1 1 
Congestive heart 
failure 0 1 0 0 1 1 
Left ventricular 
failure 0 1 0 0 0 0 
Pneumonia 0 1 2 1 1 1 
Meningoencephalitis 0 1 0 0 0 0 
Acute respiratory 
conditions 1 2 2 2 1 2 
Status epilepticus 0 2 2 0 1 2 
Burns 0 1 1 1 1 2 
Shock 0 2 2 1 1 1 
Acute dehydration 1 2 2 2 2 2 
Obstetric care 
including surgical 
interventions like 
caesarean sections 
and other medical 
interventions 
0 1 2 2 2 0 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
Colour code: 
Available Partially available Non-available 
Further, out of 12 CHCs, emergency care services in CHC Mehraj  were not 
available. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
83 
Non-availability of emergency services in violation of the norms ibid  would 
lead to denial of patient care in emergent situation. 
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
3.3.3 Management of e mergency cases in PHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for PHCs, 24 hours  emergency services such as  
appropriate management of injuries and accident, f irst aid, stitching of 
wounds, incision and drainage of abscess, stabilisation of the condition of the 
patient before referral, dog bite/snake bite/scorpion bite cases and other 
emergency conditions should be provided in PHCs. These services are to be 
provided primarily by the nursing staff. However, in case of need, Medical 
Officer may be available to attend to emergencies on call basis. Intra- natal 
care: 24-hour delivery services both normal and assisted including appropriate 
and prompt referral for cases needing specialist care should be ensured. 
Table 3.16: Availability of emergency services in PHCs 
Name of District Number of 
test-checked 
PHCs 
24 hours management 
of selected emergency 
services 
Emergency on call 
basis, 24-hour normal 
delivery services and 
referral 
Bathinda 4 1 2 
Fatehgarh Sahib 4 1 2 
Gurdaspur 4 2 2 
Hoshiarpur 4 3 4 
Ludhiana 4 0 1 
Moga 4 1 1 
Total 24 8 12 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘mostly available’, Yellow depicts ‘partial available ’ and Red depicts 
‘least/not available’ 
Facility of 24 hours management of selected emergency services was available 
in eight PHCs. Emergency on call basis, 24-hour normal delivery services and 
referral services were available in 12 out of 24 test -checked PHCs. Only in 
one district – Hoshiarpur – e mergency on call basis, 24 hours normal delivery 
services and referral  were available in all four PHCs and 24 hours 
management of selected emergency services were available in three PHCs. 
Further, five PHCs without Medical Officers and three PHCs without Staff 
Nurses were operational, as discussed in Paragraph 2.5.5.1 of Chapter II. 
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
3.3.4 Non-availability of Intensive Care Unit 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for District Hospitals, in ICU, critically ill patients  
requiring highly skilled life saving medical aid and nursing care are 
concentrated. These should include major surgical and medical cases, head 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
84 
injuries, severe haemorrhage, acute coronary occlusion, kidney and respiratory 
catastrophe, poisoning, etc. It should be the ultimate medical care the hospital 
can provide with highly specialised staff and equipment. The number of 
patients requiring intensive care may be about 5 to 10 per cent of total medical 
and surgical patients in a hospital. The unit shall not have less than 4 beds nor 
more than 12 beds. Number of beds may be restricted to 5 per cent of the total 
bed strength initially but should be expanded to 10 per cent gradually. Out of 
these, they can be equally divided among ICU and High Dependency Wards. 
As per NHM Assessors’ guidelines, the hospital should also provide intensive 
care service as part of curative services.  
None of the test -checked District Hospitals had ICU services except for DH, 
Gurdaspur wherein all the above said services were available but nursing staff 
required as per the norms of the Indian Nursing Council for these services 
were inadequate i.e. one nurse is required for each bed in ICU  (shortage of 
nurses discussed in Chapter-II).  The bed-to-nurse ratio in Shift-I was 5:1 and 
in Shifts -II and III, it was 10:1. Further detail s of other  facilities and 
equipment in ICU at DH Gurdaspur were as under: 
Table 3.17: Availability of ICU services in DH Gurdaspur 
Particulars Availability 
Availability of various types of ICU services as prescribed by National 
standards 
Available# 
Functional in-patient beds in ICU 10 ICU beds 
Percentage of patients admitted in ICU who were monitored for 
fluid/electrolyte charting 
Fluid: 100 per cent 
Electrolyte:  
100 per cent 
Percentage of patients admitted in ICU who were monitored for intake 
and output charting 
100 per cent 
Percentage of patients admitted in ICU who were monitored for cardiac 
care monitoring 
100 per cent 
Availability of ICU ventilators Not available 
Facilities for curative services in ICU Available 
Facilities for diagnostic services in ICU Available 
User charges displayed in local and simple language and communicated 
to patients effectively 
Available 
Availability of adequate space and waiting area for ICU as per 
requirement 
Available 
Nutritional assessment of patient as required and directed by doctor Not done 
Source: Information furnished by DH, Gurdaspur 
# ABG, Portable X-ray, ECO investigation was not available. 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability ’, Yellow depicts ‘partial availability ’ and Red depicts 
‘non-availability’ 
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
3.3.4.1 ICU services in RH Patiala 
Minimum Standard Requirements for the Medical College Regulations,  2010 
(For 200 admissions annually) provide that there shall be a well -equipped and 
updated Intensive Care Unit (ICU), Intensive Coronary Care Unit (ICCU), 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
85 
Paediatric/Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (PICU/NICU) having five beds in 
each. ICU should be located near casualty. Further, one nurse is required to be 
deployed on each ICU bed. 
Audit noticed that: 
 There was a significant shortage of 81 nurses against the requirement 
of 141 nurses30 in ICU, ICCU and NICU. 
 PICU was not functional in RH Patiala during the period 2016-2021. 
Thus, substantial shortage of required nurses in ICUs  could affect the quality 
healthcare services to the patients admitted there. 
The hospital authority while admitting  the facts stated (June 2022) that PICU 
was started in May 2022 and efforts would be made to get additional staff as 
per norms. 
3.3.5 Emergency cases referred to other hospitals 
The NHM Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance , 2013 prescribe that 
in case a patient is referred to a higher -level hospital, the hospital authorities 
are required to inform in advance about the referral to the higher -level 
hospital. It further provides that the hospital authorities should follow -up with 
the treatment of the referred patient. 
The position of total patients admitted in emergency of test -checked GMCH  
(RH Patiala)/DHs and referred to higher institutions during the selected 
months31 is detailed in Table 3.18. 
Table 3.18: Position of patients referred to higher facility 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
GMCH/DHs 
Total admission in emergency in  
selected months 
Patients referred to higher 
facility (percentage) 
1. Bathinda  3,600 415 (12) 
2. Fatehgarh Sahib 659 22 (3) 
3. Gurdaspur 1,420 229 (16) 
4. Hoshiarpur 4,825 299 (6) 
5. Ludhiana 6,153 292 (5) 
6. Moga 4,473 332 (7) 
7. RH Patiala 10,395 699 (7) 
Total 31,525 2,288 (7) 
Source: Test-checked hospitals 
Note: Records of six months in respect of referred patients were not maintained by four DHs32. 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘good performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and red depicts ‘poor 
performance’ 
Table 3.18 shows that out of 31,525 pat ients admitted in emergency, 
2,288 cases (7 per cent) were referred to higher institutions during the selected 
period.  The referral of patients to other/higher institutions in two DHs viz.  
 
30 47 available beds (ICU: 14, ICCU: 13 and NICU: 20) X three shifts (one for each shift). 
31 November 2016; February 2018; May 2018; August 2019; and November 2020. 
32 DHs (i) Fatehgarh Sahib (November 2016, February 2018 and May 2018); (ii) Gurdaspur  
(November 2016); (iii) Hoshiarpur (November 2016); and (iv) Moga (November 2016).    

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
86 
Bathinda (12 per cent ) and Gurdaspur (16 per  cent) was higher than that of 
other selected hospitals. Even RH Patiala had also referred seven per cent  of 
the patients to other health institutions.  Similarly, out of 7,672 patients 
admitted in emergency of 11 test -checked CHCs33 (out of 12 CHCs), as many 
as 1,103 patients (14 per cent) were referred to higher/other institutions during 
the selected period . However, these institutions neither intimated referral 
linkages in advance nor were the patients followed up. This indicated that the 
provisions of emergency services were not sufficient in these health 
institutions keeping in view the other peer institutions. 
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
3.4 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
COVID-19 is the disease caused by a new coronavirus called the Severe Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2). The most common 
symptoms of COVID -19 are fever, dry cough, fatigue and other symptoms 
that are less common and may affect some patients which include loss of taste 
or smell, nasal congestion, conjunctivitis (also known as red eyes), sore throat, 
headache, muscle or joint pain, different types of skin rash, nausea or 
vomiting, diarrhoea, chills or dizziness. Symptoms of severe COVID -19 
disease include shortness of breath, loss of appetite, confusion, persistent pain 
or pressure in the chest and high temperature. The time from exposure to 
COVID-19 to the moment when symptoms begin is, on an average, 5- 6 days 
and can range from 1-14 days.  
COVID-19 can spread by breathing in air carrying droplets or aerosol particles 
that contain the SARS -CoV-2 virus when close to an infected person or in 
poorly ventilated spaces with infected persons, by having droplets and 
particles that contain the SARS-CoV-2 virus land on the eyes, nose, or mouth–
especially through splashes and sprays like a cough or sneeze and by touching 
the eyes, nose, or mouth with hands that have the SARS -CoV-2 virus particles 
on them. 
Audit reviewed the Emergency Response to COVID -19 by the State and the 
lessons learnt for future preparedness. 
3.4.1 Fund utilisation under COVID -19 in the State and  
test-checked districts 
The Government of India provided funds under Emergency COVID Response 
Package (ECRP) to the State in order to support preparedness and prevention 
related activities due to COVID -19 outbreak.  The receipt and expenditure 
under ECRP is shown in Table 3.19. 
 
33 Records were not provided by CHC Nihal Singh Wala. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
87 
Table 3.19: Utilisation of funds under COVID-19 
(₹ in crore) 
EMERGENCY COVID RELIEF PACKAGE 
Year Funds provided by Expenditure incurred 
GoI State Government 
2019-20 40.82 27.21 68.03 
2020-21 165.28 0 161.38 
2021-22 204.55 0 204.55 
Total 410.65 27.21 433.96 
Source: Departmental information 
Further, funds were also provided under the State Disaster Response Fund and 
Chief Minister’s COVID-19 Relief Fund to manage the pandemic as under: 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Budget 
allotted 
during the 
year 
Amount 
withdrawn 
from 
treasury 
Expenditure 
incurred 
Closing 
Balance 
 
Utilisation 
certificate 
submitted 
STATE DISASTER RESPONSE FUND 
Department of Health and Family Welfare 
2019-20 0.00 50.00 50.00 8.40 41.60  
2020-21 41.60 265.71 265.71 273.72 33.59  
2021-22 33.59 255.36 255.36 286.25 2.70 500.23 
Total (A)  571.07 571.07 568.37  500.23 
Department of Medical Education and Research  
2019-20 0.00 4.39 4.39 4.39 0.00 0.00 
2020-21 0.00 263.99 127.30 116.45 10.85 73.90 
Total (B)  268.38 131.69 120.84  73.90 
Total (A+B)  839.45 702.76 689.21  574.13 
CHIEF MINISTER COVID-19 RELIEF FUND 
Year Funds received Expenditure incurred 
2020-21 25.76 25.76 
Source: Departmental information 
Audit noticed that the funds were utilised on various components  
viz. Drugs/Consumables/Diagnostics, Human Resources, Equipment/Facilities 
for Patient Care Services, IT Software and Hardware, Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) Activities and Training, COVID Care Kits and 
Pulse Oximeters, Civil Works , Equipment, etc. Out of the total funds of 
₹ 839.45 crore provided under SDRF during the year 2019-2022, an amount of 
₹ 702.76 crore was withdrawn from the treasury for further transfer to 
different authorities (Deputy Commissioners of the districts, Civil Surgeons, 
National Health Mission, Punjab Health Systems Corporation, etc.). However,  
utilisation certificates for expenditure of ₹ 574.13 crore only were forwarded 
by the Department of Health and Family Welfare (DH&FW) and Department 
of Medical Education and Research (DMER) to the State Government. 
Besides, ₹ 25.76 crore were also spent out of the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund.   

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
88 
Funds utilisation in test -checked RH Patiala and five districts (except district 
Moga34) under COVID-19 are shown in Table 3.20. 
Table 3.20: Fund utilisation in test-checked RH Patiala and districts except 
Moga under COVID-19 
(₹ in lakh)  
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Receipt Expenditure Receipt Expenditure Receipt Expenditure 
Bathinda 10.00 0.00 355.66 364.86 252.94 249.99 
Fatehgarh Sahib 0.00 0.00 10.00 10.00 5.00 5.00 
Gurdaspur 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 286.00 151.00 
Hoshiarpur 10.00 0.00 146.64 125.17 177.71 158.36 
Ludhiana 10.00 0.00 95.00 104.02 0.00 0.00 
RH Patiala 0.00 0.00 2,006.96 1,283.47 1,155.30 1,148.03 
Total 40.00 10.00 2,624.26 1,897.52 1,876.95 1,712.38 
Source: Information furnished by the test-checked districts 
Funds amounting to ₹4,541.21 lakh (₹40.00 lakh in 2019- 20, ₹2,624.26 lakh 
in 2020-21 and ₹1,876.95 lakh in 2021-22) were released to five selected Civil 
Surgeons (except District Moga) and RH Patiala during the period  
2019-2022. Out of ₹4,541.21 lakh, the selected five districts and RH Patiala 
incurred an expenditure of ₹3,619.90 lakh (₹10.00 lakh in 2019- 20, ₹1,897.52 
lakh in 2020-21 and ₹1,712.38 lakh in 2021-22) for COVID-19 management. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.4.2 Availability of oxygen and drugs for COVID -19 in health 
 institutions 
3.4.2.1  Availability of oxygen 
Rule 45 of the Static and Mobile Pressure Vessels (Unfired) Rules, 2015 
provides that no person shall store any compressed gas in any vessel except 
under and in accordance with the conditions of a license granted under these 
rules. Further, Rule 55 provides that a license granted under these rules may 
be renewed by the Chief Controller or Controller authorised by him and the 
license may be renewed for a maximum period of five years where there has 
been no contravention of the Act or the Rules framed thereunder or of any 
conditions of the license so renewed. 
Audit noticed that Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO) 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, GoI granted permission (November 2013 
and valid up to March 2016) to Rajindra Hospital (RH), Patial a under Static 
and Mobile Pressure Vessels (Unfired) Rules, 1981, for storage of 6,100 Kgs 
of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO). 
However, RH Patiala kept on storing LMO even after the expiry of license.  
The supplier agency of LMO stopped the supply of LMO in November 2020 
citing expired license as the reason. Later on, RH Patiala got the license 
renewed in April 2021, having validity thereof till September 2025, with 
enhanced storage capacity of 27,267 kg.  Accordingly, after renewal of license, 
 
34 District Moga did not provide record/information. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
89 
the supply of LMO was resumed in April 2021. Due to non -renewal of license 
for storage of LMO, supply of oxygen to the patients was being made through 
oxygen cylinders during the COVID -19 period from November 2020 to 
April 2021. Audit noticed that owing to COVID -19 pandemic, the prices of 
oxygen cylinders were on higher side as compared to LMO.  Had the license 
been renewed in time, an excess expenditure of ₹0.70 crore (as detailed in 
Table 3.21) incurred on purchase of cylinders could have been avoided. 
Table 3.21: Details of excess expenditure on purchase of oxygen cylinders 
Sr.No. Description Excess expenditure 
1. No. of A type cylinders purchased 04 
2. Volume of oxygen supplied through A type cylinders 
(0.70 m3 per cylinder) 4X0.70 =2.8 cubic meter 
3. No. of B type cylinders purchased 1,958 
4. Volume of oxygen supplied through B type cylinders 
(1.5 m3 per cylinder) 1,958X1.5= 2,937 cubic meter 
5. No. of D type cylinders purchased 84,278 
6. Volume of oxygen supplied through D type cylinders 
(7.0 m3 per cylinder) 
84,278X7.0=5,89,946 cubic 
meter 
7. Total volume of oxygen supplied by cylinders 
(Rounded off total of 2+4+6) 5,92,886 cubic meters 
8. Total amount of funds spent in supply of oxygen 
through cylinders ₹ 1,69,50,359 
9. Cost of LMO as per approved rate contract (if LMO 
could be purchased instead of cylinders) (₹ 16.80 x 
5,92,886 cubic meter) 
₹ 99,60,485 
 Difference (8-9) ₹ 69,89,874 
Source: Records of RH Patiala 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference. Thus, lack of timely action by RH Patiala in renewal of  
license led to excess expenditure on purchase of oxygen cylinders  during the 
period of COVID-19. 
3.4.2.2 Non-availability of drugs for COVID-19 
The Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Punjab issued 
(June 2021) Clinical Management Protocol of COVID -19 patients and 
directed all the Civil Surgeons/Medical Superintendents to follow the protocol 
at all isolation facilities. The Protocol also prescribed medicines required for 
treatment of COVID -19 at Dedicated Covid Health Centres (10 drugs) and 
Dedicated Covid Hospitals (11 drugs). 
Accordingly, availability of COVID -19 drugs in health institutions 
(RH Patiala and DHs) during the period June 2021 to March 2022 was 
checked and following shortcomings were noticed:  
(i) In RH, Patiala (Dedicated Covid Hospital), out of 11 prescribed drugs 
only four drugs (Remdesivir, Antimicrobials, Enoxaparin 40 mg, 
Inj. Tocilizumab) were available throughout the period whereas remaining 
seven drugs (Paracetamol, Antitussives, Vitamin C, Vitamin D, Budesonide, 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
90 
Ivermectin, Intravenous dexamethasone) were available partially with stock 
out period ranging between 7 and 294 days.  
(ii) In six test -checked DHs, availability of COVID -19 drugs was as 
follows: 
Table 3.22: Availability of COVID-19 drugs in test-checked 
Health Institutions 
Name of Health 
Institution 
Total number 
of drugs 
recommended 
Numbers 
of drugs 
available 
Numbers of 
drugs not 
available 
Number of 
drugs 
partially 
available 
Stock out period of 
partially available 
drugs (in days) 
DH Bathinda 10 9 1 0 - 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib 10 9 0 1 92 
DH Gurdaspur 10 5 2 3 4 to 288 
DH Hoshiarpur 10 10 0 0 - 
DH Ludhiana 10 2 1 7 3 to 169 
DH Moga 10 7 0 3 61 to 303 
Source: Departmental data 
Analysis of data/information supplied by the DHs revealed that all prescribed 
drugs for treatment of COVID -19 patients were not available throughout the 
period in five districts except DH Hoshiarpur. In four DHs, one to seven drugs 
were partially available with stock out period ranging between 3 and 303 days. 
On being pointed out in audit (January 2023), the Medical Superintendent,  
RH Patiala stated that no demand was raised from COVID -19 cell. No reply 
was furnished by DHs. 
3.5 Maternity Services 
Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) and Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) are 
important indicators of the quality of maternity services available. As per the 
Sample Registration System R eport of Registrar General of India, MMR for 
Punjab was 129 during the year 2016-2018, compared to 113 at the National 
level. Further, as per National Family Health Survey- 5, IMR was 28.0 for 
Punjab, compared to 35.2 at the National Level during the year 2019-2021.  
On being enquired about the reasons for higher MMR, the Department stated 
(December 2022) that the underlying cause for most of the m aternal deaths 
was associated with anaemia and the Department had directed the districts to 
treat anaemic  pregnant women at the time of detection itself.
 
Antenatal care (ANC), Intra -partum care (IPC) or delivery care and Postnatal 
care (PNC) are the major components of facility based maternity services . 
ANC is the systemic supervision of women during pregnancy to monitor the 
progress of foetal growth and to ascertain the well -being of the mother and the 
foetus. Under IPC, interventions for safe delivery in labour room and 
operation theatre are performed. PNC includes medical care of the mother and 
newborn after delivery of the child especially during 48 hours post -delivery, 
which are considered critical. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
91 
Norms for provisioning of various maternal health services for different levels 
of hospitals and CHCs have been specified in  the Maternal and Newborn 
Health Toolkit, 2013 (MNH Toolkit), Guidelines for Antenatal Care and 
Skilled Attendance at Birth, 2010 and IPHS norms prescribed by GoI for 
delivery of quality maternal health services.  
3.5.1 Achievement of required four antenatal check -ups (ANC) and 
delivery of i ron folic acids (IFA) tablets and t etanus toxoid (TT) 
to pregnant women 
ANC involves general and abdominal examination and laboratory 
investigations to monitor pregnancies, management of complications, such as 
Reproductive Tract Infection (RTI)/Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) and 
comprehensive abortion care. Antenatal Care and Skilled Attendance at Birth, 
2010 Guidelines, stipulate that every pregnant woman should undergo general 
and abdominal examinations during each ANC visit. 
Module I of above guidelines, provides that it should be ensured that every 
pregnant woman makes at least four visits for ANC, including the first 
visit/registration. It should be emphasised that this is only a minimum 
requirement and that more visits may be necessary, depending on the woman's 
condition and needs. The suggested schedule for antenatal visits is: 
1st visit: Within 12 weeks —preferably as soon as pregnancy is suspected, for 
registration of pregnancy and first antenatal check -up; 2nd visit: between 
14 and 26 weeks ; 3rd visit: between 28 and 34 weeks ; and 4th visit: between 
36  weeks and term. 
Further, all pregnant women need to be given one tablet of iron f olic acid 
(IFA: 100 mg elemental iron and 0.5 mg folic acid) every day for at least  
100 days and full course of 180 days , starting after the first trimester, at 14 -16 
weeks of gestation. IFA dose is given to prevent anaemia (prophylactic dose)  
and this dosage regimen is to be repeated for three months post -partum. 
Further, as per National  Immunisation Schedule, Tetanus Toxoid (TT), TT-1 
should be provided early in pregnancy and TT-2 after 4 weeks of  TT-1. 
The percentage of pregnant women registered and ANC, TT, and IFA tablets 
provided in the State of Punjab as per NFHS-5 is given in Table 3.23. 
Table 3.23: Indicators of Antenatal Care, TT administration and IFA tablets  
in the State 
(In per cent) 
Indicators 2015-16 2019-2021 
ANC received in the first trimester 75.6 68.5 
Pregnant women who received at least four 
ANC 68.5 59.3 
TT administration 92.9 89.7 
IFA (180 days) 19.9 40.5 
Source: NFHS-5 Survey Report 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’ and red depicts ‘poor performance’ 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
92 
It is evident from the above table that mothers who had antenatal check- up in 
the first trimester (%) has gone down from 75.6 per cent  in 2015-16 to 
68.5 per cent in 2019-2021.  Similarly, mothers who had at least four antenatal 
care visits during their pregnancy has also gone down from 68.5 per cent to 
59.3 per cent  and m others whose last birth was protected against neonatal 
tetanus has also gone down from 92.9 to 89.7. However, there is a n 
improvement in delivery of iron folic acid during the period 2015- 16 to  
2019-21 but it remains only at 40.5 per cent of pregnant women.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
3.5.2 Institutional deliveries in public hospitals and private hospitals  
Position of institutional deliveries in public hospitals and private hospitals in 
the State during 2016-2022 is given in Table 3.24. 
Table 3.24: Number of institutional deliveries (ID) conducted in public hospitals 
and private hospitals during 2016-2022 
Year Total 
deliveries 
conducted 
Total IDs 
(percentage 
of total 
deliveries) 
IDs at public healthcare 
facilities 
IDs at private healthcare 
facilities 
Home 
deliveries 
 Deliveries 
conducted 
Percentage 
of total IDs 
Deliveries 
conducted 
Percentage 
of total IDs 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (3-4) 7 8 (2-3) 
2016-17 3,82,445 3,63,803 (95) 1,99,732 55 1,64,071 45 18,642 
2017-18 3,74,779 3,62,658 (97) 1,93,328 53 1,69,330 47 12,121 
2018-19 3,72,882 3,64,177 (98) 1,87,024 51 1,77,153 49 8,705 
2019-20 3,79,150 3,73,687 (99) 1,86,942 50 1,86,745 50 5,463 
2020-21 3,59,679 3,54,547 (99) 1,64,504 46 1,90,043 54 5,132 
2021-22 3,73,469 3,69,816 (99) 1,61,940 44 2,07,876 56 3,653 
Total 22,42,404 21,88,688 (98) 10,93,470 50 10,95,218 50 53,716 
Source: Data provided by SHS, Punjab and DHS 
From the above table, it was observed that: 
 Out of total deliveries, the percentage  of pregnant women opting for 
institutional delivery was ranging from 95 to 99 per cent  in the State 
during 2016-2022. The increasing trend of institutional deliveries is 
more or less similar to NFHS-5 (94.3 in 2019-2021) and NITI Aayog’s 
SDG India Index (98.5 in 2020-21), as discussed in Chapters I and IX 
respectively. 
 Out of the total 21.89 lakh reported institutional deliveries, only 
10.93 lakh deliveries (50 per cent ) were performed in Government 
health institutions. 
 Though out of total deliveries reported, there was an increase of 
four per cent  (95 per cent  to 99 per cent ) in institutional deliveries 
during 2021-22 over the institutional deliveries during 2016- 17 in the 
State, the increase in institutional deliveries in private institutions was 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
93 
11 per cent (45 per cent  to 56 per cent ) showing preference for 
deliveries in the private hospitals. 
 The percentage of  institutional deliveries in Government hospitals 
continuously decreased year after year during 2016-2022. In Punjab 
State, 189 Gynaecologists and 161 Paediatricians were found posted 
against the sanctioned strength of 355 and 361 respectively, resulting 
in shortage of 166 Gynaecologists (47 per cent ) and 200 Paediatricians  
(55 per cent) in the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab. 
This may be a major reason for increasing percentage of deliveries in 
private health institutions. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts and stated that for providing mother and child health (MCH) services, 
building of better infrastructure wa s being focused on and by the end of 2024, 
Punjab would have 45 fully functional MCH wings which would lead to 
increase in percentage of institutional deliveries in the public sector.  
The facilities for institutional deliveries in test-checked districts was not as per 
the requirement, as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.5.2.1  Maternity and Child care service in DHs and availability of Beds 
Under NHM, Mother and Child Wings should be established in District 
Hospitals to overcome the constraints of increasing case loads and institutional 
deliveries at these facilities. Further, Assessor ’s Guidebook for Quality 
Assurance provides that adequate number of beds in DHs should be available 
as per delivery load i.e. 10 beds for 100 deliveries per month. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that maternity and child care service was 
available in all DHs. However, in four
35 DHs, shortage of beds in maternity 
ward ranged between 9 per cent  and 29 per cent , which indicated that 
adequate beds were not available in these DHs to provide maternity and child 
care service. 
3.5.2.2 Labour room facilities in CHCs/PHCs 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, labour room should be available in CHC/PHC. 
Availability of labour room facility in  the test-checked CHCs/ PHCs is given 
below:  
Table 3.25: Availability of Labour Room in test-checked CHCs/PHCs 
Type of health 
institution (HI) 
Total number of HIs Availability of labour room in HIs 
CHCs 12 12 
PHCs 24 16 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ 
 
35  DHs at (i)  Sangrur (29 per cent ); (ii)  Pathankot (17 per cent ); (iii)  Malerkotla (9 per cent ); and 
(iv) Fazilka (9 per cent). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
94 
Labour room was available in all the selected CHCs. Out of 24 test -checked 
PHCs, labour room was not available in eight36 PHCs. 
3.5.2.3 Pathological investigations 
ANC Guidelines , 2010 prescribe conducting six pathological investigations, 
depending upon the condition of pregnancy during ANC visits to identify 
pregnancy related complications. Availability of pathological investigations 
for pregnant women in the test-checked health institutions is given in 
Table 3.26. 
Table 3.26: Availability of pathological investigations for pregnant women in 
test-checked Health Institutions 
Name of Test DHs (6) CHCs (12) 
Blood group including Rh factor 6 12 
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory 
(VDRL)/Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) 
5 12 
HIV testing 5 12 
Rapid Malaria test 4 6 
Blood Sugar testing 6 12 
Hepatitis B surface Antigen (HBsAg) 6 12 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ 
Audit observed that all pathological investigations related to pregnancy were 
conducted in all the test -checked DHs except Venereal D isease Research 
Laboratory/Rapid Plasma Reagin, HIV testing and Rapid Malaria test in 
DH Bathinda and Rapid Malaria test in DH Moga.  
Further, it was observed that out of the six prescribed pathological 
investigations, six
37 CHCs had facilities for all the tests. Six 38 CHCs had five 
pathological facilities but Rapid Malaria Test was not available. 
3.5.2.4  Caesarean deliveries (C-Section) 
MNH Toolkit designated all FRU -CHCs/DHs as Centre s for providing 
surgical (C -Section) services with the provision of specialised human 
resources ( Gynaecologist/Obstetrician and A naesthetist) and equipped 
operation theatre to provide Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC) to pregnant 
women. The Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) entitles all pregnant 
women to C -Section services with a provision for free drugs, consumables, 
 
36 (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii)  Bhari; (iii)  Nanowal; (iv)  Ranjit Bagh; (v)  Otalon; (vi)  Sowaddi Kalan; 
(vii) Mallianwala; and (viii) Thathi Bhai. 
37  (i) Bhucho Mandi; (ii)  Bassi Pathana; (iii)  Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iv)  Naushera Majha Singh ; 
(v) Shamchaurasi; and (vi) Sudhar. 
38 (i) Mehraj; (ii)  Amloh; (iii)  Mahilpur; (iv)  Sidhwan Bet ; (v) Bagha Purana ; and  
(vi) Nihal Singh Wala. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
95 
diagnostics, etc.  The status of C-section deliveries as per NFHS-5 in the State 
of Punjab is given in Table 3.27. 
Table 3.27: Status of caesarean deliveries (C-Section) in the State 
Indicators 2015-16 
(In percentage) 
2019-2021 
(In percentage) 
C-section deliveries 24.6 38.5 
Private health facility C-section deliveries 39.7 55.5 
Public health facility C-section deliveries 17.8 29.9 
Source: NFHS-5 Survey Report 
Colour code : Red depicts ‘high number of C-section deliveries ’ and Yellow depicts ‘satisfactory 
number of C-section deliveries’ 
It is evident from the above table that C-section deliveries have increased from 
24.6 per cent in 2015-16 to 38.5 per cent  in 2019-21 in the State of Punjab. 
But the increase in rate of C-section deliveries was seen more at private health 
facilities (55.5 per cent) as compared to public health facilities (29.9 per cent). 
Further, WHO also suggests that caesarean sections are effective in saving 
maternal and infant lives, but only when they are required for medically 
indicated reasons. At population level, c aesarean section rates higher than 
10 per cent  are not associated with reductions in maternal and newborn 
mortality rates. 
Position of C- section deliveries conducted in public healthcare facilities and 
private healthcare facilities in the State during 2016 -17 to 2021-22 is given in 
Table 3.28. 
Table 3.28: Number and percentage of C-Section deliveries conducted in public 
hospitals and private hospitals in the State 
Year Public Healthcare Facilities Private Healthcare Facilities 
Normal 
delivery 
C section Total Percentage 
of C-Section 
Normal 
delivery 
C-Section Total Percentage 
of C-Section 
2016-17 1,47,459 52,273 1,99,732 26 1,11,824 52,247 1,64,071 32 
2017-18 1,42,030 51,298 1,93,328 27 92,138 77,192 1,69,330 46 
2018-19 1,36,312 50,712 1,87,024 27 92,792 84,361 1,77,153 48 
2019-20 1,33,932 53,010 1,86,942 28 92,854 93,891 1,86,745 50 
2020-21 1,14,765 49,739 1,64,504 30 91,563 98,480 1,90,043 52 
2021-22 1,12,639 49,301 1,61,940 30 96,599 1,11,277 2,07,876 54 
Total 7,87,137 3,06,333 10,93,470 28 5,77,770 5,17,448 10,95,218 47 
Source: Departmental data 
Colour code: Red depicts high number of C section deliveries and above the norms 
Audit observed that out of 21.89 lakh total institutional deliveries in the State, 
8.23 lakh C -Section deliveries ( 37.60 per cent ) were performed during  
2016-2022 i.e. the proportion of deliveries performed through C -Section was 
much higher during the period 2016-2022. In public healthcare facilities in the 
State, out of 10.93 lakh total institutional deliveries, 3.06 lakh deliveries were 
performed through C -section which was 28 per cent  of total institutional 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
96 
deliveries.  Moreover, in private healthcare facilities in the State, out of  
10.95 lakh institutional deliveries, 5.17 lakh deliveries were performed 
through C-Section which was 47 per cent of total institutional deliveries.  The 
deliveries performed through C -Section in public and private healthcare 
institutions was on an increasing trend ranging from 26 per cent to 30 per cent 
and 32 per cent to 54 per cent respectively. 
Position of C-section deliveries conducted in the test-checked six DHs during 
2016-17 to 2021-22 is given in Chart 3.5. 
Chart 3.5: Number and percentage of C-Section deliveries conducted in  
test-checked DHs during 2016-2022 
 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
It was observed that: 
• The average percentage of C -Section deliveries was 42 per cent  in  
DH Bathinda, 27 per cent  in DH Fatehgarh Sahib, 43 per cent  in  
DH Gurdaspur, 25 per cent  in DH Hoshiarpur, 30 per cent  in  
DH Ludhiana and 43 per cent in DH Moga.  
• The percentage of C -Section deliveries was higher in DH Moga  and it 
ranged between 39 per cent and 52 per cent  during 2016-2022; in  
DH Gurdaspur, it ranged between 33 per cent  and 48 per cent  and in  
DH Bathinda it ranged between 38 per cent  and 46 per cent.  Further, 
in remaining three 39  DHs, the percentage of C -Section deliveries 
ranged between 17 per cent and 34 per cent during 2016-2022.  
 
39 (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Hoshiarpur; and (iii) Ludhiana. 
17,137 
3,914 8,669 11,816 
32,329 
16,112 
12,468 
1,428 
6,622 3,990 
13,758 
12,130 
42%
27%
43%
25%
30%
43%
No. of normal deliveries No. of C-Section deliveries
Percentage of C-Section deliveries

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
97 
• In RH Patiala, five 40  DHs, 12 CHCs and 16 41  PHCs, out of  
7,620 test-checked delivery cases, partographs 42 were plotted in only 
1,910 cases (25 per cent) during 2016-2021.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.5.3 Special New-born Care Unit  
As per MNH Toolkit  and IPHS 2012 norms , twelve bedded Special Newborn 
Care Unit (SNCU) is essential to treat critically ill newborns in a district 
hospital.  
Audit observed that out of six test -checked DHs, SNCU facility was not 
available in DH Fatehgarh Sahib and data regarding SNCU facility was not 
provided by DH Bathinda. 
Total admission, referral rate, LAMA rate, absconding rate, and neonatal death 
rate in the remaining four43 test-checked DHs is given in Table 3.29. 
Table 3.29: Evaluation of SNCU services in test-checked DHs through  
Outcome Indicators 
Name of 
health facility 
Year Total 
admissions in 
SNCU 
Referral 
rate 
LAMA rate Absconding 
rate 
Neonatal 
death rate 
DH Gurdaspur 
2016-17 850 8.24 4.47 0 0.71 
2017-18 615 6.83 4.88 0 1.30 
2018-19 1,024 7.03 4.88 0 0.49 
2019-20 667 11.09 3.75 0 1.05 
2020-21 847 8.62 3.31 0 0.47 
2021-22 1,122 4.28 4.63 0 0.45 
Total 5,125 7.40 4.35 0 0.68 
DH Hoshiarpur 
2016-17 Data not provided 
2017-18 1,036 4.92 8.20 1.93 3.38 
2018-19 856 8.29 7.94 2.45 1.64 
2019-20 918 8.82 9.15 2.51 1.96 
2020-21 898 8.02 4.57 2.34 1.56 
2021-22 697 25.25 4.88 1.15 1.43 
Total 4,405 10.24 7.08 2.11 2.07 
DH Ludhiana  
2016-17 1,440 11.60 9.65 0.21 4.65 
2017-18 1,322 13.39 11.80 0.30 3.33 
2018-19 1,320 14.32 19.70 0.00 2.95 
2019-20 1,347 13.21 19.52 2.38 4.08 
2020-21 1,190 15.21 10.59 1.76 3.87 
2021-22 1,650 19.33 9.39 1.15 2.61 
Total 8,269 14.65 13.29 0.96 3.56 
 
40 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Ludhiana; and (v) Moga. IPD files were not 
provided by DH Hoshiarpur. 
41 (i) Mandi Kalan ; (ii)  Bhai Rupa ; (iii) Lehra Mohabbat ; (i v) Sanghol; ( v) Nandpur Kalour; 
(vi) Behrampur; ( vii) Dorangla; ( viii) Dhianpur; (i x) Chakowal; ( x) Paldi; ( xi) Possi;  
(xii) Mand Bhander; (xiii) Ghawaddi; (xiv) Mansuran; (xv) Patto Hira Singh; and (xvi) Sukhanand. 
42 A partograph or portogram is a composite graphical record of key data (maternal and fetal) during 
labour entered against time on a single sheet of paper. 
43 (i) Gurdaspur; (ii) Hoshiarpur; (iii) Ludhiana; and (iv) Moga. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
98 
Name of 
health facility 
Year Total 
admissions in 
SNCU 
Referral 
rate 
LAMA rate Absconding 
rate 
Neonatal 
death rate 
DH Moga  2016-17 Data not provided 
2017-18 681 15.71 3.38 0.15 4.11 
2018-19 662 17.82 3.93 0.30 2.72 
2019-20 784 21.43 4.59 0.38 0.77 
2020-21 798 13.91 6.14 0.13 0.75 
2021-22 1,009 16.45 7.53 1.78 1.39 
Total 3,934 17.03 5.34 0.64 1.83 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
Colour cod e: Green depicts ‘ good performance’, Yellow depicts ‘satisfactory performance’ and Red 
depicts ‘poor performance’ 
It is evident from the above table that:  
i. In DH Gurdaspur, a total of 5,125 cases were admitted in SNCU during 
the period 2016-2022. The rate of r eferral cases ranged between 
4.28 per cent and 11.09 per cent , LAMA rate ranged between 
3.31 per cent and 4.88 per cent  and n eonatal death rate ranged  between 
0.45 per cent and 1.30 per cent during the same period. 
ii. In DH Hoshiarpur, a total of 4,405 cases were admitted in SNCU during 
the period 2017-2022. Data for the period 2016- 17 was not available. The 
rate of r eferral cases ranged between 4.92 per cent  and 25.25 per cent , 
LAMA rate ranged between 4.57 per cent  and 9.15 per cent  and neonatal 
death rate ranged between 1.43 and 3.38 per cent  during the period  
2017-2022. 
iii. In DH Ludhiana, a total of 8,269 cases were admitted in SNCU during the 
period 2016-2022. The rate of referral cases ranged between 
11.60 per cent and 19.33 per cent , LAMA rate ranged between 
9.39 per cent and 19.70 per cent and n eonatal death rate ranged between 
2.61 per cent and 4.65 per cent during the period 2016-2022.  
iv. In DH Moga, total number of 3,934 cases were admitted in SNCU during 
the period 2017-2022. Data for the period 2016- 17 was not available. The 
rate of r eferral cases ranged between 13.91 per cent  and 21.43 per cent , 
LAMA rate ranged between 3.38 per cent  and 7.53 per cent  and neonatal 
death rate ranged between 0.75 per cent  and 4.11 per cent during the same 
period. 
Higher rates of referrals, LAMA, Absconding and Neonatal deaths could be 
attributed to short availability of SNCU equipment, which ranged between 
37 per cent and 85 per cent in test- checked DHs, as mentioned in 
Paragraph 4.2. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
99 
3.5.3.1 Lack of Human Resources in SNCU 
As per Facility Based Newborn Care Operational Guide , 2011 a 12-bedded 
SNCU requires at least one Paediatrician or a trained doctor round the clock. It 
is proposed that one Paediatrician trained in neonatology should be posted at 
the unit, supported by two or three medical officers trained in Facility Based 
Newborn Care. Such a unit will also require three nurses in each shift round 
the clock. Audit observed the following: 
(i) DH Hoshiarpur was having SNCU with 9 beds whereas DHs at Ludhiana 
and Moga were having SNCU with 10 beds each against the requirement 
of 12 beds.  
(ii) No Paediatrician/trained doctor was available round the clock in SNCU s; 
Paediatrician was available in morning shifts only and on call basis in 
evenings and night shifts.  This could be attributed to shortage of 
Paediatricians in four out of five test -checked DHs , as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.5.1.3. 
(iii) In two DHs (Bathinda and Gurdaspur), against the requirement of three 
nurses in each shift, only two nurses in morning and one nurse in evening 
as well as in night shift was available. In the remaining three DHs 
(Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana and Moga), only one nurse was available in each 
shift against the requirement of three nurses. 
Non-availability of Paediatricians/trained doctors  round the clock and short 
availability of nurses could be one of the reasons for higher referrals.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts and stated that the State was regularly working on closing the HR gaps.  
3.5.3.2 Non-availability of drugs in SNCU 
Audit observed that against 17 prescribed drugs as per NHM Assessor’s 
Guidebook, 3 to 15 drugs were not available in SNCU of five
44 DHs during 
2016-2021. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
3.5.3.3 Kangaroo Mother Care 
Government of India issued (September 2014) Operational  Guidelines of 
Kangaroo Mother Care and Optimal Feeding of Low Birth Weight Infant s, to 
give a clear idea to service providers on what exactly Kangaroo Mother Care 
(KMC) is and how KMC techniques can be implemented when caring for low 
 
44  (i) Bathinda; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Hoshiarpur; (iv) Ludhiana; and (v) Moga. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
100 
birth weight infants to help in reducing neonatal mortality. KMC  is a low 
resource, evidence based, high impact intervention and standardised care for 
low birth weight 45 infants which, like breastfeeding, should be part of routine 
care. It can prevent up to half of all deaths in infants weighing less than 
2000 grams.  KMC includes early and prolonged skin-to-skin contact with the 
mother (or a substitute caregiver) and exclusive and frequent breastfeeding. 
This natural form of human care stabilises body temperature, promotes breast 
feeding, and prevents infection and other morbidities. This also leads to early 
discharge, better neuro development and encourages bonding between mother 
and infant. Further, KMC Unit of 8- 10 beds is recommended for every 
hospital with SNCU or should be located as close to SNCU as possible in the 
existing/new premises. 
Audit observed that KMC facility was not available in three DHs at Fatehgarh 
Sahib, Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana. Further, following deficiencies were noticed 
in the remaining three DHs
46: 
(a) Against requirement of 8- 10 beds in KMC, DH Moga had no bed. 
However, in DH Bathinda and DH Gurdaspur only two and five beds 
were available respectively.  
(b) Storage facility for expressed breast milk was not available in DHs. 
(c) Semi-reclining beds, easy chairs  and storage space for locker for mother 
was not available in DHs, except two easy chairs in DH Bathinda. 
On being pointed out, the Department stated (December 2022) that the State 
was in the process of procuring KMC chairs. The Department may also ensure 
adequate storage facility for expressed breast milk to avoid wastage. 
3.5.4 Administration of birth doses  
As per WHO, “A fully immunised infant is one who has received BCG, three 
doses of OPV, three doses of Hepatitis B and Measles before one year of age.” 
The schedule of vaccination at birth of an infant is as follows:  
Hepatitis B: At birth for delivery, preferably within 24 h ours of delivery ; 
OPV: At birth for deliveries within first 15 days ; and as per Operational 
Guidelines-Injection Vitamin K Prophylaxis at Birth,  Vitamin ‘K’: as a single 
dose soon after birth.  
The details of achievement in vaccination of birth doses to new -borns in six  
test-checked districts are given in Table 3.30. 
 
45 Low birth weight (LBW) has been defined by the World Health Organisation (WHO) as weight at 
birth less than 2,500 grams. 
46 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Gurdaspur; and (iii) Moga. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
101 
Table 3.30: Achievement of birth doses given to newborns during 2020-21 
Name of District Total live births Achievement (percentage) 
Vitamin ‘K’ OPV Hepatitis B 
Bathinda 17,456 55 79 72 
Fatehgarh Sahib 4,850 39 104 75 
Gurdaspur 19,931 57 81 63 
Hoshiarpur 18,169 76 82 80 
Ludhiana 48,028 46 86 54 
Moga 11,783 57 82 80 
Source: Data from Health Management Information System 
Colour code :  Green depicts ‘ good achievement ’, Yellow depicts ‘ satisfactory’ and Red 
depicts ‘poor achievement’ 
It can be seen from above table that the administration of Vitamin K doses and 
Hepatitis B doses which were supposed to be given soon after birth and within 
24 hours of delivery respectively was only 55 per cent  and 72 per cent  in 
Bathinda district, 39 per cent  and 75 per cent  in Fatehgarh Sahib district,  
57 per cent and 63 per cent  in Gurdaspur district, 76 per cent  and 80 per cent  
in Hoshiarpur district, 46 per cent  and 54 per cent  in Ludhiana district,  
57 per cent and 80 per cent in Moga district. However, administration of OPV 
doses in Fatehgarh Sahib was quite satisfactory whereas in  the remaining five 
districts, it ranged between 79 per cent and 86 per cent. The administration of 
doses of BCG was quite satisfactory in four 47 districts whereas in Bathinda 
district, it was 86 per cent and in Gurdaspur district, it was 96 per cent. 
Audit further observed that out -of-stock period of BCG vaccine ranged 
between 7 and 123 days in three 48 CHCs and PHC Nandpur Kalour; stock-out 
period of OPV vaccines ranged between 10 and 49 days in two 49  CHCs; 
Hepatitis-B vaccines ranged between 4 and 363 days in three 50 CHCs and 
three 51  PHCs; and in respect of Tetanus Toxoid (TT) vaccines it ranged 
between 7 and 32 days in two CHCs at Bassi Pathana and Amloh and 
PHC Nandpur Kalour during the period 2016-2021 (Appendix 3.3). 
It is evident from  above that although t he administration of birth doses to 
newborns was mandatory, the Department could not ensure the availability as 
well as administration of these doses without any break. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department stated (December 2022) that 
vaccines were administered in Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib and Ludhiana which 
showed that vaccines were not out of stock. The reply was not tenable as  the 
 
47 (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Hoshiarpur; (iii) Ludhiana; and (iv) Moga. 
48 (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Amloh; and (iii) Sidhwan Bet. 
49 (i) Bassi Pathana; and (ii) Sidhwan Bet. 
50 (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Amloh; and (iii) Sidhwan Bet. 
51 (i) Nandpur Kalour; (ii) Bhai Rupa; and (iii) Sanghol. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
102 
Senior Medical Officers of CHCs at Bassi  Pathana, Amloh in District 
Fatehgarh Sahib and Sidhwan Bet in District Ludhiana ; and Medical Officers 
of PHC Bhai Rupa in District Bathinda had confirmed non- availability of 
vaccines during audit.  
3.5.5  Check outs within 48 hours of delivery in post-natal care 
The 12th Five Year Plan aims to bring all women during pregnancy and 
childbirth into the institutional fold so that delivery care services of good 
quality can be provided to them at the time of delivery at zero expense as 
envisioned under the Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) programme. 
The programme entitles all pregnant women to absolutely free institutional 
delivery including C-Section with a provision for free drugs, diagnostics, diet, 
blood; and transport from home to facility  and from facility to drop back 
home. Further, there should be adequate number of beds in post- natal care 
ward to ensure 48 hours of stay after delivery. Details related to women 
discharged within 48 hours from health facilities in the test -checked six 
districts are given in Table 3.31. 
Table 3.31: Number of women discharged within 48 hours after delivery  
during 2020-21 
Name of District Total number of 
institutional deliveries 
Total number of 
women discharged 
within 48 hours of 
delivery 
Percentage of women 
discharged within 48 
hours of delivery 
Bathinda 17,702 4,561 26 
Fatehgarh Sahib 4,876 317 7 
Gurdaspur 20,066 6,365 32 
Hoshiarpur 18,390 494 3 
Ludhiana 48,595 8,254 17 
Moga 11,871 6,846 58 
Source: Data from Health Management Information System 
Colour code :  Green depicts ‘ satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘ moderate’ and Red depicts 
‘poor performance’ 
It was observed that maximum 58 per cent  women were discharged within 
48 hours after delivery in district Moga whereas only 3 per cent women were 
discharged within 48 hours after delivery in district Hoshiarpur. Similarly, the 
percentage of women who were discharged within 48 hours after delivery 
from the health institutions in the remaining districts of Bathinda, Fatehgarh 
Sahib, Gurdaspur and Ludhiana was 26 per cent, 7 per  cent, 32 per cent and  
17 per cent respectively due to repeated requests by the patients/attendants to 
discharge them from the hospital before 48 hours.  Higher rate of women 
discharged within 48 hours in districts Bathinda, Gurdaspur, Ludhiana and 
Moga could be attributed to shortage of beds in respective DHs, as discussed 
in Paragraph 5.3.2 (Table 5.5). 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
103 
3.5.6 Non-adherence to the National Guidelines for  prevention of  
Parent-to-Child Transmission of HIV 
National Guidelines for Prevention of Parent -to-Child Transmission of HIV 
(December 2013) provide tha t infants born to HIV -infected mothers should 
receive Nevirapine prophylaxis immediately after birth within an hour of 
delivery to further reduce prepartum and postpartum HIV transmission.  
An Integrated Counselling and Testing Centre  (ICTC) is a place where a 
person is counselled and tested for HIV, of his own free will or as advised by a 
medical provider. An ICTC facility is essentially required in DH and CHC as 
per IPHS norms.  
It was observed from the information obtained from the sampled DHs and 
CHCs that 310 HIV infected mothers delivered infants during 2016-2021 in 
five
52 DHs and three 53 CHCs. However, dose of Syrup Nevirapine was not 
given to 56 infants (18 per cent ) to further reduce postpartum HIV 
transmission.  Further, ICTC s were functional in all the  six test-checked DHs 
and in case of CHCs, ICTC s were not functional in seven 54 out of 12 test -
checked CHCs. 
The Department stated (December 2022) that during 2017- 18, there was a 
shortage of supply of Nevirapine Syrup from NACO and the supply ha d been 
purchased by Punjab State AIDS Control Society (PSACS ), as a result of 
which Nevirapine Syrup was given late  (within 42-60 days of birth).  It was 
further stated that the record of 56 infants was with concerned ICTC and not in 
delivery rooms.  It was added that as per PPTCT guidelines, ARV Prophylaxis 
(Nevripine/Ziduvidine) should be available in all the delivery rooms for 
emergency. The reply  of the Department that the record of 56 infants was 
available with ICTC wa s not acceptable as the data regarding number of 
infants not provided with the s yrup was supplied by the Department  itself. 
Moreover, the Department had admitted that in 2017-18, the syrup was 
administered late by 42-60 days after the birth whereas it was to be provided 
within an hour of delivery as per the guidelines ibid. 
3.5.7 Maternity care outcomes 
With a view to gauge the quality of maternity care provided by the  
test-checked hospitals, Audit ascertained the outcomes in terms of still birth, 
referral, LAMA, absconding rate, and neonatal deaths pertaining to the years 
2016-2022. 
 
52 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Hoshiarpur; and (v) Ludhiana. 
53 (i) Fatehgarh Churian; (ii) Sudhar; and (iii) Sidhwan Bet. 
54 (i) Bhucho Mandi; (ii)  Mehraj; ( iii) Amloh; (i v) Bassi Pathana; ( v) Naushera Majja Singh ; 
(vi) Mahilpur; and (vii) Shamchaurasi. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
104 
3.5.7.1 Still births 
The stillbirth rate is a key indicator of quality of care during pregnancy and 
childbirth, which is defined by WHO as: ‘the extent to which healthcare  
services provided to individuals and patient s population improve desired 
health outcomes. In order to achieve this, healthcare needs to be safe, 
effective, timely, efficient, equitable, and people -centred’. Still birth and/or 
intrauterine fetal death is an unfavorable pregnancy outcome and is defined as 
complete expulsion or extraction of the baby from its mother with no signs of 
life. Details of rate of still birth/intrauterine death (IUD) in test -checked RH, 
Patiala and six DHs are given in Table 3.32. 
Table 3.32: Still birth rate in test-checked RH/DHs 
Year RH 
Patiala 
DH 
Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 
Ludhiana 
DH 
Moga 
2016-17 9.27 0.12 1.37 2.85 3.51 2.87 2.75 
2017-18 8.67 0.06 1.14 1.48 2.66 1.54 2.45 
2018-19 7.93 0.53 1.56 2.03 2.82 1.77 2.10 
2019-20 6.60 0.52 1.54 1.79 2.64 1.59 1.89 
2020-21 7.89 0.77 1.15 2.18 2.90 1.94 1.55 
Source: Information provided by test-checked RH Patiala/DHs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and Red depicts ‘poor 
performance’ 
It was observed that: 
(i) In RH Patiala, the still birth rate was very high and it ranged between 
6.60 per cent and 9.27 per cent. 
(ii) In six test -checked DHs, stillbirth rate was low in DH Bathinda ranging 
between 0.06 per cent  and 0.77 per cent  whereas in the remaining five 
DHs, it was ranging between 1.14 per cent and 3.51 per cent. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts and stated that for reduction in still  births, quality antenatal services, 
early identification of high-risk pregnancies and timely referral to higher 
facility were being focussed on.  
3.5.7.2 Other indicators 
Performance of the test -checked DHs on certain outcome indicators such as 
average Referral Out Rate (ROR), average Leave Against Medical Advice 
(LAMA) and average Absconding Rate (AR) for the period 2016- 17 to  
2021-22 is given in Table 3.33. 
  

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
105 
Table 3.33: Average ROR/LAMA/AR in test-checked DHs 
Name of 
Hospital 
Total IPD 
in 
Maternity 
Average ROR Average LAMA Average 
Absconding 
Cases Rate Cases Rate Cases Rate 
Bathinda Data not provided 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
5,204 1,288 24.75 14 0.27 0 0.00 
Gurdaspur 19,838 870 4.39 1,095 5.52 504 2.54 
Hoshiarpur 19,539 1,037 5.31 2,588 13.25 232 1.19 
Ludhiana 72,243 3,676 5.09 8,351 11.56 4,625 6.40 
Moga 23,789 1,532 6.44 921 3.87 76 0.32 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and Red 
depicts ‘poor performance’ 
It is evident from the above table that average ROR was lowest (4.39 per cent ) 
in DH Gurdaspur and highest (24.75 per cent ) in DH Fatehgarh Sahib.  
Average LAMA was lowest (0.27 per cent ) in DH Fatehgarh Sahib and 
highest (13.25 per cent ) in DH Hoshiarpur. There was no absconding case in  
DH Fatehgarh Sahib but it was highest (6.40 per cent ) in DH Ludhiana  
amongst six test-checked DHs.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.5.7.3  Death Review 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, all mortality cases that occur in the hospital shall be  
reviewed on a fortnightly basis. Further, as per Child D eath Review 
Operational Guidelines (2014), detailed investigation should be conducted in 
all cases of child deaths taking place in a hospital. The Facility Based  
Neonatal and Post-Neonatal Death Review Forms (Forms 4a & 4b) should be 
filled for the child death (depending on the age category) by the Duty Medical 
Officer. The Treating Medical Officer (doctor under whose care the child was 
primarily admitted in the hospital) will assign the medical cause of death and 
add any other information that he/she has regarding the social factors and 
delays associated with the death. 
Details of maternal and neonatal death reviews conducted in test-checked DHs 
during 2016-2022 are given in Table 3.34. 
  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
106 
Table 3.34: Maternal death review/neonatal death review conducted in  
test-checked DHs during 2016-2022 
Name of 
Hospital  
Maternal Death  Neonatal Death  
No. of 
maternal 
deaths  
No. of 
maternal 
death 
reviews 
conducted  
Shortfall 
(percentage)  
No. of 
neonatal 
deaths  
No. of 
neonatal death 
reviews 
conducted  
Shortfall 
(percentage)
  
DH Bathinda 28 28 0 56 21 62.50 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Nil Nil Nil 3 0 100 
DH Gurdaspur 8 0 100 35 0 100 
DH Hoshiarpur 17 17 0 125 42 66.40 
DH Ludhiana 23 0 100 294 0 100 
DH Moga  10 0 100 97 0 100 
Source: Information provided by test-checked DHs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and Red depicts ‘poor 
performance’ 
It is evident from the above table that: 
• DH Bathinda and DH Hoshiarpur reviewed all maternal deaths 
whereas in DH Gurdaspur, DH Ludhiana and DH Moga, no maternal 
death review was conducted during 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
• In DH Bathinda and DH Hoshiarpur, there was shortfall of 
62.50 per  cent and 66.40 per cent respectively in conducting review of 
neonatal deaths. Further, in DH s at Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur, 
Ludhiana and Moga, no neonatal death review was conduct ed during 
2016-17 to 2021-22. 
The Department should ensure the review of maternal and child deaths in all 
the health institutions and take corrective measures to overcome these causes 
as it could help in reducing overall Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) and Infant 
Mortality Rate (IMR) in the State. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.5.7.4  Monthly Satisfaction Survey and Form -III register in Maternity 
Wing 
As per NHM Assessor ’s Guidelines, the facility should establish a system for 
patient and employee satisfaction and the survey should be done on monthly 
basis.  
As per Comprehensive Abortion Care ( Training and S ervice Delivery 
Guidelines) 2018, it is mandatory to fill and record information for abortion 
cases, performed by any technique, in Form III – Admission Register for case 
records. 
Out of the six test -checked DHs, four 55 DHs did not  conduct the monthly 
satisfaction survey in maternity wing during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
 
55 (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Hoshiarpur; and (iv) Moga. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
107 
Further, it was found that a register in 'Form III  - Admission Register’ for 
recording therein the details of admissions of women for the termination of 
their pregnancies was maintained in maternity wing in only three56 DHs.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.6  Line and Support Services 
Line and support services such as e mergency services, i maging services, 
pathology services, ambulance services, blood bank, dietary services, laundry 
services, Bio-Medical Waste Management, ICU, oxygen service and mortuary 
service are important for effective functioning of hospitals.  
Scrutiny of information/data collected from the Department revealed that all 
the above line and support services except one or two were found available in 
all DHs. The hospital-wise details of services is depicted in Table 3.35. 
Table 3.35: Details of line services (Line and Support) available in DHs 
Name of the 
District Hospital 
Emergency 
Services 
Imaging 
Services 
Pathology 
Services 
Ambulance 
Services 
Blood Bank 
Dietary 
Services 
Laundry 
Services 
Bio-Medical 
Waste 
Management 
ICU 
Oxygen 
Service 
Mortuary 
Service 
Amritsar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Barnala Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Bathinda Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Faridkot Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N Y Y 
Fazilka Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y 
Fatehgarh Sahib Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Ferozepur  Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Gurdaspur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
Hoshiarpur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Jalandhar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
Kapurthala Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Ludhiana Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Mansa Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Moga Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Malerkotla Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N Y Y 
Pathankot Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Patiala Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N Y N 
Rupnagar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Sangrur Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
SAS Nagar Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y 
 
56 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Ludhiana; and (iii) Fatehgarh Sahib. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
108 
Name of the 
District Hospital 
Emergency 
Services 
Imaging 
Services 
Pathology 
Services 
Ambulance 
Services 
Blood Bank 
Dietary 
Services 
Laundry 
Services 
Bio-Medical 
Waste 
Management 
ICU 
Oxygen 
Service 
Mortuary 
Service 
SBS Nagar Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N Y Y 
Sri Muktsar Sahib Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
Tarn Taran Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 
Source: Information provided by DHS 
Note: Dietary services were available in selected DHs under JSSK Scheme only. 
Colour code: 
Available Not available 
It was evident from the above table that: 
 Blood bank service was not available in DH s at Patiala and SBS 
Nagar; 
 Dietary service was not available in three DHs (Faridkot, Faz ilka and 
Malerkotla) for the indoor patients; and 
 ICU service in DHs except for DHs at Fazilka, Gurdaspur, Jalandhar,  
Sri Muktsar Sahib and SAS Nagar was not available. 
Significant audit findings in the test-checked health institutes are discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs: 
3.6.1 Diagnostic services 
Efficient and effective diagnostic services, both radiological and pathological, 
are amongst the most essential healthcare facilities for delivering quality 
treatment to the public based on accurate diagnosis. Many of the significant 
radiology and pathology tests were not performed in the test -checked health 
institutions due to lack of required equipment and skilled manpower. 
Significant audit findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.6.1.1 Availability of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology)  Services in  
test-checked DHs 
Radiology, also called diagnostic imaging, is a series of different tests that 
take pictures or images of various parts of the body. Radiology is essential to 
the diagnosis of many diseases. Adequate availability of functional radiology 
equipment, skilled human resources and consumables are the key requirements 
for the delivery of quality radiology services. 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe radiology services for the district hospitals (X-ray, 
Ultrasonography, CT scan , etc.) and X -ray ( chest, skull, spine, abdomen, 
bones, dental, etc.). These also prescribe diagnostic services under Cardiology, 
ENT, Endoscopy, Respiratory and Ophthalmology in DHs. The availability of 
diagnostic services under various categories in the test -checked DHs is 
detailed in Table 3.36.
 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
109 
Table 3.36: Availability of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology) services in  
test-checked DHs 
Name of 
Service 
Name of test DH 
Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 
Ludhiana 
DH 
Moga 
 
Radiology  
X-ray for chest, skull, 
spine, abdomen, bones 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Dental X-ray Yes No No Yes Yes Yes 
Ultrasonography Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
CT scan No No No No No No 
Barium swallow, 
Barium meal, Barium 
enema, IVP  
No No No Yes No No 
MMR (Chest)  Yes No No No Yes No 
HSG  No No No No No No 
Cardiology 
ECG  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Stress tests   No No No No No No 
ECHO No No No No No No 
ENT Audiometry Yes No No No Yes No 
Endoscopy for ENT  Yes No No Yes No No 
Ophthalmology 
Refraction by using 
Snellen's chart Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Retinoscopy Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Ophthalmoscopy Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Endoscopy 
Laparoscopic 
(diagnostic)  Yes Yes No No No Yes 
Oesophagus  No No No No No No 
Stomach  No No No No No No 
Colonoscopy  No No No No No No 
Bronchoscopy  No No No No No No 
Arthroscopy  No No No No No No 
Hysteroscopy  No No No No No No 
Respiratory  Pulmonary function 
tests  No No No No No No 
Source: Data furnished by test-checked District Hospitals  
Colour code: 
Available Not available 
It was observed that: 
 Facility of X -ray for chest, skull, spine, abdomen and bones was 
available in all test-checked DHs.  
 Facility of Dental X -Ray was available in all test -checked DHs except 
DHs at Fatehgar h Sahib and Gurdaspur. Ultrasonography was 
available in all the test-checked district hospitals; 
 CT Scan , ECHO, Stress test and HSG services were not available in 
any test-checked DHs.  However, ECG service was available in all 
test-checked DHs; 
 Facility for Barium Swallow, Barium meal, Barium enema, IVP  was 
not available in any test-checked DHs except DH Hoshiarpur.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
110 
MMR (Chest) and Audiometry services were available in DH Bathinda 
and DH Ludhiana only; and 
 Endoscopy and Respiratory services were not  available in any  
test-checked DHs57.  Ophthalmology services were available in all of 
the test-checked DHs.  
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.1.2 Availability of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology)  services in  
RH Patiala 
GMCH followed the NMC norms but  no norms for diagnostic (radiology) 
services are prescribed in NMC,  t herefore, availability of these services in  
RH Patiala have been compared with IPHS norms for 500 bedded district 
hospital. During the course of audit, details related to availability of diagnostic  
radiology services in RH Patiala were obtained and shown in Table 3.37. 
Table 3.37: Availability of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology) services  
in RH Patiala 
Sr. No. Type of Radiology Services Availability  
1. Cardiology58(3)  3 
2  Ophthalmology59(3)  3 
3. ENT60(2)  2 
4. Radiology61(7)  6 
5. Endoscopy62(7)  7 
6. Respiratory63(1)  1 
Source: Information furnished by RH Patiala 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ 
It was observed that under radiology category,  all radiology services were 
available except MMR (Chest) in RH Patiala. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
  
 
57  Except for Laparoscopic (diagnostic) test under Endoscopy service at DHs Bathinda, 
Fatehgarh Sahib and Moga.   In other three test -checked DHs viz. Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and 
Ludhiana, endoscopy equipment was not available. 
58 (i) ECG; (ii) Stress Test; and (iii) ECHO. 
59 (i) Refraction by using Snellen’s chart; (ii) Retinoscopy; and (iii) Ophthalmoscopy. 
60 (i) Audiometry; and (ii) Endoscopy for ENT. 
61 (i) X-ray for chest, skull, spine, abdomen, bones; (ii) Barium swallow, Barium meal, Barium 
enema, IVP; (iii) MMR (Chest); (iv) HSG; (v) Dental X -ray; (vi) Ultrasonography; and  
(vii) CT scan. 
62 (i) Oesophagus; (ii) Stomach; (iii) Colonoscopy; (iv)  Bronchoscopy; (v) Arthroscopy; 
(vi) Laparoscopy (Diagnostic); and (vii) Hysteroscopy. 
63 Pulmonary function test. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
111 
3.6.1.3  Availability of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology)  services in  
test-checked CHCs 
IPHS 2012 norms provide that X -ray for chest, skull, spine, abdomen, bones  
and Dental X -ray facilities  should be available in a CHC under imaging 
services. Further, ECG which is a cardiac investigation service should be 
provided in a CHC. Availability of these services in the test-checked CHCs is 
given in Table 3.38.  
Table 3.38: Availability of services related to Radiology and Cardiac 
investigation in test-checked CHCs 
Name of district Name of CHC Radiology Services Cardiac 
Investigation 
X-ray Dental  
X-ray 
ECG 
Bathinda 
CHC Bhucho Mandi Yes No Yes 
CHC Mehraj Yes No No 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
CHC Amloh Yes Yes Yes 
CHC Bassi Pathana Yes Yes No 
Gurdaspur CHC Fatehgarh Churian Yes Yes Yes 
CHC N M Singh Yes No Yes 
Hoshiarpur 
CHC Mahilpur Yes Yes No 
CHC Shamchaurasi Yes Yes No 
Ludhiana 
CHC Sidhwan Bet Yes Yes Yes 
CHC Sudhar Yes Yes No 
Moga CHC Bagha Purana Yes Yes Yes 
CHC Nihal Singh Wala Yes No No 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
Colour code: 
Available Not available 
It is evident from above that  Dental X-ray service was not available in CHCs 
Bhucho Mandi, Mehraj, Naushera  Majja (NM) Singh and Nihal Singh Wala.  
The facility of cardiac investigation (ECG) was also not availa ble in six 
CHCs. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.1.4 Non-registration of imaging equipment from authorities 
As per Section 3 of Atomic Energy (Radiation and Protection) Rules, 2004, no 
person shall, without a license - (a) establish a radiation installation for sitting, 
design, construction, commissioning, operation; and (b) decommission a 
radiation installation. No person shall handle any radioactive material or 
operate any radiation generating equipment except in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of a license. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
112 
Audit noticed that requisite license from AERB was obtained by all the  
test-checked health institutions except CHC  Mehraj for providing the X -ray 
services.  
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.1.5 Thermoluminescent Dosimeters (TLD) for radiation protection 
Staff working in the X -ray room ha ve to wear monitoring equipment such as 
TLD badges 64 and pocket dosimeters 65. As per Atomic Energy (Radiation 
Protection) Rules, 2004, monitoring equipment shall be provided to radiation  
workers and dose records shall be maintained. In case of any institution 
violating the prescribed regulatory requirements, AERB is empowered to 
suspend/modify/withdraw the license/registration issued to the X -ray 
installation or seal the X -ray installation(s) in accordance with Rule s 10 and 
31 of the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 respectively. 
Availability of TLD badges and pocket dosimeters in  the test-checked DHs 
during 2016-2022 is detailed in Table 3.39. 
Table 3.39: Availability of TLD badges and pocket dosimeters  
in test-checked DHs 
Name of Health Institution TLD badges Pocket dosimeters 
DH Bathinda  Yes No 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib Yes Yes 
DH Gurdaspur Yes No 
DH Hoshiarpur No No 
DH Ludhiana Yes No 
DH Moga Yes Yes 
RH Patiala Radiodiagnosis Yes66 Not used 
Radiation Oncology Yes Yes 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked hospitals 
Colour code: 
Available Not available 
It is evident from the above table that Thermoluminescent D osimeters (TLD) 
badges were available in all  test-checked DHs except DH Hoshiarpur  but 
pocket dosimeters were not available in any DHs except DH Fatehgarh Sahib ,  
DH Moga and RH Patiala for Radiation Oncology department . Due to  
non-availability of these safety equipment, safety of technicians was , 
therefore, compromised.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
64 TLD badges are used to detect radiation at levels that can be harmful to humans. 
65 Pocket Dosimeters are used to provide the wearer with an immediate reading of his or her exposure 
to X-rays and gamma rays.  
66 Except October -December 2018, January -March 2019, October -December 2020, 2021  and  
January-March 2022. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
113 
3.6.2 Pathology services 
Pathology services are the backbone of any hospital for extending  
evidence-based healthcare to the public. As in the case of radiology services, 
availability of essential equipment, reagents and human resources are the main 
drivers for the delivery of quality pathology services through in-house 
laboratories. The audit observations related to these services have been 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.6.2.1 Availability of pathology services in test -checked Hospitals 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe 72 types of pathological investigations in the  
categories of clinical, microbiology, serology and biochemistry to be carried 
out in DHs. Audit observed that the pathology services in the test -checked 
hospitals were provided through in- house laboratories. Availability of 
pathology services offered by the test-checked DHs is detailed in Table 3.40. 
Table 3.40: Availability of pathology services in test-checked DHs 
Name of Health 
Institution 
Clinical pathology67 
(29) 
Pathology68 
(8) 
Microbiology (7) 
with Serology (7) 
Biochemistry 
(21) 
DH Bathinda 22 2 7 11 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib 19 3 8 9 
DH Gurdaspur 26 4 13 12 
DH Hoshiarpur 21 3 7 11 
DH Ludhiana 26 4 12 14 
DH Moga 21 2 10 10 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked hospitals    
Figure in parenthesis shows number of tests required.  
Colour code : Green depicts ‘adequate availability’, Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ and Red 
depicts ‘least availability’ 
It is observed from above table that complete range of test s under pathology 
services was not available at any test-checked DHs. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.2.2 Availability of pathology services in test-checked CHCs 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe 29 types of pathological investigations in the  
categories of clinical (18) 69 , pathology (sputum ), microbiology (2) 70 , 
serology (3)71 and biochemistry (5) 72 to be carried out in CHCs.  Availability 
 
67 Clinical Pathology (29): Haematology (7), Immunoglobin profile (IGM, IGG, IGE, IGA), 
Fibrinogen Degradation product (13), Urine Analysis (2), Stool Analysis (4), Semen Analysis, CSF 
Analysis and Aspirated fluids (3). 
68 Pathology (8): PAP smear (1), Sputum (1), Haematology (5) and Histopathology (1). 
69 Clinical pathology: Haematology, Urine Analysis, Stool Analysis, etc. 
70 Microbiology: Smear for AFB & KLB; Grams stain for throat swab, sputum, etc. 
71 Serology: VDRL, Pregnancy test, WIDAL test, etc. 
72 Biochemistry: Blood S ugar, Blood U rea, Liver Function T est, Kidney F unction Test, Blood L ipid 
Profile. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
114 
of pathology services offered by the test -checked CHCs is detailed in 
Table 3.41. 
Table 3.41: Availability of pathology services in test-checked CHCs 
Name of 
District 
Name of CHC Clinical 
Pathology 
(18) 
Pathology 
(1) 
Microbiology with 
Serology  
(5) 
Biochemistry 
(5) 
Bathinda Mehraj 7 0 3 1 
Bhucho Mandi 12 0 3 4 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Amloh 8 0 4 5 
Bassi Pathana 11 0 3 3 
Gurdaspur Fatehgarh Churian 12 0 4 4 
N M Singh 9 0 4 5 
Hoshiarpur Mahilpur 13 0 3 5 
Shamchaurasi 9 0 4 5 
Ludhiana Sudhar 15 1 4 5 
Sidhwan Bet 10 0 4 5 
Moga Bagha Purana 12 0 5 2 
Nihal Singh Wala 15 0 4 5 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘adequate availability’, Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ and red depicts 
‘least/non-availability’ 
In the test-checked CHCs, it was observed that: 
i. There was short fall in availability of clinical pathology diagnostic 
services ranging from 17 per  cent to 61 per cent at test -checked 
CHCs; 
ii. Pathology ( sputum diagnostic ) service was available only in  CHC 
Sudhar; 
iii. There was short fall in availability of Microbiology with Serology 
pathological tests ranging up to 40 per cent; and 
iv. All Biochemistry tests facility was available at seven CHCs only and 
in other five CHCs, there was shortfall in Biochemistry tests ranging 
between 20 per cent and 80 per cent.  
On being pointed out  in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
3.6.2.3  Waiting time and Turn-around time 
Time taken in receiving samples from the patients for investigations i.e. 
Waiting time (WT) and time taken in getting the investigation s done and 
reporting the results to the patients i.e. T urn-around t ime (TAT) reflect s the 
overall efficiency of the diagnostic services, in terms of patient satisfaction. 
Audit observed that the doctors prescribed the tests/investigations on the 
patients’ prescription slip s. The patients were registered in the pathology/  
radiology departments for the procedures based on the recommendations given 
by the doctors. Further, it was found that none of the test -checked hospitals 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
115 
maintained the records pertaining to TAT and WT. So, in the absence of the 
requisite records, TAT and WT could not be ascertained. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.6.2.4 Quality assurance of pathology services  
IPHS 2012 norms provide that external validation of lab reports shall be done  
on a regular basis. Further, Paragraph 3.1.14 of NHM Guidelines also provides 
that under free diagnostic services initiative, system for regular cross checking 
of sample diagnostic results with identified reference laboratory should be 
established. 
Accordingly, PHSC issued every year a list of health institutions to get 
External Quality Assurance (EQA) every month from the nominated 
laboratory (Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu). 
Out of 4 3 test-checked health institutions, only 12 health institutions  
(six DHs and six CHCs) were falling in the list prescribed by PHSC for EQA  
test.  Against the requirement of 600 test reports
73 in ten 74 health institutions 
for 60 months , 381 75 test reports were made available to Audit . Of these, 
performance of test reports for only 124 76 test reports  were found up to the 
mark and in the remaining 257 test reports  (67.5 per cent ), the performance 
was found poor/unacceptable.  
Out of 381 test reports, audit scrutinised 32 test reports of selected months 77. 
The details of number of tests (one report contains various tests) conducted 
and tests found poor or unacceptable are detailed in Table 3.42. 
Table 3.42: Status of poor/unacceptable tests 
District 
Hospital 
Tests 
conducted 
Number of 
test reports 
(selected 
months) 
Tests found 
poor/ 
unacceptable 
Percentage of 
poor/ 
unacceptable 
tests 
Test reports were 
available in selected 
months except following 
Bathinda 97,726 4 20,645 21 November 2016 
Fatehgarh Sahib 27,592 2 2,313 8 November 2016, May 
2018 and August 2019 
Gurdaspur 37,073 4 6,779 18 November 2016 
Ludhiana 85,833 4 8,245 10 November 2016  
Moga 52,253 4 18,269 35 May 2018 
Total 3,00,477 18 56,251 19  
 
73 One test report for every month for five years (2016-2021), works out to 60 reports for each health 
institute. 
74 Two health institutions viz.  DH Hoshiarpur and CHC Nihal Singh Wala did not provide 
records/information of EQA (monthly reports). 
75 DHs: Bathinda (46); Fatehgarh Sahib (51); Moga (50); Ludhiana (51); and Gurdaspur (47).  
 CHCs: Amloh  (26); Bassi Pathana (30); Fatehgarh Churian (51); Sudhar (26); and  
Bagha Purana (03) 
76 DHs: Bathinda (4); Fatehgarh Sahib (37); Ludhiana (18); Gurdaspur (22); and Moga (5).  
CHCs: Amloh (2); Bassi Pathana (21); and Fatehgarh Churian (15).  
77  November 2016; February and May 2018; August 2019; and November 2020. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
116 
District 
Hospital 
Tests 
conducted 
Number of 
test reports 
(selected 
months) 
Tests found 
poor/ 
unacceptable 
Percentage of 
poor/ 
unacceptable 
tests 
Test reports were 
available in selected 
months except following 
CHCs 
Amloh 26,254 3 16,011 61 November 2016 and 
November 2020 
Bagha Purana 29,881 3 4,844 16 November 2016 and 
November 2020 
Bassi Pathana 809 1 0 0 
November 2016, February 
2018, May 2018 and 
August 2019 
Fatehgarh 
Churian 29,802 4 12,920 43 November 2016 
Sudhar 28,317 3 20,733 73 November 2016 and 
February 2018 
Total 1,15,063 14 54,508 47  
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs/CHCs 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘satisfactory quality’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate quality’ and Red depicts ‘poor 
quality’ of tests 
Table 3.42 shows that – 
 In DHs, overall 1 9 per cent  of tests conducted were found 
poor/unacceptable as per EQA report with highest 35 per cent  in  
DH Moga. 
 In CHCs, overall 47 per cent  of test s conducted were found 
poor/unacceptable as per EQA report with highest 73 per cent  in CHC 
Sudhar. 
Poor and unacceptable results could result in giving misleading information to 
the patients resulting in erroneous information to the doctors while treating the 
patients. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.3 Ambulance services 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, DHs are required to have three running ambulances 
with well-equipped Basic Life Support (BLS) . It should be desirable to have  
one Advanced Life Support (ALS) ambulance. CHCs are also required to have 
ambulance round the clock with basic life support.  It is desirable that PHC 
has ambulance facilities for transport of patients for timely and assured 
referral to functional FRUs in case of complications during pregnancy and 
child birth
. There shall be a dedicated parking space separately for ambulances 
near emergency. Availability of ambulance services in test -checked 
DHs/CHCs is detailed in Table 3.43. 
 
 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
117 
Table 3.43: Availability of ambulance services in RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs 
Health Institution No. of ambulances 
required as per norms 
Availability of 
ambulance services 24X7 
Availability of 
parking space 
DH Bathinda 3 4 Yes 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
3 2 Yes 
DH Gurdaspur 3 3 Yes 
DH Hoshiarpur 3 4 Yes 
DH Ludhiana 3 5 Yes 
DH Moga 3 4 Yes 
RH Patiala NA 0 NA 
CHCs (12) 12 3 Yes 
PHCs (24) 24 2 Yes 
Source: Information provided by DHs/CHCs/PHCs   NA= Not available 
Colour code 
 Represents ‘availability’ 
 Represents ‘short availability’ 
 Represents ‘non-availability’ and ‘acute shortage’ 
Audit noticed the following: 
 Adequate number of ambulances were available in all the test -checked 
DHs except DH Fatehgarh Sahib wherein two ambulances were 
available against the norms of three.  
 In RH Patiala, no ambulance was available during 2016-2021.  
 Out of 12 CHCs and 24 PHCs, ambulance service/transport facilities 
were available only in three
78 CHCs and two79 PHCs.   
 It was also noticed that ambulances at CHC Naushera Majja Singh and 
PHCs Ranjit Bagh and Behrampur had no valid registration certificate. 
3.6.3.1  Issues in operation and monitoring of Emergency Medical 
Ambulance Services (ERS-108) 
With an aim to provide comprehensive emergency response services (medical, 
police, fire, etc.) to the people on a sustainable basis and round the clock 
safety to citizens in a timely and effective manner, Punjab Health Systems 
Corporation (PHSC) proposed in 2015 to outsource operation and 
management of Emergency Response Services (ERS) and an agreement was 
signed (May 2016) between PHSC and ambulance service provider for a 
period of five years with operational cost  of ₹ 1.21 lakh per ambulance per 
month with five per cent  annual increase of the quoted rate. Further, after 
expiry of the agreement, PHSC again entered  (March 2021) into a new  
agreement with the service provider for  the next five years with operational 
cost of ₹ 1.35 lakh per ambulance per month. 
 
78 (i) Amloh; (ii) Naushera Majja Singh; and (iii) Nihal Singh Wala. 
79 (i) Ranjit Bagh; and (ii) Behrampur. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
118 
The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) was prepared in May 2016 (for the 
first tenure of agreement) to facilitate smooth implementation, operation and 
monitoring of Emergency Medical Ambulance Services (ERS -108) which was 
also revised in March 2021 (for second tenure of agreement). 
Initially, the service provider started ERS with 240 basic life support 
ambulances provided by PHSC and as of March 2022, 325 ambulances were 
available in the fleet. 
Analysis of dump data of ERS-108 provided by PHSC revealed the following: 
(i) As per SOP, the Emergency Response Centre (created by the agency) 
informs the ambulance in respective locations to attend to the emergency 
victim. The response time as specified in the request for proposal (RFP)  was 
an average of 30  minutes in r ural areas and 20 minutes in urban areas for the 
first tenure of agreement and for the second tenure of agreement, it was 
15 minutes for urban areas and 20 minutes for rural areas for all those calls 
where the distance from the base location/current location to the  pick-up 
location is not more than 10 km .  However, in the following 8,176 instances 
(during July 2021 to  December 2022), the response time was more than the 
prescribed time, as detailed in Table 3.44. 
Table 3.44: Response time of ambulance more than prescribed time 
Period Total 
number of 
trips 
Rural (Number of instances) Urban (Number of 
instances) 
Where distance is less than  
10 km and response time is 
more than 20 minutes 
Where distance is less than 
10 km and response time is 
more than 15 minutes 
2016 to June 2021  Relevant fields were not captured in data i.e. reaching time 
on scene, reaching time to health facility, etc. 
2021 
(July to December) 
96,270 1,701 1,077 
2022 1,91,993 3,833 1,565 
Source: Analysis of dump data of ERS provided by PHSC 
Adherence to response time was important to provide medical assistance to the 
patient in time . N ot capturing the time of arrival of the ambulance at the 
location of the patient in the data base for the period from 2016 to June 2021 
defeated the very purpose of having a clause regarding response time 
incorporated in SOP.  
Thus, monitoring would be hampered as necessary data was not captured. 
(ii) Non-disposal of condemned ambulances 
PHSC instructed (August 2014)  all Civil Surgeons/DMCs and Medical 
Superintendents in the State of Punjab for reorganisation of the committee 
along with financial powers to condemn unserviceable articles of stores/stock.  

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
119 
Audit observed that ERS -108 service was operationalised with 240  BLS 
ambulances in 2015 and up to December 2022, 270 more ambulances were 
added in the fleet. Out of these, 185 ambulances with book value of 
₹ 23.03 crore were condemned during 2016- 17 to 2022- 23 (December 2022) 
but these vehicles were not disposed of (March  2023) as required under 
instructions ibid.  With the passage of time, the condition of these vehicles 
would deteriorate and would fetch lesser value.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.6.4 Oxygen services 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, Double Outlet Oxygen Concentrator, one each for  
the labour room and OT should be available in a DH. Among the equipment 
for Eclampsia Room, oxygen supply (central) should be available. The Special 
Newborn Care Unit (SNCU) should have oxygen reservoir and silicone round 
cushion masks – sizes 0 & 00 (1 set for each bed (essential) + 2).  Further, 
Double Outlet Oxygen Concentrator 1 for every 3 beds (essential) should be 
available in SNCU and oxygen cylinder with trolley and gas with one bed 
should be available in the recovery room. The hospital should ensure the 
availability of a naesthesia equipment such as O 2 cylinder for Boyles 
Apparatus, pipe line supply of oxygen, nitrous oxide, compressed a ir and 
suction (desirable). 
Further, NHM Assessor’s guidelines provide that the healthcare facility should 
ensure the availability of centralised/local piped oxygen and vacuum supply 
(Standard D5), ambulance/transport vehicle having adequate arrangement for 
oxygen (Standard E11.4).  As per Standard C5.1, the facility should ensure the 
availability of medical gases such as availability of oxygen cylinders.  
Standard D5.3 provides that there should be a procedure for prompt 
replacement of empty cylinders with filled cylinders and for periodic checking 
of all terminal units for malfunctioning.  Instructions for operating different 
equipment should be clearly displayed. Availability of oxygen services in the 
test-checked health institutions is detailed in Table 3.45. 
Table 3.45: Oxygen services in test-checked GMCH/DHs 
Name of service GMCH District Hospitals at 
 
RH Patiala 
Bathinda 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
Gurdaspur 
Hoshiarpur 
Ludhiana 
Moga 
Whether the requirement of oxygen in the hospital 
was assessed and infrastructure created 
accordingly? 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Whether the standard operating procedure for 
oxygen was available and was being followed? 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
120 
Name of service GMCH District Hospitals at 
 
RH Patiala 
Bathinda 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
Gurdaspur 
Hoshiarpur 
Ludhiana 
Moga 
Whether agreements were executed for the supply 
of uninterrupted oxygen? 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Whether centralised oxygen supply system was 
installed in the hospital? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
In all such cases, whether required buffer stock 
was assessed and maintained all the time? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether records of serviceability and availability 
of oxygen cylinders were maintained as per 
guidelines? 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Whether required oxygen supply (central) was 
available in Eclampsia Room? 
Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
Whether oxygen reservoir is available for each 
bed at Special New-born Care Unit? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether the health institutions have Double 
Outlet Oxygen Concentrator at Special  
New-born Care Unit? 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Source: Information provided by RH/DHs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
It was observed that: 
i. Requirement of oxygen was assessed and infrastructure  was created 
accordingly and the standard operating procedure for oxygen was 
available and followed in all the test- checked hospitals except DH  
Gurdaspur and DH Hoshiarpur. 
ii. Agreements were executed for the supply of uninterrupted oxygen in 
all test-checked DHs except DH Gurdaspur and DH Hoshiarpur. 
iii. Centralised oxygen supply system was installed and where centralised 
oxygen supply system was not available in the hospital, required buffer 
stock of oxygen cylinders was also assessed and maintained all the 
time in all DHs. 
iv. Records of serviceability and availability of oxygen cylinders were not 
being maintained by DH Gurdaspur and DH Hoshiarpur , as adequacy 
of required oxygen cylinders was not assessed by these hospitals due to 
availability of centralised supply system there. 
v. Required oxygen s upply ( central) in Eclampsia Room was not 
available at DH Gurdaspur. 
vi. Though oxygen reservoirs for each bed at Special New -born Care Unit 
were available at all DHs but D ouble Outlet Oxygen Concentrator at 
Special New-born Care Unit  was not available at DHs  Gurdaspur and 
Hoshiarpur. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
121 
3.6.5 Dietary services 
As per IPHS 2012 norms for district and sub district hospitals, the dietary 
service of a hospital is an important therapeutic tool. It should be easily 
accessible from outside along with vehicular accessibility and separate room 
for dietician and special diet. The location should be such that the noise and 
cooking odour emanating from the department do not cause any inconvenience 
to the other departments. At the same time , location should involve the 
shortest possible time in delivering food to the wards.  Apart from normal diet, 
diabetic, semi-solid and liquid diets shall be available, and the food shall be 
distributed in a covered container. Quality and quantity of diet shall be 
checked by competent person on regular basis. 
As per NHM Assessor ’s guidelines  (Standard D6) provides that “Dietary 
services are to be available as per service provision and nutritional 
requirement of the patients”.  
Audit noticed that no dietary service for IPD patients (except under the 
scheme JSSK) was available (neither in -house nor outsourced) in the  
test-checked DHs/CHCs/PHCs and RH Patiala.  
However, availability/non- availability of dietary services under JSSK in the 
test-checked DHs/RH is detailed in Table 3.46. 
Table 3.46: Dietary services under JSSK in test-checked RH/DHs 
Particulars 
DH 
Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 
Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
RH Patiala 
Availability of dietary service A A A A A A A 
If available, in-house/ outsourced 
(OS) OS OS OS OS OS OS In 
house 
Availability of kitchen A NA A NA A NA A 
Availability of standard procedures 
for preparation, handling, storage and 
distribution of clean, hygienic and 
nutritious diet to the indoor patients 
as per their caloric requirement 
A NA A NA A A A 
Availability of policy and procedure 
for regular quality checking of raw 
material, kitchen sanitation, cooked 
food, etc.  
A NA A NA A A A 
Availability of quality testing of diet 
supplied in health facilities A NA A NA A A A 
Evaluation of dietary services in 
health facilities NA NA A NA A A A 
Conduct of dietetic research on menu 
planning, preserving nutritional 
values, storage of food items, modern 
methods of cooking, etc.  
A NA A NA A A A 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘availability ’, Yellow depicts ‘outsourced’ and Red depicts  
‘non-availability’ 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
122 
It is evident from the above table that: 
i. Dietary services under JSSK were available in all test -checked health 
institutions and were provided through outsourced agenc ies except  
RH, Patiala wherein it was provided through inhouse service. 
ii. Kitchen for dietary services was available in all test -checked hospitals 
except DHs at Fatehgarh Sahib, Hoshiarpur and Moga. 
iii. Policy and procedure for regular quality checking of raw material, 
kitchen sanitation, cooked food, etc. was not available in  
DHs Fatehgarh Sahib and Hoshiarpur.  
3.6.6 Blood Centre 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, Blood Centre 80  shall be in close proximity to  
pathology department and at an accessible distance to operation theatre 
department, intensive care units and emergency and accident department. 
Blood Centre should follow all existing guidelines and fulfil all requirements 
as per the various Acts pertaining to setting up of the Blood Centre. Separate 
reporting room for doctors should be there. IPHS also provide that CHC shall 
have well -lit, clean and preferably air -conditioned Blood Storage Unit. 
Availability of blood centres in the test -checked health institutions is detailed 
in Table 3.47. 
Table 3.47: Availability of blood centres in test-checked RH Patiala/DHs 
Particulars GMCH District Hospitals at 
RH Patiala 
Bathinda 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Gurdaspur 
Hoshiarpur 
Ludhiana 
Moga 
Whether blood centre was available? Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
If yes, whether valid license was available to 
run the blood centre? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether blood centre was available in close 
proximity to pathology department? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether blood centre was at an accessible 
distance to operation theatre department, 
intensive care units and emergency and 
accident department? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Whether separate reporting room for doctors 
was available? 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs 
It was further noticed that blood storage facility was not available at any  of the   
test-checked CHCs except CHC Sudhar. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
80 The words “Blood Banks” have been substituted (March 2020) as “Blood Centres” in the Drug and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
123 
3.6.7 Laundry services 
IPHS 2012 norms provide that hospital laundry should be provided with 
necessary facilities for segregated collection, drying, pressing and storage of 
soiled and cleaned linens. It may be outsourced. 
As per Kayakalp Guidelines, the provision of clean linen is a fundamental 
requirement for patient care. Incorrect procedures for handling or processing 
of linen can present an infection risk both to staff and patients who 
subsequently use it. Hence, correct linen management is important to prevent 
Hospital Acquired Infection (HAI) and ensure a better hygienic hospital 
environment. The term ‘hospital linen’ includes all textiles used in the hospital 
including mattresses, pillow covers, blankets, bed sheets, towels, screens, 
curtains, doctors’ coats, theatre clothes and table clothes. The hospital receives 
all these materials from different areas like OT, wards, outpatient departments 
and office areas. All the linen of critical areas like OT and ICU etc. need to be 
changed daily. Kayakalp Guidelines also provides that hospitals need to 
ensure that they have at least four sets of linen per day, even though six sets 
are preferable. Classification of six sets of linen needed in hospitals are: 
(i) One already in use (on bed); (ii) One ready to use (in sub store); (iii) One in 
transit-route to laundry or to the ward; (iv) One in washing cycle in laundry;  
and (v) Two in stock (in central store).  Further, there should be a system to 
check the cleanliness and quantity of the linen received from laundry. 
Further, NHM A ssessor’s guidelines (S tandard D7) include availability of 
adequate quantity of clean and usable linen, process of providing and changing 
bed sheets in -patient care area and process of collection, washing and 
distributing the linen. Besides direct observation, staff interaction may help in 
knowing availability of adequate sets of linen and work practices. An 
assessment of segregation and disinfection of soiled laundry should be 
undertaken. Further, the facility should have standard procedures for handling, 
collection, transportation and washing of linen. 
In six DHs, washing of linen was being managed in-house by deploying one to 
two persons on District Collector (DC) rates or through contractual workers. 
However, in all CHCs, the washing of linen was being managed through local 
arrangement on need basis. Availability of Laundry service in the test-checked 
health institutions is detailed in Table 3.48(a).
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
124 
Table 3.48(a): Laundry services in test-checked DHs/CHCs 
Particulars 
DH Bathinda 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib 
DH Gurdaspur 
DH Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
Bathinda CHCs (2) 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
CHCs (2) 
Gurdaspur CHCs (2) 
Hoshiarpur CHCs (2) 
Ludhiana CHCs (2) 
Moga CHCs (2) 
Availability of required 
linen sets A A A A A A 2 1  2 2 2 2 
Availability of system of 
changing the patient/OT 
linen at the prescribed 
intervals to maintain 
hygiene 
A A A A A A 1 2 2 2 2 2 
Availability of system to 
check the quality of 
cleanliness of the linen 
received from laundry 
NA A A NA A A 1 2 2 2 2 2 
Availability of date -wise 
and patient -wise records 
against each entry of linen 
issued from linen stock 
NA A A NA A A 1 2 1 0 2 2 
Availability of system for 
periodic physical 
verification of linen 
inventory 
NA A A A A A 1 2 2 2 2 2 
Follow-up of procedure 
for sluicing of soiled and 
infected linen 
NA A A NA A A 1 2 2 2 0 2 
Maintenance of norms for 
washing and drying of 
linens 
NA A A A A A 1 
2 (out 
sourced 
in Bassi 
Pathana) 
2 2 2 2 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs/CHCs 
Note: Numbers (0,1,2) represent the number of CHCs wherein the particular service is available. 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘availability ’, Yellow depicts ‘partial availability ’ and ‘Red depicts  
non-availability’ 
It was observed that: 
 Required linen sets were not available in CHC Bassi Pathana.  
 System of changing the patient/OT linen at the prescribed intervals to 
maintain hygiene was not maintained by CHC Mehraj. 
 System to check the quality of cleanliness of the linen received from 
laundry was not available in two DHs
81 and CHC Mehraj. 
 Date-wise and patient -wise records against each entry of linen issued 
from linen stock was not maintained in two DHs at Bathinda and 
Hoshiarpur and four CHCs at Mehraj, Fatehgarh Churian, Mahilpur 
and Shamchaurasi.  
 System for periodic physical verification of linen inventory was not 
maintained in DH Bathinda and CHC Mehraj. 
 
81 (i) DH Bathinda (Average BOR: 127); and (ii) DH Hoshiarpur (Average BOR: 76). 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
125 
 Follow-up of procedure for sluicing 82 of soiled and infected linen was 
not done in two DHs at Bathinda and Hoshiarpur and in three CHCs at 
Mehraj, Sudhar and Sidhwan Bet. 
  Norms for washing and drying of the linens  was not followed in  
DH Bathinda and CHC Mehraj.  
The position of laundry services vis -à-vis number of beds/BOR is depicted in 
Table 3.48(b). 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference. 
3.6.7.1 Availability of linen in DHs 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe 21 different types of linen such as beds heets, 
blankets, pillows, pillow covers, etc. which are required for patient care 
services in the hospitals having 101-500 beds. 
The position of  unavailability/shortage of different types of linen in six  
test-checked DHs, is given in Table 3.48(b). 
Table 3.48(b): Availability of linen vis-a-vis number of beds/BOR  
in test-checked DHs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
linen article 
Bathinda  
(200 beds 
Average 
BOR=127) 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib  
(100 beds  
Average 
BOR=79) 
Gurdaspur 
(110 beds  
Average 
BOR=161) 
Hoshiarpur 
(200 beds  
Average 
BOR=76) 
Ludhiana 
(290 beds  
Average 
BOR=100) 
Moga  
(150 beds  
Average 
BOR=166) 
R A R A R A R A R A R A 
1. Bedsheets  800 1,300 800 466 800 2,160 800 2,659 1,200 1,350 800 436 
2. Bedspreads  1,200 0 1200 0 1,200 0 1,200 0 1,800 0 1,2
00 
0 
3. Blankets Red 
and Blue 
50 181 50 25 50 150 50 273 100 144 50 95 
4. Patna towels 300 0 300 0 300 0 300 0 1000 180 300 0 
5. Table cloth 60 0 60 0 60 0 60 0 75 0 60 0 
6. Draw sheet 100 0 100 0 100 0 100 1,890 150 170 100 2 
7. Doctor’s 
overcoat 
60 0  60 0 60 0 60 0 90 400 60 0 
8. Hospital 
worker OT 
coat  
250 0 250 0 250 0 250 185 400 0 250 0 
9. Patients 
house coat 
(for female) 
600 0 600 10 600 0 600 386 900 340 600 5 
10. Patients 
Pyjama (for 
male) Shirt 
300 0 300 0 300 58 300 170 400 0 300 0 
11. Over shoes 
pairs 
80 0 80 0 80 0 80 0 100 4,300 80 0 
12. Pillows  300 80 300 0 300 0 300 2 450 437 300 13 
 
82 Wash or rinse freely with a stream or shower of water.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
126 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
linen article 
Bathinda  
(200 beds 
Average 
BOR=127) 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib  
(100 beds  
Average 
BOR=79) 
Gurdaspur 
(110 beds  
Average 
BOR=161) 
Hoshiarpur 
(200 beds  
Average 
BOR=76) 
Ludhiana 
(290 beds  
Average 
BOR=100) 
Moga  
(150 beds  
Average 
BOR=166) 
R A R A R A R A R A R A 
13. Pillow covers 600 80 600 0 600 0 600 150 900 357 600 34 
14. Mattress 
(foam) Adult 
200 116 200 100 200 110 200 200 300 330 200 82 
15. Paediatric 
Mattress 
20 0 20 0 20 0 20 10 40 0 20 8 
16. Abdominal 
sheets for OT 
150 0 150 0 150 0 150 1,050 200 280 150 0 
17. Perineal 
sheets for OT 
150 0 150 0 150 0 150 0 200 0 150 0 
18. Leggings 100 0 100 0 100 0 100 0 150 0 100 0 
19. Mortuary 
sheet 
50 0 50 0 50 0 50 0 70 295 50 0 
20. Mats (Nylon) 100 0 100 0 100 0 100 0 200 0 100 0 
21. Mackintosh 
sheet (in 
metres) 
200 0 200 0 200 13 200 40 300 300 200 0 
Type of linen 
available 
 
5   4   5   12   13   8 
Type of linen not 
available   
16 
 
17 
 
16 
 
9 
 
8 
 
13 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
R = Required; and A = Available. 
Note: Average BOR pertained to the period 2016-2022, as depicted in paragraph 3.2.7. 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘Adequate/Excess’, Yellow depicts ‘Moderate’ and Red depicts ‘Not available/Inadequate’ 
Table 3.48(b) shows that: 
 Out of 21 types of required linen, 8 to 17 types of linen, especially bed 
spreads, patients’ house coat (for female), Patients’ pyjama -shirt (for 
male), paediatric mattress, etc. were not adequately available in DHs , 
especially in four DHs with high BOR (Moga: 166;  Gurdaspur:161; 
Bathinda: 127; and Ludhiana: 100).  
 Even the basic linen i.e. bedsheets in DHs at Fatehgarh Sahib and Moga ; 
blankets in DH Fatehgarh Sahib ; pillows and pillow covers in all  
test-checked DHs (except Ludhiana) ; mattresses (adult) in all  
test-checked DHs (except Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana) ; mattresses 
(paediatric) in all test -checked DHs, patient house coat (for female) and 
patient pyjama shirt (for male) in all test- checked DH s were not 
adequate in line with the norms ibid.  
 As against the requirement of 100 over  shoes pairs, 4,300 were available 
in DH Ludhiana, whereas no over shoes were available in other  
test-checked DHs.  Similarly, in DH Hoshiarpur with average BOR of 
76 per cent , 2,659 number of bedsheets were available against the 
requirement of 800 bedsheets, whereas in DH Moga with average BOR 
as high as 166 per cent , only 436 bedsheets were available against the 
requirement of 800 bedsheets. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
127 
Thus, non- availability or shortage of linen adversely affected the quality of 
IPD services where BOR was higher than the prescribed norms , which 
indicated that even the basic laundry services were not being provided to the 
patients in DHs. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.6.8 Bio-medical waste management 
Bio-Medical waste means any waste, which is generated during the diagnosis, 
treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals or research activities 
pertaining thereto or in the production or testing of biological, including 
categories mentioned in the Schedule of the Bio- Medical Waste Management 
Rules. 
As per Rule 4(r) of Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules , 2016, it shall be 
the duty of every occupier
83 to establish a system to review and monitor the 
activities related to bio-medical waste management, either through an existing 
committee or by forming a new committee and the Committee shall meet once 
in every six months and the record of the minutes of the meetings of this 
committee shall be submitted along with the annual report to the prescribed 
authority. Healthcare establishments having less than thirty beds shall 
designate a qualified person to review and monitor the activities relating to 
bio-medical waste management within that establishment and submit the 
annual report. 
As per Schedule -IV under Rule 8(3) and ( 4), bio-medical waste containers or 
bags should be labelled as biohazard or cytotoxic. As per Rule 4(m), occupier 
shall “conduct health check up at the time of induction and at least once in a 
year for all its healthcare workers and others involved in handling of  
bio-medical waste and maintain the records for the same”. As per Rule 4(h), 
occupier shall “immunise all its healthcare workers and others, involved in 
handling of bio- medical waste for protection against diseases including 
Hepatitis B and Tetanus that are likely to be transmitted by handling of  
bio-medical waste, in the manner as prescribed in the National Immunisation 
Policy or the guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued 
from time to time”. 
Availability of services as per BMW Rules in the test -checked health 
institutions is detailed in Table 3.49.
 
 
83 “occupier" means a person having administrative control over the institution and the premises 
generating bio-medical waste, which includes a hospital, nursing home, clinic, dispensary, 
veterinary institution, animal house, pathological laboratory, blood centre, healthcare facility and 
clinical establishment, irrespective of their system of medicine and by whatever name they are 
called. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
128 
Table 3.49: Bio-Medical Waste Management services in test-checked  
Health Institutions 
Name of Service 
Bathinda Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
District Hospital 
No of CHCs (02) 
No of PHCs (04) 
Authorisation for 
generating bio-medical 
waste was obtained by 
the hospital from State 
Environment Protection 
and Pollution Control 
Board 
1 2 2 1 1 4 1 1 4 1 2 4 1 2 4 1 2 3 
Availability of Waste 
Management 
Committee under the 
Chairmanship of head 
of hospital 
1 2 1 1 2 0 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 1 1 2 4 
Waste Management 
Committee met 
regularly to review the 
performance of the 
hospital as regards 
waste disposal 
1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 1 1 2 4 
Availability of proper 
system for disposal of 
bio-medical liquid 
waste 
1 2 3 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 4 1 2 0 1 1 4 
Plastics bags which 
contained bio-medical 
waste had been labelled 
as per guidelines i.e. 
symbols for biohazard 
and cytotoxic 
1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 4 1 2 4 1 2 4 1 2 4 
The hospital and 
healthcare authorities 
had ensured that 
personal protective 
equipment was 
provided to waste 
handlers 
1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 4 1 2 4 
Availability of barcode 
system, for bags or 
containers containing 
biomedical waste that 
were to be sent out of 
the premises, was 
ensured by the hospital 
1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 3 1 0 2 0 2 4 1 2 4 
Periodic medical check-
up and immunisation of 
staff were carried out. 
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 1 2 1 2 4 1 2 4 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked health institutions 
Colour Code : Green depicts ‘availability’, Yellow depicts ‘partial availability’ and Red depicts ‘non/least 
availability’ 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
129 
It is evident from the above table that: 
i. Authorisation for generating bio- medical waste was obtained by all  
test-checked hospitals, CHCs and PHCs except CHC Bassi  Pathana,  
N. M. Singh and three84 PHCs. 
ii. Waste management committee was available and met regularly to 
review the performance of the hospital as regards waste disposal in all 
test-checked hospitals, CHCs and PHCs except 11
85 PHCs. 
iii. Proper system for disposal of bio-medical liquid waste was available in 
all test-checked hospitals, CHCs and PHCs except CHC Bassi Pathana, 
Nihal Singh Wala and 1086 PHCs. 
iv. Plastics bags which contained bio- medical waste had been labelled as 
per guidelines i.e. symbols for bio- hazard and cytotoxic  by all the  
test-checked health institutions except PHC Jodhpur Pakhar. 
v. The hospital and healthcare authorities had ensured that personal 
protective equipment were provided to waste handlers in all the  
test-checked health institutions except two PHCs at Jodhpur Pakhar 
and Ranjit Bagh (Hoshiarpur). 
vi. Barcode system, for bags or containers containing biomedical waste 
were ensured by all test -checked health institutions except  
DH Ludhiana, CHCs at Mahilpur, Shamchaurasi and four
87 PHCs. 
vii. Periodic medical check -up and immuni sation of staff was carried out 
by all the test- checked health institutions except CHC Shamchaurasi  
(Hoshiarpur) and five88PHCs. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.8.1 Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) for treatment and disposal of 
 liquid waste in hospital 
Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules , 2016 prescribe that every 
institution shall ensure segregation of liquid chemical waste at source and 
ensure pre -treatment or neutralis ation prior to mixing with other effluent 
generated from healthcare institutions, ensure treatment and disposal of liquid 
waste in accordance with the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
 
84 PHCs at (i) Mandi Kalan; (ii) Jodhpur Pakhar; and (iii) Patto Hira Singh. 
85 PHCs at (i) Lehra Mohabbat ; (ii)  Mandi Kalan ; (iii)  Jodhpur Pakhar ; (iv)  Nandpur Kalour ; 
(v) Sanghol; (vi)  Bhari; (vii)  Nanowal; (viii)  Ranjit Bagh ; (ix)  Ghawaddi; (x)  Otalon; and 
(xi) Sowaddi Kalan. 
86 PHCs at (i) Jodhpur Pakhar ; (ii)  Bhari; (iii)  Nanowal; (iv)  Behrampur; (v)  Ranjit Bagh ; 
(vi) Ghawaddi; (vii) Mansuran; (viii) Otalon; (ix) Sowaddi Kalan; and (x) Nandpur Kalour. 
87 PHCs at (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Dorangala; (iii) Paldi; and (iv) Possi. 
88  PHCs at (i) Jodhpur Pakhar; (ii) Ranjit Bagh; (iii) Paldi; (iv) Possi; and (v) Nandpur Kalour. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
130 
1974 (6 of 1974) and prescribes effluent treatment plant for liquid waste also. 
Sludge from Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) shall be given to common  
bio-medical waste treatment facility for incineration or to hazardous waste 
treatment, storage and disposal facility for disposal. 
Test-check of records of Punjab Pollution Control Board showed that out of 
13,426 HCFs, 10,089 HCFs had installed system for pre -treatment of liquid 
waste with 1 -2 per cent sodium hypochlorite.  However, only 324 HCFs had 
provided ETPs for the final treatment of their liquid waste.   
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.6.9 Mortuary Services 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, mortuary provides facilities for keeping dead bodies 
and conducting autopsy. Post -mortem room shall have stainless steel autopsy  
table with sink, a sink with running water for specimen washing and cleaning 
and cup-board for keeping instruments. A separate room for body storage shall 
be provided with at least two  deep freezers for preserving body.  
One mortuary van should be available.  Further, as per NHM Assessor ’s 
guidelines, the mortuary services  and facility for pathological post -mortem 
(Standard A5.8) should be available. As per S tandard E16.4, mortuary should 
have a system for categori sing the dead bodies before preservation and 
mortuary technician has to maintain full records of body brought to mortuary; 
mortuary has system to provide identification tag/wrist band for each stored 
dead body; and all bodies sent to mortuary are accompanied with copy of 
death certificate issued by hospital. Mortuary has system for storage of 
unclaimed body for fixed duration as per State guidelines. Standard F4.2 
provides that the facility ensures standard practices and materials for 
disinfection and sterilisation of instruments and equipment. A vailability of 
healthcare infrastructure for mortuary services in test -checked DHs /RH is 
detailed in Table 3.50. 
Table 3.50:  Availability of healthcare infrastructure for mortuary services in 
test-checked DHs/RH 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Gurdaspur 
DH Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
1. Availability of mortuary facility in 
the hospital 24x7 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
2. Stainless steel autopsy table with 
sink, a sink with running water for 
specimen washing and cleaning 
and cup-board for keeping 
instruments in post-mortem room 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
131 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Gurdaspur 
DH Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
3. Availability of separate room for 
body storage provided with at least 
two deep freezers for preserving 
the body 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
4. Mortuary van No Yes Yes Yes No No No 
5. Availability of facility for 
pathological post-mortem 
Yes Yes Yes No Yes No No 
6. System to categorise the dead 
bodies before preservation 
Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No 
7. System to provide identification 
tag/wrist band for each stored dead 
body 
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
8. System for storage of unclaimed 
body for fixed duration 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
9. Copy of death certificate 
accompanied with bodies sent to 
mortuary  
Yes Yes Yes No No No No 
10. Facility of high level disinfection 
by boiling or chemical done as per 
protocol at mortuary 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs 
Colour Code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
It was observed that: 
(i) All the test- checked district hospitals had 24x7 mortuary facility, 
and f acility of separate room for body storage provided with at 
least two deep freezers for preserving the body was available in all 
DHs/RH. System for storage of unclaimed body for fixed duration 
was also available in all six test-checked DHs and RH Patiala. 
(ii) System to provide identification tag/wrist band for each stored 
dead body was not available at DHs Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur; 
(iii) Stainless steel autopsy table with sink and facility for high level 
disinfection by boiling or using chemicals  was not available in  
DH Moga; 
(iv) Facility for pathological post -mortem was not available at  
DHs Gurdaspur, Ludhiana and Moga; 
(v) Mortuary van was not available at DHs Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana , 
Moga and RH Patiala; 
(vi) Death certificate did not accompany dead bodies sent to mortuary 
in four DHs
89; 
(vii) System to categori se the dead bodies before preservation was not 
available at DHs Gurdaspur and Moga. 
 
89 DHs at (i) Gurdaspur; (ii) Hoshiarpur; (iii) Ludhiana; and (iv) Moga. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
132 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.7 Water Supply 
As per Kayakalp  guidelines, availability of adequate water, sanitation and 
hygiene services are essential components of providing basic healthcare 
services in the healthcare institutions . Healthcare institutions
 need adequate 
supply of quality water. As per Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS), the water 
requirement in the hospital with bed strength not exceeding 100 is  
340 litre/bed/day and exceeding 100, it is 400 litre/bed/day. Further as per 
IPHS 2012 norms, approximately 450 to 500 litres  of water per bed per day is 
required for a district hospital. Moreover, physical testing (at least once in a  
year on samples obtained directly from the source e.g. well water and bore 
water) and microbiological testing (every three months and additionally when 
the source is changed/major repairs are done) are to be conducted. 
All overhead tanks need to be manually cleaned at least at an interval of  
six months. The date of water tank cleaning needs to be written on the water 
tank for ready visibility and easy remembrance for next schedule of cleaning. 
Adequacy of water supply in the  test-checked RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs is 
detailed in Table 3.51. 
Table 3.51: Water Supply in test-checked health institutions 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
institute 
Assessment of 
water 
requirement 
per bed per 
day after 
excluding 
requirements 
for fire-
fighting, 
horticulture 
and steam 
Biological/Physical 
testing of water 
samples and 
maintenance of 
record 
Maintenance 
of record 
related to 
water 
consumption, 
purification, 
complaints on 
water supply 
disruption/ 
downtime 
Regularly 
cleaning 
of 
overhead 
water 
tank at 
prescribed 
interval 
AMC of 
water 
purifiers 
 RH Patiala Yes Yes Yes Yes* Yes 
Bathinda DH, Bathinda Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
CHC, Bhucho 
Mandi No No No Yes No 
CHC, Mehraj No No No No No 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH, Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
CHC, Bassi 
Pathana No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
CHC, Amloh No No No Yes No 
Gurdaspur 
DH, Gurdaspur No No No Yes Yes 
CHC, Fatehgarh 
Churian No No No Yes Yes 
CHC, Naushera 
Majja Singh No No No Yes Yes 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
133 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
institute 
Assessment of 
water 
requirement 
per bed per 
day after 
excluding 
requirements 
for fire-
fighting, 
horticulture 
and steam 
Biological/Physical 
testing of water 
samples and 
maintenance of 
record 
Maintenance 
of record 
related to 
water 
consumption, 
purification, 
complaints on 
water supply 
disruption/ 
downtime 
Regularly 
cleaning 
of 
overhead 
water 
tank at 
prescribed 
interval 
AMC of 
water 
purifiers 
Hoshiarpur 
DH, Hoshiarpur No Yes No No Yes 
CHC, Mahilpur No No No Yes Yes 
CHC, 
Shamchaurasi No Yes Yes No Yes 
Ludhiana 
DH, Ludhiana No No No Yes No 
CHC,  
Sidhwan Bet No No No No No 
CHC, Sudhar Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Moga 
DH, Moga No Yes No Yes Yes 
CHC, Bagha 
Purana No No No Yes Yes 
CHC, Nihal 
Singh Wala No No No Yes No 
PHCs (24) 3 (Yes) 8 (Yes) 2(Yes) 11 (Yes) 6 (Yes) 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked health institutions 
*  Record not made available. 
Colour Code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
It was observed that: 
 Out of 43 selected health institutions , only in RH Patiala, two DHs 90, 
CHC Sudhar and three PHCs at Chakowal, Possi and Mand Bhandher 
made the assessment of water requirement per bed per day. 
 DHs at Gurdaspur and Ludhiana did not carry out biological/physical 
testing of water samples. However, out of 12 CHCs, only three CHCs i.e. 
Shamchaurasi, Sudhar and Bassi  Pathana and eight
91 PHCs carried out 
the same.  
 Records related to water consumption, purification, complaints on water 
supply disruption w ere maintained properly at RH Patiala, two DHs 92 
and three CHCs 93 and two PHCs at Possi and Mand Bhandher. As such, 
in the absence of biological /physical testing of water samples and non-
maintenance of above record, quality of water supply could not be 
assessed. 
 
90 DHs at (i) Bathinda; and (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib. 
91  PHCs at (i) Nandpur Kalour; (ii) Nanowal; (iii) Paldi; (iv) Possi; (v) Mand Bhander; (vi) Ghawaddi; 
(vii) Mansuran; and (viii) Otalon. 
92  DHs at (i) Bathinda; and (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib. 
93  CHCs at (i) Shamchaurasi; (ii) Sudhar; and (iii) Bassi Pathana. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
134 
 Regular cleaning of overhead water tank at prescribed intervals  was not 
carried out at DH Hoshiarpur, CHC at Mehraj, Sidhwan Bet and CHC 
Shamchaurasi and 1394 PHCs.  
 Out of the test -checked health institutions, AMC of water purifier was 
carried out in all test-checked RH/DHs (except DH Ludhiana), six CHCs 
and six95 PHCs only. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.8 Power Supply 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, back-up generator facility should be  available at all 
institutions. Generator should be of good capacity. Generator of 75 KV in 
Civil Hospital and generator of 5 KV in CHCs should be maintained.  
PHCs should have power backup (Generator/Invertor/UPS) for OT.  Further, 
AMC should be taken for all equipment which needs special care and 
preventive maintenance should be done to avoid break down and reduce down 
time of all essential and other equipment. Availability of power supply in  
the test-checked health institutions is detailed in Table 3.52. 
Table 3.52: Availability of power supply in test-checked health institutions 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
facility 
Availability of 
24-hour 
uninterrupted 
stabilised 
power supply 
with three 
phases and 
capacity of 75 
KVA 
generator 
Installation 
of 5 KVA 
generator 
Generator/ 
Invertor/ 
UPS 
AMC of 
available 
backup 
facility like 
generators 
and inverters 
Bathinda 
DH Bathinda Available NA NA Available 
CHC (2) NA 2 NA 1  1 
PHC (4) NA NA 3 1 3 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib Available NA NA Available 
CHC (2) NA 1 1 NA 1 
PHC (4) NA NA 2 2 2 
Gurdaspur 
DH Gurdaspur Available NA NA Available 
CHC (2) 2 NA NA 2 
PHC (4) NA NA 0 - 
Hoshiarpur 
DH Hoshiarpur Available NA NA Available 
CHC (2) NA 2 NA 1 1 
PHC (4) NA NA 4 3 1 
 
94 PHCs at (i) Mandi Kalan; (ii) Lehra Mohabbat; (iii) Nandpur Kalour; (iv)  Bhari; (v) Nanowal; 
(vi) Ranjit Bagh; (vii)  Behrampur; (viii)  Dorangla; (ix)  Dhianpur; (x)  Swaddi Kalan; (xi)  Thathi 
Bhai; (xii) Sukhanand; and (xiii) Malianwala. 
95 PHCs at (i) Mandi Kalan; (ii) Chakowal; (iii) Paldi; (iv) Possi; (v) Mand Bhander; and (vi) Otalon. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
135 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
facility 
Availability of 
24-hour 
uninterrupted 
stabilised 
power supply 
with three 
phases and 
capacity of 75 
KVA 
generator 
Installation 
of 5 KVA 
generator 
Generator/ 
Invertor/ 
UPS 
AMC of 
available 
backup 
facility like 
generators 
and inverters 
Ludhiana 
DH Ludhiana Available NA NA Not Available 
CHC (2) NA 2 NA 1 1 
PHC (4) NA NA 1 3 1 
Moga 
DH Moga Available NA NA Not Available 
CHC (2) NA 2 NA 1 1 
PHC (4) NA NA 1 3 1 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions  NA=Not applicable 
Colour code: 
Availability Non-availability 
It was observed that 24- hour uninterrupted stabilised power supply with three  
phases and capacity of 75 KVA generator was available in all the  
test-checked DHs. AMC of backup facility like generators and inverters was 
not available in DH Ludhiana and DH Moga. Uninterrupted stabilised power 
supply was available in test -checked CHCs except CHC Bassi  Pathana.  
But AMC of generator was not available at four CHCs at  
Bhucho Mandi, Shamchaurasi, Sidhwan Bet and Nihal Singh Wala.  Out of 
test-checked 24 PHCs, power back-up was available in 1 1 PHCs (46 per cent) 
only and AMC of generator was not taken by PHC Possi.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.9 Infection Control Management 
As per Kayakalp guidelines, hospitals need to designate personnel from the 
Infection Control Committee, to conduct the activities of monitoring of 
cleanliness. The person designated for monitoring will take daily rounds after 
each cleaning cycle and will also conduct surprise rounds of the hospital to 
ensure proper cleanliness and identify any areas for improvement in the 
current practices. He/She will also be responsible for supervision of 
housekeeping activities by countersigning the checklists used for m onitoring. 
All the checklists should be displayed at relevant areas and should be 
customised to the particular area. Health institute needs to have an effective 
pest control plan for ensuring a pest and animal free environment in the 
institute. Availability of infection control services in test- checked hospitals is 
detailed in Table 3.53. 
  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
136 
Table 3.53: Availability of infection control services in RH/DHs 
Particulars 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
Availability of Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) 
Y Y N N Y Y N 
Checklist for hygiene and 
infection control 
Y Y N N Y N N 
Hospital Infection Control 
Committee (HICC) 
Y Y N Y Y Y Y 
Pest control Y Y N Y Y N Y 
Rodent control Y Y N Y Y N Y 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked health institutions (Y=Yes, N=No) 
Colour code: 
Availability Non-availability 
 
It was observed that: 
 SOPs for prevention of infection were prepared in all the test -checked 
RH/DHs except three DHs96. 
 Checklist for hygiene and infection control was not maintained in  
DHs Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur, Ludhiana and Moga.  Infection 
Control Committee was not available in DH Fatehgarh Sahib. In DH 
Ludhiana, the Hospital Infection Control Committee was formed in 
January 2018; and 
 In respect of DHs, pest and rodent control practices were not followed 
in two DHs Fatehgarh Sahib and Ludhiana. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.10 Cleaning Services  
NHM Assessor’s Guidebook requires that the hospitals should ensure 
decontamination of functional areas.  
Audit observed that out of the 43 test -checked health institutions 
(RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs), RH Patiala and six DHs  outsourced the cleaning 
services to private vendors/firms. The r emaining 12 CHCs and 24 PHCs hired 
persons locally for cleaning work. Deficiencies in cleaning services in health 
institutions noticed during joint inspection are detailed in Table 3.54. 
 
 
96 DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; and (iii) Moga. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
137 
Table 3.54: Position of cleaning services in the healthcare institutions 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars related to cleaning No. of health institutions 
RH Patiala and  
DHs (7) 
CHCs 
(11*) 
1. Cleaning register was  maintained and 
kept in every ward 
5 3 
2. Cleaning was found entered regularly in 
cleaning register 
5 3 
3. Stock of cleaning material was kept in 
the ward 
5 7 
4. Floors, walls, roofs and rooftops were 
kept neat and clean 
5 10 
5. Furniture and fixture were kept neat and 
clean 
5 10 
6. Toilets, sinks and water taps were kept 
neat and clean 
5 10 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs/CHCs 
*  Record was not produced by CHC Nihal Singh Wala. 
Note: Position of cleaning services in PHCs in respect of above parameters could not be ascertained. 
Colour code: 
 Availability in most health institutions  
 Availability in some health institutions  
 Availability in least health institutions  
Audit noticed that none of the above services/records were available in  
DHs Fatehgarh Sahib and Gurdaspur. In eight CHCs 97, neither the cleaning 
register was being maintained nor were entries of cleaning being recorded in 
cleaning registers. In four CHCs 98 stock of cleaning material was not kept in 
the ward and in CHC Fatehgarh Churian, floors, walls, roofs, rooftops, 
furniture and fixture, toilets, sinks and water taps were not neat and clean. 
Thus, hygienic conditions to the patients were compromised exposing them to 
the risk of infection. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.11 Patient Safety  
 
3.11.1 Availability of patient safety services in test -checked health 
institutions   
IPHS 2012 norms for DHs provide that Hospital Management Policy should  
lay emphasis on hospital buildings with earthquake proof, flood proof and fire 
protection features.   
As per O utcome 4.1 of National Disaster Management (NDM) Guidelines 
(Hospital Safety), 2016 “Once the detailed plans for preparedness, response 
 
97 (i) Mehraj; (ii) Amloh ; (iii) Bassi Pathana; (iv) Fatehgarh Churian ; (v) Naushera Majja Singh ; 
(vi) Shamchaurasi; (vii) Sidhwan Bet; and (viii) Bagha Purana. 
98 (i) Amloh; (ii) Bassi Pathana; (iii) Fatehgarh Churian; and (iv) Naushera Majja Singh. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
138 
and recovery have been developed, these need to be tested on ground and 
accordingly the shortfalls/gaps need to be reduced by altering and updating the 
same.” As per Rule 4.8, “Every hospital shall ensure the continuity of essential 
services in all the circumstances by ensuring adequate resources and hospital 
supplies, developing and ensuring back -up arrangement of utility services, 
having a deployable evacuation plan, coordinating and networking with 
neighbouring hospitals/healthcare institutions that can facilitate in continuing 
the essential services of the hospitals during the emergencies.” Further, as per 
Rule 8(2), “Hospitals shall acquire No Objection Certificate from the Chief 
Fire Officer.” 
National Building Code of India, 2016 (Part 4), Fire and Life Safety require 
that fire extinguishers must be installed in every hospital so that the safety of 
the patients/attendants/visitors and the hospital staff may be ensured in case of 
any fire in the hospital premises.  
Further, NHM Assessor ’s Guidelines provide that the facility should have a 
disaster management plan in place and the staff is aware of disaster plan and 
their role and responsibilities in the event of a disaster is defined. License for 
storing spirit should be available with the health facility.  
IPHS norms for DHs also suggest that Fluorescent Fire Exit plan should be 
displayed at each floor. Availability of patient safety services in the  
test-checked RH/DHs is detailed in Table 3.55. 
Table 3.55: Availability of services related to patient safety in RH/ DHs 
 
Name of service 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Gurdaspur 
DH Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
SOP is being followed in patient safety  Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Disaster management plan formulated for 
patient safety  
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Formation of disaster management committee  Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes 
Facility assigned a space or ward to manage 
additional patient load in the event of a disaster  
Yes Yes Yes No No No Yes 
Follow a periodic plan to evaluate and manage 
disasters and mass casualty incidents  
Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes 
Standard Operating Procedure for all concerned 
departments to act in an event of a disaster  
Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
Facility connected to network of referral 
facilities that will be necessary in a disaster  
No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
Provisions of detection, fire prevention, 
planning for isolation of fire and transfer of 
occupants to a place of comparative safety or 
evacuation of the occupants to achieve ultimate 
safety were in place  
Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
139 
Name of service 
RH Patiala 
DH Bathinda 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Gurdaspur 
DH Hoshiarpur 
DH Ludhiana 
DH Moga 
No Objection Certificates required to be 
obtained from the Fire Department  
Yes No Yes Yes No No Yes 
Illuminated signage for fire exit was available  
Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Availability of underground static water tank 
which should remain full at all times to meet 
any contingency had been constructed and 
utilised for the said purpose  
Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes 
Fire alarms and hose reel  had been installed to 
detect the fire and meet any contingency  
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
Excise permit to store spirit  Yes No No No No No Yes 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked RH/DHs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
Similarly, availability of patient safety services in test- checked CHCs is 
detailed in Table 3.56.  
Table 3.56: Availability of services related to patient safety in CHCs 
 
Name of service 
Bhucho Mandi 
Mehraj 
Bassi Pathana 
Amloh 
Fatehgarh 
Chaurian 
N. M. Singh 
Mahilpur 
Shamchaurasi 
Sidhwan Bet 
Sudhar 
Bagha Purana 
Nihal Singh 
Wala 
SOP is being followed in patient 
safety  
Yes No Yes Yes No No No No  Yes Yes No No 
Disaster management plan formulated 
for patient safety  
No No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No No No 
Formation of disaster management 
committee  
No No No Yes No No No Yes No Yes No No 
Facility assigned a space or ward to 
manage additional patient load in the 
event of a disaster  
Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No No 
Follow a periodic plan to evaluate and 
manage disasters and mass casualty 
incidents  
Yes No Yes No No No No Yes Yes Yes No No 
Standard Operating Procedure for all 
concerned departments to act in an 
event of a disaster  
No No Yes Yes No No No No Yes Yes No No 
Facility connected to network of 
referral facilities that will be 
necessary in a disaster  
Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No 
Provisions of detection, fire 
prevention, planning for isolation of 
fire and transfer of occupants to a 
place of comparative safety or 
evacuation of the occupants to 
achieve ultimate safety were in place  
No No Yes Yes No No No No No Yes No No 
No Objection Certificates required to 
be obtained from the Fire Department  
No No No No Yes Yes No No Yes No No No 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
140 
Name of service 
Bhucho Mandi 
Mehraj 
Bassi Pathana 
Amloh 
Fatehgarh 
Chaurian 
N. M. Singh 
Mahilpur 
Shamchaurasi 
Sidhwan Bet 
Sudhar 
Bagha Purana 
Nihal Singh 
Wala 
Illuminated signage for fire exit was 
available  
No Yes No No Yes Yes No No No No No No 
Availability of underground static 
water tank which should remain full 
at all times to meet any contingency 
had been constructed and utilised for 
the said purpose  
No Yes No No Yes No No No No No No No 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and Red depicts ‘non availability’ 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
3.11.2  Availability of fire-fighting equipment  
As per IPHS 2012 norms , fire -fighting equipment should be available, 
maintained and be readily available whenever required. Availability of fire -
fighting equipment in the test -checked health institutions is given in 
Table 3.57. 
Table 3.57: Availability of fire-fighting equipment in test-checked  
health institutions 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
institution 
Fire 
hydrant 
Smoke 
detector 
Fire 
extinguisher Sand buckets 
Patiala RH Patiala Available Available Available Available 
Bathinda DH Bathinda Available Available Available Not available 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Available Available Available Not available 
Gurdaspur DH Gurdaspur Available Available Available Not available 
Hoshiarpur DH Hoshiarpur Available Available Available Not available 
Ludhiana DH Ludhiana Available Available Available Not available 
Moga DH Moga Available Not 
available Available Not available 
Bathinda 
CHC Bhucho 
Mandi 
Not applicable 
Available Not available 
CHC Mehraj Available Available 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
CHC Bassi 
Pathana 
Available Not available 
CHC Amloh Available Not available 
Gurdaspur 
CHC Fatehgarh 
Churian Available Not available 
CHC, Naushera 
Majja Singh Available Not available 
Hoshiarpur 
CHC Mahilpur Available Not available 
CHC 
Shamchaurasi 
Available Available 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
141 
Name of 
District 
Name of health 
institution 
Fire 
hydrant 
Smoke 
detector 
Fire 
extinguisher Sand buckets 
Ludhiana 
CHC Sidhwan 
Bet Available Not available 
CHC Sudhar Available Not available 
Moga 
CHC Bagha 
Purana Available Not available 
CHC Nihal Singh 
Wala 
Available Not available 
PHCs (24), fire-fighting 
equipment available in 7 2 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked health institutions 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘availability’ and red depicts ‘non-availability’ 
It was observed that: 
Fire hydrants and fire extinguisher s were found available in all the  
test-checked RH/DHs. Sand bucket was not available in any test -checked 
DHs, however, it was available in RH Patiala.  
Fire extinguishers were available in all the test -checked CHCs and in case of 
PHCs, it was available in seven PHCs 99 only. Out of test -checked CHCs/ 
PHCs, Sand buckets were available in two CHCs (Mehraj and Shamchaurasi) 
and two PHCs (Paldi and Mand Bhandher) only.  
Thus, non- availability of adequate fire safety services at health institutions 
could result in loss of precious lives of patients, attendants, visitors and 
hospital staff besides damage to the property in case of fire exigency. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.12 Working of Drug De- addiction Centre 
To battle the menace of drugs in Punjab by treating and rehabilitating addicts, 
Drug De-addiction Centres (DDC) and Drug Rehabilitation Centres (DRC) 
were established in  the State. Further, in order to provide treatment and 
aftercare to substance users, Government of Punjab (GoP) framed 
(January 2011) the Punjab Substance Use Disorder Treatment and Counseling 
and Rehabilitation Centres Rules, 2011 (Rules), and set up five Model Drug  
De-addiction Centres (MDDC), 36 DDCs and 19 DRCs in the State. 
 
99 PHCs at (i) Possi; (ii)  Mand Bhadher ; (iii)  Chakowal; (iv)  Mansuran; (v)  Patto Hira Singh ; 
(vi) Sukha Nand; and (vii) Thathi Bai. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
142 
3.12.1 Treatment in Drug De-addiction Centres 
Position of registration of drug addict patients of five selected DHs and RH 
Patiala except DH Moga (where no drug de -addiction centre was available)  
during the period 2016-2021 is depicted in Table 3.58. 
Table 3.58: Position of registration of drug addict patients during 2016-2021 
Health 
institution 
(DH/GMCH) 
Total 
number of 
patients 
visited OPD 
Admitted 
in IPD 
Completed 
their course  
(out of 
IPD) 
Discharged on 
request without 
completion of 
course 
LAMA Absconding 
1 2 3 (4+5+6+7) 4 5 6 7 
Bathinda100 34,345 3,541 1,237 841 892 503 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib101 
39,922 1,145 699 0 366 43 
Gurdaspur 9,658 760 539 38 143 40 
Hoshiarpur 10,539 1,724 1,556 0 158 10 
Ludhiana 1,29,801 1,583 391 805 289 98 
RH Patiala 11,510 1,446 1,282 0 164 0 
Total 2,35,775 10,199 5,704 1,684 2,012 694 
Source: Test-checked DDCs 
Colour Code: Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate performance’ and Red depicts 
‘poor performance’ 
From above, it may be seen that out of total 2,35,775 OPD patients,  
10,199 patients were admitted in the healthcare centres of which only  
5,704 (56 per cent ) completed their course. Of the remaining 4,495 patients, 
1,684 (17 per cent ) patients were discharged on request without completing 
the course of de -addiction whereas 2,012 patients (20 per cent ) left against 
medical advice (LAMA) and 694 patients (7 per cent ) absconded during  
2016-2021. Thus, the objective of setting- up of DDCs for providing 
comprehensive treatment to each addicted person could not be fully achieved. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022)  the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.12.2  Shortage of staff in DDC 
Rule 14(C)(1) of the above Rules prescribes that one part time doctor,  
two counsellors, four staff nurses, three ward attendants and three security 
guards were required for proper functioning of substance use disorder 
treatment centre. 
 
100 68 patients were under treatment as of March 2021. 
101 37 patients were referred to other DDC. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
143 
In the test-checked six DDCs, Audit noticed the following: 
 Two doctors in DDC Patiala and one doctor in DDC Ludhiana  were 
posted in excess. 
 One counsellor was short each in DDC Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur 
and Hoshiarpur. 
 One staff nurse was short in DDC Gurdaspur whereas one staff nurse 
was posted in excess in RH Patiala. 
 Two ward attendants were short in DDC Fatehgarh Sahib and one each 
in DDC Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur. However, two ward attendants 
were posted in excess in DDC Bathinda.  
 One security guard was posted in excess each in Bathinda, Ludhiana 
and Patiala, whereas no security guard posted in Gurdaspur. 
The above position is indicative of lack of optimum utilisation of available 
human resources. Shortage of staff also affected the working of DDCs. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022)  the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.12.3 Drug Rehabilitation Centres 
After detoxification in a Drug De -addiction Centre, patients with substance 
abuse are shifted in the Drug Rehabilitation Centres (DRC) where food, 
medicine (as per requirement), stay, counseling by a qualified counsel lor and 
recreational facilities are available. 
The position of detoxified persons admitted in DRC in four 102 selected DHs 
(except DH Ludhiana and RH Patiala where no DRC was available) during the 
period 2016-2021 is given in Table 3.59. 
Table 3.59: Position of detoxified persons admitted in DRC 
DH/GMCH Number of drug 
addict patients 
detoxified from 
DDC 
Number of 
detoxified patients 
admitted in DRC 
Discharge 
after 
completing 
the course 
LAMA Absconding 
1 2 3 (4+5+6) 4 5 6 
Bathinda 1,237 608 231 327 50 
Fatehgarh Sahib103 699 599 201 368 27 
Gurdaspur 539 366 77 279 10 
Hoshiarpur 1,556 434 320 114 0 
Total 4,031 2,007 829 1,088 87 
Source: Test-checked DRCs 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘satisfactory performance’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate performance’ and Red 
depicts ‘poor performance’ 
 
102 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Gurdaspur; and (iv) Hoshiarpur. 
103 Three cases were referred. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
144 
Table 3.59 shows that: 
 Out of 4,031 detoxified patients, only 2,007 patients (50 per cent) were 
admitted in DRCs.  
 Out of 2,007 admitted patients, only 829 patients (41 per cent ) 
completed their course whereas 1,088 patients (54 per cent ) left the 
course against medical advice (LAMA) and 87 patients ( 5 per cent ) 
absconded during the audit period. LAMA and Absconding cases  
could be attributed to shortage of staff in DRCs, as discussed in the 
succeeding paragraph. 
Thus, the objective of setting- up of DRCs for providing comprehensive 
treatment to each addicted person could not be fully achieved. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.12.4 Shortage of staff in DRC 
Rule 14(C)(2) of the above Rules states that  one programme  officer/project 
director, three social workers/counsellors, three ward attendants, two security 
guards were required for proper functioning of Disorder Treatment and 
Counseling and Rehabilitation Centre. 
During test -check of four
104  DRCs for the audit period, Audit noticed the 
following: 
 No programme officer was posted in DRC Fatehgarh Sahib and 
Hoshiarpur. 
 Six105 counsellors were found short in four DRCs. 
 One ward attendant each in DRCs Fatehgarh Sahib and Gurdaspur was 
short whereas one ward attendant was posted in excess each in DRCs 
Bathinda and Hoshiarpur.  
 No security guard was posted in DRC Gurdaspur whereas nine security 
guards were posted in excess in three106 DRCs. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference. 
3.13 Display of Citizen Charter and other boards 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, Citizens’ Charter should be prominently displayed 
near the entrance of the facility. Further, t he building should have a prominent 
board displaying the name of the Centre in the local language at the gate and 
 
104 (i) Bathinda; (ii)  Fatehgarh Sahib ; (iii)  Gurdaspur; and (iv) Hoshiarpur. DRC was not working 
under RH Patiala and DRC was not available in Ludhiana district. 
105 Bathinda-1; Fatehgarh Sahib-2; Gurdaspur-2; and Hoshiarpur-1. 
106 Bathinda-3, Fatehgarh Sahib-1 and Hoshiarpur-5. 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
145 
on the building. It should also have prominent display boards in local language 
providing information regarding the services available/user charges/fee and 
the timings of the centre. Relevant Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) material shall be displayed at strategic locations. 
Citizen Charter including patient rights and responsibilities shall be displayed 
at OPD and Entrance in local language. 
During joint inspection, it was noticed that Citizen  Charter was not 
established/displayed in one DH Gurdaspur, four CHCs
107 and 19 PHCs108. 
In the remaining 19 health institutions, the requisite information was not found 
displayed in the Citizen Charter, as depicted in Table 3.60 and Appendix 3.4. 
Table 3.60: Details of information not displayed in the Citizen Charter 
Sr. 
No. 
Information not provided in the 
Citizen Charter 
Out of 
Five DHs and  
RH Patiala 
Eight 
CHCs 
Five 
PHCs 
1. Availability of OPD services and their 
timings (department-wise) 0 2 0 
2. Availability of diagnostic services 1 2 0 
3. Availability of emergency and trauma 
care services and mode of approach 
thereof 
0 0 2 
4. Availability of ambulance services 1 4 2 
5. Responsibilities of users 1 2 1 
6. Services not available at the facility level 4 7 5 
7. Equipment not in order 4 8 5 
8. Services available to BPL patients 1 6 1 
Source: Joint Inspection of test-checked hospitals 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘ most availability ’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate’ and Red depicts ‘least 
availability’ 
Further, the requisite display boards were also not available in some health 
institutions, as detailed in Table 3.61 and Appendix 3.5. 
Table 3.61: Position of other display boards 
 
107  (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Fatehgarh Churian; (iii) Sudhar; and (iv) Nihal Singh Wala. 
108 (i) Lehra Mohabbat ; (ii) Mandi Kalan; (iii) Bhairupa; (iv) Jodhpur Pakhar ; (v) Nandpur Kalour ; 
(vi) Sanghol; (vii) Bhari; (viii) Nanowal; (ix) Behrampur; (x) Dhianpur; (xi) Dorangla; (xii) Ranjit 
Bagh; (xiii) Ghawaddi; (xiv) Mansuran; (xv) Sowaddi Kalan ; (xvi) Otalon ; 
(xvii) Sukhanand; (xviii) Thathi Bhai; and (xix) Malianwala. 
Sr. No. Particulars of other display boards Out of 
Hospitals 
 (Seven) 
CHCs  
(12) 
PHCs  
(22*) 
1. Adequate number of notice boards detailing 
the location of all the services/departments/ 
wards was not available 
0 3 13 
2. Display board was not in simple local 
language 
0 0 9 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
146 
Source: Joint Inspection of test-checked hospitals 
* PHC Jodhpur Pakhar was not functional and joint inspection of PHC Malianwala could not be done 
due to non-availability of Medical Officer. 
Colour code : Green depicts ‘ most availability’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate availability’ and Red 
depicts ‘least availability’ 
Due to non- display of citizen s charter and other display boards at the health 
institutions, patients, attendants and visitors could not be made aware of their 
rights and responsibilities while visiting health institutions. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.14 Monitoring mechanism 
 
3.14.1 Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee 
As per Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee (VHSNC) 
guidelines, one VHSNC  is required to be constituted for every inhabited 
revenue village and these VHSNCs were required to meet at least once in a 
month for carrying out defined activities like creating awareness, preparation 
of village health plan and analysis of key issues and problems.  The details of 
VHSNCs constituted and number of meetings held during  
2016-2021 are given in Table 3.62. 
Table 3.62: Details of VHSNCs constituted and number of meetings held 
during 2016-2021 
Year Total number 
of VHSNCs 
constituted 
Number of VHSNCs 
meetings required to 
be conducted during 
the year 
Number of VHSNCs 
meetings conducted 
during the year 
Shortfall 
(percentage) 
2016-17 12,956 1,55,472 1,12,543 42,929 (28) 
2017-18 12,956 1,55,472 1,43,680 11,792 (8) 
2018-19 12,956 1,55,472 1,41,257 14,215 (9) 
2019-20 12,982 1,55,784 86,693 69,091 (44) 
2020-21 12,982 1,55,784 87,906 67,878 (44) 
Source: State Health Society data 
Colour code: Green depicts ‘least shortfall’ and Yellow depicts ‘moderate shortfall’ 
Sr. No. Particulars of other display boards Out of 
Hospitals 
 (Seven) 
CHCs  
(12) 
PHCs  
(22*) 
3. Display board was not followed at all levels 0 1 9 
4. The facility does not display the services and 
entitlements available in its departments 
2 3 13 
5. Health institutions does not display rights of 
patients 
2 5 15 
6. User charges were not displayed 1 2 16 

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
147 
Table 3.62 shows that though required number of VHSNCs were constituted 
but there was a shortfall ranging between 8 per cent  and 44 per cent  in the 
number of meetings held during the period from 2016- 17 to 2020- 21, which 
could affect the qualitative performance of activities.  
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
3.14.2 Supervision and Inspections 
(a) Internal Audit 
As per IPHS  2012 norms, Internal Audit of the services available in the  
hospital should be conducted on a regular basis (preferably quarterly) through 
hospital monitoring committee. The committee shall comprise Civil 
Surgeon/CMO, Medical Superintendent, Deputy Medical Superintendent, 
Departmental in charge, Nursing Administrator and Hospital Manager. The 
findings of audit shall be discussed in meetings of hospital monitoring 
committee and corrective and preventive action shall be taken.  
Audit, however, noticed that no internal audit was conducted in any of the 
test-checked DHs during 2016-2021. 
(b) Medical Audit  
As per IPHS 2012 norms, medical audit committee shall be constituted in the  
hospital. Audit shall be conducted on regular basis (preferably monthly). 
Sample size for audit shall be decided and records of patients shall be selected 
randomly. Records shall be evaluated for completeness against standard 
content format, clinical management of a particular case. 
However, no medical audit was conducted in any of the test -checked health 
facilities except DH Ludhiana during 2016-2021.  
(c) Social Audit 
The social audit is conducted with the objectives to look into the process of 
implementing the project, assess the quality of the infrastructure created; 
assess the basic services provided; and the satisfaction of the beneficiaries on 
the benefits provided. As per IPHS 2012 norms, social audit is required to be  
conducted through Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKS)/Hospital Management 
Committee (HMC), etc. with involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) 
and other stakeholders as per the guidelines issued by the Government of 
India. However, no social audit was conducted in any of the selected health 
facility except DH Ludhiana during 2016-2021.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
148 
(d) Disaster Preparedness Audit 
The Disaster Preparedness Audit through RKS was not conducted in any of 
the test-checked DHs during 2016-2021, as required under IPHS 2012 norms. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference.  
Had the above supervision and inspection been got done, various 
inconsistencies in the healthcare institutions, as discussed in this Report, could 
have been better monitored. 
3.15 Conclusion 
OPD services were available in all the test -checked health institutions  
but ENT OPD service in DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, General Medicine in DHs at 
Fazilka and Sri Muktsar Sahib, General Surgery in DH Sri Muktsar Sahib, 
Ophthalmology in DH Malerkotla, Obstetrics &  Gynaecology in DHs at 
Fazilka and Malerkotla, and Psychiatry OPD service in DH Amritsar were not 
available. Dental OPD service was not available in test -checked GMCH 
Patiala (RH Patiala).  However, all required OPD specialist services were not 
available in test- checked CHCs except CHCs at Mahilpur, Shamchaurasi  and 
Sudhar. OPD services were available in all the test-checked PHCs except PHC 
Jodhpur Pakhar.  Moreover, AYUSH services were not available in most of 
the test-checked CHCs/PHCs. The availability of doctors was not ensured as 
per the patient load in the health institutions. Registration and pharmacy 
counters were also not found adequate in DHs  besides non- availability of 
online registration facility in any healthcare institutions. 
All IPD services were available in selected DHs except Psychiatric service in 
DH Bathinda.  Complete IPD services , except for General Medicine, were not 
available in test -checked CHCs. Moreover, IPD services as well as beds for 
IPD were not available in eight and fifteen PHCs  respectively. Radiotherapy, 
Nephrology, Neurosurgery and Neurology IPD services were also not 
available in RH Patiala.  Negative/Positive isolation room was not available in 
test-checked RH/DHs except DH Gurdaspur. Posting of surgeons in DHs were 
not ensured according to surgery load. Moreover, piped suction and medical 
gases, heating, air -conditioning, ventilation, etc. in Operation Theatre (OT) 
was not available in half of the test -checked DHs and OT facility was not 
available in four CHCs and any test-checked PHCs. 
The Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) in  all the test- checked DHs was above 
80 per cent except DH s at Fatehgarh Sahib and Hoshiarpur. It was 
significantly high in DHs at Moga and Gurdaspur.  Efficiency of the hospital 
as indicated by Bed Turnover Rate ( BTR) was found on lower side in DH 
Fatehgarh Sahib and RH Patiala, and higher side in DHs Gurdaspur and Moga.  

Chapter-III: Healthcare Services 
149 
Discharge rate was lower in DHs at Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib and Hoshiarpur 
indicating that these hospitals were under -performing.  Referral Out Rate 
(ROR) in DH Gurdaspur was on higher side which indicated that healthcare  
facilities were not adequate in this hospital.  Leave against medical advice 
(LAMA) rate in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur and Ludhiana , and 
absconding rate in DH Fatehgarh Sahib was alarmingly high which shows that 
these hospitals could not gain trust of patients.  
In emergency services, it was noticed that  availability of Emergency 
Operation Theatre for Maternity, Orthopaedic Emergency, Burns and P lastic 
Surgery and Neurosurgery cases round the clock was not available in four 
DHs. Congestive Heart Failure service in nine CHCs, Left Ventricular Failure 
and Meningoencephalitis service in 11 CHCs were not available.  Facility of  
24 hours m anagement of emergency services such as accident, first aid, 
stitching of wounds , etc. were available only in eight out 24 test -checked 
PHCs.  
Adequate drugs were not found available in the State during COVID -19 
period and excess expenditure was also incurred by RH Patiala on purchase of 
oxygen cylinders due to non- renewal of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO)  
storage license timely. 
In maternity services, institutional births in public health facilities  remained at 
50 per cent  during the period 2016- 2022 and deliveries in private health 
facilities were increasing year to year. Labour room facility was not found 
available in eight  PHCs. C-Section deliveries were also seen higher than 
norms prescribed by WHO. National guidelines for P revention of Parent -to-
Child Transmission of HIV were not adhered to in 18 per cent  cases. Further, 
there was shortfall in conducting review of maternal deaths and neonatal 
deaths during 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
Among line and support services, health institutions up to CHC level were 
performing well in providing few services, while improvement was needed in 
most of the other services. ICU services in DHs of the State except at Fazilka, 
Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Sri Muktsar Sahib and SAS Nagar were not available.  
In diagnostic services, radiological service viz.  Radiology (except X-ray and 
ultrasonography), Cardiology (except ECG), Endoscopy and Respiratory were 
not available in DHs and Cardiac Investigation (ECG) was also not available 
in half of the test -checked CHCs as required under IPHS norms. Complete 
range of tests under pathology services was not available in any of the test-
checked health institutions and Blood storage facility was not available in any 
test-checked CHCs except CHC Sudhar. 
Dietary service was not being provided by any test -checked health institution 
to IPD patients except patients  admitted under Janani Shishu Suraksha 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
150 
Karyakram (JSSK) . Further, most of the CHCs and PHCs are required to 
improve in all these services especially in adequate supply of quality water 
and power supply. Internal control and monitoring were also found 
inadequate. 
3.16  Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may: 
(i) ensure availability of basic facilities, registration and pharmacy 
counters in OPDs of each hospital at all levels, and ensure availability 
of doctors as per patient load in the health institutions; 
(ii) ensure that all OPD services, IPD services, emergency services, OT 
services, maternity services  and ICU services as prescribed under 
IPHS norms for different health institutions are made available to the 
beneficiaries; 
(iii) create infrastructure for Kangaroo Mother Care ( KMC) and storage 
facility for expressed breast milk in the hospitals; 
(iv) ensure the basic diagnostic services as prescribed under IPHS norms 
at secondary level health facilities as well as quality of test reports; 
(v) take steps to improve and strengthen support services  also so that  
overall healthcare experience is improved; and 
(vi) strengthen the monitoring mechanism to identify strengths and 
weaknesses so as to enable the healthcare institutions to improve their 
overall functioning. 
 

151 
Chapter-IV 
 
Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and  
other consumables 
Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables constitute 
vital components for delivering comprehensive health services. The State 
Government had constituted ( April 1996) the Punjab Health Systems 
Corporation (PHSC) under PHSC Act , 1996, to procure, stock and distribute 
drugs and to purchase, maintain and allocate quality equipment to various 
health institutions.  Further, PHSC is implementing (August 2014)  a 
customised Drugs and Vaccine Distribution Management System (DVDMS) 
named ‘e-Aushadhi’ with a view to strengthening and streamlining the supply 
chain management  system for storage and distribution of drugs and 
consumables in the State of Punjab. 
Audit findings on various components of drug management  viz. availability of 
drugs, their storage, dispensation to patients and procurement in the health 
institutions are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1  Availability of essential and critical drugs, medicines and 
consumables 
As per IPHS  norms 2012, 493 drugs, lab reagents, consumables and 
disposables under 20 different categories for minimum assured services should 
be available in a District H ospital. Availability of drugs, lab reagents, 
consumables and disposables under 20 categorie s in the test- checked DHs/RH 
is as detailed in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Availability of essential Drugs, Lab Reagents, Consumables and 
Disposables in test-checked DHs/RH as of December 2022 
Sr. 
No. 
Categories Number 
required as 
per IPHS  
Availability in test-checked DHs/RH 
DH, Bathinda 
DH, Fatehgarh Sahib 
DH, Gurdaspur 
DH, Hoshiarpur 
DH, Ludhiana 
DH, Moga 
RH, Patiala 
1. Analgesic/Antipyretics/Anti Inflammatory 11 7 6 7 8 6 7 6 
2. Antibiotics & Chemotherapeutics 76 28 21 22 25 24 22 17 
3. Anti Diarrhoeal 6 3 1 2 0 1 2 0 
4. Dressing Material/Antiseptic Ointment Lotion 24 12 9 12 11 8 15 9 
5. Infusion Fluids 14 11 9 9 9 10 11 10 
6. Eye and ENT 25 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 
7. Antihistamines/Anti-allergic 12 7 4 5 6 5 5 2 
8. Drugs acting on Digestive system 20 10 8 6 7 6 7 2 
9. Drugs related to Haemopoietic or 
Hematopoietic system 4 3 1 2 2 1 2 0 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
152 
Sr. 
No. 
Categories Number 
required as 
per IPHS  
Availability in test-checked DHs/RH 
DH, Bathinda 
DH, Fatehgarh Sahib 
DH, Gurdaspur 
DH, Hoshiarpur 
DH, Ludhiana 
DH, Moga 
RH, Patiala 
10. Drugs acting on Cardiovascular system 26 10 9 10 9 12 11 8 
11. Drugs acting on Central/Peripheral Nervous 
system 40 20 15 15 18 20 19 13 
12. Drugs acting on Respiratory system 16 8 5 6 6 5 7 3 
13. Skin Ointment/Lotion, etc. 23 9 4 5 7 4 6 2 
14. Drugs acting on Uro-genital system 5 4 3 3 2 3 4 1 
15. Drugs used in Obstetrics and Gynaecology 35 13 12 14 15 16 13 6 
16. Hormonal Preparation 14 4 1 1 2 1 3 3 
17. Vitamins 24 8 7 8 11 7 10 7 
18. Other drugs and material &misc. items 83 24 26  33 26 25 35 11 
19. Emergency life-saving drugs for SNCU 12 8 6 9 7 7 8 8 
20. Other essential medicines & supplies for SNCU 23 10 10 15 11 14 17 11 
Total 493 201 158 186 184 177 206 120 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked Health Institutions 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red denotes ‘most shortage’ 
It is evident from the above t able that the availability of essential drugs, 
consumables and disposables was below 50 per cent  in all the test- checked 
DHs, which could be attributed mainly to short procurement of essential drugs 
by PHSC, as discussed in P aragraph 4.3.1.  Further, the availability of 
essential drugs, consumables and disposables was  also poor in RH Patiala 
being a tertiary healthcare institution, though IPHS norms were not applicable 
on this hospital. 
Such substantial shortage of drugs in these secondary level hospitals not only 
compromised the health of the patients  but also put extra financial burden on 
them especially those belonging to poor families. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.2 Availability of equipment in selected DHs 
Under IPHS 2012 norms, equipment norms are worked out keeping in mind 
the assured service recommended for various grades of the district hospitals. 
The equipment required are worked out under 25 different categories. Some of 
the equipment which may be available in  an ideal situation are indicated as 
Desirable while the rest are categorised as Essential.  

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
153 
During the course of audit, availability of  essential equipment 1 listed under 
18 different categories of IPHS 2012 norms for DHs and 2 categories 
involving 33 essential equipment selected from NHM Assessor’s Guidebook 
for Quality Assurance in District Hospitals which are required in DHs have 
been checked  in test- checked DHs. The details of different numbers of 
equipment prescribed and availability in DHs (as of March 2021 ) are given in 
Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Position of availability of equipment in the selected DHs  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of equipment Types of essential 
equipment required 
for hospital 
Types of equipment available in 
sampled DHs 
Bathinda  
(200 beds) 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
 (100 beds) 
Gurdaspur  
(110 beds) 
Hoshiarpur  
(200 beds) 
Ludhiana 
 (290 beds)  
Moga  
(150 beds) 
100 to 
200 
bedded 
201 to 
300 
bedded 
1. Imaging equipment  11 13 6 7 7 4 10 9 2. X-ray room accessories 
3. Cardiopulmonary equipment 12 14 0 0 1 0 9 0 
4. Labour, Neo-Natal and SNCU 
equipment 27 27 16 10 15 21 12 12 
5. General equipment for SNCU (11) 
38  38 22 0 21 20 29 23 6. Disinfection equipment for SNCU (11) 
7. Equipment for individual patient care 
in the Special Newborn Care Unit (16) 
8. Immunisation equipment 13 13 9 8 13 11 13 6 
9. ENT equipment 18 20 5 4 1 1 2 2 
10. Eye equipment 24 24 15 11 13 18 21 20 
11. Dental equipment 42 42 22 22 16 25 16 27 
12. Operation Theater equipment 21 22 7 6 4 7 8 9 
13. Laboratory equipment 51 51 15 12 16 15 22 25 
14. Surgical equipment sets 43 53 14 9 2 12 20 14 
15. Endoscopy equipment 3 7 1 1 0 0 0 1 
16. Anaesthesia equipment 15 16 10 5 7 5 13 7 
17. Post-mortem equipment 7 7 5 4 2 5 5 7 
18. ICU equipment 10 10 0 0 4 0 8 0 
19. Emergency services equipment 14 14 11 8 10 7 12 6 
20. IPD equipment 19 19 12 11 6 18 7 9  
Total 368 390 170 118 138 169 207 177 
 Shortage 198 250 230 199 183 191 
 Shortage in percentage 54 68 63 54 47 52 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked DHs 
Colour code: 
Good Average Poor 
Table 4.2 shows that: 
 There was a huge shortage of various types of equipment ranging between 
47 per cent and 68 per cent in test-checked DHs with substantial shortage 
in DHs Fatehgarh Sahib (68 per cent) and Gurdaspur (63 per cent).  
 
1 3 35 and 357 essential equipment are required for 100 to 200 bedded and 201 to 300 bedded district 
hospital respectively.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
154 
 The major shortage of equipment in test -checked DHs was in 
Cardiopulmonary, ENT, Operation Theat re, Laboratory, Surgical and 
Endoscopy equipment. 
 Shortage of ICU equipment in DH Gurdaspur  and DH Ludhiana was  
60 per cent  and 20 per cent respectively.  No ICU equipment was  
available in other test-checked DHs.  
4.2.1 Shortage of equipment in RH, Patiala  
National Medical Council norms also prescribe 926 types of essential 
equipment in clinical departments of Government Medical College and 
Hospital. 
In RH Patiala, again st the requirement of  926 types of equipment, only 
555 equipment ( March 2021) were available. Thus, there was a shortage of 
40.06 per cent in various types of equipment (Appendix 4.1). 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.2 Shortage of equipment in CHCs/PHCs 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe  32 types of essential equipment for CHC and 
26 types of equipment for PHC.  Status of equipment in test -checked 
CHCs/PHCs (March 2021) is given in Appendix 4.2 and Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Availability of equipment in test-checked CHCs/PHCs 
Healthcare 
Facility 
CHCs/ PHCs 
without any 
shortfall 
CHCs/ PHCs with shortfall (per cent) 
1 to 25% 26 to 50% 51 to 75% 76 to 99% 100% 
CHCs (12) 0 9 1 2 0 0 
PHCs (22*) 0 9 8 4 1 0 
Source: Test-checked CHCs/PHCs 
* Data in respect of two PHCs viz. Jodhpur Pakhar and Nanowal was not provided to Audit. 
Audit noticed that non- availability of types of eq uipment varied from  
9 per cent to 53 per cent  in sampled CHCs with highest shortage in CHC s at 
Naushera Majja Singh and Mahilpur. In PHCs, it was from 4 per cent  to 
77 per cent and highest shortage was noticed in PHC, Thathi Bhai. 
Acute shortage of equipment at various level s such as RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs 
adversely affected the services of healthcare institutions. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
155 
4.3 Procurement of drugs/medicines 
Timely supply of drugs of good quality, which involves procurement as well 
as logistics management, is of critical importance in any health system.  
As mentioned earlier , the State Government established (April 1996) Punjab 
Health Systems Corporation (PHSC ) for purchase of drugs, consumables and 
equipment (including installation and maintenance) for various health 
institutions in the State. PHSC  operates “Online Drug Inventory and Supply 
Chain Management System”. Field units make online demand for medicines  
through this system on the basis of which PHSC  procures medicines. 
However, in case of medicines, consumables , etc. in short supply or  
non-availability in the Drug Warehouse, the health institutions could procure 
these medicines locally. 
4.3.1 Short procurement of essential drugs by PHSC 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe availability of 394 essential drugs/medicines 
(excluding re agents, consumables and disposables)  under 18 categories in 
hospitals. However, Punjab Health Systems Corporation (PHSC) had prepared 
and approved 214 to 235 drugs only as a list of Essential Dr ugs (EDL)   
during 2016- 17 to 2021- 22. Moreover, no drug/medicine was approved  
category-wise. 
Essential drugs approved and procured by PHSC during the period 2016- 17 to 
2021-22 is shown in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Position of essential drugs purchased by PHSC 
Period No. of essential 
drugs required 
as per IPHS 
norms 
No. of essential drugs approved and 
purchased by PHSC 
Short 
procurement of 
drugs as per 
IPHS norms 
(%age)  
Approved Purchased Not purchased 
(%age) 
2016-17 394 214 205 9 (4) 189 (48) 
2017-18 394 226 196 30 (13) 198 (50) 
2018-19 394 226 181 45 (20) 213 (54) 
2019-20 394 235 213 22 (9) 181 (46) 
2020-21 394 235 203 32 (14) 191 (48) 
2021-22 394 235 189 46 (20) 205 (52) 
Source: PHSC data 
Table 4.4 shows that all the essential drugs as  required under IPHS norms 
were not procured by PHSC and the short procurement ranged between 
46 per cent and 54 per cent  during 2016- 2022.  Moreover, PHSC could not 
procure its own approved essential drugs ranging between 4  per cent  and  
20 per cent. The short availability of drugs  and consumables in various health 
institutions could be attributed to short/delayed supply of drugs and 
consumables, as discussed in Paragraphs 4.3.3.2, 4.3.3.4 and 4.3.3.5. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
156 
The Department , while admitting  the facts, stated (December 2022) that all 
efforts were being made to ensure maximum availability of drugs at the 
facility level as per requirements/norms for the concerned level of hospital 
facility. It was also stated that recently the eligibility criteria for the medicines 
had been reviewed/revised and it was  expected that the position would further 
improve.  
4.3.2 Non-procurement of approved essential drugs under Janani 
Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram 
As per Guidelines of Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK), drugs are 
required to be given free of cost to pregnant women during Ante -Natal Care 
(ANC), Intra -Natal Care (INC), Post -Natal Care (PNC) which includes 
management of normal delivery, C -section and complications during 
pregnancy and childbirth. The same is also needed when a neonate is sick and 
needs urgent and priority treatment. 
JSSK guidel ines prescribe availability of 9 3 essential drugs in hospitals, but 
PHSC had approved 48 to 65 essential drugs under the Karyakaram during  
2016-2022. Moreover, PHSC could not make available even its own approved 
essential drugs. Details of non-procurement/short procurement of drugs under  
JSSK is detailed in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Position of procurement of drugs under JSSK scheme by PHSC 
Period No. of drugs 
required as 
per JSSK 
guidelines 
No. of essential drugs approved and 
purchased by PHSC 
Short procurement 
of drugs as per 
JSSK guidelines 
(%age) 
Approved Purchased Not procured 
(%age) 
2016-17 93 48 37 11 (23) 56 (60) 
2017-18 93 57 33 24 (42) 60 (65) 
2018-19 93 57 40 17 (30) 53( 57) 
2019-20 93 65 44 21 (32) 49 (53) 
2020-21 93 65 41 24 (37) 52(56) 
2021-22 93 65 47 18 (28) 46(49) 
Source: PHSC data 
It is evident from Table 4.5 that: 
(i) Essential drugs ranging between 49 per cent and 65 per cent under JSSK 
guidelines were not procured by PHSC during the period 2016-2022; and 
(ii) Moreover, even essential  drugs ranging between 23 per cent  and  
42 per cent  approved by PHSC under JSSK were also not procured  
during the same period. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
157 
Further, five essential drugs 2 were those which were not procured by PHSC 
throughout the audit period 2016-2022. 
Acute shortage of essential drugs reflects poor performance of healthcare  
institutions compromising the health of the patients.  
The Department , while admitting  the facts, stated (December 2022) that all 
efforts were being made to ensure maximum availability of drugs under the 
JSSK programme at the concerned level of hospital facility through S tate HQ. 
If any essentially required item under JSSK could not be procured and 
supplied through State HQs, the same was  being procured at local level by the 
hospitals as such items are generally those items for which either other 
alternatives were available or consumption was  very less. The reply of the 
Department is not tenable as even after the procurement of drugs by the 
concerned hospital s, the required essential drugs under JSSK could not be 
provided, as mentioned under Paragraphs 4.3.2.1 and 4.3.4.3. 
4.3.2.1 Shortage of EDL under JSSK in healthcare institutions 
JSSK Guidelines prescribe availability of 9 3 essential drugs in hospitals, but 
PHSC had approved EDL for JSSK containing 48 to 65 drugs only during the 
period from 2016- 17 to 2020-21. Moreover, PHSC could not make available 
even its own approved essential drugs and the position of shortages in the six 
DHs and RH Patiala was as detailed in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Position of essential drugs under JSSK scheme in selected DHs  
and RH-Patiala 
Year 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
No. of drugs enlisted in EDL 48 57 57 65 65 
No. of drugs not available throughout 
the year 8 to 34 5 to 43 5 to 46 5 to 50 5 to 49 
Number of drugs not available for upto 
two months 1 to 5 1 to 5 2 to 4 1 to 10 1 to 6 
Number of drugs not available for two 
to four months 1 to 5 1 to 6 1 to 12 3 to 6 3 to 9 
Number of drugs not available for 
more than four months but less than 
one year 
2 to 16 1 to 15 2 to 13 8 to 19 6 to 25 
Source: Data from test-checked hospitals/RH-Patiala 
It is evident from Table 4.6 that: 
 Against the required essential drugs, 5 to 50 drugs were not available in 
test-checked six DHs and RH Patiala during the period 2016-2021.  
 
2   (i) Amoxycillin 250 mg + Cloxacillin 250 mg  + Lactobacillus Spores 60 Million Cap/Tab ;  
(ii) Levo Salbutamol Respirator 0.31 mg; (iii) Misoprost Tab 25 mcg/ 200 mcg; (iv) Nitrofurantoin 
150 mg SR Tab; and (v) Zinc Sulphate 20 mg/5ml syrup. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
158 
 As many as 1 to 10 drugs, 1 to 12 drugs and 1 to 25 drugs were found 
out of stock for up to two months, for two to four months and for more 
than four months but less than one year respectively. 
Similarly, shortage of essential drugs under JSSK in the test -checked CHCs is 
detailed in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Position of essential drugs under JSSK in selected CHCs 
Year 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
No. of drugs enlisted in EDL 48 57 57 65 65 
No. of drugs not available throughout 
the year 20 to 48 33 to 57 32 to 57 32 to 65 27 to 65 
Number of drugs not available for up to 
two months 2 to 13 3 to 6 0 to 5 1 to 5 1 to 5 
Number of drugs not available for two 
to four months 2 to 3 1 to 3 2 to 8 1 to 5 1 to 7 
Number of drugs not available for more 
than four months but less than one year 1 to 14 2 to 13 1 to 16 2 to 24 1 to 20 
Source: Data from test-checked CHCs 
From Table 4.7 it may be seen that: 
 Against the required essential drugs, 20 to 65 drugs were not available in 
test-checked CHCs throughout the period during 2016-2021.  
 Further, 1 to 13 drugs, 1 to 8 drugs and 1 to 24 drugs were found out of 
stock for the period up to two months, for two to four months and for 
more than four months but less than one year respectively. 
CHC Fatehgarh Churian did not produce stock register for the period 2017-18. 
In CHCs of Bhucho Mandi and Mehraj, no essential drug was found available 
during the period 2016-2021. 
Thus, due to non/short availability of essential drugs in the healthcare 
institutions, core objective of the JSSK of providing free medicines to the 
common man was defeated as the Department  failed to provide even the 
minimum essential drugs.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.3.3 Irregularities in supply of medicine 
4.3.3.1 Irregular purchase of drugs from the suppliers whose sample were 
declared failed two or more times consecutively 
Clause 15(ii)(d) of DNIT for purchase of drug s/consumables provides that  if 
two or more batches of the same drug of a manufacturer fail consecutively on 
testing, the concerned manufacturer will be debarred for the concerned item. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
159 
Further, if sample of two or more drugs of a manufacturer fails consecutively, 
the manufacturer will be debarred and prosecution proceedings will be 
launched against such manufacturer. 
Audit noticed from the data of e -Aushadhi that four drugs were supplied by 
four suppliers, but two or more batches of drugs supplied by them were found 
failed, as detailed in Table 4.8.  PHSC, instead of debarring the suppliers, 
again purchased the same drugs  from them ignoring the terms and conditions  
of DNIT ibid. 
Table 4.8: Details of batches of drugs declared failed 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Medicine No. of batches 
declared failed 
Month & year in 
which batches failed 
Month & year of 
next purchase 
1. Tab. Atenolol 50 mg 2 March 2017 August 2017 
2. Inj Lignocaine  5 April-June 2018 2019-20 
3. Tab. Pantoprazole 40mg 11 March 2020 December 2020 
4. Tab. Calcium 500 mg 3 September 2020 November 2020 
Source: PHSC data 
In one case, samples of two drugs 3 supplied by one supplier were found failed 
in quality tests consecutively during the year 2019- 20 but  the drugs were 
continuously being purchased from the said supplier even after  receipt of the 
test reports. Instead of debarring and initiating prosecution proceedings against 
the supplier, purchases were made from this supplier in the subsequent year 
which is against the provisions ibid. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  replied (December 2022) that  
the test report of each batch as referred in the audit observations is being 
checked and detailed reply would be furnished on the basis of actual facts. 
Final reply is awaited.  
4.3.3.2 Non-supply of drugs and consumables by suppliers 
As per Clause 22(b) of the r ate contract, delivery in case of medicine and 
Inj/IV fluid in normal circumstances must be completed within 45 and 60 days 
respectively and in emergent requirements, the suppliers shall have to deliver 
the material within 30 days or even earlier and in such cases the supplier must 
ensure to deliver the material within the period mentioned in the purchase 
order from the issue of award and on receipt of the order. Further,  
Clause 34A(b) of the r ate contract also provides that if the supplier  fails to 
execute the supplies during the currency of rate contract, he shall be liable to 
be debarred for the next three years. 
During scrutiny of records, it was noticed that PHSC issued supply orders 
during the period 2020 -2022 to 24 suppliers for the supply of 32 drugs/ 
 
3 Iron folic acid drops (each ml contains 20 mg iron and 100 micro gm folic acid); and iron and folic 
acid small tablet (45mg elemental iron and 400 micrograms folic acid). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
160 
consumables amounting to ₹ 6.36 crore (Appendix 4.3) , but no drugs/  
consumables were supplied by the suppliers till date (November 2022) and no 
action was taken by PHSC  against the suppliers  under terms and conditions  
ibid. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department replied (December 2022) that  
most of the medicines reflected in the audit observation pertained to the orders 
placed during COVID  period (2020-21) and GoI ha d advised to consider the 
condition as force majeure, however, notices were issued from time to time to 
the concerned suppliers who had failed to supply the material but no harsh 
action of debarring was taken for non- supply considering the situation.  
The reply of the Department  is not convincing as no documents in support of  
reply were provided. 
4.3.3.3 Loss due to expiry of drugs 
As per Standard D2 of NHM Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance, 
scientific management of the inventory is to be adhered, so that drugs and 
consumables are available in adequate quantity in patient care area. 
Measurable elements of this standard look into processes of indenting, 
procurement, storage, expired drugs management, inventory management, 
stock management at patient care areas, including storage at optimum 
temperature. While assessing drug management system, these practices should 
be looked into in each clinical department, especially at the nursing stations 
and its complementary process at drug stores/ pharmacy. Further, as per   
Rule 2.10(a)(1) of Punjab Financial Rule s (PFR), same vigilance should be 
exercised in respect of expenditure incurred from Government revenues, as a 
person of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of expenditure of his 
own money. 
Scrutiny of data of e -Aushadhi portal revealed that various drugs involving 
140 batches of ₹ 6.57 crore expired (between July 2015 and July 2021) at 
DWHs
4 prior to supply/iss uance to the health institutions. Expiry of drugs 
prior to issuance is in violation of provisions ibid  and resulted in loss to the 
State exchequer. Moreover, these expired drugs were also not disposed of. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(December 2022) that as per past experience continuous improvisation was 
being made to ensure that there was no drug left unconsumed at time of 
expiry. It was also added that a s a step i n this direction , orders were being 
placed only for 3- 6 months requirements w ith effect from  the year 2020 and 
therefore the position had improved significantly in this regard.  
 
4 Drug Warehouses at Amritsar, Bathinda and Kharar. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
161 
4.3.3.4 Short levy of liquidated damages and non-cancellation of order 
As per Clause 23 (a) of tender documents, if the successful bidder fails to 
execute the supply order within the stipulated period, penalty at the rate of  
0.25 per cent per day of the value of the order not supplied will be levied. The 
maximum cap of liquidated damages is 15 per cent  of contract value of goods 
not supplied/supplied with delay. Once the maximum penalty/liquidated 
damages limit is reached, the order shall stand cancelled automatically.  
Short levy  of liquidated damage s: Audit noticed that PHSC issued the 
supply order (June 2017) to supply two medicines 5 within 30 days .  
These medicines were supplied by the supplier with a delay ranging between   
28 and 67 days  after the due date , but PHSC imposed liquidated damage s 
amounting to ₹ 0.02 crore  treating the delay ranging between 3 and  
37 days only. This resulted in short levy of liquidated damages of ₹ 0.06 crore 
(₹ 0.08 crore - ₹ 0.02 crore), as detailed in Table 4.9. 
Table 4.9: Details of short levy of Liquidated Damages (LD) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of 
medicine 
Name of 
DWH 
Value of 
medicines 
supplied 
Cut-off 
date to 
supply 
medicine 
Date of 
supply 
Period of 
delay beyond 
cut-off date 
Amount of LD 
imposed 
Amount of 
LD required 
to be imposed 
Short levy of 
LD 
Tab. 
Cefpodoxime 
200 mg 
Amritsar 
(Verka) 
32,50,800.00 14.7.2017 16.8.17 33 days 
 
24,381.00 
(for 3 days) 
2,68,191.00 2,43,810.00 
Bathinda 32,50,800.00 14.7.2017 11.8.17 28 days 0.00 2,27,556.00 2,27,556.00 
Kharar 13,49,082.00 
 
2,76,318.00 
14.7.2017 
 
14.7.2017 
19.9.17 
 
3.11.17 
67 days 
 
112 days 
1,24,790.00 
(for 37 days) 
77,369.00 
(for 112 days) 
2,25,971.00 
 
77,369.00 
1,01,181.00 
 
0.00 
Tab. 
Carbamezapine 
200 mg 
Amritsar 
(Verka) 
1,49,310.00 14.7.2017 16.8.17 33 days 
 
1,120.00 
(for 3 days) 
12,318.00 11,198.00 
Bathinda 1,11,982.50 14.7.2017 11.8.17 28 days 0.00 7,839.00 7,839.00 
Kharar 1,11,982.50 14.7.2017 19.9.17 67 days 
 
10,358.00 
(for 37 days) 
18,757.00 8,399.00 
Total 85,00,275.00    2,38,018.00 8,38,001.00 5,99,983.00 
Source: PHSC data/information 
Non-cancellation of order: Further, in respect of 47 supply orders (during 
2016-2021 except 2018-19) of drugs valuing ₹ 2.99 crore, it was noticed that  
the suppliers failed to supply the requisite drugs within prescribed timeframe 
and the drugs were supplied with delays ranging between 61 and  
253 days after the lapse of prescribed time frame. As maximum cap of 
liquidated damages of 15 per cent  (0.25 * 60 days)  of penalty is reached with 
delay of 60 days after prescribed timeline, the cap had already been reached in 
the instant cases and orders were required to be cancelled as per the terms and 
conditions of the contracts.  
 
5 (i) Tab. Cefpodoxime 200 (10X10 strip): 25 lakh; and (ii) Tab. Carbam azepine 200 mg  
(10X10 strip): five lakh. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
162 
Audit noticed that PHSC, instead of cancelling the order of the suppliers, 
accepted the drugs even after the delay which is in violation of terms and 
conditions of the contract. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.3.3.5 Short supply of Drugs and Consumables  
As per Clause 23(h) of the tender document for r ate contract (RC) “if the 
articles are not supplied by the schedule d date full or in part, the order in 
respect of the quantity not supplied is liable to be cancelled at the contractor ’s 
risk and expense. Further, as per note under Clause 34-A(b), if the firm fails to 
execute the supplies during the currency of the rate contract, it shall be liable 
to be debarred for the next three years”. 
Scrutiny of data of e -Aushadhi revealed that against 107 supply orders issued 
to 78 suppliers by PHSC for the supply of drugs and consumables amounting 
to ₹ 32.94 crore during 2016-2022, the suppliers supplied drugs and 
consumables amounting to ₹ 20.50 crore only resulting in short supply of 
material of ₹ 12.44 crore as detailed in Table 4.10, but no action was taken by 
PHSC against these suppliers as required ibid. 
Table 4.10: Position of drugs supplied by the supplier against the supply order 
Year Number of supply 
orders against 
which material 
supplied short 
No. of 
suppliers 
involved 
Value of supply 
orders issued 
(₹ in crore) 
Total value of material 
supplied against column-4 
(₹ in crore) 
1 2 3 4 5 
2016-17 23 17 4.32 3.01 
2017-18 28 21 11.31 8.09 
2018-19 13 9 3.76 1.79 
2019-20 22 13 5.97 3.49 
2020-21 17 14 3.98 2.66 
2021-22 4 4 3.60 1.46 
Total 107 78 32.94 20.50 
Source: PHSC data 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.3.3.6 Irregular purchase of Vaccine  
As per Clause 40(a) of the tender document for rate contract (RC) of 
medicines, each batch of medicines will be got tested by the 
empanelled/Government laboratories. Testing charges on actual basis will be 
deducted from the payment of the suppliers. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
163 
Audit noticed that PHSC entered (December 2019) into a rate contract  with a 
supplier for the supply of vaccine ‘Inj. Anti Rabies Vaccine (ARV)  
(Cell Culture)’ which was valid for six months from the date of issue of RC 
i.e. up to June 2020. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that PHSC irregularly procured the above vaccine 
of ₹ 3.53 crore from the supplier in August 2020 and February 2021 even after  
the expiry of rate contract /without entering into new RC . Further, samples of 
this vaccine were not got tested after receiving from the supplier on the basis 
that vaccines provided by the supplier were got tested by him from National 
Control Laboratory Kasauli, being a Government Laboratory and so there was 
no need for Central Quality Control Cell (CQCC) reports. Due to inaction of 
PHSC, the supplied vaccines escaped the mandatory quality -check as per the 
provisions ibid.  Thus, undue favour was given to the supplier by procuring 
drugs after expiry of RC , besides not  getting the quality of medicines tested  
from the empanelled/Government laboratories by PHSC. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.3.3.7 Delivery of drugs/consumables with short shelf-life 
As per Drug Policy (2012-13) of the State Government and terms and 
conditions of the r ate contracts, the material (Drugs/Consumables) supplied 
should have five-sixth (5/6
th) shelf life remaining at the time of delivery. 
Mention was made in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India on Social, General and Economic Sectors (Non- PSUs) - Government of 
Punjab, for the year ended 31 March 2018, regarding acceptance of 
drugs/consumables with short shelf life (Paragraph 2.1.7).  
Scrutiny of data of e-Aushadhi portal revealed that Drug Warehouses6 (DWH) 
accepted drugs/consumables in 1,858 cases with shorter  shelf-life ranging  
up to 1,291 days at  the time of delivery during the period from 2016-17  
to 2022- 23 (up to September 2022). This was an undue advantage to the  
suppliers as drugs/consumables  delivered with  less shelf-life was in 
contravention of the terms and conditions of the rate contracts.  Besides, less  
shelf-life could also lead to early expiry of drugs/consumables, as discussed in 
Paragraph 4.3.3.3. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
 
6 (i) Bathinda (597) ranging between 1 to 972 days; (ii)  Kharar (628) ranging between 1 and 
1,291 days; and (iii)  Verka (Amritsar) (633) ranging between 1 and 972 days. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
164 
4.3.4 Quality control mechanism in respect of drugs 
As per Punjab Procurement Policy, the Punjab Health Systems Corporation 
shall be the Nodal Agency for procurement of medicines, m aterial, machinery 
and equipment, f urniture, etc. for whole of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare , Punjab and its different wings. The detailed rules and 
regulations are provided in the Procurement Policy to purchase the drugs/ 
consumables and medical equipment . Appendix to Paragraph 15 of procedure 
for procurement of drugs/consumables provides that the tender document 
should contain the detail ed process that will be followed for carrying out 
inspection/testing of the medicines/material. 
4.3.4.1  Supply of medicines without testing 
As per Clause 40(b) of the tender document for procurement of medicines and  
the running Rate Contract (RC), ‘Regular and random testing of material will 
be undertaken from Government/Government approved laboratories at the 
time of supply and at any time during the shelf life or whenever any defect is 
noticed’. 
Audit noticed that 311 batches of drugs and consumables were supplied by  
89 suppliers during 2018-2020 and the same were issued to the health 
institutions by the Drug Warehouses (DWH) without getting these drugs and 
consumables tested by the empanelled /Government approved laboratory 
nominated by the PHSC. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  replied (December 2022) that 
sometimes due to urgency of requirements, the drugs are issued without 
testing with the approval of the competent authority and in the meantime 
testing wherever applicable is carried out. The reply of the Department  is not 
in line with the terms and conditions ibid .  Moreover, issuance of drugs 
without testing may cause risk to the patients’ health.  
4.3.4.2 Supply of NOSQ drugs to the health institutions 
Clause 15(ii)(a&c) of DNIT for purchase of drugs/consumables provides that 
if any supply against the Rate Contract is found to be not of standard quality 
(NOSQ) on test analysis from approved laboratory, the contractor will be 
liable to replace the entire quantity or make full payment of entire 
consignment against the particular invoice irrespective of fact that part or  
whole of the supplied stores may have been consumed and if the contractor  
fails to replace the batch declared to be NOSQ or fails to make payment in lieu 
of that, the contractor is liable to be debarred for two years in respect of one or 
more or all the items in the rate contract of the DHFW, Punjab. 
Audit noticed from the data of e -Aushadhi in PHSC that samples of  
126 batches of 26 drugs were found failed during 2016-2021. O ut of these,  

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
165 
26 batches of 10 drugs7 were further supplied to the health institutions by 
Drug Warehouses instead of getting it replaced from the suppliers.  
It was also noticed that  out of these 26 batches, 17 batches  of nine drugs were 
supplied to the health institutions even after the receipt of test report.  
During test -check, audit noticed that five such NOSQ drugs involving  
11 batches were consumed in RH Patiala, DH Ludhiana and CHCs  at Sudhar 
and Sidhwan Bet. 
Issuance of NOSQ drugs for the consumption of patients indicate poor internal 
control mechanism compromising the health of the patients. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department replied (December 2022) that 
the test report of each batch as referred to in the audit observations is being 
checked and detailed reply would be furnished on the basis of actua l facts. 
Final reply was awaited.  
4.3.4.3  Non-conducting of sample test and not obtaining of test reports 
for locally purchased medicines/drugs 
The drugs are to be procured centrally at PHSC level for ensuring availability 
of these medicines at all health institutions of Punjab State. Further, as per 
Clause 40(a) of tender document for Rate Contract (RC) as well as terms and  
conditions of supply orders being issued by PHSC , the supplied material 
should be accompanied with test reports in respect of each batch from NABL 
accredited laboratory and the material supplied will also be got tested by the 
PHSC from Government laboratory/empanelled laboratories after the receipt 
of material and testing charges on actual basis will be deducted from the 
payment of the suppliers. Condition 15(ii)(a) of tender document provides that 
if any supply against the Rate Contract are found to be not of standard quality 
on test analysis from approved laboratory and/or on inspection by competent 
authority, the contractor will be liable to replace the entire quantity or make 
full payment of entire consignment against the particular invoice irrespective 
of fact that part or whole of the supplied stores may have been consumed.  
However, in case of medicines, etc. in short supply or not available in the 
Drug Warehouse, the health institutions could procure these medicines locally. 
Test-check of records of district hospitals (except DH Moga) showed that DHs 
had procured medicines/drugs/consumables from the local market and rates 
contract firms valuing ₹ 17.78 crore during the period 2016-2022. These drugs 
 
7 (i) Glutaraldehyde Sol. I.P 2% ; (ii) Levo cetirizine Tab 5 mg ; (iii) Calcium (Calcium Carbonate 
1.25 gm equivalent to 500 mgs of elemental calcium,  cholecalciferol (Vit D- 3 staboosed) 250 IU 
tab; (iv) Ribavirin 200mg Cap;  (v) Albendazole Tab (400 mg) ; (vi) Iron and Folic Acid Small  
(45 mg elemental iron and 400 microgram folic acid) - Pink color ; (vii) Iron Folic Acid Drops  
(each m l contains 20 mg iron and 100 microgram folic acid) ; (viii) Pantoprazole Tab 40 mg ;  
(ix) Syrup Zinc Sulphate 20mg/ 5ml; and (x) Drop Paracetamol 100mg/ml with dropper. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
166 
were purchased local ly and were not accompanied by any test reports  
(except DH Ludhiana). Further, neither was  any quality testing of the drugs 
undertaken nor was  any sample got tested separately in accredited 
laboratories. 
In the absence of quality testing  of drugs, hospitals were unaware about 
quality of drugs supplied to the patients. Thus, f ailure to ensure quality testing 
diluted the mechanism for supply of quality drugs to the patients  in the 
hospitals. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
4.4 Storage of drugs 
Drugs and Cosmetic Rules , 1945 stipulate parameters for the storage of drugs 
in stores to maintain the efficacy of the procured drugs before issue to patients. 
The norms and par ameters prescribed in the said r ules were, however, not 
adhered to as observed during joint physical verification (January-May 2022) 
of pharmacies in the test- checked RH/DHs/CHCs/PHCs as detailed in  
Table 4.11. 
Table 4.11: Deficiencies in storage of drugs  
Sr. 
No. 
Parameters Deficiency in number of selected 
healthcare institutions 
Total 
(40) 
Shortage 
(per cent) 
Probable impact of not 
adhering to parameter 
RH 
(one) 
DHs 
(six) 
CHCs 
(12) 
PHCs 
(218) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8=7/40*100 9 
1. Air-conditioned pharmacy 1 2 4 15 22 55 Loss of efficacy and 
shelf-life of drugs 
2. Labelled shelves/racks 1 2 2 7 12 30 High turnover time in 
the disbursement of 
drugs 
3. Away from water and heat 0 0 0 0 0 0 Loss of efficacy and 
shelf-life of drugs 
4. Drugs stored above the floor 0 1 1 0 2 5 -do- 
5. Drugs stored away from walls 0 0 1 2 3 8 -do- 
6. 24-hour temperature recording 
of cold storage area 
1 2 4 11 18 45 -do- 
7. Display instructions for 
storage of vaccines 
1 2 3 9 15 38 -do- 
8. Functional temperature 
monitoring device in freezers 
1 0 1 5 7 18 -do- 
9. Maintenance of temperature 
chart of deep freezers 
1 1 3 5 10 25 -do- 
10. Drugs kept under lock and key 0 0 2 1 3 8 Misuse of costly drugs 
11. Poisons kept in a locked 
cupboard 
0 0 0 2 2 5 Unauthorised access to 
dangerous drugs 
12. Expired drugs stored 
separately 
0 1 2 5 8 20 Mixing of expired drugs 
with usable drugs 
Source: Test-checked hospitals 
 
8 Joint inspection in respect of three PHCs could not be carried out, as one PHC Jodhpur Pakhar was 
not functional and Medical Officer in two PHCs Malianwala and Bhairupa was not available.  

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
167 
Table 4.11 shows that several major deficiencies (up to 55 per cent ) were 
present in the system of drug storage in the test -checked RH/DHs, CHCs and 
PHCs; thus, efficacy of drugs distributed to the patients could not be assured. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.4.1 Non-availability of adequate medicine counter in o utpatient 
department 
According to IPHS 2012 norms, for every 200 OPD  patients daily , there 
should be one counter for dispensing medicine. 
All test-checked health institutions had counters within the benchmark except 
four DHs at Fatehgarh Sahib, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana and Moga. The average 
OPD load per day at these DHs was around 150 to 950 OPD s (2016-2022).  
However, only one to two drugs dispensing counters were available in these 
DHs
9 against required three to five counters. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
4.5  Procurement of equipment and their maintenance 
 
4.5.1 Annual maintenance of equipment 
PHSC signed (January 2017) an agreement with a Service Provider for 
maintenance of Biomedical Equipment in all public healthcare delivery 
institutions w ith effect from  July 2016.  As per agreement, PHSC will pay 
service charges at the rate of  7.34 per cent  per year of  Inventory plus  
Service Tax/GST. 
4.5.1.1 Avoidable expenditure incurred on mapping of equipment 
As per Paragraph 7(b) of agreement, the service provider was required to have 
a physical m apping of equipment up to PHC level within three months 
commencing from 1
st July 2016. Further, Rule 15.4(a) of PFR  (Vol. I) 
provides that all materials received should be examined, counted, measured or 
weighed, as the case may be, when delivery is taken, and should be taken in 
charge by a responsible Government employee who should see that the 
quantities are correct and their quality is good, and record a certificate to this 
effect. The Government employee receiving the stores should also be required 
to give a certificate that he has actually received the materials and recorded 
them in the appropriate stock registers. 
 
9 (i) DH Fatehgarh Sahib (available two/required four) ; (ii)  DH Hoshiarpur (a vailable one/required 
five); (iii)  DH Ludhiana (a vailable two/required five) ; and (iv) DH Moga (a vailable one/required 
three). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
168 
Scrutiny of records revealed that: 
(i) Service provider completed the mapping of inventory comprising  
136 types of equipment costing ₹ 199.55 crore (functional  and  
non-functional equipment: ₹ 142.17 crore, equipment under AMC/CMC: 
₹ 40.21 crore and equipment under warranty: ₹ 17.17 crore)  between  
July-September 2016 for which PHSC paid ₹ 3.00 crore to the service  
provider.  
(ii) Further, no information was availabl e on record regarding the visits to  
health institutions by the service provider as a result of which it could not 
be ascertained whether all the equipment up to root level had been 
mapped. 
(iii) Out of 136 types of m apped equipment, valuation of 72 types of 
equipment was assessed at ₹ 71.75 crore on hypothetical basis instead of 
actual book value. This shows  that mapping of equipment had been made 
on inventory price fixed by the service provider in its own manner , 
thereby indicating probable excess payment of service charges on this 
account. It was also seen that a suggestion was given (December 2016) by 
the Managing Director (MD) of PHSC to form a high- level committee 
under the chairmanship of ACS to resolve the issues of  quantity and cost 
of equipment mapped by the service provider. However, PHSC failed to 
form a high-powered committee for proper fixation of inventory price.  
The PHSC stated (November 2022) that the prices of maximum equipment 
were taken as per purchases made by them and the Asset Summary submitted 
by the service provider; and after checking/correction of equipment -wise asset 
value, the agreement was framed/signed. The reply of PHSC was not 
acceptable as the prices of these equipment procured by other States/PGIMER 
were adopted.  Moreover, while making the first payment  to the service 
provider, the Assistant Controller of Finance and Accounts (PHSC) had also 
pointed out the matter to the MD about the authenticity of quantity of 
equipment and rate of items mentioned in the list, on which no action was 
taken. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.5.1.2 Excess payment of service charges 
As per Paragraphs  6(a) and 7(g) of agreement, in consecutive quarter s, value 
of the inventory will be recalculated which will include additions and 
deletions in the existing inventory (adding new equipment after repair, expiry 
of AMC/CMC and expiry of warranty equipment to the existing inventory). 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
169 
Scrutiny of records revealed that: 
(i) While mapping equipment and thereafter during October 2016 to  
June 2021, total value of existing/mapped equipment including Value 
Added Tax 10 (VAT) was taken whereas there was no such specific 
condition of including the VAT in the  cost of inventory. As such, 
taking the value including VAT instead of the value without VAT for 
service charge resulted in excess payment of service charges amounting to 
₹ 4.03 crore (including VAT) as detailed in Table 4.12. 
Table 4.12: Details of excess payment of service charges 
(₹ in crore) 
Period Value of 
equipment 
with VAT 
Value of the 
equipment 
without 
VAT 
Value of 
VAT/ 
GST 
Service 
charges 
rate11 p.a. 
Service 
charges 
paid in 
excess 
Service Tax/ 
GST paid on 
service charges 
paid in excess* 
(%) 
Total 
excess 
payment 
1 2 3 4 5 6=4*5/400 7 8=6+7 
 Jul 16 - Sep 2016 142.17 135.40 6.77 7.34 0.12 15 0.14 
 Oct 16 - Dec 2016 110.10 104.86 5.24 7.34 0.10 15 0.11 
 Jan 17 - Mar 2017 133.54 127.18 6.36 7.34 0.12 15 0.13 
 Apr 17 - Jun 2017 170.07 161.97 8.10 7.34 0.15 15 0.17 
 Jul 17 -Sep 2017 174.40 166.09 8.31 7.707 0.16 18 0.19 
 Oct 17 - Dec 2017 176.86 168.44 8.42 7.707 0.16 18 0.19 
 Jan 18 -Mar 2018 178.73 170.22 8.51 7.707 0.16 18 0.19 
 Apr 18 - Jun 2018 185.36 176.53 8.83 7.707 0.17 18 0.20 
 Jul 18 - Sep 2018 186.63 177.74 8.89 8.092 0.18 18 0.21 
 Oct 18 - Dec 2018 189.82 180.78 9.04 8.092 0.18 18 0.22 
 Jan 19 - Mar 2019 193.43 184.22 9.21 8.092 0.19 18 0.22 
 Apr 19 - Jun 2019 193.44 184.23 9.21 8.092 0.19 18 0.22 
 Jul 19 - Sep 2019 194.21 184.96 9.25 8.497 0.20 18 0.23 
 Oct 19 - Dec 2019 193.94 184.71 9.23 8.497 0.20 18 0.24 
 Jan 20 - Mar 2020 193.94 184.71 9.23 8.497 0.20 18 0.24 
 Apr 20 - Jun 2020 188.68 179.69 8.99 8.497 0.19 18 0.22 
 Jul 20 - Sep 2020 188.38 179.41 8.97 8.922 0.20 18 0.23 
 Oct 20 - Dec 2020 185.25 176.43 8.82 8.922 0.20 18 0.24 
 Jan 21 - Mar 2021 178.70 170.19 8.51 8.922 0.19 18 0.22 
 Apr 21- Jun 2021 175.30 166.95 8.35 8.922 0.19 18 0.22 
Total 4.03 
Source: PHSC records 
* Service Tax at the rate of 15 per cent up to June 2017 and GST at the rate of 18 per cent from July 2017 onwards. 
(ii) Similarly, w hile taking cost of new equipment added during the period 
April 2020 and June 2021, total cost of equipment including GST was 
taken to calculate the service charge in place of assessable value (actual 
cost of equipment without GST) of equipment. This resulted in excess 
payment of service charges of ₹ 0.11 crore (Appendix 4.4). 
 
10 VAT/CST calculated at the rate of five per cent.  
11 As per term s and conditions of agreement, the bid amount shall be annually escalated by a simple 
interest of five per cent for each subsequent year. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
170 
(iii) In case of new assets which were purchas ed after completion of mapping  
after expiry of warranty period, it was noticed during test-check of records 
(July 2018 to September 2019) that addition was made on the basis of 
value taken while mapping of old/existing  equipment instead of actual 
purchase cost of new equipment which was much higher resulting in  
excess payment of service charges of ₹ 1.20 crore (Appendix 4.5). 
The PHSC , while admitting  the facts in respect of audit observations at 
Sr. Nos. (i) and (ii), stated (November 2022) that in new tender, only basic 
price had been taken without t ax/GST for inventory of asset. Further, the 
Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in exit conference with  
respect to Sr. No. (iii).  
4.5.1.3 Irregular payment to the service provider 
As per Clause 7(u) of agreement, the  service provider shall repair all  
non-functional equipment within three months from t he date of 
commencement of the contract/agreement. Scrutiny of records revealed that on 
completion of mapping of equipment, 4,760 number of equipment valuing 
₹ 40.52 crore were found non-functional but the service provider rectified only 
351 equipment instead of repairing all the 4,760 equipment during  
October-December 2016. As such, the  contractor failed to repair all the  
non-functional equipment within the time as provided in the agreement. 
It was also noticed that the service provider could repair only 3,181 equipment 
at the cost of ₹ 27.82 crore during October 2016 to March 2019 and the  
remaining 1,579 number of equipment valuing ₹ 12.70 crore were not repaired 
and removed from the list of non- functional equipment (September 2019). 
Thus, asset management by PHSC was inefficient. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.5.1.4 Non-conducting of annual third -party audit for calibration of 
equipment 
Paragraph 7(k) of agreement provides  that Annual Third- Party Audit for 
calibration of equipment serviced by the service provider shall be carried out 
by NABL accredited Laboratory, or CEDTI or C -DAC or National Physical 
Laboratories or any other Government recognized agency at the cost of PHSC. 
Decision of the PHSC shall be final and binding in respect of any deviations 
reported by third party Audit and the service provider shall be liable to pay 
penalties for any default in this regard. As per Paragraph 8(b), the payment  
was to be released on quarterly basis which inter alia included that payment of 
fourth quarter will be released upon submission of reports of Calibration and 
Preventive Maintenance Services duly verified by the competent authority. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
171 
Scrutiny of records revealed that no third- party audit for calibration of 
equipment was conducted during the entire contract period from July 2016 to  
June 2021. However, payments of service charges of ₹ 3.68 crore were made 
ignoring the terms and conditions of agreement . N o documentary evidence 
was available regarding calibration of equipment done by the service provider.  
The impact/effect of non -calibration and non- conduct of annual third-party 
audit thereof has been highlighted in Paragraph 3.6.2.4 of Chapter-III. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(November 2021 and December 2022) that  third party audit was not carried 
out. 
4.5.2 Irregularities in procurement of equipment 
4.5.2.1 Excess expenditure on procurement of cardiac equipment 
General condition (10b) of DNIT provides that price bids of only those tenders 
who fulfil all the eligibility conditions on the basis of the details furnished by 
the tenderer in technical bids will be opened. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that PHSC invited (May 2016) tender to rate 
contract to purchase 122 ‘Defibrillators’. Five bidders participated in the 
tendering process, out of which three (L1, L2 and L3) were qualified in 
technical bid. L 1 was declared (February 2017) successful bidder by PHSC 
who quoted rate of ₹ 0.02 crore per unit. On a representation (March 2017) 
given by tenderer L2  with regard to the desired technical specification 
submitted by L1, PHSC cancelled (August 2018) the tender process after one 
and a half years instead of awarding it to L2 (who then became  the L1) at the  
rate of ₹ 0.02 crore per unit.  
PHSC again invited (February 2019) a fresh tender to purchase the said 
equipment in which L 1 bidder of previous tende ring process was again 
declared L1 in this process at the rate of ₹ 0.08 crore per unit with some 
changes in technical specification. PHSC procured (2019- 2021) 
39 defibrillators by incurring expenditure of ₹ 3.13 crore after three years. 
This resulted in delayed procurement of the equipment and  extra financial  
burden on State exchequer for an amount of ₹ 2.35 crore. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
172 
4.5.2.2 Unfruitful expenditure incurre d on purchase of ventilators for 
adults and paediatric use 
Rule 15.2(b) of Punjab Financial Rules (PFR) provides that purchase must be 
made in most economic manner and in accordance with definite requirement 
so that it does not prove unprofitable to the Government . As per 
Rule 2.10(a)(1) of PFR s, same vigilance should be exercised in respect of 
expenditure incurred from Government revenues, as a person of ordinary 
prudence would exercise in respect of the expenditure of his own money. 
Scrutiny of records re vealed that in DH Ludhiana, 14 ventilators
12 valuing 
₹ 2.14 crore were received (April 2019) from PHSC. DH Ludhiana furnished 
(April 2019) installation report to PHSC showing that all equipment  were 
installed.  It was, however, noticed that only nine paediatric ventilators were 
installed in SNCU and the remaining five adult ventilators were lying in store.  
Further, all nine installed paediatric ventilators could not be made operational 
due to non- availability of technician  though an extra expenditure of 
₹ 0.06 crore was also incurred on their maintenance in June 2021. Besides, 
four out of five adult ventilators were handed over (June 2020) to a private 
hospital i.e. Christian Medical College, Ludhiana for treatment of COVID -19 
patients referred from DH Ludhiana. 
This resulted in idle expenditure of ₹ 2.14 crore on purchase of ventilators due 
to improper management of equipment. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
4.5.2.3 Delay in installation of medical equipment 
Scrutiny of records  revealed that PHSC issued  (between March 2019 and 
September 2019) nine supply orders for supply of 28 equipment valuing  
₹ 2.92 crore. The equipment were supplied between April 2019 and  
January 2020 but these were got installed and put to use during the period 
between December 2019 and November 2020 with delay s ranging between 46 
and 453 days due to non- readiness of the site at various hospitals  
(Appendix 4.6). Thus, due to non- synchronisation of availability of 
infrastructure and purchase of equipment, expenditure incurred on equipment 
before installation remained blocked for the delay period and deprived the 
patients of intended benefits. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
 
12  Five ventilators for Adults: ₹ 0.70 crore; and nine ventilators for Paediatric use: ₹ 1.44 crore. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
173 
4.5.2.4 Non/short implementation of Pradhan Mantri Swasthya 
Suraksha Yojana at GMCH Patiala 
Under the Pradhan Mantri  Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) 
(August 2003) launched with the objective to correct imbalances in the 
availability of tertiary care hospitals/medical colleges providing super 
speciality services and improving quality of medical education in India, GoI 
approved a proposal for construction of Super Special ity Blocks at 
Government Medical Colle ge and Hospital (GMCH) i.e. Rajindra  Hospital, 
Patiala at a co st ceiling of ₹ 150.00 13 crore (₹120 crore as Centre share and  
₹ 30 crore as State share) including civil construction, m edical equipment and 
consultancy c harges. PMSSY broadly involved Super Specialty Blocks as 
Centre of Excellence in areas like Oncology,  Nephrology, Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, Paediatric Surgery, Burns and Plastic Surgery, Cardiology, 
Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Urology, Endocrinology and 
strengthening of existing Departments through procurement and installation of 
medical equipment and s ervices with a focus on high end equipment such as 
MRI, CT scan, Linear Accelerators, etc. 
As per MoU signed (June 2016) between GoP and GoI for the said project, the 
State Government committed to create the required posts and deploy the 
personnel against the posts at the Institution as per scope of upgradation in a 
time bound manner for the smooth and efficient functioning and utilisation of 
the Super Special ity Blocks. Further, GoI instructed (July 2017) to begin  
Post Graduate Courses in Super Special ity Blocks constructed at Government 
Medical College, Patiala under PMSSY. 
Audit noticed that out of ₹ 150 crore, funds of ₹ 126 crore (GoI Share: 
₹ 96 crore and State S hare: ₹ 30 crore) were released by GoI as well as State 
Government to the executing agencies
14. Super Special ity Block had been 
constructed and initially started working (November 2020) by incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 60 crore. 
However, against the allocated (June 2018) amount of ₹ 56.80 crore for 
equipment, medical equipment of ₹ 44.62 crore  only could be received in 
GMCH, Patiala (upto June 2022) against the purchase order of ₹ 45.34 crore 
issued between January 2018 and April 2022. Out of 94 equipment , 
15 equipment valuing ₹ 4.08 crore were lying idle in GMCH Patiala  
 
13 Civil construction ( ₹ 82.74 crore); Equipment ( ₹ 41.80 crore); Services - MGPS, OT  and CSSD 
(₹ 15 crore); Contingency and Consultancy ( ₹ 1.88 crore); Furniture ( ₹ 5.08 crore); and  
IT-Network Infrastructure Plus LAN, etc. (₹ 3.50 crore). 
14 Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC) Ltd. , Noida for construction of super speciality 
block and HLL Infra Tech Services (HITES) Ltd ., Noida for procurement of equipm ent and 
Services viz. MGPS, OT, CSSD, etc. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
174 
(Appendix 4.7) either due to  non-posting of specialised doctors/paramedical 
staff or non-installation of equipment.  
Thus, due to non- posting of teaching staff and non- installation of complete 
equipment, the services in respect of four departments viz. Neurosurgery, 
Urology, Nephrology and Preclinical in newly Super Special ity Block could 
not be made fully functional. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department stated (December 2022) that  
vacancy for Neurosurg eon had been advertised in news papers and the date of 
interview would be fixed soon. The Department, however, did not respond 
regarding non-deployment of other specialists/paramedics and non -installation 
of equipment.  Thus, the fact remains that due to non- posting of adequate 
specialised doctors/paramedical staff and/or non-installation of equipment, the 
requisite healthcare facilities could not be provided to the masses. 
4.5.2.5 Non-installation/functioning of equipment/machinery for  treatment 
of cancer patients 
(i) Bhabhatron-II machine 
The Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Medical Education 
and Research (DMER) requested (December 2014) the Tata Memorial Centre, 
Department of Atomic Energy (DoAE), Government of India (Go I)
15 for 
provision of Bhabhatron- II machine -  an advanced digital Cobalt therapy 
machine with Cobalt source to be installed at Government Medical College 
(GMC), Patiala for treatment of cancer patients. While making the request, the 
Secretary, DMER assured DoAE (Go I) that requisite infrastructure was  
available at GMC, Patiala for operating the machine. Accordingly, DoAE, GoI 
granted (May 2015) financial assistance of ₹ 2.80 crore for the purpose.  
Audit of records revealed that the Department, through Punjab Health Systems 
Corporation, procured (June 2016) the Bhabhatron-II machine from a firm at a 
cost of ₹ 2.01 crore. The machine was installed in GMC, Patiala between   
October 2016 and June 2017. However, the same could not be put to use for 
want of requisite manpower i.e. Radiation Oncologist and Medical Physicist 
during the period from November 2016 to March 2019.  
Mention was made in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India on Social, General and Economic Sectors (Non- PSUs) - Government of 
Punjab, for the year ended 31 March 2018 highlighting idle expenditure 
arising from non -functional machine for treatment of cancer patients 
(Paragraph 3.10). While discussing the paragraph in Public Accounts 
 
15 In place of old Theratron 780 machine. 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
175 
Committee (PAC), the Department assured (December 2021) to run the 
machine within a month.  
Though the requisite manpower was available since April 2019 and all the 
formalities for source loading from Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
(AERB), Mumbai was completed (November 2022) but the machine could not 
still be put to use due to non-obtaining of license from AERB, Mumbai.  
On being enquired (October 2022) about the latest status of the Bhabhatron-II 
machine, the Department stated (November 2022) that the requisite license 
would be obtained from AERB after commissioning of the machine. Further, 
the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in the exit conference. 
Thus, despite giving assurance to PAC, Bhabhatron- II machine had not been 
made functional (November 2022), which not only rendered the expenditure 
of ₹ 2.73 crore
16 incurred thereon as idle, but  also denied the  facility of in-
house treatment of advance d cases of cancer for more than six years from its 
procurement. 
(ii) Brachytherapy Machine 
In GMCH, Patiala, a Brachytherapy machine 17 of ₹ 0.57 crore18 was installed 
(August 2007) in the Cobalt room. Thereafter,  the Brachytherapy machine 
was uninstalled (August 2016) after construction of separate Brachytherapy 
room in December 2015. However, the same could not be installed in new 
room as the supplier company intimated in the meeting of High -Powered 
Committee that the existing model of Brachytherapy machine was not being 
manufactured and its spare parts would not be available in future. Therefore, 
upgradation of Brachytherapy machine was required and matter of  
upgradation of Brachytherapy machine was placed in the meeting of CADA19 
Board (September 2017) .  Accordingly, PHSC conveyed (January 2020) the 
approval of funds of ₹ 4.25 crore for upgradation of Brachytherapy machine. 
Although the new room for installation of Brachytherapy machine had been 
constructed (December 2015), neither was the old machine  installed nor was 
the machine upgraded (February 2023). R esultantly, 215 patients had to be 
referred to other hospitals for Brachytherapy between August  2017 and 
March 2022 and the old machine was lying idle since August 2016.  
 
16 Payment for cost of machine : ₹ 1.79 crore, installation and commissioning of new machine as well 
as decommissioning charges of old machine: ₹ 0.19 crore, payment to Board of Radiation & Isotope 
Technology Mumbai for Cobalt teletherapy source: ₹ 0.75 crore  
17 Brachytherapy machine is used for the treatment of cancer, especially prostate/uterus cancer, by 
insertion of radioactive implants directly into the tissue. 
18 USD 129 000 = ₹ 0.57 crore (calculated taking value of one USD which was equal to ₹  44.10 in 
2005). 
19 Punjab State Cancer and Drug Addiction Treatment Infrastructure Fund (CADA) Board. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
176 
GMCH, Patiala stated  (November 2022) PHSC had been requested time and 
again to purchase/upgrade the machine. On being enquired (November  2022) 
from PHSC, no reply was received. Further, the Department  admitted 
(December 2022) the facts in the exit conference. 
4.6  Conclusion 
Availability of all essential drugs including drugs under JSSK was not 
maintained in the test- checked health institutions. Absence of essential drugs 
forced beneficiaries to look and arrange for these medicines from outside. 
Moreover, PHSC could not procure its own approved essential drugs. 
Therefore, procurement and availability of drugs/medicines and other 
consumables left a lot of scope for improvement for delivery of quality 
healthcare services to the masses in the State of Punjab.  Availability of 
prescribed essential equipment was also found insufficient in test -checked 
institutions. Issues such as purchase of drugs from ineligible supplier,  
non-supply/short supply, delayed supply, loss due to expiry of drugs, 
accepting drug supply having less shelf life, purchase of vaccine after expiry 
of rate contract etc. were noticed in the procurement of drugs.  In the quality 
assurance aspect, issues such as issuance and consumption of sub- standard 
medicines, absence of sample testing for local purchase etc. were noticed and 
hence, quality was not a priority. Thus, quality control was compromised at 
every s tep, for short delivery or non- delivery, no action was taken against 
violation. Quality assurance also compromised by non- testing/failed testing, 
supply of expired drugs and again no action was taken against violation. 
Further, issues such as excess payment of service charges due to incorrect 
valuation of equipment and addition of new equipment on old higher value for 
maintenance, non -conducting third party audit for calibration of equipment, 
excess/unfruitful expenditure on procurement of equipment, non- installation/ 
utilisation of equipment and non- functional of cancer treatment machine in 
health institutions were also observed. 
4.7 Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may consider: 
(i) putting in place a robust mechanism for timely installation and proper 
functioning of high value equipment for obstacle -free delivery of 
healthcare services to the patients. 
(ii) taking suitable steps to address the shortfall of drugs, equipment and 
other consumables in the healthcare institutions; 
(iii) fixing accountability in case of supply as well as in quality assurance 
of Not of Standard Quality drugs; 

Chapter-IV: Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other consumables 
177 
(iv) directing the drug warehouses for purchasing drugs/consumables 
with longer shelf -life so as to avoid early expiry of drugs and 
consumables; 
(v) valuation of equipment as per codal provisions and terms and 
conditions of the agreement to avoid excess payment; 
(vi) conducting requisite third- party audit for calibration of equipment to 
ensure that equipment functions properly; and 
(vii) maintenance of equipment to reduce the breakdown time of critical 
equipment and ensuring that the equipment are put to optimal use. 

179 
Chapter-V 
 
Healthcare Infrastructure 
To ensure quality provision of close -to-client health services, an organised 
provider network is essential. For this, benchmarks are needed to ensure that 
expected standards are maintained. This purpose is being served by Indian 
Public Health Standards (IPHS) which are a set of uniform standards envisaged 
to improve the quality of healthcare delivery in the country. IPHS norms were  
developed in the year 2007 and revised in 2012 keeping in view  the changing 
protocols of the existing programmes and introduction of new programmes. 
These standards cover Sub Health Centres (SHC), Primary Health Centres 
(PHC), Community Health Centres (CHC), Sub District Hospitals  (SDH) and 
District Hospitals (DHs). They provide guidance on the infrastructure, human 
resource, drugs, diagnostics, equipment, quality, and governance requirements 
for delivering health services at these facilities. 
IPHS norms  2012 support government health facilities to attain a minimum 
acceptable functional standard (indicated as ‘Essential’) while striving and 
aspiring for improvement (indicated as ‘Desirable’). Service delivery defined 
for each level of health facilities is the basis for developing other health system 
strengthening components (infrastructure, human resources, drugs, diagnostics/ 
equipment, quality improvement, monitoring/supervision, governance and 
leadership).  
5.1 CHCs have not been upgraded to First Referral Units (FRU)  
As per IPHS 2012 norms, the secondary level of health care essentially includes 
CHCs, constituting the First Referral Units (FRU). The CHCs were designed to 
provide referral health care for cases from the PHCs level and for cases in need 
of specialist care approaching the centre directly. CHC is a 30-bedded hospital 
providing specialist care in Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Surgery, 
Paediatrics, Dental and AYUSH. Further, as per Punjab Vision D ocument, 
2030, current PHCs and/or CHCs can be converted  into FRUs with additional 
FRUs to be created. 
In Punjab, 118 CHCs have been designated as FRUs out of 150 CHCs. Thus, 
32 CHCs functioned as Non -FRUs. Out of designated 118 CHCs, one CHC
1 
has not been made functional due to non-availability of specialist, as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.5.2.2.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
1  CHC Bareta (District Mansa). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
180 
5.2 Inadequate availability of health institutions vis -à-vis prescribed 
norms 
According to Census 2011, the State of Punjab has a population of 2,77,43,338. 
As per IPHS  2012 norms , to provide the Primary Healthcare Services in the 
rural areas of the State, a Sub-Centre (SC) for approximately 5,000 population, 
Primary Health Centre (PHC) for approximately 30,000 population and 
Community Health Centre ( CHC) for approximately 1,20,000 population are 
required. While the CHCs established in rural areas serve as the first level of 
referral services, the Sub -Divisional Hospitals
2 (SDH) and District Hospitals 
(DH) serve as the secondary level of the healthcare system and give support to 
the services being provided in the primary healthcare system. The availability 
of health institutions against requirement as of March 2022 is given in 
Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Availability of health institutions in the State of Punjab  
as of March 2022 
Type of health institution  Requirement of health 
institutions as per IPHS 
2012 norms (as per 
population of 2011) 
 Number of 
health 
institutions 
existing 
 Shortfall 
(per cent) 
Sub Centre 5,549 2,952 2,597 (47) 
Primary Health Centre 925 424 501 (54) 
Community Health Centre 231 150 81 (35) 
Sub Divisional Hospital 46 42 4 (9) 
District Hospital 23 23 -- 
Government Medical 
College and Hospital NA 4 -- 
Source: Director, Health and Family Welfare NA - Not applicable. 
Colour Code: 
 Green colour depicts ‘least shortfall’ 
 Yellow colour depicts ‘moderate shortfall’ 
Table 5.1 shows that there was shortage in different categories of health 
institutions ranging between 9 per cent and 54 per cent as of March 2022 in the 
State of Punjab.   
The position of requirement of CHCs, PHCs and SCs against IPHS norms in the 
State and their availability as of March 2016 and March 2022 is  shown in 
Chart 5.1. 
 
2 As per IPHS norms, a Sub-Divisional Hospital caters to about 5-6 lakh people. 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
181 
 
Source: Director, Census Operations, Punjab and Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab 
Chart 5.1 shows that as on 31 March 2016, there were 151 CHCs, 432 PHCs 
and 2,950 SCs. Over a period of six years, only two SCs were added in the State, 
however, number of CHC/PHCs (one CHC  and eight PHCs ) reduced during 
2016-2022.  
It was also noticed that only 3,526 CHCs/PHCs/SCs were available in the State 
of Punjab in March 2022 against the requirement of 6,705 as per IPHS norms. 
Shortages in CHCs, PHC s and SCs w ere 35 per cent , 54 per cent  and  
47 per cent respectively. Further, the detail s of district-wise requirement and 
availability of CHCs, PHCs and SCs as per population norms are given in  
Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: District-wise requirement and availability of CHCs, PHCs and SCs as 
per population norms 
Name of 
District 
Population as per 
Census 2011 
No. of 
CHCs 
required  
No. of 
CHCs 
available 
Shortage 
of CHCs 
(%age) 
No. of 
PHCs 
required 
No. of 
PHCs 
available 
Shortage 
of PHCs 
(%age) 
No. of 
SCs 
required 
No. of 
SCs 
available 
Shortage 
of SC 
(%age) 
Gurdaspur 16,21,725 13 13 0 (0) 54 30 24 (44)  324 222 102 (31) 
Pathankot 6,76,598 6 4 2 (33) 23 9 14 (61) 135 68 67 (50) 
Amritsar 24,90,656 21 6 15 (71) 83 28 55 (66) 498 179 319 (64) 
Tarn Taran 11,19,627 9 11 +2 (+22) 37 17 20 (54) 224 153 71 (32) 
Kapurthala 8,15,168 7 5 2 (29) 27 12 15 (56) 163 88 75 (46) 
Jalandhar 21,93,590 18 11 7 (38) 73 28 45 (62)  439 198 241 (55) 
SBS Nagar 6,12,310 5 4 1 (20) 20 17 3 (15) 123 95 28 (23) 
Hoshiarpur 15,86,625 13 12 1 (08) 53 32 21 (40) 317 244 73 (23) 
Rupnagar 6,84,627 6 4 2 (33) 23 13 10 (43) 137 86 51 (37) 
SAS 
Nagar 9,94,628 8 5 3 (38) 33 12 21 (64) 199 76 123 (62) 
Ludhiana 34,98,739 29 11 18 (62) 117 31 86 (74) 700 265 435 (62) 
Ferozepur 10,02,874 8 4 4 (50) 34 17 17 (50) 201 122 79 (39) 
Fazilka 10,26,200 9 6 3 (33) 34 19 15 (44) 205 109 96 (47) 
Faridkot 6,17,508 5 3 2 (40) 21 8 13 (62) 124 62 62 (50) 
231
925
5,549
151 432
2,950
150 424
2,952
CHCs PHCs SCs
Chart 5.1: Requirement and availability of CHCs, PHCs 
and SCs
Required Available in March 2016 Available in March 2022

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
182 
Name of 
District 
Population as per 
Census 2011 
No. of 
CHCs 
required  
No. of 
CHCs 
available 
Shortage 
of CHCs 
(%age) 
No. of 
PHCs 
required 
No. of 
PHCs 
available 
Shortage 
of PHCs 
(%age) 
No. of 
SCs 
required 
No. of 
SCs 
available 
Shortage 
of SC 
(%age) 
Sri 
Muktsar 
Sahib 
9,01,896 8 5 3 (38) 30 19 11 (37) 180 102 78 (43) 
Moga 9,95,746 8 6 2 (25) 33 21 12 (36) 199 122 77 (39) 
Bathinda 13,88,525 12 9 3 (25) 46 19 27 (59) 278 136 142 (51) 
Mansa 7,69,751 6 4 2 (33) 26 13 13 (50) 154 103 51(33) 
Sangrur 12,25,415 10 6 4 (40) 41 23 18 (44) 331 
192* 139* 
(42) Malerkotla 4,29,754 4 2 2 (50) 14 5 9 (64) 86 
Barnala 5,95,527 5 4 1 (20) 20 10 10 (50) 119 72 47 (39) 
Patiala 18,95,686 16 10 6 (38) 63 28 35 (56) 379 185 194 (51) 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 6,00,163 5 5 0 (0) 20 13 7 (35) 120 73 47 (39) 
Total 2,77,43,338  231 150 81   925 424  501  5,549 2,952 2,597 
Source: Departmental data, Data regarding number of CHCs/PHCs as on 31.03.2022  
*Data of district Malerkotla was not available separately. 
Note: Malerkotla district was carved out of Sangrur district on 02.06.2021. Population of district Malerkotla has been taken from 
www.malerkotla.nic.in and population of district Sangrur has been reduced to that extent. 
Colour code: 
 Green colour depicts ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow colour depicts ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour depicts ‘most shortage’ 
It is evident from Table 5.2 that in district Tarn Taran, two excess CHCs were 
available and other districts except Gurdaspur and Fatehgarh Sahib were short 
by 1 to 18 CHCs.  Similarly, in all districts, shortage in availability of PHCs 
was ranging between 3 and 86; while that of SCs  was ranging between 28  
and 435. 
The Department did not set targets for year-wise upgradation/new establishment 
of CHCs/PHCs/SCs. The Department was still far behind in  establishment of 
required health institutions as per IPHS norms. Further, variation was also seen 
across districts in terms of population per CHC/PHC/SC , as detailed in 
Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: District-wise number of persons per CHC/PHC/SC 
Name of 
District 
Population 
as per 
Census 2011 
No. of 
CHCs 
No. of persons 
per CHC 
No. of 
PHCs 
No. of persons 
per PHC 
No. of 
SCs 
No. of 
persons 
per SC 
Gurdaspur 16,21,725 13 1,24,748 30 54,058 222 7,305 
Pathankot 6,76,598 4 1,69,150 9 75,178 68 9,950 
Amritsar 24,90,656 6 4,15,109 28 88,952 179 13,914 
Tarn Taran 11,19,627 11 1,01,784 17 65,860 153 7,318 
Kapurthala 8,15,168 5 1,63,034 12 67,931 88 9,263 
Jalandhar 21,93,590 11 1,99,417 28 78,343 198 11,079 
SBS Nagar 6,12,310 4 1,53,078 17 36,018 95 6,445 
Hoshiarpur 15,86,625 12 1,32,219 32 49,582 244 6,503 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
183 
Name of 
District 
Population 
as per 
Census 2011 
No. of 
CHCs 
No. of persons 
per CHC 
No. of 
PHCs 
No. of persons 
per PHC 
No. of 
SCs 
No. of 
persons 
per SC 
Rupnagar 6,84,627 4 1,71,157 13 52,664 86 7,961 
SAS Nagar 9,94,628 5 1,98,926 12 82,886 76 13,087 
Ludhiana 34,98,739 11 3,18,067 31 1,12,863 265 13,203 
Ferozepur 10,02,874 4 2,50,719 17 58,993 122 8,220 
Fazilka 10,26,200 6 1,71,033 19 54,011 109 9,415 
Faridkot 6,17,508 3 2,05,836 8 77,189 62 9,960 
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 9,01,896 5 1,80,379 19 47,468 102 8,842 
Moga 9,95,746 6 1,65,958 21 47,416 122 8,162 
Bathinda 13,88,525 9 1,54,281 19 73,080 136 10,210 
Mansa 7,69,751 4 1,92,438 13 59,212 103 7,473 
Sangrur 12,25,415 6 2,04,236 23 53,279 
192*  8,621* 
 
Malerkotla 4,29,754 2 2,14,877 5 85,951 
Barnala 5,95,527 4 1,48,882 10 59,553 72 8,271 
Patiala 18,95,686 10 1,89,569 28 67,703 185 10,247 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 6,00,163 5 1,20,033 13 46,166 73 8,221 
Total 2,77,43,338 150   424   2,952   
Source: Departmental data; Data regarding number of CHCs/PHCs as on 31.03.2022  
*Data of district Malerkotla was not available separately. Population of district Malerkotla has been taken from 
www.malerkotla.nic.in and population of district Sangrur has been reduced to that extent. 
Inadequate number of health institutions would impact the qualitative delivery 
of health services to patients. 
The Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in the exit conference. 
5.2.1 Infrastructure availability 
IPHS 2012 norms provide guidance on the infrastructure, human resource s, 
drugs, diagnostics, equipment, quality, and governance requirements for 
delivering health services at these facilities. It has been more than 10 years since 
the IPHS norms were issued. However, the State Government has not mapped 
availability of the infr astructure, services, and human resources against IPHS 
norms and there was no centralised database of services available across 
government health institutions. Audit found wide variations across similar type 
of health institutions across districts as detailed in subsequent paragraphs 
without specific reason or planning to upgrade them in a phased manner. 
Audit assessed their availability in test-checked health institutions. Six districts 
(Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana and Moga) were 
selected for field study and following health institutions were covered:  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
184 
i. Six District Hospitals of selected districts; 
ii. 12 out of 56 Community Health Centres  (two CHCs from each 
district); and 
iii. 24 out of 146 Primary Health Centres  (four PHCs from each 
district). 
While general upkeep , availability of beds  and building infrastructure  are 
discussed in this chapter, other services, availability of medicine  and human 
resources have been discussed in previous chapters. 
5.2.2 Appearance and upkeep/planning and layout of health institutions 
requiring upgradation 
IPHS 2012 norms prescribe  good appearance and upkeep of hospitals, 
environmentally friendly features, circulation areas and other disaster 
prevention measures. 
Appearance and upkeep/planning and layout of test-checked DHs buildings 
(January – May 2022) is shown in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Appearance and upkeep/planning and layout of  
District Hospitals buildings 
Particulars Required (IPHS norms) DH 
Bathinda 
DH 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH 
Gurdaspur 
DH 
Hoshiarpur 
DH 
Ludhiana 
DH 
Moga 
Environmentally 
friendly features 
Rainwater harvesting (RH), 
solar energy use (SEU) and use 
of energy -efficient bulbs 
(EEB)/equipment. Provision 
should be made for 
horticulture services including 
herbal garden. 
No, 
except 
herbal 
garden 
Yes, 
except 
rainwater 
harvesting 
and solar 
energy 
Yes, 
except solar 
energy 
Yes, 
except  RH, 
SEU 
No 
No, 
except 
EEB 
Circulation areas 
Circulation areas comprise 
corridors, lifts, ramps, 
staircase and other common 
spaces, etc.  
The flooring should be anti -
skid and non-slippery. 
Yes Yes, 
except lift Yes Yes, 
except lift Yes 
No, 
except 
anti-skid 
and non- 
slippery 
flooring 
Disaster 
Prevention 
Measures 
Earthquake proof measures – 
structural and non -structural 
should be built in to withstand 
quake as per geographical/  
State Govt. guidelines  (for 
seismic zone v)  
Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Firefighting equipment Yes Yes Yes Yes Not 
functional Yes 
Source: Departmental data 
Colour Code: 
 Green colour depicts ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow colour depicts ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour depicts ‘most shortage’ 
 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
185 
The general appearance and upkeep varied vastly across the test-checked DHs. 
Some of the contrasting images of the facilities are shown below. 
 
Seepage from wall in IPD Ward at DH, 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
 
Vehicles are parked in Emergency Area 
at DH, Moga 
 
Poor maintenance of residential quarter at 
Fatehgarh Churian 
 
Poor maintenance of building at PHC, 
Otalon (Ludhiana) 
 
Clean and furnished building of CHC, 
Naushera Majja Singh (Gurdaspur) 
 
Clean and well-maintained ICU of 
COVID-19 at DH, Ludhiana 


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
186 
Building structure of DH Fatehgarh Sahib, Emergency Area at DH Moga, 
building of PHC Otalon (Ludhiana) and most of the residential accommodation 
of selected health institutions were not maintained and were in a dilapidated 
condition. On the other hand, CHC Naushera Majja Singh (Gurdaspur) and ICU 
at DH Ludhiana were well maintained. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
5.3 Availability of beds in health institutions 
The National Health Policy, 2017 recommends two beds per 1,000 population. 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, one bed per 1,000 population is an ‘Essential’ norm 
for every district while two beds per 1 ,000 is a ‘Desirable’ target they should 
aspire towards. Further, the final number is influenced by its population, local 
epidemiology, burden of disease, community requirements, health- seeking 
behaviour of the population, and contribution of the private sector for each 
district.  
The ‘Essential’ number of beds in a district should be provided through the 
public health system of: 
i. Tertiary care (Medical Colleges); 
ii. Secondary care (DH, SDH and selected CHCs); and  
iii. Primary care (PHCs and remaining CHCs).  
However, while calculating the patient-bed ratio in a district, it should primarily 
rely on the facilities from PHC to DH since tertiary care facilities (Medical 
Colleges) do not cater only to the district where it is located, but to other districts 
too. 
5.3.1  Availability of beds in Health Institutions not mapped across the 
State 
To achieve the ‘Desirable’ number of beds, the contribution of the private sector 
(based on the access to private healthcare in the local area), Railways, Armed 
Forces, Power Grid, Coal fields, Employees’ State Insurance (ESI) and other 
Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) hospitals may also be considered while 
continuing to strengthen and increase bed provision at public health fac ilities. 
As a thumb rule, all such beds that are available and functional for a patient for 
more than 24 hours, have been calculated as inpatient hospital beds (including 
critical care beds). The remaining beds such as Emergency, labour delivery 
recovery (LDR), dialysis, day- care and pre and post-operative beds have not 
been counted as in-patient hospital beds. However, all such beds will be counted 
for budgetary allocation, provision of Human Resources (HR), and clinical and 
other support services. The bed requirements are as follows: 
 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
187 
Population Essential beds Desirable beds 
Less than 2 lakh 50 beds + 15 additional 100 
Between 2–5 lakh 100 beds + 25 additional 200 
Between 5–10 lakh 200 beds + 38 additional 300 
Between 10–20 lakh 300 beds + 49 additional 400 
Between 20–30 lakh 400 beds + 60 additional 500 
More than 30 lakh 500 beds + 65 additional 700 
To achieve the benchmarks set under National Health Policy and IPHS 2012 
norms as above, Government should make plans for each of the districts based 
on its population, local epidemiology, burden of disease, community 
requirements, health-seeking behavior of the population, and contribution of the 
private sector.  
However, Government of Punjab had not made district-wise plans detailing the 
present status of bed availability in public and private sector health institutions. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
5.3.2 Inadequate beds in District Hospitals 
As per IPHS 2012 norms, there should be a district hospital in each district to 
cater to the secondary healthcare needs of the public at the district level. Further, 
there should be 275 beds in a district hospital for a district having a population 
of 10 lakh. 
Scrutiny of data revealed that the number of functional beds in the DHs did not 
conform to the IPHS norms as there were  significant shortages of beds in all 
DHs except DHs at Barnala, Pathankot and SAS Nagar which  ranged between 
22 per cent and 75 per cent as of March 2022, as detailed in Table 5.5. 
Table 5.5: Shortage of beds in district hospitals as of March 2022 
District 
Hospital 
Population 
as per  
census 2011  
No. of beds 
required in 
DH 
No. of beds 
available 
Shortage of 
beds 
Shortage of beds 
in per cent 
Amritsar 24,90,656 685 200 485 71 
Bathinda 13,88,525 382 200 182 48 
Faridkot 6,17,508 170 97 73 43 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 6,00,163 165 100 65 39 
Fazilka 10,26,200 282 85 197 70 
Ferozepur 10,02,874 276 120 156 56 
Gurdaspur 16,21,725 446 110 336 75 
Hoshiarpur 15,86,625 436 200 236 54 
Jalandhar 21,93,590 603 470 133 22 
Kapurthala 8,15,168 224 125 99 44 
Ludhiana 34,98,739 962 290 672 70 
Mansa 7,69,751 212 100 112 53 
Moga 9,95,746 274 150 124 45 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
188 
District 
Hospital 
Population 
as per  
census 2011  
No. of beds 
required in 
DH 
No. of beds 
available 
Shortage of 
beds 
Shortage of beds 
in per cent 
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 9,01,896 248 90 158 64 
Patiala 18,95,686 521 300 221 42 
Rupnagar 6,84,627 188 120 68 36 
Sangrur 12,25,415 337 240 97 29 
Malerkotla 4,29,754 118 120 +2 +2 
SBS Nagar 6,12,310 168 100 68 41 
Tarn Taran 11,19,627 308 150 158 51 
Barnala 5,95,527 164 160 4 2 
Pathankot 6,76,598 186 180 6 3 
SAS Nagar 9,94,628 274 300 +26 +10 
Source: Director, Census Operation, Punjab and Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab and 
MD, PHSC 
Note:  Population of district Malerkotla has been taken from www.malerkotla.nic.in  and population of 
district Sangrur has been reduced to that extent. 
Colour Code: 
 Green colour depicts ‘least shortage’ 
 Yellow colour depicts ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour depicts ‘most shortage’ 
The shortage of beds in District Hospitals has been depicted in the map 
(Chart 5.2). 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
189 
Chart 5.2: Shortage (in per cent) of beds in District Hospitals 
-
Source: Director, Census Operations, Punjab and Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab; and 
MD, PHSC 
District Malerkotla was carved out of Sangrur district but could not be depicted in the map drawn through 
MS Excel (Microsoft 365). 
Colour Code: Darker the colour, higher the shortage of beds in DHs 
Non-availability of adequate number of beds would affect the bed occupancy 
rate (BOR) and bed turnover rate of DHs, as could be seen in case of DHs 
Gurdaspur, Moga and Bathinda wherein the BOR was 161 per cent, 
166 per cent and 127 per cent respectively during 2016- 2022, as discussed in 
Paragraph 3.2.7. 
The Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in the exit conference. 
5.3.3 Availability of beds in CHCs/PHCs  
As per IPHS 2012 norms , t he CHC should have 30 indoor beds with one 
operation theatre, labour room, X -ray, ECG and laboratory facility. Further, a 
PHC covers a population of 30,000 with six indoor/observation beds. Out of the 


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
190 
selected 12 CHCs and 24 PHCs, five CHCs and 15 PHCs did not have beds as 
per norms, as shown in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Shortage of beds in selected CHCs and PHCs as of March 2022 
Sampled 
District 
CHC 
(Out of total 
56 CHCs in 
the district) 
No. of 
beds 
available 
in CHCs 
Shortage 
of beds 
in CHCs 
PHC 
(Out of total 
146 PHCs in the 
district) 
No. of 
beds 
available 
in PHCs 
Shortage 
of beds 
in PHCs 
Bathinda 
Bhucho 
Mandi 30 0 Mandi Kalan 4 2 
Bhai Rupa 5 1 
Mehraj 19 11 Lehra Mohabbat 4 2 
Jodhpur Pakhar 0 6 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Bassi Pathana 30 0 Sanghol 3 3 
Nandpur Kalour 6 0 
Amloh 30 0 Bhari 3 3 
Nanowal 0 6 
Gurdaspur 
Fatehgarh 
Churian 30 0 Ranjit Bagh 0 6 
Behrampur 5 1 
Naushera 
Majja Singh 30 0 Dorangla 6 0 
Dhianpur 6 0 
Hoshiarpur 
Mahilpur 24 6 Chakowal 6 0 
Mand Bhander 7 +1 
Shamchaurasi 24 6 Paldi 6 0 
Possi 6 0 
Ludhiana 
Sidhwan Bet 30 0 Ghawaddi 6 0 
Mansooran 6 0 
Sudhar 30 0 Otalon 0 6 
Sowaddi Kalan 0 6 
Moga 
Bagha Purana 25 5 
Patto Hira 
Singh 4 2 
Thathi Bhai 0 6 
Nihal Singh 
Wala 25 5 Sukhanand 5 1 
Malian Wala 0 6 
6 12    24    
Source: Test-checked CHCs and PHCs 
Colour code: 
Adequate Short Not available 
It was further noticed that seven PHCs were functioning without beds.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
5.4 Health and Wellness Centres 
The National Health Policy, 2017 recommended strengthening the delivery of 
Primary Healthcare, through establishment of “Health and Wellness Centres 
(HWCs)” as the platform to deliver Comprehensive Primary Healthcare  and 
called for a commitment of two thirds of the health budget  to primary 
healthcare. 
As per Ayushman Bharat Comprehensive Primary Healthcare through Health 
and Wellness Centres O perational guidelines, in February 2018, the 
Government of India (GoI) announced that 1,50,000 Health & Wellness Centres 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
191 
(HWCs) would be created by transforming existing SCs and PHCs to deliver 
Comprehensive Primary Healthcare and declared this as one of the two 
components of Ayushman Bharat. The other component of Ayushman Bharat, 
namely the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) aims to provide 
financial protection for secondary and tertiary care. 
(A) Operationalisation of Health and Wellness Centres 
As per Comprehensive Primary Healthcare guidelines for HWCs, a key addition 
to the primary health team at the SC -HWC, would be the Mid- level Health 
Provider (MLHP) who would be a Community Health Officer (CHO). The 
CHO would be either a B.Sc. in Community Health or a Nurse (GNM or B.Sc.) 
or an Ayurveda practitioner, trained and certified through IGNOU/other State 
Public Health/Medical Universities for a set of competencies in delivering 
public health and primary healthcare services. 
As per Project Implementation Plan of National Health Mission, 
1,400 SCs/PHCs of Punjab were proposed to be upgraded as Health and 
Wellness Centres in the years 2018-19 and 2019-20. Besides, 800 new HWCs 
were proposed to be constructed in the year 2020-21.  
Audit noticed that 2,715 SCs/PHCs (2,270 SCs, 352 PHCs and 93 UPHCs) were 
upgraded to HWCs during the period 2018-2021 by constructing new buildings 
or in the existing buildings but 341 HWCs out of these were yet to be made 
operational (July 2022). 
Chart 5.3: Number of operational and non-operational HWCs in Punjab 
 
Source: Information supplied by NHM, Punjab 
In 341 HWCs, CHOs could not be deployed, due to which these HWCs are not 
made operational to provide the full services as per HWC guidelines norms.  
On being pointed out, the Department replied (December 2022) that 
2,989 SCs/PHCs had been upgraded to HWCs against the target of 2,274 (2,715 
up to March 2021 against the target of  1,724 and 2,989 up to December 2022 
against target of 2 ,274).  T he Department did not, however, furnish reply in 
respect of non-operationalisation of 341 HWCs.  
2,374
341
Operational HWC
Non operational HWC

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
192 
(B) Non-availability of required infrastructure in HWCs 
Audit observed that required basic infrastructure and amenities were not 
available in 24 test-checked HWCs during the period 2018-2021, as detailed in 
succeeding paragraphs:  
(i) Non-availability of Healthcare Services 
Operational Guidelines of Ayushman Bharat prescribe that 12 type s of 
healthcare services would be delivered at HWC. 
It was, however, noticed that complete 12 types of healthcare services were not 
being provided by all these HWCs. Out of these 12, only five services 3 were 
available in 24 test-checked HWCs and  the remaining seven health services 
were not available in 1-20 HWCs, as detailed in Table 5.7. 
Table 5.7: Number of HWCs where health services were not available 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Service Number of HWC 
where services were 
not available 
1. Management of common Communicable diseases and  
Outpatient care for acute simple illness and minor ailments 
1 
2. Management of Communicable diseases  including National 
Health Programmes (Tuberculosis, Leprosy, Hepatitis, HIV-
AIDS, Malaria, Kala-azar, Filariasis and Other vector borne 
diseases) 
4 
3. Screening and basic management of Mental health ailments 12 
4. Care for Common Ophthalmic and ENT problems 13 
5. Basic oral healthcare 10 
6. Elderly and palliative healthcare services 3 
7. Emergency Medical Services, including Trauma and Burns 20 
Source: Test-checked HWCs 
On being pointed out, the Department stated (December 2022) that on line 
training had been imparted (June-July 2021) to Community Health Officers to 
provide all 12 types of services. The r eply is not tenable as despite imparting 
training to CHOs, the above said services were not being provided  
(May-June 2022) at HWCs.  
(ii) Shortage of h uman resources 
Section 2 of Operational Guidelines ( Inputs for Health and  Wellness Centre) 
requires that a team of at least three service providers (one Mid-level provider, 
at least two Multi-Purpose Workers (MPW) and a team of Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHAs) at the norm of one per 1,000) is to be provided. 
 
3 (i) Care in pregnancy and childbirth; (ii) Neonatal and infant healthcare service; (iii) Childhood and 
adolescent healthcare services; (iv) Family planning, Contraceptive services and other Reproductive 
Healthcare Services; and (v) Screening, Prevention, Control and Management of  
Non-communicable diseases.  

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
193 
In the test-checked 24 HWCs, it was noticed that in three 4 HWCs, only t hree 
MPWs were posted against the requirement of six MPWs . There was also 
shortage of 16 ASHA workers5 in 12 HWCs. 
The Department while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that filling 
up of vacant posts of the staff at HWCs was under process.  
(iii) Non-availability of essential civil infrastructure 
Ayushman Bharat guidelines  prescribe that major civil infrastructure upgrade 
would largely be required for developing the Sub Health Centre as Health and 
Wellness Centre. 
During examination of records in 24 test -checked HWCs, it was noticed that 
only three HWCs were functioning in newly constructed buildings and the 
remaining were operational in the existing Government/Local Bodies/  
Gram Panchayat buildings. T he basic essential facilities , as detailed in 
Table 5.8, were not available in the test-checked HWCs. 
Table 5.8: Number of HWCs deficient in essential civil infrastructure 
Sr. 
No. 
Essential requirement of infrastructure No. of HWCs in which 
infrastructure was not 
available 
1. A well-ventilated clinic room with examination space 7 
2. 
Office space for Mid-Level Health Provider/Community Health 
Officer 9 
3. 
Storage space for storing medicines, equipment, documents, health 
cards and registers 7 
4. Designated space for lab/diagnostic centre 23 
5. Separate male and female toilets  18 
6. Deep burial pit for bio medical waste management 24 
7. Assured water supply that can be drawn and stored locally 11 
8. 
Electricity supply linked to main lines or adequate solar source, 
inverter or back-up generator as appropriate  5 
9. Patient waiting area covered to accommodate at least 20-25 chairs 21 
10. Adequate residential facilities for the service providers 23 
11. Space/Room for Yoga 23 
Source: Test-checked HWCs 
The Department, while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that the 
infrastructure strengthening of HWCs was  being done by two executive 
agencies in a phased manner and work was under progress. 
(iv) Non-availability of emergency medicine kit 
As per operational guidelines of Ayushman Bharat, availability of emergency 
medicine kits consisting of four types of medicines (injection A drenaline, 
 
4 HWCs at Chunni Kalan (1); Mandialan (1); and Sherpur Bet (1). 
5 Only 56 ASHA workers were posted against the requirement of 72.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
194 
injection Hydrocortisone, injection Dexamethasone and Glyceryl tri -nitrate-
sublingual tablet 0.5 mg) are required to be made available in HWCs. 
During scrutiny of records in 24 test -checked HWCs, it was noticed that no 
emergency medicine kit was available in 20 HWCs. Complete kit consisting of 
all the requisite four medicines was available in HWC Salempur only.  
Three HWCs had kits containing only two or three medicines. 
The Department, while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that the 
delivery of drugs on time is being now ensured at all the HWCs. 
(v) Non-availability of required Diagnostic Services at HWC 
Ayushman Bharat guidelines provide an indicative list of eight types of required 
diagnostic services. During the scrutiny of records, it was noticed that all the  
required diagnostic services were not available in all test-checked  
24 HWCs. The details of non-availability of diagnostic services in HWCs are  
given in Table 5.9. 
Table 5.9: Number of HWCs deficient in diagnostic services 
Sr. 
No. 
Type of diagnostic service No. of HWCs deficient in  
diagnostic services 
1. Haemoglobin 13 
2. Urine Pregnancy Rapid Test 1 
3. Urine Dipstick- urine albumin and sugar 18 
4. Blood Glucose (Glucometer) 4 
5. Malaria smear, RDK 10 
6. RDK for Dengue 21 
7. Sickle Cell rapid test 24 
8. Collection of sputum samples 16 
Source: Test-checked HWCs 
The Department , while admitting  the facts, stated (December 2022) that six 
diagnostics tests were being done at HWCs and the remaining two tests would 
be introduced at HWCs in a phased manner. 
(vi) Shortage of lab diagnostic material and r eagents for screening 
As per operational guidelines of Ayushman Bharat, 19 types of reagents and 
diagnostic material are required to be available in HWC for screening and 
diagnosis of beneficiaries. 
Against requirement of 19 types of reagents and diagnostic material,  
11 to 19 types of reagents and diagnostic material were not available in 
24 test-checked HWCs. Thus, the intended beneficiaries were deprived of 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
195 
evidence-based diagnosis and treatment due to non- availability of requisite 
reagents and material. 
The Department , while admitting  the facts, stated (December 2022) that 
glucometer, digital haemoglobinometer and BP apparatus had been provided at 
all the HWCs.  
(vii) Non-availability of furniture and fixtures 
As per Ayushman Bharat guidelines, total seven articles of furniture and fixtures 
are required to be available for smooth functioning of an HWC.  
During examination of records of 24 test -checked HWCs, it was noticed that 
requisite furniture and fixtures were not available in 2-19 HWCs, as depicted in 
Table 5.10. 
Table 5.10: Number of HWCs wherein furniture and fixtures were not available 
Sr. 
No. 
Required furniture and fixtures No. of HWCs where  
furniture and fixtures were not available 
1. Chairs for patient waiting area 19 
2. Footstep 15 
3. Office Chair 5 
4. Office Table 2 
5. Screen Separators with stand 15 
6. Steel Almirah/Cupboard/storage chests 7 
7. Stool for attendants 11 
Source: Test-checked HWCs 
The Department , while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that 
furniture was provided at all the HWCs where infrastructure work ha d been 
completed and for the remaining HWCs, it was being procured as per the 
requirement from the untied funds. 
(viii) Shortage of l inens, consumables and miscellaneous items 
Ayushman Bharat guidelines provide that total 37 items of linens, consumables 
and other m iscellaneous items are required to be available for smooth 
functioning and providing quality services to the beneficiaries.  
Audit noticed that against the requirement of 37 types of linens, consumables 
and other miscellaneous items, 16 to 37 types of items were not available in 
24 test-checked HWCs. 
The Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in the exit conference. 
(ix) Non-availability of requisite clinical material, tools and equipment 
As per Ayushman Bharat Guidelines , total 66 types of c linical material, tools 
and equipment are required to be available at HWC. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
196 
Against the requisite 66 types of c linical material, tools and equipment; 21 to 
61 types were not available in 24 test-checked HWCs. 
The Department, while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that a t ool 
kit containing 30 types of equipment had already been provided at 2,096 HWCs. 
(x) Non-availability of screening methods  
As per Ayushman Bharat guidelines, an indicative list of seven types of required 
screening methods have been specified.  
Out of required seven types of screening methods, three 6 types of screening 
methods were not available in all the test- checked 24 HWCs. Three 7 types of 
screening methods were found available in 4 to 15 HWCs. Remaining one8 type 
of screening method consisting of four parts was available in nine HWCs only, 
however, in remaining 15 HWCs, this method was partially available. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
(xi) Non-availability of Essential medicines at HWC 
As per Ayushman Bharat Guidelines , a list of 71 essential medicines plus 
20 additional essential medicines which may be included after approval as 
suggested by the task force are required to be available at HWC. 
In two HWCs 9, the Department could not ensure availability of any essential 
medicine throughout the period 2019- 2021, whereas only 2 to 27 types of  
medicines against required 71 essential medicines were available during audit  
period (2019-2021) in 22 HWCs. However, 8 to 22 types of medicines were 
found available for partial period during 2019-2021 in 10 HWCs. Similarly, out 
of 20 additional essential medicines, only one to three  types of medicines  
(fully/partially) were available in 21 HWCs. However, in three HWCs 10,  
no additional essential medicines were found available. 
 
6 (i) Cervical cancer (Visual Inspection through Acetic Acid); (ii) Mental disorders (Questionnaire 
algorithm for mental disorder detection and epilepsy); and (iii) Disability and Palliative care 
(Questionnaire to assess requirement). 
7 (i) Eye care (Snellen’s and Near vision Chart) in 15 HWCs; (ii) Malnutrition (Weight Charts and 
weighing machine) in 11 HWCs; and (iii) New born and Child Screening for development delays and 
disabilities (RBSK Screening Tools) in four HWCs. 
8  Non-communicable diseases general screening method consisting of (i) Weighing Machine for 
different age groups and Stadiometers for Body Mass Index; (ii) Blood pressure; (iii) Peak Flow 
Meter; and (iv)  Questionnaire for detection of risk factors  e.g. smoking, substance abuse and for 
chronic respiratory disease (CBAC). 
9 Talwandi Bhageria and Fatehgarh Korotana. 
10 (i) Mandialan; (ii) Khairar; and (iii) Sekha. 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
197 
The Department  while admitting the facts, stated (December 2022) that  
61 medicines were available at HWCs and the delivery of drugs on time was 
being ensured at all HWCs. 
Existing SCs and PHCs were transformed into HWCs to ensure universal access 
to an expanded range of comprehensive primary health services and to deliver 
the quality healthcare services to the poor/needy people in line with Ayushman 
Bharat guidelines ibid , but this target could not be achieved due to lack of 
infrastructure, medicines, equipment, diagnostic service, etc. 
5.5 Creation of Building Infrastructure 
To deliver quality health services in the public health facilities, adequate and 
properly maintained building infrastructure is of critical importance. The 
deficiencies in creation of building infrastructure in health institutions are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
5.5.1 Inconsistencies in building infrastructure 
During test -check of selected healthcare institutions, Audit noticed various 
inconsistencies in building infrastructure.  The institute -wise status, given in 
Appendix 5.1, disclosed that:   
 As per NHM framework, facility survey was required to be conducted 
to assess the requirement of infrastructure. However, the requisite 
facility survey was not conducted in any of the selected 
DHs/CHCs/PHCs.  
 As per IPHS 2012 norms, building structure and the internal structure is 
required to be disaster proof especially earthquake proof, flood proof 
and equipped with fire protection measures . However,  requisite 
protection measures were not available in four selected DHs , eight 
CHCs and 22 PHCs. 
 As per IPHS 2012 norms, toilets with adequate water supply separate 
for male s and females should be available  in health institutions.  But 
adequate separate toilet facility was not available in nine selected PHCs. 
 As per IPHS  2012 norms, health i nstitutions should have pictorial, 
bilingual directional and layout signage of all the departments and public 
utilities (toilets, drinking water , etc.) for easy access .  However, this 
facility was not available in DH Moga and seven selected PHCs.  
 As per IPHS 2012 norms, barrier free access environment (ramp, hand 
railings, etc.) is required to be provided for easy access to physically 
challenged patients and elderly persons. However , this facility was not 
available in 18 selected PHCs. Besides, in one selected CHC, ramp was 
available without hand railings.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
198 
 As per NHM Assessor ’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance 2013,  
intra-mural and extra -mural communication facility is required to be 
available in hospitals. However, no such facility was available in any of 
the test-checked health institutions. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the 
facts in the exit conference.  
5.5.2 Irregularities in creation of new infrastructure 
5.5.2.1 Status of new construction and upgradation works approved under 
PIPs 
As per Programme Implementation Plans (PIP) for the years 2016-2022, project 
cost of ₹ 564.73 crore for 60 major construction works 11 was sanctioned.  
However, funds of ₹ 408.78 crore were approved/released in PIPs for these 
works.  The work-wise status has been detailed in Appendix 5.2.   
Audit observed that out of 60 works: 
 Construction in respect of 26 works had been completed 
(November 2022).  Of these, only two works were completed in time 
and balance 2 4 works were completed with a delay ranging between 
100 days and 1,381 days.  
 Four works which were due to be completed between March 2017 and 
September 2021 were still under construction (November 2022). 
 Four works comprising construction of 2,200 Health and Wellness 
Centres (HWC) were to be completed during 2018-2021.  However, out 
of the construction works for 512 HWCs entrusted to PHSC, only 
221 HWCs were constructed (November 2022).  
 Out of r emaining (26), 15 works (25 per cent) were not taken up for 
construction (February 2023) and 11 works are under progress. 
Analysis of completed 26 civil works is given in Table 5.11. 
Table 5.11: Summary of delays in completion of works 
Period of delay No. of civil 
works 
Expenditure 
incurred  
(₹ in crore) 
No. of works completed in time  2 19.97 
No. of works completed with a delay upto one year  15 90.75 
No. of works completed with a delay beyond one 
year but upto 2 years  4 12.76 
No. of works completed with a delay beyond 2 years  5 42.06 
Total 26 165.54 
Source: Data furnished by PHSC 
 
11 Five ongoing works from previous years and 55 new works. 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
199 
In case of the six selected districts, out of the 20 works taken up for completion, 
only 10 works could be completed. Only one work w as completed within the 
scheduled completion time, whereas in case of the remaining nine works, there 
were delays ranging from 3 months to 32 months (delay of up to one year in 
seven cases, more than one year in one  case, and more than two years in one 
case). Further, in case of the remaining 1 0 incomplete works, it was observed 
that delays were due to slow pace of work, delay in finalis ing estimates , as 
summarised in Table 5.12. 
Table 5.12: Status of incomplete works in selected districts 
Sr. 
No. 
District Name of work Due date/ 
year of 
completion 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
as on 
October 2022  
(₹ in lakh) 
Work status 
1. Bathinda MCH Wings: Construction of  
30-bedded ward for SDH Talwandi 
Sabo 
2021-22 60.44 Work in progress 
2. Bathinda Construction of 30-bedded ward, along 
with 4-bedded HDU, storeroom, etc. for 
DH Bhatinda. 
2021-22 50.22 Work in progress 
3. Bathinda Extension plan of the regional drug 
warehouse at Bathinda @ ₹ 43 lakh 
2021-22 0 Tender opened and 
under evaluation 
4. Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
New MCH Wing  7.10.2020 712.22 Work in progress 
(95% completed)  
5. Hoshiarpur Construction of 30-bedded ward, along 
with 4-bedded HDU, storeroom, etc. for 
DH Hoshiarpur 
2021-22 225.35 Work in progress 
6. Hoshiarpur New construction of the Drug 
warehouse at DH Hoshiarpur 
2021-22 0 Tender opened and 
under evaluation 
7. Gurdaspur New District Early Intervention Centre 
(RBSK) at Gurdaspur 
2019-20 0 Estimates under 
preparation 
8. Gurdaspur Construction of 50-bedded MCH Wing 
at DH Gurdaspur @ ₹  1250.00 lakh  
2021-22 191.86 Work in progress 
9. Ludhiana MCH Wings: Construction of  
30-bedded ward for SDH Raikot 
2021-22 479.06 Work in progress 
10. Ludhiana Construction of  100-bedded MCH 
Wing at DH Ludhiana 
2021-22 154.91 Work in progress 
Source: Data furnished by PHSC 
The delay in completion and non -starting of  various construction and 
upgradation works has not only resulted in blocking of funds in those works, 
but also has resulted in denial of the intended benefits to the general public. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(December 2022) that  in cases of non-completion of work, if any , in the 
specified time, action had been initiated against the agencies as per agreement. 
The Department , however, did not furnish specific reply supported by 
documentary evidence.  
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
200 
5.5.2.2 Non starting/completion of projects/schemes  sponsored by GoI 
under Department of Medical Education and Research  
Government of India approved seven schemes /projects for tertiary care health 
services in the State under the Department of Medical Education and Research, 
Punjab. Test-check of records revealed that out of seven projects, two projects 
were not started and the remaining five schemes/projects were incomplete as of 
September/October 2023.  The status of works is detailed in Table 5.13. 
Table 5.13: Status of works 
Name of 
scheme/project 
Purpose Targeted 
date/year of 
completion 
Project cost Expenditure 
incurred 
Status of work/ Remarks Reply of the 
Department 
(December 2022) 
Setting up of State 
Organ and Tissue 
Transplant 
Organisation 
(SOTTO) at GMC 
Patiala and Organ 
Retrieval Centres  
at GMCs Patiala 
and Amritsar. 
To meet the 
acute shortage 
of human organs 
(100 per cent  
centrally 
sponsored). 
2019-20 GoI sanctioned 
(September 2019) funds 
of ₹ 1.21 crore
12. 
Nil Despite availability of 
funds, Department neither 
set up SOTTO at GMC 
Patiala nor established 
Organ Retrieval Centres at 
GMCs Patiala and Amritsar 
(December 2022). 
Delay occurred 
due to COVID- 19 
and the same is 
being expedited. 
Establishment of 
Burns Unit at RH 
Patiala (CSS 
funding pattern 
60:40) 
To reduce 
incidence and 
its 
consequential 
trauma due to 
burn injuries. 
December 
2018 
Out of project cost of 
₹ 
3.47 crore, GoI 
sanctioned/released 
₹ 1.25 crore 13 as first 
instalment  
(December 2016). 
Nil Construction work of b urns 
unit was not started so far 
(December 2022). 208 burn 
patients were 
referred to 
other institutions. 
Administrative 
sanction of ₹ 3.05 
crore for setting up 
of burns unit had 
been issued and 
the work would be 
started. 
Multi-Disciplinary 
Research Unit 
(100 per cent  
centrally 
sponsored) 
Establishment 
of modern 
Biological 
Lab/Multi-
Disciplinary 
Research 
facilities for 
promoting 
medical 
research. 
Project was to 
be completed 
during  
2013-2015, 
but continued 
till 2019-20. 
₹ 5.25 crore and ₹ 0.34 
crore per annum for five 
years for contractual staff 
and contingencies.  
GoI released ₹ 3.29 
crore
14 between 
September 2014 and 
May 2021. 
₹ 1.04 crore
15 Despite availability of 
funds, Department could not 
make MRU functional 
(December 2022) due to 
non-recruitment of staff 16 
and procured equipment of 
₹ 0.81 crore were lying idle 
since November 2018. 
Recruitment 
would be carried 
out in a short time 
while finalising 
the required 
qualifications of 
the staff to be 
recruited. 
 
12 (a) Establishment of State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisation (SOTTO) at GMC Patiala: 
₹ 0.33 crore (non-recurring) and ₹ 0.38 crore (Recurring); and (b) Establishment of Organ Retrieval 
Centre at Rajindra Hospital, Patiala and GMC Amritsar (Non -recurring to each of the institutions): 
₹ 0.25 crore.  
13 Construction: ₹ 0.78 crore and for equipment: ₹ 0.47 crore. 
14 ₹ 1.25 crore in September 2014, ₹ 1.97 crore in August 2019 and ₹ 0.07 crore in May 2021 
(Civil work: ₹ 0.25 crore, Equipment: ₹ 2.50 crore, Salary: ₹ 0.32 crore, Contingency: ₹ 0.22 crore). 
15 Civil work: ₹ 0.23 crore and Equipment: ₹ 0.81 crore. 
16 (i) O ne Research Scientist -II; (ii) one Research Scientist; (iii) two Lab Technicians; and 
(iv) Lab Assistant/DEO (Grade-I).  

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
201 
Name of 
scheme/project 
Purpose Targeted 
date/year of 
completion 
Project cost Expenditure 
incurred 
Status of work/ Remarks Reply of the 
Department 
(December 2022) 
Setting up of State 
Cancer Institute at 
Amritsar under 
scheme 
NPCDCS17 
Strengthening of 
Tertiary Care for 
prevention and 
control of 
Cancer (CSS 
Funding pattern 
60:40). 
January 2019 Project of 
₹ 114.61 crore18approve
d in 2016-17. 
GoI released (June 2016) 
first instalment of 
₹ 51.58 crore 19 and GoP 
released ₹ 55.20 crore 
including GoI’s share. 
₹ 54.87 crore 
(construction 
work: ₹ 35.65 
crore and 
M&E: 
₹ 19.22 
crore20). 
Construction work of 
building was in progress 
(December 2022). 
Equipment of ₹ 19.22 crore 
procured (August-
September 2020) was lying 
idle (October 2021).  
Efforts are being 
made to complete 
the project 
(October 2021). 
Further, no reply 
was received.  
Setting up of 
Tertiary Cancer 
Care Centre at 
Fazilka under 
scheme NPCDCS 
Strengthening 
of Tertiary Care 
for prevention 
and control of 
Cancer (CSS 
Funding pattern 
60:40). 
October 2017 Project of ₹ 44.71 crore21 
approved in 2016-17.  
GoI released (September 
2016) funds of ₹  20.12 
crore22. 
₹ 14 crore Construction work was 
completed (March 2022).  
However, Tertiary Cancer 
Care Centre was not 
functional (December 
2022). 
Machinery 
specifications are 
being prepared 
and soon the 
machinery will be 
procured. 
Strengthening/ 
upgradation of 
existing 
State/Central 
Government 
Medical Colleges 
to increase MBBS 
seats (CSS 
Funding pattern 
60:40) 
To increase 
100 MBBS 
seats23 in GMCs 
Patiala and 
Amritsar during  
2014-15 with 
objective to 
meet the 
shortage of HR 
in health. 
By the end of 
12th five-year 
plan i.e  
2012-17 
₹ 120 crore for both 
GMCs. GoI released its 
share of ₹ 72 crore in 
instalments ( ₹ 36 crore 
for each College) during  
2015-2019.  
₹ 73.40 crore 
(₹ 43.81 crore 
at GMC 
Patiala and 
₹ 29.59 crore 
at GMC 
Amritsar). 
 
Construction work for GMC 
Patiala was partially 
completed and handed over 
(September 2021)  and 
remaining work wa s under 
progress (November 2022). 
Construction work for 
GMC, Amritsar was still 
incomplete (October 2022).  
Major works of all 
buildings have 
been completed. 
At present, the 
additional work is 
being done by 
PWD. 
Establishment of 
New Medical 
College at SAS 
Nagar (Mohali) 
With a view to 
overcome the 
shortage of 
doctors, a 
scheme was 
devised 
(February 2014) 
by GoI (CSS 
funding pattern 
60:40). 
The project 
was to be 
established 
during  
2019-20 and 
academic 
session was to 
start from 
2020-21. 
₹ 189 crore  
(GoI released its entire 
share amounting to 
₹ 113.40 crore during 
the period between  
May 2018 and  
January 2019).  
₹ 22.19 
crore24 
Addition/alteration work 
completed at DH/SIHFW 25. 
After construction of 
boundary wall at the earlier 
proposed site, new site in 
Sector 81, SAS Nagar 
Mohali has been allotted 
(October 2022). The work is 
yet to be started. 
Admissions have 
started from  
2021-22 batch as 
permitted by the 
National Medical 
Council 
(NMC)/GoI. 
Source: Department of Medical Education and Research, Punjab 
5.5.2.3 Non-establishment of Advance Autism Care and Research Centre 
in Punjab  
The Department of Health and Family Welfare proposed (May 2016)  to 
establish an Advanced Autism Care and Research Centre in Punjab.  
The Centre would work as a daycare centre having residential facility, separate 
 
17  National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and 
Stroke (NPCDCS). 
18 ₹ 36 crore for construction, ₹ 71.51 crore for equipment, ₹ 3.00 crore for CT simulator and 
₹ 4.10 crore for maintenance of Radiotherapy Equipment. 
19 ₹ 35.10 crore and ₹ 16.48 crore for purchase of equipment/construction activities. 
20 (i) HDR Branchy Therapy: 3,30,000 USD ( ₹ 2.48 crore calculated taking value of one USD as 
₹ 75.02); (ii) Linear Accelerator: 18,50,000 USD ( ₹ 13.88 crore); (iii) Dosimeter: ₹ 2.10 crore; and 
(iv) Mould Room and Immobilisation Equipment: ₹ 0.76 crore. 
21 Civil work: ₹ 11.41 crore and Equipment cost: ₹ 33.30 crore. 
22 ₹ 6.43 crore and ₹ 13.69 crore on 5 September 2016. 
23 GMC Patiala: 50 seats and GMC Amritsar: 50 seats (from 150 to 200 seats in each college). 
24 ₹ 16.37 crore for addition/alteration of DH/SIHFW, ₹ 4.23 crore for equipment and ₹ 1.59 crore for 
consultancy service and boundary wall of new medical college. 
25  State Institute of Health and Family Welfare wherein medical college was operational. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
202 
administrative block with offices, clinical centre, school, vocational centre and 
research centre. The work of ‘Construction of Advance Autism Care and  
Research Centre at Sector 79, SAS Nagar’ was administratively approved and 
technically sanctioned in December 2016 and January 2017 respectively at a 
cost of ₹ 12.83 crore. The work was allotted (October 2016) to a contractor for 
₹ 10.93 crore to be completed by November 2017. 
Audit noticed that despite lapse of more than six years, construction work of 
Advance Autism Care and Research Centre was not comp leted 
(December 2022) even after enhancement of time up to May 2021 and the cost 
of work to ₹  13.53 crore though expenditure of ₹  12.70 crore (January 2023) 
had already been incurred on the work (95 per cent completed).   
Thus, due to non- completion of the work, autistic children of the State were 
deprived of the intended benefits. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(December 2022) that out of three blocks, two blocks were completed, however, 
due to change in scope of work, COVID pandemic, etc., the work of third block 
was still in progress.  
5.5.2.4 Non-operation of lifts installed in MCH wing 
NHM Assessor’s Guidebook for Quality Assurance in District Hospitals 2013 
requires that the healthcare facility ensure safety of lifts and lifts have required 
certificate from the designated bodies/board with installed Automatic Rescue 
device. The h ospital should have a defined policy for providing disabled 
friendly services. Access to lift facility should be provided without any physical 
barrier and  is friendly to people with disabilities  and symbol of access is 
displayed at the facilities available for people with disabilities. 
The new building of MCH wing (three-storey) at DH Ludhiana was having lift 
facility, which was installed in 2014 at a cost of ₹ 0.52 crore. However, on the 
basis of information provided by the Senior Medical Officer, DH, Ludhiana, it 
was seen that the lifts were non-functional since the time of installation  due to  
non-availability of manpower. Due to non-operation of lift, the patients/people 
with disabilities were deprived of the existing facility of lift in MCH wing. 
On being pointed out , the Department  admitted (December 2022) the fact s in 
the exit conference.  
5.6 Non-availability and non -maintenance of residential 
accommodation   
As per IPHS 2012 norms , all essential medical and para -medical staff will be 
provided with residential accommodation. If the accommodation could not be 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
203 
provided due to any reason, then the staff may be paid house rent allowance 
and, in that case, they should stay in vicinity, so that essential staff is available 
24x7. Availability of residential accommodations in the test -checked health  
institutions is given in Table 5.14. 
Table 5.14: Availability of residential accommodations in test-checked 
health institutions 
Name of Health Institution No. of 
quarters 
available 
No. of 
quarters 
occupied 
Status 
GMCH RH Patiala 11 11 All residential quarters are 
declared unsafe by PWD 
DH 
1. DH Bathinda 22 17 Five quarters need restoration 
2. DH Fatehgarh Sahib 34 21 13 quarters are requiring major 
repairs 
3. DH Gurdaspur 19 9 10 quarters are in dilapidated 
condition 
4. DH Hoshiarpur 30 9 21 quarters are not allotted  
5. DH Ludhiana 23 16 Seven quarters are not in good 
condition 
6. DH Moga 34 21 13 quarters are not in good 
condition 
CHC 
1. CHC Bhucho Mandi 3 2 One quarter requires maintenance 
2. CHC Mehraj 10 0 All 10 quarters require renovation 
3. CHC Bassi Pathana 6 0 All six quarters are in dilapidated 
condition 
4. CHC Amloh 6 4 One quarter is being used as 
medical store and other is in 
dilapidated condition 
5. CHC Fatehgarh 
Churian 
11 4 Seven quarters are in dilapidated 
condition 
6. CHC N M Singh 0 0 No residential accommodation 
available 
7. CHC Mahilpur 4 4 -- 
8. CHC Shamchaurasi 3 0 No quarter is allotted to the staff 
9. CHC Sidhwan Bet 13 8 Three quarters are vacant and two 
quarters are unsafe 
10. CHC Sudhar 10 3 Seven quarters are unsafe and 
require repair 
11. CHC Bagha Purana 6 6 -- 
12. CHC Nihal Singh 
Wala 
2 2 -- 
PHC 
1. PHC Lehra Mohabbat 3 0 All three quarters need restoration 
2. PHC Mandi Kalan 1 1 -- 
3. PHC Bhai Rupa 0 0 No quarter is available 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
204 
Name of Health Institution No. of 
quarters 
available 
No. of 
quarters 
occupied 
Status 
4. PHC Jodhpur Pakhar 0 0 No quarter is available 
5. PHC Nandpur Kolour 3 0 One quarter is being used as office 
and two quarters are in dilapidated 
condition 
6. PHC Sanghol 5 0 All five quarters are in dilapidated 
condition 
7. PHC Bhari 0 0 No quarter is available 
8. PHC Nanowal 0 0 No quarter is available 
9. PHC Behrampur 3 0 Quarters are in poor condition 
10. PHC Dhianpur 0 0 No quarter is available 
11. PHC Dorangla 13 0 All 13 quarters are in bad 
condition 
12. PHC Ranjit Bagh 8 0 All eight quarters are in bad 
condition 
13. PHC Chakowal 0 0 No quarter is available 
14. PHC Paldi 17 0 All 17 quarters are unsafe 
15. PHC Possi 5 0 All five quarters are unsafe 
16. PHC Mand Bhander 11 3 Eight quarters are declared 
condemned 
17. PHC Ghawaddi 0 0 No quarter is available 
18. PHC Mansuran 0 0 No quarter is available 
19. PHC Otalon 0 0 No quarter is available 
20. PHC Sowaddi Kalan 3 0 All three quarters are condemned 
21. PHC Mallianwala 0 0 No quarter is available 
22. PHC Patto Hira Singh 6 0 All six quarters are condemned 
23. PHC Sukhanand 0 0 No quarter is available 
24. PHC Thathi Bhai 5 0 All five quarters are condemned 
Total 330 141  
Source: Information furnished by test-checked health institutions 
It is evident from the above table that: 
 Out of available 330 residential quarters in all test-checked 43 health 
institutions, only 141 quarters (43 per cent ) were allotted to the staff. 
27 quarters which were in live able condition were not allotted to the 
staff and remaining 162 quarters were in a dilapidated condition and 
required repair.  
 In 12 health institutions (one CHC and 11 PHCs), no residential quarter 
was available for staff. 
 

Chapter-V: Healthcare infrastructure 
205 
Status of Government residential accommodation in the Health Institutions 
  
PHC, Behrampur CHC, Sidhwan Bet 
  
CHC, Sudhar PHC, Thathi Bhai 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
5.7 Conclusion 
Inadequate number of health institutions and infrastructure adversely impacted 
the delivery of quality health services to the patients as is evident from the 
following: 
There was shortage in different categories of health institutions (Sub-Centres to 
CHCs) in the State of Punjab and shortage of beds were also noticed in health 
institutions. The building infrastructure was not in line with the IPHS norms. 
Though requisite number of HWCs have been upgraded but t here was acute 
shortage of infrastructure, availability of services, human resources, medicines, 
consumables, equipment and diagnostic services in all the test-checked HWCs. 
Out of 60 construction works, only two works were completed on time and the 
remaining major construction works  were either completed with delay s or not 
taken up for construction  resulting in denial of the intended benefits to the 
general public. Further, the State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisation at 
GMCH Patiala; Organ Retrieval Centre at GMCHs Patiala and Amritsar ; State 


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
206 
Cancer Institute at Amritsar; Tertiary Cancer Care Centre at Fazilka  and 
Advanced Autism Care and Research Centre in SAS Nagar could not be 
established. The Burns Unit at RH Patiala was also not established and 
resultantly 208 patients were referred  during 2016-2021. Besides, Multi-
Disciplinary Research Unit set up at GMCH, Patiala remained non-functional 
till date.  Out of available 330 residenti al quarters, only 141 quarters were 
allotted to the staff, 27 quarters which were in habitable condition were not 
allotted to the staff and the remaining 162 quarters were in a dilapidated 
condition and required repair, c ompromising round-the- clock availability of 
healthcare personnel. Moreover, in 12 health institutions, no residential quarters 
were available for the staff. 
5.8 Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may ensure: 
(i) setting up of adequate number of health institutions viz. 
SCs/PHCs/CHCs so that healthcare facilities are  provided to all 
sections of society; 
(ii) strengthening HWCs by providing requisite infrastructure, medicines, 
equipment and diagnostic services to deliver comprehensive primary 
healthcare as envisaged under the operational guidelines of HWC; 
(iii) timely completion of construction works and setting up of required 
infrastructure/machinery for delivery of quality health services in public 
health institutions; 
(iv) adequate maintenance and upkeep of the health institutions in 
accordance with the IPHS norms; and  
(v) provision of functional residential quarters for medical/paramedical 
staff. 
 

207 
Chapter-VI 
 
Financial Management 
 
6.1 Budget allocation and expenditure on Health Sector  
Finances for health infrastructure and management of health services in the 
State are sourced through the State budget. Details of allocation of budget , 
expenditure incurred and savings in Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and Department of Medical Education and Research during 2016- 17 to  
2021-22 are given in Table 6.1 and Chart 6.1.
 
Table 6.1: Budget allocation and expenditure on health sector 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget  Expenditure Savings 
2016-17 3,162.69 2,890.23 272.46 
2017-18 3,393.53 2,747.84 645.69 
2018-19 3,469.20 3,243.85 225.35 
2019-20 3,863.96 3,518.75 345.21 
2020-21 4,131.55 3,853.35 278.20 
2021-22 4,974.31 3,942.47 1,031.84 
Total 22,995.24 20,196.49 2,798.75 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 
Chart 6.1: Savings against total budget provision (per cent) 
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 
It is evident from the above Chart  that funds ranging from 6.50 per cent to 
20.74 per cent were not utilised  by State Government on health sector during 
2016-17 to 2021-22. 
It was noticed that during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22, as against the budget 
provisions of ₹ 777.16 c rore in 44 schemes, the Finance Department had 
withdrawn almost the entire budget provision amounting to ₹ 771.03 crore 
(99.21 per cent ) through reappropriation, as detailed in Appendix 6.1. This 
showed lack of intent on the part of the State Government which  did not 
prioritise one of the important key social services i.e. health for enhancing 
human development, as is also evident from the very low percentage of 
8.61
19.03
6.50 8.93 6.73
20.74
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Saving Percentage Year
Savings per cent against Total Budget Provisions
Savings against funds received

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
208 
expenditure on health to total expenditure and to GSDP of the State, as 
discussed in Paragraph 6.3. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
6.2  Share of expenditure on Health Sector by GoI and State 
Government 
The State Government implements Central Sharing Schemes, in which funds 
received/expenditure incurred are in the ratio of 60:40 (Centre:State). Besides, 
various State Plan schemes and Central Sector schemes are also implemented 
by the Health and Family Welfare Departmen t and Medical Education and 
Research Department. Total expenditure incurred by the State during 2016-17 
to 2021-22 is given in Chart 6.2. 
Chart 6.2: Expenditure of Health Sector in the State 
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 
Further, budget provision and expenditure in respect of GoI and the State on 
health sector is not shown separately in the Budget documents  of Punjab and 
hence, contribution of GoI and State on health sector in the State could not be 
analysed separately. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
6.3  Expenditure on Health Sector by the State vis -à-vis National 
Health Policy norms 
Paragraph 2.4.3.1 of NHP, 2017 envisages increase in the health expenditure by 
Government as a percentage of GDP from the existing 1.15 per  cent to 
2.5 per cent by 2025 and increase State sector health spending to more than  
8 per cent of their budget by 2020. 
Chart 6.3 indicates the percentage of the State expenditure on health sector to 
GSDP of Punjab and its total expenditure. 
2,890 2,748
3,244 3,519
3,853 3,942
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
(₹ in crore)

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
209 
Chart 6.3: Expenditure on Health by Punjab Government to  
Total Expenditure of State/GSDP 
Source: Report on State Finances and Appropriation Accounts 
From above, it is seen that against the target of 8 per cent , the Government 
spending on health sector has increased from ₹ 2,890.23 crore (2.16 per cent of 
total expenditure of State) during 2016-17 to ₹ 3,942.47 crore (3.11 per cent of 
total expenditure of State) during 2021- 22. Similarly, as against the target of 
2.5 per cent (to be achieved by 2025), the expenditure on health by the State 
Government remained stagnant around 0.68 per  cent of the GSDP during the 
same period. As such, there  is still scope for the Government to increase 
expenditure on health sector . It was also noticed that the Government had not 
prepared any roadmap to increase the expenditure on health sector. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
6.4 Application of resources 
 
6.4.1 Revenue and Capital Expenditure 
Revenue expenditure includes establishment expenses, Grant -in-aid to various 
Institutions (NHM, AYUSH, etc.), expenditure on training programmes, 
immunisation programme, family planning programmes, Employees State 
Insurance Scheme, various schemes/programmes of State/Central Government, 
assistance to other Non-Government Institutions, purchase of medicines, etc. 
Capital Expenditure includes construction/major repair of buildings of health 
institutions, acquisition of land and strengthening of State Drug Regulatory 
System. 
2.16
2.72 2.76 2.61
3.02 3.11
0.68 0.58 0.63 0.66 0.72 0.68
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Percentage
Year
Percentage of expenditure on health to total expenditure of the State
Percentage of expenditure on health to GSDP of the State
(at current prices)

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
210 
Out of the total expenditure of ₹ 20,196.49 crore incurred on health during  
2016-2022, revenue expenditure was ₹ 19,767.05 crore (97.87 per cent) against 
the budget provision of ₹ 22,113.61 crore while capital expenditure was 
₹ 429.44 crore (2.13 per cent) against the budget provision of ₹ 881.63 crore, as 
depicted in Chart 6.4. Besides, there was savings of ₹ 2,346.56 crore 
(10.61 per cent) under revenue heads and ₹ 452.19 crore (51.29 per cent) under 
capital heads. 
Chart 6.4: Capital Expenditure vis-à-vis Revenue Expenditure 
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 
It was further noticed that the various schemes/projects, as detailed in 
Table 6.2, were not completed due to improper management by the State 
Government.
 
Table 6.2: Details of schemes/projects which could not be completed  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of scheme/project Incomplete  
as on 
Discussed in 
Paragraph 
1. Non-completion of the work of new Medical College at Mohali October 2022 
5.5.2.2 
2. Non-establishment of Burn Unit under the National 
Programme for Prevention & Management of Burn Injuries 
December 
2022 
3. Non-setting up of State Cancer Institute at Amritsar December 
2022 
4. Non-setting up of Tertiary Cancer Care Centre at Fazilka December 
2022 
5. Non-completion of infrastructure work under Scheme 
“Strengthening/Up-gradation of existing State/Central 
Government Medical Colleges to increase MBBS seats in the 
country” 
October 2022 
6. Non-establishment of an Advanced Autism Care and Research 
Centre in Punjab 
December 
2022 
5.5.2.3 
Source: Information furnished by DMER and PHSC 
This showed that the healthcare sector was not given adequate priority in the 
State. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
97.87%
2.13%
Capital Expentiture vis-a-vis Revenue Expenditure 
(2016-17 to 2021-22)
Revenue Expenditure Capital Expenditure

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
211 
6.4.2 Budget allocation and expenditure on important components 
under National Health Mission 
National Health Mission (NHM), Punjab received funds in 60:40 ratio from GoI 
and Government of Punjab. There was wide variation in the budget provision 
and actual expenditure during the period from 2016- 17 to 2020-21. Important 
components under NHM with very high variations are shown in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Budget allocation and expenditure on important components  
under National Health Mission 
 
Source: Information furnished by NHM, Punjab 
Note: Expenditure incurred (more than 100 per cent) in excess of budget allotment during 2020-21 under 
components ‘new construction’ and ‘procurement of drug/equipment’ met from the unutilised funds of 
previous years. 
As can be seen from the above table, the utilisation percentage varied across the 
years. There were persistent savings or excess es or both in these schemes.  
For instance, 
i. In case of  Hospital Strengthening, out of budget provision of  
₹ 49,637 lakh, only ₹ 15,069 lakh (30 per cent) was utilised. 
ii. Funds for New Constructions were utilis ed ranging between 
31 per cent to 123 per cent during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 


Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
212 
iii. For procurement of drugs/equipment , funds were utilised ranging  
between 53 per cent  and 117 per cent  during the years 2016- 17 to 
2020-21. 
iv. For annual Maintenance Grants/Corpus Grants to HMS/RKS , funds 
were utilised ranging between 5 per cent and 84 per cent during the 
years from 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
v. Funds utilisation under Monitoring and Evaluation was ranging 
between 39 per cent and 98 per cent during the years from 2016-17 to 
2020-21. 
vi. Under National programme for prevention and  control of Fluorosis  
which is being implemented in two districts (Ferozepur and Sangrur) , 
no funds were utilised during 2016-17 to 2017-18 and during 2018-19 
to 2020-21, utilisation of funds was ranging between 14 per  cent and 
33 per cent.  The low spending was due to the fact that the number of 
cases in these two districts have come down significantly from 734 in 
2016 to 15 in 2022. 
vii. Budget provision under Information , Education and Communication 
(IEC)/Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) was utilised ranging 
between 24 per cent and 73 per cent during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
viii. For New initiative/Strategic  Interventions , NHM had utilised only 
22 per cent funds during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
Thus, budget preparation needs improvement so that funds could be made 
available to important activities instead of allotting funds to entities or activities 
where either immediate requirement does not exist or the entity does not have 
capacity to spend. However, where funds need to be spent, capacity also needs 
to be improved. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
6.4.3 Delay in submission of State Programme Implementation Plans to 
Government of India 
As per Operational Guidelines for Financial Management of NHM, the financial 
year beginning from 1st of April is the enforcement date of the Annual Project 
Implementation Plans.  Hence, the budget needs to be approved, communicated 
and consented at all levels before this date. The success of budgeting exercise 
is dependent on adherence to time schedules fixed by the Government of India 
(GoI) from time to time. The details of due dates for submission vis-a-vis actual 
dates of submission of State Programme Implementation Plans (SPIP) during 
2016-2022 are given in Table 6.4. 

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
213 
Table 6.4: Delay in submission of State Programme Implementation Plans  
to Government of India 
Year Due date for 
submission of 
SPIP to GoI 
Actual date for 
submission of SPIP 
to GoI 
Delay 
(In days) 
Date of 
approval by GoI 
Date of release 
of funds 
2016-17 20.02.2016 03.03.2016 12 23.06.2016 13.06.2016 
2017-18 30.01.2017 18.05.2017 108 18.07.2017 16.06.2017 
2018-19 09.02.2018 19.02.2018 10 13.07.2018 26.06.2018 
2019-20 15.01.2019 14.02.2019 30 05.03.2019 20.06.2019 
2020-21 30.11.2019 07.02.2020 69 17.04.2020 06.04.2020 
2021-22 31.12.2020 22.01.2021 22 12.06.2021 22.07.2021 
Source: State Health Society 
Table 6.4 shows that the SPIPs for each year were submitted to GoI with delays 
ranging from 10 days to 108 days, which ultimately delayed the approval and 
release of funds by GoI.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted the facts 
(December 2022) and stated that approval was  granted after the approval of 
National Programme Coordination Committee the dates of which varie d every 
year. However, the Department admitted that delayed approval of SPIP affected 
the activities in a significant manner.  The delay in approval of SPIP had a 
cascading effect as is evident from the savings noticed under various 
programmes under NHM (pointed out in Chapter VII - Implementation of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes) as funds could not be utili sed over the short 
period of time for which they were available during the year. 
6.4.4 Delay in release of funds to State Health Society 
Government of India (GoI) instructed (July 2014) that funds released by them 
must be transferred to State Health Society (SHS) within fifteen days, otherwise 
the State Government is liable to pay penal interest.  Release of 2
nd tranche of 
funds depends upon the transfer of 1 st tranche of funds from treasury to SHS. 
Further, GoI also decided (October 2017) the rate of penal interest on delayed 
releases of funds by the States. 
Examination of records revealed that funds of ₹ 2,015.68 crore were released 
by GoI (60 per cent Central Share) during 2016-2022 by issuing 519 sanctions 
for further transfer to State Health Society but instead of releasing the funds 
within 15 days, the funds were released by the State Government to SHS with 
delays up to 345 days thereby delaying the delivery of healthcare services and 
also created a liability of ₹ 25.49 crore on account of penal interest
1 on the State 
exchequer.  The State Government neither paid the penal interest nor reported 
it to GoI. 
 
1 7.16 per cent (2016-17) and 7.14 per cent (2017-2022). 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
214 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted the facts (December 2022) and 
stated that release of funds got delayed due to the lengthy procedure. Further, it 
was also stated that the case of penal interest on delayed release of funds was 
being taken up with the Finance Department. 
6.4.5 Non-accounting of interest earned on NHM funds 
Operational guidelines for financial management (January 2012) of NRHM 
provided that NRHM funds would be kept in separate bank accounts. Further, 
the interest earned on the funds would be utilised for the same purpose for which 
the State PIP was approved. Mention was made in the Comptroller and Auditor 
General’s (CAG) Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2010 
(Paragraph 2.1.9) and in the Report of the CAG on Social, General and 
Economic Sectors (Non -Public Sector Undertakings) for the year ended 
31 March 2016 (Paragraph 2.3.7.2)  regarding non- accounting of interest on 
NRHM funds. The P ublic Accounts Committee had recommended 
(January 2014) that the Department should ensure that the interest earned on 
NRHM funds was utilised only for the programmes under NRHM. 
Audit, however, noticed that the State Health Society (SHS) had transferred 
funds of ₹ 1,186.72 crore to various bank accounts of PHSC for procurement of 
drugs, consumables, equipment and civil works under NHM during the period 
2016-2022.  PHSC earned interest of ₹ 14.20 crore on these funds, which was 
neither intimated to SHS nor was accounted for by PHSC against the NHM 
funds.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(December 2022) that PHSC was not charging any departmental charges from 
NHM for execution of various works allotted by NHM . The r eply is not  
convincing as no documentary evidence was provided by PHSC regarding their 
authority to levy any departmental charges on the projects/works executed from 
funds provided by the NHM. 
6.5 Parking of funds outside Government Account 
Paragraph 2.10(b)(5) of Punjab Financial Rules (PFR) provides that no money 
is withdrawn from the treasury unless it is required for immediate disbursement 
or has already been paid out of the permanent advance and that it is not 
permissible to draw advances from the treasury for the execution of works the 
completion of which is likely to take a considerable amount of time. 
6.5.1 Punjab Nirogi Yojana 
The State Government constituted (August 2007) the Punjab Nirogi Society 
(PNS) and established the State Illness Fund under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme – ‘Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi’. The State Government and the Central 

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
215 
Government were to contribute to the corpus in the ratio of 67:33. Under this  
Scheme, financial assistance up to ₹ 1.50 lakh was to be provided in an 
individual case to the people living Below Poverty Line (BPL) possessing 
yellow cards who were suffering from major life -threatening diseases 2.  
The State Government contributed ₹ one crore each year during 2007 -08 and 
2008-09 and ₹ 0.25 crore during 2010- 11; and GoI provided (March and 
May 2008) ₹ 0.50 crore as matching contribution for the year 2007 -08. 
Subsequent funds were not released by GoI due to non-submission of requisite 
documents3 to them. 
Mention was made in the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (CAG) Report 
(Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 (Paragraph 3.2.5) regarding 
ineffective implementation of the Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi Scheme instituted for 
healthcare of BPL people. 
Audit, however, observed that only 103 BPL patients could avail the financial 
benefit up to the year 2019- 20 since the inception of the Scheme. The balance 
amount of ₹ 4.92 crore including interest was lying unutilised with the Society 
outside Government account as of March 2022. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department while admitting the facts, stated 
(December 2022) that the State Government had decided to dissolve PNS and 
Finance Department asked (August 2022) to take a decision (by the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare) regarding transfer of unutilised grants to another 
society of similar nature.   The matter was pending with the Secretary, Health 
and Family Welfare, Punjab. 
6.5.2 Mukh Mantri Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh Scheme 
Under Mukh Mantri Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh (MMPCRK) Scheme (revised 
in July 2015), relief of ₹ 1.50 lakh is provided to eligible cancer patients of the 
State of Punjab  for treatment. The treatment is available in Government and 
Government-aided hospitals.  Department of Finance, Government of Punjab 
(January 2020) directed all the departments that all the unspent balances 
along with interest accrued should be deposited in the treasury by 31st March. 
Fund position under this scheme for the period 2016-2022 is given in Table 6.5. 
  
 
2 Cancer, heart diseases, kidney and urinary disease, orthopaedic, thalassemia, bone-marrow transplant, 
AIDS, chronic mental illness, epilepsy, brain tumour, etc. 
3 Utilisation Certificates, audit certificate, list of beneficiaries, etc. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
216 
Table 6.5: Details of allotted funds and expenditure incurred during 2016-2022 
under MMPCRK Scheme 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
balance 
Funds  
drawn 
Interest 
earned 
Expenditure  Closing 
Balance 
2016-17 14.90 25.00 0.45 35.34 5.01 
2017-18 5.01 15.00 0.12 19.42 0.71 
2018-19 0.71 37.50 0.31 37.62 0.90 
2019-20 0.90 43.20 0.10 40.71 3.49 
2020-21 3.49 160.00 1.00 68.61 95.88 
2021-22 95.88 0.00 2.69 21.76 76.81 
Total 280.70 4.67 223.46  
Source: Departmental data 
Audit noticed that the total number of new cancer patients registered under the 
Scheme to get the benefit declined from year to year from 8,925 cases in 2016 
to 3,212 cases in 2021 ( except in 2019 when the number of cases had risen to 
7,838) due to lack of wide publication of the scheme. Thus, out of the available 
funds of ₹ 164.49 crore and ₹ 98.57 crore during 2020- 21 and 2021- 22, only 
41.71 per cent and 22 per cent  respectively were spent under the Scheme, 
thereby leading to parking of funds of ₹ 95.88 crore (as on 31 March 2021) and 
₹ 76.81 crore (as on 31 March 2022) outside the Government account, in 
contravention of codal provisions ibid. 
On being pointed out in audit , the Department admitted (December  2022) the 
facts in the exit conference. 
6.5.3 Retention of user charges 
Article 266(1) of the Constitution of India subject to the provisions of  
Article 267, provides that all revenues received by the Government of State, 
all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways 
and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in 
repayment of loans shall form a consolidated fund to be entitled the 
Consolidated Fund of State. Article 266(2) provides that all other public 
moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of a State shall be credited 
to the Public Account of the State. Further, Department of Finance permitted 
(July 2018, July 2020 and January 2021) to retain the user charges collected 
by the health institutions under Department of Medical Education and 
Research, Punjab ( DMER) for the period 2018- 2021 with the condition that 
‘no budget shall be provided to Administrative Department under SOE -28-
Professional Services for Government Colleges and Hospitals’. 

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
217 
Audit noticed that user charges of ₹ 147.55 crore (including interest of 
₹ 2.36 crore earned thereon) were collected by 10 institutions 4 under DMER 
at Patiala and Amritsar during the period 2018-2021 and the amount retained 
without approval of the legislature. Out of these funds, an expenditure of  
₹ 107.80 crore was incurred by these institutions and an amount of 
₹ 39.35 crore was deposited into the treasury during 2018-2022, leaving 
balance amount of ₹ 0.40 crore lying with Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. 
Moreover, Rajindra Hospital, Patiala did not deposit the user charges of 
₹ 1.54 crore into the treasury, out of ₹ 5.35 crore collected during 2021- 22; 
thus, user charges of ₹ 1.94 crore were still lying with Rajindra Hospital, 
Patiala (November 2022).  
On being pointed out in audit, t he Department stated (December 2022) that  
Finance Department had issued permission to retain user charges till  
31 March 2021 and thereafter out of ₹ 1.94 crore, an amount of ₹ 1.43 crore 
had been deposited in Government treasury. The reply was not acceptable as 
retention of user charges and utilisation thereof without obtaining approval of 
the State Legislature was irregular and was in contravention of the 
Constitutional provisions ibid. 
6.5.4 Non-deposit of interest into treasury 
Government of Punjab, Department of Finance directed (February 2015 and 
April 2020) that all the unspent balances along with interest accrued should be 
deposited into treasury immediately. 
Audit observed that interest of ₹ 13.38 crore was earned by P unjab H ealth 
System Corporation (PHSC) on the funds of ₹ 1 95.00 crore received (kept in 
Savings account) from the DMER during the period 2016-2022. However, 
interest of ₹ 13.38 crore so earned by PHSC was neither refunded to the funding 
agency nor was deposited in the Government account. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  admitted the facts  
(December 2022) and stated that interest earned on the funds provided by the 
DMER were not returned/deposited as no departmental charges were taken from 
DMER for the implementation of project. The r eply is not convincing as no 
documentary evidence was provided by PHSC regarding levy of departmental 
charges on the works executed for other Government departments. 
 
 
 
4 (i) GMC, Patiala; (ii)  Rajindra Hospital, Patiala; (iii) Ayurvedic College, Patiala; (iv) Ayurvedic 
Hospital, Patiala; (v) Dental College, Patiala; (vi) T.B. Hospital, Patiala; (vii) T.B. Hospital, Amritsar; 
(viii) Dental College, Amritsar; (ix) GMC Amritsar; and (x) Guru Nanak Dev Hospital, Amritsar. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
218 
6.6 Irregularities in the payment of concession fee 
Article 266(1) of the Constitution of India , s ubject to the provisions of 
Article 267, provides that all revenues received by the Government of State, all 
loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and 
means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of 
loans shall form a consolidated fund to be entitled the Consolidated Fund of 
State. Article 266(2) provides that all other public moneys received by or on 
behalf of the Government of a State shall be credited to the Public Account of 
the State. 
Further, Articles 12.2(a) and 12.2(c) of the agreement signed (August 2009) 
between M/s Max Healthcare Institute Ltd (Concessionaire) and Government 
of Punjab to set up Max Super Specialties under Design, Build, Operate and 
Transfer (DBOT) basis at Mohali and Bathinda provided that the concessionaire 
shall, with effect from the operations date and during the concession period, pay 
to GoP concession fee at the rate of five per cent of the gross revenue of each 
financial year  of the concession period and it shall be payable by the 
Concessionaire to GoP in equated quarterly installments within seven days of 
the close of each quarter in the bank account advised by GoP to the 
Concessionaire. In the event of delay of up to four weeks by the Concessionaire 
in the quarterly payment of the concession fee from the date the concession fee 
is due and payable, the Concessionaire shall be required to pay GoP interest 
thereon at the rate of SBI Prime Lending Rate (PLR) plus two per  cent 
per annum from due date until the date of such payment. Audit noticed the 
following irregularities in the funds management of the public private 
partnership project: 
6.6.1 Non- deposit of concession fee in Consolidated Fund of the State 
Test-check of records of PHSC revealed that an amount of ₹ 135.70 crore on 
account of concession fee was received so far (for the period from 
November 2011 to September 2022) from Max Hospitals since the date of 
operationalisation (September 2011). Of these, ₹ 50 crore w as deposited 
(October 2018) into the treasury and the remaining amount of ₹ 85.70 crore was 
available with PHSC which was lying outside the Consolidated Fund of the 
State.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department stated (December 2022) that the 
State Government decided in principle to deposit all the proceeds in the 
Consolidated Fund of the State in the treasury but later on the High Powered 
Committee decided in July 2021 that the funds received from Max Hospitals be 
utilised for strengthening of the health infrastructure and as such, the funds 
available had not been deposited in the Consolidated Fund.  The reply of the 

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
219 
Department is not tenable as the action of the Department  was not in line with 
the Constitutional provisions. 
6.6.2 Short receipt of concession fee 
During examination of balance sheets, it was noticed that both the hospitals 
earned gross revenue of ₹ 1,440.10 crore during the period from 2016- 17 to 
2020-215 and concession fee of ₹ 72.01 crore6 was required to be paid to GoP. 
But the concessionaire paid ₹ 71.89 crore only considering the gross revenue of 
₹ 1,435.50 crore. This resulted in short payment of concession fee amounting to 
₹ 0.12 crore. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department replied (December 2022) that the 
difference between gross revenue and quarterly statements is due to debtors 
movement, unbilled revenue, interest and project  on sale of investment. The 
reply of the Department is not tenable as these components are the parts of other 
income, so, these components were neither considered in gross revenue nor in 
quarterly statements. 
6.6.3 Non-levy of interest on delayed payment of concession fee 
Audit noticed that the quarterly instalments on account of concession fees were 
deposited by both hospitals after the expiry of due dates and period of delay 
varied from one day to 61 days during 2016-20217. But the PHSC did not levy 
interest amounting to ₹ 0.28 crore on the delayed payments, as required under 
the provisions of the agreement ibid.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department  replied (December 2022) that 
Government of Punjab, Department of Finance has constituted a committee 
having two teams for conducting audit of Max Hospitals and to finalise the 
penalty and the audit report was awaited. 
6.7 Budget and Expenditure for selected districts 
In the selected districts, year -wise allotment and expenditure of funds during   
2016-2022 pertaining to Department  of H ealth and Family Welfare was as 
shown in Table 6.6. 
  
 
5 There was no difference between the gross revenue and the amount on which the concession fee was 
paid during the year 2021-22. 
6  Five per cent of ₹ 1,440.10 crore. 
7 Installments on account of concession fees were deposited by both the hospitals in time during  
2021-22. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
220 
Table 6.6: Budget and Expenditure for selected districts during 2016-2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Bathinda Fatehgarh Sahib Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga Total 
Budget Exp. 
(in per 
cent) 
Budget Exp. (in 
per cent) 
Budget Exp. 
(in per 
cent) 
Budget Exp. 
(in per 
cent) 
Budget Exp. 
(in per 
cent) 
Budget Exp. 
(in per 
cent) 
Budget Exp. 
(saving 
in per 
cent) 
2016-17 89.60 86.88 
(96.96) 41.12 38.89 
(94.58) 131.73 122.03 
(92.64) 123.56 118.26 
(95.71) 130.84 122.11 
(93.33) 55.76 52.12 
(93.47) 
572.61 540.29 
(5.64) 
2017-18 98.59 97.07 
(98.46) 45.22 41.36 
(91.46) 129.43 125.72 
(97.13) 122.39 115.50 
(94.37) 149.82 134.86 
(90.01) 56.92 53.75 
(94.43) 
602.37 568.26 
(5.66) 
2018-19 102.34 100.57 
(98.27) 45.89 44.47 
(96.91) 145.55 140.89 
(96.80) 129.39 119.95 
(92.70) 143.26 135.35 
(94.48) 58.08 56.11 
(96.61) 
624.51 597.34 
(4.35) 
2019-20 102.74 100.90 
(98.21) 50.29 47.22 
(93.90) 159.14 150.18 
(94.37) 135.39 130.40 
(96.31) 174.90 168.81 
(96.52) 65.37 61.33 
(93.82) 
687.83 658.84 
(4.21) 
2020-21 112.41 107.18 
(95.35) 53.44 45.81 
(85.72) 182.92 158.65 
(86.73) 145.69 141.59 
(97.19) 193.56 187.76 
(97.00) 69.16 65.57 
(94.81) 
757.18 706.56 
(6.69) 
2021-22 123.58 121.93 
(98.66) 61.20 54.74 
(89.44) 184.33 180.52 
(97.93) 166.50 156.91 
(94.24) 223.34 192.58 
(86.23) 77.31 69.95 
(90.48) 
836.26 776.63 
(7.13) 
Total 629.26 614.53 
(97.66) 297.16 272.49 
(91.70) 933.10 877.99 
(94.09) 822.92 782.61 
(95.10) 1,015.72 941.48 
(92.69) 382.60 358.82 
(93.78) 4,080.76 3,847.92 
Source: Civil Surgeon Office 
i.From the above, it was observed that:  
i. The expenditure increased by 43.74 per cent in 2021-22 as compared to 
2016-17.  
ii. Savings were ranging between 4.21 per cent and 7.13 per cent during 
2016-2022. 
Moreover, out of total budget provision of ₹ 22,995.24 crore, there was a budget 
provision of ₹ 4,080.76 crore (17.75 per cent) in the six selected districts during 
the period 2016- 17 to 2021-22.  Against this, the total expenditure in the 
selected districts on Health Services was ₹ 3,847.92 crore i.e. 19.05 per cent of 
the total expenditure (₹ 20,196.49 crore) on the health sector. Thus, there were 
savings of ₹ 232.84 crore during the period 2016-2022. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
6.8 Other points 
 
6.8.1 Avoidable liability on account of s urcharge and i nterest against 
electricity bills 
As per Rule 2.10(b)(3) of PFR, all charges incurred are drawn and paid at once 
and are not held up for want of funds. Further, t he Punjab State Power 
Corporation Limited (PSPCL) lev ies surcharge on delayed payment of 
electricity bill up to 15 days beyond the due date and also charges interest at the 
rate of 1.5 per cent per month on gross unpaid amount after 15 days of due date.  
During test-check of records of District Hospital, Ludhiana, it was noticed that 
against the total bill of ₹ 7.58 crore (including surcharge and interest amounting 
to ₹ 2.16 crore due to delay/non-payment of bill on time) was raised by PSPCL 
during the period from January 2018 to March 2022, an amount of ₹ 1.58 crore 

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
221 
only was paid up to March 2022.  Had the Department  paid the bill timely, 
liability of ₹ 2.16 crore could have been avoided.  
On being pointed in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts 
in the exit conference.  
6.8.2 Undue benefit to suppliers due to  non-obtaining of performance 
security  
As per tender document as well as purchase order/rate contract, the successful 
bidder within 10 days after receipt of acceptance letter shall be required to pay 
performance security deposit equivalent to 10 per cent of the total value of the 
order. It will be refunded after satisfactory completion of the warranty period.  
In addition to other penal action if the supplier fails to supply the goods and 
perform the service as per contract leading to termination of the contract, the 
performance security amount will be forfeited. 
Test-check of records in PHSC revealed that PHSC had placed (March 2020) a 
supply order with the supplier for the supply of adult ventilators (65 Nos.) and 
defibrillators (4 Nos.) costing ₹ 9.42 crore against the rate contract (March 2019 
for ventilators and June 2019 for defibrillator). Against the due amount of 
performance security of ₹ 0.94 crore (10 per cent of ₹ 9.42 crore), performance 
security of ₹ 0.10 crore in the form of bank guarantee  was obtained from the 
supplier.  At a later stage, PHSC cancelled (August 2020) the supply orders due 
to non-supply of requisite quantity of ventilators by the supplier . However, no 
action was taken by the Department against the supplier for non-suppl y of the 
requisite quantity . Thus, non- adherence to the provisions of the contract 
agreement ibid, resulted into compromising the departmental interest and giving 
undue benefit of ₹ 0.84 crore to the supplier. 
On being pointed in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts 
in the exit conference.  
6.8.3 Non-submission of detailed contingent bills 
When money is required in advance or when they are not able to calculate the 
exact amount required, Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDO) are permitted 
to draw money without supporting documents, through A bstract Contingent 
(AC) bills, by debiting service heads and the expenditure is reflected as an 
expense under the service head. Rule 274 of Punjab Treasury Rules as amended 
by State Government in November and December 2016 provides that Drawing 
and Disbursing Officers (DDO) are required to present D etailed Contingent 
(DC) bills containing vouchers in support of financial expenditure within six 
months from the date of drawal of such advance. Delayed submission or 
prolonged non- submission of DC bills may affect the completeness and 
correctness of accounts.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
222 
The details of Abstract Contingent (AC) bills pending for adjustment as on 
31 March 2022 in respect of Health and Family Welfare Department  are given 
in Table 6.7. 
Table 6.7: Year-wise pendency of AC bills 
(₹ in crore) 
Year No. of Bills Amount drawn Amount adjusted Balance Amount 
2018-19 36 51.97 51.70 0.27 
2019-20 51 109.81 98.82 10.99 
2020-21 74 73.51 59.89 13.62 
2021-22 28 35.21 25.76 9.45 
Total 189 270.50 236.17 34.33 
Source: Finance Accounts 
Table 6.7 shows that a total of 189 AC bills amounting to ₹ 270.50 crore were 
drawn during 2018-22, out of which DC bills of ₹ 34.33 crore (12.69 per cent) 
were not submitted so far (January 2023). 
Delayed submission or prolonged non- submission of DC bills may affect the 
completeness and correctness of accounts and therefore, requires close 
monitoring by the respective DDOs for ensuring submission of DC bills. 
On being pointed in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts 
in the exit conference.  
6.8.4 Non-disposal of condemned medical equipment 
Rule 15.3 of PFR Vol -1 provides that any item of store when it becomes 
unserviceable should be declared condemned and should be disposed of through 
public auction and these unserviceable items should not be kept in store for 
longer period as with the passage of time their condition may deteriorate further 
which may result into loss of Governmen t money. Further, PHSC issued 
(29 August 2014) instructions to all Civil Surgeons/D eputy M edical 
Commissioners and Medical Superintendents in the State of Punjab for  
re-organisation of the committee along with financial powers to condemn 
unserviceable articles of stores/stocks. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that w hile providing the maintenance service, 
4,801 medical equipment worth ₹ 36.69 crore (book value) were declared 
condemned/non-repairable during service period from June 2017 to June 2021. 
Accordingly, such condemned/non-repairable equipment had not been disposed 
of under the provisions ibid  (November 2021). Delay in disposal of assets 
would deteriorate the condition and further decrease the value of assets with the 
passage of time. 
On being pointed in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts 
in the exit conference.  

Chapter-VI: Financial Management 
223 
6.8.5 Excess payment of fuel charges 
PHSC provided (July 2020) an Advance Life Support (ALS) ambula nce to 
DH Ludhiana as per norms which was further  handed over (August 2020) to a 
service provider (who was already providing the ambulance servic e under 
Emergency Revolving Service  108) for operation and maintenance. The fuel 
charges thereon at the rate of ₹ 25,000 per month were to be paid by DH 
Ludhiana, which were to be deducted by PHSC from the service charges being 
paid to the service provider. 
Audit noticed that an amount of ₹ 0.23 crore was paid by DH Ludhiana on 
account of fuel charges to the service provider during August 2020 to 
September 2022 (26 months) against the admissible amount of ₹ 0.07 crore  
(as PHSC deducted from service charges), which resulted in excess payment of 
₹ 0.16 crore made by DH Ludhiana on account of fuel charges. 
Due to lack of coordination between DH Ludhiana and PHSC and inadequate 
control mechanism, excess payment was made to the service provider. 
On being pointed in audit, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts 
in the exit conference.  
6.9 Conclusion 
There was lack of budget intent on the part of the State Government who did 
not prioritise one of the important key social services i.e. health for enhancing 
human development, as is also evident from the low percentage of expenditure 
on health sector which was much below the recommendations of the  
NHP, 2017. Expenditure on healthcare sector was highly skewed in favour of 
revenue expenditure with barely any capital expenditure. The State Government 
released funds to the SHS with delay resulting in creation of liability in the form 
of penal interest. Interest earned by PHSC was neither intimated to SHS nor was 
accounted for by PHSC against the NHM funds. Funds were lying unutilised 
outside Government account with Punjab Nirogi Society and Mukh Mantri 
Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh Scheme in contravention of codal provisions. 
6.10 Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may consider: 
(i) i ncreasing the budget allocation on health services in line with the 
guidelines of National Health Policy; 
(ii) showing the GoI and the State share separately in the budget provision 
and the expenditure thereagainst on Health sector; 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
224 
(iii)(a) reviewing the healthcare ecosystem in the State to identify the 
constraints/factors adversely impacting the absorptive capacity of 
funds and make concerted efforts for their resolution; 
(b) increasing emphasis on growth and development of medical and 
healthcare sector by reorienting budget allocations to favour capital 
expenditure; 
(iv) providing adequate funds to healthcare sector besides utilisation of the 
allocated budget to ensure availability of ample and quality healthcare 
infrastructure and services to the people of the State; 
(v) timely submission of State Programme Implementation Plans to GoI for 
timely receipt of funds from them; and further release of funds to the 
State Health Society well in time for effective utilisation of the funds in 
programme implementation; and 
(vi) ensuring deposit of Government money, lying outside Government 
account with various agencies, into Consolidated Fund of the State for 
its optimum utilisation. 

225 
Chapter-VII 
 
Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Health being a State subject, the Central Government supplements the efforts of 
the State Governments in delivery of health services through various schemes 
of primary, secondary and tertiary care.  The findings with respect to audit of 
implementation of centrally sponsored schemes in the State are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
7.1 National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) 
The National Health Mission (NHM) is the flagship health sector scheme of GoI 
which encompasses two Sub- Missions, National Rural Health Mission 
(NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM).  The main 
programmatic components include Health System Strengt hening, 
Reproductive-Maternal-Neonatal-Child and Adolescent Health (RMNCH+A), 
and Communicable and Non- Communicable Diseases. The NHM envisages 
achievement of universal access to equitable, affordable and quality healthcare 
services that are accountable and responsive to people’s needs. 
To address healthcare needs of urban population, particularly urban poor, the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has formulated NUHM as a  
Sub-Mission under an over -arching NHM to provide equitable and quality 
primary healthcare services to the urban population with special focus on slum 
and vulnerable sections of the Society. NUHM was implemented in all six 
selected districts. 
7.1.1 Mapping and Vulnerability Assessment 
NUHM guidelines  (2017) required conduct of “Mapping and Vulnerability 
Assessment” to understand the available resources, service gaps and health 
needs of the urban residents, with a deliberate focus on the special needs of the 
vulnerable groups. It was recommended to conduct city mapping either through 
GIS (Geographical Information System) or through a manual consultative 
process. Vulnerability assessment was to assess vulnerability status of wards, 
slums and slum households in the city, to understand the vulnerability status of 
a particular slum and each household in the slum. ‘Vulnerability Mapping and 
Assessment’ was required to be done on a periodic basis. This may not be an 
extensive exercise and can be conducted in a sampled way as an annual exercise 
which can be linked to the annual planning and budgeting process.  
Urban Community Health Centers (UCHCs) were to be made operational for 
every 2.5 lakh population, Urban Primary Health Centers (UPHCs) were to be 
made operational with population of approximately 50,000-60,000 and were to 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
226 
be located preferably within a slum or near a slum area within half a kilometer 
radius, catering to a slum population of approximately 25,000-30,000. 
It was observed that NUHM was implemented in all the six selected districts,  
but city mapping was conducted only in district Bathinda through GIS. Further, 
16 UPHCs in Ludhiana city, five in Bathinda city, two in Fatehgarh Sahib 
district, two in Gurdaspur city, two in Hoshiarpur city and two in Moga city 
were established within a distance limit of three  to five kilometers radius from 
identified slum areas, against the NUHM guidelines of setting up UPHCs within 
half a kilometer radius of slum areas. Moreover, six UCHCs in Ludhiana city 
were also established within a distance limit of five to seven kilometres radius 
from the identified slum area s, against the NUHM guidelines of setting up 
UCHCs within half a kilometer radius of slum areas. This defeated the NUHM’s 
objective of equitable and quality primary healthcare services to the urban 
population with special focus on slums and vulnerable sections of the society. 
7.1.2 Outreach sessions 
The framework of the NUHM lays significant emphasis on improving the reach 
of health services to the vulnerable groups. Outreach services play an important 
role in systematically delivering various benefits of health services to those who 
need them the most and find it difficult to access the centre -based services. 
Outreach services under NUHM consciously target the slum dwellers and other 
vulnerable groups in towns and cities.  
Details of outreach sessions held in the test-checked districts during the period 
2016-2022 are shown in Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1: Status of outreach sessions held in test-checked districts 
Name of District Target Achievement Shortfall Shortfall (%) 
Bathinda 1,075 930 145 13.49 
Fatehgarh Sahib 432 285 147 34.03 
Gurdaspur 399 342 57 14.29 
Hoshiarpur 432 364 68 15.74 
Ludhiana 4,224 2,369 1,855 43.92 
Moga 408 330 78 19.12 
Source: Information furnished by State Health Society, Punjab 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘less shortage’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
Audit observed that outreach camps were organised with a shortfall of  
13.49 per cent in Bathinda, 34.03 per cent in Fatehgarh Sahib, 14.29 per cent in 
Gurdaspur, 15.74 per cent  in Hoshiarpur, 43.92 per cent  in Ludhiana and 
19.12 per cent in Moga. The main reasons for non- achievement of target were  

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
227 
non-availability of budget, deputation of staff on COVID duty and shortage of 
staff. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.2 Kayakalp Programme 
After the launch of “Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (SBA)’’ in October 2014, 
“Kayakalp’’ initiative was launched by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare in May 2015 to: 
(i) promote cleanliness, hygiene and infection control practices in public 
healthcare facilities, through incentivising and recognising such public 
healthcare facilities that show exemplary performance in adhering to 
standard protocols of cleanliness and infection control;  
(ii) inculcate a culture of ongoing assessment and peer review of performance 
related to hygiene, cleanliness and sanitation; and 
(iii) create and share sustainable practices related to improved cleanliness in 
public health facilities linked to positive health outcomes.  
Those DHs, SDHs, CHCs, PHCs, UPHCs and HWCs which have achieved high 
levels of cleanliness, hygiene and infection control were to be recognised and 
felicitated with awards. Status of achievers under Kayakalp programme in the 
State is given in Chart 7.1. 
Chart 7.1: Status of achievers under Kayakalp programme in the State 
 
Source: Information supplied by Punjab Health Systems Corporation 
It is evident from the chart that as on 31 March 2022, against 3,258 public health 
institutions, only 10 per cent health institutions (334) were found eligible for 
Kayakalp awards.  Moreover, the number of health facilities receiving Kayakalp 
award in percentage terms increased during the period 2016-17 to 2018-19 but 
decreased during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. However, in terms of absolute 
figures, there was a continuously increasing trend during the six- year period 
2016-2022 except for the year 2019-20. 
642 742 738 738
3,258 3,258
58 92 144 113 163
334
9%
12%
20%
15%
5%
10%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Achievement Percentage
Target and Achievement
Total Health Institutions Achievement Achievement Percentage

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
228 
Audit further observed in the six selected districts that during 2021-22, 59 out 
of total 1,231 health institutions achieved Kayakalp status with a shortfall of 
95 per cent . Year -wise break -up showing the target -cum-achievement in  
the test-checked six districts is shown in Chart 7.2. 
Chart 7.2: Status of achievers under Kayakalp programme in test-checked 
districts 
Source: Information supplied by the respective Deputy Medical Commissioners 
It is evident from the above c hart that the number of health facilities receiving 
Kayakalp award did not register growth commensurate with the rising number 
of total health institutions during the six-year period of 2016-2022 even though 
the award was to be given only on the criteria of maintenance of cleanliness and 
hygiene.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.3 Achievement under National Quality Assurance Programme 
National Quality Assurance Standards have been developed keeping in mind 
the specific requirements for public health institutions as well as global best 
practices. Standards are meant for providers to assess their own quality for 
improvement as well as facilities for certification. Under National Quality 
Assurance Programme, two types of certifications are envisaged at State and 
National level of certification. Financial incentives are also given as per level  
and scope of certification. 
Audit observed that against the total number of 3,258 public health institutions, 
only 17 (0.52 per cent ) were National Quality Assurance Standards (NQAS) 
certified as of March 2022.  Non-certification could be attributed to inadequate 
human resources, infrastructure challenges, lesser number of capacity building 
induction training/orientation of administrators, etc. Year-wise certification of 
health institutions during the period 2016- 2022 in the State is  shown in 
Table 7.2. 
247 247 274
527
1,137 1,231
8 20 31 25 37 59
3%
8%
11%
5%
3%
5%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Achievement Percentage
Target and Achievement
Total Health Institutions Achievement
Achievement Percentage

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
229 
Table 7.2: Number of health institutions receiving NQAS certification  
in the State 
Year Total number of health 
institutions of the State to 
be covered under NQAS 
Total number of 
health institutions 
certified under NQAS 
Number of health 
institutions not 
certified 
2016-17 214 0 214 
2017-18 214 4 210 
2018-19 738 7 731 
2019-20 738 11 727 
2020-21 3,258 14 3,244 
2021-22 3,258 17 3,241 
Source: Information supplied by Punjab Health Systems Corporation 
Further, it was observed that only five out of 245 health institutions were NQAS 
certified in the test -checked six districts with a shortfall of 98 per cent . 
Moreover, none of the DHs in the test -checked districts were certified under 
NQAS scheme.  Non-attainment of NQAS certification indicates that these 
health institutions could not ensure minimum 70 per cent of the health services 
at par with quality standards set by National Health Systems Resource Centre, 
MoHFW, GoI.  Facility-wise achievement of NQAS certification in   
test-checked six districts is given in Table 7.3. 
Table 7.3: Number of health institutions (HI) that achieved NQAS  
in test-checked districts 
Type 
of HI 
Bathinda Fatehgarh Sahib Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
Number 
of HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
DH 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 
SDH 3 0 1 0 1 0 3 2 4 1 0 0 
CHC 9 1 5 0 13 0 12 0 11 0 6 0 
PHC 24 1 13 0 30 0 32 0 51 0 21 0 
Total 37 2 20 0 45 0 48 2 67 1 28 0 
Source: Information supplied by the respective Deputy Medical Commissioners 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.4 Implementation of Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) 
As per Operational Guidelines issued (February 2013) by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare , GoI, Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) is a 
Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services Programme to provide 
comprehensive care to all the children in the community. The objective of this 
initiative is to improve the overall quality of life o f children through early 
detection of birth defects, diseases, deficiencies, development delays and 
disability. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
230 
(i) Shortage of manpower under RBSK  
As per Paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3 of RBSK guidelines (February 2013), a Mobile 
Health Team (MHT) is required to be constituted consisting of four members, 
two Doctors (AYUSH) one male and one female, with a bachelor’s degree from 
an approved institution, one ANM/Staff Nurse and one Pharmacist, to conduct 
the screening of children in the age group of six weeks to six years in 
Anganwadis and 6-18 years in Government and Government-aided schools.  
Audit observed that 90 MHTs were constituted in the six test-checked districts 
as on 31 March 2021 but 20 teams had no male doctors and 28 teams were 
operational without female doctors. Besides, it was also noticed that no 
nurse/ANM was posted in 40 teams and 44 teams were working without 
pharmacists. This affected services of MHT.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted the facts and stated that 
requirement of manpower had been sent to the higher authorities. 
(ii) Non-achievement of targets 
As per RBSK guidelines, Block micro plan for school and community visits, 
monthly outreach plan based on the mapping of educational institutions and 
Anganwadis and enrollment in them is required to be prepared and targets so 
fixed were required to be achieved. 
The position of children screened in schools and Anganwadis against the target 
under RBSK during the period 2016- 2021 in the six test-checked districts is  
given in Table 7.4. 
Table 7.4: Details of children screened in schools and Anganwadis during  
2016-2021 under RBSK 
Particulars Target Achievement Shortfall Shortfall 
(In 
percentage) 
No. of children 
noticed with 
diseases 
No. of 
children 
treated 
No. of schools to be 
visited and achievement  
thereagainst  
30,091 27,712 2,379 8 
3,01,140 1,97,260 
No. of children to be 
screened and achievement 
in schools thereagainst 
34,97,651 30,27,035 4,70,616 13 
No. of Anganwadi centres 
to be visited and 
achievement thereagainst  
40,600 37,430 3,170 8 
No. of children to be 
screened and achievement 
in Anganwadis  
thereagainst 
20,02,921 12,61,520 7,41,401 37 
Source: Departmental data 
Audit observed that shortfall in visits to schools and Anganwadis against the 
target was eight per cent.  Moreover, target of screening of children at visited 

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
231 
schools and Anganwadis was short by 13 per cent and 37 per cent respectively. 
Further, out of screened children, s even per cent  children were noticed with 
diseases of which only 66 per cent children were treated. Thus, neither were 
targets achieved nor were all the children identified with diseases treated under 
RBSK.   
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted the facts and stated that 
Mobile Health Team staff was engaged in the management of COVID -19 
pandemic and are now being reverted to their original duties. It was further 
stated that a better mechanism would be devised to follow up each referral case.  
It was noticed in audit that most of the children suffered from serious health 
conditions viz. club foot, congenital cataract, cleft l ip, hearing impairment, 
goitre, thalassemia, congenital heart disease, etc.  Every effort should be made 
by the D epartment to fully screen all children and ensure that each child gets 
the required medical attention to prevent morbidity and mortality. 
(iii) Non-availability of medicines/drops/ointment 
Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare prescribed  
(March 2014) list of 27 essential drugs/medicines and local drops/ointments for 
Mobile Health Teams under RBSK for on- the-spot treatment of common 
ailments and minor acute conditions. These medicines can be dispensed by local 
ANM.  
Audit observed that no essential medicines/drops/ointments except Iron and 
Folic Acid (IFA) and Albenda zole were available with 90 MHTs in  the six  
test-checked districts during 2016-2021. The very purpose of providing on the 
spot treatment of common ailments and minor acute conditions of children was 
defeated due to non-availability of medicines with MHTs. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department stated that there was no mention 
of medicines/drops/ointments in Operational Guidelines of RBSK. The reply of 
the Department is not convincing as the directions of GoI (March 2014) were 
clear in this regard. 
(iv) Shortage of m anpower in District Early Intervention Centres 
(DEIC) 
As per RBSK guidelines, an Early Intervention Centre will be established at the 
District Hospital to provide referral support to children detected with health 
conditions during health screening. A team consisting of Pediatrician , Medical 
Officer, Paramedics will be engaged to provide services. There is also  
a provision for engaging a manager who would carry out mapping of tertiary 
care facilities in Government institutions for ensuring adequate referral support. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
232 
Audit observed that in the test-checked three 1 out of total five DEICs 
established in Bathinda, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana, Rupnagar and Tarn- Taran at 
District Hospital level, there was a shortage of manpower ranging between 38 
per cent  and 85 per cent  as detailed in Appendix 7.1.  Further, no 
Physiotherapist was posted in any DEIC. Besides, it was also noticed that in 
DEIC Hoshiarpur, only Lab Technicians and Social Workers were working 
against the requirement of 13 categories of staff. Thus, shortage of staff in 
DEICs affected the treatment facility and the referral support services could not 
be provided as envisaged. Moreover , three more DEICs costing ₹ 2.70 crore 
were to be set up at Gurdaspur, Patiala and Ferozepur, as per PIP for the year 
2019-20 but no work was initiated till December 2022.  
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted the facts and stated that 
matter for recruitment of DEIC staff had been sent to NHM. 
7.5 Family Welfare Scheme 
India was the first country in the world to launch a National Programme for 
Family Planning in 1952. Following its historic initiation, the Family Planning 
programme has undergone many transformations in terms of policy and actual 
programme implementation. Post International Conference on Population and 
Development (ICPD) 1994 held in Cairo, there was a de -emphasis on Family 
Planning globally with the donors substantially reducing the funding for Family 
Planning (FP) programmes. However, subsequently it was realised that without 
increasing use and access to contraceptives, it would be difficult to impact the 
high maternal, infant and child mortality. Thereafter a gradual shift occurred 
from clinical approach to the reproductive child health approach.  The National 
Population Policy (NPP) in the year 2000 brought about a holistic and a  
target-free approach which accelerated the reduction of fertility. Current family 
planning efforts include contraceptive services, spacing methods, permanent 
methods, emergency contraceptive pills, etc. Out of the above-mentioned family 
planning methods, spacing methods and emergency contraceptive pills are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
7.5.1 Non-disbursement of compensation to sterilisation acceptors 
(Male/Female) 
As per guidelines (September 2007) issued by MoH&FW, GoI, for 
compensation package to acceptors of sterilisation, the mission steering group 
of National Rural Health Mission has considered and approved further revision 
in the compensation package to accept ors of sterilisation with particular boost 
to male participation in family planning i.e. Vasectomy and Tubectomy in 
public health facilities and accredited private health facilities to all categories in 
 
1 In  three District Hospitals (i) Bathinda; (ii) Hoshiarpur; and (iii) Ludhiana. 

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
233 
High Focus States and BPL/SC/ST in Non- High Focus States. Punjab was 
considered in the category of Non-High Focus States. 
Compensation scheme for sterilisation acceptors provides compensation 2 for 
loss of wages to the beneficiaries and also to the service provider team for 
conducting sterilisation. Under this scheme, the Government of India releases 
compensation for sterilisation acceptors to both females and males.  
Audit observed that in  the six test -checked districts, 8,749 out of total 
59,950 cases of sterilis ation acceptors were not paid compensation during the  
audit period. Further, the details of sterilisation acceptors during the period  
2016-2022 in test-checked districts are given in Table 7.5. 
Table 7.5: Number of Sterilisation acceptors (Tubectomy/Vasectomy) in  
test-checked districts 
Year Bathinda Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
Tubectomy 
2016-17 2,331 317 2,263 1,122 8,454 1,756 
2017-18 2,107 238 2,045 1,073 5,041 1,665 
2018-19 1,904 156 1,866 1,109 5,114 1,168 
2019-20 1,875 255 1,327 923 4,174 1,088 
2020-21 1,119 90 1,116 687 1,005 674 
2021-22 1,178 59 836 511 954 798 
Vasectomy 
2016-17 54 8 100 20 66 19 
2017-18 86 12 54 32 41 9 
2018-19 158 6 67 20 165 5 
2019-20 59 2 91 42 197 16 
2020-21 33 0 36 28 60 1 
2021-22 14 1 15 6 26 3 
Source: Information provided by District Family Welfare Officers in test-checked districts 
The main objective of the compensation scheme was to boost the participation 
of men and women in family planning. Thus, non-payment to sterilisation 
acceptors, as above, would discourage the masses to go for sterilisastion , as is 
also evident from the data (Table 7.6), which shows that number of sterilisation 
acceptor by and large decreased during the period 2016-2022.  Further,  
non-achievement of targets of sterilisation, as depicted in Table 7.7, would also 
impair the objective of the scheme.  
 
2 Vasectomy acceptor (for all) - ₹ 1100; Tubectomy acceptor (for BPL+SC/ST) - ₹ 600; and Tubectomy 
acceptor (for Non-BPL + Non SC/ST) - ₹ 250. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
234 
7.5.2 Achievement of targets for sterilisation and spacing methods 
Family planning has undergone a paradigm shift and emerged as a key 
intervention to reduce maternal and infant mortalities and morbidities. It is  
well-established that the States with high contraceptive prevalence rate have 
lower maternal and infant mortalities. Greater investments in family planning 
can thus help mitigate the impact of high population growth by helping women 
achieve desired family size and avoid unintended and mistimed pregnancies. 
Further, contraceptive use can prevent recourse to induced abortion and 
eliminate most of these deaths. The target and achievement of various 
components of family planning services in the State is given in Table 7.6. 
Table 7.6: Targets and achievements of sterilisation and spacing methods  
in the State of Punjab (2016-2022) 
Family Planning services Target Achievement Achievement (%) 
Vasectomy 16,000 5,705 35.66 
Tubectomy 2,65,000 1,59,432 60.16 
IUCD insertion 15,25,000 8,17,146 53.58 
Condom users Not fixed 13,88,91,165 - 
Oral pills users Not fixed 68,15,277 - 
Source: Information furnished by the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
Thus, the achievement against the fixed target in vasectomy, tubectomy and 
IUCD insertion was significantly low i.e. 35.66 per cent , 60.16 per cent  and 
53.58 per cent respectively. Moreover, targets for c ondom users and oral pills 
users were not fixed during the period 2016-2022.  
Further, the details of targets and achievement of various components of family 
planning services in the five
3 test-checked districts are given in Table 7.7. 
Table 7.7: Targets and achievements of Sterilisation and Spacing methods in 
test-checked districts during 2016-2022 
Family Planning services Target Achievement Achievement (%) 
Vasectomy 4,902 1,404 28.64 
Tubectomy 93,238 52,973 56.81 
IUCD insertion 4,36,613 2,29,119 52.48 
Condom users* 5,82,140 5,23,769 89.97 
Oral pills users* 1,58,568 1,14,794 72.39 
Source: Information provided by District Family Welfare Officers in test-checked districts 
*  Data pertains to four test-checked DHs except for Bathinda which had not fixed targets; and records of 
Hoshiarpur were not provided to Audit. 
Audit observed that achievement in sterilisation cases ranged between  
28.64 per cent and 89.97 per cent during 2016-2022 which showed that targets 
 
3 (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Ludhiana; and (v) Moga. Records of 
Hoshiarpur were not provided to Audit. 

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
235 
were not achieved in sterilisation and spacing methods. Further, four4 out of six 
test-checked districts had fixed targets for condom users and oral pills users and 
no targets were fixed in Bathinda whereas Hoshiarpur district did not furnish 
information.  Achievement of targets for c ondom users and oral pills users in 
four districts ranged between 54 per cent  and 96 per cent during the period 
2016-2022. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.6 National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme (NTEP) 
The National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme (NTEP) provides technical 
and managerial leadership to anti -tuberculosis activities in the country. As per 
the National Strategic Plan 2017-2025, the programme has a vision of achieving 
a "TB free India", with strategies under the broad themes of " Detect, Treat, 
Prevent and Build pillars for universal coverage and social protection". The 
programme provides various free of cost, quality tuberculosis diagnosis and 
treatment services across the country through the government health system. 
As per the Financial Management Report (FMR) of NHM Punjab, the budget 
provision and expenditure incurred on NTEP by the NHM5, Punjab is shown in 
Chart 7.3. 
Chart 7.3: Budget provision and expenditure under NTEP in the State 
 
Source: Information supplied by State Health Society, Punjab 
Audit observed that Government of India had been regularly making budget 
provision for NTEP , but the expenditure incurred by NHM ranged between 
36.34 per cent and 63.30 per cent during the years from 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
4  (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Ludhiana; and (iv) Moga. 
5  National Health Mission (NHM), Punjab receives funds in 60:40 ratio from GoI and Government of 
Punjab. 
2,060
1,297
3,031
4,147
4,796
854 821
1,196
2,120 1,743
41.46%
63.30%
39.46%
51.12%
36.34%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Percentage Expenditure
Budget provision and ExpenditureBudget Provision (₹ in lakh) Expenditure (₹ in lakh)
Percentage expenditure

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
236 
7.7 National Mental Health Programme 
The objective of Mental Health Programme is to provide mental health services 
including preventive, promotion, and long- term continuing care at different 
levels of district level healthcare system. The audit findings observed in the 
implementation of Mental Health Programme are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
7.7.1 Non-utilisation of funds under National Mental Health 
Programme (NMHP) 
As per the Financial Management Report (FMR) of NHM, the budget provision 
and expenditure incurred on National Mental Health Programme by NHM, 
Punjab during the period 2016-2021 is shown in Chart 7.4. 
Chart 7.4: Budget provision and expenditure under NMHP in the State 
 
Source: Information supplied by State Health Society, Punjab 
Audit observed that the Government of India had been regularly making budget 
provision for National Mental Health Programme but the whole budget 
remained unspent during the period 2016-2018 and expenditure incurred during 
the period 2018-2021 ranged between 3.27 per cent and 6.17 per cent only. 
On being pointed out in audit, the Department admitted the facts and did not 
assign any reason for non-utilisation of budget. 
7.7.2 Implementation of Mental Health Programme in selected districts 
As per NMHP, 2015 (Part 2(E)), the services at DHs include Outpatient 
services, counselling services and in- patient services. Further, in out -patient 
services, given the scarcity of the skilled manpower in mental health specialities 
in the country, the OPD  services in mental health/psychiatry services shall be 
provided by doctors who may be trained General Duty Medical Officers 
(GDMOs).  However, in districts where trained MO is not available, the services 
303.38
354.20
315.87
142.00
305.20
10.34 8.76 15.46
3.27%
6.17%
5.07%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Percentage Expenditure
Budget provision and Expenditure
Budget Provision (₹ in lakh) Expenditure (₹  in lakh)
Percentage expenditure

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
237 
of a private psychiatrist may be utilised. In counselling services, all patients 
(and their attendants, if available and only if the patients agree to involve them) 
assessed by the trained doctor, should receive counselling/psycho- social 
interventions/psycho-education, as per the clinical needs. In -patient services 
include patients of mental disorders, who require in- patient management, 
should be admitted in a dedicated ward which is exclusively meant for this 
purpose. 
Further, as per NMHP, 2015, (Part 2(F)) services at CHCs will include:  
(i) outpatient services for walk-in patients and patients referred by the PHC will 
be provided by the trained medical officer.  In addition to this, in- patient 
services will also be provided for emergency psychiatry illnesses ; 
(ii) Counselling services shall be provided by the Clinical Psychologist/trained 
Psychologist; and (iii) Continuing care and support to persons with severe 
mental disorder (SMD).  
Audit observed in 15 test -checked health institutions (DHs/CHCs) that 
availability of services under NMHP is shown in Table 7.8: 
Table 7.8:  Availability of mental health services in test-checked  
health institutions 
Sr. 
No. Particulars DHs  
(6) 
CHCs 
(96) 
1. 
Whether trained General Duty Medical Officers 
(Psychiatrist)/trained medical officer were available in 
DHs/CHCs 
6 0 
2. Whether Clinical Psychologist/trained Psychologist were 
available in DHs/CHCs 5 0 
3. Whether provisions of Out -patient services for walk -in-
patient and patients referred by the PHC is provided by MO 6 5 
4. 
Whether early identification, diagnosis and treatment of 
common mental disorders (anxiety, depression, psychosis, 
schizophrenia, Manic Depressive Psychosis) are available 
6 5 
5. Whether In -patient services are available for emergency 
psychiatry illnesses 5 1 
6. Whether counseling services provided by the Clinical 
Psychologist/trained Psychologist 5 1 
7. 
Whether continuing care and support to persons with Severe 
Mental Disorder (SMD) provided to the patients. (This 
includes referral to district hospital for SMD patients and 
follow up based on treatment plan drawn up by the 
Psychiatrist at the district hospital) 
6 1 
Source: Information supplied by test-checked health institutions 
 
6 (i) Bhucho Mandi; (ii) Bassi Pathana; (iii) Amloh; (iv) Fatehgarh Churian; (v) Naushera Majja Singh; 
(vi) Shamchaurasi; (vii) Sidhwan Bet; (viii) Bagha Purana; and (ix)  Nihal Singh Wala.  Records of 
three CHCs (Mehraj, Mahilpur and Sudhar) were not provided to Audit. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
238 
From above, it is apparent that: 
i. No post of trained medical officer  in CHCs were sanctioned, however, 
mental health/psychiatry services were being provided by other medical 
officers in five7 CHCs. Clinical Psychologist/trained Psychologist were 
available in all DHs except DH Gurdaspur and no post of Clinical 
Psychologist/trained Psychologist w as sanctioned for CHCs. However, 
in CHC Nihal Singh Wala, Clinical Psychologist/trained Psychologist  
service was provided through outsourced staff. 
ii. Provisions of Outpatient services for walk- in-patient and patients 
referred by the PHCs were not available in four CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, 
Fatehgarh Churian, Naushera Majja Singh and Bagha Purana). 
iii. Provision for early identification, diagnosis and treatment of common 
mental disorders (anxiety, depression, psychosis, schizophrenia, Manic 
Depressive Psychosis) were not available in four CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, 
Fatehgarh Churian, Naushera Majja Singh and Bagha Purana). 
iv. In-patient services for emergency psychiatry illnesses were not available 
in eight CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, Bassi Pathana, Amloh, Fatehgarh 
Churian, Naushera Majja Singh, Sidhwan Bet, Bagha Purana and Nihal 
Singh Wala) and DH Gurdaspur. 
v. Counseling services were not available in eight CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, 
Bassi Pathana, Amloh, Fatehgarh Churian, Naushera Majja Singh,  
Shamchaurasi, Sidhwan Bet and Bagha Purana) and DH Gurdaspur. 
vi. Continuing care and support to persons with Severe Mental Disorder 
(SMD) was not provided to the patients in eight CHCs (Bhucho Mandi, 
Bassi Pathana, Amloh, Fatehgarh Churian, Naushera Majja Singh,  
Shamchaurasi, Bagha Purana and Nihal Singh Wala). 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.7.3 Availability of Mental Health Programme drugs in selected health 
institutions 
As per instructions issued (May 2018) by Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Government of India, 20 types of psychotherapeutic drugs/medicines 
for seven  types of mental health  conditions should be available at DHs and 
14 types of drugs should be available at CHCs/PHCs. 
 
7 CHCs at (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Amloh; (iii) Shamchaurashi ; (iv) Sidhwan Bet; and (v)  Nihal Singh 
Wala. 

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
239 
As per data supplied by test-checked health institutions (DHs: 6, CHCs: 12 and 
PHCs: 238), the shortfall (percentage) in availability of mental health drugs is 
given in Appendix 7.2. 
Audit observed that: 
i. Shortfall in DH Bathinda was 45 per cent ; in DH Fatehgarh Sahib was 
55 per cent; in DH Gurdaspur was 95 per cent , in DH Hoshiarpur was 
75 per cent, in DH Ludhiana was 20 per cent and in DH Moga was 
50 per cent. 
ii. Shortfall ranging between 50 per cent  and 100 per cent was seen in  
12 test-checked CHCs.  
iii. Shortage of drugs was 100 per cent  in 209 PHCs and in three 10 PHCs, 
shortage of drugs ranged between 86 per cent and 93 per cent. 
The extent of shortage of mental health services at the level of CHCs and 
shortage of mental health drugs in the health institutions indicated that mental 
healthcare in the State is a neglected area. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.8 National Programme for Healthcare for the Elderly (NPHCE) 
The National Programme for Healthcare for the Elderly (NPHCE) is an 
articulation of the International and National commitments of the Government 
as envisaged under the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (UNCRPD), National Policy on Older Persons (NPOP) adopted by 
the Government of India in 1999 and Section 20 of “The Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007” dealing with provisions for 
medical care of Senior Citizens.  
As per the Financial Management Reports (FMR) of NHM, the budget 
provision and expenditure incurred on National Programme for Healthcare for 
the Elderly (NPHCE) in the State during the period 2016- 17 to 2020-21 is 
shown in Chart 7.5. 
 
 
 
8  PHC Paldi did not produce record. 
9 (i) Mandi Kalan; (ii) Bhai Rupa; (iii) Lehra Mohabbat; (iv) Jodhpur Pakhar; (v) Sanghol; (vi) Bhari; 
(vii) Nanowal; (viii) Ranjit Bagh; (ix) Behrampur; (x) Dorangala; (xi) Dhianpur; (xii) Ghawaddi; 
(xiii) Mansooran; (xiv) Otalon; (xv) Sowaddi Kalan; (xvi) Chakowal; (xvii) Possi; 
(xviii) Mand Mandher; (xix) Patto Hira Singh; and (xx) Malian Wala. 
10 (i) Nandpur Kalour; (ii) Thathi Bhai; and (iii) Sukhanand. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
240 
Chart 7.5: Budget provision and expenditure under NPHCE in the State 
 
Source: Information supplied by State Health Society, Punjab 
Audit observed that the Government of India had been regularly making budget 
provision for National Programme for Healthcare of the Elderly (NPHCE) 
during the year 2016 -17 to 2020- 21, but NHM had utilised only  
22.92 per cent, 6.68 per cent , 15.46 per cent  and 64.89 per cent  in the years 
2016-17, 2017- 18, 2018 -19 and 2020 -21 respectively whereas in 2019-20, 
expenditure was incurred in excess of the budget provision.  
Keeping in view the increasing life expectancy, focused approach needs to be 
adopted for geriatric care. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.9 National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) 
Government of India launched the National Tobacco Control Programme 
(NTCP) in the year 2007- 08, with the aim to - (i) create awareness about the 
harmful effects of tobacco consumption; (ii) reduce the production and supply 
of tobacco products; (iii) ensure  effective implementation of the provisions 
under “The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of 
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and 
Distribution) Act, 2003” (COTPA); (iv) help the people quit tobacco use;   
and (v) facilitate implementation of strategies for prevention and control of 
tobacco advocated by WHO Framework Convention of Tobacco Control. 
As per Financial Management Report (FMR), the budget provision and 
expenditure incurred on National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) by 
NHM, Punjab is shown in Chart 7.6. 
 
217.45
337.90
98.90 105.50
17.60
49.85
22.56 15.29
143.00
11.42
22.92%
6.68% 15.46%
135.55%
64.89%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Percentage Expenditure
Budget provision and Expenditure
Budget Provision (₹ in lakh) Expenditure (₹ in lakh)
Percentage expenditure

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
241 
Chart 7.6: Budget provision and expenditure under NTCP in the State 
Source: Information supplied by State Health Society, Punjab 
Audit observed that the Government of India had been regularly making budget 
provision for NTCP, but NHM had incurred expenditure which ranged between 
12.79 per cent and 50.16 per cent only during the year 2018-19 to 2020-21 
whereas no expenditure was incurred against budget provision of ₹ 198.00 lakh 
during 2017-18. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.10 National Programme for Control of Blindness 
The National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) was launched in the 
year 1976 as a 100 per cent centrally sponsored programme with the goal of 
achieving a prevalence rate of 0.3 per cent of the population. The four-pronged 
strategy of the programme is: strengthening service delivery, developing human 
resources for eye care, promoting outreach activities and public awareness and 
developing institutional capacity. 
As per Financial Management Report (FMR) of NHM Punjab, budget provision 
and expenditure incurred on National Programme for Control of Blindness 
(NPCB) by NHM, Punjab during the period 2016- 17 to 2020-21 is shown in 
Chart 7.7. 
0.00
198.00
168.50
123.57
68.00
0.00 0.00
84.52
53.07
8.70
0.00%
0.00%
50.16%
42.94%
12.79%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Percentage Expenditure
Budget provision and Expenditure
Budget Provision (₹ in lakh) Expenditure (₹ in lakh)
Percentage expenditure

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
242 
Chart 7.7: Budget provision and expenditure under NPCB in the State 
Source: Information supplied by State Health Society, Punjab 
Audit observed that the Government of India had been regularly making budget 
provision for National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) during the 
year 2016- 17 to 2020- 21, but the expenditure by NHM ranged between  
25.18 per cent and 73.31 per cent only during the years 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.11 Janani Suraksha Yojana 
Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) is a safe motherhood intervention under NHM 
being implemented with the objective of reducing maternal and neo- natal 
mortality by promoting institutional delivery among the poor pregnant women. 
For pregnant women of below poverty line (BPL) and those belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes (SC)/Scheduled Tribes (ST) going to a public health 
institution for delivery, entire amount of ₹ 700 and ₹ 600 for rural and urban 
areas respectively should be disbursed in one go, at the health inst itution. 
Moreover, ₹ 500 was to be given for home deliveries of BPL and  
SC/ST pregnant women. The mother and the ASHA (wherever applicable) 
should get their entitled money at the health centre immediately on arrival and 
registration for delivery.  
The number of deliveries under JSY and incentive paid to beneficiaries during 
the period 2016- 2022 as provided by the test -checked districts is  shown in 
Table 7.9. 
 
700.66
807.29 901.51
2993.45
775.18
513.68
325.04
486.97
753.68
462.55
73.31%
40.26%
54.02%
25.18%
59.67%
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Percentage Expenditure
Budget provision and Expenditure
Budget Provision (₹ in lakh) Expenditure (₹ in lakh)
Percentage expenditure

Chapter-VII: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
243 
Table 7.9: Incentive paid under JSY during the period 2016-2022  
in test-checked districts 
Name of 
district 
Number of 
deliveries 
under JSY 
Number of beneficiaries 
to whom incentive under 
JSY was paid 
Number of beneficiaries 
to whom incentive under 
JSY was not paid 
Bathinda 17,709 13,469 4,240 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 14,505 4,493 10,012 
Gurdaspur 19,959 16,375 3,584 
Hoshiarpur 29,580 23,248 6,332 
Ludhiana 31,329 31,329 0 
Moga 16,816 15,241 1,575 
Total 1,29,898 1,04,155 25,743 
Source: Information supplied by the respective District Family Welfare Officers  
Audit observed that out of 1,29,898 beneficiaries, cash assistance was not 
provided to 25,743 beneficiaries (20 per cent) in five districts. The main reasons 
for disbursement of less cash assistance were non- deposit of JSY Card,  
non-providing of bank details and other supporting documents by the 
beneficiaries. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.12 Immunisation of children 
Immunisation is an important and effective health intervention for children. 
Vaccines have been so  effective that some diseases  that were once feared are 
now either eradicated or easily manageable. Yet, in the recent past many new 
diseases are emerging too . This makes immunisation of a child even more 
important. Target/achievement in immunisation against DPT, TT10 and TT16 
of children of five years to 16 years age in the State is given in Table 7.10.  
Table 7.10: Target/achievement in immunisation of children aged 
5 years to 16 years  
Year DPT TT10 TT16 Achievement (%) 
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement DPT TT10 TT16 
2016-17 4,48,000 4,02,360 4,82,000 3,01,266 5,26,000 2,33,828 90 63 44 
2017-18 4,52,000 3,91,814 4,86,000 3,05,893 5,31,000 2,41,274 87 63 45 
2018-19 3,94,358 3,84,955 4,97,600 2,99,549 5,97,800 2,45,091 98 60 41 
2019-20 4,38,800 3,79,849 5,01,545 3,17,861 6,02,534 2,59,440 87 63 43 
2020-21 4,41,802 3,82,150 4,62,220 2,71,704 4,84,220 1,99,232 86 59 41 
2021-22 4,41,690 3,44,311 5,07,780 2,30,095 6,10,000 1,66,640 78 45 27 
Source: Information furnished by DH&FW, Punjab 
Audit observed that achievements against the targets of Diphtheria Pertussis 
Tetanus (DPT) Booster II up to 5 years children ranged from 78  per cent   

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
244 
to 98 per cent , Tetanus Toxoid 10 (TT  10) for 10 years children ranged from 
45 per cent  to 63 per cent  and TT  16 for 16 years children ranged from  
27 per cent to 45 per cent during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22.  This indicated 
the dismal performance of immunisation in the State, particularly for TT 10 and 
TT 16. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
7.13 Conclusion 
Inadequacies in identification and mapping of needs of vulnerable population 
resulted in projection and tailoring of National Schemes to State/local 
requirements. Various inconsistencies were noticed in implementation of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes under N HM as it was seen that MHTs were 
functioning with inadequate staff strength in six test -checked districts which 
adversely affected the s creening of children. Only two out of 27 essential 
medicines/drops/ointments were available with MHTs despite having been 
prescribed by GoI. Health institutions aspiring to achieve Kayakalp status were 
significantly on a lower side and NQAS certified health institutions also did not 
show steady growth.  
DEICs were also inadequately staffed and construction of 
new DEICs was delayed. It was also noticed that funds were not utilised 
completely on implementation of National Health Programmes under NHM and 
there was an acute shortage of drugs for mental health problems. Besides, 
achievement against the fixed target for sterilisation and spacing methods was 
significantly low.  
7.14 Recommendations 
In light of audit findings, the State Government may consider; 
(i) mapping and vulnerability assessment of dependent population to 
understand the available resources, service gaps and health needs of the 
urban residents; 
(ii) provision of adequate manpower to ensure effective implementation of 
Rashtriya Bal Swasthaya Karyakram; 
(iii) improving the absorptive capacity of National Health Programmes 
under NHM through proper utilisation of allocated funds; 
(iv) motivating health institutions to aspire for achievement of Kayakalp 
status and NQAS certification; and 
(v) Prioritising immunisation of infants. 
 

245 
Chapter-VIII 
 
Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
National Health Accounts1 (NHA) is a tool to describe health expenditures and 
flow of funds in both Government and private sector in the country. Focus of 
NHA is on describing (1) entities 2 that provide resources to spend for health 
goods and services in the health system ; (2) entities3 receiving and managing 
funds from financing sources to pay for or to purchase health goods and 
services; (3) entities
4 receiving finances to produce/provide health goods and 
services; and (4) use of funds across various healthcare services5. 
NHA shows the expenditure incurred through Government s ector as well as 
private sector to provide healthcare. Thus, the role of Government is not limited 
to Government hospitals but also to regulate the private sector hospitals, clinics, 
pharmacies, etc. in the healthcare sector. Therefore, the existence of regulatory 
mechanism is important to protect healthcare consumers from health risks, 
provide a safe working environment for healthcare professionals and ensure 
public health and welfare provided through health programmes. 
Regulatory agencies monitor individual and corporate healthcare practitioners 
and facilities, inform the government about changes in the way the healthcare 
industry operates, ensure higher safety standards and attempt to improve 
healthcare quality and follow local, S tate and Central guidelines. With a view 
to check the adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms, 
implementation of the following Acts/Rules have been analysed in audit: 
• Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010; 
• Standards prescribed under National Medical Commission Act, 2019; 
• Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945; and 
• Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
 
1 National Health Accounts (NHA) E stimates for India for the f inancial year 2018-19 released in the 
year 2022. 
2  (a) Union Government : 11.71 per cent; (b) Enterprises: 5.51 per cent; (c) Others: 2.03 per cent; 
(d) State Government: 19.63 per cent; (e) Local Bodies: 1.01 per cent; and (f) Household Revenues: 
60.11 per cent. 
3  (a) Other Schemes: 5.07 per cent; (b) Private Health Insurance: 7.25 per cent; (c) Union Government: 
11.30 per cent; (d) Government Health Insurance (GHI ): 6.04 per cent ; (e) State Government: 
14.27 per cent; (f) Local Bodies: 2.84 per cent; and (g) Out of Pocket Expenditure: 53.23 per cent. 
4  (a) Providers of Preventive Care: 5.34 per cent; (b) Government Hospitals: 17.34 per cent; (c) Others: 
2.49 per cen t; (d) Private Hospitals: 28.69 per cent ; (e) Patient Transport: 3.50 per cent ; 
(f)  Government Clinics: 7.75 per cent ; (g) Private Clinics: 4.37 per cent ; (h) Diagnostic Labs: 
3.92 per cent; (i)  Pharmacies: 22.60 per cent; and (j) Admin Agencies: 4.00 per cent.  
5  (a) Governance and Administration: 3.96 per cent ; (b) Preventive Care: 9.44 per cent ; (c) Other 
functions: 3.03 per cent; (d) Pharmaceutical and other medical goods: 22.49 per cent ; (e) Patient 
transport: 3.50 per cent; (f) Inpatient Curative Care: 34.55 per cent ; (g) Outpatient Curative Care: 
18.86 per cent; and (h) Lab and Imaging: 4.17 per cent. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
246 
8.1 Implementation of the Clinical Establishments Act and Rules in 
the State  
 
8.1.1 Clinical Establishment Act 
The Central Government passed the Clinical Establishment s (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2010 (Act No. 23 of 2010) (CEA, 2010) dated 18  August 2010. 
It is considered expedient to provide registration and regulation of clinical 
establishment with a view to prescribe minimum standards of facilities and 
services which may be provided by them so that mandate of Article 47 of the 
Constitution for improvement in public health may be achieved. 
The State Governments were to adopt this Act. Section 56 of the Act ibid  
provides that the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the States in which the 
enactments specified in the Schedule are applicable. A s per the Schedule, 
Punjab State has its own Act i.e. “The Punjab State Nursing Home Registration 
Act, 1991”. 
Audit observed that ‘The Punjab State Nursing Home Registration Act, 1991’ 
was never enacted and hence, no rules were ever framed thereunder. It was , 
however, noticed that The Punjab Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2020 was enacted in October 2020, however, rules thereunder 
were not framed (July 2022).  Thus, it is evident that healthcare facilities in the 
State have been functioning in an unregulated manner. 
The provisions of the Act are meant to act as a deterrent against quackery and 
unethical practices.  Due to delay in implementation of the Act ibid, the 
following issues remained unresolved: 
 Absence of Punjab State Master Register of Clinical Establishments; 
 Non-setting up of minimum standards of facilities and services  
including emergency care and referral services; 
 Non-setting up of Fair Price Medicine Shop and a Fair Price Diagnostic 
Centre by every clinical establishment having more than one hundred 
beds;  
 Missing a ctive participation of the clinical establishment in the 
implementation of all National and State Health Programmes;  
 Non-compliance with all the applicable laws including any rules, 
regulations, instructions, guidelines, notifications, circulars, by- laws, 
etc. by clinical establishment; and 
 Non-providing of first aid to all the victims of road traffic accidents, rail 
accidents, air accidents, explosions, natural disasters and calamities who 
come or are brought to the clinical establishment. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
247 
8.1.2 Registration of Private Clinics/Hospitals in the State under  
Clinical Establishment Act , 2020 was restricted to Clinics/  
Hospitals with more than 50 beds 
As per provision of Section 2(a)  of the Punjab Clinical Establishments Act, 
2020, clinical establishment means “a hospital, maternity home, nursing home, 
dispensary, clinic, sanatorium or an institution by whatever name called that 
offers services and facilities providing diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, 
injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy in any recognis ed system of 
medicine established and administered or maintained by any person or body of 
persons, whether incorporated or not”, and shall include a clinical establishment 
owned, controlled or managed by (a) a Government or a department of the 
Government; (b) a trust, whether public or private; (c) a corporation (including 
a society) registered under a C entral, Provincial or State Act, whether or not 
owned by the Government; (d) a local authority; and (e) a single doctor. 
 
Further, as per the provision of Section 11, no person shall keep or carry on  a 
clinical establishment without being duly registered by the concerned 
registration authority in respect thereof. 
However, as per Section 8(i ) of Punjab CEA, clinical establishments with one 
hundred or more beds only are required to be registered and subsequently this 
limit was revised (June 2021) to more than 50 beds through a notification issued 
by the State Government.  Accordingly, private clinics or establishments which 
have bed capacity up to  50 beds are not required to be registered.  However , 
there is no exclusion in this regard for any clinical establishment in terms of bed 
capacity or otherwise in the CEA 2010 (Central Act). The prescribed minimum 
standards of facilities and services cannot be ensured in unregistered clinical 
establishments having bed capacity up to 50 beds. Also, as rules were not 
framed, there is no methodology/mechanism to check those that are 
unregistered. Unless rules are framed, the Act cannot be operationalised. 
Thus, the objective for registration and regulation of clinical establishments to 
prescribe minimum standards of facilities and services remained unfulfilled.  
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.2 Directorate of Medical Education and Research  
The Directorate of Medical Education and Research, Punjab was established in 
1973.  The main aim of this Directorate is development of medical manpower, 
quality education in the field of medicine and preparation of specialist and 
super-specialist doctors in the State to improve the standard  of medical 
education and promote research activities in the medical colleges of Punjab 
State.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
248 
The shortcomings observed in regulatory role of the Director, Medical 
Education and Research (DMER) are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
8.2.1  Establishment and infrastructure of Medical Education Institutes  
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 33 of the Indian Medical Council 
Act, 1956, the Medical Council of India with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government formulated the ‘Minimum Requirements for 1506/200/250 
MBBS Admissions Annually Regulations, 2010’ (amended up to January 2018) 
with an objective to establish the minimum requirements for accommodation in 
the college and its associated teaching hospitals, staff (both teaching and 
technical) and equipment in the college departments and hospitals.  
Further, the National Medical Commission
7 Act (NMC), 2019 provides for a  
medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable 
medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high- quality medical 
professionals and enforces high quality and ethical standards in all aspects of 
medical services. In exercise of power conferred by Section 57 of NMC Act, 
2019 (Act No. 30 of 2019), the ‘Minimum Requirements for Annual MBBS 
Admissions Regulations, 2020’ were notified by NMC in October 2020. These 
Regulations are applicable for the Medical Colleges being established from the 
academic session 2021-22 onwards. 
In pursuance of these Regulations, all four Government Medical Colleges were 
recognised in the State. However, shortcomings in minimum requirements 
(infrastructure and buildings) as prescribed by NMC were benchmarked with 
respect to ‘Minimum Requirements f or 150/200/250 MBBS Admissions 
Annually Regulations, 2010’ in three
8 educational institutes (Medical 
Colleges), as shown in Table 8.1.  
Table 8.1: Status of facilities not available in Medical Colleges  
Name of College Particulars as per 
Schedule I of 
Regulations, 
2010 
Requirement as per provision Actual position  
GMCH, Amritsar 
Lecture Theatre Lecture theatre (preferably air -conditioned) – 
Minimum four (three with seating capacity of 300 
students and one in the hospital with capacity for 
300 student) 
Four lecture theatres with 
capacity of 150 students each 
Examination Hall Three (capacity of 250 with 250 Sqm. each) Two examination halls with 
capacity of 250 are available 
 
6  ‘Minimum Requirements for 150 MBBS Admissions Annually Regulations, 1999’ were applicable. 
7  Earlier named as Medical Council of India. 
8  The fourth Government Medical College i.e. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Science, 
SAS Nagar, which started admissions of 100 MBBS students from the academic year 2021 -22, on 
which ‘Minimum Requirements for 150/200/250 MBBS Admissions Annually Regulations, 2020’ 
were applicable.  Though new building of the Medical College was under construction, it was 
functioning in the State Training Institute of Punjab and was attached with the existing District 
Hospital, SAS Nagar. 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
249 
Name of College Particulars as per 
Schedule I of 
Regulations, 
2010 
Requirement as per provision Actual position  
Central Workshop Central workshop having facilities for repair of 
mechanical, electrical and AC and Refrigeration 
equipment of college and the hospitals 
Not available 
Rural Health 
Training Centre 
Health Centre shall be within a distance of 30  kms 
with separate residential arrangements for boys, 
girls and interns and mess facilities. Hostel 
accommodation shall be provided for 10 per cent of 
annual intake 
Hostel arrangement in Rural 
Health Training Centre is not 
available 
Day Care Centre Day care centre with adequate facilities for taking 
care of the infants and the children of female 
students/working personnel and patients 
Not available 
Guru Gobind 
Singh Medical 
College, Faridkot 
Administrative Block Separate common room for Male and Female 
students with attached toilets (150 Sq.m. each) 
Not available 
Central Library Seating arrangement for at least 300 students For 200 students only 
One Room for 150 students (inside) For 100 students only 
One Room for 150 students (outside) For 100 students only 
Lecture Theatre Lecture theatre (preferably air -conditioned) – 
Minimum four with seating capacity of 180 
students and one with capacity of 200 students 
One with capacity of 240 
seats 
Three with 180 seats (each) 
Biometric 
fingerprint 
attendance 
Fingerprint attendance machine for capturing 
faculty attendance, using Online Faculty 
Attendance Monitoring Systems (OFAMOS) under 
the Digital Mission Mode Project (DMMP) 
Not available 
Government 
Medical College, 
Patiala 
Administrative 
Block 
Separate common room for Male and Female 
students with attached toilets (200 Sqm. each) 
Not available 
Central 
Photographic 
Section 
Central Photographic Section and audiovisual 
section with accommodation for studio, dark room, 
enlarging and Photostat work along with facilities 
for microphotography and mounting 
Not available 
Incinerator An incinerator plant commensurate with hospital 
bed strength 
Not available 
Intercom Network Intercom network including paging and bleep 
system between various sections, hospitals and 
college shall be provided for better services, 
coordination and patient care  
Not available 
Day care centre Day care centre with adequate facilities for taking 
care of the infants and the children of female 
students/working personnel and patients 
Not available 
Source: Information supplied by DMER 
Colour Code: 
 Green denotes ‘least shortage’  
 Yellow denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red denotes ‘most shortage’ 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
250 
8.3 Drug Controller of the State  
The Commissioner ate, Food and Drugs Administration, Punjab (FDA) is a 
Regulatory Agency under DH&FW.  It regulates the manufacture of drugs and 
cosmetics and sale of drugs in the State. The mission of the FDA  is to protect 
public health and to strive for pharmaceutical excellence by ensuring the 
availability of safe, effective and quality drugs. FDA is responsible for 
implementation and enforcement of the Central Act, namely ‘Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940’ and Rules framed thereunder. 
Some important responsibilities of the FDA include grant of manufacturing and 
sales licenses for Allopathic Drugs (Modern Medicine) through inspection; 
monitoring of quality of medicines and cosmetics through routine and statutory 
sampling; post-marketing surveillance; detection of spurious, a dulterated and 
misbranded drugs and c osmetics; conducting investigation of complaints and 
filing prosecution against the offenders; etc. 
8.3.1 Shortfall in inspections of manufacturing/selling units by Drug 
Inspectors 
Rules 51 and 52 of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 provide that Drug 
Inspectors (DI) should inspect the manufacturing and selling units minimum 
once in a year to ensure compliance of conditions of license. 
Scrutiny of records of Zonal Licensing Authority (ZLA), Bathinda out of  
six selected ZLAs revealed that against the due 3,360 inspections of selling 
units, 2,802 inspections were carried out by the DIs during 2016-2021 resulting 
in shortfall of 558 inspections (17 per cent ).  Moreover, against 45 due 
inspections of manufacturing units  during 2016-21, only 34 inspections were 
carried out  which resulted in shortfall of 11 inspections (24 per cent ) of 
manufacturing units  due to shortage of DIs . DIs carried out the requisite  
inspections in the remaining five sampled districts. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.3.2 Selling/Manufacturing without valid/renewed license  
Section 27(b) of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 provides for punishment in 
case of manufacture and sale of drugs without a valid license as required under 
Clause(c) of Section 18. 
Audit observed from FDA records that during the inspections carried out by the 
Drug Inspectors during 2016-2022 that 160 selling/manufacturing units were 
running without  valid/renewed licenses. Of these, eight cases were under 
investigation and in three cases, the investigation was completed but  further 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
251 
action in the Court of law was  yet to be initiated and in the remaining cases , 
action was taken with delay up to 1,427 days. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts in 
the exit conference. 
8.3.3 Delay in grant of license to new manufacturing units 
For grant of license for manufacturing drugs, Commissioner, Food and Drugs 
Administration, Punjab fixed (January 2019) timeline of 60 days from the date 
of application.  
During test -check of records of Joint Commissioner (Drugs), Punjab, it was 
noticed that the licenses were granted to the following manufacturing units with 
delay ranging between 16 days and 354 days as detailed in Table 8.2. 
Table 8.2: Details of delay in granting licenses to manufacturing units 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of  
Manufacturing unit 
Date of 
application 
Date of grant 
of license 
Delay  
(in days) 
1. Henkel Solutions 05.04.2017 24.05.2018 354  
2. Prolific Consumer Healthcare 20.02.2018 07.05.2018 16  
Source: FDA, Punjab 
Audit further noticed that licenses were issued late due to delay in inspections 
as well as compliance of shortcomings by the applicant firms. 
On being pointed out, the Government  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.4 Bio-Medical Waste Management   
Government of India in exercise of the powers conferred by the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and in supersession of Biomedical Waste (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 1998, published the Bio- Medical Waste Management 
Rules, 2016 (BMW Rules) on 28 March 2016.  These Rules stipulate duties of 
the occupier or operator of a common Bio-medical Waste Treatment Facility as 
well as the identified authorities. These rules apply to all persons who generate, 
collect, receive, store, transport, treat, dispose or handle bio- medical waste in 
any form including healthcare facility. Punjab Pollution Control Board (PPCB) 
has been entrusted with the task of implementation of environment laws in the 
State of Punjab, which includes implementation of BMW  Rules framed under 
the provisions of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
As per BMW Rules, "Bio-medical waste" means any waste, which is generated 
during the diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals or 
research activities. "Bio -medical waste treatment and disposal facility" means  
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
252 
any facility wherein treatment, disposal of bio- medical waste or processes 
incidental to such treatment and disposal are carried out and includes common 
bio-medical waste treatment facilities. “Healthcare facility” (HCF) means a 
place where diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals 
is provided irrespective of type and size of health treatment system and related 
research activity. "Occupier" means a person having administrative control over 
the institution and the premises generating bi o-medical waste. "Operator of a 
common bio-medical waste treatment facility" means a person who owns or 
controls a Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment Facility (CBMWTF) for the 
collection, reception, storage, transport, treatment, disposal or any other form  
of handling of bio-medical waste.  
During scrutiny of records of Punjab Pollution Control Board ( PPCB), it was 
noticed that the Department was publishing on its website the list of authorised 
HCFs with regard to BMW generation treatment and disposal. Further, the 
Department has adopted bar coding and GPS system for tracking purpose of 
bio-medical wastes.  Though no specific grievance redressal mechanism with 
regard to bio-medical waste management was in operation, however, all types 
of complaints related to various types of pollution received through the online 
portal were being disposed of after taking required action. 
However, some shortcomings with regard to the authorisation and operation of 
HCFs were noticed which are being discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:  
8.4.1 Health Care Facilities generating Bio -Medical Wastes without 
obtaining authorisation from PPCB 
Section 10 of Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 provides that every 
occupier or operator handling bio- medical waste, irrespective of the quantity 
shall apply to PPCB, for grant of authorisation, who shall grant the provisional 
authorisation.  Further, Section 13(1) of these rules provides that every occupier 
or operator of common bio- medical waste treatment facility shall submit an 
annual report to the prescribed authority on or before 30th of June of every year, 
giving the details of the respective treatment facility including location, waste 
quantities generated , etc. This information is to be compiled, reviewed and 
analysed for the whole State and sent to the Central Pollution Control Board on 
or before 31 st July every year . Besides, Section 15 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 stipulates that failure to comply with or contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
From the annual reports on Bio- medical Waste Management submitted by 
PPCB, it was not iced that there were many HCFs which were in operation 
without applying for authorisation from PPCB. It was further noticed that all the 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
253 
authorised HCFs were not submitting the annual reports. The year -wise details 
of such HCFs are shown in Table 8.3. 
Table 8.3: Operation of HCFs without authorisation during  
the period 2016 to 2021 
Year Total 
Number of 
HCFs in 
operation 
Number of HCFs 
operating 
without 
authorisation 
Percentage of 
HCFs operating 
without 
authorisation 
Number of 
Occupiers who 
did not submit 
annual report 
Percentage of 
non-
submission of 
annual report 
2016 6,475 1,875 29 2,233 34 
2017 7,137 1,987 28 4,262  60 
2018 8,234 3,765 46 4,165 51 
2019 9,595 5,193 54 5,465 57 
2020 12,554 2,314 18 8,066 64 
2021 13,426 1,519 11 8,550 64 
Source: Information/data furnished by PPCB 
From the above table, it is evident that during 2016 to 2021, HCFs ranging 
between 11 per cent and 54 per cent were operating without authorisation. 
Further, non-submission of annual reports by HCFs was on an increasing trend, 
which ranged between 51 per cent  and 64 per cent  with an average of 
6,561 units during the years 2018- 2021. This indicates inadequate compliance 
of the regulatory mechanism on Bio- Medical Waste Management in the State 
and non- adherence to the provisions of Section 15 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986. 
On being pointed out, the Department admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.4.2 Non-conduct of third -party audit of the existing Common  
Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CBWTF) 
Schedule-III of Bio Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 specifies that it is 
the duty of State Pollution Control Board to undertake and support third party 
audits of the Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CBWTF) in the 
State.  
During scrutiny of records of PPCB, as per annual report submitted to the CPCB 
for the year 2021, it was not iced that there were five CBWTFs in operation in 
the State, but no third-party audit had been conducted so far. 
8.4.3 Inadequate training of health workers 
Section 4(g) of Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 provides that all 
HCFs should provide training to  all its workers involved in handling of  
bio-medical waste at the time of induction and thereafter, at least once in a year. 
Details of training programmes conducted, number of personnel trained, and 
number of personnel who had not undergone any training shall be provided in 
the Annual Report. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
254 
Audit observed that trainings were not imparted by HCFs as required under the 
Rules, as detailed in Table 8.4. 
Table 8.4: Shortfall in imparting trainings by HCFs during  
the period 2016 to 2021 
Year Total number of 
HCFs 
Number of HCFs which 
organised trainings for 
health workers 
Shortfall in organising 
trainings (percentage) 
2016 6,475 373 6,102 (94) 
2017 7,137 642 6,495 (91) 
2018 8,234 1,164 7,070 (86) 
2019 9,595 1,346 8,249 (86) 
2020 12,554 1,593 10,961 (87) 
2021 13,426 1,331 12,095 (90) 
Source: Information/data furnished by PPCB 
It is evident from the above table that the shortfall in organising training for the 
health workers by HCFs was ranging between 86 per cent  and 94 per cent  
contrary to the provision of the Rules ibid.    
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.4.4  Non-constitution of Bio-Medical Waste Management Committee 
Section 4(r) of Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016  provides that all 
Health Care Facilities (HCF) shall establish a system to review and monitor the 
activities related to bio-medical waste management, either through an existing 
committee or by forming a new committee.  
Audit observed that out of total 13,426 HCFs  as of December 2021, only 
5,994 HCFs (45 per  cent) constituted Bio -Medical Waste Management 
Committees during 2016-2021 and the remaining 7,432 HCFs did not constitute 
the Committee.  Non-formation of the requisite committee in 55 per cent HCFs 
indicated lack of  system to review and monitor the activities relating to  
bio-medical waste management in HCFs. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.4.5 Non-practicing pre-treatment of Microbiology and Biotechnology 
waste 
Section 8(8) of Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016  provides that 
Microbiology waste and all other clinical laboratory waste shall be pre -treated 
by sterilisation to Log 6 or disinfection to Log 4 9, as per the World Health 
 
9 Disinfectant effectiveness of Microbiology and all other clinical laboratory waste are measured with 
different levels e.g. Log 6 denotes sterlisation by 99.9999% and Log 4 denotes disinfection by 
99.99%. 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
255 
Organisation guidelines before packing and sending to the Common Bio-
Medical Waste Treatment Facility. 
Audit noticed that lab microbiology and biotechnology waste was pre -treated 
by 14 per cent  to 19 per cent  HCFs only during the period 2016 to 2021 as 
depicted in Table 8.5.  HCFs ranging from 81 per cent to 86 per cent  did not 
follow the provisions as laid down in the Rules ibid  which indicated improper 
monitoring by PPCB.  L apse in pre -treatment of microbiology and 
biotechnology waste could result in spreading of infection due to such untreated 
highly infectious waste. 
Table 8.5: Position of pre-treatment of lab microbiology and  
biotechnology waste 
Year Total number 
of HCFs 
Number of HCFs in which 
pre-treatment of lab 
microbiology and 
biotechnology waste was done 
Number of HCFs in which  
pre-treatment of lab microbiology 
and biotechnology waste was not 
done (percentage) 
2016 6,475 898 5,577 (86) 
2017 7,137 1,377 5,760 (81) 
2018 8,234 1,405 6,829 (83) 
2019 9,595 1,861 7,734 (81) 
2020 12,554 1,792 10,762 (86) 
2021 13,426 2,117 11,309 (84) 
Source: Information and data furnished by PPCB 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.4.6 No punitive action for violation 
Rule 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act , 1986 provides that whosoever 
fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect of each such 
failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both 
and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or 
contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or 
contravention. 
Audit observed that a total of 13,174 violations in HCFs and 26 violations in the 
Common Bio- Medical Waste Treatment Facilit ies (CBWTF) were noticed  
during 2016-2021. Though show cause notices were issued to all such  
HCFs/CBWTF, no punitive action was taken against the violators. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
256 
8.4.7 Shortfall in meetings of Advisory Committee 
Section 11 of Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 provides that every 
State Government shall constitute an Advisory Committee for the respective 
State under the chairmanship of the respective Health Secretary to oversee the 
implementation of the Rules in the respective S tate and to advi se any 
improvements.  Moreover, the Advisory Committee shall meet at least once in 
six months and review all matters related to the implementation  of the 
provisions of these Rules in the State. 
Audit observed that the first meeting of the Advisory Committee was conducted 
(September 2018) after a gap of 29 months after publication of notification of 
Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules , 2016 (March 2016). The position of 
meetings of Advisory Committee is detailed in Table 8.6. 
Table 8.6: Position of meetings of Advisory Committee 
Year Number of meetings 
required to be held 
Number of  
meetings held 
Shortfall 
2016-17 2 0 2 
2017-18 2 0 2 
2018-19 2 1 1 
2019-20 2 1 1 
2020-21 2 1 1 
2021-22 2 0 2 
Total 12 3 9 
Source: Information and data furnished by PPCB 
Table 8.6 shows that only three meetings of Advisory Committee were held 
during the period 2016-2022 against the requirement of twelve  meetings, 
thereby resulting in 75 per cent shortfall in conduct of the meetings. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the facts  in 
the exit conference. 
8.5  Conclusion 
The envisaged regulatory mechanism was not functioning effectively to ensure 
responsible provision of health services to the people.  For the registration and 
regulation of the clinical establishments, the State Government adopted Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act in October 2020 i.e. after a 
gap of ten years from the date when the Clinical Establishment s (Registration 
and Regulation) Act was enacted in 2010 by the Union Government. Rules 
under the State Act were yet to be framed .  Provisions of Punjab Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2020 do not bind the private 
clinics or establishments having capacity up to  50 beds to get themselves 
registered unlike Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
2010 passed by the Central Government which provides that all the clinics or 

Chapter-VIII: Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanisms 
257 
establishments should be registered.  As a result, the prescribed minimum 
standards of facilities and services could not be ensured in these unregistered 
clinical establishments.  Adequacy of infrastructure in the Medical Colleges as 
per norms was not ensured. Further, 160 selling/manufacturing units were 
running without valid/renewed licenses.  Some Health Care Facilities were 
working without valid authoris ation and the requisite annual reports  were not 
submitted by most of the HCFs. Further, most of the HCFs did not impart  any 
training to the Health Workers  and also did not constitute Bio-Medical Waste 
Management Committees  to review and monitor the activities related to  
bio-medical waste management and the Advisory Committee was not actively 
overseeing the implementation of the BMW Rules. These were being poorly 
implemented in the State posing a serious health hazard. 
8.6 Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may consider: 
(i) expediting framing of rules under the Clinical Establishments 
(Registration and Regulation) Act and ensure implementation thereof at 
the earliest; 
(ii) ensuring adequate infrastructure at medical colleges for smooth 
functioning; 
(iii) giving direction to the Drug Inspectors for conducting inspections of 
manufacturing and selling units as per extant Rules; 
(iv) ensuring adequate monitoring mechanism to check selling/ 
manufacturing without valid/renewed licenses and taking timely action 
against those units running without valid licenses; and 
(v) ensuring compliance with Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules by all 
HCFs in public as well as in private sector with regard to obtaining 
requisite authorisation from PPCB , submission of annual returns , 
conducting adequate training, constitution of Bio Medical Waste 
Management Committees, etc. 

259 
Chapter-IX 
 
Sustainable Development Goal-3 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) evolved from the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDG). The MDGs were a set of eight international 
development goals with 18 quantifiable targets for the year 2015 set by the 
Millennium Summit of the United Nations in 2000.  MDGs were the first Global 
attempt at establishing measurable goals and targets on key challenges facing 
the world within a single framework and galvanised countries and communities 
into action. 
The Sustainable Development Goals , 2030 Agenda was adopted by the  
United Nations General Assembly in September 2015 to set out a vision for a 
world free of poverty, hunger, disease and want  which came into effect from  
1 January 2016 and goals were to be achieved by 2030. There are 17 SDGs  
(SDG-1 to SDG -17) and 169 targets for sustainable development. India is 
committed to 2030 Agenda and SDGs were to be taken as key contours of 
envisioning development up to local level. 
SDG-3 seeks to ensure health and well -being for all, at every stage of life.  
The Goal addresses all major health priorities, including reproductive, maternal 
and child health; communicable, non- communicable and environmental 
diseases; universal health coverage; and access to safe, effective, quality and 
affordable medicines and vaccines.  There are 28 Global Indicators covering 
13 Global Targets. In India, National Institution for Transforming India (NITI) 
Aayog is responsible for overall coordination of the SDGs and the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is responsible for 
formulation of the National Indicator Framework (NIF) to monitor the SDGs.
 
Punjab Vision Document, 2030 was circulated (November 2018) by the State 
Government to achieve Sustainable Development Goals. To implement Punjab 
Vision, 2030, the State Government established (August 2019) the Sustainable 
Development Goals Coordination Centre (SDGCC) under the Planning 
Department in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP). The Coordination Centre is meant to work as a resource and 
knowledge hub, a think tank and a monitoring post for the Government of 
Punjab (GoP).  It will facilitate the planning and implementation process of the 
Punjab Vision, 2030 in the State. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
260 
9.1 Formulation of State Indicator Framework and District Indicator 
Framework  
To monitor and measure the progress of SDGs, the State Government had to 
formulate State Indicator Framework (SIF) and District Indicator Framework 
(DIF) in consultation with the NITI Aayog. The State Governments have been 
given flexibility to develop their own indicators taking into consideration local 
priorities to monitor SDGs and NIF will serve as a basis.  
A brief description of the thirteen targets under SDG-3 is given below: 
Target No. Brief description 
3.1 By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 1,00,000 live births 
3.2 By 2030, end preventable deaths of new -borns and children under 5 years of age, with all 
countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as  
12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births 
3.3 By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases 
and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases 
3.4 By 2030, reduce by one -third premature mortality from non- communicable diseases 
through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being  
3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse 
and harmful use of alcohol 
3.6 By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents  
3.7 By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including 
for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health 
into national strategies and programmes 
3.8 Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality 
essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential 
medicines and vaccines for all 
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals 
and air, water and soil pollution and contamination  
3.a Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organi sation Framework Convention 
on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate 
3.b Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and 
non-
communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to 
affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declara tion on 
the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS) Agreement and Public 
Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in 
the Agreement on TRIPS regarding flexibilities to protect public hea lth, and, in particular, 
provide access to medicines for all  
3.c Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and 
retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed 
countries and small island developing States 
3.d Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early 
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks 

Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
261 
Audit noticed the following from a comparative analysis (Appendix 9.1) of the 
indicators for 13 targets by scrutinising Global Indicators Framework (GIF), 
National Indicators Framework (NIF) and State Indicators Framework (SIF):  
i. There are 28 Global Indicators and 41 National Indicators covering all  
13 targets under SDG -3 as per NIF (Version 3.0) . In Punjab, the State 
Indicator Framework (SIF) was formulated in October 2021 based on 
NIF (Version 1.0) which consisted of 41 National Indicators covering 
12 targets1. The State adopted all 41 NIF Indicators covering 12 targets 
in its SIF (Version 1.0).  
ii. In addition, 55 Punjab Specific Indicators were formulated covering 
eight out of 12 targets under SDG -3. No State -specific indicator was 
developed for target Nos. 3.6, 3.9, 3.a and 3.c at State level. 
iii. The District Indicator Framework describing relevant district- level 
indicators, data unit, periodicity, department concerned and proposed 
data source  was not  prepared. However, a District Baseline Report 
containing only baseline data on SDG indicators to assess the starting 
point on SDGs was prepared. The SDG District Baseline Report Punjab 
was published having 33 indicators. These 33 indicators cover eight out 
of 1 2 targets i.e. no indicator was  developed for the remaining four  
targets i.e. target Nos. 3.5, 3.9, 3.a and 3.b. 
The details of indicators adopted in the National Indicator Framework and State 
Indicator Framework from Global Indicator Framework are presented in the  
Chart 9.1. 
Chart 9.1: Status of indicators formulated/adopted for targets of SDG-3 
Sources: Global Indicator Framework, National Indicator Framework & State Indicator Framework 
 
1  Indicator under Target No. 3.d was not evolved in NIF Version 1.0. 
2 2
5
2 2 1 2 2 3
1
3
1 2
4 3
10
3 3
1
3
8
2 1 1 2
0
13
15 14 13
9
1
10
13
2 1
3 2
0
3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.a 3.b 3.c 3.d
Number of Indicators
Global Target No.
Targets and Indicators under SDG-3
Indicators in GIF
Indicators adopted from GIF and New in NIF (Version-1.0)
Indicators adopted from NIF and New in SIF (Version 1.0)

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
262 
In the absence of District Indicator Framework, achievement in the test-checked 
districts could not be assessed during audit. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
9.2 Sustainable Development Goals Index Reports 
SDG India Index Baseline Report, 2018 issued by NITI Aayog provides that the 
SDG Index can be useful to States/UTs in assessing their progress towards 
SDGs in the following ways:  
i. Support States/UTs to benchmark their progress: SDG India Index can 
help States/UTs to benchmark their progress against the national targets 
and performance of their  peers to understand reasons for differential 
performance and devise better strategies to achieve the SDGs by 2030.  
ii. Support States/UTs to identify priority areas: SDG India Index will act 
as a tool to highlight the key areas on which the respective States/UTs 
need to invest and improve by enabling States/UTs to measure 
incremental progress.  
iii. Highlight data gaps related across SDGs: SDG India Index highlights 
the need to develop statistical systems at the National and State levels to 
increase the capacity and capability of data collection. 
9.2.1 Status of Punjab SDG Index Reports  
The State Government published the first Punjab Sustainable Goals  Index 
Analysis Report based on NITI Aayog’s SDG India Index Report for the year 
2020-21.  
In the State, 55 Punjab Specific Indicators were developed, but these were  not 
published in Punjab SDG Index Report 2020-21 . Instead, 10 NIF indicators 
were published which had the same data sources2 as of India SDG Index Report  
2020-21 and National targets for 10 indicators were set as the State targets . 
Thus, it is merely a replication of India SDG Index Report 2020-21. Further, 
baseline figures of indicators were not mentioned in the SIF and hence, State’s 
progress cannot be benchmarked against different indicators. 
SDG District Baseline Report Punjab  was published having 33 indicators for 
SDG-3 for which data sources were the information collected from the National 
reports such as National Family Health Survey (NFHS), Crime in India Report, 
Central Government Portals and departments  concerned. SDGCC had not 
developed any mechanism for ensuring reliability of data being provided by the 
departments concerned. Ensuring reliability of data ensures  genuineness of 
achievement against target.  
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
2 Health Management Information System of  Ministry of Health and Family Welf are and  Sample 
Registration System of Ministry of Home Affairs, GoI.  

Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
263 
9.2.2 Partial publication of Indicators for SDG-3 in SDG Index Reports 
The Global Indicator Framework for SDGs developed by the Inter-Agency and 
Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG 3 -SDGs) comprises of 232 unique 
indicators (excluding duplicate and triplicate ones). Based on the level of 
methodological development and the availability of data, all these indicators 
have been classified into three tiers (Tier 4  I, II and  III) to facilitate 
implementation. As of 30 November 2022, there were 25 indicators under Tier 
I, 3 under Tier II and zero under Tier III for SDG-3.  
Tier-wise analysis of Indicators (Appendix 9.1)  adopted in India SDG Index 
Report for Punjab and Punjab SDG Index Report out of GIF/NIF has been given 
in Table 9.1. 
Table 9.1: Tier-wise indicator for SDG-3 
Tier No. of 
Indicators 
in GIF 
NIF 
Indicators 
from GIF 
and New 
Indicators 
NIF Indicators 
from GIF 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index 2021 
NIF Indicators 
from GIF 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index 2021 
Remarks 
I 25 14 8 8 
8 indicators cover 8 
targets 
(3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 
3.7, 3.8 and 3.c) 
8 indicators cover 7 
targets 
(3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 
3.8 and 3.c) 
II 3 0 0 0 No indicator covered 
III 0 0 0 0 Not applicable 
New 
(I & II) -- 27 2 2 
2 indicators cover 
2 differently defined 
targets (3.2 and 3.8) 
Total 28 41 10 10 
10 indicators cover 
only 8 targets 
10 indicators cover 
only 7 targets 
Source: Global Indicator Framework, National Indicator Framework & State Indicator Framework 
 
 
3  Constituted by United Nations Statistical Commission and agreed upon at the 48 th session of the 
United Nations Statistical Commission held in March 2017 and adopted by the General Assembly on 
6 July 2017 (A/RES/71/313). 
4  Tier I: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and standards 
are available, and data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per cent of countries and of 
the population in every region where the indicator is relevant.   
 Tier II: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and standards 
are available, but data are not regularly produced by countries.   
 Tier III: No internationally established methodology or standards are yet available for the indicator, 
but methodology/standards are being evolved.  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
264 
It is evident from Table 9.1 and Appendix 9.1 that:  
i) No indicator was  published in India SDG Index for four Targets  
(3.5, 3.9, 3.a  and 3.b) under SDG -3 i.e. indicators adopted for SDG -3 
capture only eight out of the 12 SDG-3 targets due to non-availability of 
data at sub-national level i.e. State Level.  
ii) Punjab Sustainable Development Goals Index 2020- 21 Report adopted 
10 indicators for SDG-3 while it captures only seven targets out of 12.  
Thus, it is evident that most Global Indicators and more than 50 per cent of NIF 
Indicators are under Tier I. These Tier -I Indicators are conceptually clear and 
have an internationally established methodology and standards , and data are 
also regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per  cent of countries . 
However, P unjab published  10 Indicators covering only 7 out of  
12 T argets. The performance of these indicators has been discussed in 
Paragraph 9.4.1. 
Covering more numbers of indicators by managing data thereof will present a 
more detailed picture of achievement of the target concerned.   
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
9.3 Planning and mapping budget for SDG-3 
 
9.3.1 Non-preparation of Strategic Plan and Action plan for SDG-3 in 
Punjab 
The State Government and the UNDP entered into a Memorandum of 
Agreement (MoA) on 21 August 2019 to coordinate the implementation of  
SDG Vision 2030 for the State of Punjab with an estimated cost of ₹ 9.06 crore 
for the period of three years. It was agreed to deliver seven years’ Strategic Plan 
and three years’ Action Plan under Component 2 of Annexure -1 of the MoA 
along with generating SDG awareness among all stakeholders, SDG localisation 
at District and  GP Level, establishing plans and systems to mobilise p artners 
and resources to meet the estimated needs for human, financial and physical 
resources, developing sophisticated technology- based tools to monitor SDGs 
and ensuring monitoring and evaluation systems are in place to collect data and 
monitor progress etc. under Components 1, 3, 4 and 5. 
Audit noticed from the information furnished (March 2023) by the Department 
of Planning, Government of Punjab that a strategic plan was  not formulated. 
However, a document titled Punjab State SDG action plan namely Punjab SDG, 
2030 Road Map was completed by the SDGCC.  

Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
265 
Thus, after SDGs came into effect from 1 January 2016, Punjab Vision 
Document, 2030 was formulated in November 2018 after a lapse of more than 
two years and a further step in this direction was taken in August 2019  
by entering into an agreement with UNDP after a lapse of more than three years. 
Further, the State Strategic Plan for SDG -3 which was to be formulated in the 
first year of the agreement was  not formulated even after the end of the 
agreement period ( 21 August 2019 to 20 September 2022). In the absence of 
integrated planning, the Departments aligned for achievement of SDG -3 are 
working as usual in silos. 
Audit is of the view that integrated planning considering trade -offs and 
synergies among different SDGs and within SDG is the next step to achieve the 
desired goals after development of vision like Punjab Vision Document , 2030. 
Priorities in respect of targets, for instance target of universal healthcare access 
within SDG-3 may be fixed based on availability of resources and their  
contribution to more SDGs apart from SDG-3. 
9.3.2 Budgeting for Sustainable Development Goals focusing on SDG-3 
in Punjab 
There are several ways in which SDGs are being integrated in budgeting -  
(i) mapping budget allocations against SDGs; (ii) including a narrative in the 
budget document to broadly explain how budget corresponds to SDGs;  
(iii) using SDG achievements to evaluate budget outcomes ; and (iv) resorting 
to SDGs as a tool to rationalise resource allocation and decide financing 
priorities.  Further, as per Vision Document 2030, incorporating and aligning 
the local challenges for implementing SDGs requires Government of Punjab to 
strengthen and prioritise its spending in accordance with the goals and targets 
described in the State Vision 2030. In addition, GoP will also have to find new 
and innovative ways of raising additional resources to fund the gaps that 
will/may arise due to the funds available and funds required to meet the Vision 
2030 goals and targets. 
Audit noticed from the information furnished by the nodal department that State 
Budget has not yet been aligned (March 2023) to the SDGs. Besides ,  
Outcome-Output Framework on the basis of State Budget was  also not 
developed as w as done in the neighbouring State of Haryana.  
Moreover, these tasks were to be accomplished by the SDGCC as per the 
deliverables incorporated in the Memorandum of Agreement.  
Further, as per Vision Document 2030, funds required under GoP Budget Head 
related to SDG-3 Goal over the three years (FY17-FY19), seven years (FY17-
FY23) and 14 years (FY17-FY30) periods to achieve Vision 2030 are shown as 
under: 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
266 
(₹ in crore) 
Budget Head FY17-FY19 FY17-FY23 FY17-FY30 
Public Health and Family Welfare 18,648.53 1,10,602.76 6,14,048.27 
However, based on the GoP Budget, the status of funds5 made available for the 
three-year period 2017-2019 and seven-year period 2017-2023 is shown below: 
(₹ in crore) 
Budget Head FY17-FY19 FY17-FY23 
Public Health and Family Welfare 6,862.73 25,433.05 
It is evident from the above tables that 77 per cent less funds were provided in 
the budget during the seven -year period of 2017-2023 and the shortage was to 
the tune of ₹  85,169.71 crore. Though it was claimed in the report ‘Localising  
SDGs 2019’ issued by NITI Aayog in July 2019 that provisions were being 
made to bridge the resource gaps , the gap has been widening year on year.  
Thus, GoP will have to look for alternative sources of funding to meet the  
resource gap arising out of what is likely to be available and what is required to 
achieve SDG 2030 goals/targets.   
9.3.3 Mapping of Programmes/Schemes for SDG-3 in Punjab 
The programmes/schemes under SDG -3 were initially mapped  (June 2019)  
during formulation of Four-Year Strategic Action Plan  (4SAP) of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare wherein 19 programmes/ schemes 
were mapped with different indicators  adopted from the NIF such as Janani 
Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram, Janani Suraksha Yojna, Strengthening of 
Healthcare Infrastructure for MCH, Ensuring Comprehensive Primary Health 
Care, Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram, ASHA Programme, Immunisation, 
Reduction in prevalence and incidence  of Communicable Diseases, Revised 
National TB Control Programme, National Vector Borne Disease Control 
Programme, National Viral Hepatitis Programme, National Leprosy 
Elimination Programme, Punjab State AIDS Control Society, etc. 
However, no further exercise was carried out during the development of State 
Indicator Framework as it was developed much later in October 2021 and  
55 new State-specific indicators were developed in the SIF whereas at the time 
of earlier mapping in the 4SAP, there were only 41 indicators adopted from the 
NIF. The mapping exercise in the SIF would have been a useful tool to identify 
opportunities for convergence and co- implementation of schemes and  
programmes. On the other hand, it would have facilitated an assessment of the 
adequacy of programmes/schemes for achieving the relevant SDG targets in the 
State. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
 
5  Annual Financial Statement of Government of Punjab for the period 2017-2023. 

Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
267 
9.4 Performance of indicators for SDG-3  
SDG India Index for 2018-2021 provide information regarding performance of 
indicators for SDGs.  
9.4.1 Analysis of performance of Indicators meant for evaluation of 
progress of SDG-3 
Out of total 96 indicators (41 indicators adopted from NIF and 55 Punjab 
specific indicators) formulated in the SIF, only 10 indicators have been taken in 
the SDG Punjab Index reports for measuring progress of 7 targets (out of 12) of 
SDG-3.  
Year-wise achievement (2018-2021) of 10 indicators under SDG -3 against the 
targets fixed for 2030 by the Centre and adopted by the State have been analysed 
by Audit, as shown in SDG India Index for 2018- 2021. The performance of 
indicators is presented in Table 9.2. 
Table 9.2: Performance of 10 indicators during the period 2018-2021 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of indicator Target 
for 2030 
Achievement 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1. 3.1.1 Maternal Mortality Rate 70 122 122 129 
2. 3.2.1 Under  5 mortality rate per 
1,000 live births 
25 33 33 23 
3. 3.2.3 Percentage of fully 
immunised children in the age 
group 9-11 months 
100 89 62 89 
4. 3.3.1 HIV Incidence per 1,000 
uninfected population 
0 -- 0.07 0.08 
5. 3.3.2 Total case notification  of 
Tuberculosis per 1, 00,000 
population 
242 153 182 196 
6. 3.4.2 Suicide Rate per 1,00,000 
population 
3.5 -- -- 7.9 
7. 3.6.1 Death Rate due to road 
traffic accidents per 1,00,000 
population 
5.81 -- -- 15.41 
8. 3.7.3 Percentage of institutional 
deliveries out of total deliveries 
reported 
100 -- 62.6 98.5 
9. 3.8.2 Monthly per capita out -of-
pocket expenditure on health as a 
share of monthly per  capita 
consumption 
7.83 -- -- 13.5 
10. 3.c.1 Total physicians, nurses and 
midwives per 10,000 population 
45 64 56 56 
Source: SDG India Index for 2018-2021 
The above table shows that performance in respect of three indicators (3.2.1, 
3.3.2 and 3.c.1) was better than the national target and the performance on one 
indicator (3.7.3) has shown significant improvement from 2019- 20 to 2020-21 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
268 
against the target of 2030 whereas performance on six 6 indicators meant for 
evaluating progress on SDG-3 was showing marginal improvement. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
9.5 Intervention and coordination  
India presented its second Voluntary National Review (VNR) in July 2020   
to United Nations’ High -Level Political Forum (HLPF) 7 . The title of the 
presentation, 'Decade of Action: Taking SDGs from Global to Local' was meant 
to make compliance of the commitments towards involvement of  
multi-stakeholders and localising the SDGs. The second VNR provides for eight 
steps (as mentioned in the picture below) towards SDGs locali sation at sub-
national level i.e. at State/UT level in India.  
 
 
6  3.1.1: Maternal Mortality ; 3.2.3: Percentage of fully immunised children in the age group  
9-11 months; 3.3.1: HIV Incidence per 1,000 uninfected population; 3.4.2: Suicide Rate per 1,00,000 
population; 3.6.1: Death Rate due to road traffic accidents (per 1,00,000 population) ; and   
3.8.2: Monthly per capita out -of-pocket expenditure on health as a share of monthly per capita 
consumption. 
7  As a signatory to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, India is committed to participating 
in the international review of the progress of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) on a regular 
basis. The foremost platform for international follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda is the United 
Nations’ High-Level Political Forum (HLPF), which has been meeting annually since 2016 under the 
auspices of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).  
 In the HLPF, UN member countries present their Voluntary National Review (VNR) on the 
implementation of SDGs. The VNRs serve as a basis for the international review of the progress on 
the SDGs. 


Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
269 
Scrutiny of information (2018-2022) of SDGCC revealed efforts made for 
localisation of SDGs  and achievement thereof . The achievement and 
shortcomings noticed in the State are mentioned below:  
 SDG related awareness generation involved various activities carried 
out by SDGCC such as launch of SDGCC website, launch of the SDG 
e-module and SDG Anthem for Punjab, setting in place communication 
platforms with academia and journalists, events with r adio jockeys and 
students.  
 Shortcomings noticed regarding drafting of SIF and DIF ha ve been 
mentioned in Paragraph 9.1.  
 Shortcomings regarding data ecosystem ha ve been mentioned in 
Paragraph 9.2. 
 Despite having been developed, SDG dashboard could not be 
operationalised (March 2023) due to non- availability of funds with the 
department for hosting the dashboard on Punjab State Data Center 
(PSDC) server.  
 The SDG Coordination Centre was established in August 2019 and the 
agreement period was three years which was later on extended for a 
month i.e. up to September 2022 and then the State Government decided 
not to grant further extension. However, SDGCC could not complete 
tasks such as formulation of State Strategic Action Plan, a lignment of 
State Budget to SDGs, development of Output -Outcome Framework 
based on the State Budget, constitution of SDG Cell in only four districts 
of Patiala, SAS Nagar, Fatehgarh Sahib and Rupnagar instead of in all 
the districts and capacity building exercise on SDG indicators/dashboard 
through various tutorials during its entire tenure of agreement including 
the extended period.  
 Dashboard was not activated for SDG review as of March 2023.  
 Government of Punjab constituted a State Level Task Force for 
monitoring of SDGs under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Finance and 
Planning Minister and Project Steering Committee (PSC) for periodic 
review of project (Establishment of SDGCC) activities to be jointly co-
chaired by Planning Secretary, Government of Punjab and UNDP. The 
State Level Task Force held six meetings up to February 2023 and PSC 
met only two times (once in March 2021 and in August 2022) during the 
period August 2018 to February 2023.  
 Shortcomings regarding ranking of districts have been mentioned in 
Paragraph 9.1.   

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services  
270 
Thus, it is evident from the above paragraphs that the eight- step process to be 
adopted for locali sation of the SDGs in the States , as presented in the second 
Voluntary National Review in July 2020 to United Nations’ High- Level 
Political Forum was not effectively executed in the State of Punjab. Further, the 
SDGs could not reach the lower strata of State Government as well as L ocal 
Government effectively even after a lapse of more than seven  years out of the 
total 15-year period. 
The reply of the State Government was awaited (February 2024). 
9.6 Conclusion 
SDG-3 aims to ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all, at all ages 
by addressing all major health priorities: reproductive, maternal, new -born, 
child and adolescent health; communicable and non- communicable diseases; 
universal health coverage; and access for all to safe, effective, quality and 
affordable medicines and vaccines.  
The State adopted all the 41 NIF indicators which cover 12 out of 13 targets in 
its SIF. Out of these 12  targets of SDG -3, Punjab Specific Indicators for four 
targets were not formulated/adopted in the SIF.  Further, the District Indicator 
Framework was not developed  (March 2023). The State was able to publish 
only 10 indicators (seven targets) out of 96 indicators (12 targets) during the 
eight years’ period (2023) as against the timeframe for achievement of SDG s 
by the year 2030. 
The mapping of the existing programmes/schemes with relevant SDGs in the 
State Budget, showing linkages and performance against the planned budget 
expenditure for the SDG targets was not done.  Analysis of  progress of 
10 indicators for SDG-3 (2018-2021) revealed that performance of only three  
indicators (3.2.1, 3.3.2 and 3.c.1) was satisfactory. 
9.7 Recommendations 
There needs to be convergence of all the various State agencies involved in 
implementation of the different aspects of SDG-3.  Accordingly, 
(i) the State Government may take steps to adopt more numbers of indicators 
in Punjab SDG Index Report so as to present a comprehensive picture for 
measuring and monitoring the performance of the State in achievement of 
SDGs; 
(ii) State Strategic Plan with well- defined milestones for measuring and 
monitoring the implementation may be developed on priority basis; 

Chapter-IX: Sustainable Development Goal-3 
271 
(iii) the State Budget should be aligned to the SDGs and the District Indicator 
Framework should be developed in line with the National Indicator 
Framework; and 
(iv) SDGs Dashboard should be operationalised. 
 
Chandigarh 
The 11 September 2024 
 
(NAZLI J. SHAYIN) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The 13 September 2024 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


Appendices 
 
273 
Appendix 1.1 
(Referred to in ‘Introduction’) 
Responsibilities of Health and Family Welfare Department as per 
Government of Punjab, Allocation of Business Rules, 2007 
(A) ALLOPATHIC SYSTEM OF MEDICINE WING 
i.  Establishment of Directorate of Health and Family Welfare and Civil Surgeon  
ii.  Urban and rural allopathic health services including community health centres, 
primary health centres and sub -centres, subsidiary health centres, hospitals and 
dispensaries 
iii.  Public health and sanitation 
iv.  Prevention and control of diseases - National Malaria Eradication Programme - 
National Small Pox Eradication Programme - Mass Vaccination - Other 
Preventive Measures - Immunization against Polio - National Leprosy Control 
Programme - National Trachoma Control Programme - National Programme 
for Control of Blindness 
v.  Prevention of food adulteration - Food Inspectorate - Food Laboratories 
vi.  Drug Control 
vii.  Public health laboratories 
viii.  Chemical laboratories 
ix.  Bacteriological laboratories 
x.  Training of para health staff 
xi.  Health education and publicity 
xii.  Health statistics 
xiii.  Employees State Insurance Scheme 
xiv.  State and District Family Welfare Bureaus 
xv.  Urban and Rural Family Welfare Services 
xvi.  Fairs and pilgrimages 
xvii.  Mental Hospital, Amritsar 
xviii.  T.B. Hospital, Hermitage, Sangrur 
xix.  T.B. Clinic and Sanatorium, Patiala 
xx.  Pasteur Institute and prevention and control of rabies 
xxi.  Punjab Vaccine and Hygiene Institute, Amritsar 
xxii.  Central Midwifery Board 
xxiii.  Punjab Civil Medical Service Class I and Class II 
xxiv.  Prohibition of smoking in cinema halls 
xxv.  Sanitary Board relating to water supply and other sanitary schemes submitted 
by the Board and grant-in-aid by the Board 
xxvi.  All matters relating to the administration of the following Acts and Rules made 
thereunder - (a) the Poison Act, 1919; (b) the Punjab Vaccination Act, 1953; 
(c) the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969; and (d) the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 
xxvii.  Medical attendance on Government employees and their families, levy of fees 
by medical officers 
xxviii.  Blood transfusion services and blood banks 
xxix.  Eye banks 
xxx.  Infectious Diseases Hospitals 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
274 
xxxi.  Maternity and Child Welfare 
xxxii.  Coordination 
(B) AYURVEDIC AND UNANI SYSTEM OF MEDICINE WING 
i.  Establishment of Ayurvedic Wing, Punjab 
ii.  Ayurvedic and Unani System of medicines 
iii.  Urban and rural ayurvedic health services 
iv.  Promotion of Yoga as an alternative system of medicine 
(C) HOMOEOPATHIC SYSTEM OF MEDICINE WING 
i.  Establishment of the Homoeopathic Wing, Punjab 
ii.  Homoeopathic system of medicine 
iii.  All urban and rural Homoeopathic dispensaries in the State 
Source: Allocation of Business Rules, 2007, GoP 
 

Appendices 
275 
Responsibilities of Department of Medical Education and Research as 
per Government of Punjab, Allocation of Business Rules, 2007 
i.  Establishment of Directorate of Medical Education and Research, and the Professors, 
Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Senior Lecturers, Lecturers, Registrars 
and Demonstrators at the Government Medical Colleges, Amritsar and Patiala, the 
Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot and the Government Dental Colleges.  
ii.  T.B. Sanatorium, Amritsar.  
iii.  Government Medical College, Patiala.  
iv.  Rajindra Hospital, Patiala.  
v.  Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot.  
vi.  Guru Gobind Singh Hospital, Faridkot.  
vii.  Government Medical College, Amritsar.  
viii.  Guru Teg Bahadur Medical Hospital, Amritsar.  
ix.  Dental College, Amritsar.  
x.  Dental College and Hospital, Patiala.  
xi.  Ayurvedic College and Hospital, Patiala.  
xii.  Medical Education and Training of Nurses and Paramedical Staff.  
xiii.  Indian Council of Medical Research.  
xiv.  State Medical Faculty, Medical registration including Medical Council of India, 
Central Dental Council.  
xv.  The Punjab Medical Council, the Punjab Nursing Council, the Punjab Dental 
Council, the Punjab Pharmacy Council, the Punjab Ayurvedic Council and the 
Punjab Homoeopathic Council -Registration of Doctors, Dentists, N urses, 
Pharmacists, Homoeopaths and Vaids.  
xvi.  All matters relating to the administration of the following Acts and Rules made 
thereunder - (a) the Indian Medical Degree Act, 1916; (b) the Punjab Anatomy Act, 
1963; and (c) the Punjab Corneal Grafting Act, 1963.  
xvii.  Private Medical Colleges and Hospitals - Christian Medical College and Brown 
Hospital, Ludhiana; and Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana.  
xviii.  Grant-in-aid to private medical colleges and teaching hospitals and aushadhalayas.  
xix.  Admissions to all the Medical and Dental Colleges, including private colleges, and 
the Ayurvedic College, Patiala.  
Source: Allocation of Business Rules, 2007, GoP 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
276 
 
Appendix 1.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.9) 
Details of selected units covered in the Performance Audit 
Apex Unit and Directorate Units  
1. Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare 
2. Director, Health and Family Welfare 
3. Director, Health Services (DHS) 
4. Managing Director, Punjab State Health Systems Corporation (PHSC) 
5. Mission Director, State Health Society (SHS) 
6. Commissioner, Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) 
7. Chairman, Punjab Pollution Control Board (PPCB) 
Primary and Secondary Health Care 
*District Malerkotla was carved out of District Sangrur as the 23rd District of Punjab on 2 June 2021 
Tertiary Health Care 
1. Principal Secretary, Department of Medical Education and Research 
2. Director, Medical Education and Research 
3. Government Medical College and Rajindra Hospital at Patiala 
Sampled District 
(Out of total 22* 
districts) 
Civil Surgeon District Hospitals 
(DHs) 
CHCs 
(Out of total  
56 CHCs) 
PHCs 
(Out of total  
146 PHCs) 
Health & Wellness 
Centre 
(Out of 883 HWCs) 
Bathinda Civil Surgeon, 
Bathinda DH Bathinda 
Bhucho Mandi 
Mandi Kalan Dullewala 
Bhai Rupa Gehri Bhagi 
Mehraj 
Lehra Mohabbat Teona Pujara 
Jodhpur Pakhar Lehra Mohabbat 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
Civil Surgeon, 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Bassi Pathana 
Sanghol Chunni Kalan 
Nandpur Kalour Khumna 
Amloh 
Bhari Hargana 
Nanowal Bhamri 
Gurdaspur Civil Surgeon, 
Gurdaspur DH Gurdaspur 
Fatehgarh 
Churian 
Ranjit Bagh Mallowali 
Behrampur Marrianwal 
Naushera Majja 
Singh 
Dorangla Thikriwal 
Dhianpur Hardochhani 
Hoshiarpur Civil Surgeon, 
Hoshiarpur DH Hoshiarpur 
Mahilpur 
Chakowal Mandialan 
Mand Bhander Amroh 
Shamchaurasi 
Paldi Khairar 
Possi Salempur 
Ludhiana Civil Surgeon, 
Ludhiana DH Ludhiana 
Sidhwan Bet 
Ghawaddi Gidderwind 
Mansuran Kadon 
Sudhar 
Otalon Sekha 
Sowaddi Kalan Sherpur Bet  
Moga Civil Surgeon, 
Moga DH Moga 
Bagha Purana 
Patto Hira Singh Fatehgarh Korotana 
Thathi Bhai Taktupara 
Nihal Singh Wala 
Sukhanand Talwandi Bhegerian 
Malian Wala Mahla Kalan 
06 06 06 12 24 24 

Appendices 
 
277 
Appendix 1.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.10) 
List of guidelines issued under National Health Mission (NHM) 
Sr. No. Name of Criteria 
i.  Guidelines on Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) 
ii.  Framework for Implementation of National Health Mission 2012-2017 
iii.  Maternal and Newborn Health Toolkit (2013) 
iv.  Guidelines for Antenatal Care and Skilled Attendance at Birth, 2010 
v.  Guidelines for Janani-Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (2011) 
vi.  Operational Guidelines of Kangaroo Mother Care and Optimal Feeding of 
Low Birth Weight Infants (2014) 
vii.  Operational Guidelines-Injection Vitamin K Prophylaxis at Birth (2014) 
viii.  Child Death Review Operational Guidelines (2014) 
ix.  Comprehensive Abortion Care (Training and Service Delivery 
Guidelines), 2018 
x.  Guidelines for implementation of Kayakalp Initiative (2015) 
xi.  Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee (VHSNC) Guidelines 
(MoHFW, GoI) 
xii.  Ayushman Bharat- Comprehensive Primary Health Care through Health 
and Wellness Centres Operational Guidelines (2018) 
xiii.  Operational Guidelines for Financial Management of National Health 
Mission 
xiv.  National Urban Health Mission Guidelines (2013) 
xv.  Operational Guidelines for Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (2013) 
xvi.  MoH&FW Guidelines for Compensation Package to acceptors of 
sterilisation (2007) 
xvii.  National Strategic Plan 2017-2025 (NTEP) 
xviii.  Guidelines for implementation of district level activities under National 
Mental Health Programme, 2015 
xix.  National Programme for Healthcare for elderly 
xx.  National Tobacco Control Programme 
xxi.  National Programme for Control of Blindness 
xxii.  Janani Suraksha Yojana Scheme 
xxiii.  Facility Based Newborn Care Operational Guide, 2011 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
 
278 
Appendix 2.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.5.1.3) 
Availability of human resources in District Hospitals 
Name of DH 
Amritsar 
Barnala 
Bathinda 
Faridkot 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
Fazilka 
Ferozepur 
Gurdaspur 
Hoshiarpur 
Jalandhar 
Kapurthala 
Ludhiana 
Malerkotla 
Mansa 
Moga 
Pathankot 
Patiala 
Rupnagar 
Sangrur 
S.A.S Nagar 
SBS Nagar 
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 
Tarn Taran 
Total 
Chief Medical 
Superintendent/ 
Hospital 
Superintendent 
S 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 21 
P 2 1 2 1 1 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 2 1 1 0 
20 
Medical Specialist 
S 3 2 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 4 2 3 1 2 3 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 1 50 
P 1 3 2 2 1 0 1 2 5 1 1 1 1 2 0 1 3 2 1 2 2 0 2 36 
Surgery Specialists 
S 5 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 4 2 2 1 2 3 7 2 2 1 4 2 2 1 55 
P 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 0 2 2 6 2 3 3 4 1 0 2 49 
Obstetrician/ 
Gynaecologist (O&G 
specialist) 
S 4 3 3 3 3 1 2 2 2 4 3 4 1 2 5 3 17 3 2 4 2 4 1 78 
P 2 4 3 3 3 0 2 4 1 3 2 5 1 3 2 3 3 1 4 3 1 1 1 55 
Psychiatrist 
S 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 4 2 1 2 39 
P 0 2 3 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 0 1 1 2 1 0 1 3 1 1 2 33 
Dermatologist/ 
Venereologist 
S 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 29 
P 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 24 
Paediatrician 
S 7 5 6 6 6 2 6 4 5 4 4 6 1 5 5 2 7 5 5 6 6 5 4 112 
P 5 1 5 4 2 2 3 6 3 3 1 4 1 3 2 5 5 1 3 5 3 1 2 70 
Anesthetist (Regular/ 
trained) 
S 8 5 5 4 5 2 5 4 5 9 5 5 1 5 5 7 5 5 4 5 5 2 5 111 
P 6 2 5 4 4 2 3 4 7 3 5 6 0 3 3 4 3 3 1 7 4 0 4 83 
ENT Surgeon 
S 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 25 
P 1 1 3 2 2 1 1 1 3 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 1 3 1 0 1 34 

Appendices 
279 
Name of DH 
Amritsar 
Barnala 
Bathinda 
Faridkot 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
Fazilka 
Ferozepur 
Gurdaspur 
Hoshiarpur 
Jalandhar 
Kapurthala 
Ludhiana 
Malerkotla 
Mansa 
Moga 
Pathankot 
Patiala 
Rupnagar 
Sangrur 
S.A.S Nagar 
SBS Nagar 
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 
Tarn Taran 
Total 
Ophthalmologist 
S 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 25 
P 0 2 3 3 1 1 1 1 3 2 1 1 0 2 2 2 3 1 2 2 2 1 1 37 
Orthopedician 
S 5 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 5 1 2 1 1 2 7 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 42 
P 4 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 4 1 2 1 1 3 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 1 47 
Radiologist 
S 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 26 
P 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 2 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 11 
Microbiologist 
S 2 1 1 2 3 1 3 1 3 1 2 1 0 1 1 2 4 2 1 2 2 1 1 38 
P 3 0 0 3 2 1 3 2 3 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 3 1 1 3 1 1 3 35 
General Duty 
Doctors (Medical 
Officer) 
S 10 10 20 11 11 12 13 14 19 24 14 19 10 10 11 17 17 14 6 15 13 12 16 318 
P 7 2 11 9 5 4 9 12 13 14 4 12 5 7 3 10 10 6 5 6 3 6 8 171 
Dental Surgeon 
S 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 2 1 1 1 31 
P 4 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 4 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 0 34 
Forensic Specialist 
S 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 16 
P 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 7 
Pathologist and 
Blood Bank  
In-charge 
S 2 1 4 1 2 1 1 1 2 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 35 
P 2 1 5 1 1 1 2 4 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 5 1 2 1 1 1 2 44 
Total 
S 56 39 56 40 44 32 44 36 55 75 41 52 24 38 44 56 70 44 30 56 43 37 39 1,051 
P 40 25 50 41 31 20 35 44 53 45 26 43 14 29 27 45 48 27 28 47 24 17 31 790 
Source: Departmental data 
S: Sanctioned post and P: In position 
Colour code: 
 Dark green colour denotes ‘excess manpower’ 
 Light green colour denotes ‘least shortage/no shortage’ 
 Yellow colour denotes ‘moderate shortage’ 
 Red colour denotes ‘most shortage/non-availability’ 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
280 
Appendix 2.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.5.2.1) 
Availability of human resources in Community Health Centres 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
1. Amritsar Lopoke 8 10 10 0 11 14 11 21 7 13 12 8 14 10 29 
2. Amritsar Majitha 8 7 4 43 11 11 9 18 7 7 8 +14 13 13 0 
3. Amritsar Manawala 8 13 11 15 11 13 13 0 7 14 13 7 11 7 36 
4. Amritsar Verka 8 14 12 14 11 13 11 15 7 13 17 +31 17 14 18 
5. Amritsar Mehta 8 7 5 29 11 7 6 14 7 8 6 25 13 1 92 
6. Amritsar Tarsika 8 13 9 31 11 13 10 23 7 12 10 17 21 13 38 
7. Barnala Channawal 8 5 2 60 11 6 6 0 7 3 3 0 2 1 50 
8. Barnala Mehal Kalan 8 9 7 22 11 14 7 50 7 10 8 20 27 14 48 
9. Barnala Dhanaula 8 11 7 36 11 13 10 23 7 18 14 22 31 26 16 
10. Barnala Bhadaur 8 12 4 67 11 8 6 25 7 6 3 50 8 5 38 
11. Bathinda Goniana 8 16 7 56 11 14 11 21 7 15 11 27 15 13 13 
12. Bathinda Bhucho Mandi 8 6 5 17 11 0 6 0 7 3 5 +67 3 7 +133 
13. Bathinda Nathana 8 11 6 45 11 22 11 50 7 14 9 36 23 18 22 
14. Bathinda Sangat 8 12 4 67 11 6 4 33 7 9 6 33 14 13 7 
15. Bathinda Ballianwali 8 9 5 44 11 12 7 42 7 15 9 40 47 16 66 
16. Bathinda Bhagta 8 9 5 44 11 13 7 46 7 11 5 55 18 11 39 
17. Bathinda Mehraj 8 11 1 91 11 8 4 50 7 7 4 43 5 5 0 
18. Bathinda Maur Mandi 8 7 4 43 11 11 6 45 7 9 8 11 17 9 47 
19. Bathinda Rama Mandi 8 7 3 57 11 10 3 70 7 7 5 29 12 7 42 
20. Faridkot Sadiq 8 14 4 71 11 13 10 23 7 10 8 20 18 12 33 
21. Faridkot Bajakhana 8 13 5 62 11 12 9 25 7 13 8 38 29 24 17 

Appendices 
281 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
22. Faridkot Jaito 8 8 3 63 11 16 12 25 7 8 8 0 8 8 0 
23. Fatehgarh Sahib Amloh 8 7 4 43 11 12 9 25 7 7 4 43 16 7 56 
24. Fatehgarh Sahib Basi Pathan 8 7 3 57 11 13 7 46 7 7 5 29 18 7 61 
25. Fatehgarh Sahib Khera 8 8 7 13 11 12 10 17 7 8 5 38 7 10 +43 
26. Fatehgarh Sahib Chanarthal 
Kalan 8 5 3 40 11 7 0 100 7 5 3 40 24 7 71 
27. Fatehgarh Sahib Khamano 8 7 10 +43 11 11 11 0 7 5 5 0 5 1 80 
28. Fazilka Ramsara 8 6 2 67 11 2 5 +150 7 1 1 0 1 6 +500 
29. Fazilka Wahabwala 8 6 1 83 11 7 5 29 7 2 2 0 10 2 80 
30. Fazilka Sitto Gunno 8 12 6 50 11 15 7 53 7 10 5 50 16 14 13 
31. Fazilka Dabwala Kalan 8 15 5 67 11 18 10 44 7 12 5 58 32 16 50 
32. Fazilka Khui Khera 8 12 7 42 11 18 7 61 7 15 10 33 18 14 22 
33. Fazilka Jalalabad 8 9 10 +11 11 16 10 38 7 14 11 21 27 17 37 
34. Ferozepur Ferozeshah 8 11 4 64 11 11 7 36 7 8 3 63 10 8 20 
35. Ferozepur Mamdot 8 13 2 85 11 12 8 33 7 9 8 11 19 7 63 
36. Ferozepur Guru Harsahai 8 9 3 67 11 9 8 11 7 10 9 10 8 7 13 
37. Ferozepur Makhu 8 8 2 75 11 8 8 0 7 7 4 43 15 7 53 
38. Gurdaspur Bham 8 8 6 25 11 15 9 40 7 11 10 9 23 11 52 
39. Gurdaspur Ghuman 8 4 1 75 11 12 8 33 7 4 4 0 5 2 60 
40. Gurdaspur Qadian 8 4 2 50 11 12 8 33 7 6 6 0 13 7 46 
41. Gurdaspur Fatehgarh 
Churian 8 16 10 38 11 16 10 38 7 13 13 0 5 3 40 
42. Gurdaspur D.B. Nanak 8 5 4 20 11 13 12 8 7 7 6 14 14 9 36 
43. Gurdaspur Kot Santokh Rai 8 7 7 0 11 12 12 0 7 5 5 0 6 1 83 
44. Gurdaspur Naushera Majha 
Singh 8 12 11 8 11 12 11 8 7 17 15 12 14 9 36 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
282 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
45. Gurdaspur Singowal 8 9 7 22 11 12 12 0 7 5 5 0 7 7 0 
46. Gurdaspur Purana Shalla 8 10 8 20 11 10 8 20 7 5 5 0 1 1 0 
47. Gurdaspur Bhaini Mian 
Khan 8 7 3 57 11 12 7 42 7 4 2 50 0 0 0 
48. Gurdaspur Kalanaur 8 12 6 50 11 12 10 17 7 17 15 12 30 26 13 
49. Gurdaspur Kahnuwan 8 15 11 27 11 14 9 36 7 10 8 20 19 7 63 
50. Gurdaspur Dhariwal 8 6 6 0 11 16 15 6 7 6 4 33 6 1 83 
51. Hoshiarpur Mand Mandher 8 16 8 50 11 13 13 0 7 11 7 36 17 8 53 
52. Hoshiarpur Tanda 8 12 9 25 11 16 16 0 7 14 10 29 27 18 33 
53. Hoshiarpur Binewal 8 7 2 71 11 11 2 82 7 8 4 50 8 3 63 
54. Hoshiarpur Mahilpur 8 10 6 40 11 11 6 45 7 5 2 60 6 1 83 
55. Hoshiarpur Bhunga 8 15 9 40 11 17 16 6 7 13 14 +8 27 17 37 
56. Hoshiarpur Harta Badla 8 6 4 33 11 6 4 33 7 6 4 33 8 3 63 
57. Hoshiarpur Hariana 8 8 3 63 11 4 4 0 7 4 4 0 4 1 75 
58. Hoshiarpur Shamchaurasi 8 7 4 43 11 12 10 17 7 3 3 0 4 2 50 
59. Hoshiarpur Hajipur 8 11 11 0 11 17 14 18 7 14 12 14 12 9 25 
60. Hoshiarpur Budha Bar 8 11 5 55 11 11 7 36 7 10 7 30 23 8 65 
61. Hoshiarpur Bhol Kalota 8 6 4 33 11 11 9 18 7 6 5 17 6 3 50 
62. Hoshiarpur Kamahi Devi 8 6 4 33 11 11 7 36 7 7 3 57 8 4 50 
63. Jalandhar Adampur 8 14 14 0 11 15 12 20 7 9 7 22 12 7 42 
64. Jalandhar Kala Bakra 8 14 8 43 11 13 11 15 7 7 7 0 22 20 9 
65. Jalandhar Kartar Pur 8 20 14 30 11 13 11 15 7 13 10 23 9 4 56 
66. Jalandhar PAP Jalandhar 8 13 3 77 11 6 4 33 7 6 1 83 19 5 74 
67. Jalandhar Shankar 8 10 4 60 11 11 4 64 7 6 5 17 14 7 50 
68. Jalandhar Apra 8 11 6 45 11 11 7 36 7 5 3 40 14 4 71 

Appendices 
283 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
69. Jalandhar Bara Pind 8 23 10 57 11 11 5 55 7 8 5 38 16 9 44 
70. Jalandhar Bundala 8 13 4 69 11 16 6 63 7 8 6 25 26 13 50 
71. Jalandhar Noor Mahal 8 7 4 43 11 10 6 40 7 5 4 20 6 6 0 
72. Jalandhar Lohian 8 9 7 22 11 10 8 20 7 4 4 0 4 4 0 
73. Jalandhar Shahkot 8 9 5 44 11 10 9 10 7 5 4 20 8 7 13 
74. Kapurthala Begowal 8 8 2 75 11 12 5 58 7 6 4 33 10 4 60 
75. Kapurthala Fattu Dhinga 8 12 5 58 11 10 4 60 7 7 3 57 14 4 71 
76. Kapurthala Kala Sangian 8 12 7 42 11 18 7 61 7 7 5 29 20 13 35 
77. Kapurthala Panchhat 8 13 5 62 11 7 2 71 7 6 5 17 18 10 44 
78. Kapurthala Tibba 8 8 9 +13 11 15 10 33 7 6 5 17 13 8 38 
79. Ludhiana Hathur 8 12 3 75 11 13 8 38 7 15 6 60 17 8 53 
80. Ludhiana Sidhwan Bet 8 14 8 43 11 13 12 8 7 13 6 54 27 14 48 
81. Ludhiana Dehlon 8 7 3 57 11 12 8 33 7 10 8 20 20 4 80 
82. Ludhiana Kum Kalan 8 11 9 18 11 13 8 38 7 6 4 33 10 9 10 
83. Ludhiana Sahnewal 8 12 8 33 11 14 8 43 7 12 7 42 20 10 50 
84. Ludhiana Malaud 8 11 8 27 11 14 9 36 7 11 10 9 27 15 44 
85. Ludhiana Payal 8 10 8 20 11 12 9 25 7 13 11 15 15 15 0 
86. Ludhiana Pakhowal 8 15 9 40 11 10 9 10 7 7 6 14 11 11 0 
87. Ludhiana Gur Sar Sudhar 8 11 6 45 11 13 10 23 7 11 6 45 17 7 59 
88. Ludhiana Manupur 8 13 5 62 11 10 4 60 7 7 2 71 13 11 15 
89. Ludhiana Machiwara 8 11 8 27 11 16 7 56 7 11 5 55 32 15 53 
90. Malerkotla Ahmadgarh 8 8 3 63 11 13 6 54 7 10 5 50 11 7 36 
91. Malerkotla Amargarh 8 8 3 63 11 11 8 27 7 9 7 22 19 12 37 
92. Mansa Bareta 8 8 2 75 11 10 2 80 7 8 5 38 25 9 64 
93. Mansa Khiala Kalan 8 15 7 53 11 9 7 22 7 11 7 36 7 5 29 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
284 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
94. Mansa Bhikhi 8 11 3 73 11 5 4 20 7 10 6 40 3 2 33 
95. Mansa Jhunir 8 8 3 63 11 6 6 0 7 5 2 60 4 4 0 
96. Moga Bagha Purana 8 10 2 80 11 17 13 24 7 10 9 10 12 10 17 
97. Moga Kot Ise Khan 8 15 8 47 11 14 12 14 7 12 10 17 13 10 23 
98. Moga Dhudike 8 14 6 57 11 18 16 11 7 11 11 0 19 14 26 
99. Moga Daroli Bhai 8 10 6 40 11 15 8 47 7 10 7 30 19 5 74 
100. Moga Badhni Kalan 8 10 3 70 11 13 10 23 7 11 10 9 7 4 43 
101. Moga Nihal Singh 
Wala 8 10 3 70 11 14 11 21 7 10 5 50 12 8 33 
102. Pathankot Bungal Badhani 8 13 9 31 11 14 2 86 7 10 8 20 33 28 15 
103. Pathankot Gharota 8 12 8 33 11 15 5 67 7 8 5 38 12 8 33 
104. Pathankot Sujanpur 8 9 5 44 11 11 7 36 7 4 3 25 3 3 0 
105. Pathankot Narot Jaimal 
Singh 8 9 10 +11 11 13 2 85 7 14 8 43 22 13 41 
106. Patiala Tohra 8 5 4 20 11 3 0 100 7 5 4 20 7 2 71 
107. Patiala Bhadson 8 9 6 33 11 12 7 42 7 7 5 29 10 5 50 
108. Patiala Dudan Sadhan 8 7 7 0 11 7 6 14 7 8 6 25 9 8 11 
109. Patiala Modeltown 8 10 6 40 11 10 9 10 7 3 5 +67 9 6 33 
110. Patiala Tripuri 8 8 8 0 11 13 12 8 7 7 8 +14 19 16 16 
111. Patiala Shurtrana 8 10 2 80 11 11 3 73 7 5 1 80 11 9 18 
112. Patiala Badshapur 8 6 3 50 11 11 1 91 7 5 3 40 13 5 62 
113. Patiala Patran 8 6 2 67 11 11 4 64 7 4 0 100 4 4 0 
114. Patiala Kalo Majra 8 12 14 +17 11 14 7 50 7 12 8 33 19 15 21 
115. Patiala Ghanaur 8 9 7 22 11 11 5 55 7 7 5 29 12 12 0 
116. Rupnagar Nurpur Bedi 8 13 9 31 11 13 11 15 7 13 8 38 21 11 48 
117. Rupnagar Chamkaur Sahib 8 12 4 67 11 13 12 8 7 11 10 9 27 19 30 

Appendices 
285 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
118. Rupnagar Morinda 8 10 8 20 11 14 13 7 7 10 8 20 18 13 28 
119. Rupnagar Bharatgarh 8 11 7 36 11 15 13 13 7 14 8 43 34 13 62 
120. Sangrur Sherpur 8 16 3 81 11 9 8 11 7 7 4 43 14 8 43 
121. Sangrur Lehragaga 8 7 2 71 11 12 6 50 7 9 5 44 8 5 38 
122. Sangrur Bhawanigarh 8 5 3 40 11 14 8 43 7 8 6 25 7 7 0 
123. Sangrur Longowal 8 12 2 83 11 11 5 55 7 11 4 64 15 6 60 
124. Sangrur Kauhrian 8 8 5 38 11 12 4 67 7 9 4 56 17 15 12 
125. Sangrur Dirba 8 8 0 100 11 13 5 62 7 10 6 40 10 7 30 
126. SAS Nagar Antala 8 11 6 45 11 4 4 0 7 7 3 57 5 1 80 
127. SAS Nagar Banur 8 8 9 +13 11 11 10 9 7 5 5 0 0 0 0 
128. SAS Nagar Dhakoli 8 10 8 20 11 15 12 20 7 6 6 0 9 7 22 
129. SAS Nagar Lalru 8 10 8 20 11 12 8 33 7 5 5 0 5 5 0 
130. SAS Nagar Kurali 8 4 7 +75 11 6 6 0 7 2 6 +200 0 9 0 
131. SBS Nagar Saroya 8 10 6 40 11 11 8 27 7 12 7 42 25 10 60 
132. SBS Nagar Mukandpur 8 13 5 62 11 13 11 15 7 10 8 20 12 8 33 
133. SBS Nagar Banga 8 8 4 50 11 12 13 +8 7 12 10 17 10 10 0 
134. SBS Nagar Rahon 8 4 3 25 11 10 7 30 7 6 3 50 24 9 63 
135. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib Doda 8 10 3 70 11 14 12 14 7 14 13 7 24 33 +38 
136. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib Lambi 8 10 1 90 11 15 13 13 7 19 15 21 18 15 17 
137. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib Sarawa Bodlan 8 5 1 
80 11 10 3 70 7 4 1 75 2 1 50 
138. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib Chak Sherewala 8 8 2 75 11 14 10 29 7 12 8 33 19 17 11 
139. Sri Muktsar 
Sahib Bariwala 8 6 2 
67 11 10 8 20 7 9 4 56 23 16 30 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
286 
Sr. 
No. Name of District Name of CHC 
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
R S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
S P 
V/E 
(in 
per 
cent) 
140. Tarn Taran Mianwind 8 10 5 50 11 18 14 22 7 9 9 0 27 18 33 
141. Tarn Taran Sur Singh Wala 8 11 4 64 11 12 9 25 7 14 14 0 14 13 7 
142. Tarn Taran Ghariala 8 9 4 56 11 15 8 47 7 10 6 40 31 19 39 
143. Tarn Taran Harikepattan 8 6 1 83 11 3 2 33 7 5 5 0 4 2 50 
144. Tarn Taran Kairon 8 11 6 45 11 13 11 15 7 19 18 5 20 13 35 
145. Tarn Taran Khem Karan 8 12 1 92 11 14 9 36 7 15 12 20 22 19 14 
146. Tarn Taran Brahampura 8 6 2 67 11 3 1 67 7 3 2 33 4 1 75 
147. Tarn Taran Sarhali 8 13 4 69 11 13 13 0 7 11 9 18 25 21 16 
148. Tarn Taran Kasel 8 12 5 58 11 17 9 47 7 10 8 20 31 10 68 
149. Tarn Taran Naushera 
Pannuan 8 6 4 33 11 11 4 64 7 9 8 11 8 2 75 
150. Tarn Taran Chhabhal 8 11 7 36 11 12 6 50 7 13 7 46 12 9 25 
Total 1,200 1,490 816 45 1,650 1,771 1,202 32 1,050 1,339 990 26 2,198 1,378 37 
Source: Departmental data 
R=Required; S= Sanctioned post; P= In position; V= Vacant post; and E= Excess 
Note: Detail of sanctioned strength as well as men in position for the posts of ANM (S-55, P-35) and Dialysis Technician (S-01, P-00) are not included in paramedical staff as these two posts 
are not defined under IPHS norms 2012. However, against the sanctioned posts, shortages of staff in these categories were noticed. 
Colour code:  Darker the colour higher the percentage of shortage from green to red 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
 
287 
 
Appendix 2.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.5.3.1) 
Availability of human resources in Primary Health Centres 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
1. Amritsar Gaggomahal  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
2. Amritsar Kiampur  1 0 100 3 3 0 3 3 0 3 3 0 
3. Amritsar Sudhar  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
4. Amritsar Barar  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 6 3 50 
5. Amritsar Jasraur  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 1 50 6 2 67 
6. Amritsar Kaler  2 1 50 0 0 0 4 2 50 5 2 60 
7. Amritsar Othian  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 4 4 0 
8. Amritsar Chetanpura  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 5 5 0 
9. Amritsar Raja Sansi  2 1 50 9 6 33 4 4 0 7 1 86 
10. Amritsar Ramdas  3 2 33 7 7 0 6 6 0 16 11 31 
11. Amritsar Nawan Pind  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 5 3 40 
12. Amritsar Chawinda Devi  2 1 50 5 4 20 4 3 25 12 3 75 
13. Amritsar Kathu Nangal  1 1 0 5 4 20 2 2 0 5 3 40 
14. Amritsar Threawal  2 2 0 7 4 43 7 7 0 21 13 38 
15. Amritsar Wadla Viram  1 1 0 0 1 0 2 2 0 4 3 25 
16. Amritsar Jandiala Guru  1 1 0 5 4 20 2 2 0 5 4 20 
17. Amritsar 
Bhai Mohkam 
Singh Memorial 
Satellite 
Hospital 
2 2 0 10 6 40 5 4 20 2 0 100 
18. Amritsar Attari  2 1 50 5 2 60 3 2 33 7 2 71 
19. Amritsar Bakhna Kalan  2 1 50 5 2 60 2 2 0 6 3 50 
20. Amritsar Chakmukand  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 4 4 0 
21. Amritsar Iban Kalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
22. Amritsar Varpal  1 1 0 5 4 20 2 2 0 5 3 40 
23. Amritsar 
Bhai Daya 
Singh Memorial 
Satellite 
Hospital 
3 3 0 10 7 30 3 3 0 5 3 40 
24. Amritsar 
Bhai Dharam 
Singh Memorial 
Satellite 
Hospital 
2 1 50 10 8 20 5 5 0 6 4 33 
25. Amritsar 
Bhai Himant 
Singh Memorial 
Satellite 
Hospital 
3 2 33 8 6 25 3 3 0 4 1 75 
26. Amritsar 
Bhai Sahib 
Singh Memorial 
Satellite 
Hospital 
3 2 33 10 7 30 5 4 20 4 4 0 
27. Amritsar Bhinder  1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 
28. Amritsar Butala  1 0 100 5 4 20 2 2 0 4 2 50 
29. Amritsar Buter Kalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 3 0 100 
30. Amritsar Khalchian  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 4 3 25 
31. Amritsar Matewal  1 0 100 5 5 0 2 1 50 4 1 75 
32. Amritsar Tahli Sahib  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 4 3 25 
33. Amritsar Rayya  1 1 0 5 4 20 2 1 50 4 3 25 
34. Barnala Bhathlan  2 1 50 4 1 75 2 1 50 4 3 25 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
288 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
35. Barnala Hamidi  2 2 0 1 1 0 3 1 67 4 3 25 
36. Barnala Shekha  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 2 1 50 
37. Barnala Thikriwala  2 2 0 1 0 100 4 4 0 1 1 0 
38. Barnala Chappa  2 1 50 2 1 50 3 1 67 10 4 60 
39. Barnala Rurke Kalan  2 2 0 4 3 25 3 2 33 3 3 0 
40. Barnala Gehlan  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 5 3 40 
41. Barnala Dhilwan 1 1 0 3 0 100 2 1 50 3 3 0 
42. Barnala Sehna 1 1 0 4 1 75 2 1 50 3 3 0 
43. Barnala Tallewal 1 1 0 6 1 83 1 1 0 2 1 50 
44. Bathinda Balluana  2 2 0 4 4 0 3 2 33 6 5 17 
45. Bathinda Teona  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 4 1 75 
46. Bathinda Virk Kalan  2 2 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
47. Bathinda Jeeda  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
48. Bathinda Bandi  1 0 100 1 0 100 3 1 67 7 2 71 
49. Bathinda Chak Atar 
Singh Wala  3 3 0 1 0 100 5 1 80 12 0 100 
50. Bathinda Kotshamir  2 1 50 4 4 0 2 1 50 5 2 60 
51. Bathinda Lehra 
Mohabbat  3 3 0 4 2 50 3 2 33 6 2 67 
52. Bathinda Bodhi Pura  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 1 0 100 
53. Bathinda Dyal Pur Mirja  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 2 1 50 
54. Bathinda Dhapali  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 0 100 3 3 0 
55. Bathinda Badiala  2 0 100 4 0 100 4 1 75 9 0 100 
56. Bathinda Karar Wala  1 1 0 4 0 100 3 1 67 5 1 80 
57. Bathinda Mandi Kalan  2 2 0 4 2 50 2 1 50 4 4 0 
58. Bathinda Bhai Rupa  2 0 100 4 4 0 2 1 50 4 3 25 
59. Bathinda Jodhpur Pakhar  1 0 100 3 0 100 2 0 100 5 1 80 
60. Bathinda Maiser Khana  1 0 100 3 2 33 2 0 100 7 3 57 
61. Bathinda Pakka Kalan  2 1 50 1 0 100 3 2 33 7 4 43 
62. Bathinda Natheha  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 1 0 100 
63. Faridkot Golewala  1 1 0 3 2 33 2 2 0 7 5 29 
64. Faridkot Jand Sahib  2 1 50 6 3 50 8 4 50 19 14 26 
65. Faridkot Bargari  1 0 100 4 4 0 2 0 100 5 3 40 
66. Faridkot Gurusar  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 1 0 100 
67. Faridkot Rori Kapura  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 1 67 
68. Faridkot Kot Sukhia  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 5 4 20 
69. Faridkot Hari Nau  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 1 1 0 
70. Faridkot Panj Grain 
Kalan  2 1 50 4 2 50 4 4 0 6 5 17 
71. Fatehgarh Sahib Ladpur  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
72. Fatehgarh Sahib Malowal  2 1 50 4 0 100 5 2 60 9 3 67 
73. Fatehgarh Sahib Nandpur Kalaur  5 4 20 7 5 29 5 5 0 29 20 31 
74. Fatehgarh Sahib Nogawan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 5 5 0 
75. Fatehgarh Sahib Balhari Kalan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 4 4 0 
76. Fatehgarh Sahib Bhagrana  2 2 0 7 4 43 2 2 0 5 3 40 
77. Fatehgarh Sahib Bhamrasi  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 2 33 4 2 50 
78. Fatehgarh Sahib Mulepur  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 6 2 67 
79. Fatehgarh Sahib Nabipur  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 5 3 40 
80. Fatehgarh Sahib Sangat Pur 
Sodian  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 5 5 0 

Appendices 
289 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
81. Fatehgarh Sahib Bhari  1 1 0 4 2 50 2 2 0 6 3 50 
82. Fatehgarh Sahib Nanowal  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 4 1 75 
83. Fatehgarh Sahib Sanghol  1 1 0 4 5 +25 4 3 25 7 7 0 
84. Fazilka Baluana  2 1 50 3 2 33 2 1 50 4 2 50 
85. Fazilka Khatwana  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 4 1 75 
86. Fazilka Kundal  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 0 100 3 1 67 
87. Fazilka Waryam Khera  1 1 0 5 3 40 2 1 50 3 1 67 
88. Fazilka Kaller Khera  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 5 17 
89. Fazilka Killianwali  2 1 50 7 6 14 3 1 67 5 3 40 
90. Fazilka Maujgarh  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 3 1 67 
91. Fazilka Panjkosi  2 0 100 6 1 83 4 1 75 5 5 0 
92. Fazilka Panniwala 
Mahla  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
93. Fazilka Jhumian Wal  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 4 1 75 
94. Fazilka Jandwala 
Bimeshah  2 2 0 6 3 50 6 2 67 16 14 13 
95. Fazilka Hasta Kalan  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 3 1 67 
96. Fazilka Karni Khera  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 2 33 
97. Fazilka Tahli Wala 
Bodla  1 1 0 4 3 25 3 2 33 4 2 50 
98. Fazilka Laduk Mandi  1 1 0 6 4 33 3 3 0 6 4 33 
99. Fazilka Kheowali Dhab  1 1 0 5 2 60 2 1 50 3 3 0 
100. Fazilka Chak Janisar  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 2 67 
101. Fazilka Ghubaya  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 3 50 
102. Fazilka Lamochar 
Kalan  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 6 4 33 
103. Ferozepur Arifke  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
104. Ferozepur Jhokh Hari Har  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
105. Ferozepur Khai Pheme Ke  2 1 50 4 2 50 2 2 0 2 2 0 
106. Ferozepur Nur Pur Sethan  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
107. Ferozepur Lallae  1 0 100 1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 
108. Ferozepur Malwal  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 1 67 
109. Ferozepur Sulhani  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 0 100 
110. Ferozepur Mudki  2 0 100 5 3 40 3 2 33 13 8 38 
111. Ferozepur Wakilan Wala  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
112. Ferozepur Jiwan Arain  2 1 50 3 1 67 2 2 0 1 0 100 
113. Ferozepur Panje Ke Uttar  1 0 100 3 1 67 2 1 50 1 0 100 
114. Ferozepur Sohangarh  2 2 0 3 1 67 2 1 50 1 0 100 
115. Ferozepur Lakho Ke 
Behram  1 0 100 2 2 0 2 1 50 1 1 0 
116. Ferozepur Kassoana  6 5 17 5 4 20 9 6 33 9 8 11 
117. Ferozepur Khosa Dal 
Singh  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
118. Ferozepur Malan Wala  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 1 50 1 0 100 
119. Gurdaspur Bhular  7 7 0 4 3 25 3 3 0 9 6 33 
120. Gurdaspur Jaito Sarja  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
121. Gurdaspur Taragarh  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
122. Gurdaspur Wadala 
Garanthian  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
123. Gurdaspur Aliwal  1 1 0 4 3 25 2 1 50 2 0 100 
124. Gurdaspur Kala Afgana  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 2 0 100 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
290 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
125. Gurdaspur Kandila  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
126. Gurdaspur Panj Garaian  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 0 100 
127. Gurdaspur Bharath  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
128. Gurdaspur Mand  1 1 0 0 0 0 4 3 25 5 1 80 
129. Gurdaspur Udhan Wal  2 3 +50 4 4 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
130. Gurdaspur Rangar Nangal  2 1 50 6 6 0 4 4 0 4 4 0 
131. Gurdaspur Shri Hargobind 
Pur  2 2 0 5 5 0 4 1 75 8 1 88 
132. Gurdaspur Dehargawar  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
133. Gurdaspur Dharam Kot 
Randhawa  1 1 0 4 2 50 2 2 0 1 1 0 
134. Gurdaspur Dhyanpur  1 1 0 5 3 40 4 4 0 24 18 25 
135. Gurdaspur Kalianpur  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
136. Gurdaspur Satkoha  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 2 33 
137. Gurdaspur Ranjit Bagh  3 2 33 2 2 0 5 3 40 12 12 0 
138. Gurdaspur Behampur  2 2 0 7 7 0 6 5 17 13 11 15 
139. Gurdaspur Jharoli  1 2 +100 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 0 100 
140. Gurdaspur Marara  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 3 +50 2 2 0 
141. Gurdaspur Dorangala  5 5 0 8 6 25 5 5 0 24 13 46 
142. Gurdaspur Jaura Chittron  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 7 3 57 
143. Gurdaspur Bhumbli  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 4 3 25 
144. Gurdaspur Babehali  3 2 33 7 4 43 3 2 33 2 2 0 
145. Gurdaspur Gunopur  2 2 0 4 2 50 3 3 0 2 0 100 
146. Gurdaspur Nanowal Jinder  2 1 50 1 1 0 3 3 0 2 2 0 
147. Gurdaspur Wadala Bangar  1 0 100 1 1 0 3 3 0 1 1 0 
148. Gurdaspur Gill Manj  2 2 0 4 3 25 3 3 0 3 2 33 
149. Hoshiarpur Badla  2 1 50 1 0 100 2 1 50 5 4 20 
150. Hoshiarpur  Ghogra 1 1 0 1 0 100 3 2 33 5 3 40 
151. Hoshiarpur Mand Bandher 2 2 0 1 1 0 3 3 0 4 2 50 
152. Hoshiarpur Kathala 
Sheikhon  2 2 0 1 1 0 3 3 0 3 3 0 
153. Hoshiarpur Miani  2 2 0 1 1 0 3 3 0 1 1 0 
154. Hoshiarpur Bathal  3 2 33 8 6 25 4 3 25 10 2 80 
155. Hoshiarpur Binjon  2 1 50 8 1 88 4 3 25 10 2 80 
156. Hoshiarpur Padrana  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 1 0 100 
157. Hoshiarpur Panam  1 1 0 2 0 100 2 1 50 2 0 100 
158. Hoshiarpur Possi  1 0 100 6 4 33 3 3 0 18 10 44 
159. Hoshiarpur Rampura Bilron  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 1 1 0 
160. Hoshiarpur Ajnoha  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 8 1 88 
161. Hoshiarpur Barian Kalan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 1 0 100 
162. Hoshiarpur Jejon  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 1 67 8 1 88 
163. Hoshiarpur Paldi  3 2 33 8 5 38 8 5 38 34 11 68 
164. Hoshiarpur Sarhala Kalan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 2 0 100 
165. Hoshiarpur Janauri  1 1 0 5 1 80 2 2 0 5 4 20 
166. Hoshiarpur Bagpur  2 1 50 1 1 0 4 3 25 6 4 33 
167. Hoshiarpur Bulowal  2 1 50 1 1 0 3 3 0 5 3 40 
168. Hoshiarpur Chaukowal  3 1 67 5 5 0 7 5 29 21 18 14 
169. Hoshiarpur Nasrala  2 1 50 1 1 0 4 4 0 5 4 20 
170. Hoshiarpur Sus  2 2 0 0 0 0 3 3 0 4 2 50 

Appendices 
291 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
171. Hoshiarpur Chabewal  2 1 50 4 4 0 3 2 33 8 6 25 
172. Hoshiarpur Jallowal  2 2 0 1 0 100 3 1 67 6 4 33 
173. Hoshiarpur Mehlanwali  2 2 0 1 1 0 3 3 0 3 1 67 
174. Hoshiarpur Phuglana  2 2 0 6 2 67 3 3 0 15 3 80 
175. Hoshiarpur Behbalmanj  1 1 0 1 1 0 3 2 33 1 1 0 
176. Hoshiarpur Bhangala  1 1 0 7 6 14 3 2 33 4 2 50 
177. Hoshiarpur Chanaur  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 2 1 50 
178. Hoshiarpur Tanda Ram 
Sahaj  1 1 0 1 1 0 3 2 33 1 1 0 
179. Hoshiarpur Datarpur  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 2 33 2 2 0 
180. Jalandhar Arjanwal  2 2 0 4 1 75 2 2 0 17 11 35 
181. Jalandhar Daroli Kalan  1 0 100 4 3 25 2 0 100 5 3 40 
182. Jalandhar Pandori Nijran  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 2 33 
183. Jalandhar Bolina  2 1 50 1 1 0 2 1 50 2 2 0 
184. Jalandhar Jamsher Khas  4 4 0 3 3 0 5 2 60 19 12 37 
185. Jalandhar Raipur Pharala  1 0 100 4 2 50 2 1 50 2 1 50 
186. Jalandhar Raipur 
Rasulpur  1 1 0 4 3 25 2 2 0 5 5 0 
187. Jalandhar Buttran  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 2 33 
188. Jalandhar Chitti  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 2 0 
189. Jalandhar Randhawa 
Masandhan  2 1 50 4 2 50 2 2 0 2 2 0 
190. Jalandhar Baloki  1 1 0 3 0 100 2 2 0 3 3 0 
191. Jalandhar Mehatpur  2 2 0 3 0 100 8 3 63 14 12 14 
192. Jalandhar Malian Kalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
193. Jalandhar Sarih  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
194. Jalandhar Ugi  3 2 33 4 0 100 4 3 25 4 2 50 
195. Jalandhar Bilga  3 0 100 8 4 50 6 4 33 18 12 33 
196. Jalandhar Kot Badal Khan  1 0 100 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
197. Jalandhar Talwan  1 0 100 4 0 100 2 1 50 1 0 100 
198. Jalandhar Dayalpur  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 0 100 4 2 50 
199. Jalandhar Dosanjh Kalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 4 2 50 
200. Jalandhar Nagar  1 0 100 0 0 0 2 1 50 4 2 50 
201. Jalandhar Mao Sahib  2 0 100 4 0 100 2 2 0 2 1 50 
202. Jalandhar Jandiala  2 2 0 8 3 63 7 3 57 23 15 35 
203. Jalandhar Rurka kalan  2 0 100 6 0 100 3 2 33 6 3 50 
204. Jalandhar Goraya  3 2 33 1 0 100 3 1 67 5 1 80 
205. Jalandhar Gidder Pindi  1 0 100 1 0 100 1 1 0 0 0 0 
206. Jalandhar Lassuri  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 2 0 5 2 60 
207. Jalandhar Rupewal  2 1 50 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
208. Kapurthala Maqsoodpur  3 2 33 4 0 100 5 1 80 9 2 78 
209. Kapurthala Surakhpur 1 1 0 4 1 75 2 1 50 2 1 50 
210. Kapurthala Bhano Langa  1 1 0 4 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
211. Kapurthala Khallu 1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 1 0 100 
212. Kapurthala Dhilwan  4 1 75 5 2 60 5 3 40 12 8 33 
213. Kapurthala Atholi   1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
214. Kapurthala Palahi  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 0 100 
215. Kapurthala Saprore 2 1 50 4 0 100 2 0 100 1 0 100 
216. Kapurthala Ranipur  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 3 0 100 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
292 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
217. Kapurthala Didwindi  2 1 50 3 1 67 2 2 0 3 0 100 
218. Kapurthala Paramjitpur  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 2 0 100 
219. Kapurthala Kabirpur 2 2 0 4 0 100 4 0 100 12 1 92 
220. Ludhiana Chowkiman  2 1 50 4 1 75 3 2 33 5 1 80 
221. Ludhiana KaunkeKalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 2 0 100 
222. Ludhiana Manuke  1 1 0 0 0 0 3 1 67 3 0 100 
223. Ludhiana Sabadi Kalan  1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 
224. Ludhiana Talwandi Kalan  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 3 2 33 
225. Ludhiana Boparai Kalan  3 2 33 7 6 14 2 1 50 5 4 20 
226. Ludhiana Dalla Badla  1 2 +100 1 0 100 2 2 0 4 3 25 
227. Ludhiana Isru  2 1 50 8 2 75 3 1 67 7 4 43 
228. Ludhiana Ghwadi  2 2 0 4 3 25 2 2 0 3 2 33 
229. Ludhiana Purain  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 3 2 33 
230. Ludhiana Mattewara  2 0 100 4 1 75 2 2 0 2 2 0 
231. Ludhiana Katani Kalan  3 1 67 5 0 100 4 2 50 10 4 60 
232. Ludhiana Ladowal  2 1 50 4 4 0 4 2 50 2 2 0 
233. Ludhiana Jodhan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 1 1 0 
234. Ludhiana Mansuran  2 2 0 7 7 0 4 4 0 4 3 25 
235. Ludhiana Humbran  2 1 50 3 1 67 3 2 33 4 2 50 
236. Ludhiana Bhanohar  1 1 0 0 0 0 3 2 33 2 2 0 
237. Ludhiana Mohi  1 1 0 1 1 0 3 2 33 7 5 29 
238. Ludhiana Rauni  1 1 0 4 3 25 2 1 50 4 3 25 
239. Ludhiana Mandiala Kalan  1 0 100 1 1 0 3 1 67 4 4 0 
240. Ludhiana Siarh  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
241. Ludhiana Kalakh  2 1 50 7 1 86 4 3 25 1 1 0 
242. Ludhiana Bassian  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 1 67 5 3 40 
243. Ludhiana Lohatbadhi  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 4 3 25 
244. Ludhiana Andlu  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 3 +50 0 0 0 
245. Ludhiana Latala  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 2 2 0 
246. Ludhiana Ghungrali 
Sekha  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 0 100 2 1 50 
247. Ludhiana Mehdoodan  1 2 +100 4 2 50 2 2 0 2 2 0 
248. Ludhiana Utalon  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 5 4 20 
249. Malerkotla Kagan Wal  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 3 1 67 
250. Malerkotla Kup Kalan  2 1 50 6 1 83 2 2 0 2 2 0 
251. Malerkotla Kuthala  3 2 33 8 2 75 3 3 0 5 4 20 
252. Malerkotla Gowara  1 1 0 4 3 25 2 0 100 5 3 40 
253. Malerkotla Manvi  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 0 100 3 2 33 
254. Mansa Birke Kalan  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
255. Mansa Kularian  1 1 0 4 0 100 2 1 50 4 3 25 
256. Mansa Ranghrial  1 1 0 4 0 100 2 1 50 4 1 75 
257. Mansa Bohha  1 0 100 4 2 50 2 1 50 4 2 50 
258. Mansa Dhaipai  2 1 50 3 2 33 2 1 50 2 2 0 
259. Mansa Phapre Bhai Ke  3 2 33 4 0 100 4 3 25 1 1 0 
260. Mansa Bhaini Bagha  1 1 0 3 1 67 2 1 50 2 1 50 
261. Mansa Nangal Kalan  2 2 0 3 0 100 2 1 50 1 1 0 
262. Mansa Ubha  1 1 0 4 2 50 2 2 0 1 0 100 
263. Mansa Joga  3 1 67 4 4 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 

Appendices 
293 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
264. Mansa USAD Mansa 1 1 0 3 1 67 2 1 50 3 3 0 
265. Mansa Bheniwal  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
266. Mansa Jaurkian  1 0 100 2 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
267. Mansa Krandi  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
268. Moga Lande  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 2 1 50 
269. Moga Nathuwala  1 0 100 0 0 0 3 1 67 3 2 33 
270. Moga Rajeana  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 2 0 
271. Moga Sukhanand  1 1 0 3 1 67 3 2 33 2 1 50 
272. Moga Thathi Bhai  2 0 100 0 0 0 5 5 0 8 7 13 
273. Moga Chand Niwana  2 1 50 6 1 83 1 1 0 1 0 100 
274. Moga Jalalabad East  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 1 50 
275. Moga Khosa Randhir  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 1 67 
276. Moga Kishan Pura 
Kalan  1 0 100 4 3 25 2 2 0 2 1 50 
277. Moga Dharamkot  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 
278. Moga Fatehgarh 
Panjtoor  1 1 0 4 3 25 2 1 50 2 1 50 
279. Moga Butter Kalan  1 1 0 6 5 17 2 2 0 3 1 67 
280. Moga Charik  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 0 100 
281. Moga Kokri Kalan  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 2 1 50 
282. Moga Malianwala  2 0 100 6 0 100 4 1 75 4 0 100 
283. Moga Daulat Pur 
Niwan  2 1 50 6 3 50 2 0 100 1 1 0 
284. Moga Manuke  2 1 50 3 1 67 2 1 50 2 1 50 
285. Moga Bilaspur  2 2 0 4 3 25 3 3 0 3 2 33 
286. Moga Lopon  3 0 100 7 0 100 4 3 25 4 0 100 
287. Moga Patto Hira 
Singh  3 2 33 5 4 20 3 3 0 12 10 17 
288. Moga Rauke Kalan  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 2 0 2 1 50 
289. Pathankot Dunera  2 1 50 4 1 75 2 1 50 2 2 0 
290. Pathankot Bamyal  1 1 0 4 0 100 3 2 33 5 1 80 
291. Pathankot Bath Sahib  1 1 0 2 1 50 3 2 33 3 3 0 
292. Pathankot Gurdaspur 
Bhaia  2 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 1 67 
293. Pathankot Kathlaur  1 1 0 1 1 0 3 2 33 5 1 80 
294. Pathankot Tara Garh  1 1 0 6 1 83 3 3 0 4 2 50 
295. Pathankot Bhoa  1 1 0 4 1 75 2 1 50 3 2 33 
296. Pathankot Ghiyala  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
297. Pathankot Madho Pur  1 1 0 1 1 0 3 3 0 3 3 0 
298. Patiala Ajnauda  4 3 25 3 2 33 2 1 50 9 7 22 
299. Patiala Babarpur  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 6 2 67 
300. Patiala Sauja  4 4 0 3 2 33 2 2 0 10 8 20 
301. Patiala Kakrala_ 2 1 50 3 2 33 2 0 100 7 2 71 
302. Patiala Fatehpur  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 6 3 50 
303. Patiala Gharam  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 5 2 60 
304. Patiala Roshan Pur 
Jhungian  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 4 2 50 
305. Patiala Sursitigarh  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
306. Patiala Hasanpur  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 4 2 50 
307. Patiala Gajju Majra  1 1 0 4 0 100 2 2 0 6 1 83 
308. Patiala Kalar Bhaini  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 5 1 80 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
294 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
309. Patiala Kalyan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 3 2 33 
310. Patiala Balbera  1 1 0 6 2 67 2 2 0 5 3 40 
311. Patiala Jogipur  1 1 0 6 3 50 2 2 0 8 2 75 
312. Patiala Kauli  4 2 50 6 4 33 5 3 40 13 9 31 
313. Patiala Arno  1 0 100 4 2 50 2 2 0 5 3 40 
314. Patiala Ajrawar  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 6 4 33 
315. Patiala Harpalpur  3 3 0 3 2 33 3 1 67 18 13 28 
316. Patiala Kapuri  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 50 7 2 71 
317. Patiala Mardan Pur  2 1 50 3 1 67 1 1 0 5 3 40 
318. Patiala Gopalpur  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 4 3 25 
319. Patiala Khera Gajju  1 0 100 4 3 25 2 1 50 4 3 25 
320. Patiala Khera Gurna  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 4 2 50 
321. Patiala Dhanetha  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 2 67 
322. Patiala Dhanthal  2 0 100 4 1 75 2 1 50 5 4 20 
323. Patiala Gajewas  2 2 0 4 0 100 2 2 0 5 4 20 
324. Patiala Kakrala  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 5 4 20 
325. Patiala Kularan  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 1 83 
326. Rupnagar Dher  2 1 50 4 3 25 2 2 0 5 1 80 
327. Rupnagar Abiana  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 1 67 
328. Rupnagar Jhandian  5 2 60 9 1 89 3 3 0 6 0 100 
329. Rupnagar Khan Pur 
Khuhi  2 1 50 4 3 25 2 2 0 3 1 67 
330. Rupnagar Kathera  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 3 2 33 
331. Rupnagar Kiratpur Sahib  2 2 0 7 5 29 4 2 50 15 9 40 
332. Rupnagar Surat Pur Farm  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
333. Rupnagar Amrali  2 1 50 4 3 25 2 2 0 3 2 33 
334. Rupnagar Boor Majra  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
335. Rupnagar Bhallan  3 1 67 4 2 50 4 1 75 12 2 83 
336. Rupnagar Sahjowal  3 1 67 4 2 50 2 2 0 5 3 40 
337. Rupnagar Behrampur 
Zimdara  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
338. Rupnagar Pur Khali  2 1 50 4 1 75 2 2 0 1 1 0 
339. Sangrur Bhasaur  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 1 50 5 5 0 
340. Sangrur Bhalwan  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 2 0 
341. Sangrur Kanjhla  1 1 0 6 1 83 2 1 50 3 2 33 
342. Sangrur Mimsa  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 1 50 3 2 33 
343. Sangrur Mulowal  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 1 50 3 2 33 
344. Sangrur Fatehgarh Panj 
Garian  2 1 50 2 1 50 6 4 33 16 13 19 
345. Sangrur Mandvi  2 1 50 4 0 100 6 2 67 14 6 57 
346. Sangrur Maniana  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
347. Sangrur Bhutal Kalan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 4 4 0 
348. Sangrur Haryao  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 0 100 3 2 33 
349. Sangrur Kallia  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
350. Sangrur Shadi Heri  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
351. Sangrur Khanauri Kalan  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 1 50 4 3 25 
352. Sangrur Gharachon  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 2 0 
353. Sangrur Nadampur  1 0 100 3 1 67 2 2 0 2 1 50 
354. Sangrur Gagarpur  1 1 0 2 0 100 2 0 100 5 2 60 

Appendices 
295 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
355. Sangrur Sarion  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 1 50 5 3 40 
356. Sangrur Ubhawal  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 100 5 4 20 
357. Sangrur Mahilan  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 5 5 0 
358. Sangrur Chhajli  2 1 50 4 1 75 2 1 50 5 4 20 
359. Sangrur Gandwan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 3 0 
360. Sangrur Jakhepal  2 0 100 4 2 50 3 1 67 5 4 20 
361. Sangrur Sant Attar 
Singh Cheema  4 2 50 9 3 67 4 0 100 5 5 0 
362. SAS Nagar Basauli  1 1 0 4 2 50 1 1 0 1 1 0 
363. SAS Nagar Khizargarh  2 1 50 2 2 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
364. SAS Nagar Pandwala  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 6 2 67 
365. SAS Nagar Chandon  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
366. SAS Nagar Gharuan  3 3 0 5 4 20 5 5 0 11 9 18 
367. SAS Nagar Majat  1 1 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
368. SAS Nagar Mullanpur  2 2 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 
369. SAS Nagar Boothgarh  3 3 0 3 3 0 2 2 0 13 11 15 
370. SAS Nagar Khijrabad  1 1 0 4 4 0 2 2 0 3 1 67 
371. SAS Nagar Palheri  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
372. SAS Nagar Landran  3 2 33 4 4 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
373. SAS Nagar 3 B 1 3 3 0 1 0 100 3 2 33 5 3 40 
374. SBS Nagar Kathgarh  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 2 2 0 
375. SBS Nagar Paniali  1 2 +100 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
376. SBS Nagar Takarla  1 2 +100 4 0 100 3 1 67 1 1 0 
377. SBS Nagar Pojewal  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
378. SBS Nagar Sahiba  2 1 50 4 1 75 2 1 50 2 1 50 
379. SBS Nagar Khan Khanan  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 2 0 
380. SBS Nagar Behram  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 3 0 3 1 67 
381. SBS Nagar Katarian  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 1 50 
382. SBS Nagar Khatkar Kalan  2 1 50 4 0 100 3 4 +33 3 1 67 
383. SBS Nagar Sandhawan 
Pharala  3 1 67 7 0 100 3 2 33 2 1 50 
384. SBS Nagar Aur  2 1 50 5 4 20 2 1 50 3 1 67 
385. SBS Nagar Kamam  3 1 67 3 0 100 2 2 0 9 2 78 
386. SBS Nagar Bharta Khurd  2 1 50 6 0 100 2 1 50 4 1 75 
387. SBS Nagar Jabowal  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 50 3 0 100 
388. SBS Nagar Jadla  3 1 67 4 1 75 2 1 50 2 1 50 
389. SBS Nagar Muzaffarpur  2 0 100 5 1 80 6 2 67 9 1 89 
390. SBS Nagar Sujjon  3 2 33 9 1 89 7 3 57 18 8 56 
391. Sri Muktsar Sahib Badian  1 0 100 4 1 75 2 1 50 3 1 67 
392. Sri Muktsar Sahib Gurusar 
Mandhir  2 0 100 4 1 75 2 0 100 3 3 0 
393. Sri Muktsar Sahib Kotbhai  2 0 100 4 0 100 2 1 50 3 0 100 
394. Sri Muktsar Sahib Malan  2 0 100 4 3 25 2 0 100 3 2 33 
395. Sri Muktsar Sahib Bhai Ka Khera  2 0 100 5 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
396. Sri Muktsar Sahib Kandu Khera  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 1 50 
397. Sri Muktsar Sahib Mahuana  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 6 3 50 
398. Sri Muktsar Sahib Roran wali  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 2 2 0 
399. Sri Muktsar Sahib Singhe Wala  1 0 100 5 1 80 2 1 50 2 1 50 
400. Sri Muktsar Sahib Kabarwala  1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
296 
Sr.  
No. Name of District Name of PHC 
Medical Officer Nurse - Midwife 
(Staff Nurse) 
Paramedics Others 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
S P V/E  
(In 
Pert 
cent) 
401. Sri Muktsar Sahib Panniwala Fatta  1 0 100 2 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 100 
402. Sri Muktsar Sahib Ramnagar  1 1 0 1 0 100 1 1 0 1 1 0 
403. Sri Muktsar Sahib Ballam Garh  1 1 0 1 0 100 3 2 33 2 1 50 
404. Sri Muktsar Sahib Gulabewala  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 1 50 7 3 57 
405. Sri Muktsar Sahib Hari Ke Kalan  2 2 0 1 1 0 3 1 67 3 3 0 
406. Sri Muktsar Sahib Kanian Wali  2 1 50 4 3 25 3 1 67 3 2 33 
407. Sri Muktsar Sahib Thandewala  1 1 0 4 0 100 2 1 50 4 2 50 
408. Tarn Taran Dera Sahib  2 1 50 7 3 57 3 2 33 6 3 50 
409. Tarn Taran Fatehbad  1 2 +100 3 4 +33 3 3 0 6 4 33 
410. Tarn Taran Goindwal Sahib  1 2 +100 4 3 25 2 1 50 1 1 0 
411. Tarn Taran Algon Kothi  1 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 
412. Tarn Taran Mari Megha  1 0 100 0 0 0 3 3 0 3 2 33 
413. Tarn Taran Kirtowal  1 2 +100 4 3 25 2 2 0 4 4 0 
414. Tarn Taran Sabrai  1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 3 0 
415. Tarn Taran Rajoke  3 1 67 3 0 100 3 2 33 4 4 0 
416. Tarn Taran Valtoha  2 1 50 4 2 50 2 1 50 4 4 0 
417. Tarn Taran Bhikhi Wind  2 0 100 4 4 0 3 3 0 3 3 0 
418. Tarn Taran Chola Sahib  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 4 3 25 
419. Tarn Taran Sarai Amanat 
Khan  1 2 +100 0 0 0 2 2 0 5 1 80 
420. Tarn Taran Dhotian  2 2 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 3 2 33 
421. Tarn Taran Bagarian  1 0 100 1 1 0 2 3 +50 2 2 0 
422. Tarn Taran Delka  1 1 0 1 0 100 2 2 0 3 3 0 
423. Tarn Taran Pandori Ram 
Singh  1 1 0 4 2 50 2 2 0 2 0 100 
424. Tarn Taran Rataul  1 0 100 1 0 100 2 1 50 3 2 33 
Total 645 442 31 1,146 575 50 1,082 717 34 1,965 1,140 42 
Source: Departmental data 
S-Sanctioned post; P-In position; and V/E-Vacant/Excess post 
Colour code:  Darker the colour higher the percentage of shortage from green to red 

Appendices 
297 
 
Appendix 3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.1.9) 
A survey of doctors and patient s selected on random basis was conducted  
(June 2022) during performance audit to get feedback from doctors and 
patients’ satisfaction.  As many as 652 patients participated in survey to 
ascertain the quality of services in the selected health institutions viz.  
RH Patiala and DHs/CHCs/PHCs taking the following outcome indicators: 
Citizen Charter  
During survey of test -checked hospitals, it was noticed that all the selected 
health Institutions displayed Citizen Charter except DH Gurdaspur,  
four CHCs
1 and 19 PHCs2.  User charges were not displayed in DH Bathinda, 
two CHCs 3 and 18 PHCs 4. Further, it was noticed that the Charter of all the 
hospitals did not depict all information about services not available and about 
equipment not in order except DH Ludhiana, DH Moga and  
CHC Sidhwan Bet.   
Dietary Services  
During joint physical verification of dietary services in test -checked hospitals, 
it was observed that no dietary service for IPD patients (except under the 
scheme JSSK) was available.  No dedicated kitchen and menu chart for dietary 
services was available except in RH Patiala, DH Bathinda and  
DH Ludhiana. Dietician was posted only in RH Patiala and facility of serving 
trolley was available only in RH Patiala and DH Bathinda.  The food supplied 
to the patients was not patient -specific such as diabetic, semi -solid and liquid 
in test-checked health facilities; system of diet counselling to the patients, 
formulation of caloric requirement and accordingly setting diet for the patients 
was not adopted except in RH Patiala; types of the diets were not prescribed 
by the Department except in DH Ludhiana; protective gears (apron, head gear, 
clear plastic gloves, etc. ) were not used by the cooks in the kitchen those 
serving food except in RH Patiala and quality of diet was checked by a 
competent person on regular basis as prescribed in IPHS Guidelines except 
DH Moga. No staff was deployed for cooking and distribution of foods except 
 
1 CHCs at (i) Bassi Pathana; (ii) Fatehgarh Churian; (iii) Sudhar; and (iv) Nihal Singh Wala. 
2 PHCs at (i)  Lehra Mohabbat; (ii)  Mandi Kalan; (iii)  Bhairupa; (iv)  Jodhpur Pakhar; (v)  Nandpur 
Kalour; (vi)  Sanghol; (vii)  Bhari; (viii)  Nanowal; (ix)  Behrampur; (x) Dhianpur; (xi) Dorangla; 
(xii) Ranjit Bagh; (xiii)  Ghawaddi; (xiv) Mansuran; (xv) Sowaddi Kalan; (xvi) Otalon;  
(xvii) Sukhanand; (xviii) Thathi Bhai; and (xix) Malianwala. 
3  CHCs at (i) Mehraj; and (ii) Bassi Pathana. 
4  PHCs at (i) Lehra Mohabbat; (ii)  Mandi Kalan; (iii)  Bhairupa; (iv)  Jodhpur Pakhar; (v)  Nandpur 
Kalour; (vi)  Sanghol; (vii)  Bhari; (viii)  Nanowal; (ix)  Behrampur; (x) Dhianpur;(xi) Dorangla; 
(xii) Ranjit Bagh; (xiii)  Mansuran; (xiv) Sowaddi Kalan; (xv) Otalon; (xvi) Sukhanand; 
(xvii) Thathi Bhai; and (xviii) Malianwala. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
298 
RH Patiala, DH Bathinda and DH Ludhiana and no FSSAI registration 
certificates were issued under Food Safety and S tandards Act, 2006 in any of 
the test-checked hospitals except DH Bathinda. 
Hospital Facilities  
Timings/working hours of OPD and other services were displayed except in 
nine PHCs
5; complaint register was not maintained and kept available to 
beneficiaries except in DH Bathinda, DH Hoshiarpur, DH Ludhiana, four 
CHCs6 and six PHCs 7. Potable water facility was available in all the  
test-checked hospitals except DH Moga, CHC Bagha Purana and eight PHCs8.  
Patients and visitors were sensitis ed and educated through appropriate 
IEC/BCC approaches except DH Fatehgarh Sahib, DH Gurdaspur, five CHCs 9 
and 13 PHCs10; procedures for taking informed consent before treatment were 
established except DH Fatehgarh Sahib, three CHCs 11 and 10 PHCs 12 and 
adequate visual privacy was provided at every point of care in all tests 
checked hospitals except in DH Fatehgarh Sahib, three CHCs
13 and  
11 PHCs14.  
Doctors’ Survey  
As many as 116 doctors from the test -checked health institutions were 
surveyed. It was observed that out of these , 40 doctors had MBBS or 
equivalent degrees and 64 doctors had higher degrees. 76 doctors had been 
posted in the respective hospitals upto 5 years, 19 doctors had been posted for 
more than 5 years but upto 10 years and 21 doctors had posting tenure more 
than 10 years. 18 per cent  of the doctors stated that they were not provided 
with all the required infrastructure in the hospital to see the patients.  
19 per cent  of the doctors stated that they had to attend to more than  
70 patients per day and 16 per cent  of doctors stated that they had to work for 
more than 6 hours per day. 18 per cent  of doctors stated that the generic 
 
5   PHCs at (i) Lehra Mohabbat;  (ii) Jodhpur Pakhar;  (iii) Dorangla;  (iv) Ranjit Bagh;  (v) Mansuran; 
(vi) Sukhanand; (vii) Bahrampur; (viii) Dhianpur and (ix) Malianwala. 
6  (i) Mahilpur; (ii) Shamchaurasi; (iii) Sidhawan Bet; and (iv) Sudhar. 
7  (i) Mandi Kalan ; (ii) Chakowal; (iii) Paldi; (iv) Mand Bhandher ; (v) Ghawaddi; and  
(vi) Thathi Bhai. 
8  (i) Sanghol; (ii) Bhari; (iii) Nanowal; (iv) Behrampur; (v) Dhianpur; (vi) Dorangala; (vii) Ranjit 
Bagh; and (viii) Malian wala. 
9  (i) Mehraj; (ii) Bucho Mandi; (iii) Bassi Pathana; (iv) Amloh; and (v) Sudhar. 
10  (i) Lehra Mohabbat; (ii) Mandi Kalan; (iii) Nandpur Kalour; (iv) Sanghol; (v) Bhari; (vi) Nanowal; 
(vii) Behrampur; (viii) Dhianpur; (ix) Dorangla; (x) Ranjit Bagh; (xi) Mansuran; (xii) Patto Hira 
Singh; and (xiii) Malian wala. 
11   (i) Mehraj; (ii) Bassi Pathana; and (iii) Amloh. 
12  (i) Mandi Kalan;  (ii) Nandpur Kalour; (iii)  Sanghol; (iv) Bhari; (v) Nanowal; (vi)  Dorangla; 
(vii) Ranjit Bagh; (viii) Sowadi Kalan; (ix) Otalon; and (x) Malian wala. 
13   (i) Mehraj; (ii) Bassi Pathana; and (iii) Amloh. 
14   (i) Lehra Mohabbat; (ii) Mandi Kalan; (iii) Nandpur Kalour; (iv) Sanghol; (v) Bhari; (vi) Nanowal; 
(vii) Behrampur; (viii) Dhianpur; (ix) Dorangla; (x) Ranjit Bagh; and (xi) Malianwala. 
 

Appendices 
299 
medicines/medicines as prescribed were not available in the hospital 
pharmacy. 79 per cent  of doctors stated that they had heavy patient load, 
20 per cent stated that they had normal patient load and one doctor was unable 
to say anything about patient load. Out of 116, only 86 doctors were satisfied 
with the process of the registration of the medical practitioner in the hospital.   
53 per cent of the doctors stated that the registration number (doctor) was not 
displayed in the clinic, prescription, and receipts.  28 per cent of doctors stated 
that they had no trained medical staff.  65 per cent  of the doctors fe lt that 
improvement was to be made in the health care infrastructure in the 
Government hospitals as per the requirement of the patients. 16 per cent  of 
doctors stated that monthly meetings were not held among the doctors to 
discuss or address the issues faced by the hospital. 89 per cent  of the doctors 
stated that there was a monitoring system in place for patients requiring long 
term/continuous treatment (with ailments like TB/HIV etc.).   
In-patient survey  
In the test-checked hospitals, 268 in-patients were surveyed. It was found that 
50 per cent of in-patients were admitted for 3 days or less, 17 per cent were 
admitted for more than 3 but upto 5 days, whereas 33 per cent in-patients were 
admitted for more than five days. 59 per cent  patients stated that it took less 
than or equal to 30 minutes to get admitted. All the patients stated that 
admission/information about the ongoing treatment was shared with patients 
or attendants regularly.  81 per cent patients stated that facilities for differently 
abled persons were available.  38 per cent  of patients stated that the doctors 
visited single time a day and  62 per cent of patients stated that doctors visited  
2-4 times a day. All the  surveyed in-patients stated that the responses of the 
Nurses in the ward were prompt; and 90 per cent in-patients stated that the 
facilities for the prescribed investigations (lab/radiology) were made available 
by the hospital and consent was taken from family member/attendant before 
treatment. Only 73 per cent  patients stated that clean and adequate toilet 
facility was available for male and female patients but  91 per cent  patients 
stated that garbage was removed from patient care area regularly and 
complaints (if any) were attended to promptly. Out of these in -patients,  
21 per cent patients stated that prescribed drugs were not made available at 
Pharmacy and wards. 
Out-patient survey 
During field study of selected health institutions, total 384
15 number of OPD 
patients were survey ed. During analysis of the patient survey proformas, it 
was noticed that 54 per cent patients said that Enquiry/May I Help desk was 
 
15  (i) RH Patiala: 45 patients ; (ii) six DHs: 164 patients ; (iii) 12 CHCs: 78 patients ; and  
(iv) 24 PHCs: 97 patients. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
300 
not available with the competent staff. According to 16 per cent  patients, 
seating arrangements was not adequate at registration/OPD counter s.  
OPD hours for doctors and rate list were not displayed according to 48  
per cent  and 61 per cent  patients respectively. Further, 25 per cent  patients 
said that number of registration counters were not adequate in health 
institutions. 35 per cent patients informed that patient calling system was not 
satisfactory.   
From further analysis , it was found that prescribed medicines were not made 
available to 42 per cent  patients by health institution’s pharmacy.   
57 per cent (pathological tests) and 65 per cent  (radiology tests) patients said 
that all tests  recommended by the doctors were not done by the hospital.   
63 per cent  patients objected that complaint box was not available in  
test-checked health institutions.  
Time Survey 
(i) Waiting time for registration 
Time taken for registration at the registration counter is depicted in  
table given below: 
Time taken for registration at the registration counter in OPDs 
Waiting time for 
registration 
Number of OPD patients surveyed  
RH Patiala 
(percentage) 
DHs 
(percentage) 
CHCs 
(percentage) 
PHCs 
(percentage) 
Total 
(percentage) 
Up to 2 minutes  10(22) 20 (12) 16(20) 62(64) 108(28) 
2 to 5 minutes  26(58) 54(33) 38(49) 24(25) 142(37) 
5 to 10 minutes  4(9) 42(26) 15(19) 11(11) 72(19) 
Above 10 minutes  5(11) 48(29) 9(12) 0 62(16) 
Total 45 164 78 97 384 
Source: Patient survey in test-checked hospitals 
Above table shows that out of 384 OPD patients surveyed, 62 OPD patients 
(16 per cent ) had to wait for more than 10 minutes to get themselves 
registered. Long time waiting indicated shortage of registration counters at 
health institutions. 
(ii) Waiting time between registration and consultation with the 
doctor 
Waiting time between registration and consultation with the doctor is depicted 
in table given below: 

Appendices 
301 
Table: Waiting time between registration and consultation with doctor 
Waiting time for 
consultation with 
doctor 
Number of OPD patients surveyed  
RH 
Patiala  
DHs CHCs  PHCs  Total 
(percentage) 
Up to 2 minutes  1 13 16 49 79 (21) 
2 to 5 minutes  3 32 15 21 71 (18) 
5 to 10 minutes  4 43 23 13 83 (22) 
Above 10 minutes  37 76 24 14 151(39) 
Total 45 164 78 97 384 
Source: Patient survey in test-checked hospitals 
Above table shows that 151 patients (39  per cent) were attended ten minutes 
after being registered. Long waiting indicated shortage of doctors at hea lth 
institutions (except in PHCs), as detailed in table given below: 
Position of doctors in the selected health care institutes 
Particular 
Availability of doctors at 
RH Patiala  DHs CHCs  PHCs  
Required  333 231 120 24 
Available 210 179 58 31 
Shortage (Percentage)  123 (37) 52 (23) 62 (52) -7 
Source: Departmental information 
The result of long waiting time was visible at OPD in the hospitals. 
 
  
Huge rush in OPD at DH Ludhiana 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
302 
 
(iii) Consultation time per patient  
Consultation time taken per patient is given in table given below: 
Consultation time per patient 
Consultation time 
Number of OPD Patients surveyed  
RH Patiala  DHs  CHCs  PHCs  Total (percentage) 
Up to 2 minutes  1 51 20 32 104(27) 
2 to 5 minutes  3 59 34 54 150(39) 
5 to 10 minutes  31 41 19 9 100(26) 
Above 10 minutes  10 13 5 2 30(8) 
Total 45 164 78 97 384 
Source: Patient survey in test-checked hospitals 
Above table shows that 254 patients (66 per cent) got consultation time of less 
than five minutes which is an indication of inadequate attention to the patient. 
(iv) Waiting time at Pharmacy counter 
Status of waiting time at Pharmacy counter for taking medicines is depicted in 
table given below:  
Waiting time at Pharmacy counter 
Waiting time 
Number of OPD patients got medicines from Pharmacies  
RH Patiala 
(45) 
DHs 
(164) 
CHCs  
(78) 
PHCs 
 (97) 
Total 
(percentage) 
Up to 2 minutes  0 60 23 56 139(42) 
2 to 5 minutes  0 65 28 27 120(36) 
5 to 10 minutes  0 5 19 12 36(11) 
Above 10 minutes  2 27   7 2 38(11) 
Total 2 157 77 97 333 
Source: Patient survey in test-checked hospitals 
Audit observed that 333 patients (out of 384 surveyed) took medicines from 
pharmacies in the selected health institutions. Above t able shows that  
259 patients (78 per cent) got medicines within five minutes at the pharmacies 
of the respective hospitals and 38 (11 per  cent) patients waited for more than 
ten minutes to get the medicines at the pharmacies. 
 

Appendices 
303 
 
 
 
Long queues at pharmacy counter at DH Ludhiana 
(v) Availability of medicines at Pharmacy and prescription of generic 
medicines 
The Department of Health and Family Welfare instructed (October 2018) to 
follow the Code of Medical Ethics issued by Punjab Medical Council and if 
any SMO/MO did not follow these instructions, departmental disciplinary 
action would be taken against him/her.  Rule 1.5 of Code of Medical Ethics 
stated that every physician would prescribe drugs with generic names and he 
would ensure that there was rational prescription and use of drugs. 
Survey of 384 OPD patients revealed the status of availability of prescribed 
medicines at the Pharmacy and non -prescription of generic medicines, as 
detailed in table given below: 
Availability of prescribed medicines at the pharmacy and  
prescription of generic medicines 
Health 
institution 
No. of 
OPD 
patients 
surveyed 
Number of 
medicines 
prescribed 
by doctors 
Number of 
medicines 
available 
at 
pharmacy 
Number of 
medicines 
not available 
at pharmacy  
Prescription of 
Generic 
medicines 
Non-generic 
medicines 
RH Patiala 45 130 13 117 49 81 
DHs 164 607 443 164 503 104 
CHCs 78 303 163 140 243 60 
PHCs 97 287 227 60 263 24 
Total 384 1,327 846 481 (36%) 1,058 269 
Source: Patient survey in test-checked hospitals 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
304 
Above table shows that out of 1,327 medicines prescribed by the doctors,  
481 medicines (36 per cent ) were not available in the pharmacies of the  
test-checked health institutions. The OPD patients were compelled to purchase 
the required medicines from open market, thereby putting financial burden on 
them. Further, doctors prescribed 269 non- generic medicines (20 per cent ) to 
the patients against the ethics/instructions ibid. 
Audit also noticed that out of 384 surveyed patients, 50 patients (13 per  cent) 
could not get medicine at pharmacy counters due to non- availability of 
medicines. It was further noticed that Not of Standard Quality (NOSQ) drugs 
were also supplied to the patients. 
On being pointed out, the Department  admitted (December 2022) the audit 
observation.  
Fire-fighting services  
No objection certificate (NOC) was not obtained from Fire Department except 
RH Patiala, DH Gurdaspur  and three CHCs
16. S moke detector was not in 
place/ functional in any of the test -checked hospitals except RH Patiala, five 
DHs17 and two CHCs18. The provision of alarm in case of fire was not in place 
in test-checked health institutions except RH Patiala, four DHs19, two CHCs20. 
Underground backup water for fire was not available at test -checked health 
institutions except RH Patiala and four DHs 21, CHC Fatehgarh Churian and 
PHC Ghawaddi.  Underground static water tank for meeting the fire 
contingency was not constructed in any of the test -checked health institutions  
except RH Patiala and four DHs 22 and CHC Fatehgarh Churian. Evacuation 
plan routes for fire exit were not displayed in test -checked health institutions 
except RH Patiala, two DHs23 and three PHCs24. 
 
16  CHCs at (i) Fatehgarh Churian; (ii) N M Singh; and (iii) Sidhwan Bet. 
17  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Gurdaspur; (iv) Hoshiarpur; and (v) Ludhiana.  
18  CHCs at (i) Fatehgarh Churian; and (ii) N M Singh. 
19  DHs at (i) Bathinda; (ii) Fatehgarh Sahib; (iii) Hoshiarpur; and (iv) Ludhiana. 
20  CHCs at (i) Fatehgarh Churian; and (ii) Sidhwan Bet. 
21  DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Hoshiarpur; and (iv) Ludhiana. 
22  DHs at (i) Fatehgarh Sahib; (ii) Gurdaspur; (iii) Hoshiarpur; and (iv) Ludhiana. 
23  DHs at (i) Gurdaspur; and (ii) Ludhiana. 
24  PHCs at (i) Mand Bhander; (ii) Ghawaddi; and (iii) Patto Hira Singh. 

Appendices 
305 
 
Appendix 3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.5(b)) 
Detail of surgery load per surgeon in test-checked CHCs 
Name of CHC Year 
General Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology 
Accident Emergency Total 
No.25 of 
surgeries 
conducted No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
CHC  
Bhucho Mandi 
2016-17 0 608 1 3 0 0 0 0 611 
2017-18 0 571 0 0 0 0 0 0 571 
2018-19 0 291 0 0 0 0 0 0 291 
2019-20 0 166 1 6 0 0 0 0 172 
2020-21 1 180 0 0 1 0 1 0 180 
2021-22 1 112 1 3 1 0 1 0 115  
Total 2 1,928 3 12 2 0 2 0 1,940 
CHC Mehraj 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
CHC  
Bassi Pathana 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 567 567 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,061 1,061 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 878 878 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 788 788 
2020-21 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 362 362 
2021-22 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 395 395  
Total 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 4,051 4,051 
CHC Amloh 
2016-17 1 125 1 146 1 172 1 211 654 
2017-18 1 132 1 232 1 188 1 235 787 
2018-19 1 185 1 182 1 300 1 310 977 
2019-20 1 235 1 83 1 378 1 393 1,089 
2020-21 1 119 1 4 1 278 1 278 679 
2021-22 1 19 1 9 1 233 1 233 494  
Total 6 815 6 656 6 1,549 6 1,660 4,680 
CHC  
Fatehgarh 
Churian 
2016-17 1 350 1 220 0 120 0 113 803 
2017-18 1 309 1 208 0 90 0 104 711 
2018-19 1 290 1 283 0 128 0 121 822 
2019-20 1 259 1 354 0 85 0 126 824 
2020-21 1 113 1 350 0 177 0 67 707 
2021-22 0 0 1 361 0 0 0 0 361  
Total 5 1,321 6 1,776 0 600 0 531 4,228 
 
25  (i) General; (ii) ENT; (iii) Ortho; and (iv) Eye. 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
306 
Name of CHC Year 
General Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology 
Accident Emergency Total 
No.25 of 
surgeries 
conducted No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
CHC  
Naushera Majja 
Singh 
2016-17 1 112 1 264 0 118 0 202 696 
2017-18 1 110 0 213 0 91 0 244 658 
2018-19 2 57 1 189 0 180 0 112 538 
2019-20 2 215 1 318 0 232 0 280 1,045 
2020-21 2 143 1 558 0 169 0 270 1,140 
2021-22 1 257 1 545 0 254 0 168 1,224 
 
Total 9 894 5 2,087 0 1,044 0 1,276 5,301 
CHC Mahilpur 
2016-17 3 50 1 81 0 0 0 0 131 
2017-18 2 41 1 64 0 0 0 0 105 
2018-19 1 28 1 44 0 0 0 0 72 
2019-20 1 28 1 21 0 0 0 0 49 
2020-21 1 471 1 15 0 0 0 0 486 
2021-22 1 757 0 0 0 0 0 0 757 
 
Total 9 1,375 5 225 0 0 0 0 1,600 
CHC  
Shamchaurasi 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 0 57 0 45 0 0 0 0 102 
 
Total 0 57 0 45 0 0 0 0 102 
CHC Sudhar 
2016-17 1 46 1 276 0 0 0 0 322 
2017-18 1 119 1 185 0 0 0 0 304 
2018-19 1 120 1 121 0 0 0 0 241 
2019-20 1 3 1 10 0 0 0 0 13 
2020-21 1 49 1 12 0 0 0 0 61 
2021-22 1 149 1 2 0 0 0 0 151 
 
Total 6 486 6 606 0 0 0 0 1,092 
CHC  
Sidhwan Bet 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 1 28 0 0 0 0 28 
2019-20 0 0 1 122 0 0 0 0 122 
2020-21 0 0 1 110 0 0 0 0 110 
2021-22 0 0 1 92 0 0 0 0 92 
 
Total 0 0 4 352 0 0 0 0 352 
CHC  
Bagha Purana 
2016-17 0 0 1 32 0 0 0 0 32 
2017-18 0 0 1 25 0 0 0 0 25 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 
Total 0 0 2 57 0 0 0 0 57 

Appendices 
307 
Name of CHC Year 
General Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology 
Accident Emergency Total 
No.25 of 
surgeries 
conducted No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Average 
No. of 
surgeries 
CHC  
Nihal Singh 
Wala 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked CHCs 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
308 
 
Appendix 3.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.4) 
Details of non-availability of vaccines (in days) 
Year 
Name of 
health 
institution 
Stock out period of vaccines (in days) 
BCG OPV (zero dose) Hepatitis-B TT 
Period Days Period Days Period Days Period Days 
Community Health Centres 
2016-17 
Bassi Pathana 01.09.2016 to 
14.09.2016 
14 01.04.2016 to 
25.04.2016 
25 01.09.2016 to 
14.09.2016 
14   
01.02.2017 to 
07.02.2017 
7 01.02.2017 to 
01.03.2017 
29 01.02.2017 to 
07.02.2017 
7 01.02.2017 to 
07.02.2017 
7 
Amloh 01.09.2016 to 
14.09.2016 
14 -- -- 03.07.2016 to 
02.08.2016 
31 -- -- 
2017-18 
Amloh -- -- -- -- -- -- 27.04.2017 to 
04.05.2017 
8 
Sidhwan Bet -- -- -- -- 02.11.2017 to 
05.11.2017 
4 -- -- 
2018-19 
Bassi Pathana 01.07.2018 to 
31.10.2018 
123 01.06.2018 to 
01.07.2018 
31 01.06.2018 to 
31.10.2018 
153 -- -- 
01.01.2019 to 
01.02.2019 
32 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Amloh 05.12.2018 to 
17.12.2018 
13 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
06.03.2019 to 
25.03.2019 
20 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Sidhwan Bet -- -- -- -- 21.03.2019 to 
31.03.2019 
11 -- -- 
2019-20 
Bassi Pathana -- -- -- -- -- -- 01.12.2019 to 
01.01.2020 
32 
Amloh -- -- -- -- 01.04.2019 to 
07.04.2019 
7 17.07.2019 to 
26.07.2019 
10 
-- -- -- -- 02.05.2019 to 
07.05.2019 
6 -- -- 
-- -- -- -- 26.10.2019 to 
30.10.2019 
5 -- -- 
Sidhwan Bet 25.07.2019 to 
08.08.2019 
15 26.10.2019 to 
04.11.2019 
10 01.04.2019 to 
07.04.2019 
7 -- -- 
29.09.2019 to 
14.10.2019 
16 -- -- 27.04.2019 to 
13.05.2019 
17 --- -- 
13.07.2019 to 
16.07.2019 
4 -- -- 
20.12.2019 to 
31.12.2019 
12 -- -- 
2020-21 Bassi Pathana -- -- 21-10-2020 to 
08-12-2020 
49 -- -- -- -- 
Primary Health Centres 
2016-17 Nandpur 
Kalour 
04.10.2016 to 
18.10.2016 
15 -- -- -- -- 24.08.2016 to 
06.09.2016 
14 
2017-18 Nandpur 
Kalour 
-- -- -- -- 08.05.2017 to 
08.09.2017 
124 -- -- 
2018-19 
Bhai Rupa -- -- -- -- 04.04.2018 to 
29.03.2019 
360 -- -- 
Sanghol -- -- -- -- 31.05.2018 to 
24.06.2018 
25 -- -- 
 -- -- -- -- 12.03.2019 to 
24.03.2019 
13 -- -- 
Nandpur 
Kalour 
-- -- -- -- 12.05.2018 to 
31.03.2019 
324 -- -- 

Appendices 
309 
Year 
Name of 
health 
institution 
Stock out period of vaccines (in days) 
BCG OPV (zero dose) Hepatitis-B TT 
Period Days Period Days Period Days Period Days 
2019-20 
Bhai Rupa -- -- -- -- 01.04.2019 to 
04.02.2020 
and 
08.02.2020 to 
31.03.2020 
363 -- -- 
Sanghol -- -- -- -- 02.04.2019 to 
13.05.2019 
and 
02.08.2019 to 
25.08.2019 
66 -- -- 
Nandpur 
Kalour 
-- -- -- -- 01.04.2019 to 
12.12.2019 
256 -- -- 
2020-21 
Bhai Rupa  -- -- -- -- 17.04.2020 to 
18.07.2020 
93 -- -- 
Nandpur 
Kalour 
07.01.2021 to 
23.01.2021 
17 -- -- --  -- -- 
Source: Test-checked health institutions 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
310 
 
Appendix 3.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.13) 
Analysis of Joint Inspection Report-Citizen Charter 
Sr. No. 
Name of District 
Name of health facility 
Whether the facility has established citizen 
charter? 
Charter provides information about available 
OPD services and their timings department-wise. 
Charter provides information about available 
diagnostic services. 
Charter provides information about available 
emergency and trauma care services and mode of 
approach thereof. 
Charter provides information about available 
ambulance services. 
Charter provides information about 
responsibilities of users. 
Charter provides information about services not 
available at the facility level. 
Charter provides information about equipment 
not in order. 
Charter provides information about services 
available to BPL patients. 
   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
District Hospitals 
1. Bathinda DH Bathinda Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No No No 
2. Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
DH Fatehgarh 
Sahib Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes 
3. Hoshiarpur DH Hoshiarpur Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes 
4. Ludhiana DH Ludhiana Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
5. Moga DH Moga Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6. Patiala Rajendra Hospital Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes 
Community Health Centres 
1. 
Bathinda 
Mehraj Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No 
2. Bhucho Mandi Yes Yes No Yes No Yes No No No 
3. Fatehgarh 
Sahib Amloh Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No No 
4. Gurdaspur NM Singh Yes No No Yes No Yes No No No 
5. 
Hoshiarpur 
Mahilpur Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No 
6. Shamchaurasi Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes 
7. Ludhiana Sidhwan Bet Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
8. Moga Bagha Purana Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes 
Primary Health Centres 
1. 
Hoshiarpur 
Chakowal Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No Yes 
2. Paldi Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No No Yes 
3. Possi Yes Yes Yes No No Yes No No No 
4. Mand Bhander Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes 
5. Moga Patto Hira Singh Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No No Yes 
Source: Joint Inspection of hospitals 

Appendices 
311 
 
Appendix 3.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.13) 
Analysis of Joint Inspection Report-Display of Citizen Charter  
and other boards 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of health 
facility 
Are there adequate 
number of notice 
boards detailing the 
location of all the 
services/departments/ 
wards, etc.? 
Is it in 
simple 
local 
language? 
Is it 
followed at 
all the 
levels? 
The facility displays 
the services and 
entitlements available 
in its departments 
It 
displays 
rights of 
patients 
Whether user 
charges are 
displayed? 
 District Hospitals 
1. Bathinda Yes Yes Yes No Yes No 
2. Fatehgarh Sahib Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
3. Gurdaspur Yes Yes Yes No  No Yes 
4. Hoshiarpur Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
5. Ludhiana Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6. Moga Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
7. RH Patiala Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
 Community Health Centres 
1. Mehraj No Yes No No No No 
2. Bhucho Mandi Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
3. Bassi Pathana No Yes Yes No No No 
4. Amloh No Yes Yes No No Yes 
5. Fatehgarh Churian Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
6. NM Singh Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
7. Mahilpur Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
8. Shamchaurasi Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
9. Sidhwan Bet Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
10. Sudhar Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
11. Nihal Singh wala Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
12. Bagha Purana Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
 Primary Health Centres 
1. Lehra Mohhabat Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
2. Mandi Kalan No No No No No No 
3. Bhairupa No No No No No No 
4. Nandpur Kalour No Yes Yes No No No 
5. Sanghol No Yes Yes No No No 
6. Bhari No Yes Yes No No No 
7. Nanowal No Yes Yes No No No 
8. Behrampur No No No No No No 
9. Dhianpur No No No No No No 
10. Dorangla No No No No No No 
11. Ranjit Bagh No No No No No No 
12. Chakowal Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
13. Paldi Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
14. Possi Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
15. Mand Bhander Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
16. Ghawaddi Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
17. Mansuran No No No No No No 
18. Sowaddi Kalan Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
19. Otalon No No No No No No 
20. Patto Hira Singh Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
21. Sukhanand No No No No No No 
22. Thati Bhai Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
Source: Joint Inspection of hospitals 
Note: PHC Jodhpur Pakhar (Bathinda) was not functional; and Joint Inspection of PHC Malianwala could not be done due to  
non-availability of Medical Officer  

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
312 
 
Appendix 4.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.1) 
Shortage of equipment in Rajindra Hospital, Patiala 
Sr. No. Category-wise 
equipment 
Rajindra Hospital, Patiala 
Type of 
equipment 
required as 
per NMC 
norms 
Type of 
equipment 
available 
Type of 
equipment 
not 
available 
Percentage 
of non-
availability 
A Non-Clinical Departments  
1. Anatomy 33 26 7 21.21 
2. Physiology 84 52 32 38.10 
3. Biochemistry 30 26 4 13.33 
4. Pathology  55 30 25 45.45 
5. Microbiology 33 33 0 0.00 
6. Pharmacology 9 9 0 0.00 
7. Forensic Medicine 79 21 58 73.42 
8. Community Medicine 63 8 55 87.30 
A Total 386 205 181 46.89 
B Clinical Departments 
9. Medicine 43 37 6 13.95 
10. Paediatrics 31 12 19 61.29 
11. Dermatology, 
Venerology & 
Leprosy 
6 3 3 50.00 
12. Department of 
Psychiatry 
13 10 3 23.08 
13. Department of 
Surgery 
42 29 13 30.95 
14. Orthopaedics 24 8 16 66.67 
15. Ophthalmology 37 17 20 54.05 
16. Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology 
164 153 11 6.71 
17. Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
94 45 49 52.13 
18. Department of 
Anaesthesia/ICU 
49 7 42 85.71 
19. Department of Radio 
Diagnosis 
10 10 0 0.00 
20. Central Casualty 5 2 3 60.00 
B Total 518 333 185 35.71 
A+B Total 904 538 366 40.49 
Optional 
Department 
Department of 
Radiotherapy 
22 17 5 22.73 
Grand Total 926 555 371 40.06 
Source: GMCH, Patiala 

Appendices 
313 
 
Appendix 4.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.2) 
Shortage of equipment in CHCs 
Sr. 
No. 
Numbers   of 
Equipment 
required for a 
particular service 
Number of equipment available in test-checked CHCs against required numbers under a particular 
service 
Bathinda Fatehgarh Sahib Gurdaspur Hoshiarpur Ludhiana Moga 
CHC Bhucho 
Mandi 
CHC Mehraj 
CHC Amloh 
CHC Bassi 
Pathana 
CHC Fatehgarh 
Churian 
CHC N M Singh 
CHC Mahilpur 
CHC 
Shamchaurasi 
CHC Sidhwan 
Bet 
CHC Sudhar 
CHC Bagha 
Purana 
CHC Nihal 
Singhwala 
1. Operation Theatre 
(11) 
7 10 11 7 8 4 5 10 10 10 8 8 
2. Labour Room (12) 10 9 9 8 9 7 6 11 10 11 10 10 
3. Radiology (9) 8 7 4 6 7 4 4 7 6 8 7 7 
Total (32) 25 26 24 21 24 15 15 28 26 29 25 25 
Percentage Availability 78 81 75 66 75 47 47 88 81 91 78 78 
Percentage Shortfall 22 19 25 34 25 53 53 12 19 09 22 22 
Shortage of equipment in PHCs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
District 
  
Name of PHC 
Number of equipment required and available under a particular service in PHC 
Labour 
Room (4) 
Laboratory 
(7) 
Medical/ 
Surgical (15) 
Total 
(26) 
Percentage of 
availability 
Percentage 
of Shortfall 
1. 
Bathinda 
 Bhai Rupa 4 0 9 13 50 50 
2.  Mandi Kalan 3 0 9 12 46 54 
3.  Lehra Mohabbat 4 6 12 22 85 15 
4. Jodhpur Pakhar Data was not provided (PHC was not functional) 
5. 
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
Sanghol 4 5 9 18 69 31 
6. Nandpur Kalour 4 7 14 25 96 4 
7. Bhari 4 0 9 13 50 50 
8. Nanowal Data was not provided 
9. 
Gurdaspur 
Ranjit Bagh 0 7 8 15 58 42 
10. Behrampur 4 6 13 23 88 12 
11. Dorangla 4 7 11 22 85 15 
12. Dhianpur 4 6 10 20 77 23 
13. 
Hoshiarpur 
Chakowal 4 3 10 17 65 35 
14. Paldi 4 4 10 18 69 31 
15.  Possi  4 5 12 21 81 19 
16. Mand Bhander  4 5 13 22 85 15 
17. 
Ludhiana 
Mansuran 4 2 13 19 73 27 
18. Ghawaddi 4 6 12 22 85 15 
19. Sowadi Kalan 3 0 9 12 46 54 
20. Otalaon 4 7 6 17 65 35 
21. 
Moga 
Mallianwala 0 1 6 7 27 73 
22. Patto Hira Singh 4 5 13 22 85 15 
23. Sukhanand 4 0 8 12 46 54 
24. Thatibhai 0 1 5 6 23 77 
Source: Data provided by test checked CHCs and PHCs 
Colour Code: Green depicts ‘least shortage’, Yellow depicts ‘moderate shortage’ and Red depicts ‘most shortage’ 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
314 
 
Appendix 4.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.3.2) 
Details of drugs/consumables not supplied 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No. 
Purchase 
Order No. 
and date 
Name of drug/consumable Quantity 
of 
Purchase 
Order 
Name of Supplier Total Order 
Value   
(Incl. VAT)  
1. 16575 dt 
07.04.2020 
N-95 Mask 
PPE Kits for influenza Size XL 
50000 
50000 
Halyard Health India 
Limited 
339.85 
2. 16581 dt 
17.04.2020 
Escitalopram Tab 10 mg 7500 Wing Biotech 0.04 
3. 17639 dt 
04.12.2020 
Salbutamol Respiration Solution  
5 mg/ml 
25000 Cipla Limited 2.15 
4. 18241 dt 
20.12.2020 
Haloperidol Inj 5 mg/ml 9740 Bharat Parenteral Ltd. 0.57 
5. 18212 dt 
28.12.2020 
Dicyclomine HCL Tab 10 mg 500000 Healthy Life Pharma 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0.73 
6. 18354 dt 
06.01.2021 
Piperacilin+ 
Tazobactam inj 4.5 mg 
Vancomycin Inj 250 mg 
40000 
 
5000 
ANG Life Science India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
31.33 
7. 22200 dt 
03.03.2021 
Albendazole Tab 400 mg 1200000 Apple Formulation Pvt. 
Ltd. 
22.18 
8. 22282 dt 
17.03.2021 
Olanzapine Tab 10 mg 30000 Hab pharmaceuticals & 
Research Ltd. 
0.15 
9. 22380 dt 
20.4.2021 
Iron Folic Acid Drops (each ml contains 
20 mg Iron and 100 micro gram Folic 
Acid )  
150000 Legen Healthcare 9.24 
10. 22383 dt 
20.04.2021  Doxycycline Cap 100mg HCL IP  1000000 Overseas Health Care 
Pvt Ltd 10.86 
11. 81 dt 
03.05.2021  Doxycycline Cap 100mg HCL IP  1500000 Overseas Health Care 
Pvt Ltd 16.30 
12. 1138 dt 
20.08.2021  Diazepam  Inj 5 mg/ml  2943 Nandani Medical 
Laboratories Pvt Ltd 0.15 
13. 1357 dt 
02.11.2021 Diclofenac Sodium Inj 25mg/ml 105000 Agron Remedies Pvt Ltd 2.14 
14. 1356 dt 
02.11.2021 Dextrose (25 % )100ml  3000 Pentagon Labs Ltd 0.37 
15. 1334 dt 
02.11.2021 
Thiocolchicoside 4mg, IP, Tab  140000 Theon Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd 3.00 
Amoxycillin + Clauvinic Acid -500mg + 
125 mg Tab  2100000 Theon Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd 94.28 
16. 1383 dt 
02.11.2021  
Cefotaxime Inj 1 gm  30000 Agron Remedies Pvt Ltd 3.73 
Piperacillin + Tazobactam Inj 4.5 gm 
(Piperacillin 4 gm + Tazobactum 500 mg)  40000 Agron Remedies Pvt Ltd 20.60 
17. 1390 dt 
02.11.2021  Vitamin K 1mg/ml Inj.  42000 Bharat Parenterals Ltd 2.75 
18. 1425 dt 
03.12.2021  
Blood Transfusion set (sterilized) should 
conform to ISI standard  34292 Lars Medicare Pvt Ltd 2.97 
19. 1587 dt 
30.12.2021  Paracetamol Tab (500 mg)  3000000 Micron Pharmaceuticals 9.74 
20. 1586 dt Paracetamol Tab (500 mg)  7000000 Pinnacle Life Science 22.74 

Appendices 
315 
Sr. 
No. 
Purchase 
Order No. 
and date 
Name of drug/consumable Quantity 
of 
Purchase 
Order 
Name of Supplier Total Order 
Value   
(Incl. VAT)  
30.12.2021  Ltd 
21. 2251 dt 
10.02.2022  Ranitidine Inj IP 25mg/ml  300000 Alpa Laboratories Ltd 6.65 
22. 2837-40 dt 
23.02.2022  Paraffin gauze 10cm x 10cm  11895 Batra Pharmaceuticals 
And Distributers 0.73 
23. 2250 dt 
10.02.2022  Hyocine Butyl Bromide Inj 20mg/ml  70000 Bharat Parenterals Ltd 5.22 
24. 2878-81 dt 
23.02.2022  
Feeding Tubes (infant) P.V.C. Non Toxic 
X-ray Opaque F line sterilized Disposable 
pyrogen free size various sizes  
24550 Ind Biosciences 1.13 
PVC Ryles Tube size:FG 14  246 Ind Biosciences 0.02 
25. 2882-85 dt 
23.02.2022 
Suction Catheter 14F  13076 Rudraksh Pharma 
Surgico Pvt Ltd 0.57 
Pedia Set  445 Rudraksh Pharma 
Surgico Pvt Ltd 0.09 
26. 2845-48 dt 
23.02.2022  O.T. Cap Disposable (Surgeon) 7903 Rudraksh Pharma 
Surgico Pvt Ltd 0.06 
27. 2252 dt 
10.02.2022  Ceftriaxone Inj 1gm  60000 Agron Remedies Pvt Ltd 7.53 
28. 2969-71 dt 
09.03.2022  Diclofenac Sodium Inj 25mg/ml  105000 Agron Remedies Pvt Ltd 2.14 
29. 2972-73 dt 
09.03.2022  Vitamin Tab.- Vit E 400mg (Sofgel) 250000 Asoj Soft Caps Pvt Ltd 0.42 
30. 2974-75 dt 
09-.03.2022  Amoxycillin Cap 500 mg  700000 Astam Healthcare Pvt 
Ltd 10.10 
31. 3140 dt 
31.03.2022  Clindamycin 600mg Inj  3500 N Bharat Parenterals Ltd 0.92 
32. 2963-65 dt 
09.03.2022  Amoxycillin Cap 500 mg  300000 Maxmed Life Science 
Pvt Ltd 4.33 
Total 32 medicines/consumables  24 suppliers 635.78 
Source: PHSC data/information 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
316 
Appendix 4.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.5.1.2(ii)) 
Excess payment of service charges on GST  
Period Name of the equipment Rate of equipment taken 
for paying service charge 
(Per unit) 
Assessable value 
of equipment 
(per unit) 
Diff. in rate No. of new 
equipment 
added 
Total excess 
valuation 
Rate of service 
charge 
per annum 
Service charge paid 
in excess 
(₹ in lakh) 
April 2020 to 
June 2020  
Bio Safety Cabinet 3.95 3.47 0.48 5 2.4 8.497 0.05 
Blood Collection Monitor 0.65 0.57 0.08 16 1.28 8.497 0.03 
Fully Auto Analyzer 10.45 9.93 0.52 2 1.04 8.497 0.02 
Platelet Incubator 1.79 1.57 0.22 10 2.2 8.497 0.05 
Refrigerated Cryo Bath 1.15 1.01 0.14 10 1.4 8.497 0.03 
Sterile Connecting Device 5.67 5.4 0.27 17 4.59 8.497 0.10 
Water Bath Plasma Thrawing 0.68 0.61 0.07 16 1.12 8.497 0.02 
Electric Cautery 0.75 0.67 0.08 44 3.52 8.497 0.07 
Service charge paid for next four quarters     17.55 8.922 1.57 
July 2020 to 
Sept 2020  
Blood Bank Refrigerator 1.79 1.51 0.28 32 8.96 8.922 0.20 
Deep Freezer- 40 2.02 1.58 0.44 12 5.28 8.922 0.12 
Deep Freezer-80 4.73 3.69 1.04 7 7.28 8.922 0.16 
Service charge paid for next three quarters     21.52 8.922 1.44 
October to 
December 
2020  
Automated Hematology Analyzer 3.67 3.11 0.56 1 0.56 8.922 0.01 
Blood Bank Refrigerator 1.79 1.51 0.28 2 0.56 8.922 0.01 
CR System 10.64 9.5 1.14 27 30.78 8.922 0.69 
ECG machine 0.54 0.48 0.06 25 1.5 8.922 0.03 
Service charge paid for next two quarters     33.4 8.922 1.49 
January 2021 
to March 
2021  
Blood Bank Refrigerator 1.79 1.51 0.28 3 0.84 8.922 0.02 
CR System 10.64 9.5 1.14 27 30.78 8.922 0.69 
6.03 5.39 0.64 1 0.64 8.922 0.01 
Deep Freezer- 80 4.73 3.69 1.04 3 3.12 8.922 0.07 
Fully Auto Analyzer 10.45 9.93 0.52 1 0.52 8.922 0.01 
X Ray machine- 60mA 1.71 1.45 0.26 1 0.26 8.922 0.01 
Service charge paid for next one quarter     36.16 8.922 0.81 
April 2021 to 
June 2021 
Videoscopic General Surgery Laparoscope 33.5 29.91 3.59 15 53.85 8.922 1.20 
Blood Bank Refrigerator 1.79 1.51 0.28 3 0.84 8.922 0.02 
C Pap 4.99 4.22 0.77 4 3.08 8.922 0.07 
Photo Therapy Unit Double 0.76 0.64 0.12 4 0.48 8.922 0.01 
CR System  10.64 9.5 1.14 1 1.14 8.922 0.03 
5.87 5.24 0.63 1 0.63 8.922 0.01 
Fully Auto Analyzer 10.45 8.86 1.59 1 1.59 8.922 0.04 
X Ray Machine- 500mA 5.18 4.39 0.79 1 0.79 8.922 0.02 
  Total  9.11 
 GST at the rate of 18 per cent 1.6 
 Total excess service charge paid 10.75 
Source: PHSC records 

Appendices 
317 
Appendix 4.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.5.1.2(iii)) 
Excess payment of service charges by adopting higher value of new equipment 
Period Name of the equipment Rate per 
unit 
considered 
Actual assessable 
value per unit of New 
added equipment 
Diff. in 
rate 
No. of new 
equipment 
added 
Excess 
considered 
value 
Rate of service 
charge per 
annum 
Service charge 
paid in excess  
(₹ in lakh) 
July to 
September 
2018 
Fully Auto Analyzer 14.85 9.95 4.9 28 137.2 8.092 2.78 
Service charge for three quarters up to 6/2019     137.2 8.092 8.33 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2020     137.2 8.497 11.66 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2021     137.2 8.922 12.24 
October to 
December 
2018 
Elisa Reader cum washer 4.24 2.34 1.9 17 32.3 8.092 0.65 
Fully Auto Analyzer 14.85 9.95 4.9 4 19.6 8.092 0.40 
Autoclave (H) 2.5 1.55 0.95 1 0.95 8.092 0.02 
Autoclave (V) 0.7 0.55 0.15 4 0.6 8.092 0.01 
Service charge for two quarters up to 6/2019     53.45 8.092 2.16 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2020     53.45 8.497 4.54 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2021     53.45 8.922 4.77 
January to 
March 2019 
Autoclave (H) 2.5 1.55 0.95 117 111.15 8.092 2.25 
Autoclave (V) 0.7 0.55 0.15 168 25.2 8.092 0.51 
Boyles Apparatus 2.2 2.09 0.11 145 15.95 8.092 0.32 
Elisa Reader Cum Washer 4.24 2.34 1.9 18 34.2 8.092 0.69 
Semi Auto Analyzer 1 0.77 0.23 3 0.69 8.092 0.01 
Service charge for next one quarter up to 6/2019     187.19 8.092 3.79 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2020     187.19 8.497 15.91 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2021     187.19 8.922 16.70 
April to June 
2019 
Autoclave (V) 0.7 0.55 0.15 7 1.05 8.092 0.02 
Elisa Reader cum washer 4.24 2.34 1.9 5 9.5 8.092 0.19 
Fully Auto Analyzer 14.85 9.95 4.9 7 34.3 8.092 0.69 
Semi Auto Analyzer 1 0.77 0.23 79 18.17 8.092 0.37 
Service charge for next four quarters upto 6/2020     63.02 8.497 5.35 
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2021     63.02 8.922 5.62 
July to 
September 
2019 
Autoclave (H) 2.5 1.55 0.95 3 2.85 8.497 0.06 
Autoclave(V) 0.7 0.55 0.15 6 0.9 8.497 0.02 
Elisa Reader Cum Washer 4.24 2.34 1.9 1 1.9 8.497 0.04 
Fully Auto Analyzer 14.85 9.95 4.9 6 29.4 8.497 0.62 
Semi Auto Analyzer 1 0.77 0.23 5 1.15 8.497 0.02 
Service charge for next three quarters up to 6/2020*     6.8*   8.497 0.43  
Service charge for next four quarters up to 6/2021*      6.8 *  8.922 0.61 
Total Service Charge 101.78 
GST @ 18 per cent 18.32 
Total excess service charge paid 120.10 
Source: PHSC records 
* ₹ 36.20- ₹ 29.40 (The value of Fully Auto Analyzer was taken on actual basis henceforth)

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
 
318 
Appendix 4.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.5.2.3) 
Details of delayed installation of medical equipment after procurement 
Sr. 
No. 
Supply order 
No./Date 
Name of equipment Quantity Value of 
equipment 
(in ₹) 
Date of 
supply 
Date of 
installation 
Delayed in 
installation 
(days) 
1. 1207-1211/ 
05.07.19  
Pediatrics 
Ventilators 1 16,01,600.00 28.08.19 07.12.19 101 
Adult Ventilators 1 14,00,000.00 28.08.19 18.08.20 356 
2. 1650-54/ 
10.09.19 
300mA X-Ray 
machine 1 9,19,337.44 14.11.19 30.12.19 46 
3. 1211-1216/ 
05.07.19 Multi para monitors 8 47,40,736.00 17.09.19 18.08.20 336 
4. 340-347/ 
08.03.19  
Pediatrics 
Ventilators 5 80,08,000.00 10.04.19 26.03.20 351 
Adult Ventilators 5 70,00,000.00 10.04.19 25.05.20 411 
5. 1555-59/ 
26.08.19 Audiometer System 1 8,82,000.00 05.01.20 27.02.20 53 
6. 1851-57/ 
30.09.19 Deep Freezer 1 5,08,580.00 06.11.19 13.11.20 373 
7. 1057-1062/ 
21.06.19 Centrifuge machine 1 19,47,000.00 08.08.19 03.11.20 453 
8. 1549-54/ 
26.08.19  
Front glass 
refrigerator 1 84,960.00 06.10.19 13.11.20 404 
Blood collection 
monitor/Bio mixer 1 88,256.00 06.10.19 13.11.20 404 
Refrigerated high 
speed centrifuge 1 19,47,000.00 06.10.19 13.11.20 404 
9. 1598-1603/ 
28.08.19 FGD Refrigerator 1 84,960.00 06.10.19 11.07.20 279 
Total 28 2,92,12,429.44       
Source: PHSC records 
 

Appendices 
319 
 
Appendix 4.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.5.2.4) 
Details of equipment lying idle in GMCH Patiala 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Equipment 
Name of 
Department 
Total Price 
on DDP basis 
(Figure in ₹) 
Date of 
receipt of 
Equipment 
Date of 
Installation 
Reasons of 
non- 
installation/ 
non-
utilisation 
1. High Speed 
Electrical Drill 
system 
Neurosurgery 24,04,614  21.02.2019 06.07.2020 Installed but 
not in use due 
to non-
posting of 
Neurosurgeon 2. Neurosurgical 
Operating 
Microscope  
Neurosurgery 
1,11,13,226  10.01.2019 03.07.2019 
3. General 
Neurosurgery 
Instrument Set 
Neurosurgery 
9,58,380  31.05.2018 19.05.2020  
4. C Arm Flat Panel Neurosurgery 1,19,47,000  18.06.2020 27.06.2020  
5. 8 Channel EMG -
NCS-EP system 
Neurosurgery 
34,22,476  11.08.2020 19.11.2020 
6. Binocular 
Microscope 
Preclinical 
14,516  11.05.2021 Not 
installed 
Due to 
shortage of 
paramedical 
staff, new 
laboratory in 
the super 
specialty 
block could 
not be made 
functional.  
7. Bio Safety 
Cabinet 
Preclinical 
 3,18,600  08.07.2021 Not 
installed 
8. BOD Incubator Preclinical 47,200  05.07.2021 Not 
installed 
9. Elisa reader with 
washer and shaker 
Preclinical 
21,24,000  28.07.2021 Not 
installed 
10. Hot air oven 
(more than 200 
liters) 
Preclinical 
 61,360  05.07.2021 Not 
installed 
11. Laminar Air Flow 
Chamber 
Preclinical 
1,23,900  28.06.2021 Not 
installed 
12. Refrigerated 
Centrifuge 
Preclinical 
6,73,898  26.05.2021 Not 
installed 
13. Continuous Renal 
Replacement 
Therapy (CRRT) 
Equipment 
Nephrology 
10,34,085  10.05.2019 16.12.2019 Dialysis set is 
very costly. 
Usually, 
patients 
cannot afford.  
 
14. Laparoscopy Set 
(Urology) 
Urology 60,88,652  13.08.2019 Not 
installed 
Due to 
incomplete 
supply of 
instrument. 
15. Cystoscope & 
Resectoscope – 
Pediatric 
Urology 
4,30,652   Not 
installed 
Instrument 
supplied were 
not 
compatible 
with 
telescope 
Total   4,07,62,559    
Source: Departmental data/information 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
320 
Appendix 5.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.5.1) 
Availability of required infrastructure in health care institutions 
Name of health 
care facility 
Whether facility surveys 
were conducted to assess 
the requirement of 
infrastructure? 
Whether the building 
structure and the 
internal structure is 
disaster proof especially 
earthquake proof, flood 
proof and equipped 
with fire protection 
measures? 
Whether the facilities 
like public utilities 
(toilets) are separate 
for male and female? 
Whether directional and 
layout signage displayed 
appropriately in bilingual and 
pictorial form for all the 
departments and utilities 
(toilets, drinking water, etc.) 
for easy access and is user 
friendly? 
Whether barrier free 
access environment 
(viz. ramp, hand 
railing, etc.) has been 
provided for easy 
access to differently 
abled and elderly 
persons? 
Whether facility 
has infrastructure 
for intramural and 
extramural 
communication?  
District Hospital 
Bathinda No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Fatehgarh Sahib No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Gurdaspur No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Hoshiarpur No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Ludhiana No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Moga No No Yes No Yes No 
Community Health Centre 
Bhucho Mandi No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Mehraj No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Bassi Pathana No No Yes Yes Ramp without hand 
railing 
No 
Amloh No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Fatehgarh Churian No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Naushera Majja 
Singh 
No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Mahilpur No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Shamchaurasi No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Sidhwan Bet No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Sudhar No No Yes  Yes Yes  No 
Baghapurana No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Nihal Singh Wala No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Primary Health Centre 
Mandi Kalan No No Yes Yes No No 
Lehra Mohabbat No No Yes Yes No No 
Bhai Rupa No No No Yes No No 
Jodhpur Pakhar* No No No No No No 
Sanghol No No No Yes No No 
Nandpur Kalour No No No Yes No No 

Appendices 
321 
Name of health 
care facility 
Whether facility surveys 
were conducted to assess 
the requirement of 
infrastructure? 
Whether the building 
structure and the 
internal structure is 
disaster proof especially 
earthquake proof, flood 
proof and equipped 
with fire protection 
measures? 
Whether the facilities 
like public utilities 
(toilets) are separate 
for male and female? 
Whether directional and 
layout signage displayed 
appropriately in bilingual and 
pictorial form for all the 
departments and utilities 
(toilets, drinking water, etc.) 
for easy access and is user 
friendly? 
Whether barrier free 
access environment 
(viz. ramp, hand 
railing, etc.) has been 
provided for easy 
access to differently 
abled and elderly 
persons? 
Whether facility 
has infrastructure 
for intramural and 
extramural 
communication?  
Bhari No No No Yes No No 
Nanowal No No No Yes No No 
Ranjit Bagh No No Yes No No No 
Behrampur No No Yes No No No 
Dorangla No No Yes No No No 
Dhianpur No No Yes No No No 
Chakowal No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Paldi No No Yes Yes No No 
Possi No No No Yes No No 
Mand Bhander No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Ghawaddi No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Mansuran No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Otalon No No Yes No No No 
Sowaddi Kalan No No No Yes No No 
Patto Hira Singh No No Yes Yes Yes No 
Mallianwala No No No No No No 
Thatibhai No Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
Sukhanand No No Yes Yes No No 
Source: Test-checked hospitals  
* PHC Jodhpur Pakhar was not functional 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
322 
 
Appendix 5.2 
(Referred to in Paragraph 5.5.2.1) 
Details of ongoing as well as new major projects to create infrastructure approved under Programme Implementation Plans (PIP)  
during the period 2016-2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
PIP 
Type of facility Name of ongoing/  
new project 
Project cost 
 
Funds 
allotted 
Approved 
cost 
Due date of 
completion 
Whether 
project 
completed 
If yes, date 
of 
completion 
Exp. 
incurred 
Delay 
(In 
days) 
Delay in 
Months 
2016-17 
Additional 
building/major 
upgradation of 
existing 
structure/major 
repair/HPD in DH 
DH, Fazilka 20.00 20.00 19.00 18.10.2017 Yes 31.07.2021 19.13 1,381 46 
DH Rupnagar 5.00 5.00 5.00 03.07.2018 Yes 30.04.2019 4.57 301 10 
DH Gurdaspur 20.00 20.00 19.86 25.09.2016 Yes 25.09.2016 19.28 0 0 
Construction of 
MCH 
Dasua 
38.00 38.00 
3.96 20.12.2017 Yes 30.07.2018 3.35 222 7 
Malerkotla NA 18.12.2017 Yes 22.04.2019 4.34 490 16 
Nakodar 5.49 03.03.2017 No 99% 3.45 - - 
Moga 6.96 05.03.2020 Yes 15.01.2021 4.56 316 11 
Sangrur 6.73 04.10.2017 Yes 15.09.2020 6.10 1,077 36 
Khanna 9.76 10.01.2018 Yes 31.08.2020 8.81 964 32 
Samana 6.00 20.12.2017 Yes 30.07.2018 5.59 222 7 
GMCH Patiala 30.00 20.50 30.29 21.06.2017 Yes 11.05.2018 28.99 324 11 
New construction of 
Building SDH 
Dera Bassi 6.00 6.00 1.00 20.05.2016 Yes 20.05.2016 0.69 0 0 
Sardulgarh 5.00 15.10.2016 Yes 30.06.2017 4.38 258 9 
2017-18 
Construction of 
Residences in SDH 
20 Residences of 
Medical Officers 
(₹21.00 lakh each) and 
40 residences of Para 
Medicals (₹12.00 lakh 
each) 
9.00 9.00 
9.00 
23.02.2019 
& 
21.08.2019 
Yes 05.05.2022 8.02 1166 
& 
987 
39 
 
33 
New MCH  
DH Tarn Taran 
22.00 22.00 
6.66 10.06.2019 Yes 13.12.2019 5.92 186 6 
DH Pathankot 4.05 10.06.2019 Yes 31.01.2020 2.96 235 8 
CHC Bham 3.25 01.04.2019 Yes 20.07.2020 2.97 477 16 
CHC Fatehgarh Churian 3.57 21.06.2019 Yes 10.02.2020 3.44 234 8 

Appendices 
323 
Year of 
PIP 
Type of facility Name of ongoing/  
new project 
Project cost 
 
Funds 
allotted 
Approved 
cost 
Due date of 
completion 
Whether 
project 
completed 
If yes, date 
of 
completion 
Exp. 
incurred 
Delay 
(In 
days) 
Delay in 
Months 
2018-19 
New MCH Wing At DH Fatehgarh Sahib 
and at CHC Goniana 14.00 14.00 
9.00 
 
5.22 
07.10.2020 
& 
05.06.2020 
No 
95% 
& 
15.05.2021 
7.12 
 
4.11 
 
 
344  
 
 
11 
Infrastructure 
strengthening 
HWCs 
600 SC 60.00 60.00 
 
* 
Burns & injury unit 
(Civil work) 
At DH Jalandhar and 
Bathinda 2.40 2.40 
1.20 
 
1.43 
21.07.2020 
& 
12.03.2020 
Yes 
15.12.2021 
& 
10.12.2020 
1.40 
 
0.89 
512  
& 
273 
17 
 
9 
2019-20 
6 New MCH 
SDH Kharar 
38.00 29.00 
9.81 07.09.2021 Yes 15.05.2022 7.54 250 8 
SDH Phagwara 6.02 22.03.2021 Yes 10.06.2022 4.05 445 15 
SDH Jagraon 8.06 22.09.2021 Yes 31.12.2021 6.45 100 3 
SDH Budhlada 5.49 06.07.2021 No 62% 2.97 - - 
SDH Malout 4.30 04.12.2020 Yes 01.10.2021 3.51 301 10 
SDH Gidderbaha 5.06 04.12.2020 Yes 10.07.2021 4.49 218 7 
3 new DEIC 
(RBSK) 
At Gurdaspur, Patiala 
and Ferozepur 2.70 2.70 The work for construction of 3 No. DEIC at Patiala, Ferozepur, Gurdaspur amounting to 
₹ 360 lakh approved in PIP 2022-23. Estimates under preparation 
Strengthening of SC 
(infrastructure)  800 SC 80.00 80.00 
* 
2020-21 
New construction of 
SHCs/ SC 300 SHCs 90.00 15.00 
Strengthening of SC 
to HWC 500 SHC 40.00 16.00 
SDH For additional beds in 
SDH Tapa 6.25 6.25 4.95 20.09.2021 No 97% 3.39 - - 
2021-22 
Additional building/ 
Major Upgradation 
of MCH Wings 
Five works 
(i) Constructing 30-
bedded ward, along with 
4-bedded H DU, store 
room, etc. for 4 DHs 
(Faridkot, Hoshiarpur, 
Bhatinda and Barnala).  
 
9.37  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2021-22= 
17.19 
@50% 
7.21 - Work in 
progress 
- 
0.37 - 
- 6.19 - Work in 
progress 
- 
2.25 - 
6.98 - Work in 
progress 
- 
0.50 - 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
324 
Year of 
PIP 
Type of facility Name of ongoing/  
new project 
Project cost 
 
Funds 
allotted 
Approved 
cost 
Due date of 
completion 
Whether 
project 
completed 
If yes, date 
of 
completion 
Exp. 
incurred 
Delay 
(In 
days) 
Delay in 
Months 
(ii)Constructing 100-
bedded MCH Wing @ 
DH Ludhiana  
(Construction will be 
completed in Two FY) 
25.00 
6.06 - Work in 
progress - 1.29 - 
13.62 - 
Work in 
progress 
 
- 1.55 - 
Upgradation/ 
Renovation of CHC 
One work 
Construction of 30-
bedded CHC along with 
alteration of existing 
CHC (Construction will 
be completed within 2 
years) 
 
6.00 2021-22= 
3.00 
@50% 
- 
- Drawing approved, estimate under approval - 
Drug Warehouses Three works 
Extension plan of the 
regional drug warehouse 
at Kharar @ ₹ 150 lakh 
+Verka @ ₹ 83 lakh 
+Bathinda @ ₹ 43 lakh 
2.76  2021-22=  
2.76 
- 
- 
Tender opened & under evaluation 
- Tender opened & under evaluation 
Estimate prepared & under approval 
New construction: 
MCH Wings 
7 MCH Wings: (i) 
construction of 30 
bedded ward for SDH 
Talwandi Sabo,  Nabha,  
Patti, Raikot, Derabasi  
in five districts and DH 
mukhtsar. (ii) 
Constructing 50-bedded 
MCH Wing at DH 
Gurdaspur @ ₹ 1250.00 
lakh (Construction 
should be completed 
within 2 years) 
@ ₹ 234.30 lakh 
per district hospital 
for constructing 30-
bedded ward, along 
with 4-bedded High 
Dependency Unit 
(HDU), store room, 
etc.  
 26.56 
(14.06+12.50) 
2021-22= 
13.28 
6.80 - Work in 
progress - 0.60 - 
- 
7.43 - Work in 
progress - 1.61 - 
7.27 - Work in 
progress - 1.94 - 
7.23 
- Work in 
progress - 4.79 - 
0 
- 
Drawing 
prepared 
& under 
approval 
 
- 0 - 

Appendices 
325 
Year of 
PIP 
Type of facility Name of ongoing/  
new project 
Project cost 
 
Funds 
allotted 
Approved 
cost 
Due date of 
completion 
Whether 
project 
completed 
If yes, date 
of 
completion 
Exp. 
incurred 
Delay 
(In 
days) 
Delay in 
Months 
8.62 - Work in 
progress  1.74 - 
10.08 - Work in 
progress  1.92 - 
Construction of 
Drug Warehouses 
Three works 
New construction of 
the Drug warehouse 
at DH Hoshiarpur, 
Ferozepur & Sangrur. 
9.99 2021-22= 
5.00 
0.98 
- 
Tender opened & under evaluation 
- 0.63 Tender allotted 
0.89 Tender opened & under evaluation 
Others Three works 
Construction/ 
extension of three 
mortuary at DH  
Barnala, Mansa and 
Kapurthala    
@ ₹ 50.00 lakh 
each for the 
construction of 
mortuary at DH 
Barnala & Mansa, 
₹ 19.90 lakh for 
the extension of 
existing mortuary 
at DH Kapurthala 
including of cost 
of equipment like 
freezers, 
generators, etc. 
1.20 
2021-22= 
1.20 
0.25 
- 
Work allotted recently 
- 
0.29 
Estimate under approval 
0.30 
Estimate approved & tender being called 
Blood bank/ 
BCSU/ BSU 
One work -5 blood 
banks to be upgraded 
into BCSU  
@ ₹ 10 lakh for 
each blood bank 
0.50 
2021-22= 
0.50 - - - - 
Total 60 Projects 564.73 408.78 - - - - 
Source:  Departmental data/information 
*Four works comprising construction of 2200 HWCs were to be completed during 2018- 2021, but only 532 HWCs were constructed (June 2022) by PHSC and M/s. HLL Healthcare Ltd. The 
construction work of 512 HWCs was allotted to PHSC but only 221 HWCs were constructed by PHSC so far (November 2022). 
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
326 
Appendix 6.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph 6.1) 
Details of health schemes where almost entire budget provisions were 
withdrawn through re-appropriation during 2016-2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Year Name of Scheme Original 
budget 
Supple-
mentary 
Re-
appropriation 
Total 
Budget 
1. 
2016-17 
Co-location in Community Health Centres 
(Outdoor patients clinic)/Establishment of 
Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Sidha and 
Homeopathy out door patients clinic in 
Community Health Centres/ SDHS/DHS 
0.81 0.00 -0.79 0.02 
2. Upgradation/Strengthening of Nursing 
Services in the State 
12.72 0.00 -12.72 0.00 
3. Behavioural Change Communication/IEC 
activities 
0.21 0.00 -0.21 0.00 
4. Setting up of two Centres for Panduroga  0.71 0.00 -0.71 0.00 
5. Opening of Wellness Centres under 
AYUSH including Yoga at two 
Community Health Centres (Kapurthala 
and Hoshiarpur) 
0.20 0.00 -0.20 0.00 
6. Strengthening of Existing Government 
Homeopathic Dispensaries (Prime 
Minister Gramin Yojana) 
0.43 0.00 -0.43 0.00 
7. Upgradation of Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, 
Siddha and Homeopathy Dispensaries 
1.30 0.00 -1.30 0.00 
8. Establishment of Programme 
Management Unit 
0.12 0.00 -0.12 0.00 
9. Mobility Support at State and District 
Level 
0.17 0.00 -0.17 0.00 
10. Strengthening of Existing Drug Testing 
Laboratory 
0.20 0.00 -0.20 0.00 
11. Infrastructure Support for Clinical 
Software to Strengthening Homeopathic 
Health Mechanism 
0.30 0.00 -0.30 0.00 
12. Strengthening of Drug Testing Laboratory 
at Patiala 
0.20 0.00 -0.20 0.00 
13. Grants-in-Aid to Punjab Health 
Corporation for establishment of Primary 
Rural Rehabilitation and Drug De-
Addiction Centres in the State 
6.40 0.00 -6.40 0.00 
14. Establishment of Primary Rural 
Rehabilitation and Drug De-Addiction 
Centres in the State 
13.60 0.00 -13.60 0.00 
15. 
2017-18 
Matching Grant to State Blood 
Transfusion Council under the Control of 
AIDS Control Society 
4.00 0.00 -4.00 0.00 
16. Vaccination against Human Papilloma 
Virus for Prevention of Cancer of Cervix 
5.00 0.00 -5.00 0.00 
17. Assistance to Punjab Health System 
Corporation - National Health Protection 
Scheme 
10.00 0.00 -10.00 0.00 
18. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana for 
Workers covered under below poverty 
line 
3.33 0.00 -3.33 0.00 
19. School Health Programme 1.00 0.00 -1.00 0.00 

Appendices  
327 
Sr. 
No. 
Year Name of Scheme Original 
budget 
Supple-
mentary 
Re-
appropriation 
Total 
Budget 
20. Strengthening of Existing Government 
Homeopathic Dispensaries (Prime 
Minister Gramin Yojana) 
0.43 0.00 -0.43 0.00 
21. Strengthening of Existing Government 
Homeopathic Dispensaries 
0.20 0.00 -0.20 0.00 
22. 
 
National AIDS Control Programme - 
Prevention and Control of AIDS and STD 
Programme 
30.00 0.00 -30.00 0.00 
23. Tertiary Cancer Care Centre  50.00 0.00 -45.00 5.00 
24. Strengthening of Fire Safety Services in 
the Hospitals 
3.00 0.00 -3.00 0.00 
25. Opening of new Medical College at SAS 
Nagar, Mohali 10.00 0.00 -9.99 0.01 
26. Establishment of Primary Rural 
Rehabilitation & Drug de-addiction 
Centres in the State 
50.00 0.00 -50.00 0.00 
27. Assistance to Health & Wellness Clinics 
in the State 5.00 0.00 -5.00 0.00 
28. Universal Health Insurance Scheme 100.00 0.00 -100.00 0.00 
29. 
2018-19 
National Health Protection Scheme 10.00 0.00 -9.99 0.01 
30. Health Wellness Scheme 22.50 0.00 -22.49 0.01 
31. Setting up of Food and Drug Authority 5.00 0.00 -4.99 0.01 
32. Assistance to PHSC - Sarbat Sehat Bima 
Yojana 
50.00 0.00 -50.00 0.00 
33. Opening of two new medical colleges in 
the State (Malerkotla and Mukerian) 10.00 0.00 -10.00 0.00 
34. 
2019-20 
Assistance to PHSC - National Health 
Protection Scheme 
60.00 0.00 -60.00 0.00 
35. Health Wellness Scheme 22.50 0.00 -22.50 0.00 
36. Medical Relief to Other Hospitals and 
Dispensaries 
1.50 0.00 -1.35 0.15 
37. Primary Health Centre  0.15 0.00 -0.14 0.01 
38. Mission Tandrust Punjab 2.00 0.00 -1.85 0.15 
39. 
2020-21 
Vaccination against Human Papilloma 
Virus for Prevention of Cancer of Cervix 
1.00 0.00 -1.00 0.00 
40. Establishment of new medical colleges at 
Kapurthala and Hoshiarpur 20.00 0.02 -19.96 0.06 
41 
2021-22 
Matching Grant to State Blood 
Transfusion Council under the Control of 
AIDS Society 
2.00 0.00 -2.00 0.00 
42. Setting up of Food and Drug Authority 31.16 0.00 -31.16 0.00 
43. MMPCRK 150.00 0.00 -150.00 0.00 
44. New medical colleges at Kapurthala and 
Hoshiarpur 80.00 0.00 -79.30 0.70 
Total 777.14 0.02 -771.03 6.13 
Source: Appropriation Accounts of respective years 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
328 
 
Appendix 7.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 7.4(iv)) 
Shortage of manpower in District Early Intervention Centres (DEIC) 
Sr. 
No. 
Designation  Number of 
staff required  
Number of staff available  
Bathinda  Shortfall 
(%) 
Ludhiana Shortfall 
(%) 
Hoshiarpur Shortfall 
(%) 
1. Medical professional  
(Pediatrician- 1, 
Medical Officer-1, 
Dental Doctor-1) 
3 1 67 1 67 0 100 
2. Physiotherapist  1 0 100 0 100 0 100 
3. Audiologist & 
Speech Therapist 
1 1 0 1 0 0 100 
4. Psychologist 1 1 0 1 0 0 100 
5. Optometrist 1 1 0 1 0 0 100 
6. Early interventionist 
cum special educator 
cum social worker 
1 1 0 1 0 1 0 
7. Lab technician 2 1 50 0 100 1 50 
8. Dental Technician  1 0 100 0 100 0 100 
9. Manager 1 1 0 0 100 0 100 
10. Data Entry Operator 1 1 0 1 0 0 100 
Total 13 8 38 6 54 2 85 
Source: Departmental information 

Appendices  
329 
 
Appendix 7.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 7.7.3) 
Shortfall of mental health drugs in test-checked health institutions 
District Name of Health 
Institution 
Required Available Shortage Percentage of shortage 
Bathinda 
DH Bathinda 20 11 9 45 
CHC Bhucho Mandi 14 2 12 86 
CHC Mehraj 14 1 13 93 
PHC Mandi Kalan 14 0 14 100 
PHC Bhai Rupa 14 0 14 100 
PHC Lehra Mohabbat 14 0 14 100 
PHC Jodhpur Pakhar 14 0 14 100 
Fatehgarh Sahib 
DH Fatehgarh Sahib 20 9 11 55 
CHC Bassi Pathana 14 1 13 93 
CHC Amloh 14 7 7 50 
PHC Nandpur Kolour 14 2 12 86 
PHC Sanghol 14 0 14 100 
PHC Bhari 14 0 14 100 
PHC Nanowal 14 0 14 100 
Gurdaspur 
DH Gurdaspur 20 1 19 95 
CHC Fatehgarh 
Churian 14 0 14 100 
CHC N M Singh 14 0 14 100 
PHC Ranjit Bagh 14 0 14 100 
PHC Behrampur 14 0 14 100 
PHC Dorangla 14 0 14 100 
PHC Dhianpur 14 0 14 100 
Hoshiarpur 
DH Hoshiarpur 20 5 15 75 
CHC Mahilpur 14 0 14 100 
CHC Shamchaurasi 14 0 14 100 
PHC Chakowal 14 0 14 100 
PHC Possi 14 0 14 100 
PHC Mand Bhander 14 0 14 100 
Ludhiana 
DH Ludhiana 20 16 4 20 
CHC Sidhwan Bet 14 2 12 86 
CHC Sudhar 14 3 11 79 
PHC-Ghawaddi 14 0 14 100 
PHC-Mansooran 14 0 14 100 
PHC-Otalon 14 0 14 100 
PHC-Sowaddi Kalan 14 0 14 100 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
330 
District Name of Health 
Institution 
Required Available Shortage Percentage of shortage 
Moga 
DH Moga 20 10 10 50 
CHC Bagha Purana 14 2 12 86 
CHC Nihal Singh Wala 14 2 12 86 
PHC Patto Hira Singh 14 0 14 100 
PHC Thathi Bhai 14 1 13 93 
PHC Sukhanand 14 2 12 86 
PHC Malianwala 14 0 14 100 
Source: Information furnished by the test-checked health institutions 
 
 

Appendices  
331 
Appendix 9.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 9.1 and 9.2.2) 
Statement of Indicators ensuring achievement of Sustainable Development Goal-3:  
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
3.1 By 2030, reduce 
the global maternal 
mortality ratio to less 
than 70 per 100,000 
live births 
3.1.1 Maternal 
mortality ratio Tier I Adopted   3.1.1 Adopted   Adopted Adopted 
           3.1.1.1 Percentage of 
Institutional Deliveries   Adopted as 
3.1.3 
           3.1.1.2 
Percentage of deliveries 
in Public Health 
Institutions 
    
           3.1.1.3 Percentage of deliveries 
in Private Institutions     
           3.1.1.4 
Total number of High 
Risk Pregnancies 
identified 
    
           3.1.1.5 
Percentage of home 
deliveries attended by 
skill birth attendant 
    
           3.1.1.6 
Percentage of BPL 
Pregnant woman 
received benefits out of 
total pregnant women 
under JSY 
    
           3.1.1.7 
Number of District 
Hospital, Sub Divisional 
Hospitals having 
dedicated MCH Wing 
    

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
332 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.1.1.8 Sub Centre to be made 
functional as H&WC     
  
3.1.2 Proportion of 
births attended by 
skilled health 
personnel 
Tier I Developed 
Percentage of births 
attended by skilled 
health personnel. 
(Period 5 years)  
3.1.2 Adopted       
      Developed 
Percentage of births 
attended by skilled 
health personnel. 
(Period 1 year)  
3.1.3 Adopted       
      Developed 
Percentage of women 
aged 15−49 years 
with a live birth, for 
last birth, who 
received antenatal 
care, four times or 
more. (Period 5 
years/1 year)  
3.1.4 Adopted       
           3.1.4.1 
Percentage of pregnant 
women received at least 
4 ANC 
    
3.2 By 2030, end 
preventable deaths of 
newborns and 
children under 5 years 
of age, with all 
countries aiming to 
reduce neonatal 
mortality to at least as 
low as 12 per 1,000 
live births and under-
5 mortality to at least 
as low as 25 per 1,000 
live births 
3.2.1 Under-5 
mortality rate Tier I Adopted   3.2.1 Adopted   Adopted  Adopted 

Appendices  
333 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.2.1.1 Percentage of children 
with Diarrhoeal disease     
           3.2.1.2 
Percentage of children 
with Diarrhoea provided 
ORS 
    
           3.2.1.3 
Percentage of children 
with Diarrhoea provided 
Zinc 
    
           3.2.1.4 Prevalence of Acute 
Respiratory Infections     
           3.2.1.5 Schools & Anganwadi 
Visited (%age)     
           3.2.1.6 
Number of children 
screened: (Anganwadi) + 
(School) 
    
           3.2.1.7 Number of children 
diagnosed with 4-Ds     
           3.2.1.8 Number of children 
received the treatment     
           3.2.1.9 Number of children with 
CHD/RHD referred     
           3.2.1.10 Number of children with 
CHD/RHD operated     
           3.2.1.11 
Percentage of new born 
provided Home Based 
New Born Care Visits (6 
in case of institutional 
delivery and 7 in case of 
home delivery) 
    
           3.2.1.12 
Functional Sick Neonatal 
Care Units at DH and 
SDH level 
    

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
334 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
  3.2.2 Neonatal 
mortality rate Tier I Adopted   3.2.2 Adopted   
Percentage 
of  
children in 
the age 
group  
9-11 months  
fully 
immunized 
Percentage of  
children in the 
age group  
9-11 months  
fully 
immunized 
(3.2.3) 
      Developed 
Percentage of 
children aged 12-23  
months fully 
immunized (BCG, 
Measles and three 
doses of 
Pentavalent vaccine) 
3.2.3 Adopted       
3.3 By 2030, end the 
epidemics of AIDS, 
tuberculosis, malaria 
and neglected tropical 
diseases and combat 
hepatitis, water-borne 
diseases and other 
communicable 
diseases 
3.3.1 Number of 
new HIV infections 
per 1,000 uninfected 
population, by sex, 
age and key 
populations 
Tier I Adopted   3.3.1 Adopted   Adopted Adopted 
  
3.3.2 Tuberculosis 
incidence per 
100,000 population 
Tier I Adopted   3.3.2 Adopted   Adopted Adopted 
           3.3.2.1 
TB cases successfully 
treated  
(cured plus treatment 
completed)  
among TB cases notified 
to the national health 
authorities during a 
specified period  
    
           3.3.2.2 Annual Blood 
Examination Rate  
    
  3.3.3 Malaria Tier I Adopted   3.3.3 Adopted       

Appendices  
335 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
incidence per 1,000 
population 
  
3.3.4 Hepatitis B 
incidence per 
100,000 population 
Tier I Adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Viral Hepatitis 
(including A&B) 
incidence per 100,000 
population 
3.3.4 Adopted       
           3.3.4.1 
Patients registered for 
treatment for Viral 
Hepatitis vs provided 
treatment 
    
           3.3.4.2 
Patients provided 
treatment for Viral 
Hepatitis vs Cured 
    
  
3.3.5 Number of 
people requiring 
interventions against 
neglected tropical 
diseases 
Tier I Developed Dengue: Case Fatality 
Ratio 3.3.5 Adopted       
      Developed Number of 
Chikungunya cases 3.3.6 Adopted       
      Developed 
Number of new cases 
of Kala Azar/ V 
Leishmaniasis 
3.3.7 Adopted       
      Developed 
Number of new cases 
of Lymphatic 
Filariasis (LF) 
3.3.8 Adopted       
      Developed 
Proportion of grade-2 
cases amongst new 
cases of Leprosy 
3.3.9 Adopted       
      Developed HIV Prevalence Rate 3.3.10 Adopted       
3.4  By 2030, reduce 
by one third 
premature mortality 
from non-
communicable 
diseases through 
3.4.1 Mortality rate 
attributed to 
cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, 
diabetes or chronic 
respiratory disease 
Tier I Adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Number of deaths due 
to cancer 3.4.1 Adopted       

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
336 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
prevention and 
treatment and 
promote mental 
health and well-being 
           3.4.1.1 
Number of Patients 
registered vs provided 
treatment under Mukh 
Mantri Cancer Rahat 
Kosh  
    
           3.4.1.2 
Percentage of women 
screened for cervix and 
Breast cancers 
    
           3.4.1.3 
Percentage of 30+ 
population screened for 
oral/other cancers 
    
  3.4.2 Suicide 
mortality rate Tier I Adopted   3.4.2 Adopted   Adopted Adopted 
      Developed 
Percentage 
distribution of leading 
cause groups of 
deaths  
3.4.3 Adopted       
           3.4.3.1 30+ population screened 
for NCDs     

Appendices  
337 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.4.3.2 
Proportion of population 
in age group 30+ years 
who are currently taking 
antihypertensive 
medication among age 
group 30+ with systolic 
blood pressure >=140 
mmHg or with diastolic 
blood pressure >=90 
mmHg 
    
           3.4.3.3 
Proportion of population 
in age group 30+ years 
who are currently taking 
medication for diabetes 
(insulin or glycaemic 
control pills) among 
number of adults 15-49 
years who are having 
random blood sugar 
level-high (>140mg/dl) 
    
           3.4.3.4 
Percentage of Sub-
Centre operationalised 
for H&WC 
    
           3.4.3.5 Percentage of deaths due 
to water borne diseases     
           3.4.3.6 
Percentage of Primary 
Health Centres 
Operational Health & 
Wellness Centres 
    
           3.4.3.7 Percentage of deaths due 
to water borne diseases     

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
338 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
3.5 Strengthen the 
prevention and 
treatment of 
substance abuse, 
including narcotic 
drug abuse and 
harmful use of 
alcohol 
3.5.1 Coverage of 
treatment 
interventions 
(pharmacological, 
psychosocial and 
rehabilitation and 
aftercare services) 
for substance use 
disorders 
Tier II Developed 
Percentage of adults 
(15+ years) who have 
had at least 60 
millilitre or more of 
pure alcohol on at 
least one occasion 
weekly 
(approximately 
equivalent to standard 
alcoholic drinks) 
3.5.1 Adopted       
  
3.5.2 Alcohol per 
capita consumption 
(aged 15 years and 
older) within a 
calendar year in 
litres of pure alcohol 
Tier I Developed 
Number of persons 
treated in de-
addiction  
centres (in number) 
3.5.2 Adopted       
           3.5.2.1 
No. of persons admitted 
in Drug-Rehabilitation 
Centre 
    
           3.5.2.2 
No. of persons treated in 
Drug Rehabilitation 
Centre 
    
           3.5.2.3 
Number of persons 
enrolled in OOAT 
Clinics 
    
           3.5.2.4 No. of persons treated in 
OOAT     
      Developed 
Percentage of 
population (men (15-
54  
years) and women 
(15-49 years)) who 
consume  
alcohol 
3.5.3 Adopted       

Appendices  
339 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.5.3.1 
Number of persons who 
consume alcohol 
admitted in Drug-
deaddiction centre 
    
           3.5.3.2 
Number of persons who 
consume alcohol treated 
in Drug-deaddiction 
centre 
    
3.6 By 2020, halve 
the number of global 
deaths and injuries 
from road traffic 
accidents 
3.6.1 Death rate due 
to road traffic 
injuries 
Tier I Adopted   3.6.1 Adopted   Adopted Adopted 
3.7 By 2030, ensure 
universal access to 
sexual and 
reproductive health-
care services, 
including for family 
planning, information 
and education, and 
the integration of 
reproductive health 
into national 
strategies and 
programmes 
3.7.1 Proportion of 
women of 
reproductive age 
(aged 15–49 years) 
who have their need 
for family planning 
satisfied with 
modern methods 
Tier I Developed 
Percentage of 
currently married 
women (15-49 years) 
who use any modern 
family planning 
methods 
3.7.1 Adopted       
           3.7.1.1 Access to modern 
contraceptive methods     
           3.7.1.2 Reduction in unmet 
needs     
           3.7.1.3 Promoting Terminal 
methods     
           3.7.1.4 PPIUCD     
           3.7.1.5 Total IUCD Insertions 
(Copper-T)     

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
340 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.7.1.6 Expansion of PAIUCD     
           3.7.1.7 
Expansion of Injectables 
and Chaya contraceptive 
for promoting spacing 
between children 
    
  
3.7.2 Adolescent 
birth rate (aged 10–
14 years; aged 15–
19 years) per 1,000 
women in that age 
group 
Tier I Developed 
Percentage of women 
aged 15-19 years who 
are already mothers or 
pregnant 
3.7.2 Adopted       
      Developed 
Percentage of 
Institutional Births (5 
years/1  
years) 
3.7.3 Adopted   Adopted   
3.8 Achieve universal 
health coverage, 
including financial 
risk protection, access 
to quality essential 
health-care services 
and access to safe, 
effective, quality and 
affordable essential 
medicines and 
vaccines for all 
3.8.1 Coverage of 
essential health 
services 
Tier I Developed 
Percentage of 
currently married 
women  
(15-49 years) who use 
any modern family  
planning methods 
3.8.1 Adopted       
           3.8.1.1 PPIUCD     
           3.8.1.2 Total IUCD Insertions 
(Copper-T)     

Appendices  
341 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
  
3.8.2 Proportion of 
population with 
large household 
expenditures on 
health as a share of 
total household 
expenditure or 
income 
Tier I Developed 
Percentage of TB 
cases successfully 
treated (cured plus 
treatment completed) 
among TB cases 
notified to the 
national health 
authorities during a 
specified period 
3.8.2 Adopted   
Adopted as 
Monthly per 
capita out-
of-pocket 
expenditure 
on health as 
a share of 
Monthly Per 
capita 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
(MPCE) 
Adopted as 
Monthly per 
capita out-of-
pocket 
expenditure on 
health as a 
share of 
Monthly Per 
capita 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
(MPCE) 3.8 
      Developed 
Percentage of people 
living with HIV  
currently receiving 
ART among the 
detected  
number of adults and 
children living with 
HIV 
3.8.3 Adopted       
      Developed 
Proportion of 
population in age 
group 15-49 years 
who are currently 
taking 
antihypertensive 
medication among 
number of adults 15-
49 years with systolic 
blood pressure >=140 
mmHg or with 
diastolic blood 
pressure >=90 mmHg 
 
  
3.8.4 Adopted       
      Developed 
Proportion of 
population in age 
group 15-49 years 
3.8.5 Adopted       

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
342 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
who are currently 
taking medication for 
diabetes (insulin or 
glycaemic control 
pills) among number 
of adults 15-49 years 
who are having 
random blood sugar 
level-high 
(>140mg/dl) 
      Developed 
Proportion of women 
aged 30-49 years who 
report they were ever 
screened for cervical 
cancer and the 
proportion of women 
agen 30-49 years who 
report they were 
screened for cervical 
cancer during the last 
5 years 
3.8.6 Adopted       
      Developed 
Prevalence of current 
tobacco uses among 
men and women aged 
15-49 years 
3.8.7 Adopted       
           3.8.7.1 
No. of persons benefitted 
through National 
Tobacco Control 
Programme 
    
      Developed 
Total physicians, 
nurses and midwives 
per  
10,000 population, 
(similar to Indicator 
3.c.1) 
3.8.8 Adopted   Adopted   
           3.8.8.1 
Percentage of Doctors 
are in place against 
sanctioned posts 
    
           3.8.8.2 
Percentage of Nurses are 
in place against the 
sanctioned posts 
    

Appendices  
343 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
3.9 By 2030, 
substantially reduce 
the number of deaths 
and illnesses from 
hazardous chemicals 
and air, water and soil 
pollution and 
contamination 
3.9.1 Mortality rate 
attributed to 
household and 
ambient air pollution 
Tier I Adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Mortality rate 
attributed to 
unintentional 
poisoning  
3.9.1 Adopted       
  
3.9.2 Mortality rate 
attributed to unsafe 
water, unsafe 
sanitation and lack 
of hygiene 
(exposure to unsafe 
Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene for All 
(WASH) services) 
Tier I Adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Proportion of men 
and women reporting  
Asthma in the age 
group 15-49 years 
3.9.2 Adopted       
  
3.9.3 Mortality rate 
attributed to 
unintentional 
poisoning 
Tier I Not Adopted            
3.a Strengthen the 
implementation of the 
World Health 
Organization 
Framework 
Convention on 
Tobacco Control in 
all countries, as 
appropriate 
3.a.1 Age-
standardized 
prevalence of 
current tobacco use 
among persons aged 
15 years and older 
Tier I Adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Prevalence of current 
tobacco uses among 
men and women aged 
15-49 years 
3.a.1 Adopted       

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
344 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
3.b Support the 
research and 
development of 
vaccines and 
medicines for the 
communicable and 
non-communicable 
diseases that 
primarily affect 
developing countries, 
provide access to 
affordable essential 
medicines and 
vaccines, in 
accordance with the 
Doha Declaration on 
the TRIPS Agreement 
and Public Health, 
which affirms the 
right of developing 
countries to use to the 
full the provisions in 
the Agreement on 
Trade-Related 
Aspects of 
Intellectual Property 
Rights regarding 
flexibilities to protect 
public health, and, in 
particular, provide 
access to medicines 
for all 
3.b.1 Proportion of 
the target population 
covered by all 
vaccines included in 
their national 
programme 
Tier I Not Adopted    Not Adopted       
  
3.b.2 Total net 
official development 
assistance to 
medical research 
and basic health 
sectors  
Tier I Adopted    3.b.1 Adopted       

Appendices  
345 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
           3.b.1.1 
Number of proposals 
submitted for medical 
research to the Health 
Department 
    
           3.b.1.2 
Percentage of Medical 
Research Proposal 
approved by the Health 
Department 
    
  
3.b.3 Proportion of 
health facilities that 
have a core set of 
relevant essential 
medicines available 
and affordable on a 
sustainable basis 
Tier II Not Adopted            
3.c Substantially 
increase health 
financing and the 
recruitment, 
development, training 
and retention of the 
health workforce in 
developing countries, 
especially in least 
developed countries 
and small island 
developing States 
3.c.1 Health worker 
density and 
distribution 
Tier I Developed 
Total physicians, 
nurses and midwives 
per  
10,000 population 
3.c.1 Adopted     Adopted 
      Developed 
Percentage of public 
investment in health 
as proportion to GDP 
3.c.2 Adopted 
Percentage of Health 
Budget Allocation out of 
total Annual Budget 
    

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
346 
Global Target Global Indicator Tier 
Classification 
Indicators adopted 
from GIF in National 
Indicators 
Framework (Version-
1.0) 'as it is' or 
developed new or 
adopted with changed 
nomenclature 
Indicator defined in 
NIF (Version-1.0) 
Indicator 
No. as 
per NIF 
(ver. 1.0) 
Indicators in 
Punjab SIF 
Nomenclature of new 
indicator in SIF 
Indicators 
adopted in 
India SDG 
Index- 
2020-21 
Indicator 
adopted in 
Punjab SDG 
Index-2020-21 
3.d Strengthen the 
capacity of all 
countries, in 
particular developing 
countries, for early 
warning, risk 
reduction and 
management of 
national and global 
health risks 
3.d.1 International 
Health Regulations 
(IHR) capacity and 
health emergency 
preparedness 
Tier I Not evolved.    Not adopted       
  
3.d.2 Percentage of 
bloodstream 
infections due to 
selected 
antimicrobial-
resistant organisms 
Tier II Not evolved.    Not adopted       
Source: Global Indicators Framework, National Indicators Framework and State Indicators Framework 
 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
347 
Glossary of abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full Form 
AC Abstract Contingent 
AER Adverse Event Rate 
AERB Atomic Energy Radiation Board 
ALoS Average Length of Stay 
ALS Advance Life Support 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
ANC Antenatal Care 
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwifery 
ART Anti-Retroviral Therapy 
ARV Anti-Rabies Vaccine 
BCG Bacille Calmette-Guerin 
BE Budget Estimate 
BIS Beneficiaries Identification System 
BLS Basic Life Support 
BMW Bio-Medical Waste 
BOR Bed Occupancy Rate 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
BTR Bed Turnover Rate 
CADA Cancer and Drug Addiction Treatment Infrastructure 
CBCDR Community based Child Death Review 
CBMWTF Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facility 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CDR Child Death Review 
CHC Community Health Centre 
CHD Coronary Heart Disease 
CHO Community Health Officer 
CMC Comprehensive Maintenance Contract 
CMO Chief Medical Officer 
CQCC Centre Quality Control Cell 
C-Section Caesarean section 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CT scan Computed Tomography scan 
DBOT Design Build Operate and Transfer  
DC Detailed Contingent 
DCDRC District Child Death Review Committee 
DDC Drug De-addiction Centre 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DEIC District Early Intervention Centre 
DGR&PG Department of Governance Reforms and Public Grievances 
DH District Hospital 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
348 
Abbreviation Full Form 
DH&FW Department of Health and Family Welfare 
DHR Department of Health Research 
DHS Director, Health Services 
DHS District Health Society 
DI Drug Inspector 
DMC Deputy Medical Commissioner 
DNIT Detailed Notice Inviting Tender 
DNO District Nodal Officer 
DR Discharge Rate 
DRC Drug Rehabilitation Centre 
DMER Department of Medical Education and Research 
DVDMS Drugs and Vaccine Distribution Management System 
DWHs Drug Warehouses 
EC Empowered Committee 
EDL Essential Drug List 
ENT Ear Nose and Throat 
EQA External Quality Assurance 
ETP Effluent Treatment Plant 
FBCDR Facility Based Child Death Review 
FDA Food and Drug Administration 
GMC Government Medical College 
GMCH Government Medical College and Hospital 
GoI Government of India 
GoP Government of Punjab 
GSDP Gross State Domestic Product 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HCFs Health Care Facilities 
HDN Hemorrhagic Disease of the Newborn 
HICC Hospital Infection Control Committee 
HRP High Risk Pregnancy 
HSG Hysterosalpingography 
HVAC Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning 
HWC Health and Wellness Centre 
ICCU Intensive Coronary Care Unit 
ICTC Integrated Counselling and Testing Centre 
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
IEC Information Education and Communication 
IFA Iron and Folic Acid 
IMR Infant Mortality Rate 
INC Intensive Neonatal Care 
IPD In-Patient Department 
IPHS Indian Public Health Standards 

Appendices  
349 
Abbreviation Full Form 
IUD Intrauterine Foetal Death 
IVP Intravenous pyelogram 
JSSK Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram 
KMC Kangaroo Mother Care 
LAMA Leave Against Medical Advice 
LD Liquidated Damages 
LHV Lady Health Visitor 
LMO Liquid Medical Oxygen 
LT Lab Technician 
MCI Medical Council of India 
MDDC Model Drug De-addiction Centre 
MDR Maternal Death Review 
MHT Mobile Health Team 
MMPCRK Mukh Mantri Punjab Cancer Rahat Kosh 
MMR Maternal Mortality Rate 
MNH Maternal and Newborn Health 
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPW Multi-Purpose Worker 
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
MRU Multi-Disciplinary Research Unit 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NFHS National Family Health Survey 
NHM National Health Mission 
NHP National Health Policy 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NNMR Neonatal Mortality Rate 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NOSQ Not of Standard Quality 
NOTP National Organ Transplant Programme 
NPCDCS National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
NPPMBI National Programme for Prevention and Management of Burn Injuries 
NRHM National Rural Health Mission 
NUHM National Urban Health Mission 
NVD Normal Vaginal Delivery 
NVP Nevirapine 
OPD Out-Patient Department 
OPV Oral Polio Vaccine 
OT Operation Theatre 
PESO Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation 

Performance Audit Report on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
350 
Abbreviation Full Form 
PHC Primary Health Centre 
PHSC Punjab Health Systems Corporation 
PIP Programme Implementation Plan 
PLR Prime Lending Rate 
PMSSY Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PNC Post Natal Care 
PNS Punjab Nirogi Society 
PPCB Punjab Pollution Control Board 
PPSWOR Probability Proportional to Size Without Replacement 
PSeGS Punjab State e-Governance Society 
PSPCL Punjab State Power Corporation Limited 
PSS Patient Satisfaction Score 
PW Pregnant Women 
PWD Public Works Department 
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swaasthya Karyakaram 
RC Rate Contract 
RCH Reproductive and Child Health 
RDS Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
RE Revised Estimate 
RH Rajindra Hospital 
RHD Rheumatic Heart Disease 
RKS Rogi Kalyan Samiti 
RMNCH+A Reproductive-Maternal-Neonatal Child and Adolescent health 
ROR Referral Out Rate 
SC Subcentre 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
SDGCC Sustainable Development Goal Coordination Centre 
SDH Sub-Divisional Hospital 
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund 
SHA State Health Agency 
SHS State Health Society 
SIF State Indicator Framework 
SMO/MO Senior Medical Officer/Medical Officer 
SN Staff Nurse 
SNCU Special Newborn Care Unit 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SOTTO State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisation 
SPIP State Programme Implementation Plan 
SPMSU State Programme Management Support Unit 
TCCC Tertiary Cancer Care Centre 
TFR Total Fertility Rate 
TMS Transaction Management System 

Appendices  
351 
Abbreviation Full Form 
TT Tetanus Toxoid 
U5MR Under 5 Mortality Rate 
UCs Utilisation Certificates 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNAIDS United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VHSNC Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee 
VKDB Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding 
WHO World Health Organisation 
 