Report of  
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttar Pradesh 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
Enacted Statutes 1.1 1 
Scenario in Uttar Pradesh 1.2 1 
Organisational set-up  1.3 1 
Audit objectives 1.4 2 
Audit Criteria 1.5 2 
Audit scope and Methodology 1.6 3 
Audit findings 1.7 4 
Chapter II 
Compliance with the provisions of the Act 
Comparison of State level Rules with requirements 
of the Act 
2.1 5 
Chapter III 
Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
Role of Registering Officers  in establishment 
registration 3.1.1 12 
Status of registration of establishments 3.1.2 13 
Important conditions of the Acts/Rules not 
mentioned in certificate of registration 3.1.3 15 
No clause for registration in agreements 3.1.4 16 
Delay in issue of Registration Certificate 3.1.5 17 
Delayed registration of establishments 3.1.6 18 
Register of establishments not maintained 3.1.7 19 
Usage of receipts  3.1.8 19 
Status of registration of beneficiaries 3.2.1 21 
Non compliance with the instructions of the GoI 3.2.2 22 
Registration of ineligible beneficiaries 3.2.3 23 
Implementation of Mission Mode Project 3.2.4 25 
Issuance of identity cards 3.2.5 26 
Chapter IV 
Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board 
Return in Form-I not submitted by the employers 4.1.1 30 
Assessment of cess not done by the Cess 
Assessment Officers other than DLC/ALC 4.1.2 31 
Status of assessment of cess 4.1.3 32 

 
Performance Report on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
ii 
 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Cess not paid 4.1.4 33 
Deficiency in assessments 4.1.5 34 
Implementation of GIS survey 4.1.6 34 
Delayed or failure to collect cess on approval of 
building plans 4.2.1 36 
Shortfalls in collection of cess 4.2.2 36 
Cost of construction not calculated on uniform rates 4.2.3 38 
Deduction of collection charges without working 
out actual expenditure on collection of cess 4.2.4 39 
Collected cess not transferred to the Board 4.3.1 40 
Delayed transfer of collected cess to the Board 4.3.2 40 
Transactions outside of the Government Account 4.4.1 41 
Not transferring of cess deposited into treasuries to 
the Board 4.4.2 42 
Inadequate accounting of receipts of cess 4.4.3 43 
Data of cess receipts not processed 4.4.4 44 
Chapter V 
Safety and Health of Workers 
Safety Policy not submitted by 
employers/contractors 
5.1 48 
Deficient role of Inspectors 5.2 48 
Constitution of Safety Committee not ensured 5.3 50 
Appointment of Safety Officers not ensured 5.4 50 
Reporting of accident cases and inquiry thereof 5.5 51 
Compensation to deceased or injured workers 
under Workmen’s Compensation Act 1923 
5.6 52 
Not conducting inquiry due to lack of coordination 5.7 53 
Execution of contracts without provisioning of 
compliance to the Rules 
5.8 54 
Not adopting the National Building Code of India 
2016 
5.9 54 
Indian Standard Safety Code for Scaffolds and 
Ladders (IS: 3696) 
5.10 55 
Chapter VI 
Inspections 
Appointment of the Chief Inspector and other 
Inspectors 
6.1 58 
Contradictory provisions by the GoUP 6.2 59 
Penalty not imposed on employers for failure to 
submit notice of commencement of work 
6.3 59 

 
Table of Contents 
iii 
 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Deficiency in Format for issuing Inspection Note 6.4 59 
Status of Inspections 6.5 60 
Follow up of Inspection Notes 6.6 62 
Planning for inspections 6.7 63 
Maintenance of records by the employers not 
ensured 
6.8 63 
Chapter VII 
Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board 
Constitution of the Board 7.1 66 
Functionaries of the Board 7.1.1 67 
Meeting of the Board 7.1.2 69 
Assigning of functions of the Board 7.1.3 70 
Preparation of budget estimates 7.2.1 71 
Preparation of Annual Report 7.2.2 74 
Preparation of Annual Accounts 7.2.3 75 
Constitution of committees 7.2.4 75 
Management of Welfare Fund 7.2.5 77 
Inefficiencies in implementation of the schemes 7.2.6 83 
Not conducting social audit of the schemes 7.2.7 93 
 
APPENDICES 
Number Particulars Page  
No. 
I  The organisational structure of the Board in the State 97 
II  The list of selected districts, units and schemes 98 
III  Details of registration of establishments in test -
checked districts during 2017-22 
99 
IV  Details showing deficient assessment of cess in 
selected districts 
100 
V  Details showing not deducting of cess over the amount 
of GST in contractors Bills 
102 
VI  Details showing not deducting of cess over the amount 
of Centage charges 
103 
VII  Details showing cess deposited partially against the 
Maps approved through online system during 2019-22 
103 
VIII  Details showing cess collected during the period  
2017-22 but not deposited to the Board 
104 
IX  Details showing delay in transfer of collected cess 
during 2017-22 to the Board 
104 

 
Performance Report on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
iv 
 
APPENDICES 
Number Particulars Page  
No. 
X  
Details of cases of workplace accidents during the 
period 2017-22, where required inquiry was not 
conducted by the Inspectors 
105 
XI  Details of sanctioned and vacant posts of Inspectors in 
the State as of March 2023 
105 
XII  Details showing number of beneficiaries under the 
schemes during the period 2017-22 
106 
XIII  Details of schemes implemented by the Board during 
2017-22 
107 
XIV  Details showing status of implementation of proposed 
activities of the Model Scheme 
108 
Glossary of abbreviations 113 
 

v 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2022 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
Uttar Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘ Welfare of 
Building and Other Construction Workers ’, covering the period 201 7-22. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in 
the course of test -audit for the period 2017-22. Instances relating to the 
period subsequent to 20 21-22 have also been included, wherever 
necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Executive Summary 
To regulate the employment and conditions of service of the Building and 
Other construction workers (workers) and to provide for their safety, health 
and welfare measures , the Government of India (GoI)  enacted  
(August 1996) “the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996” (the Act). The Act 
requires establishment of the Building and Other Construction Workers 
Welfare Board (Board) for ensuring safety, health and welfare measures for 
workers. Additionally, the GoI also enacted (August 1996) “the Building 
and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act , 1996” (the Cess Act) 
for levy and collection of a cess on the cost of construction incurred by 
employers to generate resources for the Board. The Government of Uttar 
Pradesh (GoUP) subsequently notified (February 2009) “the Uttar Pradesh 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Rules 2009 ” (Rules 2009) to implement the Act 
within the State. 
The aim of this Audit was to ascertain whether the GoUP implemented both 
Acts as envisaged and if it improved working conditions of the workers. 
Audit also reviewed implementation of provisions relating to registration of 
establishments & workers; assessment, collection and transfer of cess to the 
Board and utilisation of cess. 
Audit observed deficiencies in framing of required rules by the GoUP as the 
Rules 2009 did not address many requirements of the Act such as 
constitution of Expert Committee, benefits to be provided to workers after 
turning 60, payment of medical expenses to workers, the terms & service 
conditions of officers/employees of the Board, required form and timeline 
for preparation and submission of budget, annual report & annul accounts 
etc. by the Board. 
The process of establishment registration was inefficient. The Registering 
officers had limited role in registration process, there was no system to track 
changes of registration certificate particulars or verify details submitted by 
the employer for registration , and employers were not informed of 
registration conditions . The Board did not establish any mechanism to 
identify potential employers through consistent monitoring of construction 
endeavours in the State. The Government departments/autonomous bodies 
did not register their construction works, and annual targets of establishment 
registration were not achieved during 2017 -22. Besides, not only 
registration of establishments was delayed but certificates were also issued 
after prescribed time. The GoUP did not transfer receipts of establishment 
registration to the Board. 
Similarly, process of beneficiary registration was not efficient. The status of 
registration of beneficiaries had improved in the State during 2020 -22, 
though, count of  active beneficiaries remained low. The GoUP allowed 
registration of ineligible beneficiaries involved in works covered under the 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
viii 
  
Mines Act , 1952 or the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act. The format of identity cards for the workers prescribed by 
the GoUP was not consistent with requirements of the Act. 
The system for assessing, collecting and transferring cess to the Board was 
not effective . The employers did not submit required notice for cess 
assessment, and t he Cess Assessment Officers ( except from the Labour 
department) did not make cess assessment. Even assessments made by the 
Labour department  officers were marginal ( ranged between zero and  
24 per cent) against the registered establishments in selected districts during 
2017-22. Assessments were made in respect of only individual employers 
ignoring construction works of Government departments/local bodies . The 
Cess Collecting Officers either did not deduct cess from the contractors bills 
or excluded permissible items. The Development authorities/local 
authorities either did not impose cess at the time of approval of building 
plans or lev ied short cess. No uniform rates were used for calculating 
construction cost in selected districts.  The cess collection from properties, 
identified under Geographic Information System survey in five districts of 
the state, was unsatisfactory. The Cess Collecting Officers deducted 
collection charges without working out actual expenditure on cess collection 
and also failed to transfer collected cess to the Board in prescribed time. No 
accounting system was prescribed for cess receipts, and most transactions 
remained outside the Government Account. 
The implementation of safety and health provisions for workers could not 
be ensured . The employers did not frame Safety policy . Constitution of 
Safety committee and appointment of Safety Officer by the employers was 
not ensured. The role of Inspectors in enforcement of related provisions was 
also deficient. The employers did not report accidents, resulting in not 
conducting inquiry in all accidental cases during 2017 -22. The affected 
workers were also deprived of compensation under the Workmen 
Compensation Act.  
The system of inspections was also deficient . There was no documented 
records regarding basis for selecting worksites or planning inspections.  
Employers of registered establishments did not notify Inspectors regarding 
work commencement, leading to few inspections in selected districts during 
2017-22. The inspection format did not require checking of various potential 
provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 . Besides, there was no monitoring of 
follow up on inspection observations. 
The constitution and functioning of the Board w as not proper. The GoUP 
failed to constitute or reconstitute the Board on time and sanction its posts 
of the Secretary and other Officers/employees . The GoUP did not include 
all mandatory functions of the Board, as enshrined in Section 22 of the Act, 
in the Rules 2009. Number of meetings of the Board was deficient and 
notice and agenda of the meeting were not served on time. The preparation 
and submission of budget estimates by the Board was not only delayed but 

 
Executive Summary 
ix 
 
also not approved by the GoUP. The Board did not prepare its annual reports 
since inception and annual accounts since inception till the year 2020 -21. 
The Sate Advisory Committee did not play pivotal role in the matters related 
with administration of the Act. The management of Welfare fund was also 
not efficient as large funds were lying unutilised with the Board and even 
funds were diverted for other than the prescribed purposes. The 
implementation of schemes for workers benefit was inefficient as many 
workers did not get assistance despite approval of applications or got 
assistance with delays. The status of implementation of Model Welfare 
Schemes of the Government of India was not satisfactory. 
Recommendations summarised: 
Audit recommends to the State Government: 
• plugging the gaps of Rules 2009 with the requirements of the Act 
such as constitution of Expert Committee, delineation of benefits 
to be extended to workers who reach the age of sixty and specifying 
format and timeline for preparation of the annual report and 
accounts. 
• assigning responsibilities to Registering officers for verifying 
registration certificate and ensuring cent per cent  timely 
registration of establishments and beneficiaries under their area 
of jurisdiction. 
• devising a robust mechanism for identifying prospective 
employers, their registration and issuance of certificate on time.  
• consider punitive measures against the Government officials for 
non-compliance of regula tory and stat utory requirements under 
the Act and the Rules. 
• ensure that o nly eligible workers are allowed to register with the 
Board for availability of scheme  benefits to only intended 
beneficiaries. 
• consider revising the format of identity card according to the 
provisions of the Act for proper upkeep of details of employments 
of workers. 
• introduce a system to monitor submission of required return 
(Form-I) by the employers and processing of returns within the 
stipulated time. 
• ensure that all Cess Assessment Officers assess cess in accordance 
with the Cess Act and Rule s and adopt uniform rates for 
calculating construction cost across the State. 
• ensure assessment of cess for works of the Government 
departments/local bodies along with the individuals. 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
x 
  
• introduce a system for approval of building plans with levy and 
realisation of cess at the local government level. 
• consider developing a mechanism for reconciliation of collected 
cess. 
• develop a system to monitor the preparation and submission of 
Safety Policy, constitution of Safety committee and appointment of 
Safety Officer by the eligible employers. 
• consider making Assistant Labour Commissioner/Deputy Labour 
Commissioner responsible for providing of compensation and 
Assistant Director (Factories) responsible for inquiry in each case 
of accident at workplaces. 
• issue directions for timely submission of notice of commencement 
and completion of work in Form-4 and may consider taking action 
against the defaulter employers.  
• consider fixing of targets of inspections for the inspectors of 
factory division of Labour department and adopt a transparent 
system for planning and conduct ing inspections and introduce a 
system for monitoring follow up of observations raised during 
inspections. 
• ensure reconstitution of the Board on time  and timely holding of 
meetings of the Board. 
• ensure preparation and approval of budget estimates in time and 
preparation and submission of annual report and accounts on 
time. 
• consider establishing a mechanism for monitoring and supervising 
the implementation of schemes to ensure timely processing of 
applications and distribution of benefits. 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter I: Introduction 
The enacted statutes by the Government of India (GoI) and Government of 
Uttar Pradesh ( GoUP) for Welfare of Building and Other Construction 
Workers have been discussed in the present chapter. Audit objectives, 
criteria, scope and methodology of audit have also been included in this 
chapter.  
1.1 Enacted Statutes 
The GoI  enacted (August 1996) the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 
(the Act) and the Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess 
Act, 1996 (the Cess Act) to ensure safety, health and welfare measures for 
building and other construction workers (referred to as workers) by means 
of levying and collecting  Labour Cess (Cess). In addition, the GoI also 
framed (March 1998) the Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Cess Rules, 1998 (the Cess Rules) to implement these Acts. 
The Act requires each State Government to constitute a Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Board (the Board) and formulate rules for 
exercising the powers conferred by the Act.  The Act appli es to 
establishments employing ten or more workers in Building or Other 
construction work. Furthermore, the Act specifies that any worker between 
the ages of 18 and 60  with ninety days of service as a construction worker 
in the State during the preceding twelve months, is eligible for registration 
as a beneficiary. 
1.2 Scenario in the Uttar Pradesh 
In accordance with the stipulations of the Act, the  GoUP introduced 
(February 2009) the Uttar Pradesh Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules , 
2009 (referred to as Rules 2009), after a lapse of more than a decade since 
the enactment of the Act. Subsequently, in November 2009, the GoUP 
constituted the Board for executing the welfare programmes outlined in the 
Act and Rules 2009. 
Furthermore, the GoUP initiated implementation of cess of one per cent on 
construction expenses borne by employers, coinciding with the formation of 
the Board in November 2009. By March 2022, the Board had successfully 
registered 1.44 crore workers and overseen execution of 25 distinct schemes 
aimed at the enhancement of welfare of workers. 
1.3 Organisational set-up  
Principal Secretary of the Labour and Employment Department of the 
GoUP, is c hairman of the Board. The Board consists of the Labour 
Commissioner of the GoUP, who is also the Chief Inspector, and ten other 
members, both ex-officio and nominated. The Secretary of the Board, who 
is also its Chief Executive Officer, oversees its operations and activities. The 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
2 
 
 
 
Secretary receives assistance from two Additional Secretaries, a Finance & 
Accounts Officer, a Deputy Secretary, and an Assistant Secretary. 
At the regional level 1, responsibilities of assessment and collection of cess 
and registration of workers  & establishments , have been  assigned to the 
Additional Labour Commissioner/Deputy Labour Commissioner (DLC). 
Similarly, at district level, the Assistant Labour Commissioner (ALC) 
assumes these responsibilities. Furthermore, district -level authorities from 
various Government departments and executive agencies involved in project 
execution, building plan approvals, and urban local body management have 
been designated as Cess Assessing and Collecting Officers.  
Beyond this, role of other Inspector for enforcing Act  and Rules 2009  
provisions have been bestowed upon officials such as the DLC, ALC and 
Labour Enforcement Officers (LEOs). Moreover, the District Magistrate, 
DLC and ALC are entrusted with the responsibility of approving benefits 
under the Board's schemes for eligible registered beneficiaries. The Board's 
organizational structure has been given in Appendix-I. 
1.4 Audit Objectives 
The audit objectives of the Performance audit (PA) were to ascertain 
whether: 
➢ the Rules 2009 notified by the GoUP under the Act are consistent with 
the spirit of provisions of the Act; 
➢ there was effective system for registration of establishments and 
beneficiaries; 
➢ cess assessment, collection, and transfer of collected cess to the Welfare 
Fund was efficient; 
➢ the GoUP prescribed appropriate health and safety norms and could 
ensure an environment of compliance to those norms by employers; 
➢ the GoUP implemented transparent and effective system of inspections 
to check evasion of cess and compliance to health and safety norms by 
employers; and 
➢ administration and utili sation of Welfare Fund for implementation of 
welfare schemes by the Board was efficient and effective and as per Act 
and Rules framed by the GoUP. 
1.5 Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following sources:  
➢ The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (the Act), 
➢ The Uttar Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2009 
(the Rules, 2009); 
 
1  There are 26 regional offices of Labour Department in the State for performing the functions of Board. 

 
 
 
Chapter I: Introduction 
3 
 
 
 
➢ The Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1996 
(the Cess Act ) and the Building and Other Construction Workers 
Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 (the Cess Rules); 
➢ Resolutions passed by the Board;  
➢ National Building Code of India, 2016  (Part 7  titled ‘Construction 
Management, Practices and Safety); 
➢ Indian Standard Safety Code for Scaffolds and Ladders Part I & II; and 
➢ Inspection Policy notified by GoUP and State Financial Rules. 
1.6 Audit scope and methodology  
The PA, encompassing period 2017-22, was conducted from January 2023 
to July 2023. The records were reviewed at the Board's Headquarters , the 
Commissioner's office (Labour Department), and six district-level offices of 
the Labour Department . To facilitate this assessment, three districts each 
were selected based on benefit disbursement under the welfare schemes and 
cess contributions. The selected districts were Agra, Gautam Buddha Nagar 
(G. B. Nagar) , Lucknow, Moradabad, Prayagraj and Varanasi. Moreover, 
two units 2 from construction work execution departments (Public Works 
and Irrigation) , and two units from building plan approval  departments  
(one Development Authority and one Urban Local Body3) of these selected 
districts were also selected for scrutiny of records. 
Additionally, 10 out of the 25 schemes implemented by the Board during 
2017-22, were selected using stratified random sampling to verify eligibility 
criteria and timely disbursal of benefits. The details of the selected units and 
schemes are mentioned in Appendix-II. 
The audit methodology included requisitioning of records and information, 
analysis of documents, responses of auditee units to audit queries and 
observations, and performing joint physical verifications at the sampled 
establishment sites. An Entry Conference was held on 6 January 2023 with 
the Additional Chief Secretary of the Labour Department (GoUP). During 
this conference, the audit methodology, scope, objectives, and criteria were 
elucidated. Further, an Exit Conference was also held with the Principal 
Secretary, Labour Department on  31 January 2024, wherein audit 
observations and conclusions were discussed with the Department. The 
State Government also submitted detailed replies  to the audit observations 
and conclusion of draft report of PA in month of March 2024. Replies of the 
State Government, where available, have been suitably incorporated in the 
relevant paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
2  On the basis of expenditure on construction works. 
3  Having highest population in the district. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
4 
 
 
 
1.7 Audit Findings 
The audit findings are presented in following chapters: 
Chapter II- Compliance with the provisions of the Act  
Chapter III- Registration of establishments and beneficiaries 
Chapter IV- Assessment, collection and transfer of cess to the Board 
Chapter V- Health and Safety of Workers 
Chapter VI- Inspections 
Chapter VII- Administration and utilisation of Welfare Fund 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Compliance with the  
provisions of the Act 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter II: Compliance with the provisions of the Act 
This chapter highlights the shortcomings in framing of required rules by the 
GoUP. 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ Rules 2009 did not have provisions for constitution of Expert 
Committees, and for providing benefits to beneficiaries after 
attaining age of 60 years in compliance with the Sections 14(2) and 
62(2)(i) of the Act. 
➢ All mandatory functions of the Board, as provided in the Act, have 
not been included in Rules 2009. 
➢ Required format and timeline for preparation and submission of 
budget estimates, annual report and annual accounts have not been 
provided by the GoUP under Rules 2009. 
2.1 Comparison of State level Rules with requirements of the Act 
As per Section 62 of the Act, State Governments were required to frame 
Rules for the implementation of its various provisions. The formulation of 
Rules was imperative for registration of establishments  and beneficiaries, 
determination of entitlements for beneficiaries  and ensuring safety; health 
and welfare measures of workers etc.  
To address this, the GoUP notified Rules 2009 in February 2009, 
incorporating pertinent provisions that corresponded to requirements of the 
Act. However, in certain areas , not even provisions of the Rules 2009 but 
also their implementation was deficient against the requirement of the Act. 
The details in this regard are given in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1: Comparison of provisions of the Rules 2009 with the requirements of the 
Act and their status of implementation 
Requirements as per provisions of the 
Act 
Status of 
compliance of 
requirements of 
the Act under the 
Rules 2009 
Shortfalls against 
the requirement of 
the Act or in 
actual 
implementation of 
the Rules 2009 
For constitution of State Advisory 
Committee (SAC) , to advice State 
Governments on matters related to 
administration of Act, Sections 4(3) and 
62(2)(a) requires that the number of 
nominated members, their term and other 
details required for functioning of SAC , 
shall be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
Rules 10 to 22 
provided required 
provisions in 
respect of  
constitution and  
functioning of 
SAC. 
The constitution 
and functioning of 
SAC were deficient 
in the State as 
discussed in 
paragraph 7.2.4. 
For constitution of Expert Committees  
(EC), to advice State Governments in 
framing of rules, Sections 5(2) & 62(2)(b) 
require that the fees and allowances that 
may be paid to the members of the EC, shall 
be prescribed by the State Government. 
No rules were 
framed for 
constitution and 
functioning of EC. 
To address the 
deficiencies of 
Rules 2009 
(paragraphs 3.2. 5, 
5.3, 6.2 and 7.1.3 ), 
provisions of EC is 
required under 
Rules 2009.  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
6 
 
 
 
Requirements as per provisions of the 
Act 
Status of 
compliance of 
requirements of 
the Act under the 
Rules 2009 
Shortfalls against 
the requirement of 
the Act or in 
actual 
implementation of 
the Rules 2009 
For registration of establishments, Sections 
7(2)-(3) and 62(2)(c) -(d) require that form 
of application, registration fee, form of 
certificate and registration conditions may 
be prescribed by State Government through 
rules. 
Rules 23 to 28 
provided required 
provisions in this 
regard. 
The conditions of 
registration 
certificate were not 
adhered to 
(paragraphs 3.1. 3 
and 6.4). 
For Registration of workers as 
beneficiaries, Sections 12(2) -(3) and 
62(2)(f)-(g) require that the form for 
registration of beneficiaries together with 
the required documents  (including 
certificate of employment) and requisite fee 
for this,  may be prescribed by the State 
Government through rules.  
Rules 27 and 276 
provided required 
provisions in 
respect of 
registration of 
beneficiaries.  
Provisions for 
certificate of 
employment and 
identity card s were 
not as per 
requirement of  Act 
(paragraphs 3.2. 2 
and 3.2.5). 
Sections 14(2) and 62(2)(i) require 
provisioning of benefits by the State 
Government for those workers, who had 
been a beneficiary for at least three years 
continuously immediately before attaining 
the age of 60 years. 
No provisions 
were made for 
providing benefits 
to beneficiaries as 
envisaged in 
related Sections of 
the Act. 
In absence of rules, 
no action was 
initiated by the 
Board in this regard 
(paragraph 7.1.3). 
Sections 15 and 62(2)(j) require prescribing 
of form by the State Governments to 
maintain Employment register by 
employers to keep details of employment of 
beneficiaries employed under their 
establishment. 
Rule 278 provided 
required format of 
form in this regard. 
Despite prescribing 
required format, 
related register was 
not maintained 
(paragraph 6.8). 
For Constitution of the Board, Sections 
18(4) and 62(2)(k) require prescribing of 
terms and conditions of appointment of the 
Chairman and nominated members, their 
salaries and other allowances, manner of 
filling vacancies etc. by the State 
Government through rules. 
Besides, Sections 19(3) and 62(2)(l) also 
require that terms and conditions of 
services and payment of  salaries and 
allowances to the Secretary , and other 
officers & employees of the Board shall be 
prescribed by the State Government 
through rules. 
Rules 256 to 269 
provided required 
details in respect of 
constitution of the 
Board. However, 
there was no 
provisions for 
terms and 
conditions of 
services and 
payment of salaries 
and allowances to 
the Secretary and 
the other officers & 
employees. 
Though the GoUP 
did not make 
provisions 
regarding payment 
of salary to the 
Secretary and 
employees of the 
Board, however, 
salary was being 
paid to them from 
the Welfare Fund 
by the Board. 
Section 62(2)(n) requires prescribing of 
details for providing financial assistance to 
beneficiaries for house building loans or 
advances, education of their children, 
medical expenses etc. by the State 
Government. 
Besides, Sections 22(3) & 62(2)(o) also 
require provisioning of annual grants-in-aid 
to local authorities or employers for  
providing welfare measures and facilities to 
Rules 2009 did not 
have any 
provisions for 
payment of 
medical expenses 
to the workers or 
their family 
members and 
engagement of 
local authority or 
employer for 
welfare of workers.  
Despite no  
provision in the 
Rules 2009, the 
Board had 
implemented 
Medical Aid 
Scheme, Workers 
Critical Illness 
scheme etc. for 
payment of medical 
expenses to the 
workers. 

 
 
 
Chapter II: Compliance with the provisions of the Act 
7 
 
 
 
Requirements as per provisions of the 
Act 
Status of 
compliance of 
requirements of 
the Act under the 
Rules 2009 
Shortfalls against 
the requirement of 
the Act or in 
actual 
implementation of 
the Rules 2009 
workers and their family members  by the 
State Governments under rules. 
Sections 25 & 62(2)(p) require prescribing 
of form and timeline for preparation and 
submission of annual budget of the Board. 
Rules 2009 did not 
mention required 
form and timeline 
in this regard.  
Due to lack of 
provisions, the 
preparation and 
submission of 
budget estimate 
was delayed 
(paragraph 7.2.1). 
Sections 26 & 62(2)(q)  require prescribing 
of form and timeline for preparation and 
submission of an annual report on activities 
of the Board. 
Similarly, Sections 27 & 62(2)(r)  require 
prescribing of form and timeline for 
preparation and submission of an annual 
statement of account of the Board. 
Rules 2009 did not 
mention required 
forms and 
timelines in this 
regard.  
Due to lack of these 
provisions, the 
Board did not 
prepare annual 
report and annual 
statement of 
accounts 
(paragraphs 7.2.2 
and 7.2.3). 
Sections 28 & 62(2)(s) require fixing of 
working hours and provisioning of rest day 
and payment for work on rest day etc. for 
workers through framing of rules in this 
regard. 
Rules 35 to 43 
provided requisite 
provisions in this 
regard. 
Due to non-
maintenance of 
prescribed 
registers, 
compliance of 
provisions could 
not be ensured 
(paragraph 6.8). 
Sections 30 and 62(2)(t) to (v) require 
prescribing of required registers and 
records, to be maintained by the employer 
for keeping details of works performed by 
workers such as working hours, rest day, 
wages paid to them and receipts thereof . 
Besides, manner and place for display of 
required notices and issuance of wage book 
or slip to workers by the employer  are also 
to be include in rules. 
Rules 46 to 51 
provided requisite 
provisions in this 
regard. 
Due to insufficient 
inspections, 
compliance of 
provisions in this 
regard could not be 
ensured 
(paragraphs 6.5 
and 6.8). 
Sections 33, 36, 37 and 62(2)(w) to (y) 
require provisioning for facilities such as 
latrines/urinals, first -aid, canteens etc., for 
workers at the construction sites by the 
employers through rules. 
Rule 54, 55 and 56 
provided requisite 
provisions in this 
regard. 
Due to insufficient 
inspections, 
compliance of 
provisions could 
not be ensured 
(paragraph 6.5). 
Sections 38 and 62(2)(za) require 
prescribing of number of representatives of 
employer and worker for constitution of 
Safety Committee and appointment of a 
Safety Officer by deciding qualifications 
and duties in this regard through rules. 
Rule 2009 did not 
prescribe number 
of representatives 
of employer and 
worker for 
constitution of 
Safety committee. 
Employers neither 
constituted Safety 
Committee nor 
appointed Safety 
Officer (paragraph 
5.3 and 5.4). 
Sections 39(1) and 62(2)(zb) require 
prescribing of format for submission of 
notice of accident at worksite causing death 
or bodily injury to workers and timeline for 
Rule 251 provided 
required provisions 
in this regard. 
The employers did 
not submit required 
notice to the 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
8 
 
 
 
Requirements as per provisions of the 
Act 
Status of 
compliance of 
requirements of 
the Act under the 
Rules 2009 
Shortfalls against 
the requirement of 
the Act or in 
actual 
implementation of 
the Rules 2009 
submission of such notice  by employers  
through rules. 
Inspectors 
(paragraph 5.5). 
Sections 40 and 62(2)(zc) require framing 
of rules by the State Government regarding 
measures to be taken for safety and health 
of workers in course of their employment. 
Rule 60 to 249 
provided required 
provisions in this 
regard. 
The GoUP could 
not ensure 
implementation of 
these provisions 
(paragraph 5.8). 
Sections 43 and 62(2)(zd)  require 
empowering and engaging Inspectors for 
conducting inspections through rules.  
Rules 253 and 254 
provided required 
provisions in this 
regard. 
Sufficient 
inspections were 
not conducted by 
Inspectors during 
the period 2017 -22 
(paragraph 6.5). 
Sections 45(1) and 62(2)(ze)  require 
deciding date of payment of wages  to 
workers by the employer through rules. 
Rule 49 provided 
required provisions 
in this regard. 
Due to non -
maintenance of 
required registers , 
compliance of 
provisions could 
not be ensured 
(paragraph 6.8). 
The foregoing table demonstrates that the enacted statutes broadly adhered 
to the stipulations of the Act. However, it is noteworthy that certain 
provisions of the Act were yet to be fully addressed by the GoUP. 
Furthermore, audit identified inconsistencies within the rules concerning the 
submission of a notice of work commencement by employers to the 
Inspector. Section 46 of the Act mandates this submission to occur before 
30 days of work commencement. However, R ule 27(3) of the Rules 2009 
specifies that employers are required to notify the relevant Inspector 15 days 
prior to commencing the work. A similar incongruity was noted where some 
of the works notified as ‘Building and Other Construction Works’ by the 
GoUP was contrary to the provisions of Section 2(d) of the Act, as discussed 
in paragraph 3.2.3. 
Nevertheless, adhering to constitutional provisions through legislation does not 
inherently ensure proficient execution in practical contexts. The audit has 
discerned that the legal frameworks lacked resolute enforcement. This situation is 
particularly pronounced in aspects concerning the constitution of the Board and 
State Advisory Committee, the registration of establishments and beneficiaries, 
safeguarding the safety and health of workers, managing service conditions and 
welfare initiatives, as well as the formulation and submission of budget estimates, 
annual accounts, and annual reports, all of which are elaborated upon in the 
subsequent chapters.  
The State Government did not offer (March 2024) any comments on the Audit 
observations. 
 

 
 
 
Chapter II: Compliance with the provisions of the Act 
9 
 
 
 
To sum up: 
The GoUP has established the requisite Rules in accordance with the provisions 
outlined in the Act. However, certain issues remain unaddressed which include 
the formation of Expert Committee, delineation of benefits to be extended to 
workers who reach the age of sixty and have maintained three years of 
continuous membership with the Board before their retirement age, stipulations 
regarding the terms and conditions of service for the Secretary and other Board 
officials, encompassing the provision for their salary and other allowances, 
stipulating the mandatory functions to be carried out by the Board, specifying 
the format and timeline for the preparation of the annual report and accounts, 
determining the number of members for the Safety Committee, among others. 
As a result of these gaps, there have been deficiencies in the administration of 
the relevant provisions of the Act. 
Recommendation 1: The State Government may consider plugging the gaps of 
Rules 2009 with the requirements of the Act such as constitution of Expert 
Committee, delineation of benefits to be extended to workers who reach 
the age of sixty and specifying format and timeline for preparation of the 
annual report and accounts. 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Registration of Establishments 
and Beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and 
Beneficiaries 
The shortcomings in registration of establishments and beneficiaries have 
been highlighted in this chapter. 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The role of Registering Officers in  the process of registration of 
establishments was limited. This led to lack of a structured system for 
documenting the changes in particulars of certificate of registered 
establishments over the time  and validating information and 
documents submitted by the employers at the time of establishment 
registration. 
➢ The status of registration of establishments during 2017 -22 was 
deficient as the targets remained unachieved. There was no effective 
procedure to ensure registration of each project undertaken by the 
Government departments/ autonomous bodies and even by the 
individuals. 
➢ The conditions, under which certificate of establishment registration 
issued, w ere not communicated to the employers . Registration of 
establishments was delayed, and registration certificates were issued 
beyond the prescribed time. 
➢ Agreements between works executing agencies of GoUP  and the 
contractors for execution of construction work during 2017 -22, 
lacked clauses for registration of establishment and beneficiaries.  
Similarly, permission letter for approval of building plan had also no 
such conditions. 
➢ The GoUP did not transfer registration receipts of ₹ 20.88 crore 
during 2017-22 to the Board. 
➢ The status of beneficiary registration in the state  was low  during 
2017-20, though, there was a substantial increase (648 per cent) in 
the year 2020 -21 on account of waiver of  required fee in view of 
Covid pandemic and implementation (August 2020) of facility of 
self-certification of days of work by the workers. Only 49.97 per cent 
beneficiaries renewed their membership  against the registered  
144.19 lakh beneficiaries as of March 2022.  
➢ There was no system to ensure registration of workers employed in 
works executed by the Government departments/ autonomous 
bodies/individuals.  
➢ 23.33 lakh ineligible beneficiaries, involved in mining, MGNREGS 
and brick making works, were registered with Board.  
➢ The identity card issued by the Board to registered beneficiaries was 
not consistent with requirement of the Act and was not being used for 
entering the details of employment of workers. 
The registration of establishments and workers is the most important aspect 
for implementing the provisions of the Act. Unless a worker is registered 
under the provisions of the Act and is employed by a registered 
establishment, that worker will not be entitled to any benefits that may 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
12 
 
 
 
accrue under the provisions of the Act. However, audit observed following 
deficiencies in registration of establishments and beneficiaries: 
3.1 Registration of establishments 
As outlined in Section 7 of the Act, every employer is required to register 
their establishment within sixty days from the commencement of work. This 
is done by applying, along with the required fees, to the designated 
Registration Officer. To facilitate this process, the provisions 4 of the Rules 
2009 introduced (August 2017) the concept of online registration via the 
departmental web portal, allowing employers to apply using Form-I. 
During the audit, it was observed that the GoUP had established a protocol5 
for establishment registration but lacked a robust mechanism to ensure that 
each building or construction work got registered as an establishment under 
the purview of the Act. The shortcomings in this regard are elaborated upon 
in succeeding paragraphs. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that instructions were 
issued to ensure registration of all establishments  and awareness programs 
are being organized at local level for ensuring the same.  
3.1.1 Role of Registering Officers in establishment registration 
As per the provisions of Section 6 of the Act, the State Governments are 
required to appoint Registering Officers for registration of establishments . 
Besides, Section 7(4) of the Act and Rule 24(3) of the Rules 2009 mandates 
that the employers must intimate to the Registering Officer within 30 days 
of any changes in ownership or management or other particulars of 
certificate of registration. 
Audit observed that the GoUP appointed (September 1999) Labour 
Commissioner of UP, all Additional/Deputy/Assistant Labour 
Commissioner of Labour Department as Registering Officer for registration 
of establishments  but establish ed necessary provisions and required 
procedures only by February 2009 6, resulting in delay  of more than nine 
years in registration process. 
Further, the implementation of online process for registration of 
establishments reduced the role of Registering officers as certificate of 
registration was to be issued within a day  of application. It is also evident 
by the fact that in the selected districts, registering authorities had no data 
regarding cases wherein  changes in certificate details such as employer 
address, maximum number of workers to be employed, probable date of 
commencement and completion of works, ownership etc., had occurred after 
registration of establishments during the period 2017-22. 
Moreover, provisions of Section 8 of the Act and Rule 24 of the Rules 2009 
allows for the cancellation of registration certificates obtained through false 
 
4  Under the Rule 24.  
5  Under the Rules 24 to 28 of Rules 2009. 
6  Framework for the registration of establishments were outlined only through Rules 2009. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
13 
 
 
 
information or forged documents. However, audit noticed that due to limited 
role of the DLC/ALC in the process of registration of establishments, no 
actions were initiated in the selected districts to validate the information and 
documents submitted by employers. Consequently, neither the accuracy of 
certificate particulars was ensured, nor were any certificates acquired 
through false information or forged documents revoked during 2017-22. 
In reply, the State Government claimed (March 2024) that individuals could 
record changes in particulars of certificate through Nivesh Mitra portal. The 
State Government also stated (March 2024) that provision for cancellation 
of online applications has now been developed on portal and planned to 
extend certificate issuance time from one day to seven days. 
Reply is not acceptable as Nivesh Mitra  portal did not have any facility 
through which individuals c ould record the changes  in particulars  of 
certificate. The portal also did not have facility to  validate the information 
and documents received, though required for ensuring accuracy of 
certificate particulars.  
3.1.2 Status of registration of establishments 
As outlined by the provisions of Section 7 of the Act, every construction 
project must be registered as an establishment. However, audit noticed in 
selected districts that contractors working on Government or autonomous 
bodies construct ions projects failed to register their projects as 
establishments during 2017-22, violating the provisions of Act and Rules 
2009 as detailed in paragraph 3.1.4. 
Furthermore, there was a lack of an effective procedure  to ensure the 
registration of construction projects undertaken by individuals and large -
scale construction endeavours, whose building plans were approved by local 
authorities. Consequently, the state of establishment registration was 
notably deficient, leading to inability to fulfil the annual targets set by the 
Board. A comprehensive breakdown of establishment registration in the 
State during 2017-22 is provided in Table 3.1 below: 
Table 3.1: Details of registration of establishments in the State during 2017-22 
Year Annual targets of 
registration of 
establishments 
No. of registered 
establishments in 
the State 
Shortfall in 
per cent as 
against the 
targets 
Annual 
increase(+)/ 
Decrease ( -) 
in per centage 
2017-18 42000 25807 38.55 (-)31.64 
2018-19 42000 35065 16.51 (+)35.87 
2019-20 42000 26199 37.62 (-)25.28 
2020-21 42000 30553 27.25 (+)16.61 
2021-22 Not fixed 25605 - (-)16.19 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
The data above indicates that, throughout the period 2017-22, the annual 
targets for establishment registration were consistently unachieved, with 
shortfalls ranging from 1 7 to 39 per cent. This discrepancy persisted even 
though the Board did not revise the annual targets throughout this period, 
without considering the changing construction landscape within the State. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
14 
 
 
 
Moreover, while establishment registration in the State witnessed an 
upswing during the year 2018 -19 compared to the levels of 2017 -18, 
subsequent to this period, the registration status of establishments 
experienced a downward trajectory. The status of registration of 
establishments in the selected districts with the exception of Agra and  
G B Nagar, also witnessed a decline during 2017 -22, as detailed in 
Appendix-III. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the efforts are being 
made for ensuring cent per cent registration of establishments by organising 
awareness programmes at district level. Further, the State Government also 
stated that targets for registration of establishments for the year 2023 -24 
have been allocated on the basis of actual registration figures of the districts 
and assured that special care would be taken for improvement in 
establishment registration.  
Constraints in registration of establishments 
Several factors could have contributed to the constraints encountered in 
establishment registration, which are as follows: 
➢ In October 2018, the GoI issued a directive to decentralize the authority 
of establishment registration to officials below the rank of 
Deputy/Assistant Labour Commissioner  for effective establishment 
registration. However, audit noted that the GoUP did not initiate any 
measures for power decentralization. 
➢ The Board failed to establish any mechanism to identify potential 
employers through consistent monitoring of construction endeavours in 
the State by application of GIS technology or mapping, in line with the 
GoI's directives of October 2018. Notably, only five7 districts within the 
State underwent GIS property mapping by the Board during 2017 -22 
and identified  1,17,424 employers, who had not got themselves 
registered earlier under the Act. Due to not conducting such exercise in 
other districts, unregistered employers could not be identified. 
➢ In a bid to align with the GoI's directives of October 2018, the GoUP 
instructed (January 2019 and April 2022) Government departments and 
local authorities for forwarding the copies of work orders to the district 
authorities of the Board . This directive aimed to ensure establishment 
registration. However, despite repeated orders of t he GoUP, the 
Government departments and local authorities  of the selected districts 
did not comply with the same. As a result,  registering authorities were 
deprived from the  valuable information sources about im minent 
construction activities . Consequently, registration of all construction 
projects carried out under these bodies could not be ensured. 
➢ In addition, the GoI issued a directive in October 2018, for forwarding 
of registration certificate/license copies by the Central and State 
Government authorities, operating under various labour laws, to the 
Board's authorities. This directive aimed to guarantee establishment 
registration under the Act. However, audit noticed that due to 
 
7  G B Nagar, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow and Meerut. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
15 
 
 
 
insufficient coordination among the concerned Central and State 
Government authorities, no advancements were made in this area. 
Consequently, the registration of all construction projects for which 
information was available with these authorities could not be ensured. 
➢ The GoUP notified (July 2013) 40 work s as Building or Other 
Construction Work, violating the provisions of Section 2(1)(d)8 of the 
Act as out of these works, works related with stone quarries work or 
mining, marble/stone work, lime making, extraction of sand, soil or core 
sand, brick manufacturing works at brick kilns etc. were regulated by 
the Mines Act 1952 in the State.  Despite notification of these works as 
Building or Other Construction Work, no directives were issued by the 
GoUP to mandate the registration of these works as establishments 
under the Act. Consequently, despite the workers of  these work 
categories enjoying  membership of the Board  (as discussed in 
paragraph 3.2.3), establishments connected with these works, remained 
unregistered. 
Thus, non-compliance of the directives of the GoI and GoUP and provisions 
of the Act attributed towards not ensuring registration of all eligible 
establishments in the State. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that instructions have 
been issued to the Registering Officers for ensuring cent per cent  
registration of establishments. Further, the State Government  also 
mentioned developing of a Cess portal to identify potential employers and 
undertaking GIS survey in other districts. Besides, the State Government 
asserted that brick kilns being a production unit, does not fall under the 
category of establishment.  No comments were offered by the State 
Government on other issues. 
Reply is not acceptable as classification of brick kilns as Building or Other 
Construction Works was irregular being regulated in the State under the 
Mines Act 1952.  Further, brick kilns  could not be registered as 
establishment in spite of registering their workers as beneficiaries of the 
Board. 
3.1.3 Important conditions of the Act/Rules not mentioned in 
certificate of registration 
As per provisions of Section 7(3) of the Act, certificate for registration of 
establishment is to be issued under such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the State Governments in this regard.  Accordingly, the GoUP under Rule 
27 of the Rules 2009, prescribed specific conditions 9 under which 
certificates are issued for the registration of establishments. Some 
noteworthy provisions of these certificates /conditions encompass the 
prohibition of employing a workforce exceeding the number specified in 
 
8  Requires notification of such works as Building or Other Construction Work, to which provisions of the 
Factories Act 1948 or Mines Act 1952 does not apply. 
9  The certificate is non -transferable, fee for registration of establishment is non -refundable, the certificate of 
registration of an establishment is valid only for the concerned work, a copy of the certificate of registration 
is to be displayed at a conspi cuous place at the premises where the building and other construction work is 
being carried etc. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
16 
 
 
 
the registration certificate, obligatory notification of changes in the 
employed workforce to the Registering Officer within a seven -day 
timeframe, the potential revocation of certificates acquired through 
misrepresentation, concealment of facts, or the use of fraudulent documents, 
with possible legal actions against the applicant. Additionally, the 
requirement for submission of a notice to the Inspector at least 15 days 
before commencing and completing the work is emphasized. 
However, audit noticed that  certificates issued via the Board's website 
lacked any printed conditions, despite making reference to an annexure 
intended for this purpose.  As a result, all the important conditions to be 
complied by the employers were not made part of the certificate of 
registration.  
Consequently, the absence of communication regarding certificate 
conditions and the omission of instructions related to the adherence of 
crucial provisions of the Act , hindered the compliance of multiple 
provisions of both the Act and the Rules 2009. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that format of 
registration of certificate has been revised by mentioning provision of Rule 
27(1)(c) of Rules 2009 printed on it.  
Reply is not acceptable as all potential conditions of the Act and the Rules 
2009 were not incorporated in the revised format of certificate. 
3.1.4 No clause for registration in agreements 
In compliance with the orders10 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the 
GoUP directed (June 2014) to incorporate provisions for registration of 
establishment and beneficiaries in the agreements of execution of 
construction works. Besides, the GoUP had also directed (November 2013) 
to include provisions of registration of beneficiaries in tender documents of 
construction works. 
However, audit observed that out of 12 test-checked units related with work 
execution, ten 11 units did not incorporate clauses for registration of 
establishments and beneficiaries in the agreements entered during 2017-22. 
Consequently, in three12 units (out of these ten units ), only 10 works were 
registered as establishments against the total 1 ,410 agreements executed 
during 2017-22 for execution of works. In the remaining two13 test-checked 
units, the agreements included provisions solely for the registration of 
establishments, neglecting to address the inclusion of beneficiaries.  
Similarly, akin to the above test -checked units, none of the 12 units 
evaluated in relation to building plan approvals, incorporated provisions for 
the registration of establishments and beneficiaries within the agreements 
awarded for construction project execution. This led to non-registration of 
establishment and beneficiar ies, with the exception of Development 
 
10  Issued during special writ petition no.318/2006. 
11  CD-I (Taj Trapezium) Agra, PD Agra, Head Works Div; Agra Canal (Okhla); G B Nagar, C.D.-I Lucknow, 
C D-II Lucknow, Madhya Ganga Canal (CD -15) Moradabad, World Bank Division; Moradabad, C D -IV 
(Kumbh Mela) Prayagraj, CD-I Prayagraj and PD Varanasi. 
12  CD-I (Taj Trapezium) Agra; PD Agra and Madhya Ganga Canal (CD-15) Moradabad. 
13  PD, G B Nagar and CD-III Varanasi. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
17 
 
 
 
Authority (DA) Moradabad. Notably, within DA, Moradabad, the inclusion 
of a provision for the registration of establishments in the tender conditions 
resulted in the successful registration of establishments. 
Additionally, among these 12 test -checked units associated with building 
plan approvals, nine 14 units that granted building plan approvals during 
2017-22 did not include  provisions pertaining to the registration of 
establishments and beneficiaries in the permission letters for approved 
building plans. 
Thus, due to the failure to adhere to the GoUP's directives and the omission 
of necessary provisions within agreements, tender conditions, and 
permission letters for approved building plans, the registration of all eligible 
establishments and beneficiaries could not be ensured. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that instructions are 
being issued to the departments related with execution of construction 
works for incorporating the condition related with registration of 
beneficiaries in the agreements with the contractors and also to ensure 
registration of beneficiaries accordingly. 
3.1.5 Delay in issue of Registration Certificate 
As per Section 7 of the Act, certificate of establishment registration is to be 
issued to the employer within a timeframe specified by the State 
Government. Accordingly, the Registration Officer is obligated to furnish 
the certificate to the employer within one day of receiving the application  
as per provisions of the Rules 2009, assuming that the provided application 
particulars meet the necessary criteria. 
However, an examination of the data from the selected districts for the 
period 2017-22 revealed instances where the specified timeframe was not 
adhered to. Details of these instances are given Table 3.2 below: 
Table 3.2: Delay in issue of registration certificate in selected districts  
during 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
Total number 
of registered 
establishments 
during  
2017-22 
Data 
available15 in 
respect of 
registered 
establishments 
during  
2017-22 
Number of 
certificates 
issued 
with delay  
(per cent) 
Certificates issued with a 
delay of 
up to 
one 
month 
more 
than 
one 
month 
and up 
to six 
months 
more 
than 
six 
months 
Agra 2131 1179 677 (57) 477 176 24 
G B Nagar 18177 6430 2011 (31) 1196 740 75 
Lucknow 3951 1857 1028 (55) 329 585 114 
Moradabad 1369 1356 677 (50) 465 167 45 
Prayagraj 2464 912 364 (40) 240 113 11 
Varanasi 629 623 400 (64) 263 103 34 
(Source: Labour department of selected districts) 
 
14  Development Authorities – Agra, G B Nagar, Lucknow, Moradabad, Prayagraj and Varanasi; Nagar Palika 
Parishads – Dadri (G B Nagar), Shamsabad (Agra) and Thakurdwara (Moradabad). 
15  Dates of application for registration and issue of certificate of registration were available only for these 
establishments. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
18 
 
 
 
Above table  clearly demonstrates that, in comparison to the available 
records of registered establishments, a significant proportion of certificates, 
ranging from 3 1 to 64 per cent , were issued after delays in the  selected 
districts16. A considerable number of these certificates were issued with  
delays exceeding six months. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that to avoid delays in 
issue of certificates, process of registration has been made fully automated.  
Reply is not acceptable as the instances of delay occurred under the online 
automated system of registration.  
3.1.6 Delayed registration of establishments 
As per Section 7 of the Act, employers are required to submit application 
for registration of establishments within 60 days of commencement of 
work. Further, provisions of Rules 2009 require completion of registration 
process within a day of submission of application. Accordingly, registration 
of establishments is to be ensured within 6 1 days of commencement of 
work. Further, the GoUP directed (January 2014) for imposition of penalty 
or initiation of legal action against the employers, who did not register their 
establishment in compliance with the provisions of the Act. 
However, scrutiny of data of registration of selected districts during  
2017-22 revealed that the establishments were not registered by the 
employers on time due to delayed submission of application as per details 
given in the Table 3.3 below:  
Table 3.3: Delay in establishment registration in selected districts during 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
Total number 
of registered 
establishments 
during 2017-
22 
Data 
available17 in 
respect of 
registered 
establishments 
during 2017-
22 
Establishments 
registered 
within 61 days 
of 
commencement 
of work 
Establishments registered with 
delays 
up to 
one 
month 
more 
than 
one 
month 
and up 
to six 
months 
more 
than 
six 
months 
Total 
(per cent) 
Agra 2131 1276 383 120 438 335 893 (70) 
G B Nagar 18177 6735 3728 443 1622 942 3007 (45) 
Lucknow 3951 1916 324 66 215 1311 1592 (83) 
Moradabad 1369 1340 439 119 478 304 901 (67) 
Prayagraj 2464 983 249 59 365 310 734 (75) 
Varanasi 629 619 199 42 177 201 420 (68) 
(Source: The Labour department of selected districts) 
It is evident from the above that most of the establishments were registered 
with delays during 2017-22 as the percentage of delayed registration of 
establishments ranged between 45 and 83 in this regard. Further, it was also 
observed that due to not registering the establishment within the stipulated 
time, no action was initiated against the employers in compliance with the 
directions of the GoUP.  
 
16  DLCs of G B Nagar and Prayagraj replied that delayed issue of certificate of registration was due to glitches 
in Board’s portal. 
17  Dates of commencement of work and issue of certificate of registration were available only for these 
establishments. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
19 
 
 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that delay in registration 
of establishments was due to various factors, including a shortage of LEOs, 
non-compliance of provisions by the contractor s of public 
sector/government departments, approval of building maps by the D A 
without registration of establishment, inaction by the LEOs, no intervention 
of Registering Officers in the process of registration of establishments etc. 
3.1.7 Register of establishments not maintained 
As per the provisions of Rule 2 4(2) of the Rules 2009, Registering officer 
is required to maintain a register in the Form 3 for showing the particulars 
of establishments in relation to which certificates of registration have been 
issued. 
Audit observed that after implementation of online registration process , 
register of establishments was  not being maintained in any of the Labo ur 
Department offices across the selected districts during 2017 -2218. The 
register of establishments is an important tool to keep watch on furnishing 
of various notices by the employers such as dates of commencement and 
completion of work . However, due to non -maintenance of the register, 
neither the monitoring of submission of required notices by the employers 
nor assessment of cess and inspection of registered establishment was 
ensured by the responsible authorities. 
In reply, the State Government stated  (March 2024)  that the required 
information of registered establishments has been maintained on the Board 
portal, which can be viewed online.  
Reply is not acceptable  as required information  on establishment 
registration has not been made public on Board ’s portal for ensuring 
transparency and accountability in this regard. Moreover, Rule 24 (2) of 
Rules 2009, as amended during August 2017 for introducing the online 
process of registration, mandates maintenance of afore mentioned register 
keeping in view its importance. 
3.1.8 Usage of receipts  
In compliance with the provisions of Section 7 of the Act, the GoUP decided 
fee for registration of establishments under Rule 28 of the Rules 2009. The 
fee ranged from ₹ 1,000 to ₹ 10,000 depending upon the number of 
workers19 likely to be employed by the employer on any day of work. 
However, the provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 are silent about the 
usages of receipts on account of registration of establishments. 
Audit observed that the GoUP did not issue any directions regarding usages 
of receipts on account of registration of establishments . As a result , 
proceeds20 of registration of establishment were also not shared with the 
 
18  Except Moradabad, where required register was maintained up to the year 2018-19. 
19  ₹ 1000 for up to 100 workers, ₹ 5000 for more than 100 and up to 500 workers and ₹ 10000 for more than 
500 workers. 
20  Deposited under the heads of account “ 0230 (Labour and Employment)-800 (other receipts) -10  
(under UPBOCW Rules)-01(receipts from registration). 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
20 
 
 
 
Board by the GoUP  during 2017-22. The details of receipts on account of 
registration of establishments vis-à-vis total number of registered 
establishments during 2017-22 are given in Table 3.4 below: 
Table 3.4: Details of receipts for registration of establishments during 2017-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Amount of registration fee No. of registered establishments 
in the State 
2017-18 470.81 25807 
2018-19 728.28 35065 
2019-20 483.74 26199 
2020-21 149.92 30553 
2021-22 255.14 25605 
Total 2087.89 143229 
(Source: The Voucher Level Computerisation & Board) 
The above receipts amounting to ₹ 20.88 crore during 2017-22 were 
intended for the well-being of workers but were not disbursed to the Board 
by the GoUP. Consequently, the Board was deprived of a potential income 
source. 
Besides, receipts on account of registration fee also did not align with the 
number of registered establishments as number of registered establishments 
increased in the year 2020-21 with the levels of year 2017-18 and 2019-20 
but receipts decreased significantly. Moreover, despite increase in receipts 
figures during the year 2021 -22, number of registered establishments 
decreased in comparison with the levels of the year 2020-21.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) t hat the process for 
making required arrangements in Act for transfer of receipts of registration 
fee to the Board is under way. 
3.2 Registration of beneficiaries 
As per Sections 11 and 12 of the Act, every worker aged between 18 and 
60 years and engaged in building work for not less than 90 days during the 
preceding 12 months, is entitled to be registered as beneficiary by the 
officials of the Board for availing benefits from the Welfare fund.  
The provisions of Rule 275 and 276 of the Rules 2009 provided for 
registration of workers21 as beneficiaries by making an application in  
Form-25 to the Registering Officers or through online -mode on 
departmental website with annual registration fee of ₹ 20. To register, 
workers needed to submit  self-attested copy of Aadhaar card , bank 
passbook and a certificate of employment from the employer or Inspector 
of the area concerned that the applicant had worked at least 90 days in 
preceding 12 months. Besides, as per provisions of Rule 279, a beneficiary 
is also required to pay annual contribution22 to the Board until they turned 
60 to retain their membership. Further, in case of engagement of beneficiary 
in building and other construction works for less than 90 days in any year 
 
21  Not registered as a beneficiary with any other Welfare Fund established under any law for the time being in 
force. 
22  ₹ 20 per year. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
21 
 
 
 
or if the worker fails to pay prescribed contribution up to one year, their 
status as beneficiary is to be ceased. 
However, audit observed the provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 were not 
followed by the Board as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:  
3.2.1 Status of registration of beneficiaries 
The Board had fixed annual targets for registration of beneficiaries during 
2017-21. The status of registration of beneficiaries against the annual 
targets vis-à-vis active beneficiaries (who have renewed their membership) 
in the State during 2017-22 is given in the Table 3.5 below: 
Table 3.5: Registration of beneficiaries against the targets vis-à-vis active 
beneficiaries in the State 
Year Targets for 
registration 
of 
beneficiaries 
No. of 
registered 
beneficiaries 
at the 
beginning of 
the year 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
registered 
during the 
year 
Progressive 
figures of 
registered 
beneficiaries 
Active beneficiaries 
(percentage against 
total registered 
beneficiaries at the 
beginning of the year) 
2017-18 8,80,000 31,43,733 7,25,996 38,69,729 2,50,779 (7.98) 
2018-19 8,80,000 38,69,729 6,36,366 45,06,095 2,71,185 (7.00) 
2019-20 8,80,000 45,06,095 6,00,401 51,06,496 3,47,556 (7.71) 
2020-21 24,82,424 51,06,496 44,93,481 95,99,977 22,76,507 (44.58) 
2021-22 Not fixed 95,99,977 48,18,823 1,44,18,800 47,97,211(49.97) 
(Source: The information provided by the Board) 
From the above table, it can be seen that throughout the period 2017-20, the 
set annual physical targets for beneficiary registration were not met . Also, 
there was a noticeable decline in beneficiary registrations during this period, 
even though the targets remained constant. However, there was a substantial 
648 per cent  increase in beneficiary registrations in the year 2020 -21 
compared to the preceding year, 2019 -20. Beneficiary registration further 
increased by an additional seven per cent in the subsequent year 2021-22. 
It was also observed that the increase in number of registered beneficiaries 
during 2020-22 was due to waiver of registration fee by the Board, in view 
of emergency arising out from the Covid-19 pandemic. Besides, the Board 
also relaxed (August 2020) the requirement of certificate of employment 
from the employer or Inspector for the registration of beneficiaries.  
Further, despite manifold increase in registered beneficiaries during  
2020-22, active registered beneficiaries remained only 50 per cent of the 
total registered beneficiaries at the end of March 2022. This situation 
remained even though the Board had set targets for renewal of membership 
of all eligible beneficiaries during the year 2021 -22. It was also observed 
that after recall (March 2022) of free registration/renewal facility after 
Covid pandemic, many beneficiaries registered during the year 2020 -21 
could not renew their membership. 
In reply, the State Government  stated (March 2024) that efforts such as 
registration of workers for a period of three years at one time, facility of 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
22 
 
 
 
registration through Jan Suvidha Kendra, organising camps for registration 
of workers etc., have been made to facilitate workers in registration process. 
Constraints in registration of beneficiaries 
It was also observed that despite increase in number of beneficiaries, the 
following areas were overlooked by the Board and other responsible 
authorities over the years: 
➢ The employers did not provide details of workers eligible for 
registration as beneficiaries in compliance with the directions 
(November 2013) of the GoUP. 
➢ The GoUP directed (November 2013) to conduct regular inspections 
of establishments to ensure registration of each worker . However, 
due to deficient format of inspection note, this aspect was 
overlooked by LEOs during the inspections.  
➢ No system was put in place to ensure  registration of workers 
employed under works of the Government departments/autonomous 
bodies etc. 
➢ Due to difficulty in keeping track records of renewals, many workers 
could not ensure renewal of their membership as there was no system 
to remind them in this regard, leading to loss of membership and 
consequent benefits. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the Board has issued 
instructions to executing agencies to provide workers details for registration. 
The State Government also stated that facility of online self-registration has 
been provided to workers. Besides, at the instance of audit, facility of Short 
Message Service (SMS) has been introduced for renewal of membership of 
workers. 
3.2.2 Non-compliance with the instructions of the GoI  
In compliance with the directions (March 2018) of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India, the GoI issued (October 2018) many instructions in respect 
of registration of beneficiaries, which were not adhered  to by the Board 
completely as per the following details: 
➢ The GoI instructed to allot Unique Identification Number to the 
registered workers for portability of welfare benefits. For this 
purpose, complete details of registered workers were to be uploaded 
on the National BOCW portal. However, the Board partially 
implemented this instruction as despite initiating process of allotment 
of Unique Identification Number to the beneficiaries, details of 
registered workers were not uploaded on the National BOCW portal. 
Besides, the Board also lacked complete details of registered workers 
as details uploaded on the Board portal did not contain information 
about mobile number, description of family, status of renewal etc.in 
respect of all registered workers. 
➢ The GoI also directed the Board to allow self-certification of days of 
work by the workers containing information such as details of sites 
of work, name of employer and number of days of work as per ID 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
23 
 
 
 
card of worker etc. However, the Board allowed (August 2020) self-
certification of days of work without asking required details from the 
workers such as details of sites of work, name of employer and 
number of days of work as per ID card of worker etc. Thus, GoI 
instruction was implemented partially. 
➢ To facilitate registration of migrant workers, the GoI instructed that 
the source States should try and register them in their home state, give 
them an ID card/pass book with a unique number and upload these 
details on their website. They should also creat e facilitation 
centres/help desks in the destination districts for the registration of 
eligible workers and may also take up the matter with destination 
States to help these workers get registered in the destination states. 
However, audit observed that no action was initiated by the GoUP or 
by the Board in this regard. 
Thus, due to non -compliance or partial compliance of the GoI instructions, 
a transparent and effective system for registration of eligible workers could 
not be implemented. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that details of only  
56 lakh registered workers have been uploaded on National BOCW portal 
and efforts are underway to obtain mobile number and description of family 
of workers at the time of renewal of membership and distribution of benefits. 
The State Government also stated that provisions for filling required details 
in self-certification of days of work on the Board portal has been initiated. It 
was also stated by the State Government that there are no separate 
arrangements for registration of migrant workers, but they do issue migration 
certificates. 
3.2.3 Registration of ineligible beneficiaries 
The provisions of the Act, applies to every establishment which employs, or 
had employed on any day of the preceding twelve months, ten or more 
building workers in any building or other construction work but does not 
include work s covered under the Factories Act, 1948 or the Mines Act, 
1952. Section 2(1)(d) of the Act, provided an illustrative list 23 of works to 
be considered as building or other construction work and required the State 
Government to notify such other works in this regard. 
As discussed in paragraph 3.1.2, the GoUP notified 24 40 works including 
works related with stone quarries or mining, extraction of sand; soil or core 
sand, etc. under Section 2(1)(d) of the Act as Building or other Construction 
work, which were otherwise covered under the Mines Act 1952 and not to 
be covered under Building or other construction work as per the provision 
of the Act. Besides, list of prospective works, issued (July 2013) by GoI for 
 
23  The construction, alteration, repairs, maintenance or demolition of buildings, streets, roads, railways, 
tramways, airfields, irrigation, drainage, embankment and navigation works, flood control works ( including 
drainage works), generation, transmission a nd distribution of power, water works, oil and gas installations, 
electric lines, wireless, radio, television, telephone, telegraph and overseas communications, dams, canals, 
reservoirs, watercourses, tunnels, bridges, viaducts, aqueducts, pipelines, tower s, cooling towers, 
transmission towers etc. 
24  Vide notification no. 488/36-2-2013 dated 25 July 2013. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
24 
 
 
 
notifying additional Building and other construction works under the Act by 
the State Governments, did not include above works for this purpose. 
Audit observed that out of the total 154.81 lakh registered beneficiaries with 
the Board as of February 2023, 1.66 lakh workers were related with mining 
activities. Thus, registration of workers covered under the Mines Act, was 
contrary to the provisions of the Act.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that notification of  
40 works as Building or Other Construction Works has been made in 
accordance with provisions of the Act , claiming authority to do so . While 
agreeing with the authority of the State Government, it is important to ensure 
that works are notified under only one Act and should not be covered under 
two Acts at the same time, as in this case. 
Apart from above the GoUP also issued instructions for registration of other 
class of ineligible beneficiaries, as discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.2.3.1 Registration of MGNREGS workers 
The GoI directed (July 2013) to all State Governments to register Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
workers with at least 50 days of work in preceding 12 months as 
beneficiaries of Board. Accordingly, the GoUP issued (August 2013) 
directions for registration of MGNREGS workers as beneficiaries of the 
Board. 
Audit observed that the GoI withdrew (February 2017) earlier directions 
consequent on re -examination of MGNREGS workers as construction 
workers. However, the State Government did not comply with the revised 
orders of the GoI.  
It was also noted that among the overall count of 154.81 lakh registered 
beneficiaries under the Board as of February 2023, there were 13.70 lakh 
workers associated with MGNREGS. However, due to not issuing any 
instruction by the GoUP, works of MGNREGS were not registered as 
establishment under the provisions of the Act.  The registration of 
MGNREGS workers as beneficiaries of the Board without registration of 
their works, violated ruling of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India . The 
Hon’ble Court had ruled25 that only those workers working in registered 
establishments and/or registerable establishments under the Act will be 
covered as beneficiaries of the Board.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the MGNREGS 
workers have been registered on the basis of 90 days of work. Further, it 
was also stated by the State Government that the Board has directed to the 
Divisional Commissioners/District Magistrates to register construction 
works being executed under MGNREGS as establishment.  
 
25  In the case of National Campaign Committee for Central Legislation on Construction Labour Versus Union 
of India & Others. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
25 
 
 
 
Reply is not acceptable as directions of Board re quiring registration of 
MGNREGS works as establishment was not provided to audit in support of 
claim made by the Government. 
3.2.3.2 Registration of brick kiln workers 
The Directorate of Geology and Mining, Uttar Pradesh has classified brick 
earth as a mineral and also regulates operation of brick kilns in the State, as 
provisions of the Mines Act 1952 applies on excavation of minerals. Further, 
provisions of the Act applies to building and other construction works but 
does not apply to works covered under the Factories Act, 1948 and the 
Mines Act, 1952. 
However, audit observed the GoUP not only classified (July 2013) brick 
making work at brick kilns as Building or Other construction work but also 
issued instructions26 from time to time to register the workers of brick kiln 
as beneficiaries of Board. Accordingly, the Board had registered 7.97 lakh 
workers related with brick kiln against the total registered 154.81 lakh 
beneficiaries as of February 2023. 
Thus, classification of brick making work at brick kilns as Building or Other 
Construction work and registering their workers as beneficiaries of the 
Board violated the provisions of the Act.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that brick kilns of the 
State are covered under the production  activities and not related to 
construction activities.  
The reply of the State Government  contradicts its  order (July 2013) 
classifying brick making as Building or Other Construction Work. 
3.2.4 Implementation of Mission Mode Project 
The GoI directed (July 2020) to implement a Mission Mode Project (MMP) 
to ensure registration of all left-out workers within a period of three months 
and timely renewal of membership , so that they may avail benefits of 
welfare schemes of the Board . The GoI estimated (July 2020) 81.52 lakh 
workers in the State, out of which 56.70 lakh were already registered with 
the Board and against these registered workers, only 19.19 lakh were live 
registered workers (who have renewed their membership on time).  
Accordingly, under the MMP, not only 24.82 lakh left-out workers were to 
be registered by the Board, but renewal process was also to be eased for 
timely renewal of membership of beneficiaries. For this purpose, Board had 
to incentivise renewals and Seva-Bandhus/NGOs/Volunteers/Trade unions 
were to be engaged for timely renewal and revival of the lapsed registration. 
Further, for addressing the portability of membership on migration from one 
State to another, process to issue online Migration Certificate was also to be 
initiated by the Board within a period of three months under MMP. Besides, 
a host of technological tools such as Mobile App, Call centre, Missed call 
 
26  G.O. no. 39/2016/1462/36-2-2016-7 G/2015 dated 29.9.2016 and 18/2015/1621/36 -2-2015-7G/2015 dated 
29-12-2015. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
26 
 
 
 
with Web links etc. were also to be introduced by the Board to ease the 
process of registration.  
However, audit observed that the Board did not take any action to 
incentivise renewals and did not rope Seva-Bandhus/NGOs/Volunteers/ 
Trade unions for timely renewal and revival of the lapsed registration. 
Besides, neither the process for issue of online Migration Certificate was 
initiated by the Board nor suggested technological tools were introduced by 
the Board for aforesaid purposes. 
Moreover, though the GoI had anticipated only 81.52 lakh workers in the 
State as of July 2020, the Board had registered 144.19 lakh workers  
(more than 90 per cent of estimated numbers) up to March 2022. However, 
live members remained only 47.97 lakh (50 per cent 27). This once again 
highlights that the measures taken by the Board for renewing or reinstating 
the memberships of beneficiaries that had lapsed, were not adequate. 
Thus, due to not implement ing measures of the MMP, timely renewal of 
membership could not be ensured.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that online facility for 
registration/renewal of membership has been provided through the Board 
portal and Jan Suvidha Kendra. Besides, provision for issue of Migration 
Certificate through the Board portal and SMS facility for renewal of 
membership have also been introduced at the instance of audit. The State 
Government also stated that due to these measures , over 90 per cent  
beneficiaries against the targets, have been registered by the Board.  
3.2.5 Issuance of identity cards  
As per Sections 13 of the Act, an identity card is to be issued to every 
registered beneficiary by the Board for entering their details of the Building 
or Other Construction Works. The required details of identity card are to be 
entered by the employer based on Register of beneficiaries. Section 15 of 
the Act mandates maintenance of Register of beneficiaries 28 by the 
employer for keeping details of employment of beneficiaries. Moreover, the 
GoI also directed (October 2018) to issue identity card in the form of a 
passbook/employment diary for entering the employment details of 
workers. In compliance with the provisions of the Act, Rule 277 of the Rules 
2009 prescribed Form 27 for issuing identity cards, containing details of 
worker and their spouse.  
However, audit observed that the format prescribed by the GoUP under 
Rules 2009 for identity card was not consistent with the requirements of the 
Act as there was no provision for entering details of the building or other 
construction works performed by the worker. Further, the GoUP also did 
not initiate any action 29 for providing identity card in the form of a 
 
27  Out of 96 lakh registered beneficiaries at the beginning of the year 2021-22. 
28  To be maintained in Form 28 as per the Rule 278 of the Rules 2009. 
29  The Board had passed (January 2020) a resolution for providing Identity Cards in the form of a passbook, no 
development was made in this regard as of June 2023. 

 
 
 
Chapter III: Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
27 
 
 
 
passbook/employment diary to maintain the employment details of workers. 
As a result , identity cards issued by the Board did not provide any 
information regarding days of work of beneficiary. Audit further observed 
that the identity cards issued by the Board were also not compliant with the 
prescribed format (Form 27) as it lacked details of spouse of the worker. 
Besides, format prescribed (April 2014) by the Chief Inspector for issuing 
inspection note for carrying out inspections of the establishments, did not 
require checking of maintenance of Register of beneficiaries by the 
employer. Joint physical verifications of establishments by the audit team 
confirmed non-maintenance of Register of beneficiaries by the employers. 
This also suggests that due to the lack of a system to track workers' 
employment details through their identity cards and the failure to maintain  
a Register of beneficiaries, there is no basis for issuing certificates for days 
of work, which is required (minimum 90 workdays) for the registration or 
renewal of beneficiary memberships. 
Moreover, audit observed inconsistencies in format of Form 28 (for Register 
of beneficiaries) under the Rules 2009, as there was no mention for upkeep 
of details of employment of workers. 
Thus, issuing improper identity cards and no t maintaining details of 
employment of workers through Register of beneficiaries  involves risk of 
registration or renewal of membership of ineligible beneficiaries. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that provisions for 
acquiring details of employment have been made at the instance of audit and 
online data of beneficiaries eliminates need for p assbook-style identity 
cards.  
Reply is not acceptable as self -declaration of employment by the workers  
cannot be verified without upkeep of proper identity card and Register of 
beneficiaries by the employers. 
To sum up: 
The GoUP failed to establish a  system for ensuring registration of each 
construction work and verifying employer information. Despite constant 
targets, rate of establishment registration remained low during 2017-22. 
Important conditions of the  Act/Rules were not conveyed to the 
employers through certificate of registration . Moreover, not only  
registration of establishments was delayed in the state, but also the 
issuance of certificates. The GoUP did not transfer the revenue generated 
from the registration of establishments to the Board, even though it was 
collected under the framework of the Rules 2009. 
Further, the Board also did not establish any effective system for ensuring 
registration of each worker as a beneficiary. The government 
departments/local authorities overlooked the provisions of registration of 
establishment and beneficiaries. Despite increased beneficiary 
registration during 2020 -22 due to rebate on registration fee and 
certificate of employment, active members remained low.  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
28 
 
 
 
Recommendation 2: The State Government may consider assigning 
responsibilities to Registering Officers for verifying registration 
certificate and ensuring cent per cent registration of establishments and 
beneficiaries under their area of jurisdiction. 
Recommendation 3:  The State Government should devise a robust 
mechanism for identifying prospective employers , their registration and 
issuance of certificate on time.  
Recommendation 4: The State Government may consider punitive 
measures against the Government officials for non -compliance of 
regulatory and statutory requirements under the Act and the Rules. 
Recommendation 5: Only eligible workers should be allowed to register 
with the Board for availability of scheme benefits to only intended 
beneficiaries. 
Recommendation 6: The State Government may consider revising the 
format of identity card according to the provisions of the Act for proper 
upkeep of details of employments of workers. 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
Assessment, collection and 
transfer of collected cess to 
the Board 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected  
cess to the Board 
This chapter highlights shortcomings in assessment, collection and transfer 
of collected cess to the Board. 
Brief snapshot of the Chapter: 
➢ The status of assessment of cess in the State was deficient as either 
the employers did not submit required return (Form -I) or Assessing 
Officers did not make assessments based on submitted returns.  
➢ The assessment of cess in selected districts ranged from zero to  
24 per cent  of registered establishments  during 2017 -22, as 
assessment was made in respect of only  individual employers , 
ignoring construction work s of G overnment departments/ local 
bodies.  
➢ There was accumulated arrears of ₹ 20.06 crore in four selected 
districts against the cess assessments made during 2017-22.  
➢ The implementation of GIS survey project for identification and 
assessment of properties in five cities of the state, was inefficient due 
to partial serving of bill/notices to the identified properties and non-
realisation of cess of ₹ 1,179.95 crore. 
➢ The six test -checked m unicipalities either did not approve the 
building plan or approved building plan without collection of cess.  
➢ The Cess Collectors did not consider G oods & Services Tax and 
Centage Charges as part of construction work costs, resulting in short 
collection of cess of ₹ 3.66 crore during 2017-22 in selected districts.  
➢ The test-checked Development Authorities also failed to collect cess 
according to estimated cost of work, resulting in sh ort collection of 
cess of ₹ 12.99 crore. 
➢ The Board lacked a mechanism for ensuring the timely transfer of 
collected cess by Cess Collecting Officers to its bank account.  
➢ The lack of  a prescribed accounting system for  cess receipt and 
transfer to the Board  resulted in non-realisation of ₹ 3.88 crore due 
to returned cheques/bank drafts by the banks.  
➢ The cess deposited into treasuries and bank account of the Board, did 
not appear in Public Account of the State, violating Article 266(2) of 
the constitution.  
➢ The State Government also short transferred  ₹ 34.60 crore to the 
Board against cess deposited into treasuries during 2017-22. 
The provisions of the Act, the Cess Act and the Rules 2009 warrant that the 
lawfully imposable cess should be imposed, collected, and put in the 
statutory Welfare fund without any delay , so that the benefits may flow to 
the eligible workers at the earliest.  
However, audit observed that there were many shortfalls in the pro cess of 
assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board, as 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
30 
 
 
 
4.1 Assessment of cess 
Section 3 of the Cess Act requires levy of a cess of at least one per cent of 
the cost of construction incurred by the employer . This is to be collected 
from employer through deduction at source in relation to a building or other 
construction work of a Government or of a public sector undertaking or 
advance collection through a local authority at the time of approval of such 
building or other construction work, subject to final assessment in this 
regard. 
However, audit observed following deficiencies in the pro cess of 
assessment of the cess: 
4.1.1 Return in Form-I not submitted by the employers  
As per the provisions of Section 4 of the Cess Act and Rule 6 of the Cess 
Rules, every employer is required to submit prescribed return  in Form-I to 
the Assessing Officer. This is to be submitted  within 30 days of 
commencement of work for assessment of cess, indicating estimated cost of 
construction. Failure to do so may result in issue of notice by the Assessing 
Officer for furnishing of required return in a specified period. The GoUP 
also directed (February 2014) Assessing Officers to issue registered notices 
to the non-compliant employers for submission of Form-I. 
However, audit observed that in none of the six selected districts, any 
register/record was maintained by the Labour department for Form -I 
submissions and assessment made there against during the period 2017-22. 
Besides, in f our selected districts 30, Form -I were not submitted by the 
employers on their own for assessment of cess, however, ALC/DLC of these 
districts did not issue required notice to the employers of all registered 
establishments. Further, in the selected G B Nagar and Moradabad districts, 
though the employers had submitted a total 7 ,680 and 1 ,369 Form -I 
respectively during the period 2017 -22 along with the due amount of cess 
on the basis of details of Form-I, however, no assessment of cess was made 
by the ALC/DLC in compliance with the provisions of the Cess Act and 
Cess Rules. 
Besides, it was also observed that in none of the selected districts, required 
action was initiated against the employers, who failed to submit Form -I, 
though Rule 15 of the Cess Rules requires sending of such cases to the GoI 
for deciding the further course of action.  
Thus, due of not furnishing of required returns by the employers, assessment 
of cess could not be ensured in most of the cases.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that direction has been 
issued for maintenance of required register for Form I submissions and 
assessments. Further, i n G B Nagar and Moradabad  districts, assessment  
orders are being issued after serving notices to employers , who have 
 
30  Agra, Lucknow, Prayagraj and Varanasi. 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
31 
 
 
 
submitted F orm- I. The State Government also stated that d irections are 
being issued for implementation of Rule 15 of Cess Rules. Further, the State 
Government also intimated that a cess portal ( cessupbocw.in) has been 
developed (February 2023) to streamline the cess collection pro cess, 
wherein provisions for keeping details of Form I, assessment of cess, notice 
etc. have been made. 
4.1.2 Assessment of cess not done by  the Cess Assessment Officers 
other than DLC/ALC 
As per Section 5 of the Cess Act and Rule 7 of the Cess Rules, assessment 
of cess is to be made by the Assessing Officer within six months of receipt 
of Form-I. The Assessing Officers are required to issue an assessment order 
specifying date of payment, amount of cess due, cess already paid by the 
employer or deducted at source and the balance amount payable by the 
employer. This order is to be provided to the employer, the Board and to the 
Cess Collecting Officer within five days of such order. 
To execute related provisions, the GoUP a ppointed (November 2009 and 
September 2010) all District Magistrates and the officers of 16 Government 
departments31 including the ALC/DLC of Labour Department as Cess 
Assessment Officer and Cess Collectors to make them responsible for 
assessment and collection of cess. Moreover, ALC/DLC were also assigned 
to monitor assessment and collection of cess made by these officers. Further, 
the GoUP also appointed (November 2014) Deputy/Assistant Director 
(Factories) and Deputy/ Assistant/Director (Boiler) of the Labour 
Department as Cess Assessment Officer and Cess Collector in their 
respective jurisdictions.  
However, audit observed that the Cess Assessment Officers of the test -
checked units in all selected districts, except the DLC/ALC, did not carry 
out assessments of cess by issuing assessment orders in compliance with the 
provisions of the Cess Act and Rules  and were only functioning as Cess 
Collectors. This led to no t communicating of details of due amount and 
balance amount of cess to the Board officials, when collected cess amount 
was transferred by these Cess Collecting authorities. Moreover, role of these 
authorities as the Cess Collecting Officers was also deficient as discussed in 
succeeding paragraph no. 4.2.1. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that officers from other 
departments were nominated as Cess Assessment Officer and Cess 
Collector only to ensure cess collection for works executed by their 
respective departments.  
 
31  The Secretary (Development Authorities), Executive Engineer (Public Works Department), Executive 
Engineer (Irrigation Department), Executive Engineer (Power Corporation), Secretary (Mandi Parishad), 
Project Manager (UP Bridge Corporation), Executive Engineer (Rajkiya Nirman Nigam), Executive Engineer 
(Rajkiya Nalkup Nigam), Executive Engineer (UP Jal Nigam), Executive Engineer (Samaj Kalyan Nigam), 
Executive Engineer (UP Awas evam Vikas Parishad), Additional/Deputy/ Municipal Commissioner (Nagar 
Nigam), Executive Officer (Municipalities), Block Development Officer, Assistant/Deputy/Additional 
Labour Commissioner (Labour Department) and District Basic Education Officer. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
32 
 
 
 
Reply is not acceptable as notification (September 2010) of the State 
Government assigned assessment responsibilities to officers of various 
Government departments. 
4.1.3 Status of assessment of cess 
The GoUP directed (February 2014) ALC/DLC to make assessment orders 
with help of a specialised committee and after vetting by an Income Tax 
Evaluator. 
Audit observed that i n compliance with the provisions of Section 5 of the 
Cess Act and Rule 7 of the Cess Rules, the ALC/DLC of selected districts 
made some assessment of cess through assessment orders during the period 
2017-22. However, these cases of assessment were minimal compared to 
the number of registered establishments. It was also observed that in four32, 
out of the six selected districts, no register was maintained by the ALC/DLC 
in respect of assessment orders made during the period 2017-22, leading to 
lack of details such as total  number of assessment orders made during the 
period 2017-22, amount of cess assessed and received, balance amount etc. 
However, based on progress reports and register s from ALC/DLC of two 
selected districts 33, the status of cases of assessment of cess vis-a-vis the 
registration of establishments during the period 2017-22 have been detailed 
in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Cases of assessment and registration of establishments during 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
Total no. of 
registered 
establishments 
during 2017-22 
No. of assessment 
orders made during 
2017-22 
Percentage of 
cases of 
assessments  
Agra 2131 467 22 
G B Nagar 18177 02 00 
Lucknow 3951 No Records Maintained - 
Moradabad 1369 No Records Maintained - 
Prayagraj 2464 95 04 
Varanasi 629 154 24 
(Source: Information provided by the DLC/ALC of selected districts) 
It is evident that the cases of assessment of cess ranged between zero to  
24 per cent as against the registered establishments, violating the provisions 
of the Cess Act and Cess Rules requiring assessment of cess in respect of 
every employer.  Further, audit also found that ALC/DLC of selected 
districts only made assessments during 2017 -22 in respect of individual 
employers and neglected assessment of works of the Government 
departments/local authorities. Despite this fact, no monitoring mechanism 
was established by the Board to ensure assessment of each establishment. 
As a result, audit could not ascertain due and balance amount of cess against 
the registered establishments during the period of the year 2017-22. Further, 
it was also observed that  neither the assessments were made by the 
ALC/DLC with the help of specialised committee nor vetted by the Income 
 
32  Agra, G B Nagar Lucknow and Moradabad. 
33  Prayagraj and Varanasi. 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
33 
 
 
 
Tax Evaluator in compliance with the direction of the GoUP, leading to 
deficient assessments as discussed in paragraph no. 4.1.5. Thus, despite 
evolving a mechanism for assessment of cess by appointment of various 
Assessment Officers, it could not be implemented, resulting in non -
assessment of cess in most of the cases. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the directions are 
being issued for maintaining register by the Cess Assessment Officers and 
monitoring is also being done at different levels to ensure cent per  cent 
assessment and collection of cess in respect of all registered establishments. 
The State Government further claimed that deficiencies indicated in  
Table 4.1 has been addressed by the selected districts, but did not submit 
any documentary evidence in this regard.  For Government department 
works, the State Government intimated that an o nline system 
(cessupbocw.in) has been developed (February 2023)  for entering 
assessment details. 
4.1.4 Cess not paid 
As per the provisions of the Cess Act and Cess Rules, employer is liable to 
pay cess by the stipulated date of assessment order.  
However, audit observed that in selected districts, the employers did not pay 
due amount of cess against the assessments  made during the period 2017 -
22 as of March 2023. The status of due and received amount of cess against 
the assessments in the selected districts during the period 2017 -22 is given 
in Table 4.2 below: 
Table 4.2: Details of received cess against the assessments during 2017-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of 
district 
Total amount of 
assessments during the 
period 2017-22 
Received amount 
against the 
assessments 
Balance amount 
Agra 1659.91 484.66 1175.25 
G B Nagar 4.28 4.28 0.00 
Lucknow No Records Maintained No Records 
Maintained 
No Records 
Maintained 
Moradabad No Records Maintained No Records 
Maintained 
No Records 
Maintained 
Prayagraj 972.08 629.96 342.12 
Varanasi 1025.12 535.77 489.35 
Total 3661.39 1654.67 2006.72 
(Source: Information provided by the DLC/ALC of selected districts) 
It is evident from the above that accumulated arrears for cess in selected 
four districts totalled ₹ 20.07 crore, exceeding the received amount. This 
indicated inefficiency of Labour Department in collecting and monitoring 
of compliance of assessment orders. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that in Prayagraj and 
Varanasi districts, Recovery Certificates for ₹ 724.72 lakh have been issued, 
but did not provide any documentary evidence in this regard. Besides, the 
State Government also mentioned initiating Recovery certificate issuance in 
Agra and Moradabad districts.  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
34 
 
 
 
4.1.5 Deficiency in assessments 
The Board issued (December 2018) instructions for assessment of cess, 
based on rates of Central Public Works Department or Public Works 
Department (PWD). 
However, audit observed that the ALC/DLC  of selected districts  applied 
incorrect plinth area rates of the PWD schedule for calculating the cost of 
the construction work, resulting in understatement of the construction cost 
and consequently less assessment and collection of cess amounting to  
₹ 2.95 crore during the period 2017-22, as detailed in Appendix- IV. 
In reply, the State Government, while accepting the audit observation, stated 
(March 2024) that notices have been issued for reassessment of cess in Agra 
district, process for recovery of additional amount of cess is underway in  
G B Nagar  after re-examination of assessment s and re-assessment of cess 
has been done based on revised plinth area rate s of PWD schedule in 
Prayagraj. The State Government also assured that development of a 
Standard Operation Procedure for assessment of cess is underway.  
4.1.6 Implementation of GIS survey 
In accordance with the Board's approval in January 2015, a project was 
initiated to identify and estimate the cost of constructed properties and 
buildings in urban and rural areas of Lucknow, Meerut, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, 
and Noida (including Greater Noida) districts/cities of the State. This 
identification and cost estimation of properties were to be carried out using 
a Geographical Information System (GIS) survey, starting from February 
2009. Agreements were entered into with four private firms/government 
enterprises34 between March 2015 and March 2017 for this purpose, with 
the aim of generating cess equivalent to one per cent of the total cost  of 
construction of properties. 
As per provisions of agreements, the contracted firms were to submit cess 
bills for the properties built after February 2009, based on the survey. 
Subsequent actions such as issuing notices and assessment orders were to 
be undertaken by the relevant ALC/DLC for recovery of cess as per these 
bills. This project was scheduled to be completed within eight months of 
award of work. 
However, audit observed that the contracts were awarded for conducting 
GIS survey without inviting tender s, violating the provisions of the UP 
Procurement Manual 2016. Further, none of the nominated firms had 
completed their assignment within the agreed timeframe 35. The details of 
bills generated and amount thereof vis-à-vis recovery of cess have been 
given in the Table 4.3 below: 
 
34  Science and Technology Entrepreneurs Park, Harcourt Butler Technical Institute (March 2015) for Lucknow; 
M/s Millennium Telecom Ltd. (December 2016) for Meerut and Ghaziabad; Construction Industry 
Development Council (December 2016) for Kanpur and Indian T elephone Industries Ltd. (March 2017) for 
Noida and Greater Noida. 
35  The scheduled completion date of project was eight months from the date of work award. 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
35 
 
 
 
Table 4.3: Showing status of generated bills and recovery of Cess as of January 2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
district 
No. of 
correct 
bills 
generated 
for levy of 
cess 
Amount 
of 
correct 
bills 
No. of 
bills 
served 
through 
notice 
Amount 
of bills 
served 
Amount of 
cess 
recovered 
against 
notices 
Amount of cess 
recovered 
through 
assessment 
orders against 
unserved 
notices 
Amount 
recovered 
through RC 
against the 
outstanding 
assessment 
orders 
Total 
amount 
recovered 
against the 
bills 
(percentage) 
Ghaziabad 2143836 341.94 12901  266.49 22.96  49.18 11.18 83.32 (24) 
Kanpur 2236837 74.51 15401  47.97 12.51 6.66 4.06 23.23 (31) 
Lucknow 41972 160.86 18917  94.48 3.70  22.32 11.98 38.00 (24) 
Meerut 1426038 60.74 10737  36.81 6.98  6.59 0.81 14.38 (24) 
Noida & G 
Noida 
17386 884.56 14165  695.20 156.60  24.82 2.31 183.73 (21) 
Total 117424 1522.61 72121 1140.95 202.75 109.57 30.34 342.66 (23) 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident from the above that the cess amounting to only ₹ 342.66 crore 
was recovered as of January 2023 against the amount of bills of  
₹ 1,522.61 crore, leaving a shortfall of ₹ 1,179.95 crore (7 7 per cent ). 
Further, the  engaged firms submitted not only erroneous bills 39 but also 
failed to serve all correct bills to the individuals; resulting in poor recovery 
of the cess against the assessment. 
Thus, due to pending recovery of levied cess, funds for welfare of labourers 
could not be generated to the desired extent. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that an amount of  
₹ 872.11 crore has been recovered  and process for recovery of remaining 
amount is underway. The State Government also attributed first time 
implementation of GIS survey and unanticipated practical problems towards 
delays. 
Reply is not acceptable as correction of erroneous bills amounting to  
₹ 48.69 lakh and distribution of bills/notices amounting to ₹ 132.29 crore 
were pending at the level of engaged firms  and concerned ALC/DLC as of 
December 2023 even after seven to nine years of the scheduled completion 
date of the GIS survey. 
4.2 Collection of cess 
An effective machinery and full compliance of the provisions the Cess Act 
and Rules are crucial for cess collection. The GoUP appointed various 
authorities as the Cess Assessment and Collecting Officers to establish and 
strengthen the collection machinery . However, non -compliance with 
provisions of the Cess Act and Rules h indered the collection of due cess. 
The audit findings in this regard are as under: 
 
36  Out of 23,761generate bills, only 21,438 bills were found correct. 
37  Out of 22,827 generated bills, only 22,368 bills were found correct. 
38  Out of 16,688 generated bills, only 14,260 bills were found correct. 
39  5,210 bills in Ghaziabad, Kanpur and Meerut districts. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
36 
 
 
 
4.2.1 Delayed or failure to collect cess on approval of building plans 
The GoUP appointed (September 2010/August 2011) the Secretary of 
Development Authority  (DA) and the Executive Officer of Nagar Palika 
Parishad (NPP)/Nagar Panchayat (NP) of the State as the Cess Assessment 
and Collection Officer for collecting cess at the time of approval of the 
building plans.  
However, audit noticed that, in disregard of the provisions of the Cess Rules 
and GoUP orders, the  six Development Authorities under examination 
failed to establish a mechanism for collecting cess based on the estimated 
cost of construction works when sanctioning building plans, till the GoUP 
once again directed (March 2016) them to do so. 
Further, as per the provisions of the Section 178 to 180 (read with Section 
298) of the UP Municipalities Act 1916, NPPs/NPs of the State are 
empowered to approve building plans after making required bye-laws in this 
regard. However, audit observed that ou t of the six NPPs/NPs examined, 
four40 of them did not f ormulate required bye -laws for approving the 
building plans , leading to non-approval of building plans by three 
NPPs/NPs41. In the case of NPP Dadari in G B Nagar district, eight building 
plans were approved between September 2020 and February 2023 without 
formulation of bye-laws and without levy and collection of cess. Moreover, 
in remaining two NPPs/NPs 42, where bye-laws were formulated, a total of 
422 maps43 were approved during the years 2017 -22 without the levy and 
collection of cess. This indicated a lack of oversight by designated officers 
in collecting cess, resulting in a loss of revenue for the Board. 
Thus, due to not implementing or delayed implementation of the provisions 
of the Cess Act and Rules  by the authorities responsible for approving 
building plans, many establishments may have remained outside of cess net. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that an online portal has 
been introduced for real time collection of cess from DA. Further, the State 
Government stated that matter has been referred (January 2024) to the Urban 
Development Department for ensuring advance cess collection at the time 
of approval of building maps by the Municipalities of the state. 
4.2.2 Shortfalls in collection of cess 
The Cess Collecting Officers did not collect/deduct due cess from the 
individual employers or bills of contractors, the details of which are 
discussed below: 
 
40  NP (Bakshi ka Talab); Lucknow, NP (Gangapur); Varanasi, NPP (Dadri); G B Nagar, and NP (Lalgopalganj); 
Prayagraj. 
41  NP (Bakshi ka Talab); Lucknow, NP (Gangapur); Varanasi and NP (Lalgopalganj); Prayagraj. 
42  NPPs Thakurdwara (Moradabad) and Shamshabad (Agra). 
43  NPP Thakurdwara (Moradabad): 199 maps during 2019-22, though no records were maintained for the period 
2017-19 and NPP (Shamshabad) Agra: 223 maps during 2017-22. 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
37 
 
 
 
4.2.2.1 Not including GST and centage charges in the cost of work 
The GoUP directed (February 2010) the Government departments/Public 
Sector Undertaking/Local Authorities to deduct cess from contractors’ bills 
alike Income tax. After implementation (July 2017) of Good and Service 
Tax (GST), the GoUP reaffirmed this direction and further instructed 
(November 2017) to deduct cess after adding GST to cost of work. Besides, 
the Secretary of the Board also decided (October 2011) to include Centage 
Charges in construction cost for cess calculation. 
However, audit observed that the test -checked units did not comply with 
orders of the GoUP and deducted cess from the contractor’s bills without 
including amount of GST in cost of work. As a result, ₹ 2.49 crore could not 
be realised on account of cess as detailed in Appendix-V. 
Besides, out of the 12 test-checked units related with the execution of work, 
seven units44 received ₹ 116.53 crore on account of Centage Charges from 
the other departments or their own works during the period 2017 -22. 
However, these Centage Charges were not included in cost of the works, 
resulting in non-collection of ₹ 1.17 crores as cess (Appendix-VI). 
Thus, due to not observance of orders of the GoUP/Board, due amount of 
cess could not be deducted from contractor’s bills. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that since GST is a tax, 
imposition of cess on tax does not seem to be proper.  
Reply is not acceptable as the GoUP did not issue any order to this effect.  
4.2.2.2 Not deducting cess from the contractors bill 
In accordance with Section 3 (1) of the Cess Act, the Government 
departments/local authorities are required to deduct cess equivalent to one 
per cent of the cost of the construction work from the bills of contractors.  
However, audit observed that out of the 12 units examined in connection 
with the execution of works, five units45 failed to deduct cess amounting to 
₹ 2.21 crore from the contractor’s bills during the period 2017 -22. This 
omission occurred in relation to 4 43 vouchers for the payment of 
construction works totalling ₹ 220.95 crore. Similarly, in three NPPs/NPs46, 
out of six test-checked NPPs/NPs, cess amounting to ₹ 34.85 lakh was not 
deducted from 2 23 vouchers for the payment of construction work 
amounting to ₹ 34.85 crore to the contractors during the period 2017 -20. 
This highlights a lack of oversight in ensuring cess deductions. 
The State Government did not offer (March 2024) any comment is this 
regard. 
 
44  CD-I (Taj Trapezium) Agra, PD (PWD) Agra, Head works division (Okhala)G B Nagar, World Bank division 
(PWD) Moradabad, CD (Kumbh Mela), Prayagraj and CD-I (PWD) Prayagraj. 
45  PD (PWD) Varanasi, CD -3(PWD) Varanasi, PD (PWD) Agra, CD -4 (Kumbh Mela), Prayagraj and CD -I 
(PWD), Prayagraj. 
46  NPP; Dadri (G B Nagar), NPP; Shamshabad (Agra) and NP; Bakshi ka Talab (Lucknow). 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
38 
 
 
 
4.2.2.3 Less collection of cess  
As per provisions of Rule 4(4) of the Cess Rules, advance cess at the notified 
rates on the estimated cost of construction is to be collected at the time of  
approval of a construction work by a local authority.  
The GoUP implemented (June 2019) Online Building Plan Approval 
System (OBPAS) in D A of the State for approval of building plans. Audit 
observed that in the test -checked five D A47, a total 9,825 building plans 
having estimated construction cost of ₹ 3,515.44 crore were approved 
during the period 2019 -22 through OBPAS. In respect of these approved 
maps, cess of only ₹ 22.16 crore, as against the due cees of 35.15 crore, was 
collected by the concerned D A from the employers , resulting in short 
collection of cess amounting to ₹ 12.99 crore, as detailed in Appendix-VII. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that a proper system has 
been developed through online portal for cess collection and instructions are 
being issued to concerned authorities to ensure actual cess collection. 
4.2.3 Cost of construction not calculated on uniform rates 
The GoI  directed (October 2018) for adoption of a uniform mechanism 
based on rates of the PWD/Municipal/ local authority for calculating  
construction cost to collect advance cess uniformly at the time of approval 
of building plans.  Accordingly, the Board issued (December 2018) 
instructions for assessment of cess based on rates of Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD) or PWD.  
However, audit observed that the test-checked DA (except YEIDA48 of G B 
Nagar) adopted different rates49 during the period 2017-22 for this purpose. 
The rates used by these DA were based on circle area rate of District 
Magistrate, issued for determining the cost of construction for levy of stamp 
duty on sale deed of transfer of immovable properties.  Additionally, the 
ALC/DLC of these selected districts made assessments during the period 
2017-22 on the basis of plinth area rates of PWD schedule. This resulted in 
inconsistent assessment of construction cost by DA and Labour department 
officials.  
Moreover, it was also observed that circle rates did not include  additional 
construction cost for internal and external services ranging from 23 to  
34.25 per cent as provided in plinth area rate of PWD schedule. As a result, 
there was underestimation of construction cost by the DA. 
Thus, not calculating the cost of construction works on uniform rates in the 
state resulted in less collection of cess. 
 
47  Agra, Lucknow, Moradabad, Prayagraj and Varanasi. 
48  Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority, wherein no mechanism was established for 
collection of advance Cess at the time of approval of buildings plans and employers directly deposited 
advance Cess to the ALC/DLC prior to the approval of the maps by the DA. 
49  Agra (₹ 14500 per meter2 for the period 2017-22), Lucknow (₹ 20000 per meter2), Moradabad (w.e.f. August 
2017; ₹ 13000 per meter2 and w.e.f. August 2019; ₹ 14000 per meter2), Varanasi ((₹ 15635 per meter2 for the 
period 2017-22) and Prayagraj (₹ 18000 per meter2 for the period 2017-22). 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
39 
 
 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that directions were 
issued (December 2018) for assessment of cess on the basis of scheduled 
rates of PWD  or CPWD or evaluation report of registered evaluators of 
Income Tax department.  
Reply is not acceptable as there is a  lack of uniformity in application of 
rates. 
4.2.4 Deduction of collection  charges without working out actual 
expenditure on collection of cess 
As per Rule 5 of the Cess Rules, the proceeds of cess are required to be 
transferred by Government departments, PSUs, and local authorities to the 
Board. They are allowed to deduct actual collection expenses  up to  
one per cent of the total collected amount or claim these expenses from the 
Board. 
However, audit observed that neither the GoUP nor the Board issued 
instructions on deduction of collection expenses from cess proceeds. 
Further, no system was in place for claiming of collection expenses from the 
Board. Despite this, four DA 50 that were examined deducted one per cent 
collection expenses amounting to ₹ 105.36 lakh from cess collected by them 
during 2017-22. These deductions were made in respect of cess proceeds of 
approval of building plans either by accepting the total amount of cess or 
one per cent of the levied cess into their own bank accounts, and without 
working out any actual expenditure on cess collection. 
Therefore, the deduction of collection expenses, without working out  
corresponding expenditure, was not as per Rule 5 of the Cess Rules . 
Moreover, accepting the cess into their own bank accounts by the DA  also 
violates the provisions of the Cess Rules, as these rules require the collection 
of cess through a crossed bank draft made in favour of the Board.  
The State Government replied (March 2024) that a system has been 
developed to transfer collected cess by the DA directly into the bank account 
of the Board from OBPAS, eliminating the need for collection charges.  
Reply of the State Government is silent regarding deduction of collection 
charges by some Cess collecting authorities  as no directives ha ve been 
issued to address the issue. 
4.3 Transfer of collected cess to the Board 
Section 3 of the Cess Act and Rule 5 of the Cess Rules require cess 
collecting authorities to transfer collected cess to the Board within 30 days 
of its collection.  
However, audit observed that there was no mechanism  in place to ensure 
timely transfer of collected cess to the Board. Scrutiny of records of test -
checked units revealed that collected cess were either not transferred or 
 
50  Lucknow (₹ 88.21 lakh), Moradabad (₹ 1.39 lakh), Prayagraj (₹ 10.67 lakh) and Varanasi (₹ 5.09 lakh). 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
40 
 
 
 
transferred to the Board with delays. The audit findings in this regard are as 
under: 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that an online system 
has been developed to avoid delays in this regard. 
4.3.1 Collected cess not transferred to the Board 
The GoI directed (October 2018) strict adherence to Section 3 of the Cess 
Act and Rule 5 of the Cess Rules and recommended taking suitable action 
against non-compliant cess collectors. Accordingly, the GoUP instructed 
(January 2019) Cess Collecting Officers to deposit collected cess to the 
Board on time and provide details of establishments  from which cess was 
collected. Besides, the GoUP  also directed initiating legal action against 
non-compliant Cess Collecting Officers.  
Audit observed that the Cess Collecting Officers within the six units51 under 
scrutiny failed to transfer cess amounting to ₹ 84.64 crore, collected during 
2017-22, to the Board as of March 2023  (as detailed in Appendix-VIII). 
Furthermore, no action was taken by the Board against non-compliant Cess 
Collecting Officers. This indicates the absence of a system for reconciling 
cess deductions and collections, as well as the subsequent transfer of these 
funds to the Board. 
It was also observed that the Cess Collecting Officers, except those from the 
Labour Department , did not provide details of employers such as 
registration number of establishment, cost of construction work, due and 
collected amount of cess etc. along with the cess transferred to the Board. 
As a result, officials of the Board could not ensure correctness of cess 
transferred. 
Thus, absence of a reconciliation mechanism raised concerns about potential 
loss of revenue to Board and diversion of collected cess by the Cess 
Collecting Officers. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that requests have been 
made to concerned DA for transfer of collected cess to the Board and a real 
time cess collection system has been developed through OBPAS. 
4.3.2 Delayed transfer of collected cess to the Board 
The GoI  directed (October 2018) State Governments to ensure timely 
transfer of collected cess to the Board and asserted for initiating penal action 
in case of non-compliance of prescribed timeline of 30 days. 
However, audit observed that among the six DA that were examined, four52 
of them transferred the collected cess amounting to ₹ 29.48 crore during the 
period 2017-22 to the Board with delays ranging from one to 31 months, as 
detailed in Appendix-IX. This resulted in a loss of accrued interest  to the 
Board. 
 
51  Development Authorities of the Agra, Lucknow, Moradabad and Varanasi districts, Yamuna Expressway 
Industrial Development Authority (G B Nagar) and NP Lalgopalganj (Prayagraj). 
52  Agra, Moradabad, Prayagraj and Varanasi. 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
41 
 
 
 
Besides, the GoI also directed (October 2018) State Boards to ensure proper 
cess collection from Indian Railways. However, instances were found in 
audit that cess collection from Indian Railways was not proper as in selected 
Prayagraj District, no cess was collected from Indian Railways prior to the 
period of July 2020 . Besides, cess of ₹ 5.11 crore deducted by the Indian  
Railways within the Prayagraj region, during the period of July 2020 to June 
2022, was transferred to the Board with a delay of one to 24 months. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that communications 
have been made with concerned authorities in this regard. 
Reply is not acceptable as corrective measures have not been taken by the 
State Government. 
4.4 Accounting of cess 
The GoUP or Board did not prescribe proper accounting system for receipts 
of cess and its transfer to the Board. This is not only important for recording 
the financial transactions and upkeep of proper records but also for ensuring 
checks on pilferage and delays in transfer of funds to the Board . The audit 
observations in this regard are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that Board has decided 
procedure for receipt and transfer of cess to Board , and maintenance of 
accounts along with audit of a ccounts are  being ensured in all districts.  
However, no documentary evidence was provided by the State Government 
in this regard. 
4.4.1 Transactions outside of the Government Account 
Article 266(2) of the Constitution of India states that all other public funds 
received by or on behalf of the Government of a State should be credited to 
the Public Account of the State. Additionally, Rule 5 of the Cess Rules 
specifies that collected cess should be transferred to the head of account of 
the Board under the State's accounting procedure. Consequently, collected 
cess should initially appear in the Public Account before being transferred 
to the Board's bank account. 
However, audit noted that the GoUP permitted the opening of a savings bank 
account for the Board in any nationalized bank's Lucknow Branch in March 
2010. Subsequently, the GoUP decided  (August 2011 ) to u se heads of 
account 0230 (Labour & Employment) - 800 (Other receipts)-11 (Receipts 
under BOCW Act)- 00 (Labour Cess) for depositing collected cess into the 
treasury. Besides, as per the instructions (December 2012) of the GoUP, 
deposited amounts under above heads of accounts were to be transferred to 
the Board's bank account for expenditure on welfare of workers. To 
facilitate the transfer, the GoUP employed heads of account 2230 (Labour 
& Employment) -01(Labour receipts) -111(social security of labourers) -04 
(refund of amount deposited for the fund of BOCW) under the Grant 76, for 
making necessary budget provisions. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
42 
 
 
 
It is important to note that the heads of account designated by the GoUP for 
cess transactions were outside the Public Account of the State, which is 
inconsistent with the provisions of Article 266(2) of the Constitution of 
India.  
However, the GoUP later directed (August 2013 and September 2016) to 
deposit cess amount directly into the Board's bank account. Despite the fact, 
many Cess Collecting Officers continued to deposit the cess amount into 
treasuries, though major portion of cess proceeds during the period 2017-22  
(₹ 4,483.63 crore out of ₹ 4,559.09 crore) was directly deposited into the 
bank account of the Board. 
Thus, depositing cess directly to the Board's bank account without bringing 
it into Government Accounts, violates the provisions of Article 266 of the 
Constitution and the Cess Rules, 1998. This made it unfeasible to determine 
the amount of cess collected and transferred to the Board through 
Government Accounts. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the Board has been 
empowered to open and operate bank account and that the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India has also ordered to deposit cess into the Board's bank account. 
While agreeing with the authority of the Board, it is required that all public 
money received by or on behalf of the State Government should be credited 
with Public Account before being transferred to Board's bank account. 
4.4.2 Not transferring of cess deposited into treasuries to the Board 
As discussed in paragraph 4.4.1 above, the pro cess of transferring 
deposited cess from treasuries to the Board's bank account involves budget 
route of the GoUP. This process necessitates the certification of challans by 
the respective treasuries through which cess amounts were initially 
deposited and accounted for under the prescribed heads of account. 
However, audit noted that either due to insufficient budget provision under 
Grant 76 for refund of cess amounts to the Board by the GoUP or failure to 
certify the challans by the treasuries, cess amounts deposited into treasuries 
during the period 2017-22 could not be transferred to the Board, as detailed 
in Table 4.4 below: 
Table 4.4:Transfer of cess amount deposited into treasuries to the Board  
during 2017-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Amount of 
cess with 
treasuries in 
the 
beginning of 
the FY 
Amount of 
cess received 
by treasuries 
during the 
year 
Amount of 
budget 
provision for 
refund of 
collected 
cess 
Amount 
transferred to 
the bank 
account of the 
Board 
Closing 
Balance 
2017-18 2927.17 769.09 3696.26 3696.26 00.00 
2018-19 00.00 1472.34 1000.00 1000.00 472.34 
2019-20 472.34 1198.12 1000.00 873.21 797.25 
2020-21 797.25 838.77 1000.00 1000.00 636.02 
2021-22 636.02 3802.03 1000.00 977.77 3460.29 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
43 
 
 
 
It is evident that due to less provisioning of budget and certification 
requirements, ₹ 34.60 crore could not be transferred to the Board at the end 
of March 2022.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that during the  year 
2022-23, ₹ 40.10 crore was transferred from treasuries to the Board's bank 
account and that the repeated orders have been issued for depositing cess 
directly into the Board's bank account.  
Reply is not acceptable as at the end of the financial year 2022 -23, cess 
amounting to ₹ 36.09 crore was pending at the Government level for transfer 
into the Board's bank account.  
4.4.3 Inadequate accounting of receipts of cess 
Audit observed that the Board has not established a system for the proper 
accounting of cess receipts, both at the district -level offices and at the 
Board's headquarters. In absence of specific guidelines, a register was 
maintained in the offices of the ALC/DLC of selected districts (except 
Prayagraj53) to record the details of cheques/demand drafts received from 
Cess Collecting Officers and individuals during the period 2017 -22. 
However, due to direct online transfers of cess by individuals into Board's 
bank account , the entries in this register were often incomplete. This 
occurred because there was no established system to provide real -time 
notifications of online transactions to the Board authorities. Besides, 
monthly reconciliation of the register's total with the bank statement  was 
also not done in any of the selected districts. 
This situation suggests that the  Board relied solely on bank statements  for 
accounting of cess and did not verify the accuracy of collected and deposited 
amounts. This lack of verification is further evident in the absence of records 
maintained by Board officials to track due cess amounts, and the amounts 
deposited by cess collectors/individuals against these dues. 
Audit further observed that many cheques/demand drafts received on 
account of cess and deposited in to bank account by the authorities of the 
Board, were returned by the bank during the period 2017-22. The details of 
returned cheques/demand drafts and amount recovered there against in the 
selected districts during the period 2017 -22 are given in the Table 4.5 
below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53  No register was maintained for the period 2019-22. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
44 
 
 
 
Table 4.5: Details of returned cheques/demand drafts and amount recovered there 
against during 2017-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of 
District 
No. of 
cheques/demand 
drafts returned 
by the banks 
during the 
period of 2017-
22 
Amount of 
returned 
cheques/demand 
drafts by the 
banks 
No. of 
cheques/demand 
draft received 
back from the 
employers 
Amount of 
received back 
cheques/demand 
drafts 
Amount 
not 
recovered 
from the 
employers 
Agra 09 05.60 00 00.00 5.60 
G B Nagar 16 299.21 16 299.21 0.00 
Lucknow 189 674.78 149 589.94 84.83 
Moradabad 18 10.18 02 01.05 09.13 
Prayagraj 65 146.08 00 00.00 146.08 
Varanasi 55 347.53 06 205.08 142.45 
Total 352 1483.38 173 1095.28 388.09 
(Source: Information provided by the DLC/ALC of selected districts) 
It is evident from the above that ₹ 3.88 crore could not be recovered in the 
selected districts on account of returned cheques/demand drafts. Besides, 
audit also found instances of return of cheques/demand drafts by the banks 
at the headquarters of the Board , but due to non -maintenance of records, 
amount involved could not be ascertained i n audit. This situation suggests 
that there were potential errors in accounting of cess. 
It was also observed that in selected Prayagraj district, 97 cheques of  
₹ 262.17 lakh were received in the office of the ALC/DLC between 
November 2017 and April 2022, though not deposited into the bank account 
of Board up to the month of September 2022. Due to this delay , these 
cheques became time barred , and against these time barred cheques only  
₹ 145.89 lakh was recovered as of June 2023. Besides, due to non -
maintenance of any register in this regard during the period 2019-22, status 
of deposition of other received cheques/drafts in the bank account of the 
Board by the officials of the ALC/DLC Prayagraj, could not be ascertained 
in audit. 
Further, a s per the directions ( October 2018 ) of the GoI, the Board is 
required to maintain complete break -up of each source of welfare fund 
including the amount of penalty received on account of delay or less 
payment of cess. However, in absence of accounting system, such data was 
not available at the headquarters of the Board, though required under the 
directions of the GoI for presenting the true financial position of the Board. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that Cess Deposit 
register, which was not maintained during 2019-22 in Prayagraj district, has 
been maintained  and assured that required action would be taken after 
getting the details of returned cheques/bank drafts. 
4.4.4 Data of cess receipts not processed 
Audit observed that the Board received cess proceeds in the form of 
cheques, demand drafts, or through RTGS/NEFT from employers and cess 
collecting authorities but did not process this data for the purpose of cess 

 
 
 
Chapter IV: Assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Board  
45 
 
 
 
assessment, registration of establishments and the workers employed 
therein. Further, the Board failed to maintain a comprehensive database of 
construction works undertaken in the State. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that system has been 
developed for recognition of establishment s, assessment and collection of 
cess and that the online database is being prepared through coordination 
with different Government departments. 
To sum up: 
The GoUP  and the Board did not establish a mechanism to ensure the 
submission of Form -I by employers,  hindering the cess assessment 
process. This led to ineffective performance by the Cess Assessing 
Officers and limited cess assessments. Besides, lack of proper monitoring 
prevented the recovery of assessed cess amounts from employers. 
The Cess Collecting Officers exhibited a lackadaisical approach to cess 
collection, either not collect ing cess at all or collected insufficient 
amounts. Additionally, they also did not adhere to the directives issued by 
the GoUP/Board . Moreover, the absence of a standardized rate for 
calculating construction cost also contributed to the shortfall in cess 
realisation. 
The Cess Collecting Officers either did not transfer the collected cess to 
the Board or did so with significant delays. Besides, the GoUP/Board did 
not prescribe any accounting policies to ensure the proper accounting of 
cess receipts, and these transactions were not accounted for under the 
Public Account of the State.  
Recommendation 7: The State Government needs to introduce a system 
to monitor submission of required return (Form -I) by the employers and 
processing of returns within the stipulated time. 
Recommendation 8: The State Government should ensure that all Cess 
Assessment Officers assess cess in accordance with the Cess Act and 
Rules and adop t uniform rates for calculating construction cost across 
the state. 
Recommendation 9: The State Government should ensure assessment of 
cess for works of the Government departments/ local bodies along with 
the individuals. 
Recommendation 10: The State Government should introduce a system 
for approval of building plans with levy and realisation of cess at the local 
Government level. 
Recommendation 11: The State Government must develop a mechanism 
for reconciliation of collected cess and ensure that cess receipts are made 
part of the Public Account of State Government and are transferred to the 
Board on time. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-V 
Safety and Health of Workers 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Safety and Health of Workers 
This chapter discusses issues related to safety and health of workers. 
Brief snapshot of the chapter:  
➢ The compliance of provisions related with safety and health of workers 
was deficient in the  selected districts. The employers failed to submit 
safety policy to the Chief Inspector  and information regarding 
constitution of safety committee and appointment of Safety officer  was 
not available with Labour Department. 
➢ The inspections conducted during 2017 -22 in selected districts for 
ensuring the compliance to provisions of safety and health of workers 
were negligible against the registered establishments  and there was no  
standardised format for issuing inspection notes.  
➢ There was no established system for providing workplace accident notice 
by the employers, leading to lack of investigation in  each case of 
accidents during 2017-22.  
➢ The lack of coordination among the Labour Department authorities 
hindered both accident inquiries and compensation payment to the 
deceased/injured workers of many accidental cases. 
➢ Required clauses for  ensuring safety and health of workers were not 
included in agreements executed with contractors for construction works 
during 2017-22.  
➢ The safety provisions of National Building Code of India  2016 and 
Indian Standard Safety Code for Scaffolds and Ladders , were not 
followed for ensuring safety and welfare of workers. 
The Act aims to ensure safety, health, and welfare measures for workers. 
Chapter VII of the Act outlines provisions in this regard, including Section 40 
requiring the State Governments to formulate rules concerning safety 54 and 
health of workers. These rules are expected to ensure the safety, health, and 
well-being of workers while they are engaged in their duties. Accordingly, the 
GoUP enacted comprehensive regulations from Rule 60 to Rule 252 under 
Rules 2009 to guarantee safety and health of workers at worksites.  Besides, 
Section 44 of the Act and Rule 250 of the Rules 2009, also held employers 
accountable for safety, health and welfare of engaged workers. Moreover, for 
effective implementation of these p rovisions, concept of an adequate 
enforcement machinery is also provided in the Act and Rules 2009.  
Rules 253 to 255  of the Rules 2009 empowers Inspectors for effectively 
enforcing the provisions of the Act and Rules . The Labour Commissioner of 
GoUP also made (October 2010) Inspectors of the Director (Factories) 55 
responsible for ensuring safety and health of workers. However, audit observed 
following shortfalls in observance of provisions in this regard: 
  
 
54  Including provisions for necessary equipment and appliances for the protection of workers during their 
employment. 
55  A division of Labour Department of the GoUP. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
48 
 
 
 
5.1 Safety Policy not submitted by employers/contractors 
Section 40(2)(r) of the Act requires employers and contractors to frame a safety 
policy outlining the necessary measures for ensuring the safety and health of 
workers during building or construction operations. Rule 216 of the Rules 2009 
further mandates that establishments with fifty or more workers must prepare a 
written safety and health policy and submit this policy in triplicate to the Chief 
Inspector, with a copy to relevant Inspector of the area or local authority. 
However, audit observed that in none of the selected districts eligible employers 
and contractors submitted copies of their safety policy to the Inspectors or local 
labour department authorities. This indicates a failure on their part to formulate 
such policy. Additionally, it was observed that the issue of not framing of safety 
policy by the employers was also not brought to the forefront during inspections 
in the selected districts, with the exception of Lucknow.  Thus, not submitting 
the safety policy by the employers and contractors indicated that the Inspectors 
failed to enforce required arrangements to ensure safety and health of workers. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that no safety policies were 
received in regional offices of Agra, Moradabad and Varanasi districts, but  
71 establishments submitted the same in regional offices of G B Nagar, 
Lucknow and Prayagraj districts. Further, the State Government also stated that 
instructions have been issued (January 2024) to Assistant Director (Factor ies) 
to ensure display of safety policy at construction site, aware employers about  
submission requirements and to take note of it during inspections. 
Reply is not acceptable as the employers are required to submit safety policy 
directly to the Chief Inspector with  a copy to the relevant Inspector. Besides,  
71 safety policies received in three selected districts during the period 2017-22 
(as intimated by the State Government) lacked significance as these were not 
submitted to the Chief Inspector, were not authenticated by the employers, and 
did not address key requirements such as institutional mechanism to implement 
the policy, stakeholders’ responsibilities, risk assessment techniques and 
methods, training arrangement for  all engaged persons  etc., as mandated by 
Rules 2009. 
5.2 Deficient role of Inspectors  
Rule 254 of the Rules 2009 empowers the Inspectors to issue show cause notice 
or warning to employers regarding safety, health or welfare of workers. Besides, 
an Inspector may also direct contractor or employer to arrange medical 
examinations for engaged workers . Further, Rule 255 of Rules 2009  allows 
Inspector to issue prohibition order for dangerous building and construction 
works, until required measures are taken by the employers. 
However, audit observed that very few inspections were conducted by the 
Inspectors of the Director (Factories) against registered establishments in the 
selected districts during the period 2017 -22. As a result, powers conferred to 
them for enforcing safety and health provisions could not be fully utilised. The 
details of these inspections are given in Table 5.1 below: 
 

 
 
 
Chapter V: Safety and Health of Workers 
49 
 
 
 
Table 5.1: Details of inspections in the selected districts during the period 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
No. of registered 
establishments 
during the period 
2017-22 
No. of establishments inspected by 
the Inspectors of Director 
(Factories) during the period  
2017-22 
Percentage of 
inspected 
establishments 
Agra 2131 27 1.27 
G B Nagar 18177 267 1.47 
Lucknow 3951 28 0.71 
Moradabad 1369 38 2.78 
Prayagraj 2464 02 0.08 
Varanasi 629 00 0.00 
(Source: Information provided by the Assistant Director, Factories of the selected districts) 
It is evident from the above that in selected districts, number of inspections 
conducted by the Inspectors of the Director (Factories) to ensure workers’ safety 
and health was negligible  against the registered establishments . I n Varanasi 
district, no inspections were done during 2017-22, indicating a deficient role of 
Inspectors in enforcing the provisions of the Act and the Rules 2009.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that inspections were 
conducted in Lucknow (47) and Varanasi (one) districts during 2017-22 and that 
the efforts are being made to fill the vacant posts (42.11 per cent) in cadre of 
Assistant Director (Factories) for efficient inspections.  
Reply is not acceptable as the Assistant Director (Factories) of Lucknow and 
Varanasi districts lacked proper records and inflated the inspection numbers by 
including inquiries/investigations of accidents at worksites and figures from 
other district(s). 
Deficiencies of Inspections 
Audit observed following deficiencies in conducting inspections for ensuring 
safety and health of workers: 
• Inspectors issued instructions to employers through inspection notes to 
ensure workers safety and health in selected districts, where inspections were 
conducted during 2017 -22. However, instance of issuing directions  requiring 
medical examination of workers or issuing  prohibitory orders were not 
available. 
• Inspection register was not updated in any of the selected districts for 
recording status of compliance of inspection notes, imposition of penalties or 
initiation of prosecution for non-compliance of provisions of the Act and Rules, 
etc. As a result, audit could not ascertain the status of compliance of inspection 
notes. 
• The Chief Inspector did not devise any standardise d format for issuing 
inspection notes by the Inspectors of the Director (Factories) for covering all 
aspects of workers safety and health, leading to incomplete observations in this 
regard. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that directions for medical 
examination of workers are issued during inspections and Inspectors may also 
issue prohibitory orders. Further, the State Government also issued instructions 
to update inspection registers and stated that finalisation of a check list for 
conducting inspections is under process.  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
50 
 
 
 
Reply is not acceptable as no documentary evidence in respect of directions for 
medical examination and prohibit ory orders were made available with 
Government reply.  
5.3 Constitution of Safety Committee not ensured 
As per Se ction 38(1) of the Act, establishment s with five hundred or more 
workers are required to establish a safety committee. This committee should 
consist of a specified number of representatives from both the employer and the 
workers, as prescribed by the State Government. Accordingly, Rule 218 of the 
Rules 2009, prescribes the formation of a safety committee, to identify potential 
causes and address workplace accidents and unsafe practices. This committee 
is also responsible for recommending corrective actions, including provision of 
first aid and medical welfare facilities. 
Audit observed that though the GoUP had made provisions for constitution of 
safety committee, but it did not specify actual number of representatives of both 
employer and workers for constituti ng the same. Besides, audit also observed 
that in none of the selected districts, neither the information regarding the 
constitution of safety committee by the eligible employers was available with 
the ALC/DLC nor any observation regarding safety committee was found in the 
inspection note of the Inspector of the Director (Factories). It was also observed 
that no instructions were issued to eligible employers by the labour department 
for ensuring the constitution of the safety committee on the basis of information 
of registration of establishments. As a result, constitution of safety committee 
by the eligible employers could not be ensured for preventing accident at work 
site.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that directions are being 
issued for better coordination with the Registering Officers of establishments, 
to ensure availability of information of eligible establishments in this regard to 
the Assistant Director (Factories). The State Government also added that issue 
of safety committee constitution has been incorporated into the proposed check 
list of inspections to ensure strict compliance of provision of the Act and Rules.  
5.4 Appointment of Safety Officer not ensured 
As per Section 38(2) of the Act, employers of establishments with 500 or more 
workers are mandated to designate a Safety Officer, for carrying out duties 
prescribed by the State Governments in this regard. Rule 219 of the Rules 2009, 
mandates employers to appoint a Safety Officer. Employers are also required to 
inform the relevant Inspector of this appointment . Duties of Safety Officer 
include ensuring a safe working environment at the worksites to prevent worker 
injuries and investigate accidents or occupational diseases. Besides, as per Rule 
219(3) smaller employers may collaborate to appoint a common Safety Officer 
for their group, with prior permission of the Chief Inspector. Consequently, the 
appointment of a Safety Officer was made mandatory by the GoUP. 
However, audit observed that in selected districts, neither the intimation of 
appointment of Safety Officer was available with the Inspectors for the period 
2017-22 nor status of appointment of Safety Officer was commented upon by 

 
 
 
Chapter V: Safety and Health of Workers 
51 
 
 
 
them during the inspections. As a result, appointment of Safety Officer for 
ensuring the safety and health of workers at work sites, could not be ensured.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that directions have been 
issued to Assistant Directors (Factories) to ensure appointment of Safety Officer 
and that the issue has also been included in proposed check list for inspections.  
5.5 Reporting of accident cases and inquiry thereof 
As per Section 39 of the Act, in case of any accident at worksite causing death 
or bodily injury56to workers, the employer shall give notice immediately thereof 
to such authority for investigation or inquiry of accident, in such form and 
within such time as may be prescribed by the State Government in this regard.  
Accordingly, Rule 251 of Rules 2009 prescribes that the notice of accident will 
be provided by the concerned employer in Form 24 to the Chief Inspector, 
Board, District Magistrate, Inspector and to the in-charge of nearest police 
station within 12 hours of fatal accidents and 72 hours  of other accidents. As 
per provisions of Rule 252, the Chief Inspector or an officer appointed by him 
may investigate the se cases of accidents . Further, Rule 53 of Rules 2009 also 
requires employers to submit an annual return to the Registering officer in Form 
15 detailing workplace accidents.  
However, audit observed that in selected districts , employers did not provide 
notice of accidents to the Inspectors of the Director (Factories) and to the 
ALC/DLC being the functionary of the Board, as required under the provisions 
of the Act and Rules. No action was initiated against the employers, who failed 
to report accidents. As a result,  actual number of cases of accidents at 
workplaces during 2017-22 in selected districts, was not on records.  
Audit further observed that based on complaints or media report s, some cases 
of accidents at work places were investigated by the Inspectors of the Director 
(Factories) in the selected districts. The status of investigation of these cases has 
been given in the Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: Showing details of accident cases and inquiry therein in selected districts 
during 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
No. of accident cases at work sites 
during 2017 -22 as per the 
information of the Assistant 
Director (Factories) of selected 
districts 
No. of cases, 
wherein notice of 
accident was 
provided by the 
employer  
No. of cases 
taken up for 
the inquiry 
Agra 04 00 04 
G B Nagar 35 05 35 
Moradabad 00 00 00 
Lucknow 04 00 04 
Prayagraj 01 00 01 
Varanasi 01 01 01 
(Source: Information provided by the Assistant Director, Factories of the selected districts) 
 
56  So that the person injured is prevented from working for a period of forty-eight hours or more. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
52 
 
 
 
The above Table shows that as per  information of the Assistant Director 
(Factories) of the selected districts, all available cases of accident at workplaces 
during 2017-22 were investigated by the Inspectors.  
However, audit observed five instances of accidents at workplaces in selected  
Agra (one case) , Moradabad (one case) and Varanasi  (three cases) districts 
during 2017-22, again through media reports, where required inquiry was not 
conducted by the Inspectors of the Director (Factories). The details of such 
instances have been given in Appendix-X. This indicated that due to lack 
attention f rom the Inspectors of the Director (Factories)  and failure of the 
employers to report accidents, many cases of workplace accidents could not be 
investigated.  
Audit further observed that the employers also did not submit Annual Returns 
to the ALC/DLC detailing cases of accident at work sites in selected districts 
during the period 2017 -22. Besides, audit also observed lack of co -ordination 
among the district authorities of the Labour and Factories in respect of exchange 
of information related with these accidents, which in turn resulted in either non-
payment of compensation to the affected workers or not conducting of inquiry 
as discussed in succeeding paragraph no. 5.7. 
Thus, there was no proper mechanism for reporting and investigation of 
accident cases. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that employers generally 
do not report accidents to authorities and the instructions have been issued for 
better information exchange between ALC/DLC and Assistant Director 
(Factories) in this regard. The State Government further confirmed that in five 
cases of accidents of Agra, Moradabad and Varanasi districts, inquiry could not 
be held due to unavailability of information. 
Reply is not acceptable as out of above five cases of accidents; two cases were 
in notice of the concerned ALC/DLC. 
5.6 Compensation to deceased or injured workers under Workmen’s 
Compensation Act 1923 
Section 58 of the Act mandates that workers are entit led to compensation for 
work related accidents under the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation 
Act 1923 (WCA). The Schedule II of the WCA also specifies Building or Other 
Construction Workers as workmen.  The Section 3 of WCA stipulates that  
employers are liable to pay compensation to employees injured in work related 
accidents in accordance with the provisions of the WCA. 
For implementation of provisions of the WCA, State Governments are required 
to appoint Commissioners, to whom notice 57 of the accident is to be given by 
the employee  or any other person  for claim of compensation. Besides, the 
Commissioners are also required to address accident notices filed with other 
authorities. In compliance with the provisions of the WCA, the GoUP appointed 
 
57  Detailing the name and address of the persons injured, cause for the injury, date of accident and is to be served on 
the employer wherein the injured was employed. 

 
 
 
Chapter V: Safety and Health of Workers 
53 
 
 
 
(January 2009) various authorities including the Labour Commissioner of UP 
and all ALC/DLC as Commissioner under their respective area of jurisdiction. 
Audit observed that out of the selected districts, in Agra , Lucknow and 
Prayagraj districts; no process for compensation payment to injured or deceased 
workers was initiated by the DLC during 2017-22 in nine cases of investigated 
workplace accidents (as detailed in Table 5.2 ), a lthough t he Inspectors of 
Director (Factories) forwarded these cases to the concerned DLC for initiating 
compensation payment to the deceased workers. Further, in Agra district, 
though the DLC had initiated (September 2021) process o f compensation 
payment to the family members of the deceased worker at work place accident 
on 14 May 2021 (as mentioned in Appendix-X), no final order was made as of 
June 2023. Besides, in Varanasi district, in one case of accident at workplace on 
11 September 2021  (Appendix-X), compensation was provided to the family 
members of deceased worker, though there were many cases of accidents during 
2017-22. 
In was also observed that in selected Moradabad district, despite having instance 
of accident at work site (as mentioned in Appendix-X), no action was initiated 
by the DLC for compensation  payment to the deceased worker. However, in 
selected G B Nagar, compensation was provided by the DLC to the workers or 
their dependants in 58 cases during 2017-22. 
Thus, provisions of the Act and WCA could not be adhered to (except in  
G B Nagar) for providing relief to the affected workers. 
In reply, the State Government did not offer (March 2024) any specific 
comments in this regard. 
5.7 Not conducting inquiry due to lack of coordination 
Audit observed following instances of lack of coordination between the 
functionaries of the Labour and Factories regarding workplace  accidents, 
resulting in either no investigation or non-payment of compensation: 
➢ In selected Varanasi district, a notice of accident was provided  
(12 September 2021) by the employer to the DLC, for intimation of an accident 
occurred on 11 September 2021, causing death of a worker. However, despite 
compensation payment and acknowledgement of notice of accident,  the DLC 
did not forward the same to the Assistant Director (Factories) for inquiry as 
required under the provisions of the Act and Rules 2009. 
➢ In selected Agra district, the DLC constituted a team of Inspectors 
(including ALC and two LEOs) for inspection of a construction site to check 
status of establishment registration and cess deposit, based on media reports of 
an accident on 14 May 2021 causing death of a worker. However, the DLC did 
not forward the information to the Assistant Director (Factories) for conducting 
required inquiry as per the provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 to ascertain the 
causes of accident. 
Thus, lack of coordination among the responsible authorities, resulted in non -
compliance of provisions of the Act and Rules. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
54 
 
 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that instructions have been 
issued for improved coordination among the ALC/DLC and Assistant Director 
(Factories) to address such cases.  
5.8 Execution of contract without provisioning of compliance to the 
Rules  
As per Rule 246 of Rules 2009, all employers, contractors and other concerned 
departments of the Government are required to include compliance of Rules, 
specially related with the safety, health and welfare of workers as one of the 
conditions of the contract for execution of building or other construction works. 
However, audit observed that in the test -checked units of selected districts, no 
reference to compliance of the Rules 2009 was made in agreement executed 
with the contractors. However, clauses related with compliance of applicable 
labour laws, fair wage payment, supply of wage card, display of wage rates, 
protection of health and sanitary arrangements, maternity benefit rules for 
female workers, availability of huts and wholesome of drinking water etc., were 
included in the agreement. It was further observed that despite including some 
provision related with the safety, health  and welfare of workers in the 
agreements, no mechanism was put in place to ensure their compliance. As a 
result, compliance of provisions of the Rules 2009 related with the safety and 
health of workers could not be ensured. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that due to unawareness of 
employers and contractors about provisions of safety and health of workers, 
instructions are being issued by the regional officers to aware them in this regard 
and also to incorporate related clauses in agreements. 
5.9 Not adopting the National Building Code of India 2016 
The National Building Code of India  (NBC) is a comprehensive building code 
to provide guidelines for regulating the building construction activities in India. 
It serves as a model code for all construction agencies including PWD, local 
bodies, other Government construction departments, private construction 
agencies etc. The code was first published in the year 1970 and further revised 
in 1983 and 2005 as NBC 1983 and NBC 2005 respectively.  
However, due to significant changes58 in the building construction activities, 
NBC was again revised in 2016 as National Building Code of India 2016  
(NBC 2016) reflecting the state -of-the-art and applicable contemporary 
international practices. Under  NBC 2016, a new code titled as “Construction 
management, Practices and Safety” has been introduced to regulate construction 
project management , construction planning, site management and building 
construction practices. The code also addresses safety and welfare requirements 
for workers. Besides, provisions of the Section 40(2)(s) of the Act and Rule 220 
of the Rules 2009 requires employer to ensure observance  of standards of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards in respect of the building materials, articles or 
 
58  Such as prevalence of high rises and mixed occupancies, development of new/innovative construction materials 
and technologies, greater need for preservation of environment and recognition of need for planned management 
of existing buildings and built environment etc. 

 
 
 
Chapter V: Safety and Health of Workers 
55 
 
 
 
process used in building or other construction project for which the Indian 
Standards are available. 
Audit noted that the State Government adopted (January 2008) NBC 2005 and 
directed to all DA/other Government departments related with approval of 
building plans to include its provisions under their bye-laws. Accordingly, the 
DA mandated for observance of provisions of NBC 2005 along with other 
standards in respect of structural safety and natural hazard protection of 
buildings and required submission of undertaking/certificate in respect of 
observance of these Code and Standards along with the application of building 
permission. However, NBC 2016 was not adopted by the State Government and 
the test-checked DA continued with enforcement of older versions of NBC. As 
a result, there was a lack of compliance with the provisions of the "Construction 
Management, Practices, and Safety" code of NBC 2016, while approving 
building plans/maps for Group Housing Schemes by the selected DA. The 
commitments made by the builders with application forms for approval of 
building plans during 2017-22, did not reference these standards, despite being 
required to adhere to available Indian Standards under the Act and Rules of 2009 
to ensure the safety and health of workers.  
Thus, due to not adopting the NBC 2016 while executing the construction works 
related with buildings, accidents at work sites could not be avoided. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the Chief Inspector of 
GoUP has written letter to DA to ensure compliance of provisions of NBC 2016. 
5.10 Indian Standard Safety Code for Scaffolds and Ladders (IS: 3696) 
The Part 1 of Indian Standard for Scaffolds and Ladders  (IS 3696) lays down 
safety requirements for erection, use and dismantling of scaffolds used in 
construction work for supporting and safety of workers. Similarly, Part 2 of this 
standard lays down the safety requirements for ladders used for various jobs in 
general construction work including their maintenance and demolition. The 
Section 40(2)(a) of the Act and Rule 60 and Rule 79 of the Rules 2009 also 
require that the scaffolds and ladders used in building or other construction 
works should be conforming to the national standards in this regard. 
However, audit observed that  the test -checked D As did not incorporate  any 
clause in their bye-laws regarding compliance with IS 3696. Due to this, no  
undertaking for compliance of provisions of the IS 3696  was obtained from 
employers of Group Housing Schemes at the time of approval of building plans 
in the test-checked DAs. As a result, compliance to provisions of the IS 3696 
could not be ensured, though required to be observed under the provisions of 
the Act and the Rules 2009 . Audit also found instances of accidents at 
workplaces involving bodily injury or death of workers due to improper 
maintenance of scaffolds and ladders.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that action is being taken 
by the Chief Inspector of GoUP for compliance of safety and health provisions 
by the DA.  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
56 
 
 
 
To sum up: 
The Employers, Government departments and local authorities did not adhere 
to safety and health provisions of the Act and the Rules 2009 , including 
submission of safety policies, constituting safety committees, and appointing 
Safety Officers. The Inspectors of the Director (Factories) conducted limited 
inspections, and employers failed to report  accidents. As a result, 
investigation of all cases of accidents at workplaces could not be ensured . 
Furthermore, compensation payment to injured or deceased workers was not 
made in all cases under the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act 
1923. 
Recommendation 1 2: The State Government should develop a system to 
monitor the preparation and submission of safety policy, constitution of safety 
committee and appointment of Safety Officer by the eligible employers. 
Recommendation 13: The State Government may consider fixing of targets 
of inspections for the inspectors of factory division of labour department. 
Recommendation 14: The State Government may consider making Assistant 
Labour Commissioner/Deputy Labour Commissioner responsible for 
providing of compensation and Assistant Director (Factories) responsible for 
inquiry in each case of accident at workplaces. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VI 
Inspections 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter VI: Inspections 
This chapter includes issues related to inspections of worksites for enforcing 
the provisions of the Act0 and Rules 2009. 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The GoUP appointed (November 2009) Labour Commissioner of UP 
as Chief Inspector after a lapse of ten years since implementation of 
the Act.  
➢ The GoUP had made contradictory provisions in Rules 2009 
regarding timeline of submission of work commencement notice. 
Besides, in cases of non-submission of required notice, no penalty 
was imposed against the non -complaint employers in selected 
districts.  
➢ Format developed by the Chief Inspector for issuing inspection note, 
was deficient in checking the status of wage payment compliance 
with Minimum Wages Act, availability of drinking water facility at 
worksite, registration of workers with the Board etc. 
➢ In selected districts, o nly 0.31 to 1 1.76 per cent  establishments 
against total registered establishments during 2017 -22, were 
inspected by the Inspectors  for enforcing provisions of the Act and 
Rules 2009.  
➢ 33 per cent posts of various inspecting authorities were vacant as  of 
March 2023.  
➢ There was a lack of any system for monitoring compliance of 
inspection observations, and i nspections were conducted during 
2017-22 without planning. 
The main objectives of the Act are to regulate wages, working conditions, 
safety, health, and welfare measures of the workers. To a chieve these 
objectives, provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 has laid down process for 
inspection of building or other construction works. The provisions of 
Section 43 of the Act (read with Section 44) empower Inspectors to inspect 
any construction site, to check safety measures and workers facilities. 
Besides, Section 7 of the Labour Cess Act also empowers Inspectors for 
conducting inspections of establishments.  
Further, Section 46 of the Act requires submission of notice for 
commencement of works by employers. This information is vital for 
conducting construction sites inspections for enforcement of variou s59 
provisions of the Act . Besides, Section 48 of the Act provides for 
imprisonment or imposition of penalty or both for non-compliant employers 
in this regard. Moreover, provisions of Section 50 of the Act empower the 
Chief Inspector to impose penalty for non-compliance of other provisions 
of the Act and Rules . However, audit observed following short comings in 
implementation of provisions prescribed for inspections: 
 
59  Such as Chapter-III (registration of establishment), Chapter-IV (registration of workers), Chapter-VI (hours 
of work, welfare measures and other conditions of service of building workers), Chapter-VII (safety and 
health measures) and Chapter-IX (special provisions). 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
58 
 
 
 
6.1 Appointment of the Chief Inspector and other Inspectors 
For exercising the powers conferred under both Acts and enforcing the 
provisions effectively, the State Governments were required to appoint a 
Chief Inspector and other Inspectors with their area of jurisdiction as per the 
Section 42(2) and (3) of the Act. The other  Inspectors are required to 
exercise powers and perform functions in general control and supervision of 
the Chief Inspector.  
In compliance with the provisions of the Acts, the GoUP appointed 
(September 1999) all LEOs, ALC, DLC and Additional Labour 
Commissioners of the labour department and the Director and all 
Deputy/Assistant Directors of the Factories division as other Inspectors  
under their area of jurisdiction . Despite appoint ing other Inspectors, the 
GoUP took further ten years to appoint (November 2009) the Labour 
Commissioner of UP as Chief Inspector  and another five years to decide 
(November 2014) area of jurisdiction of LEOs within the districts.  
Audit also observed that the Chief Inspector assigned (October 2010) 
Inspectors of the Director (Factories) to enforce provisions mainly related 
with safety and health of workers, as discussed earlier in the Chapter-V. 
Besides, they were also given responsibility of other provisions of the Act 
such as responsibilities of various stakeholders, hours of work, wages, 
welfare measures etc. Further, Inspectors of Labour department were made 
responsible for enforcing the provisions relating to responsibilities of 
various stakeholders, registration of establishments and beneficiaries, hours 
of work, wages, welfare measures and other conditions of service of 
building workers, special provisions etc. However, overlapping jurisdiction 
between both divisions of the labour department and lack of coordination 
among them affected enforcement of provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 
as discussed earlier in paragraph no 5.7. 
Thus, delay in making required arrangements for inspections and 
overlapping60 distribution of responsibilities, attributed towards ineffective 
enforcement of provisions of the Act and Rules 2009. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the distribution of 
work and coordination within both divisions of labour department are 
proper, and that the instructions have been issued by the Chief Inspector to 
field offices for effective implementation of provisions of the Act.  
Reply is not acceptable as there were certain overlapping responsibilities 
between both divisions of labour department and also lack of coordination 
(as discussed earlier in Chapter-V). This is also affirmed by the fact that the 
Chief Inspector/Labour Commissioner of GoUP directed (9 January 2024) 
both divisions to work together to address the issues highlighted in audit. 
 
60  Since responsibility of enforcement of provisions related with Chapter -II (responsibilities of various 
stakeholders) and VI (hours of work, wages and welfare measures) of the Rules 2009, were assigned to both 
divisions. 

 
 
 
Chapter VI: Inspections 
59 
 
 
 
6.2 Contradictory provisions by the GoUP  
The submission of a notice to the Inspectors by employers for the 
commencement of work is a crucial aspect in facilitating inspections. 
According to Section 46 of the Act, employers are obligated to provide such 
notice at least 30 days prior to commencing work. The GoUP addressed this 
requirement in Rule 45 of the Rules 2009. This rule stipulates that employers 
must send a written notice in Form-4 to the Inspector, informing them of the 
actual commencement date, the expected completion date, and other 
relevant details, as mandated by Section 46 of the Act. 
However, it is worth noting that Rule 27(3) of the Rules 2009 contradicts 
this by specifying that employers should submit a written notice to the 
Inspector fifteen days prior to both the commencement and completion of 
any building or other construction work using Form-4. Thus, the provisions 
of both Rules are contradictory and needs to be relooked by the GoUP. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that a proposal for 
amending Rule 27(3) and Rule 45 of Rules 2009 to align them with Section 
46 of the Act, is under consideration. 
6.3 Penalty not imposed on employers for failure to submit notice of 
commencement of work 
As per Section 48 of the Act, if any employer fails to provide notice of work 
commencement within the stipulated time to the Inspector, the concerned 
employer may attract imposition of penalty or imprisonment or both.  
However, audit noted that in none of the selected districts, employers of 
registered establishments submitted notice of work commencement to 
concerned Inspectors. Despite this, LEOs pursued cases of Section 46 
violations for penalties only when they conducted inspections. Since t he 
percentage of inspected establishments by the Inspectors during the period 
2017-22 was minimal compared to the total number of registered 
establishments, as illustrated in Table 6.1 of Para 6.5, a significant majority 
of Section 46 violations did not result in any penalties being imposed. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that 338 cases were filed 
under Section 48 of the Act for violation of provisions of Section 46 in the 
concerned districts during 2017 -22, and a cess portal has been developed 
(November 2023),  to facilitate submission of  notice of work 
commencement.  
The reply of the Government confirmed that only a few cases of Section 46 
violations were pursued for imposition of penalties, as there were 28,721 
registered establishments in selected districts during 2017-22 and practice 
among the employers to provide required notice lacked completely. 
6.4 Deficiency in format for issuing Inspection Note 
The GoUP directed (February 2014) LEOs to issue inspection notes with 
details of Form-4 after inspecting building or other construction worksites. 
In response, the Chief Inspector created (April 2014) a format for inspection 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
60 
 
 
 
note for inspections conducted by LEOs to enforce the provisions of the Act 
and Rules 2009 . Further instructions for adopting the prescribed format 
were given by the Chief Inspector in February 2017 and again in September 
2020. However, audit observed that the format of inspection note was 
deficient in many ways: 
➢ The format of inspection note did not inquire about wage payment 
compliance with the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (MWA), even though this 
was one of the most critical conditions of the certificate of establishment 
registration. The provisions outlined in Form 2 of the Rules 2009 stipulated 
that employers must ensure that the wages paid to workers are not less than 
the rates prescribed under the MWA. However, due to absence of any 
related queries in the format, the inspection notes not only failed to provide 
information on employers ’ compliance with the MWA but also rendered 
inspections ineffective in enforcing the MWA. 
➢ Section 32 of the Act mandates that employers must establish 
effective arrangements to provide an ample supply of drinking water at work 
sites. However, the format did not include any inquiries related to this 
requirement. Consequently, just like the issue of wage payments, the 
availability of drinking water was also not commented upon during 
inspections. 
➢ The Chief Inspector assigned (October 2010) responsibility of 
enforcement of provisions related with registration of beneficiaries , along 
with other provisions of the Act, to the Inspectors of the labour Department. 
However, due to not incorporating any query in format regarding status of 
registration of workers deployed by the employer, enforcement of one of the 
most important provisions of the Act, was also not covered in the inspection 
note by the Inspectors.  
Thus, due to deficiency of the format of inspection note, inspections failed 
to enforce many important provisions of the Act and the Rules 2009. 
In reply,  the State G overnment stated (March 2024) that format of 
inspection note is being revised for incorporating the provision related with 
observance of MWA , availability of drinking water  and registration of 
beneficiaries. 
6.5 Status of Inspections 
The GoUP directed (February 2014) to  conduct inspection of all such 
construction works, wherein required notice of work commencement were 
not submitted by the employer. However, audit observed that in selected 
districts, despite non-submission of required notice by the employer of all 
registered establishments, only a few establishments were inspected by the 
inspectors of labour department during the period 2017 -22. The details of 
establishments inspected during the period 2017-22 vis-à-vis total registered 
establishments in the selected districts have been given in Table 6.1 below:  

 
 
 
Chapter VI: Inspections 
61 
 
 
 
Table 6.1: Details of inspections against the registered establishments in selected 
districts during 2017-22 
Name of 
district 
No. of 
registered 
establishment 
during 2017 -
22 
No. of 
registered 
establishments, 
who provided 
notice of work 
commencement  
Number of 
establishments 
inspected 
during 2017-22 
Percentage of 
inspected 
establishments 
Agra 2131 00 112 5.26 
G B Nagar 18177 00 56 0.31 
Lucknow 3951 00 259 6.56 
Moradabad 1369 00 25 1.83 
Prayagraj 2464 00 19 0.77 
Varanasi 629 00 74 11.76 
(Source: Information provided by the ALC/DLC of the selected districts) 
As evident from the above, the number of inspected establishments during 
2017-22 was significantly low compared to the total number of registered 
establishments. As the employers of these registered establishments failed 
to submit notices regarding work commencement, it was necessary for 
Inspectors to conduct inspections of all registered establishments as per the 
directives issued by the GoUP. 
The constraints in carrying out Inspection may include following: 
➢ The GoUP did not create a separate cadre of Inspectors for enforcing 
the provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 and responsibility in this regard 
was assigned to the officials of the labour department. However, the LEOs 
of the labour department were already overburdened with implementing and 
enforcing 18 Central Labour Acts and four State Labour Act as of July 2017. 
➢ Overall, 3 3 per cent  posts of various other inspecting authorities 
were vacant as of March 2023 as detailed in the Appendix-XI. Besides, 
vacancy against the sanctioned posts of LEOs, mainly responsible for 
enforcing the provisions among the other inspectors, was up to 39 per cent, 
leading to shortfalls in inspections. 
➢ Inspectors other than the LEOs had rarely conducted any inspections 
during the period of the year 2017-22 in the selected districts.  
Thus, due to insufficient inspections, provisions of the Act and Rules 2009 
related with registration of establishment and beneficiaries, hours of work, 
welfare measures and other conditions of service of workers etc. could not 
be enforced effectively. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that no targets  for 
inspections were fixed during 2017 -22 keeping in view ease of doing 
business, however, since December 2022 each LEOs has been assigned to 
conduct five inspections per month. The State Government acknowledged 
that vacant posts in the cadres of LEO/DLC/ALC affected inspections 
during 2017-22 and assured that action is being taken on priority basis for 
filling vacancies. The State Government further intimated that the directions 
have been i ssued (January 2024) for ALC/DLC to conduct at least 25 
inspections per month, and that the restructuring of cadres of labour 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
62 
 
 
 
department is also under progress to accommodate increased responsibility 
and scope of work. 
6.6 Follow up of Inspection Notes 
The Chief Inspector granted (February 2017 and September 2020) a 15-days 
period to employers to address and rectify issues raised in i nspection note 
issued by LEOs. However, if issues were not resolved within the stipulated 
timeframe, the matter was to be escalated to the Chief Inspector.  Upon 
receiving such cases, the Chief Inspector had the authority to issue a show 
cause notice to the employer. If the employer failed to respond to the notice, 
the Chief Inspector could act in accordance with the provisions outlined in 
Section 50 of the Act  for imposing penalty . Alternatively, the Chief 
Inspector could empower the relevant LEO to initiate legal proceedings 
against the employer in a court of law, if the notice also went unanswered 
by the employer. 
However, audit observed that in selected districts, no registers were 
maintained for recording the subsequent follow-up actions on observations 
of inspection notes. Furthermore, there was no established system in place 
for re -inspections or periodic inspections of the work sites to ensure 
compliance of inspection note observation. Due to lack of record-keeping 
and follow -up mechanisms , the number of observations raised during 
inspections, observations that had been addressed by employers, 
outstanding objections, and details of actions taken by the Chief Inspector 
against employers, could not be ascertained in audit. 
The audit also noted that, based on authorization from the Chief Inspector, 
LEOs in the selected districts initiated legal cases against employers in the 
courts. However, no registers were maintained concerning the prosecution 
or the imposition of penalties against employers by the court. As a result, 
the audit was unable to determine the status of compliance with the 
observations through the court proceedings. This highlights a lack of  
monitoring of the follow -up actions related to issues raised through 
inspection notes, and the timely enforcement of punitive measures, thereby 
diminishing the deterrence value of the established mechanism. 
Thus, in absence of any system for monitoring of the compliance of 
observation of the inspection note, follow -up of observations could not be 
ensured. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that required records in 
respect of inspections and subsequent follow-up action has been maintained 
in selected districts.  
Reply is not acceptable as in Agra district, process for maintaining register 
for the period 2017-20 was not completed (January 2024), while no separate 
register for recording details of inspections and follow -up action was 
maintained in Prayagraj district. Besides, in remaining districts, documents 
submitted with Government reply in support of maintenance of register, 

 
 
 
Chapter VI: Inspections 
63 
 
 
 
lacked information on subsequent follow-up action taken on observations of 
inspection notes.  
6.7 Planning for inspections 
The GoUP directed (July 2017) to conduct inspections through joint teams, 
comprising at least two inspecting authorities, including the ALC, LEO, and 
Assistant Director (Factories). This directive aimed to enhance transparency 
in the inspection process. The Labour Commissioner of the GoUP directed 
(November 2019 ) that prior permission of Deputy/Additional Labour 
Commissioner would be required for conducting inspections , except in 
special circumstances where approval may be obtained after inspection.  
However, audit observed that the LEOs of the selected districts did not take 
prior permission and only  submitted inspection notes to the ALC or DLC 
for approval after conducting inspections, resulting in non -documentation 
of team formation prior to inspections in any of the selected districts except 
Agra61. Further, there was no risk-based criteria for the selection of 
construction sites by the Inspectors. As a result, there were no documented 
records regarding the basis for selecting worksites or planning inspections , 
which further highlight ed absence of a structured selection process or 
planning for inspections. 
Thus, due to lack of planning prior to conducting inspections, transparency 
could not be ensured in execution of inspections. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that due to manpower 
deficiencies, joint inspections were not conducted during 2017-22, and that 
a risk-based Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for inspections is  under 
development. Besides, it was also stated by the Government that directions 
are being issued for conducting planned and transparent inspections in view 
of audit observations. 
6.8 Maintenance of records by the employers not ensured 
Sections 28 to 30  of the Act  empowers the State Government to establish 
work hours, overtime wages, and the issuance of wage books or slips to 
workers. Furthermore, Section 30(1) of the Act mandates employers to 
maintain records and registers, as prescribed by the State Government, to 
ensure comp liance with Sections 28 to 30.  Accordingly, the GoUP 
introduced Rule 47 of the Rules 2009, requiring employers to maintain a 
Register of workers in Form-6.  
Moreover, as specified in Rules 48(A) to 53 of the Rules 2009, various 
records and registers like the Register of muster roll, Register of wages, 
Register of deductions or damages or loss, Wage book and Service 
Certificate, Register of overtime, Register of returns, and others are also 
required to be maintained by the employer or contractor. These records 
ensure compliance with work hours, wage payments, worker employment, 
welfare measures, and other service conditions for building workers. 
 
61  Joint teams were constituted by the DLC from the month of January 2020 for conducting inspections. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
64 
 
 
 
However, audit revealed that the units involved in construction works in the 
selected districts did not  develop any system to ensure maintenance of 
necessary records and registers by the employer s or contractor s either 
through departmental inspections of worksites  or provisioning of related 
clauses in agreements. This resulted in a lack of assurance regarding the 
registration of engaged workers as beneficiaries and compliance with other 
service conditions outlined in the Rules 2009. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that generally 
employers remain absent during inspections, hindering the production of 
records to LEOs and impacting the quality of inspections. The reply is not 
satisfactory as presence of concerned employers needs to be ensured. 
To sum up: 
The GoUP/Board failed to develop any system for submission of work 
commencement notice for inspections. The standardised inspection note 
format was deficient in prescribing observations for many provisions of 
the Act and Rules. Number of establishments inspected by the authorities 
was meagre compared to registered establishments and 33 per cent posts 
of various inspecting authorities was vacant.  
Recommendation 15: The State Government should issue directions for 
timely submission of notice of commencement and completion of work in 
Form-4 and have proper system and procedure for taking action against 
the defaulting employers.  
Recommendation 16: The State Government should adopt a transparent 
system for planning and conduct ing inspections and introduce a system 
for monitoring follow-up of observations raised during inspections. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VII 
Administration and utilization 
of Welfare Fund by the Board 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare 
Fund by the Board 
The issues related with administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by 
the Board have been discussed in this chapter. 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The constitution of Board was not only delayed but  the GoUP also 
failed to reconstitute the Board on time , leading to administrators 
taking over its responsibilities.  
➢ Instead of sanctioning the posts of the Secretary and other 
officers/officials of the Board, GoUP filled these posts with personnel 
of labour department and other Government departments . The Board 
had even hired 576  human resources for execution of its function 
without any sanction of posts.  
➢ The meeting of the Board during 2017 -22 was short by 42 per cent 
and notice and agenda of meetings were also not served on time  in 
respect of four out of 15 meetings. 
➢ The GoUP did not include all mandatory functions of the Board , as 
enshrined in Section 22 of the Act , under Rules 2009 ; resulting in 
overlooking of key areas of the Board responsibilities.  
➢ The process of preparation and submission of budget estimates was 
deficient and submitted to the GoUP and GoI with delays ranging 
between five to 362 days. The GoUP also did not accord any approval 
to the budget estimates for the period 2017-22.  
➢ The budget estimates were not based on scientific estimation and set 
lower targets for collection of cess during 2017-22.  
➢ The Board did not prepare annual reports since its inception and also 
did not prepare its annual accounts up to the year 2020 -21 from 
beginning.  
➢ The constitution of the State Advisory Committee was delayed, and it 
was also ineffective in providing recommendations to the GoUP in 
matters related to administration of the Act.  
➢ The management of Welfare Fund by the Board was not effective, with 
large funds lying unused and expenditure on workers welfare ranged 
from three to 22 per cent  during 2017 -22. Administrative expenses 
exceeded prescribed norms by ₹ 35.07 crore during 2017-19.  
➢ The Board incurred expenditure of ₹ 42.85 crore for purchase of land 
in violation of Hon’ble Supreme Court and GoI directions.  
➢ Despite setting spending targets  lower than budget allocation under 
schemes, these targets could not be met during 2017 -20. The number 
of beneficiaries under most  of the schemes , gradually decreased 
during 2017-22 with exceptions like Disaster Relief Aid Scheme and 
Maternity Benefit Scheme. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
66 
 
 
 
➢ Only six to 31 per cent of total registered workers with the Board were 
benefitted by its schemes during 2017-22. 
➢ The Board operated various bank accounts  and invested                               
₹ 5,358.18 crore in fixed deposits with different banks  without 
adopting any investment policy  or calling quotations from banks, 
resulting in varying interest rates between 3.50 to 5.40 per cent. 
➢ The Board also failed to implement schemes efficiently , with only       
50 per cent worker applications for assistance approved and 1.40 lakh 
beneficiaries not receiving assistance despite approval. Besides, 1.42 
lakh applications remained unattended, and disbursement of financial 
assistance was also delayed.  
➢ The Board did not  implement proposed activities of model welfare 
scheme, formulated by the GoI, or implemented it half-heartedly. 
➢  The social audit of schemes was also not conducted by the Board.  
The primary objective of the Act is to safeguard welfare of workers. The 
provisions of the Act encompass various functions aimed at ensuring that 
the benefits of this legislation are accessible to all workers. This is  to be 
achieved by establishing the Board and granting it adequate powers to 
implement welfare measures for workers. One of the Board's significant 
roles is the establishment of a fund known as the Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Fund (Welfare Fu nd), intended for the 
betterment of workers. To fund the effective implementation of welfare 
provisions under the Act, resources are generated through the Cess Act and 
other means. 
Audit findings in respect of constitution of the Board and its functioning, 
administration and utilisation of Welfare Fund etc. have been detailed in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
7.1 Constitution of the Board 
The Act mandates constitution of a Board in every State to oversee social 
security schemes and welfare measures for workers. Section 18 of the Act  
requires constitution of the Board, consisting of a Chairperson and other 
members, to carry out functions outlined in the Act.  
In compliance with the provisions of the Act, Rule 256 and 257 of the Rules 
2009 provided for constitution of the Board under the chairmanship of the 
Principal Secretary, Labour and Employment (GoUP) with other ex-officio62 
and nominated 63 members. The tenure of nominated members is three64 
 
62  One member from GoI, Chief Inspector ( i.e. Labour Commissioner of GoUP) and three official member of 
special secretary rank of GoUP. 
63  Three members each from representatives of employers and workers. 
64  Which may be extended up to four years in case of not appointment of successor in time. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
67 
 
 
 
years, with successors appointed by the GoUP on or before the expiry of 
their tenure. Besides, in case of non -constitution of Board for any reason, 
the State Government may appoint an Administrator for up to six months or 
until the Board is duly constituted, whichever is earlier. 
Audit observed that except the provision for appoint ing an Administrator 
under the Rules 2009, other provisions of the Rules 2009 regarding 
constitution of Board were in line with the Act. It was also observed that the 
Board was constituted intermittently and was last constituted in January 
2022. Besides, due to non -existence of a duly constituted Board, the 
Additional Chief Secretary, Labour  and Employment  (GoUP) was 
appointed as Administrator by the GoUP on four65 occasions for more than 
24 months during 2009-22. 
Thus, in absence of a duly constituted Board for over 24 months, there was 
no involvement of representatives of employers and workers in decision 
making, and in planning of welfare measures. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the Rules 2009 
allows appointment of Administrator. 
Reply is not acceptable as there were no such provisions in the Act and the 
Board has been conceptualised as body corporate with perpetual succession, 
not an administrative body. 
7.1.1 Functionaries of the Board 
As per Section 19 of the Act, the Board has powers to appoint a Secretary 
and such other officers and employees, required for effective discharge of 
its functions. The terms and conditions of their appointment, salary and 
allowances are to be prescribed by the State Government.  
Accordingly, Rule 263 of the Rules 2009 empowers the Board to appoint a 
Secretary66 and other officials with prior approval of the GoUP. As per Rule 
273, the Secretary serves as the Chief Executive Officer of the Board , 
responsible for conducting its activities and implementing its decisions. 
Besides, the Secretary is authorised to issue  notice to convene  Board 
meetings with approval of the Chairperson and maintain meeting records.  
7.1.1.1 Post of the Secretary not sanctioned 
Audit noted that the GoUP did not sanction post of Secretary for the Board, 
as mandated by the Act and Rules 2009. Instead, Government officers from 
the District Labour Commissioner's (DLC) office or of higher ranks were 
 
65  Ist time on 20 November 2009 for six months, IInd time on 03 June 2010 for 10 months, IIIrd time on 06 
April 2017 for five months and IVth on 16 September 2021 for three months. 
66  An officer of the Government, not below the rank of a Deputy Labour Commissioner. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
68 
 
 
 
assigned to serve as the Secretary  without consulting the Board. Further, 
during 2017-22, these officers held regular charge of Secretary’s post for 
only 14 months , with the remaining  46 months  being held o n additional 
charge. On 11 occasions, the ALC or DLC of the Lucknow region was 
assigned this additional charge . Consequently, the Board had no role in 
appointment of Secretary. 
This practice of appointing Government officers on short, temporary terms 
without regular charges deprived the Board of concentrated attention and 
carries the risk of adversely affecting its operational efficiency, as discussed 
in paragraph 7.2. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that appointment of the 
Secretary was made as per rules  and with approval of the Board during 
2017-22.  
Reply is not acceptable as neither the post of Secretary was sanctioned by 
the GoUP nor any prior consultation done with the Board before 
appointment. 
7.1.1.2 Appointment of officers of the Board  
The GoUP approved 15 temporary posts in July 2011 to facilitate the Board 
functioning with intention of filling them  through deputation, honorarium, 
or contract arrangements by the Board. 
However, audit found that the Board did not fill these sanctioned positions, 
and their continuity expired in the year 2013-14. In such a scenario, several 
officers from the Labour and other Government departments were attached 
to the Board by the Labo ur Commissioner or the GoUP to carry out its 
functions. As of July 2023, five officers were deployed at the Board without 
officially sanctioned posts. 
Thus, the failure to appoint officers against the sanctioned posts, resulted in 
dependency of the Board on the GoUP for deploying its functionaries.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that proposals for 
sanction of posts of Officers and other employees, as submitted by the Board 
during May 2018 and December 2023, are still pending.  
7.1.1.3 Appointment of employees of the Board  
The Secretary of the Board submitted many proposal 67 to the GoUP during 
2013-23 to sanction various posts of officers and employees for carrying out 
 
67  For 45 posts of Officers and other employees on 13 February 2014, for 900 posts of Officers and other 
employees on 16 January 2018 & 14 May 2018 and for 13 posts of officers on 24 March 2023.  

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
69 
 
 
 
Board functions. However, the GoUP did not accord any sanction in this 
regard as of June 2023. 
Audit further observed that the Board decided (November 2014) to hire 
human resources on various posts 68 through outsourcing from the service 
providers without sanction of posts and prior approval of the GoUP, as 
required under the provisions of the Rules 2009. As of March 2022,  576 
human resources were hired by the Board , against the requirement of 734 . 
Therefore, a significant portion of the Board's functions were being 
overseen by these outsourced employees, who were  even responsible for 
handling cheques and demand drafts . This situation was against the 
directions69 (January 2010) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, which required 
for constitution of the Board with adequate full-time staff. 
Thus, hiring of human resources by the Board without approval of the GoUP 
violated the provisions of the Rules 2009.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the proposals 
submitted (March 2014, May 2018 and December 2023)  by the Board for 
posts sanction, are still pending. 
7.1.2 Meetings of the Board 
As per Section 20 of the Act, the State Governments are required to 
prescribe the time  (periodicity) of Board meetings and procedure s for 
transaction of business in meetings. Accordingly, the Rules 264 and 265 of 
the Rules 2009 required holding of meetings of the Board once in every 
three months with 15-days prior notice to members. However, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court directed (February 2012) 70 to hold meeting of the Board at 
least once in every two months  for regular review  of implementation of 
schemes. 
Audit observed that the Board held only 1 5 meetings71 during 2017 -22, 
falling short of the required 26 meeting72 by 42 per cent in accordance with 
the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Out of 25 approved schemes, 
seven schemes73 were not implemented at all by the Board, which indicates 
 
68  Accountant, Assistant Accountant, Computer Operator and Peon for executing the functions of the Board at 
the district and regional offices of Labour Department, Directorate and Government level along with the 
headquarter office. 
69  National Campaign Committee for Central Legislation on Construction Labour  v. Union of India, (2011)               
4 SCC 653. 
70  Civil Writ Petition No. 318 of 2006. 
71  Held on 25 September 2017, 15 February 2018, 28 August 2018, 10 December 2018, 25 February 2019,           
6 September 2019, 7 January 2020, 23 March 2020, 7 August 2020, 15 October 2020, 16 December 2020, 27 
January 2021, 24 March 2021, 20 May 2021 and 9 July 2021. Out of these, four meetings were urgent. 
72  The Board remained in existence from August 2017 to August 2021 for 49 months and from January 2022 to 
March 2022 for three months. 
73  Solar Energy Assistance Scheme, Palana Grih Yojana, Mid-day meal Scheme, Khadyan Sahayata Yojana, 
Bicycle Assistance Scheme, Toilet Assistance Scheme and Pradhanmantri Suraksha Bima evam Jeevan Bima 
Yojana. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
70 
 
 
 
inadequate review of implementation of the schemes. It was also observed 
that the notice and agenda for four of 15 meetings were sent to the members 
with a delay ranging from three to nine days. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that due to                     
non-existence of duly constituted Board in the year 2017 -18 and 2021-22, 
the Covid-19 pandemic and  other unavoidable reasons during the year     
2018-19 and 2019 -20, Board meetings could not be held  as per norms . 
However, five meetings  have been held in the year 2023 -24 (up to   
December 2023) in compliance with the Rules 2009 and directions of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Besides, notice and agenda of some meetings could 
not be sent on time due to urgent calls for Board meetings. 
7.1.3 Assigning of functions to the Board 
The Board has to perform various functions for the welfare of workers under 
Section 22 of the Act. This includes providing immediate assistance in case 
of accidents, pensions after reaching the age of 60, home loans/advances, 
payment of premium of Group Insurance Schemes, financial aid for 
children's education, assistance with medical expenses, maternity benefits 
for female beneficiaries, and various other welfare measures and facilities. 
The Board is also authorised to provide loans, subsidies, grants-in-aid, etc., 
to local authorities or employers for the welfare of workers. Further, the GoI 
directed (September 2015) the State Governments to ensure that the Board 
carries out its functions as outlined in Section 22 of the Act. 
However, audit noticed that the GoUP failed to encompass all the mandatory 
functions under Rule 281 of the Rules  2009. Rule 281 specified only 
assistance related to home loans/advances and financial aid for the education 
and marriage of beneficiaries' children. Despite this, the Board implemented 
many schemes74 to cover the scope of functions outlined in Section 22 of 
the Act. However, it did not offer any assistance to beneficiaries in several 
mandatory areas of operation, including payment of Group Insurance 
Schemes and loans; subsidies and grants-in-aid to local authorities or 
employers for the welfare of workers, etc., even though 28 years had passed 
since the Act was enacted. Moreover, in areas where the Board had initiated 
relief programs for beneficiaries, there were significant deficiencies in 
implementation of these schemes, as detailed in paragraph 7.2.6. 
Besides, as per Sections 14(2) and 62(2)(i) of the Act, if a person had been 
a beneficiary for at least three years continuously immediately before 
attaining the age of sixty years, he shall be eligible to get such benefits as 
 
74  Assistance in case of accident of beneficiary, payment of Pension to the beneficiaries after attaining the age 
of 60 years, payment of medical expenses for treatment of major ailments, payment of maternity benefit to 
the female beneficiaries etc. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
71 
 
 
 
may be prescribed by the State Government through rules. However, audit 
observed that the State Government did not establish rules in this regard. 
Furthermore, audit identified that, in addition to the outlined functions of 
the Board, the GoUP under Rule 283  prescribed various activities for the 
Board to promote general welfare of workers. However, similar to the 
mandatory functions, the Board did not take action in several areas of 
activity, including conducting surveys and studies to assess the employment 
patterns, skills, income, wages, and working conditions of workers, as well 
as the impact of various Government and Board program mes intended for 
their welfare. Additionally, the promotion of the small family norm , 
eradication of social issues like drinking and dowry , organizing sports , 
cultural and recreational activities for workers, and arranging study tours for 
groups of beneficiaries etc., were neglected by the Board, though required 
under Rules 2009. 
Thus, due to the State Government's and the Board's inaction in numerous 
areas of operation, the workers could not get full benefits mandated by the 
Act and Rules 2009. 
In reply, the State Government accepted (March 2024)  that no welfare 
scheme has been framed in many mandatory areas of functioning.  
7.2 Other responsibilities of the Board 
The Act and Rules 2009 assigned  the Board  with managing and 
administering the Welfare Fund. The other responsibilities of the Board  
included submission of budget to the GoUP for sanction, preparation and 
submission of annual reports and accounts, collection of contributions from 
the beneficiaries and other charges, appointment of committees, investment 
of the available fund etc. However, audit observed following deficiencies in 
discharge of responsibilities of the Board: 
7.2.1 Preparation of budget estimates 
Section 25 of the Act requires the Board to prepare budget estimates for the 
next financial year by incorporating estimated receipts and expenditure, in 
such form and at such a time, as may be prescribed by the State Government 
and submit them to the State and Central Governments.  
However, audit noted that the Act do es not specify the roles of both 
governments in approving the budget estimates. While Rule 272(2)(b) of the 
Rules 2009 designates the Board with the responsibility of preparing and 
submitting the budget for approval to the State Government  but does not 
outline required format or timeline for this process. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
72 
 
 
 
Further, audit observed that due to lack of defined format and timeline by  
GoUP, the Board not only failed to include estimated receipts  for the 
upcoming year  and actual figures of receipts  of the previous year  in its 
budget estimates for the fiscal years 2020-21 and 2021-22 but also delayed 
the preparation and submission of budget estimates during 2017 -22, as 
detailed in Table 7.1 below: 
Table 7.1: Details of preparation of budget estimates and submission thereof  
to the Government 
Year Date of 
approval by 
the Board 
Date of 
submission to 
Governments 
Period of submission 
after commencement of 
financial year (in days) 
Status of 
sanction by 
the GoUP 
2017-18 Not approved 28/03/2018 362 Not accorded 
2018-19 15/02/2018 28/03/2018 Submitted in time Not accorded 
2019-20 25/02/2019 05/04/2019 05 Not accorded 
2020-21 07/08/2020 04/09/2020 157 Not accorded 
2021-22 24/03/2021 10/05/2021 40 Not accorded 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident from the above that, in absence of a set time schedule, budget 
estimates for the period 2017 -22 (except for the year 2018 -19) were 
submitted to the Governments after start of the financial year, with delays 
ranging from five to 362 days. Additionally, the budget estimates of the year 
2017-18 was approved by the Administrator in April 2017 and were 
forwarded to the Government at the end of the financial year, even though 
the Second Board remained in office until 5 April 2017 and the third Board 
resumed office in August 2017. The preparation an d submission of budget 
estimates for the financial year 2020 -21 w ere also delayed due to fewer 
Board meetings. It was also observed that the GoUP did not provide required 
sanction for the budget estimates, as mandated by the Rules 2009. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that after preparing the 
budget estimates, the Board submitted them to the GoI and GoUP. Further, 
it was also stated by the State Government that due to outbreak of Covid 
pandemic, the estimation of receipts and timely preparation of budget 
estimates could not be ensured during 2020-22. 
7.2.1.1 Unrealistic budget estimation 
As per the provisions of the UP Budget Manual (UPBM), budget estimates 
should be as accurate as possible. However, audit observed that the budget 
estimates were not based on any scientific estimation, resulting in wide 
variation between actual and estimated figures. The details of the budget 
estimates vis-à-vis actuals for the period 2017 -22 have been given in the 
Table 7.2 below: 
 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
73 
 
 
 
Table 7.2: Showing variations between budget estimates and actuals during 201 7-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Actuals Variations of Budget 
Estimates with 
Actuals in per cent  
Receipt Exp Receipt Exp Receipt Exp 
2017-18 990.00 579.35 1051.65 324.14 06.23 (-)44.05 
2018-19 1010.00 711.45 1156.30 193.86 14.49 (-)72.75 
2019-20 1142.00 825.97 1261.51 362.67 10.46 (-)56.09 
2020-21 Not prepared 1374.21 1258.12 882.49 - (-)35.78 
2021-22 Not prepared 1511.71 1364.13 1639.36 - 8.44 
  (Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident from above that estimation of expenditure  was inaccurate and 
varied widely, indicating randomness in budgeting process. Additionally, 
new schemes such as Medical Aid Scheme 75, Disaster Relief Aid Scheme76 
etc. were introduced through reappropriations under revised budget, which 
was against the provisions contained in UPBM77. Moreover, officials of the 
Board at headquarters, also did  not maintain budget control register for 
keeping watch on utilisation of allocated budget in compliance with the 
provisions of UPBM, leading to non-utilisation of allocated funds under the 
schemes as discussed in paragraph no. 7.2.5.2. 
In reply, the State Government confirmed (March 2024) introduction of new 
schemes through re-appropriation and stated that budget estimates are based 
on information received from districts , estimated applications of workers 
under the scheme s and expenditure of previous year. Further, it was also 
stated by the Government that accurate estimation of expenditure under the 
schemes is not possible due to their uncertain nature.  
Reply is not acceptable as persistent variation between estimated figures and 
actuals reflected inaccuracy of budget estimation . Besides, adopting 
reappropriations instead of original/supplementary budget for new 
expenditure violated provisions of the UPBM. 
7.2.1.2 Setting lower targets for collection of cess 
Audit further observed that the Board set region-wise annual targets for cess 
collection without any systematic estimation, such as considering the 
number of registered establishments or ongoing construction activities in the 
state. Instead, the se targets were based on previous year's receipts  as 
reported by district authorities. However, in absence of proper accounting 
procedures for cess proceeds (as discussed in paragraph 4.4.3), cess 
collection receipts were underreported by the district authorities. This led to 
 
75  Introduced in revised budget of the year 2017-18 through reappropriation from the savings of other schemes. 
76  Introduced in revised budget of the year 2019-20 through reappropriation from the savings of other schemes. 
77  As per para 151(iv) of the UPBM, incurring new expenditure through reappropriations is not allowed. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
74 
 
 
 
setting targets on erroneous information. Moreover, these targets remained 
unchanged over the years . The details of annual targets  of cess collection 
and achievements there against are provided in Table 7.3 below: 
Table 7.3: Details of targets for cess collection and achievement during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Target Achievement as 
per the 
information of 
districts 
Actual receipts on 
account of cess as 
per the records of 
the Board 
Percentage of target 
achievement in respect of 
information of the 
Districts Board 
2017-18 970.00 703.21 826.75 72.50 85.23 
2018-19 970.00 694.35 901.02 71.58 92.89 
2019-20 970.00 683.54 925.18 70.47 95.38 
2020-21 1000.00 664.50 888.81 66.45 88.88 
2021-22 1000.00 1008.37 1017.33 100.84 101.73 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident from the above that fixing of targets because of  erroneous 
information of district authorities and without any systematic estimation, led 
to fixing of lower targets for cess collection. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024)  that targets for cess 
collection were fixed on district information until 2019-20 but have been on 
the basis of receipts of cess bank account since 2020-21. Further, it was also 
stated by the Government that due to non -achievement of targets, it could 
not be revised every year. 
7.2.2 Preparation of Annual Report  
Sections 26 and 62(2)(q) of the Act requires compilation of an annual report 
of the Board ’s previous year activities for submitting to both the State 
Government and the Central Government in a format and within a timeframe 
specified by the State Government through rules. Under Rule 272(c) of the 
Rules 2009, the GoUP also mandates the Board to prepare and submit an 
annual report, although it does not specify the necessary format and timeline 
for doing so. 
However, a udit observed that contrary to the provisions of the Act and 
Rules, the Board did not prepare annual report since its inception. Not 
disseminating required information through annual report  hindered 
stakeholders understanding about functioning of the Board. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that preparation of 
annual report is under process but did not provide any  documentary 
evidence in support of claim. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
75 
 
 
 
7.2.3 Preparation of Annual Accounts 
As per Section 27 and 62(2)(r) of the Act, the Board is required to prepare 
annual statement of account in such form and at such time during each 
financial year as may be prescribed by the State Government. The annual 
account is to be submitted to the State Government together with the 
auditor's report for laying before the State Legislature. Besides, provisions 
of the Act  also require audit of annual accounts by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (CAG).  
However, audit observed that Rule 272(2)(d) of the Rules 2009 makes the 
Board responsible for proper maintenance of accounts  without mentioning 
required form and timeline. Besides, related provisions of the Rules 2009 
were also silent about the submission of annual account to the State 
Government. Due to these deficiencies, the Board did not prepare its annual 
accounts up to the year 2020 -21 since beginning , leading to accounts not 
audited by the C AG. As a result , reliable data of financial position of the 
Board was not available. However, the Board had prepared (May 2023) its 
annual accounts for the year 2021 -22, though, it was not submitted to the 
GoUP as of June 2023 for onward submission to the State Legislature.  
Moreover, in absence of annual accounts, the Board could not use enabling 
provisions of the Income Tax Act 1961 for exemption under Section 10 (46), 
resulting in deduction of income tax at source of ₹ 8.65 lakh and                         
₹ 38.05 lakh on the investment of the Welfare Fund during the financial year 
2020-21 and 2021-22 respectively.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that process  for 
registering the Board under S ection 10 (46) of Income Tax Act 1961 is 
underway. 
7.2.4 Constitution of committees 
As per the provisions of Section 4 of the Act,  the State Government is 
required to constitute  a State Advisory committee (SAC) to advice on  
administration of the Act. Consequently, the GoUP under Rules 10 to 22 
provided for constitution of SAC in ever y three years from the elected 
representatives of the State Legislature with other nominated and ex-officio 
members under leadership of a chairperson. The meetings of SAC are to be 
held at least once in six months or when the GoUP seeks any advice. 
However, audit observed that SAC was formed three times by the GoUP 
after notification of the Rules 2009. The first SAC was formed in November 
2013 and lasted until  March 2017, exceeding the prescribed term by five 
months. The second SAC was  formed in August 2018 after a gap of                
16 months, and the third SAC was formed in September 2021 without delay. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
76 
 
 
 
Further, despite the formation of the first SAC in November 2013, no 
meetings were held until December 2015  due to frequent changes in the 
positions of the Chairperson and nominated members. During this p eriod,   
₹ 8.12 lakh was spent from the Welfare Fund on honorarium and travel 
allowances for the Chairperson. 
Further, it was also observed that between August 2018 and March 2022, 
only six meetings of the SAC were held, falling short of the prescribed norm 
of seven meetings.  Additionally, the second SAC provided 22 
recommendations78 to the GoUP regarding the Board functioning but the 
GoUP did not take required action on most of these recommendations 79. 
Further, SAC failed to provide recommendations in three meetings held 
between November 2020 and December 2021. Besides,  the GoUP did not  
refer any matters to SAC for recommendations on administration of the Act 
or formulating and implementation of welfare schemes.  Apart from the 
SAC, constitution of other committees was also deficient as per details given 
below: 
➢ Section 5(1) of the Act require s that the State Government may 
constitute one or more expert committees, amongst the people having 
special qualifications in building or other construction works to advise on 
framing required Rules under the provisions of the  Act. However, audit 
observed that the GoUP did not frame any rule for constitution of expert 
committee under Rules 2009,  resulting in non-compliance of many of the 
requirements of the Act under the Rules 2009  (as discussed earlier in 
Chapter-II). 
➢ Under Rule 270 of the Rules 2009, the Board is also empowered to 
form committees for discharge of its duties. However, audit observed that 
the Board passed (August 2018  and October 2018 ) a resolution for 
constitution of three committees for supervising the works related with cess 
collection, registration and renewal of membership of workers and 
implementation of schemes, and also constituted the required committees 
in the month of the December 2018  but for want of No Objection 
Certificate, from the Finance and Law Department of the GoUP to decide 
duties and responsibilities of the committees, these committees could not be 
made functional as of June 2023. 
In reply, the State Government did not offer (March 2024) any comments 
on SAC and expert committees and confirmed constitution of three other 
committees by the Board without providing any details about their 
functionality and duties & responsibilities assigned to them.  
 
78  During its first three meeting held during the period of August 2018 to January 2020 
79  Some issues were taken up by the Board on their own. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
77 
 
 
 
7.2.5 Management of Welfare Fund 
As per Section 24 of the Act, every Board is required to constitute a Welfare 
Fund, consisting of loans and grants from the GoI 80, beneficiary 
contributions and other funds. Moreover, GoI is also empowered to decide 
other resources for the Board. Accordingly, provisions for levy of a cess at 
least one per cent of the construction cost have been provided under Section 
3 of the Cess Act. Consequently, the GoUP under Rule 274 provided for 
constitution of “ The Uttar Pradesh Building and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Fund” (Welfare Fund) for depositing and managing 
concerned receipts. 
Audit observed that the GoUP with the constitution of Board also 
established (March 2010) the  Welfare Fund for implementation of the 
welfare schemes as provided under Act and Rules. Besides, the GoUP also 
implemented collection of cess in November 2009. The details of receipts 
vis-à-vis expenditure from the Welfare Fund during the period 2017-22 are 
given in the Table 7.4 below: 
Table 7.4: Showing receipts and expenditure from the Welfare Fund during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year OB Cess 
receipts 
Registr-
ation 
fee 
Interest 
receipts 
Total 
available 
fund 
Exp. on 
schemes 
(%) 
Administ-
rative 
exp. (%) 
Corpus 
fund 
Total 
Exp 
CB 
2017-18 3194.99 826.75 10.54 214.36 4246.64 282.56 
(6.65) 
41.58 
(0.98) 
- 324.14 3922.50 
2018-19 3922.50 901.02 7.42 247.86 5078.80 174.47 
(3.44) 
19.39 
(0.38) 
- 193.86 4884.94 
2019-20 4884.94 925.18 13.15 323.18 6146.45 347.04 
(5.65) 
15.63 
(0.25) 
- 362.67 5783.78 
2020-21 5783.78 888.81 9.31 360.00 7041.90 868.88 
(12.34) 
13.61 
(0.19) 
- 882.49 6159.41 
2021-22 6159.41 1017.33 3.72 343.08 7523.54 1622.56 
(21.56) 
16.80 
(0.22) 
1890.00* 3529.36 3994.18 
Total 3194.99 4559.09 44.14 1488.48 9286.70 3295.51 107.01 1890.00 5292.52 3994.18 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) (*Appropriated from Welfare Fund for creating a corpus to operate the 
Atal Residential Schools established in 18 commissionerates of the State.)  
It can be seen from the above that large funds were lying in the Welfare 
Fund and only three to 22 per cent of available funds during 2017-22 were 
used for beneficiary welfare. This was against the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
and GoI directions81, to utilise the Welfare Fund for workers’ welfare. 
Further, most of the increased expenditure in 2020-22 was due to Disaster 
Relief Aid 82 and three 83 other schemes. Further, despite having funds, the 
Board did not follow the GoI directives (July 2017) to provide facilities like 
 
80  Under Section 23, the GoI may provide loans and grants to the Board with approval of the Parliament. 
81  By Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on 21 August 2015, 16 October 2015 and 19 March 2018 while by the 
GoI on 9 September 2015 and 6 October 2017.  
82  Expenditure of ₹ 775.24 crore and ₹ 958.87 crore incurred during 2020-21 and 2021-22, respectively. 
83  Maternity Benefit Scheme, Workers Daughter Marriage Scheme and Medical Aid Scheme. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
78 
 
 
 
transit accommodation, labour sheds with night shelters, mobile toilets, and 
mobile crèches for workers . This was important because workers face 
difficulties due to lack of basi c amenities while moving between jobs. It is 
worth noting that the GoUP also directed (July 2021) the Board to establish 
transit hostels for workers. 
Thus, the Welfare Fund  was not optimally utilised for workers’ welfare. 
Besides, due to accumulation of huge sums, instances of spending on other 
heads of expenditure were also noticed by the audit, which ha ve been 
discussed in succeeding paragraph. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that efforts are being 
made for formation of new policies and schemes to cover more workers, and 
that the introduction of new schemes for providing facility of labour sheds 
and night shelters, establishment of technical training centres etc., is under 
process.  
7.2.5.1 Application of Welfare Fund 
As per Sections 22 and 24 of the Act, the Welfare Fund is designated for 
covering the costs of welfare schemes for workers and other administrative 
expenses. Besides, expenditure on administrative expenses  is to be limited 
to five per cent of the total expenditure in a given financial year  and no 
expenditure is allowed for other purposes. Further, pursuant to directions 
(August 2015) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the GoI reiterated (June 2016) 
that Welfare Fund should not be used for any purpose other than  workers’ 
welfare and in case of violations, immediate corrective steps should be taken 
for recoupment of such expenditure to the Welfare Fund.  
However, audit observed that provisions of the Act and GoI directions were 
not adhered to by the Board. The details of expenditure incurred by the Board 
from the Welfare Fund during the period 2017-22 on the implementation of 
the schemes and administrative expenses  have been given in Table 7.5 
below: 
Table 7.5: Details of exp. on schemes vis-à-vis administrative expenses during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Total 
Exp.  
Exp. on 
administrative 
expenses 
(percentage of 
total Exp) 
Exp. on 
schemes 
(percentage of 
total Exp) 
Exp. to be 
incurred on 
administrative 
expenses 
Excess exp. on 
administrative 
expenses 
2017-18 324.14 41.58 (12.83) 282.56 (87.17) 16.21 25.37 
2018-19 193.86 19.39 (10.00) 174.47 (90.00) 9.69 09.70 
2019-20 362.67 15.63 (4.31) 347.04 (95.69) 18.13 
within limit 2020-21 882.49 13.61 (1.54) 868.88 (98.46) 44.12 
2021-22 1639.36* 16.80 (1.02) 1622.56 
(98.98) 81.97 within limit 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) ) (*Excluding ₹ 1890 crore appropriated for 
creating a corpus to operate the Atal Residential Schools established in 18 Commissionerates of the State.)  

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
79 
 
 
 
It is evident that an excess expenditure of ₹ 35.07 crore was incurred on 
account of administrative expenses  during 2017-19, surpassing the             
five per cent limit specified in the Act. Despite it, the Board did not make 
any effort to recoup excess expenses to the Welfare Fund in line with the 
instructions of the GoI. Moreover, an expenditure of ₹ 1890.00 crore was 
also incurred during the year 2021 -22 to create corpus for operation and 
maintenance of the At al Residential Schools established 84 in 18 
Commissionerates of the State.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that expenditure has 
been made in accordance with provisions of the Act , and the provisions of 
the Act did not require spending of at least 95 per cent of Welfare Fund for 
workers’ welfare.  
Reply is not acceptable as Section 24(3) of the Act provides that 
administrative expenses shall not exceed five per cent  of total expenses 
during a financial year, meaning thereby that at least 95 per cent  of the 
Welfare Fund is to be utilized for the benefit of workers. 
Expenditure on other than specified purposes  
As per ruling (August 2015) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, constitution of 
Welfare Fund is intended for the benefit of the construction workers not for 
the benefit of the Board. However, the Board purchased (March 2016) 1.35 
acre of land from Lucknow Development Authority (LDA) by spending        
₹ 42.56 crore (including incidental expenses viz., registration fee and stamp 
duty) for construction of its office85. Further, an amount of ₹ 29.32 lakh was 
also spent (December 2018) for construction of boundary wall at the 
purchased land. Despite this, construction work of office building could not 
be initiated as of June 2023 due to the GoI directions (June 2016) prohibiting 
use of the Welfare Fund for construction of buildings, leading to infructuous 
expenditure of ₹ 42.85 crore. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that , to save money in 
long run, the Board has purchase d land for construction of  its office 
building.  
Reply is not acceptable as the Welfare Fund is not to be used for construction 
of buildings. 
7.2.5.2 Targets set below the budget 
The Secretary of the Board set region wise annual spending targets under the 
schemes using previous year's actual expenditures as a basis. However, these 
 
84  These residential schools were constructed by the labour department of the GoUP for providing education to 
the wards of the workers through government grants. 
85  At Gomti Nagar of Lucknow. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
80 
 
 
 
spending targets did not consider allocated budget under the schemes. Further, 
these targets did not encompass  any physical targets of beneficiaries, as the 
Board had not set any annual or long -term targets for covering all workers 
within the scope of the Board's schemes. The details of year -wise spending 
targets under the schemes, the allocated budget, and the actual achievements 
during the period 2017-22 are provided in Table 7.6 below: 
Table 7.6: Status of achievement of targets of spending under Schemes during 2017 -22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Approved 
budget 
under the 
Schemes 
Target of 
spending 
under the 
schemes 
Understatement 
of targets 
against the 
budget 
allocation  
(in per cent) 
Actual 
expenditure 
Achievement 
of the targets 
of spending  
(in per cent) 
2017-18 514.05 514.00 00 282.56  55 
2018-19 686.57 514.00 25 174.47  34 
2019-20 788.17 514.00 35 347.04  68 
2020-21 1336.26 902.64 32 868.88  96 
2021-22 1476.11 902.64 39 1622.56  180 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
The table above clearly illustrates that spending targets were set 25 to           
39 per cent lower than budget allocation during 2018-22. Further, spending 
targets were also not met during the period 2017-20, with achievements 
ranging between 34 and 68 per cent . While spending target for the year 
2020-21 was achieved, the actual expenditure fell short of the allocated 
budget. However, in the year 2021-22, the actual expenditure exceeded both 
the spending target and allocated budget. 
Thus, the allocated budget was not effectively utilized for the welfare of 
workers during the period 2017-21. 
In reply, the State Government (March 2024) stated that all registered 
beneficiaries could not benefit under all schemes and there is increasing 
trend in expenditure under schemes during 2017-22. The Government also 
replied that  expenditure was within budge t during 2021 -22 due to 
supplementary budget of   ₹ 1400 crore.  
Reply is not acceptable as spending targets during 2021-22 again remained 
lower than budget provision and only 56 per cent of total budget ( original  
₹ 1476.11 crore + supplementary ₹ 1400 crore) could be utilised due to 
lower targets.  
7.2.5.3 Limiting the benefit of Welfare Fund to the beneficiaries 
As previously discussed in Table 7.4, the Board had enough funds during 
2017-22 to support social security schemes and welfare measures for the 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
81 
 
 
 
registered beneficiaries. The Board implemented 25 schemes to benefit 
these workers. 
However, due to limit ing expenditure under schemes by setting spending 
targets and  lack of annual and long -term physical targets for covering 
beneficiaries, the number of beneficiaries in 20 schemes ( out of 24 
schemes86 implemented by the Board) gradually decreased during the period 
2017-22 as per details given in Appendix-XII. This decline occurred despite 
a significant increase in the number of registered beneficiaries with the 
Board over the same period. These 20 schemes  covered only 2.82 lakh 
beneficiaries, which was 1.67 per cent of the total scheme beneficiaries. In 
contrast, beneficiaries increased in the remaining four schemes, benefiting 
98.33 per cent of the total scheme beneficiaries (Appendix-XII). However, 
it is worth noting that among these four schemes, the Disaster Relief Aid 
Scheme, which was temporarily implemented during the period 2019-22 to 
provide cash assistance during the challenging times of the COVID -19 
pandemic, contributed to benefiting 90 per cent of the scheme beneficiaries. 
If beneficiaries of Disaster Relief Aid Scheme are excluded, out of the total 
number of registered beneficiaries with the Board, only a range of six to 31 
per cent of beneficiaries or their dependents received benefits under the 
Board's schemes during the period 2017-22. 
It was also noted that the Board did not make earnest efforts to educate and 
aware workers about the various welfare schemes  despite introducing          
Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay Chetna Yojana  in November 2018 for this 
purpose. Under this scheme, only ₹ 11.96 crore was spent, out of the budget 
provision of ₹ 45.00 crore, during the period 2019-22. 
Thus, due to not fixing any annual or long-term targets for covering all 
eligible beneficiaries under the schemes , funds available with the Board 
could not utilised efficiently and coverage of schemes remained limited.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that similar schemes 
have been merged, changes have been made for easier benefit access, and  
schemes involving distribution of kinds have been dropped.  The 
Government also stated that efforts are being made for cent per cent 
utilization of budget and preparation of new scheme s is also underway for 
providing benefits to all registered workers. 
7.2.5.4 Investment 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court directed (February 2012) the Boards to invest 
surplus funds in nationalized banks. The GoUP also allowed (March 2010) 
 
86  Except Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay Chetna Yojana meant for publicity and awareness measures  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
82 
 
 
 
for opening of saving bank account of the Board in Lucknow Branch of any 
nationalised bank.  
Audit observed that the Board operated two savings bank accounts each for 
management of registration and renewal fees 87, transfer of cess proceeds, 
and spending cess proceeds during 2017 -22. Additionally, at the end of 
March 2022, the Board had four more accounts for depositing cess amounts 
collected by district authorities and for various other purposes. The closing 
balances of these bank accounts were ₹ 325.21 crore as of 31 March 2022.  
Audit further observed that the Board operated above saving bank accounts 
related with the receipt of registration fee and cess with auto sweep facility, 
wherein balances of more than ₹ two crore was automatically invested in 
fixed deposits. Besides, the Board also invested surplus funds  in fixed 
deposits of other nationalised banks. Consequently, ₹ 5358.18 crore88 was 
invested in FDs as of March 202 2, out of which  receipts were maintained 
for only ₹ 100 crore. It was also observed that investment in FDs was made 
without calling for the quotations from the nationalised/scheduled banks, 
the practice adopted by the Delhi Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers Board. As a result, rate of interest on FDs varied from 
3.50 to 5.40 per cent leading to not gaining optimal interest by the Board. 
Moreover, investments of these surplus funds  in FDs  were made by the 
Board without adopting any investment policy . In absence of such policy, 
other instruments of investments such as Government securities, bonds etc. 
could not be explored , though the Assam Government under the Building 
and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
conditions of service) R ules 2007 had made  provision for investment in 
securities.  
Audit further observed that due to non -maintenance of financial accounts 
(as discussed in paragraph no. 7.2.3), the Board understated the financial 
position of Welfare Fund by ₹ 1,689.21 crore as the closing balance of all 
bank accounts of the Board was ₹ 325.21 crore and an amount of                         
₹ 5,358.18 crore was also invested in FDs as on 31 March 2022, though, the 
closing balance of the Welfare Fund was reported only ₹ 3,994.18 crore.  
Thus, due to not adopting any investment policy, surplus balances of the 
Welfare Fund could not be invested prudently.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that different bank 
accounts have been operated to deposit registration and cess receipts 
separately. It was also  informed by the Government that FDs with lower 
 
87  Both accounts operated in different branches of Allahabad Bank up to the year  2019-20. Subsequently, only 
one bank account at the Bapu Bhawan branch of Allahabad Bank was used for this purpose. 
88  Due to non-maintenance of fixed deposit receipts for all investments, there was no mechanism for verification 
of FDs by the officers of the Board. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
83 
 
 
 
interest rates, have been revised by the banks to a maximum interest rate of 
five per cent  with retrospective dates  and an additional interest of                       
₹ 39.81 crore have been provided by the bank during 2022-23. Besides, the 
Government assured that efforts are being made for better investment of 
surplus funds. 
However, details of revised FDs were not provided with Government reply 
and it was also not made clear whether all FDs with lower interest rates were 
revised. 
7.2.6 Inefficiencies in implementation of the schemes 
Audit observed that the Board implemented 25 social security schemes for 
beneficiaries (as detailed in Appendix-XIII), however, due to frequent 
changes in guidelines of the schemes and discontinu ations of schemes  
midway or merg er with other schemes, number of implemented schemes 
remained only 1 389 at the end of the year 2021 -22. It indicated that the 
schemes were formulated without detailed deliberations. It was also 
affirmed by the fact that there was no role of the SAC in  schemes’ 
formulation. 
The uncertainty in implement ing schemes (as discussed in succeeding 
paragraph), impacted the approval and release of the financial assistance to 
workers. The year -wise details of pending application s, approved 
applications, disbursement of assistance, and pending disbursement during 
the period 2017 -22 (as of June 2023) have been given in the Table 7.7 
below: 
Table 7.7: Details of disbursement of assistance under schemes during 2017-22  
Year No. of 
applications 
pending in 
the 
beginning 
of the year 
No. of 
applications 
received 
during the 
year 
No. of cases 
sanctioned 
during the 
year (%) 
No. of 
applications 
rejected 
(%) 
Cases with 
disbursement 
of assistance 
(%) 
Cases with 
pending 
disbursement 
(%) 
Applications 
pending at 
the end of 
the year 
2017-18 14044 497873 192737 (38) 254551 (50) 178503 (93) 14234 (07) 64629 
2018-19 64629 397622 218482 (47) 156410 (34) 208509 (95) 9973 (05)  87359 
2019-20 87359 395459 313624 (65) 75666 (16) 309121 (99) 4503 (01)  93528 
2020-21 93528 1269661 543723 (40) 695251 (51) 523261 (96) 20462 (04) 124215 
2021-22 124215 655762 331714 (43) 305890 (39) 240881 (73) 90833 (27)  142373 
Total 14044 3216377 1600280 (50) 1487768 (46) 1460275 (91) 140005 (09) 142373 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
 
89  Maternity; Child and Girl Assistance Scheme, Accident Assistance/Death and Disability Aid Scheme, 
Meritorious Student Reward Scheme, Workers Critical Illness Assistance Scheme, Skill Development, 
Technology upgradation and Certification Scheme, Death and F uneral Assistance Scheme, Construction 
Workers Daughter Marriage Assistance Scheme, Housing Assistance Scheme, Pension Scheme, Residential 
School Assistance Scheme, Sant Ravidas Education Assistance Scheme and Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhayay 
Chetna Yojana. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
84 
 
 
 
It is evident from the above table that out of 32.16 lakh applications received 
during 2017 -22 for assistance under various schemes, only 16.00 lakh         
(50 per cent) was approved. Even among approved applications, 1.40 lakh 
beneficiaries did not receive assistance despite sanction, resulting in denial 
of benefits. Further, applications of 1.42 lakh beneficiaries up to the period 
March 2022 remained unattended90 by the officials of the Board as of June 
2023, though, the Secretary of the Board issued (November 2021) 
instructions for disposal of pending application within a reasonable time.  
Audit also observed that the disbursement of legitimate benefits to workers 
was also delayed. In four  selected districts 91, disbursement of assistance 
under the Daughter Marriage Assistance Scheme was provided with delays 
ranging from two to 20 months during 2020-22. This led to non-adherence 
of the Janhit Guarantee Adhiniyam 2011 , which requires social security 
services to be provided within a prescribed timeline.  Moreover, guidelines 
of selected schemes lacked provision for communicating reasons of 
rejection to applicants , indicating that  process for evaluation, acceptance 
and rejection of applications was not transparent. 
Thus, frequent changes in schemes and delayed distribution of  benefits, 
resulted in ineffective implementation of the schemes. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that efforts are being 
made to provide benefits to all eligible workers and  implement new 
schemes. It was also stated by the Government that efforts are being made 
to ensure timely disposal of applications under the Janhit Guarantee 
Adhiniyam 2011. Further, at the instance of audit, t he information of 
acceptance and rejection of application are  being provided (January 2024) 
through SMS and allowing applicants to view their application status online. 
7.2.6.1 Audit findings on schemes 
The Board announced many schemes without proper formulation of these 
schemes, monitoring their efficacy and supervising their implementation 
and even some announced schemes remained only on papers. The audit 
findings o n the selected schemes have been discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs: 
 
 
90  0.65 lakh applications for more than five years, 0.22 lakhs applications for more than four years, 0.06 lakh 
applications for more than three years, 0.23 lakh applications for more than two years and 0.19 lakh 
applications for more than one year. 
91  Agra (148 beneficiaries get assistance with delay of two to five months during the year 2021-22), Moradabad 
(100 beneficiaries get assistance with delay of 13 to 20 months during the year 2021 -22), Prayagraj (21 
beneficiaries get assistance with delay of t wo to twelve months during the year 2020 -21 and 2021-22) and 
Varanasi (243 beneficiaries get assistance with delay of two to 13 months during the year 2021-22). 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
85 
 
 
 
Pension scheme 
As per the Section 22 (b) of the Act, the Board is obligated to provide 
pension to beneficiaries who have completed the age of sixty years.  
Accordingly, the Board notified (July 2014) a pension scheme for monthly 
payment of ₹ one thousand to ₹ 1250 to those eligible workers, who were 
continuously registered with the Board for the last five years before turning 
60. However, the Board reduced (April 2016) th is eligibility criteria f rom 
five to three years and again enhanced (January 2019) it to 10 years. The 
details of number of beneficiaries and pension disbursement during        
2017-22 have been given in Table 7.8 below: 
Table 7.8: Showing details of beneficiaries and amount of pension during 2017 -22  
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Number of 
beneficiaries 
Amount paid as pension 
2017-18 392 27.82 
2018-19 410 28.15 
2019-20 155 8.59 
2020-21 155 41.0292 
2021-22 197 4.90 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident from the above table that over 60 per cent beneficiaries of the 
scheme before 2019-20, were denied pension in 2019-20 due to changes in 
eligibility criteria. Besides, due to failed transactions on account of            
non-linking of Aadhar with the bank account, many beneficiaries g ot their 
entitled pension with delays ranging from one to 49 months during the 
period 2017-22. 
Further, it was also observed that despite approving 479 applications by 
March 2022, the Board paid  pension to only 197 beneficiaries (less than      
58 per cent of approved beneficiaries) during 2021-22. Moreover, the Board 
decided (April 2022) to discontinue the  scheme due to unforeseen 
committed liabilities on  account of  pension payment to more than           
129.63 lakh registered  beneficiaries with the Board and submitted             
(May 2022) a proposal to the GoUP in this regard. However, no action was 
taken by the GoUP as of June 2023. Due to  the GoUP indecision, neither 
the pensions w ere paid nor new pensions were approved during 2022 -23 
despite pending applications. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March  2024) that changes in 
eligibility criteria were aimed to benefit maximum number of beneficiaries.  
 
92  Includes pension amount of 598 beneficiaries prior to the period of 2020 -21 due to regeneration of earlier 
failed bank transactions for a total 21 months. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
86 
 
 
 
Reply is not acceptable as the Board was not in favour of continuing the 
pension scheme, despite it being a mandatory function.  
Palana Grih Yojana 
Section 35 of the Act requires employers to provide facility of crèches in 
case of employment of more than fifty female workers.  However, Section 
22 (a to g) does not give the Board any role in providing such facilities. 
Audit observed that contrary to provisions of the Act, t he Board decided 
(August 2013) to establish mobile crèches (Sachal Palana Grih) in different 
districts of the State for the use of children of workers. The scheme was 
notified in December 2013 after approval of the GoUP  and implemented 
through the UP State Social Welfare Board (UPSSWB). Under  it, against 
the requirement of 9 ,793 mobile crèches, an amount of ₹ 48.92 crore for 
establishing 3,000 mobile crèches93 was released (January 2014) by the 
Board to UPSSWB in first phase. Further, the Board provided ₹ 5.56 crore 
and ₹ 4.23 crore (April 2014 and May 2014) to the UPSSWB for training of 
staff and heads of organizations, deputed for running these crèches.  
However, due to poor facilities and conditions of the mobile crèches, the 
Board discontinued ( September 2014) the scheme within  nine months. It 
indicated that the scheme was launched by the Board without proper 
planning and was not well thought out.  Besides, against the transferred 
amount of ₹ 58.71 crore, the UPSSWB refunded ( September 2014) only         
₹ 7.40 crore to the Board, leaving an ineffective expenditure of ₹ 48.92 crore 
for the non-mandatory mobile crèche facility. 
In reply, the State Government did not offer (March 2024) any comments 
on audit observations and only stated that the scheme has been suspended. 
Construction Workers Girl Child Help Scheme  
The Board introduced (September 2011) the scheme to protect and support 
girl children of workers and also to promote marriage at an adult age . The 
scheme involved depositing ₹ 25 thousand94  as FD in the name of the girl 
child, with the matured amount transferred to her with the approval of the 
District Magistrate  upon reaching 1 8 years  of age , if she remained 
unmarried. The scheme guidelines also provided for refund of deposited 
amount to the Board in case of death of girl child prior to attaining the age 
of 18. Moreover, the scheme was discontinued in the year 2018 -19 and 
integrated with a new scheme, namely Maternity, Child and Girl Help 
Scheme95. 
 
93  ₹ 15.00 crore for recurring expenses and ₹ 33.92 crore for non-recurring cost of crèche. 
94  W.e.f. 12.05.2017. 
95  Notified by the Board on 28 December 2018. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
87 
 
 
 
Scrutiny of records at the Board headquarters revealed that ₹ 29.24 crore 
was deposited for 14,200 girls96 of workers during 2017-22. However, audit 
observed that scheme guidelines lacked a mechanism for refund ing the 
deposited amount to the Board. The FD receipts w ere handed over to the 
workers, and in the event of any disqualification, such as death or early 
marriage, the deposited amount might be left with the Banks as it would be 
not claimed by the workers.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that amendments are 
being proposed to ensure that the FD can be refunded to the Board in case 
of early marriage or death. 
Disaster Relief Aid Scheme 
The Board notified (March 2020) Disaster Relief Aid scheme for providing 
financial aid to all registered beneficiaries to support their livelihood during 
calamities. Under the scheme, financial aid of ₹ 1000 was to be provided to 
the beneficiaries on yearly/half yearly/quarterly/monthly basis, depending 
on the GoI/GoUP/Board decisions. 
Audit observed that during 2019 -22, ₹ 1,302.12 crore was spent by the 
Board for providing financial assistance to beneficiaries in the State during 
the challenging times of the COVID -19 pandemic. However, due to failed 
bank transactions , many beneficiaries could not be covered under the 
scheme, as detailed in Table 7.9 below: 
Table 7.9: Details of beneficiaries provided financial assistance during 2019-22  
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
 
96  During 2017-20 ₹ 16.13 crore for 8,921 girls and during 2020-22 ₹ 13.11 crore for 5,279 girls. 
97  Disbursed in compliance with the orders (November 2021) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court for providing 
maintenance allowance to the workers of the eight districts of State within the National Capital Region. 
Year Total No. of 
eligible 
beneficiaries 
with the 
Board (in 
lakh) 
Instalment/ 
Rate of 
assistance 
per 
beneficiary 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
for which 
assistance 
was released 
(in lakh) 
No. of 
beneficiaries, 
received the 
assistance (in 
lakh) (%) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
deprived 
from the 
assistance 
due to failed 
transaction 
(in lakh) 
Amount of 
assistance 
not credited 
in account of 
beneficiaries 
(₹ in crore) 
2019-20 22.77 Ist/ ₹ 1000 17.91 17.91 (100) 00 00.00 
2020-21 22.77 IInd/ ₹ 
1000  
17.17 16.81 (98) 0.36 03.60 
2021-22 47.97 IIIrd/₹ 
1000  
23.03 18.10 (79) 4.93 49.30 
IVth/₹ 
300097 
6.31 4.47 (71) 1.84 55.20 
Vth/₹ 1000  42.59 33.65 (79) 8.94 89.40 
VIth/₹ 500  42.57 34.83 (82) 7.74 38.70 
VIIth/ ₹ 
500 
42.41 26.97 (64) 15.44 77.20 
Total   191.99 152.74 (80) 39.25 313.40 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
88 
 
 
 
It can be seen from the above that all eligible beneficiaries were not selected 
by the Board for aid under the scheme, with a shortfall ranging between 11 
to 52 per cent  during 2019 -22. Besides, due to failed transactions,             
39.25 lakh beneficiaries were deprived from the benefit of financial 
assistance amounting to ₹ 313.40 crore during the period 2020-22. Further, 
audit observed that funds were transferred to the bank accounts of 
beneficiaries without verifying and reconciling the details with the 
beneficiaries' records. This led to not only failed transactions but also 
resulted in irregularities, including instances of duplicate bank account 
numbers and funds being held in notional bank accounts. This suggests a 
lack of proper oversight and monitoring of the transferred funds. 
Thus, due to deficiency in beneficiary database management, many eligible 
beneficiaries could not receive aid during difficult times. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that beneficiary details 
were forwarded to banks for assistance transfer after authentication by 
relevant authorities, and that the data related with failed transactions, were 
also sent to district/regional office for reconciliation . The Government 
stated that use of Direct Benefit Transfer mode allowed for identification of 
genuine workers and transfer of assistance in accounts of real workers. The 
fact remains that the Government acknowledged that not  all registered 
beneficiaries with the Board, were real workers. 
Workers Critical Illness Assistance Scheme  
The scheme was launched  in July 2011 to reimburse medical expenses of 
workers and their family members suffering from serious illness such as 
heart surgery, kidney transplant, liver transplant, brain surgery, vertebrae 
surgery, knee transplant, treatment of cancer and HIV disease. In October 
2017, it was expanded to cover other diseases. 
Audit observed that during 2017-22, only 91 beneficiaries received benefit 
under the scheme as reimbursement  was allowed in case of treatment of 
illness in the Government  hospitals and Employees State Insurance 
Corporation (ESIC)/Central Government Health Services (CGHS) 
approved hospitals. Further, ESIC empaneled hospitals were concentrated 
only in 15 cities98 of the State, while CGHS facility was also available in 14 
cities99. Besides, the Government hospitals offered free treatment to the 
poor.  
 
98  Agra, Aligarh, Bareilly, Bulandshahar, G B Nagar, Ghaziabad, Hapur, Kanpur Nagar, Lucknow, Mathura, 
Meerut, Mirzapur, Moradabad, Prayagraj and Varanasi. 
99  Agra, Aligarh, Bagpat , Bareilly, G B Nagar, Gorakhpur, Ghaziabad, Kanpur Nagar, Lucknow, Meerut, 
Moradabad, Prayagraj ,Saharanpur and Varanasi. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
89 
 
 
 
Thus, due to imposition of restrictions, the scheme could provide relief to 
only 91 beneficiaries. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that scheme has been 
revised (October 2017) to cover all diseases included in Ayushman Bharat 
Yojana, however, benefit of scheme is allowed only in special 
circumstances. 
Reply is not acceptable as  number of beneficiaries under the scheme 
decreased even after expansion of scheme coverage.  
Residential Schools Scheme  
The scheme notified in February 2015, aimed to provide quality education, 
from primary to intermediate level, to the children of workers aged between 
six to 14 years. Under the scheme, 24 residential schools (one each for girls 
and boys) were operated in rented accommodations in the 12 districts100 of 
the State, with a capacity of 100 students  each. These schools were to be 
operated by various organization101 as nominated by the Board through an 
agreement with the approval of the GoUP. Besides, the Board also decided 
(January 2020) to close these schools after operation of the Atal Residential 
Schools in the State. 
Audit observed that the Board nominated Mahila Samakhya 102 in the year 
2015-16 for operation of these schools. However, due to non-compliance of 
provisions of the agreement 103, low enrollment of students and poor 
management of the schools, the agreement was terminated with the 
aforesaid organization. Further, Mahila Samakhya  submitted utilization 
certificate for only ₹ 40.88 crore, against the transferred amount of                   
₹ 43.92 crore (during March 2015 to May 2018 ) and accrued interest of           
₹ 37.64 lakh on the transferred funds, leaving ₹ 3.42 crore unaccounted for. 
Subsequently, the Board nominated (October 2018) three organisations viz., 
Udhaymita Vikas Sansthan  (UVS)104, Sociology Department of the 
Lucknow University  (SDLU)105 and Regional Urban and Environmental 
Studies Centre Lucknow (RUESC) 106 for operation of these schools in four, 
two and six districts respectively.  However, d ue to the inability  of the 
 
100  Agra, Azamgarh, Bahraich, Bhadohi, Etawah, Firozabad, Ghaziabad, Kannauj, Kanpur, Lalitpur, Meerut and 
Moradabad. 
101  Mahila Samakhya/ non-government organisations/  Government Organisations/ Government Institutions/ 
Universities and other such institutes as nominated by the Board 
102  An organisation of the Department of Women and Child Development, UP. 
103  Mahila Samakhya breached clause 25 of the MoU as amount transferred by the Board for operation of schools, 
was not kept in auto sweep account to have better rate of interest, separate account for recurring and non -
recurring expenses was also not opened, procurement of non -perishable items was done without inviting 
tenders. 
104  For operating the schools of the districts Azamgarh, Moradabad, Kannauj and Etawah. 
105  For operating the schools of the districts Lalitpur and Kanpur Nagar. 
106  For operating the schools of the districts Meerut, Ghaziabad, Bahraich, Agra, Firoazabad and Bhadohi. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
90 
 
 
 
RUESC in running allotted schools, these schools were also handed over 
(August 2019) to the SDLU107 and UVS108, despite their own unsatisfactory 
performance. Additionally, the Board decided (September 2019) to transfer 
the girl students from residential schools to nearby Kasturba Gandhi Girls 
Schools, citing better facilities . However, th is decision remained 
unimplemented as of March 2023. 
Further, agreements with the above two organizations were extended until 
2020-21 due to difficulties in transferring records from one to another 
organisation. However, in 2021 -22, the Public Administration 109 and 
Sociology Department110 of Lucknow University were tasked with running 
schools in six districts each. Moreover, despite the operation  of the Atal 
Residential School from the academic year 2023-24, the Residential Schools 
remained operational, contrary to the decision of the Board.  
Thus, despite the substandard management, these schools remained in 
existence even after the operation of the Atal Residential Schools.  
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that decision has been 
taken (November 2023) by the Board to discontinue the residential schools 
in phases, starting from academic session 2024-25 with no fresh admissions, 
to accommodate class eighth passed students  in mainstream schools and 
operate the residential schools with minimal resources. 
Construction Workers Daughter Marriage Assistance Scheme  
The scheme was introduced (September 2011) by the Board to eradicate 
child marriage and to pro vide financial assistance to  daughters of the 
workers for their marriage. Under it, financial assistance of ₹ 55 thousand 
for individual marriages and ₹ 65 thousand for group marriage are to be 
provided to the beneficiary. As per the provisions, benefit of the scheme is 
to be provided within 45 days of application.  
However, audit observed that in four 111 out of six selected districts, 1 ,663 
beneficiaries did not get benefit of the scheme during 2020 -22 despite 
approval of applications. Besides, disbursement of the benefit was also 
delayed (as detailed in paragraph 7.2.6). Further, in selected G B Nagar 
district, 13 beneficiaries were paid financial assistance for more than the 
prescribed amount112. Thus, non-payment and delayed payment of benefits, 
jeopardized the financial conditions of workers. 
 
107  Firozabad, Agra and Bahraich. 
108  Meerut, Ghaziabad and Bhadohi 
109  Kannauj, Azamgarh, Moradabad, Ghaziabad, Bhadohi and Meerut. 
110  Kanpur, Lalitpur, Agra, Firozabad, Etawah and Bahraich. 
111  Agra, G B Nagar, Moradabad and Varanasi. 
112  12 beneficiaries were paid @ ₹ 3.30 lakh per beneficiary while one beneficiary was paid ₹ 2.75 lakh. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
91 
 
 
 
In reply, the State Government while accepting the audit observations,  
stated (March 2024) that various factors attributed to delay and non -
payment of benefits, including involvement of other government officers in 
process of payment, verification of beneficiaries, non-updating of Aadhaar, 
and inactive bank accounts. The Government also stated that directions have 
been issued to DLC, G B Nagar for fixing the liability in cases related with 
excess payment of financial assistance  and also to recover the amount of 
excess payment. 
7.2.6.2 Implementation of Model Welfare Scheme 
In compliance with the orders (March 2018) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
the GoI framed (October 2018) a Model Scheme for the welfare of workers 
and directed State Boards for its strict implementation. Besides, the GoI also 
clarified that social security benefit under Model Welfare Scheme would 
take precedence over all other existing benefits and after meeting these 
priority expenses, balance funds would be utilized for additional benefits 
under the section 22(h) of Act. The details of proposed activities of Model 
Welfare scheme and their status of implementation in the State are given in 
Appendix-XIV and summarised in the Table 7.10 below: 
Table 7.10: Status of implementation of proposed activities of the Model Scheme 
Name of 
activity 
Benefits to be provided and their status of implementation 
Life and 
disability 
cover 
The Board is required to provide ₹ four lakhs in case of accidental 
death and ₹ two lakhs in case of natural death of workers to their 
family within 60 days of death. The GoI suggested to cover workers 
under Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana  (PMJJBY) and 
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana  (PMSBY) for providing 
required benefit. 
The Board implemented its own scheme, Accident/Death and 
Disability Assistance scheme (ADDAS) instead of PMJJBY and 
PMSBY, citing higher financial assistance 113 under their scheme. 
However, audit found that many eligible beneficiaries did not receive 
benefits under ADDAS during 2017 -22 due to delays or non -
disbursement. As a result, eligible beneficiaries were deprived from 
benefits due to non-implementation of PMJJBY and PMSBY. 
Health and 
Maternity 
cover 
The Board is required to provide coverage to maximum workers 
under Ayushman Bharat Yojana and ensure reimbursement of 
medical expenses for left -out workers. Further, the Board must 
provide paid maternity leave and financial assistance to women 
workers. 
The Board belatedly executed (February 2021) a Memorandum of 
Understanding with State Health Agency of the GoUP to implement 
Ayushman Bharat Yojana and also implemented Maternity Benefit 
scheme for providing paid maternity leave and financial assistance to 
 
113  ₹ five lakhs in case of accidental death and ₹ two lakhs in case of natural death. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
92 
 
 
 
Name of 
activity 
Benefits to be provided and their status of implementation 
women workers. Besides, the GoUP also announced (October 2020) 
to cover all registered workers under the Ayushman Bharat Yojana. 
However, audit observed that as of May 2023, only 11.65 lakh 
workers (less than 10 per cent of the total beneficiaries registered 
with the Board) had received Ayushman cards. Additionally, the 
Maternity Benefit Scheme had also low approval and assistance 
rates. As a result, the Board could not provide Health and Maternity 
coverage to all workers, in line with the activity of the Model scheme. 
Education 
The Board is required to provide financial assistance, ranging from          
₹ one thousand eight hundred to ₹ ten thousand per annum for 
education (covering up to graduation courses from class one) to 
wards of workers. 
The Board had implemented Sant Ravidas Shiksha Sahayata Yojana 
for providing financial assistance to wards of workers, ranging from            
₹ two thousand to ₹ 24 thousand (from class one to post graduation 
level). However, audit observed that alike above activities, rate of 
approval and assistance payment were also low under this activity. 
As a result, the Board could not fulfil its obligation in respect of 
concerned activity. 
Housing 
The Board is required to take proactive steps to facilitate transit 
accommodation/labour shed cum night shelter, mobile toilets and 
mobile crèches to BOC workers in the areas of their concentration 
prior to their finding of work. However, the Board did not initiate any 
programme in this regard and the concerned activity was not 
implemented. 
Skill 
development 
The Board is required to collaborate with the State/National Skill 
Development programmes to maximise benefits for workers and 
provide financial assistance to workers during training. 
The Board implemented Skill Development, Technology 
Upgradation and Certification (SDTUC) Scheme to provide training 
to workers and their family members in various disciplines through 
the UP Skill Development Mission (SDM). However, audit found 
that the SD TUC scheme was implemented as a standalone 
programme, not converged with other existing programmes of the 
State/Centre. The SDM organised training under the scheme during 
2014-19, however, due to non -payment of liabilities, no further 
training was conducte d after 2018 -19. Moreover, payment of 
assistance was also not made by the Board to the participants of 
above training.  Thus, skill development activity was also not 
implemented after 2018-19. 
Awareness 
programmes 
This activity suggests implementation of grass root level awareness 
programmes for workers such as broadcasting of welfare schemes 
videos on smartphone, using SMS services for welfare schemes, wall 
paintings, publicity and awareness initiatives by the employers etc. 
The Board had implemented Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya Chetna 
Yojana, however, despite implementing an awareness programme, it 
failed to execute grass root level awareness programmes such as 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
93 
 
 
 
Name of 
activity 
Benefits to be provided and their status of implementation 
broadcasting of videos, use of SMS services, wall paintings etc. 
Thus, this activity was not implemented as envisioned. 
Pension 
This activity intended to provide pension facility to those workers, 
who have remained registered with the Board for a minimum ten -
year period.  The Board implemented Mahatma Gandhi Pension 
Assistance Scheme for providing pension benefit to the intended 
beneficiaries, however, decided (April 2022) to discontinue the 
scheme as discussed in paragraph 7.2.6.1. 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
It is evident that the Board did not implement proposed activities of the 
Model Scheme as required under  the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India and GoI. Besides, expenditure incurred by the Board on other 
schemes such as operation of the schools, financial aid for marriage of 
daughters of workers, financial aid for girl child of workers etc. without 
providing benefit to all eligible beneficiaries under the activities of the 
Model Scheme was also in violation of the directions of the GoI. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the payment 
process of financial assistance under ADDAS has been streamlined by 
delegating the powers to ALC/DLC up to ₹ two lakhs. Besides, the State 
Government confirmed availability of complete data of only 11.65 lakh 
workers for providing Ayushman Bharat Yojana coverage. It was also stated 
by the Government that pendency of applications under Sant Ravidas 
Shiksha Sahayata Yoj ana had been cleared  and that the process for 
establishing facilitation centres and amenities at labour chowks/nakas is 
underway. The Government did not offer any comments in respect of skill 
development component and only stated that process is underway. 
Moreover, the Government also mentioned improvement in the a wareness 
programme. Under the pension component, the Government accepted the 
audit observation and stated that action is being taken to provide pension to 
earlier beneficiaries. 
7.2.7 Not conducting social audit of the schemes 
In compliance with orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the GoUP decided 
(June 2018) to conduct social audit of schemes implemented by the Board 
during 2015-18 and also nominated the Social Audit Directorate of Rural 
Development Department of the GoUP as executive agency . Accordingly, 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
94 
 
 
 
nine schemes114 of the year 2017-18 and 14 schemes of earlier years were to 
be audited by the Social Audit Directorate. 
However, audit observed that the Social Audit Directorate had expertise in 
conducting social audit of only MGNREGA in rural areas of the State, while 
the beneficiaries of the Board were both in rural and urban area of the State. 
Besides, the Social Audit Directorate also demanded one per cent of total 
expenditure of the schemes proposed for audit as audit fee, which was not 
accepted by the Board. As a result, social audit of selected schemes could 
not be initiated as of March 2022.  
As a result of not conducting the social audit, it was difficult to determine 
both the anticipated benefits of the Board's schemes and the effectiveness of 
the Board's operations. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2024) that the social audit of 
two schemes (Girl Marriage Assistance Scheme and Maternity & Child and 
Girl Child Assistance scheme) has been conducted in Mohanlalganj block 
of Lucknow district as a pilot project in the year 2023 -24. Besides, efforts 
are being made to conduct social audit of all schemes in selected blocks of 
other districts. 
To sum up: 
The GoUP did not constitute the Board on time, sanction the posts of the 
Secretary and other officials, approve the Board budget and assign 
functions to the Board in mandatory areas . Budget preparation was 
delayed and unrealistic and t he management of Welfare Fund was 
inefficient. The Board did not prepare annual reports and accounts. The 
State Advisory Committee was ineffective, and many other committees 
were also not constituted by the GoUP/Board . Only a small portion of 
registered beneficiaries with the Board could get benefits of the schemes, 
and many beneficiaries either did not receive financial assistance  or 
experienced delays. The status of implementation of the Model Welfare 
Scheme was also unsatisfactory. 
Recommendation 17: The State Government may ensure reconstitution 
of the Board on time and timely holding of meetings of the Board. 
 
114  Death and Disability Assistance Scheme, Children Welfare Scheme, Maternity Welfare Scheme, 
Construction Workers Daughter Marriage Scheme, Residential School Assistance Scheme, Medical Facility 
Scheme and others. 

 
 
 
Chapter VII: Administration and utilization of Welfare Fund by the Board  
95 
 
 
 
Recommendation 18: The State Government may ensure preparation and 
approval of budget estimates in time and preparation and submission of 
annual report and accounts on time. 
Recommendation 19: The State Government may consider establishing a 
mechanism for monitoring and supervisi ng the implementation of 
schemes to ensure  timely processing of applications and distribution of 
benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
        (RAM HIT) 
PRAYAGRAJ                                Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
THE                                                                   Uttar Pradesh 
     
 
 
COUNTERSIGNED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
NEW DELHI         Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
THE 


 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix-I 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 1.3) 
The organisational structure of the Board at the State level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The organisational structure of the Board at  the field level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: The Secretary of Board, Lucknow) 
 
 
  
Secretary of the Board Chief Inspector and Other Ex-
officio & Nominated members 
Additional Secretary 
Additional Chief Secretary,  
Labour and Employment Department (Chairman of the Board) 
 
Additional/Deputy Labour 
Commissioner 
Deputy Secretary 
Assistant Secretary (Finance) 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Labour Commissioner 
Labour Enforcement Officers 
 
 
Finance and Accounts Officer 
Labour Commissioner of GoUP 
Director (Factories) 
Assistant Director (Factories) 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
98 
 
 
 
Appendix-II 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 1.6) 
The list of selected districts, units and schemes 
A-Selected districts and Units 
Name of district Units related with execution 
of works 
Units related with approval 
of building plans 
Units related with 
Labour 
Department/Board 
Agra Construction 
Division-I, 
PWD (Taj 
Trapezium) 
Provincial 
Division, 
PWD 
Agra 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Shamshabad 
Deputy Labour 
Commissioner 
G B Nagar Provincial 
Division, 
PWD 
Agra Canal, 
Okhala 
Yamuna 
Expressway 
Industrial 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Dadri 
do 
Lucknow Construction 
Division -II, 
PWD 
Construction 
Division -I, 
PWD 
Lucknow 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar 
Panchayat, 
Baksi Ka 
Talab 
do 
Moradabad PWD (World 
Bank 
Division) 
Construction 
Division -15, 
Madhya 
Ganga Canal  
Moradabad 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Thakurdwara 
do 
Prayagraj Construction 
Division -IV, 
PWD 
(Kumbh 
Mela) 
Construction 
Division -I, 
PWD 
Prayagraj 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar 
Panchayat, 
Lalgopalganj 
do 
Varanasi Provincial 
Division, 
PWD 
Construction 
Division -III, 
PWD 
Varanasi 
Development 
Authority 
Nagar 
Panchayat, 
Gangapur 
do 
B-List of selected schemes 
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme 
1. Palana Grih Yojana 
2. Construction Workers Girl Child Help Scheme  
3. Solar Energy Assistance Scheme 
4. Disaster Relief Aid Scheme 
5. Medical Aid Scheme  
6. Workers Critical Illness Assistance Scheme  
7. Residential Schools Scheme  
8. Death and Funeral Assistance Scheme 
9. Construction Workers Daughter Marriage Assistance Scheme 
10. Maternity Benefit Scheme 
 
  

 
 
 
Appendices 
99 
 
 
 
Appendix- III 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 3.1.2) 
Details of registration of establishments in test-checked districts during 2017-22 
Name of district Year 2017-
18 
Year 2018-
19 
Year 2019-
20 
Year 2020-
21 
Year 2021-
22 
Total 
Agra 329 516 184 231 871 2131 
Lucknow 1921 738 431 525 336 3951 
G B Nagar 3068 3358 3624 3830 4297 18177 
Moradabad 244 354 266 272 233 1369 
Prayagraj 599 814 357 395 299 2464 
Varanasi 292 141 84 53 59 629 
(Source: The Labour department of test-checked districts) 
  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
100 
 
 
 
Appendix-IV 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.1.5) 
Details showing deficient assessment of cess in selected districts 
(₹ in lakh) 
District Details of audit observation Amount of 
under/ 
short 
assessment 
of cess 
Moradabad In case of M/s Pacific Development Corporation Ltd, cess amounting to              
₹ 76.47 lakh was assessed vide assessment order no 749 dated 15 February 
2019 on the basis of cost of construction work (₹ 76.47 crore) of an ordinary 
non-residential building (composite structure), while keeping in view covered 
area of construction and plinth area rates of PWD schedule. 
However, audit observed that due to not applying plinth area rate s of PWD 
schedule correctly, cost of construction work was underestimated by                       
₹ 7.79 crore as the actual cost of the work was ₹ 84 .27 crore on the basis of 
scheduled rates. Moreover, the cost of other services (@ 28.25 per cent) were 
also not considered at the time of assessment of cess. As a result, less 
assessment of cess amounting to ₹ 3 1.59 lakh (₹7.79 lakh on account of 
undervaluation of cost of work  + ₹ 2 3.80 lakh on account of other services) 
was made by the assessing officer. Despite the fact, on representation (01 April 
2019) of the employer, the case was settled (29 April 2019) only for                       
₹ 36.26 lakh  by the assessing officer and that is too without issuing  any 
reassessment order  in this regard . As a result, underassessment of cess was 
made by ₹ 71.80 Lakh (₹ 76.47 lakh + ₹ 31.59 lakh - ₹ 36.26 lakh). 
72.55 
In case of M/s S.A. Bras, cess of ₹ 2.64 lakh was assessed  in respect of a n 
ordinary non-residential building  on the basis of plinth area rates of PWD 
schedule. However, due to  not considering other services charges               
(@28.25 per cent ) for levy of cess on the  cost of construction work                       
(₹ 263.46 lakh), underassessment of cess was done (March 2023) by                      
₹ 0.75 lakh. 
Agra  In case of M/s Riddhi Siddhi Construction, due to wrong arithmetic 
calculations and applying plinth area rate of composite structure frame instead 
of RCC structure frame, the construction cost a medium non -residential 
building was undervalued by ₹  7.93 crore (cost of construction work as per 
applicable rates of PWD schedule ₹ 23 .93crore- cost as per assessment order 
₹ 16.00 crore). Besides, other services charges (@ 27.00 per cent) were also 
not considered for assessment of cess. As a result, underassessment of cess 
was made by ₹ 14.39 lakh (cess due on difference of cost ₹ 7.93 lakh + cess 
due on other service charges of actual cost ₹ 6.46 lakh) vide assessment order 
2967 dated 01 December 2022. 
23.66 
Similarly, in case of M/s Riddhi Siddhi Builders Param Eternity, due to wrong 
arithmetic calculations and not apply ing plinth area rate of RCC structure 
frame in respect of a medium non -residential building , cost of construction 
work was estimated to ₹ 11.64 crore instead of ₹ 12.32 crore. As a result, cess 
was underassessed by ₹ 9.27 Lakh vide assessment order 2601  dated                   
20 October 2022. 
G B Nagar  In case of M/s GLD Infra Project Pvt. Ltd., due to not considering revised 
plinth area rate  of PWD schedule for calculating the construction cost of a 
medium non -residential building (RCC structure frame), the cost was 
underassessed by ₹ 87.56 crore (construction cost including other service 
charges as per applicable plinth area rate of PWD sche dule ₹  407.94 crore - 
construction cost including other service charges as per assessment                         
₹ 320.38 crore). As a result, underassessment of cess was made by ₹ 87.56 lakh 
vide assessment order 46-47 dated 04 January 2022. 
161.35 

 
 
 
Appendices 
101 
 
 
 
District Details of audit observation Amount of 
under/ 
short 
assessment 
of cess 
In case of JM Aroma, although the construction work of a residential building 
having RCC structure frame was completed in the month of August 2015, but 
no action was initiated by the responsible authorities of the Labour Department 
for assessment of cess until conductance ( February 2019) of the GIS survey. 
However, on the basis of GIS survey report, bill and notice of cess amounting 
to ₹ 233.37 lakh was served to employer. However, demand of cess only to  
₹ 160.18 lakh, was made through assessment  order 6113-14, dated 26 March 
2021 as older plinth area rate of RCC structure frame of ₹ 8790 per square 
meter was applied for calculating the construction cost. Even though rate was 
revised to ₹ 13300 per square meters (w.e.f., 01 August 2013) and construction 
work over basement area commenced from September 2013. As a result, the 
levy of cess was short by ₹ 73.19 lakh. 
Lucknow In the case of M/s Omega developers and builders, under the  GIS survey, bill 
and notice of cess amounting to ₹ 155.00 lakh was served to employer  for 
construction of residential building. However, demand of cess of ₹ 68.85 lakh 
was issued vide assessment order 10357, dated 03 November 2018 on the basis 
of valuation report of employer. In assessment order , while calculating the 
construction cost, 10 per cent less plinth area rates were applied and cost of 
other services charges (29.5 %) was also not considered. As a result, cess was 
underassessed by ₹ 30.22 lakh. 
31.04 
In the Case of M/s International Public School Sitapur Road Bakshi Ka Talab, 
cess was assessed (vide order 5937 -38, dated 12 May 2023) on the basis of 
valuation report of employer. However, cost of other service charges was 
applied @ 16.50 per cent on the construction cost of ₹ 787.68 lakh, instead of 
applicable 27 per cent. As a result, less cess was levied by ₹ 0.82 lakh. 
Prayagraj  Assessment of cess of ₹ 2.23 lakh was made vide assessment order 2449, dated 
10 April 2023 in respect of non -residential building. However, while 
calculating construction cost, older plinth area rate of ₹ 13430 per square 
meters were applied instead of ₹ 21650 per square meters (w.e.f. 01 September 
2020). As a result, less assessment of cess was made by ₹ 1.11 lakh. 
Similarly, assessment of cess of ₹ 38.33 lakh was made vide assessment order 
2473, dated 17 April 2023 in respect of residential building having RCC 
structure frame. However, while calculating construction cost, older plinth area 
rate of PWD schedule of the year 2018-19 was applied though the construction 
work commenced in the year 2020 -21. Therefor due to not applying revised 
plinth area rate of the year 2020 -21, under assessment of cess was made by  
₹ 5.12 lakh. 
6.23 
TOTAL 294.83 
(Source: Information provided by the Labour Department of selected districts) 
  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
102 
 
 
 
Appendix-V 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.2.2.1) 
Details showing not deducting of cess over the amount of GST in contractors Bills 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of units Total no of 
vouchers 
Amount of 
GST 
Amount of cess 
not deducted 
through 
contractors bills 
Nagar Panchayat (Gangapur, Varanasi) 97 95.52 0.95 
Construction Division-III, PWD, Varanasi 36 4600.00 46.00 
Provincial Division, PWD, Varanasi 326 426.83 4.27 
Head Works Division, Okhala 42 839.65 8.39 
Madhya Ganga Canal, CD-15, Moradabad 75 549.57 5.50 
Word Bank Division, PWD, Moradabad  47 4131.17 41.31 
Nagar Palika Parishad, Thakurdwara, 
Moradabad 
19 137.16 1.37 
Provincial Division, PWD, Agra 11 277.76 2.78 
Construction Division-I, PWD, Prayagraj 09 137.14 1.37 
Construction Division-I, PWD, Lucknow All vouchers 2052.50 20.53 
Agra Development Authority 2686 4207.56 42.08 
Varanasi Development Authority 721 1761.85 17.62 
Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development 
Authority 
855 4243.78 42.44 
Moradabad Development Authority  266 1400.74 14.00 
Total  24861.23 248.61 
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
  

 
 
 
Appendices 
103 
 
 
 
Appendix-VI 
(Reference: Paragraph no.4.2.2.1) 
Details showing not deducting of cess over the amount of Centage charges 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of unit Amount of Centage charges 
deposited in treasury 
during the period of the 
year 2017-22 
Due amount of 
cess on the 
Centage 
charges 
Provincial Division, PWD, Varanasi 1803.19 18.03 
Construction Division-I (Taj Trapezium) Agra 1007.49 10.07 
Provincial Division, PWD, Agra 353.76 3.54 
Construction Division, Kumbh Mela, Prayagraj 5581.55 55.82 
Construction Division-I, PWD, Prayagraj 2049.53 20.50 
Head works division, Okhala 803.55 8.04 
World Bank division, PWD, Moradabad 54.00 0.54 
Total 11653.07 116.54 
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
 
Appendix-VII 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.2.2.3) 
Details showing cess deposited partially against the Maps approved through online 
system during 2019-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of 
Development 
Authority 
Total no of 
maps 
approved 
during 2019 -
22 
Amount of 
construction 
work 
Due 
amount of 
cess 
Amount 
of cess 
collected 
No. of cases, 
where less 
amount of 
cess 
collected 
Amount 
of l ess 
collected 
cess 
Moradabad  808 15351.15 153.51 143.16 273 10.35 
Varanasi  364 35914.70 359.15 314.49 52 44.66 
Agra  1958 70512.68 705.13 678.03 182 27.10 
Lucknow  4873 166210.48 1662.11 613.06 625 1049.05 
Prayagraj  785 63555.32 635.55 467.57 747 167.98 
Total 8788 351544.33 3515.45 2216.31 1879 1299.14 
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
104 
 
 
 
Appendix-VIII 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.3.1) 
Details showing cess collected during the period 2017-22 but not deposited to the Board 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of Unit Amount of cess 
collected 
Period of collection 
Moradabad Development Authority, Moradabad 489.60 May 2018 to March 
2022 
Agra Development Authority, Agra 845.82 April 2017 to March 
2022 
Varanasi Development Authority, Varanasi 332.05 April 2021 to March 
2022 
Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development 
Authority, Noida 
862.41 November 2019 to 
March 2022 
Lucknow Development Authority, Lucknow 5925.00 July 2016 to March 
2022 
Nagar Panchayat, Lal Gopalganj, Prayagraj 9.05 April 2017 to March 
2022 
Total 8463.93  
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
 
Appendix-IX 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.3.2) 
Details showing delay in transfer of collected cess during 2017-22 to the Board 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of Unit Amount of cess 
deposited with delays 
Period of delay 
Agra Development Authority 731.32  One to 31 months 
Moradabad Development Authority 130.67  One to three months 
Varanasi Development Authority 537.84  One to 30 months 
Prayagraj Development Authority 1548.15  Four to 27 months 
Total 2947.98  
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
 
  

 
 
 
Appendices 
105 
 
 
 
Appendix-X 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 5.5 & 5.6) 
Details of cases of workplace accidents during the period 2017-22, where required 
inquiry was not conducted by the Inspectors 
Name of districts Details of the workplace accidents 
Agra A construction worker died (14 May 2021) at construction site115 after falling 
from the 10 th floor of a under construction high rise group housing building 
while undertaking the construction work. Further, despite taking cognizance 
of the case by the DLC Agra from media reports, no inquiry was done by the 
Inspectors of the Director (Factories) as discussed in paragraph no 5.7.  
Moradabad One construction worker died (29 November 2021) while performing 
construction activities at under construction overbridge116 due to head injury, 
caused by an accident at worksite. 
Varanasi Two workers died, and eight workers were injured in a building collapse  
(31 May 2021) near construction site of shri Vishwanath corridor. Similarly, 
three workers died (20 April 2017) while undertaking plastering work of a 
under construction building at Chaubepur. Moreover, one worker also died 
(11 September 2021) while unload ing glass material from a vehicle under 
project related with the development of shri Kashi Vishwanath Dham, for 
which notice of accident was provided by the employer to the DLC. 
(Source: Information provided by the test-checked units) 
 
 
Appendix-XI 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 6.5) 
Details of sanctioned and vacant posts of Inspectors in the State as of March 2023 
Name of the post No. of sanctioned 
posts 
Men in 
position 
Vacant 
posts 
Percentage of 
vacant posts 
Additional Labour Commissioner 10 05 05 50 
Deputy Labour Commissioner 26 26 00 00 
Assistant Labour Commissioner 71 63 08 11 
Labour Enforcement Officer 360 220 140 39 
Total 467 314 153 33 
(Source: information provided by the Labour Commissioner, GoUP) 
  
 
115  Ganpati World-II, Fatehabad Road, Agra. 
116  Situated within limits of Majhola police station. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
106 
 
 
 
Appendix-XII 
(Reference: Paragraph no 7.2.5.3) 
Details showing number of beneficiaries under the schemes during the period 2017-22 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
 
  
Name of the scheme Number of beneficiaries during the year Total 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22  
Schemes with decreasing number of the beneficiaries  
Child Benefit Scheme 51866 31665 25026 00 00  
Accident/Death and Disability Aid 
Scheme 
5079 2230 1996 1996 2324 
Meritorious Student Award Scheme 19510 7612 7295 7728 3060 
Workers Critical Illness Assistance 
Scheme 
67 07 07 10 00 
Skill Development Technology 
Upgradation and Certification Scheme 
2740 338 00 00 00 
Death and Funeral Assistance Scheme 4567 1975 2036 1979 2042 
Construction Workers Girl Child Help 
Scheme 
5081 2242 1598 00 00 
Disability Pension Scheme 15 08 10 00 00 
Solar Energy Assistance Scheme 00 00 00 00 00 
Housing Assistance Scheme 96 1499 523 280    47 
Bicycle Assistance Scheme 00 00 00 00 00 
Pension Scheme 392 410 155 155 197 
Palana Grih Yojana 00 00 00 00 00 
Mid-Day Meal Scheme 00 00 00 00 00 
Education Assistance and Scholarship 
Scheme 
27309 3976 4181 624     00 
Residential School Assistance Scheme 2400 2400 2400 2400 2400 
Toilet Assistance Scheme 00 00 00 01 00 
Sant Ravidas Education Assistance 
Scheme 
00 00 00 00 38194  
Khadyan Sahayata Yojana  00 00 00 00 00  
Pradhanmantri Suraksha Bima evam 
Jeevan Bima Yojana 
00 00 00 00 00  
Total (A) 119122 54362 45227 15173 48264 282148 
Schemes with increasing number of the beneficiaries  
Maternity Benefit Scheme 32040 17455 12756 76292 90593  
Medical Aid Scheme 192936 193629 204462 325282 79248 
Disaster Relief Aid Scheme 00 00 1790638 1680929 11801369 15272936 
Construction Workers Daughter Marriage 
Assistance Scheme 
3570 6747 15530 33110 52982  
Total (B) 228546 217831 2023386 2115613 12024192 16609568 
Grand Total (A+B) 347668 272193 2068613 2130786 12072456 16891716 
Number of beneficiaries registered with 
the Board 
3869729 4506095 5106496 9599977 14418798  
Percentage of registered workers 
benefited with the Schemes of the Board 
9 6 41 22 84 

 
 
 
Appendices 
107 
 
 
 
Appendix-XIII 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 7.2.6) 
Details of schemes implemented by the Board during 2017-22  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of the scheme with year of 
implementation 
Period of 
implementation 
Approved 
budget 
during the 
period 2017-
22 
Expenditur
e incurred 
during the 
period 
2017-22 
1. Maternity Benefit Scheme 2017-22 370.00 402.47 
2. Child Benefit Scheme 2017-21 185.00 117.88 
3. Accident Assistance/Death and Disability A id 
Scheme 
2017-22 370.00 281.56 
4. Meritorious Student Reward Scheme 2017-22 47.00 16.11 
5. Workers Critical Illness Assistance Scheme 2017-22 234.00 67.42 
6. Skill Development, Technology upgradation 
and Certification Scheme 
2017-22 165.00 7.86 
7. Death and Funeral Assistance Scheme 2017-22 72.50 32.41 
8. Construction Workers Girl Child Help Scheme 2017-21 41.00 16.13 
9. Construction Workers Daughter Marriage 
Assistance Scheme 
2017-22 586.00 683.31 
10. Disability Pension Scheme 2017-21 00.63 0.03 
11. Solar Energy Assistance Scheme 2017-22 215.00 0.00 
12. Housing Assistance Scheme 2017-22 162.00 5.36 
13. Bicycle Assistance Scheme 2017-22 53.20 0.96 
14. Pension Scheme 2017-22 139.80 1.11 
15. Mid-day Meal Scheme 2017-22 40.03 0.97 
16. Residential School Assistance Scheme 2017-22 164.00 49.56 
17. Education Assistance and Scholarship Scheme 2017-22 110.00 7.78 
18. Khadyan Sahayata Yojana 2017-19 75.01 0.00 
19. Medical Aid Scheme 2018-22 370.00 291.16 
20. Pradhanmantri Suraksha Bima evam Jeevan 
Bima Yojana 
2018-22 86.00 0.00 
21. Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhayay Chetna Yojana 2019-22 150.00 11.96 
22. Disaster Relief Aid Scheme 2020-21 600.00 1302.12 
23. Toilet Assistance Scheme 2020-22 30.00 0.02 
24 Palana Grih Yojana 2017-18 0.00 (-)0.88 
25. Sant Ravidas Education Assistance Scheme 2021-22 20.00 18.27 
(Source: Information provided by the Secretary of the Board) 
 
  

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
108 
 
 
 
Appendix-XIV 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 7.2.6.2) 
Details showing status of implementation of proposed activities of the Model Scheme 
Name of activity Benefits to be provided 
under the activity 
Status of 
implementation of 
activity 
Shortfalls in 
implementation of activities 
of the Model Scheme 
Life and 
disability cover 
Under the activity, 
minimum coverage of  
₹ four lakhs in case of 
accidental death and ₹ two 
lakhs in the event of natural 
death, is to be provided to 
the dependents of deceased 
beneficiary, along with the 
disability benefits to the 
injured workers. 
For implementation of 
activity, the GoI suggested 
that the Board may cover 
workers (aged between 18 
and 50 years) under 
Pradhan Mantri Jeevan 
Jyoti Bima Yojana  
(PMJJBY) and Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY), for 
providing required 
coverage, by making 
payment of half of the 
premium amount of ₹ 171 
per worker per annum as 
remaining premium amount 
would be borne by the 
Central Government.  
Besides, the GoI also 
directed to ensure 
disbursement of 
compensation within 60 
days of the death of 
beneficiary. 
For providing the 
required coverage, the 
Board implemented 
Accident/Death and 
Disability Assistance 
scheme (ADDAS). The 
Board117 did not 
implement PMJJBY and 
PMSBY citing higher 
financial assistance  
(₹ five lakhs in case of 
accidental death and  
₹ two lakhs in case of 
natural death) for 
beneficiaries under their 
scheme. 
 
Audit observed that under the 
ADDAS, as against the 25911 
total applications for the 
financial assistance during the 
period of the year 2017 -22, 
envisaged assistance was 
provided to only 13625 
beneficiaries or their 
dependents.  
It was also observed that the 
District Magistrates was 
authorised for the sanctioning 
of the benefits under the 
ADDAS, which in turn also 
delayed the approval of 
financial assistance. 
Thus, due to non -
disbursement of financial 
assistance in 47 per cent cases 
during the period of the year 
2017-22, legitimate benefits 
could not be provided to 
eligible beneficiaries in 
stipulated time as directed by 
the GoI.  
Had the Board provided 
coverage of PMJJBY and 
PMSBY to beneficiaries in 
compliance with the 
suggestions of the GoI, all 
eligible beneficiaries could 
have been benefited from the 
concerned schemes. 
Health and 
Maternity cover 
Under the activity, the 
Board in close coordination 
with the State Government 
is required to provide 
coverage to the maximum 
workers under Ayushman 
Bharat Yojana. 
For providing coverage to 
the left -out workers of 
Ayushman Bharat Yojana , 
the Board was required to 
ensure reimbursement of 
their medical expenses in 
case of diseases, paid 
maternity leave to the 
For providing coverage 
to the registered 
workers under 
Ayushman Bharat 
Yojana, the Board 
belatedly executed 
(February 2021) a 
Memorandum of 
Understanding with the 
State Health Agency of 
the GoUP, as it was 
constituted for 
implementation of the 
Pradhan Mantri  and 
Mukhya Mantri Jan 
In line with the activity of the 
Model Welfare Scheme, the 
Chief Minister of UP, 
announced (October 2020) to 
cover all registered workers 
under the Ayushman Bharat 
Yojana/Mukhya Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana. Consequently, 
the Board also approved a 
proposal for providing benefit 
of the Ayushman Bharat 
Yojana to the beneficiaries 
through the Mukhya Mantri 
Jan Arogya Yojana . 
Accordingly, process for 
 
117  The Board had approved proposal (February 2018) for implementation of PMJJBY and PMSBY. 

 
 
 
Appendices 
109 
 
 
 
Name of activity Benefits to be provided 
under the activity 
Status of 
implementation of 
activity 
Shortfalls in 
implementation of activities 
of the Model Scheme 
women workers ranging 
from 90 days to 26 weeks 
for up to two deliveries and 
payment of financial 
assistance of ₹ six thousand 
per delivery to the wife of 
worker up to two deliveries. 
Arogya Yojana  in the 
State. 
Further, audit observed 
that though the Board 
had also approved 
(December 2011) 
implementation of 
Rashtriya Swasthya 
Bima Yojana 118 for 
providing health 
insurance coverage to 
the beneficiaries, which 
was discontinued in the 
year 2020 -21 without 
benefiting any worker 
within a time span of 
more than 10 years. 
Besides, the Board had 
also implemented 
Maternity Benefit 
scheme for providing 
paid maternity leave to 
women workers and 
financial aid to the wife 
of workers. 
covering only 11.65 lakh 
registered workers along with 
their families was initiated by 
the Board during the Month of 
April 2021, though the Board 
had data of 38.31 lakh eligible 
workers and their families. 
Further, as of May 2023, a 
total 11.65 lakh Ayushm an 
cards were issued to the 
workers, which was less than 
10 per cent  of the total 
beneficiaries registered with 
the Board.  
Although the Board had 
implemented Maternity 
Benefit Scheme for the 
welfare of workers and their 
family, as against the 518746 
total applications under the 
scheme during 2017 -22, only 
292523 were approved and in 
only 229136 cases  
(44 per cent ) envisaged 
assistance were provided to 
beneficiaries. 
Thus, the Board could not 
provide Health and Maternity 
coverage to all workers, in line 
with the activity of the Model 
scheme.  
Education A minimum financial 
assistance, ranging from  
₹ eighteen hundred to  
₹ ten thousand per annum 
for education (covering up 
to Graduation courses from 
class one) of wards of 
workers should be provided 
by the Board.  
The Board had 
implemented Sant 
Ravidas Shiksha 
Sahayata Yoajna  for 
providing financial 
assistance to the wards 
of workers. 
Under the Sant Ravidas 
Shiksha Sahayata Yojana , 
financial assistance ranging 
from ₹ two thousand to  
₹ 24 thousand (from class one 
to Post Graduation level) are 
to be provided on annual basis 
to the wards of the workers. 
However, audit observed that 
as against the 193179 total 
applications under the scheme 
during 2017 -22, only 101123 
were approved and in only 
74284 cases (38 per cent ) 
envisaged assistance were 
provided to beneficiaries.  
Thus, the Board again could 
not provide envisaged benefit 
of financial assistance to 
wards of all eligible workers. 
 
118  Launched (April 2008) by GoI to provide health insurance coverage for unorganized sector workers belonging 
to BPL category, which was further subsumed under Ayushman Bharat Yojana. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
110 
 
 
 
Name of activity Benefits to be provided 
under the activity 
Status of 
implementation of 
activity 
Shortfalls in 
implementation of activities 
of the Model Scheme 
Housing Board may take proactive 
steps to facilitate transit 
accommodation/labour 
shed cum night shelter, 
mobile toilets and mobile 
creches to BOC workers in 
the areas of their 
concentration prior to their 
finding work. 
Not implemented The Board did not initiate any 
programme in this regard. 
Skill 
development 
The Board may converge 
their skill development 
programmes with alike 
programmes of the 
State/Central/National Skill 
Development Corporation 
(NSDC) so as to maximise 
the benefits to workers. 
The Board had 
implemented Skill 
Development, 
Technology 
Upgradation and 
Certification (SDTUC) 
Scheme for imparting 
training to the workers 
and their family 
members in various 
disciplines. Under the 
scheme provisions were 
made for providing 
training to the workers 
through the UP Skill 
Development Mission 
(SDM). 
Further, the GoI had 
directed (August 2015) 
to implement the 
Recognition Prior 
Learning (RPL) Scheme 
for providing training to 
the workers at the 
construction sites. 
Accordingly, the Board 
had decided to 
implement the RPL 
scheme in the month of 
November 2015. 
Audit observed that under the 
SDTUC Scheme of the Board, 
a separate programme 
(without convergence with 
existing schemes of the 
State/Central/NSDC) for 
providing training to workers 
was organised by the SDM 
during the period of the year 
2014-19. Under the 
programme, as against the 
target of providing training to 
the 63000 workers or their 
family members, 69454 
participants were enrolled and 
69488 workers or their family 
members were provided 
training by the SDM. 
For this purpose, the Board had 
transferred ₹ 12.44 crore to the 
SDM during the period  
2014-18, however, due to  
non-payment of liabilities 
amounting to ₹ 95.25 crore on 
the aforesaid trainings, no 
further training programme 
was organised by the SDM 
under the SDTUC Scheme.  
Further, it was also observed 
that there was no role of Board 
in finalisation of participants 
and course/disciplines of 
training programme. As a 
result, many participants of 
SDTUC scheme during the 
period of the year 2014-19 were 
non-registered workers.  
Moreover, despite formulating 
programme for implementation 
of RPL scheme, the Board did 
not initiate any action for 
providing training to workers 
under the programme. 
Thus, the Board did not provide 
any training to workers year 
after 2018 -19, though, as per 

 
 
 
Appendices 
111 
 
 
 
Name of activity Benefits to be provided 
under the activity 
Status of 
implementation of 
activity 
Shortfalls in 
implementation of activities 
of the Model Scheme 
the directions (July 2013) of the 
GoI, the State Boards were to 
spend at least 20 per cent  
proceeds of the cess towards 
skill development of workers. 
The BOC workers should 
be given financial 
assistance in form of the 
stipend and training 
expenses during the training 
period. 
Under the SDTUC 
scheme, provisions 
were made for payment 
of wages to the 
registered workers 
during the period of 
training. 
Under the training programme 
organised during period of the 
year 2014 -19, no payment of 
assistance in the form of 
stipend, wages etc. were made 
to participants. 
Awareness 
programmes 
Grass root level awareness 
programmes such as 
broadcasting of videos of 
welfare schemes on 
smartphone of BOC 
workers, regular use of 
SMSs services to inform 
BOC workers regarding 
welfare schemes, Wall 
paintings, publicity and 
awareness initiatives by the 
employers etc. should 
adopted for this purpose. 
The Board had 
implemented Pt. 
Deendayal Upadhyaya 
Chetna Yojana  for the 
related purposes.  
Although the Board had 
implemented an awareness 
programme in this regard, 
however, no activities were 
executed for grass root level 
awareness programmes such 
as broadcasting of videos, use 
of SMS services, wall 
paintings etc. for publicity of 
welfare schemes of the Board. 
Moreover, audit observed that 
under the Pt. Deendayal 
Upadhyaya Chetna Yojana,  
major expenditure was 
incurred on organisation of 
functions to facilitate the 
workers, which was not 
proposed as an initiative under 
the concerned activity. 
Pension This facility should be 
provided to those BOC 
workers who have remained 
registered with the Board 
for a minimum ten -year 
period.  
The Board had initiated 
Mahatma Gandhi 
Pension Assistance 
Scheme for providing 
pension benefit to those 
workers, who have 
attained 60 years age 
and remained member 
of Board since last ten 
years.  
The Board has passed  
(April 2022) a resolution to 
discontinue the pension 
scheme on the basis of 
unforeseen committed 
liabilities on pension for more 
than 129.63 lakh beneficiaries 
registered with the Board as 
discussed earlier in paragraph 
no.7.2.6.1. 
(Source: Information provided by the Board) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
Glossary 
113 
 
Glossary of abbreviations used in the report 
 
Abbreviation                   Full Form 
ADDAS Accident/Death & Disability Assistance Scheme 
ALC Assistant Labour Commissioner 
BOC Building & Other Construction 
BOCW Building & Other Construction Workers 
CD Construction Division 
CGHS Central Government Health Services 
COVID Corona Virus Diseases  
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
DA Development Authority 
DLC Deputy Labour Commissioner 
EC Expert Committee 
ESIC Employees State Insurance Corporation 
FD Fixed Deposit 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GoUP Government of Uttar Pradesh 
GST Goods & Services Tax 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
LDA Lucknow Development Authority 
LEO Labour Enforcement Officer 
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
MMP Mission Mode Project 
MWA Minimum Wages Act 
NBC National Building Code 
NEFT National Electronic Funds Transfer 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NP Nagar Panchayat 
NPP Nagar Palika Parishad 
NSDC National Skill Development Corporation 
OBPAS Online Building Plan Approval System 
PA Performance Audit 
PMJJBY Pradhan Mantri Jiwan Jyoti Bima Yojna 
PMSBY Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna 
PWD Public Works Department 
RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete 
RPL Recognition Prior Learning 
RTGS Real Time Gross Settlement 
RUESC Regional Urban & Environmental Studies Centre 
SAC State Advisory Committee 
SDLU Sociology Department of Lucknow University  
SDM Skill Development Mission 
SDTUC Skill Development Technology Upgradation and Certification 
SMS Short Message Service 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
UPBM Uttar Pradesh Budget Manual 
UPBOCW Uttar Pradesh Building & Other Construction Workers 
UPSSWB Uttar Pradesh State Social Welfare Board 
UVS Udhaymita Vikas Sansthan 
WCA Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 
YEIDA Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority 
 