 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Integrated Financial Management Information 
System for the year ended  
31 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 5 of year 2024 
(Performance Audit - Civil) 

 
 
 
 
 
Paragraph Particulars Page 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Integrated Financial Management Information System 1 
1.2 Project cost 1 
1.3 Broad technical features of IFMIS 2 
1.4 Organisation structure 2 
1.5 Audit Objectives 2 
1.6 Audit Criteria 2 
1.7 Audit Scope and Methodology 3 
1.8 Project Planning 3 
1.9 Status of the Modules 4 
1.10 Organisation of Audit Findings 5 
CHAPTER II: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND FINANCIAL 
MANAGEMENT 
2.1 Project Implementation 8 
2.2 Mapping of Business rules in IFMIS 16 
2.3 Project Integration 19 
2.4 Financial Management 21 
2.5 Monitoring 26 
2.6 Conclusion 27 
2.7 Recommendations 28 
CHAPTER III: APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION 
3.1 System Requirement Specification and System Design 
Documents 
30 
3.2 Inadequate provision/use of functionality 31 
3.3 Non-mapping of Rules 36 
3.4 Input Controls 38 
3.5 Process Controls 41 
3.6 Authorisation and Validation Checks 45 
3.7 Conclusion 52 
3.8 Recommendations 52 
Table of Contents 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 202 1 
ii 
CHAPTER IV: APPLICATION SECURITY 
4.1 Application security 53 
4.2 Conclusion 62 
4.3 Recommendations 62 
CHAPTER V: INTEGRATION OF IFMIS WITH FUNCTIONS OF THE 
ACCOUNTANT GENERAL 
5.1 Integrated Financial Management Information System 63 
5.2 Provisions of Standard Forms 69 
5.3 Conclusion 71 
5.4 Recommendations 71 
Appendices 73 
Glossary of Abbreviations 119 
 

 
iii 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March 2021 
has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Madhya Pradesh under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid in the State Legislature. 
The Report contains significant results of Performance Audit of the Integrated Financial 
Management Information System of Finance Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the course of test 
audit for the period 2 019-21 as well as those which came to notice in earlier years but could 
not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; i nstances relating to the period subsequent to 
2021 have also been included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 

 
 
Executive Summary 

 
 

 
 
Chapter I: Introduction  
The Department of Finance, Government of Madhya Pradesh, is responsible for 
preparation of budget and monitoring of all receipts and expenditures of the State to ensure 
proper financial management. Integrated Financial Management Information System 
(IFMIS) is a web -based financial accounting system initiated in 2010 under National  
e-Governance plan (NeGP) of Government of India for online real time management, 
monitoring and control of fund allocations and financial transactions in different 
departments and subordinate offices of the State Government at a cost of ₹ 199.52 crore. 
The expenditure incurred towards the project till the end of March 2022 was ₹  160.74 
crore, which includes cost of additional hardware and software and its annual 
maintenance. Audit examined contract execution of IFMIS along with detailed scrutiny of 
two specific modules i.e. Budget and Receipt and Disbursement for the period of 2019-21. 
Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management  
It was observed that separate Project Management Consultant for IFMIS was not available 
during development and implementation of IFMIS. The System Integrator (SI) failed to 
achieve the project milestones and there was delay in delivery and installation of 
Hardware/Software. Only ten modules were signed off for Go -live out of 16 modules. 
Hence, the Government may consider improving the  monitoring mechanism for timely 
completion of the project and avoid post facto approvals signing off for Go-Live. 
The Government agreed to allow payment on the basis of module wise completion instead 
of overall completion of the Project which created complications with respect to the 
provision of the Agreement. Migration of data from earlier software was not completed 
and the Department had to bear an extra burden of ₹ 4.46 crore for the maintenance. The 
SI changed prime resources , out of which substantial number of the resources were found 
to be completely absent from the site.  The department failed to furnish the details of the 
functionalities tested for the modules signed off for Go -live. The Government may ensure 
project security and safety and to develop an efficient system for monitoring of inventory 
of assets.  The Government may  also consider regulat ing the payment on  the basis of 
completed functionalities envisaged in the SRS for all the modules. 
There was possibility of continued vendor dependency due to hardcoding in the core code 
and non -transfer of technical know -how. Only user training was provided to trainees , 
however, important trainings such as technical training, management training and OEM 
training had not been provided to the technical staff and management. Monitoring of 
outcomes was not done in IFMIS. Further, data analytics capability as to trend analysis 
and forecasting MIS reports was not found to be created. The project has been delayed 
abnormally and rest of the incomplete modules are unlikely to be completed at this stage, 
as the Department is switching to IFMIS Next-Gen. There was an unwarranted increase of 
the project cost by  ₹ 69.52 crore on the plea of merger of 2.37 lakh teaching cadre. 
Instances of excess payments were also noticed on account of annual maintenance contract 
and non-consideration of module wise completion. Meeting of Apex Steering Committee 
was not held after April 2015. There was inadequate monthly reporting by the S I as 
compared to that of provisioned in the Contract . The Government may ensure timely 
holding of meetings of various committees to monitor the performance of the SI. 
 
Executive Summary 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
vi 
Chapter III: Application Development and Operation  
During application development, in case of Budget Module and Receipt and Disbursement 
(R&D) Modules of IFMIS, Audit noticed instances of system design deficiencies, poor 
data quality and inadequate mapping of business rules resulting in availability of 
incomplete and incorrect data in the system, deficient input controls and absence of data 
validation. Instances of non-mapping of required business rules were noticed, resulting in 
refunds without authentication. The Government may assess the need for complete 
overhauling of the IFMIS through adequate validation checks, authorisation mechanism, to 
avoid design deficiencies etc. during development of IFMIS Next-Gen. 
It was noticed that activation of budget program was not done through system. Triggers for 
budget surrenders were not incorporated in the system, however, substantial amounts were 
surrendered at fag end of financial year. There were discrepancies relating to mapping of 
head of accounts of receipt budget and actual receipts.  
Payments and recoupment of contingency fund were not adequately captured and not 
processed through the system. Helpdesk and incident management system was inadequate 
as 97 per cent (2020-21) and 93 per cent (2021-22) of the reported incidents were closed 
after 24 hours of the specified resolution time. Further, the process of depositing lapsed 
deposit in revenue head as per provisions of M adhya Pradesh Treasury Code, 2020 was 
not mapped in IFMIS.  
The input controls were considered deficient as duplicate and invalid data  were noticed in 
the master tables , in the tables relating to bank scrolls, and in bill register  transaction 
tables. In addition to this, instances were observed where Receipt data table contained 
transactions wrongly accounted as receipts under Major Heads instead of Capital Outlay 
and in certain challan receipt transactions, the amount of challans was found negative. The 
above deficiencies indicated that the required input controls were not mapped in the 
system adequately. Thus, the reports generated based on invalid data would be wrong and 
would not be useful for further transactions or processes. 
There were discrepancies in data processing of National Pension System through the 
IFMIS. The E-file generated for remitting the NPS amount did not contain the details of 
Employees and employee-wise NPS contributions. Inconsistencies in transactions relating 
to failed payments were noticed and there was lack of controls in the system to ensure that 
the failed transactions were reprocessed and paid to the party whose payments had 
originally failed. The Government may consider to develop a mechanism in the system for 
detailed analysis of failed transactions and may develop control mechanism for re-
processing of failed transactions. 
During analysis of receipt budget tables, it was noticed that a uthorisation of receipt 
estimate was not ensured in the system. Segregation of duties for surrender of budget was 
not followed as amounts were surrendered in one step, either by creator or by verifier or by 
approver. There was absence of checks in processing of bills as s anction for payment of 
bills was not recorded in the system appropriately and in some cases , paid amount was 
greater than sanctioned amount. The Government may ensure that automated tool based 
monitoring system for measuring of performance and online reporting system is provided 
by the SI.  
Also, unreliable data relating to bank  transactions was found stored in the system  tables 
whereas the details of movement of bills were not being stored adequately , resulting in 
deficient tracking of bill movement.  

 Executive Summary 
vii 
Chapter IV: Application Security 
An information asset is related to delivery of accurate data or information for decision 
making purposes by an entity. It is considered to hold value to the organisation and should 
therefore be protected by ensuring Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability.  
It was observed that security audit of the system was not conducted by an independent 
Auditor. Digital signature validation in electronic document or transaction was not used 
and bills/sub-vouchers were forwarded to disbursement office without digital signatures. 
Certain retired employees were able to login into the IFMIS application and to perform the 
transactions due to non-deactivation of user IDs of retired employees/users. Further, there 
was inadequate user management and role based authorisation was not ensured resulting in 
inadequate logical access controls and non-mapping of business rules into the system. It 
was noticed in respect of 12 users that transactions done by the users were not recorded in 
the User Master Table. The system was also found to be susceptible to back -end 
adjustments. Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan were not tested by 
conducting drills. Basic data for biometric authentication was incomplete and functionality 
was not implemented as envisaged.  The Government may ensure regular implementation 
of information security audit by an independent auditor  and may make the Digital 
signature facility a mandatory requirement for authentication and should implement it  
with required validation checks.  Also, the c hecks may be implemented on  necessary 
deactivation of  user IDs of  retired employees to prevent any unauthori sed transactions. 
Further, the Government may ensure that testing of Business continuity plan and Disaster 
recovery plan are carried out as per contractual requirements. 
Chapter V: Integration of IFMIS with functions of the Accountant General 
It was observed that t he IFMIS did not contain facility to capture budget and receipt and 
expenditure details for classification check by the Accountant General (A&E) office. The 
functionality relating to monitoring the pending Utilisation Certificates of the  
grant-in-aid released by the State Government was not made in the system. Corrections 
were made in the data without Transfer Entry. There was delay in freezing of monthly 
Account before sending to the A ccountant’s General Office. The reliability of monthly 
accounts got affected due to allowing of alterations in data even after submission of 
accounts to the Accountant ’s General Office. It was also observed that Drawing and 
disbursing officers were created (prior to first July 2020) in the system without recording 
sanction details of Accountant General . The Government may ensure that the IFMIS is 
compatible with the system of the AG office as the department is liable to submit the 
accounts and data as required under the rules even in an e -system. Further, it was also 
observed that t he provisions of standard forms of CPWA code/MPTC  were not made in 
the system and supporting forms were not available  with monthly accounts.  The 
Government may ensure that the relevant forms of accounts as per CPWA code and 
MPTC are provisioned in IFMIS. 
 

 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 

 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  I 
INTRODUCTION 
The Department of Finance (DoF), Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP), monitors all 
receipts and expenditures of the State. The Department also looks after the allocation and 
monitoring of budget, accessing availability of funds for various schemes and moni toring the 
status of government investment in equities, loans, debentures, etc., ensuring proper financial 
management.  
In the financial year 2002 -03, GoMP took up computeri sation of its treasury operations. This 
led to the emergence of a State Financial M anagement System (SFMS). The Department 
upgraded the SFMS to Centralised State Financial Management System (C-SFMS). 
The C-SFMS was facing technology obsolescence and needed significant functional upgrades. 
Therefore, the Department intended to increase the scope and range of the system to cover all 
stakeholders which were not covered by the C -SFMS. This resulted in emergence of a  
state-wide Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) which was to enable 
the Government for seamless exchange of information across various departments and 
agencies. 
1.1  Integrated Financial Management Information System 
Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) is a web -based financial 
accounting system initiated in 2010 under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) of Government 
of India. The first step in this initiative was the Treasury Computeri sation Project which was 
taken up by State governments with funding from Government of India. It is a complete 
application software package that enables online real time management, monitoring and control 
of all fund allocations and financial transactions in different departments and subordinate 
offices of the State Government. 
The primary goal of the system is to facilitate efficient, effective and transparent management 
of the finances of the State Government through online interface between DDOs, District/Sub-
Treasuries, Finance Department at the State headquarter and other stakeholders like 
Accountant General, Reserve Bank of India and Government of India with an objective to 
improve financial management and decision making in the Government. Directorate of 
Treasuries and Accounts (DTA), Bhopal under the Finance Department, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh is the nodal agency for implementation of IFMIS. 
1.2  Project cost 
Administrative Approval of ₹ 120.17 crore for IFMIS was accorded (June 2010) by the 
Government. The project was scheduled to be completed by February 2012 . Revised 
Administrative Approval for ₹ 149.55 crore was accorded (February 2012) by the Government 
for implementation. The project cost was again revised (September 2019) to ₹ 199.52 crore by 
the Government. 
M/s Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) was appointe d as System Integrator (SI) (including 
supply, warranty and post warranty of computer hardware, software and networking 
equipment) for implementation of IFMIS and an agreement was executed between the 
Commissioner, Treasury & Accounts (CTA) and M/s TCS Ltd. (July 2010) for ₹ 120.17 crore 
and the project was to be functional in all offices of the State. 
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 2 
1.3  Broad technical features of IFMIS 
The goal of implementation of IFMIS was to enhance existing processes for better management 
of Public Finances in the state. The IFMIS has the objective to align the focus of Government 
Policies, Plans and Programs corresponding to the availability of reso urces to the economy. 
The IFMIS comprises of three sub -systems i.e. Financial Management Information System 
(FMIS), Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) and Pension 
Management Information System (PMIS). These three sub -systems are further d ivided into 
sixteen modules. The Web Portal (Cyber Treasury) module is also present as a part of the 
system. 
1.4  Organisation Structure 
The Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) is the administrative head of the DoF. CTA controls the 
functioning of DTA. The DTA, which manages the functioning  of Treasuries and Sub -
Treasuries, is responsible for implementation of IFMIS Project.  
Chart 1.1 Organisational Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.5  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit (PA) sought to ascertain whether: 
• The project management of IFMIS was efficient and effective; 
• The design and development of IFMIS was adequate to perform all the functions of Budget 
Module and Receipt and Disbursement Module (R&D) Module; 
• The operations of IFMIS facilitated intended objec tives with secured transactions and 
maintenance was effective; and 
• The system provided functionality to integrate with functions of Accountant General 
(Accounts & Entitlement) Office. 
1.6  Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following: 
• Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code (MPTC), Madhya Pradesh Financial Code (MPFC) 
and Madhya Pradesh Budget Manual (MPBM); 
Sub-Treasuries (156 in numbers) 
Additional Chief Secretary, Finance Department 
Commissioner, Treasuries and Accounts (CTA) 
Director, Treasuries and Accounts (DTA) 
Treasuries (57 in numbers) 

 Chapter I: Introduction 
Page 3 
• Government notifications and instructions issued from time to time for management of 
IFMIS and Departmental rules and regulations;  
• Functional Requirement Specifications (FRS), System Requirement Specifications 
(SRS), System Design Documents (SDD) and provisions of agreement; and  
• Best Information Technology (IT) practices. 
1.7  Audit Scope and Methodology 
This PA covered a period of two years commencing from 2019 -20 to 2020 -21 with detailed 
scrutiny of two specific modules i.e., Budget Module and R&D Module which are operational 
modules. The Audit was conducted from December 2021 to November 2022 in joint effort with 
Office of PAG (Accounts & Entitlement)-I, Madhya Pradesh. 
Audit examined contract execution of IFMIS system, its terms and conditions as proposed in 
Request for Proposal (RFP) and payments made to various vendors during the implementation 
of IFMIS, whether it adhered to as per agreement or there was any deviation without approval. 
Audit also examined various controls through data analysis using computer assisted IT 
techniques. Audit has also test –checked relevant records in Finance De partment, Directorate, 
Treasury and Accounts, selected Budget Controlling Officers (Directorates) of the selected 
Department and selected District Treasuries and its underlying selected DDOs.  
An Entry Conference was held on 14 July 2022 with the ACS, D oF in which the audit 
objectives, criteria, scope and methodology had been discussed and explained. An Exit 
Conference was held on 20 June 2023. The replies of the Government are incorporated at 
suitable places. 
1.8  Project Planning 
1.8.1 Selection of System Integrator 
The DTA, DoF, GoMP prepared Request for Proposal (RFP) for selection and appointment of 
SI for IFMIS. The RFP contained the process details, functional requirement specification, key 
professional qualification, time schedule for implementation, Bill of Material etc. The project 
was proposed to be funded through GoI funds and the State Government funds. 
The DTA invited (November 2009) bid from firms or consortium of firm s to act as SI for the 
development, implementation, maintenance, and ma nagement of IFMIS (including supply, 
warranty of computer hardware, software and networking). In response to this, total four firms 
submitted their bids and Technical Committee of the Department and Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) evaluated technical b id reports and found all the bidders technically 
qualified.  TCS was selected as SI with a total project cost of ₹ 120.17 crore.  
The expenditure incurred towards the project till the end of March 2022 was  
₹ 108.39 crore which included payment for change request, operation and maintenance during 
Managed IT Phase and Extended Managed IT Phase. Besides this, ₹ 52.35 crore was paid for 
purchase of additional hardware and software including its Annual Maintenance Contract 
(AMC). 
1.8.2 Cost components of the contract 
The contract agreement was executed (July 2010) with the TCS for a contract price of  
₹ 120.17 crore for supply, installation and operation till Managed IT Phase. Further, an 
agreement for Extended Managed IT Phase was also executed (March 2021) wit h the SI for a 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 4 
contract price of ₹ 29.37 crore. The accepted proposal comprised of the component indicated 
in the Table 1.1 and Table 1.2 below: 
Table 1.1: Project cost 
S. No. Item ₹ in crore 
1. Capital Cost 56.92 
2. Recurrent Cost (operational expenditure) till Managed IT Phase 63.25 
 Grand Total 120.17 
3. Extended Managed IT Phase 29.37 
 Source: Bid proposal of TCS 
Table 1.2: Component-wise cost 
(₹ in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Item of Expenditure Capital 
Cost 
Recurrent 
Cost 
Total Cost 
1. Application development 5.34 6.99 12.34 
2. Application product 9.24 13.41 22.65 
3. Hardware 26.64 0 26.64 
4. Operations and Maintenance (AMC) 0 42 42 
5. Software 11.51 0 11.51 
6. Site preparation 4.18 0 4.18 
7. SI training 0 0.61 0.61 
8. Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) training 0 0.24 0.24 
Total 56.92 63.25 120.17 
Source: Contract agreement with M/s TCS Limited  
1.9  Status of the Modules 
Overall scope of IFMIS application comprises of 16 modules, as detailed in the figure below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Payroll 
Plan 
Project 
Management 
Receipts & 
Disbursement 
Strong Room 
Internal Audit 
Debt and 
Investment 
Management 
Purchase & 
Inventory 
Deposit 
+-
General Ledger 
& Asset 
Accounting 
Employee Self 
Service 
Performance 
Management 
Service Matters  
PMIS 
Web Portal 
Bilingual 
Interface 
(English/
Hindi) 
Email/ 
SMS 
Alert 
Budget 
Pension Management
 
Management 
Integration with External Agencies (RBL, Agency Banks, NABARD, AGMP) 
User Training 
DC & NDR (Bhopal)/ DR 
(Gwalior) 
Supply, Installation, and commissioning of infrastructure at DC/DR/NDR and Remote 
Location 
Data Migration 
Central Help Desk 
 Implementation of IFMIS (approx..5 lacs employees, PMIS for Approx. 3 lacs pensioners) 
5 years maintenance support fir Application and Infrastructure (Hardware/Software) 
Solution Documentation 
Third Party Testing (Application, Infrastructure) 
Pending for 
Go-Live 
 Discontinued 
 Signed off for go 
live. 
 Features of Modules 
 

 Chapter I: Introduction 
Page 5 
Out of the above mentioned 16 proposed modules, 10 modules were implemented (Go-Live 
sign off), one Plan module was discontinued on the ground that difference between plan and 
non-plan was discontinued. Thus, the IFMIS project is yet to achieve all its intended objectives 
and expected outcomes even after more than a decade since its conception. 
1.10  Organisation of Audit Findings 
The Audit Findings are organised as follows: 
Chapter I : Introduction 
Chapter II : Project implementation and Financial Management 
Chapter III : Application development and operation 
Chapter IV : Application security 
Chapter V : Integration of IFMIS with functions of Accountant General 

 
 
Chapter II 
Project Implementation 
and Financial Management 

 
 

CHAPTER II 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
 
Summary  
Project Implementation: 
The contract with the Project Management Consultant was foreclosed on 30 June 2011  
thereafter a separate Project Management Consultant for IFMIS was not available during 
development and implementation of IFMIS. M/s Tata Consultancy Services appointed as 
System Integrator failed to achieve the milestones and there was delay ranging from 5 to 68 
months in delivery and installation of Hardware/Software. Only 10 modules could be signed 
off for Go -live out of 16 modules  till March 2023 . The Government considered allowing 
payment on the basis of module wise completion instead of overall completion of the Project 
which created various complications with respect to the provision of the Agreement. 
Migration of data from earlier software was not completed and the Department had to bear 
an extra burden of ₹ 4.46 crore for the maintenance of C-SFMS system up to Se ptember 
2021, after its maintenance period was over in November 2013.  The System Integrator 
changed 80 per cent  of prime resources mentioned in the bid and out of the changed 
resources, 66 per cent of resources were found to be completely absent from the site during 
the initial period i.e., up to September 2013.  
The Department accepted the Vulnerability Assessment conducted by the third party (STQC) 
as accomplishment of functionality tests. The scope of report of STQC included assessment 
of 25 network devi ces and 48 servers of Data Centre as a Vulnerability Assessment and 
failed to furnish the details of the functionalities tested for the modules signed off for Go -
live. It was further noticed that the domain values captured for movement status of bills were 
also hardcoded. Thus, there was a possibility  of continued vendor dependency due to 
hardcoding in the core code and inadequate transfer of technical know-how.  
It was also noticed that only user training was provided to 793 trainees for 96 days. Advance 
Administration training for database administrators and system managers was not provided. 
The officials were deprived of OEM and Administrators training.  
Financial Management: 
There was an unwarranted increase of the project cost by ₹ 69.52 crore on the plea of merger 
of 2.37 lakh teaching cadre in the School Education Department and Tribal welfare 
Department. 
The Department paid for the changes made before September 2017 an amount of ₹ 2.35 crore 
for 4,083 man-days out of which 781.47 man days were related to the changes, which were 
already within the scope of the contract or in contradiction of provisions of t he Budget 
Manual. The payment of ₹ 0.47 crore was therefore avoidable.  
An excess payment ₹ 15.67 crore to S ystem Integrator was made on account of non -
consideration of module wise completion and non -observance of performance of S ervice 
Level Agreements.  
Conducting of Apex Steering Committee meeting after April 2015 was not found on records. 
It was noticed that inventory of all important assets associated with each information system 
was not being maintained as per the provisions of the Information Security Policy.  
 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 8 
2.1  Project Implementation 
2.1.1 Non availability of Project Management Consultant 
Volume II, Conditions of Contract provides for ‘Project Management Unit’ (PMU) for looking 
after the overall management of the project . The PMU included Apex Steering Committee, 
Commissioner, Directorate of Treasuries and Account, Purchaser’s Project Manager, 
Department of Finance (DoF’s) Team, Technical Committee, Project Management Consultant, 
System Integrator’s (SI’s) Representative/Project Manager. 
M/s Wipro Ltd. was appointed (September 2008) as Project Management Consultant (PMC) 
of Finance Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh to provide consultancy support for 
management and technology consultant for three years , who prepared Request for Proposa l 
(RFP) for the IFMIS . Tenders were invited on the basis of this RFP (November 2009) . The 
contract with the PMC was foreclosed on 30 June 2011  and the Department did not appoint a 
new PMC. All the functions of PMC were performed by the Department itself. Thus, separate 
PMC for IFMIS was not available during development and implementation of IFMIS. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that the PMC period was not extended, because the 
department was having finance officers and technical  officers with previous knowledge of 
SFMS and CSFMS. It further saved the cost of PMC and this arrangement had not affected 
any deprivation of knowledge to the project.  
The reply is not acceptable as the PMC was a separate entity under the PMU which was to be 
assigned responsibility of project monitoring and evaluation, Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
monitoring and issue management etc. In the absence of the PMC, the department was deprived 
of professional services consequently, and project timelines could not be achieved as 
mentioned in succeeding paragraph 2.1.2. 
2.1.2 Non -achievement of Milestone and delay in delivery and installation of Hardware/  
         Software 
M/s Tata Consultancy Services was appointed as System Integrator (SI) for implementation of 
IFMIS. The agreement for the work was executed in July 201 0 for ₹ 120.17 crore.  The 
agreement provided for timely achievement of specific milestones. As per the milestones given 
in the contract, all the modules were to Go Live and rolled out in all the offices by February 
2012. 
It was noticed that the implementat ion of IFMIS was delayed, and milestones were not 
achieved as per the contract. The details of delay are given in the Table 2.1 below:  
Table 2.1: Delay in implementation of IFMIS 
S. 
No. 
Milestone As per contract Actual Achievement as 
on February 2022 
Period of delay in 
months 
1. SRS preparation & sign off 24/11/2010 April 2011 5 
2. System Design Document February 2011 February 2012 12 
3. System Architecture Document February 2011 March 2013 25 
4. Application Testing & User 
Acceptance Testing 
31/08/2011 Pending for eight 
modules1 
- 
5. Data Centre set up 06/07/2011 June 2015 46 
6. Data Recovery set up 06/07/2011 April 2017 68 
7. Pilot & System Go-Live Feb 2012 8 out of 16 - 
Source: Information provided by the Department  
                                                 
1  The last module signed off for Go -live was Pension module which was on 07 February 2020. Rest eight  
modules were yet to be operationalised (as on February 2022).  

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 9 
The Budget Module and Receipt and Disbursement Module were signed off for Go -live on 
September 2015 and September 2018 respectively . The details of the delays in various 
activities between 2011 and 2018 are discussed below: 
• As per Clause 5.2.2 of General Conditions of Contract, a Detailed Project Plan 2 was to be 
submitted by the SI within 21 days from effective date of the Contract, i.e., up to 28 July 
20103. The SI prepared the Detailed Project Plan in March 2011 with delay . As the work 
was not as per the project plan submitted by the SI, the SI was to submit the revised plan, 
however, the SI did not submit the revised plan.   
• The SRS which was to be submitted in November 2010 was submitted by the SI in March 
2011 and penalty of ₹ 0.32 crore was imposed and deducted by the Department for delay. 
The delay in preparation in SRS delayed the start of development of the application. 
• The SDD was to be submitted in February 2011, but it had been submitted by the SI in 
February 2012 . The delayed submission of SDD also affected development of the 
application. 
• As per Agreement, System Architecture Document containing details of locations of 
hardware and software was to be signed off in February 2011, but it was finalised in March 
2013. This contributed delay in procurement and delivery of Hardware by two years. The 
work order was issued in March 2013 and delivery continued during the period March 2014 
to April 2017.  
• The site for construction of Data Centre was to be handed over in Octob er 2010 by the 
Department to the System Integrator. I t was handed over in January 2012  after a delay of 
more than one year.  
• The target date for Design, Development, Customisation and integration of software/ 
application as per the contract was 25 May 2011  and testing and user acceptance of 
hardware/LAN/ WAN was to be completed by 06 July 2011 and the operational acceptance 
of system was to be completed by 29 February 2012. However, the department could hand 
over site for Data Centre on 10 January 2012. The  operational acceptance of Data Centre 
was done by the Department in September 2015 and operational acceptance of Data 
Recovery Site was done by the department in April 2017.  
• Only ten modules were signed off for Go-live out of 16 modules up to July 2023, as changes 
in deployment of resources by the SI during development of application also contributed to 
delay of development of modules, as mentioned in Paragraph 2.1.5.  
• The Department calculated the delay for various components and estimated a maximum 
penalty of 20 per cent of the contract as on 31 August 2013 i.e., ₹ 24.03 crore  but the 
Department deducted penalty of ₹ 9.90 crore only (up to December 2021). 
It was further noticed that the delay in the development of application, User Acceptance Test, 
Pilot Go live and delay in installation of Data Centre and Data Recovery Centre, compelled the 
Department to go for module -wise completion. Later,  the Government allowed (Dec ember 
2017) to make payments Module-wise instead of complete solution.  
The above facts indicated that the Department failed to ensure the timely completion of IFMIS, 
besides, it failed to recover the penalty for delay as calculated.  
The Government reiter ating the facts stated (July 2023) that due to change in Data Centre 
subcontractor by the SI, frequent changes of resources by SI also led to delay . Notices were 
                                                 
2  Items like delivery and installation, Pilot and Go-live plan, training plan, change management plan, technical 
support plan, and Operational Acceptance Test plan were s ome of the important components of Detailed 
Project Plan. 
3  21 days from effective date of the Contract i.e., 07 July 2010. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 10 
issued as per the provisions  of the contract . It was further stated that the department had 
recovered the penalty which it had calculated.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Coordination committee in its meeting in September 2013 
considered delays of more than 100 weeks in many components for implementation of penalty. 
However, the penalty was not  recovered in full from the SI. Further, the department itself 
accepted module wise Go-live despite interdependency of modules. It was the responsibility of 
the Department to choose best suitable solution during technical evaluation of SI's proposals.  
2.1.3 Negative impact of acceptance of module-wise completion 
As per Clause 3.2 of RFP, there was provision of testing, Pilot Go-Live, and commissioning of 
complete solution i.e., all modules. Further, as per Clause 3.2.1 of Conditions of Contract,  
25 per cent of the total price for Design, Development and Implementation was to be made 
after testing and User Acceptance of the complete solution. 
There were delays in the completion of the project. The SI expressed (August 2017) its inability 
to continue with the project. The Department in October 2017 decided to continue the project 
with the SI to prevent the expenditure incurred so far to be termed as unproductive and on the 
plea that in case of closure of the project, the work of salary of the employees as well as 
computerization of revenue receipts would be stopped. Accordingly, the Coordination 
Committee recommended module wise completion instead of complete sign off.  
The Government, vide order dated 30 December 2017 has considered to allow payment on the 
basis of module wise completion instead of overall completion of the Project and period of the 
Managed IT Phase was considered from 01 September 2015 (up to 31 August 2020).  
Accordingly Extended Managed IT Phase was to be started from 01 September 2020 (up to 31 
August 2023).  
The agreement executed earlier was for Implementation and Managed IT Phase, which was 
valid up to 31 August 2020 as per the Government order dated 30 December 2017. Thus, there 
was no valid agreement between the SI and the Department  from 01 September 2020 to  
26 March 2021 for maintaining the system . However, the Department entered into a contract 
on 27 March 2021 for Extended Managed IT Phase up to 31 August 2023, applicable from  
01 September 2020 i.e., from back date.  
The Government agreeing with the facts stated (July 2023) that due to COVID-19 the signing 
of addendum to Extended Managed IT Phase was delayed. 
Acceptance of the Module -wise completion of IFMIS created further complications, as 
discussed below: 
As per the agr eement, the Managed IT phase was five years from the date of signing off for 
Go-live. As per the Government order dated 30 December 2017, the managed IT phase was 
considered up to 31 August 2020 and accordingly the extended Managed IT phase was 
considered up to 31 August 2023. But by considering module -wise completion, different 
modules were signed off for Go live on different dates, so the Managed IT Phase for different 
modules would start from their respective dates of Go-Live as detailed in the Table 2.2 below: 
Table 2.2: Periods of managed IT Phase and Extended Managed IT Phase of modules 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Module 
Go live sign 
off date 
Managed IT Phase as per 
order dated 30-12-2017 
Extended Managed IT Phase 
1. Budget 01-09-15 From 01-09-15 to 30-08-20 From 01-09-20 to 30-08-23 
2. Plan 31-03-18 Discontinued Discontinued  
3. ESS 31-03-18 From 31-03-18 to 30-03-23 Should start from 31-03-23 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 11 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Module 
Go live sign 
off date 
Managed IT Phase as per 
order dated 30-12-2017 
Extended Managed IT Phase 
4. Payroll 09-05-18 From 09-05-18 to 08-05-23 Should start from 09-05-23 
5. R & D 18-09-18 From18-09-18 to 17-09-23 Should start from 18-09-23 
6. Deposit 01-08-18 From 01-08-18 to 31-07-23 Should start from 01-08-23 
7. Strong room 10-12-18 From 10-12-18 to 09-12-23 Should start from 10-12-23 
8. Pension 07-02-20 From 07-02-20 to 06-02-25 Should start from 07-02-25 
9. Service Matters 07-11-18 The Department accepted (March 2023) signing off for Go-live of 
the module from backdate (07 November 2018). 
10. Web Portal 11-11-21 The Department accepted (March 2023) signing off for Go-live of 
the module from backdate (11 November 2021). 
Remaining six modules are still to Go-Live, so its Managed IT Phase has not yet started. 
Source: Information provided by the Department  
• As evident from above, though different modules were to be signed off for Go -live on 
different dates, the order contained date of Managed IT Phase up to 31 August 2020 based 
on signing off date of Budget module only. These deprived modules  signed off after  the 
signing off of Budget module from benefits of Managed IT phase for the period beyond 
August 2020.   
• Similarly, as per the agreement the Extended Managed IT phase period was three years 
from the date of completion of Managed IT Phase. The Government co nsidered Extended 
Managed phase up to 31 August 2023 based on signing off date of Budget module only. 
Therefore, support of Extended Managed IT Phase to all the completed modules after the 
Budget module was not ensured.  
The Government stated (July 2023) t hat module -wise completion and weightage-based 
execution will be taken care of in the future project and provision of timely completion will 
be ensured.  
• As Budget and Receipt and Disbursement Modules were integrated with eight and nine 
modules of IFMIS respectively, functionalities of modules as discussed in the  
paragraph 3.2 and 3.3  such as functionalities of ways and means management, 
contingency fund a nd mapping of head of accounts of receipts got affected. Thus, 
consideration of module-wise Go-live instead of complete solution was not appropriate and 
resulted in failure in holistic and functional integration . Despite this, the Department 
declared Module-wise Go-Live signoff for eight modules (upto February 2022). 
The Government stated (July 2023) that since there was no provision of extension of 
timelines as per approved project plan and on the proposal of SI, the Government approved 
module-wise Go-Live of IFMIS. It was further stated that Budget and R&D modules were 
mutually dependent, and all other modules were dependent on these two modules therefore 
they were decided to Go-Live first. 
The reply is not acceptable as all the modules were mutually dependent and the department 
failed to get the project implemented as a complete solution. 
• The Department declared the sign off for Go-live of Budget module on 01 September 2015, 
but the Budget Plan scheme mapping was not completed (September 2016). As there were 
problems in Budget module, which could not be resolved by the SI, Department prepared 
the final Budget of 2016-17 in erstwhile MUDRA software. Further, till July 2017, entire 
process of pilot Go -live of any of the modules was not commenced such as Budge t 
allotment and surrender reports were not completed.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 12 
The Government stated (July 2023) that Budget has been prepared by IFMIS and Book 
printing was done through MUDRA software. Now all budget making and printing is done 
through IFMIS. It was further stat ed that due to non -performance of the SI and delay in 
execution of the modules in the project, department has issued notice to the SI stating it to 
be blacklisted for further participation in the bid issued by the department.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Department declared the sign off for Go-live of Budget 
module despite all functionalities of the Budget modules not fully operational.  
2.1.4 Non-completion of Data Migration from C-SFMS to IFMIS  
Agreement for software s ervice support and maintenance of Centrali zed State Financial 
Management System (C -SFMS) was executed between the Department and M/s CMC Ltd 4  
25 January 2011. Deployment of C -SFMS was done in November 2011 and the maintenance 
period was up to November 2013. The maintenance agreement 5 was extended from time to 
time up to September 2021.  
According to the agreement of IFMIS, the System Integrator must migrate and convert all data 
available in C-SFMS to the new system IFMIS. The System Integrator was to do data sizing 
for migrating the data. Data conversion and migration were to be completed by February 2012.  
It was noticed that due to delay in implementation and Go -live of IFMIS the maintenance 
agreement was extended from time to time up to September 2021. The Annual maintenance 
for four sub systems of C-SFMS system was done by M/s TCS Ltd. The total maintenance cost 
for the four subsystems of C -SFMS was ₹ 0.58 crore per annum. Thus, due to  
non-implementation of IFMIS the department has to bear an extra burden of ₹ 4.46 crore for 
the maintenance of C -SFMS system up to September 2021, after its maintenance period was 
over in November 2013. A total of eight modules of IFMIS have been si gned off for Go-live 
(upto February 2022) but the Data migration of C -SFMS was not completed and the 
Department was still dependent on C -SFMS. Department had to bear avoidable burden of 
Annual maintenance cost of C -SFMS system, after its maintenance period  was over in 
November 2013.  
Thus, IFMIS could not achieve its independent functionality and the Department  was 
compelled to maintain the old system even after a lapse of more than 10 years. 
The Government while accepting the facts (July 2023) stated that the SI failed to migrate data 
to IFMIS. Further, Module wise Go -live and increasing timeline was requested by SI  and as 
such, the transition of execution of Modules was made accordingly. Parallel run of modules 
was not executed and only payments have been made as per weightage of the module. The SI 
has provisioned to provide C -SFMS reports in IFMIS. Therefore, this is the complete failure 
of execution of data migration by the SI.  
The reply is not acceptable as the complete data migration was to  be completed by February 
2012 and the contract/ addendum did not provide for migration as per module wise 
requirement.  
2.1.5 Changes in resources deployment was made without prior approval  
As per Clause 6.1.4 of RFP Vol-I provides that the resources6 projected in the proposal cannot 
be changed without written permission from the Purchaser i.e. the Department. There was 
                                                 
4  M/s TCS Ltd took over M/s CMC Ltd in April 2015. 
5  Period of Maintenance agreement was from November 2011 to November 2013. 
6  1. Engagement Manager 2. Project Manager 3. Application Development & Integration Lead 4. Security lead 
5. Networking Lead 6. Infrastructure & Data center Lead 7. Training & change management lead 8. Quality 
Assurance Lead 9. Domain specialist Finance 10. Domain specialist HR, 11. Database A dministrator Leader 
and 12. Web Administrator.  
 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 13 
provision of replacement of resource from the proposed list of resources in case the resource 
does not qualify on the minimum requirement criteria. A maximum of 20 per cent of the total 
resource may be allowed to be replaced and in the case of a request from bidder, replacement 
shall not exceed 30 per cent. 
It was noticed 7 that the deployed personnel have been replaced without permission of  the 
Department. The System Integrator changed 80 per cent of prime resources mentioned in the 
bid and out of changed resources 66 per cent of resources were completely absent from the site 
during the initial period i.e., up to September 2013, as detailed in Appendix 2.1. It included 
the prime resources such as Engagement Manager, Project Manager, Infrastructure and Data 
Centre Lead, Quality Assurance Lead of the project. These substantial changes in deployed 
resources not  only affected the quality  of product (as mentioned in Chapter 2) but also 
contributed to delaying the project (as mentioned in paragraph 2.1.2). 
Thus, System Integrator had violated the provisions of RFP and changed the prime resources 
frequently, but no action had been taken by the Department in this regard.   
The Government agreeing with facts stated (July 2023) that notice to the SI was issued as per 
Clause 6.1.4 of Volume I of the RFP of the contract.  
The fact remains that prior approval of the Department was not obtained by SI in terms of the 
provisions of the contract. This also contributed to a  delay in the implementation of IFMIS. 
Moreover, inadequate manpower in initial years of project hampered the progress of work as 
mentioned in earlier paragraph 2.1.2.  
2.1.6 Inadequate application testing 
As per Clause 3.2 of RFP Vol. III, Operational Acceptance Tests8 (OAT) were to be done by 
the Department. All the tests should have been conducted before the start of the Managed IT 
Phase. As per para 5.10.4 of Vol. II, RFP, installation and commissioning shall be carried out 
individually for each identified major component or Subsystem(s) of the System.  
Further, the issuance of Operational Acceptance Certificates (OACs) for individual major 
components shall not relieve the Supplier of its obligation to obtain an OAC for the System as 
a whole.  
The Department issued separate OACs for Data Centre (DC), Data Recovery (DR) Centre and 
Nearest Disaster Recovery (NDR) Centre. The details of major components are given in the 
Table 2.3 below: 
Table 2.3: Showing issuance of separate OACs  
Particulars of major component/ sub system Date of Operational Acceptance 
Hardware, software and non-IT devices at DC September 2015 
Hardware, software and non-IT devices at DR April 2017 
Hardware at NDR April 2017 
Additional hardware and software at DC  January 2020 
Additional hardware and software at DR January 2020 
Source: Information provided by the Department  
                                                 
7  As per status and issues of IFMIS with the System Integrator prepared by the Department. 
8  Database Test, Data Sampling, Functionality Test, Unit Test, System Test, Security, Stress Test, Reliability 
Testing, Performance Testing , Consistency Testing, Recovery Testing , Audit Trail, Multi-User Capabilit y, 
Help Information Testing , Limit Testing , Volume Test , System Integration Test , Compatibility and 
Configuration Testing, Storage Testing, Installation Testing, Environment Testing, Graphical User Interface 
(GUI) Test , Manual Procedures Testing , User Information Testing , Maintainability and Monitoring 
performance of local area network.  
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 14 
The functionality test was a part of OAT which was to be conducted by the Department with 
the assistance of SI. Functionality test was required for testing that the functional requirements 
specified in all the modules are met. All functions were to be tested when the user provides 
inputs with correct and incorrect inputs. The STQC 9 was appointed as third-party test agency 
in February 2012. 
It was noticed that the Department accepted the Vulnerability Assessment conducted by the 
third party (STQC) as accomplishment of functionality tests. The scope of report of STQC 
included assessment of 25 network devices and 48 servers of Data Centre as a Vulnerability 
Assessment. The department failed to furnish the details of the functionalities tested for the 
modules signed off for Go-live. Thus, the actual functionality testing which was to be done by 
the department was not done.   
Further, except the functionality test, though the other tests as per RFP Volume III  
(Appendix 2.2) were conducted in February 2018, yet the Department issued the OAC of Data 
Centre effective from 01 September 2015 i.e., with effect from back da te. Moreover, seven 
modules which were signed off for Go -live after February 2018, their OAT s as required had 
not been carried out. 
The Government stated (November 2022) that the SI failed to complete the complete 
functionality testing from third party tes ting agency as per approved testing plan and RFP 
provisions. For submission of certificate from TPT DTA has issued reminders and notice to 
TCS. It was further stated that two rounds of testing were done, and all the observations were 
enclosed. However, a formal certificate was not given. In order to expedite the implementation 
of modules, TPT and UAT were performed in parallel.  
The reply itself indicates that functionality testing under the OAT was not completed. As per 
the provisions of RFP, the responsibility of conducting OAT including functionality tests was 
with the Department. However, the Department failed to complete the functionality test.  
2.1.7 Possibility of vendor dependency due to Hardcoding  
As per provisions of Software Development & Re -Engineering Guidelines for Cloud Ready 
Applications10, as part of the software engineering, it is important to use technologies 
developed in open standards. As part of the overall software development lifecycle, a minimum 
customization and maximum configuration approach should be adopted. There should not be 
any hardcoding in any aspect of the development. Master data should be available in 
parameterised format. It should not be hardcoded in the application.  Further, as per scope of 
work of Project Management Consultant (PMC), the consultant was to supervise the overall 
project progress and suggest National and International best practices to be adopted for smooth 
functioning of the project.  
It was noticed that various variables in the colum n of payment details table and bill register 
table were being captured through codes, instead of fetching the values from master tables. The 
flag/ domain values of columns were not readily available. Adoption of hardcoding in the core 
code was contrary to above mentioned provisions. It was further noticed that the domain values 
captured for movement status of bills were also hardcoded.  Moreover, the contract with the 
PMC (M/s Wipro Ltd.) was foreclosed on 30 June 2011 and the Department did not appoint a 
 
                                                 
9  Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification, IT services, Kolkata whi ch is a Central Government 
agency.  
10  Prepared by the Department of Electronics & Information Technology, Ministry of Communications & 
Information Technology, New Delhi. 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 15 
new PMC, the refore supervision and suggestions relating to  compliance of National best 
practices for development of IFMIS were foregone. Thus, the possibility of continued vendor 
dependency cannot be ruled out.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that during  preparation of SRS, all due care was taken to 
parameterize the rules to make system configurable. Chapter 4 of SRS of each module has 
corresponding masters. However, circulars issued by the Government impact the existing 
business rules. Therefore, at few levels, the system may have been hardcoded by SI for fast 
execution. The SI failed to make the complete system configurable. 
The reply is not acceptable as the solution was to allow for the development of new features, 
functionalities, changes to be done through interfaces external to the existing code base, which 
was not available.  
2.1.8 Inadequate transfer of technical know-how  
As per functional and technical requirement, deliverables included technical documentation to 
explain source code during Design, Development and Implementation Phase. As per GCC 
Clause 3.2.1, the SI has to hand over technical know -how inter alia included, source code, 
Solution Design Documents, documentation records and all relevant items to the purchaser on 
Pilot Go-live of each module.  
It was noticed that the Department directed (December 2020) the SI for handing over of 
deliverables under Clause GCC 7.1 (Vol. II) and 1.5.1 of Vol. III including source code. A total 
of 11 modules have been completed for Pilot Go-live, however, the System Integrator did not 
hand over the source code, Solution Design Documents, other documented records of all 
relevant items.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that solution documentation has been shared and SI has 
reassured that updated source code will be provided. This milestone is mentioned in the RFP 
Vol. II and Vol. III as the last activity of the project. The complete solution documentation will 
be verified by the DTA technical committee. Payments are also on hold for this component. 
The reply is not acceptable as the SI has to hand over technical know-how inter alia included, 
source code, Solution Design Documents, documentation records and all relevant items to the 
purchaser on Pilot Go-live of each module. Further, on being requisitioned for exit management 
policy, the Department stated that exit management policy was given in RFP-Vol. II. However, 
no formal exit management policy was found. 
2.1.9 Trainings for IFMIS 
As per para 2.7.2 of technical requirements (Volume III) appended with agreement, System 
Integrator will carry out assessment of training needs, and based on such assessment, develop 
training delivery schedule and training materials for training the users, technical staff and the 
management. Apart from three types of training, System Integrator was to arrange for Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) training and Advance Administration training for data centre 
administrators in second year of implementation . Further, as per para 7.4 of the Change  
Management and Training Plan submitted by the System Integrator, the training calendar was 
to be prepared for 2000 users and 80 Technical users. It will be DTA’s responsibility to arrange 
a training coordinator and arrange facilities and equipment for propagating the training by 
2,000 trainers to remaining IFMIS users.  
It was noticed that only user training was provided to 793 trainees for 96 days. Adva nce 
Administration training for database administrators and system managers was not provided. 
Further, it was informed (November 2022) that 34 System Managers and five System Analyst 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 16 
were working in the Department, but they were not given back -end access a nd OEM, or 
technical training was not imparted to them. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that instructions were given to all the Treasury Officers to 
provide the training. Training was provided continuously even at e-Daksh centres by treasuries. 
In spite of several reminders, the SI has not given OEM training. Penalties will be imposed 
accordingly. 
The reply is not acceptable as deficient training was provided to master trainers and the details 
of training provided by the DTA to all the DDOs and officials posted in the departments were 
not available on the records. Moreover, important training such as technical training, 
management training and OEM training had not been provided to the technical staff and 
management.  
2.2  Mapping of Business rules in IFMIS 
2.2.1 Non-provision of Indian Government Accounting Standards in IFMIS 
Indian Government Accounting Standards (IGAS) -2, published in May 2010 applies to the 
Union Government and the State Governments in accounting and classification  of Grants-in-
aid received or given by them. As per the Standard, Grants -in-aid are given by the Union 
Government to State Governments and by the State Governments to the Local Bodies in 
discharging functions of local Governments (the Panchayats and the Municipalities) under the 
Constitution. Further, as per Paragraph 9 of the Standards, Grants-in-aid disbursed by a grantor 
to a grantee shall be classified and accounted for as revenue expenditure in the Financial 
Statements of the grantor irrespective of the purpose for which the funds disbursed as Grants-
in-aid are to be spent by the grantee. Expenditure on Grant -in-aids for the purpose of creating 
assets shall not, except in cases specifically authorised by the President on the advice of the 
Comptroller an d Auditor General of India, be debited to a capital head of account in the 
Financial Statements of the Government.  
It was noticed that the Functional Requirement Specification (FRS), System Requirement 
Specification (SRS) and System Design Documentations (SDD) did not incorporate 
requirements as per provisions of IGAS-2 and the business rule for correct accounting of Grant-
in-aids was not implemented in IFMIS.  
Analysis of the Bill Data of Grant -in-aids for the period 2019 -21, showed that there were  
3,005 number of bills relating to expenditure/payment of ₹  9,574.25 crores on account of 
Grant-in-aid by GoMP to the agencies 11 for incurring Capital Expenditure. The expenditure 
was wrongly debited to different heads in the Capital Expenditure, instead of the Revenue 
Account. The details are given in Appendix 2.3. This indicated that the required Business 
Rules were not mapped and validation controls to put check on selection of Major Head relating 
to Capital Expenditure were not provided in IFMIS due to which w rong Major Heads were 
accepted by the System, which further led to wrong accounting of Grant -in-aid related 
expenditure in IFMIS.  
Thus, non -implementation of the IGAS -2 standard, resulted in Revenue Expenditure of  
₹ 9,574.25 crores being misclassified as  Capital Expenditure during the financial years  
2019-20 and 2020-21.  
                                                 
11  Grants were mainly utilised by GoMP for disbursing the Funds to Local Bodies such as Nagar Panchayats, 
Gram Panchayats, Janpad Panchayats, Nagar Palika Parishads, Zila Panchayats, etc. 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 17 
The Government stated (July 2023) that it was not envisaged at that time, however, the 
suggestions for IGAS-2 are being sought from the stakeholders in IFMIS Next Gen.  
The reply is not acceptable as due to the non-provisioning of conditions of IGAS-2, expenditure 
related to Grant-in-Aid was not booked in its proper Major Head.  
2.2.2 Medium term expenditure framework statement not operational 
As per provisions of Madhya Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) 
Act, 2005, under Section 5 of the Act read with Rule 3, 4, 5 and 7 of Madhya Pradesh FRBM 
rules, 2006, the State Government is required to lay Macro -Economic Framework Statement, 
Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement, Fiscal Policy Strategy Statements and Discloser 
Statements along with the Annual Financial Statements and Demand for Grants before the 
Assembly. Medium Term Fisc al Policy Statement included rolling targets and projections of 
Fiscal Indicators, Capital Receipts, and Total Expenditure etc. related provisions of MTEF 
were also made in the FRS.  
It was noticed that out of four tables earmarked for using functionality of MTEF, only two 
tables were created in the system, which did not contain any data, though, the statements 
required under the provisions of FRBM Act, 2005 were laid before the Assembly. This 
indicated that functions were being used outside the system.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the functionality was developed in IFMIS but due to 
discontinuation of plan module, the functionality was not used. 
The reply is not acceptable as statements under the Madhya Pradesh FRBM Act were being 
laid in the Assembly despite discontinuance of Plan module.  
2.2.3 Monitoring of outcomes not done 
As per Functional Requirement Specification (FRS), the system was to have the details of work 
in progress projects including outcome of projects, activity details, milestone  completed etc. 
The activities were to be covered through plan module. Further, as per SRS, the process of 
Outcome budget included for recording of the targets to be achieved. Similarly corresponding 
provisions were made in SDD. Responsibilities of the Sta te Planning Commission inter-alia 
included fixation of annual targets and review of progress of selected schemes. SRS of Budget 
module provided for validation of the scheme level budget with approved plan ceiling/plan 
outlay as defined by State Planning Commission. Plan module inter-alia included monitoring 
reports for scheme wise outlays by State Planning Commission.  
It was noticed that the Department on plea that it had discontinued segregation between plan 
and non-plan schemes, discontinued the plan mod ule. Analysis of data relating to outcome 
budget revealed that there were four tables created for outcome budget , out of which table 
containing detailed records was having data up to February 2017. The State Government 
stopped making the Outcome Budget fro m the year 2015-16. In absence of outcome budget, 
purpose of monitoring of scheme wise outlays and outcomes by the State Planning Commission 
was defeated. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that it was not a software failure, but as Government 
discontinued segregation between Plan/Non-plan, the  plan module was discontinued. 
The reply is not acceptable as project management was a part of Functional Requirement 
Specifications, which inter-alia included indentification of the projects with priority and 
outcomes each year and discontinuance of segragration between Plan and Non -plan may not 
be a basis for exclusion of the process of monitoring of outcomes.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 18 
2.2.4 Data analytics capability not created in IFMIS application 
As per Volume III - Functional & Technical Requirements of IFMIS, Database and Data 
warehousing Services will in clude services like Database Analysis and Design, Data 
Warehousing and Business Intelligence (BI), Conversion and Business specific data that the 
application tracks or manages. BI applications of IFMIS were to include the activities of 
decision support sys tems, query and reporting, Online Analytical Processing (OLAP), 
statistical analysis, forecasting, and data mining. Further, the scope of work of Project 
Management Consultant (PMC), included to oversee the automation/computeri sation aspects 
of each process. However, the contract was foreclosed by the Government on 30 June 2011.  
However, audit could not find any trend analysis and forecasting MIS reports in the IFMIS 
application to support senior management by providing roll up, drill -down reports to help in 
generating trend analysis and have capability to perform forecasting, indicating that data 
analytics capabilities were not developed in IFMIS.  Moreover, there was no PMC to oversee 
implementation of processes relating to data analytics in IFMIS.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that dashboard reports are available for analysis. SI could 
not configure data warehousing and BI tools. The Department has regularly reminded the SI 
to provide the same, but the SI failed to provide these features. Notices have been issued to 
the SI. 
The fact remains that SI failed to provide the required features as per the provisions of the 
contract.  
2.2.5 Master data not fully captured in both English and Hindi 
As per directions issued (February 2012) by Department of Official Language, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India, while purchasing or getting the software developed, it 
should be ensured that it has full facility to work in the bilingual except in unavoidable 
circumstances. Further, as per  provisions of SRS of R&D module, transaction data will be 
presented in the language it was entered, while master data will have to be entered in both the 
languages.   
It was noticed during scrutiny of master tables of IFMIS database, that the numbers of a ctive 
records in both the language were different as detailed in the Table 2.4 below: 
Table 2.4: Details of numbers of records in English and Hindi 
Name of table Total records Records in 
English 
Records in 
Hindi 
CMN_CONTACT_MST 4,828 4,826 2 
CMN_BUDGETLINE_TXN 7,923 3,960 3,963 
CMN_LOOKUP_MST 9,130 4,734 4,396 
CMN_VALUESET_VALUE_MST 39,835 19,932 19,903 
CMN_BANK_BRANCH_MST 3,28,157 1,84,945 1,43,212 
WF_JOB_MST 66,31,957 66,00,455 31,502 
CMN_ADDRESS_MST 1,11,31,358 1,11,13,275 18,083 
WF_JOB_MVMNT_MST 16,1,67,134 1,60,81,497 85,637 
FD_RND_VENDOR_MST 5,12,53,972 4,88,68,736 23,85,236 
 Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
As a result of the above discrepancy in number of records, when data was retrieved from these 
tables, based on language ID, correctness of the data in Hindi and English rows could not be 
ensured. It was further noticed that records in the master tables con tained text in Hindi, but 
language ID mentioned as English record and vice versa.  

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 19 
Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code (MPTC) issued by Finance Department provided for various 
MPTC forms in Hindi/ English. However, the format of bill of MPTC was not adopted in 
IFMIS as these were only in English. 
Thus, the system did not have field level check for records in Hindi/English which led to 
difference in records in both languages. Data integrity to that extent was affected due to lack 
of input control for ensuring the o verall consistency of the data in information system's 
applications. 
The Government stated (July 2023) the SI could not implement the field level check of 
checking language in application. However, data cleaning activity is under process for all 
functionalities and is a regular process. The SI failed to provide the facility to validate the 
language in the English and Hindi fields separately. 
2.3  Project Integration 
The details showing intergration of IFMIS with various stakeholder is dep icted in Chart 2.1 
below:  
Chart 2.1: Chart showing integration with stakeholders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The system was envisaged to integrate with all the stakeholders of IFMIS. The stakeholder of 
IFMIS included HoDs, BCOs, DDOs and officials all the departments, Reserve Bank of India, 
AG office, agency banks, employees, pensioners, vendors and citizens. It was noticed that the 
IFMIS was not fully integrated with the stakeholders as envisaged.  
2.3.1 Integration with Reserve Bank of India 
As per sub-Clause 2.7.1 system integration under Clause 2.7, Service Specifications of  
RFP Vol. III, the System Integrato r was to ensure that IFMIS application is able to provide 
technical integration for data interchange with the systems hosted by the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) and the application must provide data interchange capabilities based on open standards.  
DoF 
BCO 
(HOD) 
Admin 
Dept 
 
DDO 
(HOO) 
Employees 
Pensioner 
Others 
(Vendors/Agent) 
Citizen 
RBI 
AGMP 
Financial Inst. 
(Agency, 
Bank/NABARD) 
 • Citizen Grievances 
• Online payment of 
taxes/dues 
FMIS 
 HRMIS 
PMIS 
• Workflow based approval 
hierarchy. 
• All transaction processing 
linked with approval. 
• Online system for financial 
sanction/admin 
sanction/technical sanction 
• Out of 
Treasury 
Transaction 
• Payment-
Receipt 
Reconciliation  
• State 
Accounts 
 
• Employee 
self Service 
• Service 
Book 
• Online 
Pension 
Processing 
• Pension 
Grievances 
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 20 
It was noticed that integration of IFMIS with the system of RBI was not done as desired in 
above mentioned Clause of RFP since initiation of the system. The coordination committee 
accepted (June 2022) the change request for integration with RBI stating that the u ser 
acceptance testing would start from 01 July 2022 in all the 54 treasuries. The integration of 
IFMIS with RBI is still not done (December 2022). The department has planned for integration 
of IFMIS Next Gen with the Core Banking System of RBI i.e., e-Kuber for making e-payments.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that during the preparation and finalisation of RFP, concept 
of e-payments and Aadhaar based payments in e -kuber did not exist in form of integration.  
Provisions of integrations  with RBI was referred with respect to the Debt and Investment 
Module of IFMIS, that has been tried to achieve partially . However, integration process with 
RBI with DMO is still pending due to coordination issues with RBI. 
It is accepted that e-Kuber application of RBI did not exist at initial stage of IFMIS. However, 
the fact remains that there were pending issues with the RBI. 
2.3.2 Integration with PRIASoft 
As per recommendation (October 2020) mentioned in the Clause 7.69 of Fifteenth Finance 
Commission report, the upgraded PRIAsoft 12 (software for Panchayati Raj institution)  needs 
to be integrated with the IFMIS of the State Governments and the Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS) of the CGA 13 in the Union Governm ent. This was required in 
order to generate online accounts by each rural local body, enable online auditing of such 
accounts and their consolidation at the State and all-India levels. It was noticed that IFMIS was 
not planned for integration with PRIAsoft software.  
The Government accepted the fact of non -integration and stated (July 2023) that it will be 
integrated in IFMIS Next Gen mutatis- mutandis. 
2.3.3 Integration with Agency banks 
As per provisions of FRS, the state disbursement system should be linked with the agency bank 
system through a payment gateway and was to contain an electronic reconciliation system that 
would capture the e-scrolls coming from the bank and match it with the disbursement cleared. 
During the walkthrough with the system, it wa s noticed that manual cash book was being 
maintained in Pay and Accounts Office (PAO) office at Vallabh Bhawan Secretariat which was 
a time taking work as facility of consolidated bill is not available in the IFMIS. However, as 
reported by the PAO, all the functions of PAO have been mapped but there were problems in 
pay fixation and computation of arrears.  
It was also informed that luggage file14 is being received from the bank on next day and in case 
of failed transactions the details are received in three  to four days. In Vindhyachal Bhawan 
(Cyber treasury), automated process of payment from State Bank of India was demonstrated 
and as informed this process has been implemented on pilot basis in Vindhyachal Treasury and 
Bhopal Treasury. Thus, automated inte gration for payment and electronic reconciliation as 
envisaged in FRS was not achieved fully.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the solution available with the agency banks during 
the development phase was available in the form of Corporate Internet Banking (CINB). This 
solution had limitations of automating the exchange of files in server -to- server environment 
under CINB. Now, automated server to server integration in e -kuber and State Bank of India 
                                                 
12  Panchayati Raj Institution’s Accounting Software. 
13  Controller General of Accounts. 
14  A consolidated file in soft copy generated daily, which contains all the details of payments.  

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 21 
has been implemented. In IFMIS monthly reconciliat ion statement is generated at DDO level 
and cash book is generated at treasury level for maintenance of accounts . The SI failed to 
provide compliance with FRS. 
2.4  Financial Management 
2.4.1 Unwarranted revision of project estimate 
As per para 2.8 of Functional Requirement Specification, the system should handle more than 
one type of payroll, e.g., regular employees paid monthly, and temporary/contract staff paid 
irregularly work charged/contingency employee. The Government accorded (June 2010) 
Administrative Approval (AA) of ₹ 120.17 crore for implementation of IFMIS. Agreement was 
executed between the Government and M/s Tata Consultancy Ltd. for implementation of 
IFMIS. As per the agreement, timelines for implementation phase and Managed IT phase were 
two years and five years respectively. The AA was revised to ₹ 149.55 crore in February 2012. 
There were 10.46 lakh sanctioned posts in September 2016 and salary drawn for 4.54 lakh posts 
in August 2016 as per the SI.  
The technical committee recommended (December 2018) for additional hardware due to the 
merger of 2.37 lakh teaching cadre in the School Education Department and Tribal welfare 
Department. The co -ordination committee mentioned (June 2019) that Pilot/Go -live of eight 
modules out of 16 modules has been done and load on hardware will be increased on 
deployment of rest of the modules.  
Further, it was noticed that the Department revised (September 2019) project cost to  
₹ 199.52 crore by reducing the project cost by ₹ 19.55 cror e and adding ₹ 69.52 crore on 
account of additional hardware and software on the plea of merger of 2.37 lakh teaching cadre 
in School Education Department and Tribal Welfare Department and for making payment of 
salary through the system. The revised Admini strative Approval for ₹ 199.52 crore was 
accorded by the Government in September 2019.  
Increase in project cost by ₹ 69.52 crore was unwarranted, as provision for sufficient posts was 
already there in IFMIS and it was unrealistic as provision of additional hardware was made on 
the plea of future completion of the modules, though only eight modules have been made Go-
live till date (February 2022) and the Department was planning for development of new 
financial management system named Next Generation IFMIS for new requirement and 
technical upgradation.  
The Department incurred ₹ 39.76 crore and ₹ 12.59  crore on account of additional hardware 
and its Annual Maintenance. Further, as upgrades related to the System  was to be authorised 
by the Apex level Steering Committee which was not done. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that during preparation and finali sation of RFP and SRS 
the project was envisaged for five lakh employees and three lakh pensioners. Later on, data 
base for adhyapak samvarg  (teaching c adre), non -regular employees maandeyi/ maansevi 
dainik vetan bhogi (honorary daily wagers)/ samvida karmachari (contractual employees) was 
made and change in system configuration was done. Further it was stated that employee data 
was migrated from legacy system to IFMIS. As of date, the system is generating salary of 10.65 
lakh employees (regular and non-regular).  
The reply is not acceptable as the department failed to provide justification for non-provision 
of employees according to vacant posts. Moreover, the FRS and SRS of payroll module already 
had provision for the functionality of handling payroll for non -regular employees such as 
contractual employees, daily wages employees etc.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 22 
2.4.2 Changes in contract element with respect to change request 
As per Clause 6.3.3 of conditions of the Contract, if, for reasons attributable to the System 
Integrator, the System does not conform to the Functional & Technical Requirements or does 
not conform to all other aspects of the Contract, the System Integrator shall  at its cost and 
expense make such changes, modifications, and/or additions to the System as may be 
necessary. Further, as per Clause 8.1.2.2 of Vol. II, if the Purchaser proposes a change, it shall 
send to the System Integrator a “Request for Change Proposal,” requiring the System Integrator 
to prepare and furnish to the Purchaser as soon as reasonably practicable a “Change Proposal,” 
apart from other information. It shall also include detailed estimated cost (man-days/rate/codes 
lines) of the Change. 
2.4.2.1 Adoption of unjustified rate of payments for change request 
The Department paid an amount of ₹ 2.35 crore 15 in June 2019 and November 2020 and  
₹ 0.38 crore16 in March 2019 on account of change requests at the rate of ₹ 6,000 per man-day 
on the recommendations of the Technical Committee. Following issues were noticed: 
• As per Clause 8.1.2 of RFP, the payment for the change requests was to be made for the 
changes initiated by the department. As per Clause 8.1.2.5 of RFP Vol -II the pricing of  
any Change shall be calculated in accordance with the rates and prices included in the 
Contract. However, per man-day rate was not mentioned in the contract document and the 
rate of ₹ 6,000 per man -day was adopted for payment of change requests.  Further, no 
justified calculation for adoption of rate of ₹ 6,000 per man-day for payment was there on 
records. 
The Department stated (March 2022) that as per recommendations of technical committee 
the rate of previous contract for C-SFMS was adopted. No specific reply was furnished by 
the Government (July 2023).  
• Though the change proposals were approved by the technical committee, but the same were 
not approved by the Apex Level Steering Committee as was required as per conditions of 
contract wherein it was mentioned that the Apex Level Steering Committee will authorise 
all changes, modifications, upgrades and policy level aspects related to the System. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that there was no need to refer all matters to Apex 
Committee. If there is opinion difference/dispute/referred by the Coordination Committee 
and Technical  Committee, then such matter will be decided in the Apex Steering 
Committee.  
The reply is not acceptable as it was not in line with the provisions of the contract.  
2.4.2.2 Avoidable payment for change request  
The Department paid for the changes made before September 2017 an amount of ₹ 2.35 crore 
for 4,083 man -days out of which 781.47 man -days were related to the changes, which were 
already within the scope of the contract or in contradiction of provisions of the Budget Manual. 
The payment of ₹ 0.47 crore was therefore avoidable. The details are given in the  
Appendix 2.4.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that due to changes in rules and codes and those processes 
or functionality not covered in SRS, the matter was referred to the change request committee. 
                                                 
15  Payment for 4,083 man-days prior to September 2017. 
16  Payment for 630 man-days after September 2017. 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 23 
After approval from empowered committee, actual change request was accepted, and payment 
was made to the SI.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Committees approved the payment for changes which were 
within the scope of the agreement. 
2.4.3 Excess payment on account of AMC for first year 
Provision for Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) of hardware and software of ₹ 42.34 crore 
amounting was in the agreement. An amount of ₹ 3.10 crore was to be paid on account of AMC 
(for 1 st year) which included an amount of ₹ 0.36 crore for AMC of existing hardware and 
software.  
It was seen  that as the SI was not maintaining the existing hardware and software , the 
Department deducted an amount of ₹ 0.36 crore and paid an amount of ₹ 2.74 crore 17 on 
account of AMC of newly acquired hardware and software for 1st year based on full agreement 
value of hardware and software of ₹ 42.34 crore. In fact, the Department actually procured 
hardware and software amounting to ₹ 34.40 crore and accordingly payment of ₹ 2.22 crore 
was to be made on account of AMC which resulted in excess payment of ₹ 0.52 crore.   
The Government stated (July 2023) that matter is being checked with the SI and recovery will 
be made as per calculation.  
The reply is not acceptable as the payment was made on account of AMC for the hardware and 
software which were not procured.  
2.4.4 Excess payment due to non -consideration of module -wise weightage and without 
considering evaluation of Service Level Agreements 
As per the order of the Government (December 2017), payment for AMC was to be made as 
per the weightage given for each module in the RFP. Further, as per condition of the contract, 
the payments to System Integrator for Managed IT Phase were to be made on basis of quarterly 
invoice18 submitted by the System Integrator in two installments i.e., 90 per cent of invoice 
value after evaluation of Services Level Agreements (SLAs)19 and 10 per cent of invoice value 
after final sign off. Monthly entitlement of the System Integrator was to be calculated for the 
services provided during the month based upon the performance against SLAs agr eed in the 
contract. Entitlements for the month were to be made in consultation and agreement with the 
Purchaser. 
It was noticed (July 2022) that eight modules were signed off for Go -live. Although the 
weightage for completed modules as per RFP was 55.50 per cent of total weightage of all the 
modules, the Department made the payments for AMC without considering weightage of 
completed modules.  
The SI did not provide an automated tool-based monitoring tool therefore monitoring of SLAs 
of IFMIS by the Department was not done. However, the Department made the payment to SI 
without evaluation of SLAs. When pointed out by audit in January 2022, the Department 
considered 60 per cent of weightage for performance of SLAs and made payment for second 
quarter of ninth year in June 2022. Considering overall performance of SLAs to 60 per cent, 
excess payment ₹ 15.67 crore to SI was made on account of non-consideration of module wise 
                                                 
17  ₹ 3.10 crore AMC for hardware and software - ₹ 0.36 crore for AMC of existing equipment = ₹ 2.74 crore. 
18  The quarterly invoice included cost of maintenance of hardware, software, license fee for all Commercial  
off-the-shelf (COTS) software. 
19  Managed IT services, Data center and networking facility. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 24 
completion and non -observance of performance of SLAs. The details are given in  
Appendix 2.5. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that the payment of AMC of application was made on the 
basis of weightage of actual modules live as per the decision of cabinet. The payment of 
Hardware and software were made as per the actual procurement and defined SLAs . The 
payment is made on the basis of SLA, which has been calculated as per automated tools 
provided by SI.  
The reply is not acceptable as though the payment of AMC was regulated on the basis of actual 
procurement, but it was not regulated on the basis of weightage of modules signed off for Go-
Live. Further, automated tool-based monitoring system for generating SLA reports and 
analysing tickets was not provided by the SI.  
2.4.5 Loss of central assistance due to delay in implementation of project 
Under the Mission Mode Project – Treasury Computerisation, the Government of India (GoI) 
would release the central share to the designated State/Union Territory  (UT) in three 
instalments of 40 per cent, 30 per cent and 30 per cent respectively. The States/UTs were 
required to complete their project in three years and any residual components were allowed to 
be spilled over into the fourth year. The release of instalments was, however, based on the 
achievement of stipulated milestones. 
As per Appendix 6 (Time schedule) of the contract agreement with the System Integrator Time 
Schedule with respect to implementation of IFMIS, the Data Migration – operational 
acceptance – System “Go Live” – Roll at all offices was to be completed within 86 weeks from 
signing of Agreement . The Agreement was signed in July 2010 thus, all the modules of the 
IFMIS was to Go Live and roll at all offices by February 2012.  
The GoI has included the Mission Mode Project (MMP) i.e., computerisation of treasuries 
under the National e -Governance plan (NeGP). The Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts 
has informed (March 2011) the GoI that the time schedule for completion of the IFMIS project 
would be three years and the project Go -live was scheduled as 19 months. Under the plan, 
financial support of ₹ 0.75 crore per district was to be obtained for the project from the GoI 
which indicates that the Department may get ₹ 37.50 crore20 for the IFMIS from the GoI. The 
balance fund was to be managed by the State Government.  The project was delayed 
abnormally, and it could not be implemented as planned.  
It was noticed that the first instalment of ₹ 15 crore was released in March 2011 but no progress 
on the project was reported to the GoI by the Department till June 2011. As of August 2012 
the Department had sent the Utilisation Certificate (UC) of only ₹ 1.68 crore. The Department 
sent the last instalment of UC for ₹ 0.33 crore in the year 2016-17 i.e., after lapse of more than 
five years after being asked by the GoI in October 2016 for fu rnishing the UCs of remaining  
₹ 0.33 crore out of ₹ 15 crore released in 1 st instalment in order to consider the release of 2 nd 
instalment. Thus, Central Assistance of ₹ 22.50 crore could not be obtained.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that due to del ay in project timelines by the SI further 
central assistance could not be sought. 
The fact remains that the delay in work deprived the Department of further GoI assistance. 
 
 
                                                 
20  For 50 Districts at that time. 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 25 
2.4.6 Non- regulation of payment for OEM Training  
As per the provisions of agreement, System Integrator was to provide training for Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) product in second year of implementation. A provision of  
₹ 0.24 crore was made in the agreement. Total amount quoted by the bidder for design, 
development and implementation (software and services) was indicated as ‘D’ in the RFP and 
‘D’ was to be paid in two subcomponents21. Total amount of ‘D’ was ₹ 13.77 crore. 
It was noticed that break up for payment of first subcomponent was further bifurcated into five 
stages22 which did not specifically include training stage separately.  
The System Integrator stated (May 2022) that the OEM training was not viable at current stage 
of the project. However, the Department had already made payments for SRS sign off, Pilot 
and System Go-Live considering the contract amount of ‘D’ without regulating value of ‘D’ 
for not providing OEM training. Thus, the Department not only made an excess payment of  
₹ 8.42 lakh23 but was also deprived from OEM training. 
The Government agreeing with the fact stated (July 2023) that in spite of several reminders the 
SI has not given OEM training. Penalty will be imposed accordingly and corresponding amount 
pertaining to OEM training will be recovered from the due payments of the SI. 
The fact remains that the officials were deprived of OEM and Administrators training and reply 
does not explain how the department will be able to provide OEM training in the last year of 
the project and the payment was also not adjusted accordingly. 
2.4.7 Non- regulation of payment for non-functional processes 
The department regulated the payment for System Go -Live of seven modules on basis of 
completion of the functional process 24 in view of Government order of December 2017 for 
making module wise payments. The payment was proportionately reduced by the Department 
as per completion of functional processes in respect of five modules are given in the Table 2.5 
below: 
Table 2.5: Details of numbers of processes under the modules 
Module Total process as per SRS Total functional process 
ESS 49 46 
Pay roll 3 2 
R&D 10 8 
Strong room 15 10 
Pension 10 4 
  Source: System Requirements Specification of IFMIS modules  
It was noticed that the Department while making payment for Pilot Go-Live for nine modules, 
the payment for above mentioned five modules was not reduced proportionately for incomplete 
functional processes for the reasons not on records, which led to extra payment of  
₹ 0.34 crore25.   
The Government stated (July 2023) that processes as per development were being tested in 
UAT phase and thereafter in Pilot testing phase. The processes which were developed as per 
                                                 
21  1. Design, customization, Development and implementation, training and 2. Final signoff.  
22  1. SRS signoff, 2. Testing and user acceptance, 3. Pilot system Go -live (Sign off), 4. System Go -live and  
5. Solution documentation. 
23  SRS signoff: ₹ 3.64 lakh, Pilot system Go -live (Sign off): ₹ 2.98 lakh, System Go -live: ₹ 1.80 lakh = Total:  
₹ 8.42 lakh. 
24  Functional process as mentioned in the SRS of respective modules. 
25  Calculated by ignoring penalty imposed.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 26 
the present scenario have been moved to Go -live phase and payment was made accordingly. 
Although, process wise pro-rata deduction will be made from the due payments of the SI. 
2.5  Monitoring 
2.5.1 Meeting of Apex steering committee and Information Security Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RFP Vol-III of the contract provided that all aspects of the system will be governed by an Apex 
Steering Committee (ASC). The ASC will authori se all changes, modifications, upgrades and 
policy level aspects related to the System. Thus, the meeting of ASC w as to be organi sed 
regularly. As per provisions of Information Security Policy of IFMIS, the Information Security 
Committee (ISC) of Department of Finance shall comprise Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO), Information Security Officer (ISO), Administrators (Security, System, Database, and 
Network), IFMIS Cell Representatives, Security Representatives (Security administrator/ 
Technical Members), Statewide Representatives, GoMP Offices Project Head and Vendors. 
Conducting of Apex Steering Committee mee ting after April 2015 was not found on records . 
Changes and modifications in the system have been reported by the System Integrator and the 
Department has also made payment with respect to Change Requests as discussed in paragraph 
2.4.2. Non-holding of meeting of ASC indicated that the changes were not authorised by ASC. 
It was further noticed that details relating to the holding of quarterly meeting of ISC were not 
found on records.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that in the IFMIS project, a separate c ommittee for 
approvals of change request was in place  and only major changes/deviations etc., 
recommended/referred by the Coordination Committee are taken up in the Apex Steering 
Committee. 
The reply is not acceptable as there were major changes, like the decision of making module 
wise payment (December 2017) and change in project cost (September 2019). The meetings of 
ASC should have been regularly held; however, no meetings were held after April 2015.  
2.5.2 Inadequate reporting by the System Integrator 
As per Clause 5.2.4 of RFP Vol. II, General Condition of the Agreement, the System Integrator 
was to submit monthly reports of results accomplished, cumulative deviations to date from 
schedule of progress milestones, corrective actions to be taken to return to planned schedule of 
progress, proposed revisions to planned schedule, other issues and outstanding problems, 
Chief Information Security Officer 
Information Security Officer 
IFMIS Cell 
representative 
Security 
administrator Nodal officers 
(Statewide 
Representatives of 
DoF, GoMP offices 
Project head 
vendors/ Third 
party 
Network/ System/ Database 
Administrators 

 Chapter II: Project Implementation and Financial Management 
Page 27 
proposed actions to be taken, resources that the System Integrator expects to be provided by 
the Purchaser and/or actions to be tak en by the Purchaser in the next reporting period, other 
issues or potential problems the System Integrator foresees that could impact on project 
progress and/or effectiveness.  
Apart from this, other reports needed to monitor Contract performance/progress with System 
implementation include inspection and quality assurance reports, training participants test 
results, monthly log of service calls and problem resolutions. However, the System Integrator 
did not submit the reports as per the provisions of the agreement. Thus, the Department could 
not monitor the contract performance. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that regular weekly meetings with respect to review of 
performance of project were held. However, SI did not comply with the pr ovisions of the 
contract and project plan on submission of reporting. 
The reply is not acceptable as in the absence of  non-submission of  monthly reports as 
provisioned in the contract, the department failed to monitor the progress of the project and the 
project was delayed. 
2.5.3 Asset and Inventory Management 
As per Clause 4.1.1 of the Information Security Policy, an inventory of all important assets 
associated with each information system shall be drawn up and maintained. The asset register 
should contain information about Hardware Asset, Software Asset, Paper Asset, Electronic 
Asset, People Asset, Supporting Asset and Facility Asset. Further, the Asset register should 
contain but not limited to information like Asset -Id, Process supported by the asset, As set 
Location, User of asset, Acquisition Date, Type of asset and Remarks. Asset Information shall 
be classified in terms of its value, legal requirements, sensitivity and criticality to the 
organisation. Purpose of having IT Asset Management in IFMIS was to follow a procedure to 
keep proper track and allocation of every IT Assets. It will help in enabling users to know 
which asset is owned by whom and where it is located. 
It was noticed that inventory of all important assets associated with each information  system 
was not being maintained as per the provisions of the Information Security Policy. Further, 
validity of support for Microsoft software and Symantec software license was up to 31 August 
2020, which was not renewed up to December 2021. Thus, in the a bsence of proper 
maintenance of records, the Department was unable to monitor validity period of software.  
The Department stated (September 2022) that the information is not being maintained in  the 
format prescribed in information security policy. The sam e shall be maintained in future. In 
respect of software license, it was stated that OEM support was renewed up to 31 August 2023 
as informed by SI on 27 May 2022. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department was not aware of validity of licenses of software, 
as the asset register maintained by the department did not contain information as per 
Information Security Policy document of System.  
2.6  Conclusion 
• There were delays in the completion of project. Out of the total 16 proposed modules, 
only ten modules were implemented owing to reasons like delays in submission of system 
architecture document by the SI, handing over of site by the Department, hardware 
procurement and delivery and delay in development of the modules.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 28 
• The inventory of the assets was not being maintained as per the provisions of Information 
Security Policy, therefore the Department was unable to monitor validity period of 
software.  
• While making payment for Pilot Go -Live for nine modules,  the Department ignored 
monitoring of complet ed functional processes and failed to deduct the proportionate 
amount for incomplete functional processes.  
• The Department failed to take over the deliverables as per the conditions of the contract 
as the System Integrator did not hand over the source code, Solution Design Documents, 
other documented records.  
• The SI did not submit the reports as per the provisions of the contract and the meetings of 
Apex Steering Committee also were not held regularly, as such the Department could not 
monitor the contract performance of the SI.  
2.7  Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
• The Government may  consider improving the monitoring mechanism for timely 
completion of the project and avoid post facto approvals signing off for Go-Live. 
• The Government may ensure project security and safety and develop an efficient system 
for monitoring of inventory of assets. 
• The Government may also consider regulating the payment on the basis of completed 
functionalities envisaged in the SRS for all the modules. 
• The Government may get all the know-how transferred from the SI and must get its own 
staff trained to handle and run the system without help of the SI before expiry of the 
contract period and leaving of the project by the SI. 
• The Government may ensure timely holding of meetings of various committees to monitor 
the performance of the SI. 

 
 
Chapter III 
Application Development 
and Operation 

 
 

CHAPTER III 
APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION 
 
Summary  
Application development is the process of designing, building, and implementing software 
applications. During audit, it was observed that the requisite table meant for storing all the 
details of the Budget Program was having no records for the period 2019-21. The system did 
not have provisions to generate alerts/triggers on savings before the due date to help effective 
monitoring of budgetary controls. There were discrepancies relating to mapping of head of 
accounts of receipt budget and actual receipts.  
The payment and recoupment of Contingency Fund was not correctly captured and processed 
through the System and there was mismatch in figures of IFMIS and actual figures related 
to Contingency Fund. Helpdesk and incident management system was inadequate as 97 per 
cent (2020-21) and 93 per cent (2021-22) of the reported incidents were closed after 24 hours 
of the specified resolution time. Further, the process of depositing lapsed deposit in revenue 
head as per provisions of Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code, 2020 was not mapped in IFMIS.  
The input controls were considered deficient as in the master table provisioned for storing 
employee data, 157 rows repeated more than one time, PAN number in 3,49,293 records was 
not entered and  was wrong in 11 records. Further, in 726 records length of AADH AAR 
number was either more or less than 12 digits, AADH AAR number was not captured in 
52,344 records and bank account details were not captured in 4,357 records. Invalid data was 
also noticed in the tables relating to bank scrolls, and in bill register transactio n tables. In 
addition to this, instances were observed where the Receipt data table contained transactions 
wrongly accounted as receipts under Major Heads instead of Capital Outlay and in certain 
challan receipt transactions, the amount was found negative . The above deficiencies 
indicated that the required input controls were not mapped in the system adequately. Thus, 
the reports generated based on invalid data would be wrong and would not be useful for 
further transactions or processes. 
The E-file generated for remitting the NPS amount did not contain the details of Employees 
and employee -wise NPS contributions.  Inconsistencies in transactions relating to failed 
payments were noticed and there was a lack of controls in the system to ensure that the failed 
transactions were reprocessed and paid to the party whose payments were originally failed.  
During analysis of receipt budget tables, it was noticed that authorisation of receipt estimate 
was not ensured through the system. Segregation of duties for surrend er of budget was not 
followed as amounts were surrendered in one step , either by creator or by verifier or by 
approver. There was absence of checks in processing of bills as sanction for payment of bills 
was not recorded in the system appropriately  and in some cases, paid amount was greater 
than the sanctioned amount. Also, unreliable data relating to bank transactions was found 
stored in the system tables whereas the details of movement of bills were not being stored 
adequately, resulting in lacking tracking of bill movement.  
Thus, audit findings in case of Budget Module and Receipt and Disbursement (R&D) 
Modules of IFMIS, indicate d system design deficiencies, poor data quality resulting in 
availability of incomplete and incorrect data in the system , deficient input controls and 
absence of data validation, and refunds without authentication. 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 30 
APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT 
Application development is the process of designing, building, and implementing software 
applications. Application development defines the process of how the application is made, and 
generally follows a standard methodology. It also deals with Application controls which are 
specific to an IT System and involve mapping of business rules into the applications; thus, 
providing for input, processing and output controls.  
In cases of Budget Module and Receipt and Disbursement (R&D) modules of IFMIS, Audit 
noticed instances of system design deficiencies, poor data quality and inadequate mapping of 
business rules resulting in availability of incomplete and incorrect data in the system, deficient 
input controls and absence of data validation, as discussed in following paragraphs:  
3.1  System Requirement Specification and System Design Documents 
3.1.1 Changes in System Requirement Specifications after final signoff 
As per para 5.4.3.1 of General Conditions of the Contract (GCC), the Supplier shall prepare 
and furnish to the Purchaser, the System Requirement Specifications (SRS) for which the 
Supplier must obtain the Purchaser’s approval before proceeding with work on  the system or 
any Subsystem covered by the documents.  
The Department approved sign off for SRS version 1.4 to achieve objectives of IFMIS on  
08 April 2011. The Department was to identify and address any modification/ change with 
respect to any section of SRS within four weeks from SRS signoff date.  
However, the supplier prepared SRS version 1.5 by including changes in June 2011 after lapse 
of four weeks. The approval of SRS version 1.5 was not taken.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the SI had delayed in submission of SRS version 1.5, 
and the SI has been penalized on the payment of milestone of SRS. 
The reply is not acceptable as purchase r’s approval was not taken before proceeding with the 
work.  
3.1.2 Changes in SDD were not approved   
As per para 5.4.3.1 of GCC, the Supplier shall prepare and furnish to the Purchaser the System 
Design Document (SDD) for which the Supplier must obtain the Purchaser’s approval before 
proceeding with work. Further, purpose of the SDD was to understand and validate the design 
specifications which have been used to develop the modules. As per para 5.4.3.8 of GCC, the 
Supplier shall not depart from any approved document unless the Supplier has first submitted 
to the Purchaser, an amended document and obtained the Purch aser’s approval of the 
document, pursuant to the provisions of this GCC Clause. 
It was noticed that the System Integrator (SI) prepared SDD version 1.2 in February 2012. The 
Coordination Committee approved (February 2012) the SDD for both1 the modules. There were 
deviations during development of application with respect to the provisions of the SDD. 
However, the supplier did not submit the amended SDD prior to making changes in the system. 
Further, as per the General  System Requirement mentioned in the FRS for enterprise-wide 
usability and workflow aspects of IFMIS, the system was inter alia to provide functionality to 
access transaction history. However, the data was not fully captured into some history tables 
of transaction tables.  
                                                 
1  Budget module and Receipt & Disbursement module. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 31 
The Department stated (April 2023) that tables have not been used due to process change, new 
tables have been created as per process change. The Government stated (July 2023) that after 
several reminders to SI, revised SRS and SDD  (incorporating all the changes) are submitted 
for Go-live modules by the SI.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Supplier was to first submit the amended SDD to the 
Purchaser and to obtain the Purchaser’s approval of the document, which was not done. Due to 
the non-approval of changes in the SDD before application development, the Department could 
not verify whether the SI has developed all the requirements laid down in the FRS. The non -
capturing of complete data for history tables indicated shortcomings.  
3.2  Inadequate provision/ use of functionality 
3.2.1 Activation of budget program not done 
The process of Budget consolidation is depicted in the Chart 3.1 below:  
Chart 3.1: Budget Consolidation Process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As per provisions of MP Budget Manual Vol . I, estimates of expenditure should be prepared 
by DDOs separately for plan and non -plan expenditure and should be submitted to the 
concerned BCOs within communicated deadlines. Further, as per para 4.22 of SRS of Budget 
module, the system was designed to activate the Budget Preparation activity which will be 
intimated online to relevant stakeholders by sending intimations in work list regarding Budget 
Preparation, such  as Receipt budget, Public Account, Plan budget preparation, Non -plan 
budget preparation, Revised budget preparation, Supplementary budget estimate every year.  
Department of Finance (DoF) users can also define the last date of submission of re -
appropriation and budget surrender proposal. After the notification is received from the Finance 
 
Budget 
Budget Preparation 
 
Plan/Non-Plan Budget 
Supplementary Budget (P/NP) 
Revised Budget (P/NP) 
Public Accounts Resource Estimates 
Off-Budget, Gender Budget, Outcome 
Budget 
Vote on Accounts 
Receipts/Revised Receipt Estimate 
Budget Management 
Budget Allotment/Distribution 
Budget Re-Distribution 
Re-Appropriation 
Contingency Fund 
 
Payment of CF 
 Recoupment of CF 
Budget Consolidation 
Budget 
Compilation 
Submission of 
Consolidated 
Estimates 
Budget Approval  
Appropriation Bill 
Budget book 
Printing 
Budget Surrender 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 32 
Department, the system will have an option for relevant Administrative Department and Budget 
Controlling Officer (BCO) to define the time limit for DDOs to submit the budget estimate.  
It was noticed that four tables were provisioned in SDD for the budget activation functionality. 
Out of which, table meant for storing all details of the approved Budget Program was having 
only six records and transaction table to store all the details of the Budget Program including 
all the details of Creator, Verifier and Approver was having no records for the period 2019-21. 
Further, there was no data in various columns of these  tables, thus, budget activation 
functionality was not done through system. Thus, the functionality as envisaged in MP Budget 
Manual and SRS of Budget Module was not implemented in the system.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that notification of budget programs was issued by the 
finance department to all departments and BCOs. Due to delay in submission of budget 
estimate from DDO to BCO, BCO has prepared budget estimate suo motu. 
The reply itself indicates that the activation of the budget programme process was not done 
through the system.   
3.2.2 Irregularities in Budget line of receipt in Budget Module 
As per SDD of Budget module, budget preparation process included creation of Budget 
Controlling Officer (BCO) master and Heads of Account (HOA) configura tion. It is further 
provided for Receipt Budget preparation. Accordingly, Budget program/Budget preparation 
activity was to be activated by the Department of Finance for the receipt budget estimate. The 
preparation of receipt estimate is to be started at D DO level. DDO was to create the receipt 
estimate for relevant receipt heads and to submit it to BCO, Administrative Department and 
DoF for approval.  
As per SRS of Budget module, system should allow integration of the receipt budget formats 
with debt manag ement module for the following data of Loans and Advances, Interest 
Payments and write-off of bad debts. 
It was noticed that Grant number for receipt head was entered as ‘0000’ for 222 budget line 
codes in the master table of Head of Accounts. In Budget re ceipts transaction table of Budget 
Module, 310 records were related to Major Head code “0000” indicating inefficient mapping 
of major heads. Out of these only 16 records had entries, the remaining 294 records had null 
values. Two records out of 16 records,  having amount of ₹ 2,00,000 (₹ 1,00,000 each) were 
approved2 at various stages by Budget Controlling Officer and Administrator, even when the 
data was unrealistic as incorrect Major Head was accepted by the system.  
Thus, reliability of data was not ascertained in receipt budget and process of receipt budget was 
not being done through the system.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that during budget preparation, the system shows all the 
HOA, which were used from last five years. BCO was allowed to add new HOA with heads as 
zero. Actual HOAs were created by the Finance Department. The system was made flexible at 
Finance Department level.  
The reply is not acceptable, the system should have validation checks for mapping of head of 
accounts as per the budget. Moreover, budget preparation process at DDO level was bypassed 
in cases where major head was recorded as zero.    
                                                 
2  Shown in the columns ‘ADMIN APPROVED AMT’, ‘BCO APPROVED AMT’ and ‘BCO APPROVED RE 
AMT’ with Major Head “0000” in the FD_BUD_RCPT_DTLS_TXN table. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 33 
3.2.3 Budget surrender monitoring 
As per the provisions of Quick Guide for Budget Controlling Officers of Budget Manual Vol. 
I, if the Administrative Department anticipates savings even after examination of excesses in 
the manner described, should surrender the same to the Finance Department. Such an exercise 
should be undertaken by 15 th of January for each financial year so that resources can be 
allocated by the Finance Department to other demand of grants. Once the surrender will be 
approved, based on this the Department will re -appropriate the available amount to any other 
budget head. Accordingly, the system was to have an alert feature to indicate the Department 
to surrender the budget on due date or the system should not allow surrender after due date. 
Audit observed the following deficiencies in the monitoring mechanism: 
➢ The system did not have provisions to generate alerts/triggers on savings before the due 
date i.e., before 15 th January to help effective monitoring of budgetary controls. 
Analysis of tables relating to budget surrender of IFMIS revealed that the system 
allowed to perform surrender operations even after 15 January and allotted budget 
estimates of ₹ 482.21 crore was surrendered on 31 March 2020 for the year 2019 -20 
and ₹ 298.46 crore on 31 March 2021 for the year 2020 -21. Thus, the  amount 
surrendered at fag end of the financial year could not be utilised. 
➢ In the year 2019 -20, an amount of ₹ 16.20 crore surrendered by Superintending 
Engineer, Capital Project 3 was greater than the allotted budget (₹ 16.15 crore) 
indicating checks were not imposed.  The AG office 4 also intimated that the amounts 
have not been considered in Appropriation Accounts due to delayed surrenders.   
The non-mapping of provisions of the Bu dget manual with the IFMIS regarding surrender of 
savings before 15th of January for each financial year  had resulted in non -utilisation of the 
resources for effective monitoring of surrender process. 
The delayed surrender at end of financial year instead of timely surrendering i.e. before 15 
January, deprived from reallocation of surrendered funds.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that direction has been issued to all BCOs that the system 
is having functionality of global budget limit mapping to DDO, whi ch can be used to avoid 
dependency of surrender from DDO to BCO level. The suggestions will be incorporated in 
Next Gen. 
3.2.4 Mismatch of figures of budget books and IFMIS data 
As per SRS of Budget module, the System should have formats to compile /prepare budget 
books in various volumes to be presented to the Legislative Assembly.  
During analysis of final budget allotment and Budget head of account tables, it was observed 
that regular budget estimates and supplementary budget estimates are separately captured into 
the tables for a particular year. On comparing the regular budget estimates given in the budget 
book Part-3 of Government of MP with the data stored, differences between estimates as per 
Budget books and estimates as per data stored in the budget  tables of IFMIS were noticed in 
respect of 21 Grants 5 and 18 Grants 6 for the years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 respectively. The 
summarised details are given in the Table 3.1 below: 
                                                 
3  Under Urban Development and Environment Department, BCO Code: 1807. 
4  Office of the Accountant General (A&E)-I Gwalior 
5  Grant numbers: 001, 010, 012, 016, 019, 020, 022, 023, 024, 025, 029, 030, 033, 045, 046, 048, 052, 053, 
055,058, and 064. 
6  Grant numbers: 003, 007, 009, 010, 012, 020, 023, 024, 025, 029, 030, 033, 048, 052, 053, 055,058, and 064 . 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 34 
Table 3.1: The summarised details of difference of amounts voted and charged grants 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Voted Charged 
No. of Grants Amount of difference No. of Grants Amount of difference 
2019-20 19 5,215.25 4 30.02 
2020-21 18 5,068.96 1 19.28 
  Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
Figures of budget books and budget data stored in IFMIS were having different figures , 
indicating manual intervention in automated process of finalisation through the system.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that since budget was prepared on the vote on account 
basis, therefore corrections in the data have been made by the Finance Department and request 
was made to the AG office and department for corrections. 
The reply indica tes that the process was bypassed as the corrections made by the Finance 
Department were being updated in the system afterwards. 
3.2.5 Ways and means management system 
As per Clause 1.5.1.5 of SRS and 2.1 of SDD, the system will incorporate Ways and Means 
Management by which Department of Finance will be able to administer the priority of claims. 
The system will have the feature of controlling the cash outflow of the State Government by 
providing the feature of putting restrictions on payment processing of all the cleared bills.  
It was noticed that the Government from time to time had enforced a ceiling  in budget 
expenditure. However, tables related to Ways and Means Management were found blank in the 
database. Further, the facility for operating the functionality was not available at the front-end. 
This indicated that Ways and Means Management functionality was created partially in the 
System. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that since IFMIS was not having server -to-server 
integration with RBI and as Debt and Investment Management Office (DMO) module was not 
operational, this table was not used. Apart from this, functionalities in the budget module have 
been redeveloped to control ways and means by setting limit as per the instructions of the 
finance department. 
The reply is not acceptable as the functionality meant for prioritising the payment of bills as 
per SDD of R&D module was an internal process, which was not implemented.   
3.2.6 The Contingency Fund not captured through the system 
As per para 3.11 and 3.12 of SDD of Budget module, for payment of Contingency Fund, if the 
required expenditure cannot be met through re -appropriation, the BCO Office was to prepare 
the proposal for Contingency Fund  by providing the required details and submit to the 
Government. For recoupment, once the payment of Contingency Fund  is approved by the 
Department, relevant BCO will submit the supplementary budget e stimate in immediate 
supplementary estimates for the recoupment of Contingency Fund. System will populate list of 
outstanding Contingency Fund for relevant head of account at the time of preparation of 
supplementary budget estimate. 
The details of payment of Contingency Fund and recoupment of Contingency Fund  as per 
transaction tables are given in the Table 3.2 below:  

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 35 
Table 3.2: Details of payment of Contingency Fund and recoupment 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial Year Payment from Contingency Fund Recoupment of Contingency Fund 
2017-18 191.67 Nil  
2018-19 251  Nil 
2019-20 260.06 230  
2020-21 390.50  237  
2021-22  
(up to 11/2021) 
33.62  Nil  
Total  1,126.85   467  
Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
Further, the report generated from the system for the years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 indicated 
different figures, which shows that the payment and recoupment of Contingency Fund was not 
correctly captured and processed through the System. Thus, there was mismatch in IFMIS, and 
actual figures related to Contingency Fund which indicated ineffective monitoring and control 
overflow of funds through Contingency Fund.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that there were two processes for release of Contingency 
Fund and for recoupment of Contingency Fund. At the time of release of budget, recoupment 
of Contingency Fund can be done.  
The reply is not acceptable as the system failed to capture full details of Payment of 
Contingency Fund and Recoupment of Contingency Fu nd and the reply does not address the 
issue. 
3.2.7 Irregularity in sending SMSs and Emails 
As per Point 1.5.1.3 ‘Bill Processing at DDO Office’ of System Requirement Specification 
(SRS) of Receipt and Disbursement (R&D) Module of IFMIS, whenever a bill is objected 
within the DDO office for any reason, an SMS would be sent to the concerned party/employee 
mentioning about the rejection. Each phase of bill processing would be intimated through SMS 
to the party/employee. Further, each phase of bill processing would be intimated through SMS 
to the concerned party/employee. Similarly, the provision to send e‐mail notification of the 
self-generated e‐challan copy to the payee was also incorporated in the SRS.  
It was noticed that though the SMSs were to be sent reg ularly to the concerned parties/ 
employees but there were gaps in sending the SMSs ranging from seven days to 68 days to the 
concerned parties/employees for any of the stages of Bills processed and payment made to 
them. Similarly, the emails were to be sen t regularly to the concerned parties/ employees, but 
there were gaps in sending emails ranging from five to 77 days for information of Bills 
processed and payment.  
Thus, the above gaps in sending SMSs and Emails adversely impacted the transparency in bills 
processing/bill payments. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that the SI has reported technical issue in sending SMS. 
The defect was resolved, and then regular SMS were sent. SMS are sent only as notification to 
the stakeholders. 
The reply is not acceptable as the SI failed to provide uninterrupted functionality.  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 36 
3.2.8 Inadequate help desk and incident management 
As per Clause 9.3 RFP Vol . II, GCC, for managed IT Phase Supplier has to put in place a 
complaint logging system7 for the Help Desk. Reports from the complaint logging system will 
be used for monitoring SLAs8 related to Help Desk. The average resolution time for problems 
recorded at the help desk for ‘Crisis’ category is within one hour and ‘Non-Crisis’ category is 
within three hours. The time taken was to be recorded using help desk tools and application 
performance monitoring tool. The time taken beyond the prescribed limits would be considered 
a breach.  
It was noticed that automated tool-based monitoring of performance indices and online 
reporting system was not provided by the SI. Further, the Department did not develop any 
mechanism to ascertain the type of complaint (crisis or non -crisis) nature. Time period -wise, 
year-wise details of resolution of complaints are given in the Table 3.3 below:    
Table 3.3: Time taken for resolution of complaints9  
Period 2020-21 2021-22 
Same Day 524 851 
Within a week 5,394 5,057 
Within 7 to 15 days 2,638 2,971 
Within 15 to 30 days 3,397 2,107 
Within 30 to 180 days 7,304 2,679 
After 180 days 984 7 
Resolution in Progress 2 24 
Total 20,243 13,696 
  Source: Information provided by the Department  
As detailed above, 97 per cent (2020-21) and 93 per cent (2021-22) of the incidents reported 
upon were closed after 24 hours of the specified resolution time. There was no mechanism to 
track the status of complaints. Further, the helpdesk tickets were marked as closed without 
recording the action taken. There was no facility available to obtain feedback on resolution of 
the ticket from the originators. In the absence of a feedback mechanism, the effectiveness of 
the helpdesk functionality was not verifiable. Moreover, in the ab sence of non-categorization 
of tickets in terms of SLA, weightage considered for payment to the supplier was not justified. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that nodal teams at district level, division level and DTA 
level have been constituted for monitoring of application tickets and accordingly SLA reports 
were monitored. Penalty was also imposed as per SLA for delay in resolution of application 
tickets. The SI has failed to adhere to the provisions of RFP Vol. II Clause 9 of SLA regarding 
resolution of time-based noncritical call logs. 
The fact remains that as the Department was unable to categorise the tickets as crisis/non-crisis, 
performance through SLA was not being monitored during Managed IT Phase and extended 
Managed IT Phase.  
3.3  Non-mapping of Rules 
3.3.1 Inadequate mapping of head of accounts of receipt budget with actual receipts 
As per para 6.8 of MP Budget Manual, Volume  I, the Finance Department monitors progress 
of expenditure and collection of receipts with respect to Budg et for ensuring proper cash 
management. Further, according to para 11 of Madhya Pradesh Financial Code Volume  I, the 
                                                 
7  Portal, Voice and E-Mail. 
8  Service level agreements. 
9  Status as on 05 August 2022. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 37 
Accountant General will send to the Departmental Controlling Officer a statement of receipts 
according to the major, minor and detailed hea ds of revenue brought to credit in his accounts 
in each month. The Departmental returns submitted under the preceding rule should be 
consolidated by the Controlling Officer in a register so as to show the total receipts for each 
month classified according to the heads of account in the budget estimates. The two sets of 
figures should then be compared. SRS of Budget contained functionality of Budget Scheme 
Mapping with Budget Line. After mapping with budget Head of Account and BCO, it would 
be available for budget preparation by relevant BCO. Further, as per SRS of R&D module, 
Cyber treasury administrator was assigned with role for mapping of Receipt head before the 
start of financial year. 
It was noticed that SRS for Budget module provided 10 that system will capture actual receipts 
from office accounting module and Head of Accounts (HOA) will be mapped with BCO. 
However, mapping of receipt estimate to actual receipts on basis of head of account were not 
provisioned in SRS.  
Further, on comparing of data contained in tables for final budget allotment and actual receipts 
for the years 2019 -21, discrepancies relating to mapping of head of accounts in either of the 
tables were noticed, as the Head of Accounts mentioned in the actual receipt table were not 
found in the Budget table and vice versa, for the years 2019 -21. Thus, functionality required 
as per provisions of Madhya Pradesh Budget Manual and Madhya Financial Code Volume  I 
was not mapped in IFMIS. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that now under IFMIS cyber-Treasury functionality, 97 
per cent of challans are e-challans. The head of accounts maintained for e-challan submission 
are maintained according to the budget book Vol . II, daily monitoring repo rts are sent to the 
Finance Department administrators and the Finance Department takes measures while 
preparing Receipt Budget estimates. In IFMIS next gen, provision of integration is proposed 
with CAG/CGA. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Government rep ly does not address the issue relating to the 
years 2019-21.  
3.3.2 Accounting of lapsed deposit in revenue head 
As per rule 334 of Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code (MPTC), 2020 , the amount not less than  
₹ 10,000, which has not been withdrawn till three years shall be accounted in accounting head 
0075. Further, as per Functional Requirement Specification (FRS) system should provide 
related rules in the system and should transfer the amount for certain deposits namely  
K-deposit/Revenue after defined validity p eriod to lapse to concerned government revenue 
receipt head. List of lapsed deposits and balances shall be sent to the AG immediately after  
31 March. 
It was noticed that processing of Refund of Lapsed Deposit was however mentioned in SRS 
and SDD but detai ls of functionality as per FRS relating to accounting of amount in receipt 
head of lapsed deposit as per provisions of FRS were not found on SRS and SDD. This 
indicated that process of depositing lapsed deposit in revenue head as per provisions of MPTC, 
2020 was not mapped in IFMIS. This indicated inadequate mapping of business rules. Further 
a list of lapsed deposits was to be submitted to the Accountant General immediately after  
31 March in Form MPTC-71, which was not provided in the SRS.  
The Government  stated (July 2023) that SRS and SDD were prepared in 2010. So, the 
functionality was not included at that time. The process to lapse a deposit will be requested by 
                                                 
10  As mentioned in remarks to the comments in SRS action tracker V 1.2. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 38 
concerned deposit operator for further processing. Currently, this process was offline due to 
non-integration of IFMIS with VLC. This causes a delay in compilation of lapse d deposit. A 
process is being developed with consultation with the AG office for the same.  
The reply is not acceptable as the functionality was included in the Functional Req uirement 
Specification and the SI failed to develop the functionality.  
3.3.3 Role of the Chief Engineer not mapped as per Works Department Manual 
As per appendix 1.23 of Works Department Manual Volume II (Part I), the Chief Engineer 
(CE) shall prepare the budget estimate annually and administer the budget allotment. He will 
further see that any money not likely to be needed during the year is promptly surrendered. The 
Chief Engineer is the Head of Department in respect of his Basin/Zone/Project etc. and various 
DDOs work under the control of the Chief Engineer.  
It was noticed that details of the Secretary, Engineer-in-Chief, Project Director, Direct or and 
Commissioner of works Department  were stored as Budget Controlling Officers (BCO) in 
BCO master table. However, the role of the Chief Engineers was not mapped for administering 
the budget allotment  as per provisions of MP Works Department manual. Thus, he has no 
control over the overall budget process in respect of the DDOs working under his control. It 
resulted in bypassing the functions of Chief Engineer as a budget controlling authority. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that as per the list pub lished by finance department, the 
Chief Engineer is not a BCO. BCOs are created as per the Budget manual.  
The reply is not acceptable because as per Functional Requirement Specifications, the system 
should allow DDOs to customise their accounting system in case of Works/Forest departments. 
Further, Mapping of business rules is primary requirement in any IT system being developed. 
Although the Chief Engineer is not BCO, yet, the roles of the Chief Engineer in accounting 
system for preparing budget estimates  and administering budget allotment, should have been 
mapped, which was not done.  
3.4  Input Controls 
Input controls are the application controls which seek to minimise the risk of incorrect data 
entry by making validation checks, duplicate checks and other related controls. These provide 
the earliest opportunity to detect and correct possible mistakes. Input control is extremely 
important as the most important source of error or fraud in computerised systems is incorrect 
or fraudulent input. Controls over in put are vital to the integrity of the system. Weak input 
control may increase the risk of entry of unauthorised data, data entered into the application 
may be irrelevant, incomplete data entry, entry of duplicate/redundant data. 
3.4.1 Duplicate and invalid data in Master tables 
As per SRS of Receipt and Disbursement module, administrator creator had the role to create 
all types of master data and administrator verifier was having rights to verify and update the 
master data.  
It was noticed that there were deficiencies in master data as detailed below: 
• The table provisioned to contain detailed information of bank branches was having wrong 
IFSC Code stored in seven rows and dummy branch BSR Code in 1.55 lakh records.  
The Department stated that due to non-receipts of BSR code from the Departments dummy 
values were entered.  

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 39 
• In the table provisioned for storing employee data, 157 rows repeated more than one time, 
PAN11 number in 3,49,293 records was not entered and wrong in 11 records. Further, in 
726 records length of AADHA AR number was either more or less than 12 digits, 
AADHAAR number was not captured in 52 ,344 records, bank account details were not 
captured in 4,357  records. The above-mentioned discrepancies in data show inadequate 
input controls in IFMIS. Data is said to be reliable when the data accurately captures the 
parameter it is representing.  The weak input controls in IFMIS resulted in capturing 
unreliable, incomplete and incorrect data. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that  PAN, Aadha ar and account number validation is 
already incorporated in system, validation is imposed to check the duplicate records. Also, data 
cleaning is in progress of all records.  
The reply is itself contradictory as data cleaning indicates existence of invalid data as result of 
weak input controls.  
3.4.2 Invalid data captured in the tables related to bank scrolls 
As per SDD of R&D module, detail of Bank Payments Scroll was stored in  two tables for 
header and detailed data. Following was noticed:  
• Invalid dates were captured in scroll date and e-file date columns of header table. Further 
a dummy debit account number ‘111111111111111’ and dummy e -File name ‘EFILE1’ 
was captured in all the records. In the details table invalid/wrong IFSC codes, voucher 
numbers, DDO Code were captured besides bank name and payment identifier was not 
captured.  
• In case of table for storing receipt transactions, invalid value of year was captured, beside 
no value was captured in 16.95 crore records. 
• In case of tables relating processing of TA Bills, invalid data like same arrival date and 
departure date and time, uniform class of travel was captured. Moreover, unrealistic data12 
was found in journey mode and journey purpose columns. Thus, in absence of valid data 
of journey performed, justifications of payment of TA bills were not being recorded in the 
system adequately.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that  data is captured in text field, thus validation is  not 
available and was based on inputs entered by user. As suggested, necessary validation in the 
data capturing is being sought from the SI to incorporate in the application software. 
3.4.3 Invalid Financial Year Code captured in Bill Register transaction table 
As per SDD of R&D module, the database contained a table for storing details of bill register 
to store the common bill details while creating bill from received claim.  
Analysis of bill register table indicated that wrong financial years were captured into financial 
year code of the table as detailed in the Table 3.4 below:  
                                                 
11  Permanent Account Number 
12  Data like ‘important, NA, 000, 03/19 to 06/19 etc.’ were entered in Journey mode column and data like 
01.02.2020, 05/2019, 0.026 etc. were entered in Journey purpose column. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 40 
Table 3.4: Details of financial year with respect to created and updated date 
Financial 
year code 
Corresponding 
financial year 
From 
created 
date 
Up to 
created date 
From 
updated date 
Up to 
updated date 
Numbers 
of 
records13 
03 2003-2004 08-02-18 16-06-20 12-02-18 16-06-20 74 
04 2004-2005 15-05-18 11-12-19 16-05-18 11-12-19 14 
05 2005-2006 08-05-18 29-06-20 09-05-18 30-06-20 19 
06 2006-2007 10-01-18 01-07-20 16-01-18 04-07-20 245 
07 2007-2008 08-05-18 23-06-20 08-05-18 25-06-20 200 
08 2008-2009 13-02-18 23-06-20 19-02-18 25-06-20 174 
09 2009-2010 22-03-18 19-06-20 23-03-18 19-06-20 219 
10 2010-2011 09-05-18 30-06-20 10-05-18 08-07-20 363 
11 2011-2012 09-05-18 30-06-20 14-05-18 30-06-20 423 
12 2012-2013 12-03-18 28-06-20 15-03-18 01-07-20 465 
13 2013-2014 22-03-18 28-06-20 24-03-18 01-07-20 759 
14 2014-2015 13-01-18 30-06-20 24-01-18 06-07-20 1,181 
15 2015-2016 12-01-18 01-07-20 16-01-18 09-07-20 1,918 
16 2016-2017 20-01-18 30-06-20 24-01-18 17-08-20 4,852 
17 2017-2018 01-01-18 01-07-20 01-01-18 31-12-20 25,698 
18 2018-2019 10-01-18 03-12-21 16-01-18 03-12-21 6,01,738 
19 2019-2020 11-01-19 03-12-21 12-01-19 03-12-21 7,80,899 
20 2020-2021 01-01-20 03-12-21 01-01-20 03-12-21 6,93,689 
21 2021-2022 09-01-21 03-12-21 11-01-21 03-12-21 6,36,914 
22 2022-2023 16-01-21 02-12-21 19-01-21 03-12-21 151 
23 2023-2024 13-01-21 30-11-21 15-01-21 02-12-21 39 
NULL --  08-01-18 03-12-21 09-01-18 03-12-21 48,68,334 
 Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
From the above, it is evident that the system failed to capture the correct financial year code 
into the Bill Register Transaction table. Similarly, there are 48,68,334 transactions wherein the 
financial year code was NULL. Therefore, the purpose of creating the column of financial year 
code in the table has been defeated. 
It was further noticed that all the expenditure data was captured in expenditure report table 14. 
The financial year-wise data was incorrectly captured as there were 48,98,017 records (out of 
total 80,83,369 records) against which financial year code was ‘Null’. T his indicated non -
enforcement of ‘NOT NULL’ constraint on the column of financial year code of the table.   
The Government stated (July 2023) that expenditure reports are generated based on voucher 
date. However, as pointed out by the Audit, the fault was due to the ignorance of the SI. 
The reply is not acceptable as due to capturing of wrong financial year codes, the integrity of 
data was not ensured, and wrong data of financial years may lead to generation of erroneous 
reports to the management.  
3.4.4 Lack of reliability due to absence of input controls 
As per System Design Document (SDD) of Receipt and Disbursement (R&D) Module of 
IFMIS, R&D Module would implement an Integrated State Receipt and State Disbursement 
system that would handle the processing of all kinds of revenues and expenditures of the State, 
respectively. As per para 25 of Government Accounting Rules, 1990; a four -digit Code has 
been allotted to the Major Head, the first digit indicating whether the Major Head is a Receipts 
Head or Revenue Expenditure Head, or Capital Expenditure Head or Loans and Advances. If 
the first digit is '0' or '1', the Head of Account (HOA) will represent Revenue Receipt; '2' or '3' 
                                                 
13  Only ‘Bills Approved by TO’ taken into account. 
14  FD_RND_EXP_RPT table was used to generate various MIS expenditure reports. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 41 
will represent Revenue Expenditure; '4' or '5' Capital Expenditure; '6' or '7' Loans and Advances 
Head; and '8' will represent Contingency Fund and Public Account. 
During the verification of receipt data table following deficiencies were noticed: 
• In case of four transactions, amount of ₹ 54,33,716 received during April 2020 to September 
2021, towards Fees and Treasury -By-Transfer through Challans, were wrongly accounted 
as receipts under Major Head 4425 and 4801, which were related to ‘Capital Outlay on Co-
operation’ and ‘Capital Outlay on Power Projects’ respectively. The detail s are given in 
Appendix 3.1.  
• In case of seven challan receipt transactions during the period 15 May 2019 to 16 September 
2021, the amount was negative (₹ -13,324).  
     In addition to the above, in case of 322 challan receipt transactions during the peri od May 
2019 to December 2021, the amount in the  challan was ‘₹ 0’, for which preparation of 
challan was not required. The challans were towards 14 15 various Major Heads for various 
purposes viz electric line, deposit, encashment of bank guarantee, colleges,  panchayats, 
hospitals, recovery, security amount, sansad nidhi, work by transfer, etc. 
• As per SRS and SDD of R&D Module of IFMIS, unique identification number was to be 
generated by the system on challan details. The format of Challan number was to be as 
detailed in the Table 3.5 below: 
Table 3.5: Description of challan numbers 
Reference Treasury 
Code 
Bank Branch 
Code 
Major 
Head 
Month Year Serial 
number 
Digits 3 7 4 2 2 5 
  Source: SRS and SDD of R&D Module of IFMIS  
Scrutiny of Challan details for 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, captured in receipt table, revealed that 
the above coding pattern was not followed by IFMIS uniformly. In the case of 2,47,66,517 
number (78.29 per cent) of challans out of 3,16,31,284 total challans, un iformity of coding 
pattern was not followed. Furthermore, in the case of 68,64,767 challans, where the coding 
pattern was followed as per SRS and SDD of IFMIS, the Bank Branch Code was wrongly 
captured as ‘9999999’. Thus, indicating lack of input controls.  
The above deficiencies indicated that the required input controls were not mapped in the system 
adequately, due to which, wrong Major Heads and wrong Amounts were accepted by the 
System. Further, data migration from erstwhile System C-SFMS into IFMIS was also deficient, 
thereby not ensuring the reliability of data of IFMIS. 
Data is said to be reliable when the data accurately captures the parameter it is representing.  
The weak input controls in IFMIS resulted in capturing unreliable, incomplete and incorrect 
data. Thus, the reports generated based on invalid data would be wrong and would not be useful 
for further transactions or processes.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that under IFMIS the e-receipt cyber treasury functionality 
was rolled out in November 2021. Prior to this period , the HOA validation was not available 
with budget book, thus capital HOA were added manually as per request of the departments. 
As pointed out in observation, now the discrepancy has been corrected. 
The reply is not acceptable as the provisions relating to HOA already existed and the pattern 
of challan number was also included in SRS and SDD. The system should not have accepted 
the erroneous values. The SI failed to implement the provisions.  
                                                 
15 0028, 0040, 0058, 0071, 0202, 0216, 0401, 0701, 8011, 8443, 8658, 8782, 8443 and 8782. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 42 
3.5  Process Controls 
Processing Controls are the application controls that ensure complete and correct processing of 
input. They also ensure that incorrect transactions are not processed. The objectives for 
processing controls are to ensure that the transactions processing is accur ate and complete, 
transactions are unique and have no duplicates, all transactions are valid etc.  
Weak process controls would lead to inaccurate processing of transactions leading to wrong 
outputs/results and some of the transactions being processed by th e application may remain 
incomplete. Further, allowing for duplicate entries or processing which may lead to duplicate 
payment in case of payment to vendors for goods. This may also lead to unauthorised changes 
or amendments to the existing data. 
3.5.1 Differences in amounts of NPS contribution bills 
National Pension System (NPS) was introduced for the Employees appointed after  
01 January 2005. As per System Requirement Specification (SRS) of Receipt and 
Disbursement (R&D) Module, Employees’ and Government’s Contribution to NPS was to be 
disbursed to National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) through State Disbursement 
System by Treasury Office by raising a bill of Refund of Revenue (MPTC -44), along with 
Employee and government deduction schedu les as supporting document. Further, e‐File was 
to be uploaded on NSDL portal by Treasury Officer for crediting the employees’ and 
governments NPS Contribution to Employee’s NPS accounts maintained by NSDL. 
It was noticed that table for storing details of header16 and detailed transactions and remittance 
to NSDL through DPPFI 17 were containing data. However, the detailed transaction table did 
not contain details of Employee and employee -wise NPS contributions and only header table 
was being used for storing s ummarised DDO-wise information. The payment of consolidated 
amount of NPS was made to DPPFI after creating claim and bills in R&D module. Therefore 
the E-file generated for remitting the NPS amount did not contain the details of Employees and 
employee-wise NPS contributions.   
Further, NPS contributions were processed for remittance through a claim processing table and 
NPS bill header table. Review of data relating to the period during 2019 -21 in both the tables 
revealed that in 21 cases, the lesser amount of ₹ 11.37 lakh remitted than actual Employee and 
Government NPS Contribution, whereas, in other nine cases, the amount of ₹ 3.38 crore was 
remitted without recording Contribution details in NPS details table or NPS header table. It 
could not be ascertaine d from the front end, whether it were related to adjustment of prior 
period. 
The Department stated (August 2022) that the discrepancy was due to lack of check and 
verification. Now, the check and validation  process has been put in the system. The 
Government stated (July 2023) that corrective measures have already been taken and informed 
to the AG office. 
The reply is not acceptable as the control and v alidation should have been incorporated into 
the system before signing off for Go-Live. 
3.5.2 Inconsistencies in failed payment transactions in IFMIS 
Indian Financial System Code (IFSC) is mandatory for fund transfers from one Bank account 
to another. Every bank branch will have a unique 11-digit IFSC, whose first four digits 
                                                 
16  Table has consolidated data based on detailed table.  
17  Directorate of Pension, Provident Fund, Insurance (DPPFI), Bhopal. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 43 
represent the Bank, fifth character is zero and last six characters represent the branch. Further, 
the IFMIS database contained vendor master table and failed transaction table.  
It was noticed that the wrong IFSC was fed in case of 212 vendors in vendor master table as 
detailed in Appendix 3.2 (A). Further scrutiny of failed payment transactions table for the 
period 2019-21 revealed that in 2,19,902 cases, payment of ₹ 357.17 crore was failed due to 
wrong IFSC Code. This also included 50 cases where the account number of the payee was fed 
as ‘0’ mainly due to lack of validation checks and verification of correctness of master data at 
verifier/ approver level in IFMIS. The wrong IFSC Code continued in IFMIS Database and 
payment of ₹ 145.55 crore in 30,103 bank accounts continuous ly failed in the range of two to 
90 times.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the main cause was due to migration/mergers of few 
nationalized banks. Corrective measures in the application were taken with co -operation and 
coordination with e-kuber and State Bank of India. 
The reply is not acceptable as the changes in circumstances were not mapped in the application 
by the SI. 
3.5.3 Non-mapping of head of account for failed transactions 
As per Appendix  4 of Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code, 2020, the Drawing  and Disbursing 
Officer (DDO) was required to verify and check all unsuccessful transactions and update the 
account details. There was a provision for reconciliation of failed payment transactions in the 
SRS of IFMIS. Appendix  25 and 26 of Madhya Pradesh T reasury Code, provided that the 
amount of a "Failed Payment Transaction" has to be deposited on the same day by means of 
challan in the Civil Deposit Head of Accounts18. This was revised (July 2020) and the amount 
of a “Failed Payment Transaction” has to be  deposited by means of challan in the Revenue 
Head of Accounts (Major Head starting from 0 and 1). 
It was noticed that in case of 49 failed payments up to 30 June 2020, amount of ₹ 4.12 crore 
was wrongly deposited in accounting head of ‘Deposits of Local F unds19’ instead of correct 
Civil Deposit Head as detailed in Appendix 3.2 (B). Moreover, the Department also failed to 
update the IFMIS after revision in Treasury Code from 1 July 2020 and did not map the 
automatic deposit of "Failed Payment Transaction" by means of challan in the Revenue Head 
of Accounts therefore, in case of 253 failed payments after 30 June 2020, amount of  
₹ 2.49 crore was wrongly deposited in ‘Deposits of Local Funds’ (Major Head - 8448) and 
‘Civil Deposit’ (Major Head-8443) Head of Accounts instead of Revenue Head of Accounts. 
This has resulted in wrong accounting of the failed transactions.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that now corrective and preventive measures have been 
taken and after e-kuber and SBI SLIA, failed payments are automatically handled. 
The reply is not acceptable as it does not explain why the SI failed to map revised rules of MP 
Treasury Code prior and after revision.  
3.5.4 Inconsistencies in process of failed payment transactions 
As per SDD of R&D module, recording of Payment scroll details containing the details of Bank 
Scroll was to be done in payment scroll table. There was a provision for the Payment Branch 
User to upload the soft copy of Payment E -Scroll. Status of successful or unsuccessful 
transaction was to be recorded in the payment scroll table. 
                                                 
18  Major Head-8443. 
19  Major Head – 8448. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 44 
Although, there were 4.47 lakh failed transactions during period of 2019 -21 in failed 
transaction table but status of all the payment transactions was recorded as successful in 
payment scroll details table. 
Lack of controls in re-processing of failed e‐payment Transactions 
It was noticed that the reasons for the failure of e-payments were not found recorded in 
the table or in the failed transactions report generated by IFMIS. While reprocessing the 
failed pay ments, the payments should be made to the party whose payments were 
originally failed. However, there were no checks in the reprocessing of payments from 
the failed e-payment transactions.  
Audit re-processed payments of six failed challans through IFMIS a pplication (replica) 
menu to check process control in re -processing of failed e-payment. Payment of the six 
failed challans, pertained to different DDOs, was reprocessed in favour of an employee 
of the Department. The payment process was successful from Creator to Approver and e-
payment was passed by Treasury Officer.  
It was noticed that while initiating the payments from the failed transactions, all the failed 
e-payments transactions for a given period were displayed irrespective of the DDOs and 
the logged-on user was able to select any of transactions out of the displayed list under a 
particular Treasury and reprocess it for payments. The discrepancy indicated lack of 
process and validation controls in IFMIS. There was a lack of controls in the system to 
ensure that the failed transactions were reprocessed and paid to the party whose payments 
were originally failed. In the absence of proper control mechanism to reprocess the failed 
transactions, it could not be ensured in Audit whether the failed e -payments were 
reprocessed to the actual parties to whom the payments were originally due and also the 
possibility of wrong and over payments cannot be ruled out. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that prior to November 2022 due to CINB 20 system, the 
department to get failed payment data DDO wise. It was the responsibility of the DDO to check 
failed transactional data and generate the bills accordingly. After November 2022 and rollout 
of AePS21, it can be checked failed transactions beneficiary wise and generate bills accordingly 
by DDO. 
The reply is not acceptable as the system was unable to keep track of failed transactions and 
thus it paved the way for wrong reprocessing of failed transactions.    
3.5.5 No n-mapping of the required Business Rules resulting in refun ds without  
           authentication 
As per SRS, refund of a Revenue Bill was to be prepared in the DDO’s office when the claimant 
submit request for refund in DDO’s Office against the amount deposited by claimant earlier. 
For refund of Revenue and Security Deposit, refund sanction order from concerned Department 
was required for processing of refund bills whose credit data is not available in the system, 
provision would be provided to capture the challan details. If the Refund Claim is raised in the 
same financial year as that of receipt, then appropriate receipt head will be deducted from the 
bill, else, corresponding expenditure head will be used for accounting the refund.  
Further, as per Clause 166 of Madhya Pradesh Financial Code (MPFC), refund of rev enue is 
classified in two parts, i.e. refunds to which the claimants are legally entitled and refunds which 
are made ex -gratia, the Government being under no legal obligation to make them. As per 
Clause 167 (b) of MPFC, in case of refunds in which the Gove rnment being under no legal 
                                                 
20  Corporate Internet Banking. 
21  Aadhaar Enabled Payment System. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 45 
obligation to make them, the application should be rejected in case of delay of more than one 
year from the date of application of the concerned party for refund. 
It was noticed that the SDD of R&D module included a provision in  Refund of Revenue 
Attributes using Refund of revenue table, but the data dictionary did not contain any details 
about the table. Therefore, the purpose of creating the table was not available on records.  
Scrutiny of refund of revenue table and receipt table revealed following deficiencies: 
• There were provisions to capture the challan details and receipt transaction ID in refund of 
revenue table for processing of refund bills. However, in case of 9,541 Bills of refund of 
revenue22 processed during January 2018 to December 2020, the details of original Challan 
Number vide which the original Revenue was received/credited in the Accounts of the 
Government by Bank/Treasury or receipt transaction ID was not available.   
• The system was unable to capture challan details to classify the type of refund of revenue 
as per provisions of MPFC. In case of 1,874 Bills of Revenue Refund amounting to  
₹ 15.99 crore, the refund was processed by IFMIS even after the lapse of more than one 
year from the date of Challan of receipt of Revenue. The delay ranged from 3 66 days to 
962 days. Further, the details of submission of application for refund by the concerned 
parties were also not available in IFMIS to verify the same. 
• Due to non -provisioning for capturing Challan details of original revenue receipt 
mandatorily in IFMIS, the System had allowed the payments of ₹ 0.49 crore in 37 cases 
of Refund of Revenue was made to different parties other than who had deposited the 
revenue. The details are given in Appendix 3.3. It was also seen in four cases, the refund 
was processed through IFMIS two days to six days  before the date of Challan, which is 
practically not possible and points out to major control flaws in the IFMIS. This indicated 
lack of validation controls in processing of payment of refund of revenue.  
The Governm ent stated (July 2023) that refund of revenue also has failed e -payment 
transactions, tax and non -tax revenues, and as per process after the deposit of challan ledger 
gets updated and refund are processed based on the balance of operator and not as per challan. 
Regarding lapse of challan, it is the responsibility of DDO to seek competent permission for 
further action. Other discrepancies and defects are resolved as suggested. 
The reply is not acceptable as the verification of failed transactions as envisage d in MP 
Treasury Code 2020 was not possible through the system, as it was being re -processed on the 
basis of deposit of challan ledger. Regarding lapse of challan, as per Functional Requirement 
Specifications, the System was to provide related rules in the  system and transfer the amount 
of revenue after defined validity period to lapse, to concerned government revenue receipt 
head.  
3.6  Authorisation and Validation Checks 
Authorisation is the function of specifying access rights to resources. Access control uses 
authentication to verify the identity of the user. When a user tries to access a resource, the 
access control process checks that the user has been authorised to use the resource. As per para 
9.2 of information security policy, the Procedures/Guidelines to be followed for input data 
validation to ensure correctness included checks to the parameters, out of range values, invalid 
characters, missing or incomplete data etc. Further,  procedures to be followed for control of 
internal processing for addressing data integrity issues were also included in the document. 
Following deficiencies were noticed:  
                                                 
22  Relating to ED, PD and LFD repayment. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 46 
3.6.1 Non recording of approval details of receipt estimates 
As per provisions of SRS of Budget module, the overall Budget Program will be configured in 
the system which will have timelines for submission of budget by Administrative Departments/ 
BCO. Proposals for all Receipt Budget must reach the Department before the pre-defined date. 
BCO will have the facility of mapping respective budget schemes/budget heads with different 
DDOs and DDO will be able to view only those schemes/budget heads which are mapped to 
them by their parent BCO. The process at each level of D DO, BCO/HOD, the Administrative 
Department and the Finance Department was included in SRS. 
During analysis of receipt budget tables, it was noticed that there were nine records out of 32 
records created by DDOs for the receipt estimate amounting to ₹ 2,134.72 crore ( for year  
2019-20) and eight records out of 30 records receipt estimate amounting to ₹  10,731.66 crore  
(for 2020-21) for which details of approval by the BCO, Administrative Department and the 
Finance Department  were not found recorded in the s ystem. Thus, authorisation of receipt 
estimates was not ensured and indicating partial utilisation of created facility.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that mostly the receipt estimates are finali sed at the BCO 
level during budget preparation. 
The reply is not acceptable as after finalising the receipt estimates at the BCO level details of 
approval by Administrative Department and Finance Department were also not available. 
3.6.2 Mismatch of budget figures between allotted budget tables and allotment to BCOs 
As per provisions of SRS of Budget Module (Budget allotment/ Distribution Process), the 
Department will allocate/distribute budget to BCOs and BCO will allocate/ distribute budget 
to DDOs. The Department can enter a general cut across the board for specific head of account 
(in terms of percentage basis). The system will automatically deduct the budget allotment based 
on the percentage entered by the Finance Department. The system will provide the facility to 
stop the Budget allotment/distribution in all or any particular heads. BCO can also re-distribute 
the budget from one period to another period and from one DDO to another DDO. 
During analysis of tables of IFMIS replica database related to budget allotted by the 
Government and budget allotted to BCO, it was observed that there were differences between 
budget figures and budget figures allotted to BCOs for the years 2019-20 and 2020-21. On the 
basis of requisitioned SQL 23 statements, it was noticed that the allotment to BCOs exceeded 
the budget allotment for 11 grants in the year 2019 -20 and for 64 grants in the year 2020 -21. 
The details are given in Appendix 3.4 (A) and (B).  
The Government informed (July 2023) that the query will be discussed with the SI to find out 
the difference in the figures.  
3.6.3 Lack of maker-checker control for surrender of budget  
As per para 1.4, Roles and Description of System Requirement Specifications (SRS) of Budget 
Module, four roles namely Budget Assistant, First Verifier, Final Verifier and Approver at 
Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDO) office level were provisioned for processing. Further 
as per para 3.7, surrender Preparation of the System Design Document for Budget Module, the 
process of Budget Surrender starts with identifying the budget savings for the current financial 
year. DDO will be able to view the comparison of actual expenditure with the Budget 
availability.  
                                                 
23  Structured Query Language for Oracle tables. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 47 
Scrutiny of tables relating to surrender of budget by DDOs revealed that in 35,325 transactions 
relating to 3 ,234 DDOs of 46 Departments had surrend ered an amount of ₹ 6,592.51 crore 
during 2019-21, in only one step either by creator or by verifier or by approver24. Out of these 
35,325 transactions, a total of 25,200 transactions were processed by DDOs and remaining 
10,125 transactions were processed by the officials other than DDOs. The details are given in 
Appendix 3.5. This indicated that control of different maker and checker was not followed in 
process of surrender of funds at DDO level.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that directions to all BCO have been issued that the System 
is having functionality of global budget limit mapping to DDO, which can be used to avoid 
dependency of surrender from DDO to BCO level. 
The reply is not acceptable as it does not address the issue of non-implementation of role in the 
hierarchy.  
3.6.4 Absence of checks on bill amount with sanctioned amount 
As per para 1.5.1.2 of SRS of Receipt and Disbursement module, all the claims were to be 
checked for financial power for sanctioning the claim. All the sanctioned claims, alo ng with 
sanction order number and date, wherever applicable, will be made available to bill clerk of 
DDO Office for further processing. Bills will be created for claims accepted by the bill clerk. 
In all Government transactions, the payment of any bill sho uld not be greater than the 
sanctioned amount for such bills. 
It was noticed that Project Management Module inter alia included functionality of electronic 
sanction. The Project  Management Module was not signed off for Go -live and there were 
problems in the Project Module. It was further noticed that the sanction order details are entered 
manually and there was also facility for uploading the scanned copy of the order. It only 
provided reference data to the manual sanction order. Analysis of the bill data showed that the 
sanction order reference data entered contained junk data in place of the sanction order. 
Further, on comparison of Fully Vouched Contingency Bill table with the Sanction order table, 
it was found that there were 4,329 transactions, wherein the paid amount was greater than the 
sanctioned amount. This indicated that there is no check/control in the system to limit the bill 
amount with the sanctioned amount during creation of bills. It was also test checked that the 
system allowed processing a bill for payment against a less sanctioned amount for that bill. On 
analysis of sanctioned claim transaction table and payment details table it was noticed that 
sanctioned amount was greater than claimed amount in case of 51 transaction, out of which 
payment was made in 31 transactions. Thus, absence of electronic sanction orders coupled with 
unreliable reference data impacted the authenticity of the vouchers.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that due to updates and patching in the application by SI, 
validation of sanction amounts greater than bill amount might have been missed by the SI. 
Since, e-sanction module was not rolled out in IFMIS. There was no relation of sanction amount 
to bill amount as a workaround. Sanction orders were allowed to be uploaded  along with the 
bill submission and are checked manually in bill passing. However, this is being taken in Next-
Gen. 
In the absence of proper mapping between Fully Vouched Contingency Bill table and the 
Sanction order table, the system was having issues relating to validation controls and manually 
uploaded sanction orders were also not being checked during passing of bills.    
                                                 
24  With level ID of 10 or 20 or 30. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 48 
3.6.5 Poor mapping of bank accounts 
As per para 2.2.2 of SRS of R&D module, mode of payment, claimant name, bank name, bank 
branch name, bank IFSC code, bank account number and net amount will be captured by DDO 
office at time of bill creation. Further, as per para 2.1.8, in case there are multiple Bank account 
numbers mapped against one claimant with respective amounts that is to be credited in the 
different bank accounts, system will apportion the net payable amount and give credit to the 
different bank account numbers. The system will check that the total of amount credited in the 
different bank accounts is equal to the net amount. Party Code was a unique code for the Party 
i.e. Employee/Vendor/Contractor. As per SRS, party code was to be auto populated from claim 
details from the correspon ding claim raising module. SDD of R&D module provided for 
attribute of transaction status (successful or unsuccessful) in bank scroll details. The bank scroll 
details were stored on a separate table. 
It was noticed that that party code and party name are c aptured into payment details table. 
Analysis of successful e-payment transactions from payment transaction table, along with bill 
register table, payment scroll details table, failed payment details table and voucher details 
reports generated by IFMIS application, discrepancies such as payment of two employees and 
three vendors in one Account Number, payment of one employee and one vendor in one 
Account Number, payment of two employees in one Account Number etc. were noticed as 
detailed in Appendix 3.6. Other deficiencies noticed are as follows: 
• In payment details table for the period 2019-21, in 102 transactions, invalid bank Account 
numbers like ‘0000000000’ were captured. Out of which, 22 transactions were recorded 
in failed transaction table, but in anot her 22 transactions, whose UTR number was 
generated in payment scroll table, status of successful or unsuccessful transaction was 
unreliable as status of all the transactions was shown as ‘1’ in payment scroll table. 
• In 57 similar transactions, the UTR Num bers were not available in the table though the 
Cheques were shown as cleared. In another 22 transactions, the payments were shown as 
failed as per failed transaction scroll table. However, the Cheques were shown cleared and 
reconciliation status were ‘S’ in these cases. 
Thus, important tables of IFMIS contained unreliable data of transactions and Audit could not 
ascertain the information regarding the name of actual parties to whom the payments were 
made, how different IFSC codes for one account number were captured into relevant tables and 
exhibiting in the voucher details report generated by IFMIS. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that vendor registration for e-payment is maintained as per 
bank account number, name of vendor/ beneficiary cannot be valida ted, and vendor master is 
maintained locally at DDO level and not globally. Validation on capturing of account number 
in vendor master is validated as per the bank branch requirements like greater than 15 digits, 
18 digits and alpha numeric. However, validation such as 0000000000000 and 1111111111111 
was not available. It was clarified that vendor creation was also allowed through bulk excel 
upload also therefore, such discrepancies have been occurred at DDO level. In order to make 
the vendor master unique across the State, the Government stated that they were working to 
make vendor master as global for uniqueness. 
The reply itself indicated that required validations were not incorporated in the system, which 
resulted in irregularities in data.   
3.6.6 Lack of validation checks in Receipt and Disbursement Module 
As per System Design Document (SDD) of Receipt and Disbursement module, workflow job 
master table was defined, contained details like employee name post code, Job ID, job title etc. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 49 
Job master table c ontained 78,53,435 records indicating various details 25. Further, following 
tables were to be used for validations, as detailed in the Table 3.6 below:  
Table 3.6: Details of tables relating to validation checks 
Name of table Description 
FD_RND_VLDTN_MST 
(Validation master table) 
Validation master table, the details are used to validate the bill 
while processing the bill 
FD_RND_VLDTN_TXN This table will store transactional data performed by the user 
with role creator, verifier and approver. 
FD_RND_BILLTYPE_VLDTN_RLT Validation Master Update Screen Attributes included use of 
the table  
Source: SDD of R&D Module of IFMIS  
The validation master table contained a column of Job ID. The Job ID number column was 
defined in entity relationship diagrams in SDD of Receipt and Disbursement Modules. Replica 
database showed that Job ID number column was incorporated in 35 tables of Re ceipt and 
Disbursement Modules. However, out of which only 10 tables could be identified in the SDD.  
It was noticed that there was provision of Job ID in 10 tables relating to storage of master data 
and mapping of bank branches, bill types, bill approval,  check validity etc, however, in Job ID 
column different values (Null, 0 and -1) were stored. Further, out of the above tables, in the case 
of Validation master table there were only 45 entries and there were no entries in the validation 
transaction table. Thus, no validation checks were used in the System. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that validation master was created through the migration 
process due to which the JOB ID was not used. This field would have been updated, if it had 
been created through front end. It was further stated that there was provision to map the validation 
with the bill types. In case of absence of data in Job ID field, the Department stated (April 2023) 
that as per initial process Receipt and Disbursement module was developed b ased on hierarchy-
based workflow and which was converted to role based workflow, therefore, the Job ID field was 
not used. The Government stated (July  2023) that there was a change  request from the 
Department on change of workflow.  
The reply is not admissible as the absence of JOB ID discontinued the validation process. It was 
the responsibility of the supplier  to ensure implementation of validation checks. Validation 
Master Update Screen Attributes were not created to map validations. Further, the change request 
resulted in irregularities relating to validation controls.  
3.6.7 Unauthorised operation of Major Heads by Treasury Offices  
As per para 1.5.1.9 of SDD of Receipt and disbursement module, the Drawing and 
Disbursement Officer (DDO) is the authorise d officer of the Government, who is vested with 
the authority to withdraw funds from the Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and Public 
Account of the State Government. DDO was required to submit the claims to the Treasury for 
withdrawal and payment of mon ey from Consolidated Fund of the State. As per Budget 
allocation, District Treasury Officers as Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) are 
responsible for making payment of Salaries, Pensions and other social security payments. 
                                                 
25  BRANCH_NAME, CREATED_DATE, DEPARTMENT_NAME, DUE_DATE, 
EMP_DESIGNATION_NAME, EMP_NAME, END_DATE, FROM_EMP_NAME, 
FROM_EMP_POST_CODE, FROM_LOCATION_CODE, JOB_ID, LOCATION_NAME, 
PARENT_JOB_ID, POST_NAME. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 50 
It was noticed that 40 Treas ury offices as DDOs operated 34 Major Heads 26 other than those 
related to payment of Salaries, Pensions and other social security payments and processed 
12,519 bills amounting to  ₹ 6,418.30 crore as DDOs. The details are given in the  
Appendix 3.7 . Thus , the absence of validation checks in operating Major Heads as per 
respective roles of each DDO posed a risk of unauthorised operation of head of accounts by 
DDOs. 
The Government stated (July 2013) that a mapping of HOA with MP Treasury Code, bill types 
will be executed to improve the checks and validations. 
The reply is not acceptable as it does not explain how the system allowed operation of different 
head of accounts despite having roll-based authorisation system.  
3.6.8 Inadequate reliability of receipt data 
As per para 2.10 of System Requirements Specifications (SRS) of Receipt and Disbursement 
(R&D) Module relating to receipt reconciliation, the Agency Bank Administrator uploads the 
reconciliation report/s on the portal daily to make the portal transaction database in sync with 
the payments received by the Agency Bank. After that, the Agency Bank admin uploads the 
final digitally signed e-scroll on the portal daily, which is verified by Treasury Admin. Receipt 
branch user will have the option of selecting the scroll date before uploading the file. Approved 
challans are considered for accounting in the treasury. Further, IFMIS would have provision 
for the treasury administrator to e nter/modify the scroll date. The accounting of receipts was 
considered as on the scroll date. 
During scrutiny of receipt transaction table 27 for the period from April 2019 to March 2021, 
following discrepancies were noticed:  
• In the case of 29,65,595 receipt transactions during April 2019 to March 2021, the scroll 
date was found before the date of Transaction/receipt. The difference in scroll date and 
transaction date ranged from one day to 6,580 days. This indicated lack of input and 
validation control and permissible manual intervention in recording of scroll date in 
IFMIS.   
• In the case of 38,84,167 receipt transactions though the scroll date was recorded, the Scroll 
number was blank.  
• ‘From Date’ is the tenure start date for which challan is being deposit ed and ‘To Date’ is 
tenure end date for which challan is being deposited. However, in case of 12,800 number 
of receipt transactions, ‘From  Date’ was after the ‘To  Date’. The difference in both the 
dates ranged from one day to 902 days.  
This indicated that the required input and validation controls were not mapped adequately in 
IFMIS due to which wrong dates were accepted by the System, thereby not ensuring the 
reliability of data of IFMIS.  
The Department stated (April 2023) that now necessary validation will be implemented. The 
Government stated (July 2023) that E -challan submission has provision to capture period in 
the format of ‘from date and to date’ and this depends on the tax payment b eing made by the 
taxpayers. Prior to 2021, the cutoff date time of challan submission by agency banks was not 
as midnight. SBI had cutoff time as 08:00 pm for the transaction date. Now, all agency banks 
are maintaining cutoff time 00:00 hours.  
                                                 
26  Major head: 2013, 2014, 2029, 2030, 2039, 2040, 2041, 2043, 2049, 2053, 2055, 2056, 2058, 2059, 2070, 
2075, 2202, 2210, 2216, 2217, 2225, 2230, 2250, 2401, 2408, 2425, 2701, 2810, 2851, 2852, 2853, 3475,  
6003 and 6075. 
27  FD_RND_CMN_RCPT_TXN. 

 Chapter III: Application Development and Operation 
Page 51 
Though the Department would put the validation on scroll date field, but the reply does not 
explain the valid reason for capturing incorrect entries in From date and To date columns. 
Further the reply is silent about irregularities in challan date and blank scroll numbers.  
3.6.9 Inadequate tracking of bill movement 
As per para 2.2 of SRS (R&D), bills should be created by DDO Office -Bill Clerks from the 
sanctioned claims and forwarded to Verifier(s)/DDO for further processing of bills created 
from the claims, accepted  by DDO Office. Bill Clerk will forward to First Verifier of DDO 
office for verification of bill details entered by DDO Office -Bill Clerk. Next in the hierarchy 
will be Final Verifier. Verifiers will verify Head of Account, Amount, Claim Details, Grant 
availability and supporting documents of the bills against the checklist configured in the 
system. Once the Verifiers are done with the verification of bill, it will be forwarded to DDO 
for approval. Verifiers and DDO will be provided with the Approval/Reject ion option. DDO 
will verify HOA information, claim amount, grant availability and supporting documents. 
Further as per SDD of R&D module, the Bill movement transaction table was used to store the 
status of the bill on its each movement from the user to user.  
It was noticed that:  
• Bill movement master table had seven columns and 1.79 crore records 28 to which the bill 
movement details are stored. However, vital information such as Bill movement status, 
movement date, movement Id, bill amount were not stored in the table. Further, Bill 
movement transaction table having 49 columns, had data up 31 March 2019 only.  
• Analysis of bill movement master tab le and payment details table 29 revealed that there 
were 7,770 bills amounting to ₹ 2,427.80 cores in which the entire process from creation 
to approval/rejection of bill was carried out by single users during the period from 12 
September 2018 to 03 December  2021. Thus, workflow hierarchy 30 was not followed in 
the system. 
The Department stated (April 2023) that the functionality (hierarchy-based workflow) was 
developed but later on these functionalities were discontinued and role  based 
functionalities for some process have been developed. The workflow details for all levels 
have been captured in the system. Further, the Government stated (July 2023) that there 
was change requested by the Department on change of workflow mechanism.  
The reply is not acceptable a s multiple roles were being performed by a single user 
indicating that role-based workflow adopted by the Department was not as per requirement 
of SRS and SDD. Moreover, necessary approval for change from hierarchy-based 
workflow to role based workflow was not found on records. In the absence of segregation 
of duties and its implementation, risk of leakage, fraud and diversion of fund cannot be 
ruled out. 
As the Department is switching to IFMIS Next-Gen and has awarded (October 2023) the work 
of IFMIS Next Gen to M/s Terracis Technologies Ltd., it is recommended that the Department 
may address the issues pointed such as lack of validation checks, lack of authorisation 
mechanism, design deficiencies, poor data quality and inadequate mapping of business rules,  
etc., during Development of IFMIS Next -Gen to avoid the pitfalls associated with the 
implementation of IFMIS. 
                                                 
28  From 01 April 2019 to 31 March 2021. 
29  FD_RND_PAYMENT_DTLS_TXN. 
30  Creator, verifier and approver. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 52 
3.6.10 Missing running serial numbers of Bills 
As per Chapter 1.5.1.2 - Claim Processing of SRS of R&D Module, a unique Bill number with 
running serial number of DDO office will be generated by the system upon the creation of Bill.  
During scrutiny of bill register table31, it was noticed that there were gaps between bill numbers 
ranged between 1 and 1,743 among 5,812 DDOs for the year 2019-20. Thus, a total of 5,27,245 
bill numbers are missing in the year 2019-20. Similarly, for the year 2020-21, the gaps between 
bill numbers ranged between 1 and 1,547 among 5,643 DDOs. Thus, a total of 4,87,898 bill 
numbers are missing in the year 2020-21. 
This indicated that the system failed to follow the business rule regarding generation of running 
serial numbers for DDO-wise Bill Numbers. Thus, data reliability was affected to that extent. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that oracle sequence is used for fast processing as cache 
functionality is used, due to which running serial numbers may get skipped.  
3.7  Conclusion 
• Audit noticed instances of system design deficiencies resulting in poor data quality and 
inadequate mapping of business rules resulting in incomplete and incorrect data in the 
system, deficient input controls and absence of data validation in Budget Module and 
Receipt and Disbursement (R&D) Modules of IFMIS.  
• Non-mapping of business rules in case of refund of revenue resulted in lack of justification 
for payment of refund of revenue.  
• Inconsistencies in failed payment transactions were observed mainly due to wrong account 
details and there was lack of control over re-processing of failed transactions. 
• Automated tool-based monitoring of performance  of the Contract  and online reporting 
system was not provided by the System Integrator.  
3.8  Recommendations 
Audit recommends that:  
• The Government may assess the need for complete overhauling of the IFMIS by ensuring 
adequate validation checks, authorisation mechanism, to avoid design deficiencies and to 
ensure the data quality of IFMIS. All the deficiencies associated with the IFMIS may be 
suitably addressed by the Department during development of IFMIS Next-Gen. 
• Adequate mapping of business rules  may be ensured during development of IFMIS  
Next-Gen. 
• The Government may consider developing a mechanism in the system for detailed analysis 
of failed transactions and may develop control mechanism for re-processing of failed 
transactions. 
• The Government may ensure that automated tool-based monitoring system for measuring 
of performance and online reporting system is provided by the SI.  
                                                 
31  FD_RND_BILL_REGISTER_TXN is main bill register table to store the common bill details while creating 
bill from received claims. 

 
 
Chapter IV 
Application Security 

 
 

CHAPTER IV 
APPLICATION SECURITY 
 
Summary  
Audit of application security aspects of IFMIS, revealed that security audit of the system was 
not conducted by an independent Auditor and no review of the security policy was done after 
October 2012. Digital signature validation in electronic documents or transaction was not 
used and bills/sub -vouchers were forwarded to disbursement office without digital 
signatures. Total 67,182 employees retired between 31 October 1992 and   
30 November 2021,  user IDs  were not deactivated from the IFMIS application. Bill 
transactions involving ₹ 139.17 crore were found to be carried out by 17 8 users after they 
were retired. 
Non-implementation of role-based authorisation resulted in inadequate logical access to the 
system and allowed non-eligible posts to create transactions.  Transactions were done by the 
users not recorded in the system. It was observed that the system was susceptible to back -
end adjustments and the integrity constraints defined to enforce the business rules for the 
system were weak. Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan were not tested by 
conducting drills. In the test-checked biometric details table, 65,489 records were found with 
null thumb attachment and 35,084 records were with null photo attachment. This indicated 
that the basic data for Biometric authentication was incomplete and thus functionality was 
not implemented as envisaged. 
 
4.1  Application Security 
An information asset is related to the provision of accurate data or information for decision 
making purposes by an entity. It is considered to hold value to the organisation and should 
therefore be protected by ensuring Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability.  
The contract document provided that 
the supplier was to, inter alia, submit 
security policy document. As per the 
conditions of the contract, design 
and implementation of security 
architecture was also included in 
deliverables. Supplier was to 
facilitate and co -ordinate external 
tie-ups, certification support and 
security. The supplier prepared 
(October 2012) Information Security 
Policy Document Version 1.6, to lay 
down the IFMIS Information 
Security Policy Framework, so as to 
assist Department in implementing 
the Information Security Policy by 
providing step-by-step procedures to 
build and enhance the information security for DC/DR/NDR and other offices of the 
Department using IFMIS application. Issues relating to application security are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs.  
Information 
Hardware 
 Software 
Confidentiality 
Integrity 
 Availability 
Application 
Security 
Network 
Security 
DC/DR 
/NDR 
Security 
Components of Information Security 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 54 
4.1.1 Security Audit by independent Auditor and review of security policy 
As per Clause 9.6 of the information  security policy, Vulnerability Assessment (VA) for 
information systems shall be done once in six months irrespective of the changes made in the 
system. VA shall be carried out by the Security Administrator and his team as well as the 
independent auditors for critical business information systems. Based on the VA report the 
potential technical vulnerabilities shall be addressed by the respective team within agreed time 
frame. Further, as per Clause 3.3.7 of security policy, regarding  independent review of 
Information Security Policy, the Information Security Policy document shall be reviewed and 
updated at least once in six months or when significant technological, process or security 
implementation changes occur. Security vulnerabilities shall be formally i dentified through a 
process of security audit conducted every six months by an independent auditor, who was to 
be engaged by the Department. 
It was noticed that the security audit was not conducted by an independent Auditor engaged by 
the Department. Moreover, the Security policy was created in October 2012, but review or 
update of security policy was not done.  
The Department stated (August 2022) that third party/security audit were part and scope of the 
project, and few security audits were done, and rest were pending due to non -availability of 
STQC agency. The matter has been taken up with SI to change the security auditor. Since the 
first level audit was not completed, cascading security audits could not be conducted. It was 
further stated (November 2022) that VA was proposed to be carried out on new delivery and 
installation. VA was not repeated every six mont hs as no change was anticipated or made on 
hardware. Further the Government stated (July 2023) that the specific contract conditions will 
be incorporated in IFMIS Next Gen.  
The fact remains that review of security policy was not done and security audits were not 
conducted as envisaged.  
4.1.2 Non implementation of digital signature 
General System requirements of FRS provided for Enterprise -wide usability; accordingly the 
system was to provide functionality to support the creation and use of electronic and digital 
signatures to validate and revalidate Electronic & Digital signatures and to maintain a record 
of electronic and digital signature validation in combination with the associated electronic 
document or transaction. Accordingly, the following  provisions were made in the SRS  as 
detailed in the Table 4.1 below. 
Table 4.1: Provisions relating to use of digital signatures 
Paragraph 
of SRS/SDD 
Description 
2.3.2 DDO will be provided with a feature to Digitally Sign the bill on approval. Digital Signature 
Verification feature was to be given to all users of Disbursement Office, to check the validity 
of the Digital Certificate of the DDO used to digitally sign the b ill and will also check the 
integrity of bill data submitted to Disbursement Office by the DDO. 
2.10.2.2 For online Challan Reconciliation and Approval, Agency Bank admin was to digitally sign the 
e‐scroll and upload the final digitally signed e‐scroll on the portal daily. Treasury admin was 
to verify the digital signature and approves the challan entries of e‐scroll. Digital signature was 
to be provided for E‐Scroll submission to prevent any data tampering of E‐Scroll file.  
3.10 For receipt reconciliation, agency Bank admin was to digitally sign the  
e-scroll and upload the final dig itally signed e -scroll on the portal daily. Treasury admin was 
to verify the digital signature and approves the challan entries of e-scroll. 
  Source: SRS and SDD of R&D Module of IFMIS  

 Chapter IV: Application Security 
Page 55 
There were 5,978 active DDOs in the table 1 against which only 5,370 digital signature IDs 
were found in digital signature procurement table2 indicating inadequate availability of digital 
signatures. Even, out of 5,370 digital signature IDs, 646 IDs were recorded as rejected, only 
3,087 IDs were approved by TO and status of 1,636 IDs was recorded as ‘Requested’, however, 
all the IDs were shown as active.  
It was further noticed that the Bills/sub-vouchers forwarded to Disbursement Office were not 
digitally signed.   Following discrepancies were noticed during the test check of vouchers/  
sub-vouchers of Indore city and Vindyachal  Treasury for the month of September 2020 and 
March 2021 apart from non-implementation of digital signatures:  
• In the month September 2020, sub -voucher attached with voucher no. 1338 3 was not 
legible. 
• On comparing the vouchers entered in VLC system of AG office 4 for the month of 
September 2020, it was noticed that 12 vouchers 5 relating to Vindhyachal Treasury and  
15 vouchers 6 relating to Indore city Treasury pertaining to Major Head 2071 were not 
found in the IFMIS system.  
• Voucher no. 517 of Major Head 2055, for the payment of ₹  3,53,041, contained two 
payments of ₹ 33,491 and ₹ 3,19,550, but same invoice no. 477/A was attached as sub -
voucher in the system for both the payments.  
• Voucher no. 135 of September 2020 under the Major Head 2071 was related to the 
payment of leave encashment of three employees. The calculation sheet for arriving to the 
amount of leave encashment was not attached. This indicated availability of inadequate 
information to approving authority.  Moreover, pass order was also not attached. 
• Moreover, blank sub-vouchers, sub-vouchers with lesser amount, unrelated documents and 
irrelevant supporting documents were uploaded with vouchers. 
• Vouchers, sub-vouchers and monthly accounts which were sent to AG (A&E) office were 
not digitally signed. 
Thus, the absence of implementation of digital signature paved the way for irregularities 
relating to incomplete voucher/ sub -voucher in the system resulted in lack of justification of 
payments and therefore, implementation of the digital signature process  was insufficient to 
provide an assurance on non-repudiation and data integrity.  
In case of non-implementation of digital signatures, the Department stated (July 2022) that the 
supplier was to implement the in-house digital signature solution but during the implementation 
phase the supplier discontinued the digital signature solution. The Department has planned to 
implement the e -Sign s olution through MAP_IT 7. However, no reply was furnished for 
discrepancies in vouchers/sub-vouchers in Indore and Vindhyachal treasuries.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that as per the provisions of MP Treasury Code, DDO and 
Treasury officers have login-based access and approvals. However, as per provisions of SRS, 
the SI had to provide functionality of digital signature at bill approval. SI failed to provide and 
procure digital signature facility as envisaged, therefore, competent authority took the service 
of e-sign from MPSEDC8 and the same was implemented by SI in IFMIS. As per suggestions/ 
 
1  CMN_DDO_MST (DDO master table). 
2  CMN_DIGITAL_SIGN_PROC_TXN. 
3  Voucher no. 1338 with Bill reference No. 20007221430. 
4  Office of the Principal Accountant General (Accounts & Entitlement), MP , Gwalior. 
5  Voucher no. 303, 18, 398, 308, 309, 116, 320, 336, 412, 144 and 139, 228.  
6  Voucher no. 75, 134, 170, 215, 216, 234, 251, 255, 290, 301, 319, 360, 361, 391 and 394.  
7  Madhya Pradesh Agency for Promotion of Information Technology. 
8  Madhya Pradesh State Electronics Development Corporation 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 56 
recommendations from the AG office bill passing by DDO and TO are now authenticated with 
e-sign from February 2023. It was further stated that under cyber treasury functionality , the 
daily scroll/MIS uploading is carried out by agency bank themselves, as login credentials are 
provided to the concerns nodal agency link bank branch. Since sub voucher and sanctioned 
attachment in the bills is the responsibility of the DDO and same as  to be verified by the 
treasuries. Notices will be issued to the concerned treasuries on non-adherence of rules. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department should have planned and executed for stable 
solution of digital signatures before signing off for Go -live of Receipt and disbursement 
module.  
4.1.3 Inadequate implementation of password policy 
As per SR 75 of MPTC 2020, 
password provided by Treasury to the 
DDOs should be changed 
immediately and from time to time 
but not more than 30 days interval. As 
per User Password Management of 
Information Security Policy 
Document - Version 1.6, passwords 
are a common means of verifying a 
user’s identity before access is given 
to an information system or service. 
To allow passwords to be changed 
when needed, pas swords shall never 
be hard -coded (incorporated) into 
software/scripts developed or 
modified in -house. Passwords shall 
be communicated by phone or 
through email in a password protected file. In case of new users, password shall be 
communicated to their respective supervisors. Users shall immediately change the password 
after first login. Password Guidelines inter -alia included provision of maximum ag e of 
password as 42 days.  
Test check of password data in table, it was noticed that information relating multiple encrypted 
passwords of users of IFMIS was stored indicating tracking of changing of passwords by users. 
Analysis of the data for the period from 01  April 2019 to 31 March 2021 indicates that only 
65.72 per cent users changed their passwords frequently and password policy was enforced to 
only that extent. It indicated that a defined password policy could not be implemented by the 
Department.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that as of now, enforced password policy for user is  
90 days and this is enforced only when the user logs on to the system.  
The reply is not acceptable as it does not explain reasons for not changing the password in 
remaining cases indicating that password policy was not enforced to that extent.  
4.1.4 Non-deactivation of retired officials’ user IDs 
According to Para one of Chapter 5.3 of IFMIS Information Security Policy Document, in case 
of normal resignation/retirement/termination/transfer & release of user or termination of 
contract with the third parties, access rights shall be revoked/disabled with immediate effect.  
Analysis of the User Master table revealed following deficiencies: 
Login screen of IFMIS  


 Chapter IV: Application Security 
Page 57 
• User IDs of 67,182 employees retired between 31 October 1992 and  30 November 2021, 
were not deactivated from the IFMIS application. These retired users were able to login 
into the IFMIS application and to perform the transactions including creation of bills. 
Sample of active retired employees are mentioned in the Table 4.2 below: 
Table 4.2: Sample of active user IDs of retired employees 
LOGIN_ID EMP_CODE NAME DOB DOR 
400002913 500523754 DATA RAM JARMAN 05-09-59 30-09-21 
051000999 436 SURESH KUMAR SHRIVASTAVA 25-10-59 31-10-21 
052017248 500454691 ASHA KAUL 27-03-59 31-03-21 
171006293 500255521 YASHWANT SINGH PANWAR 12-03-58 31-03-20 
Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
Non-deactivation of accounts of retired employees/users posed threat of unauthorised use of 
user account for performing transactions. This constituted violation of expressions endorsed in 
IFMIS Information Security Policy Document.  
Audit test checked transaction tables of bill register and payment details and noticed that 3,991 
bill transactions involving ₹ 139.17 crore were carried out by 178 users after they were retired 
within the period between 01 April 2019 and 31 March 2021 due to not deactivating the user 
IDs of employees in IFMIS after their retirement. Some of the instances are given in the  
Table 4.3 below:  
Table 4.3: Sample instances of transactions by retired employees  
LOGIN_ID Username Date of 
birth 
Date of 
retirement 
Bill No Bill Created 
Date 
Amount in 
₹ 
230007694 ANIL SONI 10/06/58 30/06/20 20006693251 17/07/20 1,98,91,369 
140003975 VISHNU 
MORGAONKAR 
14/01/59 31/01/21 20008797883 12/03/21 1,15,85,581 
130002412 NANNU LAL 
MAGROR 
05/07/58 31/07/20 20006997201 27/08/20 1,03,80,920 
141020288 GHANSHYAM 
DAS TALREJA 
01/07/58 30/06/20 20007295934 29/09/20 98,64,750 
Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
Specifically, in case of one user9 who retired on 30-04-2020 processed 302 bills amounting to 
₹ 4.63 crore during the period between 02 May 2020 and 25 March 2021, after his retirement. 
Unauthorised access to IFMIS application by retired employees/users and transactions carried 
out by them after retirement indicated very weak logical access control and major vulnerability.  
• The employee name column in the User  Master Table was to be explicitly  used for 
identification of name of each user. However, there were 11,725 records in the User Master 
Table wherein the data other than employee name 10 was entered11 out of which 119 users 
were active.  
• 1,158 records were found deactivated before the superannuation date 12 of the employees 
although, the reasons for such deactivation could not be verified from the IFMIS data. This 
indicated that the system was not automatically updating flag value 13 of the master table, 
based on retirement date. Further, analysis revealed that the system did not capture any 
 
9  Login Id: 181009776. 
10  'Admin_Department', 'Admin', 'Director', 'FMIS', 'HP', 'DPO', 'Collector', 'डीडीओ_व्यवस्थापक', 'व्यवस्थापक'. 
11  created between 12 March 2015 and 02 June 2016. 
12  30 November 2021 and above. 
13  EMP_SRVC_FLAG = 1 for active and 2 for inactive. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 58 
data in updated date field of table for 3,68,135 retired employees, indicating that data in 
User Master table was not automatically being updated and also not mapped with other 
program/procedures of the application governing login access controls. 
The Department stated (April 2023) that as per the process, the user is not deactivated. The 
concerned office in charge removes the employee from the post, the user cannot login once the 
employee has been removed from the post.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the SI had been requested to implement two factor 
authentication with One Time Password for role players in the system. But SI has failed to 
implement the recommendation of the security policy. It was assured that the provision will be 
made in IFMIS Next Gen. 
The reply is not acceptable as in case of normal resignation/retirement/termination/transfer of 
user, access rights were to be revoked/disabled. Thus, the functionality was not adequately 
implemented. Moreover, unauthorised operations by retired official s may pose the potential 
risk of fraudulent payments and put the financial system at risk.  
4.1.5 Protection of Log Information 
According to para 7.9.3 of Information security policy, logging facilities and log information 
shall be protected against tampering and unauthorized access. Log files including network 
devices and critical servers shall be backed up to a centrali sed server. The audit logs required 
for future investigation, analysis, or for evidence purpose will be securely retained. As per 
information security policy, all the event logs for servers will be backed up and will be retained 
for a period of at least five years.  
It was noticed during an attempt of logging in to production environment that the system denied 
with the message that “Maximum number of users exceeded”. On being enquired about the 
user logs for assessing numbers of users on time of attempt, it was stated  that logs were being 
maintained for one week as per configuration. Thus, log information was not being maintained 
as per information security policy.   
The Government stated (July 2023) that the number of logged in application users’ information 
is maintained but specific server related logs are not retained.  
The reply is not acceptable as according to the information security policy all the events logs 
for servers were to be backed up and retained for five years.  
4.1.6 Inadequate user management 
As per the IFMIS framework architecture document, authorization requires the authentication. 
Role based authori sation was supported in IFMIS, in which roles of the logged -in user are 
matched against the roles of accessed resource. The user  was not allowed to access the 
resources for which role are not assigned to that user. As per the budget user manual submitted 
by the supplier, Budget assistant involved in budget management activity was to create budget 
surrender proposals. 
It was noticed that in the case of 14 tables having 3.13 crore records, created user id was not 
entered for 0.25 crore records. The tables were mainly related to budget allotment, mapping of 
DDOs etc. The details were absent in the records due to non -enabling of null constraint in the 
column containing details of created user id.  
Further, analysis of budget surrender details table and post relationship table revealed that a 
total budget surrender proposals amounting to ₹ 8,49,146 involved 33 records were created by 
the user having post of ‘Peon’ and surrender of amount ₹ 7,23,021 involved 28 records created 
by the user having post of ‘Daftari’  and these transactions were executed specifically on  

 Chapter IV: Application Security 
Page 59 
30 March 2021 and 31 March 2020. Similarly, seven records of budget surrender amounting 
to ₹ 5,54,87,000 were created by the user having post of ‘Tractor Driver’. Out of above in case 
of amount of ₹ 8.49 lakh surrendered by the ‘Peon’ on 30 -03-2021, the status was shown as 
‘Approved’ and in case of ‘Daft ari’ it was shown as ‘Draft’ and for ‘Tractor Driver’ it was 
‘Null’. The details are shown in Appendix 4.1. 
Thus, role-based authorisation was not ensured to that extent and users other than Budget 
assistant had access to Budget Module in IFMIS. It indicates inadequate logical access controls 
and business mapping rules in IFMIS. 
The Department stated (November 2022) that it is mandatory to create hierarchy for work 
related to Budget in IFMIS and all the DDOs, BCOs, Administrative departments, Finance 
Department have been provided privileges for creating hierarchy as per their requirement. The 
number of the government officials in some of the DDO, BCO and departments were very less, 
therefore the work was done accordingly. The Government stated (July 2023) that the system 
is designed as hierarchy based except R&D module, which is role based. 
The reply is not acceptable as the system should have prompted for creating of hierarchy as per 
limitations of roles of the posts held by the users.   
4.1.7 Transactions by Users not existed in User Master Table 
As per SDD of Receipt and Disbursement module, users were configured with specific roles 
of creator, verifier and approver. The users were able to update the records as per mapping of 
roles. 
Analysis of tables relating to payment details and employee master data revealed that the  
17 users 14 who were not found in employee master data, performed 2,764 bill transactions 
amounting to ₹ 159.16 crores between 07 February 2018 and 31 March 2021 and cheques were 
also cleared in these cases.  
It was further noticed that 12 users15 mentioned in the updated by column of bill register table 
were not found in employee master data, however, these users had processed 14,066 bills 
valuing to ₹ 690.78 crore during 16 January 2018 to 01 April 2019. Since the identity of above-
mentioned users could not be verified from the employees’  master table, there was major 
vulnerability in validation controls in the core process of Receipt and Disbursement module.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that there was no validation on ‘updated by user’ field of 
mentioned table, when the field is updated in the system. This was just a number and not the 
actual employee ID or user ID. This discrepancy occurred due to inadeq uate information and 
communication gap to the module leaders of System Integrator. 
The reply is not tenable as the data in ‘updated by user ID’ column was captured in all cases 
other than 29 cases mentioned above. The reply of the Department does not satisfactorily 
explain as to how these 29 users were missing from the employee master table which indicates 
security vulnerabilities in IFMIS as the system failed to identify these users.  Moreover, 
operations by the users not existing in master table may pose the potential risk of unauthorised 
payments and put the financial system at risk. 
 
14  User ID: 310319, 31032020, 808007, 2803007, 410007, 1204007, 2504007, 404007, 904007, 304007, 
3006007, 3103007, 406007, 2403007, 1104007, 31032021, 507007. 
15  User ID:2310007', '11007', '31032019', '2503007', '2509777', '5062018', 1022020', '14007', '220118',  
'1805007',  '123456',  '220918777'. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 60 
4.1.8 System susceptible to backend adjustments 
As per para 2.1 of Software Development and Re-engineering Guidelines, solution architecture 
includes service granularity. It includes each service operation maps to a single business 
function, although, if a single operation can provide multiple functions without adding design 
complexity or increasing message sizes, this can genetically reduce implementation and usage 
costs. Moreover, this would include the maintaining the activity logs – including user 
information, delta change, time stamps. 
It was noticed that the created date was later than the updated date in tables as given in  
Table 4.4 below: 
Table 4.4: Showing name of tables having created date was later than the updated date 
Name of table Purpose Nos of 
records 
FD_RND_CMN_RCPT_TXN Stores all details of receipts transactions  3 
FD_RND_BILL_BUDLINE_TXN Stores head of account (Budget Line) details for the bill 
created from the received claim. 
14 
  Source: Extract from IFMIS database  
It was further noticed that the created date was later than voucher date and treasury officer’s 
approval dates in 1,97,891 and 1,97,495 records of bill register table respectively.  
Further, scrutiny of payment details table revealed that the data type of both ‘created date’ and 
‘updated date’ was defined as ‘DATE’ instead of ‘TIMESTAMP’. While the default value of 
‘created date’ was ‘sysdate’, the default value of ‘updated date’ was set to ‘Null’. This resulted 
in non-capturing of time along with date into these fields. 
The Department stated (August 2022) that there is currently no check and validation in the 
updated date field in the mentioned tables. Further, the Government stated (July 2023) that the 
SI could not adhere to design document, this has led to such discrepa ncies of validations, the 
SI has been asked to fix the issue.  
The reply is not acceptable as validation of ‘update date’ was not mentioned in the SDD. This 
paved the way for non-provision of validation check on ‘update date’ field. The ‘updated date’ 
is system generated and correctly captured into all records except the 17 records mentioned 
above. It shows that integrity constraints defined to enforce the business rules for the system 
were weak and susceptible to backend adjustments. 
4.1.9 Non testing of Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan 
As per RFP Vol . III, the Supplier was to develop a detailed Business Continuity Plan and IT 
Disaster Recovery Management Plan (BCP and DRP) before the System has cleared all 
Operational Acceptance Tests. The BCP and DRP will be developed in consultation with the 
CISO16 and obtain final approval, in writing, from the Apex Steering Committee. The BCP and 
DRP will include a structured set of disaster recovery actions that will comply with parameters 
such as the Recovery Time Objective (RTO), Recovery Point Objective (RPO) and Service 
Delivery Objective (SDO).  
It was noticed that Business Impact Analysis (BIA) was not done prior to contingency/disaster 
recovery planning and BCP and DRP was not tested by conducting drills. It was further noticed 
that Budget Module was reported to Go-live from 01 September 2015 and the Data centre was 
considered under Managed IT phase from that date but as the Data Recovery centre was set up 
in April 2017, indicating that no Data Recovery arrangements were available from September 
 
16  Chief Information Security Officer. 

 Chapter IV: Application Security 
Page 61 
2015 to April 2017. Thus, disaster recovery actions to comply with parameters of RTO, RPO 
and SDO were not performed and the system was put at risk. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that in spite of several reminders, the SI has not performed 
testing of business continuity plan and disaster recovery plan. The SI had again been reminded 
to complete the BCP activity with third party tester (STQC) and get the certificate. Ten  
per cent payment has been withheld on account of the activity. 
The fact remains same that testing of BCP and DRP for IFMIS was not done as BCP and DRP 
are important to enable an organisation's recovery of its critical business processes and IT 
systems in an efficient and timely manner in the event of a disaster. 
4.1.10 Functionality of Biometric authentication not implemented 
As per General system requirement mentioned in FRS, the system should provide secured login 
to the system through Biometric thumb impression device and secured username and login. 
Further, as per para 2.10.11.2 of SRS, R&D Module, Security Feature, biometric login was to 
be provided to Treasury Admin for E‐Scroll approval. As per SRS of R&D module, bills 
approved by DDO will be forwarded to Disbursement Office for passing/auditing. Biometric 
authentication was mandatory for approver at the time of approving the transaction for the first 
time after login.  
During the analysis of replica data, it was observed that there were three tables related to 
Biometric data in the system. However, out of th ese, two tables were having no records and 
one table contained 3,69,546 records for biometric details. In the biometric details table, 65,489 
records were with null thumb attachment and 35,084 records were with null photo attachment. 
This indicated that the ba sic data for Biometric authentication was incomplete and thus 
functionality was not implemented as envisaged. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that regarding biometric authentication it was proposed to 
get the biometric data from UIDAI 17 initially. But UIDAI, as per the Aadhaar Act, refused to 
provide demographic data and during implementation of IFMIS, UIDAI integration was not 
available. However, SI has been asked to provide biometric authentication, but SI failed to 
provide the same. 
The fact remains the same that functionality was not implemented as envisaged.  
4.1.11 Data Retention policy was not prepared 
The Department has to make a Data Retention policy. An organi sation’s data retention policy 
controls how it saves data for compliance or regulatory reasons, as well as how it disposes of 
data once, it is no longer required.  
It was noticed that in the agreement no mention about the retention period of transactional data 
within the live database was there. Further, how long the backup of all history data was to be 
retained has also not been mentioned, neither in the agreement n or in the SRS/SDD of R&D 
module. This indicates that the Data Retention Policy was not prepared by the Department for 
the Project. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that backup and retention policy is maintained in IFMIS.   
The reply is not acceptable as details of documented data retention policy were not furnished.  
 
 
 
17  Unique Identification Authority of India 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 62 
4.2  Conclusion 
• Security audit was not conducted by an independent Auditor as per the provision of the 
information security policy. 
• Digital signatures were not implemented and instances of uploaded illegible sub-vouchers, 
non-availability of vouchers and irrelevant supporting documents were noticed.  
• User IDs of retired officials were not deactivated, and they performed the transactions even 
after the date of their retirement.  
• Testing of Business continuity plan and disaster recovery plan was not carried out. 
4.3  Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
• The Government may ensure regular implementation of information security audits by an 
independent auditor.   
• The Government may make the Digital signature facility a mandatory requirement for 
authentication and should implement it with required validation checks.  
• Checks may be implemented on deactivation of  user IDs of retired employees to prevent 
any unauthorised transactions.  
• The Government may ensure that testing of Business continuity plan and Disaster recovery 
plan are carried out as per contractual requirements. 

 
 
Chapter V 
Integration of IFMIS with functions of 
the Accountant General 

 
 

CHAPTER V 
INTEGRATION OF IFMIS WITH FUNCTIONS OF  
THE ACCOUNTANT GENERAL 
3 
Summary  
The Functional Requirement Specification requires that the interface of the IFMIS should be 
same as for other stakeholders with format specific to the system of office of the  
Accountant General (A &E) with needed access rights. However, it was observed that the 
system did not contain the facility to capture budget and receipt and expenditure details for 
classification check by the Accountant General (A&E) office. Further, the State Government 
provides grants to various agencies and individuals, however  the provision to check the 
status of pending Utilisation Certificates was not made in the system.  
Instances were also found where corrections were done in the data without Transfer Entry. 
Accounts were found frozen after submission to the A ccountant General office with delays 
ranging between one to 736 days from the due date This delay in freezing of monthly 
Account before sending to the A ccountant General office may affect reliability of monthly 
accounts. Drawing and disbursing officers were created (prior to first July 2020) in the 
system without recording sanction details of the A ccountant General office. Provisions of 
standard forms and formats as per CPWA code or MP Treasury Code were found inadequate 
in the system and supporting forms were also not available with monthly accounts. 
 
5.1  Integrated Financial Management Information System 
5.1.1 Lack of interface between IFMIS and VLC systems 
As per Functional Requirement Specification (FRS), the interface of the system should be same 
as for other stakeholders with format specific to the system of office of the Accountant General 
(Accounts and Entitlements) 1 with needed access rights. As per SRS of Budget module, the 
system will generate/prepare Budget books which are to be presented in the Legislative  
Assembly.  
It was noticed that IFMIS does not allow Accountant General (A&E) office to capture budget 
and receipt and expenditure details for classification check and preparation of accounts 
respectively. Following deficiencies were noticed: 
• Facility to get budget through IFMIS was not there in the system and the Department was 
sending budget data in a Compact Disk (CD). The budget data so received was to be 
uploaded in Voucher Level Computerisation (VLC) system of the AG (A&E) office. The 
format in which the Department was sending the data was not fully compatible with the 
VLC system. Different formats are being used for soft copy and hard copy of budget books. 
Supplementary budget is not being provided by the Department in soft copy, only bud get 
books of Supplementary budget are being sent to AG (A&E) office. Moreover, receipt 
budget data was being fed in the VLC system manually.  
• Receipt data made available to the AG office was only up to minor head. Wrong 
classification of Detailed Head 73 2 and 74 3 was also observed. For uploading the 
expenditure data in VLC system, data received in text format from treasuries was being 
 
1  Office of the Accountant General (Accounts and Entitlement) Madhya Pradesh, Gwalior. 
2  Inter account transfers. 
3  (-) Recoveries. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 64 
imported to VLC system. But due to incomplete data, remaining data was to be posted 
manually. Moreover, complete classification of expenditure under Major head  
2071-Pension is not being received in treasury accounts and AG (A&E) office compiled 
these vouchers manually.  
• Irregularities of non -availability of bifurcated data pertaining to pension bills, different 
voucher code for conditional & un -conditional Grants-in-Aid vouchers, non -provision of 
service head pertaining to 8009 -GPF withdrawal vouchers etc. were noticed. Further, 
IFMIS does not have any provision for incorporating Transfer Entry whenever required. 
As per budget, provisioning of classification of Festival advance and other advances were 
not being received from Treasury Accounts. 
In the absence of integration between IFMIS and VLC, Audit cannot derive adequate assurance 
regarding the data reliability in IFMIS and it needs extensive reconciliation with VLC data 
maintained in the AG (A&E). 
The Government stated (July 2023) that during implementation phase, representatives from the 
SI and Directorate Treasuries and Accounts visited the AG office to study the integration 
requirements. There were compatibility issues with the software version at VLC and the AG 
office did not have any system integrator. Therefore, Access of IFMIS application was 
provided to the AG office to monitor the monthly account reports. On integration with VLC 
discussions have also taken place for IF MIS Next Generation and accordingly provisions are 
made in Next Gen.  
Though the decision of the Department to on-board AG office in Next Gen IFMIS is a welcome 
step, the fact remains that Next Gen IFMIS is yet to be implemented by the Department. 
5.1.2 Provision for status of Utilisation Certificates not made 
The State Government provides grants to various agencies and individuals. At the time of 
release of these grants, the expenditure is charged off to the functional head of account. The 
effectiveness and utilisation of grant -in-aid released by the State Gove rnment is monitored 
through the mechanism of Utilisation Certificate (UC). Financial rules stipulate that in the case 
of conditional grants, UC evidencing the proper utilisation of the grant is to be furnished to the 
Principal Accountant General (A&E) by t he sanctioning authority on or before 30 September 
of the year following that to which the Grant was released. UCs outstanding beyond a specified 
period indicates absence of assurance on utilisation of grants for intended purposes.  
It was noticed that the facility to select UC option with respect to Grants -in-aid was available 
in the system but the functionality relating to monitoring of UC were not available in the 
system. However, total 18 UCs involving ₹ 1,406.31 crore related to FY 2019 -20, were not 
submitted by the bodies and authorities of the State against the Grants -in-aid provided by the 
Departments.   
The Government stated (July 2023) that earlier in IFMIS system option for UC had already 
been incorporated and that it is the responsibility of drawing and disbursing officer to select 
and attach UC accordingly. Again, the facility to add UC option is separately provisioned. In 
the current financial year bifurcation was made through object/detail code.  
The reply is not acceptable as it does not explain how the monitoring of pending UCs was done 
through IFMIS.  
5.1.3 Correction without Transfer Entry 
As per Clause 4.20 of SRS and Clause 2.17 of SDD of R&D module a screen will be accessed 
by payment branch user of Disbursement/DDO office for making correction in Head of 
Account when the misclassification has been identified after the account has been submitted to 

 Chapter V: Integration of IFMIS with Functions of the Accountant General 
Page 65 
the AG office. This screen will be used in the case where the AG office does not agree  to 
become the user of IFMIS application. In such scenario, when the AG office makes the 
necessary corrections in the secondary account, details of the corrections will be intimated by 
the AG office, which will be captured through this screen and incorpora ted as secondary 
accounts without affecting or updating the primary accounts originally submitted by the 
disbursement office. Following tables were provisioned in SDD as mentioned in Table 5.1 
given below: 
Table 5.1: List of tables provisioned in SDD 
S. 
No. 
Table Name Description 
1. FD_RND_EXP_REVENTRY_MST  Table for Reversal Entry Master 
2. FD_RND_EXP_REVENTRY_MST_HST  This table will maintain history for Reversal Entry 
Master Table 
3. FD_RND_EXP_REVENTRY_TXN This table will store transactional data performed by the 
user with role creator, verifier and approver. 
4. FD_RND_EXP_REVENTRY_TXN_HST  This table will maintain history for Reversal Entry 
Transactional Table 
5. WF_JOB_MST  This is workflow job master table 
Source: System Design Document of R&D module of IFMIS  
Further, if any correction is to be made after sending the account to the AG office, then 
correction is proposed and Transfer entry is to be effected in the AG office. 
All the related tables in the database were blank except reversal entry master table4, which had 
total 5,243 records for the period of 2019-21. Following was noticed:  
• 3,438 entries were those where old Heads of Account and new Heads of Account were 
same. The reversal entries were to be done only when misclassifications have been noticed 
after sending the accounts to the AG office.  
• In 1,281 cases out of 5,243 cases, the old amount has been changed in the reversal entries. 
As most of the entries pertained to Receipt head and reasons for change in the amount were 
not known and the party name has also been changed.  
• Out of the 3,438 entries only 159 entries contained the AG sanction order date indicating 
that remaining reversal entries were made without the sanction from the AG office. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that there was no provision to change the Head of 
Accounts, only book transfer can be modified after due concurrence from the AG office and 
then it is modified by end user. The SI failed to implement the general ledger and  asset 
accounting module in which effect of reversal entry and transfer entry done in R&D module, 
were provisioned. The Government further stated that they had  reminded and shared concept 
note along with SRS several times to make provision of transfer entr y and reversal entry in 
primary and secondary account, but the SI failed to implement. After the changes in account , 
revised account has been sent to the AG office by the concerned treasury.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Department failed to implement the functionality of transfer 
entry in primary and secondary accounts.  
5.1.4 Delay in freezing of monthly Account before sending to the AG office 
In the IFMIS system the Treasury officer shall generate and send monthly accounts 
electronically to the AG office. Printed and signed copy of List of Payment (LOP) and Schedule 
of Receipts (SOR) was also to be sent to the AG office for confirmation of electronic accounts. 
The treasuries are required to send compiled accounts to the AG office every month, at a later 
 
4  FD_RND_REC_REVENTRY_MST. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 66 
stage if any misclassification or erroneous entry is found, requisition for correction is to be sent 
to the AG office. The entry shall be corrected only on receipt of approval from the AG office.  
Further, para 4.13 of SRS provides that the s ystem will have the functionality of freezing the 
account up to a particular date major Head wise. Major Head once froze/locked then details of 
challans/vouchers corresponding to that major head cannot be edited. Generally, this is done 
after the account is matched for a particular major head up to particular date. Account Freeze 
utility is provided to freeze the accounts treasury‐wise before submitting to the AG office. 
System will populate all the Major Head re lated to payment or all the Major Head related to 
receipt, depending upon the Major Head type selected. For the range of Expenditure and 
Receipt related Major Head, the system will refer Budget module. Furthermore, para 2.13.3 of 
SDD provisioned for total nine number of tables for mapping freezing of account as mentioned 
in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: List of tables related to Freezing of Account 
S. 
No. 
Table Name Description 
1. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_MST  This table contains details of frozen accounts 
2. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_MST_HST  This table will maintain history for frozen Account 
Master Table 
3. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_TXN4  This table will store transactional data performed by 
the user with role creator, verifier and approver. 
4. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_TXN_HST  This table will maintain history for frozen Account 
Transaction Table 
5. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_MST_DTL  Frozen account master detail table 
6. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_MST_DTL_HST  History table for frozen account master detail table 
7. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_TXN_DTL  Frozen account transaction detail table 
8. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_TXN_DTL_HST  History table for frozen account transaction detail table 
9. WF_JOB_MST  This is workflow job master table 
Source: System Design Document of R&D module of IFMIS  
Following was noticed: 
• Out of these provisioned tables only two tables i.e. FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_MST and 
FD_RND_FREEZED_ACC_TXN are available in the database, other tables were however 
not found in the system. There was no data in the transaction table, but all the data related 
to freezing of account is stored in a Master table.   
• Accounts were frozen after submission to the AG office with delays ranging between one 
to 736 days from the due date as detailed in Appendix 5.1. 
• In the case of Vallabh Bhawan Treasury of Bhopal, it was noticed that for the month of 
October 2019 to December 2019, the date of Freezing of monthly accounts was recorded 
294 to 331 days before the date of submission of monthly accounts to the AG office.  
• For the years 2019-20 and 2020-21, in 27 rows, the records were updated after submission 
to the AG office. Details as given in Appendix 5.2. 
• The details of 20 District Treasuries for 56 months regarding Freezing, submission, etc., 
were not recorded in table mentioned above. Therefore, compliance with the provisions 
was not ensured. The details are shown in Appendix 5.3.  
• It was also seen that the changes were made in the 27 cases where the Monthly Account 
has been updated after sending it to the AG office. 
The Government stated (July 2023) that from year 2022 the account is automatically frozen on 
5th of every month. Only after getting approval of requisition for correction from the AG office, 
the account unfreezing process is being done at DTA. After making  necessary corrections, 
concerned treasury sends revised account to the AG office for necessary action. 

 Chapter V: Integration of IFMIS with Functions of the Accountant General 
Page 67 
The reply itself indicate that automatic freezing of accounts was being done from the year 2022, 
however, reply is silent about irregularities relating the period 2019 -21, which affected 
reliability of monthly accounts due to allowing of alterations in dat a even after submission of 
accounts to the AG office.  
5.1.5 Vouchers having Net Amount greater than Gross Amount 
As per SDD, two tables 5 inter alia collects information of deductions of GPF, DPF etc. 6 and 
deductions of GIS, income tax etc. 7 along with pay bill detail transactions. These figures are 
further processed for compilation of accounts. Further, the net amount of bill was a calculated 
column based on Gross amount minus deductions.  
It was noticed during scrutiny of data relating to period 2019 -21, that there were 21 vouchers 
wherein net amount was greater than gross amount and figures entered in deduction columns 
of both the tables were negative, thus resulting in excess net amount t han gross amount. The 
details are shown in Appendix 5.4. This indicated that the process mentioned in the SDD was 
not incorporated in the system.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the lack of validation on excess net amount than gross 
amount was due to negligence/bug in the application by the SI. Preventive action has already 
been taken by fixing the bug by the SI.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Department  failed to enforce basic validation checks on 
amounts of vouchers in the system.  
5.1.6 Not obtaining authorisation for creation of DDO 
As per Rule 15C of MP Treasury Code Vol . I, a Treasury Officer shall not permit the first 
drawl by a newly created Drawing Officer unless an authority is received by the Treasury 
Officer from the Accountant General, placing the new Drawing Officer in account with the 
Treasury. Further, as per SRS, the Drawing Officer can start the withdrawal after sanction from 
the State Government  and declaration from Head of Administrative Department and 
Authorisation by the AG office placing the Drawing Officer with the treasury concerned. The 
provision remained in force till June 2020. 
It was noticed (June 2022) that there were 5,945 active DDOs as per DDO master table 8. But 
in table, there was no valid entry in the column for storing AG sanction details 9. Moreover, 
invalid data for AG sanction date as 01 January 2000 was captured in 4,987 records of DDO 
master table. This indicated that the system accepted invalid data.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that as per treasury code, Commissioner, Treasuries and 
Accounts has been authori sed for creation of Drawing and Disbursement Officer. Data of C -
SFMS did not have mandatory field of the AG approval. 
The reply is not acceptable as 5,580 records belong to the period before 1 July 2020 which did 
not contain valid entry of AG sanctions. However, the reply is silent about invalid entries in 
records relating to the period after 30 June 2020.  
 
5  FD_RND_BILL_REGISTER_TXN and HR_PAY_PAYBILL_DTL_TXN. 
6  AG_BT. 
7  TRY_BT. 
8  CMN_DDO_MST. 
9  AG Sanction ID. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 68 
5.1.7 Difference in figures of Reserve Bank Deposits between front end report and database 
figures 
As per SDD and actual database, the payments and receipts details of Bank Scrolls were stored 
in two tables10.   
During Scrutiny of data for the District Treasury, Indore for the month March 2021, differences 
in figures of Reserve Bank Deposits (RBD) were noticed in Bank wise and Date wise report 
for payments and receipts, from front end (RBD internal) and report generated from replica 
server data, based on the query made available by the Department. The two sets of figures are 
shown in the Table 5.3 below. 
Table 5.3: Statement showing differences in Reserve Bank Deposit figures  
Name of SBI Branch As per report generated from 
Replica Server Data 
As per report generated from 
front-end (RBD internal) 
Credit Amount Debit Amount Credit Amount Debit Amount 
P.Y. Road 116185525 3304206680 11558725 3358333905 
Indore Naka, Depalpur 14991217 444739755 14989217 444739755 
Town Hall, MHOW 9526448 234021210 9526448 238256785 
Sanwer 205557 301997143 205557 301997143 
  Source: Extract from IFMIS database and front-end report of IFMIS 
Thus, reliability of the data could not be assured due to variation in figures.  
The Government stated (July 2023) that the issue arose due to merger of sub treasuries and city 
treasury Indore in district treasury Indore. 
The reply is not acceptable as the merger of treasuries took place for financial year 2022 -23. 
Further, mismatch of figures from database and generated reports indicates incorrect reporting 
in monthly accounts. 
5.1.8 Difference in figure of cash Account obtained from front end report and extracted 
from database 
The cash account of Indore treasury was generated for the month of January 2021 from front 
end and database through SQL11. It was noticed in four cases that there were differences in the 
amount as well as number of challans in Cash Accounts, as detailed in Table 5.4 below. 
Table 5.4: Showing differences in Cash Account figures 
Head of Account As per SQL query 
provided for Cash 
Account 
As per report generated 
from front end 
Amount Challans Amount Challans 
General Provident Fund 503896 18 695644 20 
Medical and Public Health 63274 46 80875 47 
Housing 159556 133 165136 136 
Non-ferrous Mining and Metallurgical Industries 12600 7 46974 25 
  Source: Extract from IFMIS database and front-end report of IFMIS  
No specific reply was furnished by the Government. However, the Government referred  
(July 2023) the discussion of meeting held on 10 April 2023 and stated that there is need to 
discuss on the query of observation.  
Reply is not acceptable as results of audit are based on SQL query provided to the audit by 
Department itself.  
 
10  FD_RND_PAYMENT_SCROLL_DTL and FD_RND_RCPT_SCROLL_HDR_TXN. 
11  Structured query language. 

 Chapter V: Integration of IFMIS with Functions of the Accountant General 
Page 69 
5.2  Provisions of Standard Forms 
5.2.1 Non generation of Form-51 
CPWA code provides that Remittances between officers rendering accounts to the same 
Accounts Officer shall be entered in the Schedule of Reconciliation of Cheques & Remittances 
in Form CPWA-51. Soon after the expiry of the month, monthly settlement should be effected 
with all treasuries in respect of the transactions of the entire Works Division with them. The 
divisional officers will undertake reconciliation in Form-51 indicating the differences between 
the cheques and remittances. Form-51 was to be sent t o the AG office along with monthly 
accounts. However, it was noticed that provision of Form -51 was not  made in the IFMIS, 
indicating that reconciliation was affected to that extent.   
5.2.2 Inadequate format of Form CPWA-65  
Para 22.4.16 of CPWA code provided for Schedule of Deposit Works in Form CPWA -65, 
which was to be submitted by the Divisional Officer with monthly account. Part II of the 
Schedule, provided for (1) invariably submitted with the accounts for March, and (2) any 
expenditure thereon has been charged to Miscellaneous Public Works Advances, and extract 
from Part II relating to such works only is submitted to the Pay and Accounts Officer.  
It was noticed from the front end of IFMIS that the format of Form-65 is not as required under 
CPWA code. Even provision of Part -I and Part -II has also not been made  in the format , 
resulting in presentation of incomplete data to the AG office. 
5.2.3 Non availability of supporting forms required to be attached with Monthly Accounts 
Para 22.4.12 of CPWA code stipulates that the Monthly Account should be prepared in the 
Form CPWA-8012 for presentation to the Divisional officer and submission to the Pay and 
Accounts Officer. This account is an abstract of the entire receipts and disbursements of the 
month as worked out in the Abstract Book 13 and as detailed in the various schedules and 
registers and shows also in the opening and closing cash balances.  
Further, para 22.4.15 of the CPWA code provisioned for submission of Monthly Accounts to 
the AG office. It should be supported by the various forms as mentioned in Appendix 5.5.  
Scrutiny of replica data/Front end and test check of divisional data revealed that some of the 
forms14 of Monthly Account have not been provisioned in the System. Further, Form 61 which 
was meant for containing vouchers, transfer entry order, etc., were not available in the system. 
This resulted in presentation of incomplete monthly accounts of works Department to the AG 
office. 
The Government stated (July 2023) in respect of non -generation of Form -51, Form-65 and 
supporting forms required to be attached with the monthly accounts, that all the suggestions 
with respected to the CPWA code will be incorporated. As per the present scenario of technical 
advancement the CPWA forms may also be rationalised.  
5.2.4 Inadequate provision of MPTC forms in the system 
The Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code  (MPTC) was revised in 2020. It was noticed that  
provisions for forms/register prescribed in MPTC were not included in the SRS, as  the 
observations detailed in the Table 5.5 below:  
 
12  With all supporting registers, schedules, vouchers, etc. 
13  Form 81. 
14  Form 64A, 61, 67, 76, 76A, 66, 83 and 81. 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 70 
Table 5.5: Details of observations 
Provision of MPTC 2020 form and purpose Reply of Department  
MPTC 8 : As per rule 53 challan in form MPTC 8 is 
given for depositing money through challans for Land 
revenue and CESS. 
The physical challans up to ₹ 10,000 only are being 
deposited in treasury and rest of the deposits are 
being made through Cyber Treasury.  
Reply of DTA is irrelevant as MPTC -8 is an 
important form to deposit Land revenue and CESS. 
MPTC-17: Rule 39 Note 4 provides that when payment 
of a bill is required to be made through some other 
person or agency or when payment is desired to be made 
by means of demand draft, cash order, etc. or when the 
cash drawn from the Treasury is advanced to a 
subordinate officer for disbursement, it would  be 
necessary for the drawing officer to make a note to this 
effect in the bill register i.e., in form MPTC-17. 
All the important fields of Bill Register have been 
incorporated in IFMIS. Fields which are not 
important have not been incorporated in the 
system.  
MPTC 78A : Rule 27 (2) provides that if an error is 
noticed after submission of the account to the AG office, 
then in that case where error has occurred in treasury 
while making entry a note in front of such point is to be 
made. The Treasury  Officer should not make any 
correction in figures, Head of accounts, or any other. For 
proper transfer, a letter in Form MPTC 78A is to be sent 
to the AG office.  
As the online integration with VLC is not there in 
the system, hence requisition for correction was 
provisioned offline. Hence, provision of MPTC-78 
was not made in SRS/SDD.  
 Source: Provisions of Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code and audit observations  
Other forms as per provisions in MPTC 2020 were also not provisioned in the IFMIS, as 
detailed in the Table 5.6 below: 
Table 5.6: Details of provisions 
Provision of MPTC 2020 form and purpose 
MPTC 55: As per rule 289 all receipts on account of the Public Works Department must be recorded in a 
register.  
 
MPTC 56: Amounts deposited by Municipalities towards their share of the cost of such Water supply schemes 
with the Public Health Engineering Division should be entered in the register/schedule of receipts , even 
though, the amounts are not paid into the Treasury by Officers of the Department. 
MPTC 58 : Similarly rule 294 ibid provides a consolidated receipt in Form MPTC 58 for the Forest 
remittances received and credited during the month shall be furnished by the Treasury Officer on the fifth day 
of the ensuing month to each of the Forest Officers. 
MPTC 64: Rule 348 provided that each item of deposit received will be recorded in the register of deposit 
receipts to be kept up by each civil court in Form MPTC 64. 
MPTC 65 : All payments made from these deposits will be entered by the court in a separate register of 
repayment of deposits in Form MPTC 65. 
MPTC-75: Rule 347 provided for the maintenance of personal deposit register in MPTC -75. 
MPTC 69: Rule 375 provided that a plus and minus memorandum in Form MPTC 69 should be appended to 
the monthly accounts showing for each local fund the balance at the beginning of the month, the amounts 
received and credited during the month, and those paid out during the month and the balance at the end of the 
month. 
 Source: Provisions of Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code  
The Government stated (July 2023) that exercise during various meetings with the AG office 
for rationalisation of MPTC forms was held and sent to the AG office for approval.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Department failed to complete the planning stage before 
implementation of IFMIS.  
 
 

Chapter V: Integration of IFMIS with Functions of the Accountant General 
Page 71 
5.3  Conclusion 
• There was a lack of interface between IFMIS and VLC system. Correction entries mainly
pertaining to Receipt head  were made without Transfer Entries . Freezing of monthly
Account before sending it to the AG office was implemented with delays.
• Provisions of relevant f orms of CPWA Code and MPTC were not made properly in the
system.
5.4  Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
• The Department may ensure that the compatibility issues of IFMIS with the system of the
AG office are resolved in order that the Department can submit the accounts to AG in an
efficient manner.
• The Department may ensure that the relevant forms of accounts as per CPWA Code and
MPTC are provisioned in IFMIS.
(PRIYA PARIKH) 
Bhopal Accountant General 
The 28 October 2024 (Audit-II) 
Madhya Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 29 October 2024 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
Appendices 

 
 

Appendix 2.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.5) 
Details of changes in resources deployment 
S. No. Role As per Project Plan 
March 2011 
(No. of personnel) 
Deployment period of resource as per 
Project Plan 
Remarks by the Department 
1 Engagement Manager 2 1st One week per quarter till Go-Live Absent 
2nd Regular Replaced and No appearance since SRS approval 
2 Project Manager 2 1st One week per quarter till Go-Live -- 
2nd Full time at project site Replaced without permission 
3 Application 
Development & 
Integration Lead 
2 1st One week per quarter till Go-Live Absent from April 2011 
2nd Regular Replaced 
4 Security Lead 1 In the 1st year for 5 months Not available regularly 
5 Networking Lead 2 In the 1st year for 2 months Replaced 
From 4th month to 16th month at project site Replaced 
6 Infrastructure & Data 
center Lead 
2 In the 1st year for 3 months Absent 
From 3rd month up to Go-Live -- 
7 Training & change 
management Lead 
2 From 2nd half month in the duration of  
12-16 months 
Absent 
From month 11 to month of 26 Replaced without permission 
8 Quality Assurance Lead 2 7 days for every quarter Absent 
Continuous 7 days per month up to Go-Live -- 
9 Domain Specialist 
Finance 
2 Full time at project Site Absent from April 2011 
Full time at project Site -- 
10 Domain Specialist HR 3 Continuous 7 days for 7 th, 8th, 10 th & 12 th 
months & 15 days for 15th month 
Absent 
For 8 months from the beginning  --  
From 6th month upto Go-Live -- 
11 Database Administrator 
Leader 
3 Full time at project Site Replaced without permission 
Continuous 7 days per month upto Go-Live  Replaced without permission 
12 Web Administrator  2 Continuous 7 days for 18 th, 20th, 22nd & 24th 
month 
Absent 
Last 7 months upto Go-Live -- 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 74 
Appendix 2.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.6) 
Details of Operational Acceptance tests to be carried out as per RFP Volume-III   
Clause of 
RFP vol.-III 
Test Methodology/techniques 
 
3.2.1.1 Database Test (a) Verify complete and correct installation of Database Management System 
(b) Data Integrity Testing 
3.2.1.2 Data Sampling (a) Database Back-up & Recovery Testing 
(b) Query Testing 
(c) Database Connection Test (Determine if the database server will be able to sustain the expected number of connections)  
3.2.1.3 Functionality Test (a) Test that the functional requirements specified in all the modules are met  
(b) All functions MUST be tested when user provide inputs with correct and incorrect inputs  
(c) Testing of Formats 
3.2.1.4 Unit Test (a) Each module or Component should to be fully tested independently before integration  
3.2.1.5 System Test (a) All specified functionality should exist. This testing verifies the as-built program's functionality and performance with 
respect to the requirements for the software product 
(b) All System functions that are accessed through menus should be tested 
(c) Defect test: Test software defects before implementation 
(d) House Keeping functions like archiving 
(e) Easy to use: Graphical user interface as per requirement specification 
(f) Server, Storage system shutdown and power up test 
(g) System backup and restoration test 
3.2.1.6 Security (a) Attempt to break the password 
(b) Time out facility on dormant menu/screen. To continue using the open screens the user MUST re -login 
(c) Reviewing and Evaluating the Security Controls 
(d) Conduct penetration testing, security audit and hardening exercises 
3.2.1.7 Stress Test (a) Finding errors that will show themselves under certain combinations of events or  data values 
(b) Heavy repeating of certain actions or inputs 
(c) Time Test – To determine if individual business transactions run to completion in a reasonable amount of time  
3.2.1.8 Reliability Testing (a) Testing the system for prolonged use at varying levels, or, possibly, constant value at peak level 
3.2.1.9 Performance Testing (a) Testing to probe the system against prescribed timing 
3.2.1.10 Consistency Testing (a) Test the consistency of data and results across the applications 
3.2.1.11 Recovery Testing (a) Testing the response of the system to failures of all sorts including but not limited to power failure 
3.2.1.12 Audit Trail (a) Tracking critical transactions 
  (b) Logging all critical errors 
3.2.1.13 Multi-User Capability (a) Test that the application system can support several users 

 Appendices 
Page 75 
Clause of 
RFP vol.-III 
Test Methodology/techniques 
 
3.2.1.14 Help Information Testing (a) Testing for help information that will be verified for detail and presentation 
3.2.1.15 Limit Testing (a) Test as to how the system reacts to data which is maximal or minimal in the sense of attaining limit 
(b) The system will be tested beyond the limits specified to verify whether sufficient margins have been built in 
3.2.1.16 Volume Test (a) Test to submit the system to large volumes of data 
3.2.1.17 System Integration Test (a) Testing Components and Component Integration 
(b) Testing System Interfaces 
(c) After each system has been fully integrated to create a larger system, each module or sub -system MUST have a defined 
interface which will be used to call another program component 
(d) Parameter interface: Data and function references are passed from one component to another 
(e) Procedure interface: One sub-system encapsulates a set of procedure which is called by other sub-system  
(f) Message passing interface: One sub-system request a service from another sub system 
(g) Validation (Completeness) 
(h) Robustness Testing 
(i) Testing for 24x7 availability 
(j) Error Detection & Recovery Testing 
(k) Measuring response time, throughput and availability 
(l) Monitoring Resource Utilization 
(m) Data Conversion 
3.2.1.18 Compatibility and 
Configuration Testing 
(a) Operating System and Data Base Compatibility 
(b) Hardware and Network Compatibility 
(c) Checking Compliance with recent industry standards 
(d) Test the compatibility of data to the higher version, as and when applicable 
3.2.1.19 Storage Testing (a) Testing to detect instances when the system exceed the specified limits (e.g. processing or supplying large volume of data) 
3.2.1.20 Installation Testing (a) The ease of installation will be checked 
(b) Where installation counts are applicable, the number of installations specified will be tested. The system will be checked for 
a higher number of installations than specified, also to uninstalled to check if the installation count is reduced  
3.2.1.21 Environment Testing (a) The application will be tested whether it works under different environments 
e.g. application will be tested on different networks 
3.2.1.22 Graphical User Interface 
(GUI) Test 
The system will be tested for GUI which will include but will not be limited to:  
(a) Menus 
(b) Message Boxes 
(c) Keyboard Interface 
(d) Cursor Management 
(e) Visual Design 
3.2.1.23 Manual Procedures (a) If the system works only with manual aid, an archive utility that requires the manual loading of tapes or a system requir ing 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 76 
Clause of 
RFP vol.-III 
Test Methodology/techniques 
 
Testing manual switching of remote devices during processing 
3.2.1.24 User Information Testing (a) The user documents will be reviewed for clarity, ease of use, details of all required system facilities, and details of all system 
error messages together with sufficient information to allow the replications of errors  
3.2.1.25 Maintainability (a) Reviewing and Evaluating Maintainability 
3.2.1.26 Performance in 
LAN/WAN environment 
(a) Monitoring performance of LAN/WAN 
Total 26 test 60 Methodology/techniques 
 
 
  

 Appendices 
Page 77 
Appendix 2.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.1) 
Grant-in-Aid was wrongly debited to Capital Account, instead of Revenue Account 
IFMIS Major Head 
Code 
Major Head 
Operated 
Major Head Description No. of Bills Net Bill Amount (₹) 
1687 5425 Capital Outlay on other Scientific and Environmental 
Research 
20         11,96,00,000  
1703 4070 Capital Outlay on other Administrative Services 4         20,14,60,000  
1711 4515 Capital Outlay on other Rural Development Programmes 2,060     68,33,82,32,950  
1733 4202 Capital Outlay on Education, Sports, Art and Culture 167      1,99,08,86,164  
1736 4225 Capital Outlay on Welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and other Backward Classes 
566      1,29,85,65,002  
1857 4217 Capital Outlay on Urban Development 121     19,00,65,15,900  
1896 4235 Capital Outlay on Social Security and Welfare 6           1,54,04,000  
1927 4403 Capital Outlay on Animal Husbandry 19           1,47,63,021  
1935 4425 Capital Outlay on Co-operation 23         26,92,15,400  
1951 4801 Capital Outlay on Power Projects 19      4,48,79,07,000  
Grand Total 3,005    95,74,25,49,437  
Grand Total in crore ₹ 9,574.25 crore 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 78 
Appendix 2.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.2.2) 
Avoidable change request considered by the Department  prior to  September 2017 
S.No. Module Change request needed for Man-days reported 
by Supplier & 
accepted by the 
department 
Man-days 
considered by 
the department 
for payment 
Remarks 
1 Budget Budget cross DDO/BCO allotment changes: As per the 
requirement in the SRS there is no process defined in 
which BCO can directly provide the allotment to any 
other BCOs DDOs. A new process is designed 
completely at BCO level so that BCO can directly allot 
to other BCOs DDOs 
246.50 197.20 In contradiction with the 
provisions para B 14 of M.P. 
Budget Manual Vol.I 
2 Budget Plan & Non Plan change: Due to merger of Plan & Non -
Plan in FY 2017-18 
302.60 242.08 The work was related to Budget 
line master table and in the 
replica it was not found to be 
done. 
3 Budget Tables affected due to merger 246.50 202.20 The work was related to Budget 
line master table  
4 R&D and GST Challan posting process changes:  Single challan screen 
for allowing offline posting bank scroll  wise, Challan 
wise separate screen has been replaced with single 
screen. 
175.00 139.99 The FRS already provided for 
Receipt Branch User to upload 
the soft copy of Receipt E‐Scroll 
if the same is provided by the 
banks.  
Total 781.47 
 
Amount in lakh at the rate of ₹ 6,000 per man-day 46.89 lakh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Appendices 
Page 79 
Appendix 2.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.4) 
Non-regulation of payment on the basis of module-wise completion and Service Level Agreement 
(Amount in ₹) 
S.No. Components Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7 Y8 
(3rd year) (4th  year) (5th  year) (6th  year) (7th  year) (8th year) 
1 Maintenance and Support charges as 
per contract 
1,92,11,931 1,27,87,231 1,27,87,231 1,27,87,231 1,23,44,943 1,01,33,503 
2 Support & enhancement as per 
contract 
2,25,38,228 2,25,84,554 2,26,32,270 2,26,81,417 2,31,51,919 2,36,32,338 
3 AMC as per contract  6,48,09,571 6,31,01,513 6,40,81,544 6,13,60,385 6,79,57,657 6,18,86,522 
4 Total  as per Contract  10,65,59,730 9,84,73,298 9,95,01,045 9,68,29,033 10,34,54,519 10,34,54,519 
5 AMC after deduction of ₹ 36,16,393 
on account of non-maintenance of  
existing equipment (old equipment at 
time of Agreement) 
6,11,93,178 5,94,85,120 6,04,65,151 5,77,43,992 6,43,41,264 5,82,70,129 
6 AMC considered by the department as 
per the operational HW/SW 
2,69,04,070 3,85,60,456 4,91,28,853 4,69,17,870 5,22,78,254 4,73,45,365 
  Paid by the Department             
7 Support & enhancement  2,25,38,228 2,25,84,554 2,26,32,270 2,26,81,417 2,31,51,919 2,36,32,338 
8 AMC paid (@ 90 per cent of AMC 
considered by the department as per 
the operational HW/SW) 
2,42,13,663 3,47,04,410 4,42,15,968 4,22,26,083 4,70,50,429 4,26,10,828 
9 Total amount paid by the 
Department 
4,67,51,891 5,72,88,964 6,68,48,238 6,49,07,500 7,02,02,348 6,62,43,166 
10 Amount as per weightage for Go-Live 
modules i.e. 55.5 per cent of AMC 
paid 
1,34,38,583 1,92,60,948 2,45,39,862 2,34,35,476 2,61,12,988 2,36,49,010 
11 Payment was to be made on basis of 60 
per cent performance of SLA (10*60 
per cent) 
80,63,150 1,15,56,569 1,47,23,917 1,40,61,286 1,56,67,793 1,41,89,406 
12 Difference of payment (8-11) 1,61,50,513 2,31,47,841 2,94,92,051 2,81,64,797 3,13,82,636 2,84,21,422 
         Total difference Amount (Total of row 12): ₹ 15,67,59,261 (Say ₹ 15.67 crore)  
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 80 
Appendix 3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.4.4) 
Details of challans accounted as Capital outlay instead of Receipts 
S.No. Transaction ID Receipt 
Date 
Treasury 
Code 
Name of Party Major 
Head 
Major Head 
Description 
Purpose Challan No Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 2000198938694 08/04/20 14925 M/S INDORE 
PREMIER C 
4425 Capital Outlay 
on  
Co-operation 
Fees 170/9999999/4425/03/20/000001 51,31,929 
2 2000213907726 06/04/21 14925 MUKHY KARYP 
ADHI 
4425 Capital Outlay 
on  
Co-operation 
Fees 170/9999999/4425/03/21/000002 3,00,000 
3 200219718546 22/09/21 9242 Distt. Woman and 
Child Development 
Officer, Umaria 
4801 Capital Outlay 
on Power 
Projects 
Treasury 
By-Transfer 
440/9999999/4801/09/21/000002 724 
4 200219718534 22/09/21 9242 Distt. Woman and 
Child Development 
Officer, Umaria 
4801 Capital Outlay 
on Power 
Projects 
Treasury 
By-Transfer 
440/9999999/4801/09/21/000001 1,063 
Total 54,33,716 
 
  

 Appendices 
Page 81 
Appendix 3.2 (A) 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.2) 
Details of wrong IFSC Codes in Vendor Master Table 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050435930 DEVIDEEN CHAODHARI SBIN000405 30897843967 
200050441705 MEENA PATEL PUNB099000 990000100853333 
200050442271 Chandrahas Patle UBIN054216 421602010012356 
200050448479 Ashok SBIN000468 10990090151 
200050449763 raamavaranaseeg pitaa malakhaanaseeg PUNB078800 788000100019822 
200050449765 raajendrasinh pitaa nirabhaanasinh PUNB078800 788000100089609 
200050449767 jitendrasinh pitaa mahaadevaprasaad PUNB078800 7880001000920 
200050449769 meenaabaaii bevaa raajendrasinh PUNB078800 788001700147713 
200050449771 dhanukuvar bevaa bhagavaanaseeng PUNB078800 788001700224429 
200050452243 GIRJA PD PITA RADHECHARAN SBIN000474 10633161216 
200050452329 PRAHLAD SBIN000474 30263019702 
200050452349 Phulchand Sharma SBIN000453 10801526030 
200050452351 Devendr Aarse SBIN000453 20349990343 
200050452353 Bhagwat Patel SBIN000453 33826124355 
200050452355 Ramsevak Chauve SBIN000453 10801486085 
200050452357 Harprsad Patel SBIN000453 10801519704 
200050452377 RAMSEWAK PITA RAMAUTAR ALLA021037 22095359158 
200050455169 MAHRANI UBIN055474 594702130001452 
200050456475 Ramsingh so sannulal sothiya PUNB068000 680001700078454 
200050457359 Gopal Singh CBIN0MPDCA 183000594315 
200050457369 Bhageetaram Kushwah CBIN0MPDCA 183000978562 
200050457529 Shreemati Davi CBIN0MPDCA 183002454059 
200050458117 Atar Singh CBIN0MPDCA 183000823187 
200050458315 Munshi Baghel CBIN0MPDCA 683511002836 
200050458693 udham singh so raghunath singh CBIN028221 175000698972 
200050462905 SUMITSOHARINARAYAN SBIN000355 32693630843 
200050464233 Heeralal Ahirwar SBIN000410 31112798693 
200050476197 Salikram charmkar ALLA0 2491828688 
200050476441 Kalusingh BARB0PARAX 11960100002199 
200050476451 Munsingh Pataliya CNRB000474 4142101001984 
200050477863 Rahul Chowdhri CBIN028163 3145103624 
200050486267 KAMLESH SO RAMAYAN BIN0548146 481402010422829 
200050487015 RADHA CBIN028229 3668761216 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 82 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050487069 PRAKASH CHANDRA SHARMA BARB0SATNA 24820100012486 
200050488755 Bharti  Singh PUNB021400 2104001700071320 
200050488769 JYOTI GAUTAM SBIN001260 33187384737 
200050489245 BHYIALAL PUNB063800 638001700006636 
200050502637 SUMITSOHARINARAYAN SBIN000355 32693630843 
200050502925 KAMLESH THATHIYA SBIN000408 33706134360 
200050503119 Guddi Sikarwar SBIN000578 10526666082 
200050509940 Rajeshwari daheriya SBIN000478 33384386876 
200050509994 HIMANSHU PRAVEEN BARB0BETUL 30720100003410 
200050515418 SMT SHASHI THAKUR HDFC000224 2241000032006 
200050519687 dinesh bilwal SBIN000396 31853462942 
200050523397 DAUJASOFOOLCHAND SBIN007107 34450282716 
200050533242 KALYAN SINGH SO SAMRATH SINGH SBIN000218 53031040148 
200050537731 REKHA VERMA BIN0RRMBGB 80015639171 
200050537931 NASRIN MANSURI SBIN000408 11253064306 
200050537933 ANITA JATRE SBIN004092 30287994353 
200050539991 Raghvendra  Ramavatar Patel RRMBGB 8076428906 
200050540101 ku akshata paulghantwar PUNB009100 591001500101397 
200050540911 Rajeshwari daheriya SBIN000478 33384386876 
200050541125 AJULATA SBIN000390 32292877376 
200050541938 KAMLESH SO RAMAYAN BIN0548146 481402010422829 
200050543298 PRAN SINGH PAL SBIN001069 34821958479 
200050543300 AMAR SINGH PAL SBIN001069 34806827943 
200050547860 Dhanraj SBIN000544 32426565675 
200050550332 brajendra koshal CBIN028452 3423749899 
200050552638 PREMRANI VISHWAKARMA PUNB099000 990001700023582 
200050553280 NANDRAM SO BHEEKAM SYN 77562200009864 
200050557604 KALPANA SBIN000280 20317901688 
200050559174 SUHAGRANI PUNB009900 990001700128423 
200050560724 Rahul Patel SBIN000453 33869606474 
200050561924 LALBIHARI BAIS CBIN0MPDCB 685007029233 
200050562040 GUDDI GOND CBIN0R2000 2002041010000600 
200050562124 SAVNAM KHAAN  13 I PUNB019500 1935000104124270 
200050566640 MEETA KHEDEKAR BKID000824 882410100009145 
200050567446 MAHENDHRA  SO BOGERAM HDFC 50100205831180 
200050580886 PUKHRAJ SO BHAGWAN IN0005332 10048447813 

 Appendices 
Page 83 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050589124 SHIVKUMAR   BHAIYALAL ALLA021037 50208954177 
200050589226 KRISHNAPAL  MITHILA PRASAD SBIN000851 31056901635 
200050589268 LAXMI PRASAD ALLA02127 50265071375 
200050589528 LAXMAN   SADHU ALLA021272 50307369536 
200050589888 JAWAHARLAL VALD RAMPRASAD BRA   PUNB044500 445000100190868 
200050590602 kalyan so dhansig UBIN053749 373402011000580 
200050590610 gyansing so dhansing UBIN053349 373402010995895 
200050590614 samrat so kalyan UBIN053349 373402010995599 
200050592114 SANGRAM UBIN053437 373402010997722 
200050592148 PREMBAI UBIN053437 37402011000979 
200050595604 karan singh so jawar lal SBIN003027 20336321865 
200050596808 RAWJI BAJAR105 HDFC000036 361050033738 
200050596830 RAJNAGAR 1 KALA GOYAL SBIN000388 30704188150 
200050599359 SHIVKUMAR   BHAIYALAL ALLA021037 50208954177 
200050599439 KRISHNAPAL  MITHILA PRASAD SBIN000851 31056901635 
200050599475 LAXMI PRASAD ALLA02127 50265071375 
200050599617 LAXMAN   SADHU ALLA021272 50307369536 
200050599851 JAWAHARLAL VALD RAMPRASAD BRA   PUNB044500 445000100190868 
200050602319 SHRI ANIL KUMAR SBIN000348 10545087171 
200050603319 nisa bhuwansingh PUNB021570 2157001500012320 
200050604701 SHAKIL AHMAD 30152 32141457527 
200050604703 PAVAN LODHI 30152 32264981154 
200050604707 DHARMENDRA SONI 30152 35612790266 
200050604709 VINOD JATAV 30152 31930647063 
200050604711 DINESH CHOUDHARY 30152 63017555559 
200050604713 MUKESH koli 30152 30083751694 
200050604715 SUMANT SAHU 30152 31558209677 
200050604717 SENDPAL YADAV 30152 33581090511 
200050604719 SITARAM PANDEY 30152 53035150226 
200050604721 ROSHAN LAL RAJAK 30152 31660351605 
200050604723 RAJARAM PAL 30152 63025416333 
200050604725 BRAJENDRA SINGH YADAV 30152 33584458971 
200050604727 NANDRAM YADAV 30152 35299211670 
200050604729 RAJESH JHN 30152 36042330591 
200050604731 DEVENDRA SHARMA 30152 31788218921 
200050606597 ANIL GUPTA 30152 32043347468 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 84 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050606599 BALVEER JATAV 30152 34295486534 
200050606601 pawan vishwakarma 30088 32573924206 
200050606603 RAKESH  RAJAK 30152 33733912873 
200050606605 DAVENDRA BHARDELIYA 30152 32999656901 
200050606607 narendra  Chauhan 30152 53035131134 
200050606609 ASHISH  DUBY 30088 35069382457 
200050606611 NARESH BHARGAV 30152 33248312640 
200050606613 ANKIT TIWARI 30088 63051632363 
200050608618 ANIL KUMAR DEHARIYA SBIN000348 33436790760 
200050608626 MANIKRAO MARSHKOLE SBIN000348 33060515302 
200050608632 DHEERA LAL   JHALLU PRASAD PUNB027300 2723000102019730 
200050608644 RAMBIHARI   TAGHALIYA KOL SBIN000474 10633097033 
200050608772 MUNNELAL PITA RAMSUJAAN PUNB044500 445001700053904 
200050608894 RANI BEWA UMAKANT PUNB026700 2675000100023450 
200050609814 AASHAK CHANDBHAN DAYARAM PUNB027300 273000170002 
200050619736 Vijay MAHB00008 60193122135 
200050622786 SAROJ SYNB000771 77182250001204 
200050624322 KAMALESHADAFHE PUNB008300 83001700013274 
200050625416 Gorelal Patel BARB0MACHH 5070100002755 
200050634648 Ramsavroop patel UBIN053250 325502010248167 
200050634650 Ganpat UBIN053250 325502010261561 
200050635680 buiya bai SBIN000417 10779509799 
200050638340 Dropati Bai Shrivastav wo Rambabu UCBA000259 2590110077634 
200050638344 Monika Shrivastav so Rambabu UCBA000259 2593211023845 
200050638350 Anjali Narvariya so Ramdyal UCBA000259 2590110052693 
200050638660 PRABHAT KUMAR THAKURAY SBIN000468 30116692248 
200050641496 Madhorao Hiralal PUNB013430 1390000100073390 
200050643013 ARJUN SINGH TAWAR SBIN 32553765746 
200050643332 parvati  rameshwar BKID0NAMRG 603510410001026 
200050644796 udham singh so raghunath singh CBIN028221 175000698972 
200050645086 surendra prasad Tiwari UBIN054658 466502010559670 
200050645870 Raj bhusan singh ALLA021044 50055861044 
200050648392 JOKHU UBIN054179 484302010004707 
200050654216 SHALKU RAMPRSHAD SBIN000537 34214303217 
200050654226 SAMBHU RAMSHAY SBIN000537 34281142566 
200050654252 DURJANSHING FOOLSHING SBIN000537 34496418555 

 Appendices 
Page 85 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050654296 PUSPARANI NANHELAL BIN0MPDCBC 167000078902 
200050654318 RAMPRSHAD RAMLAL UBIN057032 417745175023 
200050654366 MOTILAL KARODI UBIN057032 7300201002925 
200050654368 MAHENDRA SHANKAR UBIN057032 20125101000013 
200050654372 BALRAM BATTULAL UBIN057032 73002010001378 
200050655188 VEERSINGH SO BHEROSINGH UCBA00010 100110025765 
200050657843 JAGDEESH CBIN0MPDCA 180000313778 
200050659218 RAJNI BARB0BHIKA 38978100016034 
200050664831 VADANA  VANADAN SWA HAYATA SAHOOM SONPURA SBIN000544 34445571975 
200050665121 Y  BISWAS SBIN000348 10545081077 
200050665129 bhamari bai gudabal UCBA000259 2590110123263 
200050665165 DINESH KUMAR SO NARVADA PRASAD PUNB008700 887000100083863 
200050665349 RAHUL PITA HUKUM SINGH UBIN057685 776802010000431 
200050665365 VANDNA KORAV SBIN000842 20396149326 
200050668689 REENA BARB0DEORI 4970100015230 
200050669191 PREM LAL SAHU SO PANCHAM CBIN028015 2347254072 
200050669891 AMBREESH SHIVKUMAR SBIN001143 31684708718 
200050669893 CHANDADEVI SHIVKUMAR SBIN001143 31689503410 
200050671285 OMPRAKASH ALLA021087 50138711405 
200050680841 MAYA UCBA000146 14610110041727 
200050683241 GANESHRAM SO NARAYAN SINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000709702 
200050683243 VIMLA BAI WO GANESHRAM DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000709611 
200050683281 SANDHYA WO RAMRAJSINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000267059 
200050683283 RAMCHARAN   DULATSINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000267162 
200050683289 RAJESH SO BABULAL DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000272659 
200050683293 GEETABAI WO GANESHRAM DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175001102529 
200050683295 GANESHRAM SO RAMPRASAD  DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000192025 
200050683297 VINEETA WO TEJENDRA SINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175006283598 
200050683299 TEJENDRA SINGH SO HARINARAYAN DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000293759 
200050683301 MAHENDRA SINGH SO HARINARAYAN DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000293840 
200050683303 HALKIBAI WO HARINARAYAN DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000293806 
200050683309 HARINARAYAN SO NAVAL SINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000199348 
200050683343 KASHIBAI   RAMSINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000198811 
200050683345 PARAMLAL SINGH   RAMSINGH DHATURIYA CBIN0MPDCB 175000198720 
200050685371 Pooja Balu Chawda UCBA000114 11420100003604 
200050692987 Munni Bai Kaurav SBIN000372 33207652255 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 86 
VNDR_CODE VNDR_NAME IFSC_CODE ACCOUNT_NO 
200050695073 Rakesh radhelal IBKL000040 939988016 
200050695115 Mangal shing  Manshing PUNB004200 420000100238721 
200050695119 Radhelal  Parmanand PUNB004200 42000100148020 
200050697273 Tejbhan singh BARBO 37518100001979 
200050697281 PREM BAI SAKARWAR CBIN028151 3150857788 
200050697283 KUNTI BAI MANERI CBIN028151 3388519794 
200050697285 RAM BAI JARHA ONE CBIN028151 3315568931 
200050697287 MADHURI BAI KOL BHUNDI CBIN028151 3937759676 
200050697289 KISMAT BAI RAGHOPUR CBIN028151 3153478458 
200050697291 AMSIYA BAI BODLI CBIN028151 3430579541 
200050697293 SUMITRA BAI KARHI CBIN028151 3272570547 
200050697295 JANKI BAI KAUDIYA SIXTY THREE CBIN028151 3236305083 
200050697297 KAUSILYA BAI BARHAIKUDRI CBIN028151 3095528802 
200050700379 IMRAT SO GAPHURKHAN UCB0000010 10100001477 
200050700431 Heeralal Sanodia PUNB004900 490000100714154 
200050701156 AYUSH SAHU SBIN002153 34798751161 
200050702728 Moh  Aashif Kureshi ALLA021240 50263212287 
200050705300 Chunwadi PUNB062400 6240001700021030 
200050713147 Mp Pasch Kshe Vidy Vit Co Ltd SBIN000342 10434283117 
200050715258 MAGAN PITA LAMJI UNB0716300 7163000100041540 
200050721133 Bhagirath Ganpat PUNB013900 1319001700001470 
200050721463 Jayant patel SBIN000355 34459857686 
200050722345 PRAKASH LADKA AKHADE DASHNAWAL SMCB000102 53022456261 
200050722827 Rupa Hardash SBIN003004 20289177184 
200050723179 Pravin Raghusingh BARB0BHARA 8340100011170 
200054801953 ANJU PATHAK SBIN0RRMBGB 80008373693 
200056745804 RUKHMANI KALLU BKID0008916 891610510002559 
200059620130 HOTEL UJJAINI UJJAIN MPSTATE TOURISM DEV CORP LTD HDFC0004989 MPTOUR2118 
200063038264 Rangoli Printers CBIN0R20002 2002041130000320 
200065588075 Jagdev Tomar 0 63044057924 
200065588076 Veerendra Rathor 0 2002010040510 
200065588077 Virendra Kaushik 0 945210100023464 
200065597948 GUJRAT SWEETS  CBIN0MPDCAK 655001007649 
200066932575 Ekata 0 4063755778 
200076396740 Prakhar BARB0INDORE 6060200000719 
 

 Appendices 
Page 87 
Appendix 3.2 (B) 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.3) 
Details of wrong Head of Accounts in case of failed payment transactions up to 30 June 2020 
SCROLL_DTL 
_ID 
SCROLL_ 
HDR_ID 
DEPOSITOR _NAME SCHEME_CODE GROSS 
AMOUNT 
(in ₹) 
HOA CREATED_DATE 
200011936136 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
2,59,336 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:30 PM 
200011936137 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,96,088 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:30 PM 
200011936138 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
9,01,116 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:30 PM 
200011936139 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
13,62,971 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:30 PM 
200011936170 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
17,67,426 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:32 PM 
200011936171 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
27,35,392 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:32 PM 
200011936172 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
27,78,785 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:32 PM 
200011936173 2000310952 PARIYOJANA ADHIARI GOVINDPURA 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
50,60,641 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:32 PM 
200011936269 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
16,95,454 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:38 PM 
200011936270 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
16,43,795 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:38 PM 
200011936287 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
11,37,528 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:41 PM 
200011936293 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
9,84,636 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:41 PM 
200011936296 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
9,40,349 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:42 PM 
200011936297 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
9,09,052 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:42 PM 
200011936306 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,82,835 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:43 PM 
200011936313 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 500272514~1~0120~Failed E- 8,06,454 000-8448-00- 7-23-2018 2:44 PM 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 88 
SCROLL_DTL 
_ID 
SCROLL_ 
HDR_ID 
DEPOSITOR _NAME SCHEME_CODE GROSS 
AMOUNT 
(in ₹) 
HOA CREATED_DATE 
PHANDA BPL Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 120-0120-00 
200011936320 2000310952 PROJECT OFFICE CHILD DEV SER 
PHANDA BPL 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
7,75,642 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
7-23-2018 2:45 PM 
200012485613 2000336968 PROJECT OFFICER ICDS NMH 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
11,85,069 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-2-2018 4:17 PM 
200012575393 2000343561 PROJECT OFFICER ICDS NMH 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
24,10,007 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
12-6-2018 3:30 PM 
200012791365 2000351687 PROJECT OFFICER GRAMIN MAHILA 
AWAM BAL VIKAS MNS 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,88,976 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-10-2019 5:10 PM 
200012791366 2000351687 PROJECT OFFICER GRAMIN MAHILA 
AWAM BAL VIKAS MNS 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
9,32,885 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-10-2019 5:10 PM 
200012847423 2000353695 POICDS KASRAWAD 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
13,95,216 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-19-2019 5:28 PM 
200012847424 2000353695 POICDS KASRAWAD 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
10,46,412 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-19-2019 5:28 PM 
200013417640 2000375773 PARIYOJNA ADHIKARI GAROTH 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
11,78,398 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
4-10-2019 4:34 PM 
200013470948 2000378697 PROJECT OFFICER MAHILA BAL 
VIKAS MALHARGARH MDS 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
13,26,120 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
4-25-2019 4:52 PM 
200013691801 2000390100 PROJECT OFFICER ICDS NMH 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,84,642 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
6-14-2019 3:22 PM 
200014329354 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
4,500 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:24 PM 
200014329444 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
6,120 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329445 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
5,000 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329446 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
6,000 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329447 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
10,760 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329454 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
37,770 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329448 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
4,279 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 

 Appendices 
Page 89 
SCROLL_DTL 
_ID 
SCROLL_ 
HDR_ID 
DEPOSITOR _NAME SCHEME_CODE GROSS 
AMOUNT 
(in ₹) 
HOA CREATED_DATE 
200014329449 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
15,000 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329450 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
6,052 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329451 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
11,876 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329452 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,100 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329453 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
1,00,624 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329455 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
762 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329456 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
14,040 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329457 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
3,750 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329458 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
20,000 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014329459 2000423930 SBI Mandla 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
44,109 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
11-1-2019 2:29 PM 
200014561091 2000435906 PROJECT OFFICER ICDS NMH 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
1,90,036 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
12-20-2019 12:07 PM 
200014789013 2000443932 Project Officer lcds Sondwa Distt Alirajpur 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
6,37,243 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-21-2020 2:44 PM 
200014789014 2000443932 Project Officer lcds Sondwa Distt Alirajpur 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
7,10,052 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-21-2020 2:44 PM 
200014789015 2000443932 Project Officer lcds Sondwa Distt Alirajpur 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
8,54,114 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-21-2020 2:44 PM 
200014789016 2000443932 Project Officer lcds Sondwa Distt Alirajpur 500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
2,55,570 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
1-21-2020 2:44 PM 
200014970332 2000451906 PROJECT OFFICER ICDS RAMPURA 
DIST NMH 
500272514~1~0120~Failed E-
Transactions Ladli Laxmi Scheme 
14,27,195 000-8448-00-
120-0120-00 
2-24-2020 3:34 PM 
Total 49 cases   4,11,58,177   
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 90 
Appendix 3.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.5) 
Details of Cases of Refund of Revenue in which the Refund was given to ineligible Parties, who had not deposited original Challans 
S.No. REFREVBI
L_DTL_TX
N_ID 
Refund 
Date 
Amount 
Originally 
Deposited  
(in ₹) 
Amount 
Refunded 
(in ₹) 
Challan No Party Name by 
which Original 
Amount was 
deposited 
Party Name to 
which Refund 
was given 
Major 
Head 
Purpose Treasury 
Display 
Code 
Challan 
Date 
Time 
Gap in 
Refund 
(Days) 
1 2000665419 09-09-2020 8,700 8,000.00 0030118041/051/2
80720 
&#2357; 
&#2330; o  p d 
? ? o p d 0030 
 
051 28-07-2020 43 
2 2000414702 07-11-2019 14,474 1,124.00 010/1777777/8658/
11/184/55550 
Divisional 
Project Engineer 
Balaghat 
EE RES 
BALAGHAT 
8658 WORK BY-
TRANSFE
R 
010 21-10-2019 17 
3 2000601875 03-06-2020 150 67,275.00 014/9999999/8443/
10/19/000001 
Gyanchand jain 
Waraseoni 
SBI Waraseoni 8443 rent 014 03-10-2019 244 
4 2000306304 21-05-2019 58,199 58,199.00 030/9999999/8443/
04/19/000019 
0303102001 0301402001 8443 FEP 030 04-04-2019 47 
5 2000683593 09-10-2020 27,800 27,800.00 030/9999999/8443/
06/20/000162 
0302506019 0302106019 8443 FAIL E 
PAYMENT 
030 20-06-2020 111 
6 2000683594 09-10-2020 27,800 27,800.00 030/9999999/8443/
06/20/000162 
0302506019 0302106019 8443 FAIL E 
PAYMENT 
030 20-06-2020 111 
7 2000680189 06-10-2020 27,800 27,800.00 030/9999999/8443/
06/20/000162 
0302506019 0302106019 8443 FAIL E 
PAYMENT 
030 20-06-2020 108 
8 2000439117 12-12-2019 1,43,900 1,43,900.00 030/9999999/8443/
11/19/000085 
DDO CODE 
0302506024 
DDO CODE 
0301003004 
8443 E-PAY 
FAILED 
030 06-11-2019 36 
9 2000449493 02-01-2020 1,43,900 1,43,900.00 030/9999999/8443/
11/19/000085 
DDO CODE 
0302506024 
DDO CODE 
0301003004 
8443 E-PAY 
FAILED 
030 06-11-2019 57 
10 2000459442 10-01-2020 1,43,900 1,43,900.00 030/9999999/8443/
11/19/000085 
DDO CODE 
0302506024 
DDO CODE 
0301003004 
8443 E-PAY 
FAILED 
030 06-11-2019 65 
11 2000459575 10-01-2020 1,43,900 1,43,900.00 030/9999999/8443/
11/19/000085 
DDO CODE 
0302506024 
DDO CODE 
0301003004 
8443 E-PAY 
FAILED 
030 06-11-2019 65 
12 2000641599 31-07-2020 60,660 2,000.00 030/9999999/8443/
12/19/000001 
DFO P BETUL 0300709002 8443 PERSONA
L DEPOSIT 
030 02-12-2019 242 
13 2000663928 07-09-2020 60,660 2,000.00 030/9999999/8443/
12/19/000001 
DFO P BETUL 0300709002 8443 PERSONA
L DEPOSIT 
030 02-12-2019 280 
14 2000415928 08-11-2019 78,018 78,018.00 044/9999999/8443/
11/19/000002 
D D O CODE 
CEOMEHGAO 
D D O CODE 
0442003049 
BEO 
8443 NA 044 04-11-2019 4 

 Appendices 
Page 91 
S.No. REFREVBI
L_DTL_TX
N_ID 
Refund 
Date 
Amount 
Originally 
Deposited  
(in ₹) 
Amount 
Refunded 
(in ₹) 
Challan No Party Name by 
which Original 
Amount was 
deposited 
Party Name to 
which Refund 
was given 
Major 
Head 
Purpose Treasury 
Display 
Code 
Challan 
Date 
Time 
Gap in 
Refund 
(Days) 
MEHGAON 
15 2000126046 30-07-2018 20,000 1,22,306.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000012 
SBI cwa 
0705802015 
SBI cwa 
0701003003 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 70 
16 2000225781 19-12-2018 7,75,294 7,500.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000015 
SBI cwa 
07002506001 
SBI cwa 
0705002001 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 212 
17 200014334 19-05-2018 7,384 12,52,500.0
0 
070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000016 
SBI cwa 
0701003001 
SBI cwa 
0700405999 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 -2 
18 200014244 18-05-2018 7,384 12,52,500.0
0 
070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000016 
SBI cwa 
0701003001 
SBI cwa 
0700405999 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 -3 
19 200036006 06-06-2018 7,241 65,500.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000018 
SBI cwa 
0701003001 
SBI cwa 
0703502001 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 16 
20 2000182892 10-09-2018 4,560 6,055.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000019 
SBI cwa 
0701402001 
SBI cwa 
0701003004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 112 
21 2000122631 26-07-2018 10,150 7,38,622.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000020 
SBI cwa 
0705002001 
SBI cwa 
0700709004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 66 
22 200029109 01-06-2018 1,48,842 30,870.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000021 
SBI cwa 
0701003003 
SBI cwa 
0700709004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 11 
23 2000136040 06-08-2018 6,000 49,703.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000022 
SBI cwa 
0705002001 
SBI cwa 
0700709004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 77 
24 200084948 03-07-2018 19,581 44,640.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000024 
SBI cwa 
0705403001 
SBI cwa 
0700704013 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 43 
25 2000189324 19-09-2018 47,075 10,000.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000025 
SBI cwa 
0701003003 
SBI cwa 
0703802002 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 121 
26 2000198768 06-10-2018 47,075 10,000.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000025 
SBI cwa 
0701003003 
SBI cwa 
0703802002 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 138 
27 200013754 18-05-2018 1,326 7,500.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000026 
SBI cwa 
0704206005 
SBI cwa 
0700709004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 -3 
28 2000184896 11-09-2018 1,326 7,500.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000026 
SBI cwa 
0704206005 
SBI cwa 
0700709004 
8443 failed e 
payment 
070 21-05-2018 113 
29 200062983 22-06-2018 2,581 22,742.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000027 
kukkut palan 
imlikheda 
SBI cwa 
0702506009 
8443 p d 070 21-05-2018 32 
30 2000119091 24-07-2018 2,581 22,742.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000027 
kukkut palan 
imlikheda 
SBI cwa 
0702506009 
8443 p d 070 21-05-2018 64 
31 200084946 03-07-2018 4,362 2,23,910.00 070/9999999/8443/ kukkut palan SBI cwa 8443 p d 070 21-05-2018 43 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 92 
S.No. REFREVBI
L_DTL_TX
N_ID 
Refund 
Date 
Amount 
Originally 
Deposited  
(in ₹) 
Amount 
Refunded 
(in ₹) 
Challan No Party Name by 
which Original 
Amount was 
deposited 
Party Name to 
which Refund 
was given 
Major 
Head 
Purpose Treasury 
Display 
Code 
Challan 
Date 
Time 
Gap in 
Refund 
(Days) 
05/18/000028 imlikheda 0700704013 
32 200091050 06-07-2018 5,290 6,450.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000029 
kukkut palan 
imlikheda 
SBI cwa 
0702003006 
8443 p d 070 21-05-2018 46 
33 200093035 07-07-2018 5,290 6,450.00 070/9999999/8443/
05/18/000029 
kukkut palan 
imlikheda 
SBI cwa 
0702003006 
8443 p d 070 21-05-2018 47 
34 2000420730 15-11-2019 20,000 13,800.00 162/9999999/8443/
11/19/000004 
SBI itarsi s b i 
it1622506008 
8443 failed 
trasanction 
162 21-11-2019 -6 
35 2000440661 16-12-2019 20,000 9,958.00 162/9999999/8443/
12/19/000002 
SBI s b i it 
1623102009 
8443 failed 162 11-12-2019 5 
36 2000648511 11-08-2020 65,899 76,838.00 351/9999999/8443/
03/20/000003 
PRINCIPAL 
GOVT DEGREE 
COLLEGE 
3513802003 
TEHSILDAR 
JAWAR 
3510709002 
8443 E 
PAYMENT 
FAILED 
351 18-03-2020 146 
37 2000667980 14-09-2020 65,899 59,187.00 351/9999999/8443/
03/20/000003 
PRINCIPAL 
GOVT DEGREE 
COLLEGE 
3513802003 
TEHSILDAR 
JAWAR 
3510709002 
8443 E 
PAYMENT 
FAILED 
351 18-03-2020 180 
37 Cases 49,22,889 
 
 
      
 
  

 Appendices 
Page 93 
Appendix 3.4 (A)  
(Referred to in paragraph 3.6.2) 
Budget Figure Comparison for the Year 2019-20 
(Amount in ₹) 
Budget Allotment to BCO Budget as per budget table      
YEAR_ 
FROM 
YEAR_ 
TO 
DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Difference Voted 
(7-4) 
Difference 
Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2019 2020 . - 1,44,32,07,48,000 . - 1,44,32,07,48,000 - - 
2019 2020 .. - 1,48,03,33,73,000 .. - 1,48,03,33,73,000 - - 
2019 2020 001 7,01,07,20,598 62,25,01,000 001 7,54,32,59,404 34,80,01,750 53,25,38,806 -27,44,99,250 
2019 2020 002 92,60,17,000 - 002 99,97,28,000 - 7,37,11,000 - 
2019 2020 003 75,57,16,17,906 1,21,60,000 003 76,47,52,36,000 1,52,00,000 90,36,18,094 30,40,000 
2019 2020 004 66,87,72,200 1,44,000 004 79,26,08,000 1,80,000 12,38,35,800 36,000 
2019 2020 005 4,21,72,93,600 - 005 4,30,16,71,000 - 8,43,77,400 - 
2019 2020 006 1,18,11,61,93,700 1,04,82,24,200 006 1,46,23,63,60,543 1,30,98,53,000 28,12,01,66,843 26,16,28,800 
2019 2020 007 33,24,54,74,000 15,68,000 007 34,80,95,41,000 19,60,000 1,56,40,67,000 3,92,000 
2019 2020 008 20,62,47,49,400 2,16,24,000 008 20,82,44,09,001 2,06,34,000 19,96,59,601 -9,90,000 
2019 2020 009 26,36,03,600 - 009 27,88,21,000 - 1,52,17,400 - 
2019 2020 010 27,23,09,64,802 72,00,000 010 23,80,01,94,201 90,00,000 -3,43,07,70,601 18,00,000 
2019 2020 011 10,12,11,97,000 - 011 10,48,99,37,001 - 36,87,40,001 - 
2019 2020 012 97,35,36,06,800 5,76,10,07,200 012 1,06,72,89,94,000 7,20,12,59,000 9,37,53,87,200 1,44,02,51,800 
2019 2020 013 2,02,54,27,82,200 32,00,000 013 2,26,08,44,94,105 40,00,000 23,54,17,11,905 8,00,000 
2019 2020 014 11,33,69,78,400 15,86,000 014 11,82,64,67,001 17,86,000 48,94,88,601 2,00,000 
2019 2020 015 1,600 - 015 2,000 - 400 - 
2019 2020 016 98,25,69,600 17,17,500 016 1,00,90,65,000 20,16,500 2,64,95,400 2,99,000 
2019 2020 017 22,66,12,53,800 48,000 017 25,11,46,23,000 60,000 2,45,33,69,200 12,000 
2019 2020 018 8,15,05,78,600 2,37,800 018 9,25,94,56,000 2,71,000 1,10,88,77,400 33,200 
2019 2020 019 74,66,49,74,600 7,20,00,000 019 76,47,67,83,003 7,25,00,000 1,81,18,08,403 5,00,000 
2019 2020 020 40,49,77,74,800 5,30,00,000 020 32,90,27,56,000 5,50,00,000 -7,59,50,18,800 20,00,000 
2019 2020 021 73,67,41,200 - 021 81,39,50,000 - 7,72,08,800 - 
2019 2020 022 85,18,77,54,800 15,40,00,000 022 85,57,28,61,009 15,50,00,000 38,51,06,209 10,00,000 
2019 2020 023 73,37,45,57,700 1,16,00,000 023 80,26,30,70,907 1,16,00,000 6,88,85,13,207 - 
2019 2020 024 81,50,92,97,000 3,20,00,00,000 024 86,42,08,20,604 3,20,00,00,000 4,91,15,23,604 - 
2019 2020 025 3,54,17,34,400 5,61,64,00,000 025 3,30,65,39,000 7,02,05,00,000 -23,51,95,400 1,40,41,00,000 
2019 2020 026 2,03,15,11,000 80,000 026 2,26,13,22,000 1,00,000 22,98,11,000 20,000 
2019 2020 027 1,68,76,09,46,200 - 027 1,69,61,42,96,001 - 85,33,49,801 - 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 94 
Budget Allotment to BCO Budget as per budget table      
YEAR_ 
FROM 
YEAR_ 
TO 
DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Difference Voted 
(7-4) 
Difference 
Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2019 2020 028 95,04,26,400 61,81,800 028 96,39,29,000 61,85,000 1,35,02,600 3,200 
2019 2020 029 19,02,29,81,200 1,79,05,11,200 029 15,88,94,75,001 1,83,16,84,000 -3,13,35,06,199 4,11,72,800 
2019 2020 030 39,73,73,81,000 3,84,800 030 39,25,55,58,000 4,81,000 -48,18,23,000 96,200 
2019 2020 031 2,53,97,39,200 48,000 031 2,58,73,49,101 60,000 4,76,09,901 12,000 
2019 2020 032 3,70,94,44,800 8,000 032 4,50,07,85,000 10,000 79,13,40,200 2,000 
2019 2020 033 89,17,85,22,000 4,40,000 033 88,70,17,54,001 5,50,000 -47,67,67,999 1,10,000 
2019 2020 034 8,64,88,46,487 1,44,000 034 9,37,91,53,204 1,80,000 73,03,06,717 36,000 
2019 2020 035 9,82,80,69,400 800 035 11,21,93,86,000 1,000 1,39,13,16,600 200 
2019 2020 036 1,10,05,81,600 1,92,000 036 1,12,30,38,000 2,40,000 2,24,56,400 48,000 
2019 2020 037 2,15,92,83,600 96,000 037 2,39,33,69,000 1,20,000 23,40,85,400 24,000 
2019 2020 038 5,53,13,43,400 8,00,000 038 5,57,78,24,000 10,00,000 4,64,80,600 2,00,000 
2019 2020 039 13,12,39,91,800 1,00,000 039 15,50,45,61,102 1,25,000 2,38,05,69,302 25,000 
2019 2020 040 36,70,75,23,264 54,00,000 040 37,03,38,65,101 60,00,000 32,63,41,837 6,00,000 
2019 2020 041 800 - 041 1,000 - 200 - 
2019 2020 042 1,29,35,86,400 800 042 1,34,42,52,000 1,000 5,06,65,600 200 
2019 2020 043 1,90,43,06,600 4,00,000 043 2,01,22,42,000 5,00,000 10,79,35,400 1,00,000 
2019 2020 044 25,35,78,54,200 8,00,000 044 25,69,69,78,000 10,00,000 33,91,23,800 2,00,000 
2019 2020 045 1,61,92,77,000 4,00,000 045 1,62,86,69,000 4,00,000 93,92,000 - 
2019 2020 046 2,16,85,02,400 - 046 2,46,71,92,000 - 29,86,89,600 - 
2019 2020 047 16,14,13,44,000 4,80,000 047 16,70,32,83,000 6,00,000 56,19,39,000 1,20,000 
2019 2020 048 33,23,95,69,200 35,00,000 048 30,71,57,64,000 3,27,00,000 -2,52,38,05,200 2,92,00,000 
2019 2020 049 14,23,28,05,400 8,00,000 049 14,54,70,31,000 10,00,000 31,42,25,600 2,00,000 
2019 2020 050 9,95,18,31,000 96,000 050 11,27,19,64,000 1,20,000 1,32,01,33,000 24,000 
2019 2020 051 86,55,23,400 40,000 051 1,09,32,88,102 50,000 22,77,64,702 10,000 
2019 2020 052 24,56,09,83,200 - 052 23,00,20,39,000 - -1,55,89,44,200 - 
2019 2020 053 2,58,17,67,71,200 - 053 2,70,45,46,37,000 - 12,27,78,65,800 - 
2019 2020 054 1,51,36,97,600 - 054 1,60,92,16,000 - 9,55,18,400 - 
2019 2020 055 50,68,14,94,200 12,00,000 055 49,94,84,23,434 13,00,000 -73,30,70,766 1,00,000 
2019 2020 056 1,54,26,86,400 48,000 056 1,70,08,77,000 60,000 15,81,90,600 12,000 
2019 2020 057 1,000 - 057 1,000 - - - 
2019 2020 058 33,83,83,30,000 - 058 1,47,03,78,27,000 - 1,13,19,94,97,000 - 
2019 2020 059 14,00,00,00,000 - 059 14,00,00,00,000 - - - 
2019 2020 060 3,32,23,33,000 - 060 3,42,23,33,003 - 10,00,00,003 - 

 Appendices 
Page 95 
Budget Allotment to BCO Budget as per budget table      
YEAR_ 
FROM 
YEAR_ 
TO 
DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Difference Voted 
(7-4) 
Difference 
Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2019 2020 061 2,73,17,400 - 061 2,73,18,000 - 600 - 
2019 2020 062 2,11,26,46,600 57,600 062 2,11,40,77,000 72,000 14,30,400 14,400 
2019 2020 063 32,17,07,600 - 063 33,23,68,000 - 1,06,60,400 - 
2019 2020 064 69,00,72,15,200 6,01,73,60,000 064 75,16,85,75,003 6,02,17,00,000 6,16,13,59,803 43,40,000 
2019 2020 065 1,02,95,84,000 - 065 1,07,74,46,000 - 4,78,62,000 - 
2019 2020 066 8,90,50,75,400 - 066 8,94,53,83,000 - 4,03,07,600 - 
2019 2020 067 8,26,66,85,000 2,40,00,000 067 8,93,18,98,101 3,00,00,000 66,52,13,101 60,00,000 
2019 2020 068 2,18,79,86,000 - 068 2,71,21,91,000 - 52,42,05,000 - 
2019 2020 069 29,70,76,600 - 069 31,51,11,000 - 1,80,34,400 - 
2019 2020 070 88,20,200 - 070 90,93,000 - 2,72,800 - 
2019 2020 071 30,86,36,800 - 071 35,54,42,000 - 4,68,05,200 - 
2019 2020 072 1,800 - 072 2,000 - 200 - 
Total 19,90,45,14,50,257 3,16,79,59,07,700  21,96,98,22,32,933 3,19,71,91,81,250 2,06,53,07,82,676 2,92,32,73,550 
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 96 
Appendix 3.4 (B) 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.6.2) 
Budget Figure Comparison for the Year 2020-21 
(Amount in ₹) 
BUDGET ALLOTMENT TO BCO BUDGET AS PER BUDGET TABLE      
YEAR_FROM YEAR_TO DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Diff Voted (7-4) Diff Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2020 2021 . - 1,71,15,23,54,700 . - 1,70,09,31,46,100 - -1,05,92,08,600 
2020 2021 .. - 1,82,23,92,43,400 .. - 1,63,46,13,06,000 - -18,77,79,37,400 
2020 2021 001 7,75,77,22,000 61,04,01,600 1 7,52,53,04,000 39,97,20,100 -23,24,18,000 -21,06,81,500 
2020 2021 002 1,34,43,45,600 - 2 1,33,93,76,000 - -49,69,600 - 
2020 2021 003 80,23,08,60,100 1,52,50,000 3 79,96,92,92,700 1,52,50,000 -26,15,67,400 - 
2020 2021 004 97,05,03,500 3,00,000 4 94,91,44,000 3,00,000 -2,13,59,500 - 
2020 2021 005 4,55,88,39,500 - 5 4,52,28,11,000 - -3,60,28,500 - 
2020 2021 006 1,74,62,09,67,600 3,30,12,31,800 6 1,74,26,92,61,400 3,30,05,47,000 -35,17,06,200 -6,84,800 
2020 2021 007 37,40,01,58,100 23,00,000 7 37,34,00,82,000 23,00,000 -6,00,76,100 - 
2020 2021 008 36,98,82,98,500 4,08,49,800 8 36,74,27,52,000 3,98,49,000 -24,55,46,500 -10,00,800 
2020 2021 009 74,26,75,000 - 9 12,59,12,000 - -61,67,63,000 - 
2020 2021 010 28,28,25,04,900 48,80,000 10 23,89,54,82,500 45,99,000 -4,38,70,22,400 -2,81,000 
2020 2021 011 9,88,03,87,400 25,000 11 9,11,12,29,000 25,000 -76,91,58,400 - 
2020 2021 012 1,18,81,62,04,200 1,000 12 1,09,76,19,37,000 1,000 -9,05,42,67,200 - 
2020 2021 013 1,46,70,96,07,000 34,00,000 13 1,40,62,21,29,000 34,00,000 -6,08,74,78,000 - 
2020 2021 014 9,91,53,60,800 13,88,000 14 9,43,97,75,000 13,88,000 -47,55,85,800 - 
2020 2021 015 25,63,75,000 1,00,000 15 25,45,75,000 1,00,000 -18,00,000 - 
2020 2021 016 1,29,57,52,700 17,35,000 16 1,28,30,32,000 17,35,000 -1,27,20,700 - 
2020 2021 017 9,86,73,11,800 2,00,000 17 6,40,97,14,000 2,00,000 -3,45,75,97,800 - 
2020 2021 018 9,84,70,01,500 3,37,600 18 9,75,54,48,000 3,00,000 -9,15,53,500 -37,600 
2020 2021 019 76,38,47,91,300 25,50,000 19 75,63,13,52,900 25,50,000 -75,34,38,400 - 
2020 2021 020 51,46,04,33,400 5,00,00,000 20 42,17,56,29,000 5,00,00,000 -9,28,48,04,400 - 
2020 2021 021 62,37,41,000 - 21 62,35,01,000 - -2,40,000 - 
2020 2021 022 68,49,63,50,500 10,11,00,000 22 56,92,51,44,000 10,11,00,000 -11,57,12,06,500 - 
2020 2021 023 68,91,24,33,700 1,05,12,000 23 63,05,48,18,400 1,00,00,000 -5,85,76,15,300 -5,12,000 
2020 2021 024 68,13,08,72,400 2,55,00,00,000 24 65,81,65,95,000 2,55,00,00,000 -2,31,42,77,400 - 
2020 2021 025 58,26,83,200 7,50,05,00,000 25 33,14,06,000 7,50,05,00,000 -25,12,77,200 - 
2020 2021 026 1,72,24,18,700 2,00,000 26 1,63,53,33,000 2,00,000 -8,70,85,700 - 
2020 2021 027 1,90,11,29,71,900 2,00,000 27 1,89,49,38,34,000 2,00,000 -61,91,37,900 - 
2020 2021 028 98,10,09,200 65,22,800 28 97,62,28,000 65,21,000 -47,81,200 -1,800 

 Appendices 
Page 97 
BUDGET ALLOTMENT TO BCO BUDGET AS PER BUDGET TABLE      
YEAR_FROM YEAR_TO DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Diff Voted (7-4) Diff Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2020 2021 029 19,77,83,77,000 1,72,15,91,800 29 17,70,92,48,900 1,70,41,59,000 -2,06,91,28,100 -1,74,32,800 
2020 2021 030 38,02,91,08,700 7,04,200 30 37,15,80,55,000 6,81,000 -87,10,53,700 -23,200 
2020 2021 031 1,05,54,06,800 1,00,000 31 1,05,08,45,000 1,00,000 -45,61,800 - 
2020 2021 032 3,56,26,08,500 10,000 32 3,55,36,94,000 10,000 -89,14,500 - 
2020 2021 033 98,89,40,88,300 5,00,000 33 89,94,90,78,100 5,00,000 -8,94,50,10,200 - 
2020 2021 034 7,44,33,38,230 1,20,000 34 7,38,24,28,630 1,20,000 -6,09,09,600 - 
2020 2021 035 7,69,17,78,000 2,000 35 6,86,74,73,000 2,000 -82,43,05,000 - 
2020 2021 036 1,10,74,27,300 4,00,000 36 1,10,68,85,100 4,00,000 -5,42,200 - 
2020 2021 037 1,05,39,05,300 80,000 37 1,01,54,49,000 80,000 -3,84,56,300 - 
2020 2021 038 5,93,48,76,466 8,00,000 38 5,62,89,34,666 8,00,000 -30,59,41,800 - 
2020 2021 039 9,22,20,07,000 1,10,000 39 8,82,50,73,400 1,10,000 -39,69,33,600 - 
2020 2021 040 37,62,57,78,600 30,00,000 40 36,81,04,22,000 30,00,000 -81,53,56,600 - 
2020 2021 041 90,93,000 - 41 90,93,000 - - - 
2020 2021 042 1,35,00,22,700 1,000 42 1,31,93,11,000 1,000 -3,07,11,700 - 
2020 2021 043 1,64,18,56,500 5,00,000 43 1,55,75,49,000 5,00,000 -8,43,07,500 - 
2020 2021 044 30,63,28,88,000 10,00,000 44 30,38,77,42,000 10,00,000 -24,51,46,000 - 
2020 2021 045 1,000 - 45 1,000 - - - 
2020 2021 046 1,62,56,83,400 - 46 1,50,92,90,000 - -11,63,93,400 - 
2020 2021 047 12,97,17,17,400 4,00,000 47 12,40,53,67,000 4,00,000 -56,63,50,400 - 
2020 2021 048 51,90,71,22,200 63,20,000 48 48,77,78,63,000 60,00,000 -3,12,92,59,200 -3,20,000 
2020 2021 049 15,29,84,33,700 10,00,000 49 14,98,27,37,000 10,00,000 -31,56,96,700 - 
2020 2021 050 6,31,31,09,900 1,00,000 50 6,15,26,36,000 1,00,000 -16,04,73,900 - 
2020 2021 051 61,89,17,100 1,50,000 51 50,14,42,000 1,50,000 -11,74,75,100 - 
2020 2021 052 21,67,64,75,900 - 52 20,30,87,13,000 - -1,36,77,62,900 - 
2020 2021 053 2,13,66,77,43,200 - 53 2,03,23,21,62,800 - -10,43,55,80,400 - 
2020 2021 054 1,83,39,50,500 - 54 1,64,14,21,000 - -19,25,29,500 - 
2020 2021 055 53,26,08,00,400 4,80,000 55 51,13,41,85,000 2,15,000 -2,12,66,15,400 -2,65,000 
2020 2021 056 1,15,62,35,100 1,00,000 56 1,09,71,63,000 1,00,000 -5,90,72,100 - 
2020 2021 057 42,87,33,400 - 57 41,37,69,200 - -1,49,64,200 - 
2020 2021 058 1,05,48,04,81,600 10,000 58 78,13,58,31,000 10,000 -27,34,46,50,600 - 
2020 2021 059 11,31,28,00,000 - 59 11,31,28,00,000 - - - 
2020 2021 060 7,08,70,42,800 - 60 7,00,23,42,000 - -8,47,00,800 - 
2020 2021 061 3,00,17,800 - 61 4,50,16,000 - 1,49,98,200 - 
2020 2021 062 2,00,49,53,200 50,000 62 2,00,27,01,000 50,000 -22,52,200 - 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 98 
BUDGET ALLOTMENT TO BCO BUDGET AS PER BUDGET TABLE      
YEAR_FROM YEAR_TO DEMAND VOTED CHARGED GNCD VOTED CHARGED Diff Voted (7-4) Diff Charged (8-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
2020 2021 063 1,22,71,05,100 - 63 1,19,28,11,900 - -3,42,93,200 - 
2020 2021 064 80,89,22,60,400 7,20,05,44,000 64 74,37,54,71,000 7,20,00,00,000 -6,51,67,89,400 -5,44,000 
2020 2021 065 1,27,80,05,800 - 65 1,27,78,15,000 - -1,90,800 - 
2020 2021 066 9,23,20,44,700 - 66 9,19,92,87,000 - -3,27,57,700 - 
2020 2021 067 5,11,09,77,600 2,00,00,000 67 4,85,00,30,000 2,00,00,000 -26,09,47,600 - 
2020 2021 068 4,00,00,000 - 68 4,00,00,000 - - - 
Total  20,76,37,97,53,096 3,76,55,36,55,700  19,51,90,32,34,598 3,56,48,47,25,200 -1,24,47,65,18,498 -20,06,89,30,500 
 
  

 Appendices 
Page 99 
Appendix 3.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.6.3) 
Statement showing details of surrender transactions only at one level 
(Amount in lakh) 
S.No. Department 
Code 
Name of 
Department 
Numbers of DDOs offices 
operated by user 
Transactions by 
level 10 
Transactions by 
level 20 
Transactions by 
level 30 
Total Transactions 
Level 
10 
Level 
20 
Level 
30 
Total 
DDOs 
Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount 
1 1 General 
Administration 
17 8 38 63 123 207.11 61 618.89 304 343.78 488 1,169.78 
2 10 Forest 35 17 59 111 362 1,281.53 81 499.98 1,623 6,646.86 2,066 8,428.38 
3 11 Commerce and 
Industry 
  
2 2 
 
-  - 12 901.42 12 901.42 
4 12 Mineral Resources 1 
 
2 3 3 0.27  - 15 2.43 18 2.71 
5 13 Energy Department 1 1 1 3 4 0.15 4 - 2 0.02 10 0.17 
6 14 Agriculture 56 22 93 171 343 3,512.34 105 604.14 1,640 4,814.58 2,088 8,931.06 
7 15 Co-operation 4 1 6 11 6 1.27 2 0.05 20 3,155.88 28 3,157.20 
8 16 Labour 8 6 8 22 20 2.55 42 34.60 18 1.63 80 38.79 
9 17 Public Health and 
Family Welfare 
33 18 70 121 236 580.47 134 590.93 1,327 1,889.42 1,697 3,060.81 
10 18 Urban Development 
And Environment 
8 2 14 24 54 312.82 4 0.06 147 4,31,383.27 205 4,31,696.15 
11 19 Public Works 22 4 27 53 75 975.70 7 223.86 93 5,371.13 175 6,570.69 
12 2 Home 51 32 95 178 611 774.58 306 281.28 2,117 5,098.62 3,034 6,154.48 
13 20 School Education 49 31 95 175 320 14,525.65 259 2,232.40 877 7,026.43 1,456 23,784.48 
14 21 Law and Legislative 
Affairs 
17 5 22 44 264 985.80 52 313.62 708 1,031.42 1,024 2,330.84 
15 22 Panchayat 9 4 3 16 33 508.41 17 469.35 28 29.55 78 1,007.31 
16 23 Planning Economics 
and Statistics 
10 9 22 41 43 278.58 42 85.47 264 1,627.93 349 1,991.98 
17 24 Public Relation 
Department 
11 7 28 46 167 220.27 46 3.50 292 267.27 505 491.03 
18 25 Tribal Affairs 
Department 
37 34 105 176 271 1,954.66 308 4,838.30 2,372 19,638.54 2,951 26,431.50 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 100 
S.No. Department 
Code 
Name of 
Department 
Numbers of DDOs offices 
operated by user 
Transactions by 
level 10 
Transactions by 
level 20 
Transactions by 
level 30 
Total Transactions 
Level 
10 
Level 
20 
Level 
30 
Total 
DDOs 
Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount 
19 26 Social Welfare 22 10 42 74 188 358.53 44 22.39 471 2,572.94 703 2,953.86 
20 27 Narmada Valley 
Development 
22 8 24 54 105 746.53 22 165.89 149 107.64 276 1,020.06 
21 29 Food and Civil 
Supplies 
14 9 31 54 72 10.93 38 14.92 218 98.26 328 124.12 
22 3 Jail 17 5 46 68 161 65.11 8 1.33 427 270.56 596 337.00 
23 30 Culture 5 5 4 14 26 2.03 23 216.14 47 19.90 96 238.07 
24 31 Water Resources 
Department 
23 5 31 59 61 341.90 46 14.28 125 5,237.99 232 5,594.17 
25 34 Public Health 
Engineering 
22 10 46 78 137 2,063.66 28 158.23 370 4,066.41 535 6,288.29 
26 35 Department of 
Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying 
10 6 18 34 115 27.15 30 8.51 328 92.78 473 128.44 
27 36 Fisheries 17 5 30 52 77 36.67 23 26.07 297 206.70 397 269.43 
28 38 Higher Education 58 23 118 199 166 383.23 69 143.95 757 1,724.92 992 2,252.10 
29 4 Finance 15 11 46 72 74 12.11 88 28.41 362 5,246.43 524 5,286.95 
30 42 Technical Education, 
Skill Development 
and Employment 
73 39 124 236 306 14,422.24 162 394.29 924 17,696.24 1392 32,512.77 
31 47 Bhopal Gas Tragedy 
Relief and 
Rehabilition 
2 2 2 6 40 79.82 38 19.15 52 115.45 130 214.42 
32 5 Commercial Tax 20 8 42 70 98 42.72 41 9.93 344 9,826.37 483 9,879.03 
33 50 Women and Child 
Development 
35 21 85 141 370 1,947.73 376 1,110.13 2,497 8,101.12 3,243 11,158.98 
34 52 Village industry 5 2 7 14 26 17.55 2 0.85 35 27.99 63 46.40 
35 53 Medical Education 12 3 14 29 135 1,983.99 15 69.55 216 3,784.26 366 5,837.80 
36 54 Minority and 
Backward Class 
Department 
24 12 35 71 305 2,188.93 189 295.36 965 1,755.00 1459 4,239.29 

 Appendices 
Page 101 
S.No. Department 
Code 
Name of 
Department 
Numbers of DDOs offices 
operated by user 
Transactions by 
level 10 
Transactions by 
level 20 
Transactions by 
level 30 
Total Transactions 
Level 
10 
Level 
20 
Level 
30 
Total 
DDOs 
Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount Nos Amount 
37 55 Scheduled Caste 
Welfare Department 
1 1 
 
2 7 196.63 15 17.70  - 22 214.33 
38 58 Rural Development 66 35 132 233 375 3,455.61 145 1,573.18 1,148 30,068.53 1668 35,097.32 
39 59 Horticulture and 
Food Processing 
28 15 48 91 177 287.13 131 2,504.34 775 2,207.25 1083 4,998.72 
40 6 Spirituality 
  
1 1 
 
-  - 5 0.02 5 0.02 
41 60 Ayush 19 9 41 69 232 45.89 173 15.18 1,293 530.31 1698 591.38 
42 61 Non Conventional 
Energy Resources 
  
1 1 
 
-  - 21 10.73 21 10.73 
43 65 MSME 15 6 21 42 47 2.70 31 0.81 128 20.41 206 23.92 
44 7 Revenue 37 30 70 137 308 347.22 276 576.48 1,165 2,285.53 1749 3,209.24 
45 8 Transport 3 1 10 14 6 0.58 1 - 40 5.09 47 5.67 
46 9 Sports and Youth 
Welfare 
19 8 32 59 68 143.65 24 60.08 182 366.12 274 569.85 
Total 3,234        6,59,251.14 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 102 
Appendix 3.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.6.5) 
Statement of observations on basis of payment transactions of IFMIS database and Voucher generated from IFMIS application. 
Observation Impact 
Payment of two employees and three vendors in one Account Number : Same Account number ( 31638223218) 
was shown in the case of  two employees (SURESH RAGHU, Assistant Teacher, Block Education Officer Silwa ni, 
EMP_CODE 57318 and KODULAL NA, Head Master (Middle School), Block Education Officer Silwani, 
EMP_CODE 500154565) and three vendors (SALIM KHAN - Party_Code 50032964009, TOPHEEK - Party_Code 
2000118815145 and Saleem Khan - Party_Code 2000203185080). ₹  4,72,800, ₹ 2 ,07,483, ₹ 23 ,400, ₹12 ,800 and  
₹ 30 ,435 were paid to them respectively into the same Account number 31638223218. However, different IFSC 
Codes (SBIN0000544 and SBIN0010504) were shown in the database table the Voucher details report generated 
from IFMIS. 
It could not be ascertained in Audit as to whom 
(to which employee/vendor) the actual payment 
was made and how the transactions were effected 
to one account number having different IFSC 
Codes. 
Payment of one employee and one vendor in one Account Number : An employee Mr. RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRIVASTAV, Forester, DFO (EAST) TERRITORIAL, CHHINDWARA (EMP_CODE: 500317195) and one 
vendor LAXMI TRADERS (Party_Code: 2000202621509) have the same Account Number 1415602135 with 
different IFSC Codes. And ₹ 11,685 and ₹ 57,880 were paid respectively to these two parties on 17 -02-2021 to the 
same Account number 1415602135. However, different IFSC Codes (CBIN0280750 and CBIN0284170) were 
shown in the database table the Voucher details report generated from IFMIS. 
Due to the above discrepancy in IFMIS data, it 
could not be ascertained in Audit as to whom (to 
the employee or to the vendor) the actual 
payment was made and how the transactions were 
effected to one account number having different 
IFSC Codes. 
Payment of two employees in one Account Number:  HEMRAJ KABIR PANTHI, EMP_CODE=5001047743 
(PARTY_CODE), a Primary Teacher, B.E.O. GUNA and KRISHNA PARIHAR, EMP_CODE=5001047962 
(Party_Code) a Primary Teacher, B.E.O. GUNA have the same Account number 061 02041008336 (IFSC Code 
same) and ₹ 31,365 and ₹ 43,090 were paid respectively to these two parties on 02 -09-2020 to the same Account 
number 06102041008336. 
It could not be ascertained in Audit as to whom 
(to which employee) the actual payment was 
made. 
Payment of three vendors in one Account Number: Three vendors RAJKUMAR (Party_Code: 2000118815146 ), 
VIMALESH AA0 AMARASIH GAIAD (Party  Code: 50040290698) and CHOTU AADIWASI  (Party_Code: 
2000159196516 ) having one Account Number 3308073184 were paid ₹ 19,500, ₹ 39,000 and ₹ 2,250 respectively 
on 22 -08-2019 and 18 -03-2020. But the IFSC Codes (CBIN0282031, CBIN0284903 and CBIN0281596) were 
shown different. 
Due to the above discrepancy in IFMIS data, it 
could not be ascertained in Audit as to whom (to 
which party) the actual payment was made and 
how the transactions were effected to one account 
number having different IFSC Codes. 
Payment to same party names with different party codes : Payments were made to same party names with 
different party codes wherein the amounts paid, bill number, Cheque number and date of payment were the same.  
However, the IFSC Codes of same Account number were different.  
Since the party name, amount, bill nu mber, cheque number, account number and date of payment were the same, it 
could not be ensured in Audit whether these payments were made to different parties or double payments to the 
same party. Only party codes are different in these cases. Also how the transactions were effected to one account 
number having different IFSC Codes. 
In the absence of reliable data, Audit could not 
ascertain the information regarding the name of 
actual parties to whom the payments were made, 
how different IFSC codes for one account number 
was captured into relevant tables and exhibiting 
in the voucher details report generated by IFMIS. 

 Appendices 
Page 103 
Appendix 3.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.6.7) 
Details of unauthorised Major Heads operated by Treasury Offices for processing Bills 
S. 
No. 
DDO Name (Treasury) 
Name of Major Head Operated 
BILL_NET_AMOUNT (in ₹) 
1 ADDL T O FOR SR TREASURY OFFICER DISTT TREASURY BHOPAL (TOTAL)          62,84,25,58,684  
Administration of Justice                      16,26,520  
Interest Payments            15,31,01,30,411  
Internal debt of the State Government            46,69,59,76,656  
Loans for Miscellaneous General Services                 81,22,40,000  
Other Administrative Services                   2,20,70,647  
Stamps and Registration                        5,14,450  
2 DISTT.TREASURY OFFICER SHIVPURI (TOTAL)                      5,79,744  
Administration of Justice                           43,400  
Miscellaneous General Services                           15,000  
Stamps and Registration                        5,21,344  
3 DISTT.TREASURY OFFICER RAJGARH (TOTAL)                            8,199  
Stamps and Registration                             8,199  
4 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER VIDISHA (TOTAL)                          38,075  
Stamps and Registration                           38,075  
5 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER  HARDA (TOTAL)                          19,000  
Stamps and Registration                           19,000  
6 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER HBAD (TOTAL)                          17,781  
Stamps and Registration                           17,781  
7 DIST.TREASURY OFFICER SHAJAPUR (TOTAL)                          14,292  
Stamps and Registration                           14,292  
8 DISTT TREASURY OFFICE CHHINDWARA MP (TOTAL)                          78,352  
Stamps and Registration                           78,352  
9 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER DEWAS (TOTAL)                          76,074  
Medical and Public Health                           70,074  
Miscellaneous General Services                             6,000  
10 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER INDORE (M.P) (TOTAL)                      4,61,485  
Stamps and Registration                        4,61,485  
11 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER JABALPUR (TOTAL)                      5,64,151  
Stamps and Registration                        5,64,151  
12 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER JHABUA (TOTAL)                          96,000  
Administration of Justice                           50,900  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 104 
S. 
No. 
DDO Name (Treasury) 
Name of Major Head Operated 
BILL_NET_AMOUNT (in ₹) 
Stamps and Registration                           45,100  
13 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER KHANDWA (TOTAL)                          51,186  
Stamps and Registration                           51,186  
14 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER SINGROLI (TOTAL)                          75,961  
Land Revenue                           15,575  
Stamps and Registration                           60,386  
15 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER, BARWANI (TOTAL)                            5,000  
Stamps and Registration                             5,000  
16 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER GWALIOR (TOTAL)                      8,29,689  
Stamps and Registration                        8,29,689  
17 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER KHARGONE (TOTAL)                    11,87,000  
Administration of Justice                      11,87,000  
18 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER ASHOKNAGAR (TOTAL)                          36,367  
Stamps and Registration                           36,367  
19 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER BURHANPUR (TOTAL)                          76,322  
Stamps and Registration                           76,322  
20 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER SATNA (TOTAL)                    11,30,435  
Administration of Justice                        6,72,600  
Stamps and Registration                        4,57,835  
21 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER DINDORI (TOTAL)                          13,410  
Other Administrative Services                           10,000  
Stamps and Registration                             3,410  
22 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER PANNA (TOTAL)                      1,08,440  
Administration of Justice                           16,000  
Stamps and Registration                           92,440  
23 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER RATLAM (TOTAL)                          43,207  
Stamps and Registration                           43,207  
24 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER SEONI (TOTAL)                          19,661  
Stamps and Registration                           19,661  
25 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER TKG (TOTAL)                          53,957  
Stamps and Registration                           53,957  
26 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER UJJAIN (TOTAL)                      4,67,000  
Stamps and Registration                        4,67,000  
27 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER KATNI (TOTAL)                          77,100  
Stamps and Registration                           77,100  

 Appendices 
Page 105 
S. 
No. 
DDO Name (Treasury) 
Name of Major Head Operated 
BILL_NET_AMOUNT (in ₹) 
28 DISTT. TREASURY OFFFICER MORENA (TOTAL)                          69,968  
Stamps and Registration                           69,968  
29 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER MANDLA (TOTAL)                      1,27,700  
Stamps and Registration                        1,27,700  
30 DISTT. TREASURY OFFICER SAGAR (TOTAL)                      1,02,063  
Administration of Justice                           42,000  
General Education                           17,000  
Stamps and Registration                           43,063  
31 DISTT.TREASURY OFFICER BETUL (TOTAL)                      2,18,000  
General Education                        1,62,000  
Other Administrative Services                           35,000  
Stamps and Registration                           21,000  
32 SUB TREASURY OFFICER LOCAL BTB (TOTAL)                    11,07,500  
Administration of Justice                      11,07,500  
33 SUB TREASURY OFFICER NALKHEDA LOCAL BTB (TOTAL)                       2,51,250  
Administration of Justice                             6,250  
Stamps and Registration                        2,45,000  
34 SUBTREASURY OFFICER LOCAL BTB (TOTAL)                    19,11,350  
Administration of Justice                      17,96,750  
Miscellaneous General Services                        1,14,600  
35 TREASURY OFFICER  SHEOPUR (TOTAL)                          21,895  
Stamps and Registration                           21,895  
36 TREASURY OFFICER ANUPPUR (TOTAL)                            7,030  
Stamps and Registration                             7,030  
37 TREASURY OFFICER DISTT AGAR MALWA MP (TOTAL)                          18,200  
Stamps and Registration                           18,200  
38 TREASURY OFFICER UMARIA (TOTAL)                          10,000  
Stamps and Registration                           10,000  
39 TREASURY SUBTREASURY OFFICER LOCAL BTB (TOTAL)                    82,41,530  
Administration of Justice                        5,91,750  
Industries                             9,600  
Taxes on Sales, Trade etc.                      76,40,180  
40 TREASURY/SUBTREASURY OFFICER LOCAL BTB (TOTAL)           1,32,22,45,024  
Administration of Justice                   3,69,43,952  
Collection Charges under State Goods and Services Tax                   9,31,66,836  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 106 
S. 
No. 
DDO Name (Treasury) 
Name of Major Head Operated 
BILL_NET_AMOUNT (in ₹) 
Co-operation                           19,832  
Council of Ministers                 14,31,99,916  
Crop Husbandry                             9,750  
District Administration                      21,68,636  
Food, Storage and Warehousing                        6,38,560  
General Education                      48,17,322  
Housing                           67,375  
Industries                        3,98,000  
Interest Payments                             8,526  
Jails                        2,39,831  
Labour and Employment                           90,000  
Land Revenue                   1,42,73,213  
Major and Medium Irrigation                      13,09,970  
Medical and Public Health                      18,89,051  
Miscellaneous General Services                   1,62,59,840  
Non ferrous Mining and Metallurgical Industries                 25,78,20,016  
Non-Conventional Sources of Energy                        3,69,110  
Other Administrative Services                      51,45,846  
Other General Economic Services                           87,200  
Other Social Services                        2,13,000  
Police                           22,290  
Public Works                           81,000  
Stamps and Registration                 34,11,82,043  
State Excise                      82,28,331  
Stationery & Printing                           30,000  
Taxes on Sales, Trade etc.                 38,88,57,936  
Taxes on Vehicles                      34,50,000  
Urban Development                        1,06,500  
Village and Small Industries                        4,86,000  
Welfare of Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes                         6,65,142  
Grand Total         64,18,30,18,082  
 
 
 

 Appendices 
Page 107 
Appendix 4.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.6) 
Statement showing budget surrendered by Peon, Daftari and Tractor Driver 
Budget 
Surrender ID 
Amount 
Surrendered in ₹ 
Date Post Name 
Budget surrendered by Peon 
200013761          99,130  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013851       1,35,152  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013881            5,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013853            2,863  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013854            6,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013855          16,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013856            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013857            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013858            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013859            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013860            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013861          12,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013862            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013863          40,563  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013864          15,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013865          10,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013866          50,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013867          11,852  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013868       1,22,029  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013869          32,790  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013870          48,159  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013871          50,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013872            9,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013873            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013874            9,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013875          14,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013876          71,009  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013877            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013878            1,000  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013879          19,826  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013880                 68  30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 108 
Budget 
Surrender ID 
Amount 
Surrendered in ₹ 
Date Post Name 
200013852 10,705 30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
200013904 50,000 30-03-21 Peon-0000113389 
33 records 8,49,146     
Budget surrendered by Daftari 
200010623          59,522  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010653            4,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010625          10,390  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010626          19,442  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010627          16,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010628          16,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010629            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010630            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010631            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010632            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010633            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010634            5,706  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010635               800  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010636            8,040  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010639          16,932  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010640          10,712  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010641          98,947  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010642          17,804  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010643          25,860  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010644          40,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010645            9,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010646            9,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010647          14,400  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010648       2,59,982  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010649            1,000  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010651            4,576  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010652          26,370  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
200010624          43,538  31-03-20 Daftari-0000114049 
28 records 7,23,021     
Budget surrendered by Tractor Driver 
2000203727          35,00,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 

 Appendices 
Page 109 
Budget 
Surrender ID 
Amount 
Surrendered in ₹ 
Date Post Name 
2000203728          27,42,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
2000203729       2,00,00,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
2000203733          25,67,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
2000203731          16,78,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
2000203732          50,00,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
2000203730       2,00,00,000  30-03-20 Tractor Driver-0000292341 
7 records 5,54,87,000     
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 110 
Appendix 5.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.4) 
Delay in freezing of Accounts in days 
2019-20 
Name of treasury/ Month Year Apr-19 May-19 Jun-19 Jul-19 Aug-19 Sep-19 Oct-19 Nov-19 Dec-19 Jan-20 Feb-20 Mar-20 
Agar Malwa Treasury 123 91 61 170 370 371 309 279 247 240 324 180 
Alirajpur Treasury 0 213 183 153 121 91 63 29 35 159 127 95 
Anuppur Treasury 402 373 340 312 281 251 218 188 160 127 97 67 
Ashoknagar Treasury 23 25 23 29 41 35 84 53 60 119 90 115 
BALAGHAT TREASURY 337 283 276 246 215 184 154 123 93 62 31 122 
Barwani District Treasury 555 525 496 464 434 404 372 342 313 280 250 223 
Betul District Treasury 616 582 554 521 484 456 428 399 366 338 308 275 
Bhind Treasury 231 199 169 137 108 79 47 16 84 52 29 157 
Burhanpur Treasury 83 179 173 141 109 78 50 386 378 345 315 287 
Chhatarpur Treasury 60 30 33 508 476 444 414 383 353 322 291 261 
Chhindwara Treasury 116 84 56 23 153 122 88 60 203 173 142 115 
Damoh Treasury 11 0 7 1 21 3 1 40 32 0 7 0 
Datia Treasury 334 302 272 243 214 183 152 123 91 61 29 78 
Dewas Treasury 1 0 0 0 70 62 34 60 25 31 24 5 
Dhar Treasury 600 569 537 509 477 445 394 383 354 323 295 263 
Dindori Treasury 9 42 46 36 54 34 29 63 35 38 31 97 
District Treasury Office Bhopal 277 245 216 184 145 120 73 63 32 351 326 293 
District Treasury Office Niwari N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 0 232 192 163 134 179 
Guna Treasury 36 249 217 188 154 126 96 66 367 362 333 304 
Harda Treasury 31 47 161 129 94 66 36 231 220 191 162 129 
Hoshangabad Treasury 32 29 90 60 27 27 30 26 36 60 30 159 
Indore City Treasury 319 286 257 226 194 161 131 103 69 61 33 124 
Indore District Treasury 280 246 218 186 154 134 93 64 180 145 117 89 
Jabalpur City Treasury 280 248 219 190 316 280 254 225 192 162 155 125 
Jabalpur District Treasury 33 26 40 33 30 29 69 37 39 30 48 54 
Jhabua Treasury 27 83 54 126 91 63 36 67 37 33 154 125 
Katni Treasury 607 579 547 517 484 456 427 396 364 334 305 274 
Khandwa Treasury 88 64 25 67 35 89 57 28 21 3 3 7 
Khargone Treasury 274 245 217 183 152 123 92 60 31 176 164 315 
Mandla Treasury 34 19 31 38 64 56 23 15 7 2 504 504 
Mandsaur Treasury 586 554 525 494 463 397 401 393 361 26 22 47 
Morena Treasury 307 273 245 216 183 153 122 91 63 340 340 304 

 Appendices 
Page 111 
Name of treasury/ Month Year Apr-19 May-19 Jun-19 Jul-19 Aug-19 Sep-19 Oct-19 Nov-19 Dec-19 Jan-20 Feb-20 Mar-20 
Motimahal Gwalior Treasury 95 63 76 68 36 97 97 66 35 267 238 207 
Narsinghpur Treasury 606 595 566 535 484 476 443 402 385 350 322 294 
Neemuch District Treasury 21 31 23 26 19 27 17 29 28 32 28 87 
Panna Treasury 90 60 29 57 25 68 38 161 153 121 90 61 
Raisen Treasury 147 114 85 56 23 68 37 125 117 84 55 27 
Rajgarh Treasury 98 68 46 365 492 736 715 676 653 621 593 559 
Ratlam Treasury 89 81 50 496 485 456 421 395 365 333 303 274 
Rewa Treasury 19 62 33 122 90 60 30 421 393 360 331 301 
Sagar Treasury 620 587 558 528 496 466 435 405 376 343 312 285 
Satna Treasury 308 269 239 210 177 147 115 85 56 24 16 7 
Seedhi Treasury 31 14 35 29 30 32 28 28 48 29 80 70 
Sehore Treasury 25 96 68 156 121 93 64 34 5 62 33 37 
Seoni Treasury 484 453 424 393 366 335 279 266 239 204 179 150 
Shahdol Treasury 148 118 87 57 338 286 254 245 215 184 154 124 
Shajapur Treasury 262 230 201 171 138 110 76 46 279 270 237 209 
Sheopur Treasury 87 66 483 453 422 391 360 330 300 271 238 209 
Shivpuri Treasury 637 608 581 547 512 487 455 421 392 355 329 265 
Singrauli Treasury 634 604 574 539 508 478 442 413 392 354 326 296 
Tikamgarh Treasury 31 29 29 27 24 86 30 24 40 33 43 33 
Ujjain Treasury 31 46 39 35 41 80 123 94 64 31 123 95 
Umaria Treasury 90 60 29 237 206 174 144 114 84 53 29 57 
Vallabh Bhawan Treasury, Bhopal 91 61 46 58 74 67 -272 -302 12 304 276 242 
Vidisha Treasury 2 51 22 44 60 27 55 26 39 145 112 84 
Vindhyachal Treasury 28 30 22 13 7 61 28 6 96 63 33 114 
 
2020-21 
Name of treasury Apr-20 May-20 Jun-20 Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21 Mar-21 
Agar Malwa Treasury 263 233 203 194 163 131 102 72 40 31 N.A N.A 
Alirajpur Treasury 67 38 177 148 116 65 54 22 32 176 145 117 
Anuppur Treasury 208 183 153 147 116 85 62 33 104 220 24 24 
Ashoknagar Treasury 49 49 85 56 115 84 54 38 6 29 25 27 
BALAGHAT TREASURY 90 59 27 151 120 88 57 27 35 27 N.A N.A 
Barwani District Treasury 188 161 127 98 65 20 24 27 21 50 27 N.A 
Betul District Treasury 249 217 189 154 130 95 67 50 53 23 46 25 
Bhind Treasury 124 97 67 35 26 60 51 10 23 27 21 23 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 112 
Name of treasury Apr-20 May-20 Jun-20 Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21 Mar-21 
Burhanpur Treasury 251 226 195 164 132 84 61 30 7 182 153 135 
Chhatarpur Treasury 231 201 170 140 86 78 60 29 5 N.A N.A N.A 
Chhindwara Treasury 75 54 30 30 119 71 59 28 22 3 151 127 
Damoh Treasury 0 0 31 0 0 29 30 22 23 0 54 26 
Datia Treasury 72 44 9 0 12 56 65 34 2 2 0 0 
Dewas Treasury 9 6 29 1 6 5 1 61 32 5 31 3 
Dhar Treasury 211 206 173 136 106 N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 
Dindori Treasury 97 71 41 22 33 71 45 29 14 18 12 98 
District Treasury Office Bhopal 244 235 202 173 141 97 83 55 21 23 26 28 
District Treasury Office Niwari 144 119 75 57 26 70 61 33 0 N.A N.A N.A 
Guna Treasury 256 241 203 179 147 102 89 59 371 24 20 21 
Harda Treasury 99 71 38 174 145 114 85 54 30 25 26 N.A 
Hoshangabad Treasury 123 96 63 35 61 29 63 32 25 29 22 35 
Indore City Treasury 89 60 28 30 146 91 63 26 10 6 7 26 
Indore District Treasury 35 246 N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 
Jabalpur City Treasury 94 63 31 149 117 86 57 33 25 27 21 26 
Jabalpur District Treasury 22 24 28 28 28 33 30 27 0 24 21 26 
Jhabua Treasury 88 62 32 56 3 11 60 29 21 5 21 83 
Katni Treasury 239 216 183 154 124 71 66 34 22 26 N.A N.A 
Khandwa Treasury 1 1 4 31 0 3 1 2 0 0 0 N.A 
Khargone Treasury 71 79 48 17 39 58 47 69 13 50 18 22 
Mandla Treasury 548 504 471 453 424 390 363 328 303 267 244 N.A 
Mandsaur Treasury 19 212 18 31 21 6 24 23 23 64 22 22 
Morena Treasury 271 244 213 182 151 101 90 60 27 85 56 27 
Motimahal Gwalior Treasury 174 148 116 85 56 77 64 34 25 21 24 27 
Narsinghpur Treasury 237 232 202 169 140 85 57 27 0 11 55 N.A 
Neemuch District Treasury 46 41 33 32 35 31 36 27 25 22 20 24 
Panna Treasury 30 23 59 28 117 83 55 19 28 25 67 59 
Raisen Treasury 36 41 32 8 99 69 37 22 35 27 22 26 
Rajgarh Treasury 534 502 473 438 410 380 346 319 287 255 228 N.A 
Ratlam Treasury 239 214 182 151 122 71 58 28 22 30 54 25 
Rewa Treasury 270 241 211 177 144 99 87 51 24 23 241 214 
Sagar Treasury 244 223 190 162 130 82 69 36 N.A N.A N.A N.A 
Satna Treasury 4 26 11 36 33 52 42 28 366 23 0 26 
Seedhi Treasury 40 27 183 147 87 90 96 33 1 4 1 36 
Sehore Treasury 26 27 32 83 54 5 14 32 0 0 3 N.A 

 Appendices 
Page 113 
Name of treasury Apr-20 May-20 Jun-20 Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21 Mar-21 
Seoni Treasury 113 88 55 176 142 94 87 54 366 N.A N.A N.A 
Shahdol Treasury 94 64 159 150 120 89 59 29 24 27 10 28 
Shajapur Treasury 177 148 111 84 57 81 68 39 73 44 26 102 
Sheopur Treasury 178 148 117 87 56 24 79 48 35 27 24 N.A 
Shivpuri Treasury 265 236 202 173 141 103 85 40 4 26 N.A N.A 
Singrauli Treasury 263 240 206 177 148 97 65 35 3 8 1 N.A 
Tikamgarh Treasury 27 25 122 32 2 11 26 55 23 27 22 45 
Ujjain Treasury 62 136 102 73 42 40 47 39 25 N.A N.A N.A 
Umaria Treasury 54 24 73 43 86 54 34 30 0 25 26 30 
Vallabh Bhawan Treasury, Bhopal 350 321 267 259 76 29 168 116 106 78 21 26 
Vidisha Treasury 46 27 56 26 123 74 60 11 23 24 16 22 
Vindhyachal Treasury 82 54 21 159 115 82 68 40 7 26 25 3 
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 114 
Appendix 5.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.4) 
Records Updated after Submission of Accounts to the AG Office 
FREEZED
_ ACC_ 
MST_ID 
FREEZE_ 
ACC_ 
CODE 
MAJO
R_ 
HEAD_ 
TYPE 
LOCK_DA
TE 
AG_ 
SUBMISSIO
N_ DATE 
UPDATED_ 
DATE 
TRSRY
_ LOC_  
CODE 
PAYMEN
T_ 
MONTH 
PAYMEN
T_FIN_Y
EAR 
CURREN
T_STAT
US 
CREAT
ED_BY 
_USER_ 
ID 
TRY_NAME 
200012228 505356 2 2/6/2021 2/5/2021 3/29/2021 18665 1 2021 10 39675 Anuppur Treasury 
200011324 504682 2 12/24/2020 4/9/2020 8/30/2021 18393 3 2020 10 5007082
54 
Burhanpur Treasury 
20007932 502543 2 1/17/2020 8/9/2019 3/29/2021 17472 7 2019 10 39637 District Treasury Office 
Bhopal 
20007947 502558 2 1/17/2020 1/7/2020 3/29/2021 17472 12 2019 10 39637 District Treasury Office 
Bhopal 
200012587 505527 2 3/9/2021 3/2/2021 11/24/2021 15182 2 2021 10 5004727
80 
Hoshangabad Treasury 
200012209 505342 2 2/5/2021 2/3/2021 4/7/2021 13136 1 2021 10 5008039
70 
Mandsaur Treasury 
200011443 504770 2 12/31/2020 4/16/2020 9/16/2021 12775 3 2020 10 5002657
07 
Narsinghpur Treasury 
200012466 505466 1 3/5/2021 3/3/2021 9/22/2021 11741 2 2021 10 39614 Rewa Treasury 
200012467 505467 2 3/5/2021 3/3/2021 9/24/2021 11741 2 2021 10 39614 Rewa Treasury 
200012465 505465 1 3/5/2021 2/13/2021 9/22/2021 11741 2 2021 10 39614 Rewa Treasury 
200012968 505647 1 4/8/2021 3/12/2021 9/22/2021 11741 3 2021 10 39614 Rewa Treasury 
200011873 503696 2 9/7/2020 8/5/2020 3/31/2021 11125 8 2020 10 5005191
10 
Satna Treasury 
200010739 504181 1 12/5/2020 4/15/2020 3/31/2021 17470 4 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
20009662 503505 1 8/6/2020 5/14/2020 3/31/2021 17470 5 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
20009663 503506 1 8/6/2020 6/6/2020 3/31/2021 17470 5 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
20009666 503509 1 8/6/2020 7/7/2020 3/31/2021 17470 6 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
20009665 503508 1 8/6/2020 6/16/2020 3/31/2021 17470 6 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
20009668 503511 1 8/6/2020 7/15/2020 3/31/2021 17470 7 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 

 Appendices 
Page 115 
FREEZED
_ ACC_ 
MST_ID 
FREEZE_ 
ACC_ 
CODE 
MAJO
R_ 
HEAD_ 
TYPE 
LOCK_DA
TE 
AG_ 
SUBMISSIO
N_ DATE 
UPDATED_ 
DATE 
TRSRY
_ LOC_  
CODE 
PAYMEN
T_ 
MONTH 
PAYMEN
T_FIN_Y
EAR 
CURREN
T_STAT
US 
CREAT
ED_BY 
_USER_ 
ID 
TRY_NAME 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200010412 503991 1 10/29/2020 8/14/2020 3/31/2021 17470 8 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200010413 503992 1 10/29/2020 9/30/2020 3/31/2021 17470 9 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200010414 503993 1 10/29/2020 10/3/2020 3/31/2021 17470 9 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200011370 504716 1 12/29/2020 10/14/2020 3/31/2021 17470 10 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200011371 504717 1 12/29/2020 11/5/2020 3/31/2021 17470 10 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200011372 504718 1 12/29/2020 11/12/2020 3/31/2021 17470 11 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200011373 504719 1 12/29/2020 12/5/2020 3/31/2021 17470 11 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200011618 504885 1 1/6/2021 12/15/2020 3/31/2021 17470 12 2020 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
200012193 505327 1 2/4/2021 1/12/2021 3/31/2021 17470 1 2021 10 39672 Vallabh Bhawan 
Treasury, Bhopal 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 116 
Appendix 5.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.4) 
Statement showing treasury wise details of non-availability of account freezing information  
Name of treasury Jan-
21 
Oct-
20 
Nov-
20 
Dec-
20 
Feb-
21 
Mar-
21 
Apr-
19 
May-
19 
Jun-
19 
Jun-
20 
Jul-
19 
Jul-
20 
Aug-
19 
Aug-
20 
Sep-
19 
Sep-
20 
Agar Malwa Treasury 
    
N.A N.A 
          
Balaghat Treasury 
    
N.A N.A 
          
Barwani District Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Chhatarpur Treasury N.A 
   
N.A N.A 
          
Dhar Treasury N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 
         
N.A 
District Treasury Office 
Niwari 
N.A 
   
N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 
 
N.A 
 
N.A 
 
N.A 
 
Harda Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Indore District Treasury N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 
   
N.A 
 
N.A 
 
N.A 
 
N.A 
Katni Treasury 
    
N.A N.A 
          
Khandwa Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Mandla Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Narsinghpur Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Rajgarh Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Sagar Treasury N.A 
  
N.A N.A N.A 
          
Sehore Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Seoni Treasury N.A 
   
N.A N.A 
          
Sheopur Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Shivpuri Treasury 
    
N.A N.A 
          
Singrauli Treasury 
     
N.A 
          
Ujjain Treasury N.A 
   
N.A N.A 
          
Total: 20 Treasuries  
 

 Appendices 
Page 117 
Appendix 5.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.5) 
Details of Vouchers having Net Amount greater than Gross Amount 
DDO Code Treas
ury 
Code 
Grant MH
CD 
SM
CD 
MIC
D 
SHC
D 
Segme
nt 
code 
Object 
Code 
Voucher No Gross Amount in 
₹ 
Treas
ury 
Deduc
tions  
AG 
Deduction
s  
Total 
Deductio
ns 
Net 
Expendit
ure in ₹ 
0504206001 17472 047 2230 03 003 6477 0101 11 050/2230/042019-20/0044 14,479 0 -31,416 -31,416 45,895 
0515002001 17465 055 2235 02 001 9041 9999 11 051/2235/052019-20/0074 4,640 0 -9,528 -9,528 14,168 
0905802003 16419 062 2515 00 101 2474 9999 11 090/2515/042019-20/0013 4,265 0 -4,263 -4,263 8,528 
0901402003 16419 013 2401 00 001 3733 0101 11 090/2401/042019-20/0001 19,653 0 -37,488 -37,488 57,141 
1302506003 15710 049 2225 01 277 4717 0103 11 130/2225/042019-20/0026 66,668 0 -1,234 -1,234 67,902 
1302506003 15710 049 2225 01 277 4717 0103 11 130/2225/042019-20/0092 1,39,108 0 -76,521 -76,521 2,15,629 
1802506005 14605 049 2225 01 277 1398 0103 11 180/2225/042019-20/0049 16,711 0 -238 -238 16,949 
1800704003 14605 008 2029 00 001 6846 9999 11 180/2029/052019-20/0042 10,228 0 -9,018 -9,018 19,246 
2801003004 12473 010 2406 02 110 2899 0101 11 280/2406/042019-20/0100 7,058 0 -2,623 -2,623 9,681 
3002003010 12147 027 2202 01 101 4396 0101 11 300/2202/072019-20/0397 38,100 -6,000 - -6,000 44,100 
3102903002 11969 039 2408 01 001 0629 9999 11 310/2408/052019-20/0001 26,493 0 -209 -209 26,702 
3200704010 11741 008 2029 00 103 1472 9999 11 320/2029/042019-20/0059 1,02,856 0 -83,295 -83,295 1,86,151 
3200704010 11741 008 2029 00 103 1472 9999 11 320/2029/042019-20/0058 1,52,501 0 -66,569 -66,569 2,19,070 
3200704010 11741 008 2029 00 103 1472 9999 11 320/2029/042019-20/0086 77,342 0 -70,690 -70,690 1,48,032 
3200704010 11741 008 2053 00 094 0619 9999 11 320/2053/052019-20/0038 30,984 0 -63,343 -63,343 94,327 
3200704010 11741 008 2029 00 103 1472 9999 11 320/2029/052019-20/0063 95,181 0 -7,271 -7,271 1,02,452 
3200406004 11741 006 2054 00 098 4361 9999 11 320/2054/052019-20/0020 36,527 0 -9,706 -9,706 46,233 
3203102009 11741 023 2701 80 800 2250 0101 19 320/2701/052019-20/0046 59,991 0 -431 -431 60,422 
4102003005 9855 027 2202 01 101 4396 0101 11 410/2202/042019-20/0583 7,102 0 -2,348 -2,348 9,450 
4400709001 9242 008 2053 00 093 1509 9999 11 440/2053/042019-20/0084 70,697 -832 - -832 71,529 
4403802001 9242 044 2202 03 103 0798 0101 11 440/2202/052019-20/0111 12,095 0 -2,273 -2,273 14,368 
MHCD: Major Head, SMCD: Sub Major Head, MICD: Minor Head, SHCD: Scheme Head  
 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 118 
Appendix 5.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.2.3) 
List of Forms of Accounts  
S. No. Forms and description 
1 Schedule of Refunds of Revenue and Receipts and Recoveries on Capital Accounts, in Form C.P.W.A 46 -A.  
2 Classified Abstracts of Expenditure, Form C.P.W.A 74 
3 Schedules of Works Expenditure, Form C.P.W.A 64  
4 Schedule of Establishment Expenditure, Form C.P.W.A 64-A  
5 Consolidated Contingent Bill (With necessary vouchers) Form G.A.R. 31  
6 Schedule Dockets, Form C.P.W.A 61 with necessary vouchers, transfer entry order, survey reports and sale accounts attached to  each  
7 Schedule Docket of percentage recoveries Form C.P.W.A 62 
8 Stock Account, Form C.P.W.A 73 (With Sale Accounts, Form C.P.W.A 19, in support of the Cash Credit to Stock) 
9 Schedule of Debits to Stock Form C.P.W.A 72 
10 Abstract Account of Credits, Debit and the Suspense Register Balances of the Purchases, Accounts, Form C.P.W.A 69 and Form C. P.W.A 67 
11 Schedule of Miscellaneous Works Advances, Form C.P.W.A 70 
12 Schedule of Workshop Suspense (Local Form)  
13 Schedules of Credits and Debits to Miscellaneous Heads of Account. Form C.P.W.A 76  
14 Schedule of Transactions adjusted under the head “Cash Settlement Suspense Account”, Form C.P.W.A 76 -A  
15 Schedule of Transaction Adjusted under the head “MPSSA” in Form C.P.W.A 69  
16 Schedules of Credits and Debits to Remittances, Form C.P.W.A 77  
17 Schedule of Monthly Reconciliation of Cheques and Remittances, Form C.P.W.A 51  
18 Schedules of Deposits, Form C.P.W.A 79 (Abstract of Form C.P.W.A 67 of Deposit Register)  
19 Schedule of Deposit Works, Form C.P.W.A 65 (with Report of Progress of Expenditure)  
20 Schedule of Takavi Works, Form C.P.W.A 66, with accepted certificates of Collector referred to in paragraph 16.4.5  
21 Copies of Tools and Plant Received Sheets and Tools and Plant Indents, Form C.P.W.A 13 and 14 (only in respect of Special Too ls and Plant) Form C.P.W.A 14 
should be accompanied by the supporting survey report of stores, Form C.P.W.A 18, Sale Accounts, Form  C.P.W.A 19 and acknowledgements of Officers 
concerned in the case of articles transferred to other P.W.D. Divisions, including the Divisions of other Governments  
22 Abstract Book Form CPWA-81  
23 Statement showing the expenditure on Deposit Work, Form CPWA-65-A  
24 List of Accounts submitted to AF, Form C.P.W.A 83 
 
 

 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 

 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
AA Administrative Approval 
ACS Additional Chief Secretary 
AG Accountant General 
AG (A&E) Accountant General (Accounts & Establishment) 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
ASC Apex Steering Committee 
BCO Budget Controlling Officer 
BCP Business Continuity Plan 
BI Business Intelligence 
BIA Business Impact Analysis 
BPR Business Process Re-engineering 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
CISO Chief Information Security Officer 
COTS Commercial off-the-shelf 
CPWA Central Public Works Accounts 
C-SFMS Centralized State Financial Management System 
CTA Commissioner, Treasuries and Accounts 
CTR Consolidated Treasury Receipts 
DC Data Centre 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DoF Department of Finance 
DR Data Recovery 
DRP Disaster Recovery Management Plan 
DTA Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts 
FRBM Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
FRS Functional Requirement Specification 
FRS Functional Requirement Specification 
GCC General Conditions of the Contract 
GoI Government of India 
GoMP Government of Madhya Pradesh 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HOA Head of Accounts 
HoD Head of Department 
HRMIS Human Resource Management Information System 
IFMIS Integrated Financial Management Information System 
IFSC Indian Financial System Code 

Performance Audit Report on IFMIS for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 120 
IGAS Indian Government Accounting Standards 
ISC Information Security Committee 
ISO Information Security Officer 
IT Information Technology 
LAN Local Area Network 
LOP List of Payment 
MP WD 
Manual 
Madhya Pradesh Works Department Manual 
MPBM Madhya Pradesh Budget Manual 
MPFC Madhya Pradesh Financial Code 
MPTC Madhya Pradesh Treasury Code 
MTEF Medium Term Expenditure Framework 
NDR Nearest Disaster Recovery 
NeGP National e-Governance plan 
NPS National Pension System 
NSDL National Securities Depository Limited 
OAC Operational Acceptance Certificate 
OAT Operational Acceptance Tests 
OEM original equipment manufacturer 
OLAP Online Analytical Processing 
PMC Project Management Consultant 
PMU Project Management Unit 
R&D Receipt and Disbursement 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RPO Recovery Point Objective 
RTO Recovery Time Objective 
SDD System Design Document 
SDO Service Delivery Objective 
SFMS State Financial Management System 
SI System Integrator 
SLA Services Level Agreement 
SOR Schedule of Receipts 
SQL Structured query language 
SRS System Requirement Specification 
TCS Tata Consultancy Services 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
UT Union Territory 
UTR Unique Transaction Reference 

 Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
Page 121 
VA Vulnerability Assessment 
VLC Voucher level Computerisation 
WAN Wide Area Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 