 
 
 
  
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 5 of 2025 
(Compliance Audit – Civil) 


 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 5 of 2025 
(Compliance Audit – Civil) 

 
 i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Description 
Reference 
Paragraph Page 
PREFACE  iii 
OVERVIEW  v 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational structure of the Office of the Accountant 
General (Audit I), Kerala 1.4 2 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 2 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.6 3 
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
CHAPTER II - WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
and other Child Protection Schemes 2.1 5 
CHAPTER III - HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 3.1 41 
CHAPTER IV - COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
Misappropriation 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Misappropriation of Government money in Coconut 
Nursery, Valiyathura, Thiruvananthapuram 4.1 69 
Unfruitful Expenditure 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure on two buildings and consequent 
idling of equipment 4.2 72 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Idle investment on an agricultural market complex 4.3 76 
  

 
 ii 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. Description Page 
1.1 Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports 
and paragraphs as on 30 September 2023 79 
1.2 Details of Action Taken Notes pending as of September 2023 80 
1.3 
Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending 
discussion by the Public Accounts Committee as of September 
2023 
81 
2.1 List of 12 sub schemes under innovative projects funded by 
State Government 82 
2.2 List of institutions covered in audit 83 
2.3 Delay in preparation of Social Investigation Reports 84 
2.4 List of facilities available in JJBs/CWCs in selected districts 85 
2.5 Status of post-adoption follow up visits conducted in selected 
districts during 2018-19 to 2022-2023 86 
2.6 Details of allotment and expenditure of funds 87 
2.7 Details of excess sponsorship amount paid to persons above  
18 years of age 89 
2.8 Details of  inspections conducted by the District Inspection 
Committee in the selected districts 90 
3.1 Components of RUSA 90 
3.2 List of selected districts and institutions 92 
3.3 Comparison statement of RUSA guidelines and Kerala State 
Higher Education Council Act, 2018 93 
3.4 Scheme-wise details of fund flow under RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 97 
3.5 Details of advance payment by Kannur University 98 
3.6 Details of availability of facilities in the selected institutions 
for persons with disabilities 99 
3.7 Details of Teaching Faculty in selected 15 institutions from 
2018-19 to 2022-23 100 
3.8 Student teacher ratio in selected institutions 101 

 
 iii 
PREFACE 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the period 
ended March 2023 is prepared for submission to the Governor of Kerala under 
Article 151 (2) of the Constitution for being laid before the State Legislature. 
 
The Report contains significant results of Compliance Audit of the Departments 
and Autonomous Bodies of the Government of Kerala including Departments 
of Agriculture Developm ent and Farmers’ Welfare , Higher Education  and 
Women and Child Development. 
 
The instances mentioned in this report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2022-23 as well as those, which came to notice 
in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports. 
Instances relating to the period subsequent to 2022 -23 are also included, 
wherever found necessary. 
 
The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

 
 
 
  
OVERVIEW 

 
 
  

 
 v 
Overv
iew 
OVERVIEW 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains two 
Subject-Specific Compliance Audit  paragraphs and three Compliance Audit 
paragraphs including instances of non-adherence to codal provisions , absence 
of supervisory control , idle investment, unfruitful expenditure etc., involving 
₹22.94 crore. The major audit findings are mentioned below. 
Subject-Specific Compliance Audit 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and other Child 
Protection Schemes 
Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) was introduced as a centrally 
sponsored scheme under the Ministry of Women and Child Development in the 
year 2009-10, with the aim of providing institutional, family and community -
based care to children and  promoting preventive measures for protecting them 
from situations of vulnerability, risk and abuse, educating public on child rights 
etc. ICPS provides financial support for implementation of the Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (Act).  
Audit observed that the State has not framed rules to streamline the 
implementation of the scheme for childcare and protection, in violation of the 
stipulation of the Act to frame rules for carrying out the purpose of the Act. As 
of March 2023, registration of 165 Child Care Institutions (CCIs) in the five 
selected districts was not renewed. Audit noticed that in majority of the cases 
requiring re newal, delay happened at the end of DCPU, in forwarding the 
applications to the District Magistrates (DM), which in turn delayed the conduct 
of inspections by the DMs.  Grading of CCIs had not been conducted till date  
(February 2024). There was a delay of 364 and 447 days in submitting of Social 
Investigation Reports (SIR) to Juvenile Justice Boards (JJB) and Child Welfare 
Committees (CWC) respectively.  As SIRs hold a crucial role in the decision -
making process of JJB/CWC, delay in their preparation could h ave adverse 
consequences for the child. 
None of the 17 selected CCIs were updating the Individual Care Plans as 
stipulated in the Rules. Audit observed that children with special needs/mentally 
challenged children were kept in institutions which were not p rovided with the 
specified standards set for these children. None of the test checked CWCs at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Wayanad had a system in place to extend 
special care and treatment to children requiring de-addiction from use of drugs, 
substance and liquor. Further, there were no exclusive homes for 
protection/treatment/rehabilitation of children with mental illness and 
Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Wayanad due to which addicts had to be 
accommodated along with normal children, which was not a desirable practice. 
In the selected districts, the outreach workers had not visited the foster families 
as prescribed in the ICPS guidelines. There were instances of prolonged spells 

 
 vi 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
of absence of the chi ldren from CCIs, whose stay was terminated by is suing 
release order s without ensuring the well being and safety of the children. 
Considering the vulnerable circumstances of these children, in the event of an 
untoward incident which may occur during the period of overstay, the 
CCI/CWC/JJB/Government could land itself in a legally embarrassing position 
as regards the safety of the child.  Home Study Reports (HSRs)  inter alia  
containing details of Prospective adoptive Parents, were not prepared and 
uploaded in time in the selected districts. 
Audit noticed th at cradle points to receive abandoned children were installed 
only in two of the 14 Specialised Adoption Agencies (SAA) in the State. There 
was delay of 49 to 275 days in examination by District Medical Officer (DMO) 
in respect of children with special needs in Thiruvananthapuram and Ernakulam 
districts, which impeded the declaration of the child as legally free for adoption. 
Audit noticed delay in conducting post adoption follow ups in the test checked 
districts. Due to non-conduct of post-adoption follow ups as prescribed, it could 
not be assessed on a periodical basis, as to whether the adopted child was having 
adjustment problems with the adoptive parents.  In SAA Thiruvananthapuram, 
it was noticed that an amount of ₹16.91 lakh of adoption fee was diverted for 
meeting salary expenses. 
Audit observed delay in completion of enquiry process regarding children in 
conflict with law which resulted in enhanced pendency in cases handled by JJB. 
Delay in completion of inquiry process by JJB would contribute to the undue 
extension of period of trial undergone by a CCL, which is not acceptable in 
terms of the child’s right to live with dignity. In order to rescue children engaged 
in child labour, child begging and child trafficking, the DCPOs were directed 
(September 2020) to conduct rescue drives at least three times in a week . 
However, in the selected districts, the number of rescue drives conducted were 
much less than the targeted number of 156 during 2021 to 2023.  Four children 
were disbursed with both Central and State sponsorships, which was in violation 
of Central/State sponsorship guidelines. The payment of State sponsorship to 56 
Scheduled Caste (SC) and six Scheduled Tribe (ST) students, who were already 
in receipt of financial assistance from SC/ST Development Department, 
resulted in ineligible payment of financial assistance worth ₹20.78 lakh.  
Audit observed that in the selected 17 CCIs, against the prescribed number of 
340 inspections, the SIC conducted only six inspections during the audit period, 
which was a meagre two per cent. Further, the CWC had not conducted any 
inspection of the residential facilities for children in Ernakulam, during the 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23, while in Wayanad, the number of inspections during 
2018-19 to 2020 -21 ranged fr om seven to 15. Non -conduct of inspections by 
CWCs would adversely impact the possible improvements to the quality of 
services in CCIs.  The Child Protection Management Information System 
(CPMIS), developed by C -DIT, for which ₹2.67 lakh was paid , could not be 
made functional even as of March 2024. 
  

 
 
Overview  
vii 
Recommendations:  
 Adequate basic facilities may be provided for children and families 
approaching JJBs and CWCs. 
 Government must ensure that children with special needs are provided 
safe stay with adequate facilities. 
 Government must ensure that co -habitation of children with mental 
illness and those requiring de -addiction from drugs, liquor etc., along 
with normal children is not permitted. 
 CWCs should conduct regular visits to CCIs and facilitate effective  
follow up to ensure that children in foster care lead a safe and 
comfortable life. 
 Cradle Baby Points must be installed as prescribed under the Rules, for 
safe abandonment of babies.  
 The Department should ensure that children in receipt of sponsorship 
from ICPS are not receiving financial assistance from SC/ST  
Development Department. 
(Paragraph 2.1) 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
The Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme launched by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) 
in September 2013, to be operated in the XII and XIII five-year plan periods. 
The major objective of RUSA was to enable and empower the States to develop 
sufficient capabilities to plan, implement and monitor initiative s for the higher 
education sector as a whole. The scheme was to be implemented in two phases 
i.e, RUSA 1.0 during the period 2013-17 and RUSA 2.0 during 2018-22. 
The Kerala Higher Education Act of 2007 was amended by the State keeping in 
view the RUSA guidelines (September 2013) in July 2018 only, after a gap of 
five years. Audit observed that certain provisions in the amended Act were not 
in conformity with the provisions outlined in the RUSA guidelines.  For 
instance, as per the RUSA guidelines, the Chairman of the Council shall be an 
eminent academic/public intellectual with proven leadership qualities. 
However, the amended Act provided for the State Minister for Higher Education 
to be the Chairman of the Council.  
There was delay in preparation of State Higher Education Plan (SHEP). The 
baseline survey that was to be conducted prior to formulation of SHEP to 
analyse critical needs in terms of access, equity and excellence in higher 
education was not under taken. There was delay ranging from 347 days to 4½ 
years in the submission of final Detailed Project Reports by seven selected 
institutions. Decision of GoK to restrict the scope of the scheme to Government 
institutions prevented 166 Government aided colle ges having NAAC 
accreditation from being considered for RUSA 1.0. Government curtailed the 

 
 viii 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
role of Kerala State Higher Education Council (KSHEC) from management of 
RUSA funds, thereby deviating from the provisions in RUSA guidelines. There 
was delay rangin g from 19 to 395 days in allotment of State share to State 
Project Director (SPD). 
Delay in submission of physical inspection reports by the State to Project 
Approval Board resulted in non-release of final instalment of State and Central 
shares to institut ions. Audit observed that the actual spending on higher 
education during 2018 -23 ranged from 0.44 per cent to 0.51 per cent of the 
GSDP in the State. GoK did not enhance spending on Higher Education sector, 
as envisaged under the scheme.  
Even after three years of approval of original DPR, the Government College, 
Tripunithura was not able to decide upon the project to be executed and multiple 
options were being explored. Resultantly, the allotted fund remained unutilised. 
The SPD, w ithout ensuring the completion of integration of VC facility at 31 
locations, had effected full payment to KELTRON which resulted in infructuous 
expenditure of ₹1.24 crore. The project of construction of New Model Degree 
College at Wayanad approved in July 2018 was yet to commence as of February 
2024, i.e., even after a lapse of more than five years. Institutions took up projects 
which were not included in original DPR and not accorded with technical 
sanction for execution. This apart, for work pertaining to the Seminar Complex 
at Kannur Un iversity, the Syndicate of the University, disregarding the 
guidelines of the scheme, extended undue favour to the contractor by 
sanctioning excess mobilisation advance as well as granting unjustified 
extension of one year. However, despite an expenditure of ₹5.13 crore from 
RUSA funds, the contractor had not completed the work even after a lapse of 
nearly five years from June 2019. Further, the Scientific Instrumentation Centre 
at Kannur University was not made functional even after a lapse of five years 
and the four instruments purchased for ₹2.20 crore for installation in the centre 
had to be kept at t he disposal of the Heads of the Departments in various 
campuses of the University. The construction of auditorium at Sree 
Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit (SSUS), Kalady was not completed even 
after a lapse of five years from the release of fund. 
RUSA aimed at ensuring that issues of access, equity and quality are addressed 
in an equitable manner. By addressing equity issues such as converting existing 
building into fully disabled friendly and barrier free environment, significant 
impact was expected in  the enrolment of students from deprived and 
marginalised sections. However, out of 16 test checked institutions, only four 
had included proposals for providing disabled friendly facilities for ₹239 lakh. 
Thus, low priority was being assigned by institutions to installation of disabled 
friendly features while selecting components under RUSA.  
Non-constitution of Board of Governors and Project Monitoring Units in 
selected institutions indicated that low priority was assigned to timely review 
and decision making with regard to implementation of institutional projects. 
Audit analysis of the Geographic Information System in the RUSA website in 
January 2024 revealed that only 19 out of the 157 funded institutions had geo -

 
 
Overview  
ix 
tagged their information on the status of project implementation. This indicated 
that the  prospects of web -based monitoring system were not harnessed 
effectively in the State. During 2018 -23 the number  of guest/ contract faculty 
appointed in 15 selected in stitutions ranged from 42 to 47 per cent against the 
10 per cent criteria specified in UGC norms. Pre -requisites of RUSA 1.0 and 
targets of RUSA 2.0 were not completely achieved by the State. 
Recommendations: Government may ensure that 
 All works undertaken  are geo -tagged for effective implementation of 
web-based monitoring system. 
 The spending on higher education is increased to two per cent of the 
GSDP as per the Memorandum of Understanding with Government of 
India. 
 Recruitment of staff for faculty positions is carried out as per the norms 
for smooth functioning of the Institutes. 
 Projects under RUSA should be completed in a time bound manner to 
achieve the targeted benefits and the option of taking action against 
officials responsible for severely delayed cases is explored. 
 (Paragraph 3.1) 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
Audit noticed instances where funds released by the Government of Kerala for 
creating public assets for the benefit of the community remained 
unutilised/blocked due to  misappropriation of Government money, unfruitful 
expenditure on buildings, idle investment, etc., owing to lack of administrative 
oversight and concerted action at various levels. The details are given below. 
Misappropriation 
 Non-adherence to codal  provisions and absence of supervisory controls  
resulted in misappropriation of ₹1.28 lakh in Coconut Nursery, 
Valiyathura, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Systemic deficiencies with regard to recording of entries in cash book and 
prompt remittances to appropriate hea ds of account and serious lapse in 
verification and attestation of entries in cash book being performed by a 
single official, has led to embezzlement of money in the Coconut Nursery. 
Furthermore, the misappropriated amount was replaced with Government 
money by authorities concerned, signifying weak internal controls. 
Recommendation: 
Government should ensure that codal provisions regarding day to day handling 
of monetary transactions, as laid down in Kerala Treasury Code and Kerala  
 
  

 
 x 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Financial Code, are strictly ensured by Heads of Offices. Weak internal controls 
should be addressed on priority to prevent misappropriation of funds. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
Unfruitful expenditure 
 Lack of co -ordination in executing works and absence of effective  
monitoring by Kerala State Science and Technology Museum resulted in 
infructuous expenditure of ₹15. 03 crore on two buildings and idle 
investment of ₹5.05 crore on equipment.  
(Paragraph 4.2)  
 An agricultural market complex at Vattavada set up at a cost of ₹2.45 crore 
in an unsuitable site without motorable approach road, is idling since its 
inauguration, for the last four years.   
(Paragraph 4.3) 
 
 

 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 

 
 
 
  

 
 1 
CHAPTER I 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1. About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from Compliance Audit of Government Departments and 
Autonomous Bodies. 
Compliance Audit refers to examination of transactions relating to expenditure 
of the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions of the Constitution of 
India, applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders and instructions 
issued by the competent authorities are being complied with.  
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature important results of audit. The audit findings are expected to enable 
the Executive to take corrective action as also to frame policies and directives 
that will lead to improved financial manage ment of the organisations, thus  
contributing to better governance. 
This chapter explains the profile of units under audit jurisdiction, planning and 
extent of audit and follow up on previous Audit Reports. 
1.2. Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 
There were 46 Departments in the State at Secretariat level during 2022-23. The 
Accountant General (Audit I), Kerala ( AG (Audit I)), conducts audit of 33 
Secretariat Departments, all Public Sector Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies 
thereunder and Local Self -Government Institutions (LSGIs) in the State. The 
Departments are headed by Additional Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ 
Secretaries, who are assisted by Directors/ Commissioners and subordinate 
officers under them. The Accountant General (Audit II), Kerala, conducts audit 
of 14 Departments1. 
A comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government during the 
year 2022-23 and in the preceding four years is given in Table 1.1. 
  
                                                 
1  In the case of Fisheries and Ports Department, auditee institutions under Fisheries is audited by AG 
(Audit I) and Ports by AG (Audit II). 

 
 2 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Table 1.1: Comparative position of expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Disbursements 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Revenue expenditure 110316.39 104719.92 123446.33 146179.51 141950.93 
General services 50827.13 55504.03 50360.72 70110.00 69831.68 
Social services 38210.77 34044.77 44832.44 50695.61 50275.91 
Economic services 12379.77 9107.25 18760.72 15713.81 12280.82 
Grants-in-aid and contributions 8898.72 6063.87 9492.45 9660.09 9562.52 
Capital expenditure 7430.54 8454.80 12889.65 14191.73 13996.56 
General services 197.96 157.42 259.84 268.26 306.89 
Social services 1784.29 1090.64 2277.90 3342.63 3030.08 
Economic services 5448.29 7206.74 10351.91 10580.84 10659.59 
Total 117746.93 113174.72 136335.98 160371.24 155947.49 
(Source: Finance Accounts for the respective years) 
1.3. Authority for Audit 
The authority for audit by the C&AG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (C&AG's (DPC) Act). C&AG 
conducts audit of expenditure of the Departments  of the Government of 
Kerala (GoK) under Section 13 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole 
auditor in respect of 24 Autonomous Bodies which are audited under Sections 
19 and 20(1) of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. In addition, C&AG also conducts audit 
of 121 Autonomous Bodies which are substantially funded by the Government, 
under Sections 14 and 15 of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act besides 1,158 educational 
institutions2, 50 Public Sector Undertakings and 1,200 LSGIs 3. Principles and 
methodologies for various audits are p rescribed in the Auditing Standards and 
the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, issued by the C&AG. 
1.4. Organisational structure of the Office of the Accountant General 
(Audit I), Kerala 
Under the directions of the C&AG, the Office of the AG (Audit I) conducts 
audit of 33 Government Departments and Offices, PSUs, Autonomous Bodies 
and Institutions thereunder, which are spread all over the State.  
1.5. Planning and conduct of audit 
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various 
Departments of G overnment based on expenditure incurred, criticality/  
complexity of activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of 
overall internal controls and concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings 
are also considered in this exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency 
and extent of audit are decided.  
                                                 
2 Government-aided Colleges: 184; 
 Government-aided Higher Secondary Schools: 846; and 
 Government-aided Vocational Higher Secondary Schools: 128. 
3 Grama Panchayats: 941, Block Panchayats: 152, District Panchayats: 14, Municipal  Corporations: 6 
and Municipalities: 87. 

 
 3 
Introduction  
After completion of audit, Inspection Reports (IRs) containing audit 
observations are issued to the Heads of the Offices and Departments. The 
Departments are requested to furnish replies to the audit observations within 
four weeks from the date of receipt of the IRs. Whenever replies are received, 
audit observations are either settled or further action for compliance is advised. 
The importan t audit observations arising out of these IRs are processed for 
inclusion in the Reports of the C&AG of India, which are submitted to the 
Governor of the State under Article 151  (2) of the Constitution of India for 
placing in the State Legislature.  
During 2022-23, the Office of the AG (Audit I) utilised 25,860 party days to 
carry out the audit (compliance, performance and financial audits) of 680 units 
of various departments/ organisations under its jurisdiction. The Audit Plan 
covered those units/ entitie s, which were vulnerable to significant risks as per 
risk assessment. 
1.6. Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 
 
1.6.1. Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit Objections/ 
Inspection Reports/ timely disposal of draft audit paragraphs and matters 
pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee, issued by the State Government 
in 2017 provides for prompt response by the Executive to the Inspection Reports 
(IRs) issued by the Accountant General for rectification, in compliance with the 
prescribed rules and procedures and accountability for the deficiencies, lapses 
etc., noticed during audit inspection. The Heads of Offices and next higher 
authorities are required to comply with the audit observations contained in the 
IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and promptly report their compliance to 
the Accountant General within four weeks of receipt of IRs. Half-yearly reports 
of pending IRs are being sent to the Secretaries of the Departments to facilitate 
monitoring of audit observations. 
As on 30 September 2023, 5,550 IRs (27,156 paragraphs) (issued upto 31 March 
2023) were outstanding in respect of 31 Departments. Details of IRs and 
paragraphs outstanding are given in Appendix 1.1. 
1.6.2. Response of Departments to the paragrap hs included in this 
Report 
Compliance Audit paragraphs were forwarded to the Additional Chief 
Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of Departments concerned during 
February 2024 to July 2024 for furnishing replies. Response of Government was 
received for the two Subject-Specific Compliance Audit paragraphs and two out 
of three Compliance Audit paragraphs featured in this Report. The replies 
received were suitably incorporated in the Report. 

 
 4 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
1.6.3. Follow up on Audit Reports 
According to the Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit 
Objections/ Inspection Reports/ timely disposal of draft audit paragraphs and 
matters pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee issued by the State 
Government in 2017, the Administrative Departments should s ubmit 
Statements of Action Taken Notes on audit paragraphs included in the Reports 
of the C&AG directly to the Legislature Secretariat, with copies to the 
Accountant General within two months of their being laid on the Table of the 
Legislature. As of Septe mber 2023, two Administrative Departments did not 
comply with the instructions and did not submit Statements of Action Taken 
Notes of 13 paragraphs for the period 2018-19 to 2020 -21 as detailed in  
Appendix 1.2.  
1.6.4. Paragraphs pending discussion by the Public Accounts Committee  
Seventy-one paragraphs pertaining to five Departments for the period 2016-17 
to 2020-21 were pending discussion by the Public Account s Committee as of 
September 2023 (Appendix 1.3). 

 
 
  
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 

 
 
 
 

 
 5 
CHAPTER II 
 WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
2.1. Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and other 
Child Protection Schemes 
2.1.1. Introduction 
‘Child Protection’ is about protecting children from any perceived or real danger 
or risk to their life, personhood and childhood. It is about reducing their  
vulnerability to any kind of harm and ensuring that no child falls out of the social 
safety net and that those who do, receive necessary care, protection and support 
so as to bring them back into the safety net. Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
(ICPS) was introduced4 as a centrally sponsored scheme under the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development in the y ear 2009 -10. The scheme aimed to 
provide institutional, family and community-based care to children and promote 
preventive measures for protecting them from situations of vulnerability, risk 
and abuse, educating public on child rights, etc. ICPS provides financial support 
for implementation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 20155 (Act). 
Government of Kerala (GoK) also funds schemes for care and protection of 
children, viz., (i) Our Responsibility to Children (ORC) and (ii) Innovative 
Projects - including 12 sub schemes (Appendix 2.1). 
2.1.2. Organisational setup 
The Women and Child Development  Department (WCDD) of the State is 
headed by the Principal Secretary at Government level. At the field level, it is 
headed by the Director, Women and Child Development Department. In order 
to ensure effective implementation of ICPS at State and District level, the State 
Child Protection Society (SCPS) and 14 District Child Protection Units 
(DCPUs) were set up (August 2014) in the  State. There were 27 Government 
Child Care Institutions (CCIs) and 697 NGO 6 run CCIs in the State. Besides, 
State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA) functioned as a unit under the SCPS, 
dealing with adoption of children and r elated matters. The DCPUs  in 14 
Districts are headed by the District Child Protection Officers (DCPOs). The 
Child Care Institutions7, Child Welfare Committees (CWC) and Juvenile Justice 
Board (JJB) function in all 14 districts.  
                                                 
4  Three schemes, viz., i) Programme for Juvenile Justice for Children in need of care and protection and 
Children in conflict with Law , ii) Integrated Programme for street children , and iii) Scheme for 
assistance to homes for children (Shishu Greh) were incorporated in the Integrated Child Protectio n 
Scheme (ICPS). 
5  By repealing the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act , 2000, Government of India enacted the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (Act). 
6  Non-Governmental Organisation 
7  Includes Specialised Adoption Agencies, Children’s homes, Observation homes, Special homes, Open 
shelters and Places of safety  

 
 6 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
2.1.3. Audit objectives and criteria 
The Compliance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether: 
 adequate mechanisms and structures were in place for the planning and 
implementation of ICPS and other Child protection schemes, as 
envisaged in the scheme/guidelines of Government of India (GoI),  and 
the schemes of the State Government; 
 rehabilitation and social re-integration were being achieved through the 
schemes as envisaged in the guidelines of the scheme, Act and Rules; 
 the funds were adequate and received on time and subsequently routed 
to societies/units (viz., SCPS, DCPUs and SARA) to manage the scheme 
effectively and efficiently; and 
 effective monitoring mechanism was in place to supervise the 
implementation, progress and evaluation of schemes in accordance with 
the provisions contained in the guidelines, Act and rules. 
Audit adopted the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 
and Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016,  
Guidelines of ICPS and Adoption Regulations, 2017 and 2022  as the majo r 
criteria against which audit observations were framed. The efficacy in  
implementation of State schemes was evaluated against the norms prescribed 
by Government orders/instructions. 
2.1.4. Scope and methodology of audit 
The Department of Women and Child Developm ent was responsible for the 
implementation of ICPS and other Child Protection Schemes in the State. Audit 
was conducted from April to September 2023 and covered the Child Protection 
Schemes implemented during the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. 
The scope of audit extended to the implementation of child protection schemes 
in five8 out of 14 districts in the State, selected using Stratified Sampling. Audit 
methodology included scrutiny of records  and registers, conduct of joint 
physical verification and  obtaining data through issue of requisitions  to the 
Government, SCPS, DCPUs, JJBs, CWCs, Specialised Adoption Agencies 
(SAA) and CCIs ( Appendix 2.2). Only those CCIs that have received grant 
from the Government were sampled for scrutiny. As on 31 March 2023, 11,114 
children were inmates of various CCIs in the State. In the CCIs located in 
selected districts, the inmate strength was 675. Audit also obtained data from 
departments like Police, Labour , Health and Scheduled Caste s/Scheduled 
Tribes Development which partake in implementing child protection measures 
in the State. 
                                                 
8  Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Wayanad and Kannur 

 
 7 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
An Entry Conference was conducted with the Principal Secretary, Women and 
Child Development Department on 16 May 2023 wherein the scope, 
methodology, criteria, etc., were discussed and agreed upon. 
The Exit Conference was held on 17 May 2024 with the Principal Secretary, 
Women and Child Development Department, wherein the audit findings of the 
Compliance Audit were discussed in detail. 
Audit findings 
2.1.5. Funding 
The ICPS is being implemented in the State with financial assistance from both 
GoI and GoK. Every year, State Government submits budget proposals before 
the Project Approval Board. After approval by the Project Approval Board, GoI 
releases the Central share to the State Government after adjusting the unspent 
balance of previous year, if any, available with State Government. On receipt of 
Central share, State Government releases the Central share along with matching 
State share to implementing units.  
During the period 2018-22, the proportion of financial assistance to be borne by 
GoI for various components of the scheme ranged from 35 to 90 per cent  
depending upon the project components 9. From the year 2022-23 onwards, the 
mode of funding was shifted from the conventional  mode10 to the Public 
Financial Management mode11 and the funding pattern to 60:40 between Centre 
and State.  
The Central funds were allocated based on the fixed inmate strength of 50 and 
25, at the CCIs , by GoI on the basis of standards of accommodation. As  the 
number of children in the CCIs does not remain static, the State did not request 
for funds on the basis of actual inmate strength in the CCIs . Instead, the State 
had proposed to receive and release entire funds allocated by GoI, admissible 
as per scheme guidelines. 
The funds received from GoI and GoK during the five -year period covered in 
audit and the expenditure incurred are shown in Table 2.1: 
  
                                                 
9  All structural components viz., State Project Support Unit (S PSU), State Child Protection Society 
(SCPS), State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA), District Child Protection Units (DCPU), 
Regulatory bodies like Juvenile Justice Boards (JJB), Child Welfare Committees (CWC), all 
Homes/SAAs run by Government/NGOs, Open Shelters. 
10  Routed through State budget 
11  The Public Financial Management System (PFMS) is a web -based online software application 
developed and implemented by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India  

 
 8 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Table 2.1: Details of funds received, expenditure incurred and unspent balance 
during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Funds received 
Total 
expenditure12 
Unspent 
balance of GoI 
share which 
was 
revalidated/ 
adjusted 
against next 
year’s 
release13 
GoI share14 GoK share15  Total 
1 2 3 4 (2+3) 5 6 
2018-19 1263.47 1383.27 2646.74 2351.89 216.95 
2019-20 1487.50 991.67 2479.17 1093.21 733.20 
2020-21 1135.82 1246.01 2381.83 1808.06 783.85 
2021-22 607.45 1132.37 1739.82 1809.30 357.57 
2022-23 1284.88 1212.54 2497.42 3005.66 580.24 
(Source: Utilisation Certificates furnished by GoK  and abstracts of Detailed Appropriation 
Accounts) 
Central funds ranging from ₹216.95 lakh to ₹783.85 lakh which  remained 
unspent each year, were revalidated by GoI and adjusted against the release of 
next year.  
The Principal Secretary assured to examine the scope of rationalising the budget 
in response to Audit suggestion to factor in the number of inmates, during Exit 
Conference (May 2024). Government stated in reply (August 2024) that as the 
second instalment f rom GoI is released only at the fag end of every financial 
year, it was not possible for all components to be fully utilised within the limited 
period remaining in the financial year. 
2.1.6.  Structural framework for implementation of ICPS 
The JJ Act defines the ‘child’ as a person who has not completed 18 years of 
age. A ‘child in conflict with law’ (CCL) is defined as one who was alleged or 
found to have committed an offence and who has not completed 18 years of age 
on the date of committing the offence. A ‘child in need of care and protection’ 
(CNCP) is defined as one who is found without any home or settled place of 
abode or means of subsistence/found working in contravention of labour laws 
in force or begging, living on the street or who resides with a person who has 
injured, exploited, abused or neglected the child, etc. To decide upon the course 
of action to be adopted, a CCL is produced before a JJB, comprising a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of First class with two social 
worker members, of whom one shall be a woman. A CNCP, is to be produced 
before a CWC comprising the Chairperson and members having a minimum of 
                                                 
12  Figures booked by Office of the Accountant General (A&E) Kerala under the ICPS head of account 
‘2235-02-102-61’ (till 2021-22) and ‘2235-02-102-19’ (from 2022-23).  
13  As per utilisation certificates furnished to GoI 
14  As per utilisation certificates furnished to GoI 
15  Figures furnished by SCPS 

 
 9 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
seven years of experience of working with children in the field of education, 
health or welfare or a practising professional16 or a retired judicial officer.  
Audit examined w hether the mechanisms and structures prescribed by 
legislations were in place to enable effective implementation of the scheme, as 
detailed below:  
2.1.6.1. Inconsistency of provisions in scheme guidelines vis-à-vis the Act  
As per Sections 35 and 36 of the Act, a child who is an orphan, surrendered or 
appears to be abandoned and below six years of age can be placed by the CWC 
in a Specialised Adoption Agency (SAA) only. If the child is above six years of 
age, they can be placed in a Children’s home. 
Guidelines of ICPS and Mission Vatsalya17, lay down measures to support State 
and NGO run SAAs where adoptable children below six years of age are 
provided residential care. These guidelines however state that  no child shall  
remain in the care of an SAA for more than a period of one year. 
Audit observed that the above clause in the guideline s restricting the period of 
stay of a child in SAA to one year may not be in the best interest of the child. In 
usual practice, a child who is less than six years of age, if not adopted, will have 
to be retained in a SAA until the child attains the age of six or gets adopted, 
whichever is earlier. Further, the time limit cannot also be applied to children 
coming from unfavourable family env ironment who were temporarily 
accommodated in SAA, and not for adoption. Thus, the time limit of one year 
set by guideline for stay of a child in SAA besides not being child-friendly, was 
not compatible with the Act, and may need to be reviewed. 
Government stated (April 2024) that, as per Section 1(4) of the JJ Act, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the provisions of the Act shall apply to matters concerning children in need of 
care and protection and hence, considering the best interest of the child, the Act 
will prevail.  
2.1.6.2. Non-framing of State Rules  
Section 110 of the Act requires the State Government to make rules to carry out 
the purposes of the Act. Despite the Central Act and Guidelines of the scheme, 
formulated in September 2015 and 2014 respectively , for the effective 
implementation of child protection legislation and achievement of child 
protection goals, the State has not framed any Rules. The State Government is 
currently adhering to the Juvenile J ustice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Model Amendment Rules, 2022, formulated by GoI and all activities are 
conducted in accordance with these Model Rules.  
During the course of audit, instances demanding specific intervention of 
Government in the form of a norm/regulation were noticed, as detailed in 
                                                 
16  with a degree in child psychology/psychiatry/social work/sociology/human development or in the field 
of law 
17  ICPS was renamed as Child Protection Services Scheme in 2017 and has been subsumed under Mission 
Vatsalya from 2022-23.  

 
 10 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Paragraph 2.1.6.3. Formulation of State Rules for implementation of the Act 
would contribute to enhancing the efficiency of SCPS and DCPUs in complying 
with the provisions of the Act in State specific scenarios. 
Government replied (April 2024) that redrafting of draft State rules in alignment 
with the amendments made to the JJ Rules in 2022, was in progress and was 
expected to be submitted soon.  
2.1.6.3. Functioning of CCIs without valid registration  
Section 41(1) of the Act states that all institutions, whether run by State 
Government or voluntary/non-governmental organisations should be registered, 
regardless of whether they are receiving grants or not from the Central/State 
Government. The period of registration shall be five years which was to be 
renewed quinquennially. The application for registration/renewal of an 
institution was to be submitted to the Government.  At the time of registration, 
the State Government shall determine and record the capacity and purp ose of 
the institution. 
The CCIs were to seek renewal three months prior to the expiry of period of 
registration and an application of registration was to be disposed within 60 days 
from the date of receipt of application. Rule 21(6) of JJ Model Rules 2016 states 
that post registration, the Government shall annually review the facilities, staff 
strength, infrastructure and compliance with standards of care, rehabilitation 
and re -integration services and management of the CCI. The decision on 
renewal of registration shall be based on the annual review done in the year in 
which the renewal is sought. Neither had the Rules nor any orders of State 
Government specified an authority to conduct annual review of CCIs till 
September 2022, after which, the Rules were amended, authorising the District 
Magistrate (DM) to conduct annual inspection of CCIs. The DCPUs were to 
scrutinise the applications for registration received from CCIs and forward them 
to the DM, who, after conducting inspection of the CCI, conveyed his remarks 
to the Director, WCDD.  
A total of 214 CCIs were functioning in the five selected districts during 2022-
23, of which 165 were required to renew their registration before March 2023. 
Of these, registrations of only three CCIs in Kannur district were  renewed 
before the date of expiry of registration. Table 2.2 depicts the details regarding 
the submission of applications for renewal of registration and delay in 
processing them at DCPU level in the five selected districts during 2022-23. 
  

 
 11 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Table 2.2: Details of delay in submission and processing of applications for 
renewal during 2022-23* 
  Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Wayanad Kannur Total 
Total number of CCIs 
during 2022-23  84 26 71 12 21 214 
No. of CCIs requiring 
registration before 31 
March 2023  
70 22 46 9 18 165 
Number of 
applications received 59 21** 45 9 18 152 
Number of CCIs 
which had not applied 11 1 0 0 0 12 
No. of CCIs which had 
been re-registered 0 0 0 0 3 3 
No. of cases in which 
delay occurred at 
DCPU level for more 
than six months 
32 22 9 0 7 70 
*as on 31 March 2023; ** one application received for cancellation. 
(Source: Data furnished by DCPUs) 
Audit observed that in majority of the cases requiring renewal, delay happened 
at the end of DCPU, in forwarding the applications to the DM. This in turn 
delayed the conduct of inspections by the DMs. Renewal of registration has not 
been granted (October 2023) to 149 CCIs18, consequent upon which the CCIs 
were functioning without a valid registration. It was also seen that 12 CCIs had 
not even submitted applications for renewal of registration. As valid registration 
to function is a mandatory requirement, non -renewal before expiry of 
registration and functioning without registration is against the provisions in the 
Act.  
Government replied (April 2024) that a circular was issued to DCPOs to issue 
a temporary receipt to an institution while receiving the application , which 
could be considered as provisional registration as per Section 41(4) of JJ Act. It 
was also stated that detailed instructions will be issued to all DMs for processing 
the application in time and the process of CCI registration would be monitored 
by the SCPS within regular intervals.  
Issuing a temporary receipt as acknowledgement of the application cannot be  
regarded as provisional registration. Hence, the contention of Government that 
the institutions could continue functioning on the basis of temporary receipt is 
unacceptable.  
2.1.6.4. Grading of institutions  
Paragraph 6(ii) of Mission Vatsalya guidelines issued in July 2022 envisages 
the State Government to take up exercise to grade each CCI at fixed intervals. 
The grading was to be done based on infrastructure, quality of services, 
wellbeing of children espe cially in terms of health and education, restoration 
and rehabilitation of children, etc. The grading of CCIs including designing of 
                                                 
18  152 (CCIs requiring renewal) minus 3 (renewal granted) = 149 

 
 12 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
parameters and indicators was to be carried out in consultation with National 
Institute of Public Co-operation and Child Development (NIPCCD), Bangalore. 
Audit found that no such grading of CCIs had  been done by the State 
Government till date (February 2024).  
Government replied (April 2024) that the State has initiated a social audit of all 
the institutions in the State with the collaboration of United Nations Children's 
Fund (UNICEF), which is to be considered as the initial process of grading. 
After the social audit, the State has planned to contact NIPCCD Bangalore for 
further support in grading the institutions. 
The reply was not acceptable as the process of social audit would not suffice the 
objective of grading. The fact that the grading process, mandated as per 
guidelines, remain s unimplemented, indicates that the Government was not 
keen on its implementation.  
2.1.7. Rehabilitation and Social Re-integration 
The process of rehabilitation and social re -integration of children was to be 
undertaken preferably through family based care such as by restoration to family 
or guardian, adoption or foster care. If this was not re sorted to, rehabilitation 
and social re -integration was to be attained through institutional care. 
Deficiencies noticed by audit in the measures adopted to ensure the well -being 
of the child in the course of rehabilitation and social re -integration are 
elaborated below: 
2.1.7.1. Deficiencies in preparation of Social Investigation Report  
Social Investigation Report 19 (SIR) presents detailed information on the 
circumstances of the child, the situation of the child on economic, social, 
psycho-social and other relevant factors, and the recommendation thereon. As 
per Rule 19(3) of JJ Rules, CWC shall assign the case of a child to a Social 
Worker/Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer or to any recognised NGO for 
conducting the social investigation. T he JJB and CWC shall take into account 
the SIRs prepared in Form 6 and Form 22 respectively, by the Probation Officer 
or NGO along with the evidence produced by the parties producing the child. 
Information so collected formed the basis for arriving at a conclusion regarding 
the future course of action to be taken with respect to the supervision/custody 
of the child. The SIR was to be completed and submitted by the social worker 
within 15 days from the date of first production of the child before the 
JJB/CWC. 
Audit undertook an assessment of timeliness in submission of SIRs in 100 cases 
each, which appeared before the JJB and CWC in the selected five districts 
during 2018-23 (Appendix 2.3). It was observed that there was delay extending 
to 364 and 447 days in submitting SIRs to JJB and CWC respectively. 
                                                 
19  Rule 2(xvii) of JJ Rules 

 
 13 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
In a specific instance in Ernakulam district, a child placed in a CCI, whose SIR 
was not prepared, was sent (2011) to foster care at the age of 4 ½ years and was 
subsequently adopted by the foster family in 2016. Later, in May 2019, the child 
was returned to institutional care by the mother citing difficulty in handling the 
child at home . However, SIR of the child was not seen prepared even at this 
stage. Audit observed that the child eventually committed suicide (July 2020) 
in the institution.  
Timely preparation of SIR of the child at  least on re-joining institutional care 
from foster setup would have helped CWC gain an insight into the psycho-social 
status and mental stature  of the child, which could have facilitated effective 
counselling measures. As SIRs hold a crucial role in the decision -making 
process of JJB/CWC, delay in their preparation could have a dverse 
consequences for the child. 
Government replied (April 2024) that the completion of SIR has been delayed 
due to lack of adequate staff in DCPUs, especially considering the high volume 
of cases they need to address within their respective districts. The State has 
proposed to the Central Government, the posting of one extra social worker for 
DCPUs to resolve this issue. It was also assured that directions will be given to 
DCPOs to take steps to complete social investigation in time. 
2.1.7.2. Lapses in preparation and review of Individual Care Plan  
As per Rule 2(xi) of JJ Model Rules,  Individual Care Plan (ICP) is a 
comprehensive development plan for a child based on age and gender specific 
needs and case history of the child, prepared in consultation with the child, in 
order to restore their self -esteem, dignity and self-worth and nurture them into 
a responsible citizen. Accordingly, ICP shal l address the needs of a child 
pertaining to health and nutrition, emotional and psychological support, 
education and training, etc. The ICP in Form 7, as prescribed in the JJ Model 
Rules encapsulating personal details and progress report of a child requir ing 
institutional management shall be prepared by the Child Welfare Officer or Case 
Worker. The progress report of the child was to be prepared every fortnight for 
the first three months and thereafter on a monthly basis. Further, the ICPs were 
to be forwarded to the CWC within a fortnight for approval. The management 
committee20 of the institution was to review the ICPs quarterly.  
Audit noticed that none of the 17 selected CCIs were updating the ICPs as 
stipulated in the Rules. Neither were the ICPs forwarded to CWC nor were they 
reviewed by the management committee. At SAA Wayanad, though the ICPs 
were prepared, they were not seen forwarded to the CWC. The DCPUs 
attributed the shortfall in preparation of ICPs to dearth of counsellors and lack 
of awareness of the available staff regarding ICP updation. 
As ICPs are designed to assess the needs and progress of the child, their 
preparation is crucial in evaluating the developmental stages of the child. Hence, 
                                                 
20  Comprising DCPO as Chairperson, Person-in-charge as Member-Secretary, Probation Officer or Child 
Welfare Officer or Case Worker, Medical Officer, Psychologist or Counsellor, Workshop Supervisor 
or Vocational Instructor, etc., as members. 

 
 14 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
ICPs need to be prepared carefully  and meticulously as envisaged in the 
guidelines. 
Government replied (April 2024) that a surprise inspection committee will be 
formed at the district level to visit institutions and verify the availability of ICPs 
for all children. It was also stated that follow up training for counsellors on 
preparation of ICP will be conducted promptly. 
2.1.7.3. Inadequate facilities in Juvenile Justice Boards and Child Welfare 
Committees 
Rule 6(10) and 16(12) of JJ Rules require the State  Government to provide 
infrastructure to the JJBs and CWCs respectively. Provisions in ICPS guidelines 
specify that the room where the CWC and JJB holds its sittings should be well 
equipped with sufficient space, necessary furniture and equipment, be well lit 
and have a child friendly environment . Section 7 of JJ Act mandates JJB to 
ensure that all procedures are conducted in a child friendly manner and that the 
venue does not appear intimidating to the child and does not resemble regular 
courts. JJ Model Rules insist that the JJB shall not sit on a raised platform. The 
waiting rooms for children and families should have provisions for drinking 
water as well as indoor recreation for children. List of facilities that were 
available/deficient in the JJBs and CWCs in the selected districts are given in  
Appendix 2.4. 
Audit also observed that the space provided for the functioning of JJB in 
Thiruvananthapuram district resembles a court to the extent that the members 
of the JJB are conducting the procedures from a raised platform. Further, CWC 
Thiruvananthapuram did not have sufficient space for the waiting area, as seen 
in the photograph below.  
 
Figure 2.1: Families and children stand, waiting outside CWC Thiruvananthapuram 
due to non-availability of facilities (October 2023) 


 
 15 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Government should ensure that the children and families who approach the 
JJB/CWC are provided with basic facilities like waiting room, supply of 
drinking water, etc., and a child friendly environment.  
Government replied (April 2024) that the non -recurring fund allotted by the 
Central Government to the JJBs/CWCs in selected districts could be utilised to 
ensure sufficient facilities in these Boards and Committees. It was added that 
the facilities for the remaining districts will be financed from the State fund. 
2.1.7.4. Inadequate facilities at Government Children’s Home for Girls, 
Kannur  
The physical infrastructure required in a CCI had been prescribed in Rule 29(iv) 
of JJ Rules. The requirements include dormitories, sick room, recreation room, 
etc.  
A joint physical verification (September 2023) at the Government Children’s 
Home (GCH) for Girls, Kannur  conducted along  with the authorities of the 
institution revealed that the CCI did not have a sick room, outdoor play ground, 
recreation room, library and couns elling room. Audit also found that the 
Children’s Home did not have sufficient beds for the 26 inmates and the store 
room was congested.  
 
Figure 2.2: Beds being arranged without in-between space, to accommodate more children at 
Government Children’s Home for Girls, Kannur (September 2023) 
Providing adequate facilities as prescribed in the Rules is to be prioritised,  as 
these requirements have been framed with the intention of providing a congenial 
growing atmosphere to the child.  
Government replied (April 2024) that an amount of ₹25 lakh has been 
sanctioned to Government Children’s Home, Kannur for infrastructure work s 
and renovation works and that after the completion of th ese works, recreation 
room, library and counselling room and storeroom will be set up. 


 
 16 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
2.1.7.5. Children with special needs not provided with requisite facilities  
Section 53.1 (ii, iii) of the Act envisage d that the institutions in the process of 
rehabilitation and re -integration of children with special needs shall provide 
equipment such as wheelchairs, prosthetic devices, hearing aids, braille kits, 
etc., and extend appropriate education for children with special needs. Rule 
36(4) of JJ Rules states that specialised trainers and experts shall be appointed 
to cater to the educational needs of children with special needs, whether physical 
or mental. Learning disorders are to be identified, assessed and reported in ICP 
and further assistance given to the child by trained professionals.  
Audit observed that certain CCIs were not complying with  the aforementioned 
statutes, in the following instances. 
 The Home for Orphans and Destitute children (Boys), Vaduthala was 
registered as a CCI in Ernakulam district and was granted (December 
2017) registration with validity of five years, for functioning as a 
Children’s home with inmate capacity of 35. Despite 13 to 35 children 
with special needs residing in the CCI per year during 2018 -23, no 
specialised trainers were seen appointed to train the children and 
learning disorders were not assessed and reported upon.  
 On a scrutiny of files relating to the CCI at DCPU Ernakulam, Audit 
noticed that the DM Ernakulam had conducted (April 2023) an 
inspection of the CCI for renewal of registration. On detecting that the 
facilities provided by the CCI were not adequ ate to suit the needs of 
special children, the DM had served notice (July 2023) to the CCI. 
However, the report on the physical inspection of the institution was not 
available at the DCPU. Despite repeated requests made by Audit to the 
DM to produce the re port of the inspection conducted in the CCI, this 
was not complied with (February 2024). Thus, Audit could not gather 
information about the nature of deficiencies in the running of the CCI, 
as pointed out by the DM, based on which notice was served to the CCI. 
Also, the extent of compliance on the part of the CCI in this regard, could 
not be ascertained.  
 ICPS guidelines state that the Scheme shall provide for institutional care 
of children with special needs by supporting a specialised unit within the 
existing homes or by setting up specialised shelter home s for children 
with special needs. Audit noticed that in three out of seven Children’s 
Homes test checked, 24 children 21 with special needs were 
accommodated during the period covered in audit. These Homes did not 
set up specialised units within, to extend support and care to children 
with special needs.  
 As per directions of CWC Ernakulam, a mentally and physically 
challenged girl aged 12, who was also a victim of sexual abuse registered 
                                                 
21  GCH for Girls, Alappuzha – 13, GCH, Ernakulam – 5, GCH for Boys, Kannur - 6 

 
 17 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
under the POCSO 22 Act, 2012, was admitted (June 2019) to the Home 
for Orphan and Destitute (Girls), Pachalam in Ernakulam. This 
institution was not registered as a CCI for accommodating girls. The 
CWC had placed the child in this institution, as there was no registered 
special home for differently abled girl children in Ernakulam district. 
Records at DCPU Ernakulam mentioned that, as the CCI faced 
difficulties in handling the child in co-residence with normal children, it 
requested the CWC to shift the child to another instit ution. However, 
CWC directed the institution to retain the child as there was no alternate 
care home to which the child could be accommodated. Hence, the child 
continued in the institution until she succumbed to death in January 
2021, from pneumonia. Follo wing the demise of the child, the 
Programme Manager, ICPS conducted an inquiry into the situation 
which led to the death of the child and reported (February 2021) that the 
institution did not have sufficient staff for extending care and protection 
to the child and that appropriate measures to rehabilitate the child were 
not undertaken on time.  
In the above instances, CWC could not  shift the children from the resident 
homes to an alternate facility, as such a facility was not available in the entire 
district. This resulted in the children with special needs/mentally challenged 
children being kept in institutions which were not provided with the specified 
standards set for these children. Considering the fact that 96 per cent (697 out 
of 724) of CCIs in the State were run by NGOs, Government should carry out 
periodical checks to ensure that these CCIs are adhering to the prescribed 
standards, so that the inmates are provided with facilities envisaged by the Act 
and Rules. 
Accepting the audit observations, Government replied (April 2024) that State -
level inspection committee will be reconstituted soon to conduct surprise 
inspections at the CCIs in the State. Directions will also be issued to district -
level inspection committees to inspect the CCIs in the district and take remedial 
actions. Department level inspection committee will be formed at district level 
to conduct surprise inspection at CCIs in the district to ascertain that CCIs have 
minimum facilities. It was further stated that the Home Management Committee 
will also follow up and monitor the existing facilities in CCIs. 
2.1.7.6. Co-habitation of children with mental illness and children 
requiring de-addiction from drugs, liquor, etc ., along with normal 
children 
As per Rule 80(1) of JJ Model Rules 2016, the JJB/CWC/Children’s Court may 
send the child who is mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or drugs or any other 
substance to a fit facility for such period as may be certified by a medical officer 
or mental health expert, as necess ary for proper treatment of the child. In the 
                                                 
22  Protection of Children from sexual offences 

 
 18 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
selected districts, 179 cases23 of children with mental illness and 138 cases24 of 
children requiring assistance for de -addiction from use of drugs, substance, 
liquor, etc., were attended to by the CWCs during the period of audit.  
Rule 80(3) of JJ Model Rules 2016 states that State Government may set up 
separate Integrated Rehabilitation Centres for children addicted to use of liquor, 
substance, etc., on the basis of appropriate age groups. Audit noticed that none 
of the test  checked CWCs at Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Wayanad 
had a system in place to extend special care and treatment to children requiring 
de-addiction from use of drugs, substance and liquor. Further, there were no 
exclusive homes for protection/treatment/rehabilitation of children with mental 
illness at Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Wayanad due to which the child 
addicts had to be accommodated along with normal children , which was not a 
desirable practice.  
The following adverse incidents were noticed in audit: 
 The GCH for Boys, Thiruvananthapuram, with a total inmate strength 
ranging from 55 to 80 during the period from 2018 -19 to 2022-23, was 
seen accommodating 11 to 28 children with mental illness and related 
behavioural problems along with normal children.  
 At GCH for Girls at Mayithara, Alappuzha, children who were under 
psychiatric treatment were accommodated along with normal children 
during the five year period of audit. 
 At GCH Wayanad, children with mental disabilities/special needs were 
residing with normal children during the five year period of audit. 
Audit observed that no special facility was provided for managing mentally ill 
children in these CCIs. The staff of these institutions were not trained to handle 
such children. Further, co-habitation of children with mental illness along with 
normal children may turn detrimental to both categories of children. 
Considering the number of cases that require de -addiction, Government has to 
view the matter very seriously and urgent in tervention is required as usage of 
drugs, substance, etc., puts the life of younger generation at risk. Integrated 
Rehabilitation Centres for child addicts on the basis of appropriate age groups 
may be set up as suggested under Rule 80(3).  
Government replied (April 2024) that as per the directions of High Court JJ 
Committee, a de -addiction centre exclusively for children will be started at 
Thavanur in Malappuram District. Necessary directions will be given to CCIs 
to provide special facilities for mentally ill children. Child Welfare Committees 
will be given directions to declare NGO run JJ Homes with facilities to 
accommodate children with special needs and for de-addiction, as fit facilities 
and utilise them for rehabilitating children with special needs/ addicted children. 
                                                 
23  Thiruvananthapuram – 26, Ernakulam – 5 (data for 2018 -19 to 2020 -21 not furnished), Kannur – 9 
(details for 2018-19 to 2020-21 not available), Alappuzha – 133 and Wayanad - 6 
24  Thiruvananthapuram – 76, Ernakulam – 16 (data for 2018-19 to 2020-21 not furnished), Kannur – 0 
(details for 2018-19 to 2021-22 not available), Alappuzha – 43 and Wayanad - 3 

 
 19 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
2.1.7.7. Functioning of Open Shelters  
Section 43 (2)  of the Act states that the open shelters shall function as a 
community-based facility for children  (up to the age of 18 years)  in need of 
residential support, for protecting them from abuse, weaning them or keeping 
them away from life on the streets. These institutions were not meant to provide 
permanent residential facilities but were to complement the existing institutional 
care facilities on a short-term basis. Rule 22(7) stipulates that in cases where the 
child requires more than short-term care and protection exceeding 24 hours, he 
may be produced before CWC for initiating further appropriate steps.  
Audit observed that CWC had issued (June and July 2022) orders permitting 
stay of two pers ons in the Open Shelter  at Thiruvananthapuram even after 
attaining the age of 18, which was violative of provisions of the Act.  
Audit also came across instances in which two children continued to stay in the 
open shelter for prolonged periods (one year an d 2 ½ years) from the date of 
joining the shelter. As an open shelter is meant for temporary stay, continued 
stay for longer periods when facilities like Children’s homes where the children 
can lead a normal life are available, is against the provisions of  the Act and 
Rules. The CWC, which is to ensure the overall welfare of vulnerable children, 
was itself circumventing rules, which was not justifiable. 
The Rules stipulated that the Open Shelters have to submit monthly information 
to the DCPU regarding the details of children availing the service in Form 29. 
Of the three  Open Shelters 25 in selected districts, only one Open Shelter in 
Ernakulam had furnished monthly information regarding its inmates during the 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23.  
Government replied (April 2024) that instructions have been given to  DCPOs 
concerned to collect monthly information from Open Shelters and submit to the 
State office and that this would be monitored regularly. 
2.1.7.8. Deficiencies in operation of foster care system  
Foster care system enables a child to be placed for the purpose of alternate care 
in the domestic environment of a family, other than the child’s biological family, 
that has been selected, qualified , approved and supervised for providing such 
care. It aims to eventually re -unite the child with own family when the family 
circumstances improve, and thus prevent institutionalisation of children in 
difficult circumstances. Children in need of care and protection could be placed 
in foster care including group foster care 26 through the order of the CWC for a 
short or extended period of time.  
Table 2.3 shows the number of families  who were extending foster care 
facilities in selected districts and the number of children being accommodated 
in these foster care families during the period covered in audit.  
                                                 
25  at Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Kannur 
26  As per Section 2(32) of the JJ Act, “group foster care” means a family like care facility for children in 
need of care and protection who are without parental care, aiming at providing personalised care and 
fostering a sense of belonging and identity, through family like and community based solutions 

 
 20 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Table 2.3: Details of families extending foster care facilities in selected districts 
during 2018-23 
 Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Wayanad Kannur Total 
No. of families providing 
foster care 46 27 11 22 36 142 
No. of children 
accommodated under 
foster care programme 
48 25 27 29 37 166 
No. of group foster care 
units 0 0 127 0 0 1 
No. of children 
accommodated under 
group foster care 
0 0 118 0 0 118 
(Source: Data furnished by SCPS) 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in the operation of foster care system 
in test checked districts: 
 ICPS Guidelines entrust the DCPU with the responsibility to ensure that 
the outreach worker28 visits each foster family once a week for the first 
month, followed by monthly visits. These visits facilitate assessment of 
the extent to which the children in foster care adjust to the new 
environment and are comfortable with it . N o such visits were being 
conducted by outreach workers in the selected districts of 
Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Kannur and Wayanad. 
 Rule 23(18) of JJ rules require the CWC to conduct monthly inspection 
of the foster families or foster care givers to check on the well -being of 
the child. This would include interaction with the child, its foster parents, 
their biological children, school teachers, parents of origin and 
neighbours. In the selected districts  of Ernakulam and Wayanad, no 
inspection of this manner was seen conducted by the CWC during the 
audit period. As regards Kannur, the DCPU replied that the details of 
such inspections were not available on record. 
 Rule 23(17) of JJ Rules require the DCPU to maintain a record of each 
child in foster care in Form 34. This form captures details of ICP, Home 
Study Report, Child Study Report, record of vi sits made to the foster 
family, etc. Audit noticed that in four selected districts of 
Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Wayanad and Kannur, these details 
regarding children in foster care were not maintained in Form 34.  
In the absence of regular visits to the foster family by CWC and outreach 
workers and systematic updating of details of foster care in the prescribed 
format by DCPUs, the authorities were evidently not in active contact with the 
child sent to foster care a nd could not assess the extent to which the child was 
adapting to his environment.  
                                                 
27  SOS Children’s Village 
28  Outreach workers act as a link between the community and the DCPU and shall be responsible for 
identifying families and children at risk and offer necessary support services. 

 
 21 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Government replied (April 2024)  that instructions will be issued to CWCs to 
conduct inspections of foster families, either in person or in online mode, and 
that the District Magistrates will also be directed to monitor these inspections. 
Additionally, DCPOs will be instructed to ensure that Outreach workers/Social 
Workers attached to DCPUs visit each foster family/ foster caregiver regularly 
to monitor the well-being of the child. 
2.1.7.9. Leave of absence of children and overstay on leave  
As per Rule 18 of JJ Rules, any child in need of care and protection shall be 
produced before the CWC and the CWC, after interaction with the child, may 
issue directions for placing the child in a Children’s Home. Section 98 of JJ Act 
empowers CWC and JJB to permit leave of absence to any child placed in an 
institution on special occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, serious 
illness of parent or emergency of like nature, under supervis ion, for a period 
generally not exceeding seven days in one instance.  If a child fails to return to 
the Children’s Home on expiry of leave period, the JJB or CWC can cause him 
to be taken back to the home concerned or issue release order permitting the 
child to live with parents or guardian. Scrutiny of records revealed certain 
instances wherein children going on leave from CCI did not return to the 
institution and the CCI and CWC did not initiate timely follow up measures, as 
detailed below: 
 Five children within the age of six years who proceeded on leave29 from 
SAA Wayanad did not return to the CCI on expiry of leave. Of these, in 
the case of three siblings who proceeded on leave on  
01 January 2023, the release order of CWC terminating their stay in the 
Home to join family, was seen issued after eight months on 12 
September 2023.  
Audit observed that the fourth child who went on leave on 13 April 2023, 
had not returned to the Home till date (February 2024). Neith er had the 
CCI informed the above fact to CWC nor has CWC issued any release 
order to the child.  
As regards the fifth child who left SAA Wayanad on 16 March 2020, the 
CCI did not inform CWC that the child ha d not returned on expiry of 
allotted leave. CWC issued release order of the child from the institution, 
on request of parents, on 05 January 2022.  
 A girl child , aged 11 years, who was placed in GCH Kakkanad, 
Ernakulam on 13 December 2021 went on leave, on the very next day of 
admission, as per orders o f CWC. Though the granted leave period 
expired on 27 December 2021, the child did not return to the Children’s 
Home. The institution reported the matter to CWC on 23 March 2022 
only and CWC issued release orders after nine months, on 06 January 
2023.  
                                                 
29  One child in March 2020, three children in January 2023 and one child in April 2023  

 
 22 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
 On a  scrutiny of Admission and Discharge register s and Attendance 
Book at GCH for Boys Nooranad, Alappuzha, Audit observed that two 
children aged eight years who proceeded ( November 2018 and April 
2019) on leave from the institution as per orders of CWC, did not return 
on expiry of leave . Further, the fact of overstay of the children was 
brought to the notice of CWC by the CCI belatedly in January 2019 and 
August 2019 only and  the release orders of these children from GCH 
were seen issued by CWC in July 2022.  While the Act specifies the 
number of days for which a child can go on leave as seven, the orders of 
CWC do not always limit the leave period to seven days or specify the 
number of days of leave. In this case, CWC had issued orders (March 
2019) permitting the children to go on leave for two months which was 
much in excess of the prescribed limit.  
Such instances  as cited above,  make way for situations wherein during the 
period of overstay between expiry of leave and issue of release order, the child 
remains physically absent from the institution and the whereabouts of the child 
are not being traced and the safety of the child is compromised.  After a 
prolonged spell of absence of the child from the institution, without even 
ascertaining the status of well -being of the child, release order is issued, 
terminating their stay in the CCI. Considering the vulnerable circumstances of 
these children, in the event of an untoward incident which may occur during the 
period of overstay, the CCI/CWC/JJB/Government could land itself in a legally 
embarrassing position as regards the safety of the child.  
Government assured (April 2024) that the Superintendents of CCIs have been 
instructed to report the matter to the CWC, if the children did not return to 
homes after leave with in the stipulated time of seven days. It was also stated 
that necessary instructions will be given to the CWCs to issue release orders to 
the children who have not returned after leave.  Audit underscores the need for 
CWCs/CCIs to pro-actively enquire the whereabouts of children gone on leave, 
so as to ensure their well -being and safety, before granting release orders to 
them. 
2.1.7.10. Efficacy in implementation of adoption procedures 
Adoption Regulations, 2017 and 2022 framed by Central Adoption Resource 
Authority (CARA) and notified by Central Government define any orphan or 
abandoned or surrendered child, declared legally free for adoption by the CWC, 
a child of a relative 30, or a child of spouse from earlier marriage who has been 
surrendered by the biological parents for adoption by the step-parent, as a child 
eligible for adoption. Audit examined whether a system was in place in the 
State, to ensure that adoption procedures were followed strictly in  compliance 
with the regulations framed. The observations of Audit are detailed in the 
following paragraphs: 
                                                 
30  As defined under Section 2(52) of the Act 

 
 23 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Delay in preparing, uploading and revalidating Home Study Reports  
‘Home Study Report’ (HSR)31 contains details of Prospective adoptive Parents32 
(PaP) or foster parents, and shall include social and economic status, family 
background, description of home and atmosphere and health status. The  CWC 
was to obtain the HSR of the foster family through the DCPUs. 
Regulation 29(3)(d) of Adoption Regulations, 2017 states that every Specialised 
Adoption Agency (SAA) shall complete the HSR of PaPs, within one month 
from the date of their registration and submission of required documents. The 
period by which HSR was to be completed was extended to two months vide 
Regulation 30(3)(d) of Adoption Regulations, 2022 and it was also to be ensured 
that revalidation of HSR was to be done prior to its period of expiry.  
Scrutiny of records pertaining to HSRs revealed following shortfalls during the 
audit period: 
 In Ernakulam district, out of a total of 124 cases, HSRs were completed 
after a delay of 13 to 58 days in eight cases . In Wayanad district, the 
delay ranged from five to 245 days in 21 cases. In Kannur district, the 
delay ranged from three to 1031 days in 29 cases. 
 The Regulations also envisage that t he HSR shall be posted on the 
designated portal by the SAA within a period of three days from the date 
of completion of HSR. 
However, in seven cases in Alappuzha district, the delay in uploading 
the HSR on the designated p ortal ranged between nine and 80 days. In 
Wayanad district, in 26 cases, the delay ranged between three and 158 
days. In Kannur district, in 27 cases, the delay ranged between three to 
225 days.  
 In three cases in Alappuzha district, revalidation was not done before the 
date of expiry of HSR and the delay in revalidation ranged between 81 
to 153 days. In Wayanad district, in four cases, though revalidation was 
due between April 2020 and September 2022, it has not been conducted 
till date (October 2023). In Kannur district, in 28 cases, the delay was in 
the range of 12 to 390 days. 
As the CWC, before placing the child in foster care, shall obtain the HSR of the 
foster family through the DCPU, the timely preparation and uploading of HSR 
is a crucial step in en suring congenial homes for adoptable children. Further, 
children with special needs were to be considered for placement in foster family, 
only if the HSR of the foster family supports its fitness and has facilities for care 
of such children. 
Government replied (April 2024) that directions have been given to DCPUs at 
Ernakulam, Kannur and Wayanad districts to conduct home study in 174 
                                                 
31  Rule 2(viii) of JJ Rules 
32  Section 2(49) of the Act defines “Prospective adoptive Parents” as a person or persons eligible to adopt 
a child as per the provisions of Section 57 of the Act. 

 
 24 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
pending cases at the earliest and to Alappuzha DCPU to upload the pending 
HSR by collecting documents from the applicants. 
Non-setting up of cradle points and signages  
Adoption Regulations, 2017 and 202233 insist that every SAA shall set up cradle 
baby points at its own home and may install cradles at primary health centres, 
hospitals, nursing homes, etc., to receive abandoned children. The SAA is to be 
nominated as a Cradle Baby Reception Centre and shall be equipped with all 
basic facilities for infants. The Cradle Baby Reception Centre was to be linked 
to cradle points at the Primary Health Care Centres/Hospitals/Nursing home s, 
etc. The DCPU shall facilitate procurement of cradles for the cradle points. 
Further, to provide guidance to biological parent/s to safely abandon children, 
the CARA had directed (September 2022) all SAAs to mandatorily display 
cradle signage at various places.  
Audit noticed that cradle points were installed only in two34 out of the 14 SAAs 
in the State. Among the test checked five districts, only Thiruvananthapuram 
had a cradle point at SAA. As regards cradle points installed at sites other than 
SAA, th ere was one 35 cradle at Alappuzha and two cradles at Ernakulam 36. 
There were no places for safe abandonment of children in Wayanad and Kannur 
districts. Non-availability of cradles as stipulated indicates that the DCPUs did 
not facilitate procurement of crad les as required by the Guidelines of ICPS. 
Further, there were no signages erected near any of these cradle baby points.  
Instances of newborn babies being abandoned in unsafe and unhygienic 
surroundings can be avoided only by promoting more cradle points to hand over 
the infants and spreading awareness regarding the location of such points. Safe 
abandonment can benefit the newborn  from possible loss of life  and protect 
them against any possible harm or abuse when thrown in an inhuman manner 
into trash, garbage, bushes, etc. Installation of cradle baby points and erecting 
signages for easy detection as prescribed, would enable better chance of saving 
the life of an abandoned newborn. 
Government stated (April 2024) that Kerala State Child Welfare Council has 
been directed to set up baby cradle reception centres in connection with 
SAA/hospitals in the State using MLA funds.  
Delay in medical examination of adoptable children with special needs  
Regulation 36 (8) of Adoption Regulations , 2022 requires the DM to refer 
children having health issues or suspected special needs/ conditions to the Chief 
Medical Officer of the District (District Medical Officer (DMO)) within 24 
hours of receipt of information about such children from the respective SAA or 
CCI. The DMO s hall then examine the health status of the child and assess 
                                                 
33  w.e.f. 23 September 2022  
34  Thiruvananthapuram and Malappuram 
35  at Women and Child Hospital, Alappuzha  
36  at Little Flower Hospital, Angamaly and General Hospital, Ernakulam 

 
 25 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
whether the child is having any ailment or special needs, within a period of 15  
days. 
On a scrutiny of records in the SAAs in the selected districts, it was noticed that 
in Thiruvananthapuram SAA , the DMO was not conducting examination of 
health status of the children within the prescribed period of 15 days. The delay 
in examination by DMO, Thiruvananthapuram ranged from 228 to 275 days in 
respect of children with special needs. Details of delay are shown in Table 2.4.  
Table 2.4: Details of delay in conducting medical examination by DMO 
Child Date on which 
examination was due 
Date on which 
examination was done  
Delay  
(in days) 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Child 1 20.12.2022 20.09.2023 275  
Child 2 20.12.2022 20.09.2023 275  
Child 3 02.02.2023 Pending (October 2023) Pending 
Child 4 05.02.2023 20.09.2023 228  
Child 5 25.01.2023 20.09.2023 239  
(Source: Data furnished by Kerala State Council for Child Welfare) 
The delay in conduct of medical examination hinders the declaration of child as 
legally free for adoption. As this would delay the process of adoption, the 
medical examination should be conducted within the time limit as prescribed in 
the rules. 
Government replied (April 2024) that Medical Examination Report (MER) of 
children with special need was transferred to DMOs concerned via  Child 
Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System (CARINGS) portal for 
detailed examination of their health status . It was further stated that due to the 
delay on the part of DMO, the Government intervened in this matter and the 
MERs of these children were completed and the same have been updated in the 
CARINGS portal. 
The reply is not justifiable as such inordinate delay on the part of the DMO 
could restrict the chances of children with special needs being chosen for 
adoption. Hence, this step of medical examination and issue of MER must be 
accorded top priority.  
Delay in conducting post-adoption follow up  
Regulation 13 of  Adoption Regulations, 2017 states that t he SAA, which has 
prepared the HSR , shall prepare the post -adoption follow up report on six  
monthly basis for two years (four follow ups) from the date of pre -adoption 
foster placement with the PaPs. This report is to be uploaded in the CARINGS 
portal along with photographs of the child.  
Audit noticed delay in conducting post-adoption follow ups in the test checked 
districts, which is detailed in Appendix 2.5. 
Due to non-conduct of post-adoption follow ups as prescr ibed, it could not be 
assessed on a periodical basis, as to whether the adopted child was having 
adjustment problems with the adoptive parents. As the Regulations envisage the 

 
 26 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
SAA to arrange for counselling for adoptive parents and adoptees in such cases 
if required, regular conduct of these follow ups is very crucial. 
Government replied (April 2024) that strict direction has been given to SAAs 
for the disposal of pending cases in a time-bound manner. 
Diversion of adoption fee for other than adoption related expenses 
Regulation 2(3) of Adoption Regulations, 2017 and 2022, define adoption fee 
as the fee to be received from the PaP directly, in case they are living in India 
and through Authorised Foreign Adoption Agency /Central Authority / 
Government department, in cases of inter -country adoptions. The adoption fee 
collected can be utilised for meeting expenses related to the welfare of children, 
maintenance of home and  expenses incurred for finalising the adoption. The 
recognition of an SAA could be suspended or revoked for misuse or diversion 
of adoption fee for purposes other than the purposes for which it was received. 
On scrutiny of records maintained at the SAAs in the selected districts, it was 
noticed that in Thiruvananthapuram and Ernakulam, expenses re lated to fish 
and hen farming, pet animal maintenance, cable and internet charges, repairs of 
two wheelers, etc., were met out of adoption fee collected. It was also noticed 
that an amount of ₹16.91 lakh of adoption fee was diverted for meeting salary 
expenses of SAA, Thiruvananthapuram. However, no action was seen taken 
against the SAAs for non-permissible use of adoption fee. 
Government replied (April 2024) regarding the diversion of Grant -in-aid and 
adoption fee by the SAA, that direction will be given to DCPOs concerned for 
examining the same and to submit inquiry report, based on which necessary 
action will be taken. 
2.1.7.11. Delay in completion of inquiry process by Juvenile Justice Board  
Provisions in the Act 37 and JJ Rules38 state that the State Government shall 
constitute for every district, one or more JJBs for exercising the powers and 
discharging its functions relating to children in conflict with law. In Kerala, JJB 
has been constituted in all the 14 districts. The Board shall sit on all working 
days for a minimum of six hours , commensurate with the working hours of a 
Magistrate court, unless the case pendency is less and the State Government 
issues an order in this regard. 
Section 14 (1) and (2) and Section 15 of JJ Act states that when a Child in 
conflict with law (CCL) is produced before the JJB, it shall hold an inquiry 
which shall be completed within a period of four months from the date of first 
production of the child before the JJB, unless the period is extended fo r a 
maximum of two months considering the circumstances of the case.  
In violation of the above, Audit noticed that in Thiruvananthapuram, inquiry of 
all 1,263 children produced before JJB, Thiruvananthapuram during the audit 
period was extended beyond six  months, due to delay in submission of final 
                                                 
37  Section 4  
38  Rule 3, 4 

 
 27 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
report and mental assessment report by counsellors. Inquiry of all 265 children 
produced before JJB, Wayanad was extended beyond six months, as the Board 
met only once in a week. In Alappuzha, out of 213 children produced before the 
JJB, inquiry of 64 children was extended beyond six months, for which no 
reasons were furnished. 
Audit observed that the time lag in completion of inquiry process contributed to 
enhanced pendency in cases handled by JJB, as seen in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5: Details of pending cases and period of pendency with respect to the 
cases handled by JJB  
Year 
Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Wayanad Kannur 
No. of 
pending 
cases 
Period of 
maximum 
pendency 
No. of 
pending 
cases 
Period of 
maximum 
pendency 
No. of 
pending 
cases 
Period of 
maximum 
pendency 
No. of 
pending cases 
Period of 
maximum 
pendency 
No. of 
pending 
cases 
Period of 
maximum 
pendency 
2018-19 273 7 years 109 5 years 384 6 years 10 4 years 296 1 year 
2019-20 309 8 years 144 5 years 271 6 years 16 3 years 240 2 years 
2020-21 380 9 years 164 5 years 287 6 years 31 2 years 286 3 years 
2021-22 425 10 years 172 5 years 207 6 years 37 1 year 329 4 years 
2022-23 413 11 years 190 6 years 251 5 years 29 less than 
one year 256 5 years 
(Source: Data furnished by SCPS and DCPUs) 
It was seen that there were cases with pendency of more than 11 years in 
Thiruvananthapuram and more than six years in Alappuzha . In 
Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam and Kannur districts, the JJB did 
not sit on all working days, despite higher pendency of cases.  
The Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
(CMM) was to review the pendency of cases of JJB once every three months 
and direct the Board to increase the frequency of  its sittings or recommend the 
constitution of additional Boards. The status of pendency and reasons thereof, 
were to be reviewed every six months by a High Level Committee39.  
In contravention of the above, the CJM or the CMM did not review the 
pendency of cases every three months in Wayanad and Alappuzha. Further, the 
High Level Committee was not constituted in the State till date (February 2024).  
Government replied (April 2024) that action will be taken in collaboration with 
the Police and Judicial Departments to ensure prompt submission of final 
reports and maintain full-time judicial officers in the JJBs. It was further stated 
that a directive will be issued to facilitate th e review by the CJM and the DM, 
as well as to ensure the prompt formation of High Level Committee. 
Delay in completion of inquiry process by JJB would contribute to the undue 
extension of period of trial undergone by a CCL, which is not acceptable in 
terms of the child’s right to live with dignity. 
                                                 
39  consisting of the Executive Chairperson of the State Legal Services Authority,  who shall be the 
Chairperson, Secretary of the Home Department , Secretary of WCDD and representative nominated 
by the Chairperson. 

 
 28 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
2.1.7.12. Lack of trained Child Welfare Police Officers in police stations  
Complying with Section 107 of the Act, to co -ordinate all functions of police 
relating to children, the State Government shall constitute Special Juvenile 
Police Units (SJPU) in each district and city, headed by a police officer not 
below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police. In every police station, at 
least one officer not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) had to be 
designated as the Child Welfare Police Officer (CWPO) to exclusively deal with 
children who are either victims or perpetrators. Further, all police officers of 
SJPU shall be imparted special training, especially at induction as CWPO, to 
enable them to perform their functions more effectively.  
Audit observed that SJPU has been constituted in all the 20 police districts in 
the State. Though CWPOs were posted in all the 249 police stations in selected 
districts, in 45 40 stations, officers below the rank of ASI were be ing posted as 
CWPOs.  
Audit further noticed that apart from the CWPOs posted to two police stations  
each in Thiruvananthapuram City, Alappuzha and Kochi City and 20 stations in 
Ernakulam Rural who have received special training, none of the CWPOs in 
other stations in the test checked districts were imparted training in this regard.  
As per information furnished by selected police districts, a total of 1186, 77 and 
1322 children respectively had been apprehended for producing before JJBs, 
involvement in drug/substance cases and involvement in criminal cases during 
the period covered in audit. Considering the volume of juveniles involved in 
such cases, Government must take serious initiative to pr ovide appropriate 
training to CWPOs as envisaged in the Act. 
Government replied (April 2024 ) that due to transfer  of trained officials , 
appointment of untrained officers has occurred and to address this, funds41 have 
been allocated for an extensive training program for the CWPOs in SJPUs with 
the co-operation of Police Department. 
2.1.7.13. Lapses in execution of central sponsorship programme 
Section 45 of JJ Act and Rule 24 of JJ Rules mandate the State Government to 
make rules for the purpose of undertaking various programmes of sponsorship 
of children through DCPUs. Paragraph C(3) of Chapter X of ICPS guidelines 
elaborates the reasons and criteria for selection of children for central 
sponsorship programme. Sponsorship programmes were aimed at providing 
supplementary support to families with medical, nutritional, educational and 
other needs of the children with a view to improve their quality of life.  
The criteria of the scheme stipulated that children below 18 years hailing from 
families with annual income not exceeding ₹30,000 and ₹24,000 per annum in 
cities (other than Metro cities) and rural areas respectively, were to be 
                                                 
40  Thiruvananthapuram City – 2, Thiruvananthapuram Rural – 2, Alappuzha – 1, Kochi City – 5, 
Ernakulam Rural – 24, Kannur City – 10 and Wayanad – 1  
41  vide Proceedings of Member Secretary, SCPS dated 01 December 2023. 

 
 29 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
considered for sponsorship.  The sponsorship amount was limited to ₹2 ,00042 
per month per child and the period of sponsorship was not to exceed three years. 
The transaction was to be made through a joint account of the child with parent, 
preferably mother, in a bank or post office. Funds for central sponsorship were 
allotted by GoI to the extent of 60 per cent, while the remaining 40 per cent was 
allotted by the State Government. 
The pattern of allotment of funds by the Government and the expenditure 
incurred in selected districts were as given in Appendix 2.6(a). Audit observed 
the following deviations from the rules, in the execution of the programme in 
Wayanad district. 
 Out of 88 children covered under the programme, sponsorship was paid 
beyond the age of 18 years in three cases, leading to excess payment of 
₹0.50 lakh. Details are given in Appendix 2.7. 
 In two out of 18 records test  checked, transactions relating to the 
programme were made through single account, as against the 
requirement of a joint account.  
 In one out of 18 record s test checked, sponsorship amount was granted 
to a child where the annual family income exceeded 43 the prescribed 
limit of ₹24,000. 
The above lapses are indicative of the ineffective monitoring exercised by the 
DCPUs. 
2.1.8. Other Child Protection Schemes 
There were 12 sub schemes under innovative projects for child  care and 
protection, funded by the State Government. Audit analysed whether the mode 
of implementation of these schemes complied with extant Government orders 
and instructions, as detailed in following paragraphs: 
2.1.8.1. Our Responsibility to Children  
Our Responsibility to Children (ORC) was introduced (201 5) by the State 
Government with the objective of creating a safe, nurturing environment where 
vulnerable children involved  or at the risk of getting invol ved in destructive 
behaviour are brought to the mainstream, equipped and empowered with life 
skills, support and knowledge to realise their full potential and become  
productive members of the society. 
ORC operates at three levels, viz., school, district an d State. While the State 
Governing Body of ICPS oversees all ORC activities in the State, the District 
Level Action Group (DAG) 44 managed by the District Child Protection Officer 
(DCPO) guides the implementation of the project in the district. At the schoo l 
                                                 
42  Revised to ₹4000 from 2022-23 
43  ₹30,000 
44  consists of ORC co -ordinator and r epresentatives of the District Collector, District Police Chief, 
General Education Department, Health Department, etc. 

 
 30 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
level, the head of the school has the overall charge of  the ORC unit 45. Class 
teachers identify46 students in need of expert evaluation and management and 
refer the student to the nodal teacher. The nodal teacher, in consultation with 
the counsellor undertakes an inquiry and determines school level measures for 
children with moderate issues and refers children with severe issues to the 
District Resource Centre (DRC).  
While the number of schools in which ORC was implemented in 2015 was 93, 
380 schools in the State joined the scheme in 2022-23. In the selected districts, 
the number of schools implementing the scheme ranged from 110 to 137 during 
the period from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23. Audit noticed the following deficiencies 
in the selected districts regarding the implementation of the scheme. 
 The guidelines required the DCPO to organise consultative sessions with 
the nodal teachers and counsellors once every quarter to obtain feedback 
on the functioning of the project in the schools. Similarly, the DAG 
managed by  the DCPO was to meet before the 10 th of each month. 
However, this was not seen complied with, in four47 selected districts. 
 An Expert Resource Group (ERG) was to be formed by the DRC 
consisting of a panel of specialists who can treat specific issues that are 
beyond behavioural issues. The ERG was expected to provide training 
to the mentors/expert teachers on a regular basis. 
In Alappuzha and Kannur districts, there were no specialists under the 
ERG for the years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21. In Ernakulam district, 
only one specialist48 was available during 2018-19 and 2019-20.  
Though trainings were to be conducted on a regular basis, it was seen 
that no trainings were conducted by the ERG in Alappuzha in 2018 -19 
and 2019 -20 a nd in Kannur in 2018 -19 and 2020 -21. In 
Thiruvananthapuram, no trainings were conducted during 2018 -19 and 
2019-20. 
In the absence of a regular and consistent interaction between the DCPO, nodal 
teachers and counsellors and lack of specialists in ERG, audi t could not 
ascertain that the mentors and teachers were sufficiently trained to handhold the 
vulnerable children to realise their full potential and become productive 
members of the society. 
The DCPU was to maintain a subgroup of District Voluntary Mentors (DVMs) 
comprising retired teachers, qualified parents, etc., experienced in dealing with 
children. These mentors were to be imparted regular training on matters related 
to mentoring children and were expected to engage with the child at least once 
every week. The DAG has to appoint District Mentor Co -ordinators (DMC) 
from the pool of DVMs. The DMCs were responsible for regular monitoring of 
                                                 
45  ORC team includes a nodal teacher, counsellor and school Junior Public Health Nurse 
46  Students with behavioural, learning and emotional problems are identified  
47  Alappuzha, Thiruvananthapuram, Kannur, Wayanad 
48  ORC Psychologist 

 
 31 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
the quality of care provided to the children and were to visit each school every 
three months to supervise the activities. 
 Audit observed that in Wayanad and Kannur districts, the pool of 
volunteers was not being maintained. In Wayanad district, Audit noticed 
that DVMs were available only during 2018 -19 (91 DVMs) and only 
one49 training was conducted for DVMs. In Kannur district, the DVMs 
were available only for the years 2018 -19 (50 DVMs) and 2019-20 (20 
DVMs) and only one 50 training was conducted for DVMs till date. As 
DVMs were not available for the remaining years, DMCs were also not 
selected. 
 In Ernakulam district, th ough a pool of DVMs were being maintained, 
only two trainings on matters relating to mentoring children have been 
conducted in each year during the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. The 
visit to schools by DMCs in Ernakulam district was only 50 per cent 
during 2018-19 and 2019-20, three per cent in 2020-2151, 58 per cent in 
2021-22 and 43 per cent during 2022-23.  
Government replied (April 2024) that a directive will be issued to all DCPOs to 
ensure that consultative sessions are held regularly in all quarters, as outlined in 
the guidelines. It was also stated that training sessions were planned by ERGs 
and efforts to re-activate district voluntary movement were underway. 
2.1.8.2. Saranabalyam  
The scheme Saranabalyam was implemented by the State Government with the 
objective of making the State free from child labour, child begging and child  
trafficking. In order to rescue children engaged in child labour, child begging 
and child trafficking, the DCPOs were directed ( September 2020) to conduct 
rescue drives at least three times in a week. 
Audit noticed that in the selected districts, the number of rescue drives  
conducted were much less than the targeted number of 156 52 during 2021 to 
2023 as shown in Table 2.6: 
  
                                                 
49  in 2018-19 
50  in 2019-20 
51  COVID period 
52  52 weeks x 3 inspections = 156 

 
 32 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Table 2.6: Details of rescue drives conducted by DCPOs during the period  
2018-19 to 2022-23 
Period 
Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Wayanad Kannur 
No. of 
rescue 
drives 
conducted 
No. of 
children 
rescued 
No. of 
rescue 
drives 
conducted 
No. of 
children 
rescued 
No. of 
rescue 
drives 
conducted 
No. of 
children 
rescued 
No. of 
rescue 
drives 
conducted 
No. of 
children 
rescued 
No. of 
rescue 
drives 
conducted 
No. of 
children 
rescued 
2018-19 8 3 106 15 3 2 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 21 22 118 20 6 4 42 0 42 20 
2020-21 3 8 11 9 1 1 27 0 30 2 
2021-22 8 7 16 11 2 11 25 0 47 1 
2022-23 17 5 25 10 2 31 12 0 52 0 
Total 57 45 276 65 14 49 106 0 171 23 
(Source: Data furnished by SCPS) 
Audit noticed that 182 children could be rescued during the drives undertaken 
in the audit period. Hence, the authorities may consider stepping up the number 
of inspections/rescue drives to identify children involved in begging, labour and 
trafficking.  
Government replied (April 2024) that the Department has developed plans to 
enrich capacity bu ilding of district level stakeholders, reframing existing 
evaluation indicators and that proposals for the same would be submitted.  
2.1.8.3. State sponsorship program - Vijnanadeepthi  
In line with the criteria governing the Central sponsorship programme detailed 
in paragraph 2.1.7.13, the State Government launched (October 2017) the State 
sponsorship programme, Vijnanadeepthi to grant sponsorship to 1000 children 
in the State per year. The pattern of allotment of funds by the Government and 
the expenditure incurred in selected districts were as given in Appendix 2.6 (b). 
It was noticed that a total of 7 89 children53 were granted State sponsorship in 
selected districts during the period covered in audit. Audit conducted a t est 
check of records relating to granting of sponsorship to these children and came 
across the following deficiencies in DCPU, Wayanad.  
 In six out of 119 cases, sponsorship was granted to children beyond the 
age of 18 years resulting in an excess payment of ₹0.54 lakh  
(Appendix 2.7). 
 As against the prescribed period of three years, Audit noticed that out of 
119 cases, sponsorship was granted (February 2018 to August 2021) in 
excess of permissible amount in 20 cases for seven additional months 
and in 26 cases, for six additional months, resulting in excess payment 
of ₹5.92 lakh54. 
 In three55 out of 10 records test checked, sponsorship was seen granted 
to children where the annual family income exceeded the prescribed 
limit of ₹24000.  
                                                 
53  Thiruvananthapuram – 305, Alappuzha – 106, Ernakulam – 128, Wayanad – 119, Kannur - 131 
54  (20 cases x ₹2,000 x 7 months) + (26 cases x ₹2,000 x 6 months) = ₹5,92,000 
55  ₹36,000 (2 cases) and ₹48,000 

 
 33 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Government replied (April 2024)  that a comprehensive report has been 
requested from the DCPOs and further action will be taken once detailed report 
is received. 
2.1.8.4. Simultaneous receipt of Central and State ICPS sponsorships/ICPS 
sponsorship and financial assistance from other departments  
The guidelines for Central sponsorship consider  children receiving financial  
assistance under any similar scheme of G overnment as not eligible for 
sponsorship under the scheme , whereas  guidelines for State sponsorship 
consider children receiving any type o f financial assistance from the 
Central/State Government as ineligible for assistance under the programme.  
A total of 1 ,32056 children received sponsorships in the five selected districts 
during the period covered in audit. Scrutiny of related data reveale d instances 
of children simultaneously receiving both the Central and State sponsorship as 
detailed in Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7: Details of children simultaneously receiving both the Central and 
State sponsorship 
(₹ in lakh) 
 Districts Period Amount 
Child 1 Thiruvananthapuram April 2022 to September 2022 0.12 
Child 2 Thiruvananthapuram April 2022 to September 2022 0.12 
Child 3 Ernakulam September 2021 to December 2022 0.40 
Child 4 Wayanad December 2021 to February 2022 0.06 
(Source: Data from DCPUs) 
The total excess sponsorship paid amounted to ₹0.70 lakh. 
 Sixty nine children belonging to Scheduled Castes (SC) category and six 
children belonging to Scheduled Tribes (ST) category were in receipt of 
Central/State sponsorship from WCDD. Of these, 56 SC and all six ST 
children were in receipt of financial assistance from SC/ST 
Development Department and hence were not eligible for sponsorships 
from WCDD. This resulted in ineligible payment of financial assistance 
worth ₹20.78 lakh57 from WCDD. 
As both sponsorship guidelines have clearly barred double payments of similar 
nature, before grant of financial assistance, the DCPUs should make adequate 
enquiries, at least in schools or at SC/ST Development Departments to ensure 
that the children were n ot in receipt of other similar financial assistance. 
Payment of multiple financial assistance to the same beneficiary, apart from the 
possibility of depriving an eligible child of its rightful share, is a violation of the 
guidelines.  
Government replied (April 2024) that a comprehensive report has been called 
for from the DCPOs. Further action will be taken once the detailed report is 
received. 
                                                 
56  Central sponsorship – 531, State sponsorship - 789 
57  ₹19.30 lakh for 56 SC children and ₹1.48 lakh for six ST children 

 
 34 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
2.1.8.5. Sanctioning of Juvenile Justice F und without the orders of C hild 
Welfare Committee 
Section 105 of JJ Act a nd Rule 83 of the Rules required the State Government 
to form a Juvenile Justice Fund and make adequate budgetary allocations 
towards this  fund. The fund may also receive donations, voluntary 
contributions, etc. Accordingly, the State Government formed a fund, Balanidhi 
and issued guidelines (November 2017) as to its collection and utilisation and 
selection of beneficiaries. Clause 3 under Section IV of the  above guidelines 
states that a child can be granted  financial assistance as per the medical 
certificate, on the basis of recommendation of the CWC and the DCPO. 
Audit noticed that 84 children in the State have been granted financial assistance 
for medical treatment during the audit period, of which 24 children 58 were from 
the selected districts. Twenty two of the se 2 4 children have been granted 
financial assistance without the recommendation of CWC, as specified in the 
guidelines.  
Government replied (April 2024)  that the Department will ensure that 
procedures followed align with guidelines and that as part of guaranteeing the 
timely release of funds, the said clause has been omitted in the newly proposed 
guidelines submitted to the Government in October 2023 . The  action of the 
Government in omitting the said clause  is not justifiable as it may cause 
infringement of eligibility criteria.  
2.1.9. Monitoring 
Monitoring is a continuous process of collecting and analysing information 
about a programme, and comparing actual ag ainst planned results in order to 
judge how  well the intervention was being implemented. Audit analysed 
whether the monitoring mechanisms as envisaged in the Act and Rules were in 
place to impart efficiency to the implementation of child protection schemes.  
2.1.9.1. Shortfall in conduct of inspections  
State/District Inspection Committees  
As per Section 54 of the JJ Act and the provisions 59 contained in the rules, the 
State Government shall appoint Inspection Committees for the State and 
districts, for all institutions registered or recognised to be fit under the Act. The 
Inspection Committees were to mandatorily conduct visits to all facilities 
housing children in the area allocated, at least once in three months and submit 
reports of the findings of such visits within a week of their visit, to the District 
Child Protection Units or State Government, as the case may be, for further 
action.  
                                                 
58  Thiruvananthapuram -16, Alappuzha – 1, Ernakulam – 1, Wayanad – 3 and Kannur - 3 
59  Rule 41(4) of JJ Model Rules states that the SIC shall carry out random inspections of the institutions 
and Rule 41(10) states that the DIC shall carry out inspection of the facilities housing children in the 
district at least once every three months 

 
 35 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
Audit observed that the State Inspection Committee (SIC) and District 
Inspection Committees (DIC) have been fo rmed in the State in 2017 and 2018 
respectively. However, in the selected 17 CCIs, against the prescribed number 
of 340 inspections60, the SIC conducted only six inspections during the audit 
period, which was a meagre two per cent. The DCPO Kannur replied t o audit 
that, though a DIC was formed in the district, it was not reconstituted since 
November 2020. Owing to this, Inspection Reports have not been submitted to 
the DCPU and corrective actions could not be initiated. In Wayanad  district, 
though Inspection Committee was formed, no inspections were seen conducted 
in the selected CCIs. The number of inspections conducted in test checked 
districts during the audit period are detailed in Appendix 2.8. In the absence of 
regular inspections of the CCIs, the lack of facilities and problems encountered 
by children would go unnoticed. 
Government replied (April 2024) that the inspections were carried out as part of 
renewal of the JJ registration and detailed instructions will be issued to c arry 
out periodic inspections at Children’s Homes. However shortfall in inspections 
and its adverse consequences were noticed in the course of audit, which need to 
be addressed urgently. 
Non-conduct of inspection by Child Welfare Committees 
The CWC was to conduct at least two inspections per month, of residential 
facilities for children in need of care and protection and recommend action for 
improvement in quality of services extended, to the DCPU and the State 
Government. 
Audit noticed that the CWC has not conducted any inspection of the residential 
facilities for children in Ernakulam, during the period 2018 -19 to 2022-23. In 
Wayanad, the number of inspections during 2018 -19 to 2020 -21 ranged from 
seven to 15. Thiruvananthapuram and Kannur districts did no t furnish any 
records to audit in this regard. 
Non-conduct of inspections by CWCs would adversely impact the possible 
improvements to the quality of services in CCIs.  
Government replied (April 2024) that all CWCs have been directed to conduct 
inspections. Furthermore, detailed instructions will be provided to all CWCs to 
conduct periodical visits to CCIs. 
Non-conduct of inspection in JJB by the District Judge  
The Rules required the District Judge to conduct an inspection of the JJB once 
every quarter and appraise the performance of the members of the JJB on the 
basis of their participation in the proceedings of the Board and submit a report 
to the Selection Committee constituted under Rule 87 of the Rules. 
                                                 
60  (17 CCIs) x (four inspections per year) x (five years) 

 
 36 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Audit noticed that in the selected districts of Th iruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, 
Wayanad and Kannur, no inspection in this regard has been conducted during 
2018-19 to 2022-23. 
Government stated (April 2024) that the matter will be included as an agenda 
item in the upcoming Juvenile Justice Committee meeting to seek a decision on 
ensuring periodic inspections by the District Judge. 
Non-conduct of inspection in CWC by the District Magistrate  
The District Magistrate (DM) who was the District Collector was to inspect and 
review the functioning of the CWC once  in every quarter and submit a report 
on the performance of the Chairperson and the members of the CWC , on the 
basis of their participation in the proceedings of the CWC , to the Selection 
Committee. 
Audit noticed that in Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam, and 
Wayanad districts, no inspection in this regard had  been conducted by the DM 
during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23. In Kannur district, no inspection ha d been 
conducted by the DM since June 2022. 
Government replied (April 2024) that a directive will be issued to all DMs, 
instructing them to ensure periodic inspections of CWCs.  
2.1.9.2. Housing of district offices away from district headquarters 
As per the ICPS guidelines 61, the DCPU shall function under the overall 
administrative control and supervision of the DM  of the district concerned. In 
the detailed counter affidavit62 filed (November 2019) by the State Government 
in the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala, it was stated that steps were being taken 
to make sure that all the DCPU offices were housed at the district headquarters. 
Audit noticed that among the DCPUs in the selected districts, the DCPU at 
Ernakulam district alone was housed at the district headquarters, which was the 
seat of administrative head of implementation of ICPS and other child 
protection programmes at the district level. Three of the remaining four DCPUs 
were located away 63 from the district headquarters . Even after four years of 
filing of affidavit, the State Government has not complied with its own 
undertaking to the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala regarding functioning of 
DCPUs at the district headquarters.  
Government replied (April 2024) that the DCPUs are currently functioning in 
District headquarters at only four locations  in the State. Steps will be taken to 
relocate the DCPUs to District headquarters in consultation with the DM, taking 
into account the availability of space at the headquarters. 
                                                 
61  Item 1.1 in Annexure 1 
62  Submissions as regards Paragraph 95.3 of the judgment of the Hon ’ble Apex Court in Writ  Petition 
(Civil) No. 473 of 2005 contained in counter affidavit to WP(C) N o. 23669 of 2019(S), Bachpan 
Bachao Andolan vs State of Kerala on 17 November 2021. 
63  Thiruvananthapuram – 10 kms, Wayanad – 10 kms, Kannur – 22 kms 

 
 37 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
2.1.9.3. Non-functioning of Child Protection Management Information 
System  
Rule 84 (ix) of JJ Rules required the SCPS to maintain a State level database of 
all children in institutional and non-institutional care and update it on a quarterly 
basis.  
The WCDD entered into an agreement (May 2020) with the Centre for 
Development of Imaging Technology (C-DIT) for the design and development, 
technical support and annual maintenance of website and software for Child 
Care Homes Management. Accordingly, a Child Protection Management 
Information System  (CPMIS) software was developed 64 by C -DIT for 
maintenance of data relating to ICPS. The admission of inmates to the childcare 
homes, their transfer and release, etc., were to be recorded online in the CPMIS 
and monitored by WCDD. An amount of ₹2.67 lakh was paid (September 2020) 
to C-DIT for this purpose. 
Though the agreement was signed and payment made as early as in May 2020 
and September 2020 respectively, the portal could not be made functional due 
to technical reasons even as of March 2024. 
Government replied (April 2024)  that a plan has been devised to integrate all 
websites and portals under the umbrella of SCPS into a single platform. To 
facilitate this, the State has allocated ₹23 lakh for the project and an agency has 
been selected for execution. 
Lack of effective utilisation of Track Child portal  
Rule 18(7) of JJ Model Rules envisaged that in the case of an 
abandoned/lost/orphaned child, the CWC, before passing an order granting 
interim custody of the child pending inquiry, shall ensure that, the information 
regarding such child is uploaded on a designated portal. Regulation 6(6) of 
Adoption Regulations, 2017 states that for tracing out the biological parents or 
the legal guardians, the CWC may direct the DCPU to advertise the particulars 
and photograph of the child in a national newspaper with wide circulation within 
three working days from the time of receiving the child and also ensure entry of 
data in the designated portal (Track Child portal65 or Khoya Paya portal66).  
Audit scrutiny revealed that  in Thiruvananthapuram, details of 46 
orphaned/abandoned/missing children were not uploaded in the portal. Neither 
was the existing data in portal referred to, to ascertain whether the child was a 
                                                 
64  Scope of the project include d Child Care Homes registration and renewal, ownership and manager 
database, Childcare homes management, inmate registration and approval, inmate database 
management, Individual Care Plan for inmates, JJB and ICPS dashboards, etc. 
65  Track Child portal pro vides an integrated virtual space for all stakeholders and ICPS bodies which 
includes Central Project Support Unit (CPSU), SCPS/Units and DCPUs, CCIs, Police Stations, CWCs, 
JJBs, etc. in the 35 States/UTs. It also provides a networking system amongst all the stakeholders and 
citizens to facilitate tracking of a "Child in distress". It requires data entry and updating at various 
levels such as Police stations, CCIs/Homes, Shelters, CWCs and JJBs, etc. 
66  Khoya Paya portal helps parents to register and repor t online the details of their missing child ren. 
Parents, whose child is missing, can register to report a missing child, give details of a missing child 
and search details of missing child. 

 
 38 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
missing child. Further, the particulars and photographs of the children were 
advertised only in two regio nal vernacular dailies instead of a national 
newspaper. In Alappuzha, though five abandoned/missing/orphan ed children 
were found since the formation of SAA in 2022 -23, the data was not uploaded 
in Track Child Portal/ Khoya Paya portal.  Moreover, the particu lars and 
photographs of the children were advertised only in regional vernacular dailies, 
that too after 19 to 79 days. In Ernakulam and Kannur, the portal was not found 
utilised for uploading of data and ascertaining that the received children were 
missing from their homes.  
Government stated (April 2024) that the DCPUs have been instructed to input 
data into the portal and that training sessions will be arranged for persons 
concerned to ensure proficient utili sation of the portal. It was also stated that 
instructions will be given to all DCPOs, to publish the particulars of an orphan 
or abandoned child in national newspaper with wide circulation for tracing out 
the biological parents or legal guardians as per Regulation 6(7) of Adoption 
Regulations, 2022. 
Non-maintenance of databases  
 Rule 85(viii) of JJ Model Rules 2016 requires the DCPO to assess the 
number of children in difficult circumstances and create district-specific 
databases to monitor trends and patterns of children in difficult 
circumstances. Audit noticed that in the selected districts, the DCPOs 
have neither assessed the number of children nor created any database 
to monitor the trends and patterns of children in difficult circumstances. 
Given the fact that considerable number 67 of children in conflict with 
law received psycho -social support through KAVAL scheme 68 during 
2018-19 to 2022-23, formulation of database would help identify more 
such children in need of intervention in these districts.  
No remarks were offered by Government in this regard. 
 Rule 85(xix) of JJ Model Rules 2016 requires the DCPO to maintain a 
database of medical and counselling centres, de -addiction centres, 
hospitals, open schools, education facilities, apprenticeship and 
vocational training programmes and centres, recreat ional facilities for 
children with special needs, etc., and forward the same to JJBs, CWCs, 
Children’s Courts and SCPS. Among the selected districts, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam and Wayanad were not 
maintaining a database of de -addiction centr es, hospitals, etc., which 
would limit the scope of timely rehabilitation of vulnerable children 
from difficult circumstances, children with special needs or mental 
illness, etc. 
No remarks were offered by Government in this regard. 
                                                 
67  ranging from 54 to 96 in Ernakulam, 17 to 119 in Wayanad, 98 to 151 in Thiruvananthapuram, 3 to 54 
in Alappuzha and 36 to 64 in Kannur  
68  KAVAL is a State Scheme that aims at social re -integration and rehabilitation of children in conflict 
with law (under ICPS)  

 
 39 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme and 
other Child Protection Schemes  
2.1.10. Conclusion 
While the JJ Act stipulated that a child less than six years has to be placed in a 
SAA till adoption, provisions in the ICPS and Mission Vatsalya guidelines 
permitted a child to be accommodated in an SAA for not more than one year , 
which was not consistent with the provisions of the Act. Though the Act requires 
the State Government to formulate rules for streamlining the implementation of 
the Act, the State Government has n ot complied with the same , which would 
have facilitated effective management of State specific scenarios. While  
registration to function as a CCI was a mandatory requirement, non-renewal of 
registration before its expiry led to the CCIs functioning without registration. 
Children and families who had to approach the JJB/CWC during their sittings 
were not provided with basic facilities like waiting room, drinking water, etc., 
and child friendly environment . Alternate facilities to accommodate children 
with special needs were not established, which resulted in children with special 
needs being forced to continue in CCIs not meeting specified standards. Certain 
selected CCIs had to accommodate mentally challenged children alongside 
normal children, even though no special facilities were available and the staff 
was not equipped to manage such children. Facilities to accommodate children 
with mental illness and children requiring de-addiction from  use of drug, 
substance and liquor  were inadequate. Children permitted to go home  on 
vacation and overstaying without the orders of CWC could put Government in 
a legally embarrassing situation in case of an untoward incident during the 
period of overstay. Monthly inspection of the foster families or foster care givers 
to check on the well-being of the child was not performed adequately. Sufficient 
number of cradle baby points were not  seen installed for safe abandonment of 
children. Payments were seen made in violation of guidelines in bo th Central 
and State sponsorship schemes. Delay in examination of children with special 
needs in the SAAs by the DMOs in two test checked districts ranged from 49 to 
275 days. Only a few CWPOs have been imparted appropriate training as per 
the requirement in the Act. Twenty two out of 25 children have been granted 
financial assistance from Juvenile Justice Fund without the recommendations of 
the specified authorities. In two SAAs, expenditure from adoption fee collected 
was incurred on unspecified items. There was shortfall in conduct of inspection 
of facilities housing children, by the State and District Inspection Committees, 
CWCs, etc. The operationalisation of software intended for maintenance of data 
relating to ICPS was delayed due to recurrent technical glitches. 
2.1.11. Recommendations 
 Adequate basic facilities may be provided for children and families 
approaching JJBs and CWCs. 
 Government must ensure that children with special needs are provided 
safe stay with adequate facilities. 

 
 40 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
 Government must ensure that co -habitation of children with mental 
illness and those requiring de -addiction from drugs, liquor etc., with 
normal children is not permitted. 
 CWCs should conduct regular visits to CCIs and facilitate effective 
follow up to ensure that children in foster care lead a safe and 
comfortable life. 
 Cradle Baby Points must be installed as prescribed under the Rules, for 
safe abandonment of babies.  
 The Department should ensure that children in receipt of sponsorship 
from ICPS are not receiving financial assistance from SC/ST  
Development Department. 
 

 
 41 
CHAPTER III 
 HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.1. Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
3.1.1. Introduction 
The Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme launched by the Ministry of Human Resource Development69 (MHRD) 
in September 2013, to be operated in the XII and XIII five-year plan periods70. 
The major objective of RUSA was to enable and empower the States to develop 
sufficient capabilities to plan, implement and monitor initiatives for the higher 
education sector as a whole. The scheme aimed to improve the quality of State 
Universities and colleges and enhan ce their existing capacities so that they 
emerge as dynamic, demand -driven, quality conscious institutions, responsive 
to rapid economic and technological developments at the national and 
international levels.  
The scheme was  to be implemented in two phase s, i.e, RUSA 1.0 during the 
period 2013 -17 and RUSA 2.0 during 2018 -22. Government of India (GoI) 
approved (February 2022 ) continuation of the scheme till 31 March 2026 for 
further review. In the State, the Principal Secretary of Higher Education 
Department acts as the State Project Director  (SPD) and the Director of 
Collegiate Education is the State Project Coordinator of RUSA. 
The components of RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 undertaken for implementatio n in the 
State are detailed in Appendix 3.1. 
3.1.1.1. Institutional Hierarchy in RUSA 
The participative and inclusive institutional structure envisaged in RUSA 
guidelines at the Central, State and Institutional level and the roles and powers 
of the various bodies are shown below in Chart 3.1: 
  
                                                 
69  Renamed as Ministry of Education by a gazette notification issued in August 2020  
70  XII five year plan covered the period 2012-17 and XIII five year plan pertained to the period 2017-22 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
42 
Chart 3.1: Institutional Hierarchy in RUSA 
  
State Higher Education
Council (SHEC)
• Prepares the State Higher 
Education Plan (SHEP) 
and provides State 
institutions with inputs 
for creating their plans. 
State Project Directorate 
(SPD)
• Oversees project 
implementation at the 
State level.
State Technical Support 
Group (TSG)
• Monitors the flow of 
funds and information.
Institutional Level 
 
National Mission 
Authority (NMA)
• Provides 
guidance for 
overall policy 
and planning 
and reviews the 
functioning of 
the Project 
Approval 
Board (PAB).
Project Approval 
Board (PAB)
• Examines, 
appraises and 
approves State 
Higher 
Education Plans 
and approves the 
release of fund to 
States and 
Institutions.
National Project 
Directorate (NPD)
• Entrusted with 
project fund 
management and 
project 
implementation 
at Central and 
State level. 
Technical Support 
Group (TSG)
• Helps States in 
formulation and 
appraisal of State 
educational plans.
Central Level
State Level
Board of Governors
• Forms, supervises and guides 
various committees required for 
project implementation and internal 
project monitoring. 
Project Monitoring Units
• Monitors the projects at the 
institutional level.
 Universities / Colleges 

 
 43 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
3.1.2. Audit Objectives, Scope and Methodology 
The Compliance Audit was conducted from May to August 2023 with a view to 
assess whether; 
 the implementation of RUSA scheme was planned properly, effectively 
and efficiently to improve access, equity and quality in higher education 
in the State; 
 the Scheme was executed efficiently in compliance with the extant 
instructions and Guidelines; 
 adequate initiatives were taken for effective financial management of 
RUSA funds; and 
 monitoring and evaluation of the scheme was effective. 
Audit scrutinised records pertaining to the period from 2018 -19 to 2022-23 at 
Higher Education Department, Government of Kerala (GoK), State Project 
Directorate and in the sele cted Universities/institutions  in four selected 
districts71. All four Universities in the selected districts were taken up for audit. 
Twenty per cent of RUSA funded institutions (12 institutions) and 10 per cent 
of institutions which did not receive funds under RUSA 1.0  and 2.0  (nine 
institutions) were selected through Simple Random Sampling without 
Replacement method using IDEA software. The selected institutions are listed 
in Appendix 3.2. An Entry Conference was held with the State Project 
Coordinator, RUSA on 24 May 2023 wherein the audit objectives, scope and 
methodology adopted were discussed and agreed upon. On conclusion of audit, 
an Exit Conference was conducted on 23 April 2024 with the Principal Secretary 
to Government, Higher Education Department, wherein the audit findings were 
discussed in detail. Reply of GoK was received (April 2024) and has been 
suitably incorporated in the paragraphs. 
Audit findings 
RUSA was an umbrella scheme to be operated in mission mode which would 
subsume other existing schemes72 in the sector. In order to realise the intended 
outcomes, a set of commitments towards reform process have to be made by the 
States which must be fulfilled during the course of implementation of RUSA. 
These commitments were non -negotiable and were at two lev els, viz., 
commitment given by the States to the Centre and commitment given by 
institutions to the State. Unless these commitments were fulfilled, the States and 
institutions were not to be considered eligible to avail grants under the scheme. 
Audit examined the extent of compliance to these commitments, and the 
resultant observations are detailed below: 
                                                 
71  Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Palakkad and Kannur 
72  Schemes of Model Degree Colleges and Sub-mission on Polytechnics were subsumed under RUSA in 
addition to schemes under UGC. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
44 
3.1.3. Non-conformity between certain clauses in the amended Kerala 
State Higher Education Act 2007 and RUSA guidelines 
As per RUSA guidelines (September 2013), State Government was required to 
set up a n State Higher Education Council ( SHEC) by an Act of the State 
Legislature within two years. The SHEC is the supreme policy body for higher 
education, to develop comprehensive, long -term and inclusive State Higher 
Education Plan (SHEP), by aggregating Institutional Development Plans (IDPs) 
of institutions. 
In Kerala, the Kerala State Higher Education Council (KSH EC) was in 
existence since 2007, as per provisions of the Kerala Higher Education Act of 
2007 (Act). Paragraph 5.2 of RUSA guidelines lays down the term of council 
members and the manner in which the States with existing councils were to 
reconstitute the councils.  Though GoK joined RUSA on 30 October 2013 by 
committing to bring reforms in the Higher Education sector in the State and 
attended the first Project Approval Board (PAB) meeting held by MHRD on 06 
November 2013, the State amended the Act in July 2018 only , after a gap of 
five years. Furthermore, there were provisions in the Act which did not  
synchronize with clauses outlined in the guidelines of RUSA as detailed below:  
According to  RUSA guidelines, the Chairman of the Council shall be an 
eminent academic/public intellectual with proven leadership qualities and one 
nominee of Government  of India shall also be included as a member. The 
Chairman, who was to hold one non-extendable term of five years was to be 
selected by a committee consisting of Chief Minister of the State, Speaker of 
the Legislative Assembly and the Leader of Opposition , based on the 
recommendation of shortlisted candidates made by a search -cum-selection 
committee of eminent academic /public intellectuals  with proven record and 
integrity. Similarly, the Vice Chairman and Member Secretary who were to 
serve for one non-extendable term of five years were to be selected by a three 
member search committee consisting of Chairman of the Council and two other 
members, one nominated by the State Council and the other by the Government.  
Audit noticed that the provisions in the amended Act did not synchronize with 
the above requirements  in the guidelines . For instance, d isregarding the 
selection process prescribed by RUSA, the amended Act provided for the State 
Minister for Higher Education to be the Chairman of the Council and Vice 
Chairman and Member Secretary to be appointed by the Government.  
There were eight variations noticed between provisions in RUSA guidelines and 
the provisions in the amended Act of 2018 are shown in Appendix 3.3. 
Government stated (April 2024) that the KSHEC Act was amended in 2018, 
incorporating majority of the provisions as envisaged in the RUSA guidelines 
keeping in mind the specific considerations of the State. The amendments are 
in essence and not in conflict with the RUSA guidelines or detrimental to the 
broad objectives of RUSA. However, the aforesaid deviations establish that the 
amendments made to the Act of 2007 in 2018, were not in consonance with the 
provisions relating to RUSA.  

 
 45 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
3.1.4. Delay in preparation of State Higher Education Plan and  non-
conduct of Baseline Survey 
As per RUSA guidelines, a Perspective Plan for Higher Education called State 
Higher Education Plan (SHEP) had to be drawn up by the SHEC for submission 
to the MHRD, Government of India. SHEP was the guiding document which 
was to serve as the benchmark against which the performance of a State and its 
institutions were graded. The SHEP was to have two components, Institutional 
component and State component. The Institutional component necessitated  
preparation of Institutional Development Plan (IDP) at institutional level, based 
on the inputs and discussions with multiple stakeholders within the institution’s 
jurisdiction. The IDPs were to be  aggregated at the State level as SHEP. The 
State componen t was to address issues related to excellence, spatial and 
geographical gaps, access, governance, etc. Unserved and under -served areas 
were to be identified and special provisions made for new institutions in these 
areas.  
Under RUSA 1.0, SHEP was required to be submitted to MHRD by 31 January 
2014. The final SHEP was submitted to MHRD by GoK in February 2015, 
which was considered by PAB in March 2015. Audit observed that out of nine 
institutions under RUSA 1.0 selected for detailed audit, none had submitted 
IDPs to SHEC for preparation of SHEP.  
The SHEP for RUSA 2.0 was prepared and submitted by SHEC in May 20 18. 
Audit observed that none of the selected institutions under RUSA 2.0 had 
furnished (May 2018) their IDPs to KSHEC for preparation of SHEP. This 
indicates that SHEPs for RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 were prepared by KSHEC without 
aggregating the IDPs. As RUSA envisages a bottom up approach, wherein IDP 
would depict the resource requirements at institutional level as well as at its sub 
units for programme implementation in terms of infrastructure, human 
resources, procurement, scheme execution, etc., non-submission of IDPs would 
result in SHEP being prepared without factoring in the requirements of the 
institutions.  
Further, Audit observed that  prior to the formulation of SHEP, the State had 
also not undertaken a baseline survey to analyse critical needs in terms of access, 
equity and excellence in higher education as envisaged in the scheme  
guidelines. In the absence of a baseline survey, Audit could not draw assurance 
regarding issues relating to unserved and under -served areas having been  
identified and special pro visions for new institutions made in the SHEP to 
benefit these areas. 
Government stated (April 2024) that SHEP was prepared by KSHEC taking into 
consideration the resource requirements of every higher educational institution 
in the State, based on the data collected from those institutions with special 
consideration given to unserved and under-served areas and special provisions 
for new institutions made in the SHEP to benefit these areas. The above reply 
is not factually correct, as the selected institutions had not submitted IDPs to 
SHEC, in the absence of which the resourc e requirements of institutions could 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
46 
not be known. Further, the data claimed to have been collected from institutions 
by SHEC has not been furnished to Audit (June 2024). 
3.1.5. Delay in submission of DPRs by institutions 
The Project Approval Board (PAB) was to e xamine, appraise and approve 
SHEPs submitted by the States, assess the performance of States and institutions 
and approve release of funds73. On receiving approval of PAB, MHRD releases 
first instalment of 50 per cent of the Central share to the State in re spect of 
institutions included under the  scheme. Such institutions were required to 
furnish a Detailed Project Report (DPR) containing details of the works, 
estimates, etc., to SPD within the dates communicated to the respective 
institutions by SPD. The fu nds to the institutions were released by SPD on 
approval of DPRs. 
Audit noticed that out of nine selected institutions  under RUSA 1.0, there was 
delay of 15 months in the submission of DPR by Kannur University. Yet another 
institution, Government College, Tripunithura, had not finalised the DPR even 
as on September 2023. Consequently, Central and State share of funds allotted 
to the State Nodal Account of SPD as Infrastructure Grant could not be utilised 
by the institution for want of finalisation of DPR.  
Under RUSA 2.0, all the institutions were required to upload (May 2018) data 
in the portal for receiving the RUSA assistance. SPD of RUSA directed (13 June 
2018) 95 shortlisted institutions in the State to submit DPRs to SPD on or before 
19 June 2018. Audit test checked the records of eight institutions and found that 
there was delay ranging from 347 days to 4 ½ years in the submission of final 
DPRs by seven institutions, as shown in Table 3.1 below: 
Table 3.1: Details of delay in submission of DPRs under RUSA 2.0 
Sl. No. Name of institution Date of submission 
of final DPR 
Delay in 
days 
1.  Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom College, 
Valayanchirangara June 2019 347 
2.  Government Sanskrit College, Tripunithura June 2022 713 
3.  TM Jacob Memorial Government College, 
Manimalakkunnu August 2020 774 
4.  NSS Training College, Ottappalam October 2019 469 
5.  Government Arts College, 
Thiruvananthapuram June 2019 347 
6.  HHMSPBNSS College for Women, 
Neeramankara July 2019 377 
7.  Cochin University of Science and Technology March 2023  1716 
(Source: Data obtained from institutions) 
                                                 
73  For selection under RUSA 2.0, institutions were required to upload institutional data directly 
to Challenge Level Funding Portal (Portal ) of MHRD and the TSG at the Centre examines 
and a ppraises the proposals received from institutions, based on which PAB accords 
approval for inclusion of institution under the scheme. 

 
 47 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
The delay in submission of final DPRs by institutions resulted in delayed  
releasing of fund by SPD to the institutions. 
Government stated (April 2024) that in all the seven cases DPR was submitted 
in time. However, due to non-compliance of RUSA guidelines, discrepancies in 
the estimates or documents furnished, lack of statutory clearances etc., SPD had 
advised the institutions to rectify and  resubmit the DPR. The reply is not 
acceptable, as the DPRs had to consider the inherent and potential external risks 
involved in implementation. Had the DPRs been prepa red at the initial stage 
itself by giving due regard to the above aspects, re -submission and associated 
delays in completion of projects could have been avoided.  
3.1.6. Exclusion of Government Aided institutions from coverage under 
RUSA 1.0 
All State Universities and Colleges (both compliant as well as non -compliant 
with Section 12B and 2(f) of UGC, Act 195674) across the country were eligible 
to be covered under RUSA to improve the learning outcomes and employability 
of graduates and to scale -up research, development and innovations . While 
Government colleges and universities would be eligible for all the components, 
Government aided institutions could also be considered eligible for permitted 
activities75 based on certain norms and parameters.  
Audit noticed that, as part of implementation of RUSA 1.0, GoK decided (July 
2014) to consider the IDPs of Government Higher Educational Institutions only. 
Consequently, SHEC proposed six Universities and 63 Government colleges in 
the SHEP submitted (February 2015) to MHRD under the components 
Infrastructure Grants to Universities  and Infrastructure Grants to Colleges, 
respectively. Audit noticed that out of the 63 Government colleges, 28 colleges 
were accredited with various grades of National Assessment and Accreditation 
Council ( NAAC) and the remaining 35 colleges did not possess NAAC 
accreditation. However, only four universities and 15 colleges having NAAC A 
or B grades /NBA accreditation  were approved  (March 2015) , for inclusion 
under RUSA 1.0, by PAB. Further, two universities and 11 colleges were added 
under RUSA 1.0 in subsequent76 PABs.  
On scrutiny of S HEP submitted in February 2015, Audit observed that there 
were 166  Government aided colleges which possessed valid NAAC 
accreditation during 2014-15. However, these colleges were not included in the 
proposal for the infrastructure grants to colleges based on the Government 
direction.  
Government replied (April 2024) that as per the RUSA 1.0 guidelines, it was 
not mandatory to provide assistance to Government aided colleges. The above 
contention is not acceptable as RUSA 1.0 Guidelines explicitly state that 
                                                 
74  The University Grants Commission (UGC) provides financial assistance to eligible colleges which are 
included under Section 2(f) and declared fit to receive central assistance (UGC grant) under Section  
12 (B) of UGC Act, 1956 as per approved pattern of assistance under various schemes. 
75  Infrastructure and quality improvement 
76  During the period 2017-19 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
48 
funding will be available to Government aided institutions also, subject to their 
meeting certain pre-conditions. The decision of GoK to restrict the scope of the 
scheme to Government institutions prevented the 166 Government aided 
colleges having NAAC A or B grades from being considered for RUSA 1.0. 
3.1.7. Financial Management 
3.1.7.1. Funding 
The RUSA scheme was implemented with a fund sharing pattern of 60:40 
between the Central and State Governments.  On approval of State Higher 
Education Plan (SHEP) submitted by the S tate, MHRD was to release Central 
Government funds to the State Government.  
The Ministry of Finance directed (March 2021) every State Government to 
designate a single nodal agency (SNA) for release of funds under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes (CSS). The SNA  was to open a single nodal account for 
each CSS w ith effect from 01 July 2021 . The implementing  institutions were 
required to open zero balance subsidiary accounts for transferring funds as 
decided by the SNA. Accordingly, GoK designated (July 2021) SPD as the SNA 
and SPD directed (August 2021) all the institutions funded by RUSA to open 
zero balance subsidiary accounts. SPD also directed (August 2021) the RUSA 
funded institutions to close and transfer the balance funds of RUSA in the SB 
accounts of institutions as on 31 August 2021, to the SNA account. 
The State Government transfers the Central funds along with the State share to 
the SHEC/SPD77 and from SHEC/SPD to the institutions  for implementation. 
Out of the total release of ₹433.28 crore (Central and State) to 157 
institutions/SPD78 in the State from 2013-14 towards RUSA 1.0 and RUSA 2.0, 
the utilisation as on 31 March 2023 was ₹310.54 crore (71.67 per cent) and 
₹122.74 crore was remaining in the single nodal account of SPD. Scheme-wise 
details of fund flow as on 31 March 2023 under RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 were as 
shown in Table 3.2: 
Table 3.2: Scheme-wise details of fund flow under RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 
(₹ in crore) 
Scheme Approved Released Pending release 
from GoI/State 
RUSA 1.0 199.57 189.03 10.54 
RUSA 2.0 366.00 244.25 121.75 
Total 565.57 433.28 132.29 
(Source: Details furnished by SPD) 
Component-wise details are furnished in Appendix 3.4. Though RUSA 1.0 was 
to be implemented during 2013-1779, all the projects undertaken in test checked 
institutions under RUSA 1.0 were not completed and were in various stages of 
execution during the audit period. Funds relating to RUSA 1.0 and RUSA 2.0, 
                                                 
77  From July 2015 onwards, the funds were managed by SPD at State level 
78  Preparatory Grant, Management, Monitoring, Evaluation and Research (MMER), Equity Initiatives 
79  Thirteen institutions were subsequently brought under RUSA 1.0 during 2017-19. 

 
 49 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
amounting to ₹10.54 crore and ₹121.75 crore respectively were yet to be 
released for completing these projects for reasons such as delay in conducting 
physical inspection, non-commencement of project, etc.  
Government stated (April 2024) that a proposal for an amount of  
₹112.80 crore80 was submitted (December 2023) to th e Ministry of Education, 
GoI and the entire project will be completed, and amount utilised expeditiously 
as and when funds were received. 
3.1.7.2. Status of fund release and utilisation 
The RUSA scheme was implemented with a fund sharing pattern of 60:40 
between the Central and State Governments. Status of year -wise release of 
funds and utilisation by SPD/Institutions  during the audit period 2018 -19 to 
2022-23 were as shown in Table 3.3 below: 
Table 3.3: Details of release and utilisation of funds in the State 
Year Amount released 
(₹ in crore) 
Amount Utilised 
(₹ in crore) 
Percentage of 
utilisation 
2018-19 137.25 120.86 88.10 
2019-20 24.00 18.44 76.80 
2020-21* 0 0 0 
2021-22 15.84 12.02 75.90 
2022-23 112.34 17.36 15.50 
* During 2020-21 there was no allotment from MHRD in the COVID scenario 
(Source: Details furnished by SPD) 
Though SPD furnished the consolidated utilisation of funds released against the 
year of allotment of fund , Audit scrutiny revealed that t he actual utilisation of 
funds was spread over multiple years, as there was delay in transfer of State 
share of funds to SPD and from SPD to institutions and lags in execution of 
projects by institutions. 
Government stated that though the funds are released in various financial years, 
RUSA funds are reckoned in a project-wise manner rather than as against each 
financial year. Hence, the release order in a financial year is inclusive of several 
instalments of funds to various projects included in each phase of RUSA. 
Despite institutions not adhering to condit ions specified in the Guidelines of 
RUSA, funds were released to these institutions, as mentioned in paragraphs 
3.1.5 and 3.1.8.4.  
Significant deviations from the fund management mechanism laid down in the 
guidelines of the scheme were observed, as detailed below: 
3.1.7.3. Exclusion of KSHEC from fund management 
As per RUSA guidelines, at the State level, SHEC was to channelise funds from 
Centre as well as the State and undertake planning and evaluation activities in 
addition to monitoring and capacity building fun ctions. SHEC was to open a 
separate dedicated joint bank account and funds (both Central and State share) 
                                                 
80  Central share ₹67.68 crore 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
50 
were to be disbursed to the institutions from this account. Accordingly, Higher 
Education Department of GoK accorded sanction (January 2014) to open joint 
account of Member Secretary, KSHEC and Additional Secretary, Higher 
Education Department, GoK for dealing with funds of RUSA. However, GoK, 
citing delay in transfer of fund s due to non -availability of joint signatories, 
accorded sanction (August 2016) to convert this account to a single account in 
the designation of Joint Secretary, Higher Education Department, GoK, thereby 
curtailing the role of KSHEC in fund management. 
Government replied (April 2024) that KSHEC was not excluded from fund 
management and only a demarcation of functions with regard to fund disbursal 
was attempted. The reply is not acceptable as , being Joint signatories to the 
releases to the institutions is indicative of a shared accountability between 
KSHEC, which was the  plan formula ting authority and  SPD, the project 
implementing authority. Vesting all the fund releasing powers with one party 
amounted to a dilution of responsibility and authority and a violation of the 
scheme guidelines. 
3.1.7.4. Transfer of funds 
Delay in allotment of State share to SPD and release to institutions 
As per RUSA 1.0  and 2.0 guidelines, the States were to contribute their share 
along with Central share to the dedicated RUSA  savings account of SHEC 
within 15 days of receipt of the Central share. The funds received  by SHEC 
were in turn to be transferred to  the dedicated RUSA account of institutions 
within 15 days of receipt of the combined pool of funds from State Government. 
Non-adherence to the above conditions would necessitate payment of interest at 
1.50 per cent per annum by GoK to Centre.  
Audit observed that the delay in allotment of State share to SPD ranged from 19 
to 359 days, which resulted in interest liability to the tune of ₹1.26 crore, as 
evident from Table 3.4 below. 
Table 3.4: Details of delay in allotment of state share leading to interest liability  
Sl. 
No. 
Central share 
allotment date Amount (₹) 
State share 
allotment date 
to SPD 
Amount (₹) 
Delay in 
allotment 
beyond 15 
days 
Interest 
payable at 
1.50 per cent 
per annum (₹) 
1 31.03.2014 26260000 18.02.2015 14000000 309 333466.03 
2 18.06.2015 77187500 06.10.2015 41562500 95 301348.46 
3 01.02.2016 30000000 30.03.2016 20000000 43 53013.70 
4 15.06.2016 437250000 17.10.2016 291500000 109 1958640.41 
5 17.11.2016 27664000 21.03.2017 18442667 109 123919.56 
6 28.03.2017 138000000 29.07.2017 92000000 108 612493.15 
7 22.02.2018 134830500 30.04.2018 89887000 52 288130.93 
8 27.06.2018 595500000 18.01.2019 
447000000 
190 4649794.52 
9 28.08.2018 75000000 18.01.2019 128 394520.55 
10 18.12.2018 153000000 11.10.2019 102000000 282 1773123.29 

 
 51 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
Sl. 
No. 
Central share 
allotment date Amount (₹) 
State share 
allotment date 
to SPD 
Amount (₹) 
Delay in 
allotment 
beyond 15 
days 
Interest 
payable at 
1.50 per cent 
per annum (₹) 
11 11.04.2019 114000000 04.10.2019 76000000 161 754273.97 
12 30.09.2019 30000000 08.10.2020 20000000 359 442602.74 
13 28.06.2021 81458757 30.10.2021 54305837 109 389712.33 
14 29.12.2022 674035000 01.02.2023 449357000 19 526301.30 
 Total 12601340.94 
(Source: Fund release orders of MHRD and State) 
Prolonged delay in release of funds is not justifiable, as it in turn leads to delay 
in release of funds from SPD to institutions.  
Verification of records relating to release of first instalment to 16 selected 
institutions revealed that in 10 institutions the delay ranged from 82 to 682 days 
as detailed in Table 3.5 below. 
Table 3.5: Details of delay in transfer of funds from SPD to selected institutions 
Sl. 
No. Institution Date of receipt 
of fund in SPD 
Date of transfer 
to institution 
Delay in 
days 
1 Human Resource Development Centre (HRDC) 30.03.2016 01.02.2017 293 
2 Government College, Tripunithura 08.10.2020 13.01.2021 82 
3 Rajagiri College of Social Sciences, Kalamassery 18.01.2019 14.06.2019 132 
4 NSS Training College, Ottapalam 11.10.2019 20.11.2020 391 
5 Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom College, Valayanchirangara 18.01.2019 20.11.2020 657 
6 PKM College of Education, Madampam, Kannur 11.10.2019 20.11.2020 391 
7 HHMSPBNSS College for Women, Neeramankara 18.01.2019 11.12.2020 678 
8 Government Arts College, Thiruvananthapuram 18.01.2019 20.11.2020 657 
9 TM Jacob Memorial Government College Manimalakkunnu 08.10.2020 23.01.2021 92 
10 Government Sanskrit College, Tripunithura 18.01.2019 15.12.2020 682 
(Source: Fund release orders of SPD) 
In the reply furnished by Government (April 2024) , it was stated that delay in 
allotment of State share occurred in cases which required approval of Finance 
Department, GoK due to procedural formalities and that no interest was being 
charged for the delay mentioned. Funds were transferred to the individua l 
institutions only after their DPRs were found to be in compliance with the 
RUSA guidelines which might have caused some delay.  
Government may initiate action to check the delay in transfer of funds, as the 
delay in allotment of funds to the institutions  would impede the timely 
achievement of targets  and completion of projects . Further, the institutions 
should be  directed to submit their Detailed Project Reports and get them  
approved in time, as pointed out in paragraph 3.1.5. 
3.1.7.5. Utilisation of funds 
Audit noticed shortfalls in utilisation of funds at State and institution al level as 
seen in following paragraphs: 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
52 
Delay in release of funds due to delay in conducting physical inspection 
The Guiding Principles of the scheme stipulated that funding was norm based 
and future grants were released on the basis of level  of past achievements and 
status of utilisation of funds submitted to MHRD. MHRD releases the grants to 
the State in thr ee instalments in the ratio 50:25: 25. MHRD insisted upon 
utilisation of mor e than 75 per cent  of funds rece ived, in order to consider 
institutions for further release of funds.  The final instalment of 25 per cent of 
Central share would be  released, only when the State submitted physical 
inspection report (PIR) conducted by the Technical Support Group (TSG) 81 to 
PAB. 
In accordance with the decision of PAB, ₹565.57 crore was sanctioned during 
2013-23 to the State towards implementation of RUSA 1.0 and 2.0. As of March 
2023, SPD received ₹433.28 crore (Central and State share) and ₹ 77.75 crore 
was yet to be received  for want of PIRs to be submitted/ utilisation of funds 
above 75 per cent by the State, as instructed in the policy. Of the sum receivable, 
₹ six crore pertained to the implementation of projects in nine institutions under 
RUSA 1.0 and ₹71.75 crore was related to 120 institutions under RUSA 2.0.  
Audit observed that out of these 129 institutions, 78 had utilised more than 75 
per cent of funds received and were eligible for conduct of physical inspection 
by TSG, as of July 2023. However, physical inspection was conducted by TSG 
only in 10 out of these 78  institutions. Further, the remaining 51 institutions 
were yet to achieve utilisation of funds above 75 per cent. 
Government replied (April 2024) that by the end of 2023, phys ical inspections 
were conducted in 78 institutions, based on which proposals for funds were 
submitted to GoI on 30 December 2023. However, delay in submission of PIRs/ 
utilisation of funds above 75 per cent resulted in non-receipt of final instalment 
of State and Central shares to the institutions till date (March 2023). 
Expenditure on higher education vis-à-vis GSDP 
One of the pre -requisites of RUSA 1.0 was that the State Government must 
gradually increase the spending on higher education sector to two per cent of 
GSDP82 during the course of implementation . Under RUSA 2.0, State 
Governments were to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
the Department of Higher Education (MHRD), GoI to be eligible for funding. 
As GoK had received funds under RUSA 1.0, it was liable to increase its 
spending on higher education. Further, in the MoU entered into (May 2018) 
between the State Head of Higher Education Department and RUSA National 
Mission Director, it was assured that the spending on higher education  would 
be increased to at least two per cent of GSDP by March 2020.  
                                                 
81  The State council (SPD in the State) appoints and decides the composition of TSG. 
82  Gross State Domestic Product is a measure in monetary terms, of the sum total volume of all finished 
goods and services produced during a given period of time, usually a year, within the geographical 
boundaries of the State 

 
 53 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
However, Audit observed that the actual spending on higher education during 
2018-23 ranged from 0.44 per cent to 0.51 per cent of the GSDP, as detailed in 
the Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Total State expenditure on Higher Education during 2018-23 
Year GSDP of the State 
(₹ in crore) 
Two per cent 
of GSDP 
(₹ in crore) 
Actual expenditure 
on Higher Education 
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure in 
Percentage 
2018-19 554228.32 11084.57 2691.67 0.48 
2019-20 559194.17 11183.89 2462.40 0.44 
2020-21 518205.90 10364.12 2433.28 0.46 
2021-22 584410.34 11688.21 3017.64 0.51 
2022-23 622397.72 12447.96 3088.11 0.49 
(Source: Details collected from Economics and Statistics Department, GoK and VLC figures)  
GoK thus did not enhance spending on Higher Education sector, as envisaged 
under the scheme. 
Government stated (April 2024) that with the available resources, allocating two 
per cent of GSDP would be a challenging task and that the matter would be 
brought to the notice of Department of Finance, GoK. 
3.1.8. Shortfalls in execution of projects under the scheme 
Audit observed deficiencies in release and utilisation of funds by test  checked 
institutions as detailed below: 
3.1.8.1. Non- finalising of projects resulting in non-utilisation of funds 
Government College, Tripunithura submitted (January 2021) DPR  comprising 
three works 83 to SPD , for obtaining infrastructure grant amounting  to ₹ two 
crore. Of this, ₹ one crore was released (January 2021) for the construction of 
canteen building in the new campus, where an academic block was being 
constructed by Kerala Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisatio n 
(KITCO) utilising KIIFB84 funds. The Director of Collegiate Education (DCE), 
who was the State Project Coordinator of RUSA, also suggested modifications 
to the plan and the college submitted the modified plan to SPD in August 2021.  
Meanwhile, as per Government instructions issued in March 202185, ₹ one crore 
allotted for construction was credited back to the account of the SPD in October 
2021. Audit observed that even as the approval of the plan for canteen was 
pending with SPD, the college submitted (January 2022) a revised plan for 
constructing class rooms on the third floor of the academic block, for which 
permission was accorded by SPD i n March 2022. However, the implementing 
                                                 
83  Construction Component – ₹ one crore for construction of College Canteen in the upcoming campus, 
Purchase Component – ₹80 lakh, Campus Beautification and Maintenance Component – Installation 
of Water Treatment Plant ₹20 lakh 
84  Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board 
85  In line with revised guidelines of GoI wrt. Centrally Sponsored schemes, SPD instructed (August 
2021) the institutions to close the existing bank accounts and trans fer funds lying in the accounts to 
the Single Nodal Account of SPD 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
54 
agency KITCO was not willing to execute the work due to insufficiency of funds 
provided. Subsequently, t he college sought permission  (May 2022) for yet 
another project, viz., construction of a Ladies’ hostel, which was also withdrawn 
(June 2023),  stating that the marshy terrain would necessitate extra cost for 
construction of the hostel building. 
Audit noticed that even after three years of approval of original DPR, the college 
was not able to decide upon the project to be executed and multiple options were 
being explored. In the absence of  effective planning and feasibility studies  to 
identify the actual requirement of the instituti on, various unviable proposals 
were mooted  and the allotted fund remained unutilised. Besides, the 
components relating to purchase, beautification of campus and maintenance and 
installation of water treatment plant were also not undertaken. 
Government replied (April 2024) that getting clearances from statutory bodies 
for construction activities, high cost of construction, etc., delayed the project. It 
was also informed that SPD accorded (December 2023) administrative sanction 
for ₹ two crore for a new proposal submitted (October 2023) by the college for 
construction of classrooms, renovation works and purchase of equipment and 
that the project would start at the earliest. The reply confirms the audit 
observation on inability of the college in finalising the project to be executed as 
the college continues to moot new proposals.  
3.1.8.2. Infructuous expenditure out of preparatory grants 
Government of Kerala received (February 2014 to March 2017) ₹ eight crore as 
preparatory grants under RUSA 1.0 to undertake activities  for creating and 
supporting institutional structures such as SHEC, SPD and TSG, for better 
implementation of RUSA in the State. MHRD directed (January 2016) the 
States to utilise the preparatory grants and to submit the Utilisation Certificates 
(UC) by 31 March 2016.  
As per GoK’s directions (February 2016) to utilise the grants in a timely manner, 
the SPD invited proposal for implementing Video Conferencing (VC) facility86 
from Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation  (KELTRON). 
KELTRON submitted (February 2016)  detailed project proposal to SPD  for 
implementing the facility in 30 selected Government Arts and Science Colleges 
all over Kerala and Directorate of Collegiate Education, at a cost of ₹1.24 crore. 
The delivery and installation of VC facili ty was to be completed within six to 
seven weeks and the warranty of equipment was fixed as three years. SPD issued 
(February 2016) work order to KELTRON and KELTRON submitted invoice 
(March 2016) for ₹1.24 crore. SPD paid the amount in two instalments in March 
2016 itself and furnished UC to MHRD in the same month.  
KELTRON supplied (March 2017) the hardware and equipment at 31 locations, 
only after a delay of one year. However, simultaneous video conferencing at all 
31 locations did not materialise. Moreover, due to non-availability of dedicated 
                                                 
86  Included six items such as end point with camera and remote, speaker, channel mixer with mic, display 
etc. 

 
 55 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
bandwidth (i.e 40 -50 mbps), the Master Control Unit (MCU) 87 could not be 
installed at the Directorate and had to be relocated (March 2019) to State Data 
Centre at Thiruvananthapuram after two years.  
Audit observed that the Director of Collegiate Education (DCE) had informed 
(June 2019) SPD about the inability to undertake new programmes due to the 
issue of VC connectivity and requested KELTRON to make the system 
functional. However, KELTRON was able to connect 22 locations only.  In six 
locations, the devices were faulty and the remaining three locations had reported 
Internet Protocol issues. Even in the case of 22 locations claimed to have been 
connected by KELTRON, DCE pointed out that (Sep tember 2022) only one 
way connectivity could be established.  
In December 2022, DCE requested KELTRON to suggest the date for testing 
31 VC locations through MCU. However, KELTRON expressed inability to 
conduct the test due to poor condition of functional equipment and inability to 
replace damaged equipment from their own fund. Audit noticed that in response 
to the request made by SPD to re -organise the VC facility already installed, 
KELTRON informed ( July 2023) that all hardware components deployed as 
part of the project have turned obsolete  and out of warranty , due to which no 
further assistance could be provided. As per the status report furnished (January 
2024) by SPD to Audit, in 19 out of 22 locations where the system was installed, 
at least one component of the system had turned faulty and required 
replacement. 
Thus, KELTRON, despite being entrusted with the responsibility of completing 
the work within seven weeks for which full payment was received, could not 
complete the project and achieve integration of all 31 locations at a t ime, even 
after seven years. Due to non -integration of all locations, meetings, tr aining 
programmes and Online Resources Initiatives of Collegiate Education 
Programmes could not be conducted online as envisaged. The SPD, w ithout 
ensuring the completion of integration of VC facility at 31 locations , had 
effected full payment to KELTRON which resulted in infructuous expenditure 
of ₹1.24 crore. Despite funds released remaining parked with KELTRON, 
Government furnished UCs to GoI, showing the funds as spent.  
Government stated (April 2024) that KELTRON being a PSU under Industries 
Department, the Department was requested to direct KELTRON to complete 
the integration of VC facility at the 31 locations without further delay, failing 
which disciplinary action would be finalised against erring officials. 
3.1.8.3. Non-establishment of the New Model Degree College at Wayanad 
Under component five of RUSA 2.0, the project for setting up of a New Model 
Degree College (NMDC) in Wayanad District was approved (July 2018) by 
PAB. MHRD directed (July 2018) GoK to complete the process es of handing 
over of land for construction, submission of complete DPR and the tendering 
                                                 
87  MCU is a video transcoding device that helps in conducting group video conferences between multiple 
video conferencing systems. It works by mixing media points received from different endpoints of a 
video conference call in real time. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
56 
process on priority basis. GoK accorded (January 2019) permissive sanction to 
allot 10 acres of land owned by Health and Family Welfa re Department  in 
Periya village of Mananthavady Taluk in  Wayanad district and the land was 
handed over (July 2020) to Higher Education Department for constructing the 
college.  
SPD entrusted (April 2019) the task of preparation of DPR of NMDC to Kerala 
State Information Technology Infrastructure Ltd (KSITIL). On verifying 
records made available to audit, it was noticed that KSITIL  furnished (May 
2019) the DPR to SPD without ensuring the suitability of the land. SPD 
forwarded (May 2019) the DPR to MHRD. In the wake of frequent occurrence 
of landslides in the vic inity of the site , it was decided 88 (September 2019) to 
entrust National Institute of Technology (NIT), Calicut to ascertain suitability 
of the proposed land for construction. NIT reported (October 2019) that the site 
being steep and characterised by silty clay, was not fit for building works. The 
above fact was informed by the District Collector to the SPD in November 2019. 
Audit observed that c onsultancy fee of ₹14.51 lakh was paid (March 2023) to 
KSITIL for preparation of DPR.  
As KSITIL did not ensure su itability of the land while preparing the DPR,  
₹14.51 lakh expended from RUSA fund towards consultancy fee has turned  
wasteful. Despite funds amounting to ₹ six crore being credited (February 2023) 
to the SNA, no alternative site was identified and fresh D PR prepared. As a 
result, the project of construction of NMDC Wayanad is yet to be undertaken 
(February 2024).  
Government replied (April 2024) that an alternative land in possession of 
Department of Technical Education has been identified and the construction of 
NMDC was expected to start at the earliest. Government may fix responsibility 
and initiate action against KSITIL for not ensuring the suitability of selected 
land, as the land identified was located in an area prone to landslides. 
3.1.8.4. Deviation from Detailed Project Report 
On submission of Technical sanction accorded by TSG to the works proposed 
by institutions, SPD issues final authorisation to the institutions to commence  
the works for which sanction was accorded. As per the general directions issued 
by SPD while issuing Technical Sanction/final work order to the institutions, 
works included in the DPR were to be executed in the site proposed as per 
specifications contained in the DPR . Audit observed that the institutions took 
up projects which were not included original ly in the DPR and not accorded 
Technical sanction, for execution as seen in the following cases: 
 The DPR of Kannur University approved by SPD (October 2017) under 
RUSA 1.0, included three construction works 89 worth ₹  seven crore 
                                                 
88  In a joint physical verification of the site conducted by authorities of Panchayat, Revenue Department 
and RUSA. 
89  Seminar Complex at Kannur Campus – ₹5.90 crore, University Scientific Instrumentation Centre at 
Swami Anandatheertha Campus, Payyanur – ₹ one crore, Construction of open well at Staff Quarters, 
Dharmasala – ₹0.10 crore.  

 
 57 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
under t he infrastructure component . During verification of records of 
these works, it was noticed that two works, viz., construction of a car 
shed roof with rest room for drivers costing ₹55.04 lakh and construction 
of Compound Wall in Nileswaram Campus for ₹44.80 lakh which were 
not included in the DPR, were undertaken by the University utilising 
RUSA fund. 
 Maintenance of Ladies’ Hostel at  an estimated amount of ₹19.25 lakh  
was one of the works included in the DPR of Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom 
College, Valayanchirangara under RUSA 2.0. The technical sanction for 
the work was accorded by the TSG in February 2020 . As per the 
agreement executed (February 2020) between the College and Habitat 
Technology Group (Habitat), the work was to be completed by February 
2021. The work was not taken up based on the instructions of College in 
the wake of COVID in 2020.  Subsequently, the Board of Governors of 
the College decided (July 2021) to undertake maintenance work of 
Ladies’ Hostel with funds provided by the Managem ent of the 
institution, and to utilize the allotted RUSA funds for renovating History 
Museum by constructing the first floor to the existing building . Audit 
observed that the work of History museum was also entrusted to Habitat 
without executing any fresh agreement. During the joint site inspection 
conducted by Audit with the college authorities in April 2023, it was 
observed that though the first floor was constructed, electrical and 
plumbing works were not executed.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that the deviation in respect of two works 
viz., car shed and compound wall as well as the work-related to history museum 
did not have approval from SPD, and the cases were being examined in 
consultation with the Finance Department.  The deviations in projects 
undertaken, which did not have approval from SPD are a procedural violation 
and are to be viewed seriously.  
3.1.8.5. Failure in completing construction works  
Seminar Complex 
Kannur University proposed (July 2017) construction of ground f loor of 
building for Seminar Complex at Thavakkara Campus of Kannur University for 
₹5.90 crore  under RUSA 1.0. The work was entrusted to the contractor, 
Uralungal Labour Contract Cooperative Society (ULCCS). As per the 
agreement (March 2018) executed between the University and ULCCS, ULCCS 
was to be paid ₹4.70 crore and the work was to be completed within 15 months, 
by June 2019.  
The Syndicate initially decided to grant (March 2018) mobilisation advance of  
20 per cent amounting to ₹93.96 lakh to ULCCS but resolved (August 2018) to 
grant excess funds (additional 30 per cent) to the agency, thereby enhancing the 
total amount of advance granted to ₹2.34 crore. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
58 
Figure 3.1: Photographs of construction site of Seminar Complex at Thavakkara  campus, 
Kannur University taken by Audit party on 12 July 2023 
Audit noticed that the University handed over the site to ULCCS in July 2018 
only, after felling and clearing off the trees in the site. In July 2019, ULCCS 
wrote to the Registrar of the University that delayed clarifications and approval 
of drawings of pile cap, column rods and grid beam have greatly hampered the 
progress of work. Citing the above, ULCCS requested an extension of period of 
one year to complete the work, which was also granted by the Syndicate. While 
the work was in progress , ULCCS submitted (November 2020) a revised 
estimate for ₹6.04 crore, which was approved (February 2021) by the Board of 
Governors (BoG) of RUSA.  Though the agreement was executed in March 
2018, ULCCS requested multiple extensions of time 90 for completion of work 
to the University, citing reasons such as delay in handing over of site, difficulties 
experienced in pile boring beyond a certain strata, and non -availability of men 
and material due to COVID restricti ons and lock down. The request s for time 
extension were accepted and a supplementary agreement executed (April 2022) 
for extra items in the revised estimate.  
Joint verification of the site with University authorities (July 2023) revealed that 
the ground floor  of the building has not been completed and electrical and 
plumbing works were yet to be undertaken.  By then, an expenditure of ₹ 5.13 
crore had been incurred on the work.  
Thus, the Syndicate of the University, disregarding the guidelines of t he 
scheme, extended undue favour to the contractor by sanctioning excess 
mobilisation advance as well as granting unjustified extension of one year. 
Despite executing supplementary agreement in April 2022 with extra items, the 
contractor has not completed the work even after a lapse of nearly five years 
from June 2019 . After incurring an expenditure of ₹5.13 crore from RUSA 
                                                 
90  First extension – 01 July 2019 to 30 July 2020, Second extension – upto June 2021, Third extension – 
upto October 2021 


 
 59 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
funds, the intended benefit of Seminar Complex to the University is yet to be 
achieved. 
Scientific Instrumentation Centre 
Kannur University proposed (July 2017) construction of a Scientific 
Instrumentation Centre (Centre) for ₹ o ne crore and purchase of instruments 
worth ₹3.07 crore under the components of construction and purchase of RUSA 
1.0 respectively. The facility and equipment were to help the faculty, research 
scholars and students t o carry out globally competitive Research and 
Development in basic and applied sciences. The sophisticated instrumentation 
facility aimed at strengthening technological infrastructure to carry out 
advanced research in various science disciplines under one roof and make their 
services available to academic schools and departments. University accorded 
(August 2018) Technical Sanction to the est imate for ₹1.90  crore of which 
₹ one crore was sourced from RUSA funds and balance ₹0.90 crore from State 
Plan fund. The work was entrusted to ULCCS, an accredited agency. 
As per the agreement executed by the University (September 2018) with 
ULCCS, the construction of the centre including electrification and plumbing 
works91 were to be completed within nine months from th e date of agreement, 
which was extended92 subsequently through multiple orders till June 2021. The 
University stated that the completion of work got extended due to non -release 
of money from Plan fund and delay in obtaining approval from Public Works 
Department, GoK for electrical and plumbing works.  
The University revised (August 2022 -May 2023) the estimate to ₹3.30 crore 
(₹2.30 crore from Plan fund) by including three additional rooms, car porch and 
staircase in the cellar and allied electrical and plumbing works. Audit conducted 
(July 2023) a joint inspection of the site along with the authorities of the 
University and observed that the building alone was completed and works 
relating to flooring, electrification, plumbing, etc., were yet to be undertaken. 
Figure 3.2: Photograph of building for Scientific Instrumentation centre at Payyanur campus, 
Kannur University, taken by Audit party on 13 July 2023 
                                                 
91  Costing ₹1.52 crore 
92  First extension from 02 June 2019 to 11 April 2020, second extension upto 30 November 2020 and 
third extension upto 30 June 2021 


 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
60 
Thus, though the University undertook construction of the building based on an 
approved design, it opted to revise the plan with additional feature s, 
necessitating extra expenses. Consequently, the Centre was not made functional 
even after five years  and the four instruments 93 purchased for ₹ 2.20 crore for 
installation in the centre had to be kept at the disposal of the Heads of the 
Departments in various campuses of the University . Thus, the object ive of 
enabling technological infrastructure to carry out advanced research in various 
science disciplines under one roof to benefit academic schools and departments, 
remains to be realised. 
Government replied (April 2024) that for the financial year 2024 -25, the 
University has proposed to allocate ₹201.60 lakh from the State plan fund as a 
matching grant for the completion of both the works. It was also informed that 
corrective measures will be taken to complete the projects at the earliest.  
However, due to delay in completion of the projects, the students of the 
University were deprived of the benefits of the Seminar Complex and Scientific 
Instrumentation Centre. 
Audit further observed that Kannur University had violated GoK instructions 
(July 2014 and Ju ne 2018) whereby the advance payment to an accredited 
agency undertaking the work directly, should be restricted to 20 per cent of the 
estimated cost of works in the agreement executed between the institution and 
accredited agency.  Kannur University entrusted the new construction works 
undertaken under RUSA 1.0 to the contractor, ULCCS. In August 2018, 
ULCCS requested to release 50 per cent of the contract price as mobilisation 
advance towards all works for which agreement was execut ed by them with 
Kannur University, citing increase in price of materials, reduction of credit 
period by vendors post implementation of GST and need for bulk purchase of 
materials for the work. Accordingly, the Syndicate of the University 
resolved (August 2018) to grant 50 per cent of the contract price of works as 
mobilisation advance for all construction works undertaken by ULCCS. Thus, 
Kannur University paid ₹5.61 crore as advance payment to ULCCS for various 
works under RUSA, in violation of extant orders, as shown in Appendix 3.5. 
Government replied that Kannur Universi ty has violated the guidelines of 
Government on undertaking public works issued by the Finance Department 
and released excess mobilisation advances to the contractors without obtaining 
prior approval of Government. It was also stated that appropriate actio n would 
be taken against the University in consultation with Finance Department. 
Auditorium at SSUS Kalady 
As per the approved DPR, the Vice -Chancellor of  Sree Sankaracharya 
University of Sanskrit (SSUS) , Kalady sanctioned (March 2017) the 
construction of an auditorium in the University campus and entrusted the 
Engineering Department of the University to prepare a detailed estimate. 
Subsequently, the SSUS , Kalady handed over (February 2018) this work to a 
                                                 
93  Micro Raman Spectrometer, Spectro Fluorometer, X-ray Diffraction Instrument, Solar Simulator 

 
 61 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
consultant, Kerala State Nirmiti  Kendra (KESNIK), which prepared a detailed 
estimate for ₹ four crore. The University released (February 2018) ₹ three crore 
as mobilisation advance to KESNIK, which was 55 per cent in excess of the 
permissible 20 per cent of the total cost. KESNIK tendered the work and 
awarded it to another agency 94, with September 2019 as time of completion. 
KESNIK also prepared an additional detailed estimate of ₹3.75 crore for 
electrification, air conditioning, acoustics, false ceiling, compound wall, 
firefighting system, etc ., from th e plan fund of the  institution, which was 
sanctioned (November 2020) by SSUS , Kalady. The total payment made by 
SSUS, Kalady till 19 March 2022 was ₹3.35 crore , which was utilised from 
RUSA fund amounting to ₹ four crore. Audit conducted joint inspection (April 
2023) of the site and found that the construction of auditorium was not 
completed and works related to flooring, electrification and plumbing were yet 
to be undertaken. Further, no work was being currently undertaken at the site.  
Thus, the construction was left incomplete even after a lapse of five years from 
the release of fund. 
Figure 3.3: Photograph of Auditorium at SSUS, Kalady taken by Audit party on 27 April 2023 
Government accepted the audit findings and stated (April 2024) that SSUS , 
Kalady has violated the guidelines of Government on undertaking public works 
issued by the Finance Department and released excess mobilisation advances to 
the contractor without obtaining prior approval of Government. It was also 
stated that appropriate action wo uld be taken against the University in 
consultation with Finance Department and that the delay in the construction of 
auditorium will be reviewed and corrective measures will be taken to complete 
the project at the earliest. 
3.1.8.6. Infrastructure Facilities for Differently abled Persons 
RUSA aimed at ensuring that issues of access, equity and quality are addressed 
in an equitable manner. By addressing equity issues such as converting existing 
buildings into fully disabled friendly and barrier free environments by providing 
ramps/lifts for easy access to classrooms, tactile path, display boards and sign  
posts, special facilities / equipment for the disabled, etc., significant impact was 
                                                 
94  M/s. K. A. Johnson 


 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
62 
expected in the enrolment of students from deprived and marginalised sections. 
Further, the Manuals for institutional accreditation of Universities and Colleges 
under NAAC also prescribed the availability of disabled friendly  physical 
facilities in an institution as a requisite for grading purpose.  
Audit observed low priority bei ng assigned to installation of disabled friendly 
features in institutions while selecting components under RUSA. Out of the 16 
test checked institutions, only four institutions had included proposals for 
providing disabled friendly facilities like special toilets, elevators, ramps, etc ., 
for ₹239 lakh.  
Though existing institutions could have utili sed RUSA funds to erect disabled 
friendly structures, Audit observed (August 2023) that out of 358 buildings in 
selected institutions, functional ramp was available in 151 buildings (42.18 per 
cent) only. Further,  out of 244 multi-storied buildings, wheelchair access to 
upper floors was available in 30  buildings (12.30 per cent) only, the details of 
which are given in Appendix 3.6. 
Government replied (April 2024) that every effort will be made to incorporate 
disabled friendly features in institutions in future. Efforts to utilize the second 
and third instalments of the component equity initiatives for providing facilities/ 
making purchases that help disabled studen ts at various institutions were also 
underway. 
3.1.9. Monitoring  
3.1.9.1. Non-constitution of  Board of Governors and P roject Monitoring 
Unit in selected institutions 
As per RUSA 1.0 Guidelines, the Board of Governors (BoG) was to monitor the 
progress of institutional pro jects on a regular basis and provide guidance for 
improving the performance of the institutions in project implementation. The 
BoG could be a 10 -15 member body comprising eminent individuals from the 
institution itself, State government, society, industry as well as the academia. It 
was the responsibility of BoG to take all policy decisions with regard to smooth, 
cost effective and timely implementation of the institutional project s, ensure 
overall faculty development, ensure compliance with the agreed procedures for 
procurement of goods, works and services, financial management, etc. 
RUSA guidelines further envisage that each institution will have to form a 
Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) with appropriate representation from academic 
officials of the institution, faculty, senior administrative officers, technical and 
non-technical support staff and students. The PMU was responsible for 
monitoring of the project at the institutional level and was assigned with roles 
including procurement of goods, works and ser vices, financial management, 
performance audit, implementation of faculty/staff development and periodical 
updation of Management Information System. 
Audit observed that one test  checked institution, Government College , 
Tripunithura had not constituted BoG or PMU (May 2023). Audit also observed 

 
 63 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
that seven out of the 16 selected institutions did not convene any meetings of 
the BoG and/or PMU meetings in the years specified, as detailed in Table 3.7, 
which was reflective of the low priority assigned to timely review and decision 
making with regard to implementation of institutional projects. 
Table 3.7: Details of convening BoG and PMU meetings 
Name of Institution Years in which no meetings were held 
BoG PMU 
SSUS Kalady 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 Meetings held 
Government Arts College, 
Thiruvananthapuram Meetings held 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 
2022-23 
Rajagiri College, Kalamassery 2018-19, 2022-23 2018-19, 2022-23 
Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom College, 
Valayanchirangara Meetings held 2018-19  
Government Sanskrit College, 
Tripunithura 
2018-19, 2019-20, 2021-22 and 
2022-23 2018-19 
SNGS Pattambi 2020-21 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23 
Government Brennen College, 
Thalassery 
2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 
2022-23 Meetings held 
(Source: Data obtained from institutions) 
Government informed (April 2024) that Government College, Tripunithura has 
constituted both BoG and PMU in November 2023. It was assured that regular 
monitoring and evaluation of BoG and PMU of each institution would be 
undertaken by RUSA SPD. 
3.1.9.2. Shortfall in geo -tagging of works  and non -functioning of 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Human Resource Development had provided (November 2015)  
ISRO’s location-based application ‘Bhuvan RUSA’ to the States to monitor the 
progress in activities undertaken by funded institutions. The funded institutions 
were required to geo -tag the works/purchases by uploading physical and 
financial information in the application . Audit analysis of the Geographic 
Information System in the RUSA website in January 2024 revealed that only 19 
out of the 157 funded institutions had geo-tagged their information on the status 
of project implementation. Reasons for not geo-tagging works/purchases were 
not furnished to audit.  The above instances point to the fact that the prospects 
of web -based monitoring system have not been harnessed effectively in the 
State. 
RUSA aimed to implement a new web-based Management Information System 
(MIS) for monitoring the progress of project implementation in funded 
institutions and to collect IDPs and historical data of all universities and colleges 
in the State. For the purpose, MHRD launched (October 2018) National Higher 
Education Resource Center (NHERC) -MIS portal for collecting the details of 
institutions and the portal li nk was communicated (April 2019) to the 
institutions. Audit observed that the portal was not functional and MIS was not 
operationalised as envisaged. 
Government replied (April 2024) that action will be taken to monitor and ensure 
that all RUSA beneficiaries are geo-tagged. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
64 
3.1.9.3. Shortfall in regular teaching staff 
One of the pre-requisites for funding under RUSA 1.0 was that of filling up of 
faculty vacancies. The RUSA 1.0 guidelines stipulated  that the States having 
more than 15 per cent faculty positions remaining vacant by the end of the first 
year of RUSA, may lose the entitlement for any further grants. The Guidelines 
of RUSA 2.0 envisaged that colleges and universities with faculty position 
above 85 per cent  filled in regular mode an d student teacher ratio above  
10:1-20:1 were to be given top priority for selection under infrastructure grants. 
GoK entered (May 2018) into a n MoU with MHRD and agreed on filling up 
faculty vacancies and ensuring that there is no ban on recruitment and t hat the 
faculty positions in Universities would not be less than 85 per cent of sanctioned 
faculty strength. However, Audit noticed deviations from the above in filling up 
of vacancies by test checked institutions as elaborated below: 
 Audit observed that in 15 selected institutions (including Universities), 
the sanctioned faculty strength was 1776 as on 31 March 2023, against 
which the actual faculty position was 1249 (70 per cent), leaving 527 
vacant faculty positions as shown in Table 3.8. The details of sanctioned 
strength and faculty position s in individual institutions are given in 
Appendix 3.7. 
Table 3.8: Details of sanctioned posts and faculty position of 15 selected 
institutions during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23  
Year Total Sanctioned 
Teaching Post 
Actual Teaching Faculty 
(excluding Contract/ Guest 
Faculty) 
Difference/ 
Vacant Position 
2018-19 1727 1160* 568 
2019-20 1737 1179 558 
2020-21 1738 1255 483 
2021-22 1739 1253 486 
2022-23 1776 1249 527 
* In one college, there was one faculty in excess of the sanctioned strength 
(Source: Data obtained from selected institutions) 
Audit took note of the fact that as the requisite benchmark of 85 per cent 
of faculty strength was not maintained by SSUS Kalady, the project 
submitted by the institution under RUSA 2.0 was discarded (July 2018) 
by MHRD. In 2018-19, against the sanctioned strength of 220, 46 faculty 
positions remained vacant in the institution. 
 Out of the 15 selected institutions, eight institutions, which had proposed 
works under construction, renovation and purchase, did not maintain the 
student teacher ratio as stipulated in the guidelines (Appendix 3.8). 
 As per the UGC Regulation on Minimum Qualifications for appointment 
of Teachers and other Academic staff in Universities and colleges and 
measures for the maintenance of standards in Higher Education 2010 , 
teachers should be appointed on contract basis, only when it is absolutely 
necessary and when the student teacher ratio does not satisfy the laid 

 
 65 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
down norms. In any case, the number of appointments was not to exceed 
10 per cent of the total faculty position of the College / University. 
Contrary to the above, it was observed that during the audit period 2018-
19 to 2022-23, the number of Guest / Contract Faculty appointed in the 
15 selected institutions ranged from 42 to 47 per cent, as against the 10 
per cent criteria specified in UGC norms, as detailed in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Details of Guest/Contract staff appointed in selected institutions 
Period 
Sanctioned 
Regular 
Teaching Posts 
Actual 
Regular 
Teaching 
Posts 
UGC Criteria 
(10 per cent of 
total posts) 
Guest / 
Contract 
Faculty 
appointed 
Percentage of 
Guest/ Contract 
faculty 
2018-19 1727 1160 173 760 44 
2019-20 1737 1179 174 789 45 
2020-21 1738 1255 174 746 42 
2021-22 1739 1253 174 807 46 
2022-23 1776 1249 178 838 47 
(Source: Replies collected from 15 selected institutions under RUSA 1.0 and 2.0)  
Government assured in reply (April 2024) that institutions which have a student 
teacher ratio exceeding 15 per cent and guest faculty exceeding 10 per cent will 
be reminded to undertake corrective measures to adhere to the RUSA/UGC 
guidelines. 
3.1.9.4. Non-compliance to pre-requisites of RUSA scheme 
As per the pre-requisites of RUSA 1.0, it was the responsibility of the States to 
carry out Accreditation reforms. States were to ensure that all the institutions 
adopt accreditation of NAAC and National Board of Accreditation (NBA)95 as 
mandatory quality assurance framework. This was a pre-condition for sanction 
of funds under RUSA. Further, targets of RUSA 2.0 required all the State 
institutions to be NAAC accredited96 by the end of March 2020. MHRD directed 
(January 2016) the States to create a State level Quality Assura nce Cell 
(SLQAC) for facilitating timely mandatory NAAC accreditation to Higher 
Education institutions under RUSA 1.0. SLQAC was to take up various 
awareness as well as preparatory activities reaching out to the geographically 
scattered Higher Education in stitutions across the State, so as to achieve 
national and international standards.  
Though GoK created (March 2016) SLQAC and utilised ₹1.42 crore of RUSA 
fund towards its establishment expenditure (March 2023), Audit observed that 
out of the 266 Gov ernment/Aided Arts and Science institutions 97, 81 did not 
have NAAC accreditation of any grade at the beginning  of the audit period in 
2018-19. The status after five years in 2022 -23 indicated that the number of 
unaccredited institutions increased to 114 as detailed in Table 3.10. 
                                                 
95  Accreditation agency for Technical Educational institutions 
96  Accreditation given by NAAC is usually valid for a period of five years. However, institutions which 
have secured highest grade consecutively in previous two cycles of accreditation and continue to do 
so in the 3rd cycle will be eligible for extension of validity from five to seven years. 
97  Government and Aided Arts and Science colleges  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
66 
Table 3.10: Status of NAAC accreditation of Arts and Science Colleges in the 
State during 2018-23 
Year Total number of Higher 
Education institutions 
Number of institutions without 
accreditation 
2018-19 266 81 
2019-20 266 88 
2020-21 266 94 
2021-22 267 103 
2022-23 267 114 
(Source: Data furnished by the Directorate of Collegiate Education)  
The decreasing trend in obtaining accreditation raises concerns regarding the 
extent of handholding of institutions by SLQAC towards attaining the pre -
requisites of RUSA. 
Government stated (April 2024) that as per the NAAC website (August 2023) , 
a total of 234 institutions in the State were accredited. In addition, it was stated 
that several factors p osed limitation to accreditation process like frequent 
changes in the criteria of assessment by NAAC , shutting down of H igher 
Education Institutions during COVID 19 lockdown and floods in 2018 and 
2019. 
The above contention is not tenable as the targets of RUSA 2.0 required all the 
State institutions to be NAAC accredited by the end of March 2020 and Audit 
observed that 58 number of colleges did not possess NAAC accreditation of any 
grade throughout the period 2018-23. 
3.1.10. Conclusion 
GoK received funding for implementation of RUSA from March 2014. Total 
grants of ₹433.28 crore were received till March 2023 , out of which  the 
Government managed to spend only ₹310.54 crore, leaving an unspent balance 
of ₹122.74 crore. Despite institutions not adhering to conditions specified in the 
Guidelines of RUSA, funds were released to these institutions, which defeated 
the very purpose of the scheme. Though RUSA 1.0 was to be implemented 
during 2013-17, several projects undertaken in test checked institutions  under 
RUSA 1.0 were not completed by 2017 and were in various stages of execution 
during the audit period. Funds relating to RUSA 1.0 and RUSA 2.0, amounting 
to ₹10.54 crore and ₹121.75 crore respectively were yet to be released for 
completing these projects for reasons such as delay in conducting physical 
inspection, non-commencement of project etc. 
Audit scrutiny revealed several shortcomings, delays and deviations from 
adherence to provisions in the Guidelines on implementation of the scheme. The 
State excluded KSHEC from the roles of strategy and planning, monitoring and 
evaluation, etc. Even though SHEPs were endorsed by KSHEC, the activities in 
connection with their preparation were not performed by the Council. SHEPs 
were not prepared by aggregating the IDPs. Baseline survey was not conducted 
for the preparation of DPRs by institutions. There was undue delay on the part 

 
 67 
Implementation of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  
of SPD,  in releasing funds to institutions , which contributed to delay in 
implementation of components undertaken as per the DPR. 
Government spending on higher education for the period 2018 -23 ranged 
between 0.44 and 0.51 per cent of GSDP against the agreed two per cent as per 
the MoU with Government of India . Infrastructure projects remained 
incomplete due to deviation from approved DPR and consequent lack of funds 
for their completion. Out of 16 test checked institutions, only four institutions 
had included proposals for providing disabled friendly  facilities like special  
toilets, elevators, ramps, etc. 
Monitoring of the scheme at institutional as well as State level was inadequate. 
In the absence of annual perspective plan, the institutions were not having any 
timeline for progress  to be achieved in the implementation.  Geo-tagging of 
projects was not undertaken by the institutions as required under RUSA 
Guidelines. 
3.1.11. Recommendations 
Government may ensure that: 
 All works undertaken are geo -tagged for effective implementation of 
web-based monitoring system. 
 The spending on higher education is increased to two per cent of the 
GSDP as per the Memorandum of Understanding with Government of  
India. 
 Recruitment of staff for faculty positions is carried out as per the norms 
for smooth functioning of the Institutes.  
 Projects under RUSA should be completed in a time bound manner to 
achieve the targeted benefits and the option of taking action ag ainst 
officials responsible for severely delayed cases is explored. 
 

 
 5 
 
   
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
PARAGRAPHS 

 
 
Compliance Audit Report for the year ended March 2022 
6 
 

 
 69 
CHAPTER IV 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
Misappropriation 
 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPM ENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
 
4.1. Misappropriation of Government money in Coconut Nursery, 
Valiyathura, Thiruvananthapuram 
Non-adherence to codal provisions and absence of supervisory controls 
resulted in misappropriation of ₹1.28 lakh in Coconut Nursery, 
Valiyathura, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Rule 92 (a) (ii) to (iv) of the Kerala Treasury Code (KTC) requires 
Government officers who handle cash to enter all monetary transactions in 
the cash book as soon as they occur and get these attested by the Head of 
Office in token of check.  The Head of Office should verify the totalling of 
the cash book or have this done by some responsible subordinate other than 
the writer of the cash book and initial them as correct.  Article 7 (2) of 
Kerala Financial Code Vol.I (KFC) stipulates that the daily collectio n of 
each officer should be remitted to the Treasury, on the next working day, 
or if not possible to do so, at least once in a week.  
Article 297 of KFC stipulates that if the Head of Office suspects defalcation 
or loss of public moneys which involved his office, he should immediately 
send a preliminary report to the Accountant General, and to the Head of 
Office and report the case to the Vigilance and Anti -Corruption Bureau. 
The Head of Office should investigate the matter fully without delay and 
take further action, including fixing and enforcing responsibility for losses. 
The Coconut Nursery, Valiyathura, headed by the Assistant Director of 
Agriculture (ADA), supplies coconut seedlings to Krishibhavans, farmers 
and through sales counter at World Market, T hiruvananthapuram. The 
sale proceeds paid in cash or Demand draft by the beneficiaries were seen 
credited to the Special Treasury Savings Bank (STSB) 98 Account of the 
nursery and the account of District Panchayat (DP)99/ head of account100 of 
Agriculture Department. 
Audit of Coconut Nursery, Valiyathura was conducted from 17 June 2019 
to 20 June 2019 covering the period 2017-18 to 2018-19. During the course 
of audit, cash book, treasury receipts related to the sale of coconut seedlings 
and details of remittance into STSB and to accounts of District Panchayat/ 
Scheme, were subject to detailed scrutiny, which revealed the following 
circumventions of codal provisions.  
                                                 
98  Treasury Savings Bank account maintained at Principal Sub Treasury East Fort, Thiruvananthapuram 
99  Till 22 April 2018, as directed by Local Self Government Department on 27 February 2003. 
100  ‘0401-00-119-99 Receipts from Horticulture and Vegetable crops’ 

 
 70 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
 Two ADsA and one Agricultural Officer (AO) held charge of the 
office during the period 23 Decembe r 2017 to 13 August 2018.  
During this period the officials single -handedly collected the sale 
proceedings, recorded entries in the cash book and certified the 
cash, which was against the provisions  laid down in KTC. A 
responsible subordinate officer other than the writer of the cash 
book had not ensured the correctness of the entries/cash balance. 
 During the period 23 December 2017 to 13 August 2018 (203 days), 
remittances were made only on six days101. The daily cash collection 
was not seen remitted to Distr ict Panchayat or head of account of 
Agriculture Department but  retained in hand. Of the six 
remittances made during the period only three remittances were 
made to the District Panchayat and the remaining were remitted to 
the Special Treasury Savings Bank ( STSB) Account102 in violation 
of Government orders. The recordings made during the above 
period were marked by over -writings (four instances), striking off 
entries (two instances), non -accounting of remittances to treasury  
(two instances) and non-entry/delayed entry of receipts (five 
instances). 
 The AO assumed charge from his predecessor on 26 July 2018 and 
the second ADA took over charge on 13 August 2018. The opening 
cash balance on 26 July 2018 when the AO assumed charge, was 
₹7,48,673 as per cash book. However, the physical cash balance was 
not jointly verified and the cash balance recorded in the cash book 
was not certified by the incoming and outgoing officers. 
Noticing non -adherence to laid down procedures in the day to day 
management of  funds by the auditee unit, Audit undertook (February 
2021) a thorough check of entries in the cash book for the period 01 April 
2016 to 31 December 2020. Scrutiny revealed that only part of receipts 
towards sale of coconut seedlings during the period 23 De cember 2017 to 
13 August 2018 had been remitted into STSB/DP account as shown in Table 
4.1 below:  
Table 4.1: Details of remittance of receipts during the period 23 December 2017 
to 13 August 2018 
 (in ₹) 
Total amount 
collected as cash 
Total amount remitted to 
STSB/DP/Agriculture account 
Cash in hand as on 
13.08.2018 Short remittance 
1 2 3 4 (1-2-3) 
9,26,655 7,37,009  61,510 1,28,136 
(Source: Records of the Coconut Nursery) 
Audit noticed that when the second ADA assumed charge on 13 August 
2018, the cash balance recorded in the cash book was ₹8,20,466 when the 
                                                 
101  09 January 2018, 16 February 2018, 02 June 2018, 13 July 2018, 18 July 2018 and 02 August 2018  
102  Treasury Savings Bank A ccount No.701021400000024 maintained at Principal Sub -Treasury East  
Fort 

 
 71 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
actual cash balance as per receipts should have been ₹1,89,646 103. The 
incoming ADA, despite detecting mismatch of physical cash balance with 
the recording in cash book, neither informed the Head of the 
Department/Accountant General nor initiated any action to further 
investigate the matter, as spelt out in Article 297 of KFC. 
On Audit pointing out (July 2019, May 2021 104) the short remittance, the 
AO replied (February 2023) that all receipts pertaining to the period have 
been remitted to the DP/head of account in two bulk credits of ₹1,69,760105 
and ₹9,02,516106 on 02 August 2019 and 31 August 2019 respectively.  
The above two credits were made out of the balance amount in the STSB 
account, instead of recovering the short amount from responsible officers. 
This also established irregular parking of funds in STSB, without crediting 
the amount to the appropriate heads of account s of DP/Government for 
over a year and a half, which was a violation of codal provisions.  
Government replied 107 (December 2023) that Internal audit of the 
institution conducted in pursuance of audit observation has revealed that 
the delay to record the amou nts transferred to the STSB account in the 
cash book on time led to the audit finding as misappropriation of 
Government funds and that, all amounts due to the Government have been 
settled correctly later. 
The contention of Government was untenable as Audit  cross-verified 
(January 2024) each credit made to the STSB account with the TR 5 
receipts of the Coconut nursery and found that no single credit could be 
linked to the receipts relating to the short -remitted amount. The 
authorities, instead of recovering the misappropriated amount from t he 
responsible official/s, had  made good the loss by utilising Government 
money flowing from various sources into STSB, which was a blatant 
violation of rules. 
Government replied (March 2024) that an inquiry was conducted b y the 
Directorate which established unauthorised retention of ₹1.28 lakh without 
remitting to Government account, which resulted in grave 
misappropriation as observed by Audit. It was also informed that action 
will be initiated against the ADA to recover the short remittance of money 
and that explanation will be called for from the Internal Audit wing of the 
PAO for having wrongly interpreted audit findings. 
Systemic deficiencies with regard to recording of entries in cash book and 
prompt remittances to appropriate heads of account and serious lapse in 
verification and attestation of entries in cash book being performed by a 
single official, has led to embezzl ement of money in the Coconut Nursery. 
                                                 
103  ₹61,510 (Cash in hand) + ₹1,28,136 
104  Respective dates of issuing Inspection Report and Statement of Facts to Government 
105  Receipts relating to the period 05 February 2018 to 10 April 2018 
106  Receipts relating to the period 23 April 2018 to 27 June 2019 
107  Reply to the Statement of Facts  

 
 72 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Furthermore, the misappropriated amount was replaced with Government 
money by authorities concerned, signifying weak internal controls. Inquiry 
needs to be conducted on the matter, responsibility fixed on the official s 
who held charge during the period and the misappropriated amount 
recovered from errant persons. 
Recommendation: 
Government should ensure that codal  provisions regarding day to day 
handling of monetary transactions, as laid down in Kerala Treasury Code 
and Kerala Financial Code, are strictly ensured by Heads of Offices. Weak 
internal controls should be addressed on priority to prevent 
misappropriation of funds. 
Unfruitful expenditure 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
4.2. Unfruitful expenditure on two buildings and consequent idling of 
equipment 
Lack of coordination in executing works and absence of effective  
monitoring by Kerala State Science and Technology Mu seum resulted in 
infructuous expenditure of ₹15. 03 crore on two buildings and idle 
investment of ₹5.05 crore on equipment.  
Based on the proposals of the Director, Kerala State Science and Technology 
Museum (KSSTM), Government of Kerala (GoK) accorded admi nistrative 
sanction108 for setting up two infrastructure projects, viz., (i) Space Theatre as 
part of the Kerala Science City (KSC), Kottayam 109 and (ii) Planetarium at 
Regional Science Centre (RSC) , Chalakudy at ₹28 crore . Audit observed that 
due to lack of expertise, effective planning and oversight on the part of KSSTM, 
neither the Space Theatre nor the RSC could be made functional, re sulting in 
idle investment of ₹20.08 crore as discussed below: 
4.2.1. Space Theatre at Kerala Science City, Kottayam 
The Director, KSSTM executed (September 2014) agreement with Habitat 
Technology Group (HTG), which was to be the Architectural and Structural 
consultant to the work of Space Theatre 110. HTG prepared designs of each 
element of the project, tender drawings, specifications, detailed estimate of the 
work and submitted to KSSTM in April 2015. The Director, KSSTM entrusted 
(November 2014) proof checking of the design of space theatre building 
prepared by HTG to Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Chennai. The Project 
Management Consultancy (PMC) of the work was entrusted (February 2015) to 
                                                 
108  On 12 December 2013 for KSC, Kottayam and 13 July 2015 for RSC, Chalakudy  
109  The components of KSC included Science Centre, planetarium, full dome digital theatre, Edutainment 
components, cafeteria, etc. 
110  Comprising planetarium and space gallery 

 
 73 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
M/s Hindustan Life care Ltd. (HLL). The site was handed over to HLL in July 
2015 and work was scheduled to be completed by October 2016. 
The structure of the building could not be completed due to inability to execute 
micro-concreting111 on the cap brim112 of the ornamental structure surrounding 
the Space Theatre despite repeated extension upto August 2018, and it remains 
incomplete (September 2024). Initially the design was sent for vetting to IIT 
Chennai, wherein reservation was conveyed on use of micro-concreting for 
finishing of the cap brim. The mock micro-concreting (January 2017) conducted 
in the presence of the Technical Committee members failed.  Realising the 
hurdles in execution of micro-concreting of the structure, HTG proposed 
(February 2017) an alternate material, which also did not get the approval of the 
Director.  
Subsequently, the technical expertise of a retired professor of IIT Chennai was 
sought by KSSTM (October 2017) for studying the issues related to micro-
concreting and to get feasible alternate designs. The Technical expert appointed 
by KSSTM had opined that the possibility of rusting of steel trusses supporting 
the heavy cantilever113 cap brims could not be ruled out. The trusses entrapped 
in the void space between the top and bottom skins of the cap brims being 
inaccessible, ascertaining their structural stability and maintenance would be 
extremely difficult. 
Scrutiny of records and joint physical verification (October 2 019) by audit 
revealed that no progress in work was recorded during the period 2018 to 2019, 
while the structure of micro-concreting was seen stacked in open, leading to its 
rusting. As per directions of the new Technical Committee, which took over in 
November 2019, the work of erection and fixing of main frame and sub frames 
of the micro-concreting structure was undertaken in February 2020 and 
completed in later part of 2020. However, KSSTM stated to audit (June 2022) 
that the contractor114 to whom work was entrusted by HTG in September 2015 
did not have sufficient experience in micro -concreting work. The PMC and 
HTG could not give proper guidance to the contractor for executing the work.  
During the latest joint physical verification with the engineers of KS STM in 
February 2023, Audit noticed that even after incurring an expenditure of ₹13.16 
crore, the construction of Space theatre building was incomplete due to 
technical issues regarding the micro-concreting work. The e rection of the 
cantilever frames using steel pipes was seen executed over which the proposed 
micro-concreting was to be done . Additional works such as erection of dome, 
interior works, finishing works, installation of planetarium equipment including 
projectors etc., were also pending completion.  
                                                 
111  Micro-concrete is a cement based coating applied to tiles, wood, etc. to provide the look and feel of 
concrete at a fraction of the weight and cost of real concrete.  
112  Cap brim of the structure protects the exposed portion of the building from sun, rain,  etc. It serves as 
a cladding/finishing material over the covered decking plate 
113  A rigid structural element that extends horizontally and is unsupported at one end 
114  M/s Karuthedathu Constructions 

 
 74 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
  
 
The Director KSSTM stated that the envisaged profile in architectural design 
could not be achieved by micro-concreting the profile formed after erecting the 
framework. Additionally, it was also noted that despite the constructi on of 
Space Theatre coming to a standstill, KSSTM proceeded with the acquisition of 
an elaborate and delicate projection dome  costing ₹1.87 crore from M/s Carl 
Zeiss in February 2019. Thus, the building work for the Space Theatre remains 
to be completed due to the inability of KSSTM, HLL and HTG to decide upon 
a course of action for the micro-concreting work on the cap brim.  
4.2.2. Planetarium Building in Regional Science Centre, Chalakudy 
The Director KSSTM executed (March 2017) an agreement with HTG for the 
work of Construction of planetarium building at RSC, Chalakudy at Thrissur 
with completion time of 13 months. The site was handed over to HTG in May 
2017. Audit observed that the date of completion of the planetarium building 
was extended multiple times due to change in design, modifications in structure 
of dome from horizontal to tilted, delay in approval from KSSTM for revised 
design, etc.  
Initially the construction was planned to accommodate 15m diameter horizontal 
dome. When the construction reached roo f level, the horizontal dome was 
changed into tilted one. Hence the dome originally planned to a height of 10m, 
was raised to 11.5m and concreting done without modifying the structural 
design. As per the original schedule of work and estimate, the dome str ucture 
after concreting was to be plastered with cement mortar over the concrete, after 
which water proofing was to be done. However, the water proofing works were 
seen done115 before plastering of the dome structure. 
During the monsoon in June 2019, there w as considerable water seepage 
through the construction joints of the dome . The then Assistant Executive 
Engineer of KSSTM had suggested (June 2019) that the under deck acoustic 
works were to be taken up only after executing plastering and water proofing, 
                                                 
115  October 2019 
Figure 4.1: Architectural design of Space Theatre 
with cap brims fixed with micro concrete, 
prepared by Habitat Technology Group 
 
Figure 4.2: Incomplete structure of Space 
Theatre, Kottayam. Photo taken by Audit 
party on 24 February 2023 


 
 75 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
as the exact location of water seepage would not be visible once underside is 
covered. However, the then Director of KSSTM, disregarding the technical 
advice, decided to proceed with the acoustic panelling. Audit observed that 
though acoustic panelling was an item included in the main work awarded to 
HTG, the Director, without attributing reasons, entrusted (February 2020) the 
work to another agency 116, incurring an extra expenditure of ₹5.24 lakh 117. 
Plastering of dome over concrete surface was carried out by HTG only in 
October 2020 and the construction of the building was reported as completed in 
January 2021, expending ₹1.87 crore.  However severe leakage occurred from 
the dome during the rain in July -August 2021 and the building could not be 
made functional.  
Joint physical verification conducted (February 2023) by Audit along  with 
Assistant Director KSSTM revealed that the building could not be handed over 
to KSSTM yet, due to persistent leakage and dampness in the dome. The cement 
plastering covering the outer surface of the dome had cracked and was damaged. 
The sound proof materials fitted inside the planetarium were seen damaged from 
contact with seeping water. The costly equipment including t ilted dome 
imported from USA (₹78.32 lakh), projector from France (₹2.40 crore), seatings 
to be setup in the planetarium, etc., were seen stacked in the planetarium 
building, gallery building and cafeteria building.  
As could be seen from the two afore -cited instances, lack of coordination in 
executing works, lack o f ensuring synergy among agencies involved and 
absence of stage -wise monitoring on the part of KSSTM resulted in the 
buildings constructed not being put to intended use. KSSTM was to oversee the 
progress in work and ensure that it was to be completed in a timely manner so 
as to achieve the intended benefits. The unwanted haste in purchase of 
equipment despite the buildings not being made functional resulted in highly 
expensive imported equipment left idling for over five years. Government 
should fix respons ibility for the negligence and inaction on the part of the 
officials concerned and initiate action to operationalise the projects.  
The Director KSSTM in his reply (July 2024) stated that after continuous 
interactions the PMC has submitted estimate for ten sile fabric roofing instead 
of micro-concreting to complete the balance works of construction of Space 
Theatre. Once revised Administrative sanction is obtained from Government , 
the tender formalities to award the work will be started. As regards Planetarium 
building, it was replied that HTG had assured that all works related to leakage 
will be completed within ten days, once the solution suggested by the contractor 
is approved by Chief Technical Examiner and Technical Committee. It was also 
informed that a fter the satisfactory completion of leak proof work in the 
planetarium building, KSSTM will intimate the supplier to take immediate steps 
to install the dome.  
                                                 
116  M/s Artisans Development Co-operative Limited (ARTCO) Alappuzha 
117  KSSTM spent an amount of ₹7.86 lakh for acoustic paneling of the Dome through ARTCO, 
whereas if approved schedule of quantity was followed, the expenditur e on the item would 
have been ₹2.62 lakh 

 
 76 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
The reply confirms the audit finding that despite passage of nine years and 
spending of ₹20.08 c rore, construction of both structures remains incomplete 
and they were unable to be opened to public. 
The Draft paragraph was issued to Government (July 2024). Despite issuing 
reminders on 02 September 2024 and 26 September 2024, reply has not been 
received. 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPM ENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
 
4.3. Idle investment on an agricultural market complex  
An agricultural market complex at Vattavada set up at a cost of ₹2.45 crore 
in an unsuitable site without motorable  approach road, is idling since its 
inauguration, for the last four years. 
State Horticulture Mission (SHM) 118, proposed (December 2014) the 
construction of an agricultural market complex at Vattavada in Idukki district 
under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojan a (RKVY) 119 during 2014 -15. An 
amount of ₹260 lakh was allocated for the project. The market complex was to 
function as a procurement and auction centre for vegetables produced by local 
farmers. The construction was to be undertaken by the District Nirmithi Kendra 
(DNK) Idukki and the technical supervision including preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) was entrusted (March 2015) to NABCONS 120. The 
Principal Agricultural Officer (PAO) was entrusted with the monitoring of the 
construction activity. 
Vattavada Grama Panchayat (GP) identified (May 2015) 47 cents of land at 
Edamon for construction of the market complex. The DPR prepared (June 2015) 
by NABCONS certified that the selected site was a fairly settled land suitable 
for setting up agricultural market ing infrastructure and that the project was 
technically feasible and economically viable. Agreement was executed between 
PAO and DNK in October 2015, with completion in June 2016 and ₹259.65 
lakh was sanctioned for the market complex. However, the newly el ected 
Panchayat Committee decided (December 2015) against constructing the 
market complex in the originally identified site, citing that the area had been 
allotted as playground to Government Higher Secondary School, Vattavada 
long back. Audit observed tha t ₹2.47 lakh had already been spent by then, for 
preparing the site for construction.  
                                                 
118  The State Horticulture Mission is a registered society set  up under the Travancore Cochin Literary, 
Scientific and Charitable Societies Registration Act, 1955 to implement the National Horticulture 
Mission program a centrally sponsored scheme, introduced during the financial year 2005–06. 
119  RKVY was a 100 per cent GoI sponsored scheme launched in 2007 as an umbrella scheme for ensuring 
holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors by allowing states to choose their own agriculture 
and allied sector development activities as per the district/state agriculture plan. 
120  NABARD (National Agricultural Bank for Rural Development) Consultancy Services Private Ltd. 

 
 77 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
Thereafter, Vattavada GP identified (February 2016) another site at Oorkad for 
construction of the market complex . A revised estimate for ₹260 lakh was 
prepared (March 2016) by DNK as per which construction works at the new site 
commenced (June 2016), with date of completion as 31 May 2017.  Audit 
observed that the site was located in an elevated area with no motorable  
approach road. Though it was incumbent on SHM to arrange a feasibility study 
afresh to assess the suitability of the new site to the proposed activity, no such 
action was initiated.  
On completion of construction, the market complex building was inaugurated 
in September 2019. An amount of ₹2.45 crore was paid to DNK for construction 
of the building. The building was transferred to Horticorp121 in August 2020 for 
the procurement of cool season vegetables. But the steep nature of the place 
where the market complex is located and lack of a motorable road posed 
hindrance to the functioning of the market complex. Ever since its inauguration, 
the market complex has not been used for the envisaged purpose for the last four 
years.  
  
Figure 4.3: Idling agricultural market complex at Vattavada  
Photo taken by field audit party on 12 October 2022 
Audit observed that the steep ascending path to the building could not be 
traversed up and down by loaded vehicles like vans/lorries. This prevented 
farmers from bringing their produce directly to the market complex for sale. The 
Mission Director SHM replied (August 2023) that due to difficulty in bringing 
vegetables in lorries to the market complex, the vegetables were directly lifted 
from the field by Horticorp. Though the revised estimate for agricultural market 
complex at the new site included the cost of construction of a motorable 
approach road, DNK stated (October 2023) that the road work could not be  
executed, owing to public protest against converting the existing common 
pathway to an exclusive road for the market complex.  
Audit observed that SHM did not ensure  a feasibility study on the 
appropriateness of the new site, which would have exposed the nature of terrain 
and lack of free access to the site. Instead, SHM went ahead with the 
                                                 
121  Kerala State Horticultural Products Development Corporation Ltd.  


 
 78 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
construction of market complex bui lding without addressing the inadequ acies 
of the newly chosen site. The PAO, as part of effective monitoring, was to 
ensure that the building constructed was put to use for the purpose envisaged. 
Government stated (December 2023) that the steep nature of the place and lack 
of proper road to access the site had posed difficulties in functioning of the 
market complex. It was further stated that to facilitate construction of a 
motorable road, a land transfer application was submitted (August 2022) to the 
District Collector, Idukki and survey of land executed (July 2023). 
However, the inability of SHM in assessing the suitability of site for the market 
complex resulted in construction of a building in an inappropriate site. This has 
resulted in the non -functioning of the market complex and consequent idle 
investment of ₹2.45 crore for the last four years.  
(PREETHI ABRAHAM) 
Thiruvananthapuram,               Accountant General 
The 06 June 2025     (Audit I), Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi,        (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The 11 June 2025 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
    


 
 1 
  
APPENDICES 

 
 2 
Compliance Audit Report for the year ended March 2022 
 
 
 

 
 79 
Appendices 
APPENDIC ES 
Appendix 1.1 
Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports and paragraphs as 
on 30 September 2023 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6.1; page 3) 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of Department 
Number of outstanding 
Inspection 
Reports Paragraphs 
1.  Agriculture Development and Farmers’ Welfare 149 793 
2.  Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development 23 86 
3.  AYUSH 169 778 
4.  Backward Communities Development  18 65 
5.  Coastal Shipping and Inland Navigation  11 46 
6.  Cooperation 35 194 
7.  Election 6 18 
8.  Fisheries and Ports 82 357 
9.  Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 52 202 
10.  General Administration 22 80 
11.  General Education 310 1469 
12.  Health and Family Welfare 716 4509 
13.  Higher Education  320 2069 
14.  Home  304 1633 
15.  Housing 6 30 
16.  Information and Public Relations 14 57 
17.  Labour and Skills 93 435 
18.  Law 46 132 
19.  Local Self-Government 1853 7075 
20.  Minority Welfare Development 7 19 
21.  Non-Resident Keralite Affairs 7 16 
22.  Parliamentary Affairs 0 0 
23.  Personnel and Administrative Reforms 4 21 
24.  Revenue and Disaster Management 581 3838 
25.  Sainik Welfare 16 34 
26.  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
Development 376 1725 
27.  Social Justice 87 424 
28.  Sports and Youth Affairs 20 119 
29.  Vigilance 8 36 
30.  Water Resources  176 740 
31.  Women and Child Development 39 156 
 Total 5550 27156 

 
 80 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 1.2 
Details of Action Taken Notes pending as of September 2023 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6.3; page 4) 
Sl. No. Department 
Standalone Audit 
Report on 
Preparedness and 
response to floods 
in Kerala 
2021 Total 
1.  Health and Family Welfare - 1 1 
2.  Revenue and Disaster Management 12 - 12 
Total 12 1 13 
 
  

 
 81 
Appendices 
Appendix 1.3 
Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending discussion by the Public 
Accounts Committee as of September 2023 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6.4; page 4) 
Sl. 
No. Department 
2016-17 
2017-18 
2018-19 
Standalone Audit 
Report on 
Preparedness and 
response to floods in 
Kerala 
2021 
Standalone Audit 
Report on Functioning 
of the University of 
Kerala 
Total 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1.  Health and Family Welfare - - - - 1 - 1 
2.  Higher Education - - - - 1 41 42 
3.  Housing - 1 - - - - 1 
4.  Revenue and Disaster Management - - - 15 - - 15 
5.  Water Resources 1 1 - 10 - - 12 
Total 1 2 - 25 2 41 71 
*None of the paragraphs included in the Reports in columns (6) (7) and (8) were discussed by 
Public Accounts Committee. 
  

 
 82 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 2.1 
List of 12 sub schemes under innovative projects funded by State Government 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.1; page 5) 
1. Kaval 
2. Kaval Plus 
3. Saranabalyam 
4. Mobile App-Kunjaapp 
5. Parenting Clinic 
6. Juvenile Justice Fund-Balanidhi 
7. Foster Care 
8. Kinship Foster Care 
9. Group Foster Care 
10. Vacation Foster Care 
11. Vijnanadeepthi 
12. COVID-19 Financial assistance to children who lost their parents to 
COVID (from 2021-22) 
  

 
 83 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.2 
List of institutions covered in audit  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.4; page 6) 
1. Government Children’s Home for Boys, Thiruvananthapuram 
2. Government Special Home, Thiruvananthapuram 
3. Government Observation Home, Thiruvananthapuram 
4. Open shelter at Thiruvananthapuram 
5. Specialised Adoption Agency at Thiruvananthapuram 
6. Government Children’s Home for Boys, Nooranad, Alappuzha 
7. Government Children’s Home for Girls, Mayithara, Alappuzha 
8. Government Observation Home, Mayithara, Alappuzha 
9. Specialised Adoption Agency at Alappuzha 
10. Government Children’s Home for Girls, Ernakulam 
11. Government Observation Home, Ernakulam 
12. Specialised Adoption Agency at Ernakulam 
13. Government Children’s Home for Boys, Wayanad 
14. Specialised Adoption Agency at Wayanad 
15. Government Children’s Home for Boys, Kannur 
16. Government Children’s Home for Girls, Kannur 
17. Specialised Adoption Agency at Kannur 
 
 
 
 

 
 84 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 2.3 
Delay in preparation of Social Investigation Reports  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.7.1; page 12) 
a) by JJBs during the period 2018-23 
Name of District 
Number 
of cases 
verified 
Number of 
SIR prepared 
in Form 6 
Number of 
SIRs 
submitted 
with delay 
Period of delay  
(in days) 
Minimum 
delay 
Maximum 
delay 
Thiruvananthapuram 20 20 11 4 268 
Alappuzha 20 20 15 1 290 
Ernakulam 25 25 11 2 148 
Kannur 15 14 8 35 197 
Wayanad 20 20 16 6 364 
Total 100 99 61 - - 
 
b) by CWCs during the period 2018-23 
Name of District 
Number 
of cases 
verified 
Number of 
SIR 
prepared in 
Form 22 
Number of 
SIRs 
submitted 
with delay 
Period of delay  
(in days) 
Minimum 
delay 
Maximum 
delay 
Thiruvananthapuram 20 9 20 29 447 
Alappuzha 20 2 16 5 187 
Ernakulam 20 13 18 1 57 
Kannur 20 11 15 1 365 
Wayanad 20 20 18 3 65 
Total 100 55 87 - - 
 
  

 
 85 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.4 
List of facilities available in JJBs/CWCs in selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.7.3; page 14) 
  
Required 
facility 
Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Wayanad Kannur 
JJB CWC JJB CWC JJB CWC JJB CWC JJB CWC 
Sufficient 
space/ 
adequate 
infrastructure 
No No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes No 
Furniture No No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes No 
Child friendly 
room No Yes No No No No No No No No 
Waiting room Yes No Yes No Yes Yes No No Yes No 
Indoor 
recreation Yes No No No No No No No No No 
Drinking 
water Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Yes No 

 
 86 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 2.5 
Status of post-adoption follow up visits conducted in selected districts  
during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.7.10; page 25) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Ernakulam Kannur Wayanad Total 
1.  Number of adopted 
children 204 5 40 74 16 339 
2.  
First post-
adoption 
follow up 
Due as on 
31.01.2024 204 5 40 74 16 339 
Completed 
(in 
numbers) 
33 5 38 72 16 164 
Not 
completed 171 Nil 2 2 Nil 175 
Delay in 
completion 
(in days) 
0-1642 12-240 0-1460 0-286 76-470  
3.  
Second 
post-
adoption 
follow up 
Due as on 
31.01.2024 195 5 39 71 13 323 
Completed 
(in 
numbers) 
8 1 33 59 13 114 
Not 
completed 187 4 6 12 Nil 209 
Delay in 
completion 
(in days) 
0-665 30-150 0-1642 0-209 0-301  
4.  
Third post-
adoption 
follow up 
Due as on 
31.01.2024 178 Nil 31 58 9 276 
Completed 
(in 
numbers) 
Nil Nil 20 56 9 85 
Not 
completed 178 Nil 11 4 Nil 193 
Delay in 
completion 
(in days) 
NA NA 0-1460 0-409 0-492  
5.  
Fourth 
post-
adoption 
follow up 
Due as on 
31.01.2024 151 Nil 28 55 8 242 
Completed 
(in 
numbers) 
1 Nil 15 46 7 69 
Not 
completed 150 Nil 13 9 1 173 
Delay in 
completion 
(in days) 
NA NA 21-1277 0-348 46-770  
 
  

 
 87 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.6 
Details of allotment and expenditure of funds 
(Reference: Paragraphs 2.1.7.13, 2.1.8.3; Pages 29, 32) 
a) Allotment of funds for central sponsorship program in the State and 
expenditure in the selected districts* 
(in ₹) 
State/ 
selected 
district 
Year GoI share State share Total 
Allotted 
amount to 
districts 
Expenditure  Balance 
State 2020-21 84,00,000 56,00,000 1,40,00,000 1,40,00,000 1,33,34,316 6,65,684 
2021-22 84,00,000 56,00,000 1,40,00,000 1,40,00,000 1,36,66,831 3,33,169 
2022-23 2,44,72,800 1,63,15,200 4,07,88,000 3,02,90,600 2,99,48,600 3,42,000 
Thiruvananthapuram 
2020-21 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2021-22 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2022-23 Not available Not available Not available 21,96,000 21,96,000 0 
Alappuzha 2020-21 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2021-22 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 9,97,000 3,000 
2022-23 Not available Not available Not available 22,24,000 22,24,000 0 
Ernakulam 2020-21 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 9,54,000 46,000 
2021-22 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2022-23 Not available Not available Not available 23,36,000 23,36,000 0 
Wayanad 2020-21 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 5,90,000 4,10,000 
2021-22 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 9,60,000 40,000 
2022-23 Not available Not available Not available 20,08,000 20,08,000 0 
Kannur 2020-21 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2021-22 6,00,000 4,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 0 
2022-23 Not available Not available Not available 21,12,000 21,04,000 8000 
*Figures for the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 were not furnished.  
  

 
 88 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
b) Allotment of funds for State sponsorship programme in the State and 
expenditure in the selected districts 
(in ₹) 
State/ selected district Year Allotment  Expenditure  Balance 
State 
2019-20 1,98,72,000 1,74,97,235 23,74,765 
2020-21 1,95,14,000 1,83,04,000 12,10,000 
2021-22 1,79,52,000 1,75,28,461 4,23,539 
2022-23 1,84,92,000 1,66,09,082 18,82,918 
Thiruvananthapuram 
2019-20 12,00,000 7,24,000 4,76,000 
2020-21 16,62,000 16,62,000 0 
2021-22 11,12,000 11,12,000 0 
2022-23 30,00,000 30,00,000 0 
Alappuzha 
2019-20 15,36,000 12,04,000 3,32,000 
2020-21 8,40,000 8,40,000 0 
2021-22 8,64,000 8,54,000 10,000 
2022-23 13,20,000 12,50,000 70,000 
Ernakulam 
2019-20 8,64,000 8,64,000 0 
2020-21 6,32,000 5,20,000 1,12,000 
2021-22 12,36,000 12,02,000 34,000 
2022-23 11,40,000 7,40,000 4,00,000 
Wayanad 
2019-20 15,60,000 15,60,000 0 
2020-21 12,40,000 11,90,000 50,000 
2021-22 8,36,000 8,06,000 30,000 
2022-23 8,52,000 8,48,000 4000 
Kannur 
2019-20 17,28,000 14,76,000 2,52,000 
2020-21 17,80,000 16,98,000 82,000 
2021-22 15,84,000 15,84,000 0 
2022-23 8,64,000 8,44,000 20,000 
*Figures for the year 2018-19 were not furnished. 
  

 
 89 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.7 
Details of excess sponsorship amount paid to persons above 18 years of age 
(Reference: Paragraphs 2.1.7.13, 2.1.8.3; pages 29, 32) 
Sl. 
No. Name  Date of attaining 
 18 years 
Excess Total 
Excess  
(in ₹) From To Months 
Central Sponsorship 
1 Child 1 03/01/2018 02/2018 03/2018 2  4000 
2 Child 2 28/11/2021 12/2021 02/2023 15 30000 
3 Child 3 10/06/2022 07/2022 02/2023 8 16000 
Total 50,000 
State Sponsorship 
4 Child 4 20/12/2019 01/2020 02/2020 2 4000 
5 Child 5 19/04/2019 05/2019 02/2020 10 20000 
6 Child 6 05/08/2019 09/2019 02/2020 6 12000 
7 Child 7 05/10/2019 11/2019 02/2020 4 8000 
8 Child 8 16/06/2020 07/2021 08/2021 2 4000 
9 Child 9 18/07/2022 08/2022 10/2022 3 6000 
Total 54,000 
 
  

 
 90 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 2.8 
Details of inspections conducted by the District Inspection Committee in the 
selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.9.1; page 35) 
District  2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Thiruvananthapuram No. of CCIs in the district  93 93 93 88 84 
No. of inspections due 372 372 372 352 336 
Number of inspections conducted 9 0 1 12 4 
Percentage conducted 2.41 0 0.27 3.41 1.19 
No. of selected CCIs 5 5 5 5 5 
No. of inspections in selected CCIs  2 0 2 0 2 
Alappuzha No. of CCIs in the district 22 22 22 22 23 
No. of inspections due 88 88 88 88 92 
Number of inspections conducted  32 28 23 20 23 
Percentage conducted 36 32 26 23 21 
No. of selected CCIs 4 4 4 4 4 
No. of inspections in selected CCIs 0 0 1 1 1 
Ernakulam No. of CCIs in the district  72 72 72 72 72 
No. of inspections due 288 288 288 288 288 
Number of inspections conducted 2 3 1 1 0 
Percentage conducted 0.69 1.04 0.35 0.35 0 
No. of selected CCIs 3 3 3 3 3 
No. of inspections in selected CCIs 9 9 5 5 7 
Wayanad No. of CCIs in the district  25 25 25 25 12 
No. of inspections due 100 100 100 100 48 
Number of inspections conducted 7 0 2 3 2 
Percentage conducted 7 0 2 3 4.17 
No. of selected CCIs 2 2 2 2 2 
No. of inspections in selected CCIs 0 0 0 0 0 
Kannur 
No. of CCIs in the district  35 34 22 21 21 
No. of inspections due 140 136 88 84 84 
Number of inspections conducted 0 0 Not 
reconstituted 
Not 
reconstituted 
Not 
reconstituted 
Percentage conducted 0 0 0 0 0 
No. of selected CCIs 3 3 3 3 3 
No. of inspections in selected CCIs 0 0 0 0 0 
* Figures as furnished by the DCPOs and selected CCIs   

 
 91 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.1 
Components of RUSA 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.1.1; page 41) 
a)  Components of RUSA 1.0 and 2.0 (components undertaken for implementation in 
Kerala shown in Bold) 
Components under RUSA 1.0 Components under RUSA 2.0 
1. New Universities Component 1: Creation of Universities by 
upgradation of existing autonomous college 
2. Upgradation of existing autonomous colleges to 
Universities 
Component 2: Creation of Universities by 
conversion of colleges in a cluster 
3. Conversion of colleges to Cluster Universities Component 3: Infrastructure grants to Universities  
4. Infrastructure grants to Universities (₹20 
crore each) 
Component 4: Quality and excellence in select 
State Universities (new)  
5. New Model Colleges (General) Component 5: New Model Degree Colleges 
6. Upgradation of existing Degree Colleges to 
Model Degree Colleges (₹ four crore each) 
Component 6: Upgradation of existing degree 
colleges to model degree colleges  
7. New Colleges (Professional) Component 7: New colleges (professional)  
8. Infrastructure grants to colleges (₹ two crore 
each) 
Component 8: Enhancing quality and 
excellence in select autonomous colleges 
9. Research, innovation and quality improvement Component 9: Infrastructure grants to colleges  
10. Equity initiatives Component 10: Research, innovation and 
quality improvement  
11. Faculty Recruitment Support Component 11: Equity initiatives  
12. Faculty improvements (₹ one crore) Component 12: Faculty recruitment support  
13. Research Universities Component 13: Faculty improvement  
14. Vocationalisation of Higher Education 
 
Component 14: Institutional restructuring, 
capacity building and reforms 
15.Leadership Development of Educational 
Administrators  
16. Institutional restructuring and reforms  
17.Capacity building and preparation, Data 
collection and planning  
18. Management Information System  
b) Details of Components implemented in the State 
RUSA 1.0 RUSA 2.0 
Component Implementing 
Institution 
Amount 
allocated Component Implementing 
Institution 
Amount 
allocated  
Infrastructure 
Grants to 
Universities 
Six Universities ₹20 crore 
each 
Excellence and Quality 
Improvement in Selected 
Autonomous Colleges 
Five Colleges ₹ five 
crore each 
Upgradation of 
existing Degree 
Colleges to Model 
Degree Colleges 
One College ₹ four crore Research Innovation and 
Quality Improvement 
Two 
Universities 
₹50 crore 
each  
Infrastructure 
Grants to College 28 Colleges ₹ two crore 
each 
New Model Degree 
Colleges One College ₹12 crore 
Faculty 
Improvements 
HRDC, Kerala 
University  ₹ one crore Infrastructure Grants to 
Colleges 114 Colleges ₹ two 
crore each Equity Initiatives State Project 
Directorate ₹ five crore 

 
 92 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 3.2 
List of selected districts and institutions 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.2; page 43) 
Selected districts 
Colleges Selected University 
Selected Fund not released 
(10 per cent selection) 
Fund released 
(20 per cent selection) 
Ernakulam 
Mar Athanasius College of 
Engineering, Kothamangalam 
Government Sanskrit College, 
Tripunithura 
1. Sree 
Sankaracharya 
University of 
Sanskrit  
2.  
3. 2. Cochin 
University of 
Science and 
Technology 
M.E.S College Aluva, 
Ernakulam 
Rajagiri College of Social 
Sciences, Kalamassery 
Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom 
College, Valayanchirangara 
Government College, Tripunithura 
TM Jacob Memorial Government 
College, Manimalakkunnu 
Thiruvananthapuram  
St. Xavier's College, Thumba, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
HHMSPBNSS College for Women, 
Neeramankara 
University of 
Kerala 
Co-operative Academy of 
Professional 
Education (CAPE) 
Government Arts College, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
KNM Government Arts and 
Science College, 
Kanjiramkulam, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
HRDC Kerala 
Kannur 
Government College 
Thalassery, Chokli, Olavilam 
P.O, Kannur 
Government Brennen College, 
Thalassery Kannur 
University Keyi Sahib Training College, 
Karimbam, Karimbam P.O, 
Taliparamba, Kannur 
PKM College of Education, 
Madampam 
Palakkad 
Government Arts & Science 
College Pathirippala, Kongad, 
Palakkad 
NSS Training College, Ottappalam 
 
Government Engineering 
College, Sreekrishnapuram SNGS College, Pattambi 
 
  

 
 93 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.3  
Comparison statement of RUSA guidelines and Kerala State Higher Education 
Council Act, 2018 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.3; page 44) 
Para No. 
in the 
Guideline 
Provision in the 
Guideline 
Section No. 
of the Act Provision in the Act 
5.2.1(i) 
Composition of the 
Council: 
The State Higher 
Education Council 
should consist of 15 to 25 
members; each with a 
term of six years, of 
whom one -third will 
retire every two years 
11 
Composition of the Council 
1. The Council shall comprise 
of the following bodies 
namely:- 
a) The Advisory Council 
b) The Governing Council 
c) The Executive Council  
2. The bodies of the council  
shall be reconstitut ed 
simultaneously every four 
years from the date of 
constitution. 
Provided that in the event of 
delay in the constitution of 
the Bodies they shall 
continue to hold the office 
till their reconstitution.  
5.2.1(i) 1 
Chairman, preferably an 
eminent Academic/  
Public intellectual with 
proven leadership 
qualities 
7 (1) 
The Minister in charge of 
Higher Education  of the state 
shall, by virtue of his office, be 
the Chairman of the Council  
5.2.1(i) 2 
Vice Chairman must be 
an eminent academic 
administrator with 
proven record (rank of a 
Professor) – in case the 
chair is a non -academic 
person. In other  cases it 
could be a professional 
from industry etc., with 
sufficient experience in  
the sector. 
8 (1) 
The Vice Chairman: An eminent 
educationalist, preferably a 
former Vice-Chancellor shall be 
appointed by the Government  
as the Vice -Chairman of the 
Council  
5.2.1(i) 3 
Member Secretary, an 
eminent academic of the 
rank of Professor -Chief 
Executive. 
9 (1) 
The Member Secretary : An 
academician, preferably with 
administrative experience, shall 
be appointed by the 
Government as Member  
Secretary of the Council  
5.2.1(ii) Chairman will be 
selected by a committee 7 (1) The Minister in charge of Higher 
Education of the State shall, by 

 
 94 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Para No. 
in the 
Guideline 
Provision in the 
Guideline 
Section No. 
of the Act Provision in the Act 
consisting of Chief 
Minister of the State, 
Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly, 
Leader of Opposition on 
the basis of a 
recommendation of 
shortlisted candidates 
made by a Search-cum-
selection committee. 
• The Search -cum-
selection committee will 
be a three member 
committee of very 
eminent academic/public 
intellectual with prov en 
record and integrity. The 
State Council will 
nominate two members 
while the state will 
nominate one  and the 
state nominee will be the 
chair. 
• The Chairman will 
have one non-extendable 
term of five years. The 
removal of  the Chief 
Executive will be 
through a vote of non -
confidence expressed by 
at least 2/3rd numbers 
present and voting with a 
quorum of 3/4th 
members 
virtue of his office, be the 
Chairman of the Council  
 
 
5.2.1 (ii) 
A search committee of 
three members  will 
appoint the Vice 
Chairman. 
The committee will 
consist of the Chairman 
of the council (as a chair) 
and two other members 
one nominated by the 
 
8 (1) 
 
 
 
The Vice Chairman: An eminent 
educationalist, preferably a 
former Vice-Chancellor shall be 
appointed by the Government 
as the Vice -Chairman of the 
Council 
 

 
 95 
Appendices 
Para No. 
in the 
Guideline 
Provision in the 
Guideline 
Section No. 
of the Act Provision in the Act 
State council and one by 
the Government.  
The Vice Chairman 
will have one non -
extendable term of five 
years. The Vice -
Chairman may be 
removed by the 
Chairman on the  
recommendation of the 
Council. 
 
 
20 (1) 
Terms and Conditions of Vice -
Chairman, Member  Secretary 
and Members 
 
The Vice Chairman, Member 
Secretary and Members other 
than the Member of the 
Executive Council nominated 
under clause (c) of Section 16, 
unless removed from the office in 
accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, shall hold office for an 
entire term of the Body of 
Council to which they are 
appointed or nominated or 
elected as the case may be:  
Provided that they shall continue 
to hold office of Vice Chairman, 
Member Secretary and Members 
respectively for a further period 
of six months or till further 
appointment or nomination or 
election is made to the respective 
offices,  
Provided further that Vice 
Chairman, Member Secretary 
and members shall be eligible 
for re -appointment or re -
nomination or re -election for a 
further term of four years, as the 
case may be. 
5.2.1(ii) 
A search committee of 
three members  will 
appoint the Member 
Secretary. The 
committee will consist of 
the Chairman of the 
council (as a chair) and  
two other members one 
nominated by the State 
council and one by the  
government. The 
Member Secretary will 
9 (1) 
The Member Secretary: An 
academician, preferably with 
administrative experience, shall 
be appointed by the 
Government as Member  
Secretary of the Council 
 
(Also Section 20  (1) mentioned 
above)  

 
 96 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Para No. 
in the 
Guideline 
Provision in the 
Guideline 
Section No. 
of the Act Provision in the Act 
have one non-extendable 
term of five years. 
Member Secretary may 
be removed  by the 
Chairman on the  
recommendation of the 
Council. 
5.2.1(ii) 
State will appoint a five-
member selection 
committee to select 
seven new members and 
members from existing 
Council. Selection 
committee must consist 
of: 
• two eminent scientists/ 
social scientists 
• one former VC of a 
State University 
• one former Director of 
an Institute of national 
repute within or outside 
the state 
• one former VC of a 
Central University 
When the Council is 
constituted, initially, 
one-third of the Council 
members (i.e.  three 
members) should be 
given one non-renewable 
term of six -years. 
Another one-third should 
be given a four-year term 
and the remaining one -
third should be drawn 
from existing members, 
who would be given a 
term of two years. 
 Not included in the Act 
 
 
 

 
 97 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.4 
Scheme-wise details of fund flow under RUSA 1.0 and 2.0  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.7.1; page 48) 
(₹ in crore) 
Scheme Name of Component Total fund 
approved  
Total fund 
released 
Pending release 
from GoI/State 
RUSA 1.0 
Infrastructure grants to 
Universities 120 120 0 
Infrastructure grants to 
Colleges 56 50 6 
Faculty Improvement  1 1 0 
Upgradation to MDC 4 2 2 
Equity Initiatives 5 3.75 1.25 
Preparatory Grant 8 8 0 
MMER* 5.57 4.28 1.29 
Total 199.57 189.03 10.54 
RUSA 2.0 
Infrastructure grant to 
Colleges 226 160.5 65.5 
Enhancing quality and 
excellence in select 
Autonomous colleges 
25 18.75 6.25 
Research, Innovation and 
Quality improvement 100 57.5 42.5 
New MDC 12 6 6 
Preparatory Grant 3 1.5 1.5 
Total 366 244.25 121.75 
Grand total (RUSA 1.0 and 2.0) 565.57 433.28 132.29 
(*Pertaining to RUSA 1.0 and 2.0) 
 
 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
98 
Appendix 3.5 
Details of advance payment by Kannur University  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.8.5; page 60) 
(in ₹) 
Type of 
Work Name of Work RUSA Fund Agreement 
Amount (Date) 
Mobilisation 
Advance due to 
Contractor  
(20 per cent of  
Agreed Amount) 
Mobilisation 
Advance released to 
Contractor  
(50 per cent approx.) 
(Date of Release) 
Excess Status of work 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (6-5) 8 
New 
Construction 
Work 
Construction of Seminar 
Complex 6,10,00,000 
*Original Estimate 
– 4,69,82,232 
(21.03.2018) 
Revised Estimate – 
6,04,69,034 
93,96,446.40 2,34,90,446 
(16.08.2018) 1,40,94,000.60 Ongoing 
Construction of car shed roof 
with Driver’s Rest Room 42,20,000 40,41,221 
(14.09.2018) 8,08,244.20 20,20,000 
(15.09.2018) 12,11,756 Completed 
Construction of Scientific 
Instrumentation Centre, 
Payyanur Campus 
1,90,00,000 1,51,84,801 
(03.09.2018) 30,36,960.20 75,92,400 
(07.09.2018) 45,55,440 
Ongoing  
80 per cent 
completed 
Upgradation 
work 
Renovation of Laboratories 84,00,000 48,05,604 
(12.09.2018) 9,61,120.80 24,00,000 
(13.09.2018) 14,38,880 Completed 
Beautification of Thalassery 
and Thavakkara Campus 90,00,000 85,58,315 
(29.08.2018) 17,11,663 42,79,000 
(06.09.2018) 25,67,337 Completed 
Beautification of Nileswaram 
Campus 86,34,377 86,34,377 
(18.08.2018) 17,26,875 43,17,000 
(30.08.2018) 25,90,125 Completed 
Renovation of Administrative 
Block and Guest House at 
Mangattuparamba Campus 
65,00,000 54,29,594 
(12.09.2018) 10,85,919 27,14,797 
(13.09.2018) 16,28,878 Completed 
Renovation of Ladies and Gents 
Hostel at Mangattuparamba 
Campus 
80,17,351 15,91,367 
(28.07.2018) 3,18,273 7,96,000 
(29.08.2018) 4,77,727 Completed 
Providing elevators at various 
campuses 1,69,36,084 1,69,36,084 
(04.03.2018) 33,87,217 
84,68,000 
20% - (16.08.2018) 
30% - (06.09.2018) 
50,80,783 Completed 
TOTAL 2,24,32,718 5,60,77,643 3,36,44,925  

 
 99 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.6 
Details of availability of facilities in the selected institutions for persons with 
disabilities  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.8.6; page 62) 
Name of the selected 
institution 
No. of 
buildings in 
the 
institution 
No. of 
buildings in 
which 
functional 
ramps are 
provided 
No. of buildings 
having 
wheelchair 
access to upper 
floors 
Sree Neelakanta Government 
Sanskrit College, Pattambi 8 6 1 
Government Arts College, 
Thiruvananthapuram 5 5 Nil 
Government Brennen College, 
Thalasserry 31 7 1 
Government Sanskrit College, 
Tripunithura 5 2 Nil 
HHMSPBNSS College for 
Women, Neeramankara 3 2 Nil 
NSS Training College, 
Ottappalam 3 3 Nil 
PKM College of Education, 
Madampam, Kannur 2 2 2 
Rajagiri College of Social 
Sciences, Kalamassery 5 5 5 
Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom 
College, Valayanchirangara 2 2 1 
TM Jacob Memorial 
Government College, 
Manimalakkunnu 
7 1 Nil 
Government College, 
Tripunithura 1 1 Nil 
Human Resource Development 
Centre (HRDC), University of 
Kerala 
1 1 Nil 
University of Kerala 90 44 Nil 
Cochin University of Science 
and Technology 121 28 7 
Sree Sankaracharya University 
of Sanskrit, Kalady 30 16 5 
Kannur University 44 26 8 
Total 358 151 30 
 
 

 
 100 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Appendix 3.7 
Details of Teaching Faculty in selected 15 institutions from 2018-19 to 2022-23  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.9.3; page 64) 
Name of the selected institution 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
(Permanent) 
Difference 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
(Permanent) 
Difference 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
(Permanent) 
Difference 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
(Permanent) 
Difference 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
(Permanent) 
Difference 
Sree Neelakanta Government 
Sanskrit College, Pattambi 86 86 0 86 86 0 86 86 0 86 82 4 86 80 6 
Government Arts College, 
Thiruvananthapuram 53 51 2 56 51 5 56 51 5 56 51 5 56 51 5 
Government Brennen College, 
Thalasserry 127 121 6 127 120 7 129 123 6 129 125 4 129 123 6 
Government Sanskrit College, 
Tripunithura 27 28 0 34 32 2 34 32 2 34 31 3 34 31 3 
HHMSPBNSS College for Women, 
Neeramankara 81 71 10 81 67 14 76 64 12 76 65 11 78 62 16 
NSS Training College, Ottappalam 22 21 1 22 20 2 22 17 5 22 14 8 22 19 3 
PKM College of Education, 
Madampam, Kannur 8 7 1 8 7 1 8 7 1 8 7 1 8 7 1 
Rajagiri College of Social Sciences, 
Kalamassery 20 18 2 20 16 4 20 15 5 20 15 5 20 15 5 
Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom College, 
Valayanchirangara 46 40 6 46 39 7 46 45 1 45 42 3 45 42 3 
TM Jacob Memorial Government 
College, Manimalakkunnu 40 37 3 40 36 4 40 39 1 40 39 1 40 39 1 
Government College, Tripunithura 29 29 0 29 29 0 30 30 0 30 30 0 29 29 0 
University of Kerala 298 168 130 298 198 100 298 205 93 298 197 101 298 192 106 
Cochin University of Science and 
Technology 572 252 320 572 258 314 575 298 277 577 306 271 577 315 262 
Sree Sankaracharya University of 
Sanskrit, Kalady 220 174 46 220 164 56 220 170 50 220 174 46 220 171 49 
Kannur University 98 57 41 98 56 42 98 73 25 98 75 23 134 73 61 
Total 1727 1160 568 1737 1179 558 1738 1255 483 1739 1253 486 1776 1249 527 
 

 
 101 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.8 
Student teacher ratio in selected institutions  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.9.3; page 64) 
Name of the selected institution 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Total No. of Students  
Regular teaching Staff 
Student Teacher Ratio 
Total No. of Students  
Regular teaching Staff 
Student Teacher Ratio 
Total No. of Students  
Regular teaching Staff 
Student Teacher Ratio 
Total No. of Students  
Regular teaching Staff 
Student Teacher Ratio 
Total No. of Students  
Regular teaching Staff 
Student Teacher Ratio 
Sree Neelakanta Government Sanskrit College, 
Pattambi 1594 86 19:1 1619 86 19:1 1729 86 20:1 1848 82 23:1 1910 80 24:1 
HHMSPBNSS College for Women, Neeramankara 1987 71 28:1 2092 67 31:1 2064 64 32:1 1933 65 30:1 1727 62 28:1 
NSS Training College, Ottappalam 257 21 12:1 268 20 13:1 295 17 17:1 310 14 22:1 283 19 15:1 
Rajagiri College of Social Sciences, Kalamassery 324 18 18:1 336 16 21:1 340 15 23:1 336 15 22:1 367 15 24:1 
Sree Sankara Vidyapeetom College, 
Valayanchirangara 1133 40 28:1 1120 39 29:1 1091 45 24:1 1052 42 25:1 961 42 23:1 
Cochin University of Science and Technology 8252 252 33:1 8370 258 32:1 8681 298 29:1 9155 306 30:1 8513 315 27:1 
Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit, Kalady 3664 174 21:1 3824 164 23:1 3926 170 23:1 3749 174 22:1 3765 171 22:1 
Kannur University 1696 57 30:1 1703 56 30:1 1811 73 25:1 1861 75 25:1 1941 73 27:1  

 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 
 
 
 
 
 
