______________________________________________________________________  
http://www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers in Goa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Goa 
Report No. 2 of 2025

 
 
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Paragraph 
Number 
Contents Page 
Number 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary v 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 Overview 1 
1.2 Organizational set-up 1 
1.3 Audit Objectives 3 
1.4 Audit Criteria 3 
1.5  Scope of Audit and Sampling Methodology 3 
1.6 Acknowledgement  4 
1.7 Structure of the Report 4 
Chapter 2: Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
2.1 Delay in framing of State Rules 5 
2.2 Deficiency in provision for fee structure for registration of 
establishment in the BOCW Rules 
5 
2.3 Delay in constitution of the State Advisory Committee (SAC) 
and shortfalls of meetings 
6 
2.4 Delay in constitution/re-constitution of the Board 7 
2.5 Substantial shortfall in conducting meetings of the Board 8 
    Chapter 3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
3.1 Registration of establishments 11 
3.1.1 Low registration of establishments 11 
3.1.2 Intimation of the date of commencement and completion of 
any building or other construction work 
14 
3.1.3 Non-imposition of fine for delayed application for 
registration of establishments  
15 
3.1.4 Delay in issue of Establishment Registration Certificates 16 
3.1.5 Non-submission of returns by registered establishments 16 
3.2 Registration of workers as beneficiaries of BOCW fund 18 
3.2.1 Low registration of BOC Workers 18 
3.2.2 Lack of proactive efforts for registration of BOC workers 19 
3.2.3 Non-submission of assessment reports by Labour Inspectors 20 
3.2.4 Non-holding of regular camps/facilitation centres for  
registration of workers 
20 
3.3 Registration of migrant workers as a Beneficiary of the 
Welfare Fund 
21 
Chapter 4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
4.1 Non-assessment of cess 23 
4.2 Loss of revenue due to delayed co mmencement and non -
collection of cess by Village Panchayats 
25 

ii 
 
Paragraph 
Number 
Contents Page 
Number 
4.3 Non-remittance of the collected cess to the Board 26 
4.4 Delay in remittance of labour cess amounting to ₹ 4.79 crore 27 
4.5 Collection of cess through cash or cheque by Village 
Panchayats in violation of provisions of cess rules 
28 
Chapter 5: Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and Inspection of Establishments 
5.1 Non-formulation of health and safety policy by the employers 31 
5.2 Inspections relating to welfare, health and safety of 
construction workers 
31 
5.3 Joint site inspection of establishments 33 
5.3.1 Non-availability of canteen facility 33 
5.3.2 Use of head protection and other protective apparel 33 
5.3.3 Non-availability of accommodation 33 
5.3.4 Non-maintenance of workers and beneficiary register 34 
5.3.5 Non-display of registration certificate 34 
Chapter 6: Management of Welfare Fund & Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
6.1.1 High administrative expenditure incurred by the Board 37 
6.1.2 Non-preparation annual statement of accounts and annual 
reports 
38 
6.1.3 Loss of revenue due to parking of funds in saving bank 
accounts 
39 
6.1.4 Shortage of staff 40 
6.2 Implementation of welfare schemes 41 
6.2.1 Non-implementation of major schemes prescribed under the 
Act since inception 
41 
6.2.2 Deficient implementation of welfare schemes by the Board 43 
6.2.3 Non-publicity of welfare schemes among workers 45 
6.2.4 Irregularities observed in implementation of Training of BOC 
Workers and Purchase/Distribution of tool kits 
46 
6.2.4.1 Irregular payment in Training of BOC Workers 47 
6.2.4.2 Non-payment of wage loss compensation to BOC Workers 47 
6.2.4.3 Irregularities in procurement and distribution of toolkits 48 
6.3 Non-conduct of social audit 49 
6.4 Beneficiary Survey for Impact Assessment 49 
Appendices 
I List of unregistered establishments which were liable for  
registration 
53 
II Establishment who did not display the Registration 
Certificate at appropriate place 
54 
III Details of Beneficiaries who have not received benefit in their 
Bank Accounts 
55 
IV Details of Beneficiaries who are not BOC Workers 58 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2022 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Goa under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution 
of India, for being laid before the State Legislature.  
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers in Goa covering the period from 2017-22.  
The instances mentioned in the Report are those which came to notice in the 
course of the Performance Audit conducted during January 2023 to June 
2023. Matters relating to the periods outside the audit period have also been 
reported in places where they were found necessary.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
PREFACE 

Executive Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Introduction 
Building and other construction workers are among the most vulnerable 
segments of unorganised labour in India. Their work is temporary, the 
employer-employee relationship is short -term, basic amenities and welfare 
facilities are inadequate and there is a s ignificant risk to life and limb. These 
workers often face poor working conditions, lack of job security and limited 
access to social security benefits. Despite contributing significantly to the 
country's infrastructure and development, they frequently rec eive low wages 
and lack representation or bargaining power. In this context, the Government 
of India (GoI) enacted the Building and Other Construction Workers’ (BOCW) 
Act in 1996 for the welfare of building and other construction workers. 
Accordingly, the Government of Goa (GoG) constituted the Goa Building and 
Other Construction Worke rs’ Welfare Board (Board) in 2004 to oversee the 
implementation of the Act and notified the Goa Building and Other 
Construction Workers (GBOCW) Rules in 2008.  
Why this Performance Audit? 
The absence of effective regulation and enforcement exacerbates the 
vulnerability of the workers, making it crucial to implement policies to improve 
their working conditions and provide access to essential services and 
protections. This Performance Audit w as carried out to evaluate whether the 
rules notified by the Government aligned with the 1996 Acts and to assess the 
effectiveness of the systems for registration, cess management and fund 
utilization, and also to examine the enforcement of health, safety norms, and 
inspection systems for compliance. It also scrutinized the efficiency of the 
administration and utilization of funds on effective implementation of welfare 
schemes by the Board as per the Act and State rules.  
Period of audit: 2017-18 to 2021-22 
Sample:  
Both districts of the State (North Goa and South Goa districts) were selected 
for audit. Records of the Goa Building and Other Construction Workers ’ 
Welfare Board (GBOCWWB), Labour Department, Deputy Labour 
Commissioner’s (DLCs) office in North Goa and South Goa districts, three 1 
Assistant Labour Commissioner’s offices (ALC) were selected for test check. 
Further, records of three Public Works Department offices and one PSU (cess 
 
1  Ponda, Vasco and Tiswadi 
Executive Summary  

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
vi 
 
deductors) based on the highest amount of work expenditure in the last three 
years were also selected for test check. The only Municipal Corporation in the 
State, i.e. Corporation of the City of Panaji was selected, along with three 2 
Municipal Councils and four 3 Village Panchayats (cess collectors) for test 
check. 
What audit found? 
The chapter-wise findings that led to audit conclusions and recommendations 
are as follows:  
Chapter 2: Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
The Government notified the State BOCW Rules and commencement of cess 
collection with a substantial delay of about 12 years.  Fee structure for 
registration of establishments employing more than 500 workers was not 
prescribed in the rule.  The State Advisory Committee (SAC) to advise the 
Government on the implementation of the Act, was also constituted with a delay 
of 12 years. Substantial shortfall in conducting Board meetings impacted the 
functioning of the Board. 
Recommendations:  
• The State Rules may be amended to include fee structure for 
registration of establishments with more than 500 workers, in line 
with Central BOCW Rules, 1998.  
• The State Government may reconstitute the State Advisory Committee 
and the Board in a timely manner and ensure their functioning as per 
the Act/Rules.  
Chapter 3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
Registering authorities had no information about number of construction works 
going on in their respective areas. There was no co-ordination and data sharing 
between the construction licence issuing authority and the registering authority. 
Prescribed returns were not furnished by the re gistered establishments and 
intimation for commencement of construction/completion of work was not 
given as required under the Act. Registration of beneficiaries to avail benefit 
under the schemes was quite low which can be attributed to the Board’s failure 
to conduct awareness programmes among the workers. 
 
 
2  Ponda, Curchorem-Cacora and Quepem 
3  Calangute, Aldona, Betoda and Sancoale 

 
Executive Summary 
 
vii 
 
Recommendations:  
• The Department may take immediate measures to increase the 
enrolment of establishments including a mechanism with Local 
Bodies and works executing departments to get the data  of 
construction licences issued and work orders executed respectively. 
• The Board may conduct periodic surveys for identifying unregistered 
BOC workers and regular drives to improve awareness among 
workers to increase registration. 
Chapter 4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
Assessing officers appointed by the Government in the year 2007 for 
assessment of cess, had not done any assessment in their respective zones. 
Commencement of cess collection was notified by State Government w.e.f.  
01 January 2009, however, Village Panchayats started collecting cess only in  
2021-22, resulting in less collection of cess for welfare of workers. Cases of 
non-remittance, delayed remittance by local bodies and Goa State Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Limited and unauthorized mode of collection of cess 
were also observed. 
Recommendations:  
• The Government should fix responsibility for non -assessment of cess 
and ensure commencement of cess assessment at the earliest.  
• The State Government may issue necessary directions to local bodies 
and PSUs for ensuring that cess is duly assessed, levied, collected and 
remitted to the Board within specified time of 30 days as per the Cess 
Act. The Board may strictly monitor timely collection and remittance 
of the cess. 
Chapter 5: Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and Inspection of 
Establishments 
Establishments employing more than 50 workers have not formulated Health and 
safety policy as required under the Goa BOCW Rule, 2008. Despite the 
availability of full strength of Labour Inspectors (LIs), the number of inspections 
to check health and safety issues were not carried out adequately. Discrepancies 
like non-availability of canteen facility for workers, absence of head an d safety 
gears on work site, non -availability of accommodation , etc., were observed 
during joint site inspection. 
 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
viii 
 
Recommendations:  
• The Department may ensure the formulation of health and safety 
policies by the employers who employed more than 50 workers as 
required under GBOCW Rules.  
• The Department may strengthen mechanisms for conducting regular 
inspection of establishments. 
• The Department may take appropriate action on employers for non -
providing the canteen facility to the workers where 250 or more 
workers are employed. 
Chapter 6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare 
Schemes 
The Board did not prepare annual statement of accounts from 2018 -19 and 
annual report on the functioning of the Board was not prepared since inception. 
No Internal Auditor was appointed. Board incurred financial loss due to parking 
of funds in savings accounts which indicated ineffective financial management. 
Non-receipt of benefit was reported by the beneficiaries and lack of awareness 
about the welfare schemes was observed during beneficiary survey. Key 
positions of Chief Accounts Officer and Accountant r equired to manage the 
fund effectively, remained vacant and the recruitment rules for various posts 
are yet to be notified by the Government. Social and welfare schemes for the 
intended beneficiaries were not implemented adequately. Five major welfare 
schemes4 were not implemented by the Board since inception. In other schemes 
also the number of beneficiaries who availed benefit was quite low. Instances 
of distribution of identical toolkits among workers were observed. Social audit 
of the schemes as directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court was not conducted.  
Recommendations:  
• The Government may fix responsibility for non -preparation of 
accounts, instruct the Board to finalise all pending accounts and 
submit the same for Audit.  
• The Board may ensure the appointment of the Internal Auditor in a 
time bound manner. 
• A report on the functioning of the Board may be prepared and 
submitted to the Government annually as per the provisions of the Act. 
 
4  Maternity benefit, Pension benefit, Grant for repair and interest rebate for the construction 
of new house, Disability pension and medical assistance to beneficiaries. 

 
Executive Summary 
 
ix 
 
• The Government may expedite the notification of recruitment rules 
and accordingly, the Board may take immediate steps to appoint the 
required personnel to enable its effective functioning. 
• The Board may institute a mechanism for carrying out periodic 
evaluation of scheme implementation and take prompt corrective 
action as required to improve implementation. 
• The Board may implement social audit mechanism to enhance 
transparency and accountability in the implementation of schemes. 

 
CHAPTER-1 
Introduction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
1.1  Overview 
Building and other construction workers (BOCW) are among the most 
vulnerable segments of unorganised labour in India. The nature of their work 
being temporary, the relationship between the employer and employee is 
temporary, basic amenities/welfare facilities provided to workers are inadequate 
and risk to life and limb is inherent. Although the provisions of certain central 
acts were applicable to the building and other construction workers, 
Government of India (GoI) enacted (August 1996) the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 (Act) to regulate the employment and conditions of service of 
building and other construction workers and to provide for their safety, health 
and welfare.  
 Under the Act, State Governments were to constitute the Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards (BOCWWB). To augment resources of 
the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards, GoI enacted  
(August 1996) the Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act, 
1996 (Cess Act). Ministry of Labour, GoI notified (September 1996) the levy 
of cess at the rate of one per cent of the total cost of construction. For 
implementing provisions of the Cess Act, the Building and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 (Cess Rules), was enacted (March 1998) by 
the GoI. 
For implementation of the Act in the State, the Government of Goa (GoG) 
constituted (December 2004)  the Goa Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Board (GBOCWWB) and framed (December 2008) the Goa 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Rules, 2008 (GBOCW Rules) . In keeping with the 
provisions of the Act and Rules, the Board constituted (April 2011) the Goa 
Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund ( GBOCWWF) for 
grant of benefits to building and other construction workers and also for 
meeting its establishment/operational expenses.  
1.2  Organisational set-up 
The Board comprises the Chairperson and 16 other members appointed by the 
State Government  and is under administrative control of the Labour 
Department. While the Hon’ble Minister-in-Charge of the Labour Department 
is the Chairperson, the Labour Commissioner, Government of Goa ( GoG) 
serves as the Member Secretary of the Board.

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
2 
 
Figure 1: Organizational Chart 
 
Organisational Set up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Deputy Labour Commissioners (DLCs) in the districts (one in each district)  
 
 
 
 
 
The Deputy Labour Commissioners (DLCs)  in the districts (one in each district) 
were responsible for employer registration. DLC-South Goa (for South Goa 
district) and four Assistant Labour Commissioners (ALCs)  in the districts (two in 
each in North and South Goa district) were entrusted with the work of assessment 
of cess and Labour Inspectors (LIs) posted at talukas were entrusted with the work 
of beneficiary registration and benefit disbursement under the Board in their 
respective  jurisdiction.  
 
 v 
Chairman 
State Advisory 
Committee (SAC) 
Labour Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members 
1. State Govt. 
representatives 
(Chief Inspector-Ex- 
Officio) 
2. Employers’ 
Representative 
3. Building Workers’ 
Representative 
 
 
Commissioner of Labour & 
Employment 
[Notifies rules based on Act] 
Acts as Chief Inspector  (Board 
member) who is responsible for 
inspection of sites &  registration of 
establishments and 
Acts as Secretary of the Board  
responsible for registration of 
beneficiaries 
Deputy Labour Commissioner 
(District level) 
[Registration of establishments] 
 
Assistant Labour Commissioner 
(District level) 
[Cess Assessment] To advise Govt . on 
administration of BOCW 
Act. 
Labour Inspector (Taluka level) 
(Inspect sites, issue inspection reports 
& assessment reports & designated as 
Registering Officer (RO ) for 
registration of beneficiaries) 
 
Chairman 
(Minister of Labour) 
Members 
1. State Govt. 
representatives  
2. Employers’ 
Representative 
3. Building Workers’ 
Representative 
4.  
5.  
Secretary 
Chief Executive Officer 
Custodian of cess fund, 
register beneficiaries, 
implement welfare schemes 
& provide benefits 
BOCWW Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-1: Introduction 
 
3 
 
1.3 Audit Objectives 
This audit was carried out to examine whether: 
i. the GBOCW Rules, 2008 notified by the State Government under the Act was 
consistent with sprit of the BOCW Act of 1996; 
ii. there was an effective system for registration of establishments and 
beneficiaries; 
iii. cess assessment, collection and transfer of collected cess to the Fund was 
efficient; 
iv. the Government prescribed appropriate health and safety norms and could 
ensure an environment of compliance to those norms by employers; 
v. the Government implemented transparent and effective system of inspections 
to check evasion of Labour cess; and 
vi. the administration and utilization of funds on implementation of welfare 
schemes by the Board was efficient and effective and as per the Act and rules 
framed by the State Government. 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
Following are the sources of the criteria against which the audit findings have been 
benchmarked:  
i. Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996; 
ii. Goa Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of  Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Rules; 
iii. Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess Act , 1996 and Cess Rules, 
1998; 
iv. General Financial Rules;  
v. Resolutions passed by the Board;  
vi. Inspection Policy notified by State Government; and 
vii. Model Welfare Scheme for Building and Other Construction Workers. 
1.5 Scope of Audit and Sampling Methodology 
Audit covered the five-year period from 2017-18 to 2021-22. Both districts of the 
State (North Goa and South Goa districts) were selected for audit. Records of the 
Goa Building and Other Construction Workers (GBOCW) Board, Labour 
department, Deputy Labour Commissioner’s (DLC) office in North Goa and South 
Goa district, three 1 Assistant Labour Commissioner’s offices (ALC) were test 
 
1  Ponda, Vasco and Tiswadi 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
4 
 
checked. Further, records of three Public Works Department offices and one PSU2  
(cess deductors) based on the highest amount of work expenditure in the last three 
years were selected and test checked. The only Municipal Corporation  
in the State, Corporation of the City of Panaji (CCP) was selected and three 3 
Municipal Councils and four4 Village Panchayats (cess collectors) were selected by 
simple random sampling method and were also test checked.  
Apart from this, the Audit team conducted joint physical inspection of 165 randomly 
selected construction sites to verify the registration of construction workers and 
establishments as well as implementation of the provisions of the Act and Rules 
relating to safety, health and welfare of workers. The Audit team also conducted a 
beneficiary survey of 200 construction workers.  
Entry conference was held in January 2023 with the Labour Commissioner-cum-
Member Secretary of the Board to discuss the audit objectives, scope and sampling 
methodology. The audit findings were discussed in the exit conference held in  
March 2024 with the Secretary (Labour). The replies of the Department have been 
suitably incorporated in the report. 
1.6  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co -operation and assistance extended by the officers and 
staff of the State Government and the Board in conducting the audit. 
1.7  Structure of the Report 
Chapter 1:  Introduction 
Chapter 2:  Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
Chapter 3:  Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
Chapter 4:  Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
Chapter 5:  Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and Inspection of 
Establishments 
Chapter 6:  Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
 
2  Goa State Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (GSIDCL) 
3  Ponda, Curchorem-Cacora and Quepem 
4  Calangute, Aldona, Betoda and Sancoale 
5  Eight unregistered construction sites selected from the selected local bodies based on higher 
estimated construction cost where licence issued during  2021-22. Eight registered construction 
sites randomly selected through IDEA from the database of construction sites which were 
registered during 2021-22. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER-2 
Framing and 
Implementation of  
Act & Rules  
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2: Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
The main objective of the BOCW Act, 1996, is to regulate wages, working 
conditions, safety, health and welfare measures of the construction workers. The 
Act applies to every establishment which employs 10 or more building and 
other construction workers in any day of a year. The Act provides for 
establishment of Building and Other Construction Workers ’ Welfare Board 
(BOCWWB) and Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund 
(BOCWWF). The Cess Act, 1996 provides that cess at the rate not exceeding 
two per cent  and not less than one per cent is to be collected from each 
employer. The cess so collected forms the Fund, governed by the Board.  
2.1  Delay in framing of State Rules 
Sections 40 and 62 of BOCW Act, 1996  provide that the appropriate 
Government1 may, by notification, make rules regarding the measures to be 
taken for safety and health of construction workers in the course of their 
employment and the equipment and appliances necessary to be provided to 
them for ensuring their safety, health and pro tection during such employment. 
However, the State Government framed (December 2008) the Goa Building and 
Other Construction workers (Regulation of Employment and Condition of 
Service) Rules , 2008 (GBOCW Rules) after a delay of 12 years from the 
enactment of BOCW Act. Further, the State Government notified levy and 
collection of labour cess with effect from 01 January 2009  but the BOCW 
Welfare Fund was constituted only in 2011. 
While the GBOCW Rules, 2008 were consistent with the BOCW Act, 1996, 
delay of 12 years in framing of State rules resulted in lack of regulation for 
ensuring health and safety of construction workers, apart from non -
implementation of schemes for their welfare, during this period. 
The Government replied ( April 2024) that the Board required additional time  
to formulate schemes in accordance with the Rules and it will be ensured that 
no delay occurs in future amendments to these Rules.  
2.2  Deficiency in  provision for fee structure for registration of  
establishment in the BOCW Rules 
Fee structure for registration of establishments is governed by Rule 27 of the 
‘The Goa Building and Other Construction Workers Rules, 2008’, on the basis 
of number of workers employed by them as given in the Table 2.1. 
 
1  Central Government for Central Government establishments and Central PSUs, for rest 
other establishments- State Government 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
6 
 
Table 2.1: Fee Structure for Registration of Establishment 
Sl. No. No. of Workers Fee (in ₹) 
1 Up to 50 500 
2 51 to 100 1000 
3 101 to 200 2000 
4 201 to 300 3000 
5 301 to 400 4000 
6 401 to 500 5000 
7 501 and above Not Specified 
(Source: GBOCW Rules, 2008) 
The Central BOCW Rules, 1998 p rescribes fee structure for registration of 
establishments employing more than 500 workers,  however, there was no such 
fee structure prescribed by GBOCW Rules, 2008.  
Audit observed that no establishment employing more than 500 workers was 
found registered with the Department. Only one establishment employing 
exactly 500 workers was found registered (March 2020). However, audit is of 
the view that there should be provision for registration fee for establishments 
more than 500 employees in line with central BOCW rules as well as keeping in 
view the future requirements. 
The Government acknowledged (April 2024) the audit observation and assured 
that necessary amendments to the rule will be carried out to incorporate fee 
structure for registration of establishments employing more than 500 workers. 
2.3  Delay in constitution of the State Advisory Committee (SAC) and 
shortfalls of meetings 
As per Section 4 of the BOCW Act, 1996 , the State Government has to 
constitute a State Advisory Committee (SAC) to advise the State Government 
on matters arising out of the administration of the Act. The SAC shall comprise 
16 members including the Chairperson and Member -Secretary, be  
re-constituted every three years and meet at least once in six months as per Rule 
20 of the State Rules. However, the SAC was constituted in July 2008 after a 
delay of 12  years from the enactment of BOCW Act in 1996 and was  
re-constituted only in January 2016 after eight years. The SAC conducted only 
two meetings since its constitution in 2008, whereas it should have conducted 
at least 292 meetings till the year 2022 as mandated under the Act. No meeting 
was conducted during the audit period, i.e., 2017-22. This was in violation of 
 
2  One meeting in 2008 and two meetings each from the year 2009 to 2022. 

Chapter-2: Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
 
7 
 
repeated directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India , the latest such  
judgement/direction having been issued in March 20183. 
Non-reconstitution of the SAC and non -convening of meetings was in 
contravention of the provisions of the Act and Rules, which impacted the 
Government’s capacity to resolve the issues arising out of administration of the 
Act and to promote the welfare of construction workers. 
During the exit conference, the Secretary (Labour) acknowledged (March 2024) 
the facts and directed the Commissioner (Labour & Employment) and Member 
Secretary, GBOCW Board (CLE) to take necessary steps to conduct the 
meetings as prescribed under the Act. 
The Government further replied (April 2024) that the SAC was constituted on 
(January 2016) for a period of three years. Since the SAC was not re-constituted 
after that, meetings could not be held. 
The reply is not tenable as no meeting was held during the entire term of the 
SAC constituted in 2016 and the SAC was not re-constituted after 2019, which 
was in contravention of BOCW Act/GBOCW Rules.  
2.4  Delay in constitution/re-constitution of the Board  
As per Section 18 of the Act and Rule 271(4) of GBOCW, the State Government 
shall constitute a Board to perform the functions such as implementation of 
welfare schemes for building and other construction workers, registration of 
beneficiaries, fund management, etc. assigned to it under the Act. As per Sub -
rule (2) of Rule 256 of State Rules,  the term of office of the Chairperson and 
members of the Board other than the official members shall be three years from 
the date of their appointment and in no case the members shall continue in office 
beyond a period of four years.   
During scrutiny it was observed that three members of building workers 
representatives were re -appointed by the Board in the subsequent  
re-reconstituted Boards and they continued in the office for more than four 
years. 
The Board replied (July 2024) that they will adhere to the Rule while  
re-constituting the Board and assured that no member will continue in office 
beyond the period of four years from the date of their appointment. 
Further, it was observed that the State Government constituted the Board in 
December 2004,  after a delay of eight years from enactment of the Act. 
 
3  Against a Writ Petition No. 318 of 2006 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
8 
 
However, even thereafter, re-constitution of the Board was delayed as given in 
Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Delay in re-constitution of Board 
Sl. 
No. 
Occasions of Board’s 
re-constitution 
Scheduled date 
of 
re-constitution 
Actual date of 
re-constitution 
Delay in 
re-constitution 
(in months) 
1 1st re-constitution 15/12/2008 01/07/2008 No delay 
2 2nd re-constitution 01/07/2012 12/06/2013 11 
3 3rd re-constitution 12/06/2017 08/09/2017 02 
4 4th re-constitution 08/09/2021 19/08/2022 11 
(Source: Government notifications regarding constitution of the Board) 
As seen above, the re-constitution of the Board was delayed on three occasions, 
violating the extant provisions of Rules. 
The State Government replied (April 2024) that henceforth re -constitution of 
the Board shall be done as per Rule provisions. 
2.5   Substantial shortfall in conducting meetings of the Board  
As per Rule 258 of GBOCW Rules, 2008, the Board shall ordinarily meet once 
in two months. However, scrutiny of records of Board meetings indicated that 
as against 30 meetings mandated during 2017 -22, the Board conducted only 
eight meetings (27 per cent) and during 2020 -2021, no meetings were 
conducted at all. The details of Board’s meetings conducted is shown in  
Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Details of Board’s meetings conducted during the period 2017-22 
Year Number of Board’s 
meetings required 
Number of Board’s 
meetings conducted 
Shortfall of 
Board’s meetings 
2017-18 6 2 4 
2018-19 6 2 4 
2019-20 6 1 5 
2020-21 6 Nil 6 
2021-22 6 3 3 
Total 30 8 22 
(Source: Information furnished by the Board) 
Further, it was also observed that only two Board meetings were conducted in  
2022-23, which were also four short in numbers than prescribed under the Act. 
The State Government acknowledged (April 2024) the audit observation and 
stated that meetings would be convened as mandated under the Rules 
henceforth. 
 

Chapter-2: Framing and Implementation of Act & Rules 
 
9 
 
Conclusion: 
The Government notified the State BOCW Rules and commencement of cess 
collection with a substantial delay of about 12 years.  Fee structure for 
registration of establishments employing more than 500 workers was not 
prescribed in the Rule.  The State Advisory Committee (SAC) to advise the 
Government on the implementation of the Act, was also constituted with a delay 
of 12 years. Substantial shortfall in conducting Board meetings impacted the 
functioning of the Board. 
Recommendation 1: The State Rules may be amended to include fee 
structure for registration of establishments with more than 500 workers, in 
line with Central BOCW Rules, 1998. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government may re -constitute the State 
Advisory Committee and the Board in a timely manner and ensure their 
functioning as per the Act/Rules. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER-3 
Registration of 
Establishments and BOC 
Workers 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3:  Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
Registration of establishments1 and building workers are crucial steps in the 
implementation of the Act and Rules, with a direct bearing on the welfare 
of workers to ascertain the cess assessed and collected by Local Bodies and 
number of workers employed in the establishments.  Employers of any 
establishment that employs or has employed ten or more building workers 
in any building or other construction work on any day in the preceding 
twelve months are required to obtain an establishment registration 
certificate from the Labour Department. Every building worker between the 
age of 18 years and 60  years, who has worked in building or other 
construction activities for at least 90 days in the past twelve months, may 
apply to the Board for registration as a beneficiary of the welfare fund. 
In Goa, Deputy Labour Commissioners (DLCs) in the district s are 
responsible for employer registration and Labour inspectors (LIs) posted at 
talukas are entrusted with the work of beneficiary registration in their 
respective jurisdiction. 
3.1   Registration of establishments 
As per Section 7 of the Act, every employer to which this Act applies on its 
commencement, within a period of sixty days from such commencement, 
shall apply for registration of the establishment to the Registering officer 
(RO) of the area in which the building or other construction work is to be 
carried out. Every such application shall be accompanied by the fees as 
prescribed in the Rules. The res pective Deputy Labour Commissioner 
(DLC) being the RO, shall issue a certificate of registration if such applicant 
has complied with all requirements within fifteen days  of receipt of the 
application. 
Taluka-wise Labour Inspectors are deputed to inspect construction sites in 
their respective areas. If any unregistered sites are found, show cause notices 
are issued to ensure the registration of the establishments. 
3.1.1   Low registration of establishments 
Registration of establishment is done online through the Goa Online Portal2. 
As per Section 10 of the Act, an employer of an unregistered establishment 
shall not employ workers in the establishment. Number of establishments 
 
1  Means any establishment belonging to, or under the control of, Government, anybody 
corporate or firm, an individual or association or other body of individuals which or 
who employs building workers in any building or other construction work; and includes 
an establishment belonging to a contractor, but does not include an individual who 
employs such workers in any building or con struction work in relation to his own 
residence the total cost of such construction not being more than rupees ten lakhs . 
2  Website: https://goaonline.gov.in/public/Login 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
12 
 
 
registered under both the registering authorities in the State during 2017-22 
is given in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Details of registration of establishments during the year 2017-22 
Name of 
Registering 
Officer 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total 
DLC-North Goa 71 57 35 10 33 206 
DLC-South Goa 37 11 18 04 09   79 
Total 108 68 53 14 42 285 
(Source: Information furnished by the Labour Department) 
As seen in the table above, while 206 establishments were registered in 
North Goa, only 79 establishments were registered by DLC -South Goa 
during the period 2017-22 out of which 37 (46.84 per cent) pertained to the 
year 2017-18 only. Only four and nine establishments during 2020 -21 and 
2021-22 respectively, were found to have been registered with DLC -South 
Goa. Further, during 2020 -21, only 10 establishments were found to have 
been registered under DLC-North Goa. 
In Goa, permissions from the respective Planning and Development  
Authorities and Local Bodies are mandatory for any development or 
alteration of land, under the respective Acts3. Local Bodies (ULBs and VPs) 
are responsible for issue of construction licenses in their jurisdictions and 
information about all permissions for construction activity can be readily 
obtained from the Local Bodies. 
During scrutiny of records of eight test checked VPs/MCs, it was noticed 
that 1,169 construction licenses were issued by these Local Bodies during 
the period 2017 -22 whereas only 75 construction sites were registered as 
establishments with their respective ROs as detailed in Table 3.2.   
Table 3.2: Number of construction work licences issued in test checked 
Local Bodies and  registered with the Labour Department 
during 2017-22 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of LBs No. of construction 
licenses issued by 
LBs 
No. of construction 
works/sites registered 
with the DLCs (RO) 
1 Curchorem-Cacora MC 81 03 
2 Ponda MC 81 08 
3 Corporation of the City of 
Panaji               151 31 
4 Quepem MC 113 00 
5 Calangute VP 334 01 
6 Aldona VP 144 00 
 
3  Section 44 under Goa, Daman and Diu Town and Country Planning Act, 1974. Section 
184 under Municipal Act, 1968 and Section 66 under The Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 

 
Chapter-3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
13 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of LBs No. of construction 
licenses issued by 
LBs 
No. of construction 
works/sites registered 
with the DLCs (RO) 
7 Sancoale VP 223 31 
8 Betoda VP   42 01 
Total 1169 75 
(Sources: Registers of construction license and data of registered establishments) 
From the above table, it can be seen that the percentage of registration of 
construction sites was very low i.e. 6.42 per cent during the period 2017-22. 
Audit conducted joint physical inspection of eight selected 4 unregistered 
construction sites, four each under the jurisdiction of DLC -North Goa and  
DLC-South Goa. It was found that six construction sites (Appendix I) out 
of eight (75 per cent) were liable for registration under Section 7 of the Act 
as they employed 10 or more building workers on any day of the preceding 
12 months. It was noticed that though these six construction sites had 
employed between 15 and 48 workers on any day of the preceding   
12 months, the construction works were going on without valid registration. 
It is evident that all construction sites had not applied for registration. In this 
context, analysis of the reasons for low registration of establishments 
indicated the following: 
❖ There was no co -ordination between the registering authorities 
(DLCs) and the authorities responsible for issue of construction 
licences. The Department had not issued any instructions to the 
licence issuing authorities to communicate the relevant details to 
them. 
❖ No awareness campaigns/program me were conducted by the 
Department to ensure compliance with registration requirements.  
❖ None of the employers intimated the dates of commencement and 
completion of works to the Labour Department,  as discussed in 
succeeding Para 3.1.2. 
❖ Inadequate number of inspections of construction sites conducted by 
labour inspectors. As discussed in Para 5.2, no targets were fixed for 
the LIs regarding number of inspections to be conducted. Only 102 
unregistered construction sites were inspected duri ng the period  
2017-22. Out of these, 84 establishments registered with the 
Department subsequently.    
❖ Employers took the risk of not registering on account of low penalty, 
as discussed in Para 3.1.3. 
 
4  Selected on the basis of highest amount of estimated construction cost for ongoing 
works of 2021-22 at the time of Audit. 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
14 
 
 
  Registration of fewer establishments also resulted in low beneficiary 
registrations and a large number of construction workers being left out of 
the social security cover envisaged under the Act.  
The Secretary (Labour) directed the CLE  and DLC to coordinate with the 
Local Bodies and obtain information about construction licenses issued by 
them, when the matter was raised during the exit conference (March 2024). 
Further, the Government replied (April 2024) that registration of 
establishments was low due to Covid-19 pandemic which had a significant 
impact on construction activity. Regarding absence of mechanism to 
identify construction  works going in the area it was replied that due to 
shortage of Labour Inspectors the work of inspection was adversely affected 
and once the number of inspectors are increased coverage of all the work 
sites would be ensured . Regarding work sites found un registered during 
joint site inspection, it was replied that out of the six un registered sites 
found, four have since been registered. 
The Government’s reply is not acceptable, as the number of establishment 
registrations was low even during pre and post Covid -19 periods. Further, 
despite the availability of the full strength of LIs, no targets were set for 
carrying out adequate number of inspections. 
3.1.2  Intimation of the date of commencement and completion of any  
building or other construction work 
As per Section 46  of the BOCW Act, 1996, read with Rule 26 of the 
GBOCW Rules, 2008, an employer in connection with any building or other 
construction work shall before 30 days of the commencement and 
completion of any building or other construction work submit a written 
notice to the Inspector intimating the actual date of the commencement and 
completion of such building or other construction work. Further, as per 
Section 48 of the Act,  where an employer fails to give notice of the 
commencement of the building or other construction work, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine up to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
Scrutiny revealed that a total of  285 establishments 5 were registered by 
DLC-North Goa and DLC -South Goa during 2017 -22. None of the 
registered employers had intimated the actual date of commencement or 
completion of such building or other construction work. Even in the year 
2022-23, out of 36 establishments registered in both the districts 6, none of 
the employers had intimated the actual date of commencement or 
 
5  206 in North Goa and 79 in South Goa 
6  Thirty in North Goa and six in South Goa 

 
Chapter-3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
15 
 
 
completion. However, the  Department neither imposed  penalty7 nor took 
any other action as per the provisions contained in the Act ibid. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that the observation  has been 
complied with and all the establishments are now submitting notices of 
commencement and completion of works. 
Reply has to be viewed against the fact that the Department neither 
imposed any penalty against the employer nor fixed any responsibility of 
Labour Inspectors for not conducting inspection of construction works 
going on in their jurisdiction. 
3.1.3  Non-imposition of fine for delayed application for registration of 
establishments  
As per Section 7 of the BOCW Act,  every employer undertaking 
construction by engaging construction workers shall make an application to 
the RO of the district for registration of the establishment within 60 days 
from the commencement of the work. P rovided that the RO may entertain 
any such application after the expiry of the period aforesaid, if he is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within such period.  Failure/delay in registration may attract a 
fine which may extend to ₹ 1,0008.  
DLC-South Goa and DLC-North Goa registered 79 and 206 establishments 
respectively during the period 2017 -22, out of which only 70 and 137 
applications were made available to Audit . It was observed that 66 
applications of DLC -South Goa and  89 applications of  DLC-North Goa 
were received after the due date.  
The establishments were registered without seeking the reasons for delay in 
applications and without evaluating if there was sufficient cause for the 
delay.  
The State Government replied (April 2024) that efforts are made to avoid 
such situations and due procedure will be followed as per the existing Rules. 
It was also assured to carry out necessary modifications in the registration 
portal to identify the delay in date of application and commencement.  
The reply is not tenable as the Department not only failed to ensure the 
implementation of the relevant provisions of the Act but also failed to carry 
out due diligence for imposition of the applicable penalty. 
 
 
 
7  ₹ 5.70 lakh (285 establishments x ₹ 2,000 fine each establishment as per Act) 
8  Under Section 50 of the Act 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
16 
 
 
3.1.4   Delay in issue of Establishment Registration Certificates 
As per Rule 24 of the GBOCW Rules,  2008, the RO, shall register the 
establishment and issue a certificate of registration to the applicant within 
15 days of receipt of the application if applicant has complied with all the 
requirements.  
Out of total 285 registrations done in North Goa (206) and South Goa (79)  
during 2017-22, 46 registration certificates (16 per cent) were issued with a 
delay ranging from 13 days to 1,094 days as detailed in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Number of registration certificates issued with delay 
Registering Authority Delay range (in days)  
Total Upto 100 100-500 > 500 
DLC- North Goa 20 07 01 28 
DLC-South Goa 14 04 Nil 18 
Total 34 11 01 46 
(Source: Information furnished by the Labour Department) 
The delay was attributed to server problems  and procedural delays in the 
Department. Delay in registration absolved the employer from the 
responsibilities under the Rules, including those for registration of workers 
and compliance to health, safety and other welfare measures of the workers.  
The State Government replied (April 2024) that in most of the cases, delay 
in issuance of registration certificates was due to online and software issues. 
The issues are being streamlined in consultation with Goa Electronics 
Limited. 
The reply is not tenable as in one fourth cases applications were processed 
by the Department with delay. 
3.1.5   Non-submission of returns by registered establishments 
As per Rule 247 of the GBOCW Rules, 2008, employer of every registered 
establishment shall annually send a return9 relating to such establishment in 
duplicate in Form XXV annexed to the rules to the RO  so as to reach him 
not later than the 15th of February, following the end of each calendar year, 
with a copy to the Labour Inspector (LI). The return provides vital 
information such as the maximum number of building workers employed on 
any day during the year, total number  of days during the year on which 
building workers were employed, number of incidents/accidents that took 
place during the year, etc. 
 
9  The annual returns are to be submitted online through Goa Online portal maintained by 
Goa Electronics Limited.  

 
Chapter-3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
17 
 
 
Scrutiny, however, revealed that only 39 annual returns out of 197 were 
submitted by the employers during 2017-21 as detailed in Table 3.4.  
Table 3.4:  Details of returns furnished by registered establishments 
during 2017-21 
 
Calendar 
Year 
DLC-North Goa DLC-South Goa 
No. of 
returns 
due 
No. of 
returns 
received 
Percentage of 
submission of 
returns 
No. of 
returns 
due 
No. of 
returns 
received 
Percentage of 
submission of 
returns 
2017 Not 
maintained 
NA NA 43 Not 
maintained 
NA 
 
2018 25 Nil NA 12 7 58.33 
2019 30 10 33.33 22 6 27.28 
2020 14 09 64.29 06 2 33.33 
2021 38 04 10.53 07 1 14.29 
Total 107 23  90 16  
(Source: Information provided by DLCs) 
DLC-North Goa received only 23 returns, out of 107 whereas DLC -South 
Goa received only 16 returns, out of 90 due from the employers during the 
calendar year 2017 -21. This shows the employer had submitted only  
20 per cent returns to DLCs.  
Annual returns were not furnished to DLC -North Goa by any of the 
registered establishments for the calendar year 2018. None of the DLCs 
maintained the record of returns for the year 2017. DLCs did not monitor 
the timely submission of returns and compliance in case of deviations or 
lapses observed during scrutiny of returns. 
In the absence of returns, the DLCs did not have any information about the 
number of building workers employed, those entitled to be registered as 
beneficiaries, number of days of employment, accident/incident cases, etc., 
which hindered effective monitoring of the registration and implementation 
of welfare schemes for the workers. 
DLC-South Goa replied  (February 2023)  that the process for checking 
details in respect of non -submission/late submission of returns was being 
streamlined in consultation with Goa Electronics Limited.  The Board 
replied (July 2023) that directions would be issued to the LI to monitor 
annual returns. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that returns were submitted throug h 
offline process and no separate records were maintained. Also, submission 
of return is linked to registration of establishments and registration of 
establishments is being revamped. The annual return process shall also be 
streamlined for timely submission of returns. 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
18 
 
 
The reply is not acceptable as though the number of registered 
establishments in a year was available with the Department, submission of 
returns against these establishments were neither properly registered/  
maintained nor monitored by the Department. 
3.2   Registration of workers as beneficiaries of BOCW fund 
As per GBOCW Rule 28 read with Rule 30, every building worker who has 
completed 18 years of age, but has not completed 60 years of age, and who 
has been engaged in any building or other construction work for not less 
than 90 days during the preceding 12 months shall be eligible for registration 
as a beneficiary and shall cease to be a beneficiary when he attains the age 
of 60 years or not engaged in building or other construction work for not 
less than 90 days in a year, and has not paid his contribution 10 for a 
continuous period of one year.  
3.2.1   Low registration of BOC workers 
The registration of beneficiaries is managed by the Board. Workers are 
required to submit an application in the prescribed form, along with 
necessary documents11 to the Registering Officers (RO) who are appointed 
by the Labour Department.  In taluka, LIs are RO for registration of 
beneficiaries. 
After verification of the application, the respective RO issues a Registration 
Certificate. The registration process is also monitored by the Board through 
monthly returns submitted by the employers giving full details of workers 
currently employed by them and entitled to be registered as a beneficiary. 
Year-wise information on building and other construction workers 
registered as beneficiaries with the State Board is depicted in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Number of building and other construction workers 
registered with the Board during 2017-22 
Year Number of 
registered 
beneficiaries at the 
beginning of the year 
Number of new 
registrations during 
the year 
Total number of 
registered 
beneficiaries at the 
end of the year 
2017-18 1934* Nil 1934 
2018-19 1934 2080 4014 
2019-20 4014 11991 16005 
2020-21 16005 1989 17994 
2021-22 17994 51* 18045 
Total  16111  
(Source: Information provided by the Board) 
*Data maintained offline. 
 
10  ₹10 per month  
11  Experience certificate, ID proof and the requisite fees in the form of a Demand Draft 

 
Chapter-3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
19 
 
 
It could be seen from the Table 3.5, that registration of workers was quite low 
during the period 2017-22, except for the year  2019-20, wherein 11,991 
workers were registered. Further , there was a sharp decline noticed in the 
workers registration during the year 2021-22, whereas only 51 workers were 
enrolled as beneficiaries.  
Further, increased registration of beneficiaries during 2018-20 was attributed 
to awareness programmes and training conducted by the Board during the 
year 2018-19. However, the Board did not conduct any further training and 
awareness activities among the w orkers for registration  after 2019 , which 
resulted in poor registration in the subsequent years. It was also observed that 
no workers were registered as a beneficiary during 2022-23. 
                        Figure 2: Reasons for low registration of workers 
 
3.2.2   Lack of proactive efforts for registration of BOC workers 
Audit noticed that during the Registration of Establishments (2017-22) under 
Section 7 of the Act, 21,28412 workers were engaged in building and other 
construction works. However, only 16,111 workers (76 per cent ) were 
registered as beneficiaries and this showed that  all the workers  were not 
registered even in the cases of registered establishments, despite the fact that 
number of workers employed in these registered establishments  were 
available with the Department.  
 
12  Total number of workers as per registration certificates issued to establishments during  
2017-22 


 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
20 
 
 
  Further, the Department does not have any information about work carried 
out by unregistered establishments and the number of workers employed by 
them. As mentioned in para 3.1.1, during the joint site inspection of eight test 
checked unregistered establishments, it was noticed that six establishments 
employing a total of 165 workers were liable for registration under Section 7 
of the Act.  
 However, as the establishments themselves were not registered, the 
registration of beneficiaries was also not done. 
3.2.3   Non-submission of Assessment reports by Labour Inspectors 
As per Labour Department order (November 2018) , all LIs/ROs were 
required to submit the details of registration of building workers in their 
monthly assessment reports to the Board. 
However, none of the LIs submitted their monthly assessment reports to the 
Board, which also failed to monitor the same. No action was taken on  
non-submission of assessment reports by the LIs. 
3.2.4  Non-holding of regular camps/facilitation centres for registration 
of workers 
As per Model Welfare Scheme for Building and Other Construction Workers 
and Action Plan, the State Labour Department/Welfare Board may issue 
directions to workers’ registration authorities, to hold regular camps/create 
facilitation centres at prominent lab our chowks/addas for the purpose of 
conducting awareness campaigns and facilitating registration of workers. 
Further, Board in its 13 th meeting held in November 2018 decided to create 
awareness through advertisement on FM radio, announcement at Kadamba 
Bus stand across the State and spreading pamphlets, displaying hoardings, 
brochures and street plays at VPs level. 
However, Audit observed that no such instructions were issued by the Labour 
Department/GBOCWWB to the workers’ registering officers (Labour 
Inspectors) to hold regular camps/create facilitation centres at prominent 
labour chowks/addas for the purpose of conducting awareness campaigns and 
facilitating registration of workers during the period 2017-22. 
The Board accepted (July 2023) the observations and stated that they would 
fix the responsibility as this was a legacy issue, which has grown over a  
period.  
The State Government replied (April 2024) that audit observation is noted 
for compliance. It was also stated that cess collectors/labour inspectors will 
be directed to ensure registration of all unregistered workers by carrying out 
sensitization at construction sites and by surprise inspections. Further, the 
Board also decided to authorize all Labour Inspectors, all Village 

 
Chapter-3: Registration of Establishments and BOC Workers 
21 
 
 
Panchayats, Municipalities, Assistant/Junior Engineers of work executing 
departments as registering officers under the Act for registration of workers. 
The Board has forwarded this proposal for conside ration to the expert 
committee. 
3.3   Registration of migrant workers as a beneficiary of the Welfare           
Fund 
Pursuant to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court (July 2018), Model 
Scheme for Building and Other Construction Workers and Action Plan  
(for Strengthening Implementation Machinery) was placed on the official 
website of the Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment 
for compliance by State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. 
 As per the above -mentioned Scheme, to facilitate registration of BOC 
migrant workers under the Act, the destination  State may be directed to 
conduct special drive with focus on migrant BOC workers and ensure that 
the migrant workers from outside the State are not discriminated at the time 
of registration and delivery of benefits. The authorities responsible for 
registration of migrant workers must share information with the respective 
State Welfare Board so that their registration/renewal/delivery of welfa re 
benefits is monitored by the Boards of the source states. 
As per information provided by the registering authorities, 4,967 migrant 
workers were registered under inter-state migrant workers Act, 1979, who 
were employed in Building and Other constructions works in the State 
during the period 2017 -22. Under BOCW Act, it was noticed that 3,748 
migrant workers  (75.46 per cent ) were registered with the GBOCWWF. 
Further, it was also observed that in the year 2022 -23, 798 inter-state 
migrant workers were employed in building and other construction works 
in the State, however none of them were  registered as beneficiary with 
GBOCWWF. Neither did the GBOCWWB receive any data/information of 
the registered migrant workers under the BOCW Act from the source State 
Welfare Boards nor did they share any data/information of the registered 
migrant workers to the source State Welfare Boards so th at their 
registration/renewal/delivery of welfare benefits could be monitored by the 
respective Boards. 
Due to absence of non -sharing of data between the Welfare Boards, 
registration/renewal/delivery of welfare benefits of all the  inter-state 
migrant workers employed in the State could not be ensured. 
The Board replied (September 2024) that henceforth, data on registration/  
renewal/delivery of welfare benefits of all inter-state migrant workers 
employed in the State will be shared between the Welfare Boards. 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
22 
 
 
Reply has to be viewed against the fact that the Board had not taken 
immediate action to comply with the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s Order. 
Conclusion: 
Registering authorities had no information about number of construction 
works going on in their respective area s. There was no co -ordination and 
data sharing between the construction licence issuing authority and the 
registering authority. Prescribed returns were not furnished by the registered 
establishments and intimation for commencement of construction/  
completion of work was not given as required under the Act.  
Registration of beneficiaries to avail benefit under the schemes was quite 
low which can be attributed to the Board’s failure to conduct awareness 
programmes among the workers.  
Recommendation 3: The Department may take immediate measures to 
increase the enrolment of establishments including a mechanism with 
Local Bodies and works executing departments to get the data of 
construction licences issued and work orders executed respectively. 
Recommendation 4: The Board may conduct periodic surveys for 
identifying unregistered BOC workers and regular drives to improve 
awareness among workers to increase registration. 

 
 
CHAPTER-4 
Assessment, Collection and 
Remittance of Cess 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
A cess was to be levied and collected for the purposes of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996 (27 of 1996), at such rate not exceeding two per cent but 
not less than one per cent  of the cost of construction incurred by an 
employer.  
The main sources of cess were - deduction at source from contractor’s 
Running Account bill in case the work is executed by the Government 
departments or Public Sector Undertakings and in other cases, advance cess 
collection by the construction licence issu ing authorities ( Local Bodies). 
The proceeds of the cess collected were to be paid by the local authority or 
the State Government agency collecting the cess to the Board after 
deducting the cost of collection, not exceeding one per cent of the amount 
collected. Further, an employer may also pay in advance an amount of cess 
calculated on the basis of  estimated cost along with the notice of 
commencement of work to the Board. 
The cess was to be collected at a uniform rate as prescribed on the basis of 
the quantum of the building or other construction work involved and was 
subject to final assessment made by assessing officers. The cess collection 
mechanism is depicted in Figure 3 given below: 
Figure 3: Cess collection mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Non-assessment of cess 
The Cess Act, 1996 requires every employer carrying on building or other 
construction works to pay cess (Section 3 of the Act) and to furnish returns 
to the prescribed Authority/Officer within 30 days (Section 4 of the Act). In 
Assessment order 
Assessment 
Employer 
 Cess Deductor 
(PSUs & 
PWD) 
Cess Collector 
(Local 
Authorities) 
Board 
Assessing 
Authority 
(Labour 
Department) 
 
Cess 
Cess 
Cess 
Form I 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
24 
 
case of default, the Authority shall give notice to furnish the return within a 
specified date. The Cess Act further provides that in absence of any return, 
the Authority shall assess the amount of cess payable after inquiry and issue 
an order specifying a  date for payment. In case of non -payment, such an 
employer shall be liable to pay interest on the amount to be paid at the 
monthly rate of two per cent (Section 8 of the Act). If any amount of cess is 
not paid within the specified date (30 days), the authority may impose a 
penalty not exceeding the amount of cess. Deputy Labour Commissioners  
(DLCs) and Assistant Labour Commissioners  (ALCs) were appointed 
(February 2007) as Assessing Officers (AOs) under their jurisdiction for 
assessment of cess under the Cess Act (Section 9 of the Act). 
Local Bodies collect the advance cess @ one per cent at the time of issue of 
construction license. Advance cess is levied based on estimated cost 
submitted by the valuers/engineers.  
In case of variation in estimated cost, as per section 6, 7 and 8 of the Cess 
Rules, 1998, the employers are to furnish to the AO within 30 days of 
commencement or modification of work regarding the same through  
Form I, which is then to be assessed by the AO within six months. Under -
assessment and over -assessment so identified would lead to the employer 
having to pay the additional cess calculated or being eligible for refund of 
the excess cess collected respectively. 
 Audit observed the following: 
❖ The prescribed returns as per the Cess Act were not received from 
any of the registered employers by the four test -checked AOs 
during 2017-22. The AOs appointed for the purpose did not carry 
out any assessments/issued Assessment Orders in their 
jurisdictions. The same was the case in all other jurisdictions across 
the State. 
❖ The AOs did not issue any notice to employers under the Cess Act. 
❖ The test -checked AOs had no information about the number of 
building and other construction works undertaken in their 
jurisdiction. 
❖ Enquiries of work sites were not conducted by any officer 
authorized by the AOs to estimate the cost of construction. 
❖ Revised Goa Schedule of Rates (GSR) were not followed by VPs 
to determine the estimated cost of construction.  
As a result, the overall cost of construction, the cess realizable or 
penalty/interest on unrealized cess, was not ascertained by the A ssessing 
Officers. AOs appointed for the purpose have not done any assessment in 
the State since their appointment and consequently, the Board remained 

 
Chapter-4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
 
25 
 
unaware of the quantum of cess assessed as well as unrealized cess. Further, 
AOs did not issue notices in instances where employers failed to submit the 
required returns under the Cess Act.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that it was observed by the Board that 
Village Panchayats are not collecting cess as per the revised GSR and the 
Board has informed the Director of Panchayat to issue necessary 
instructions to all Village Panchayats to collect cess as per rev ised GSR. It 
was also stated that ALCs and DLCs are notified as A Os and it shall be 
ensured that these officials will do the assessment work hereafter. 
The reply is not tenable as the Labour Department did not take any action 
against the AOs for disregarding Government orders and failing to perform 
their assigned duties. As a result, realization of actual cess amount payable 
to the Board could not be ascertained.  
4.2   Loss of revenue due to delayed commencement and non -
collection of cess by Village Panchayats 
A test check was conducted to verify whether the correct amount of cess as 
notified (January 2009) by the State Government was being collected and 
remitted to the Goa Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Board in a timely manner. However, scrutiny of records in four VPs 1 
revealed that even though cess collection was notified by the State 
Government with effect from 01 January 2009 , the VPs started collecting 
cess only from 2021-22 onwards. The inordinate delay in commencement 
of cess collection resulted in a huge loss of revenue to the BOCW fund. In 
the case of the test checked VPs, ₹ 383.53 lakh was to be collected against 
348 applications for which construction licenses were issued during  
2017-21. Details of non-collection of cess are given in Table 4.1. 
      Table 4.1: Issue of construction license without collecting cess by VPs  
during 2017-21 
(Source: Information furnished by the test checked VPs) 
 
1  Calangute, Aldona, Sancoale & Betoda 
2  Cess collection started from 2020-21 
3  In 13 cases of 2017-21, demand were raised and cess collected during 2021-22. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
VPs 
No. of 
construction 
licenses where 
cess was due 
No. of  
construction 
licenses issued 
without 
collecting cess 
Estimated cost 
of construction 
where cess was 
not collected  
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of cess 
not collected  
@one per cent 
of estimated 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Calangute 122 122 24504.05 245.04 
2 Aldona2   51   51   2039.85    20.40 
3 Sancoale 168 168  11548.06   115.48 
4 Betoda3   20   07       261.13  2.61 
Total 361 348    38353.09      383.53 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
26 
 
The VPs could not furnish any reason for delayed commencement of cess 
collection in disregard of Government notification in January 2009.  
Non-collection of cess by the VPs was not taken up by the Board for action 
by the Government.  
The State Government replied (April 2024) that the Board has taken active 
steps and instructed (August 2021) the Directorate of Panchayats to direct 
panchayat secretaries to recover the cess. The Board had also brought it to 
the notice of the Government and published notice in local dailies to raise 
awareness about cess collection. Regarding collection of cess f or prior 
period, it was stated that the matter would be placed in the Board’s meeting 
for appropriate decision. 
Reply has to be viewed against the fact that the Board failed to instruct 
Director of Panchayats in time for issuing directive to VPs for cess 
collection which was effective from January 2009 , resulted in delayed 
collection of cess commencing from 2021 -22 onwards. Moreover, neither 
the Board and Director of Panchayats had taken follow up action nor any 
step was taken by VPs for recovery of cess except by VP Betoda. 
4.3   Non-remittance of the collected cess to the Board 
Rule 5 (3) of the Cess Rules provides that the cess collected should be 
remitted to the Board within 30 days of collection. Scrutiny of records of 12 
test checked units (cess collectors/cess deductors) 4 revealed that two VPs 
(Calangute and Aldona) did not remit cess amounting to ₹ 39.81 lakh to the 
Board as detailed in Table 4.2  while the other two VPs (Betoda and 
Sancoale) had deposited the entire collected amount to the Board. 
Table 4.2: Non remittance of cess to the Board 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
VPs 
Year of 
cess 
collection 
Amount of cess 
collected by 
VPs 
Amount of cess 
deposited to 
Board by VPs 
Amount of cess 
not deposited 
with the Board 
Calangute 2021-22 24.33 Nil 24.33 
Aldona 2021-225 22.17 6.69 15.48 
Total  46.50 6.69 39.81 
(Source: Information furnished by the test checked VPs) 
As seen in the table above, an amount of ₹ 39.81 lakh was not deposited 
with the Board by Calangute VP and Aldona VP, which was in 
contravention of Cess Rules. Reasons for non -remittance of cess to the 
Board were not furnished to Audit by the VPs. Further, as the Board did not 
have any mechanism for monitoring and ensuring cess collection and its 
 
4  Four test checked VPs- Aldona, Calangute, Betoda, Sancoale, four ULBs- CCP, Ponda, 
Curchorem-Cacora, Quepem, and four work executing departments - GSIDCL, PWD 
Div. III, Div. VI & Div. XII  
5   VP Aldona collected cess of 2020-21 by issuing demand notices in 2021-22. 

 
Chapter-4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
 
27 
 
remittance by cess collectors, the possibility of unauthorized utilisation of 
cess amounts could not be ruled out. 
The State Government replied (April 2024) that Directorate of Panchayat 
has passed necessary instructions to all Village Panchayats to remit the cess 
within 30 days of collection.  
The Government’s reply is not tenable as both the VPs still had not deposited 
the collected cess in violation of the extant Rules and no action was taken 
by the Government to address the issue.  
4.4   Delay in remittance of labour cess amounting to ₹ 4.79 crore 
Rule 5 of the BOCW Cess Rules, 1998  provides that the cess amount 
collected shall be transferred to the Board within 30 days of its collection. 
Government of Goa notified collection of cess @ one per cent  of 
construction cost (above ₹10 lakh) with effect from 01 January 2009. 
Records of four work executing departments (cess deductors) 6, four 
Municipal Councils/Corporations7 and four Village Panchayats (cess 
collectors)8 were test checked to verify whether the correct amount of cess 
was deducted/collected and remitted to the Board in a timely manner. It was 
observed that out of the 12 selected units, three remitted cess with a delay 
ranging up to 1,000 days during 2017 -22 as detailed in Table 4.3  while 
remaining nine units remitted cess in time. 
Table 4.3: Details of delayed remittance of cess 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
unit 
Amount 
remitted with 
delay (up to100 
days) 
Amount remitted 
with delay (101 
to 500 days) 
Amount 
remitted with 
delay (501to 
1000 days) 
Total 
GSIDCL 50.97 138.95 67.91 257.83 
CCP 215.68 - - 215.68 
VP Betoda     1.98    3.20 -     5.18 
Total   478.69 
(Source: Information provided by the selected units) 
As seen in the table above , there was a substantial delay in remittance of 
cess by the GSIDC L. Reasons for delayed remittance of cess to the Board 
were not furnished to Audit. The GSIDC L replied (July 2023) that due to 
financial constraints which were faced by the company over  the past few 
years, the accumulated cess amount was not remitted to the Board. 
 
6  GSIDCL, PWD Div. III, Div. VI & Div. XII 
7  CCP, Ponda, Curchorem-Cacora, Quepem 
8  Aldona, Calangute, Betoda, Sancoale 

 
Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
28 
 
Delayed remittance of cess to the Board is a violation of the provisions of 
the Act and carries the risk of unauthorized utilization of cess amounts by 
the cess collecting entities.  
The Secretary (Labour) assured (March 2024), to take up the matter with the 
Managing Director of GSIDCL, during the exit conference.  
The Government replied  (April 2024) that the Board has also planned  to 
discuss the issue with the concerned cess collectors/cess deductors and ask 
them to adhere with the provisions of the Cess Act, 1996. 
Reply is not tenable as action taken by the Government does not fully 
address the problem, as no mechanism to monitor the timely remittance of 
cess has been considered amidst possibility of utilization of cess collected 
by the collectors/deductors for othe r purposes. In the absence of a robust 
monitoring mechanism within the Board to ensure timely and accurate 
collection and remittance of cess, the Board would not have any control over 
realising the proceeds of the cess.  
4.5  Collection of cess through cash or cheques by Village Panchayats 
in violation of provisions of Cess Rules 
According to Rule 4(4) of the Building and Other Construction Workers’ 
Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 (BOCWW Cess Rules), where the approval of a 
construction work by a local authority is required, every application for such 
approval shall be accompanied by a crossed DD in favour  of the Building 
and Other Construction Workers Welfare Board for the applicable amount 
of cess. 
During scrutiny of records in test checked VPs9, it was observed that the 
VPs started collecting cess from the year 2021 -22 onwards. The entire 
amount ( ₹ 97.99 lakh) was collected either in cash or in cheque/DDs in 
favour of VP. 
Collection of cess in cash or by cheques , other than that prescribed under 
the Rules ibid is fraught with the risk of cheque bounce/unauthorized 
holding/use of cess amount by the cess collectors.  
The Government replied  (April 2024) that Directorate of Panchayat has 
passed (June 2023) necessary instructions to all VPs to collect cess by 
crossed demand draft and now compliance is being done by all the VPs.  
Further, the Board instructed (June 2024) Directorate of Panchayats to 
collect cess through electronic mode (RTGS/NEFT). Accordingly, the 
Directorate of Panchayat issued (July 2024) an order to implement the 
instructions of Board by all VPs. 
 
9  Aldona, Calangute, Betoda and Sancoale 

 
Chapter-4: Assessment, Collection and Remittance of Cess 
 
29 
 
Audit is of the view that compliance of instruction to collect cess by crossed 
demand draft/electronic mode need to be ensured by the Department to 
avoid the risk of unauthorized holding/use of cess amount. 
Conclusion: 
Assessing Officers appointed by the Government in the year 2007 for 
assessment of cess, had not done any assessment in their respective zones. 
Commencement of cess collection was notified by State Government w.e.f.  
01 January 2009, however, Village Panchayats started collecting cess only 
in 2021-22, resulting in less collection of cess for welfare of workers. Cases 
of non -remittance, delayed remit tance by Local Bodies and Goa State 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited and unauthorized mode of 
collection of cess were also observed.  
Recommendation 5: The Government should fix responsibility for 
non-assessment of cess and ensure commencement of cess assessment 
at the earliest.  
Recommendation 6: The State Government may issue necessary 
directions to Local Bodies and PSUs for ensuring that cess is duly 
assessed, levied, collected and remitted to the Board within specified 
time of 30 days as per the Cess Act .  The Board may strictly monitor 
timely collection and remittance of the cess.  
 

 
 
CHAPTER-5 
Welfare, Health and Safety 
of Workers and Inspection of 
Establishments 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter 5:  Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and 
Inspection of Establishments 
The Health and Safety policy outlined in the Rules specifies the establishment's 
responsibility towards the health, safety  and environmental protection of 
building workers. It assigns responsibilities to all parties involved in 
construction work s including the principal employer, contractors  and  
sub-contractors. The State Government appoints a gazetted  officer to serve as 
the Chief Inspector of building and construction, for ensuring the effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act within the State. 
5.1  Non-formulation of health and safety policy by the employers 
As per GBOCW Rule 44  every establishment employing 50 or more building 
workers shall prepare a written statement of policy in respect of safety and 
health of building workers and submit the same for the approval of the Chief 
Inspector of Inspection of Building and other Construction work. 
It was observed that though the Department registered 51 establishments during 
2018-221, where 50 or more workers were employed in any day of a year, none 
of these registered establishments had submitted any written statement of policy 
in respect of building workers.  
The submission of such a policy by the employers was not monitored by the 
Department and no notices were issued for non-compliance.  
The Government accepted (April 2024) the audit observation and assured that 
necessary instructions will be issued to all Labour Inspectors, Assistant Labour 
Commissioners to sensitize the employers about formation of the policy.  
5.2   Inspections relating to welfare, health and safety of construction  
workers 
According to Rule 303 o f the Rules, an Inspector may, inter alia, examine a 
construction site or place or premises used for a building or other construction 
work. He may issue show -cause notice or warning to employers regarding 
safety, health or welfare of building workers provided under the Act or the 
Rules. Further, he may hold an enquiry into the cause of any accident or 
dangerous occurrence due to any operation connected with or incidental to such 
building or other construction work, or of non -compliance with any of 
provisions of the Act and Rules and give directions in this regard. 
 
1  Data for the year 2017-18 was not produced 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa  
32 
 
The Labour Commissioner was appointed (January 2007) as the Chief 
Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction under the Act and seven 
LIs specified with local limits appointed (February 2007) as inspectors for all 
provisions of the Act and Rules.  
Taluka-wise details of inspections of unregistered construction sites carried 
out during 2017-22 are given in Table 5.1.  
Table 5.1: Taluka-wise inspection of unregistered construction sites 
Name of the 
Taluka 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total 
Pernem Nil Nil Nil Nil 34 34 
Bardez Nil Nil Nil Nil 23 23 
Bicholim Nil Nil Nil Nil 02 02 
Sattari Nil Nil Nil Nil 01 01 
Sanquelim Nil Nil Nil Nil 01 01 
Tiswadi Nil Nil Nil Nil 15 15 
Mormugao Nil Nil Nil Nil 04 04 
Ponda Nil Nil Nil Nil 01 01 
Sanguem Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Quepem 06 Nil Nil Nil Nil 06 
Canacona 02 Nil Nil Nil Nil 02 
Salcete 01 Nil Nil 02 10 13 
Total 09 Nil Nil 02 91 102 
 (Source: Information provided by the Board) 
As it can be seen from the table above, no inspections were carried out in the 
years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. A total of 102 inspections were carried out 
between 2017 and 2022, out of which 89 per cent inspections were carried out 
in 2021-22. All 102 inspections were exclusively conducted for unregistered 
construction sites. Scrutiny of the inspection reports test checked by audit 
revealed that none of the inspected establishments had sent notices for 
commencement/completion of work to LIs and the employers did not maintain 
documents such as register of workers, wage register, muster roll and register 
of overtime. However, no cases of accidents were reported during the audit 
period.  
As per the updated position (June 2024) furnished by the Department, 84 
establishments were registered subsequent to the inspection. Further, despite 
having the full strength of LIs during 2017 -22, none of the registered 
establishments were inspected during this period. 
It was also observed that the monthly/annual target for inspection was not fixed 
by the Department. No reasons were given for non -performance of mandated 
duties by the LIs. The supervisory officers failed to monitor and take any action 
for non -compliance w ith the Act and Rules. The Department did not have 
systems to ensure the regular inspection of establishments by LIs and failed to 

Chapter-5: Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and Inspection of Establishments 
 
33 
 
ensure that all establishments were in compliance with the health, safety and 
welfare provisions under the Act and Rules for building and other construction 
workers. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that necessary instructions will be issued 
to all LIs to conduct inspections related to health, safety and welfare. Further, 
the ALCs and DLCs will monitor the inspection reports and set the targets for 
the LIs. 
Thus, despite the availability of full strength of LIs, inspections were not carried 
out. Directions were not issued by higher authorities to DLCs/ALCs for 
monitoring of inspection reports and targets were not set for LIs for inspection. 
Further, no reasons for non-compliance of rules by the officials and authorities 
concerned have been provided.  
5.3    Joint site inspection of establishments 
Joint site inspections of eight selected registered establishments were conducted 
to check compliance with health, safety and welfare measures as contained 
under the Act and Rule. The discrepancies observed during the joint site 
inspection are discussed in subsequent paras.  
5.3.1   Non-availability of canteen facility 
As per Rule 249 of the Rules, in every place where not less than 250 building 
workers are ordinarily employed, the employer shall provide an adequate 
canteen in the manner specified in this rule for the use of such building workers. 
Two out of eight construction sites inspected, employed more than 250 workers. 
However, no canteen facility (100 per cent) was provided by the employers. 
5.3.2   Use of head protection and other protective apparel 
Rule 51 provides that every building worker required to pass through or work 
within areas at building or other construction work where there is a hazard of 
being struck by falling objects or materials, shall be provided by the employer 
with safety helmets and waterproof boots. However, it was observed that 
suitable protective equipment like safety boots, helmets, etc., were not provided 
by the employer at three construction sites (37.50 per cent). 
5.3.3   Non-availability of accommodation 
As per Section 34 of the Act, the employer shall provide, free of charge and 
within the work site or as near to it as may be possible, temporary living 
accommodation to all building workers employed by him for such period as the 
work is in progress.  

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa  
34 
 
Audit observed that one out of eight test checked sites, accommodations were 
not being provided by the employer. 
5.3.4  Non-maintenance of workers and beneficiary register 
Rule 245 requires that every employer maintain s in respect of each registered 
establishment where he employs building workers, a register in Form XV, 
containing vital information regarding the employment of building and other 
construction workers and their registration as a beneficiary with the Board. 
However, none of the inspected establishments maintained this essential 
register (Form XV). Hence, the registration status of workers could not be 
verified. 
5.3.5  Non-display of registration certificate 
As per Rule 26(5), a copy of the certificate of registration shall be displayed at 
a conspicuous place at the premises where the building and other construction 
work is being carried out. At five out of eight inspected establishments, the 
certificate of registration was not displayed at the work site (Appendix II). 
While the Board had not provided point-wise replies to the above observations 
made during joint site inspection, it was stated (July 2024) that the Department 
had already initiated action for compliance of the provisions of the Act and 
further an Office Memorandum was issued (June 2024) for implementation of 
BOCW Acts and Rules. 
Conclusion:  
Establishments employing more than 50 workers have not formulated health 
and safety policy as required under the Goa BOCW Rule s, 2008. Despite the 
availability of full strength of LIs, the number of inspections to check health 
and safety issues were not carried out adequately. Discrepancies like  
non-availability of canteen facility for workers, absence of head and safety 
gears on work site, non -availability of accommodation , etc., were observed 
during joint site inspection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-5: Welfare, Health and Safety of Workers and Inspection of Establishments 
 
35 
 
 
Recommendation 7: The Department may ensure the formulation of health 
and safety policies by the employers who employed more than 50 workers 
as required under GBOCW Rules.  
Recommendation 8: The Department may strengthen mechanisms for 
conducting regular inspection of establishments.  
Recommendation 9: The Department may take appropriate action on 
employers for non-providing the canteen facility to the workers where 250 
or more workers are employed.  
 

 
 
CHAPTER-6 
Management of Welfare 
Fund & Implementation of 
Welfare Schemes 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 6:  Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation 
of Welfare Schemes 
 
6.1 Financial Management 
6.1.1 High administrative expenditure incurred by the Board 
Section 24(1) and 24(2) of the BOCW Act provides that the Board's fund was 
to be constituted from the contributions made by the beneficiaries and the 
amount of cess received by the Board. The fund so constituted was to be utilised 
for meeting expenses of the Board in discharge of its functions1. Section 24(3) 
of the Act provides that the administrative expenditure was to be kept within a 
limit of five per cent of the total expenditure. Details of income and expenditure 
as well as administrative expenses are given in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Details of receipts and expenditure of the Board for the period 2017-22 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Source: Information provided by the Board) 
It could be seen from the above table , that as against the income of   
₹ 198.58 crore, an expenditure of ₹ 13.42 crore was incurred during 2017-22.  
Audit observed that the administrative expenditure during 2017 -22 ranged 
between 7.81 and 99.93 per cent against the ceiling of five per cent. It was also 
noticed that a meagre share (5.38 2 per cent) was incurred on welfare schemes 
and a huge amount of ₹ 184.57 crore remained unutilised.  Further, in 2022-23 
also, against the total cess collection of ₹ 84.60 crore, only a meagre 
expenditure of ₹ 3.76 lakh  (0.04 per cent ) was made on Scheme 
implementation. 
 
 
1  Welfare measures for the benefit of construction workers and salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of the Board.  
2  ₹ 1,068.39 lakh spent on welfare schemes  / ₹ 19,858.21 lakh collected on account of cess 
and other receipts during 2017-18 to 2021-22 * 100 = 5.38 per cent. 
Year 
Receipts Expenditure Percentage of 
Admin exp. 
to total exp. 
Cess 
collected 
Other/ 
misc. 
receipt 
Total Admin 
Expenditure 
Expenditure 
on schemes 
Total 
expenditure 
2017-18 3472.24 7.27 3479.51 19.56 00.08 19.64 99.59 
2018-19 3051.23 8.58 3059.81 78.33 00.05 78.38 99.93 
2019-20 3117.60 27.76 3145.36 65.99 111.98 177.97 37.08 
2020-21 4087.20 6.60 4093.80 55.64 656.93 712.57 7.81 
2021-22 6070.24 9.49 6079.73 53.68 299.35 353.03 15.21 
Total 19798.51 59.70 19858.21 273.20 1068.39 1341.59 20.36 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
38 
 
The issue of idling of cess fund was also pointed out in the Inspection Report 
of GBOCWWB for the period April 2014 to October 2020 but no corrective 
measures were initiated by the Board. 
The Government accepted  (April 2024) the observation and stated that the 
Board shall increase the registration of building workers so that more and more 
beneficiaries receive the benefits under all the welfare schemes. Further, it was 
stated (April 2024) that the Board has also revised the amount of benefits under 
different schemes, to ensure that expenditure on different schemes allows the 
permissible limit of five per cent administrative expenditure. 
Thus, the Board failed to prioritize workers' welfare and utilization of funds for 
essential benefits, such as health and safety measures, skill development, 
housing and financial assistance which defeated the purpose of setting up the 
Fund. 
6.1.2  Non-preparation of annual statement of accounts and annual reports  
Section 26 of the BOCW Act stipulates that the Board shall prepare an annual 
report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year 
and submit a copy thereof to the State Government and the Central Government. 
Section 27 of the BOCW Act st ipulates that the Board shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts 
in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (CAG). The CAG audits the acco unts of the Board 
under Section 19(2) of the CAG ’s DPC Act read with Section 27(3) of the 
BOCW Act, 1996 and prepares a Separate Audit Report which is placed in the 
State Legislature.  
Audit observed that annual accounts of the Board were prepared only till the 
year 2017-18 and accounts had not been prepared since 2018-19. Further, even 
the annual accounts up to 2017 -18, were not furnished to the CAG for audit.  
Thus, Separate Audit Reports were neither prepared nor laid in the State 
Assembly till date.  
Further, it was also observed that the Board decided (October 2021) to appoint 
an Internal Auditor from Directorate of Accounts, Government of Goa, 
however, Internal Auditor was not appointed. 
Annual reports on the functioning of the Board had not been prepared since the 
constitution of the Board.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that the Board had engaged a Chartered 
Accountant (CA) who failed to complete the task. The same will be taken up 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
39 
 
for completion by availing the services of any other reputed CA and it  will be 
ensured that annual statement of accounts and annual report will be prepared. 
The reply is not acceptable as non-preparation of accounts since 2018 -19, not 
ensuring their timely audit and non -preparation of annual reports on the 
functioning of the Board contravened the provisions of the Act and diluted the 
accountability of the Board. 
Further, the Government replied (April 2024) that request for Internal Auditor 
was made to Directorate of Accounts in December 2021. Further it was 
informed (December 2024) by the Board that a reminder has been issued  
(June 2024) to the Directorate of Accounts in this regard. 
Reply is not tenable as follow up action was not taken up by the Board with 
Directorate of Accounts after three and half years of initial request. 
6.1.3   Loss of revenue due to parking of funds in saving bank accounts  
The Board in its 8th meeting (27 April 2016) discussed about the huge amount  
(₹ 8.21 crore) accumulated in its savings bank account 3 and  observed that it 
incurred considerable revenue loss by way of difference of interest rates in 
savings bank accounts vis-a-vis fixed deposit accounts. To avail optimum 
benefit by way of interest it was decided to adopt auto sweep facility in the 
above-mentioned account whereby any amount above ₹ five lakh lying in the 
savings bank account is automatically transferred to the fixed deposit account. 
During scrutiny of records and bank statements of the two bank accounts4 held 
by the Board, it was observed that there was a balance  of ₹ 15.12 crore in the 
Canara Bank account as of 30 June 2022 and auto sweep/FD from this account 
was not initiated since opening of the account. FDs were initiated only in July 
2022. Further, in another saving account held by the Board (Union Bank), there 
was a balance of ₹ eight crore as of May 2023. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that presently the Board is availing the 
auto aweep facility from Indian Overseas Bank-Taleigao Branch. Further it was 
stated (April 2024) that due to higher rate of interest the money is being put in 
Term Deposit Receipt in the said bank presently.  
The reply is not tenable as bank statements relating to Indian Overseas Bank 
were not produced to audit for verification. Further, the reply is silent about the 
balances in saving bank accounts held in Canara Bank of India.  
 
3  A/c No. 324902010019535 of Union Bank of India, Patto, Panaji 
4  Board opened another savings accounts no. 110024727359 in Canara Bank on 25/11/2021. 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
40 
 
Thus, the Board was unable to effectively monitor its idle funds and issue timely 
instructions to banks for transferring the surplus amount (above threshold limit) 
to fixed deposits, losing higher interest income. 
6.1.4   Shortage of staff 
Section 19 of the BOCW Act provides that the Board shall appoint a Secretary 
and such officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act. The terms and conditions of 
appointment and the salary and allowances payable to t he Secretary and the 
other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
Audit observed that appointments of a Chief Accounts Officer and an 
Accountant were approved in Board’s meeting held in July 2018, however, 
these key positions remained unfilled. This resulted in serious deficiencies such 
as non -maintenance of accounts, non -preparation of annual accounts, non -
realization of time barred cheques/DDs and parking of funds in savings 
accounts as discussed in previous paragraphs. 
Board in its 14 th meeting held in November 2019 decided for automation and 
strengthening of account section by installing Tally ERP software to reduce the 
burden of managing the manual accounts. 
Further, in the 18 th Board meeting (March 2023) a resolution was passed to 
formulate recruitment rules for both existing and newly created positions. 
Accordingly, a proposal was submitted to the Government seeking approval for 
the formulation of recruitment rules. However, re cruitment rules have not yet 
been approved/notified by the Government.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that order has been placed to install Tally 
software but the concerned officials have not been trained to operate the system. 
Regarding framing of recruitment rules it was replied that the draft recruitment 
rules for existing as well as new posts has been framed (February 2024) and is 
under approval. 
The reply has to be viewed against the fact that without the required training to 
staff, the automated accounting tool would serve no purpose.  
The Government’s reply was silent about the vacancies of accounts staff, though 
its functioning had been impacted by the absence of key functionaries like Chief 
Accounts Officer and Accountant.   
Key positions of Chief Accounts Officer and Accountant required to manage 
the fund effectively, remained vacant and the recruitment rules for various posts 
are yet to be notified by the Government. 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
41 
 
6.2   Implementation of welfare schemes 
Section 22 of the BOCW Act, 1996  stipulates various social security and 
welfare schemes for the benefit of building and other construction workers. In 
pursuance to the Act, the State Government notified Goa BOCW Rules , 2008 
read with amendment Rules 2018, which prescribed 11 welfare schemes viz. (i) 
Financial assistance for education of children (ii) Death benefit (iii) Funeral 
assistance (iv) Financial assistance for marriage (v) Maternity benefit  
(vi) Pension benefit (vii) Grant for purchase of house (viii) Disability Pension 
(ix) Grant for purchase of tools (x) Medical assistance to beneficiaries  
(xi) Family Pension. 
Further, State Government notified eight additional welfare schemes  viz.  
(i) Subsistence allowance for mentally challenged and spastic children of 
building workers (2018) (ii) Interim relief to beneficiaries affected by disaster 
(2018) (iii) Menstrual hygiene scheme (2018)  (iv) Mobile health dispensary 
scheme (2018) (v) Setting up of women’s hostel scheme (2018) (vi) Mobile 
toilet scheme (2018) (vii) GBO CWWB Assistance scheme C ovid-19 (2020) 
(viii) Covid-19 Procurement of ration items under BOCWW fund (2020). 
6.2.1  Non-implementation of major schemes prescribed under the Act 
since inception 
Out of 19 welfare schemes, only nine were being implemented in the State as 
discussed in para 6. 2.2. Out of 10 unimplemented schemes, five were more 
crucial welfare and security schemes for construction and building workers 
which were never implemented by the Board. The detail of these five 
unimplemented schemes is given in Table 6.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
42 
 
Table 6.2: Details of five major unimplemented schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Scheme 
Rule/provision 
(Read with 
Amendment  
Rule 2018) 
Eligibility & Benefit 
1 Maternity 
benefit 
 
GBOCW Rule 276 The Board may on application made by 
the women beneficiaries,  sanction  
₹ 10,000 each as maternity benefit during 
the period of maternity, provided that this 
benefit shall not be allowed more than 
twice. 
2 Pension benefit 
 
GBOCW Rule 277 A member of the Fund who has been 
working as a building worker for not less 
than one year after the commencement of 
these rules shall on completion of 55 
years of age for men and 50 years of age 
for women be eligible for pension.  
3 Grant for repair 
and interest 
rebate for the 
construction of 
new house 
GBOCW Rule 279 The Board may on application by a 
member, grant an amount of ₹ One lakh 
for repairs of existing house and an 
amount up to ₹ five lakh towards the 
interest rebate on loans sanctioned to 
beneficiary by bank, financial 
institutions, etc.  
4 Disability 
pension 
 
GBOCW Rule 280  The Board may sanction an amount of ₹ 
2,000 per month for partial disability and 
₹ 5,000 per month for total disability to 
the beneficiary who got disabled due to 
paralysis, leprosy, TB, accident, etc. In 
addition to the pension, he will be eligible 
for an ex-gratia payment of not more than 
₹ One lakh depending upon the 
percentage of disability and subject to 
such conditions as may be fixed by the 
Board. 
5 Medical 
assistance to 
beneficiaries 
GBOCW Rule 285 The Board may sanction financial 
assistance to the beneficiaries who are 
hospitalized for five or more days due to 
accident or any disease. This assistance 
shall also be given to beneficiaries who 
met with accidents. If disability is due to 
accident, the w orker shall be eligible for 
financial assistance up to a maximum of 
₹15,000 depending upon the percentage 
of disability. 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
43 
 
These five crucial schemes like maternity benefit, pension benefit, grants for 
housing repairs, disability pension and medical assistance to beneficiaries were 
not implemented by the Board since the inception. 
Further, the Board in its meeting decided (November 2019) to pay 100 per cent 
contribution on behalf of beneficiaries for registration under Pradhan Mantri -
Shram Yogi Maan-Dhan Scheme. However, it was observed that this decision 
was not implemented. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that out of the five schemes benefits were 
given to some of the beneficiaries under medical assistance, maternity benefit, 
pension and disability schemes. As regards Grant for repair and interest rebate 
for the construction of new house, it was stated that there was no beneficiary 
meeting the eligibility criteria for availing benefit of Scheme. 
Reply is not tenable because, as per the records produced to audit, no 
beneficiary was given benefit under these schemes. In case of Grant for repair 
and construction of new house scheme, there was no eligibility criteria for the 
members of the fund as per  amendment of Rule 279 (2018). Thus, Board was 
unaware of amendments to the rules and failed to implement major schemes in 
the State, consequently  deprived the BOCWW fund members from availing 
intended benefits of the scheme. 
Regarding implementation of Pradhan Mantri-Shram Yogi Maan-Dhan Scheme 
it was replied (April 2024) that the scheme would be implemented after getting 
administrative approval from the Chairman. 
The reply in not tenable as even after lapse of four years, the decision taken by 
the Board is yet to be implemented. 
6.2.2   Deficient implementation of welfare schemes by the Board  
The basic purpose of collecting cess was to finance various social security and 
welfare measures for the intended beneficiaries. The number of beneficiaries 
of welfare schemes during 2017-22 are given in Table 6.3. 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
44 
 
Table 6.3: Beneficiaries of welfare schemes during the period 2017-225                                                                                                   
       (Source: Information provided by the Board) 
Audit observed that 11,360 beneficiaries under Covid-19 procurement of ration 
under BOCW fund  were unregistered workers and benefits were provided 
during Covid-19 pandemic. Further, database for 5,000 beneficiaries benefited 
under Grant for purchase of toolkit s was not maintained by the Board. 
Beneficiaries under Menstrual hygiene scheme were not specified as 
beneficiaries data was not available with the Board. 
Year-wise data of remaining 7,470  registered beneficiaries benefited under  
various welfare schemes is given in Table 6.4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  In 2022-23, 17 more beneficiaries were benefited under two schemes. 
6  Database of beneficiaries not maintained by Board 
7  These are unregistered workers and benefits were provided during Covid -19 pandemic.  
8  Under this scheme, sanitary pad dispensers and the incinerators were installed at 50 
locations on rental basis for a period of two years to provide awareness and access to the 
female BOC workers and their daughters studying from Class VII onwards regarding use of 
eco-friendly sanitary pads and disposal methods. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of welfare schemes Total number of 
beneficiaries 
1 Financial assistance for education 159 
2 Death benefit 2 
3 Funeral benefit 2 
4 Subsistence allowance for mentally challenged child 2 
5 Financial assistance for marriage 1 
6 Grant for purchase of toolkits 50006 
7 Covid-19 procurement of ration under BOCW fund 113607 
8 Assistance scheme Covid-19 7304 
9 Menstrual hygiene scheme Not specified8 
 Total 23830 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
45 
 
Table 6.4: Registered beneficiaries benefited under the welfare schemes 
Year Total number 
of registered 
beneficiaries at 
end of the year 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
benefited 
during the year 
Number of 
schemes in 
which 
beneficiaries 
got benefit 
Name of schemes where benefits 
were delivered to registered 
beneficiaries (no. of beneficiaries) 
2017-18 1934 01 01 Financial assistance for education (1) 
2018-19 4014 01 01 Financial assistance for education (1) 
2019-20 16005 424 04 Financial assistance for education (157), 
Death benefit (2), Funeral benefit (2) and 
Assistance scheme Covid-19 (263) 
2020-21 17994 7025 01 Assistance scheme Covid-19 
2021-22 18045 19 03 Subsistence allowance for mentally 
challenged child  (2), Assistance scheme 
Covid-19 (16) and Financial assistance 
for marriage (1) 
Total  7470   
(Source: Information provided by the Board) 
It can be seen from the above table that number of beneficiaries who availed 
the benefits from the Board under various schemes was quite low.  
Thus, Board did not prepare any long -term plan or annual plan to ensure 
maximum registration of beneficiaries and provide benefits for their welfare. 
Also, there was no system for monitoring/reporting the total number of 
applications received for assistance under various schemes.  
Accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (April 2024) that the 
Board was in the process to authorize all Gram Panchayats, Municipalities, 
Junior Engineers/Assistant Engineers from various work executing 
departments as Registering Officers under the Act to carry out registration of 
BOC workers. Further , it would also be ensured that a long -term plan and 
annual plan is prepared to augment the registration of construction workers as 
beneficiaries under the welfare schemes. 
6.2.3   Non-publicity of welfare schemes among workers 
As per the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s directive on 18 January 2010,  the States 
were required to effectively use media, All India Radio and Doordarshan, for 
creating awareness about the registration of building workers and benefits 
available under the BOCW Act.  

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
46 
 
Audit observed that no regular efforts9 were made for publicizing the welfare 
schemes among the target population by the Board. It indicated an inactive 
approach of the Board towards registration of beneficiaries and creation of 
awareness among the intended beneficiaries to avail the benefits available 
under the various schemes.  
6.2.4  Irregularities observed in implementation of Training of BO C   
workers and Purchase/Distribution of toolkits  
In pursuance to guidelines of the Ministry of Labour and Employment, the 
Board initiated a Skill Development Programme which had to identify 
Recognition of Prior Learning and Training to the BOC workers. These 
guidelines mandated that during such training period, the worker should be 
given financial assistance in the form of stipend and training expenses. 
Rule 281 of GBOCW Rules, 2008  read with amendment notification dated  
28 September 2018, stipulates that an amount of ₹ 5,000 would be sanctioned 
as grant to the member of the Workers’ Welfare fund for purchase of tools who 
have regularly contributed to the fund for a minimum period of three months.  
Subsequently, the above rule was modified by the Board for its better 
implementation with approval (August 2019)  of the Chairman. The Board 
decided (November 2019) to procure and distribute safety and common 
toolkit10 worth ₹ 5,000 to the beneficiaries  instead of grant of ₹ 5,000 as cost 
of purchase of toolkit to the trained beneficiary as per his own choice and work 
requirement.  
For Training of BOC Workers, an MoU on January 2019 was signed between  
M/s Labournet and Board to train the workers to whom the safety and common 
toolkit was to be distributed.  Further, for procurement of toolkits, Board 
entered into an MoU (February 202 0) with M/s Labournet Service India Pvt . 
Ltd. Bangalore (M/s Labournet) for supply, delivery and distribution of safety 
and common toolkits for the registered and trained workers of GB OCWWB. 
As per MoU, it  was the responsibility of the Board to provide det ails of sites 
and list of eligible registered workers to M/s Labournet to carry out the 
distribution of toolkits among these workers.  Audit observed some 
 
9  One-time special drive (October 2018) which was conducted (02 October 2018) at two 
locations (Porvorim and Ponda) for launching of new schemes and special registration drive 
for BOC workers’ registration. 
10  Safety shoes, safety jacket, safety helmet, cotton hand gloves, safety goggles, nose mask, 
ear plug, tool bag, safety harness, combination pliers, claw steel hammer, screwdriver, 
pointed trowel, brick trowel, measuring tape, hacksaw frame, magnetic line te ster. 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
47 
 
irregularities in training of BOC workers and purchase/distribution of toolkits 
as discussed in subsequent paras. 
6.2.4.1   Irregular payment in Training of BOC Workers 
Scrutiny of bills/invoices and payment approval note provided by Board, it was 
revealed that expenditure incurred on training of BOC workers amounted to  
₹ 3,08,54,400 (₹ 309 lakh). As per Board’s statement, the n umber of trained 
workers were 10,699 but after scrutiny of invoices/bills of training following 
irregularities were revealed: 
i. These bills consist of invoices for training of 6,985 workers, assessment of 
714 worker s and registration and generation of ID for 3 ,000 workers. 
Therefore, actually trained workers were 6,985 only. As per MoU there was 
a clause stating that successful completion of training of minimum 10,000 
construction workers had to be done, failing which MoU would be treated 
as null and void. However, payments were made by Board in violation of 
this clause.  
ii. As per M oU for training, Regional Director of Apprenticeship Training 
(RDAT) was the authority for assessment of candidates. However, Board 
irregularly paid an amount of ₹ 7,14,000  @ ₹ 1,000 per candidate to  
M/s Labournet for assessment of 714 candidates. 
iii. Bill no. LNKAINV20000017 dated 22 /07/2019 amounting to ₹ 4.50 lakh 
was charged towards registration and generation of ID for 3,000 candidates 
@ ₹ 150 per candidate which was not a part of the MoU and irregularly 
paid by the Board. 
iv. As per M oU, bills were to be submitted along with training attendance    
sheet and assessment result s declared by  the assessing body RDAT . 
However, audit observed that assessment details were not found attached 
with the paid bills.  
v. Only 49 out of 201 attendance sheets were produced to audit. On 
examination of these attendance sheets, it was found that out of approved 
six skills i.e. bar bending, carpentry, masonry, plumbing, painting & 
scaffolding, training on only one skill i.e. masonry was imparted. 
6.2.4.2  Non-payment of wage loss compensation to BOC Workers 
The MoU provided for paym ent of wage loss compensation  to workers to be 
given to the each worker @ ₹ 35 per hour in lieu of getting training and losing 
their daily wages.  

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
48 
 
During scrutiny of records, it was observed that wage loss compensation was 
not paid to the workers.  Board stated that matter was kept on hold.  
Thus, non-payment of wage loss compensation was in violation of provision of 
MoU as well as extant guidelines11 of Ministry of Labour and Employment.  
6.2.4.3   Irregularities in procurement and distribution of toolkits 
Board had procured (June 2020)  5,000 toolkits @ ₹ 4,909 amounting to  
₹ 2,45,45,000 (₹ 245 lakh) and an amount of ₹ 7.20 lakh was spent towards 
distribution and lab test charges of toolkits.  The Board acquired identical 
toolkits for all categories of construction workers in contravention to Rule 281 
of GBOCW Rules . Distribution of identical toolkits to different categor ies of 
workers was injudicious and the expenditure made from the fund for the 
procurement and distribution of toolkits was in violation of the rule mentioned 
ibid.  
Toolkits were distributed to the workers without ensuring the registration of 
beneficiary as the applications submitted by the workers were not supported by 
registration ID. Further, t he Board did not maintain database/register and 
registration details of beneficiaries to whom toolkits were distributed. In the 
absence of these details, audit could not verify whether the beneficiaries were 
actually construction workers and bonafide members of the Fund. 
It indicated the deficiencies in implementation of scheme and poor monitoring 
by the Board. Possibility of generation of fake bills without training of BOC 
workers and ineligible individuals availing benefits under the scheme cannot be 
ruled out. 
The Board replied (July 2023) that the entire process of registration and 
distribution was handled by the outsourced partner and the Board was in the 
process of getting the application forms from the outsourced partner and will 
be uploaded in the system to generate registration ID.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that the issues of irregularities will be 
taken up in the next Board meeting and appropriate action would be taken.  
The reply has to be viewed against the fact that  no corrective measures were 
taken by the Government to avoid recurrence of such irregularities by 
GBOCWWB in future. Instead, the Government referred the matter to 
GBOCWWB, which itself was involved in the irregularities. No reasons were 
 
11  Ministry of Labour and Employment guidelines mandated that during RPL training period, 
the worker should be given financial assistance in the form of stipend and training expenses. 

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
49 
 
offered for implementation of the toolkit distribution scheme without 
Government notification by the Board. 
6.3   Non-conduct of social audit 
Social audit is the verification of the implementation of a programme/scheme 
and its results by the community, with the active involvement of the primary 
stakeholders and helps strengthen the scheme by deterring corruption and 
improving implementation. 
Specific direction was given (March 2018) by the Hon’ble Supreme Court  in 
response to a writ petition12 to conduct a social audit on the implementation of 
the Act so that in future there is better and more effective implementation of the 
Act. However, social audit was never conducted for welfare schemes for 
construction and other building workers. 
During the exit conference, the CLE assured (March 2024) that necessary steps 
would be taken to conduct social audit. 
6.4   Beneficiary Survey for Impact Assessment 
Section 22 of the BOCW Act empowers the Board to provide welfare measures 
and facilities for beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Board formulated 19 welfare 
schemes for registered workers till March 2022. The Board had extended 
benefits to workers in  nine schemes during the audit period 2017-22.  
Audit conducted joint survey13 of 200 beneficiaries  who received benefits 
during the period 2017 -22 under four schemes  (Covid-19 Cash Assistance, 
Children Education Benefit, Death Benefit and Marriage Benefit).  
182 beneficiaries under Covid-19 cash assistance, 15 under education scheme, 
one under marriage scheme and two under death scheme were surveyed to test-
check the receipt of benefits, mode of payment, awareness about the welfare 
schemes and labour welfare card, present occupations of the beneficiaries, etc. 
Following cases were noticed: 
i.  Non-receipt of benefits: Forty-nine beneficiaries (24.50 per cent) out of 
200 surveyed stated that they did not receive the benefits (Appendix III).  
Board replied (July 2024) that on verification of bank details, 44 out of the 
49 beneficiaries had received the benefit. It also assured that five cases of 
non-receipt of benefit would be taken up with the bank appropriately.  
 
12  WP No 318 of 2006 
13  Beneficiary survey was conducted during April-May 2023 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
 
50 
 
ii.  Benefit to ineligible non-construction workers: Out of 200 beneficiaries, 
94 (47  per cent ) were not found to be  engaged in building and other 
construction work during the survey period. They were engaged in other 
activities/ occupations such as tailoring, working at factories/labs, farmers, 
vegetable vendors, shopkeepers, housewives, etc. Thus, the authenticity of 
employment certificates submitted at the time of registration was doubtful 
(details of beneficiaries in Appendix IV). The Board agreed (July 2023) 
that authenticity of employment cert ificates was not verified by the 
concerned LIs at the time of registration. It was also stated in July 2023 and 
July 2024 that LIs were instructed to re-verify the employment certificates 
of the 94 cases identified by Audit.  
iii.  Lack of awareness of the schemes: Out of 200, 176 beneficiaries were not 
aware of any of the schemes run by the Board. The remaining 24 workers 
were aware of  three to four schemes. Out of 200 surveyed, only 16  
beneficiaries were aware about the purpose of labour welfare card.  
Board replied (July 2024) that an OM has been issued to LIs to improve 
registration and also stated that sensitization programme and camps would be 
initiated for raising awareness among beneficiaries.   
The reply is to be seen against the fact that majority of the beneficiaries 
surveyed were unaware of the schemes run by the Board. 
Conclusion: 
The Board did not prepare annual statement of account s from 2018 -19 and 
annual report on the functioning of the Board was not prepared since inception. 
No Internal Auditor was appointed. Board incurred financial loss due to parking 
of funds in savings accounts which indicated ineffective financial management. 
Non-receipt of benefit was reported by the beneficiaries and lack of awareness 
about the welfare schemes was observed during beneficiary survey. Key 
positions of Chief Accounts officer and Accountant required to manage the 
fund effectively, remained vacant and the recruitment rules for various posts 
are yet to be notified by the Government. Social and welfare schemes for the 
intended beneficiaries were not implemented adequately. Five major welfare 
schemes were not implemented by the Board since inception. In other schemes 
also, the number of beneficiaries who availed benefit was quite low. Instances 
of distribution of identical toolkits among workers were observed. Social audit 
of the schemes as directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court was not conducted.  

Chapter-6: Management of Welfare Fund and Implementation of Welfare Schemes  
51 
 
Recommendation 10: The Government may fix responsibility for  
non-preparation of accounts, instruct the Board to finalise all pending 
accounts and submit the same for Audit. 
Recommendation 11: The Board may ensure the appointment of the 
Internal Auditor in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation 12: A report on the functioning of the Board may be 
prepared and submitted to the Government annually as per the provisions 
of the Act. 
Recommendation 13: The Government may expedite the notification of 
recruitment rules and accordingly, the Board may take immediate steps to 
appoint the required personnel to enable its effective functioning. 
Recommendation 14: The Board may institute a mechanism for carrying 
out periodic evaluation of scheme implementation and take prompt 
corrective action as required to improve implementation. 
Recommendation 15: The Board may implement social audit mechanism 
to enhance transparency and accountability in the implementation of 
schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panaji              (ETI SHUKLA) 
The                                                           Accountant General 
 
 
 
Countersigned  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The       Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
53 
APPENDIX I  
List of unregistered establishments which were liable for registration 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Establishment 
Construction 
license No. 
Estimated 
cost of 
construction 
(` in crore) 
VPs/MCs Date of 
Joint Site 
Inspection 
No. of 
workers 
employed in 
any day in a 
year 
1 M/s Sidharth 
Constructions, 
Verna 
30/2021-22 4.73 VP, Sancoale 16/05/2023 22 
2 JMD Developers, 
Gurudevmension, 
FF2 Near KTC Bus 
stand Curchorem, 
Goa 
4/2021-22 3.83 MC, Curchorem 17/05/2023 48 
3 M/s Pradeep 
Kakodkar, 
Curchorem 
5/2021-22 3.81 MC, Curchorem 17/05/2023 30 
4 M/s Khalil Fazal, 
Aldona 
15/2021-22 2.46 VP, Aldona 20/04/2023 15 
5 Avtara Homes, 
Calangute 
37/2021-22 9.24 VP, Calangute 19/04/2023 35 
6 M/s Saldana Homes,  
Calangute 
45/2021-22 9.55 VP, Calangute 19/04/2023 15 
       
       
       
     

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
54 
APPENDIX II 
Establishments who did not display the Registration Certificate at appropriate place 
(Refer paragraph 5.3.5) 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of 
Establishment 
Establishment 
Registration No. 
Address of 
Establishment 
Date of 
Joint Site 
Inspection 
1 North Goa Olalian Estate 
Private Limited 
BOCW/(NG)/5/2022 Olalian Estate Pvt. Ltd. : 
La Masseria, S. No. 
197/4-A, Siolim, Bardez, 
Goa. 
12/05/2023 
2 North Goa Vianaar Infra LLP BOCW/(NG)/10/2022 Vianaar Infra LLP : Villa 
De Fiore, S. No. 11/13, 
Bardez, Goa 
12/05/2023 
3 North Goa Realcon 
Residency LLP 
BOCW/(NG)/11/2022 Realcon Residency LLP: 
La Branca, S. No. 361/2-
A, Siolim, Bardez, Goa 
12/05/2023 
4 South Goa M/S Shetye Estate BOCW/SG/787/21 Shetye Avenue: 
Surveyed Under Chalta 
No. 67, P T Sheet No. 
245, Margao, Salcete, 
Goa 
16/05/2023 
5 South Goa Tricon Buildwell 
Private Limited 
BOCW/SG/791/21 Mananam Foundation: 
BITS Pilani K K Birla 
Goa Campus, NH 17B, 
Zuarinagar,  Mormugao, 
Goa 
15/05/2023 
      
      
      
     
 
 

Appendices  
55 
APPENDIX III 
Details of Beneficiaries who have not received benefit in their Bank Accounts 
[Refer paragraph 6.4 (i)] 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme 
District Taluka Registration No. Mode of 
Payment 
Beneficiary 
statement    
regarding 
payment 
1 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014102 DBT Not Received 
2 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010126 DBT Not Received 
3 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010651 DBT Not Received 
4 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010465 DBT Not Received 
5 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014139 DBT Not Received 
6 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074661 DBT Not Received 
7 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010118 DBT Not Received 
8 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00072705 DBT Not Received 
9 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00011760 DBT Not Received 
10 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014092 DBT Not Received 
11 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080297 DBT Not Received 
12 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074621 DBT Not Received 
13 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010122 DBT Not Received 
14 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014084 DBT Not Received 
15 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014134 DBT Not Received 
16 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00073997 DBT Not Received 
17 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072707 DBT Not Received 
18 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072411 DBT Not Received 
19 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072665 DBT Not Received 
20 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071701 DBT Not Received 
21 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071937 DBT Not Received 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
56 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme 
District Taluka Registration No. Mode of 
Payment 
Beneficiary 
statement    
regarding 
payment 
22 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071860 DBT Not Received 
23 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071888 DBT Not Received 
24 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00070681 DBT Not Received 
25 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00073991 DBT Not Received 
26 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071951 DBT Not Received 
27 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Mormugao LBR/LE/2020/000804772 DBT Not Received 
28 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
South Goa Mormugao LBR/LE/2020/00080520 DBT Not Received 
29 Financial assistance 
for education  
South Goa Velim NA DBT Not Received 
30 Financial assistance 
for education  
South Goa Velim NA DBT Not Received 
31 Financial assistance 
for education  
South Goa Velim LBR/LE/2019/00027608 DBT Not Received 
32 Financial assistance 
for education  
South Goa NA NA DBT Not Received 
33 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa NA LER/LE/2019/00073173 DBT Not Received 
34 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa NA LER/LE/2020/00080182 DBT Not Received 
35 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00077774 DBT Not Received 
36 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00084959 DBT Not Received 
37 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00073373 DBT Not Received 
38 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00071847 DBT Not Received 
39 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00070310 DBT Not Received 
40 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080697 DBT Not Received 
41 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085720 DBT Not Received 
42 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00077539 DBT Not Received 
43 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00077573 DBT Not Received 
44 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00071237 DBT Not Received 
45 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080692 DBT Not Received 

Appendices  
57 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme 
District Taluka Registration No. Mode of 
Payment 
Beneficiary 
statement    
regarding 
payment 
46 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085720 DBT Not Received 
47 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00078628 DBT Not Received 
48 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00052570 DBT Not Received 
49 Assistance Scheme 
Covid-19 
North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2020/0080838/7 DBT Not Received 
       
       
       
       
       
    
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
58 
APPENDIX IV 
Details of Beneficiaries who are not BOC workers 
[Refer paragraph 6.4 (ii)] 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme District Taluka Registration No. Present 
Occupation 
1 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080384 Agriculture 
2 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/000080316 Housewife 
3 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080419 Housewife 
4 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00010465 Agriculture 
5 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080309 Housewife 
6 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014019 Unemployed 
7 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014139 Agriculture 
8 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074661 Unemployed 
9 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080299 Housewife 
10 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00011769 Housewife 
11 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00072705 Driver 
12 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014092 Gardener 
13 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074655 Housewife 
14 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080384 Agriculture 
15 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080297 Housewife 
16 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074621 Agriculture 
17 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00011747 Agriculture 
18 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074637 Housewife 
19 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00074647 Housewife 
20 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080310 Farmer 
21 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2019/00014134 Working in 
Hotel 
22 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Quepem LBR/LE/2020/00080296 Housewife 
23 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00073997 Unemployed 
24 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072408 Housewife 
25 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072411 Agriculture 
26 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2020/00085235 Working in 
Garage 
27 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00073996 Agriculture 
28 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072671 Housewife 
29 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00070486 Housewife 
30 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071704 Agriculture 
31 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2020/00084932 Working 
Abroad 
32 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072676 Agriculture 
33 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072659 Agriculture 
34 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00070479 Unemployed 
35 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071965 Housewife 
36 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071937 Housewife 
37 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00072279 Working in 
Factory 
38 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00071888 Unemployed 
39 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00070681 Working as 
Security Guard 

Appendices  
59 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme District Taluka Registration No. Present 
Occupation 
40 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 South Goa Sanguem LBR/LE/2019/00073991 Unemployed 
41 Financial assistance for education  South Goa Dharbandora NA Housewife 
42 Financial assistance for education  South Goa Dharbandora NA Housewife 
43 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00073173 Unemployed 
44 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00072013 Service Shop 
45 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00074251 Housewife 
46 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00074234 Housewife 
47 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00076360 Fruit Vendor 
48 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00073375 Service /Part 
time Job 
49 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00083752 Tailoring 
50 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00076926 Housewife 
51 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00072265 Driver 
52 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00076296 Housewife 
53 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00076275 Housewife 
54 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez NA SHG Worker 
55 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00060303 Working at 
Shop 
56 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00060421 Housewife 
57 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00072337 Shopkeeper 
58 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2019/00072375 Unemployed 
59 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00076997 Shopkeeper 
60 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00077076 Gardener 
61 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Bardez LER/LE/2020/00080182 Shopkeeper 
62 Financial assistance for education  North Goa Morjim LEM010165305 Handicraft 
Work 
63 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00078146 Tailoring 
64 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00070292 Unemployed 
65 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080455 Unemployed 
66 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00070320 Unemployed 
67 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00084959 Unemployed 
68 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085862 Unemployed 
69 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00070310 Unemployed 
70 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080697 Unemployed 
71 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080831 Tailor 
72 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00082446 Unemployed 
73 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085720 Unemployed 
74 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00077539 Unemployed 
75 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085564 Unemployed 
76 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00082941 Working in 
Company 
77 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080886 Unemployed 
78 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080692 Unemployed 
79 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2019/00073185 Unemployed 
80 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00084745 Unemployed 
81 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00085720 Unemployed 
82 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00080681 Unemployed 
83 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00084632 Housewife 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers in Goa 
60 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme District Taluka Registration No. Present 
Occupation 
84 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Ponda LER/LE/2020/00078628 Housewife 
85 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00045694 Housewife 
86 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00075352 Housewife 
87 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00075072 Working in 
factory 
88 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00045750 Housewife 
89 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00075601 Coconut Seller 
90 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00075860 Tailor 
91 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/00074498 Housewife 
92 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2019/01008876 Lab Technician 
93 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LER/LE/2020/0080838/7 Housewife 
94 Assistance Scheme Covid-19 North Goa Tiswadi LBR/LE/2019/00059103 Housekeeping 
(Sweeper)  
    
 
 