 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Welfare of Building and Other Construction 
Workers 
for the year ended 31 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Report No. 2 of 2025 

 

Table of Contents 
 
Chapter 
number 
Description Page No.  
                         Preface iii 
                         Executive Summary v 
1 Introduction 1 
2 Registration of Establishments and construction 
workers 
5 
3 Assessment, collection and remittance of Cess 17 
4 Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of 
welfare schemes by the Board 
23 
5 Monitoring and internal control mechanism 33 
Annexures 
Number  Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
No. 
I Calculation Sheet for Cess in South 
District 
3.2(ii)(a) 37 
II Details of delayed deposit of labour cess 3.3(ii i)  38 
III Details of beneficiaries and expenditure 
incurred on welfare schemes and activities 
Chapter 4 40 
 

Preface 

iii 
PREFACE  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Lieutenant Governor of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi under Section 48 of the Governme nt of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 for being laid before the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
Construction workers constitute one of the largest categories of workers in the 
unorganized sector.  For providing safety, health a nd welfare measures to 
building and other construction workers (BOCW) thro ugh levy/collection of 
cess, the Government of India (GoI) enacted the Bui lding and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction W orkers’ Welfare Cess 
Act (Cess Act), 1996 and also framed the Building a nd Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Cess Rules (Cess Rules) in 1998.  G overnment of NCT of 
Delhi notified (January 2002) the Delhi Building an d Other Construction 
Workers Rules, 2002 (DBOCW Rules) and constituted D elhi Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Board (Board) in  September 2002 for 
providing various safety, health and welfare measur es to BOC workers 
through various welfare schemes. 
This Report has pointed out various shortcomings in  the efforts made by the 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi i n providing safety, health 
and welfare measures to construction workers.  The audit findings include 
absence of data on number of workers, shortcomings in identification of 
establishments engaged in construction work and wor kers employed by them, 
discrepancies in the data of registered workers, de ficiencies in assessment and 
collection of cess, inadequate welfare measures pro vided to construction 
workers etc.  

Executive Summary  

 
v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Construction workers constitute one of the largest categories of workers in the 
unorganized sector.  Considering the social importance and sensitivity towards 
their wellbeing, the present Performance Audit was taken up with the objective 
of assessing whether  the  Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(GNCTD) has taken adequate measures for providing safety, health and welfare 
measures to construction workers through various welfare schemes.   
The performance audit covered a period of four years from 2019-20 to 2022-23.  
For the purpose of audit, records of the offices of the Labour Department, Delhi; 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boa rd (the Board) and 
Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health were test checked. 
Main Audit Conclusions  
• As per Section 7 of the ‘Building and Other Constru ction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service ) Act, 1996 every 
employer engaged in construction activities is to a pply for registration of 
his establishment, which employs ten or more worker s in construction 
activities. Further, as per Section 10 of the Act, an establishment which is 
not registered shall not employ building workers in the establishment. 
• Identification and registration of such establishme nts engaged in 
construction activity is the first step in ensuring that the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (BOCW) engaged in these establ ishments get 
registered and can avail the benefits of various we lfare schemes of the 
Board related to providing them safety, health and welfare measures. 
• The Government of NCT of Delhi did not have any reliable data relating to 
the number of BOCW in Delhi. 
• Audit observed that in selected South and North Wes t Districts, where 
97 private establishments which deposited cess betw een April 2019 and 
March 2023 were not found registered. Similarly, 25  establishments 
involved in construction as per information available on Delhi Fire Service 
website, were also not found registered. It clearly  shows lack of proactive 
action on the part of the Board to use various sour ces of information to 
identify and register eligible establishments. 
• The Board could provide complete database of only 1 .98 lakh out of 
6.96 lakh BOC workers stated to be registered with it. Out of 1.98 lakh 
beneficiaries, for whom images were made available to Audit, 1.19 lakh 
beneficiaries were linked with 2.38 lakh images i.e . more than one image 
for individual beneficiary. 
• Availability of duplicate images, images with no fa ces, and multiple 
registrations of the same face indicates several loopholes in the registration 
process. Since a robust computer algorithm would require exactly one face 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
vi 
in each image, this indicates failure of the IT system to detect such images 
during registration. 
• In terms of renewals of registrations of the BOCW, Delhi was way behind 
the all India performance being only 7.3 per  cent  against All India 
74 per cent  renewals of registrations. 
• Section 3 of the Building and Other Construction Wo rkers’ Welfare Cess 
Act (Cess Act), 1996 provides for mandatory levy and collection of cess on 
the cost of construction and as per notification issued (September 1996) by 
GoI, cess shall be levied at one per cent of the cost construction incurred 
by an employer which will be paid to the Board. As of March 2023, the 
Board had accumulated funds of ₹ 3579.05 crore. 
• There was huge difference in figures of cess amount  collected as per 
records of cess collectors, district records and the Board. The difference in 
figures of the cess as per District records and as per the Board for four years 
amounted to ₹ 204.95 crore. The differences were not found reconciled.  
• The Department did not maintain a reconciled databa se of Cess assessed, 
collected and remitted and thus lacked a system to ascertain the quantum of 
Cess due and its timely collection. Cases of incorr ect assessment, 
short/deposit/realisation of cess were observed. 
• Expenditure on welfare schemes ranged between 9.53 and 11.33 per cent 
only  of total receipts except in 2021-22 when ex-gratia payments were 
made to the BOCW for tiding over the Covid pandemic period. 
• Benefits were given only under 12 out of 17 schemes  during 2019-20 to 
2022-23 as no expenditure was incurred in five sche mes viz Financial 
assistance for miscarriage,  Advance for purchase o r construction of 
house, Loan for purchase of work related tools, Gra nt for the purchase of 
work related tools; and Insurance Policy. 
• Financial assistance for education of children of c onstruction workers  for 
the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 amounting to ₹ 46.08 crore, for 
disbursement to 58,998 students, was released by th e Board to the 
Directorate of Education only in March 2022. Benefits for subsequent years 
were yet to be paid as of September 2023. There wer e also delays ranging 
up to 1423 days in processing of applications for f inancial assistance in 
134 out of 4017 claims relating to various schemes. 
• Despite GoI advising the States (October 2018) to t ake proactive steps to 
facilitate transit accommodation/labour shed cum ni ght shelter, mobile 
toilets and mobile crèches to BOC workers till they  find work, the Board 
has taken no concrete steps to implement the same in Delhi. 

Executive Summary 
vii 
• The Board had not provided any further training to BOC workers and their 
dependents except providing training to 350 benefic iaries in 2019-20 to 
help to upgrade their skills or diversify by acquiring new set of skills.   
• The Board approved the implementation of the GoI directives in June 2019 
but did not implement it and still continued to pro vide assistance of only 
₹ 2 lakh in case of accidental death and ₹ 1 lakh in the event of natural death 
instead of payable ₹ 4 lakh and ₹ 2 lakh respectively. 
• Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (A B PM-JAY) 
provides health insurance cover of ₹ 5 lakh per family per year in case of 
hospitalization with cashless health care services at any of the empaneled 
government and private hospitals across the country .  The Department of 
Labour and the Board had taken no steps to cover th e BOCW of NCT of 
Delhi under this beneficial scheme and thus they ar e eligible to a measly 
medical assistance of a maximum of ₹ 10,000. 
• No inspection of construction sites was carried out  either by the selected 
districts of Labour Department to ensure availabili ty of various facilities 
required to be provided by employers as per the BOC W Act nor by the 
Directorate of Industrial Safety & Health entrusted with the enforcement of 
safety and health measures for construction workers under the Building and 
Other Construction Workers' (Regulation of Employme nt and Conditions 
of Service) Act 1996 during four years of audit period. 
• No social audit  of implementation of the BOCW Act was conducted in  
Delhi (October 2023) even after five and half years  of the Supreme Court 
directive. 
What do we recommend? 
1.  Government should use all available sources for ide ntifying all 
establishments involved in construction activities, ensure registration of all 
BOC workers thereunder in a time bound manner and m aintain proper 
records of the eligible workers to whom benefit of welfare schemes is to be 
delivered. 
2.  The Board needs to coordinate with concerned govern ment departments 
and harness technology in order to identify and reg ister the BOC workers 
with ease within NCT Delhi so that all of them coul d be benefitted under 
the welfare schemes of the Board. 
3.  The Board needs to conduct a security audit of its application to plug 
loopholes in its registration system and exercise m ore vigour in 
authentication and reconciling its various databases as it is essential for the 
discharge of its core functions. 
4.  Government needs to utilize the online payment rout e for all cess 
collections to receive cess in real-time besides en sure better coordination 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
viii 
with the building plan-approving agencies to ensure  that cess lying with 
them is remitted without delay. 
5.  A robust reconciliation mechanism, preferably online, should be developed 
to ensure that all dues are being collected and accurately accounted for. 
6.  The Government needs to institute a regular scheme for mitigating 
hardships of BOC workers when construction works ar e stopped and 
facilitate inter-state portability of data pertaini ng to registered migrant 
BOC workers. 
7.  The Board needs to adhere to the timelines prescrib ed so that financial 
assistance is provided to BOC workers in time. 
8.  The Board needs to take immediate steps to implemen t various GoI 
directions aimed at the welfare of BOCW residing in  NCTD so as to 
improve their living conditions. 
9.  Board should meet at regular intervals to provide guidance and ensure that 
the functions and responsibilities of the Board are  discharged efficiently 
and effectively.  
10.  Government may institute social audit as well as internal audit to strengthen 
its internal control mechanism. 

Chapter 1 
Introduction 

 
1 
Department of Labour 
 
Performance Audit on ‘Welfare of Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Construction workers constitute one of the largest categories of workers in the 
unorganized sector.  With a view to providing safet y, health and welfare measures 
to building and other construction workers (BOCW) through levy/collection of cess, 
the Government of India (GoI) enacted the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act,1996 [BOCW 
(RE&CS) Act, 1996] and the Building and Other Const ruction Workers’ Welfare 
Cess Act (Cess Act), 1996 [BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 1 996] and also framed the 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Rules (Cess Rules) in 1998.  
Government of NCT of Delhi notified (January 2002) the Delhi Building and Other 
Construction Workers Rules, 2002 (DBOCW Rules) and constituted Delhi Building 
and Other Construction Workers Welfare Board (Board ) in September 2002 for 
providing various safety, health and welfare measur es to BOC workers through 
various welfare schemes.  
Section 3 of the Cess Act,1996 provides for mandato ry levy and collection of cess 
on the cost of construction and as per notification issued (September 1996) by GoI, 
cess shall be levied at one per cent of the cost of construction incurred by an 
employer which will be paid to the Board. As of Mar ch 2023, the Board had 
accumulated funds of 
` 3579.05 crore from levy of cess, registration fee received 
from BOCW and interest earned thereon. 
As per information furnished to the Audit, total 76 9 establishments 
1 engaged in 
construction activities were registered with the Labour Department during the period 
2019-20 to 2022-23, whereas the total number of con struction workers registered 
with the Board till May 2023 stood at 12.90 lakh. A s per Rule 266 (1) of BOCW 
Rules, 2022, every building worker in the age group of 18 to 60 years, who was not 
a member of any welfare fund established under any law and had completed a period 
of ninety days of service during the preceding twel ve months as a construction 
worker in the State, could be registered as a benef iciary after paying the requisite 
fee 2.  Moreover, the workers need to renew their regist ration every year as benefits 
are available to only those BOC workers who are reg istered and renewed their 
                                                           
1  Establishment means any establishment belonging t o, or under the control of, the Government, 
anybody, corporate or firm, an individual or associ ation or other body of individuals which or 
who employs building workers in any building or oth er construction work; and includes an 
establishment belonging to a contractor but does no t include an individual who employs such 
workers in any building or construction work in rel ation to his own residence, the total cost of 
such construction not being  more than ₹ 10 lakh. 
2  Registration fees of ₹ 5 and a subscription of ₹ 20 for a year 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
2 
registration every year. The Board is responsible for implementing 17 schemes 3 for 
the welfare of the registered BOC workers.  
1.1 Organisational set up 
At the government level, Labour Department, headed by Commissioner (Labour) is 
responsible for registration of establishment, coll ection and assessment of ‘Labour 
Welfare Cess (the cess)’ and inspection of establis hments.  At the district level, 
Deputy Labour Commissioners have been notified as Assessing Officers and Labour 
Officers and Inspecting Officers have been notified  as Cess Collectors.  Similarly, 
Assistant Labour Commissioners have been appointed as Registering Officers for 
registration of establishments.   
The Delhi Building and Other Construction Workers W elfare Board (Board), 
functions under the administrative charge of the La bour Department, is chaired by 
the Labour Minister as ex-officio Chairman and is r esponsible for administration 
and investment of funds, registration of workers as  beneficiaries, formulation of 
schemes and ultimate disbursement of benefits to th e beneficiaries.  The Board 
functions under the Secretary and is assisted by De puty Secretaries and Section 
Officers in its functions.  Deputy Secretaries and Section Officers have been 
appointed as registering and renewal officers respe ctively for registration of 
construction workers. An organizational chart of th e Department is given in Chart 
1.1
. 
Chart 1.1: Organisational Chart 
 
                                                           
3  (1) Maternity benefit (2) Pension benefit (3) Adv ance for purchase or construction of house 
(4) Disability pension (5) Loan for purchase of wor k related tools (6) Grant for the purchase of 
work related tools (7) Payment for funeral assistan ce (8) Death benefit (9) Medical assistance 
(10) Financial assistance for education (11) Financ ial assistance for marriage (12) Family 
pension (13) Imparting vocational training & Constr uction of academy for skill development 
(14) Financial assistance for travel pass (DTC) (15 ) Insurance Policy (16) Financial assistance 
for miscarriage and (17) Ex-gratia in case of permanent disability.  


Chapter 1: Introduction  
3 
Office of Labour Commissioner, GNCTD issued an orde r on 16 August 2005 
directing all Government Departments, Public Undertakings and other Government 
Bodies to remit one per cent  of the amount of cost of construction approved as per 
the tender notification from the bills as ‘Labour Cess’ at the time of making payment 
to the contractors. Besides, Delhi BOCW Rules, 2002 , as amended from time to 
time, provide for collection of one time registrati on fee of ₹ 5 and annual 
membership fee of ₹ 20 from registered workers. 
An audit report on the Functioning of Delhi Buildin g and Other Construction 
Workers Welfare Board was included in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (CAG) for the year ended 31 March 2019 (Report 1 of 2021). Most 
of the shortcomings pointed out in the earlier CAG Report ended March 2019 still 
persist as it would be seen in the subsequent paras incorporated in this report. 
1.2 Audit Objective 
The primary objectives of the performance audit were to assess: 
• Whether there was an effective system for registrat ion of establishments and 
beneficiaries; 
• Whether assessment and collection of cess was efficient; 
• Whether administration of the cess fund was effecti ve and was as per the 
provisions of relevant Act and Rules. 
• Whether cess fund was utilized exclusively for impl ementation of various 
welfare schemes and as per rules/act. 
1.3 Audit Criteria 
Criteria against which the audit findings were benc hmarked were derived from the 
following sources: 
 Building and Other Construction Workers' (Regulatio n of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act 1996; 
 Delhi Building and Other Construction Workers' (Reg ulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2002; 
 Building and Other Construction Workers' Cess Act 1 996 and Cess Rules, 
1998; 
 Resolutions passed in the Board meetings from time to time; and 
 Orders and guidelines issued by Government of India  and Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD). 
1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The audit of welfare of ‘Building and Other Constru ction Workers’ under 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi ( GNCTD) covering financial 
years 2019-20 to 2022-23, was conducted between April 2023 and November 2023 
through test check of records in the offices of the  Labour Department, Delhi; 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
4 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boa rd (the Board) and 
Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health. 
A detailed audit was conducted in two districts out of nine districts viz South District 
having the highest cess collection and North West D istrict having the highest 
registered workers. Fifteen per cent of registered establishments and Assessment 
Orders were selected from the two selected districts (South and North West Districts) 
for detailed audit. Thirteen divisions of five departments being major cess deductor 
departments 
4 were selected using Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement. 
Ten welfare schemes based on the quantum of financial assistance were selected (top 
5, 3 with medium and 2 with negligible financial as sistance), along with 
150 beneficiaries from each district were selected in this performance audit using 
the method of ‘SRSWOR’. 
Audit methodology involved scrutiny of records, doc ument analysis, audit queries 
and beneficiary survey of selected beneficiaries fo r end-user satisfaction.  Besides, 
data received from the Board was also analysed.  
An Entry Conference was held on 28 April 2023 with the officials of the Board 
wherein audit objectives, audit criteria, audit scope and methodology were discussed 
in detail. An exit conference was also held on comp letion of audit with the 
stakeholders on 27 February 2025 to discuss the aud it findings.  Replies received 
from the Government have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.5 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation of the departmen ts concerned and its field 
functionaries for assisting in the smooth conduct of the audit. 
 
                                                            
4  Public Works Department, Irrigation & Flood Contr ol Department, Delhi Tourism & 
Transportation Development Corporation, Delhi Jal B oard and Delhi Urban Shelter 
Improvement Board. 

Chapter 2 
Registration of Establishments and 
Construction Workers  

5 
Chapter 2 
 
Registration of Establishments and construction workers 
  
• As per Section 7 of the ‘Building and Other Constru ction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service ) Act, 1996 every 
employer engaged in construction activities is to a pply for registration of 
his establishment, which employs ten or more worker s in construction 
activities. Further, as per Section 10 of the Act, an establishment which is 
not registered shall not employ building workers in the establishment.  
• Identification and registration of such establishme nts engaged in 
construction activity is the first step in ensuring that the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (BOCW) engaged in these establ ishments get 
registered and can avail the benefits of various we lfare schemes of the 
Board related to providing them safety, health and welfare measures. 
• The Government of NCT of Delhi did not have any reliable data relating to 
the number of BOCW in Delhi. 
• Audit observed that in selected South and North Wes t Districts, where 
97 private establishments which deposited cess betw een April 2019 and  
March 2023 were not found registered. Similarly, 25  establishments 
involved in construction as per information available on Delhi Fire Service 
website, were also not found registered. It clearly  shows laxity on the part 
of the Board to use various sources of information to identify and register 
eligible establishments.  
• The Board could provide complete database of only 1 .98 lakh out of 
6.96 lakh BOC workers stated to be registered with it. Out of 1.98 lakh 
beneficiaries, for whom images were made available to Audit, 1.19 lakh 
beneficiaries were linked with 2.38 lakh images i.e . more than one image 
for individual beneficiary.  
• Availability of duplicate images, images with no fa ces, and multiple 
registrations of the same face indicates several loopholes in the registration 
process. Since a robust computer algorithm would require exactly one face 
in each image, this indicates failure of the IT system to detect such images 
during registration. 
• In terms of renewals of registrations of the BOCW, Delhi was way behind 
the all India performance being only 7.3 per  cent  against All India 
74 per cent renewals of registrations. 
As per Section 7 of BOCW Act, every employer is to apply for registration of his 
establishment, which employs ten or more workers in construction activities, within 
sixty days from the date on which the Act becomes applicable to the establishment.  

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
6 
As per Section 10 of the Act, an establishment whic h is not registered shall not 
employ building workers in the establishment.  Assistant Labour Commissioners of 
the Labour Department in each District have been appointed as Registering Officers 
for registration of establishments. Total 769 establishments engaged in construction 
activities were registered with the Labour Department during the period 2019-20 to 
2022-23 as given in Table 2.1 .  
Table 2.1: Number of establishments and BOCW registered 
Year Number of Establishments 
registered 
Number of BOCW registered/ 
renewed registration 
2019-20 194 51,398 
2020-21 165 2,29,022 
2021-22 172 11,03,552 
2022-23 238 1,96,590 
Chart 2.1: Number of establishments and BOCW registered 
 
Source: Information furnished by Labour Department and Board  
It can be seen from the data above that in year 2019-20, only 0.51 lakh BOC workers 
were registered. The number of registered BOC workers rose sharply in 2021-22 by 
382 per cent  and it became 11.03 lakh. In the subsequent year 2 022-23, it fell by 
82 per cent  and only 1.97 lakh BOC workers were got registered. The above data of 
registration/renewal of BOC workers as provided to the audit does not appear 
genuine/reliable due to high fluctuation in the data.  
In its reply, the Board stated that the Act does no t allow for suo moto  registration 
and therefore, application by eligible and interest ed worker is necessary for 
registration.  Reply needs to be seen in the light of the fact that creating awareness 
amongst the BOCW also was the responsibility of the Board and despite instructions 
(November 2018) of GoI to organize Camps for spread ing awareness, camps were 
organized only twice 1 in four years from 2019-20 to 2022-23.   
                                                           
1  From 24.8.2020 to 11.9.2020 at 70 locations and f rom 15.2.2021 to 15.3.2021 at 45 locations. 
194 
165 172 
238 
51.4 
229 
1103.5 
196.6 
0
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
No. of Establishment Registered 
No. of BOCW registered/registration renewed (In thousands) 

Chapter 2: Registration of establishments and construction workers  
7 
Deficiencies observed in registration of establishm ents are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
2.1 Lapses in Identification of establishments 
The identification and registration of establishments engaged in construction activity 
is the first step in ensuring that workers engaged in these establishments get 
registered and can avail the benefits of the welfar e schemes of the Board. Thus, a 
reliable data base of all establishments falling un der the ambit of the Act and an 
effective mechanism to update it regularly, is essential for effective implementation 
of the welfare schemes of the Board.  
(i)  The issue regarding absence of data relating to actual number of establishments 
associated with construction activities was pointed out in earlier Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the ye ar ended 31 March 2019 
(Report no. 1 of 2021) Para 3.2.9.1.  However, the data available with the 
Department is patchy and it continues to primarily rely on the owners of the 
establishments to apply for registration.  The Depa rtment, in reply 
(September 2023) to an audit query, stated that it did not have the requisite 
information. 
(ii)  It was observed that cess collectors were not prope rly maintaining District 
Master Register (DMR) as directed by Secretary (Lab our) in respect of 
depositors of cess wherein information like name an d address of employer, 
number and date of sanction of building plan by loc al authority, address of 
construction site, etc. were required to be filled in. North West District replied 
(November 2023) that DMR is being maintained properly as per the proforma 
but audit examination revealed otherwise. 
 In its reply, Government stated (March 2025) that the Board has launched an 
online portal for cess deposition and therefore maintenance of physical records 
is not required. Reply is not satisfactory as the D MR not only provides 
information on the cess deposited but also facilitates in keeping a track on how 
many assessments were done during the year and cess deposited against them.  
Moreover, provision for depositing cess online was started from 1 April 2024. 
(iii)  There are different sources from where details of e stablishments engaged in 
construction could be obtained and data could also be cross-checked such as 
the projects undertaken/to be undertaken by Governm ent organizations/local 
bodies (quarterly consolidated reports were to be sent to Secretary (Board) by 
these organisations), building plans approved by lo cal authorities (to be 
collected by Labour Officers and Inspecting Officer s who have been notified 
as Cess Collectors), private establishments which deposited cess at the District 
Offices and details of construction activities maintained by the local SHOs and 
available at the website of Delhi Fire Service.   
Audit observed that the Government did not use any of these sources to identify 
establishments.  This was corroborated in sampled S outh and North West 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
8 
Districts, where 97 private establishments which de posited cess between 
April 2019 to March 2023 were not found registered.   Similarly, 
25 establishments involved in construction as per i nformation available on 
Delhi Fire Service website, were also not found registered. 
In its reply, Government stated (March 2025) that M CD was sharing the data 
of building plans sanctioned by them to the concerned cess collector of Labour 
Department. Regarding details of construction activ ities maintained by the 
local SHOs, it was stated that the office order was  redundant as MCD was 
sending information regarding approved building pla ns to the Cess collectors 
and cess collectors may not require information fro m SHO.  As far as non-
registration of establishments which had deposited Cess is concerned, it was 
informed that establishments falling under the juri sdiction of Central 
Government are registered by the concerned Regional  Labour Commissioner 
Office (Central Office), however, the cess is depos ited with the BOCWW 
Board of the State only.   
However, the reply does not give any assurance that  all of the establishments 
involved in construction works have been identified and registered.   
2.2 Lapses in Registration of establishments  
As per Delhi BOCW (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Rules, 
2002, the registering officers were to maintain a r egister in Form III, showing the 
particulars of establishments which were registered.  However, no such register was 
being maintained by the South District.  Thus, the system in place to keep track of 
establishments to whom registration certificates ha d been issued was not being 
followed.   
Government stated (March 2025) that the registration of establishment under section 
7 of BOCW Act 1996 is done online on e-district por tal which has details of all 
registrations.  
The Department neither shared online records during audit to substantiate the factual 
position nor did it share a few copies as documentary proof along with the reply.   
Other deficiencies observed in the process of regis tration of establishments and 
maintenance of records thereof are as follows: 
(i) E-district is a web portal through which variou s services provided by the 
Government are available online.  The establishment s and BOCW can apply for 
registration through this portal too. Test check of records of e-district portal of North 
West district revealed that in 23 out of 24 sampled  establishments (total 152 were 
registered during 2019-23), registration certificat es were issued by the Registering 
Officer despite the fact that mandatory documents 
2 as per BOCW (RE&CS) Act 
                                                           
2  Copy of notice of commencement in Form IV [Rule 2 6(3)], Self-declaration/Undertaking 
regarding Memorandum and Articles of Association/Pa rtnership deed/Proprietors ID in case of 
company/firm and contractor agreement with owner/PE  in case of construction by contractor 
along-with authorization of Resolution of the Board in favour of person filing the application 

Chapter 2: Registration of establishments and construction workers  
9 
were not uploaded. The district office stated (Nove mber 2023) that in future, all 
mandatory documents uploaded shall henceforth be ch ecked while issuing 
registration certificates. 
In its reply (March 2025) the Government attributed the lapse to limitation of server 
and space on e-district portal.  It further stated that the issue of providing more space 
on e-district portal for uploading sufficient docum ents was being taken up with 
IT Cell of the Department. 
(ii) As per BOCW Act, an employer was required to s end a notice to the 
Inspector, Labour Department containing place of construction, number of workers 
likely to be employed, details of construction work s to be executed, at least thirty 
days before the commencement of a new work.  Furthe r, every employer was to 
apply for the registration of his establishment within a period of sixty days from the 
date on which the Act becomes applicable to the establishment. Non-compliance to 
the same as per rules attracted a penalty of 
₹ 2000 per instance.  
North West District failed to provide information related to notice of commencement 
of work submitted by the employers during 2019-23.  In South District, 44 out of 
47 employers in respect of whom assessments made by  the Assessing Officer and 
75 private unregistered establishments from whom it  had received cess  did not 
furnish notice of the commencement of work but the District did not levy aggregate 
penalty of ₹ 2.38 lakh (₹ 2,000 in each case) on these employers.   
South District, while admitting the facts, stated ( September 2023) that, in future, at 
the time of assessment, details of the commencement of work will be asked from the 
establishment concerned. The issue of non-furnishin g of information relating to 
commencement of work was pointed out in the earlier  Report of the CAG also 
(para 3.2.9.3). 
Government stated (March 2025) that in case of non- submission of notice by the 
employer, the Inspector is required to file prosecution through the Public Prosecutor 
before the Metropolitan Magistrate (empowered to im pose penalty) after obtaining 
the permission of Chief Inspector of construction, which is a very tedious process 
requiring manpower and pursuance of challans by the  Public Prosecutor before the 
Magistrate concerned.   
Reply is not acceptable as the Department needs to be proactive in pursuing such 
cases of lapses.   
(iii) DBOCW Rules stipulates that the Registering O fficer shall register the 
establishment and issue a certificate of registrati on to the applicant within fifteen 
days of receipt of the application.  Audit observed  delay in issuing the certificates 
ranging from 4 to 143 days in 20 out of 42 (48 per cent ) cases examined in audit.  
The delay in issuing registration certificates was also flagged in the earlier Report 
of the CAG (para 3.2.9.2). 
Government stated (March 2025) that in case of defi ciency of documents or 
information error in the application, objections ar e raised by concerned registering 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
10 
officer and in a few cases, the same remains pendin g at the applicant’s end which 
results in delay in granting registration certifica te.  Reply is not acceptable as audit 
had pointed out specific cases in the selected dist ricts.  Moreover, in 96 per cent  of 
the cases seen in audit, registration certificates were, in fact, being issued even 
without mandatory documents.  
Recommendation 1: Government should use all availab le sources for identifying 
all establishments involved in construction activit ies, ensure registration of all 
BOC workers thereunder in a time bound manner and maintain proper records of 
the eligible workers to whom benefit of welfare schemes is to be delivered. 
2.3 Identification and registration of construction  workers  
Rule 266 (1) of BOCW Rules, 2022 provides that ever y building worker in the age 
group of 18 to 60 years, subject to some condition mentioned therein, could be 
registered as a beneficiary after paying the requis ite fee.  Moreover, the workers 
need to renew their registration every year.  Since benefits are available only to those 
BOCW who are registered and renew registration every year, failure to do so renders 
them ineligible for benefits under various schemes of the Board. 
The government did not have any data relating to th e number of BOCW in Delhi.  
The issue regarding absence of mechanism for identi fication of all construction 
workers was flagged in earlier Report of the CAG fo r the year ended March 2019.  
However, the Department failed to evolve any mechan ism to identify all 
construction workers in Delhi. 
Government stated (March 2025) that registration of  construction workers is an 
ongoing process and the number of construction workers cannot be fixed at any point 
of time as some persons may not continue to be construction workers. It was further 
stated that the process of registration/renewal has been simplified by introduction of 
self-certification by the worker as well as tele-verification. Moreover, the Board also 
launches awareness camps, distribute pamphlet displ ays banners etc. at labour 
chowks about the benefits of registering with the Board. 
The contention of the Government on launching of awareness camps etc. is also not 
valid in view of deficiencies in awareness activiti es undertaken by the Department, 
as pointed out at para no.2.4 of the report.  Further, the reply is silent on the issue of 
identification of construction workers. 
Deficiencies in identification and registration of all the BOCW in Delhi were as 
under: 
(i)  All Assistant Engineers (AEs) of government organiz ations/local 
bodies/public sector undertakings were authorized as Registering Officers to 
facilitate online registration of construction workers working in their projects 
through login IDs and passwords provided.  However,  no construction 
worker was registered with the Board through AEs of  the selected 
13 divisions of various Departments engaged in cons truction works.  The 

Chapter 2: Registration of establishments and construction workers  
11 
Department stated (September 2023) that login IDs, and passwords were not 
provided to AEs by the Board.   
Government stated (March 2025) that the issue of identifying and registering 
all construction workers will be taken up in the ne xt Board meeting as 
recommended by audit. 
(ii)  Section 43 of the Act empowers the Inspector of Lab our Department to 
inspect the premises of any establishment where con struction work is being 
carried out which would have facilitated identification of BOCW employed 
at the site.  It was observed that no such inspecti on was carried out in the 
selected districts during the years under review, d espite it being pointed out 
in the earlier CAG report (para 3.9.2.5).  Further, in compliance to orders of 
the Hon’ble High Court, Delhi, a special inspection  team was constituted 
(October 2021) by the Secretary (Board) for inspection of construction sites 
across Delhi to ensure safety, health and welfare etc. of construction workers.  
The Board also did not provide details of total num ber of inspections 
conducted by the special inspection team, however, scrutiny of five 
3 
inspection files made available revealed that no ac tion was taken on the 
inspection reports except issuing of notice to the employers 4 concerned.  In 
reply to an audit query, the Department stated that no Central Inspection was 
conducted by it during the period under audit scrutiny. 
Government stated (March 2025) that the Labour Depa rtment has initiated 
Central Inspection System (CIS) under various Labou r Laws to randomly 
select an establishment for inspection. Further, inspection under BOCW Act 
1996 is also being brought under CIS to make it more effective. 
(iii)  From November 2018 onwards, workers could register/ renew registration 
online through the e-District portal. However, till  November 2022, data of 
only 1.39 lakh out of total 5.39 lakh workers (as of 30 September 2018) have 
been migrated to the web portal. In the absence of complete registration data 
on the portal, most of workers could not avail the facility of online renewal 
and thus deprived from the benefits of the welfare schemes of the Board. 
Thus, Audit could not derive an assurance that the Department as well as the 
Board are making sincere efforts for identifying co nstruction workers to 
whom benefits of the schemes are to be delivered and more importantly they 
actually need such benefits. Reply is awaited as of March 2025. 
Recommendation 2: The Board needs to coordinate wit h concerned government 
departments and harness technology in order to iden tify and register the BOC 
workers with ease within NCT Delhi so that all of them could be benefitted under 
the welfare schemes of the Board. 
                                                           
3  Two inspection files pertained to West Delhi and one each to North, North West and South Delhi 
Districts.    
4  M/s Raheja Developers Ltd., M/s North Delhi Metro  Mall Pvt. Ltd., M/s Sam (India), Gulermark 
JV, M/s JMC Projects India Ltd. and M/s Tata Projects Ltd.   

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
12 
2.4 Beneficiary Survey of construction workers 
Audit conducted a beneficiary survey of 300 benefic iaries in the two selected 
districts to assess the extent of awareness among the BOC workers about the Board 
and the benefits of registering with it. Chart 2.2  depicts the findings of the 
beneficiary survey.   
Chart 2.2:  Findings of Beneficiary Survey  
• A total of 81 per cent  workers 
belonged to Delhi whereas 
19 per cent  were migrant.  
• 28 per cent  workers were aware of 
Board and the process to become 
its member, while 72 per cent  cited 
lack of awareness, lengthy 
procedure and delays in approval.  
• Only 21 per cent  workers were 
aware about welfare schemes of 
Board  
• Only 37 per cent  workers knew 
about documents required for 
registration and for availing the 
benefits  
• No beneficiary (out of 300 
surveyed) attended awareness 
camp. 
47 per cent  workers stated that they 
approached District Labour Office 
in case of need for scheme benefits 
while 53 per cent  stated that they 
approached Union labour offices. 
 
The above facts show that the efforts made by the D epartment to disseminate 
information about benefits of registration and welf are schemes run by the Board 
were inadequate, which need to be augmented by usin g all available tools of 
information and media.   
Government stated (March 2025) that DBOCWW Board has developed a web portal 
namely dbocwwb.delhi.gov.in for the benefit of construction workers of Delhi. This 
portal covers various benefits available to constru ction workers, and the process of 
registration, renewal and migration in the form of video footage to create awareness 
among BOC workers. DBOCWW Board also organizes vari ous camps at 
construction sites, labour chowks to create awareness among BOC workers. 
160 
190 
62 
84 
58 
140 
300 
110 
238 
216 
242 
300 
0 100 200 300 400 
Whether approached 
District office for scheme 
benefits Yes/No 
Awareness Camp 
attended by the workers 
Yes/No 
Know about the 
documents required for 
Registration and Benefit 
Yes/No 
Aware about the 
DBOCW and Schmes 
Yes/No 
Aware about the 
Registration process 
Yes/No 
Migrant Worker Yes/No 
Total workers surveyed 
No Yes 

Chapter 2: Registration of establishments and construction workers  
13 
However, the fact remains that the results of the survey indicated lack of awareness 
about the Board and its welfare activities amongst the construction workers. 
2.5 Inconsistency in data on registration and renew al of construction 
workers 
Details of year-wise number of construction workers  registered/registrations 
renewed by the Board are shown in Chart 2.3 . 
Chart 2.3: Registration and Renewal of Beneficiaries 
 
Source:  Information provided by the Board. 
The above chart shows a variation in the number of construction workers registered 
by the Board coupled with disproportionate registra tion and renewal between 
2020-21 and 2022-23.   
Government stated (March 2025) that the number of registered workers is not fixed 
as registration/renewal is an ongoing process.  It was further stated that the 
registration/renewal is application based and that the Board is renewing the 
registration for lapsed period also after collectin g late fee.  Besides, the workers of 
Delhi could also renew their registrations by direc tly logging into the Board’s web 
portal.    
Reply is not acceptable as it does not clarify the reasons for the remarkable jump in 
registrations in 2021-22.   
Further, Audit observed difference in the data on t he number of BOCW registered 
and renewed maintained with the Board, on e-distric t portal and the information 
available in the Annual Report of the Board.  Details in Table 2.2 .  
17 
148 
937 
87 
35 
81 
166 
110 
52 
229 
1103 
197 
0
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Figures in thousands 
Fresh registrations during the year Registrations renewed during the year 
Total workers registered 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
14 
Table 2.2:  Difference in data of registration and renewal of registration by 
BOCW 
Fresh Registration 
 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Figures as per Board 16,858 1,47,998 9,37,285 86,99 9 
Figures as per e-district portal 42,728 1,89,541 9, 95,556 93,848 
Figures as per Annual Report 42,672 1,47,803 9,13,5 37 Not 
prepared 
Renewals 
Figures as per Board 34,540 81,024 1,66,267 1,09,59 1 
Figures as per e-district portal 25,343 41,487 58,3 45 1,04,078 
Figures as per Annual Report 9,171 80,939 1,64,814 Not 
prepared 
Thus, the veracity of beneficiary data available wi th the authorities entrusted with 
the BOCW welfare is suspected/not reliable. 
Further, the audit had obtained (July 2023) dump da ta of the beneficiaries from the 
Board. Image analysis of the database of beneficiaries revealed the following further 
discrepancies: 
(a)  Despite the fact that online registrations and rene wals were stated to be 
Aadhar verified, the Board could provide complete database (including image links 
and images) of only 1.98 lakh out of 6.96 lakh BOC workers stated to be registered 
with it. 
(b)  Out of 1.98 lakh beneficiaries, for whom images wer e made available to 
Audit, 1.19 lakh beneficiaries were linked with 2.38 lakh images i.e. more than one 
image for individual beneficiary.   
(c)  In the database, 45 images were linked to 97 workers, with one image linked 
to more than one beneficiary. 
(d)  In 29,453 (14.8 per cent ) out of 1.98 lakh images, either multiple (several ) 
faces were available, or no face was available.  Si nce a robust computer algorithm 
would require exactly one face in each image, this indicates failure of the IT system 
to detect such images during registration. 
(e)  Audit matched faces in the image universe (1.69 lak h images/faces) using a 
20 per cent  threshold (face similarity probability between 80- 100 per cent ) and as 
well as a 30 per cent  threshold. It was found that 1,440 faces appeared in 
3,116 images at the 0.20 threshold and 2,495 faces appeared in 5,595 images at 
0.30 per cent  threshold, indicating that the same image was used multiple times.   
Availability of duplicate images, images with no faces, and multiple registrations of 
the same face indicates several loopholes in the re gistration of beneficiaries and 
indicates weak IT protocol.   
Government stated (March 2025) that the complete data base was available and the 
same may be provided to the CAG audit team, if required.  It was further stated that 

Chapter 2: Registration of establishments and construction workers  
15 
the discrepancies pertained to the issue of downloa ding data from e-district portal 
and creating link, had been rectified now. Government also stated that as a remedial 
measure, video of each registered worker was being made mandatory at the time of 
migration and fresh registration in new portal of the Board.  
The fact remains that the Department failed to prov ide complete and credible 
database for scrutiny during audit. 
Recommendation 3: The Board needs to conduct a security audit of its application 
to plug loopholes in its registration system and ex ercise more vigour in 
authentication and reconciling its various database s as it is essential for the 
discharge of its core functions.     

Chapter 3 
Assessment, Collection and Remittance of 
Cess  

17 
Chapter 3 
 
Assessment, collection and remittance of Cess 
• Section 3 of the Building and Other Construction Wo rkers’ Welfare 
Cess Act (Cess Act), 1996 provides for mandatory le vy and collection 
of cess on the cost of construction and as per noti fication issued 
(September 1996) by GoI, cess shall be levied at one per cent of the cost 
of construction incurred by an employer which will be paid to the 
Board. As of March 2023, the Board had accumulated funds of 
₹ 3,579.05 crore.  
• There was huge difference in figures of cess amount  collected as per 
records of cess collectors, district records and the Board. The difference 
in figures of the cess as per District records and as per the Board for 
four years amounted to ₹ 204.95 crore. The differences were not found 
reconciled.  
• The Department did not maintain a reconciled databa se of Cess 
assessed, collected and remitted and thus lacked a system to ascertain 
the quantum of Cess due and its timely collection. Cases of incorrect 
assessment, short/deposit/realisation of cess were observed. 
An order was passed by the Office of Labour Commiss ioner, GNCTD on 
16 August 2005 directing all Government Departments , Public Undertakings 
and other Government Bodies to remit one per cent  of the amount of 
construction cost approved as per the tender notification from the bills as Labour 
Cess at the time of making payment to the contracto rs by way of A/c Payee 
Cheque, in favour of the Delhi Building and Other C onstruction Workers 
Welfare Board (Board) within 30 days of making such  payment. Later, the 
Board issued (November 2017) instructions to transf er the collected cess 
directly through RTGS/NEFT into its bank account of  concerned district. 
Additionally, registration fee of ₹ 5 and annual membership fee of ₹ 20 from 
registered workers were to be collected.  
It was seen in Audit that Cess was collected by the  Cess Collectors (Labour 
Officers and Inspecting Officers of the Labour Depa rtment) in the District 
offices through cheques, demand drafts and RTGS/NEF T in the bank account 
of the Board in each district and also online mode through a link provided for 
this purpose on the websites of Labour Department and the Board.  The cheques 
and drafts are handed over to staff of the Board in  the District by the Cess 
Collectors who in turn deposit the same in the acco unt of the Board.  Cess in 
respect of private constructions is collected by th e local authority (Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi, New Delhi Municipal Council a nd Delhi Development 
Authority) at the time of approval of building plan s and remitted to Board 
whereas, government departments, public undertaking s and other government 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
18 
bodies carrying out any construction work are requi red to deduct labour cess 
from the contractors’ bills and remit the same to the Board.   
Assessment of cess due in respect of cess deposited  by establishments is done 
by the jurisdictional Dy. Labour Commissioners of the Labour Department who 
have been appointed as Assessing Officers. 
Cess collected by the Board during the years from 2019-20 to 2022-23 is as per 
Table 3.1 .   
Table 3.1: Details of cess collected  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Cess collected 
2019-20 215.47 
2020-21 221.35 
2021-22 244.69 
2022-23 374.46 
Total 1055.97 
Chart 3.1: Details of cess collected 
 
Deficiencies noticed during the audit in the assess ment, collection, and 
administration of cess funds are discussed in the ensuing paragraphs. 
3.1 Cess funds being kept outside Consolidated Fund  or Public Account 
Article 266 (1) of Constitution of India, subject to the provisions of Article 267, 
provides that all revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans raised 
by the Government by issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances 
and all moneys received by that Government in repay ment of loans shall form 
one consolidated fund to be titled the Consolidated  Fund of the State.  Article 
266 (2) provides that all other public moneys recei ved by or on behalf of the 
Government of a State shall be credited to the Public Account of the State.  
Delhi is not a full-fledged State and Government of  National Capital Territory 
of Delhi (GNCTD) doesn't have a separate public account. Instead, transactions 
related to deposits, advances, remittances and susp ense are merged into the 
Public Account of the Union Government.  
215.47 221.35 
244.69 
374.46 
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Amount in crore 
Cess Collected 

Chapter 3: Assessment, collection and remittance of Cess  
19 
Audit observed that all the cess collected under th e BOCW Act in Delhi is 
credited to the account of the Board as per the ext ant orders of the 
Government/Board, the latest being of 3 April 2023. This procedure of remitting 
cess directly to the accounts of the Board is not in conformity with the spirit of 
the above provisions of the Constitution. Further, BOCW Cess Rules, 1998 
provides that the cess collected shall be transferr ed to the Board in the head of 
account of the Board under the accounting procedure s of the State.  
Accordingly, the collected cess should be depicted firstly in Public Account 
(even though managed by the Union Government) and transferred to the Board 
Account from there. 
Thus, the procedure of Labour Cess accounting and u tilisation is not in 
conformity with the extant procedures. 
3.2 Assessment of cess  
As per Section 6 of the Cess Rules, 1998, every emp loyer who is carrying out 
any building or other construction work is required  to furnish a return to the 
Assessing Officer (AO) to enable assessment of the amount of cess payable.   
Shortcomings in assessment of cess was pointed out in para 3.2.5.4 of the Report 
of the CAG for the year ended March 2019.  However,  there still remained 
discrepancies in assessment of cess as follows: 
(i) Scrutiny of records revealed that the AOs were not in possession of 
complete information viz the cost of construction, cost of borrowing, cost of 
designing and technical assistance, complete information on ongoing work etc., 
required for proper assessment of cess, in any of t he nine test checked cases in 
South District.  The South District, while admitting the facts, stated (September 
2023) that complete information will be asked for in future. North West District 
did not provide the requisite information to audit.  Further, the Government 
stated (March 2025) that it had issued detailed orders regarding the cess amount 
to be paid by the establishment in 2005 and again i n 2021-22. The cess is 
calculated on the basis of information furnished by the establishment/contractor 
and as per the aforesaid order.   
Reply is untenable as AOs of the selected districts  were not in possession of 
requisite information for assessing the cess in compliance to the Orders. 
 
(ii) For assessment of cess, the cost of constructi on to be considered is the 
cost indicated by the owner or that worked out by t he Assessing Officer (AO) 
at rates prescribed for this purpose, whichever is higher.  Audit observed 
underassessment of cess in two cases due to mistake s in calculation of 
construction cost by the AOs. 
(a)  In South district, cess due for construction of a c ommercial complex by 
M/s Sam Diecasting LLP was assessed taking rates for residential building 
instead of commercial building (Mall or Star Hotel) while working out the 
cost of construction.  The construction cost at prescribed rates was worked 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
20 
out to ₹ 14.49 crore (Annexure I).  Assessment of cess on the basis of 
lower construction cost resulted in under assessmen t of cess by 
₹ 4.45 lakh.  Government stated (March 2025) that ra tes for residential 
buildings were taken as no separate rates for comme rcial building was 
given in the order dated 2 January 2006 except for malls, 5-star hotels, 
guest house and private hospitals.  
The reply is not tenable as the building was not de clared as residential 
building and being a commercial complex, applicatio n of rate for 
residential building was not in order. 
(b)  In the case of construction of commercial complex and offices completed 
in February 2019 by M/s Puri Buildwell Private Limi ted in North West 
district, the cost of construction was calculated b y the AO as per rates 
prescribed for hospitals, colleges and private scho ols instead of that for 
shopping malls and star hotels. The under assessmen t was to the tune of 
₹ 2.30 lakh. The district authority while accepting (November 2023) the 
observation, stated that the notice has been issued  to the employer/ 
assessee. Further, the Government stated (March 202 5) that the 
assessment file of M/s Puri Buildwell Private Limit ed was being 
re-examined. 
3.3 Short deposit/realisation of cess 
Rules 7 (2) and 12 of the DBOCW Rules stipulates th at the assessment order 
passed by AO shall specify the amount of cess due, cess already paid or 
deducted at source and the balance amount payable a long with due date for 
payment.  Penalty not exceeding the amount of cess can be imposed for delayed 
payments.  Audit observed the following cases of non-realisation of cess due: 
(i)  AO had assessed ₹ 11.38 lakh  as cess payable in two 1 cases (out of nine 
selected for audit) during 2019-23 against which only ₹ 11.10 lakh was 
paid as advance cess resulting in short deposit of cess by ₹ 1.35 lakh 
including interest of ₹ 1.07 lakh.  Besides, penalty was also not levied.  
The district office, while accepting the facts, sta ted (September 2023) 
that notice will be issued to the concerned and amo unt due shall be 
recovered.  Further, the Government stated (March 2025) that the Code 
on Social Security 2020 provides for self-declaration of Cess and that a 
system would be adopted for automated/random select ion of some of 
such declaration for assessment. 
(ii)  Cess amounting to ₹ 142.18 crore collected by MCsD during the period 
under review was yet to be deposited (September 2023). Non-remittance 
of cess by MCD was flagged in the earlier Report of  CAG also 
(para 3.2.5.3) but the Government was yet to sort out the issue.  Absence 
                                                           
1  M/s BMB Developers and M/s Nehru Place Hotels Ltd . 

Chapter 3: Assessment, collection and remittance of Cess  
21 
of any penal provisions in the Act/Rules for delayed remittance of Cess 
abet the local bodies to retain cess funds with them for long periods. 
The Government stated (March 2025) that MCD had rem itted 
(November 2023) an amount of ₹ 144.57 crore.  It further stated that the 
Board was also continuously taking up this issue wi th MCD and other 
agencies for remitting the collected cess. 
(iii)  There were delays ranging from 1 to 21 months in re mitting cess 
deducted from contractor’s bills during 2019-23 in seven test checked 
divisions of Public Works Department, Irrigation an d Flood Control 
Department and Delhi Jal Board (Annexure II). However, no penalty 
was imposed and recovered. 
Government stated (March 2025) that a press release /circular was 
released to all concerned to remit the cess collect ed in Board’s bank 
account online. 
(iv)  In district offices, cess is collected by the cess collectors (Labour 
Officers and Inspecting Officers) through account p ayee cheques and 
other modes and then remitted to the Board.  As per records of the Board, 
283 dishonored cheques amounting to 
₹ 9.58 crore were under 
re-issue/revalidation as of March 2023, some of which pertained to even 
2017-18. These included 178 cheques/demand drafts p ertaining to the 
period from April 2019 to October 2020 which expired as they were not 
deposited within the validity period of the cheque. In its reply, the Board 
stated that it had returned the dishonored cheques to the DLC offices for 
their revalidation.   
Out of 203 dishonoured/expired cheques/demand draft s involving 
₹ 7.20 crore as of March, 2023 in South District, no corrective action 
was found on record to make recovery of ₹ 6.50 crore from the relevant 
departments and agencies whereas, for the remaining  cases, the district 
authorities stated (September 2023) that it had taken-up the matter with 
the employers concerned. 
Government stated (March 2025) that the Board has d eveloped a 
mechanism to collect cess directly from depositors through online mode 
only via a payment link on its web portal. 
Recommendation 4: Government needs to utilize the online payment route for 
all cess collections to receive cess in real-time b esides ensuring better 
coordination with the building plan-approving agenc ies to ensure that cess 
lying with them is remitted without delay.  
3.4 Amount of cess realized not reconciled 
Difference in figures of cess amount as per records  of cess collectors, districts 
and Board was pointed out in the Report of the CAG for the year ended 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
22 
March 2019 vide para 3.2.5.2. The Government then ( September 2023) stated 
that all the districts were reconciling the cess co llection with the Board on a 
monthly basis.  However, the issue still remains un -addressed as there was 
differences between figures of cess collected as per records of South and North 
West District offices and the Board as shown in Table 3.2 . 
Table 3.2: Cess collected as per records of South and North West Districts 
and Board 
      (₹ in crore) 
Year Cess amount 
as per district 
records 
Cess 
amount as 
per Board 
Difference between 
Board and district 
figures 
1 2 3 4 (3-2) 
2019-2020 56.15 75.76 19.61 
2020-2021 26.79 76.02 49.23 
2021-2022 36.55 91.40 54.85 
2022-2023 39.28 120.54 81.26 
Total 158.77 363.72 204.95 
Chart 3.2: Cess collected as per records of South and North West 
Districts and Board 
 
The difference in figures of the cess as per District records and as per the Board 
for four years amounted to ₹ 204.95 crore. As the differences were not 
reconciled, the correctness of the figures could not be verified in audit.   
Government stated (March 2025) that now the cess co llection process has 
mandatorily been made online. 
Recommendation 5:  A robust reconciliation mechanis m, preferably online, 
should be developed to ensure that all dues are being collected and accurately 
accounted for. 
56.15 
26.79 
36.55 39.28 
75.76 76.02 
91.4 
120.54 
19.61 
49.23 54.85 
81.26 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
2019-2020 2020-2021 2021-2022 2022-2023 
Cess amount as per district records Cess amount as per Board 
Difference between Board and district figures Amount in crore 

Chapter 4 
Utilisation of Cess Funds and 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes by the 
Board  

23 
Chapter 4 
 
Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of welfare schemes by the 
Board 
• Expenditure on welfare schemes ranged between 9.53 and 11.33 per cent 
only  of total receipts except in 2021-22 when ex-gratia payments were 
made to the BOCW for tiding over the Covid pandemic period. 
• Benefits were given only under 12 out of 17 schemes  during 2019-20 
to 2022-23 as no expenditure was incurred in five schemes 1. 
• Financial assistance for education of children of c onstruction workers  
for the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 amounting to ₹ 46.08 crore, for 
disbursement to 58,998 students, was released by th e Board to the 
Directorate of Education only in March 2022.  
• Despite GoI advising the States (October 2018) to take proactive steps 
to facilitate transit accommodation/labour shed cum  night shelter, 
mobile toilets and mobile crèches to BOC workers till they find work, 
the Board has taken no concrete steps to implement the same in Delhi.  
• The Board had not provided any further training to BOC workers and 
their dependents except providing training to 350 b eneficiaries in 
2019-20 to help to upgrade their skills or diversif y by acquiring new 
set of skills.   
• The Board approved the implementation of the GoI di rectives in 
June 2019 but did not implement it and still contin ued to provide 
assistance of only ₹ 2 lakh in case of accidental death and ₹ 1 lakh in 
the event of natural death instead of payable ₹ 4 lakh and ₹ 2 lakh 
respectively. 
•  Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB PM-JAY) 
provides health insurance cover of ₹ 5 lakh per family per year in case 
of hospitalization with cashless health care servic es at any of the 
empaneled government and private hospitals across t he country.  The 
Department of Labour and the Board had taken no ste ps to cover the 
BOCW of NCT of Delhi under this beneficial scheme a nd thus they 
are eligible to a measly medical assistance of a maximum of ₹ 10,000.  
The cess collected by the Board, interest earned on  the same and the 
registration/renewal fee etc. collected from the BO CW is at the disposal of the 
Board for providing social and health benefits to t he registered construction 
workers and their families through 17 welfare schem es such as financial 
                                                           
1  (a) Financial assistance for miscarriage (b) Adva nce for purchase or construction of house 
(c) Loan for purchase of work related tools (d) Grant for the purchase of work related tools 
(e) Insurance Policy. 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
24 
assistance in case of accident, old age pension, ho using loans, children’s 
education, medical and maternity benefits etc.   
As of March 2023, the Board had accumulated funds of 
₹ 3,579.05 crore. 
Against this, the details of expenditure incurred o n welfare schemes and 
activities by the Board during 2019-20 to 2022-23 were as shown in Table 4.1 .   
Table 4.1: Details of expenditure incurred on Welfare schemes and 
activities in comparison to total receipts of the Board 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Total Receipts Expenditure on 
welfare schemes 
and activities 
Expenditure in 
comparison to total 
receipts (in per cent ) 
2019-20 431.66 48.89 11.33 
2020-21 387.56 36.95 9.53 
2021-22 357.57 458.08 2 128.11 
2022-23 597.63 61.10 10.22 
Total 1774.42 605.02  
Chart 4.1: Details of expenditure incurred on Welfare schemes and 
activities in comparison to total receipts of the Board 
 
  
                                                           
2  It includes ex-gratia payments made to the BOCW f or tiding over the Covid pandemic 
period. 
431.66 
387.56 357.57 
597.63 
48.89 36.95 
458.08 
61.1 
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Total Receipts Expenditure on welfare schemes and activities 
Amount in crore 

Chapter 4: Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of welfare schemes by the Board  
25 
Chart 4.2:  Expenditure incurred on Welfare schemes and activities in 
comparison to Cess collected and interest earned thereon 
 
As can be seen, expenditure on welfare ranged between 9.53 and 11.33 per cent 
of total receipts except in 2021-22 when ex-gratia payments were made to the 
BOCW for tiding over the Covid pandemic period. Thu s, out of the total 
assistance of ₹ 605.02  crore during the years 2019-23, ₹ 527.42 crore 
(87 per cent ) was on account of ex-gratia payments and only 12. 83 per cent  of 
total expenditure (Less than 0.05 per cent of the total receipts) was made on 
regular welfare activities.  Further, benefits were  given only under 12 out of 
17 schemes (Annexure III) during 2019-20 to 2022-23 as no expenditure was 
incurred in five schemes 3. 
The Government stated (March 2025) that the benefit s under claims are 
application based, and that the Board has developed a web portal which provides 
a video footage to create awareness among BOC Workers about various benefits 
available to construction workers, the process of r egistration, renewal and 
migration. The Board also organizes various camps at construction sites, labour 
chowks to create awareness among BOC Workers for effective implementation 
of schemes and bringing maximum BOCW into the Board’s fold.   
However, the fact remains that very few workers are availing benefits indicating 
that the efforts made by the Board are inadequate.   
Audit observed shortcomings on the part of the Boar d in providing welfare 
measures for BOCW which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
                                                           
3  (a) Financial assistance for miscarriage (b) Adva nce for purchase or construction of house 
(c) Loan for purchase of work related tools (d) Grant for the purchase of work related tools 
(e) Insurance Policy. 
215.47 221.35 
244.69 
374.46 
215.97 
165.47 
109.54 
221.98 
48.89 36.95 
458.08 
61.1 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
450 
500 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Amont in crore 
Cess Collected Interest Earned Expenditure on BOCW Schemes 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
26 
4.1 Functioning of the Board during Covid-19 and ad herence to GoI 
directions 
In view of the unprecedented tribulation faced by t he BOCW due to outbreak 
of Covid-19, GoI triggered a fast-track time bound Mission Mode Project 
(Project) in July 2020.  GoI estimated that registr ation of only half of the 
estimated BOC workers were renewed as on 14 July 20 20 and all States/UTs 
were directed to register all left-out BOC workers by easing out the processes 
within three months.  
As per GoI (July 2020), the status of registration of BOC workers in Delhi 
against collective figures of all states is shown in Table 4.2 . 
Table 4.2:  Status of registered BOC workers in India and Delhi 
(Numbers in lakh) 
Particulars Targeted 
number of 
BOC workers 
Number of BOC 
workers registered 
Number of BOC workers who 
renewed their registration as on 
14 July 2020 
All India 500 347.75 
(69.6 %) 
257.55 
(74%) 
Delhi 7.89 5.49 
(69.5%) 
0.40 
(7.3%) 
Chart 4.3: Status of registered BOC workers in India and Delhi 
 
As per the above data, Delhi was way behind the all India performance in terms 
of renewals of registrations being only 7.3 per  cent  against All India 74 per cent 
renewals of registrations. It also did not frame an d implement any scheme for 
providing subsistence allowance during crisis such as Covid-19 or developed 
the facility of instantaneous online transfer of registration of BOCW migrating 
across states as suggested by GoI.  However, to sup port construction workers 
through periods when construction activities were s topped on account of 
Covid-19 and due to high level of pollution during 2019-20 to 2022-23, the 
Board made ex-gratia payment aggregating to ₹ 528.42 crore to 9.48 lakh 
100 100 
69.6 69.5 74 
7.3 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
All India Delhi 
Targeted No. of BOC workers Registered BOC workers 
Live/Upto date BOC workers after renewal 
Percentage (%)  

Chapter 4: Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of welfare schemes by the Board  
27 
beneficiaries ( ₹ 5000 each on four occasions, three during Covid-19  and the 
fourth when construction activities were prohibited ).  The details of payments 
made to BOCW are as given in Table 4.3 . 
Table 4.3:  Details of ex-gratia payments made during the audit period 
Instalment Date of payment Number of Beneficiaries (in lakh) Amount 
(₹ in crore) Approved for 
payment 
Actually paid 
First and 
second 
31.03.2020 to 
07.01.2022 
1.18 1.10 109.57 
Third 22.04.2021 to 
04.05.2022 
3.17 2.98 148.87 
Fourth 27.11.2021 to 
19.07.2022 
6.17 5.40 269.98 
Total 10.52 9.48 528.42 
As can be seen, these payments, intended to help th e BOCW tide over 
immediate crisis, were spread over long periods the reby reducing its 
effectiveness. The deficiencies/irregularities obse rved in making ex-gratia 
payment were as under:  
(a)  The ex-gratia payments, intended to provide immediate relief to BOCW, 
were delayed in all the four tranches.  Audit obser ved that in the last 
tranche, the payment was made to 1,25,437 construction workers four to 
eight months after the orders were issued.   
(b)  As per the table above, only 90 per cent  of the BOC workers who were 
eligible to receive ex-gratia payments actually rec eived it. In the fourth 
instalment, the Board failed to provide subsistence allowance amounting 
to 
₹ 38.62 crore to 77,230 construction workers as it d id not have the 
correct and updated bank details with it.  Further, same amount was paid 
to all construction workers though payment was to b e made as per the 
wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act for the respective 
categories of workers. 
(c)  A comparison of data of these BOC workers with the CGHS and 
VAHAN data revealed that 47 cases related to those registered workers 
who were also CGHS beneficiaries and 1,204 beneficiaries were owners 
of four-wheeler vehicles registered for private use.  
(d)  It was also observed that payments in the first thr ee instalments 
amounting to ₹ 18.33 crore could not be disbursed to 27,970 ident ified 
beneficiaries due to payment failures, indicating t hat bank account 
details were not obtained/updated by the Board.   
(e)  Though construction activities are stopped every year due to high levels 
of pollution during the winter months, subsistence allowance was not 
sanctioned by the Board after 2021. 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
28 
The above facts show failure of the Government/Boar d in discharging its 
mandate effectively. Pollution caused work stoppages are an annual feature now 
and a more robust system needs to be implemented so  that the needy get their 
dues. 
Government stated (March 2025) that  
- the Board was in the process of framing a scheme for mitigating hardships 
of BOC workers when construction works are stopped owing to natural 
calamities.   
- Board was also in the process of integration of its  data base with e-Shram 
Data to ensure portability of data that may be accessed by any State.  
- The Board registers/renews membership of constructi on workers on the 
basis of aadhar validation, and as per Rule 266 of DBOCW (RE&CS), 
2002.  It further stated that cross checking with C GHS and VAHAN data 
was not feasible.  However, Audit is of the view th at the Board should 
ensure that only genuine BOCW are given benefits. 
- All the 11 district offices of the Board have been directed to update the 
Aadhar seeded bank details of BOC Workers for timel y delivery of 
benefits. Further, a help desk has been established in each district office to 
facilitate the same. 
Recommendation 6: The Government needs to institute a regular scheme for 
mitigating hardships of BOC workers when constructi on works are stopped 
and facilitate inter-state portability of data pert aining to registered migrant 
BOC workers. 
Recommendation 7: The Board needs to adhere to the timelines prescribed so 
that financial assistance is provided to BOC workers in time. 
4.2 Implementation of welfare schemes for BOCW 
Deficiencies observed in implementation of the 10 s elected schemes 
4 of the 
Board are as under:  
(i)  Financial assistance for education of children  of construction workers for 
the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 amounting to 
₹ 46.08 crore, for disbursement to 
58,998 students, was released by the Board to the Directorate of Education only 
in March 2022 and benefits for subsequent years wer e yet to be paid as of 
September 2023.  There was also delays ranging up to 1,423 days in processing 
of applications for financial assistance in 134 out  of 4,017 claims relating to 
various schemes.  Further, payment in respect of 15  sanction orders issued in 
                                                           
4  (i) Pension Benefit, (ii) Maternity Benefit, (iii ) Death Benefit, (iv) Financial Assistance for 
Education, (v) Financial Assistance for Marriage, ( vi) Disability pension, (vii) Funeral 
assistance, (viii) Medical assistance, (ix) Imparti ng vocational training, and (x) Loan for 
purchase of work related tool. 

Chapter 4: Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of welfare schemes by the Board  
29 
October 2021 or earlier were pending with the North West District.  Apart from 
this, status of 137 sanction orders returned by the  Board (Headquarter) to the 
districts due to deficiencies was not available. 
Government stated (March 2025) that due to involvem ent of more than one 
department, it takes a little longer to disburse the amount.  It was further stated 
that endeavour shall be made to provide these benef its in minimum possible 
time. Delay in processing of applications was attributed to delay in attending to 
the deficiencies issued by the district officer by the applicant.   
(ii)  As per directions of the M/o Labour and Employment, GoI, the Board was 
to either provide minimum coverage of 
₹ 4 lakh in case of accidental death and 
₹ 2 lakh in the event of natural death to the depend ent(s) of the deceased 
beneficiary or cover BOC workers up to the age of 5 0 years under Pradhan 
Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana  by making contribution of premium amount. The Boar d approved the 
implementation of the GoI directives in June 2019 but did not implement it and 
still continued to provide assistance of only ₹ 2 lakh in case of accidental death 
and ₹ 1 lakh in the event of natural death. 
The Board stated (September 2023) that it has approved assistance of ₹ 10 lakh 
in case of natural death and ₹ 12 lakh in case of accidental death in place of 
insurance in May 2023 and the same was under proces s.  The Government, 
however, stated (March 2025) that the Board has its  own welfare schemes for 
life and disability covers for construction workers  of Delhi. The fact remains 
that despite adopting the GoI norms, the Board did not provide the envisaged 
quantum of benefits to the dependent(s) of 782 work ers deceased during the 
years 2019-20 to 2022-23. 
Further, the register containing details of deceased beneficiaries for processing 
claims in a time bound manner was not being maintai ned in the selected 
districts.    In its reply (August 2023), North Wes t District office stated that it 
has now started to maintain the register. 
(iii) Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (A B PM-JAY)  
provides health insurance cover of Rupees five lakh per family per year in case 
of hospitalization with cashless health care servic es at any of the empanelled 
government and private hospitals across the country .  The National Health 
Authority (NHA) and M/o Labour and Employment (MoLE ) had entered into 
collaboration to extend the benefits under the sche me to BOCW registered 
under the State Welfare Boards (SWBs).  However, th e Department of Labour 
and the Board had taken no steps to cover the BOCW of NCT of Delhi under 
this beneficial scheme and thus they are eligible to a measly medical assistance 
of a maximum of 
₹ 10,000. Reply was awaited as of March 2025. 
(iv)  Despite GoI advising the States (October 2018 ) to take proactive steps to 
facilitate transit accommodation/labour shed cum night shelter, mobile toilets 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
30 
and mobile crèches  to BOC workers till they find work, the Board has taken no 
concrete steps to implement the same in Delhi. The Government stated 
(March 2025) that the Board has its own dedicated s cheme for providing 
assistance for housing the eligible applicants.   
Reply is not acceptable as no deliberations were found on record to implement 
the scheme to provide transit accommodation, mobile toilets and mobile crèches 
and no expenditure was incurred by the Board on the scheme for giving advance 
for purchase or construction of house. 
(v)  GOI envisaged (October 2018) convergence of skill development activities  
of the Board with those of the State Skill Developm ent Missions/Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and National  Skill Development 
Corporation so as to help BOC workers and their dep endents to upgrade their 
skills or diversify by acquiring new set of skills.  Audit observed that the Board 
had not provided any further training to them excep t providing training to 
350 beneficiaries in 2019-20.  The Government state d (March 2025) that the 
recommendation has been noted for implementation. 
(vi)  As per DBOCW (RE&CS) Rule, 2002, a BOC worker  registered for not 
less than one year was eligible for pension of ₹ 3,000 per month on completion 
of sixty years of age with an increase of ₹ 300 every year.   In terms of the Model 
Welfare Scheme for BOC Workers issued (November 2018) by GoI, eligibility 
period for pension was 10 years and the Board was t o formulate pension 
schemes depending upon its financial capacity.  Dis regarding the Model 
Scheme, the Board approved (June 2019) pension to a  BOC worker with 
eligibility period of three years only.  In spite of this, pension was being paid to 
workers who remained registered only for one year.   
In its reply (September 2023), the Board attributed the anomaly to difference of 
eligibility period in the Act (three years) and Rules 5 and that the matter was sub-
judice before the Hon’ble Delhi High Court.  Government further stated (March 
2025) that Board is bound to abide by the decisions taken in its board meetings 
and as per the directions of Delhi High Court from time to time for disbursement 
of pension to BOC workers who had remained register ed for a period of three 
years (instead of existing period of one year) afte r getting approval from the 
competent authority.  
Reply is not acceptable as pension is being paid on the basis of eligibility period 
of one year against three years approved by the Board.   
Recommendation 8: The Board needs to take immediate  steps to implement 
various GoI directions aimed at the welfare of BOCW  residing in NCTD so 
as to improve their living conditions. 
                                                           
5  Three years in Act and One year in the Rules 

Chapter 4: Utilisation of cess funds and implementation of welfare schemes by the Board  
31 
4.3 Administrative expenditure in excess of limit 
Section 24(3) of the BOCW Act, 1996 provides that administrative expenses of 
the Board, in any financial year, should not exceed  five per cent  of the total 
expenditure incurred during that year.  However, th e administrative 
expenditure, except in 2021-22, ranged between 7.19 and 11.01 per cent  of the 
total expenditure during 2019-20 to 2022-23 as shown in Table 4.4 . 
Table 4.4: Details of administrative expenses vis-à-vis total expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Administrative 
expenses 
Total 
expenditure 
Administrative expenditure 
as a percentage of total 
expenditure 
2019-20 3.79 52.68 7.19 
2020-21 4.57 41.52 11.01 
2021-22 7.05 465.13 1.52 
2022-23 5.08 66.18 7.67 
Audit had raised the issue in the report of the CAG  for the year ended 
31 March 2019 also (para no. 3.2.10.1).  The Board needs to curtail its 
administrative expenditure within the permitted limits. 
Government stated (March 2025) that the Board was t aking utmost efforts to 
limit its administrative expenditure within the lim it of five per cent  of total 
expenditure and that steps were being taken to increase the welfare expenditure. 

Chapter 5 
Monitoring and Internal Control 
Mechanism 

33 
Chapter 5 
 
Monitoring and internal control mechanism 
• No inspection of construction sites was carried out either by the selected 
districts of Labour Department to ensure availabili ty of various 
facilities required to be provided by employers as per the BOCW Act 
or by the Directorate of Industrial Safety & Health  (DISH) entrusted 
with the enforcement of safety & health measures fo r construction 
workers under the BOC (RE&CS) Workers Act, 1996 dur ing the four 
years of audit period. 
• No social audit  of implementation of the BOCW Act was conducted in 
Delhi (October 2023) even after five and half years  of the Supreme 
Court directive.  
 Internal control within organisations are established to ensure that activities in 
its various constituent units are proceeding as pla nned.  Thus, internal controls 
are a prerequisite for effective management of functions in any organisation and 
it provide a degree of assurance to the stakeholder s that its functions are being 
adequately monitored. Issues noticed in the setup a nd management of the 
internal control and monitoring mechanism of the De partment/Board are as 
under: 
(i)  On the directions (March 2018) of the Hon’ble Supre me Court, a 
framework for social audit 
1 of implementation of BOCW Act was developed 
for being implemented by all States/UTs. No social audit of implementation of 
the BOCW Act was conducted in Delhi (October 2023) even after five and half 
years of the Supreme Court directive.  Government stated (March 2025) that the 
Board was in the process of finalizing an agency for conducting Social Audit of 
beneficiaries under its schemes. 
(ii) No inspection of construction sites was carrie d out either by the selected 
districts of Labour Department to ensure availabili ty of various facilities 
required to be provided by employers as per the BOC W Act or by the 
Directorate of Industrial Safety & Health (DISH) en trusted with the 
enforcement of safety & health measures for constru ction workers under the 
 
  
                                                           
1  Social Audit is an audit that is conducted by the  people, especially by those who are affected 
by or are the intended beneficiaries of the scheme and thus can be described as verification 
of the implementation of a programme/scheme and its results by the community. 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
34 
BOC (RE&CS) Workers Act, 1996 during the audit period.  Government stated 
(March 2025) that the Department would bring the in spection of construction 
sites under Central Inspection System so that the s ame could be done in a 
transparent manner. It was also stated that DISH was also conducting awareness 
programmes for sensitizing the employers and workers in respect of safety and 
health of workers for which it had prepared safety manual. 
(iii) DBOCW (RE&CS) Rules, 2002 provide that the Bo ard shall ordinarily 
meet once in two months to monitor the activities.  However, only four 2 Board 
meetings were conducted during the four year period  covered by Audit. 
Government stated (March 2025) that the Board condu cts meetings at regular 
interval as required.   
Reply is not acceptable as the Board is required to  meet once in two months to 
monitor its activities. 
(iv) BOCW Act provides that the Board shall submit an annual report, giving 
a full account of its activities during the previou s financial year, to the State 
Government and the Central Government which was to be laid before the State 
Legislature also.  Audit noted that the Annual Reports for 2020-21 and 2021-22 
were yet to be submitted to the government and the certified accounts of the 
Board (FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22) were not submitted to the State legislature.  
Government stated (March 2025) that annual reports were approved till 
2021-22. It was further stated that annual report f or the years 2022-23 and 
2023-24 shall be put up before the Board in next meeting. 
(v) Internal audit acts as an effective tool in exe rcising check on expenditure 
as well as on various activities and thus is an important mechanism for ensuring 
the smooth working of an organization.  Audit scrutiny revealed that the Board 
had not established an internal audit wing to ensure effective control on various 
activities. No audit of Board has been conducted by  Directorate of Audit, 
GNCTD either. Government stated (March 2025) that t he Board has hired a 
Chartered Accountant (CA) for preparation of Balanc e Sheet, Income and 
Expenditure Statement, Receipts and Payment Account s. It was further stated 
that the CA plays the role of internal auditor and exercises usual checks on 
various activities like finances, collection of ces s, investment of cess and 
welfare schemes.   
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2  14.06.2019, 07.07.2020, 21.01.2021 and 01.08.2022  

Chapter 5: Monitoring and internal control mechanism 
35 
Reply is not acceptable as checks exercised during preparation of accounts and 
internal audit are different.   
Recommendation 9: Board should meet at regular intervals to provide 
guidance and ensure that the functions and responsibilities of the Board are 
discharged efficiently and effectively. 
Recommendation 10: Government may institute social audit as well as 
internal audit to strengthen its internal control mechanism. 
New Delhi 
Dated: 27 May 2025     
(ROLI SHUKLA MALGE) 
Accountant General (Audit), Delhi 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
Dated: 05 June 2025     
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Annexures 

 
37 
Annexure I 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2(ii)(a))  
Calculation Sheet for Cess in South District 
Type of Building: Commercial Complex  
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars of construction 
items/ head 
Area in 
Sq. mtrs. 
Cost of 
construction 
declared by 
Assessee  
Cost of 
Construction 
as per 
schedule 
Rates vide 
Order dated 
02-01-2006 of 
Secy. Labour 
Final cost of 
construction 
(higher one) 
taken for the 
purpose of 
calculation 
of cess 
Cost of 
Construction 
(higher one) 
Calculated 
by Assessing 
officer 
1 Total constructed covered area 
(Up to 4 storeys including 
Mezzanine Floor) 
4715.76 3,87,99,040 4715.76 x 
20,000= 
9,43,15,200 
9,43,15,200 3,87,99,040 
2 Additional constructed 
covered area (Beyond 4 
Storeys) 
623.92 55,45,251 623.92 x 
20,000= 
1,24,78,400 
1,24,78,400 55,45,251 
3 Total   Constructed covered 
area of basement  
1283.71 1,58,42,637 1283.71 x 
20,000 = 
2,56,74,200 
2,56,74,200 1,58,42,637 
4 Total cost of Civil work in 
case of 
repairs/alteration/maintenance 
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
5 Total Cost of Demolition  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
6 Type of flooring and total area 8400 72,23,771 Ni l Nil 72,23,771 
7 Cost of Wood panelling work Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
8 Cost of wood work other than 
wood panelling  
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
9 Cost of false ceiling work  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
10 Cost of central Air 
Conditioning 
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
11 Cost of Lift Installation Nil 51,92,641 Nil Nil 51,92,641 
12 Cost of Boundary Wall 
including railing/gates 
Nil 42,25,722 42,25,722 42,25,722 42,25,722 
13 Total Cost of Swimming Pool Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
14 Cost of Electric work along 
with fitting & Fixtures (Cost 
calculated at 15% of Sl. No. 
1+2+3) 
Nil 92,55,217 Nil Nil 92,55,217 
15 Cost of Plumbing Work 
alongwith fitting & fixtures 
(Cost Calculated at 10% of Sl. 
No. 1+2+3) 
Nil 60,92,521 Nil Nil 60,92,521 
16 Cost of other development 
work including 
sewerage,external roads, 
approach roads, firefighting, 
landscaping, etc. 
Nil 81,89,852 81,89,852 81,89,852 81,89,852 
Total Cost 10,03,66,652  14,48,83,374 10,03,66,652 
Difference in Cost of Construction  ( ₹ 14,48,83,374 - ₹ 10,03,66,652 ) = ₹ 4,45,16,722 
Cess @ 1% of ₹ 4,45,16,722= ₹ 4,45,167 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
38 
Annexure II 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.3(iii)) 
Details of delayed deposit of labour cess  
Year Months in which 
Labour Cess was 
deducted from 
contractors’ bills 
Total amount 
of Labour Cess 
deducted from 
contractors’ 
bills 
Date of 
remittance of 
Labour Cess to 
the Board 
Delay in 
remittance 
North West Building Division, PWD 
2019-20 April 8,310 20.06.2019 1 month 
August 3,27,575 01.11.2019 1 month 
Dec. to January 4,25,713 31.03.2020 1 to 2 months 
2020-21 April to January 12,41,024 31.03.2021 1 to 10 month s 
2021-22 April to January 33,60,962 31.03.2022 1 to 10 month s 
2022-23 April to January 36,99,014 28.04.2023 1 to 11 month s 
South Road Division -2 (M-411) Division, PWD 
2019-20 April to  March 21,37,369 04.07.2020 2 to 13 months  
2020-21 July to Jan 13,57,092 31.03.2021 1 to 7 months 
2021-22 April to Jan 31,12,415 31.03.2022 1 to 10 months 
 
2022-23 
April to August 18,61,425 31.10.2022 1 to 5 months 
October to 
November 
2,82,482 24.01.2023 1 to 2 months 
January 3,03,555 31.03.2023 1 month 
Civil Division-VI, IFCD 
 
2019-20 
January to May 30,41,949 16.07.2019 1 to 5 months 
November 6,45,469 14.02.2020 1 to 2 months 
Feb. to March 29,71,411 06.11.2020 6 to 7 months 
2020-21 July to August 8,54,199 06.11.2020 1 to 2 months 
October to January 77,43,235 31.03.2021 1 to 4 mont hs 
 
2021-22 
May to September 21,29,851 04.12.2021 1 to 5 months  
January 23,47,150 31.03.2022 1 month 
 
2022-23 
May to November 81,41,388 10.02.2023 1 to 7 months 
February & March 38,48,561 Yet to be 
remitted (August, 
2023) 
4 to 5 months 
Civil Division-V, IFCD 
2019-20 July to August 28,86,810 05.11.2019 1 to 2 months 
November to 
January 
35,72,178 31.03.2020 1 to 3 months 
 
2020-21 
July to August 2,68,239 10.11.2020 1 to 2 months 
November 6,12,207 28.01.2021 1 month 
 
2021-22 
May to July 17,30,924 20.09.2021 1 to 3 months 
Sept. to January 37,41,256 29.03.2022 1 to 5 months  
 
2022-23 
May to July 12,07,862 20.09.2022 1 to 3 months 
September to 
October 
55,16,981 16.12.2022 1 to 2 months 
December to 
January 
17,71,048 29.03.2023 1 to 2 months 
 
  

Annexures  
39 
South-I Division, DJB 
2019-20 October 42,617 04.01.2020 1 month 
February to March 1,81,000 22.08.2020 4 to 5 months  
2022-23 May to August 7,13,404 01.11.2022 1 to 4 months 
SDW-I Division, DJB 
2019-20 August to 
December 
1,70,339 26.02.2020 1 to 5 months 
March 84,026 01.09.2020 4 months 
2020-21 November 1,83,707 30.01.2021 1 month 
North West-I Division, DJB 
2019-20 June to July 3,31,098 16.09.2019 1 to 2 months 
Sept. to March 14,11,969 25.11.2020 7 to13 months 
2020-21 Aug. to Sept. 3,86,135 25.11.2020 1 to 2 months 
Dec. to March 15,58,426 01.11.2022 18 to 21 
months 
2021-22 June to March 27,59,088 01.11.2022 6 to 15 months 
2022-23 April to July  13,74,482 14.10.2022 1 to 4 months 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers  
40 
Annexure III 
(Referred to in Chapter 4) 
Details of beneficiaries and expenditure incurred on welfare schemes and activities 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of schemes 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
No. of 
Claims/ 
workers 
Amount 
Paid 
No. of 
Claims/workers 
Amount 
Paid 
No. of 
Claims/workers 
Amount Paid No. of 
Claims/ 
workers 
Amount 
Paid 
1. Maternity Benefit (Rule 
271) 
7 2,10,000 230 67,60,000 758 2,25,70,000 1926 5,78, 00,000 
2. Financial assistance in case 
of miscarriage (Rule 271 
{A}) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3. Pension benefit (Rule 273) 200 66,47,131 364 3,8 0,71,267 481 3,90,30,090 415 3,03,55,593 
4. Advance for purchase or 
construction of house 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
5. Disability Pension 0 0 0 0 5 9,02,000 1 2,16,000  
6. Ex-Gratia Payment in case 
of permanent disability 
(Rule 275) 
7. Loan for purchase of work 
related tool (Rule 276) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8. Grant for purchase of work 
related tools (Rule 276 {A}) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9. Funeral assistance (Rule 
277) 
120 11,35,000 117 10,35,000 277 26,95,000 200 19,95 ,000 
10. Death benefit (Rule 278) 
A)  Natural Death 
B)  Accidental Death 
126 1,22,56,860 124 1,17,58,752 302 2,95,72,258 230  2,29,63,740 
11. Medical assistance (Rule 
280) 
0 0 4 15,400 182 9,43,840 0 0 
12. Financial assistance for 
education (Rule 281) & 
Financial assistance through 
DOE 
10 
 
4,03,033 150 88,54,112 194 1,25,66,255 53 46,86,124  
*43747 31,96,37,197 **14844 11,46,72,329 
13. Financial assistance for 
marriage (Rule 282) 
18 9,38,000 31 14,88,000 67 34,10,000 78 38,28,000 

Annexures  
41 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of schemes 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
No. of 
Claims/ 
workers 
Amount 
Paid 
No. of 
Claims/workers 
Amount 
Paid 
No. of 
Claims/workers 
Amount Paid No. of 
Claims/ 
workers 
Amount 
Paid 
14. Family pension (Rule 283) 0 0 1 1,00,387 1 18,7 64 1 18,000 
15. Yatra pass in DTC non ac 
bus (Rule 283 {c}) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 2152 48,08,789 
16. Imparting vocational 
training & Construction of 
Academy for skill 
development (Rule 283 {A}) 
0 13,54,080 0 0 0 0 0 ***15,76,000 
17. Insurance policy (Rule 286) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18. Ex-Gratia Payment on 
account of Covid 19 and 
stoppage of construction 
activities due to pollution in 
Delhi  
32358 145895000 45966 3,00,06,5000 575753 4,46,09,3 0,000 41434 36,73,40,000 
19. Food provided to 
construction workers during 
Covid 19 
0 0 0 0 0 67,57,118 0 4,54,897 
20. Workers Awareness 
(Expenses on 
Advertisement, Leaflets, 
SMS for awareness among 
workers, Hiring of 
Laptop/Printer for 
Conducting camps for 
registration and renewal of 
workers) 
 427429  13,88,809  14,13,033  3,76,656 
 Total  48,89,03,730  36,95,36,727  4,58,08,08,358  61,10,91,128 
 
*This data belongs to Financial Assistance through Directorate of Education for the period 2017-18. 
** This data belongs to Financial Assistance through Directorate of Education for the period 2018-19, 2019-20. 
***Advance given to Delhi Skill and Entrepreneurship University for training to registered Construction Workers. 
 