 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Integrated Financial Management System in Jharkhand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Jharkhand 
Report No. 1 of 2025 
(IT Audit-Civil)  
 

 
 
  

 
 
 
      
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Paragraph  Page number 
 Preface  v 
 Executive Summary  1-5 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 Initiation of IFMS 8 
1.2 Need for IFMS in Jharkhand 8 
1.3 IFMS in Jharkhand 9 
1.4 Objectives of IFMS  10 
1.5 Key Stakeholders of IFMS 10 
1.6 Audit objectives 12 
1.7 Audit criteria 13 
1.8 Audit scope and methodology 13 
Chapter 2 
Project Management 
2.1 Management/ Organisational Structure 15 
2.2 Establishment of Project Monitoring Unit 
(PMU) under Finance Department 
16 
2.3 Delay in preparation of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) and Action Plan 
16 
2.4 Project Implementation 18 
2.5 Delay and non-implementation of the IFMS 
modules 
19 
2.6 Monitoring and Evaluation 21 
2.7 Acquisition Controls 23 
Chapter 3 
IT Controls  
3.1 General Controls 25 
3.1.1 Inadequate documentation in software 
development 25 
3.1.2 Absence of Business Continuity Plan 25 
3.1.3 Change Management plan not formulated 26 
3.1.4 Non-integration with Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS) 27 
3.1.5 Ineffective Helpdesk Management 28 
3.2 Application Controls in IFMS 29 
3.2.1 Absence of validation controls in Treasury 
(payment) module with pension module 29 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- ii - 
Paragraph  Page number 
3.2.2 
Short realisation of revenue amounting to  
₹ 4.40 crore due to deficient validation controls 
in IFMS 
42 
3.2.3 Expenditure made without allotment  46 
3.2.4 Non-updation of figures of Revised Estimates 
on real time basis in IFMS database 50 
3.2.5 AC bills drawn without submission of DC bills  51 
3.2.6 Non-provision for submission/monitoring of 
Utilisation Certificates through IFMS 52 
3.2.7 Non-availability of data of repayment for 
debt/interest paid in IFMS 53 
 Appendices 57-68 
 Abbreviations 69-70 
 Glossary 71-72 
 
  

Table of Contents 
- iii - 
List of Appendices 
Appendix 
Number 
Paragraph 
Number Details Page 
Number 
3.1 3.2.1(ii) 
Payments of admissible DCRG/CVP 
made to the pensioners by the Treasuries 
in addition to DCRG/CVP actually 
authorised to other pensioners 
57 
3.2 3.2.1(iii) 
Excess payments of DCRG/CVP made to 
the pensioners by the Treasuries due to 
preparation of erroneous payment 
advices 
58 
3.3 3.2.1(iv) 
Excess expenditure booked by the 
Treasuries during payment of 
DCRG/CVP due to erroneous addition of 
TDS amount 
59 
3.4 3.2.1(v) 
Excess payments of DCRG/CVP shown 
in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the 
Treasuries due to non-updation of 
revised authorisations issued by AG 
(A&E) in IFMS 
61 
3.5 3.2.1(vi) 
Excess payments of DCRG/CVP shown 
in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the 
Treasuries due to incorrect classification 
of Bill Category 
65 
3.6 3.2.1(vii) 
Excess payments of DCRG/CVP shown 
in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the 
Treasuries due to incorrect capturing of 
PPO numbers 
68 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Preface 

 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has 
been prepared for submission to the Governor of Jharkhand under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India for being laid before the 
State Legislative Assembly. 
The Report contains significant results of Informat ion 
Technology Audit on Integrated Financial Management  System 
(IFMS) in Jharkhand covering the period since its i nception 
(June 2007) to November 2022. Instances relating to  the period 
subsequent to November 2022 have also been included, wherever 
necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards and Regulations on Audit and Accounts iss ued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation receive d from the 
Department of Finance, Government of Jharkhand, at each stage 
of the audit process. 
 

  
Executive Summary 

 
Executive Summary  
 
In Jharkhand, 33 treasuries are responsible for handling day-to-day transactions 
on behalf of the State Government, maintenance of r ecords thereof and 
submission of monthly accounts to the Accountant General (AG). 
For effective financial management, the Finance Department (the Department), 
Government of Jharkhand (GoJ) undertook e-Governanc e projects in the area 
of treasury automation, pension, audit etc . A web-based Treasury Information 
System (TIS) ‘KUBER’ was implemented (June 2007) to  monitor financial 
transactions, budgetary control, and flow of data to the Finance Department for 
better fiscal management, apart from timely submission of accounts to the AG. 
The system has evolved over the years adding to it,  various modules viz.,  
Treasury MIS module (2007); DDO bill preparation application (2008); online 
GPF accounting and Fund preparation module (2010) and Fund module (2012). 
As the modules were added in a phased manner, vario us issues were faced by 
the Finance Department with regard to data consiste ncy, seamless data 
exchange between different IT systems used by reven ue earning departments, 
lack of full automation, technological upgradation and issues with scalability of 
the current systems. 
Meanwhile, Government of India (GoI), Ministry of F inance, Department of 
Expenditure (DoE), launched (July 2010) a scheme fo r implementation of the 
Mission Mode Project (MMP) “Treasury Computerization” under the National 
e-Governance Plan (NeGP). The State Governments/Uni on Territories (UTs) 
were instructed to send their proposals (DPR) withi n three years, based on the 
current level of treasury computerization in the State/ UT and the desired level 
to be achieved, for appraisal and approval of Central Assistance. However, GoJ 
sent (January 2015) the DPR to the Department of Ex penditure, GoI, for 
approval after the project period stipulated in the Scheme Guideline. As a result, 
no funds were provided to the State under the MMP. Thereafter, GoJ decided 
(August 2015) to implement Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) 
in a phased manner on its own with the assistance o f National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) by upgrading the existing system.  
Presently, IFMS 2.0 (KUBER) with 12 modules has bee n implemented in the 
State with facility to capture all financial activities of the State Government and 
for helping the Finance Department in managing the resources of the State. 
IFMS is integrated with other application systems viz ., Works Accounts 
Management Information System (WAMIS), IT systems o f revenue earning 
departments of the State, Human Resource Management  System (HRMS), 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 2 - 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), Payment gateways, State Bank of 
India-Cash Management Product (SBI-CMP) and RBI e-Kuber, for faster and 
smoother processing. 
Information Technology (IT) Audit on IFMS, covering six functional modules, 
was conducted between May 2022 and July 2023 in the office of the Principal 
Secretary, Finance Department, GoJ, to examine whether (i) Business process 
re-engineering for synergy of processes in IT environment was done to align IT 
system objectives with business objectives; and (ii) IFMS system functionalities 
and controls were adequate to safeguard IT assets, data integrity, system 
effectiveness & efficiency and allow organizational goals to be achieved. 
Audit noticed deficiencies in the implementation of IFMS besides general and 
application control failures in the system, which are summarised below:  
Three modules namely (i) Planning module, (ii) Fund & Debt Management 
module and (iii) Audit module, though proposed in the DPR (January 2015), 
were not implemented. The objective of meeting the needs of effective fiscal 
management through Fund & Debt Management module of IFMS could not be 
achieved. Due to absence of an Audit Module in IFMS, State Government lost 
the opportunity to better monitor the follow-up action to audit paras, raised 
through AG’s Inspection Reports. 
The procurement of IFMS infrastructure, was done in phases, leading to overall 
delay in the implementation of IFMS in the State.  
National Informatics Centre (NIC) had not prepared the User Requirement 
Specifications (URS), Software Requirement Specifications (SRS) and data 
dictionary prior to implementation of IFMS. In the absence of documentation, 
neither DoIT nor FD could monitor the development and implementation of the 
project, resulting in total dependency on NIC without participation of other 
stakeholders.  
Business Continuity Plan (BCP) was not implemented and the funds released 
for establishment of the Near Disaster Recovery Centre (NDRC) were parked 
in the bank account of the Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Information 
Technology (JAP-IT). Non-implementation of BCP and non-existence of 
NDRC is fraught with the risk of malfunction of the System during breakdown 
impairing the objective of high availability and zero downtime. 
FD did not prescribe
 any change management procedures for changes made in 
the IFMS applications as per the business needs and objectives of the 
Department. Requirement of changes were communicated verbally and were 
being addressed in the application by the developers. The changes were made 
directly in the production environment by the Database Administrator without 
evaluation of any technical/non-technical security features, as prescribed in 
the JTC. 

Executive Summary 
 
- 3 - 
IFMS has not been integrated with the Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS). Release of Central share under CSS to the State was not being captured 
in IFMS. Mapping of accounting heads of the State-linked schemes used by GoI 
with the State Budget heads was incomplete at GoJ level. Due to incomplete 
mapping of the GoI schemes, PFMS and State Treasuries Interface could not be 
established to monitor balances lying in the bank accounts of the executing 
agencies. Non-integration of IFMS with PFMS deprived the State Government 
of a tool for capturing the master and transaction level data and real time 
monitoring of the progress of Central Sector Schemes. 
Although a post of Helpdesk Manager for IFMS was created, the Helpdesk has 
not been established. Complaints raised by the end-users were received and 
resolved by the Project Management Unit without recording the date and time 
of lodging and resolving the complaints. As such, response time and status of 
complaints could not be tracked through IFMS. 
Data analysis of IFMS database showed that in 344 cases, excess 
payment totalling ₹ 11 crore, against the authorised admissible amount 
 of 
Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (DCRG)/Commuted Value of Pension (CVP), 
was made to the pensioners by the treasuries. Audit validated these 344 cases 
with the registers/records available with the 29 treasuries concerned and also 
corroborated the same with the vouchers/treasury schedules sent to AG (A&E). 
Out of these 344 cases, Audit noticed instances of excess payment of 
DCRG/CVP valued at ₹ 2.03 crore in 47 cases, due to weak application con
 trols 
in IFMS. Excess payments were made due to (i) payments being made twice to 
a pensioner against the same authorisation order (two cases), (ii) payments made 
to a pensioner against authorisation order of a different pensioner (12 cases); 
and (iii) preparation of erroneous bills/advices (33 cases). Further, excess 
expenditure of ₹ 24.80 lakh was booked due to erroneous addition of 
 TDS 
amount in DCRG/CVP payments (30 cases).  
The remaining cases where Audit also observed inconsistencies in the IFMS 
database were due to (i) non-updation of revised pension and pensionary 
benefits (198 cases); (ii) incorrect classification of accounting heads (62 cases); 
and (iii) same PPO number being captured against more than one pensioner 
during payment (seven cases). 
Revenue amounting to ₹ 4.40 crore was short realised in (i) Transport, 
(
ii) Revenue, Registration and Land Reforms; and (iii) Water Resources 
departments during 2017-2022 due to deficient validation controls in IFMS as 
the System allowed deposit of lesser amounts than the amounts for which 
challans were generated.  
The in-built validation in IFMS for processing of expenditure was bypassed 
through the back-end and bills were processed for payment. As a result, excess 
expenditure of ₹ 1.24 crore over allotment was made by six DDOs and 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 4 - 
expenditure of ₹ 34.33 crore was incurred by 13 DDOs without any all otment 
under different heads of accounts during 2017-23.  
IFMS did not restrict DDOs from drawing subsequent AC bills without 
submission of DC bills against previous pending AC bills. As a result, 
122 DDOs were allowed to withdraw 405 subsequent AC bills, in contravention 
to Jharkhand Treasury Code (JTC). 
A total of 2,69,883 grant-in-aid (GIA) bills were withdrawn between April 2010 
and November 2022. However, information related to only 2,727 GIA bills were 
found captured in the UC related tables in IFMS database. Out of this, UCs were 
found submitted against only three GIA bills in IFMS. 
Differences in figures of Internal Debt and Loans and Advances were noticed 
in IFMS when compared with the corresponding Finance Accounts. Reason for 
the differences was that several payouts were initiated at the level of AG or 
debited by RBI directly, which could not be captured in IFMS as this system 
captures only transactions processed by treasuries. Further, records of 
repayments were maintained only by the AG office and the AG, being an 
external stakeholder, did not have direct access to IFMS to feed this data. 
Recommendations 
• S tate Government may prioritise development of the Fund & Debt 
Management module for better fiscal management. 
• State Government may establish a Helpdesk for IFMS with a provision 
for auto generated tickets and auto logs, for closure only after 
complaints are resolved. 
• State Government may ensure proper integration of IFMS with SAI 
Pension portal and put in place proper validation controls to avoid risk 
of processing claims more than once against an authorisation. 
• State Government may ensure that proper input controls are built-in 
the IFMS to retrieve the data already available in the System and auto 
populate the payment fields in read-only mode to avoid human errors. 
• State Government may ensure pension data integrity and its 
completeness through periodic batch processing by updating/ 
downloading the pension data uploaded by the AG office along with 
migration of legacy data.  
• State Government may enforce proper Primary Key/ referential 
integrity in the System and provide valid input controls in the payment 
application interface to avoid risk of excess payment. 
• State Government may review the validation controls in the Unified 
Receipt Portal (Jharkhand e-GRAS) and the portals of the 
participating departments on a regular basis to ensure that the amount 

Executive Summary 
 
- 5 - 
shown on e-challans as payable by the end-user is paid in full and 
credited to government account. 
• State Government may ensure that validation controls are put in place 
so that no payments can be processed through IFMS without having 
sufficient allotment in the particular head. 
 
 

  
Chapter 1 
Introduction 

Chapter  
1 Introduction 
Background 
In Jharkhand, 33 treasuries (27 1 at the district level including the treasury at 
Jharkhand Bhavan, New Delhi, and six 2 sub-treasuries at the sub divisional 
level) are responsible for handling day-to-day tran sactions of receipt and 
payment of money on behalf of the State Government and for maintenance of 
records thereof as per the Treasury Codes and Finan cial Rules. They compile 
and submit monthly accounts and returns 3 to the Accountant General 4 (AG).  
In keeping with the IT Vision and IT Plan of the St ate Government, “Project 
Report and Action Plan for Computerisation of Treas uries in Jharkhand” was 
prepared (September 2003) by the Department of Info rmation & Technology 
(DoIT), GoJ. Accordingly, a treasury computerisatio n project was undertaken 
(February 2004) by the DoIT with the support of Nat ional Informatics Centre 
(NIC), Jharkhand State Unit, under the e-governance project. 
In June 2007, the Finance Department, GoJ implement ed ‘KUBER’- a 
web-based Treasury Information System (TIS) for aut omation of treasuries, 
pension, audit and other functions of the Departmen t with the objective of 
ensuring data consistency, seamless exchange of data among various Systems 5 
and full automation of the treasuries. The system h as evolved over the years 
(between 2007 and 2012), with the addition of vario us modules to the system 
viz . Treasury MIS module in 2007, DDO bill preparation  application in 2008, 
online GPF accounting and Fund preparation module in 2010 and Fund module 
in 2012. The interface of the system with various s takeholders (such as 
Department of Transport ( i.e. Vahan  and Sarathi ), Department of Revenue, 
Registration and Land Reforms, Department of Mines and Geology etc .) have 
been enhanced over this period.  
                                                           
1  (1) Bokaro (2) Chaibasa (3) Chatra (4) Deoghar (5 ) Dhanbad (6) Doranda (7) Dumka  
(8) Garhwa (9) Giridih (10) Godda (11) Gumla (12) H azaribag (13) Jamshedpur  
(14) Jharkhand Bhavan (New Delhi) (15) Jamtara (16)  Khunti (17) Koderma (18) Latehar 
(19) Lohardaga (20) Pakur (21) Palamu (22) Project Building (23) Ramgarh (24) Ranchi 
(25) Sahebganj (26) Saraikela and (27) Simdega 
2  (1) Chakradharpur (2) Ghatshila (3) Madhupur (4) Maheshpur (5) Raj Mahal and  
(6) Tenughat 
3    Sale of ordinary Stamps, Income Tax receipt sta tements, Cash Account with schedules and 
documents, List of Payments with schedules and documents etc . 
4   Accounts and Entitlements (A&E) 
5   Separate IT systems of State line departments 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 8 - 
1.1 Initiation of IFMS 
The Government of India (GoI), Ministry of Finance,  Department of 
Expenditure (DoE), approved (July 2010) implementat ion of Mission Mode 
Project (MMP) “Treasury Computerization” under the National e-Governance 
Plan (NeGP). Under this plan, the State Governments/ Union Territories (UTs) 
were eligible for implementation of the Scheme through Central Assistance and 
were requested to send their proposals in accordanc e with the “Guidelines for 
Operational Model for implementation of State MMPs”  issued by the 
Department of Information Technology, GoI, for appr aisal/approval within a 
period of three years. 
The project (MMP) aimed at supporting the States to  fill the existing gaps in 
computerisation, up-gradation, expansion and interf ace requirements, apart 
from basic computerisation. This involved (i) data sharing among treasuries, 
State Finance Departments, Accountant General (AG) offices, Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI), agency banks, Central Plan Schemes Monitoring System (CPSMS) 
of Controller General of Accounts (CGA); (ii) minim al reconciliation and 
feeding treasury data seamlessly into State Data Ce ntres for reduced incidence 
of missing credits; and (iii) facilitation of pensi on payments and web-based 
citizen’s queries for receipts and expenditure etc .  
Once set up, the treasury computerization project w as expected to make 
budgeting processes more efficient, improve cash fl ow management, promote 
real-time reconciliation of accounts, strengthen Ma nagement Information 
System (MIS), improve accuracy and timeliness in accounts preparation, bring 
about transparency and efficiency in public delivery systems and better financial 
management along with improved quality of governance in the State. 
1.2 Need for IFMS in Jharkhand 
In Jharkhand, automation of treasury and related functions was undertaken in a 
piecemeal manner and the Department faced issues wi th regard to data 
consistency, limited Government process re-engineering, seamless exchange of 
data between various systems/stakeholders, lack of full automation, 
obsolescence of some of the systems due to technolo gical upgradation and 
issues with scalability of the current IT systems.  
To mitigate these issues and improve financial management, FD, GoJ, planned 
(June 2013) to implement an enterprise-wide compreh ensive Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMS)-an extension of the Treasury 
Computerization Project in the State that would col laborate amongst various 
Government departments in a structured way, interfa ce with key stakeholders 
on real time basis and simplify, streamline and ame nd the existing processes. 
Thus, IFMS consolidates many important financial management functions such 
as budgeting, payment processing, accounting, audit ing and reporting for the 
State Government and other stakeholders into a sing le integrated software 
solution. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 
- 9 - 
1.3 IFMS in Jharkhand 
IFMS Jharkhand (KUBER) is a comprehensive electroni c system to facilitate 
capture of all financial activities of the State Government.  
Presently IFMS is operational in the State with 12 modules. Of these, the 
following six are functional modules:  
(i)  Budget module – COBT (e-Budget);  
(ii)  Allotment module (e-Allotment);  
(iii)  Bill module (e -Bill);  
(iv)  Payment module (e-Treasury); 
(v)  Receipt module (Jharkhand e-GRAS); and  
(vi)  Pension module (e-Pension). 
The remaining six are reporting modules which do not have their own data and 
are dependent upon the data of the above functional modules for generating the 
desired reports. A flow diagram of the modules is shown in Pictograph 1.1 . 
Pictograph 1.1:  IFMS Modules in Jharkhand  
Functional Modules    MIS/ other Modules  
e-Budget 
For preparation and estimation of 
overall budget at the office, 
department and State level. It 
facilitates online approval of the 
budget by the Finance Department  
   e-GPF  
Online GPF Accounting System  
facilitates online accounting and 
processing of GPF accounts. Any 
change in the employee’s GPF profile 
can be requested and processed online.  
 
e-Allotment  
Works in post-budget scenario for 
release of Budget and Allotments  
   Kuber Employee Portal 
Provides online self-service facility to 
the employees to submit their 
reimbursement claims and apply for 
various loans or advances.  
e-Bill 
DDO level Bill management system 
for preparation and submission of bills 
to the treasury.  
 F  e-Payslip 
For online generation and processing of 
payslips. 
e-Treasury 
Integrates the functions of DDO (Bill 
preparation), Treasury operations, 
Bank payments and Receipts and GPF 
accounting. It provides digital 
interface of treasury accounts to AG 
and NPS data transfer to NSDL (Fund 
Manager)  
 M  e-Dashboard  
A Treasury MIS that provides a 
dashboard to all stakeholders including 
citizens to view complete financial data 
online and allows access to various 
financial reports of the State 
Government.  
Jharkhand e-GRAS 
An online Government Receipt 
Accounting System for all 
government receipt through Cyber 
Treasury. The portal is also integrated 
with GSTN, Common Payment 
Gateway and e-KUBER of RBI for 
proper reconciliation of taxes & 
receipts.  
 S  Finance Portal 
Serves as a gateway/link to all the 
modules of IFMS  and  provides 
comprehensive online information and 
data related to Organisational setup of 
Finance Department, Treasuries, Audit, 
AG Reports, Circulars/ Orders/ 
Notifications etc . 
e-Pension Portal 
For online processing of pension 
applications from DDO to AG and 
further processing of payment to the 
pensioners. 
    
Hamar Apan  Budget 
An interface for citizens for 
budgeting 
IFMS 
Database Server  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 10 - 
IFMS is integrated with modules of other financial IT Systems like Works 
Accounts Management Information System (WAMIS), exi sting Systems of 
revenue earning departments of the State, Human Res ource Management 
System (HRMS), Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN ), Payment 
gateways, SBI-CMP and RBI e-Kuber for faster and sm oother processing. 
Further, for Online Tax Payments through the intern et, Project Building 
Treasury at Ranchi was declared (November 2010) as the Cyber Treasury and 
the State Bank of India, Hatia branch, Ranchi, was nominated as the nodal bank 
for collection of all online tax payment records fr om all bank branches within 
the State and online submission to the Cyber Treasury. 
1.4 Objectives of IFMS  
The overall fiscal cycle consists of the key activi ties of Planning, Budgeting, 
Budget execution (consisting of Revenue Management,  Expenditure 
Management and Debt Management), Transaction Accoun ting & Audit. The 
objectives in each of these key areas with respect to fiscal management are: 
Objectives Key Areas 
Fiscal Management  Aggregate fiscal position and risks are monitored and managed 
Budget Realism The budget is realistic and implemented as intended  in a predictable 
manner 
Comprehensive, Policy-
based Budget 
The budget captures relevant fiscal transactions, a nd is prepared with 
due regard to government policy 
Information Adequate fiscal, revenue and expenditure records an d information are 
produced, maintained and disseminated to meet decis ion making, 
control, management and reporting purposes 
Control Arrangements are in place for the exercise of control and stewardship in 
the use of public funds 
Accountability and 
Transparency 
Arrangements for external transparency and scrutiny of Public Finances 
1.5 Key Stakeholders of IFMS 
The stakeholders of IFMS have been broadly classified as internal and external 
stakeholders. Those entities whose functions are within the purview of the State 
Government are classified as internal stakeholders,  while others are classified 
as external stakeholders. Apart from the above mentioned primary stakeholders, 
there are facilitators of the IFMS project, as shown in Chart 1.1 . 
Chart 1.1:  Stakeholders - IFMS 
Internal Stakeholders External Stakeholders 
• Finance Department, Treasury 
• Other Departments viz . Budget Controlling 
Officer (BCO) and DDOs 
• Planning and Development Department 
• Internal Audit  
• Employees 
• Pensioners 
• Accountant General 
• Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
• Agency Bank, Government of India 
• Businesses 
• Vendors 
• Financial institutions, Citizens 
Project facilitators  
• Department of Information Technology, Government of Jharkhand 
• Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Information Technology (JAP-IT), Government of Jharkhand 
• Administrative Training Institute, Government of Jharkhand  
• Department of Information Technology, Government of India 
• National Informatics Centre (NIC) 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 
- 11 - 
The brief roles and responsibilities of the primary  stakeholders with respect to 
the IFMS are as follows: 
Finance Department 
Finance Department is responsible for the overall f iscal management of the 
State, which includes the functions of planning, bu dgeting, revenue 
management, budget execution through treasuries and accounting among other 
fiscal tasks. It is also the Administrative Departm ent for the Treasury. The 
Treasury officer (TO) in the Treasury is responsible for processing of bills that 
are prepared and submitted by the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) of 
the various departments. The TO authorises the paym ents through banks and 
prepares the treasury accounts. Internal Audit func tion of the Government is 
also the responsibility of the Finance Department. 
Planning and Development Department 
After merger of the Plan and Non-plan components si nce 2017-18, the budget 
of the State is being prepared in four parts i.e.,  (i) revenue receipts, 
(ii) Establishment expenditure, (iii) schemes under central assistance (a) Central 
Sector Schemes (100 per cent  centrally funded) and (b) Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, and (iv) State schemes {(a) ongoing schemes and (b) new schemes}. 
Further, the provisional outlay for State, Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes are being fixed for the departments after r eview by the Planning and 
Development Department of the State, since 2017-18.  Moreover, provision of 
funds for schemes under different components i.e., Other Sub-Plan (OSP), 
Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) and Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan  (SCSP) is made as 
decided by the Planning and Development Department. 
Revenue Departments 
The major revenue collecting (from citizens and bus inesses) departments are 
the Commercial Taxes Department, State Excise Depar tment, Transport 
Department, Mines & Geology Department and Revenue, Registration & Land 
Reforms Department etc . Similarly, there are some departments, who collec t 
fines against law violations viz . Traffic Police, Transport Department etc . These 
collections are also remitted at agency banks and a ccounted for by the 
Treasuries. 
State Government Departments 
Departments of the State Government interact with the Finance Department for 
the purpose of budget preparation (though Budget Co ntrolling Officers-BCO) 
as well as for bill submission. The Drawing and Dis bursing Officers (DDOs) 
prepare various types of bills (Salary, Abstract Contingent bills etc .), which are 
approved by the workflow as defined in the JFR/JTC and submitted to the 
Treasury for payment. 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 12 - 
Employees and Pensioners 
Employees and Pensioners receive salary, pensions and other payments through 
the Treasury. 
Reserve Bank of India 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the banker to the Go vernment. It accounts for 
and settles the inter-government transactions. It a lso manages both short-term 
and long-term debt of the State Government by facilitating market borrowings. 
It also provides Ways & Means Advances for managing  cash balances of the 
State Government. 
Agency banks 
Agency banks, appointed by the RBI, transact government business by making 
payments against cheques authorised and issued by the Treasury and accepting 
remittances on behalf of the Treasury. 
Citizens/Businesses/Vendors 
Citizens/Businesses pay taxes to the State Governme nt through the authorised 
banks/State Government departments. The banks remit  the money to the State 
Government account at the end of the day. The citizens/businesses/ vendors also 
receive money from the Government through the Treas ury in their respective 
bank accounts on account of subsidies/refunds/payment against services etc . 
Accountant General  
The Accountant General (AG), Accounts & Entitlements (A&E), is responsible 
for compilation and consolidation of monthly accoun ts of expenditure and 
receipts based on vouchers and schedules received f rom various treasuries and 
other bodies. AG prepares the monthly civil account s of the State and renders 
them to the State Government. AG also ensures recon ciliation of accounting 
transactions by the departments of the State, maintenance of Deposit Accounts 
and Settlement of Inter-Government transactions, among other functions. 
1.6 Audit objectives 
The Information Technology Audit of IFMS in Jharkha nd was taken up to 
determine whether: 
 Business process re-engineering for synergy of proc esses in an IT 
environment was done to align IT system objectives with business 
objectives; and 
 IFMS system functionalities and controls were adequ ate to safeguard IT 
assets, data integrity, system effectiveness and ef ficiency and allow 
organizational goals to be achieved effectively and efficiently through usage 
of IT resources with adequate management and operational controls. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 
- 13 - 
1.7 Audit criteria 
The Audit objectives were examined and evaluated wi th reference to the 
following criteria: 
 Government of India guidelines on Computerisation of Treasuries; 
 Detailed Project Report (DPR) of IFMS, As-Is and To-Be document; 
 Request For Proposal documents, Functional Requirem ent Specification 
(FRS), Software Requirement Specification (SRS), Us er Acceptance Test 
(UAT) reports, Change and Configuration Management Process documents; 
 Jharkhand Budget Manual, Jharkhand Financial Rules, Jharkhand Treasury 
Code, Jharkhand Public Works/Accounts Code, Forest Act and Manual;  
 IT Act 2000 and subsequent amendments; IT Rules; Ge neral Principles of 
IT Development, Governance and Maintenance; Informa tion Technology 
(IT) and IT enabled Services (ITeS) Policy 2016 of GoJ; and 
 Other instructions/circulars issued by the State Government/Government of 
India in this regard. 
1.8 Audit scope and methodology  
The IT Audit of IFMS for the period since its incep tion (June 2007) to 
November 2022 was conducted between May 2022 and Ju ly 2023. Full data 
dump of IFMS for the period up to November 2022 was obtained (January 2023) 
from the Finance Department. The data dump was then  restored and extracted 
in .csv files for data analysis using IDEA. 
Out of the 12 modules of IFMS implemented in Jharkh and, six 
6 functional 
modules were selected for audit.  
Audit methodology included: 
1.  Review of System Design Documentation; 
2.  User walkthrough of the IFMS system by visiting all  stakeholders to study 
their working in the System; 
3.  Analysis of database using Computer Assisted Audit Techniques (CAAT) 
tools viz . IDEA (Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis); 
4.  Validation of the findings pertaining to the period from 2017-18 to 2022-23 
(upto November 2022), emanating from data analysis, with physical records 
by visiting the respective stakeholders involved. 
An Entry conference was held on 12 September 2022 with the Special Secretary, 
Finance Department (GoJ), in which the audit object ives, methodology, scope 
                                                           
6   (i) e-Budget; (ii) e-Allotment; (iii) e-Bill; (i v) e-Treasury; (v) Jharkhand e-GRAS; and 
(vi) e-Pension 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 14 - 
and criteria of the audit was explained. The Exit c onference was held on 
13 March 2024 with the Special Secretary, Finance Department (GoJ) wherein 
the audit findings were discussed. The Department a ccepted all the audit 
recommendations. The views of the Department during  the Exit conference 
have been taken into consideration while finalising  the Audit Report. The 
replies of the Department have also been suitably incorporated in the Report.  
 
 

  
Chapter 2 
Project Management 

Chapter  
2 Project Management  
2.1 Management/Organisational Structure 
In the IFMS project, the roles and responsibilities  of all stakeholders were 
defined for transparency, accountability, manageability and efficiency. 
The Project Management Organisation Structure for I FMS implementation, as 
envisaged in the DPR, is depicted in Chart 2.1 .  
Chart 2.1: Project Management Organisation Structure  
Project Leadership Team  
(Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary (Finance, IT), 
Development Commissioner, Secretary (Planning & 
Development), State Informatics Officer (SIO), NIC 
Inter-Departmental 
Committee 7 (IDC) 
Project Management Group  
Project Director 
(Additional Finance Commissioner) 
IT team 
(NIC Finance Team)  
Transformation Team 
(Inter-departmental Team-
Finance, AG, Treasury and 
others) 
Project Management 
(JAP-IT & PMU) 
Implementation Agency/ Partner 
The Project Leadership Team (PLT) is an apex level committee for providing 
tactical and strategic direction for the overall pr oject. The Inter-Departmental 
Committee 8 also provides leadership to the Project. The Proje ct Management 
Group (PMG) 9 would be responsible for ensuring the overall effe ctiveness of 
the IFMS project implementation. Under PMG, a Transformation Team was to 
be constituted to bring in the domain knowledge spe cific to each functional 
aspect covered in the IFMS.  
However, Audit observed that no such teams had been  constituted during 
implementation of the IFMS, except IDC, which was constituted (March 2004) 
for implementation and monitoring of the project. T he entire project 
implementation i.e., development as well as monitoring, was done by the  
                                                           
7  Chairman : Commissioner and Secretary, Information Technolog y Department, 
Co-Chairman:  Finance Commissioner or a Senior Officer nominated  by Finance 
Commissioner , Member Secretary : Officer of Finance Department In-charge of Treasury , 
Member:  Director of Provident Fund , Member:  S.I.O., NIC , Member:  Assistant Director, 
Information Technology Department 
8  Constituting members from Finance Department, Inf ormation Technology Department and 
NIC, Jharkhand State Unit 
9  PMG works under the direction of a Project Direct or and has three units viz ., the IT team, 
Transformation team and Project Management team 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 16 - 
Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) under the technical g uidance of NIC and the 
administrative leadership of IDC. The IDC convened 10 meetings between 
January 2008 and March 2022 to discuss the need of modules, requirement of 
hardware/software, hurdles/pros and cons faced duri ng implementation, and 
took all the strategic decisions regarding the project.  
2.2 Establishment of Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) under Finance 
Department 
To transfer the ownership of the Treasury Computeri zation Project to the 
Finance Department from DoIT, it was required to be  technically strengthened 
so that the project could be implemented without hindrance. Therefore, a Project 
Monitoring Unit (PMU) was constituted (October 2009 ) under the Finance 
Department by outsourcing high-end developers 10  recommended by NIC, for 
implementation of the project in the State. The PMU  was responsible for 
application development work, its operations and ch ange management under 
the technical guidance of NIC. Further, the strengt h of PMU was enhanced 
(October 2017) to 37 personnel consisting of 14 Pro grammers, 19 Assistant 
Programmers and four Data Entry Operators. However,  37 new posts 11  were 
created (December 2021) by surrendering the existing 37 posts of Programmers/ 
Assistant Programmers/ Data Entry Operators and sin ce then, PMU has been 
functioning with the newly created manpower. 
2.3 Delay in preparation of Detailed Project Report  (DPR) and Action 
Plan  
Under the GoI scheme (MMP), States/ UTs were requir ed to prepare project 
proposals (DPRs), including an Action Plan, based o n the current level of 
treasury computerisation in the State/ UT and the d esired level to be achieved. 
Further, the DPR and the Action Plan were required to be submitted to the 
Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance, GoI, for its scrutiny for 
technical and financial soundness, before approval by the Empowered 
Committee (EC) for release of Central Assistance. T he project was to be 
completed in three years i.e. by June 2013 with the residual components spilling 
over into the fourth year.  
The financial support for the State project was to be up to 75 per cent  of the 
individual project cost of admissible components, l imited to 
₹ 75 lakh per 
district, as on 1 April 2010. Funds were to be rele ased as Central Assistance 
                                                           
10    Programmers- 02, Assistant Programmers- 04 and D ata Entry Operators- 02 
11   Jr. Software Developer/ Asstt. Programmer (Open S ource): 03; Help Desk Manager: 01; 
Content Writer: 01; Software Trainer: 02; Software Developer/ Programmer (.NET): 03; 
Quality Analyst-cum-Software Tester: 01; Software D eveloper/ Programmer (Open 
Source): 02; Mobile App. Developer: 02; Software De veloper/Programmer (JAVA): 03; 
DBA: 01; Sr. Software Developer/ Sr. Programmer (.N ET): 05; Sr. Software Developer/ 
Sr. Programmer (Open Source): 09; Sr. Database Administrator: 02; and Manager (IT): 02 

Chapter 2: Project Management 
 
 
- 17 - 
(100 per cent  Central grant in respect of Central share) to the State Designated 
Agency in three instalments ( i.e.  40:30:30 per cent  each), subject to the 
satisfactory receipt of utilisation certificates. 
Audit observed that a Consultant 
12  was engaged (June 2013) by the FD, GoJ, 
for preparation of DPR on IFMS. A detailed assessme nt of the existing system 
in terms of functions, processes, people and techno logy was carried out to 
identify key gaps, and a DPR including an Action Pl an was prepared 
(June 2014) by the Consultant. Based on As-Is Assessment and gap analysis of 
the existing KUBER (version-1), KUBER (IFMS-2.0) wi th 10 modules was 
proposed in the DPR, as detailed in Table 2.1 . 
Table 2.1: Proposed Modules and their functionalities  
Planning module  
This module would allow the Department officials at the field level 
to plan projects through the System. The System woul d capture the 
planned project timelines, resources, expenditure, outcomes and 
output of the plan and other project details. 
Budget module  
This module would be used for preparation and estima tion of 
revenue, expenditure and the overall budget at the office, department 
and State level. It would facilitate approval of the  budget by the 
Finance/Planning & Development Department based on bu dget 
discussions. 
Receipt Management 
module  
This module would allow the departments to collect, deposit, record, 
reconcile and analyse receipts collected and refund of receipts. 
Accounts module  
The System would facilitate online preparation of ac counts in the 
treasuries based on comprehensive receipt and expen diture data 
captured from its source. It would also facilitate o nline submission/ 
updating of all accounting information to AG for pre paration of the 
monthly/ annual accounts. 
Fund & Debt 
Management module  
The System would record all the loans, guarantees an d other 
liabilities of the Government. It would also record t he investments 
and advances given by the Government to enable them to have a full 
view of their liabilities and plan fund management a ccordingly, to 
minimize the financial cost of borrowings. 
Audit module  
Both the external (audit by AG) and internal audit wou ld be 
facilitated through the System. All the audit querie s and their 
response would be logged in the System for easy monitoring of audit 
paras/ comments and for taking necessary follow-up action. 
Expenditure 
Management module  
This module would allow the departments to initiate the expenditure 
(procurement of goods/services), contract managemen t, bill 
preparation, approval of the bills by treasuries an d making payment 
through the System. 
Payroll & Employees 
Claim module  
This module would allow pay bills to be generated, su bmitted, 
reviewed, approved or rejected through the System. The System 
would have interface with HRMIS to facilitate the generation of pay 
bills including schedules of GPF contribution, CPF, taxes, insurance 
etc . 
Pension module  
This module would allow submission of the pension application with 
required documents/forms by the employee or his nom inee (in case 
of employee's death) for availing regular pension or for commutation 
of pension through the System. 
Data Warehouse and 
Reporting module  
This module will allow users to access and analyse th e budget and 
get actual information in real time. Users can also generate 
customised reports for trend analysis, future projections etc . 
                                                           
12   M/s Ernest & Young, an empanelled consultant of N ational Informatics Centre Services 
Inc. (NICSI) 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 18 - 
Against a timeline of June 2013 set by GoI, the DPR  was submitted only in 
January 2015 to DoE for approval and release of funds, i.e.  after completion of 
the project period. As a result, no Central assista nce was released by the DoE, 
GoI, to the State under MMP.  
Subsequently, the DPR (revised) was submitted (Augu st 2015) by the State 
Government to the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), GoI, for exploring 
the possibility of funding the project through the World Bank (WB) and also to 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technol ogy (MeITY), GoI, for 
funding the project under the Digital India Program . Though MeITY got the 
DPR reviewed through NIC 
13  and had the DPR modified, it conveyed 
(March 2016) its inability to fund the Project.  
2.4 Project Implementation 
GoJ decided (August 2015) to implement the Project (IFMS 2.0) in a phased 
manner on its own with the assistance of NIC, Jhark hand State Unit, by 
upgrading the existing system.  
IFMS 2.0 (KUBER), designed and developed by NIC bas ed on the DPR, is a 
custom-made IT System that bundles different financial management functions 
viz . budgeting, payment processing, accounting, audit and reporting to the 
government and other stakeholders through a single integrated software 
solution.  
Presently, 12 modules 
14  consisting of six functional and six other modules  
(Pictograph 1.1 in Paragraph 1.3 ) were implemented under IFMS after 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 21.65 crore 15  during 2011-22. 
                                                           
13    NIC Headquarters, New Delhi and NIC IFMS team, P une 
14   (1) Financial Portal (2) COBT (e-Budget) (3) Inte grated Fund Management System  
(e-Allotment) (4) DDO Level Bill Management System (e-Bill) (5) Treasury Application 
(e-Treasury) (6) Treasury MIS (e-Dashboard) (7) Jha rkhand e-GRAS (e-Challan) (8) GPF 
Accounting System (e-GPF) (9) Employee Portal (10) e-Pension (11) Kuber Pay Slip  
(e-Pay Slip) and (12) Hamar Apan  Budget 
15    Purchase of hardware and software, Annual Techni cal Support and License charges:  
₹ 16.49 crore; and Establishment charges: ₹ 5.16 crore 

Chapter 2: Project Management 
 
 
- 19 - 
 Chart 2.2: IFMS 2.0 (KUBER) 
 
2.5 Delay and non-implementation of the IFMS module s  
2.5.1 Non-implementation of IFMS modules stipulated  in DPR 
Against 10 modules proposed in the DPR of IFMS, thr ee modules viz . 
(i) Planning; (ii) Fund & Debt Management; and (iii ) Audit Module could not 
be developed (as of July 2023). Implications of non -implementation of two 
modules of the proposed IFMS are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
(i) Non-development of Fund & Debt Management modul e  
The DPR envisaged that the Fund & Debt Management module of IFMS would: 
• Capture the details 16  of each loan raised by the State Government.  
• Trigger loan repayment alerts to the concerned users based on due dates 
and allow users to generate debt repayment bills through the System. 
• Process, verify, approve and pay debt repayment bil ls through the 
System. 
• Record and reconcile loan repayment details by interfacing with Central 
Bank loan database, treasury accounts and agency bank scrolls.  
                                                           
16   Amount borrowed, Source of borrowing, Date of Bor rowing, Details of borrowing (coupon 
rate, discount offered, rate of interest, face valu e etc.), terms of reference of borrowing, 
duration of borrowing and repayment schedule 


Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 20 - 
Audit examination revealed the following: 
 Though AG’s assistance was sought (May 2017) by the FD, the Fund & 
Debt Management module has not been taken up (July 2023) for 
development. 
 AG, being an external stakeholder, was unable to ac cess IFMS for 
feeding data of Internal Debt of the State Governme nt (Major Head 
6003) 17  and Loans and Advances from the Central Government. 
 In the absence of the Fund & Debt Management module , transactions 
relating to loans were not being captured in the Sy stem and real time 
updates of the fiscal position of the State Governm ent could not be 
monitored through IFMS. 
 The State Government was not able to better manage Ways and Means 
advances. 
 The System could not facilitate preparation of borr owing and debt 
management plans in the absence of cash flow projec tions and 
commitment projections based on loan data. 
As a result, it was noticed that a discrepancy 18  of ₹ 8,064.12 crore in the figures 
of repayment of Internal Debt (Major Head 6003) obt ained from IFMS data 
(₹ 4,222.50 crore) and Finance Accounts ( ₹ 12,286.62 crore) arose, which was 
due to non-capturing of repayment amount in respect  of four minor heads 19  in 
the IFMS database. In reply, the Department stated (November 2023) that IFMS 
captured only those transactions which are made thr ough treasuries and AG is 
maintaining accounts for all other non-treasury transactions. 
In the absence of Fund & Debt Management module, th e State Government is 
unable to (i) have a full view of its liabilities; (ii) plan its fund management to 
minimise financial cost of borrowing. 
Thus, the very objective of meeting the needs of ef fective fiscal management 
could not be achieved. 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Special Se cretary accepted the audit 
observation and stated that development of this module has already been taken 
up in consultation with AG (A&E). 
Recommendation 1: State Government may prioritise d evelopment of the 
Fund & Debt Management module for better fiscal management. 
                                                           
17   Market loans (101); Compensation and other bonds (106); Ways and Means Advances from 
the RBI (110); and Special Securities issued to National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) of the 
Central Government (111) 
18   Data analysis of IFMS database are elaborated in paragraph 3.2.8 
19   101 (Market Loans); 106 (Compensation and other B onds); 110 (Ways and Mean 
Advances); and 111 (Special Securities issued to NSSF of Central Government) 

Chapter 2: Project Management 
 
 
- 21 - 
(ii) Non-development of Audit module 
The DPR envisaged that the Audit module of IFMS wou ld facilitate both 
External (AG Audit) and Internal Audit. This Module  was to facilitate 
uploading of internal audit plan, system-based transaction audit, raising of audit 
queries, response and review of audit queries throu gh the System. Further, all 
the audit queries of AG Audit and their response we re to be logged into the 
System thereby allowing easy monitoring of audit pa ras/comments and 
necessary follow-up action.  
Audit observed that the Audit module has not been d eveloped (July 2023), 
which impeded uploading of internal audit plan, system-based transaction audit 
and raising of audit queries through IFMS. Further,  the State Government also 
lost the opportunity to monitor, through IFMS, the follow-up action on audit 
paras issued by AG (Audit) through Inspection Reports. 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Special Se cretary accepted the audit 
observation and stated that the e-Audit module is also under development. 
Recommendation 2: State Government may develop the Audit module on 
priority to enable the monitoring of follow up action on audit paras. 
2.6 Monitoring and Evaluation 
According to the DPR, the overall responsibility of  ensuring adequate 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of the IFMS project  through predefined 
indicators and indices would lie with the Project M anagement Group (PMG) 
which would be facilitated by key resources at the departmental level. 
Further, a detailed M&E framework was required to be prepared to monitor the 
output, outcomes and milestone of the project besid es, evaluating the project 
outcomes. The M&E plan also envisaged use of a moni toring tool that would 
enable creation of a dashboard on project progress and improvement in the 
service level. The key indicators for monitoring of  the project progress were 
broadly categorised as (i) Goals and outcome indica tors for Project outcomes 
and (ii) Output and Process indicators for Project Implementation. 
  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 22 - 
Chart 2.3: Governance of Information & Communication Technology 
  
Audit observed that the PMG, as envisaged in the DPR, had not been established 
and assessment of the measures/activities for Goals and Outcome indicators had 
not been undertaken. The Output and Process Indicat ors of project 
implementation were being monitored and evaluated t hrough an Inter 
Departmental Committee (IDC) headed by Commissioner  & Secretary, 
Information and Technology Department. Though IDC d iscussed project 
implementation in its meetings, the goals and outco mes of IFMS could not be 
achieved optimally till September 2023, as key indi cators prescribed in the 
monitoring tool were not adopted. Thus, monitoring of the progress of the 
project and improvement in the service level was deficient.  
In reply, the Department stated (November 2023) that various modules of IFMS 
were developed under the guidance of NIC as per the  instructions and 
requirements of the FD. It was further stated that FD has a dedicated PMU 
headed by Principal Secretary, having a team of 37 technical persons, 
designated to work under the supervision of NIC. 
The reply of the Department did not address how goals and outcome indicators 
for Project outcomes were being assessed, in absenc e of the Project 
Management Group. Thus, monitoring and evaluation o f the IFMS project 
remained deficient to that extent.   
 
 
Organisational Processes 
 
Proposals  
Plans Policies 
 
Evaluate 
ICT Projects  ICT Operations 
Performance 
Compliance  
Direct  Monitor 

Chapter 2: Project Management 
 
 
- 23 - 
2.7 Acquisition Controls 
Delay in procurement of Servers 
Audit observed that hardware infrastructure 20  for the treasury computerisation 
project was procured (2007 and 2010) by DoIT and in stalled at JAP-IT Data 
Centre in which six 21  Application Software were hosted. Subsequently, ne w 
modules were added (between 2013-14 and 2017-18) an d integrated with 
external applications 22  to meet the objectives of IFMS. The application servers 
therefore became obsolete and slow during peak hours and at the fag end of the 
financial year. To meet the objective of smooth fun ctioning of IFMS, these 
servers were required to be upgraded and new servers procured. 
Audit observed that a request for proposal (RFP) fo r supply, installation and 
commissioning of the hardware and software 23  for the IFMS project was invited 
(May 2014) by JAP-IT, through e-procurement system, with last date of receipt 
of online bids by 20 June 2014. However, not a sing le bid was received online 
and hence IDC recommended (July 2014) cancellation of the tender. NIC 
suggested (February 2015) using “Oracle Exadata” 24  as this includes hardware 
components 25 . Based on a comparative study 26  conducted by NIC 
(March 2015), IDC instructed (August 2015) FD to pr ocure Oracle Exadata 
through JAP-IT by September 2015. 
Audit noticed that sanction of 
₹ 9.83 crore 27  for purchase of Oracle Exadata was 
accorded by DoIT after a gap of six months i.e.,  in March 2016 for  reasons not 
available on record. As such, the procurement could  be done only during 
2015-17 leading to delay in project implementation.  
Audit further observed that despite initial RFP bei ng floated in 2015, the 
procurement of the required hardware & software was  delayed. FD procured  
five additional Application Servers 28  only in February 2019 at a cost of 
₹ 45.26 lakh with five year onsite comprehensive warranty.  
                                                           
20    Application Servers: 04; and Database Servers: 0 2 
21   (i) Treasury Application; (ii) DDO Bill Preparati on Application; (iii) Treasury MIS; 
(iv) Budget Application; (v) NSDL Activities; and (vi) GPF Application Database 
22   (i) PFMS; (ii) SBI server for e-Payment; (iii) RB I e-Kuber; (iv) GSTN portal; (v) WAMIS; 
(vi) e-GRAS; and (vii) e-Payment from Treasury 
23   Application Server-02; Database Server-03; Redhat  Enterprise Linux operating system 
(OS) licence for server- 03; and Rack Mountable Switch, Keyboard, Mouse etc.  
24   An integrated solution pre-configured by Oracle E xperts (OEM) directly and has a single 
point support directly from OEM. Further, the solution would cost less than the traditional 
way of configuring the servers for meeting the objective of high availability 
25   Database Servers (02), Storage Servers and high-s peed Network for exchange of data 
26   Cost involved in purchasing the complete box of E xa data with configuration of Oracle DB 
on traditional servers 
27   Hardware: ₹ 2.56 crore; License: ₹ 2.94 crore; Advance Customer Support: ₹ 66.47 lakh; 
Support Services 1 st  Year: ₹ 40.23 lakh; Annual Technical Support 2 nd  Year: ₹ 1.01 crore; 
Annual Technical Support 3rd Year: ₹ 1.03 crore; and Tax, Freight etc.: ₹ 1.22 crore 
28    (i) 8 Core: 01; (ii) 10 Core: 02; and (iii) 12 C ore: 02 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 24 - 
Thus, the procurement of the required infrastructure in phases was instrumental 
in the overall delay in implementation of IFMS in the State.  
In reply, the Department stated (November 2023) tha t major procurement for 
the IFMS project was done by IT Department. It was further stated that the 
Department has requested the IT Department to provi de reasons for delay in 
procurement of infrastructure. The reply of IT Depa rtment is awaited 
(January 2025). 
  

  
Chapter 3 
IT Controls 

Chapter  
3 IT Controls  
3.1 General Controls 
3.1.1 Inadequate documentation in software developm ent 
The User Requirement Specifications (URS), prepared before the development 
of the System, describes the business needs require ment of the User from the 
System. Software Requirement Specifications (SRS) i s the complete 
specification and description of the requirements o f the software that needs to 
be fulfilled for successful development of the soft ware system. A software 
requirements specification (SRS) is a document that describes what the software 
will do and how it will be expected to perform.  
Further, data dictionary is the major component in the structured analysis model 
of the System. It lists all the data items appearing in the Data Flow Diagram. 
Despite instructions (January 2014) of the Chief Secretary, Jharkhand to ensure 
proper documentation of all the applications, Audit noticed that URS, SRS and 
data dictionary were not prepared by NIC prior to i mplementation of IFMS in 
the State. 
In the Exit Conference (March 2024), the Senior Dir ector (IT)-cum-ASIO 
(NIC) stated that, as the development of modules wa s open ended due to 
continuous need-based requirement of the Department , it was not possible to 
prepare URS and SRS. It was further stated that, af ter each module was 
developed, System Design Document (SDD) for the same had been prepared. 
In the absence of the URS and SRS, the development and implementation of the 
project was totally dependent on NIC.  
3.1.2 Absence of Business Continuity Plan 
In the IT landscape, Business Continuity Plan 29  (BCP) is framed to setup an 
infrastructure equipped to prevent or minimize dama ges caused by disasters. 
High availability 30  and disaster recovery are the major components of BCP. A 
Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) has to be designed to ensure the continuation of 
vital business processes in the event of a disaster . IFMS being an important 
financial application of the State, the FD should h ave had a robust BCP and a 
DRP to ensure high availability and zero data loss. 
                                                           
29   Business Continuity Plan (BCP) is one of the most  critical components of any recovery 
strategy to ensure an organised, safe and timely recovery in case of a disaster 
30   High availability is a key component of BCP that focuses on minimising the risks of small 
disruptions to critical systems and applications 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 26 - 
Audit observed that provision of a Near Disaster Recovery Centre (NDRC) was 
made (October 2019) at the NIC Data Centre by the F D, where the data would 
be in sync with the Primary Data Centre (PDC). The IDC recommended 
(January 2021) procurement of 16 Core Oracle Exadata System to be hosted at 
the primary site (PDC) and shifting of the existing  hardware to the secondary 
site at the NIC Data Centre located at Ranchi (NDRC ), as this hardware was 
four years old. 
It was also seen that a proposal for BCP and establishment of NDRC for IFMS 
had been prepared by JAP-IT and submitted (May 2019 ) to FD for approval. 
However, the same was approved only in January 2021 for reasons not available 
on record. 
Further, Audit observed that administrative approval for 
₹15.51 crore including 
the costs of additional licences was granted (Augus t 2022) and ₹ 10.65 crore 31  
was released (August 2022) by DoIT, GoJ to JAP-IT f or procurement of 
hardware. However, no procurement was made and the fund was kept idle with 
JAP-IT. As such, NDRC could not be made functional as of November 2023, 
for reasons not available on record. 
Thus, non-implementation of BCP and non-establishme nt of NDRC is fraught 
with the risk of malfunctioning of the System durin g breakdown impairing the 
objective of high availability and zero downtime. 
On being pointed out in Audit, the Department stated (June 2023) that BCP has 
been approved but is yet to be implemented. In the Exit conference 
(March 2024), the Special Secretary stated that the  Department is concerned 
about the establishment of NDRC and finalisation of  procurement of the 
required hardware will be done very soon. 
3.1.3 Change Management plan not formulated 
Para 11B of the Jharkhand Treasury Code (JTC) provi des that all changes to 
IFMS should follow prescribed change management pro cedures, which shall 
include a documented process of intent for a change , its evaluation and 
acceptance, testing the change and introducing it i nto the production 
environment. It also provides that all new or major  upgrades to IFMS 
applications shall be formally certified through a comprehensive evaluation of 
the technical and non-technical security features prior to operation.  
  
                                                           
31    For first year 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 27 - 
Audit observed that the FD did not prescribe any change management procedure 
for changes made in the IFMS applications as per th e business needs and 
objectives of the Department. Though the FD stated (July 2023) that 
requirement of changes were communicated verbally and were being addressed 
in the application by the developers, percentage/proportion of changes were not 
documented as required under JTC.  
This absence of documentation for changes made in t he Application, would 
make the FD totally dependent on NIC for System management. 
In reply, the Department stated (November 2023) tha t instant need of various 
departments and offices cause change management and deployment. For major 
changes, approval is being taken on file while for small bugs, changes are 
deployed by the Database Administrator with the consent of NIC.  
The fact remains that the changes were made directl y in the production 
environment by the Database Administrator without technical and non-technical 
evaluation as prescribed in the JTC. As a result, functional deficiencies in IFMS 
were noticed during data analysis as discussed in Paragraph 3.2 . 
3.1.4 Non-integration with Public Financial Managem ent System 
(PFMS) 
With the objective of tracking disbursement and uti lisation of GoI funds under 
various schemes on a real time basis, GoI launched (April 2008) the Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS). The DoE, Minist ry of Finance, GoI, 
instructed (June 2015) States/UTs to complete the mapping of all GoI schemes 
with scheme codes used by the State treasuries by 3 0 June 2015 to monitor 
balances lying in the bank accounts of the executing agencies. 
Data analysis of IFMS database revealed that agains t 2,318 scheme codes for 
which sanctioned amount were captured, only 487 sch eme codes were found 
mapped. Thus, due to incomplete mapping of GoI sche mes, PFMS and State 
Treasuries Interface could not be established to mo nitor balances lying in the 
bank accounts of executing agencies.  
Further, GoI issued (April 2021) a revised process for release of funds to the 
States for Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and for monitoring utilisation of 
the funds released since 1 July 2021. Under the rev ised process, if a CSS is 
being implemented through a separate Central or Sta te IT System, the same 
should be integrated with PFMS, and State IFMS woul d enable capture of the 
component-wise expenditure of the scheme along with PFMS scheme codes and 
unique codes of the executing agencies incurring the expenditure. 
Audit observed that release of Central share under CSS to the State was not 
being captured in IFMS due to non-integration of IFMS with PFMS.  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 28 - 
Thus, non-integration of IFMS with PFMS deprived the State Government of a 
tool for capturing the master and transactional lev el data and real time 
monitoring of the progress of Central Sector Schemes. 
While accepting the facts, the Department stated (N ovember 2023) that IFMS 
tables do not capture all the budget, expenditure a nd release data uploaded to 
PFMS. It further stated that reconciliation would only be possible if IFMS gets 
reverse MIS from PFMS portal by facilitating Server  to Server reconciliation. 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Special Secretary also stated that IFMS 
has been integrated with PFMS to the extent allowed by the PFMS and that the 
State Government has written a number of letters to CGA in this regard. 
The reply had to be seen in light of the fact that mapping of accounting heads 
of State-linked schemes used by GoI with the State Budget heads was 
incomplete at GoJ level affecting the objective of real-time monitoring of the 
progress of these schemes. 
3.1.5 Ineffective Helpdesk Management 
Helpdesk is a single point of contact for all probl ems, issues, requests and 
queries coming from end users in the client environment. An efficient Helpdesk 
should register reported problems/complaints, assig n tickets to concerned 
technical staff, track the resolution of the ticket s and prepare reports for 
analysing components of the IT system that requires  modification and 
upgradation. Helpdesk management also assists in fo rmulating training need 
analysis.  
Audit noticed that though a post of Helpdesk Manager was created in December 
2021 by the FD, no such helpdesk was established fo r IFMS. Complaints 
raised 
32  by the end-users were received and resolved by the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) instead of a helpdesk, without recording  the date and time of 
lodging and resolving the complaints.  
Audit further noticed that during 2022-23 and 2023- 24, a total of 2,196 and 
2,213 complaints respectively were reportedly recei ved by PMU and were 
resolved. Audit examination revealed the following:  
• Date and time of lodging and resolution of complaints were not recorded in 
the report to arrive at the response time in resolving the issues. 
• Ticket numbers were not generated for the complaint s raised by the end 
users and hence tracking of the complaints could not be done. 
• Caller Name and Location fields were empty in 90 and 113 cases (2022-23) 
and 86 and 144 cases (2023-24) respectively. In 14 and 37 cases during 
2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively, both fields were found empty and hence 
it was not clear as to who had raised the complaints.  
                                                           
32   either telephonically or through e-mails 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 29 - 
Thus, IFMS could not generate any report related to  helpdesk management for 
further modification/upgradation of the System and the objective of high 
availability and zero downtime of the System could not be ensured. 
The Department, while accepting the facts, stated ( November 2023) that it is 
planning to establish the Helpdesk and assured that  date and time of lodging 
complaints along with closure date will be recorded.  
Recommendation 3: State Government may establish a Helpdesk for IFMS 
with a provision for auto generated tickets and auto logs, for closure only after 
complaints are resolved. 
3.2 Application Controls in IFMS 
Deficiencies in Pension and Treasury (payment) modules 
3.2.1 Absence of validation controls in Treasury (p ayment) module and 
pension module  
Pensionary benefits viz . Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (DCRG) and 
Commuted Value of Pension (CVP) on retirement are g enerally non-recurring 
one-time payments to the pensioners.  
In Jharkhand, pension and other pensionary benefits  (DCRG and CVP) are 
being paid to the Government employees or his/ her family member(s) as 
sanctioned by the Government as per rules, duly authorised by the AG (A&E), 
Jharkhand, on his/her superannuation or death. Afte r receipt of the payment 
authorisations from the AG, the Treasury Officer (T O) prepares the bills as a 
Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) for payment of the first pension, DCRG 
and CVP. He/she subsequently passes the bills as TO authorising the payments 
by issuing online payment advice to the treasury linked bank.  
The e-Pension portal launched in 2017-18 provides a n interface for uploading 
pension applications to the AG office for issuing a nd uploading payment 
authorisations viz . Pension Payment Order (PPO), Gratuity Payment Ord er 
(GPO) and Commutation Payment Order (CPO) into the IFMS for further 
processing of payment.  
The process involved is depicted in Pictograph 3.1 . 
  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 30 - 
Pictograph 3.1 . 
 
Analysis of IFMS database revealed that pension dat a (Pension, DCRG, CVP 
authorised by AG) of the pensioners was being captu red in a table where PPO 
number, pensioners’ name, admissible amount of pens ion, DCRG, CVP were 
being stored. Payments there against made by the treasuries were being captured 
in another table where PPO number, pensioners’ name , payment amount, date 
of payment, Treasury Voucher (TV) Number and TV date were being stored. 
Further analysis revealed that out of 11,89,931 tra nsactions, related to pension 
payments, PPO numbers were found captured only in 8,18,004 (68.74 per cent ) 
transactions. In the remaining 3,71,927 transaction s, PPO numbers were not 
found captured in the payment table. Of the 8,18,00 4 transactions, 86,014 
transactions pertained to DGRG payments, 43,158 to CVP payments and 
6,88,832 transactions to pension payments. Audit cr oss-checked 1,29,172 
transactions 33  of DCRG and CVP payments with the admissible amoun ts 
available in the IFMS tables to derive an assurance that the payments of DCRG/ 
CVP made by the treasuries were in consonance with the payment 
authorisations. 
Data analysis revealed that in 344 cases 
34 , excess payment totalling ₹ 11 crore, 
against the authorised admissible amount of DCRG/CV P, was made to the 
pensioners by the treasuries. Data analysis further  revealed that in six 35  out of 
                                                           
33    DCRG: 86,014 transactions of 74,178 pensioners a nd CVP: 43,158 transactions of 30,305 
pensioners 
34    DCRG: 184 cases and CVP: 160 cases 
35    PPO No. 1117xxxxx (BKR), 1117xxxxx (CKP), 1118xx xxx (RNC), 1418xxxxx (SGH), 
1119xxxxx (JSR) and 1122xxxxx (RNC)  
DDO level 
• A DDO uploads the pension application filled by a retiring go vernment 
employee after verification along with the required docume nts in the Pension 
portal and forwards it to the Sanctioning Authority (SA) i.e. Head of the 
Department for sanction of pension and other benefits.
SA level 
• The SA after sanction forwards the application to the AG office through 
IFMS and also sends a hard copy of the application along with other 
necessary documents for authorisation of pension and other pensionary 
benefits. 
AG level 
• The employee data of the pension application, as forwarded, is downloaded by 
AG office through an interface provided in IFMS and pushed in to the SAI-
Pension Portal (a seperate System of AG office) for further p rocessing and 
authorisation.
• After authorisation of pension and other benefits in the SAI -Pension Portal, the 
PPO, GPO and CPO are uploaded into the IFMS and the hard copies of the same 
are sent to the concerned Treasury Officer and the Pensioner.
Treasury 
Level 
• The TO prepares the bills of the first pension, DCRG and CVP as per the 
authorisations received from AG office in IFMS, after recei pt of the hard copies 
of the same. The payments are then processed in IFMS through T reasury module 
for generating payment advices.

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 31 - 
344 cases, payment against DCRG was more than the ceiling of ₹ 20 lakh fixed 
(January 2017) by GoJ due to absence of control che cks in the Application 
software.  
Audit validated all these 344 cases with the registers/ records available with the 
29 treasuries concerned and also corroborated the s ame with the vouchers/ 
treasury schedules sent to AG (A&E). It was observed that excess payments of 
₹ 2.03 crore had been actually made in 47 cases whil e in 30 cases there was 
excess booking of expenditure of ₹ 24.80 lakh. The remaining cases were due 
to (i) non-updation of revised pension and pensiona ry benefits in the IFMS 
database (198 cases); (ii) incorrect-classification  of heads (62 cases); and 
(iii) same PPO number captured against more than on e pensioner during 
payment (seven cases).  
Audit further observed that the actual excess payme nts amounting to 
₹ 2.03 crore in 47 cases were due to (i) payment mad e twice to a pensioner 
against the same authorisation (two cases), (ii) pa yments made to a pensioner 
against authorisation of another pensioner (12 case s); and (iii) preparation of 
erroneous bills/ advices (33 cases). Further, excess expenditure of ₹ 24.80 lakh 
was booked due to erroneous addition of TDS amount in DCRG/ CVP payments 
(30 cases) as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.2.1 (i) Payments made twice against same authorisation  
Audit observed that in two cases of excess payment,  the Treasury Officers 
(TOs), Chaibasa and Khunti, made payments of DCRG t o a pensioner twice 
against the same GPO i.e.  first against the personal copy and the second against 
the treasury copy. These cases are illustrated in the following case studies. 
 
 
Authorisation for payment of Family pension and Gra tuity was issued 
(30 October 2018) by AG (A&E) office, Jharkhand, Ra nchi, favouring Smt. 
X, wife of Late Mr. Y (PPO No. 1418xxxxx and GPO No. 1218 xxxxx) after 
the death (January 2018) of her husband (the Govern ment servant), for 
disbursement from Chaibasa Treasury. Against GPO No . 1218xxxxx, 
₹ 13,35,200 was paid to her as DCRG by the Chaibasa Treasury (vide TV No. 
50 dated 07 January 2019) for which an entry in the Pension Payment Register 
(PPR) (maintained at the Treasury for GPO No. 1218xxxxx) was made.  
Three months later, in April 2019, the same amount of ₹ 13,35,200 was again 
found paid (vide TV No. 58 dated 25 April 2019) to her without making any 
entry in the PPR.  
The TO, Chaibasa reported to AG that the payment ma de in January 2019 
(monthly returns of first pension) was against GPO No. 1215xxxxx  and in 
April 2019 against GPO No. 1218xxxxx. 
Case Study 1 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 32 - 
Audit cross-checked DCRG authorisations issued by A G through the SAI 
Pension portal with the monthly returns submitted by the Treasury to AG and 
observed that the authorisation for GPO No. 1215xxxxx  was not issued by 
AG office. In fact, both the payments of DCRG were made against the same 
GPO ( i.e. 1218xxxxx), first in January 2019 against the pers onal copy of the 
pensioner and the second (April 2019) against the Treasury’s copy of the same 
GPO. This was validated through examination of the payment vouchers 
submitted by TO Chaibasa to AG office along with monthly treasury accounts.  
On examination, Audit observed that AG (A&E) office  issues GPOs which 
contains nine digits; “12” being the first two digi ts, year of authorization 
(“yy”) being the next two digits and the last five digits representing the distinct 
GPO number. As such, the GPO No. ( i.e.  1215xxxxx ) reported by the TO in 
the monthly returns was fake as this GPO number (1215xxxxx ) would pertain 
to the year 2015 i.e., before demise of the Government servant in 
January 2018. The matter is therefore a Red Flag fo r the Department to 
conduct a thorough investigation. 
Thus, double payment of DCRG to Smt. X against the same GPO resulted in 
excess payment of ₹ 13.35 lakh.  
 
 
 
 
Treasury Officer, Khunti, made payments of DCRG amo unting to 
₹ 7,15,680 to a pensioner (PPO No. 1418xxxxx) agains t the same GPO 
(No. 1218xxxxx) for ₹ 3,57,840 in February 2019 (vide TV No. 65 and TV 
No. 66 of February 2019). 
The payments were made by generating two advices ag ainst the same GPO, 
first on 02 February (as “GPOI”) and second on 11 F ebruary (as “GPOII”) 
resulting in excess payment of ₹ 3.58 lakh. The TO did not include the second 
payment in the monthly statement of February 2019 sent to the AG though the 
payments were accounted for in the monthly accounts. 
Thus, the excess payments were made as IFMS was not  designed to 
detect/prevent the processing of payment of DCRG to  the same beneficiary 
against the same GPO number more than once. Moreove r, IFMS also did not 
raise any System Alert on total DCRG payment agains t a pensioner exceeding 
the limit of ₹ 20 lakh. Further, no application controls were bui lt into IFMS to 
restrict multiple payments to a pensioner against the same authorisation. 
Thus, excess payments of ₹ 16.93 lakh made by Chaibasa and Khunti treasuries 
to two pensioners needs to be recovered and deposit ed into Government 
Account. Further, appropriate action, as prescribed  in JTC, has to be initiated 
against the erring officials. 
Case Study 2 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 33 - 
While accepting the facts in the Exit conference (M arch 2024), the Special 
Secretary of the Department stated that the System cannot be fully automated 
unless IFMS is seamlessly integrated with SAI-Pensi on and e-Authorisation 
including e-PPO is generated and pushed to IFMS. A new process flow to 
introduce validations in payments of pensionary ben efits and stopping manual 
keying of amounts has already been deployed to avoi d such cases to some 
extent. A middleware including new hardware is bein g installed to set-up  
e-voucher system, which will also help in seamless flow of pension data  
(e-Authorisation) to IFMS. It was further stated th at excess payments pointed 
out by Audit will be recovered.  
3.2.1 (ii) Payments made to a pensioner against aut horisation of another 
pensioner 
Audit noticed that 12 out of 47 cases of excess pay ments of DCRG/CVP 
amounting to ₹ 1.14 crore (DCRG: ₹ 76.79 lakh and CVP: ₹ 37.52 lakh) were 
due to payments made to pensioners against authoris ations issued to other 
pensioners (Appendix 3.1 ). 
In these cases, payments were made twice to the sam e pensioner in place of 
another pensioner due to wrong entry of PPO number (i.e.  PPO number of first 
pensioner fed erroneously for the second pensioner)  at the time of preparation 
of payment advice by the Treasury. One such case is illustrated below: 
 
 
Authorisation was issued to Smt. S, superannuated in June 2016, for payment 
of DCRG of ₹ 5,65,144 against GPO No. 1217xxxxx from Ranchi tre asury. 
The said amount was paid to her vide TV No. 233 dat ed May 2017. During 
validation in the Treasury, Audit noticed that anot her payment of 
₹ 8,98,821 was also made to her in July 2017 on acco unt of DCRG (vide TV 
No. 220 of July 2017).  
Scrutiny of Pension Payment Register maintained at the Treasury along with 
pension database of IFMS revealed that the second p ayment pertained to 
another pensioner, Sri G (PPO No. 1117yyyyy) , who had superannuated in 
January 2017. The payment of pensionary benefit of Sri G was authorised vide 
GPO No. 1217yyyyy. Against the authorisation, payments of CVP and pension 
were made to Sri G, while the payment of Gratuity was made to Smt. S. This 
was also substantiated from the fact that there was no evidence in the treasury 
records showing payment of the Gratuity to Sri G. As such, excess payment of 
₹ 8.99 lakh was made to Smt. S over and above her entitlement of DCRG. 
Audit observed that though the details of the autho risations36  were already 
available in the IFMS database (e-Pension), the IFMS application did not use it 
for validation while making the payments (e-treasur y). Thus, in the absence of 
                                                           
36    Name, Amount payable, Account number, PPO number, GPO/CPO number etc.  of the 
pensioner 
Case Study 3 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 34 - 
validation controls, authenticity of the claims cou ld not be verified with the 
information available in IFMS while processing the payments.  
The Department while accepting the facts stated (No vember 2023) that the 
concerned sections of the Department have been directed to furnish reasons for 
over-payment. It was further stated that it was lef t to the Treasury Officers to 
ensure that correct payments are made through inter face based on the hard 
copies of the authorisations shared by the AG Pension Cell.  
Thus, lack of due diligence by the Treasury Officer s, combined with weak 
validation controls in IFMS, led to these excess payments. 
Recommendation 4:  State Government may ensure prop er integration of 
IFMS with SAI Pension portal and put in place proper validation controls to 
avoid risk of processing claims more than once against an authorisation. 
3.2.1 (iii) Excess payment made due to generation o f erroneous advice 
Audit noticed that 33 out of 47 cases of excess payments amounting to 
₹ 72.27 lakh ( Appendix 3.2 ) were done either due to incorrect entries made 
during preparation of payment advice through IFMS o r incorrect amounts 
entered into the bills prepared manually. These manual bills were passed by the 
TOs and fed into IFMS for generating payment advice s. One such case is 
illustrated below.  
 
 
Authorisation was issued (August 2017) by AG office  to a pensioner,  
Shri X (PPO No. 1117xxxxx), for payment of DCRG of ₹ 6,90,030 from 
Chakradharpur Sub-treasury under Chaibasa Treasury.  
Against the said authorisation, the TO made payment of ₹ 69,00,030 (vide TV 
No. 26 dated 24-10-2017) due to insertion of one ex tra zero while preparing 
the bank advice in IFMS. This resulted in excess pa yment of ₹ 62,10,000 to 
the pensioner.  
The excess payment of ₹ 62,10,000, though recovered by the Treasury and 
deposited into Government Account (MH 0071) vide TC  No. 2 to 8 dated 
12 December 2017, was not reflected as adjustment in the concerned table of 
IFMS database which still shows a payment of ₹ 69,00,030 on account of 
gratuity.  
Audit noticed that no built-in controls exist in IF MS to validate the amount 
entered for payment by the TO with the admissible a mount authorised by AG 
office to restrict the processing of a different amount for payment. The System 
also did not limit the amount of Gratuity to the ceiling of ₹ 20 lakh fixed by the 
Government. Moreover, the authorised amount did not get auto populated in the 
input interface to avoid the risk of human error.  
Case Study 4 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 35 - 
The Department while accepting the facts stated (No vember 2023) that it was 
left to the Treasury Officer to ensure that correct  payments are made through 
the interface based on the hard copies of authorisa tions shared by the AG 
Pension Cell. However, a Process flow has now been implemented by the 
Department in the pension payment interface of the Treasury so that 
Pension/DCRG/CVP payments are done in accordance with digital data shared 
by SAI software. 
Recommendation 5: State Government may ensure that proper input controls 
are built-in the IFMS to retrieve the data already available in the System and 
auto populate the payment fields in read-only mode to avoid human errors.  
3.2.1 (iv) Booking of excess expenditure due to wea k controls in IFMS 
Audit noticed that in 30 cases, excess expenditure of ₹ 24.80 lakh 
(Appendix 3.3 ) was booked due to erroneous addition of tax deducted at source 
(TDS) in the amount authorised while processing payments through IFMS.  
 
 
Mr. A, superannuated in December 2020, was authoris ed payment of DCRG 
and CVP of ₹ 20,00,000 and ₹ 28,52,223 respectively (PPO No. 1122xxxxx, 
GPO No. 1222xxxxx, and CPO No. 1322xxxxx)  by the AG office . Data 
analysis revealed that ₹ 25,10,195 and ₹ 31,38,587 was paid to the pensioner 
against DCRG and CVP respectively. During validatio n in Ranchi Treasury, 
Audit noticed that the payable amount of DCRG and C VP was ₹ 20,00,000 
and ₹ 26,28,392 ( i.e., the authorised amount of ₹ 28,52,223 minus  recovery of 
₹ 2,23,831) respectively and the same amounts were p assed for payment by 
the TO. However, TDS of ₹ 5,10,195, deducted from the previous bill 
processed in the System, was added back to the admissible amount of DCRG 
and CVP during processing of the payments through I FMS and payments of 
₹ 25,10,195 ( i.e.  DCRG: ₹ 20,00,000 plus  TDS: ₹ 5,10,195) and ₹ 31,38,587 
(i.e. CVP: ₹ 26,28,392 plus  TDS: ₹ 5,10,195) were actually processed on 
account of Gratuity and CVP respectively.  
Scrutiny of the vouchers related to these payments revealed that TDS of 
₹ 5,10,195 deducted from his first pension payment was found added back to 
the admissible amount of DCRG and CVP each, resulting in booking of excess 
expenditure of ₹ 10.20 lakh. Here also, IFMS could not restrict the  payment 
of DCRG within ceiling of ₹ 20 lakh fixed by the Government. 
During validation in the treasuries, Audit observed that the TO had passed these 
(manual) bills for payments correctly as admissible . However, scrutiny of 
treasury payment schedules revealed that the gross amount was more than the 
amount authorised by the AG. On further scrutiny, i t was seen that the amount 
in the TDS column was added back to the gross amount thereby inflating it. The 
net payable amount was not affected and it remained the same as admissible for 
payment. The TO had issued the payment advice for t he net-payable amount 
Case Study 5 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 36 - 
and the same was also reflected in the bank account of the pensioners. However, 
the gross expenditure was inflated by the amount sh own as TDS, which was 
finally transferred to the Income Tax Department ag ainst the pensioners’ PAN 
through AG office. As such, both the TOs and the pe nsioners were unaware of 
what had happened in the backend of the System. 
Audit further observed that while generating the pa yment advice in IFMS 
through treasury interface, the User (bill clerk) h ad to make entry in the “Net 
amount” field only as the “Gross amount” field is u n-editable. Further, a 
deduction window with the pre-filled TDS amount, th us deducted from the 
previous bill processed in the System, popped-up an d was added 37  back to the 
“Net Amount”, on confirmation by the bill clerk. As a result, the inflated gross 
amount was being booked as expenditure by the TO. 
The step by step explanation of the above is shown in the following flow chart 
(Pictograph 3.2 ). 
Pictograph 3.2  
 
Bill A is processed for payment of Pension/ 
DCRG/ CVP 
Whether TDS deducted in Bill A 
Yes                    No 
 
TDS of ₹ X was 
deducted  
 No TDS deducted  
  
Bill clerk started processing of another 
Bill B for payment of DCRG or CVP  
 
 
 
He was prompted to fill the admissible 
amount in the field “Net-Amount” as 
the “Gross-Amount” field remained 
grey and un-editable. 
 
Deduction window pre-filled with TDS of 
₹ X popped-up 
 Deduction window popped-up with 
zero TDS 
Option 1          Option 2   
Bill clerk mechanically 
confirmed the deduction 
by pressing OK button  
Bill clerk consciously 
changed the deduction 
amount to zero and then 
pressed OK button 
 
   
“Gross-Amount” field 
increased as the TDS 
amount was added to the 
“Net-amount” 
Hence, excess 
payment processed.  
 
Gross-Amount remained 
unchanged as zero was added here 
as TDS.  
Hence, payment processed 
was in order.  
 
 
                                                           
37   The code was so written that the Deduction (TDS) amount was being added to the Net 
Amount to arrive at the Gross Amount instead of bei ng subtracted from Gross for 
calculating Net 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 37 - 
Audit also observed that IFMS is not designed to ca pture the sanctioned/ 
authorised amount as “Gross” amount from where mand atory deductions, if 
any, should get subtracted to arrive at the “Net” payable amount.  
The above can be seen from the following snapshots (Snapshots 3.1 to 3.3 ) of 
the User Interface taken by Audit during validation (at Doranda Treasury) where 
the pension payment bill of a pensioner, in which TDS of ₹ 10,000 was required 
to be deducted, was being processed followed by his DCRG payment.  
Snapshot 3.1  
Snapshot of interface for preparation of advice in IFMS for Pension payment in which TDS of ₹ 10,000 was to 
be deducted 
 
 
₹ 10,000 as TDS amount 
entered for deduction and 
confirmed by the bill clerk  
Net Amount entered as 
Gross Amount field is 
inaccessible  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 38 - 
Snapshot 3.2 
Snapshot of interface of Gratuity payment where Net payable amount was fed manually, and TDS of previous 
occasion carried forwarded  
 
 
Snapshot 3.3 
Snapshot of interface after clicking “OK” of the deduction, TDS added to Net and Gross automatically changed  
 
Same amount of TDS as 
was deducted in the last bill 
popped up here 
Admissible Amount of 
Gratuity entered as Net 
amount  
When “OK” is pressed, the TDS amount  
(₹ 10,000) was added in Gross Amount and 
excess expenditure booked 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 39 - 
As a result of systemic deficiencies in IFMS, excess expenditure of ₹ 24.80 lakh 
was booked against these 30 pensioners.  
The Department stated (November 2023) that earlier,  Treasury Officer was 
responsible for processing the pension benefits bas ed on the hard copies 
delivered by the AG Pension Cell as there was no centralised database of PPOs. 
It was further stated that after launch of e-Pensio n portal, PPOs issued by AG 
Pension Cell are now being captured in the centralised database, and the desired 
business rules and validation checks are incorporated in the said interface. 
The reply of the Department did not address the audit observation which pointed 
out defects in design and control failure in IFMS, as a result of which deductions 
were being added to the authorised amount resulting  in booking of excess 
expenditure. 
Recommendation 6: State Government may review the design and controls in 
IFMS to identify gaps and take remedial measures accordingly. 
3.2.1 (v) Incomplete data in IFMS database  
Of the 344 cases of excess payments, Audit noticed during validation at the 
treasuries that there was no actual excess payment in 198 cases (Appendix 3.4 ). 
The excess payments as noticed during data analysis  were due to revisions of 
pensionary benefits not getting captured in the IFM S database. One such case 
is illustrated below. 
 
 
A pensioner, who superannuated in July 2021, was issued authorisation by the 
AG for payment of DCRG of ₹ 11,66,022 (vide PPO No. 1121xxxxx; and 
GPO No. 1221xxxxx) from Doranda Treasury . Data analysis revealed that the 
said pensioner was paid ₹ 12,75,648 ( ₹ 11,66,022 and ₹ 1,09,626 vide TV No. 
93 and 94 of February 2022 respectively) by the concerned TO.  
Validation by Audit revealed that the payment of ₹ 1,09,626 made to the 
pensioner was against a revised GPO (GPO no. 1221yyyyy ) which had not 
been captured in the IFMS database.  
Audit noticed that the authorisations of revised DC RG/CVP issued to the 
pensioners were not captured in the IFMS tables tho ugh these data 38  were 
uploaded into the IFMS server 39  by AG office. Audit also observed that data 
related to the original GPO/ CPO, which were issued prior to launch (2017-18) 
of the Pension portal of IFMS, were also not available in IFMS.  
                                                           
38    xml format 
39    Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) server loca ted at premises of AG (A&E) Office 
Case Study 6 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 40 - 
Periodic batch processing 40  to ensure updating/capturing cent per cent  data of 
pension authorisations (original or revised) upload ed by the AG in IFMS 
database was also not being done. Moreover, no effo rt was being made to 
synchronise the pension data of IFMS with AG’s SAI Pension data to ensure 
integrity and completeness of pensioners’ data in t he System including legacy 
data.  
The Department stated (November 2023) that the revi sion cases (prior to 
2017-18) have either not been uploaded or the same has not been entered into 
the System by the respective treasury. The Departme nt would validate the 
presence of this data, based on which transactions were to be allowed. It was 
further stated that legacy transactions cannot be rectified.  
However, the Department did not ensure the complete ness of pension data in 
the IFMS database and action to include the missing  authorisations issued by 
AG office was yet to be taken. 
Recommendation 7: State Government may ensure pension data integrity and 
its completeness through periodic batch processing by updating/downloading 
the pension data uploaded by the AG office along wi th migration of legacy 
data. 
3.2.1 (vi) Input of incorrect classification of exp enditure Heads 
Out of 344 cases of excess payments noticed by Audi t during data analysis of 
IFMS, there was no actual excess payment in 62 case s ( Appendix 3.5 ) as 
confirmed during validation at the treasuries. The excess payments shown in the 
System was due to selection of incorrect classification of bill category 41  by the 
treasuries during processing of payments in IFMS. O ne such case is illustrated 
below. 
 
 
A pensioner, Mr. A superannuated in January 2021 an d was authorised 
payment of DCRG and CVP of ₹ 20,00,000 and ₹ 34,78,788 respectively 
(GPO No. 1222xxxxx; and CPO No. 1322xxxxx)  from Ramgarh Treasury. 
Data analysis revealed that Mr. A was paid ₹ 54,78,788 as DCRG against the 
admissible amount of ₹ 20,00,000. During validation, it was noticed that while 
generating payment advice for payment of CVP, the b ill category applicable 
to DCRG was inadvertently selected. As such, both t he payments were 
captured as payment of DCRG in the IFMS database ap pearing as excess 
payment of ₹ 34,78,788.  
                                                           
40   Processes to capture all pension data of AG offic e in the IFMS database for a specified 
period automatically without human intervention 
41    CVP as DCRG or vice-versa  was entered/ selected while generating payment advices 
Case Study 7 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 41 - 
Thus, IFMS is not designed in such a way that the authorised amount along with 
its bill category get auto populated in the input i nterface of IFMS to avoid the 
risk of human error. 
The Department while accepting the observation stat ed (November 2023) that 
since there was an open interface for Treasury for processing Pension benefits 
and centralised database did not exist for populati ng the PPO details as shared 
by AG Pension Cell, the Treasury should have taken care to process the 
DCRG/CVP payments by selecting the correct Bill Cat egory which the 
Treasury did not do. It further stated that since t he centralised database is in 
place now with data being shared electronically by the AG pension Cell, the 
Department is in the process of incorporating busin ess rules and validation 
checks to restrict such errors.  
3.2.1 (vii) Same PPO number captured against more t han one pensioner 
during payment  
Pension Payment Order (PPO) number, issued by the A G office, is a unique 
number assigned to a pensioner for granting pension  and other pensionary 
benefits and the pensioner is identified through this PPO number only. 
Data analysis revealed that in seven out of 344 cas es, excess payments of 
DCRG/CVP were shown in the IFMS as made to differen t pensioners from 
different treasuries against the same PPO number. D uring validation, Audit 
noticed that in these cases (Appendix 3.6 ), payments of the authorised amount 
had been actually made to the bona fide  pensioners and there was no 
discrepancy. However, incorrect PPO numbers, pertaining to other pensioners, 
were entered in IFMS by treasuries while making payments to these seven bona 
fide  pensioners showing the payments as excess. One suc h case is illustrated 
below. 
 
 
A pensioner, Mr. S, superannuated in January 2017 a nd was issued 
authorisation ( PPO No. xxxxx2103 ) for payment of DCRG and CVP of 
₹ 7,02,540 and ₹ 5,11,699 respectively (vide; GPO No. xxxxx7832; and CPO 
No. xxxxx2103).  Data analysis revealed that, against this, he was paid 
(March 2017 and May 2017) ₹ 15,96,510 and ₹ 9,85,247 as DCRG and CVP 
respectively. During validation in Ranchi treasury,  it was noticed that Mr.S 
was paid the correct amount as per the authorisations issued by AG.  
Data analysis further revealed that the payments, shown as excess payments in 
IFMS, were actually made to a different pensioner M r. N (PPO Number: 
xxxxx2013) from Godda treasury who was authorised ₹ 8,93,970 and ₹ 4,73,548 
as DCRG and CVP respectively. However while processing payment advice in 
IFMS, the last four digits of the PPO number of Mr.  N i.e.  “2013” were 
incorrectly entered as “2103” which was the PPO number of Mr.S.  
Case Study 8 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 42 - 
Thus, built-in input controls over referential integrity were not present in IFMS 
to restrict duplicate entries of PPO numbers against different pensioners.  
The Department in its reply stated (November 2023) that IFMS maintains 
pension master which contains master details of the PPOs issued by AG Pension 
Cell. The illustrated example was checked and it was found that both the PPOs 
are issued in different names against different app lication numbers and hence 
are unique in nature on which respective Treasury have made the payments. 
The reply of the Department is not relevant as inpu t controls were not in place 
in IFMS to restrict duplicate entry of the same PPO number against two different 
pensioners. In the illustrated case, the same PPO n umber was captured against 
both pensioners during processing of payment (one c orrect and another 
incorrect).  
Recommendation 8: State Government may enforce prop er Primary Key/ 
referential integrity in the System and provide val id input controls in the 
payment application interface to avoid risk of excess payment. 
Deficiencies in Receipt module (Jharkhand e-GRAS) 
3.2.2 Short realisation of revenue amounting to 
₹ 4.40 crore due to 
deficient validation controls in IFMS  
After computerisation of treasuries in Jharkhand, the Finance Department (FD) 
introduced 42  (June 2016) the Electronic Government Receipt Acco unting 
System (Jharkhand e-GRAS) in IFMS (Receipt Module) to make government 
accounting more systematic and transparent. All typ es of receipts into the 
government account were to be remitted into the ban k through e-challans 
generated in the Jharkhand e-GRAS portal. Further, FD implemented (January 
2017) online receipt service through the Jharkhand e-GRAS portal and issued 
(December 2016) directions to stop usage of manual challans from 
February 2017. After submission of challan  details in the Portal, a User could 
generate e-challan  and pay the amount {Online, Government Business Software 
Solution (GBSS) at any SBI branch and manually at any treasury-linked bank}. 
After successful payment, the payment status is updated in IFMS. 
JTC stipulates (Rule 52) that reconciliation shall be performed in the e-treasury 
electronically, as per the data of e-receipts and i nformation provided by the 
bank. For proper reconciliation of e-receipts, all the departments were to 
periodically log into the IFMS and check the status of payments received under 
respective heads and send the Consolidated Treasury Receipts for the specified 
period to the Cyber treasury at the State level. Al l revenue generating 
departments were required to be integrated with the  Jharkhand e-GRAS portal 
for realisation/accountal of revenue. 
                                                           
42    under Rules 42, 51 and 52 of JTC, 2016 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 43 - 
Data analysis revealed that a total of 2,09,36,565 e-challans  were generated 
between March 2017 and September 2022, through IFMS  with details of the 
amount payable. Of these, 1,57,74,935 transactions were found successful and 
the amount paid was also recorded/updated in the IFMS database.  
Audit matched both the sets of information to verify whether the amount shown 
payable in the e-challans was actually remitted into the Government Account.  
Data analysis revealed that out of successful trans actions, 4,341 e-challans  
(during October 2017 to April 2022) had been genera ted for remitting 
₹ 4.44 crore. However, only ₹ 3.62 lakh was actually remitted against these 
e-challans , as detailed in Table 3.1 . 
Table 3.1: Short remittance against e-challans  
Department ID Department 
Number 
of 
transact 
-tions 
Amount 
payable as per 
e-Challan 
(in ₹) 
Amount 
actually 
deposited 
(in ₹) 
Short 
remittance 
(in ₹) 
JHTDVAHAN  Transport  3,904  4,31,67,123.00  2,77,486.69  4,28,89,636.31  
JHSARTHI  Transport  9  10,500.00  518.00  9,982.00  
JHPOL Jharkhand Police 69  2,85,050.00  1,581.00  2,83,469.00  
JHNGDRS Revenue, Registration 
and Land Reforms 
4  4,43,607.00  46.00  4,43,561.00  
JHREV Revenue, Registration 
and Land Reforms 
352  56,416.26  7,246.82  49,169.44  
WRDREG Water Resource  3  4,00,000.00  75,000.00  3,25,000.00  
Grand Total   4,341  4,43,62,696.26  3,61,878.51  4,40,00,817.75  
(Source: IFMS database) 
This led to short realisation of revenue amounting to ₹ 4.40 crore under three 
revenue heads 43  during 2017-2022 due to deficient validation controls in IFMS 
as it allowed deposit of lower amounts than the amo unts for which e-challans  
were generated.  
During validation in the office of DTO, Ranchi, Audit noticed that the response 
amount (actual amount remitted) against the request  amount (amount to be 
remitted) were not being transmitted to the IT Syst ems of the revenue 
departments and hence was not visible to the operat or in the User Interface. In 
the event of a successful transaction of any amount , only the transaction status 
was being shown as ‘Success’ against the request am ount without the operator 
being able to see the response amount in the User Interface. This can be clearly 
seen from Snapshots 3.4 and 3.5 . 
  
                                                           
43   JHREV:0029; JHNGDRS and WRDREG:0030; JHPOL, JHTDV AHAN and 
JHSARTHI:0041 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 44 - 
One such case is illustrated below. 
 
 
A depositor generated (January 2022) an e- challan  (GRN-xxxxxx68060) for 
depositing ₹ 1.50 lakh as fee for allotment of a special registration number for 
a private vehicle from DTO, Ranchi, and deposited only ₹ 150 against the said 
challan . DTO, Ranchi, allotted a special registration numb er (XX-XX-XX-
9999) against the vehicle by confirming the transac tion status on VAHAN  
portal of the Transport Department. The User Interface in IFMS and VAHAN  
in respect of this case is shown in Snapshots 3.4 and 3.5 , respectively.  
 
Snapshot 3.4  
Snapshot of deposit of ₹ 150 against ₹ 1,50,000 shown as “Success” in IFMS  
 
Case Study 9 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 45 - 
Snapshot 3.5  
Snapshot of VAHAN portal showing amount as ₹ 1,50,000 and status as “Success”  
Audit further noticed that DTO, Ranchi, issued (May  2022) notices to 815 
vehicle owners of 1,289 vehicles, who had deposited lesser tax than required, to 
deposit the differential tax of ₹ 1.78 crore, but only ₹ 79.38 lakh could be 
realised (June 2023) from 549 vehicle owners. Statu s of recovery of short 
deposit of tax in respect of other departments 44  was not furnished to Audit. 
Thus, IFMS was not designed to restrict pilferage o f government revenue 
though the basic data of revenue payable and revenu e paid was being captured 
in the IFMS database.  
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Special Secretary stated that Jharkhand 
e-GRAS acts only as a payment gateway for all the Departments’ portals, which 
forwards the request of Departments’ portals to ban k and the bank responds 
back to the requesting Departments’ portals in encr ypted form. The requesting 
Departments’ portals are to validate the bank responses with their request earlier 
sent to Jharkhand e-GRAS portal before provisioning  of services to the end 
users as per SOP issued by FD. The Special Secretar y also stated that the 
Department cannot stop the instances of less remittance within IFMS because it 
is difficult for accounting of such amount.  The Sp ecial Secretary also assured 
that the matter is being taken up with the Chief Secretary to get a solution. 
The reply is not convincing as the User Interface w as not designed in such a 
way so that the operator of the revenue departments  concerned could see the 
response amount before providing the services. The fact also remains that 
leakage of revenue happened through IFMS due to non /deficient validation of 
basic data available in the database. 
                                                           
44   Jharkhand Police and Department of Revenue, Regis tration and Land Reforms 


Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 46 - 
Recommendation 9: State Government may review the v alidation controls in 
the Unified Receipt Portal (Jharkhand e-GRAS) and t he portals of the 
participating departments on a regular basis to ensure that the amount shown 
on e-challans as payable by the end-user is paid in  full and credited to 
government account. 
Deficiencies in e-Allotment module 
3.2.3 Expenditure made without allotment 
JTC stipulates that a Treasury Officer shall not pe rmit withdrawal for any 
purpose unless the claim for withdrawal is presente d by such person (DDO) in 
such form (Bill/ Cheques) as is prescribed by JTC r ules. Further, no authority 
may incur any expenditure from public funds until t he expenditure has been 
sanctioned by an authority to which power has been duly delegated and the 
expenditure has been provided for in the authorised grants and appropriation for 
the year.  
In IFMS, FD releases funds to various departments f or expenditure by the 
Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) against the approved grant for the 
year. The process involved in fund allotment and ex penditure by the DDOs in 
IFMS, is shown in the following flow-chart (Pictograph 3.3 ). 
Pictograph 3.3 
e-Allotment Module e-Bill Module 
 
• The Sanctioning Authority, 
after receiving intimation of 
the approved Grants, 
sanctions funds to the 
Controlling officer for further 
allotment to the DDOs 
• The Controlling Officer then 
distributes the funds amongst 
the DDOs for expenditure and 
a Unique number (i.e. 
Allotment Access Number) is 
generated against each 
allotment for authentication by 
the Treasury. 
• After receipt of the allotment 
letter, the DDO approaches the 
treasury for authentication for 
drawing the released 
allotment. 
• After authentication by the 
treasury, the allotment is 
finally locked against a 
particular DDO for incurring 
expenditure. 
• A DDO prepares a bill in IFMS 
against the funds alloted to him 
and a unique number (Control 
Number) is generated for future 
reference. 
• The Bill is then submitted to the 
Treasury through IFMS for 
payment. 
• Printed copy of the bill is then 
presented to the treasury by the 
DDO, where the bill is scrutinised by 
the treasury and passed for payment 
using the Control number, if found 
in order. 
• After the bill is passed by TO, an 
advice is generated in IFMS and sent 
electronically to the bank for 
payment against the bill.
• After the payment is made by the 
bank, the details of transactions are 
updated in IFMS. 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 47 - 
(I)  To ensure whether the expenditure processed through  IFMS were in 
consonance with the allotments made there against, Audit compared allotment 45  
with expenditure 46  obtained from data analysis of IFMS. It was notice d that in 
nine cases, there was excess expenditure of ₹ 1.24 crore over allotment by six 
DDOs in four treasuries 47  during 2017-23 (up to November 2022). Further, in 
17 cases, expenditure of ₹ 34.33 crore was incurred without any allotment under 
different heads of accounts by 13 DDOs in seven tre asuries 48  during the same 
period. The cases noticed are detailed in Table 3.2 (A & B) . 
Table 3.2 (A): Excess expenditure over allotment as seen in IFMS  
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year Heads of Accounts DDO Code Fund 
allotted 
Total 
no. of 
Bills 
proce-
ssed 
Gross 
Expenditure 
Excess 
Expenditure  
1. 2017-18 32S-20110210300010213 DRNASM001 30,00,000  139 30,11,853  11,853  
2. 2018-19 40S-20530009400010315 DHNDAD002 5,50,000  35 5,78,861  28,861  
3. 2019-20 01S-24020010200040101 RNCSWC003 35,24,900  42 38,40,606  3,15,706  
4. 2017-18 52S-22040010400500761 BKRTSM001 29,76,850  23 82,85,369  53,08,519  
5. 2021-22 52S-22040010450000761 BKRTSM001 1,00,000  2 3,55,376  2,55,376  
6. 2017-18 56S-25150000100030101 BKRRDS005 15,88,000  48 56,37,714  40,49,714  
7. 2019-20 56S-25150000100030101 BKRRDS005 22,00,000  47 42,79,471  20,79,471  
8. 2019-20 60S-22350310100110315 BKRSSW001 3,50,000  3 6,70,634  3,20,634  
9. 2019-20 60S-22350378900110315 BKRSSW001 1,00,000  6 1,47,700  47,700  
Total 1,43,89,750  345 2,68,07,584  1,24,17,834  
(Source: IFMS database) 
 
  
                                                           
45   Total of 8,51,851 allotments (summarised from tot al 16,13,921 instances of fund allotment 
related to 32 treasuries/sub-treasuries on financial year wise, DDO-wise and Head-wise) 
46   Total of 11,79,333 cases of payments (summarised from 1,39,57,766 transactions related to 
payment financial year-wise, DDO-wise and Head-wise) 
47   Bokaro; Dhanbad; Doranda; and Ranchi 
48    Bokaro, Deoghar, Doranda, Dumka, Latehar, Projec t Bhawan and Simdega 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 48 - 
Table 3.2 (B): Expenditure incurred without allotment as seen in IFMS 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year Heads of Accounts DDO Code 
No. of 
Bills 
processed 
Total 
Expenditure 
incurred 
without 
allotment 
1 2018-19 51S-22250279600740321 SDGSSW001 1 2,91,20 0 
2 2019-20 40S-20290079600200317 LTRDAD002 1 99,67,20 0 
3 2019-20 60C-22350210200AS0335 BKRSSW010 1 4,268 
4 2019-20 60C-22350378900110329 BKRSSW001 1 19,980 
5 2019-20 60S-22350378900110321 BKRSSW001 2 7,048 
6 2020-21 22S-20550000100020759 DMKDAD105 1 8,86,67 5 
7 2021-22 02S-240300796AG000759 DRNAHY001 1 2,62,07, 000 
8 2021-22 06S-20150010201000101 BKRELE001 14 11,59,88 8 
9 2021-22 20C-22100110388000323 DRNMED124 1 3,56,56, 495 
10 2021-22 42S-25010210109000679 PRJSES003 1 12,66,4 8,000 
11 2021-22 42S-25010278909000679 PRJSES003 1 3,87,70 ,000 
12 2021-22 42S-25010279609000679 PRJSES003 1 9,30,47 ,000 
13 2021-22 51C-222502277A7000679 DGRWSBE25 2 70,00,0 00 
14 2021-22 55S-25050170211010101 BKRRDS007 9 14,60,847  
15 2021-22 60S-22356010210000101 SDGDAD039 3 4,80,5 09 
16 2022-23 39S-22450211302000543 SDGDAD014 1 82,100  
17 2022-23 39S-22458010211000679 SDGDAD014 2 16,30, 000 
Total 43 34,33,18,210 
(Source: IFMS database) 
Audit validated these cases of excess expenditure/e xpenditure without 
allotment, with the records available in the concer ned treasuries and observed 
that the expenditure had been incurred by the DDOs only against allotments 
made available to them. However, these allotments w ere not authenticated by 
the treasuries through IFMS. 
Audit observed that the laid down process of expenditure was bypassed and bills 
were processed for payment as the System did not prevent generation of advices 
without authentication of allotment by the treasury through IFMS. 
Thus, excess expenditure over allotment/expenditure  without allotment, as per 
IFMS database, was due to absence of application co ntrols in the System to 
prevent processing of bills where funds are not ava ilable under the heads 
concerned.  
The Department while accepting the audit observations stated (November 2023) 
that expenditure without allocation cannot happen i n IFMS as there is a fund 
check through a function before processing a bill. The Department further stated 
that the Treasury, after processing the bills, may have requested and got the data 
updated through backend operations leading to data inconsistency in IFMS. 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 49 - 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Department  termed these as outliers 
and stated that the system does have the required checks to ensure that payment 
cannot be made without allotment. The Department al so assured that the 
instances pointed out by Audit would be investigated. 
(II)  To check whether the release of funds processed thr ough IFMS were in 
consonance with the sanctions made there against, A udit compared both the 
information captured in the IFMS database and noticed that ₹ 919.09 crore was 
released under 99 different heads of accounts, during 2014-23 (up to November 
2022), against which sanction for only ₹ 856.48 crore was found in the database 
resulting in excess release of ₹ 62.61 crore through IFMS. Similarly, 
₹ 83,878.41 crore was shown released under 10,060 he ads of accounts against 
which no sanction was found in IFMS. Such cases fou nd during data analysis 
are shown in Table 3.3 (i) & (ii) . 
Table 3.3 (i): Excess release of funds against sanctioned amount 
FY 
No. of 
Heads of 
Accounts 
Sanctioned 
Amount (in ₹) 
Released Amount 
(in ₹) 
Excess Release  
(in ₹) 
2014-15 11 55,85,03,900  62,48,15,699 6,63,11,799 
2015-16 11 3,20,41,12,000  3,22,57,79,500 2,16,67,500 
2016-17 14 8,29,93,163  9,71,63,388 1,41,70,225 
2017-18 44 2,95,70,80,576  3,43,09,60,477 47,38,79,901 
2018-19 9 74,18,03,519  76,86,20,188 2,68,16,669 
2019-20 7 1,01,35,61,038  1,03,56,64,430 2,21,03,392 
2020-21 3 66,98,000  78,93,000 11,95,000 
Total 99 8,56,47,52,196 9,19,08,96,682 62,61,44,486 
(Source: IFMS database) 
 
Table 3.3 (ii): Release of funds without sanction 
FY 
No. of 
Heads of 
Accounts 
Amount released 
(in ₹) 
Amount 
sanctioned  
 (in ₹) 
Amount released 
without sanction   
(in ₹) 
2014-15 3 3,52,328 0 3,52,328 
2015-16 2 95,00,000 0 95,00,000 
2017-18 3 10,46,48,72,000 0 10,46,48,72,000 
2018-19 2 6,15,97,70,000 0 6,15,97,70,000 
2020-21 33 75,68,96,328 0 75,68,96,328 
2021-22 5,311 4,95,35,56,98,836 0 4,95,35,56,98,836  
2022-23 
(Up to Nov-22) 4,706 3,26,03,69,70,191 0 3,26,03,69 ,70,191 
Total 10,060 8,38,78,40,59,683 0 8,38,78,40,59,683 
(Source: IFMS database) 
  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 50 - 
Thus, release of funds in excess of the sanctioned amount and release of funds 
without sanction through IFMS was in contravention to the Jharkhand Financial 
Rules. Further, Audit noticed that proper controls were not put in place in the 
IFMS application to ensure that funds are released only against the sanctioned 
amount. 
The Department stated (November 2023) that release of allotment is not 
dependent on the sanctioned amount. A check is avai lable in IFMS so that the 
allotment does not exceed revised estimate and expe nditure does not exceed 
allotment. 
The reply is not factual as data analysis revealed cases of allotment exceeding 
revised estimates, release of funds without sanction and expenditure exceeding 
allotment. 
Recommendation 10:  State Government may ensure tha t validation controls 
are put in place so that no payments can be processed through IFMS without 
having sufficient allotment in the particular head. 
Deficiencies in e-Budget module 
3.2.4 Non-updation of figures of Revised Estimates on real time basis in 
IFMS database 
 
As per Jharkhand Budget Manual, budget estimate is to be prepared by the 
Controlling Officers (COs) only on the forms prescr ibed by the Finance 
Department (FD) containing (i) the headings under w hich the items should be 
classified; (ii) the actuals of the past financial year; (iii) the sanctioned estimates 
of the year preceding that for which the estimate is being framed; (iv) the revised 
estimate for the current year; (v) the proposed est imate of the year; and 
(vi) explanation of increase or decrease. Further, the CO should also, estimate 
the probable revised expenditure under each unit of  appropriation, and review 
the proposed budget in the light of the revised estimates. 
Comprehensive Outlay on Budgetary Transaction (COBT ) , the e-Budget 
module of IFMS, facilitates submission of online unit-wise budget requirements 
by the CO. Data relating to Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and 
actual expenditure pertaining to each Head of Accou nts against 60 grants 
including supplementary grants, re-appropriations, surrenders and State 
Contingency Fund (JCF) were available in the IFMS database. 
Audit compared the amount of savings 49  obtained from the budget data with the 
final surrender during 2017-21 captured in IFMS and  noticed discrepancies as 
detailed in Table 3.4  (i & ii). 
 
                                                           
49   Calculated from the figures of BE, Actual Expendi ture by taking into account 
Supplementary, Re-appropriations, surrenders and Jharkhand Contingency Fund 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 51 - 
Table 3.4 (i): Surrendered amount lower than savings in IFMS  
(₹ in crore)  
Year  No. of 
Heads  
Figures as per IFMS  Figures worked out by Audit  
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
expenditure  
Final 
surrender  
Actual 
Revised 
estimates  
Savings  Difference 
(Less)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 7=(6-4) 8=(7-5) 
2017-18  610  12,056.49  9,504.05  2,292.59  12,115.74  2,611.69  319.10  
2018-19 712 24,248.44 19,191.49 3,412.71 23,565.44 4,373.96 961.25 
2019-20  520  14,641.00  10,773.43  3,679.46  14,738.70  3965.27  285.81  
2020-21 123 1,360.62 1,146.94 380.43 1,560.11 413.1 8 32.75 
2021-22 Actual Expenditure of FY 2021-22 will be available in the Budget Estimates for 2023-24  
(Source: IFMS database) 
Table 3.4 (ii): Surrender in excess of savings in IFMS  
(₹ in crore)  
Year  No. of 
Heads  
Figures as per IFMS  Figures worked out by Audit  
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
expenditure  
Final 
surrender  
Actual 
Revised 
estimates  
Savings  Difference 
(Excess) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 7=(6-4) 8=(5-7) 
2017-18  53  6,108.60  5,968.88  146.19  6,101.76  132.88  13.31  
2018-19 124 4,295.30 3,675.73 774.14 4,295.30 619.5 7 154.57 
2019-20 75 3,816.19 3,279.77 601.25 3,867.07 587.30  13.95 
2020-21 8 722.87 499.80 328.00 827.53 327.73 0.27 
2021-22 Actual Expenditure of FY 2021-22 will be available in the Budget Estimates for 2023-24  
(Source: IFMS database) 
The discrepancy in the figures was due to non-updat ion of figures of revised 
estimates in IFMS on real time basis. During valida tion with the statement of 
surrender (2020-21) furnished by FD, Audit noticed that the amount of final 
surrender was actually ₹ 327.73 crore as worked out by Audit.  
As such, data integrity of IFMS database was not en sured and the objective of 
IFMS i.e.,  efficient preparation, allocation, distribution and re-appropriation of 
budget to facilitate DDOs/departments to track thei r budget allotment and 
expenses in real time was affected. 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Department  accepted the facts and 
stated that for the purpose of printing of budget book for presentation before the 
Legislature, the figures of RE have been taken on a  cut-off date without 
considering figures of third supplementary and surr enders made. However, for 
MIS and other requirements, real-time figures are b eing fetched on run-time 
basis for validating any pay-outs, through IFMS system. 
3.2.5 AC bills drawn without submission of DC bills  
Jharkhand Treasury Code (Rule 184 to 187) stipulate s that contingent charges 
requiring countersignature after payment may be drawn on Abstract Contingent 
(AC) bills. The DDO states in each AC bill that a Detailed Contingent (DC) bill 
would be submitted to the Controlling Officer (CO) for countersignature along 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 52 - 
with a certificate to the effect that the monthly DC bill for AC bills drawn in the 
previous month have been duly countersigned and sha ll be attached to the first 
AC bill presented for payment after the 10th of eac h month. An AC bill may 
not be encashed after the 10th of the month without  this certificate. In no case, 
submission of the DC bill may be delayed beyond the  end of the sixth month 
following the month in which the AC bill was drawn from the Treasury. No AC 
bill should be encashed after the end of this period unless the DC bills have been 
submitted. 
In IFMS, the DDOs were required to adjust the AC bi ll through an Interface 
designed for compliance of AC bills. Analysis of data pertaining to AC/DC bills 
revealed that 12,217 AC bills amounting to 
₹ 20,098.82 crore were drawn by 
1,941 DDOs between May 2007 and October 2022 agains t which only 5,837 
AC bills (DC bills) amounting to ₹ 8,928.81 crore were submitted by 603 DDOs 
between March 2015 and November 2022.  
Audit further noticed that out of 5,837 AC bills fo r which DC bills were 
submitted, 858 bills of 
₹ 1,300.52 crore had been fully adjusted. The remaining 
4,979 bills of ₹ 9,078.19 crore drawn by 287 DDOs had only been par tially 
adjusted ( ₹ 7,628.29 crore).  
Data analysis further revealed that IFMS did not re strict the DDOs from 
drawing subsequent AC bills and allowed 122 out of 287 DDOs to draw 405 
AC bills without adjustment of previous AC bills of  ₹ 1,013.69 crore drawn 
(between December 2008 and March 2021). 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Department  accepted the audit 
observation and stated that action has been initiat ed to minimise the pendency 
of DC bills. However, the Department was silent on applying restrictions in 
IFMS on drawing AC bills without adjustment of previous bills. 
3.2.6 Non-provision for submission/monitoring of Ut ilisation Certificates 
through IFMS 
The Jharkhand Treasury Code (JTC) stipulates that departmental officers should 
obtain Utilisation Certificates (UCs) from the gran tees and, after verification, 
forward these to the Principal Accountant General ( A&E), Jharkhand, within 
12 months from the date of withdrawal of grants.  Further, JTC (Rule 261) 
provides that grants-in-aid sanctioned by the Government shall not be disbursed 
at the treasury except with the approval of the competent sanctioning authority, 
who should issue the sanction order only after obta ining the utilisation 
certificate of pending amount drawn in the year bef ore the previous financial 
year, from the concerned DDO. 
Data analysis revealed that 2,69,883 grant-in-aid ( GIA) bills amounting to 
₹ 2,44,925.58 crore were drawn between April 2010 an d November 2022 
through IFMS. Details of the GIA bills drawn are given in Table 3.5. 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
 
 
- 53 - 
Table 3.5:  GIA bills withdrawn between April 2010 and November 2022  
  (₹ in crore) 
Plan Type No. of bills Gross Amount 
 C (Central Plan) 19,429   54,259.42  
 N (Non-Plan) 21,322   30,927.29  
 P (Plan) 1,31,766   46,582.16  
 S (State Plan) 97,366   1,13,156.71  
 Grand Total  2,69,883 2,44,925.58 
   (Source: IFMS database) 
Data analysis further revealed that information rel ated to only 2,727 GIA bills 
(for Plan Type as “S” amounting to ₹1,332.58 crore) were found in IFMS. 
However, UCs for ₹ 1.99 crore against only three GIA bills (of ₹ 2.44 crore) 
were found in the IFMS database (November 2022). 
Thus, non-capturing of GIA bills in the database resulted in weak monitoring of 
UC submission through IFMS. Audit further observed that IFMS did not have 
any control to restrict DDOs from drawing GIA bills in the subsequent financial 
years without submission of UCs for the GIA bills d rawn in the previous 
financial years.  
The Department while accepting the audit observations stated (November 2023) 
that the module for submission of UC is already ava ilable in IFMS. However, 
the Department has not made the submission of UC ma ndatory for release of 
next allotment. In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Department stated that 
the matter would be taken up with the Chief Secreta ry to expedite submission 
of UCs.  
3.2.7 Non-availability of data of repayment for deb t/interest paid in IFMS  
As per DPR of IFMS, Fund & Debt Management Module w ould facilitate 
recording all the loans, guarantees and other liabilities of the Government along 
with the records of investments and advances given by the Government so that 
it has a full view of its liabilities and can plan its fund management. This would 
also enable the Government to minimise financial co st of borrowings by 
allowing it to better manage the Ways and Means advances.  
Audit observed that Fund & Debt Management module has not been developed 
(July 2023) in IFMS. In the absence of this Module,  details of loans, their 
repayment schedule and reconciliation with the Cent ral Bank and treasury 
accounts are not being captured in IFMS. 
Data analysis revealed that the State Government ha d an Internal Debt of 
₹ 59,500.24 crore (Major head: 6003) and Loans and A dvances of 
₹ 5,642.34 crore (Major head: 6004) as received from  the Central Government 
during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21. During validation, d ifferences of 
₹ 4,012.27 crore in Internal Debt and ₹ 1,724.27 crore in Loans and Advances 
were noticed between the Finance Accounts and the b udget tables in IFMS as 
shown in Table 3.6. 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 54 - 
Table 3.6: Statement showing differences between IFMS data and 
Finance Accounts 
 (₹ in crore) 
Receipts As per IFMS Data As per Finance 
Accounts Difference 
Year 
Internal 
Debt 
(6003) 
Loans and 
Advances 
(6004) 
Internal 
Debt 
(6003) 
Loans and 
Advances 
(6004) 
Internal 
Debt 
(6003) 
Loans and 
Advances 
(6004) 
2015-16 15,500.12  271.17  13,079.63  165.02  2,420.49  106.15  
2016-17 16,000.12  271.17  6,847.13  234.29  9,152.99  36.88  
2017-18 10,400.00  600.00  7,905.24  231.61  2,494.76  368.39  
2018-19 10,300.00  700.00  7,530.52  272.90  2,769.48  427.10  
2019-20 3,500.00  800.00  9,167.14  425.98  (-)5,667.14  374.02  
2020-21 3,800.00  3,000.00  10,958.31  2,588.27  (-)7,158.31  411.73  
Total 59,500.24 5,642.34 55,487.97 3,918.07 4,012.27 1,724.27 
(Source: IFMS database) 
Audit further observed that repayment of Loans and Advances (Major head 
6004) amounting to ₹ 699.20 crore during 2017-21 as seen from the Finan ce 
Accounts had not been captured in IFMS.  
Data analysis further revealed that an amount of 
₹ 4,222.50 crore was captured 
against repayment of Internal Debt 50  during 2017-21. However, it was observed 
from the Finance Accounts that the actual repayment  made during this period 
was ₹ 12,286.62  crore. As such, the figures in IFMS did not match w ith the 
figures of the Finance Accounts. Audit further obse rved that the repayment 
amount of ₹ 8,064.12 crore 51  could not be captured in IFMS as the records of 
these repayments were maintained by AG (A&E) and AG , being an external 
stakeholder, did not have direct access to IFMS to feed this data. Details of 
repayments against Internal Debt (6003) are shown in Table 3.7.  
Table 3.7: Repayment of Internal Debt  
(₹ in crore)  
FY As per IFMS As per Finance Accounts Difference  
2017-2018 850.33 2,788.46 1,938.13 
2018-2019 650.41 2,893.42 2,243.01 
2019-2020 1,444.37 4,057.86 2,613.49 
2020-2021 1,277.39 2,546.88 1,269.49 
Total 4,222.50  12,286.62 8,064.12 
(Source: IFMS database and Finance Accounts of the Government of Jharkhand) 
                                                           
50    Minor heads 105 (Loans from the NABARD); 108 (Lo ans from National Co-operative 
Development Corporation); and 109 (Loans from other  Institutions) under payment of 
principal amount for Internal Debt (Major Head 6003) 
51    Minor heads: 101 (Market Loans); 103 (Loans from  LIC India); 104 (Loans from GIC 
India); 107 (Loans from SBI and other Banks); 110 ( Ways and Mean Advances); 
111 (Special Securities issued to NSSF of Central Government); and 800 (Other Loans) 

Chapter 3: IT Controls 
- 55 -
Thus, the very objective of meeting the needs of effective fiscal management 
through IFMS could not be achieved. 
In the Exit conference (March 2024), the Department accepted the audit 
observation and stated that Fund & Debt Management module is under 
development in consultation with AG (A&E). 
Ranchi  
The 12 March 2025  
(INDU AGRAWAL) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
Jharkhand 
Countersigned  
New Delhi  
The 18 March 2025  
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Appendices 

- 57 - 
Appendix 3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1 (ii); page 33) 
Payments of admissible DCRG/ CVP made to the pensioners by the Treasuries in 
addition to DCRG/ CVP actually authorised to other pensioners 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Treasury PPO No. Type Name of the Pensioners Payable 
Amount 
Paid 
Amount 
Excess 
Payment 
1 Bokaro 
1116xxxxx DCRG Nxxxi Sxxxs 8,52,786 17,57,613 9,04,827 
1116yyyyy  Mxxxxxxn Mxxxxxa 9,04,827   
2 Bokaro 
1116xxxxx CVP Nxxxi Sxxxs 4,64,108 9,56,535 4,92,427 
1116yyyyy  Mxxxxxxn Mxxxxxa 4,92,427   
3 Bokaro 
1116aaaaa DCRG Gxxxl Mxxxxl 4,51,688 11,48,468 6,96,780 
1116bbbbb  Sxxxxxxxxa Kxxxxi 6,96,780   
4 Bokaro 
1117xxxxx DCRG Rxxxxxxa Rxm 6,00,600 21,45,000 15,44,400 
1117yyyyy  Sxxxxxxxd Cxxxxxy 15,44,400   
5 Dumka 
1115xxxxx DCRG Jxxxxxxe Dxxi 8,05,167 16,37,125 8,31,958 
1115yyyyy  Rxm Dxxxl Dxs 8,31,958   
6 Dumka 
1115aaaaa DCRG Axxxxxxh Kxxxr 7,92,165 16,17,363 8,25,198 
1115bbbbb  Sxxxxi Mxxxxl 8,25,198   
7 Jamshedpur 
1116kkkkk DCRG Pxxxa Nxxd Mxxxi 8,26,345 13,12,006 4,85,661 
1116lllll  Pxxxn Kxxxr Dxs 4,85,661   
8 Lohardaga 
1115ccccc CVP Bxxxxxxxt Exxa 3,89,919 8,37,560 4,47,641 
1115ddddd  Rxxxxxi Kxxxxi 4,47,641   
9 Palamu 
1121xxxxx CVP Axxxr Rxxxxn 13,76,592 24,95,565 11,18,973 
1121yyyyy  Sxxxl Kxxxr Vxxxa 11,18,973   
10 Ranchi 
1117ccccc DCRG Sxxxxi Kxxxr 5,65,144 14,63,965 8,98,821 
1117ddddd  Gxxxxd Jxa 8,98,821   
11 Ranchi 
1118xxxxx DCRG Sxxxxxh Cxxxxxa Pxxxxd 11,78,100 26,69 ,783 14,91,683 
1118yyyyy  Nxxxxxa Gxxxa 14,91,683   
12 Ranchi 
1118ccccc CVP Sxxxxxh Cxxxxxa Pxxxxd 13,37,261 30,30, 469 16,93,208 
1118ddddd  Nxxxxxa Gxxxa 16,93,208   
TOTAL 1,14,31,577 
(Source: IFMS database) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 58 - 
Appendix 3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1 (iii); page 34) 
Excess payments of DCRG/ CVP made to the pensioners by the Treasuries due to 
preparation of erroneous payment advices 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Trea-
sury Type PPO No Name of Pensioners Admissible 
Amount 
Payable 
Amount 
Amount 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
1 BKR DCRG 1118xxxxx Axxt Pxxxxd Mxxxo 11,78,100 11,78,100 11,87,100 9,000 
2 BKR DCRG 1120xxxxx Lxxxn Sxxxh 10,48,525 10,48,525 10,84,525 36,000 
3 BKR CVP 1115xxxxx Dxxxxh Pxxxxd 5,12,092 5,12,092 5,43,767 31,675 
4 CKP DCRG 1117xxxxx Rxm Pxxxn Pxxxxd 6,90,030 6,90,030 69,00,030 62,10,000 
5 CKP DCRG 1116xxxxx Axxxn Cxxxxxa Mxxxo 2,05,963 2,05,963 2,05,965 2 
6 CKP CVP 1116xxxxx Txxi Nxxxt  
W/o Sxxxxxxxr Nxxxt 4,48,179 4,48,179 4,88,179 40,000 
7 DHN DCRG 1222xxxxx Jxxxu Mxxxo 52,525 52,525 55,525 3,000 
8 DHN DCRG 1122xxxxx Rxxxxxxa Rxm 8,35,212 8,35,212 8,53,212 18,000 
9 DMK DCRG 1422xxxxx Pxxxi Mxxxu  
D/o Sxxxxxa Sxxxxn 6,00,160 6,00,160 6,00,460 300 
10 GDD DCRG 1116xxxxx Md. Mxxxxa Hxxxn 7,96,600 7,96,600 7,96,780 180 
11 GDD CVP 1120xxxxx Sxxxxxxxxxxn Pxxxxt 6,68,630 6,68,630 6,86,630 18,000 
12 GML CVP 1120xxxxx Hxxxxxa Pxxxxxa Mxxj 11,87,802 11,87,802 18,53,173 6,65,371 
13 GRH CVP 1120xxxxx Rxm Vxxxd Kxxxr 32,31,944 32,31,944 32,31,945 1 
14 JSR DCRG JxxExx22xxx Kxxxl Kxxxxxa Gxxxh 5,20,702 5,20,702 5,33,358 12,656 
15 JSR CVP 1121xxxxx Cxxxxxxxxxr Bxxxxt 17,24,673 17,24,673 17,24,693 20 
16 KHN CVP 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxn Gxxxa 12,60,565 12,60,565 12,60,575 10 
17 KHN CVP 1118xxxxx Sxxxxxm Sxxh 7,15,828 7,15,828 7,18,528 2,700 
18 LTR DCRG 1118xxxxx Rxm Dxxxl Oxxxn 6,25,433 6,25,433 6,25,435 2 
19 LTR DCRG 1418xxxxx Jxxxxxxn Pxxxxd Pxxxn 3,64,656 3,64,656 3,64,659 3 
20 LTR CVP 1118xxxxx Axxn Kxxxr Sxxxh 8,06,290 8,06,290 8,06,298 8 
21 LTR CVP 1121xxxxx Axxxxxxxr Kxxxr 11,18,973 11,18,973 11,89,973 71,000 
22 LTR CVP 1122xxxxx Rxxxxa Hxxxxxxa 13,76,592 13,76,592 13,76,593 1 
23 PKR DCRG PxxExx20xxx Sxxxu Kxxxr Dxm 5,36,927 5,31,432 5,41,432 10,000 
24 PLM CVP 1118xxxxx Axxxh Bxxxxi Gxxi 6,29,299 6,29,299 6,29,699 400 
25 RNC DCRG 1118xxxxx Bxr Bxxxxxr Sxxxh 10,34,583 10,34,583 10,34,853 270 
26 RNC CVP 1115xxxxx Ixxxxxxt 2,05,899 2,05,899 2,50,899 45,000 
27 RNC CVP 1118xxxxx Rxm Kxxxr 7,09,928 7,09,928 7,09,929 1 
28 RNC CVP 1118xxxxx Bxxxu Pxxxxp 12,23,200 12,23,200 12,23,220 20 
29 RNC CVP 1121xxxxx Md Rxxxxm Axxxxi 16,87,308 16,87,308 16,87,310 2 
30 SBJ CVP 1117xxxxx Pxxh Kxxi Sxxa 11,52,404 11,52,404 11,52,504 100 
31 SGH CVP 1117xxxxx Jxxxxl Axxxxxn 4,42,279 4,42,279 4,42,979 700 
32 SKL DCRG 1117xxxxx Rxm Jx Txxxxi 7,66,494 7,66,494 8,18,924 52,430 
33 SKL DCRG 1121xxxxx Bxxxxxxh Mxxxo 7,16,224 7,16,224 7,16,244 20 
TOTAL 72,26,872 
(Source: IFMS database) 
 

Appendices 
 
- 59 - 
Appendix 3.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1 (iv); page 35) 
Excess expenditure booked by the Treasuries during payment of DCRG/ CVP due to erroneous addition of TDS amount 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioners Admissible 
Amount 
Payable 
Amount 
Net 
Amount 
paid 
Total 
Amount Paid 
as Gross 
Reason: TDS 
added to the 
Payable Amount 
FY 
1 BKR DCRG 1116 xxxxx  Md. Gxxxxn 8,46,087 8,46,087 8,46,087 8,46,767 680 2016-2017 
2 BKR DCRG 1115 xxxxx  Rxm Bxxu Cxxxxxxxy 9,00,000 9,00,000 9,00,000 9,19,385 19,385 2016-2017 
3 BKR DCRG 1116 xxxxx  Jxi Mxxa Sxxxa 8,12,559 62,559 62,559 63,448 889 2016-2017 
4 DHN DCRG 1121 xxxxx  Rxxxxxxa Sxxxxa 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,000 10,00,008 8 2021-2022 
5 DHN CVP 1121 xxxxx  Rxxxxxxa Sxxxxa 6,70,164 6,49,042 6,49,042 6,49,050 8 2021-2022 
6 DRN DCRG 1117 xxxxx  Dxxxp Kxxxr Vxxxa 2,71,161 2,71,161 2,71,161 2,84,116 12,955 2017-2018 
7 GDD DCRG 1114 xxxxx  Vxxxxxxxxd Yxxxv 8,10,999 8,10,999 8,10,999 8,39,2 05 28,206 2014-2015 
8 GDD DCRG 1419 xxxxx  Vxxxxu Pxxxxd Yxxxv 4,65,920 4,65,920 4,65,920 5,6 5,920 1,00,000 2019-2020 
9 GDD CVP 1113 xxxxx  Kxxxxxxo Pxxxxd Sxxxa 6,80,036 6,80,036 6,80,036 6 ,93,175 13,139 2013-2014 
10 GDD DCRG 1113 xxxxx  Kxxxxxxo Pxxxxd Sxxxa 1,000 1,000 1,000 14,139 13, 139 2013-2014 
11 GML DCRG 1118 xxxxx  Oxxxxa Lxxxa 5,12,000 5,12,000 5,12,000 5,13,865 1 ,865 2018-2019 
12 JSR DCRG 1119 xxxxx  Sxxxxxxxm Bxxxxt 20,00,000 20,00,000 20,00,000 23, 29,834 3,29,834 2019-2020 
13 JSR DCRG 1116 xxxxx  Pxxxxxa Bxxxxxxe 1,000 1,000 1,000 4,17,822 4,16,8 22 2019-2020 
14 KHN CVP 1114 xxxxx  Lxxxn Mxxxo 4,02,751 4,02,751 4,02,751 4,04,083 1, 332 2014-2015 
15 PLM DCRG 1119 xxxxx  Bxxxxxu Pxxxxy 4,50,500 4,50,500 4,50,500 5,35,392  84,892 2019-2020 
16 PLM DCRG 1119 xxxxx  Kxxxxxxxn Axxxxi 10,82,928 10,82,928 10,82,928 11, 67,820 84,892 2019-2020 
17 PLM CVP 1119 xxxxx  Kxxxxxxxn Axxxxi 11,52,404 11,52,404 11,52,404 12, 37,296 84,892 2019-2020 
18 PLM DCRG 1119 xxxxx  Sxxxxxxxs Kxxxxo 8,30,907 8,30,907 8,30,907 9,15,7 99 84,892 2019-2020 
19 RNC DCRG 1117 xxxxx  Pxxxxxt Kxxxr Mxxxxxxxe 13,36,764 13,36,764 13,36, 764 13,41,764 5,000 2017-2018 
20 RNC CVP 1117 xxxxx  Pxxxxxt Kxxxr Mxxxxxxxe 7,65,975 7,65,975 7,65,975  7,70,975 5,000 2017-2018 
21 RNC DCRG 1117 xxxxx  Sxxxxxa Nxxd Sxxxxa 15,04,932 15,04,932 15,04,932 15,09,932 5,000 2017-2018 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 60 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioners Admissible 
Amount 
Payable 
Amount 
Net 
Amount 
paid 
Total 
Amount Paid 
as Gross 
Reason: TDS 
added to the 
Payable Amount 
FY 
22 RNC DCRG 1118 xxxxx  Vxxxy Kxxxr Sxxxh 7,31,640 7,31,640 7,31,640 7,31, 644 4 2017-2018 
23 RNC DCRG 1122 xxxxx  Axxxxxxa Nxxxxxn Mxxxxa 20,00,000 20,00,000 20,00, 000 25,10,195 5,10,195 2022-2023 
24 RNC CVP 1122 xxxxx  Axxxxxxa Nxxxxxn Mxxxxa 28,52,223 26,28,392 26,28, 392 31,38,587 5,10,195 2022-2023 
25 RNC DCRG 1113 xxxxx  Dr. Pxxxxd Kx Sxxxy 8,05,440 8,05,440 8,05,440 8,2 5,440 20,000 2013-2014 
26 RNC DCRG 1113 xxxxx  Dr. Nxxxxi Rxxxxn Sxxxa 7,43,067 7,43,067 7,43,067  7,73,067 30,000 2013-2014 
27 RNC DCRG 1115 xxxxx  Gxxxa Cxxxxn Sxh 10,530 10,530 10,530 40,530 30,00 0 2015-2016 
28 RNC DCRG 1117 xxxxx  Cxxxxxxxa Bxa 9,40,154 9,40,154 9,40,154 9,44,154 4,000 2017-2018 
29 RNC DCRG 1417 xxxxx  Jxxxxh Vxxxy Exxa 8,04,033 8,04,033 8,04,033 8,34, 033 30,000 2017-2018 
30 SKL DCRG 1114 xxxxx  Bxxxxxxi Pxxxxd 7,48,193 7,43,193 7,43,193 7,96,30 3 53,110 2014-2015 
TOTAL 24,80,334  
 (Source: IFMS database) 
 

Appendices 
 
- 61 - 
Appendix 3.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1 (v) ; page 39) 
Excess payments of DCRG/ CVP shown in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the Treasuries 
due to non-updation of revised authorisations issued by AG (A&E) in IFMS 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner 
Payable 
DCRG/ 
CVP 
as per 
IFMS 
Amount 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
derived 
Revised 
DCRG/CVP 
not in IFMS 
1 BKR CVP 1113xxxxx Kxxxxxxxr Rxm 11,799 6,21,040 6,09,241 6,21,040 
2 BKR CVP 1113xxxxx Nxxa Rxm Mxxxxo 19,075 4,05,505 3,86,430 4,05,505 
3 CKP CVP 1117xxxxx Mxxxxl Sxxxh Pxxxi 4,70,401 6,19,814 1,49,413 6,19,814 
4 DGR DCRG 1115xxxxx Dxxxxxxh Rxxt 9,97,213 10,00,000 2,787 10,00,000 
5 DGR DCRG DxxIxx10xx Jxxxxxxxh Pxxxxd Sxxxh 1,95,146 3,48,688 1,53,542 3,48,688 
6 DGR CVP DxxFxx41xx Axxa Rxxa Sxn 14,356 4,77,874 4,63,518 4,77,874 
7 DGR CVP 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxxa Kxxxr 5,60,470 6,48,178 87,708 6,48,178 
8 DGR CVP 1113xxxxx Bxxxxxxxxd Jxa 12,979 5,26,448 5,13,469 5,26,448 
9 DGR CVP DxxFxx26xx Dxxi Mxxxa 93,314 1,21,238 27,924 1,21,238 
10 DGR CVP 1113xxxxx Dxxxn Rxxxk 67,059 5,23,892 4,56,833 5,23,892 
11 DGR CVP 1117xxxxx Kxxxxxe Cxxxxxa Mxxxxa 10,23,398 16,73,543 6,50,145 16,73,543 
12 DGR CVP DxxFxx24xx Lxxxxxi Dxxi 1,38,550 2,98,420 1,59,870 2,98,420 
13 DGR CVP DxxExx21xxx Nxxxxxxxr Sxxu 21,829 5,38,051 5,16,222 5,38,051 
14 DGR CVP DxxExx23xxx Pxxxxa Nxxd Gxxxh 12,389 5,28,218 5,15,829 5,28,218 
15 DGR CVP DxxExx23xxx Rxm Pxxxr Sxxxh 13,373 5,45,720 5,32,347 5,45,720 
16 DGR CVP DxxExx23xxx Sxxxxxa Mxxxa 22,222 5,46,507 5,24,285 5,46,507 
17 DGR CVP 1112xxxxx Sxxxxxr Rxxt 39,724 3,17,403 2,77,679 3,17,403 
18 DGR CVP DxxExx17xxx Sxxxm Sxxxxr Gxxxa 21,042 5,55,553 5,34,511 5,55,553 
19 DGR CVP DxxFxx31xx Sxxxxh Cxxxxxa Sxxxh 2,07,760 2,93,123 85,363 2,93,123 
20 DHN DCRG 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxxxxr Txxxxr 4,41,276 4,53,080 11,804 4,53,080 
21 DHN DCRG 1114xxxxx Cxxxxxxxxxr Rxi 6,99,105 7,35,900 36,795 7,35,900 
22 DHN DCRG 1115xxxxx Dxxi Rxi 8,02,709 8,25,330 22,621 8,25,330 
23 DHN DCRG 1114xxxxx Nxxd Kxxxxxe 8,32,343 8,76,150 43,807 8,76,150 
24 DHN DCRG 1115xxxxx Pxxxxxa Kxxxxi 9,40,944 9,68,208 27,264 9,68,208 
25 DHN CVP 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxxh Txxxxi 3,73,843 3,95,309 21,466 3,95,309 
26 DHN CVP DxxSxx1xx Bxxxxt Pxxxxd Sxxxh 41,495 3,71,876 3,30,381 3,71,876 
27 DHN CVP DxxPxx31xx Bxxxxxxxxxi Kxxxxr 17,699 2,96,951 2,79,252 2,96,951 
28 DHN CVP 1113xxxxx Gxxxxxxa Nxxxxxn 
Cxxxxxxxy 21,436 4,14,944 3,93,508 4,14,944 
29 DHN CVP 1113xxxxx Hxxxxxxxxxr Pxxxxd 14,749 4,96,950 4,82,201 4,96,950 
30 DHN CVP 1113xxxxx Pxxxxxh Rxxxxn Sxxxy 1,04,535 2,33,910 1,29,375 2,33,910 
31 DHN CVP 1113xxxxx Rxxxxe Pxxxxd 17,109 2,85,455 2,68,346 2,85,455 
32 DHN CVP 1113xxxxx Sxxv Lxl Mxxxxo 1,83,972 2,19,566 35,594 2,19,566 
33 DHN CVP DxxFxx14xx Sxxxxxm Rxxxxxxxi 2,747 2,04,817 2,02,070 2,04,817 
34 DMK DCRG 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxxxa Pxxxxd Bxxxxt 11,10,780 11,32,560 21,780 11,32,560 
35 DMK DCRG 1118xxxxx Cxxxxi Kxxxi 6,25,433 6,37,346 11,913 6,37,346 
36 DMK DCRG 1115xxxxx Cxxxxxxxxo Sxh 6,98,478 7,18,724 20,246 7,18,724 
37 DMK DCRG 1115xxxxx Gxxxa Mxxxxa 7,72,926 7,95,333 22,407 7,95,333 
38 DMK DCRG 1114xxxxx Lxxxi Nxxxxxn Cxxxxxy 5,68,955 5,88,870 19,915 5,88,870 
39 DMK DCRG 1115xxxxx Mxxxxxa Hxxxxa 8,32,013 8,56,136 24,123 8,56,136 
40 DMK DCRG 1115xxxxx Mxxxxxxxi Bxxxxy 8,01,966 8,25,198 23,232 8,25,198 
41 DMK DCRG 1417xxxxx Pxxxxxxu Sxxxh 4,00,000 20,00,000 16,00,000 20,00,000 
42 DMK DCRG 1116xxxxx Rxxxxxxa Sxh 7,85,582 8,07,098 21,516 8,07,098 
43 DMK DCRG 1114xxxxx Sxxxxi Pxxxxd Mxxxxl 7,87,958 7,88,958 1,000 7,88,958 
44 DMK DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxxxh Pxxxxd Bxxxxt 9,94,934 10,00,000 5,066 10,00,000 
45 DMK CVP 1114xxxxx Bxxxxxxxxh Cxxxxxxxxe 4,25,957 4,46,606 20,649 4,46,606 
46 DMK CVP 1116xxxxx Jxxxxl Sxxxn 4,12,781 5,93,229 1,80,448 5,93,229 
47 DMK CVP 1112xxxxx Kxxxi Mxxxo 8,063 1,71,091 1,63,028 1,71,091 
48 DMK CVP DxxDxx33xx Mxxxn Mxxxn Sxh 59,783 3,38,642 2,78,859 3,38,642 
49 DMK CVP 1116xxxxx Mxxxxxxa Pxxxxd 7,98,030 12,97,930 4,99,900 12,97,930 
50 DMK CVP 1118xxxxx Md Mxxxxn Axxm 4,35,396 7,09,928 2,74,532 7,09,928 
51 DMK CVP 1120xxxxx Mxxxxxxxh Kxxxr Jxa 8,90,852 9,16,536 25,684 9,16,536 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 62 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner 
Payable 
DCRG/ 
CVP 
as per 
IFMS 
Amount 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
derived 
Revised 
DCRG/CVP 
not in IFMS 
52 DMK CVP DxxIxx2xx Pxxxxxxxd Sxh 23,599 3,76,006 3,52,407 3,76,006 
53 DMK CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxl Txxu 4,94,000 12,57,050 7,63,050 12,57,050 
54 DMK CVP DxxWxx2xx Yxxxxxxa Mxxxo 8,291 4,04,915 3,96,624 4,04,915 
55 DRN DCRG 1415xxxxx Axxr Kxxxr Pxn 2,51,628 2,58,924 7,296 2,58,924 
56 DRN DCRG 1415xxxxx Axxt Kxxxr Lxxxu 2,75,472 2,83,464 7,992 2,83,464 
57 DRN DCRG 1114xxxxx Axxl Rxxa 3,20,760 3,31,992 11,232 3,31,992 
58 DRN DCRG 1415xxxxx Axxxxh Txxxxg 2,44,176 2,51,256 7,080 2,51,256 
59 DRN DCRG 1119xxxxx Bxxxxt Txxxa 11,52,839 11,84,568 31,729 11,84,568 
60 DRN DCRG 1121xxxxx Kxxxn Pxxxxxn 11,66,022 12,75,648 1,09,626 12,75,648 
61 DRN DCRG 1118xxxxx Rxm Sxxxxn Sxxxa 12,52,939 12,76,804 23,865 12,76,804 
62 DRN DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxxr Cxxxxxy 7,70,204 7,92,528 22,324 7,92,528 
63 DRN DCRG 1119xxxxx Sxxxxxxxa Nxxxxn Sxxxh 12,09,500 20,00,000 7,90,500 20,00,000 
64 DRN DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxr Bxxxxxr Txxxa 7,70,204 7,92,528 22,324 7,92,528 
65 DRN DCRG 1115xxxxx Txxa Bxxxxxr Cxxxxxy 7,55,502 7,77,414 21,912 7,77,414 
66 DRN CVP 1113xxxxx Axxr Kxxxr Sxxxa 2,47,196 2,65,486 18,290 2,65,486 
67 DRN CVP 1117xxxxx Axxl Kxxxr Sxxxxxxxxa 4,91,640 9,83,280 4,91,640 9,83,280 
68 DRN CVP 1113xxxxx Anjani Kxxxr Cxxxxxxxy 30,679 10,20,841 9,90,162 10,20,841 
69 DRN CVP 1119xxxxx Bxxxxxxxa Mxxxxa 1,65,191 17,91,536 16,26,345 17,91,536 
70 DRN CVP DxxAxx39xx Bxxxxxxa Px Sxxxh 14,553 7,05,011 6,90,458 7,05,011 
71 DRN CVP 1113xxxxx Jxxxxxxa Pxxxxd Sxxxh 38,348 11,42,965 11,04,617 11,42,965 
72 DRN CVP 1114xxxxx Lxl Mxxxn Nxxxk 5,33,331 5,69,122 35,791 5,69,122 
73 DRN CVP 1113xxxxx Mxxxxxxxxr Nxxh Txxxxi 54,081 6,20,646 5,66,565 6,20,646 
74 DRN CVP 1113xxxxx Sxxxxa Kxxxi Dxxn 1,98,229 8,22,612 6,24,383 8,22,612 
75 GDD DCRG 1115xxxxx Bxxxd Bxxxxa 8,26,551 8,50,509 23,958 8,50,509 
76 GDD DCRG 1117xxxxx Md. Hxxxxxn 9,86,238 10,05,576 19,338 10,05,576 
77 GDD DCRG GxxDxx40xx Sxxxxxxd Pxxxxt 2,91,885 3,03,121 11,236 3,03,121 
78 GDD DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxxxxxxxa Kxxxr Jxa 8,62,109 8,86,397 24,288 8,86,397 
79 GDD CVP 1116xxxxx Axxxxxxxa Pxxxxd Yxxxv 4,75,318 12,23,200 7,47,882 12,23,200 
80 GML DCRG 1420xxxxx Sxxa Rxm Oxxxn 95,872 4,79,360 3,83,488 4,79,360 
81 GML CVP 1115xxxxx Cxxxxxa Mxxj 3,93,509 4,07,720 14,211 4,07,720 
82 GML CVP 1113xxxxx Rxxxxxxxr Nxxh Pxxxxd 82,989 2,95,002 2,12,013 2,95,002 
83 GML CVP GxxAxx4xx Sxxxxxn Lxxxxi 8,260 2,02,949 1,94,689 2,02,949 
84 GML CVP 1117xxxxx Sxxxxn Txxxo 4,30,087 6,88,912 2,58,825 6,88,912 
85 GML CVP 1115xxxxx Sxxxxh Cxxxxxa Pxxxxd 5,20,155 7,46,492 2,26,337 7,46,492 
86 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Axxxn Sxxxh 7,69,857 7,92,165 22,308 7,92,165 
87 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxxxxxr Cxxxxxxxy 7,87,958 8,10,794 22,836 8,10,794 
88 GRD DCRG 1117xxxxx Jxxxxxh Pxxxxd Mxxxo 6,12,612 6,24,624 12,012 6,24,624 
89 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Kxxxxxxxxxi Rxm 8,44,998 8,69,484 24,486 8,69,484 
90 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Lxxo Rxm 8,07,428 8,30,825 23,397 8,30,825 
91 GRD DCRG 1115 xxxxx Mxxxxxxxxi Rxy 7,87,958 8,10,794 22,836 8,10,794 
92 GRD DCRG GxxExx24xxx Nxxxxxxh Rxm 4,83,599 5,02,673 19,074 5,02,673 
93 GRD DCRG 1122xxxxx Sxxo Kxxxr Dxo 16,05,995 16,42,773 36,778 16,42,773 
94 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxxxh Sxxxh 6,44,424 6,63,100 18,676 6,63,100 
95 GRD DCRG 1115xxxxx Txxxi Nxxxxxn Cxxxxxxxy 8,07,428 8,30,825 23,397 8,30,825 
96 GRD DCRG 1114xxxxx Yxxxl Mxxxo 7,01,927 7,38,870 36,943 7,38,870 
97 GRD CVP 1113xxxxx Cxxt Lxl Mxxxxl 197 2,33,234 2,33,037 2,33,234 
98 GRD CVP GxxExx27xxx Dxxxxl Rxm 16,323 4,58,405 4,42,082 4,58,405 
99 GRD CVP 1113xxxxx Mxxxi Mxxxxi 10,423 4,24,580 4,14,157 4,24,580 
100 GRD CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxxxxa Kxxxr Sxxxh 14,82,491 15,16,414 33,923 15,16,414 
101 GRH DCRG GxxDxx47xx Rxm Cxxxxxa Pxxxxd 71,610 1,00,947 29,337 1,00,947 
102 GRH DCRG 1214xxxxx Sxxxxxxxn Sxxxh 77,292 1,55,584 78,292 1,55,584 
103 GRH CVP GxxRxx4xx Dxxxxxxh Txxxxy 6,096 4,22,614 4,16,518 4,22,614 
104 GTS DCRG 1115xxxxx Axxxt Kxxxr Rxxa 7,27,502 7,48,589 21,087 7,48,589 
105 GTS CVP 1113xxxxx Pxxxxxxxi Pxxxxxn 11,603 2,21,828 2,10,225 2,21,828 
106 HZB DCRG 1118xxxxx Ixxxxt 3,93,690 9,40,913 5,47,223 9,40,913 
107 HZB DCRG 1114xxxxx Rxxxxo Sxh 6,12,625 6,34,075 21,450 6,34,075 
108 HZB CVP 1112xxxxx Bxxxxn Pxxxxy 6,687 3,98,818 3,92,131 3,98,818 
109 HZB CVP HxxExx24xxx Cxxxxxxxxxa Dxxi 4,130 3,74,826 3,70,696 3,74,826 
110 HZB CVP HxxDxx53xx Gxxxxh Rxm Kxxxxxxa 64,015 3,05,997 2,41,982 3,05,997 

Appendices 
- 63 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner 
Payable 
DCRG/ 
CVP 
as per 
IFMS 
Amount 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
derived 
Revised 
DCRG/CVP 
not in IFMS 
111 HZB CVP 1112xxxxx Gxxxl Jxe 1,34,414 2,26,056 91,642 2,26,056 
112 HZB CVP HxxFxx12xx Jxxxxxxh Uxxxxxxy 1,24,877 2,46,803 1,21,926 2,46,803 
113 HZB CVP 1112xxxxx Jxxxl Sxxxn 1,64,527 2,65,682 1,01,155 2,65,682 
114 HZB CVP HxxExx24xxx Md Sxxxr Axi Axxxxi 10,029 5,41,984 5,31,955 5,41,984 
115 JMT DCRG 1117xxxxx Axxt Kxxxr Rxy 5,37,004 5,52,552 15,548 5,52,552 
116 JMT DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxxxy Sxxxn 4,24,125 5,86,625 1,62,500 5,86,625 
117 JMT DCRG 1115xxxxx Sxxxxi Rxm Cxxxxxxxxxy 8,42,259 8,66,679 24,420 8,66,679 
118 JMT DCRG 1114xxxxx Sxxxa Mxxxn Jxa 8,67,227 9,12,870 45,643 9,12,870 
119 JMT CVP JxxExx22xxx Bxxxxxv Kxxxr Cxxxxxxxy 12,094 4,96,163 4,84,069 4,96,163 
120 JMT CVP JxxExx21xxx Mxxxr Kxxxr Pxn 12,586 5,22,318 5,09,732 5,22,318 
121 JMT CVP JxxExx25xxx Sxxxh Axxxf Axi 5,506 3,64,797 3,59,291 3,64,797 
122 JSR DCRG 1117xxxxx Mxxxxxxl Hxxxe 3,93,690 9,29,115 5,35,425 9,29,115 
123 JSR DCRG 1114xxxxx Sxxxxy Kxxxr Mxxxxa 9,39,527 9,88,975 49,448 9,88,975 
124 JSR DCRG 1118xxxxx Sxxo Kxxxxxh Pxxxxy 3,67,223 8,77,658 5,10,435 8,77,658 
125 JSR CVP JxxExx25xxx Cxxxxxxxxxxr Pxxxxd 
Yxxxv 6,293 3,75,810 3,69,517 3,75,810 
126 JSR CVP JxxFxx34xx Gxxxxxxxr Pxxxa 3,147 2,11,405 2,08,258 2,11,405 
127 JSR CVP JxxExx22xxx Ixxxxr Cxxxxxa Mxxxxo 63,913 2,88,298 2,24,385 2,88,298 
128 JSR CVP 1113xxxxx Sxxxl Kxxxr Pxxxxd 16,195 4,35,200 4,19,005 4,35,200 
129 JSR CVP 1112xxxxx Txxxxxxa Sxxxxxxi 32,448 4,78,661 4,46,213 4,78,661 
130 JSR CVP 1112xxxxx Uxxxh Pxxxxd 27,335 4,09,438 3,82,103 4,09,438 
131 KHN CVP 1118xxxxx Pxxxxs Bxxxxxa 13,37,261 13,75,321 38,060 13,75,321 
132 KHN CVP 1113xxxxx Rxm Uxxt Pxxxxd Sxxxa 3,86,036 4,80,781 94,745 4,80,781 
133 KOD DCRG 1419xxxxx Bxxxxxxa Kxxxr 12,68,624 14,10,752 1,42,128 14,10,752 
134 KOD DCRG 1118xxxxx Bxxxxxxa Pxxxxd 14,06,790 14,33,586 26,796 14,33,586 
135 KOD DCRG 1122xxxxx Dxxxa Sxw 13,05,546 13,11,050 5,504 13,11,050 
136 KOD DCRG 1114xxxxx Dxxxxxa Rxxxxxs 7,40,174 7,79,130 38,956 7,79,130 
137 KOD DCRG 1116xxxxx Jxxxxxxxn Pxxxxxxxi 9,16,625 11,10,780 1,94,155 11,10,780 
138 KOD CVP 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxxxxr Pxxxxd Yxxxv 9,56,731 15,49,649 5,92,918 15,49,649 
139 LOH DCRG 1115xxxxx Gxxxxxxxn Mxxxxxxxe 6,64,323 6,83,579 19,256 6,83,579 
140 LOH DCRG 1114xxxxx Rxxxi Pxxxxxxxi 1,23,310 1,29,800 6,490 1,29,800 
141 LOH DCRG 1115xxxxx Txxxxa Kxxxxxxxr 7,57,218 7,79,163 21,945 7,79,163 
142 LOH CVP 1116xxxxx Axxr Cxxxd Rxm 3,49,851 5,55,286 2,05,435 5,55,286 
143 LOH CVP 1116xxxxx Axxxd Kxxxr Sxxxh 4,13,764 6,67,754 2,53,990 6,67,754 
144 LOH CVP 1120xxxxx Bxxxi Oxxxn 10,85,541 13,07,545 2,22,004 13,07,545 
145 LOH CVP 1116xxxxx Bxxa Lxxa 4,35,003 10,98,134 6,63,131 10,98,134 
146 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxn Dxxi 7,11,895 11,41,524 4,29,629 11,41,524 
147 LOH CVP 1116xxxxx Bxxxxxm Oxxxn 3,67,746 5,94,572 2,26,826 5,94,572 
148 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Mxxxxxxa Kxxxxi 4,48,179 11,40,575 6,92,396 11,40,575 
149 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Md. Hxxxm 5,08,356 13,24,749 8,16,393 13,24,749 
150 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Mxxxi Dxxi 6,86,330 11,07,030 4,20,700 11,07,030 
151 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Pxxxxxxxd Oxxxn 10,53,977 14,70,926 4,16,949 14,70,926 
152 LOH CVP 1117xxxxx Rxxxxxi Mxxz 4,40,509 11,35,150 6,94,641 11,35,150 
153 LTR CVP 1116xxxxx Lxl Jxe Mxxxo 4,43,656 7,09,928 2,66,272 7,09,928 
154 MHP DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxv Bxxxxu Gxxxh 5,42,875 7,19,120 1,76,245 7,19,120 
155 PKR DCRG 1121xxxxx Axxxxxxh Mxxxo 12,72,960 13,92,640 1,19,680 13,92,640 
156 PKR DCRG 1115xxxxx Axxt Kxxxr Sxxxh 7,69,857 7,92,165 22,308 7,92,165 
157 PKR DCRG 1118xxxxx Gxxxl Pxxxxd Sxxxh 9,51,300 9,69,420 18,120 9,69,420 
158 PKR DCRG 1119xxxxx Md Sxxxxxn Sxxxh 8,74,484 9,00,405 25,921 9,00,405 
159 PKR DCRG 1118xxxxx Md. Sxxxxxz Axxxd 9,51,300 9,69,420 18,120 9,69,420 
160 PKR CVP 1119xxxxx Md Sxxxxxn Sxxxh 12,60,565 12,97,930 37,365 12,97,930 
161 PLM DCRG 1118xxxxx Sxxxxxxxa Txxxxi 16,97,800 20,00,000 3,02,200 20,00,000 
162 PLM DCRG 1121xxxxx Uxa Sxxxxxr Pxxxxy 15,21,234 16,64,256 1,43,022 16,64,256 
163 PLM CVP PxxHxx40xx Mxxxxxxxh Pxxxxd Sxxxh 3,87,609 6,30,479 2,42,870 6,30,479 
164 PLM CVP PxxFxx40xx Sxxxj Pxxxxd Rxm 9,243 2,38,740 2,29,497 2,38,740 
165 RGH DCRG 1113xxxxx Axxxxxxxu Kxxxr Sxxxa 6,99,732 7,38,606 38,874 7,38,606 
166 RNC DCRG 1118xxxxx Axxxxxh Kxxxr Sxxxh 11,86,898 12,09,083 22,185 12,09,083 
167 RNC DCRG 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxh Pxxxxk 4,97,475 10,00,000 5,02,525 10,00,000 
168 RNC DCRG 1214xxxxx Hxxxxi Pxxxxd Sxxxh 77,805 2,33,415 1,55,610 2,33,415 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 64 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury  Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner 
Payable 
DCRG/ 
CVP 
as per 
IFMS 
Amount 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
derived 
Revised 
DCRG/CVP 
not in IFMS 
169 RNC DCRG 1119xxxxx Md Axxxn Axxxd 9,05,632 9,46,062 40,430 9,46,062 
170 RNC DCRG 1112xxxxx Pxxxr Pxxl Kxxxr 5,37,818 6,71,267 1,33,449 6,71,267 
171 RNC DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Bxxxxs 6,78,457 6,97,039 18,582 6,97,039 
172 RNC DCRG 1112xxxxx Sxxxxxa Bxxxm 7,14,318 7,24,532 10,214 7,24,532 
173 RNC CVP 1117xxxxx Axxxk Pxxxxd Sxh 18,91,634 30,79,633 11,87,999 30,79,633 
174 RNC CVP 1113xxxxx Bxxxxo Kxxxxxp -10,620 6,98,719 7,09,339 6,98,719 
175 RNC CVP 1112xxxxx Bxxh Nxxh Oxxxn 1,17,895 2,18,878 1,00,983 2,18,878 
176 RNC CVP RxxHxx40xx Gxxxxxxr Sxxxh Pxxxr 3,18,976 6,99,112 3,80,136 6,99,112 
177 RNC CVP 1115xxxxx Kxxxu Sxxxxr 5,35,101 5,35,143 42 5,35,143 
178 RNC CVP 1114xxxxx Kxxxxxa Mxxxxi Lxl 6,73,547 7,15,828 42,281 7,15,828 
179 RNC CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxa Nxxd Sxxxa 18,34,046 29,56,846 11,22,800 29,56,846 
180 RNC CVP 1117xxxxx Yxxxxa Pxxxxd Sxxxh 11,75,217 19,05,597 7,30,380 19,05,597 
181 SBJ CVP 1117xxxxx Uxxy Kxxxr Bxxxxt 6,91,639 10,85,541 3,93,902 10,85,541 
182 SDG DCRG 1118xxxxx Dxxxa Gxxxb Txxxa 9,98,775 10,00,000 1,225 10,00,000 
183 SDG DCRG 1116xxxxx Mxxxxa Txxe 8,61,465 8,89,647 28,182 8,89,647 
184 SDG CVP 1117xxxxx Bxxxxxxr Sxxxh 7,04,225 11,52,404 4,48,179 11,52,404 
185 SDG CVP 1117xxxxx Mxxxxxi Kxxxr 7,04,422 11,18,973 4,14,551 11,18,973 
186 SDG CVP 1116xxxxx Mxxxxxr Lxxxa 7,26,054 11,87,802 4,61,748 11,87,802 
187 SGH DCRG 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxn Gxxe 7,98,704 9,06,864 1,08,160 9,06,864 
188 SGH DCRG 1122xxxxx Md Ixxxxxz Nxxxm 9,23,769 18,47,538 9,23,769 18,47,538 
189 SGH DCRG 1419xxxxx Oxxxn Hx & 
Cxxxxxn Bxxxxxa 4,31,022 8,62,044 4,31,022 8,62,044 
190 SGH DCRG 1118xxxxx Pxxxxxxxn Gxxxxi 9,74,556 9,92,772 18,216 9,92,772 
191 SGH DCRG 1115xxxxx Rxxxxh Hxxxxxm 7,98,704 9,06,864 1,08,160 9,06,864 
192 SGH DCRG 1118xxxxx Vxxxy Nxxxxxn Sxh 6,82,605 6,95,607 13,002 6,95,607 
193 SKL DCRG 1220xxxxx Bxxxu Nxxxk 
S/O Late Kxxxa Nxxxk 3,18,240 6,36,480 3,18,240 6,36,480 
194 SKL DCRG 1416xxxxx Rxm Pxxi Dxxi 
W/O Rxxxxxxxxa Sxxxh 18,600 2,55,750 2,37,150 2,55,750 
195 TEN DCRG 1118xxxxx Pxxxxd Kxxxr Mxxxxa 12,49,133 12,72,926 23,793 12,72,926 
196 TEN DCRG 1120xxxxx Sxxo Cxxxxn Rxm 13,51,350 13,97,550 46,200 13,97,550 
197 TEN CVP BxxRxx4xx Rxxxxxxa Axxxxi 20,059 3,98,818 3,78,759 3,98,818 
198 TEN CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Pxxxxd 9,46,702 13,37,261 3,90,559 13,37,261 
(Source: IFMS database) 
 
 

Appendices 
 
- 65 - 
Appendix 3.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1(vi); page 40) 
Excess payments of DCRG/ CVP shown in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the Treasuries due to incorrect classification of Bill Category 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Treasury Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner Payable 
DCRG 
Payable 
CVP 
Pension/ 
SG/F.Pen 
paid 
Total  
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
detected 
Reason for Excess Payment 
1 BKR DCRG 1116xxxxx Axxxxi Cxxxxn Mxxxo 8,56,482 4,53,685  13,10,167 4,53,685 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
2 BKR DCRG 1116xxxxx Gxxxxe. Dxxxxl 7,78,718 4,23,794  12,02,512 4,23,794 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
3 BKR DCRG 1118xxxxx Jxxxxxh Pxxxxd Mxxxxi 6,06,375 6,88,296  12,94,671 6,88,296 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
4 BKR DCRG 1120xxxxx Mxxxxw Cxxxxxa Dxs 11,31,273 11,52,404  22,83,677 11,52,404 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
5 BKR DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxxxa Kxxxxi 15,33,213 6,90,459  16,90,459 1,57,246 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
6 BKR DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxn Pxxxy 5,91,773 3,13,470  9,05,243 3,13,470 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
7 BKR DCRG 1116xxxxx Jxxxxxh Pxxxxd 9,24,120 4,55,455  12,37,105 3,12,985 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
8 BKR DCRG 1120xxxxx Axxxxa Rxxxn Kxxxxxxr 14,32,200 12,97,930  25,72,060 11,39,860 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
9 BKR CVP 1120xxxxx Axxxk Kxxxr Kxxn 13,91,891 14,17,890  28,09,781 13,91,891 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
10 BKR CVP 1114xxxxx Jxxxxi Sxxxh Gxxxxxr 98,410 2,31,464  3,29,874 98,410 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
11 DGR CVP 1120xxxxx Jxxxu Mxxxxa 5,79,150 4,86,724 9128 10,75,002 9128 Pension and CVP both as CVP 
12 DHN CVP 1115xxxxx Lxxxxxxr Sxxxh Cxxxxxxxy 7,88,832 4,29,300  12,18,132 7,88,832 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
13 DRN DCRG 1117xxxxx Gxxxxxxxa Kxxxr 11,44,440 13,37,261  24,81,701 13,37,261 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
14 DRN CVP 1115xxxxx Gxxxxr Bxxxxt 10,00,000 7,00,390  17,00,390 2,99,610 DCRG as CVP (Vice versa) 
15 GDD DCRG 1116xxxxx Hxxxxo Txxxxi 8,58,924 4,67,451  13,26,375 4,67,451 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
16 GDD DCRG 1118xxxxx Rxxe Hxxxxa 9,66,735 10,97,340  20,64,075 10,97,340 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
17 GRD DCRG 1117xxxxx Fxxxxxi Dxxi W/o Nxxu Lxl 9,29,396 11,52,404  20,81,800 11,52,404 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
18 GRH DCRG 1214xxxxx Bxxxxt Kxxxr Cxxxxxy 1,07,730  2,15,460  1,08,730 Pension and DCRG both as DCRG 
19 HZB DCRG HxxDxx33xx Bxxxxt Nxxxxxn Pxxxxy 61,380 - 68,200 69,200 6,820 Pension as DCRG 
20 JSR DCRG 1114xxxxx Hxxxxxxa Pxxxxd Sxxxh 11,471 2,29,416  2,40,887 2,29,416 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
21 JSR DCRG JxxExx23xxx Nxxxxl Sxxxh 4,46,721 4,58,995  9,05,716 4,58,995 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
22 JSR DCRG 1113xxxxx P N Sxxxxxxxxv 6,80,906 2,93,505  9,74,411 2,93,505 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 66 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner Payable 
DCRG 
Payable 
CVP 
Pension/ 
SG/F.Pen 
paid 
Total  
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
detected 
Reason for Excess Payment 
23 JSR DCRG 1115xxxxx Dxxxxt Hxxxxxm 9,29,594 4,57,619  12,52,408 3,22,814 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
24 KHN DCRG 1116xxxxx Axxy Kxxxr Sxxxa 8,74,467 4,75,908  13,50,375 4,75,908 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
25 KHN DCRG 1419xxxxx Pxxxi Txxxo 
W/o Axxa Txxxo 84,168 - 12,82,586 13,66,754 12,82,586 Pension and DCRG both as DCRG 
26 KHN DCRG 1117xxxxx Bxxxl Dxxn 1,10,227  11,52,404 12,62,631 11,52,404 DCRG and Pension both as DCRG 
27 KHN DCRG 1416xxxxx Bxxxxxxxi Hxxo Dxxi Hxxo 2,82,768  1,60,311 4,43,079 1,60,311 DCRG and F-Pension both as 
DCRG 
28 KHN DCRG 1115xxxxx Jxxs Hxxxxm 1,19,574  51325 1,70,899 51,325 DCRG and Pension both as DCRG 
29 KHN DCRG 1114xxxxx Pxxxxu Dxxxl Kxxxxxi 7,34,250 5,79,545  13,13,795 5,79,545 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
30 KHN DCRG 1116xxxxx Sxxxxa Rxm Rxxxxxs 6,60,174 4,04,915  10,65,089 4,04,915 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
31 KHN CVP 1116xxxxx Axxy Kxxxr Sxxxa 8,74,467 4,75,908  13,50,375 8,74,467 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
32 KHN CVP 1115xxxxx Bxxxxxn Bxxxxxa  4,22,220 1,15,830 5,38,050 1,15,830 Pension as CVP (vice versa) 
33 KHN CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxl Txxi 69,143 4,31,660  5,00,803 69,143 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
34 KOD CVP 1118xxxxx Sxxxu Pxxxxd Yxxxv 12,00,540 13,37,261  25,37,801 12,00,540 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
35 LOH CVP 1115xxxxx Mxxxxs Dxxg Dxxg 7,21,875 4,01,546 27,773 11,51,194 27,773 CVP and Pension as CVP 
36 LTR DCRG 1122xxxxx Sxxxxxa Dxxi 6,12,425 6,68,630  12,81,055 56,205 DCRG as CVP (Vice versa) 
37 LTR CVP 1115xxxxx Exxxl Hxxxxxn 10,00,000 7,49,259  17,49,259 2,50,741 DCRG as CVP (Vice versa) 
38 LTR CVP 1121xxxxx Txxxxxk Hxxxxxn 7,99,578 10,54,076  18,53,654 7,99,578 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
39 LTR CVP 1115xxxxx Vxxxa Lxxxxn Bxxxxt 1,000 4,43,263  4,44,263 1,000 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
40 MDH CVP 1118xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Nxxd Rxy 10,04,570 11,18,973  21,23,543 10,04,570 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
41 MHP CVP 1122xxxxx Bxxxxxh Kxxxr Sxxxh 15,03,480 10,02,946  25,06,426 15,03,480 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
42 PLM DCRG 1120xxxxx Bxxj Bxxxxi Sxxxh 7,83,900 10,54,076  18,37,976 10,54,076 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
43 PLM DCRG 1120xxxxx Mxxxn Lxl 20,00,000 29,43,940  49,43,940 29,43,940 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
44 PLM DCRG 1119xxxxx Rxxxxxxxxxxh Pxxxxk 8,88,635 11,87,802  11,87,802 2,99,167 CVP as DCRG 
45 PLM DCRG 1119xxxxx Sxxxxxxxi Sxxxh 3,68,550 10,22,611  13,91,161 10,22,611 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
46 PLM CVP 1116xxxxx Nxxxl Rxm 1,05,326 4,70,204  5,75,530 1,05,326 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
47 RGH DCRG 1122xxxxx Mxxxxxo Pxxxxd 20,00,000 34,78,788  54,78,788 34,78,788 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
48 RNC DCRG 1115xxxxx Axxt Kxxxr 9,95,000 11,79,936 1,25,234 23,00,170 1,25,234 DCRG and Pension as DCRG 

Appendices 
- 67 - 
Sl. 
No. Treasury Type PPO No. Name of Pensioner Payable 
DCRG 
Payable 
CVP 
Pension/ 
SG/F.Pen 
paid 
Total  
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
detected 
Reason for Excess Payment 
49 RNC DCRG 1117xxxxx Bxxu Lxl Sxxxxa 9,31,694 12,60,565  21,92,259 12,60,565 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
50 RNC DCRG 1116xxxxx Bxr Kxxxxr Sxxxh 8,71,845  368392 12,40,237 3,68,392 DCRG and Pension both as DCRG 
51 RNC DCRG 1415xxxxx Mxxxu Dxxi 
W/O Sxxxxxxxa Sxxxh 86,050 - 7,96,143 8,82,193 7,96,143 DCRG as Pension (Vice versa) 
52 RNC DCRG 1113xxxxx Sxxu Oxxxn 67,397 - 2,97,747 2,74,004 2,06,607 Pension & recovery as DCRG 
53 RNC DCRG 1117xxxxx Sxxxxn Kxxxr Nxxxi 7,93,095 4,48,179  12,41,274 4,48,179 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
54 RNC CVP 1116xxxxx Gxxxm Sxxxxr 10,00,000 5,48,210 1,59,395 17,07,605 1,59,395 CVP and Pension as CVP 
55 RNC CVP 1115xxxxx Hxxxxu Pxxxxxn 1,000 3,22,942 2,89,698 6,13,640 2,89,698 DCRG, CVP and Pension as CVP 
56 RNC CVP 1117xxxxx Jxxxxxxn Sxxxxa 10,00,000 12,50,329 5,59,377 28,09,706 5,59,377 CVP and Pension as CVP 
57 RNC CVP 1114xxxxx Kxxxa Kxxt Sxxxh 10,00,000 9,40,464 9,08,421 28,48,885 9,08,421 CVP and Pension both as CVP 
58 RNC CVP 1116xxxxx Vxxxy Bxxxxxn Pxxxxd 7,34,063 4,42,476  11,76,539 7,34,063 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
59 SBJ DCRG 1115xxxxx Gxxxa Sxxxr Sxxxxa 4,46,408 2,57,029  7,03,437 2,57,029 DCRG and CVP both as DCRG 
60 SBJ CVP 1116xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Nxxh Cxxr 61,273 4,24,580  4,85,853 61,273 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
61 SGH CVP 1120xxxxx Vxxxxt Txxxxy 8,23,847 4,53,882  12,77,729 8,23,847 DCRG and CVP both as CVP 
62 SKL DCRG 1420xxxxx Bxxi Dxxi 
W/O Pxxxxr Sxxxh Sxxxxr 6,02,784 - 1,73,342 7,76,126 1,73,342 DCRG and Pension as DCRG 
(Source: IFMS database) 
 
  

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 68 - 
Appendix 3.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1 (vii); page 41) 
Excess payments of DCRG/ CVP shown in IFMS as made to the pensioners by the Treasuries due to incorrect capturing of PPO numbers 
(Amount in ₹) 
 Payments made to the pensioners correctly but shown as excess payments in IFMS Shown excess payments were actually paid to another  pensioner by 
capturing incorrect PPO numbers 
Sl. 
No. 
Trea-
sury Type PPO No. Pensioners’ 
Name 
Payable 
Amount 
Amount 
shown 
Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
derived 
Trea-
sury 
Incorrect 
PPO No fed 
by the 
Treasury 
Actual 
PPO No. Pensioners’ Name Amount 
Paid 
1 DRN DCRG 1116xxxxx Kxxxl Oxxxn 4,95,248  6,66,099  1,70,851  DRN 1116xxxxx 1116xxx## Frxxxxx Txxxo 1,70,851  
2 RNC DCRG 1117xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Pxxxxd 7,02,540  15,96,510  8,93,970  GDD 1117xxxxx 1117xx##x Nxxxxxxm Pxxxxd 8,93,970  
3 SGH DCRG 1118xxxxx Sxxxu Pxxxxa 11,43,450  11,44,450  1,000  PLM 1118xxxxx 1118x#xxx Pxxm Cxxxd Mxxxi 1,000  
4 GRH CVP 1115xxxxx Md. Rxxxxxxxxxn 5,68,139  8,38,344  2,70,205  GRH 1115xxxxx 1115xx##x Rxm Pxxxr Sxxxh 2,70,205  
5 GML CVP 1116xxxxx Nxxxxxn Oxxxn 4,33,135  8,95,867  4,62,732  DMK 1116xxxxx 1116xxxx# Mxxy Mxxxu 4,62,732  
6 GRD CVP 1116xxxxx Gxxa Hxxxxa 4,84,167  10,10,615  5,26,448  RNC 1116xxxxx 1116x#xxx Jxxxa Pxxxxd Rxi 5,26,448  
7 RNC CVP 1117xxxxx Sxxxxxxa Pxxxxd 5,11,699  9,85,247  4,73,548  GDD 1117xxxxx 1117xx##x Nxxxxxxm Pxxxxd 4,73,548  
TOTAL 43,38,378  71,37,132  27,98,754  TOTAL 27,98,754  
          (Source: IFMS database) 

 
 
 
 
  
Abbreviations 

Abbreviations 
 
- 69 - 
List of Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full form 
A&E Accounts & Entitlements 
AC bill Abstract Contingent bill 
BCP Business Continuity Plan 
BE Budget Estimates 
CAAT Computer Assisted Audit Techniques 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
COBT Comprehensive Outlay on Budgetary Transaction 
COs Controlling Officers 
CPO Commutation Payment Order 
CPSMS Central Plan Schemes Monitoring System 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
CVP Commuted Value of Pension 
DC bill Detailed Contingent bill 
DCRG Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DeITY Department of Electronics and Information Tec hnology 
DoE Department of Expenditure 
DRP Disaster Recovery Plan 
DTO District Transport Officer 
EC Empowered Committee 
e-GRAS Electronic Government Receipt Accounting Sys tem 
FD Finance Department 
GBSS Government Business Software Solution 
GoJ Government of Jharkhand 
GPO Gratuity Payment Order 
GSTN Goods and Services Tax Network 
HRMS Human Resource Management System 
IDC Inter-Departmental Committee 
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis 
IFMS  Integrated Financial Management System  
IT  Information Technology  
JAP-IT Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Informatio n Technology 
JCF Jharkhand Contingency Fund 
JTC Jharkhand Treasury Code 
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
MeITY Ministry of Electronics and Information Techn ology 
MIS Management Information System 
MMP Mission Mode Project 
NDRC Near Disaster Recovery Centre 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NSDL National Securities Depository Limited 
OSP Other Sub-Plan 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PDC Primary Data Centre 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 70 - 
Abbreviation Full form 
PLT Project Leadership Team 
PMG Project Management Group 
PMU Project Monitoring Unit 
PPO Pension Payment Order 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RE Revised Estimates 
RFP Request For Proposal 
SBI-CMP State Bank of India-Cash Management Product  
SCSP Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan 
SDC State Data Centre 
SDD System Design Document 
SIO State Informatics Officer 
SRS Software Requirement Specifications 
TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
TIS Treasury Information System 
TOs Treasury Officers 
TSP Tribal Sub-Plan 
TV Treasury Voucher 
UAT User Acceptance Test 
UCs Utilisation Certificates 
URS User Requirement Specifications 
WAMIS Works Accounts Management Information System 
WB World Bank 
 
 

 
Glossary 

Glossary 
 
- 71 - 
Glossary 
Terms Meanings  
Business Continuity Plan Business Continuity Plan ( BCP) is one of the most critical 
components of any recovery strategy to ensure an or ganised, 
safe and timely recovery in case of a disaster. 
Pension/Gratuity/ 
Commutation Payment Order 
Based on qualifying service and average emoluments,  
pensionary benefits are calculated and authorisatio ns are 
issued for payment through Pension Payment Order (P PO), 
Gratuity Payment Order (GPO) and Commutation Paymen t 
Order (CPO). 
Central Plan Schemes Monitoring 
System 
The Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS), is a 
Central Sector Plan Scheme implemented by the Offic e of 
Controller General of Accounts. The scheme aims at 
establishing a suitable online Management Informati on 
System and decision support system for tracking of fund 
disbursement up to the last beneficiary of Plan sch emes of 
Government of India and reporting of fund utilisati on at 
different levels of implementation on real time basis. 
Data dictionary Data dictionary is a collection of descriptions of data objects 
or items in a data model for the benefit of people to 
understand where a data item fits in the database s tructure, 
what values it may contain, and basically what the data item 
means in real world terms. 
Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (DCRG) is a lump sum 
payment made based on the total service of an emplo yee, 
either on retirement or on death. 
Disaster Recovery Plan A Disaster Recovery Plan (DR P) is designed to ensure the 
continuity of vital business processes in the event  of a 
disaster. 
Exa-Data A software solution, configured by Oracle Experts (OEM), 
having a single point support directly from OEM. Fu rther, it 
costs less than the traditional way of configuring the servers 
for meeting the objective of high availability. 
Government Business Software 
Solution 
GBSS, a web-based application used by the State Ban k of 
India (SBI) to settle funds with the Reserve Bank o f India 
(RBI). 
Goods and Service Tax Network A non-profit, non-gov ernment organisation to track every 
financial transaction and provide taxpayers with al l services 
from registration to filling taxes and maintaining all tax 
details and manage the entire IT system of the GST portal.  
Inter-Departmental Committee Constituting members f rom Finance Department, Information 
Technology Department and NIC, Jharkhand State Unit. 
Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of 
Information Technology 
JAP-IT, an Autonomous agency registered under the Societies 
Registration Act 21, 1860, is a nodal agency for 
implementing IT & e-Governance projects of Governme nt of 
Jharkhand. 
Near Disaster Recovery Centre A Data Centre establi shed in a nearby location to host Servers 
and Applications of the system to operate in the ev ent of any 
hindrance/ disaster for continuity of business processes.  
National Informatics Centre National Informatics Ce ntre (NIC) established in 1976 with 
the objective to provide technology-driven solution s to the 
Central and State Governments and works under the M inistry 
of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), 
Government of India.  
National Securities Depository 
Limited 
NSDL is a financial entity that has been establishe d to hold 
all securities as tangible or non-physical certific ates. NSDL 
functions as a bank: maintaining Demat accounts spe cifically 
for securities such as stocks and bonds.
 

Information Technology Audit on IFMS in Jharkhand 
- 72 - 
Terms Meanings  
Public Financial Management 
System 
PFMS has evolved as a robust web-based online syste m 
designed, developed, owned and implemented by the O /o 
CGA. It facilitates Payments and Exchequer Control,  Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT), Monitoring fund flow mechan ism, 
Accounting of Receipts (Tax and Non Tax), Compilati on of 
Accounts and Preparation of Fiscal Report, and 
Dissemination of Information. It has established in terface 
with financial management system of states, banks a nd other 
external systems.  
Project Leadership Team A senior management team of  IFMS comprising the Chief 
Secretary, Principal Secretary Finance, Principal Secretary IT, 
Development Commissioner, Secretary Planning and St ate 
Informatics Officer from NIC. 
Project Management Group PMG has three units viz , the IT team, Transformation team 
and Project Management team. 
Project Monitoring Unit A Project Monitoring Unit ( PMU) constituted (October 2009) 
under Finance Department for implementation of trea sury 
computerisation project in the State comprising hig h-end 
outsourced developers under the monitoring of NIC.  
SAI-Pension Pension Portal of Office of the Account ant General (A&E) 
Jharkhand for processing of Pension and other pensi onary 
benefits for issue of authorisations for payments.  
State Data Centre Jharkhand State Data Centre acts as a mediator and 
convergence point between open unsecured public dom ain 
and the sensitive government environment. It enable s various 
State departments to host their services/applicatio ns on a 
common infrastructure leading to ease of integratio n and 
efficient management. 
System Design Document Software Design Document (SD D) is a primary document of 
software development that describes the architectur e of a 
software solution.  
Software Requirement Specifications Software Requir ement Specifications (SRS) is complete 
specification and description of the requirements o f software 
that needs to be fulfilled for successful developme nt of 
software system. SRS is a format report, which acts  as a 
representation of software that enables the users t o review 
whether the software system is according to their 
requirements. 
Tax Deducted at Source A certain percentage of tax deducted by the payer at the time 
of making payments to the receiver and remitted to the 
government. 
User Acceptance Test User Acceptance Testing (UAT) is a crucial phase in software 
development where the intended users or clients tes t the 
software in real-world conditions. The goal of UAT is to 
ensure that the software meets the needs of the end -user and 
is ready for release. 
User Requirement Specifications The User Requiremen t Specifications (URS) describes the 
business needs requirement of the User from the Sys tem. 
URS is prepared before the creation of the System. 
Works Accounts Management 
Information System 
Works and Accounts Management Information System 
(WAMIS) is an accounting software for Works and For est 
departments which addresses all activities carried out by the 
technical section at a Division to monitor progress of different 
works from its initiation.  
 
 