 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit 
on 
Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Himachal Pradesh 
Report No. 3 of the year 2024 
  

 
 

i | P a g e  
Table of Contents 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Preface - iii 
Executive Summary - v 
Chapter I: Introduction 
Status of forests in Himachal Pradesh 1.1 2 
Circumstances necessitating diversion of forest land 1.2 3 
Need for compensatory afforestation 1.3 3 
Procedure for granting forest clearances 1.4 5 
Organisational structure of the Forest Department 1.5 7 
Audit Objectives 1.6 9 
Audit Criteria 1.7 9 
Scope and Methodology of Audit 1.8 9 
Non-production of records/ information to audit 1.9 11 
Acknowledgement 1.10 11 
Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management and 
Planning Authority (State Authority) 
Introduction 2.1 13 
Audit Findings 2.2 18 
Irregularities in financial management 2.3 21 
Conclusion 2.4 25 
Recommendations 2.5 25 
Chapter III: Proposals for Forest Diversion under FCA 
Status of proposals submitted between 2016-17 and 2020-21 
under Forest Conservation Act, 1980 3.1 27 
Conclusion 3.2 42 
Recommendations 3.3 43 
Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
Introduction 4.1 45 
Deficiencies noticed in planning and execution of Compensatory 
Afforestation 4.2 46 
Deficiencies noticed in Individual Compensatory Afforestation 
cases 4.3 51 
Other deficiencies 4.4 65 
Conclusion 4.5 68 
Recommendations 4.6 69 

ii | P a g e  
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
CAT plans 5.1 71 
Status of CAT plans in the State 5.2 71 
Short recovery of funds under CAT plans due to poor monitoring 5.3 72 
Case study of Bajoli Holi CAT plan 5.4 73 
Conclusion 5.5 86 
Recommendations 5.6 86 
Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation 
Introduction  6.1 87 
Geospatial study on Compensatory Afforestation 6.2 87 
Geospatial studies on Land Use Land Cover in DPFs/RFs 6.3 101 
Conclusion 6.4 106 
Recommendations 6.5 106 
Appendices 109 
Glossary of Abbreviations 163 
 
 
 
 

iii | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of the Stat e of Himachal Pradesh 
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Perf ormance Audit on 
Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh cove ring the period from 
April 2006 to March 2021 for assessing the efficacy  of Compensatory 
Afforestation cases and Catchment Area Treatment pl ans and April 2016 to 
March 2021 for effective implementation of the Fore st Conservation Act, 
1980, conducted in terms of the Comptroller and Aud itor General of India 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Services) Act, 19 71. The figures for the 
year 2021-22 have been included at appropriate places. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards 
issued (March 2017) by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India . 
Preface 

Executive Summary  

v | P a g e  
Executive Summary 
The forests of Himachal Pradesh play an important r ole in silt detention, lowering the 
intensity of rainwater and also provide quality wat er for drinking and agriculture 
purposes. The Forest Conservation Act, 1980 (FCA) i s an important Central statute 
which permits only unavoidable use of forest land f or various development purposes 
and provides for regeneration of forest cover throu gh Compensatory Afforestation 
(CA).   
Keeping in view the significance of forests, a Perf ormance Audit on Compensatory 
Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh was conducted to ascertain whether the apparatus 
created for the implementation of FCA, 1980 was run ning efficiently and effectively 
and in accordance with the prescribed norms and whether the system for compensatory 
afforestation and Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) pl ans provided under the rules 
were adequately and effectively implemented.  
This report contains significant results of the Per formance Audit on “Compensatory 
Afforestation in the State of Himachal Pradesh” cov ering the period from April 2006 
to March 2021 for efficacy of CA cases and CAT plans and April 2016 to March 2021 
for effective implementation of Forest Conservation Act, 1980. The figures for the year 
2021-22 have been included at appropriate places. R ecords at the offices of the 
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), incl uding reporting branches, 
HP Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and P lanning Authority (the State 
Authority), Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (APCCF) (Working Plan 
and Settlements) and APCCF (Research and Training) were scrutinised. The audit 
sample included nine divisions (out of 37 territorial divisions), which were selected for 
detailed check through stratified random sampling to evaluate their performance.  
The meetings of the State Authority were not held at prescribed intervals and the State 
Authority was not able to utilise even the funds wh ich it was projecting to spend on 
CAMPA and there was shortfall in utilisation of funds approved by National Authority 
to the tune of 
₹ 169.73 crore (20 per cent ) during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22. 
Despite the state constituting its own State Fund, User Agencies (UAs) continued  to 
deposit money into the bank account of the National Authority instead of the State Fund 
during the period February 2019 to March  2022, in contravention of the provisions of 
the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018. In eligible expenditure of 
₹ 6.51 crore was incurred on development of Nature/ Eco parks during 2019-20 and 
2020-21 under the component-development of degraded forest land in contravention to 
guidelines issued by MoEF&CC for utilisation of Net  Present Value. The annual 
financial statements of the State Authority for the  years 2019-20 to 2020-21 had not 
been finalised.  
A total of 1,018 cases were submitted by various UA s (for Hydro Electric Projects, 
Roads, Educational Institutes, Hospital, Transmissi on lines etc.) to MoEF&CC for 
grant of forest clearances under the Forest Conserv ation Act 1980, out of which, 
766 cases were pending for approval. Out of these 766 cases, 17 per cent  were pending 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
vi | P a g e  
at different levels in the State Forest Department,  while the rest were pending at the 
level of UAs. In the approved FCA cases, delays in processing of FCA cases for 
in-principle approval was noticed at various levels  of processing, which ranged from 
eight per cent  (from State Government to Regional Office) to 93 per cent  (from Nodal 
Officer to State Government). A 360 degree analysis of CA cases in selected divisions 
showed incomplete information submission by the Sta te Government and there were 
inordinate delays in processing applications at var ious levels in the Department for 
getting the in-principle approvals from MOEF&CC. Further, incorrect data (kml files) 
of CA sites was uploaded on E-Green watch portal, w hich could impact the decision 
making process at the State/Centre level.  It was o bserved that CA was being carried 
out outside the designated Open Degraded Forests an d there were cases of 
encroachments in these CA sites.  
Even after constitution of State-level Committee for identification of land banks for CA 
for speedy disposal of FCA cases, no land banks cou ld be identified during the period 
covered in audit. There was significant shortfall i n CA activities in the selected 
divisions. As against the stipulated CA of 5,213 ha , CA in only 4,284 ha was carried 
out. Non-carrying out of CA within the stipulated p eriod of one to two years defeated 
the purpose of the Act as the loss of land and tree s could not be compensated, besides 
creation of additional liability of 
₹ 8.72 crore in 69 cases due to cost escalation. Del ay 
in plantation resulted in delayed/ non-compensation  of environmental loss, excess 
expenditure of ₹ 2.03 crore and creation of liability of ₹ 12.87 crore for maintenance of 
the plantations in 194 cases. In 71 per cent  of test checked cases, CA site was changed 
by the divisions and there was no evidence on recor d to show that approval of 
MoEF&CC was obtained for change in location of CA.   
There was short realisation of cost of CA from the UAs to the tune of ₹ 3.29 crore as 
the Department did not keep appropriate provision f or anticipated increase in cost of 
works, scheduled in subsequent years.   
Cost of regeneration of Open degraded forest equiva lent to forest area being diverted 
in favour of two project proponent(s) amounting to ₹ 5.53 crore was not demanded/ 
realised from the UA.  Cost of plantation including  the departmental charges were not 
deposited by the UA as per approved scheme for plan tation of Taxus Baccata leading 
to non-recovery of ₹ 1.86 crore. Similarly, the Department failed to im plement Muck 
rehabilitation plan pertaining to construction of A tal Tunnel, Rohtang Pass costing 
₹ 12.09 crore even after 13 years since the approval  of plan. No funds were deposited 
by the UA.  
The Department failed to ensure compliance of additional condition of regeneration of 
degraded forest land after utilisation of 
₹ 1.71 crore in a project. Besides, non-deposit 
of funds in National Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority 
(CAMPA), non/ improper maintenance of cash book, su bmission of Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) without actual expenditure, lack  of trail of funds, expenditure not 
routed through Annual Plan of Operations (APOs), su bmission of false/ misleading 
replies to Audit and non-production of bills/ vouch ers were noticed in utilisation of 
above funds.  

Executive Summary  
vii | P a g e  
Even after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.01 crore, the Department could not carry out 
any plantation under High Altitude Transition Zone (HATZ) project and the additional 
condition of establishing a 500 Ha HATZ plantation to study the effect of global 
warming remained unfulfilled. On account of violati on of conditions imposed by 
MoEF&CC for four years, a UA was liable to pay the penalty equal to twice the normal 
Net Present Value (NPV) amounting to ₹ 3.29 crore, however the Department failed to 
recover the same. Five new Forest Rest Houses (FRHs ) (having eight rooms each 
including VIP rooms) were constructed at a cost of ₹ 3.06 crore, without prior approval 
under FCA Act and without any provision for constru ction of these FRHs in the 
Working Plan of the division.  
A Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plan is an importa nt and essential plan for 
enhancing and maintaining the ecological health of the catchment area of the proposed 
irrigation/hydroelectric projects (HEPs) with a cap acity above 10 MW. The data 
pertaining to operational CAT plans in the State in terms of funds due from UAs, funds 
actually deposited and expenditure incurred thereag ainst was not maintained by the 
Department, which shows absence of monitoring mechanism. The Department was not 
aware of the increase in project cost of HEPs as pe r revised Techno-Economic 
Clearance (TEC) and thus failed to demand additiona l funds to the tune of 
₹ 198.73 crore from UAs. As per revised TEC in respe ct of three HEPs, the installed 
capacity was increased to more than 10 MW. However, the Forest Department was not 
aware of the increased capacity and funds to the ex tent of ₹ 8.48 crore in respect of 
these HEPs, were not demanded and no CAT plans for these three HEPs were 
formulated. Test check of the selected CAT plan for  Bajoli Holi HEP showed that the 
division failed to achieve targets under the various components of afforestation within 
the stipulated time period and plantation sites wer e changed without conducting site 
inspection. The division did not conduct studies prescribed under CAT plan. Important 
infrastructure works prescribed under CAT plan such  as repair of boundary pillars, 
construction of fire lines, distribution of energy saving devices and construction of silt 
observation posts were not even started by the divi sion. Besides, no monitoring and 
evaluation of CAT plan implementation was carried out. 
During geospatial study of 22 CA sites, it was noti ced that the Department carried out 
wasteful/ irregular CA outside Open degraded forest  as is evident from the fact that 
83 per cent  of CA was carried out outside Open degraded forest . It was also noticed 
that 47 per cent  CA was carried out in Very Dense Forest (VDF)/ Mod erate Dense 
Forest  (MDF) which also raises doubts over carrying out of CA in these areas (as dense 
forest already existed in these areas). No mechanis m existed for selection of CA sites 
based on scientific data and the Department also failed to utilise the data available with 
their Geographic Information System (GIS) cell to i dentify land banks/ suitable CA 
sites in Open degraded forest area of the State.   
Geospatial study also pointed to possible encroachm ents in CA sites in the form of 
structures (built up area) in six CA sites and prac tise of agriculture in 11 CA sites. 
Further, presence of structures (built up area) was  noticed in seven Reserved 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
viii | P a g e  
Forest/Demarcated Protected Forest (RFs/ DPFs) and practise of agriculture was 
noticed in 10 RFs/ DPFs.   
Thus, the Performance Audit revealed errors of omis sion/commission involving 
information/data regarding forest cover in the Stat e and absence of coordination 
between the agencies involved in CA. 
Recommendations:  
In light of audit findings, the State Government ma y ensure holding of prescribed 
meetings of State Authority to ensure optimum utilisation of funds and timely execution 
of works under State Authority. Timely finalisation  of Annual Accounts and Reports 
may be ensured. 
The Department may take appropriate steps to remove  pendency and delays in 
in-principle approval of FCA cases. Uploading of co rrect information regarding the 
details of CA carried out on E-Green Watch portal m ay be ensured. The Department 
may ensure mandatory and timely carrying out of CA as per the conditions stipulated 
in the FCA clearance cases to avoid cost escalation  and pendency of CA. Land banks 
may be identified for speedy disposal of FCA cases and a centralised database of FCA 
cases and CA achieved thereagainst, may be maintain ed to arrive at true position of 
achievement of CA. 
The Department may devise a robust internal control mechanism to ensure and monitor 
the compliance of conditions imposed by MoEF&CC, while according approvals under 
FCA. They may review the cases to take appropriate action for fixing of accountability 
against the delinquent officials for the cases of deviations from the approved plans and 
may investigate cases of possible misappropriation of funds. 
The Department may consider maintenance of centralised database of CAT plans in the 
State in terms of funds due from UAs, funds actuall y deposited and expenditure 
incurred thereagainst for regular monitoring. They may coordinate with other 
authorities to ensure monitoring of HEPs after gran t of final approval to ascertain 
changes in project cost and capacity to ensure time ly formulation/ revision of CAT 
plans. Regular monitoring and evaluation of CAT plans may be done to ensure that the 
prescriptions of CAT plans are followed strictly and within the stipulated time period. 
The Department may consider utilisation of data available with their GIS cell to identify 
land banks/ suitable CA sites under Open degraded f orest to ensure that CA is carried 
out as per the provisions of FCA at the designated selected site. It may consider 
investigating the cases where CA was carried out in  MDF/ VDF, and fixing 
responsibility wherever required. It may analyse th e process of selection of CA sites 
and reasons for the subsequent change in location d uring execution along with fixing 
of responsibility in cases of unauthorised changes in locations.  
The Department may consider regular patrolling to e nsure that CA sites and Reserved 
Forests/Demarcated Protected Forests are kept free from encroachments and carrying 
out investigation of cases of encroachments and pro secution of defaulters as per the 
provisions of Indian Forest Act 1927. 
 

Chapter I  
Introduction  

1 | P a g e  
Chapter I 
Introduction 
Forests are a vital component in sustaining the lif e support system on Earth and are a 
source of timber, fuel, fodder and medicines. In ad dition to their aesthetic and cultural 
values, forests also act as rich repositories of bi odiversity and are recognised for their 
role in regulating air quality and climate, soil fo rmation and nutrient recycling. They 
also have a significant impact in reducing the risk  of natural disasters, such as floods, 
droughts, landslides and other extreme events. Arti cle 48A of the Constitution of India 
requires that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment, 
safeguard forests and wildlife in the country. Unde r Article 51A, it is the duty of every 
citizen to protect and improve the natural environm ent, including forests, lakes, rivers, 
and wildlife, and to have compassion for living cre atures. Sustainable Development 
Goal 15 aims to "protect, restore, and promote sust ainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, 
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification,  halt and reverse land degradation, 
and halt biodiversity loss". This Performance Audit  aims to support this goal by 
identifying the actual implementation of Compensato ry Afforestation (CA) activities in 
the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
Map 1.1: Forest cover map of Himachal Pradesh  
 
Source: India State of Forest Report 2021  


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
2 | P a g e  
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and rules made thereunder govern the schemes of 
CA activities in the State.  
1.1 Status of forests in Himachal Pradesh 
The forests of the State are important catchment ar eas for five major rivers, including 
the Beas, Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej and Yamuna. These fo rests not only support the 
agroforestry system in the plains of adjoining stat es, but also fulfil the hydropower 
needs of the state and nation. The State of Himacha l Pradesh has a geographical area of 
55,673 sq. km, constituting 1.69 per cent  of the geographical area of the country. The 
State has 12 districts, all of which are hill distr icts. About one-third of the area in the 
State is permanently under snow, glaciers and cold deserts. Tree growth is minimal in 
this region due to harsh climatic conditions. The S tate has a Recorded Forest Area 
(RFA) 
1 of 37,948 sq. km, which is 68.16 per cent  of its geographical area. However, the 
actual area under forest is only 15,443 sq. km, whi ch is only 27.73 per cent  of its 
geographical area. According to National Forest Pol icy, 1988, at least two thirds i.e. 
66 per cent  of the geographical area should be under forests i n hilly states like 
Himachal Pradesh. The State Government aims to brin g 30  per cent 2 of the 
geographical area under forest cover through planta tion over two lakh hectares of land 
by the year 2030. The rest of the RFA is barren lan d. The details of categories of 
classification of forests are given in Table 1.1 . 
Table 1.1: Recorded Forest Area 
Sr. No.  Classification  Area in Km 2 Percentage of 
Geographical Area  
1 Geographical Area 55,673 100.00 
2 Forest Area Legally Classified (RFA) 37,948 68.16  
3 Area under Forest Cover 15,443  27.73  
Break up of Area under Forest Cover 
i) Very Dense Forest (VDF) 3 3,163 
ii) Moderate Dense Forest (MDF) 4 7,100 
iii) Open Forest (OF) 5 5,180 
Source: ISFR Report 2021 and HPFD Statistics Report 2019 
  
                                                           
1 Recorded Forest Area (RFA) includes all the areas recorded as forest in government records. 
These largely consists of Reserved Forests (RF) and  Protected Forests (PF), which have been 
constituted under the provisions of Indian Forest A ct 1927 or its counterpart State Acts. Areas 
which have been recorded as forests in revenue reco rds or have been constituted under any other 
State Act or local law are also included in the RFA. 
2      As per the document Drishti Himachal Pradesh – 2030, the official SDG document of the 
Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
3 All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cove r) of canopy density of 70 per cent  and above. 
4 All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cove r) of canopy density between 40 and 
70 per cent. 
5 All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cove r) of canopy density between 10 and 
40 per cent. 

Chapter I: Introduction  
3 | P a g e  
During the period 2011 to 2021, the trend of differ ent areas under forest cover is given 
in Chart 1.1 . 
 
Source: India State of Forest Report (ISFR) of the years concerned. Figures indicate biennial 
distribution of different types of forest over a decade.  
As can be seen from the Chart 1.1 , there has been a slight increase in the area unde r 
MDF and OF, whereas area under VDF has marginally decreased.  
1.2 Circumstances necessitating diversion of forest  land 
Forests are generally used for the lifestyle and we ll-being of forest dwellers, villagers, 
and other people or species that are wholly or partly dependent on forests. They are also 
used for nature reserves, national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, biosphere reserves, as 
habitats for any endangered or threatened species of flora and fauna, and for agricultural 
purposes and rehabilitation of persons displaced fr om their residences due to river 
valley or hydroelectric projects, among others. For est land is generally diverted for 
facilitating developmental activities for non-fores try purposes, such as the construction 
of power projects, irrigation projects, roads, rail ways, schools, hospitals, rural 
electrification, telecommunications, drinking water facilities and mining. The procedure 
for granting forest clearances for diversion of for est land for non-forest purposes is 
elucidated in subsequent paragraphs. 
1.3 Need for compensatory afforestation 
The diversion of forest land for non-forest use is based on the concept of ‘Tree for tree’ 
and ‘Land for land’. The Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 states that, as far as possible, 
non-forest land for Compensatory Afforestation (CA)  should be identified in proximity 
or contiguous to Reserved Forest or Protected Fores t. If non-forest land for CA is not 
available in the same district, it should be identi fied elsewhere in the State or Union 
Territory. If non-forest land is not available in t he entire State or Union Territory, funds 
3,224 
3,224 
3,224 
3,110 
3,113 
3,163 
6,381 
6,381 
6,381 
6,705 
7,126 
7,100 
5,074 
5,078 
5,091 
5,285 
5,194 
5,180 
2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 
Area in hectare 
Chart 1.1: Decadal progress in growth of different types of forest cover 
VDF MDF OF 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
4 | P a g e  
for raising CA in double the area of the forest lan d diverted must be provided by the 
user agency. The non-availability of suitable non-f orest land for CA in the State or 
Union Territory will be accepted by the Central Gov ernment only on a certificate from 
the Chief Secretary of the State or Union Territory  Government. In case of Central 
Government or Central Undertaking, projects such as  the extraction of minor minerals 
from riverbeds, construction of link roads, small w ater works, minor irrigation works, 
and laying of transmission lines, CA should be raised on degraded forest land, twice the 
area of the forest land being diverted. 
The components of conditions for diversion of fores t land for non-forest purpose are 
depicted in the Chart 1.2 .
 
Chart 1.2: Components for diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes 
 
Source: FC Act 1980 and FC rules 2003 
As per the Forest Conservation Act 1980 (FCA 1980),  the User Agency (UA) of the 
approved developmental project would provide money for the regeneration of forests 
which are sought to be diverted for the project. Th is regeneration is to be done by the 
State Authorities at some other designated and appr oved place. As per the scheme, in 
case, private non-forest land is provided by the UA , an area equal to the forest land 
diverted is to be afforested on this. However, in c ase private forest land is not available, 
afforestation needs to be carried out in Open Degraded Forest (OF) on an area twice the 
area of forest land diverted.  
The UA is required to provide money at the prescrib ed rates, which is based on area to 
be diverted in hectares, nature of forest that is s ought to be diverted, nature of project 
proposed to be undertaken, nature of area like trib al or non-tribal, proximity of forest 
site etc. The per hectare rate is notified for each  year for different types of areas in 
which CA is to be undertaken and calculation is don e at the Divisional Forest Officer 
(DFO) level to arrive at the money required for CA scheme. The money required is 
computed based on original cost for plantation and maintenance cost for 10 years based 
Fund  Lan d 
Compensatory Afforestation in lieu of diverted forest land 
CAT Plan 
NPV  Afforestation on double the 
area of degraded forest land 
on the basis of non- 
availability certificate of the 
Chief Secretary 
Equivalent non-forest land CA/ACA/PCA 
Proposal for diversion of forest land 
 

Chapter I: Introduction  
5 | P a g e  
on notified rates. Apart from CA, a UA may be requi red to undertake penal CA in 
addition, in cases involving violation of the provisions of the FCA, 1980.  
As per Section 6 of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016, the money 
received for Compensatory Afforestation (CA )6, Additional Compensatory Afforestation 
(ACA) 7, penal compensatory afforestation (PCA) 8, net present value (NPV) 9 of the 
diverted forest land or catchment area treatment (C AT) 10  plan etc. is required to be used 
as per site specific schemes submitted by the State  along with the approved proposals 
for diversion of forest land. After receipt of the money, the State Forest Department is 
to accomplish afforestation, for which money is dep osited in the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund, within a period of one to two y ears from the date of final approval 
of projects. These funds are to be used for the development, maintenance and protection 
of forest and wildlife management. 
To compensate for the loss of tangible as well as i ntangible benefits from the forest 
lands that have been diverted for non-forest use, the net present value (NPV) of the land 
is to be recovered from the user agencies to adequa tely compensate for the loss of 
natural forests. Such funds are to be used for natu ral assisted regeneration, forest 
management and protection, infrastructure developme nt, wildlife protection and 
management, supply of wood and other forest produce , energy-saving devices, and 
other allied activities. 
1.4 Procedure for granting forest clearances 
Every User Agency (UA) that seeks to use any forest  land for non-forest purposes 
(under Section 2 of the FC Act) is required to make  a proposal to the Nodal Officer 
11 , 
Forest Conservation Act, 1980 (FCA) of the concerne d State/UT Government and 
endorse a copy of the proposal, along with a copy o f the receipt obtained from the 
office of the Nodal Officer, to the concerned DFO o r the Conservator of Forests, 
                                                           
6 CA is one of the most important requirement/ condit ions for prior approval of the Central 
Government for diversion of forest land for non-for est purposes and its purpose is to compensate 
the loss of 'land by land' and loss of 'trees by trees'. 
7 MoEF&CC in certain cases also imposes condition of  Additional Compensatory Afforestation 
(ACA) in addition to CA. 
8 Penal compensatory afforestation (PCA) means affor estation work to be undertaken over and 
above the compensatory afforestation specified in t he guidelines issued under the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980, in lieu of the extent of area over which non-forestry activities have been 
carried out without obtaining prior approval of the  competent authority under the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980 . 
9 NPV means the quantification of the environmental servi ces provided for the forest area diverted 
for non-forestry uses, as may be determined by an e xpert committee appointed by the Central 
Government from time to time in this regard.  
10  CAT Plan is an important and essential plan for en hancing and maintaining the ecological health 
of the catchment area of the proposed irrigation/hy droelectric project through site-specific 
biological and engineering measures for conservatio n of soil & moisture and management of 
water regime. A proposal for diversion of forest la nd for Irrigation/Hydro-electric projects shall 
invariably be accompanied by detailed CAT plan exce pt in respect of small hydel projects 
(maximum up to 10 MW capacity). 
11  “Nodal Officer” means any officer not below the ra nk of Conservator of Forests, authorised by the 
State Government to deal with the forest conservation matters under the FCA 1980. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
6 | P a g e  
Regional Office, as well as to the Ministry of Envi ronment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) under the provisions of the FCA. 
MoEF&CC accords prior approval on proposals of the State/UT Government in two 
stages; first, an in-principle or Stage-I approval,  and second, a final or Stage-II 
approval, based on compliance with the conditions g iven in the in-principle approval. 
Thereafter, when the State Government decides to pe rmit the use of the forest land for 
non-forest purposes, it has to pass orders to that effect along with the conditions and 
safeguards imposed by the Central Government while granting Stage-I and Stage-II 
clearance.  
Conditions relating to transfer, mutation, and decl aration 
12  as Reserved Forest (RF)/ 
Protected Forest (PF) 13  under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 of equivalent no n-forest land 
for compensatory afforestation and funds for raisin g compensatory afforestation 
thereof, are stipulated at Stage-I. For mining purp oses, additional conditions such as 
maintaining a safety zone area, fencing, and regene ration, etc., and for major and 
medium irrigation projects, catchment area treatmen t plans, are to be stipulated. After 
receipt of a report from the State Government regar ding compliance with the stipulated 
conditions, final approval under the FC Act is issued. 
The procedure for granting of permission under the FCA is depicted in Chart 1.3. 
  
                                                           
12  As per Forest Conservation Act, 1980, equivalent n on-forest land identified for the purpose of 
Compensatory Afforestation is transferred in the na me of the State Forest Department (after 
Stage-I approval and prior to Stage-II approval) an d declared as reserved (RF)/protected forests 
(PF) under Section 4 or Section 29 of the Indian Fo rest Act, 1927 (within six month of Final 
approval), so that the plantation raised could be maintained permanently. 
13  Reserved Forest (RF) is an area notified under the  provisions of India Forest Act 1927 or the State 
Forest Acts and having full degree of protection. I n RFs all activities are prohibited unless 
permitted. Demarcated Protected Forest (DPF) is an area notified under the provisions of India 
Forest Act 1927 or the State Forest Acts having lim ited degree of protection. In Protected Forests 
(PFs), any existing rights of individuals or communities are not affected . 

Chapter I: Introduction  
7 | P a g e  
Exempted 
from NFL 
No  
No  Is NFL available  
in State? 
Yes  
State Government confirms compliance with Stage I conditions  
Declared as RF/PF 
Mutated in favour of Forest Department 
NFL transferred to Forest Department 
CA in double the area of degraded 
Forest Land to be identified 
Non availability to be certified by the 
Chief Secretary 
Stage I - ‘In 
principle’ approval 
by MoEF&CC 
NFL required to be given 
Non Forest Land (NFL) not required to 
be given 
Yes  
Proposal for diversion of forest land 
Chart 1.3: Procedure for diverting forest land for non-forest purpose 
Source: FC Act, 1980 and FC Rules, 2003 
In the State of Himachal Pradesh, the RFA claimed i s much larger than the actual forest 
area. As per ‘the Handbook of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and Forest Conservation 
Rules, 2003 (Guidelines & Clarifications), 2019’, a  special provision exists for the 
State, as per which, waste lands of Himachal Prades h that come under the category of 
Protected Forests but have neither been demarcated on that ground nor transferred and 
mutated in the name of the Forest Department in the  revenue records, shall be 
considered for the purpose of CA, provided that dou ble the area of such category is 
covered under CA and is declared as Reserved Forest s/Protected Forests under the 
Indian Forests Act (IFA), 1927 after mutation in th e name of the State Forest 
Department prior to Stage-II approval. This dispens ation is applicable for Central, State 
and private sector projects. 
1.5 Organisational structure of the Forest Departme nt 
In Himachal Pradesh, the State Forest Department is  the administrative authority for 
diversion of forest. It is responsible for submissi on of such proposals to the Central 
Government. 
The organogram of the Forest Department is shown in Chart 1.4 . 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
8 | P a g e  
Chart 1.4: Organogram of HP Forest Department 
 
Source: Forest Department Website  
The State Forest Department is headed by Secretary who is the administrative head of 
the Department. Under him, the Principal Chief Cons ervator of Forests (PCCF) and 
Head of Forest Force (HoFF), as Head of the Departm ent, controls all forest affairs and 
issues such instructions, as he may consider necess ary, on the administration and 
working of the forests. The PCCF (HoFF) is assisted  by a number of Additional PCCsF 
(APCCsF) looking after separate functions like FCA proposals, CAMPA, Monitoring 
and Evaluation, Research and Training, etc., out of  whom APCCF (FCA) and APCCF 
(CAMPA) play crucial roles in compensatory afforest ation (CA). These APCCsF are 
assisted by Chief Conservators of Forests (CCsF)/ C onservators of Forests (CsF). In 
addition to these, 10 CCF(s)/ CF(s) and 37 Deputy C onservators of Forests (DCsF)/ 
Divisional Forest Officers (DFOs) oversee functions  at Circle and division level. There 
are 37 territorial Divisions under 10 circles. A te rritorial Forest Division is headed by 
DCF/ DFO, who is responsible for the proper managem ent of the forest business and 
finance of his division. Further, Assistant Conserv ators of Forests (ACsF), Range 
Officers, Block Officers and Forest Guards assists DFOs in their day-to-day work 
besides performing their specified duties. 
As can be seen from the above organogram, the struc ture dealing with compensatory 
afforestation is essentially spread over the entire  organisational hierarchy. The 
Administrative 
Head of the 
Department  
Secretary (Forest Department) 
Circles (10) 
Headquarters 
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests  
(Head of Forest Force)  
 
Conservators of Forests at Bilaspur, Chamba, 
Dharamshala, Hamirpur, Kullu, Mandi, Nahan, 
Rampur, Shimla &Solan 
Conservators of Forests at Bilaspur, Chamba, 
PCCF (Adm & HRD) and APCCF(s) for CAMPA, 
Finance, Working Plans & Settlement, Forest 
Conservation Act (FCA), M&E etc. Chief 
Conservator of Forests (CCF) Projects  
Divisional Forest Officer/Deputy Conservator of 
Forests 
Territorial 
Divisions (37)  
Head of 
Department 

Chapter I: Introduction  
9 | P a g e  
organisational structure of the State CAMPA is discussed at length in Chapter II  of the 
Report. 
1.6 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was carried out with the objective of ascertaining whether: 
 The processing for approvals under Forest Conservat ion Act 1980 was being 
done efficiently and effectively and in accordance with the prescribed norms; and 
 The system for compensatory afforestation and Catch ment Area Treatment 
(CAT) plans provided under the rules were adequatel y and effectively 
implemented. 
Further, the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, General 
and Economic Sectors for the year ended 31 March 20 13 (Government of Himachal 
Pradesh) contained a Performance Audit on Himachal Pradesh State Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authorit y, which was discussed by the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the State in Aug ust 2019. Audit further checked 
whether corrective measures were adopted by the Dep artment based on the 
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee.  
1.7 Audit Criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against criteria sourced from the following: 
• Forest (Conservation Act), 1980 and Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 
• National Working Plan Code 2004 and 2014 
• HP Forest Manual 
• Handbook of guidelines issued by Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
 Change (FC Division), Government of India in 2004 and 2019. 
• Information available on HP Forest Department websi te, MIS and other 
electronic databases maintained by the Department. 
• Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 and rules thereunder 
• State Government notifications for constitution of State Authority and creation 
of State Fund. 
• Documents on administration and functions of the en tity, policy files, annual 
reports and minutes of internal meetings. 
1.8 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
As forest clearances are usually a time-consuming p rocess and the related 
compensatory afforestation generally has a lag peri od, hence, sufficient time is to be 
allowed for a plantation to mature (a provision of ten years’ maintenance of plantation 
is kept in the CA scheme) before an assessment of its efficacy is to be made. The period 
covered under the PA was from 2006-07 to 2020-21 fo r examination of efficacy of CA 
activities and CAT plans. Financial and other data for 2021-22 has been updated 
wherever available. For all other issues covered in  the PA, the period scrutinised was 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
10 | P a g e  
from 2016-17 to 2020-21. Nine 14  (out of 37) divisions as detailed in Appendix 1.1  were 
selected by using stratified simple random sampling  without replacement method using 
IDEA software. 100 per cent  of 441 15  cases pertaining to these nine divisions for 
2006-07 to 2020-21 were audited. 22 cases 16  out of these 441 cases were taken up for 
Geospatial Studies carried out between October and December 2022 by using services 
of Aryabhata Geo-Informatics and Space Application Centre (AGiSAC) 17 .  
An Entry Conference was held on 9 November 2021 wit h the Additional Secretary 
(Forests) and Principal Chief Conservator of Forest s (Head of Forest Force) where in 
the audit objectives, criteria, methodology, scope, and sample for the performance audit 
were discussed. Further, an Exit Conference was hel d with the State Government on 
9 January 2023 to discuss the audit findings in the draft Performance Audit.  
The Performance Audit covered the offices of the St ate Forest Department dealing with 
the compensatory afforestation issues with prime fo cus on the APCCF (FCA), APCCF 
(CAMPA), the State Authority and the selected Divisions.  
Map 1.2: Distribution of divisions selected for Performance Audit 
 
Source: India State of Forest Report 2021 
 
                                                           
14  Bharmour, Chamba, Chopal, Dharamshala, Kinnaur, Kullu, Kunihar, Nachan and Seraj 
15   58 cases in Appendix 3.1 and 383 cases in Appendix 4.1 
16  22 CA sites were selected for geospatial studies o n the basis of judgmental sampling and risk 
analysis of available polygons (keeping in view iss ues like unclear images from satellite due to 
polygons falling in shadowy portion, cloud cover over the area etc.) 
17  Nodal agency functioning under the aegis of H.P. C ouncil for Science Technology and 
Environment (HIMCOSTE), Government of Himachal Prad esh to facilitate the use of spatial and 
geospatial technologies for planning and developmental activities in the state. 


Chapter I: Introduction  
11 | P a g e  
1.9 Non-production of records/ information to Audit  
The offices (State Authority, Nodal Officer FCA and Monitoring & Evaluation wing) at 
PCCF level and the selected divisions were audited and information regarding details of 
FCA cases and timeline for processing, CA stipulati on and achievement, expenditure 
and survival of CA plantations were sought during the course of audit. 
In respect of approvals under FCA and CA to be carr ied out, although information 
regarding land diverted and CA stipulated was provi ded by Nodal Officer FCA, no 
information regarding CA achieved, case-wise funds realised and expenditure incurred 
on CA and current survival percentage of CA plantat ions could be provided to Audit as 
it was stated that no such records/information are maintained by the Nodal Officer 
FCA. The CEO CAMPA and seven test-checked divisions  could not provide the above 
information and only two test-checked divisions (DF O Kullu and DFO Seraj) provided 
case-wise information on CA. Information regarding timeline for processing of FCA 
cases for cases approved during 2016-17 to 2020-21 were requisitioned from the Nodal 
Officer FCA and test checked divisions. Nodal Offic er, FCA supplied incomplete 
information and that too was based only on the parivesh 18  data, and further there was a 
mismatch 19  between the two lists supplied to Audit. Forest di visions could not provide 
any information regarding time taken to process the  FCA cases w.r.t. the prescribed 
timeline as per FCA, 1980. One test-checked divisio n (DFO Kunihar) could not even 
provide the list of FCA cases in the division during the course of audit. 
Further, files pertaining to agenda and meetings of  Steering Committee and Executive 
committee could not be produced to Audit. 
In the absence of records/ information, Audit was n ot able to comment on the above 
issues.  
 
1.10 Acknowledgement 
Notwithstanding the above cases of non-production o f records, the co-operation 
extended by the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department during the conduct of the 
performance audit is acknowledged. 
                                                           
18  PARIVESH is a web based, role based workflow applic ation which has been developed by 
MoEF&CC for online submission and monitoring of the  proposals submitted by the proponents 
for seeking Environment, Forest, Wildlife and CRZ C learances from Central, State and district 
level authorities. It automates the entire tracking  of proposals which includes online submission of 
a new proposal, editing/updating the details of pro posals and displays status of the proposals at 
each stage of the workflow.  
19          In the first list cases approved during 20 16-17 to 2020-21 were requisitioned and in the seco nd list 
timeline for processing for those cases was requisi tioned.  The first list contained 456 FCA cases 
and the 2 nd  list contained 223 cases only. 

Chapter II 
Himachal Pradesh Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds Management and 
Planning Authority (State Authority)  

13 | P a g e  
Chapter II  
Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management 
and Planning Authority (State Authority 1) 
 
2.1 Introduction  
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, in its order da ted 3 April 2000, fixed the 
responsibility of ensuring the proper carrying out of compensatory afforestation on 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and said that it was for the Ministry to monitor the 
conditions stipulated at the time of grant of forest clearance.  
On 9 May 2002, the Supreme Court ordered the settin g up of the Central Empowered 
Committee (CEC) with explicit functions of monitori ng the implementation of the 
Court’s orders, look into cases of non-compliance i ncluding those related to 
encroachments, implementation of working plans, com pensatory afforestation, 
plantation and other conservation issues. The Supre me Court of India in 
November 2001 had observed that there was poor util isation of funds deposited for 
compensatory afforestation and also that a large am ount of money for compensatory 
afforestation was not realised by the State Governm ents from user agencies. This issue 
was examined by the CEC and it is observed that in some of the States, the funds were 
deposited by the user agency as `Forest Deposit’ wh ich were readily made available to 
the concerned division for afforestation. In some o ther States, the funds were deposited 
as revenue receipts of the State Government and cou ld be made available to the Forest 
Department only through the budgetary provisions. I t is therefore recommended that 
unless the system of release of funds through budge tary provisions is changed, the pace 
and quality of compensatory afforestation cannot be  increased significantly. It was, 
therefore, desirable to create a separate fund for compensatory afforestation, wherein all 
the monies received from the user agencies would be  deposited and subsequently 
released directly to the implementing agencies as a nd when required. The funds 
received from a particular State would be utilised in the same State. This system would 
help undertake compensatory afforestation in a planned manner on a continuous basis.  
Based on the recommendations of the CEC, the Suprem e Court of India in 
October 2002 directed the creation of a ‘Compensato ry Afforestation Fund’, in which 
all the monies received from the user agencies towa rds compensatory afforestation, 
additional compensatory afforestation, penal compen satory afforestation, Net Present 
Value (NPV) of forest land, Catchment Area Treatmen t Plan Funds, etc. were to be 
deposited. The Supreme Court of India further obser ved that there was also consensus 
amongst the States and the Union Territories that t he funds for compensatory 
afforestation which were to be recovered from the u ser agencies as well as the 
unutilised funds lying with the States would be tra nsferred to such a fund. The fund 
would not be part of general revenues of the Union,  of the States or part of the 
                                                           
1 Earlier called State CAMPA as per July 2009 notific ation and presently named State Authority as 
per February 2019 notification.  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
14 | P a g e  
Consolidated Fund of India. It also proposed that t here would be a body for the 
management of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund. Supreme Court directed that the 
user agency would also pay into the fund the net va lue of the forest land being diverted 
for non-forest purpose. The fund was to be utilised  for undertaking assisted natural 
regeneration, protection of forests, infrastructure  development, wildlife protection and 
other related activities. Further, an independent s ystem of concurrent monitoring and 
evaluation was to be evolved and implemented through the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund to ensure effective and proper utilisation of funds. 
As the Supreme Court Order ordered creation of a se parate fund and a body for 
managing the fund, a separate structure for managem ent of this fund under the overall 
supervision of the State Forest Department was crea ted in August 2009. Further, as per 
directions of the Supreme Court, all proposals for diversion of forests get approved by 
the Central Government through Ministry of Environm ent, Forests and Climate Change 
(MOEF&CC). 
Table 2.1:  Fact sheet of events regarding constitution of Ad hoc  CAMPA/State 
CAMPA/National Authority/State Authority 
Date Event 
29 October 2002 
The Supreme Court of India directed that a ‘Compens atory Afforestation Fund’ 
was to be created, in which all the monies received  from the user agencies 
towards compensatory afforestation, additional comp ensatory afforestation, penal 
compensatory afforestation, NPV of forest land, Cat chment Area Treatment Plan 
Funds, etc. were to be deposited under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.  
23 April 2004 Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Plan ning Authority 
(CAMPA) was notified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
5 May 2006  The Supreme Court of India constituted Ad hoc -CAMPA 2. 
13 March 2007 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) CAMPA 
(Amendment) notification envisaged that CAMPA shoul d have Corporate 
Accounting based double entry system and auditing o f its accounts should be 
conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
10 July 2009 Guidelines on State CAMPA were approve d by Supreme Court of India. 
15 July 2009 State CAMPA guidelines were circulated  to all States/UTs. 
3 August 2009 Government of Himachal Pradesh consti tuted the State CAMPA. 
3 August 2016 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) Act, 2016 was  notified vide which 
National Compensatory Afforestation Fund (National Fund) and a National 
CAMPA (National Authority) were constituted. 
10 August 2018 The Central Government in consultation with the Sta te Governments made the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018 under the CAF Act, 2016. 
2 February 2019 
In compliance to the Compensatory Afforestation Fun d (CAF) Act, 2016, the 
Himachal Pradesh State CAMPA (State Authority) was constituted. State 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund (SCAF) (State Fund)  under interest bearing 
section of Public Account of the State was also est ablished.  The State Authority 
is responsible for the management of the State Fund. 
Source: Chronology of constitution of CAMPA as per CAF Act 2016 
                                                           
2 An Ad hoc body constituted to act as repository of all the monies recovered on behalf of the 
‘CAMPA’, which were lying with the various official s of the State Government and to exercise 
effective checks and balances for its utilisation till CAMPA becomes operational. 

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
15 | P a g e  
2.1.1 Organisational Set-up of State CAMPA Authorit y 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change  (MoEF&CC) notified the 
Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) in 
April 2004 for the management of the compensatory a fforestation funds. Ad hoc 
CAMPA was constituted by the Supreme Court in May 2 006 for the intervening period 
till CAMPA became operational. In compliance to the  Supreme Court directives, the 
Government of Himachal Pradesh constituted State CA MPA in August 2009 and the 
compensatory afforestation activities were being un dertaken by the said body. The said 
authority was working as an organ of the State Forest Department.  
A new Act in the form of Compensatory Afforestation  Fund (CAF) Act, 2016 was 
enacted by the Parliament. In compliance to the Com pensatory Afforestation Fund 
(CAF) Act, 2016, the Himachal Pradesh State CAMPA ( State Authority 3) was 
constituted in February 2019. The State Compensator y Afforestation Fund (SCAF) 
(State Fund) under interest bearing section of Publ ic Account of the State was also 
established in 2019.  The State Authority is responsible for the management of the State 
Fund. An officer not below the rank of Chief Conser vator of Forests is appointed as the 
Chief Executive Officer of the State Authority. The  State Authority has a three-tier 
structure and functions through a Governing Body, a  Steering Committee and an 
Executive Committee as given in the following Chart 2.1 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
3 Earlier State CAMPA  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
16 | P a g e  
Chart 2.1: Structure of State Authority 
 
Source: CAF Act 2016  
The Additional PCCF (CAMPA) is the CEO of the State  Authority. The governing 
body of the State Authority may with the prior conc urrence of the State Government 
create posts in the State Authority at the level of  Assistant Conservator of Forests and 
other officials to assist the steering committee an d executive committee in performance 
of its functions under the Act. After the creation of the State Authority, separate posts 
of Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Joint CEO, and De puty CEO were proposed and 
filled up by deputing officials from the State Forest Department. 
Governing Body 
•Headed by the Chief Minister. Members include Minister of Forest, 
Chief Secretary, Principal Secretaries dealing with Environment, 
Finance, Planning, Rural Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal 
Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and Technology, PCCF, Chief 
Wildlife Warden, Secretary of the Forest Department and CEO of the 
State Authority 
•Lays down broad policy framework for the functioning of State 
Authority and reviews its working from time to time.
•To meet at least once in every six months with effect from February 
2019.
Steering 
Committee 
•Headed by the Chief Secretary. Members include Principal Secretaries 
dealing with Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural Development, 
Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science 
and Technology, PCCF, Chief Wildlife Warden, APCCF (FCA), Head 
of MOEF&CC Regional Office, Nodal Officer of the State Forest 
Development Agency, an expert to be nominated by the State 
Government and CEO of the State Authority.
•Approves rules and procedures, monitors progress of funds utilisation, 
and approves Annual Plan of Operations (APOs), reports and accounts.
•To meet at least once in three months with effect from February 2019.
Earlier it was once in six months.
Executive 
Committee 
•Headed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests. Members 
include Chief Wildlife Warden, CCsF dealing with forest and wildlife 
schemes and forestry research, Nodal Officer of the State Forest 
Development Agency, a representative of Departments dealing with 
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural Development, Revenue, 
Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and 
Technology, Financial Adviser, Two Non-Government Organisations, 
Two members of District Level Panchayati Raj Institutions, an expert 
to be nominated by the State Government, CEO of the State Authority.
•Prepares and submits APOs to Steering Committee for approval, 
supervises the implementation of works, submits reports to Steering 
Committee & prepares annual reports.
•To meet at least once in three months with effect from February 2019.

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
17 | P a g e  
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Head of Forest Force (HoFF), as 
Head of the Department, controls all forest affairs  and issues such instructions, as they 
may consider necessary, on the administration and w orking of the forests. They also 
chairs the meeting of the Executive Committee meeti ng of the State Authority. Under 
them, APCCF (FCA) and APCCF (CAMPA) play crucial ro les in compensatory 
afforestation (CA). 
2.1.2 Role of APCCF (FCA) in compensatory afforesta tion 
APCCF (FCA) is the first point of contact for User Agencies (UAs) in the State Forest 
Department for the purposes of diversion of forests  for non-forest purposes. All the 
proposals are received by the APCCF (FCA), also cal led the Nodal Officer from UAs. 
After ensuring completeness of information, he send s the proposal to the DFO 
concerned. The DFO prepares the project specific re port and sends it to the Nodal 
Officer. The proposal inter alia  includes the cost of raising CA and its maintenanc e, 
which is charged from the UA.  The Nodal Officer forwards the report to the State 
Government who in turn, sends it to the Regional Office of MOEF&CC.  
The Central Government grants approval in two stage s. Stage-I approval (In-principle 
Approval) is granted to the UA once the Central Gov ernment is satisfied with the 
necessity of the project. After this approval, the UA deposits the funds required as per 
detailed report of concerned DFO with the National CAMPA and submits the proof to 
the Nodal Officer. After this, Stage-II approval (F inal Approval) is granted by the 
Central Government through MOEF&CC, on the basis of  the State Government’s 
certificate regarding compliance to the conditions prescribed by MoEF&CC. 
A detailed Annual Plan of Operations (APO) is prepared by the State CAMPA based on 
the Stage-II approvals received in the Forest Divis ion. This forms the basis of all 
subsequent actions. Thus, APCCF (CAMPA) comes into the picture once the final 
approval for a project is received and money is alr eady deposited with the National 
CAMPA. 
2.1.3 Role of APCCF (CAMPA) in compensatory affores tation 
The Additional PCCF (CAMPA) is the CEO of the State  CAMPA, now known as the 
State Authority. The State CAMPA is primarily a Fun d Management Authority. The 
actual works are carried out by the field formation s of Forest Department, who are 
designated as the Implementing Agencies. The Nation al CAMPA releases funds to the 
State Authority based upon its Annual Plan of Opera tions (APOs) approved by the 
Steering Committee. 
Based on the number of projects approved in the Div ision, an APO is prepared by the 
Division concerned which is sent to the Circle. An Annual Plan of Operation means the 
annual plan for physical activities and financial p rovisions approved by the National 
Authority or State Authority. The APO contains prop osals of site-specific plans of 
compensatory afforestation (CA), catchment area tre atment plans (CAT Plans), 
integrated wildlife management plans stipulated in the approved FCA cases of diversion 
of forest land for non-forestry purposes for their implementation during the financial 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
18 | P a g e  
year. The CA works include ANR/RDF 4 works, Block Plantation, Advance Work, 
Nursery Development, Soil Conservation Work, Mainte nance of old plantation and 
Contingencies. The APOs of all Divisions are consol idated at the respective circles and 
put up as a consolidated APO to the Steering Commit tee of the State Authority. After 
approval by the Steering Committee, the APO is sent  as demand of funds to the 
National CAMPA which releases the funds to the Stat e Authority. The State Authority 
thereafter utilises the funds received against APOs  for compensatory activities through 
its Field Units/Forest Divisions. 
2.2  Audit Findings 
 
2.2.1 Shortfall in meetings of Committees  
As per the notification of 2009 reconstituting Stat e CAMPA and the constitution of the 
State Authority in February 2019, six meetings 
5 of the Governing Body were required 
to be held during the audit period 2016-22; however , no meetings of the Governing 
Body were held. Similarly, against the prescribed 1 7 meetings 6 to be held by the 
Steering Committee during the same period, only eig ht meetings 7 were held. Seven 
meetings of the Executive Committee were held durin g the same period as against a 
minimum of 12 meetings required to be held. As the committees were not meeting as 
envisaged, the effectiveness of CAMPA activities co uld not be monitored and were 
open to deficiencies as pointed out subsequently in  this report. Further, as files 
pertaining to agenda and meetings of Steering Commi ttee and Executive Committee 
were not produced to Audit, the efficacy of these c ommittees in supervising the 
implementation of CA works and monitoring the progr ess of utilisation of funds could 
not be assessed. 
The issue of non-holding of Governing Body meetings  and prescribed number of 
Steering Committee meetings was also pointed out in  Paras 2.1.6.1  and 2.1.12.1  
respectively, of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, 
General and Economic Sectors for the year ended 31 March 2013 (Government of 
Himachal Pradesh). The Public Accounts Committee (PAC), while discussing the report 
in August 2019, wanted to know the steps proposed b y the Department to ensure that 
the prescribed number of Governing Body and Steerin g Committee meetings are held. 
However, it was noticed that shortfall in Steering Committee meetings during the 
period covered under audit continued to persist, wh ile Governing Body meetings were 
not held at all. 
The reasons for shortfall in meetings of the Commit tees were not furnished by the 
Department (November 2023). 
 
                                                           
4  Assisted Natural Regeneration/Rehabilitation of Degraded Forest 
5  Before February 2019, the number of meetings were not fixed. Hence, no target considered for 
that period. 
6  Before February 2019, two meetings in a year; after that, four meetings every year. 
7  Steering Committee met twice only during 2017-18 and 2021-22, once in other years. 

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
19 | P a g e  
2.2.2 Financial position of the State Authority 
As per practice, before the establishment of SCAF ( State Fund) in February 2019 
(Table 2.1) , all the moneys received from the User Agencies (U A) including the CA 
charges, NPV and additional charges (except the dep artmental charges which are to be 
deposited with the state government) were sent to t he National Authority which, based 
on Annual Plan of Operations (APO 
8) sent the fund to the State CAMPA (now called 
the State Authority). The same practice continued even after the establishment of SCAF 
which has been separately commented upon in Para 2.3.1 .  
The overall financial position of the State Authori ty for the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 
has been given in the Table 2.2 . The year-wise details of funds demanded by the St ate 
Authority, through the APOs, funds received from th e National Authority and funds 
released to Implementing Agencies 9 (IAs) vis-à-vis utilisation of funds during 2016-1 7 
to 2021-22 are given in the Table 2.2 . 
Table 2.2: Details of year-wise funds demanded through APOs and received from 
National Authority for the years 2016-22 
      (₹ in crore) 
Year 
Funds 
demanded 
through 
APOs 
Amount of 
APO 
approved 
by National 
Authority 
Opening 
balance 
Amount 
received from 
National 
Authority 
Total 
funds 
Funds 
released to 
and utilised 
by Forest 
Divisions 
Balance 
Funds 
(State 
Authority) 
2016-17 137.73 136.88 14.16 132.82 146.98 128.48 18 .50 
2017-18 133.94 124.80 18.50 120.00 138.5 109.01 29. 49 
2018-19 128.72 127.72 29.49 133.32 10  162.81 121.76 41.05 
2019-20 156.91 145.82 41.05 1,660.72 11  1,752.03 12  88.48 1,660.72 
2020-21 158.39 158.39 1,660.72 0 1,768.22 13  119.48 1,648.73 
2021-22 138.10 138.10 1,648.73 0 1,702.89 94.77 1,6 08.12 
Total 853.79 831.71  2,046.86  661.98  
Source: CEO, State Authority 
                                                           
8 APO is prepared in four parts:  
Part-I of APO contains brief description of forests and forestry sector in the State. 
Part-II  of APO contains activities to be undertaken for CA , CAT plan and for any other site-
specific scheme submitted by the State along with t he approved proposals for diversion of forest 
land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
Part-III  Activities to be undertaken from net present value and interest component. 
Part-IV Physical and financial targets of each activity along with the estimated cost. 
9 Circles and Divisions 
10  Against approved APO of ₹ 127.72 crore, an amount of ₹ 133.32 crore was released by Ad hoc 
CAMPA during the year 2018-19 as per details given below: 
a) ₹ 127.72 crore against the current year i.e. 2018-19 
b) ₹ 4.80 crore balance amount APO for the year 2017-18. 
c) ₹ 0.80 crore released against Nangger Van Udyan Yojna. 
11  This huge surge in amount received shows the amoun t received by the State Authority after 
reconciliation of old arrears of the State Fund received from the National fund. 
12  In the year 2019-20, ₹ 91.31 crore (including OB of ₹ 41.05 crore) amount was available with the 
bank including FDs/unspent amount etc. (1,660.72 + 91.31 = 1,752.03). Annual statement of 
accounts for the year 2019-20 in under preparation and balance shown above are subject to 
reconciliation and audit. 
13  Figure includes adjustment of interest paid by Sta te Government of ₹ 107.49 crore. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
20 | P a g e  
As can be seen from Table 2.2 , the State Authority has a huge surplus of funds w hich 
could have been utilised for CAMPA activities, howe ver, it is yet to utilise the funds. 
The situation should be viewed in light of the fact  that against the legally classified 
forest area of 68.16 per cent  of the geographical area of this state, the actual  area as in 
2021 was only 27.73 per cent 14 , and further , the State Government aims to bring 
30 per cent 15  of the geographical area under forest cover by 2030. There has also been a 
decline in the very dense forest cover of the State  from the position a decade ago as 
indicated in Para 1.1 . 
As evident from Table 2.2 , against the demand of ₹ 853.79 crore during 2016-17 to 
2021-22 through APOs, money to the tune of ₹ 831.71 crore was approved by the 
National Authority, against which only ₹ 661.98 crore (80 per cent ) was released to 
Forest Divisions. Thus, the State Authority was not  able to utilise even the funds which 
it was projecting to spend on CAMPA activities. The  shortfall in utilisation of funds 
approved by the National Authority was to the tune of ₹ 169.73 crore. This indicated 
that the pace of execution of CA was not on par wit h that proposed to the National 
Authority through the APOs.  
Out of the overall CAMPA activities, the year-wise details of expenditure incurred on 
compensatory afforestation (including maintenance o f CAs carried out in previous 
years) on CA for the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 is given in Table 2.3 . 
Table 2.3: Details of CA targets and CA carried out as per APOs during 2016-22 
Year 
Forest 
area 
diverted 
(In ha) 
Area of CA 
to be done as 
per APOs 
(In ha) 
Funds 
demanded 
through 
APOs for CA 
(₹ in crore) 
Funds 
Received  
(₹ in crore) 
Area of CA 
done as per 
APOs 
(In ha) 
 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in crore) 
2016-17 109.78 1,270 14.60 14.60 1,245.49 14.21 16  
2017-18 466.17 1,405 16.25 16.25 1,382.75 15.35 
2018-19 739.44 873 11.00 11.00 581.69 9.67 
2019-20 391.48 618.32 13.70 12.61 568.32 11.02 
2020-21 397.68 974.89 21.50 21.50 876 14.63 
2021-22 493.70 1,032 17 17 954.36 16.35 
Total 2,598.25  6,173.21  94.05  92.96 5,608.61  81.23  
Source: CEO State Authority and Nodal Officer FCA 
The APO for CA shown in Table 2.3  was a part of the overall APO approved by the 
State Authority as given in Table 2.2  which included CAT Plans, Net Present Value, 
Integrated Wildlife Management Plans and others. It  may be seen that there was a 
shortfall in achievement of CA against the targets.  Reasons for shortfall in achievement 
of CA have been analysed in Chapter IV .  
  
                                                           
14       Source: ISFR 2021 
15       As per reply of the HP State Forest Department. 
16   Figures of expenditures for 2016-17 to and 2018-1 9 are based on certified annual accounts         
while for 2019-20 to 2021-22, it is based on Department’s reply due to pending annual accounts. 

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
21 | P a g e  
In reply to the audit observation, the Chief Execut ive Officer 17  (CEO), State Authority 
stated that no reasons were provided by National Au thority for reducing the APOs for 
the period 2016-17 to 2018-19 and for the year 2019 -20, the APO was reduced due to 
non-approval of salary component under NPV. No reas ons were provided by the State 
Authority for short utilisation of funds for the pe riod 2016-17 to 2018-19. However, for 
financial year 2019-20, CEO State Authority stated that no funds were released by 
National Authority and during FY 2020-21, funds wer e transferred to the Consolidated 
Fund of the State from the bank accounts and allotm ent of budget and Standard Objects 
of Expenditure (SOEs) took time and later money had  to be re-appropriated to the 
relevant SOEs.   
The reply was not acceptable as the entire funds av ailable with the National Authority 
(till February 2019) were transferred to the State Fund in August 2019 as arrears; and 
still, there was shortfall in utilisation of funds on CAMPA activities. 
2.3 Irregularities in financial management 
A number of irregularities were noticed in the area  of financial management by the 
State Authority which have been discussed subsequently. 
2.3.1 Continued remittance of funds of ₹ 358.56 crore to National Authority 
As per the provisions of Section 3 (iii) of the Com pensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 
2016, after establishment of State Fund, all money realised from user agencies (UAs) 
by such State towards compensatory afforestation, a dditional compensatory 
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, ne t present value, catchment area 
treatment plan or any other money for compliance of  conditions stipulated by the 
Central Government under the provisions of the Fore st (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 
1980) were required to be credited to the State Fund.  
Audit noticed that the UAs continued to deposit the funds in the National CAMPA even 
after the creation of the State Fund (February 2019 ). Therefore, during the period 
February 2019 to March 2022, funds amounting to ₹ 358.56 crore were remitted by 
UAs into the bank account of the National Authority  instead of into the State Fund as 
given in the Table 2.4 . 
Table 2.4 Details of funds remitted to the National Authority  
Sr. No. Period Amount remitted to National Authority (₹ in crore) 
1 08/02/2019 to 31/03/2019 15.48 
2 01/04/2019 to 31/03/2020 88.83 
3 01/04/2020 to 31/03/2021 63.42 
4 01/04/2021 to 31/03/2022 190.83 
Total 358.56 
Source: Nodal Officer FCA 
The Department replied (December 2023) that due to ambiguity over the process of 
operating the account of State Authority, the exist ing process of depositing the 
                                                           
17  An officer not below the rank of CCF appointed by the State Government . 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
22 | P a g e  
compensatory levies in the account maintained by th e National Authority is being 
continued till a robust online mechanism is developed.   
However, the fact remains that the above remittance  of funds into the bank account of 
the National Authority was contrary to the provisio ns of the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Act, 2016. 
2.3.2 Irregular utilisation of ‘Net Present Value’ Funds on development of Eco 
Parks/Nature Parks 
Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) for the years 2019 -20 and 2020-21 were to be 
formulated in accordance with the provisions of CAF  Act and CAF Rules notified by 
MoEF&CC in 2016 and 2018 respectively. Rule 5 of CA F Rules 2018 stipulates that 
the monies received towards Net Present Value (NPV)  and Penal NPV shall be used for 
artificial regeneration, assisted natural regenerat ion, forest management, forest 
protection, forest and wildlife related infrastruct ure development (construction of 
residential and official buildings in forests for f ront line staff deployed for protection of 
forest and wildlife) wildlife protection and manage ment, supply of wood and other 
forest produce saving devices and other allied acti vities. There was no provision for 
utilisation of NPV funds or other State Funds (exce pt one per cent  from CAT plans) for 
development of nature parks/eco parks.  
Audit noticed that during the years 2019-20 and 202 0-21, an expenditure of 
₹ 6.51crore 
was incurred on development of Nature/ Eco parks un der the component “Development 
of degraded forest land” as shown in Table 2.5 . 
Table 2.5: Details of expenditure incurred on development of Nature/ Eco Parks 
Component  Year No. of Eco/ Nature 
parks Expenditure ( ₹ in crore) 
Development. of degraded 
forest land 2019-20 9 2.24 
Development of degraded 
forest land 2020-21 16 4.27 
Total 25 6.51 
Source: APO’s and QPR’s of State Authority 
The above expenditure of ₹ 6.51 crore was irregular and contrary to the provisions of 
CAF rules. 
The Department stated (February 2023) that the expe nditure was incurred on execution 
of plantation and various types of soil and moistur e conservation works for 
development of degraded forest land. The reply was not acceptable as the expenditure 
was incurred on development of 25 Eco/Nature Parks instead of development of 
degraded forest land. 
2.3.3 Non-preparation of APOs for utilisation of fu nds realised from UAs of 
₹ 6.26 crore 
Scrutiny of files of the Nodal Officer, the State A uthority showed that in two cases, 
namely (i) diversion of 81.7916 ha of forest land i n favour of Director, Higher 
Education, HP (UA) (December 2018) for establishmen t of Satellite Campus of Central 

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
23 | P a g e  
university of HP at Dehra and (ii) diversion of 40. 5084 ha of forest land in favour of 
ADM-cum-Deputy Director Admn. AIIMS Bilaspur (UA) ( March 2019) for the 
construction of AIIMS at Bilaspur, additional condi tions were imposed on the UAs by 
MoEF&CC while granting final approval. Against thes e additional conditions, both the 
user agencies deposited funds to the tune of ₹ 6.26 crore as detailed in Table 2.6 . 
Table 2.6: Funds deposited by UAs 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
FCA 
proposal 
Date of 
deposit of 
funds by UAs 
Details of condition 
imposed by 
MoEF&CC 
Particulars of work Cost of 
works 
Satellite 
campus of 
Central 
University 
06/11/2018 
Maintenance of green 
cover in the diverted 
area and execution of 
site-specific soil and 
water conservation plan 
at the project cost. 
Site specific soil and water 
conservation 3.51 
Maintenance of green cover 2.09 
Construction 
of AIIMS at 
Bilaspur 
06/02/2019 
Management of unused 
area within the diverted 
forest area as green 
cover, reclamation and 
maintenance (as green 
cover) of dumping sites. 
Site specific soil and water 
conservation 0.39 
Green cover over reclamation 
site 0.27 
Total 6.26 
Source: Nodal Officer FCA 
Audit noticed that these works were not included in  any APOs submitted by the 
Divisions concerned although funds were deposited b y the UAs in respect of these 
works.  Resultantly, the entire amount of ₹ 6.26 crore remained idle with the State 
Authority. Thus, non-inclusion of these works in th e APOs resulted in non-compliance 
with the additional conditions stipulated in the Mo EF&CC approval. Thus, though the 
money was demanded and collected for specific measu res, no work was undertaken 
even after funds were received.  
The Department stated (December 2023) that the abov e works were not included in 
earlier APOs. However, work against Satellite campu s of the Central University has 
been included in the APO for the year 2023-24 and t he Circle/division, responsible for 
APOs for construction of AIIMS at Bilaspur, have be en directed to expedite the matter 
of including the work in future APOs. 
2.3.4 Pending annual accounts  
Para 8 of State Authority  notification (July 2009) stipulates that the State Authority shall 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records  and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consu ltation with the Accountant 
General concerned.  Further, the accounts of the St ate Authority, as certified by the 
Accountant General or any other person appointed by  him in this behalf together with 
the audit report thereon and annual report, shall b e forwarded annually to the State 
Government, the MoEF&CC and the National Authority by the State Authority . 
In view of the above, the Accountant General, Himac hal Pradesh suggested the State 
Authority to prepare their accounts on the “Uniform  Format of Accounts” applicable to 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
24 | P a g e  
Central Autonomous Bodies, as the Uniform format of  accounts prescribed for 
autonomous organisations was based on the double en try system of accounting. The 
Steering Committee decided (October 2012) that acco unts of the State Authority would 
be maintained on double entry system.  
Audit noticed that the accounts upto the year 2018- 19 were converted into double entry 
system while accounts for the years 2019-20 onwards  were still pending for conversion 
into double entry system. 
It was also noticed that annual financial statement s of the State Authority for the years 
2019-20 to 2020-21 had not been finalised. In the a bsence of the financial statements, 
the accuracy of the funds received, utilised and th e financial position of the State 
Authority could not be verified in audit.  
The PAC, while discussing (August 2019) the report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India on Social, General and Economic Se ctors for the year ended 
31 March 2013 (Government of Himachal Pradesh), sta ted that as the annual accounts 
and financial statements were not prepared in time,  the monitoring of working of the 
State Authority could not be carried out. The Depar tment also intimated (August 2019) 
the PAC that a customised software was being prepar ed for conversion of accounts into 
double entry and after its operationalisation, CAMP A accounts would be prepared 
timely. However, it was noticed that the annual acc ounts of the State Authority were 
still not being prepared timely and conversion of a ccounts into double entry system was 
still pending (as of November 2023). 
The Department stated (February 2023) that accounts  for the financial years 2019-20 to 
2020-21 are being converted into double entry syste m of accounting and the annual 
financial statements for these years will be finali sed shortly and submitted to the 
Accountant General, Himachal Pradesh for certificat ion. In further reply 
(December 2023), the Department stated that the ann ual accounts for the financial year 
2019-20 have been converted into double entry system and submitted to the Accountant 
General’s Office and observations of the AG are being attended to. The annual accounts 
for 2019-20 were awaited (December 2023).
 
2.3.5 Non preparation of Annual reports as per the CAF Act/Rules  
Section 28 of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund A ct, 2016 provides that the State 
Authority shall prepare its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the State Government concerned, 
in such form and at such time, for each financial y ear, as may be prescribed.  The 
annual report of a State Authority shall, inter alia , provide for -  
(i)  the number/location of each reforestation, afforestation and conservation activity; 
(ii)  the amount and location of lands in hectares, clear ed, conserved and planted in 
connection with the activity; and 
(iii)  the amount of afforestation money collected and expended.  

Chapter II: Himachal Pradesh Compensatory Afforesta tion Funds Management and Planning Authority  
25 | P a g e  
Further, Section 29 provides that the State Governm ent shall cause the annual report 
and the audit report together with a memorandum of action taken on the 
recommendations contained therein to be laid as soo n as may be after the reports are 
received before each House of the State Legislature.  
Audit noticed that the State Authority failed to prepare the annual report and present the 
same to the State Legislature from 2015-16 onwards,  which was contrary to the 
provisions of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016. 
The Department stated (December 2023) that the annu al reports upto the year 2016-17 
had been laid before the State Assembly and reports  for the years 2017-18 and 2018-19 
had been sent to the Government of Himachal Pradesh  for laying before the State 
Assembly.  
2.4 Conclusion  
The meetings of the State Authority were not held a t prescribed intervals and the 
authority could not execute the CAs in the APOs as proposed, which resulted in 
backlog in carrying out of CA. Non-inclusion of two  FCA cases in the APOs by the 
concerned divisions resulted in non-utilisation of funds realised from UAs. Despite the 
constitution of State Fund, the funds were still be ing remitted by UAs into the bank 
account of National Authority. Irregular expenditur e was incurred on development of 
Nature/ Eco parks from NPV funds. Further, the Annu al Accounts and Annual reports 
were in arrears.  
2.5 Recommendations  
The Department may consider 
• Holding the prescribed meetings of the State Author ity and preparing APOs to 
ensure optimum utilisation of funds and timely exec ution of works under the State 
Authority. 
• Timely finalisation of Annual Accounts and Reports and maintenance of records 
prescribed under CAF Act and Rules. 

Chapter III 
Proposals for Forest Diversion under FCA  

  
27 | P a g e  
Chapter III  
Proposals for Forest Diversion under FCA 
 
This chapter includes audit findings related to del ays in processing of proposals for 
diversion of forest land for non-forest purpose und er the provisions of Forest 
Conservation Act 1980 and detailed analysis of CA i n FCA cases between 2016-17 and 
2020-21 in the nine selected divisions. 
3.1  Status of proposals submitted between 2016-17 and 2020-21 under Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 
During the period April 2016 to March 2021, 1,018 cases were submitted by various UAs 
(Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs), Roads, Educational  Institutes, Hospital, Transmission 
lines etc.) to MoEF&CC for grant of forest clearances under FCA. In-principle approvals 
in 78 cases (eight per cent ) and final approvals in 164 cases (16 per cent ) were granted 
while 766 (75 per cent ) cases were pending for in-principle approval. Yea r-wise details 
of the same are given in Table 3.1 . 
Table 3.1: Details of year wise FCA cases 
Year in 
which 
cases were 
submitted 
by UAs 
Cases 
received 
In-principle 
approval 
between 
April 2016 
and March 
2021 
Final approval 
between April 
2016 and 
March 2021 
Rejected 
Pending 
with UAs for 
compliance 
Pending with 
State Forest 
Authorities/ 
Government 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2016-17 217 1 21 84 3 101 8 
2017-18 158 24 38 2 86 8 
2018-19 177 18 21 2 123 13 
2019-20 170 10 19 1 119 21 
2020-21 296 5 2 2 207 80 
Total 1,018 78 164 10 636 130 
Source: E-Parivesh, MoEF&CC 
Of the 766 pending cases applied for between 2016-17 and 2020-21 , it was observed that 
379 2 (49 per cent ) cases pertained to roads, 82 (11 per cent ) to HEPs, 33 (four per cent ) 
to Mining and Industries, 25 (three per cent ) to Educational Institutes, 27 (four per cent ) 
to Transmission lines, 22 (three per cent ) to Drinking Water/ Irrigation, 15 (two per cent ) 
to Sewerage treatment plants, three (one per cent ) to Railways and 180 (23 per cent ) to 
others 3. 
                                                           
1  During the year 2016-17, 217 cases were received by the Department for processing under FCA, of 
which, in-principle approval to 21 cases and final approval to 84 cases respectively, was granted by 
MoEF&CC during April 2016 and March 2021; three cases were rejected and 93 cases were pending 
for approval during the period April 2016 and March  2021 and 16 cases were granted in principle 
and final approval after March 2021. Similar position is depicted for the years 2017 to 2021. 
2  Source: e-Parivesh website of MoEF&CC. 
3  These are miscellaneous kind of projects like par king, hospital, ropeways, aanganwadi centres etc. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
28 | P a g e  
Further, out of 766 cases pending for approval during the period, 130 cases (17 per cent ) 
were pending at different levels in the State Fores t Department, while 636 cases 
(83 per cent ) were in draft form 4 pending at the level of UAs. 
As per Rule 6 of Forest Conservation Rules 2003, every User Agency (UA) that wants to 
use any forest land for non-forest purposes, shall make its proposal in the relevant Form 
(Part-I) appended to these rules to the Nodal Officer of the State Government concerned 
along with requisite information and documents, com plete in all respects. The Nodal 
Officer after having received the proposal and on b eing satisfied that the proposal is 
complete in all respects and requires prior approval under section 2 of the Act, shall send 
the proposal to the DFO concerned within a period o f ten days of the receipt of the 
proposal. If the Nodal Officer finds that the propo sal is incomplete, he shall return it 
within a period of ten days to the UA and this time  period and the time taken by the UA 
to re-submit the proposal shall not be counted for any future reference. 
A sample of 60 cases 5 (out of 636) pending with the UAs were test checke d by Audit. 
Out of these, 45 proposals 6. were found to be incomplete by the Nodal Officer and sent 
back to UAs for addressing the shortcomings. In 25 proposals (out of the above 45), the 
UAs did not re-submit the proposal to the Nodal Officer and in the balance 20 proposals, 
though the UA resubmitted the proposal, the same we re again found incomplete by the 
Nodal Officer and sent back to UA (and remained  pending with them)  
Further, in the remaining 15 proposals 7 (out of 60), the proposals were accepted by the 
Nodal Officer and forwarded to DFO concerned for fu rther processing. However, the 
DFO found shortcomings in the proposal and sent the m back to UAs for removal of 
shortcomings. This clearly indicates that in these 15 cases, incomplete proposals were 
accepted from UAs (shortcomings in Part-I). Thus, accepting of incomplete proposals by 
the Nodal Officer and their reversion later on from  DFO to UAs had also resulted in 
inordinate delays in the processing of FCA proposals for grant of in-principle approval. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.1  Timeline for processing of FCA cases for in- principle approval 
After receipt of the proposal, the State Government is required to process and forward it 
to the Central Government (Regional office (RO) or ROHQ as the case may be) within a 
period of 180 days of receipt of the proposal. In c ases where Central Government has 
granted General Approvals for diversion of forest land for the specified area in each case 
and for specified public utility services and criti cal/strategic defence infrastructure, 
approval under Forest Conservation Act is granted b y the State Government. Timelines 
for processing of FCA cases at different levels is depicted in Chart 3.1. 
                                                           
4  Draft form – UA initially submits the proposal to  Nodal Officer. If the Nodal Officer finds that the  
proposal is incomplete, the case is returned to UA in draft form. 
5  Hydel – nine (all private); Drinking water – one;  Others – 22 (private - four); Roads – 23; School 
(one NGO/ one Private); Substation – one and Transmission line – one 
6  These 45 proposals were submitted by the UAs betw een April 2016 and December 2019. 
7  These 15 proposals were submitted by the UAs betw een October 2018 and November 2019. 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
29 | P a g e  
Chart 3.1: Process and Timeline for processing of FCA cases at different levels 
 
Source: Parivesh: MoEF&CC’s web portal  
3.1.2  Delays in processing of in-principle approva l  
During the period April 2016 to March 2021, 366 pro posals 8 were accorded Stage-I 
approval. Out of these, 344 cases were approved by the Central Government and 22 cases 
falling under General Approval 9 category (public utility services and critical/ st rategic 
defence infrastructure), were approved by the State Government.    
I. Out of the 344 cases approved by the Central Gov ernment, only 129 cases 
(38 per cent ) were processed and forwarded to the Regional offi ce within the stipulated 
time period of 180 days by the State Government. An average delay of 230 days per case 
in processing and forwarding of the remaining 215 cases (62 per cent ) was noticed. While 
                                                           
8  This also includes cases which were submitted bef ore April 2016. 
9  Central Government grants general approvals for d iversion of forest land for specified public utility 
services and critical/strategic defence infrastructure subject to certain conditions. In these cases, the 
decision for diversion of the forest land or rejection is taken by the respective State/UT Government 
and a copy of the decision is forwarded to the MoEF&CC and its concerned Regional Office. 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
30 | P a g e  
the delay was up to 365 days in 169 cases (79 per cent ), the delay was more than 365 days 
and up to 1,416 days in remaining 46 cases (21 per cent ).  
II. In 22 cases, where general approval was given b y the Central Government, 
12 cases (55 per cent ) were processed and forwarded to the State Governm ent by the 
Forest Department within the stipulated time period  of 180 days. An average delay of 
130 days per case in processing and forwarding of t he remaining 10 cases (45 per cent ) 
was noticed. While there was delay of up to 365 day s in nine cases (90 per cent ), there 
was a delay of 580 days in the remaining one case. 
The delay at different levels i.e. Nodal Officer FC A, DFOs, CCF/CFs and State 
Government is given in Table 3.2 .  
Table 3.2: Delay in processing of FCA cases at different levels in all the Divisions 
Processing level Total No. 
of cases 
Cases 
processed 
within time 
(Percentage 
in bracket) 
Cases 
processed with 
delay 
Average 
delay in 
processing of 
cases (days) 
Nodal Officer to DFO 366 110 (30) 256  47 
DFO to CF/CCF 366 130 (36) 236  132 
CF/CCF to Nodal Officer 366 141 (39) 225 47 
Nodal Officer to State Government 366 25 (7) 341 85  
State Government to Regional 
Office 344 316 (92) 28 20 
Source: Parivesh: MoEF&CC’s web portal  
As is evident from the Table 3.2 , the delay at various levels of processing ranged between 
eight per cent  (from State Government to Regional Office) and 93 per cent  (from Nodal 
Officer to State Government). The average delay in processing of cases ranged between 
20 days (from State Government to Regional Office) and 132 days (from DFO to 
CF/ CCF).  
Chart 3.2 Cases processed with delay at various levels in all the Divisions 
 
Source: Parivesh: MoEF&CC’s web portal  
70 64 61 
93 
8
Percentage of cases 
Processing levels 
Nodal Officer to DFO DFO to CF/CCF 
CF/CCF to Nodal Officer Nodal Officer to State Government 
State Government to Regional Office 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
31 | P a g e  
3.1.2.1 Delays in processing of in-principle approv al in the selected Divisions 
During the period April 2016 to March 2021, 89 prop osals 10  were accorded Stage-I 
approval in nine test checked divisions, out of whi ch 82 cases were approved by the 
Central Government and seven cases falling under Ge neral Approval category (public 
utility services and critical/ strategic defence infrastructure), were approved by the State 
Government.   
I. Out of the 82 cases approved by the Central Gove rnment, only 33 cases 
(40 per cent ) were processed and forwarded to Regional office within the stipulated time 
period of 180 days. An average delay of 287 days per case in processing and forwarding 
of the remaining 49 cases (60 per cent ) was noticed. While the delay was up to 365 days 
in 35 cases (71 per cent ), the delay was more than 365 days and up to 1,185  days in 
remaining 14 cases (29 per cent ).  
II. In seven cases, where general approval was give n by the Central Government, 
four cases (57 per cent ) were processed and forwarded to the State Governm ent by the 
Forest Department within stipulated time period of 180 days. An average delay of 84 days 
per case in processing and forwarding of the remain ing three cases (43 per cent ) was 
noticed.  
The delay at different levels i.e. Nodal Officer FC A, DFOs’, CCF/ CFs’ and State 
Government for the test-checked Divisions is given in Table 3.3 .
 
Table 3.3: Delay in processing of FCA cases at different levels in the selected Divisions 
Processing level 
Total 
No. of 
cases 
Cases 
processed 
within time 
(Percentage 
in bracket) 
Cases 
processed 
with delay 
Average delay in 
processing of 
cases (days) 
Nodal Officer to DFO 89 25 (28) 64  42 
DFO to CF/CCF 89 23 (26) 66  136 
CF/CCF to Nodal Officer 89 27 (30) 62  70 
Nodal Officer to State Government 89 9 (10) 80  73 
State Government to Regional 
Office 82 76 (93) 6  21 
Source: Parivesh: MoEF&CC’s web portal  
As is evident from the Table 3.3 , the delay at various levels of processing ranged between 
seven per cent  (from State Government to Regional Office) and 90 per cent  (from Nodal 
Officer to State Government). The average delay in processing of cases ranged between 
21 days (from State Government to Regional Office) and 136 days (from DFO to 
CF/CCF).  
  
                                                           
10   Out of these cases, 57 cases were submitted by th e UAs between April 2016 and March 2021 and 
remaining 32 cases were submitted before April 2016. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
32 | P a g e  
Chart 3.3 Cases processed with delay at various levels in the selected Divisions 
 
Source: Parivesh: MoEF&CC’s web portal  
As about 68 per cent  of the land in the State is legally classified as forest land, majority 
of development projects in the State have to seek approval under FCA. Thus, processing 
of FCA cases by the Department with huge delays res ulted in depriving the intended 
beneficiaries of timely benefits of these projects/ schemes, as well as timely initiation of 
CA activities. 
The Department, during the Exit Conference, accepte d (January 2023) the audit 
observation and attributed the delay in processing of FCA cases to the cumbersome 
procedure of clearance, incomplete submission of proposals by UAs and slow processing 
of work in the Department. It was also acknowledged  that due to online uploading of 
proposals/ correspondences on parivesh  portal by the UAs, the clearance process of FCA 
proposals would be improved. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.3 CA in FCA cases between 2016-17 and 2020-21 i n selected divisions 
In the nine selected divisions, a total of 58 (Appendix 3.1)  cases were proposed and 
granted final approval between 2016-17 and 2020-21.  These 58 cases were processed 
through parivesh  website of MoEF&CC. 
An area of 458 hectares was diverted in these 58 cases as per details given in Table 3.4 .  
Table 3.4: Details of area diverted and funds deposited  
(₹ in crore) 
No 
of 
cases 
Area 
diverted 
(ha) 
CA to 
be 
carried 
out 
(ha) 
CA 
amount 
deposited 
by UAs 
NPV 
(including 
Penal NPV) 
deposited 
by UAs 
Cost of 
CAT 
plans 
deposited 
by UAs 
CA 
carried 
out (ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred on 
carrying out CA 
and maintenance 
58 458 921 16.82 33.79 17.31 182 2.04 
Source: Divisional data  
As per the conditions stipulated in the final approval granted by MoEF&CC, CA is to be 
carried out within one to two years from the date o f final approval. Thus, for the cases 
72 74 70 
90 
7
Percentage of cases 
Processing levels 
Nodal Officer to DFO DFO to CF/CCF 
CF/CCF to Nodal Officer Nodal Officer to State Government 
State Government to Regional Office 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
33 | P a g e  
approved between April 2016 and March 2019, CA was to be carried out before 
March 2021 11 . 
Accordingly, there were 27 cases falling in the abo ve period, for which CA was to be 
carried out before March 2021.  
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.3.1 Cases where CA was achieved 
Out of 27 cases against which CA was to be carried out before March 2021, 100 per cent  
CA was achieved in 13 cases and also in three cases  (out of remaining 31 approved 
between April 2019 and March 2021). 
Table 3.5: Details of cases where CA was done 
(₹ in crore)  
No. of 
cases 
Area 
diverted 
(ha) 
CA to be 
carried out (ha) 
CA funds 
deposited by 
UAs 
CA 
carried 
out (ha) 
Expenditure incurred 
on carrying out CA 
and maintenance 
16 91 182 3.38 182 2.04 
Source: Divisional data  
It was also noticed that as per Final Approval gran ted by MoEF&CC, 12,206 trees 
(including 4,730 saplings) were felled against these FCA proposals, and the Department 
planted 2,00,200 plants as per the norms of compensatory afforestation (1,100 plants per 
hectare). 
3.1.3.2 Cases where CA was not carried out 
In the remaining 14 cases (out of 27), no CA has be en carried out as per details given in 
Table 3.6 .  
Table 3.6: Details of cases where CA was not done 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
cases 
Area diverted 
(ha) 
CA to be 
carried out 
(ha) 
CA funds 
deposited by UAs 
CA carried 
out (ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred on carrying 
out CA 
14 165 326 6.01 0 0 
Source: Divisional data  
Thus, it can be seen from the Table 3.6 that in more than 50 per cent of cases where CA 
was to be carried out before March 2021, no CA has been achieved even though funds 
for the same were deposited by the user agency and were available with the Department. 
It was also noticed that as per Final Approval gran ted by MoEF&CC, 2,081 number of 
trees were to be felled against these FCA proposals , however loss of trees could not be 
compensated due to non-carrying out of compensatory afforestation, which defeated the 
purpose of the FCA. 
Further, in three cases (involving 6.31 Ha 
12  of forest land) out of these 14 cases, where 
CA was stipulated on non-forest land, 6.71 Ha non-f orest land was transferred/ mutated 
                                                           
11   For the purpose of uniformity, a period of two ye ars from the date of final approval has been taken 
as grace period for carrying out CA. 
12   One case each of Chamba, Dharamshala and Kullu fo rest division having area 1.0284 ha, 1.6958 ha 
and 3.5863 ha respectively. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
34 | P a g e  
in favour of the Forest Department, hence loss of land was made good. However, the land 
was yet to be declared as Reserved Forest/ Protected Forest under the provisions of Indian 
Forest Act, 1927. This was in violation of the cond itions imposed while granting Final 
Approval for diversion of forest land under the FCA. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4 CA in FCA cases in selected cases 
In the nine selected divisions, out of these 27 cases, in which CA was due by March 2021, 
CA was not done in 14 cases. Thus, a total of 16 ca ses (including three cases for which 
CA was done despite the due date still away) consti tuted the audit sample for a 
360-degree analysis as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1.4.1 Incomplete details of cases  
The details of these 16 cases as per the data provi ded by the Department are given at 
Table 3.7 . 
Table 3.7: Details of cases for 360-degree analysis 
Division Proposal No. Proposal Name Category 
Date of 
receipt at 
nodal 
office 
Area to be 
diverted 
(in ha) 
Kullu FP/HP/VELE 
C/23144/2016 
33/11KV 2x1.6 MVA Sub 
Station Lugvalley 
Village 
Electricity 20-Dec-16 0.12 
Kullu FP/HP/Others 
/34283/2018 
Helipad for disaster 
management and rescue and 
tourism 
Others 20-Jun-18 0.2356 
Dharams 
hala 
FP/HP/Others 
/23209/2016 
Bus Stand at Baba Baroh, 
District Kangra Others 28-Dec-16 0.4608 
Kullu FP/HP/Others 
/18885/2016 
Daughter Booster Station for 
supply of CNG Others 11-Apr-16 0.7783 
Dharams 
hala 
8B/HPB/09/1 
2/2016 
HRTC Workshop at Nagrota 
Bagwan Others 16-Mar-15 0.9036 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/18431/2016 Link road to village Jathani Road 12-Mar-16 1.3226 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/13036/2015 Link road to village Chaklani Road 2-Jun-15 1.3796 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/16051/2015 
Bhatgranmoud to Khadihar 
Road Km 0/00 to3/440 Road 21-Oct-15 1.7118 
Kullu FP/HP/MIN/1 
1411/2015 M/s Paras Stone Crusher Mining 31-Mar-15 2.1754 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/20697/2016 C/O road from Soil to Tandla Road 9-Aug-16 2.39 
Seraj FP/HP/Others 
/18285/2016 
Govt. Degree College 
Gadagusain,Distt Kullu .HP Others 5-Mar-16 2.8 
Seraj FP/HP/Others 
/23885/2017 
Govt. College Sainj, Distt. 
Kullu, HP Others 8-Feb-17 3.1239 
Seraj FP/HP/ROAD 
/20535/2016 
Construction of Talara Bridge 
to Panavi Road Road 19-Jul-16 4.148 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/18373/2016 Link road to Buai Road 9-Mar-16 4.514775 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
35 | P a g e  
Division Proposal No. Proposal Name Category 
Date of 
receipt at 
nodal 
office 
Area to be 
diverted 
(in ha) 
Kullu FP/HP/TRAN 
S/16814/2015 
33kV D/C Transmission line 
from Bhanag to Prini in Distt. 
Kullu 
Transmissi 
on Line 16-Dec-15 10.9119 
Kullu FP/HP/ROAD 
/21272/2016 
Two/Four Laning of Bajoura to 
Manali (From Km. 248.300 to 
Km. 310) section of NH-21 
under NHDP-IVB in the state 
of Himachal Pradesh 
Road 7-Sep-16 53.5242 
Source: Parivesh and Divisional data 
The corresponding entries on E-Green Watch 13  portal, a monitoring mechanism devised 
by MOEF&CC to monitor CA cases, lists the following details against these projects: 
Table 3.8: Entries in E-Green Watch 
Division Project 
Year Proposal Name Purpose GPS 
ID 
Name of the 
UA Location 
Kullu 2017 33/11KV 2x1.6MVA Sub 
Station Lugvalley 
Village 
Electricity 19577 HPSEBL NA 
Kullu NA 
Helipad for disaster 
management and rescue and 
tourism 
Others NA NA NA 
Dharamshala NA Bus Stand at Baba Baroh, 
District Kangra 
 Others NA NA NA 
Kullu NA Daughter Booster Station for 
supply of CNG Others NA NA NA 
Dharamshala NA HRTC Workshop at 
Nagrota Bagwan 
 Others NA NA NA 
Kullu 2019 Link road to village Jathani Road 19576 H PPWD NA 
Kullu 2018 Link road to village Chaklani Road 19575 H PPWD NA 
Kullu 2018 Bhatgranmoud to Khadihar 
Road Km 0/00 to3/440 Road 19573 HPPWD Mandalgad 
Beat 
Kullu 2018 M/S Paras Stone Crusher Mining 19490 
PARTAP 
CRUSHERS 
MANALI 
NA 
Kullu 2018 C/O road from Soil to Tandla Constructio 
n of road 19605 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Public Works 
Department 
NA 
Seraj 2019 Govt.Degree College 
Gadagusain,Distt Kullu .HP Others 18296 NA Near 
Banogi 
Seraj 2019 Govt. College Sainj, Distt. 
Kullu, HP Others 18961 NA Near Sainj 
town 
Seraj 2020 Construction of Talara Bridge 
to Panavi Road 3 
Link to 
villages 18496 NA Near 
Talara VII 
                                                           
13   The e-Green Watch is a web-based e-governance por tal of MOEF&CC (developed by National 
Informatics Centre) that enables the temporal chang e detection for the effective online monitoring 
and evaluation of works in forestry sector undertaken by State CAMPA. The application is capable 
of showing the Compensatory Afforestation, Diverted  Land, Plantations, other Plantations and 
Assets categories on the Google earth imageries and FSI portal. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
36 | P a g e  
Division Project 
Year Proposal Name Purpose GPS 
ID 
Name of the 
UA Location 
Kullu 2018 Link road to Buai Constructio 
n of road 19574 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Public Works 
Department 
NA 
Kullu 2018 
33kV D/C Transmission line 
from Bhanag to Prini in Distt. 
Kullu 
Transmissi 
on Line 19590 HPPTCL NA 
Kullu NA 
Two/Four Laning of Bajoura 
to Manali (From Km. 248.300 
to Km. 310) section of NH-21 
under NHDP-IVB in the state 
of Himachal Pradesh 
Road NA NA NA 
Source: E- Green watch 
It was noticed that necessary details like location, FCA file no., notification order no. etc., 
were not updated by the Divisions concerned into the database though these details were 
required to be uploaded. In eight cases, even the n ame of the UA was not updated. Out 
of these 16 cases no information was uploaded for five cases on the portal. Thus, crucial 
information which could have linked the E-Green Wat ch data properly to the specific 
projects was not uploaded at all. This defeated the  very purpose of establishing a 
transparent system in the form of the portal. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4.2 Delay in processing of in-principle approval  
The issue of in-principle approval (IPA) is a time- bound process. As per the provisions, 
the project proposal needs to reach the Regional Of fice of MOEF&CC through the 
functionaries of the State government. A total of 1 80 days have been provided for this 
purpose of submission of rectified application to r each the regional office. The analysis 
of these 16 cases showed that there were considerab le delays at various levels in 
processing  of in-principle approval as detailed in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Delays in granting IPA 
(In number of days) 
Sr. 
No. Proposal Name Date of 
IPA 
Total 
Delay 
Nodal to 
DFO 
DFO to 
CF 
CF to 
Nodal 
1 33/11KV 2x1.6MVA Sub 
Station Lugvalley 08-Jun-17 No Delay No Delay 52 No Delay 
2 Helipad for disaster management 
and rescue and tourism 02-Jul-18 No Delay No Delay No Delay No Delay 
3 Bus Stand at Baba Baroh, 
District Kangra 10-Mar-17 No Delay 2 No Delay 5 
4 Daughter Booster Station for 
supply of CNG 05-Jul-16 No Delay No Delay No Delay No Delay 
5 HRTC Workshop at Nagrota 
Bagwan 01-Dec-16 142 22 52 35 
6 Link road to village Jathani 28-Jul-17 162 47 129  10 
7 Link road to village Chaklani 23-Jun-17 62 38 26 90 
8 Bhatgranmoud to Khadihar Road 
Km 0/00 to3/440 28-Aug-17 144 1 36 92 
9 M/S Paras Stone Crusher 18-Aug-17 No Delay No Del ay No Delay No Delay 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
37 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No. Proposal Name Date of 
IPA 
Total 
Delay 
Nodal to 
DFO 
DFO to 
CF 
CF to 
Nodal 
10 C/O road from Soil to Tandla 03-Aug-18 276 36 21 3 73 
11 Govt.Degree College 
Gadagusain,DisttKullu .HP 16-Nov-18 286 16 252 60 
12 Govt. College Sainj, Distt. 
Kullu, HP 22-Feb-19 257 No Delay 183 73 
13 construction of Talara Bridge to 
Panavi Road 26-Dec-18 482 269 199 57 
14 Link road to Buai 22-May-17 166 189 1 4 
15 
33kV D/C Transmission line 
from Bhanag to Prini in Distt. 
Kullu 
26-Jun-18 575 24 267 17 
16 
Two/Four Laning of Bajoura to 
Manali (From Km. 248.300 to 
Km. 310) section of NH-21 
under NHDP-IVB in the state of 
Himachal Pradesh 
09-Jun-17 No Delay 4 4 37 
Negative figures showed that there was no delay in those cases. 
Source: MoEF&CC’s web portal Parivesh 
As can be seen from the Table 3.9 , there was no delay in six cases including one private 
project of Stone Crusher, for which there was no delay at any stage till submission to the 
regional office. There was a delay in 10 other projects (all public projects) which ranged 
between 62 and 575 days with the average delay being 255 days. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4.3 Issues in CA funds of selected cases 
After compliance with the conditions stipulated in the IPA, the projects were given the 
final approval. The amount of fund requirements for  the project was analysed and is 
tabulated in Table 3.10 . 
Table 3.10: Case wise CA done and expenditure incurred  
(Amount in ₹) 
Proposal Name 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Name of CA 
site 
Year of 
Plantation  
Area in 
division 
record 
(in ha) 
CA and 
maintenance 
and 
contingencies 
Expenditure 
incurred on CA 
(including 
maintenance) 
33/11KV 2x1.6MVA 
Sub Station Lug valley 20-Nov-17 Baragarh III 2020-21 0.2             54,85 0 
               21,885  
Helipad for disaster 
management and rescue 
and tourism 
31-Aug-18 NA 2020-21 0.5        10,21,732 
               54,712  
Bus Stand at Baba 
Baroh, District Kangra 
 05-May-17  CFS Danoa 2018-19 1             78,369             1,14,372  
Daughter Booster Station 
for supply of CNG 22-Mar-17 2/10 Patalsu 
C-IIb 2018-19 1.56          3,17,500 
            1,78,420  
HRTC Workshop at 
Nagrota Bagwan 
 02-Mar-17 P.40 K CB 
Kareri 2018-19 2          1,66,989             2,28,744  
Link road to village 
Jathani 27-Feb-19 Tarapur-III 
(Jathani) 2020-21 2.66          3,15,609 
            2,91,068  
Link road to village 
Chaklani 06-Feb-18 Tarapur-III 2020-21 2.76          3,27,47 4 
            3,02,010  
Bhatgranmoud to 
Khadihar Road Km 0/00 
to3/440 
01-Aug-18 2/42 C-IV 2020-21 3.5          3,79,928 
            3,82,984  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
38 | P a g e  
Proposal Name 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Name of CA 
site 
Year of 
Plantation  
Area in 
division 
record 
(in ha) 
CA and 
maintenance 
and 
contingencies 
Expenditure 
incurred on CA 
(including 
maintenance) 
M/S Paras Stone Crusher 12-Nov-18 2/10 Patalsu 
C-IIa 2020-21 4.5          7,62,906             4,92,408  
Cons of road from Soil to 
Tandla 14-Dec-18 Baragarh-III 2020-21 4.78          7,96,58 3 
            5,23,047  
Govt.Degree College 
Gadagusain,Distt Kullu 17-May-19 
 31-Kanasar 2020-21 4.5          8,80,320             4,92,408  
Govt. College Sainj, 
Distt.Kullu 29-Jul-19 Bhallan-III 2020-21 6.25          9,78,865  
            6,83,900  
Const of Talara Bridge to 
Panavi Road 14-Jan-20 Bhallan-III 2020-21 8.296        21,02,410  
            9,07,782  
Link road to Buai 17-Dec-18 Tarapur-III 
(Bhumteer) 2020-21 9.03        10,71,410             9,88,099  
33kV D/C T/ line from 
Bhanag to Prini in Kullu 02-Nov-18 2/11 Kothi 
TichCIa 2020-21 22        36,66,282 
          24,07,328  
Two/Four Laning of 
Bajoura to Manali (From 
Km. 248.300 to Km. 
310) section of NH-21 
under NHDP-IVB in  HP 
15-Sep-17 
Kukri Piche, 
Gura ka root 
and Matyani 
2018-19 108     2,26,23,300 
       1,23,52,176  
Total 182 3,55,44,527 2,04,21,342 
Source: Divisional data 
As can be seen from the APOs for the above projects , the Department claimed to have 
completed the plantation in 2020-21 and only the ex penditure relating to maintenance 
was to be made. However, it was noted that FCA case wise expenditure figures were not 
available in the records, in absence of which case wise expenditure was computed by 
Audit on the basis of the approved norms. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4.4 Incorrect uploading of data 
E-Green Watch is a web-based and user-friendly appl ication that is transparent, reliable 
and accountable. It is an integrated e-governance p ortal that enables temporal change 
detection for effective online monitoring and evalu ation of works in the forestry sector 
undertaken by State CAMPA. 
It requires the State Forest Department to upload t he scanned copy of the map and GPS 
files of the diverted and CA lands in KML format. 
KML is a file format used to display 
geographic data in a tool such as Google Earth or Google Maps. The portal also requires 
the State Department to provide d etails of plantation works of various durations from first 
year to fifth year of operations along with the number of plants, area and species etc. 
Audit noticed that two different sets of KML files were uploaded. In 9 cases, the KML files at 
https://egreenwatch.nic.in/FCAProjects/Public/CALs/View_Download_CALand_KML.aspx  
showed CA sites which were in other states. In five  cases, no information was available 
in the above link and in two cases though details of FCA cases were available, the KML 
file was not available as given Table 3.11 . 
 
 
 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
39 | P a g e  
Table 3.11: Cases of incorrect upload of polygons 
Division Project 
Year Proposal Name GPS ID  Uploaded file 
name 
Location as 
per uploaded 
file 
State 
Seraj 2020 construction of Talara 
Bridge to Panavi Road 3 18496 
 CAL_18496.kml Batauli Chhattisgarh  
Kullu 2018 M/S Paras Stone Crusher 19490  CAL_19490.kml Kaspeti Road  Uttar Pradesh  
Kullu 2018 Link road to Buai 19574  CAL_19574.kml Khumba Haryana 
Kullu 2018 C/O road from Soil to 
Tandla 19605 
 CAL_19605.kml Topchanchi Jharkhand 
Kullu 2017 33/11KV 2x1.6MVA Sub 
Station Lugvalley 19577 
 CAL_19577.kml ITI Rajpur Chhattisgarh  
Kullu NA Helipad for disaster 
management and rescue 
and tourism 
NA Not uploaded Not uploaded 
 Not uploaded  
Dharamshala NA Bus Stand at Baba 
Baroh, District Kangra 
 
NA Not uploaded Not uploaded  Not uploaded  
Kullu NA Daughter Booster Station 
for supply of CNG 
NA Not uploaded Not uploaded 
 Not uploaded  
Dharamshala NA HRTC Workshop at 
Nagrota Bagwan 
 
NA Not uploaded Not uploaded  Not uploaded  
Kullu 2019 Link road to village 
Jathani 
19576 
 CAL_19576.kml Jind Haryana 
Kullu 2018 Link road to village 
Chaklani 
19575 
 CAL_19575.kml Talwandi 
Rana Haryana 
Kullu 2018 Bhatgranmoud to 
Khadihar Road Km 0/00 
to 3/440 
19573 
 CAL_19573.kml Thurana Haryana 
Seraj 2019 Govt.Degree College 
Gadagusain, Distt Kullu, 
HP 
18296 
 CAL_18296.kml Sukhri Dabri  Chhattisgarh  
Seraj 2019 Govt. College Sainj, Distt. 
Kullu, HP 18961 
 
File not 
available  
File not 
available  
File not 
available  
Kullu 2018 
33kV D/C Transmission 
line from Bhanag to prini 
in Distt. Kullu 
 
19590 
 
File not 
available  
File not 
available  
File not 
available  
Kullu NA 
Two/Four Laning of 
Bajoura to Manali (From 
Km. 248.300 to Km. 310) 
section of NH-21 under 
NHDP-IVB in the state of 
Himachal Pradesh 
---- Not uploaded Not uploaded 
 Not uploaded  
Source: E-Green watch 
It was further noticed that the Department could no t provide any data regarding number 
of plants, area and species etc. Further, there wer e a separate set of KML files available 
at https://egreenwatch.nic.in/Public/Reports/View_Download_KML.aspx  which showed 
different areas in the Kullu region. Both set of da ta were uploaded by the respective 
Divisional Forest Officers. 
The Department during the proceedings of PAC held in August 2019 to discuss the report 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, General and Economic 
Sectors for the year ended 31 March 2013 (Government of Himachal Pradesh), stated that 
data is being uploaded on E-Green Watch for concurr ent monitoring and evaluation. 
However, audit observed that incorrect and misleading data is being uploaded on E-Green 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
40 | P a g e  
Watch portal which defeated the objective of creati ng the portal besides reducing the 
information available for effective monitoring. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4.5 Change in location of approved CA scheme du ring execution 
FCA guidelines identifies CA as one of the most imp ortant conditions stipulated by the 
Central Government while approving proposals for de -reservation or diversion of forest 
land for non-forest uses. For all such proposals, a comprehensive scheme for CA is to be 
formulated and submitted to MoEF&CC. The comprehens ive scheme is to include the 
details of non-forest/ degraded forest area identified for compensatory afforestation, map 
of area to be taken up for compensatory afforestati on, year wise phased forestry 
operations, details of species to be planted and a suitability certificate from afforestation/ 
management point of view along with the cost structure of various operations. CA scheme 
prepared and submitted by DFO is finally approved by the MoEF&CC. 
Out of 13 cases 14 , it was noticed that the site for carrying out CA was changed in six cases 
(46 per cent). The site at which CA was carried out was different from the sites for which 
a comprehensive CA scheme was formulated, approved and submitted to MoEF&CC. 
No comprehensive scheme for changed CA location as well as justification for their 
change was prepared by the Divisions. The change in  location of CA was not approved 
by the competent authority and MoEF&CC was also not intimated of these changes. The 
details of the cases are tabulated in Table 3.12 . 
Table 3.12: Cases of Change in CA sites 
Proposal Name Name of 
Division Name of CA site Name of Proposed CA 
Sites 
Daughter Booster Station for supply of CNG Kullu 2/10 Patalsu C-IIb 2/10 Patalsu C-5 
M/S Paras Stone Crusher Kullu 2/10 Patalsu C-IIa 2/12 Mathivan C-III 
C/O road from Soil to Tandla Kullu Baragarh-III Baragarh II 
Link road to Buai Kullu Tarapur-III 
(Bhumteer) PhatiBhalyani, Tarapur 
33kV D/C Transmission line from Bhanag to 
Prini in Distt. Kullu Kullu 
2/11 Kothi TichCIa 2/10 Patalsu C-5 
Two/Four Laning of Bajoura to Manali (From 
Km. 248.300 to Km. 310) section of NH-21 
under NHDP-IVB in the state of Himachal 
Pradesh 
Kullu 
Kukri Piche, Gura 
ka root and 
Matyani 
BG-III, Hurang-III, 
Mandalgarh-III 
Source: Divisional data 
There was no evidence on record to show that a comprehensive scheme for changed CA 
location as well as justification for their change was prepared by the divisions as well as 
prior approval of the competent authority had been obtained for change in location of 
CA. This was irregular and contrary to the provisio ns of the FC Act, 1980 besides 
defeating the purpose of formulating a comprehensiv e site-specific CA scheme at the 
time of submission of FCA case. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
                                                           
14   Complete records were available for 13 cases out of 16 cases where CA was done. 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
41 | P a g e  
3.1.4.6 Geographic Information System (GIS) evaluation of the sites 
Out of these 16 sites, four sites were evaluated wi th the help of Aryabhata 
Geo-Informatics and Space Application Centre (AGiSA C) 15 , for the purposes of 
Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation an d Land Use Land Cover (LULC) 
in Reserved Forests 16  (RFs)/ Demarcated Protected Forests 17  (DPFs). The co-ordinates 
uploaded by the Department against these projects o n the E-Green Watch portal were 
analysed and the results are given in Table 3.13 . 
Table 3.13: Details of Plantations outside Open Degraded Forest  
(Area in ha) 
Name of Project Name of 
Division 
Total 
CA land 
Area under 
VDF/MDF 
Area 
under NF 
Area under 
ODF 
Construction of Talara 
Bridge to Panavi Road 3 Seraj 8.3 0.00 5.57 2.73 
M/s Paras Stone Crusher Kullu 4.5 2.10 0.80 1.60 
Link road to Buai Kullu 9.03 0.00 8.36 0.68 
C/O road from Soil to 
Tandla Kullu 4.78 4.78 0.00 0.00 
Total 27  7 15  5 
Source: Geospatial Analysis of CA sites  
As can be seen, against the norms of carrying out t he CA in  Open Degraded Forest , the 
Department claimed to have carried out CA in non-fo rest and VDF/MDF. The project 
named “C/O road from Soil to Tandla” needs special mention as the said CA was carried 
out in complete dense green forest areas. 
This not only defeated the very purpose of MOEF&CC control and superintendence but 
also points to doubtful execution of the CA projects. 
The GIS analysis done by the agency showed that in case of “C/O road from Soil to 
Tandla”, the site selected was Baragarh III which w as already completely under 
VDF/MDF at the time of site selection as shown in t he image in Chapter VI 
(para no. 6.2.2.3 ) of the Report. It can be seen from the source tha t as of 2019, the area 
selected was already under VDF/MDF. 
The FSI 2019 image no. 4  of the CA Site in the Division Kullu, Range-Patlik uhl, 
Beat-Pankot confirms that 100 per cent  of CA site fell under MDF.  The Satellite image 
no. 2 of the above site also shows 100 per cent green cover in the year 2020. 
Despite this, the Department claimed to have carried out CA in this forest area. This claim 
was fraught with the risk of misappropriation of funds claimed as spent in this case. 
                                                           
15   Nodal agency functioning under the aegis of H.P. Council for Science Technology and Environment 
(HIMCOSTE), Government of Himachal Pradesh to facil itate the use of spatial and geo-spatial 
technologies for planning and developmental activities in the State. 
16   Reserved Forest (RF) is an area notified under th e provisions of India Forest Act 1927 or the State 
Forest Acts and having full degree of protection. In RFs all activities are prohibited unless permitted. 
17   Demarcated Protected Forest (DPF) is an area noti fied under the provisions of India Forest Act 1927 
or the State Forest Acts having limited degree of protection. In Protected Forests (PFs), any existing 
rights of individuals or communities are not affected. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
42 | P a g e  
Thus, in these four cases, though as per the original plan, the plantation was to be carried 
out only in Open Degraded Forest , only a small percentage was carried out in the Open 
Degraded Forest  area and the rest was claimed to have been carried  out in other areas. 
Thus, there was complete failure of internal control by the Department in these cases. 
While accepting the audit observations during the e xit conference, the PCCF stated that 
forest areas having dense lantana probably would ha ve been treated as Very Dense 
Forest/Moderately Dense Forest by FSI while studying satellite images. It was also stated 
that in many instances, KML files provided by the field staff did not match with the actual 
location/site of the plantation. The reply was spec ulative in nature as the FSI publishes 
biennial India State of Forest Report for the whole  country, which is based on regular 
nation-wide mapping of forest cover and is accessed by a wall-to-wall mapping exercise 
using remote sensing followed by extensive ground truthing. Further, the KML files were 
called from the respective divisions and cross-checked with E-Green Watch for verifying 
their authenticity. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
3.1.4.7 Quality of sites  
GIS analysis of these four sites revealed that, two  of the sites had signs of agriculture 
being carried out on these sites, which points to lack of monitoring by forest department 
in maintenance of CA sites. The carrying out of agr iculture in CA sites is not a 
permissible activity under the Indian Forests Act 1 927. The details have been shown 
below in Table 3.14 .
 
Table 3.14: Details of Encroachments inside CA sites 
(Area in ha) 
Name of Project Name of 
Division Shrubs Green 
cover Agriculture Grassland Total 
Area 
Construction of Talara Bridge 
to Panavi Road 3 Seraj 0.25 5.87 1.30 0.88 8.30  
M/S Paras Stone Crusher Kullu 0.00 1.69 0.00 2.81 4.50  
Link road to Buai Kullu 0.00 4.12 1.29 3.63 9.04  
C/O road from Soil to Tandla Kullu 0.00 4.78 0.00 0 .00 4.78  
Source: Geospatial Analysis of CA sites  
This showed that the claims of the Department about CA were different from the ground 
reality. It was also not clear as to how forest land was getting tilled without the knowledge 
of the Department. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
3.2 Conclusion  
The 360-degree analysis of these 16 cases showed in complete data submission by the 
State Government. There were inordinate delays in p rocessing of FCA cases for 
in-principle approvals. Once the final approval of MOEF&CC was obtained, the State 
Government changed the location of the sites on its own violating the basic tenets of the 
FCA 1980. Further, incorrect data (kml files) of CA sites was uploaded on E-Green watch 
portal, which could impact the decision making proc ess at the State/Centre level.  CA 

Chapter III: Proposals for forest Diversion under FCA  
43 | P a g e  
was being carried out outside the designated Open Degraded Forest  and there were cases 
of encroachments in these CA sites.  
3.3 Recommendations  
The Department may  
• Take appropriate steps to remove delays in processing of in-principle approval. 
• Take steps to ensure correct uploading of data in the system. 
• Review the cases to take appropriate action against delinquent officials responsible 
for cases of deviations from the approved plans and  investigate cases of possible 
misappropriation of funds. 
• Find ways to stop agricultural practices from the CA sites. 

Chapter IV 
Compensatory Afforestation Activities in 
Himachal Pradesh  

45 | P a g e  
 Chapter IV 
Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
 
4.1  Introduction 
Compensatory afforestation is the process of planting trees to compensate for the loss of 
natural forests that have been cleared for developm ent or other human activities. This is 
often done as a requirement by governments or other regulatory bodies as a way to offset 
the negative impacts of deforestation and promote reforestation. The trees planted during 
compensatory afforestation are typically chosen to be native species that are well-suited 
to the local environment and will provide ecologica l, economic, and social benefits. 
Compensatory afforestation is one of the most impor tant requirements/conditions under 
the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and rules thereunder. It requires prior approval of the 
Central Government for diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes and the purpose 
of compensatory afforestation (CA) is to compensate  the loss of 'land by land' and loss 
of 'trees by trees'.  
4.1.1 Audit Universe and Sample of Compensatory Aff orestation Cases  
As per data provided by the Nodal Officer, FCA, a total of 1,535 cases of CA were given 
final approval between 1 April 2006 and 31 March 2021 in the State of Himachal Pradesh 
and were at various stages of completion. These 1,5 35 cases were spread over 
37 Divisions in the State.  
Table 4.1: CA cases between 1 April 2006 and 31 March 2021 in HP 
Number 
of cases 
Area 
diverted 
(in Ha.) 
CA stipulated 
(Degraded Forest) 
(in Ha.) 
CA (Non-
Forest Land) 
(in Ha.) 
Penal 
CA 
(in Ha.) 
Total to be 
undertaken 
(in Ha.) 
CA 
achieved 
1,535 8,106 16,113 66 356 16,535 Data not 
maintained 
Source: Nodal Officer FCA  
Nine 1 (out of 37) Divisions were selected for PA by usin g stratified simple random 
sampling without replacement method using IDEA soft ware. The details of cases in 
selected Divisions and audit sample are given in Table 4.2 . 
Table 4.2: Position of CA cases in selected Divisions  
Total 
no. of 
cases  
Area 
diverted 
(in Ha.)  
Area of 
stipulated 
CA  
(in ha)  
No. of 
CA 
achieved 
cases  
Area 
of CA 
(in ha)  
No. of 
partial 
CA 
cases  
Area 
of 
CA 
(in 
ha)  
No. 
of no 
CA 
cases  
Area 
of 
CA 
(in 
ha)  
Total 
CA 
achieved 
(in ha)  
383 2 2,572 5,213 3 281 3,634 22  6504 80 663 4,284 
Source: Divisional data 
                                                           
1  Bharmour, Chamba, Chopal, Dharamshala, Kinnaur, Kullu, Kunihar, Nachan and Seraj 
2  These cases do not include 58 cases, which have b een commented in Chapter III. 
3  4,284 (CA achieved) + 663 (Balance CA) + 268 (bal ance partial CA) = 5,215. In terms of CA 
achieved, there was excess CA done in one case (two hectare) 
4  CA Stipulated 918 Ha, CA achieved 650 Ha and Bala nce CA 268 Ha. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
46 | P a g e  
The status of CA conducted as per records of the ni ne selected Divisions in 383 cases 
(detailed in Appendix 4.1 ) is given below in Table 4.3 . The audit of CA cases was 
conducted against the samples mentioned in Table 4.3 . In the nine selected divisions, the 
Department was claiming CA ranging from a low of 69  per cent  in Chopal to a high of 
98 per cent  in Nachan.  
Table 4.3: Status of CA in nine selected Divisions  
          (Area in ha) 
Name of 
division Area diverted Stipulated CA 
CA carried out 
fully or partially 
(Per cent ) 
CA not started at 
all (Per cent) 
Bharmour 245 523 475 (91) 48 (09) 
Chamba 288 570 546 (96) 24 (04) 
Chopal 124 299 206 (69) 93 (31) 
Dharamshala 67 150 144 (96) 06 (04) 
Kinnaur 863 1,646 1,255 (76) 391 (24) 
Kullu 241 529 390 (74) 139 (26) 
Kunihar 472 952 746 (78) 206 (22) 
Nachan 125 252 246 (98) 06 (02) 
Seraj 147 292 276 (94) 16 (06) 
Total 2,572 5,213 4,284 (82) 929 (18) 
Source: Departmental Data 
As can be seen from the Table 4.3 , against the stipulated CA in 5,213 ha, CA was carried 
out only in 4,284 ha. Thus, there was a significant shortfall in CA activities in the selected 
divisions.  
Audit noticed 373 cases 
5 of non-compliance with the conditions imposed in t he 
in-principle/final approval in the nine 6 test-checked units. The cases of non-compliance 
of conditions are given in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2 Deficiencies noticed in planning and execution of Compensatory 
Afforestation  
A number of deficiencies were noticed in respect of planning and execution stage of CA 
activities as detailed below: 
4.2.1 Non-identification of land banks for Compensa tory Afforestation  
As per para 2.2 of Handbook of Guidelines issued un der the Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980, and MoEF&CC notification (November 2017) for diversion of forest land, the 
States and UTs shall create a land bank for CA for speedy disposal of the FC proposals 
under FC Act, 1980. In addition to non-forest land,  degraded forest land with crown 
density up to 40 per cent  under the administrative control of the Forest Dep artment will 
be identified using satellite imagery and in consultation with Forest Survey of India and 
will be made available for CA. To expedite creation of land bank in a systematic manner, 
                                                           
5          75 cases of no CA, 200 cases of delayed C A, 77 cases of change in location, and 12 cases of short    
realisation and nine cases of miscellaneous issues. Some of the cases may have more than one issue 
involved. 
6  DFO Kinnaur – Two; DFO Kunihar – Three; DFO Bharm our – One; DFO Kullu – One; CCF 
Rampur – One; DFO Dharamshala – One; PCCF (HoFF) – One; APCCF R&T Sundernagar – One 
and DFO Nachan - One 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
47 | P a g e  
a Committee under the chairmanship of the PCCF (HoF F) is to be constituted with the 
Chief Wildlife Warden and representatives of the Re venue Department in the State as 
members of the Committee. 
It was noticed that though there was a State-level Committee constituted (March 2018) 
for identification of land banks, only three meetin gs of the Committee could be held till 
November 2023 (one meeting in year 2018 and two in 2023) and it was only in 2023 
(vide Department reply in December 2023) that land bank of 1,792 hectares (in 
21 pockets) were identified for the first time for one project named Renukaji Dam project.  
However, the Department has not used any satellite imagery in consultation with the 
Forest Survey of India for the identification of th e land banks as required under the 
guidelines. 
Thus, even after constitution of the committee, there was a very little progress in creation 
of a comprehensive land bank. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.2 Delay in carrying out of Compensatory Affores tation   
As per the conditions stipulated in the final approval, CA is required to be carried out at 
the stipulated CA site as per comprehensive CA sche me within a period of one to two 
years from the date of issuance of final approval.  
Audit noticed that against the stipulated target of carrying out CA in 5,213 ha in 383 cases 
in the selected Divisions, CA was not carried out i n 75 cases 7 (20 per cent ) involving 
648 ha of forest (12 per cent ) land. The delay in carrying out CA is given in Table 4.4 . 
Table 4.4: Delay in carrying out of CA after date of final approval 
Particulars Delay range (in years) 
Up to two years Two to five Five to ten More than 10 years 
Number of cases 17 (22) 11 (15) 20 (27) 27 (36) 
Area (in Ha.) 223 208 108 109 
Source: Divisional data, Figures in bracket show percentage 
The delay in carrying out CA was upto five years in  37 per cent  cases, five to ten years 
in 27 per cent  of cases and more than 10 years in 36 per cent  of cases. 
Audit noticed that in 69 cases 8 (out of above 75 cases), funds to the tune of ₹ 6.79 crore 
were deposited in ad-hoc CAMPA for carrying out CA and its maintenance.  
Scrutiny revealed that due to non-carrying out of CA within the stipulated time period of 
one to two years after obtaining final approval, funds amounting to ₹ 15.51 crore 9 would 
be required to carry out afforestation and maintenance as of March 2022. Continued delay 
in carrying out afforestation would result in furth er cost escalation. Non-carrying out of 
                                                           
7  CA was not carried out in 80 cases. However, as p er final approval CA is to be carried out within a 
time period of one to two years from the date of grant of final approval. Out of 80 cases, a period of 
two years had elapsed for 75 cases. Thus, only 75 c ases had been considered for calculating the 
delay in carrying out CA. 
8  Fund position was available for only 69 cases. 
9  Excluding Contingency and departmental charges an d calculated as per norms of 2021-22 . 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
48 | P a g e  
CA defeated the purpose of the Act as the loss of land and trees could not be compensated, 
besides additional liability of ₹ 8.72 crore 10  as detailed in Appendix 4.2  was created due 
to cost escalation. 
The DFOs Kullu and Nachan stated (January and Febru ary 2023 respectively) that the 
APOs for carrying out the remaining/ balance CA hav e been prepared and submitted to 
the State Authority. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.3 Delay in execution of Compensatory Afforestat ion in completed cases 
Delay in carrying out CA entails additional liabili ty on account of increase in costs of 
plantation and their maintenance due to overall inflationary trends. With a view to address 
this issue, the Department notifies new CA rates ev ery year for the purpose of recovery 
of CA costs from the UA. 
In the nine test-checked Divisions, CA over an area of 3,632 ha in 280 number 
11  of cases 
was completed as of March 2021, out of which, CA was completed within the stipulated 
time in 69 (25 per cent ) number of cases over an area of 729 ha (20 per cent ). For the 
remaining 200 cases 12 , there was a delay in carrying out of CA over an a rea of 2,866 ha 
(79 per cent ), which ranged between one and 13 years.  
Table 4.5: Delay in execution of CA  
Particulars 
Delay range (in years) 
Up to two years Two to five Five to ten More than 10 years 
Number of cases (200) 85 (43) 65 (33) 45 (22) 05 (02) 
Area (in Ha.) (2,866) 984 457 1,140 285 
Source: Divisional data, Figures in bracket show percentage 
Audit noticed that in 194 13  cases (out of 200 cases) funds to the tune of ₹ 27.04 crore 
were deposited in ad-hoc CAMPA for carrying out CA and its maintenance, against 
which an expenditure of ₹ 29.07 14  crore was made. Thus, funds to the tune of ₹ 2.03 crore 
were utilised in excess of funds deposited by the UA.  
Further, to carry out balance maintenance against t hese cases, funds to the tune of 
₹ 12.87 crore 15  (as detailed in Appendix 4.3 ) would be required. Delay in plantation 
resulted in delayed/ non-compensation of environmen tal loss, excess expenditure of 
₹ 2.03 crore and creation of liability of ₹ 12.87 crore for maintenance of these plantations. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
                                                           
10   Calculated at the rates of ₹ 65,450 for 2016-17, ₹ 83,126 for 2017-18, ₹ 87,485 for 2018-19, 
₹ 1,00,039 for 2019-20 and ₹ 1,09,424 for 2020-21 as notified yearly by the Him achal Pradesh 
Government.  
11   Total case- 383; CA not done- 80 cases; Balance c ases- 303 (Partial CA-22 cases; complete CA- 281 
cases). CA completed in 281 cases, however one case  in which CA was stipulated in terms of 
number of tall plants is excluded from the analysis in this para 
12          Figures of year of execution of CA for 11 cases having an area of 37 ha are still awaited. 
13   For which the fund position was available. 
14    As per norms prevalent during the year of planta tion and maintenance. 
15         As per footnote number 10 above. 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
49 | P a g e  
4.2.4 Change in location of approved Compensatory A fforestation scheme during 
execution 
FCA guidelines identify CA as one of the most impor tant conditions stipulated by the 
Central Government while approving proposals for de -reservation or diversion of forest 
land for non-forest uses. For all such proposals, a  comprehensive scheme for CA is 
formulated and submitted to MoEF&CC. The comprehens ive scheme is to include the 
details of non-forest/ degraded forest area identified for compensatory afforestation, map 
of area to be taken up for compensatory afforestati on, year wise phased forestry 
operations, details of species to be planted and a suitability certificate from afforestation/ 
management point of view along with the cost structure of various operations. CA scheme 
prepared and submitted by the DFO is finally approved by the MoEF&CC. 
In the nine test-checked divisions, CA was complete d in 281 cases (out of 383 cases). 
Audit test-checked records of 108 (out of 281) cases and noticed that the site for carrying 
out CA was changed in 77 cases (71 per cent). The site at which CA was carried out was 
different from the sites for which a comprehensive CA scheme was formulated, approved 
and submitted to MoEF&CC.  
There was no evidence on record to show that a comprehensive scheme for changed CA 
location as well as justification for their change was prepared by the divisions as well as 
prior approval of the competent authority had been obtained for change in location of 
CA. This was irregular and contrary to the provisio ns of the FC Act, 1980 besides 
defeating the purpose of formulating a comprehensiv e site-specific CA scheme at the 
time of submission of FCA case. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.5 Short realisation of funds for raising Compen satory Afforestation 
The in-principle approval to UA for diversion of fo rest land for non-forestry purpose is 
granted on the condition that cost of CA at the pre vailing wage rates as per CA scheme 
and the cost of survey, demarcation and erection of  permanent pillars, if required on the 
CA land, is deposited by the UA in advance with the  Forest Department. CA is to be 
carried out within one to two years of final approval.  
Plantations under CA are maintained for seven to te n years. As per the conditions laid 
down in the final approval granted to the UA, the s cheme may include appropriate 
provision for anticipated cost increase for works scheduled for subsequent years.  
Scrutiny of records of Nodal Officer FCA/ CAMPA rev ealed that in 12 cases 16  in the 
nine test-checked divisions, though the CA scheme was prepared as per the norms fixed 
by PCCF (HoFF) during the year in which in-principl e approval was granted, however, 
the Department did not keep appropriate provision for anticipated cost increase for works 
scheduled in subsequent years, nor raised revised bill for raising of CA from the UAs. 
Audit recalculated the amount due from UAs for carr ying out CA on the basis of norms 
of CA fixed by the Department and anticipated cost escalation and found that UAs were 
                                                           
16   In which final approval was granted between April 2016 and March 2021 . 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
50 | P a g e  
liable to pay a sum of ₹ 9.21 crore on account of CA (including contingency  and all 
charges) against the amount of ₹ 5.92 crore which was deposited by the UAs. This 
resulted in under assessment and consequent short r ealisation of cost of CA to the tune 
of ₹ 3.29 crore 17  as detailed in Appendix 4.4 .  
There was nothing on record to show that any effort  was made at the level of the 
Department to remedy the situation. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.6 Lack of proper co-ordination and internal con trols 
Details of forest land diverted, and CA (Penal and additional CA) stipulated against each 
proposal were supplied by the Nodal Officer FCA; ho wever, the status of CA achieved 
against the corresponding FCA case was not availabl e with the Nodal Officer CAMPA. 
Nodal Officer CAMPA sought the information from the  divisions; however, the 
information was still awaited as of November 2022. Thus, status of CA achieved against 
the stipulated target for the whole State could not  be ascertained. Non-maintenance of 
FCA case wise data and the CA achieved thereagainst , shows absence of a monitoring 
mechanism to check the status of CA against a particular FCA case.  
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
4.2.7 Diversion of departmental charges 
The cost of raising new plantations and their maint enance as well as contingencies are 
deposited in CAMPA account. Departmental charges for implementation of CA scheme 
were fixed at the rate of 17.5 per cent  of the total cost of CA by PCCF (HoFF) (May 2004) 
and the same are recovered from UA and deposited in government treasury as receipts of 
the Forest Department.  
Final approval under FCA was granted to 441 cases 
18  during the period April 2006 to 
March 2021. Audit noticed that in 36 cases (out of 441 cases) across two divisions 19 , 
departmental charges amounting to ₹ 0.74 crore (Appendix 4.5 ), were diverted to ad hoc  
CAMPA account instead of government treasury as rec eipts of Forest Department. This 
resulted in short credit of government receipts of departmental charges. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
  
                                                           
17   Calculated at the rates of ₹ 65,450 for 2016-17, ₹ 83,126 for 2017-18, ₹ 87,485 for 2018-19, 
₹ 1,00,039 for 2019-20 and ₹ 1,09,424 for 2020-21 as notified yearly by the Him achal Pradesh 
Government . 
18          58 cases in Appendix 3.1  and 383 cases in Appendix 4.1 . 
19   DFO Kinnaur (one case) - ₹ 0.50 crore and DFO Chopal (35 cases) - ₹ 0.24 crore 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
51 | P a g e  
4.3 Deficiencies noticed in Individual Compensatory  Afforestation cases  
A number of deficiencies were noticed at the planning stage of CA as detailed below: 
4.3.1 Non/ Short recovery from UA for regeneration of open/ degraded forest 
areas  
(A) Rule 8 of Forest Conservation Rules 2003 stipulates  that on receipt of a copy of the 
in-principle approval, the DFO shall prepare a demand note containing item-wise amount 
of compensatory levies such as cost of creation and  maintenance of CA, NPV, cost of 
implementation of CAT plan or wildlife conservation  plan etc. to be paid by the User 
Agency (UA) and communicate the same to the UA with in ten days of the receipt of a 
copy of the in-principle approval. The UA shall wit hin thirty days of receipt of the 
demand note from the DFO make payment of compensato ry levies and submit a 
compliance report containing a copy of documentary evidence in respect of the payment 
of compensatory levies. 
Audit noticed that in-principle and final approval for construction of two Hydro Electric 
Projects (HEPs) was accorded in favour of M/s GMR a nd M/s JSW Energy Ltd under 
FCA,1980 by MoEF&CC as per details in Table 4.7.  
Table 4.7: Details of forest land diverted for HEP  
Name of 
Project 
Name of user 
agency 
Forest Area 
diverted in Ha 
Date of in-
principle approval 
Date of final 
approval 
Bajoli Holi HEP M/s GMR 75.304 Ha 08/07/2011 26/10/ 2012 
Kuther HEP M/s JSW Energy 
Ltd. 61.4083 Ha 22/06/2011 11/01/2013 
Source: Divisional data 
As per condition no. 18 of the in-principle approva l, the project proponent was required 
to bear the cost of regeneration of open, degraded forest equivalent to forest area being 
diverted in his favour.  
Audit noticed that even though the undertaking to b ear the cost of regeneration of open 
degraded forest equivalent to forest area being diverted in favour of the project proponent 
was obtained from the UAs before final approval, ne ither was the open/degraded forest 
identified for regeneration nor was any scheme for the same prepared by DFO Bharmour. 
Audit calculated that 
₹ 5.53 crore 20  would be needed as per approved rates for 
regeneration of open, degraded forest equivalent to  forest area being diverted in favour 
of the project proponent.  This was however not dem anded nor realised from the user 
agencies as of October 2021. 
The DFO stated that the issue of realisation of funds had been taken up with the UAs and 
audit would be apprised of the outcome accordingly. The reply was not acceptable as the 
funds should have been realised from the UAs within  40 days of receipt of in-principle 
approval. 
                                                           
20   Including departmental charges of ₹ 0.81 crore, calculated on the basis of departmenta l norms for 
CA and anticipating that the works would be started from the year 2022-23. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
52 | P a g e  
(B) While granting final approval (July 2009) for the d iversion of forest land for a 
transmission line in favour of M/s Jaypee Power Grid Limited (UA), MoEF&CC imposed 
an additional condition of plantation of Taxus Baccata 21  over 50 hectares in consultation 
with the State Forest Department and to carry out the plantation under the supervision of 
the State Forest Department. 
The scheme for plantation of Taxus Baccata with an estimated expenditure of 
₹ 1.86 crore 
was prepared (June 2015) and approved (September 2015) six years after the approval of 
the land diversion by the DFO Rampur. The UA was th en requested (October 2015) to 
deposit ₹ 1.86 crore ( ₹ 1.60 crore with ad-hoc CAMPA and ₹ 0.26 crore with DFO 
Rampur as departmental charges). However, neither t he cost of plantation nor the 
departmental charges were deposited by the UA. No r ecords of follow up action for 
effecting this recovery from the UA were made available to audit. The project for which 
forest land was diverted was made operational in 2012.  
On being pointed out during audit, DFO, Rampur refe rred (August 2021) the matter to 
CCF Rampur regarding non-payment of funds by the UA  and the need to revise the 
plantation scheme on the basis of current rates. He  also stated that no person/ official 
posted in the Division had the technical knowhow to grow the nursery of Taxus Baccata 
and requested the CF to impart training to staff in this regard. 
Audit also observed that the scheme for CA prepared by DFO Rampur 22  had not included 
contingency charges 23  in the cost of CA ( ₹ 10.36 lakh) and had also short recovered 
₹ 1.81 lakh on account of departmental charges. Thus, an amount of ₹ 12.18 lakh is still 
to be recovered from the UA.  
Thus, failure of the Department to monitor the compliance of conditions stipulated in the 
approval was contrary to the provisions of the FC Act and led to non-recovery of charges 
from UA. Besides, the delay in recovery of plantati on cost will lead to 
revision/enhancement of cost of plantation and non-achievement of intended benefits of 
the plantations. 
Further replies are awaited (February 2024). 
4.3.2 Non-implementation of Muck Rehabilitation Pla n  
As per the guidelines, checklist and related information on FCA provided on the website 
of HP State Forest Department, while preparing an F CA case, if there is any activity in 
the project which involves digging of land, a muck disposal/management plan has to be 
prepared. The User Agency (UA) has to give an undertaking that muck management plan 
(plan) would be carried out by the UA and in case o f non-implementation of the plan, it 
is liable to penalty/action. The guidelines also pr ovide for development of dumping site 
i.e., construction of retaining walls and other str uctures as per requirement of the site. 
                                                           
21   Source of drug used for treating breast cancer  
22   Under condition no. 2 of the final approval, the DFO Rampur prepared this scheme for CA over 
223 ha. 
23   Five per cent  of the CA charges . 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
53 | P a g e  
The objective is to completely stop rolling down of  the muck. Further, the dumping site 
should be located preferably five km from the river/stream/ nala . 
Approval for diversion of 75.0606 ha of forest land  for construction of Rohtang Tunnel 
in favour of Border Roads Organisation (UA) was acc orded by MoEF&CC, GoI in 
May 2008. Condition number 4 of the above approval stated that the UA had to 
implement all the conditions of the Muck Rehabilita tion Plan under the supervision of 
the State Forest Department at project cost. As per condition number 5, the dumping area 
was to be stabilised and reclaimed and plantation of suitable species was to be carried out 
over the dumping areas at the cost of the UA under the supervision of the State Forest 
Department. A detailed Muck Rehabilitation Plan costing ₹ 12.09 crore was approved by 
MoEF&CC in June 2007 while granting final approval in the above case. As per the Plan, 
approximately 15,07,700 m 3 (9,10,000 m 3 on South portal and 5,97,700 m 3 on North 
Portal) of muck was to be generated during the cour se of the project. The total land for 
muck disposal on South Portal side was 16.2406 ha and 20.00 ha on the North Portal side. 
The site identified for disposal of muck generated during construction activities at the 
south portal was approximately 200 meters from the Solang Valley, 3.09 km from 
Palchan and 11.75 km from the South Portal on the w estern side of Palchan Solang 
Dhundi road. The Seri nala  flowing beside the muck area is reported to be very turbulent 
during the rains. Therefore, in addition to protective measures to be provided for the muck 
area, it was also proposed to provide protection to  the left slope of the nala . The entire 
muck disposal area was to be divided into grids hav ing retaining structures for holding 
the muck. The muck was to be filled in the area in layers and compacted. Other civil 
works were to be carried out to arrest runoff and p revent scouring of the disposal area. 
On completion, the entire muck disposal area was to be provided with good earth on the 
top and dressed neatly and a suitable grass species was to be broadcast. Also, planting of 
suitable trees and shrubs of native species was to be carried out and maintenance of the 
same was to be done for seven years. Two nurseries in Kullu and Keylong Divisions were 
to be developed at the cost of the UA. As per the p lan, plantations at both the North and 
South portal dumping sites were to be carried out d uring the 3rd  and 7 th  years of project 
construction (cost to be borne by the UA).   
Further, various engineering works on both the muck disposal sites were to be constructed 
by the UA at its own cost prior to the start of muck dumping. Both civil engineering and 
biological works as per the plan and schedule were to be executed by the UA and the 
Forest Department was to provide technical guidance  and monitor the effective 
implementation of the plan. The forest land diverte d for muck dumping was only of 
temporary nature and was to be returned to the Fore st Department after reclamation and 
rehabilitation.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that the tunnel was in augurated in October 2020. During a 
meeting under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary h eld in October 2020, it was stated 
that the UA had given an undertaking to implement t he plan and the rehabilitation and 
plantation plan would be implemented when the UA de posited the requisite funds with 
the Department. Further, as per the meeting regardi ng implementation of muck 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
54 | P a g e  
rehabilitation plan held in November 2020 under the chairmanship of CF Kullu, no major 
works were carried out by the UA and the plan was to be revised w.r.t. corrections needed 
and recalculation of required works and budget in t he present circumstances. The CF 
directed to carry out joint inspection of dumping s ites by the forest officers and UA and 
to revise the plan and raise the bill for release o f funds from the UA accordingly. It was 
also noticed that the information pertaining to imp lementation of the plan viz. the 
description of works executed by the UA and the Department w.r.t. the provisions of the 
plan; details of monitoring done by the Department during the implementation of the 
plan; number of inspections of dumping sites carried out by the Department; creation of 
proposed nurseries and status of carrying out plant ations at the dumping sites was not 
available with DFO Kullu.  
A geospatial study and joint physical inspection (w ith the officers of HP Forest 
Department) of dumping sites on North and South por tal of Rohtang tunnel was carried 
out. The results of the same are depicted below: 
i.  Muck dumping was visible at the designated sites (Images 1 & 2). 
ii.  Muck dumping sites at both the portals of the tunnel were located at the banks of 
the river/ nala  (Images 1 & 2). 
iii.  In terms of civil work, only retaining walls on the banks of the river/ nala  to arrest 
the muck were visible, which too were not sufficient for covering the entire length 
of the dumping sites (Image 2). 
iv.  No plantations were carried out for reclamation of dumping sites (Images 1 & 2). 
v.  Temporary structures constructed by the UA were see n at the dumping sites 
(Images 1 & 2). 
vi.  Parking of vehicles inside the dumping site at South Portal was also noticed. 
vii.  Stalls and temporary sheds/ huts were also seen at the South Portal dumping site. 
Non-carrying out of plantations after completion of muck-dumping/ project, non-carrying 
out of civil works prescribed under the plan, use o f dumping sites for parking and 
construction of temporary structures/ huts not pres cribed under the plan inside the 
dumping site was in contravention of the final approval granted under FC Act 1980. The 
dumping sites were not selected at the preferred distance of five km from the river/ nala . 
Besides, due to non-availability of retaining walls along the entire length of the dumping 
site, possibility of muck flowing back into the river/ nala  could not be ruled out. 
 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
55 | P a g e  
Image 1 
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
Image 2  
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
Thus, in light of the above, the Department failed to select a suitable site at a preferred 
distance from the river/ nala , implement/monitor the plan and take penal action against 
the UA for non-implementation of the plan. No plantations and civil works (except partial 
construction of retaining wall) prescribed under th e plan were carried out by the 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
56 | P a g e  
Department even after a period of 13 years since ap proval of the plan. It was also seen 
that the dumping site was being used for unauthoris ed activities like parking of vehicles 
and construction of temporary structures. Besides, no funds for implementation of the 
plan were provided by the UA as of April 2023. 
This was a failure on the part of the Department as considerable time had lapsed without 
any muck rehabilitation being undertaken by the UA.  
The DFO Kullu stated that the UA has been requested  to undertake all measures for 
stabilisation and reclamation of dumping areas as per the Muck Rehabilitation Plan. The 
DFO Lahaul stated that matter regarding deposit of requisite funds for implementation of 
the plan and taking back possession of dumping sites has been taken up with the UA. 
The reply was not acceptable as the tunnel is under  operation and the Department failed 
to implement the plan and reclaim the dumping sites which were temporarily handed over 
to UA and were to be returned to the Forest Departm ent after reclamation and 
rehabilitation. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.3.3 Suspected fraud in use of funds 
 
The guidelines on State CAMPA issued by the MoEF&CC , GoI (August 2009) and 
Clause 4 (ii) of the Government of Himachal Pradesh  Notification (August 2009) 
provides that receipt of all monies from user agenc ies towards Compensatory 
Afforestation, Additional Compensatory Afforestation, Catchment Area Treatment Plan 
or for compliance of any other condition(s) stipulated by the Central Government, while 
according approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 shall be credited in the 
State CAMPA account 24 . Further, departmental charges @ 17.5 per cent  on account of 
CA are government receipts and are to be deposited in the State Government account. 
A Utilisation Certificate (UC) is required and soug ht by the sanctioning authority to 
satisfy themselves that the Grant-in Aid, funds etc . are utilised for the purpose they are 
sanctioned and disbursed within the stipulated period, as well as there is no misuse, delay 
in use, improper use, of these funds by the utilising agency/utility/entity. UCs are a very 
important check to control the utilisation of funds by the implementing agencies. 
In-principle approval (March 2011) for diversion of  64 ha forest land for non-forest 
purpose was granted by MoEF&CC in favour of M/s Him achal Pradesh Power 
Corporation Limited (UA) for construction of 402 MW  Shongtong Karcham Hydro 
Electric Project in Kinnaur division. As per condit ion number 15 of the approval, the 
Forest Department was required to regenerate equivalent amount of degraded forest area 
in addition to CA mentioned in condition number 1. As the UA did not have qualified 
manpower and control on forest area, they had depos ited the funds with the Forest 
                                                           
24   As per Supreme Court orders dated 5 th  May 2006, Ad-hoc CAMPA was constituted, in which a ll 
the monies towards CA, ACA, PCA, CAT plan, NPV and any other condition imposed by 
MoEF&CC was credited. Funds to State CAMPA are rele ased from Ad-hoc CAMPA on the basis 
of Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) prepared by the  State CAMPA and approved by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
57 | P a g e  
Department for compliance of the above condition. The Forest Department was required 
to implement the same and submit a compliance report.  
A CA scheme for regenerating equivalent amount of d egraded forest area amounting to 
₹ 1.37 crore was prepared by the DFO Kinnaur for com pliance of above condition. The 
UA deposited (April 2011) ₹ 1.37 crore for the same with the DFO Kinnaur as per details 
in Table 4.8. 
Table 4.8: Details of Additional CA in 64 ha  
Area for additional CA                                       64 ha    Cost of additional CA             ₹1,10,83,070 
Contingency charges @ five per cent  5,54,153 
Departmental charges @ 17.5 per cent  20,36,514 
Grand Total 1,36,73,737 
Source: Divisional data 
Audit requisitioned (November 2020) the details of the account in which the above funds 
were deposited by the Division and the status of regeneration of 64 ha of degraded forest 
area in compliance of the additional condition imposed by MoEF&CC. In reply, the DFO 
(November 2020) stated that funds received from the  UA were deposited in HP State 
Cooperative Bank Limited, Reckong-peo and plantation over an area of 125 ha had been 
achieved by utilising an amount of ₹ 1.68 crore (including accrued interest). The DFO 
submitted a Utilisation Certificate (UC) to the UA in March 2018 regarding the utilisation 
of funds, certifying that he had satisfied himself that the conditions on which the Grants-
in-Aid was sanctioned had been fulfilled. He certif ied that the said UC was based on 
100 per cent  checks by the Beat Guard, Block Officer and Range Forest Officer 
concerned and 50 per cent verification by Assistant Conservator of Forests an d 
25 per cent  random verification by DFO Kinnaur. 
Scrutiny of records (December 2020), however, revea led that the above funds were not 
deposited by the DFO in the National CAMPA account (excluding departmental charges 
of ₹ 0.20 crore which were to be deposited in State Government account). Departmental 
charges amounting to ₹ 0.20 crore were also not deposited in the State Go vernment 
account (April 2011). The cashbook showing entries of the above funds was not made 
available to Audit. A term deposit of the above amo unt was made on 18 th  June 2011 in 
Himachal Pradesh State Cooperative Bank Limited Rec kong-peo (Kinnaur) till 
17 th October 2011, on which interest of ₹ 0.02 crore was earned. The trail of funds after 
the above period was not made available by the offi ce and suddenly an amount of 
₹ 1.70 crore appeared in a new savings bank account of HP State Cooperative Bank, 
opened on 16 th  May 2017. It could also not be established whether the accrued interest of 
₹ 0.02 crore was included in the above amount. Due to lack of trail of funds, actual interest 
earned between 17 th  October 2011 and 15 th  May 2017 could not be ascertained in audit, 
especially when records of bank statements and cash book were not available with the 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
58 | P a g e  
office. Therefore, possibility of misappropriation of actual interest earned could not be 
ruled out.  
Non-deposit of funds in CAMPA account resulted in bypassing the mechanism of checks 
and balances of the Department as the funds were no t routed through Annual Plan of 
Operations 25  (APOs). 
Submission of UCs without incurring actual expendit ure: It was further noticed that no 
regeneration of degraded forest land was carried out by the DFO 26  against the additional 
condition imposed by MoEF&CC, and UCs without actua l expenditure of ₹ 1.37 crore 
were submitted to the UA (February 2019), falsely c laiming that checks were exercised 
at various levels by the office while utilising the  funds for the intended purpose. As per 
UCs, plantations were shown to be carried out in 12 5 hectare of degraded forest area 
during 2016-17 (60 ha - ₹ 0.61 crore) and 2017-18 (65 ha - ₹ 0.76 crore) against the 
stipulated 64 hectares. Scrutiny of bank statements  of the account opened in May 2017 
revealed that funds amounting to ₹ 1.71 crore were withdrawn from the account during 
2017-18 and there was no record of any withdrawals from the account in 2016-17. Thus, 
the office submitted UCs without incurring actual e xpenditure to the UA, though no 
regeneration of degraded forest land was carried out and the entire funds were withdrawn 
in 2017-18. 
Irregularities in maintenance of Cash Book: During subsequent audit (November 2021), 
a purported cash book regarding the above funds was  produced to audit, in which the 
following discrepancies were noticed: 
(i)  It was not signed by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO). 
(ii)  The cash book only depicted the withdrawals made during the period 2017-18. 
(iii)  There was no entry regarding the receipt of funds and interest earned.  
It appeared that the cash book was prepared after t he issuance of the previous audit 
observation (November 2020).  
Unverified and irregular expenditure: During the au dit (November 2021),  the office 
produced bills and vouchers for utilisation of ₹ 1.71 crore on various activities, which 
were not related to regeneration of degraded forest area. The works regarding which the 
bills and vouchers were produced were not included in the APOs approved by the 
competent authority. Besides, scrutiny of bills and  vouchers revealed the following 
discrepancies: - 
                                                           
25   An Annual Plan of Operation (APO) means the annual  plan for physical activities and financial 
provisions approved by the National Authority or St ate Authority, which describes milestones, 
conditions for success and explains how, a strategi c annual plan will be put into operation during 
the financial year. It provides a brief description , estimated cost, basis for cost estimation, agency  
identified for execution and time schedule of each activity to be executed from State Fund during 
the year. 
26   The fact was accepted by DFO in his reply dated 1 8 th December 2021. 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
59 | P a g e  
(a) Enclosure/Fencing of new plantation areas – An expenditure of ₹ 0.14 crore was 
booked against advance works on enclosure of new pl antation areas 27 . However, 
no plantation was carried out in the areas in the subsequent years, thereby rendering 
the entire exercise as well as expenditure incurred on it as unfruitful and wasteful. 
No reliable documentation was available to prove th e authenticity of these 
payments as has been highlighted in the para on cash book. 
(b) An amount of ₹ 0.30 crore was shown as paid to Sh. Baldev Singh, Contractor on 
account of construction of Gang Hut at Namgia; howe ver, no administrative 
approval and expenditure sanction, tender documents , corresponding letter of 
award of work, estimates of work, entries in Measurement Book, bills and vouchers 
were found on record and the authenticity of the ab ove payment could not be 
verified in audit. 
(c) An amount of ₹ 0.14 crore was shown as expended on purchase of various materials 
and ₹ 0.02 crore was shown as expended on exposure visit of field staff without the 
approval of the competent authority. It was noticed  that the said bill claimed that 
the staff stayed at the Hotel Le Grand Regency duri ng their stay in Ahmedabad 
(January 2018). The invoice for the exposure visit was of ₹ 2.50 lakh while only 
₹ two lakh was paid. The invoice was devoid of any a pplicable tax. There was 
nothing on record for reduction of the amount by ₹ 50,000 and the list of officials 
who went on this tour. No post-tour visit report was available on record. It was also 
not clear as to why instead of TA/DA, all-paid tour  was contemplated. Existence 
of the hotel and authenticity of expenses could not be verified in audit. 
(d) An amount of ₹ 0.34 crore was shown as expended on miscellaneous items and 
only Actual Payee Receipts of the above expenditure  were placed on record. No 
bills/vouchers; sanction orders and name of work/scheme against which these were 
sanctioned, were available with the office. A sum o f ₹ 0.67 crore was disbursed 
through cheques; however, no records (bills/voucher s, sanctions, APRs) were 
found on record.  
(e) ₹ 0.10 crore were shown expended on Soil and Moistur e Conservation works 
without approval from competent authority. 
TDS deducted but not paid to the credit of Central Government: Further, as per 
Section 201 of the Income-tax Act 1961, if a deductor fails to deduct tax at source or after 
deducting the same fails to deposit it to the Gover nment’s account then he shall be 
deemed to be an assessee-in-default and liable to pay simple interest as follows:- 
(i) at one per cent  for every month or part of a month on the amount of such tax from the 
date on which such tax was deductible to the date on which such tax is deducted; and 
(ii) at one and one-half per cent  for every month or part of a month on the amount of such 
tax from the date on which such tax was deducted to the date on which such tax is actually 
paid. 
                                                           
27   Digging of pits and closure of plantation area by fencing 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
60 | P a g e  
Besides, penalty of an amount equal to tax not dedu cted or paid could be imposed 
under Section 271C. Further, as per section 276B of the IT Act, if a person fails to pay to 
the credit of the Central Government, the tax deduc ted at source by him, he shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term wh ich shall not be less than three 
months but which may extend to seven years and with fine. 
Audit noticed that an amount of ₹ 0.24 lakh was deducted as TDS from 28 payments 
made from the above amount, however the same was not paid to the credit of the central 
government.  
Progress/compliance report of the aforesaid scheme of regeneration was also not sent to 
MoEF&CC/ PCCF (HoFF), which was not only contrary t o the provisions of the FCA 
approval but also points to the fact that the highe r officers of the Department were not 
aware of the non-compliance of conditions imposed by the MoEF&CC. 
In reply to the audit observation, the DFO Kinnaur while admitting to the audit findings 
stated that the funds were kept at Division level t o carry out penal CA due to lack of 
knowledge of guidelines. The departmental charges amounting to ₹ 0.20 crore had been 
deposited into Government treasury (December 2021) after being pointed out by audit 
and contingency charges would be deposited into CAM PA account. The DFO further 
stated that ex-post facto  sanction would be taken from competent authority for utilisation 
of interest amount. 
The document submitted with the reply of the Depart ment regarding deposit of 
departmental charges on the basis of the audit observation showed that the departmental 
charges of ₹ 0.20 crore were deposited by various contractors f rom their own sources. 
This raises suspicion regarding collusion between the office and contractors. 
The DFO also admitted to the submission of fake UCs and further stated that the UC was 
submitted to UA in advance, as the CA work was to b e taken up for which material was 
also purchased. Other works/activities (soil and moisture conservation, construction etc.) 
were executed keeping in view the local public dema nd beyond the APO. It was also 
stated that the regeneration of degraded forests wo uld be carried out during the years 
2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 free of cost for which  barbed wire and fence posts have 
already been purchased. 
The reply itself was an admission of the gross irre gularities committed by the 
Department. It is also pertinent to mention here th at false/ misleading reply regarding 
utilisation of funds and fulfilment of condition of  regeneration of degraded forest land 
imposed by MoEF&CC was furnished to audit in Novemb er 2020. Despite lapse of 
considerable time and the issue being pointed out i n subsequent audits, no investigation 
has been carried out by the Department, which shows lack of seriousness on its part.  
Thus, the Department failed to ensure compliance of additional condition imposed by the 
MoEF&CC for compensation of environment loss by reg eneration of degraded forest 
land. Besides, in the light of all the above-mentio ned pointers viz. non-deposit of funds 
in National CAMPA, non/improper maintenance of cash  book, submission of UCs 
without incurring actual expenditure, lack of trail  of funds, expenditure not routed 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
61 | P a g e  
through APOs, submission of false/ misleading repli es to audit and non-production of 
bills/vouchers, chances of misappropriation of the above funds could not be ruled out. 
In the exit conference, the Department took cognisance of the seriousness of the matter.  
A letter was issued in March 2024 to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (HoFF), 
requesting a detailed investigation and response. F ollowing this, the Department 
conducted a preliminary enquiry through the APCCF ( M&E) and submitted their report 
to this office in April 2024. The preliminary enqui ry report confirmed that prima facie, 
the observations of the Audit seemed to be correct in view of the guidelines on State 
CAMPA issued by MoEF&CC. It was also stated that the Additional PCCF (M&E), O/o 
the Pr. CCF(HoFF), HP had been directed to conduct a detailed enquiry and submit a 
report.  
The final report was awaited (June 2024). 
 
4.3.4 Non-Compliance of conditions stipulated in la nd diversion case  
Approval for diversion of forest land for limestone  mining in favour of M/s Jaypee 
Himachal Cement Limited (UA 1) was granted in Decem ber 2005, June 2006 and 
November 2014. Similarly, approval for diversion of  land in favour of M/s. Ambuja 
Cements Limited (UA 2) was granted in November 2013. As per the conditions imposed 
by the MoEF&CC, the UAs were required to: 
i. Ensure demarcation of boundary of Safety Zone (7 .5 meter strip all along the 
outer boundary of the mining lease area) and to maintain it as green belt 
28 . 
ii. Carry out afforestation on degraded forest land  to be selected elsewhere, 
measuring one and a half times the area of Safety Z one at the project cost under 
the supervision of the State Forest Department. 
The length of the mining lease boundary was 11 km 29  in respect of UA1 and 19.57 km in 
case of UA2. UA1 proposed to create safety zone (and maintain it as green belt) itself. In 
case of UA2, the length of the mining lease boundar y was wrongly calculated as 
4.54 km 30  and accordingly an amount of ₹ 11.08 lakh was deposited (March 2015) by it 
for creation of safety zone (and maintain it as gre en belt). Audit however, noticed that 
the safety zone along the outside boundary of the m ining lease area was not created by 
UA1 and the Department in case of UA2 which was contrary to the conditions stipulated 
in the final approval. Further, Audit reassessed the amount required for creation of safety 
zone 31  in case of UA2 and found that an amount of ₹ 1.03 crore would be required for 
the same at 2022-23 norms.  
                                                           
28   UA1 – June 2006 (final approval) and UA2 – November 2013 (in-principle approval) 
29   Area of safety zone – 11,000*7.50 = 8.25 ha and a rea for afforestation in degraded forest area – 
1.5*8.25 = 12.38 
30   By considering only length of the mining lease wh ich was touching forest boundary instead of the 
whole boundary of mining lease. 
31   On the basis of total length of mining lease boun dary of 19.57 km as per 2021-22 plantation norms. 
Area of safety zone – 19,570 * 7.50 = 14.68 ha and area for afforestation in degraded forest land – 
1.5 * 14.68 = 22.02 ha 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
62 | P a g e  
Funds to the tune of ₹ 5.21 lakh and ₹ 3.65 lakh were deposited by UA1 and UA2 
respectively with the DFO to carry out afforestatio n on degraded forest land. However, 
no plantation had been carried out as of March 2021 . Audit recomputed the cost of 
afforestation at present norms and found that ₹ 31.12 lakh and ₹ 55.38 lakh would be 
required to carry out afforestation in respect of UA1 and UA2 respectively. 
It was also noticed that UA2 was required to undertake gap planting and soil and moisture 
conservation activities to restock and rejuvenate the degraded open forests, if any, located 
in the area within 100 meters from the outer perimeter of the mining lease. UA2 deposited 
₹ 5.72 lakh with the DFO, which were kept by the off ice in its own account which was 
contrary to the CAMPA rules. Further, out of the ab ove funds, only an amount of 
₹ 2.00 lakh had been expended and the balance funds were still lying with the office as 
of October 2022 which indicated non-compliance of the above condition of MoEF&CC. 
Thus, additional funds of ₹ 92.38 lakh ( ₹ 1.03 crore - ₹ 11.08 lakh) would be required 
from UA2 to create safety zone (and maintain it as green belt) at present cost. Besides, to 
carry out afforestation in one and a half times the  degraded forest area, additional funds 
to the tune of ₹ 77.64 lakh 32  would be required.  
The DFO stated that while, UA1 had started the work  of creation of safety zone, in case 
of UA2 it will be created by utilising the already deposited funds. It was also stated that 
afforestation will be carried out during the year 2023-24.  
The reply was not acceptable as the conditions of c reating safety zone in 22.93 ha and 
carrying out plantations in 34.40 ha degraded forest area (since June 2006 in case of UA1 
and November 2013 in case of UA2) remained unfulfilled, besides creating a liability of 
₹ 1.70 crore ( ₹ 92.38 lakh + ₹ 77.64 lakh) to carry out the above activities at p revailing 
rates. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.3.5 Non-realisation of penalty of ₹ 3.29 crore  
FC Act provides for penal provisions in cases of violation /non-compliance of conditions 
imposed by MoEF&CC while granting approval for diversion of forest land. The penalty 
is imposed on the recommendation of the APCCF Regio nal office in whose jurisdiction 
the alleged violation has occurred. In cases, where the offence is proved, penalty shall be 
imposed for violation committed over forest area wi thout approval equal to twice the 
normal NPV. However, in case of public utility proj ects of the government the penalty 
shall be 20 per cent  of the penalty proposed above. 
Audit noticed that final approval for diversion of 25 hectare of forest land in Chakban 
Khaniyara for slate mining was accorded by MoEF&CC in favour of Industries 
Department (UA) in October 2002. MoEF&CC (October 2 006) stipulated that NPV of 
diverted forest land was to be charged in cases whe re in-principle approval was granted 
before 30 th  October 2002, and for which final approval has either been granted on or after 
30 th  October 2002, or shall be granted thereafter. 
                                                           
32   UA1: ₹ 31.12 lakh – ₹ 5.21 lakh = ₹ 25.91 lakh and UA2: ₹ 55.38 lakh– ₹ 3.65 lakh = ₹ 51.73 lakh 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
63 | P a g e  
MoEF&CC (January 2014) directed the State Forest De partment to realise the NPV of 
25 hectare of forest land diverted in favour of UA before 31 st  March 2014. In case of 
non-realisation of NPV, the final approval accorded under FCA, 1980 was to be revoked 
and all non-forest activities undertaken in forest land stopped by State Government, till 
the NPV is realised from the UA and transferred to ad-hoc CAMPA. It was noticed that 
the cost of NPV of ₹ 1.64 crore as recoverable in the proposal was depo sited by the UA 
in March 2018 in ad-hoc CAMPA account after a lapse  of four years and mining 
operations continued in violation of MoEF&CC. On ac count of violation of the 
conditions imposed by MoEF&CC for four years, the UA was liable to pay penalty equal 
to twice the normal NPV amounting to ₹ 3.29 crore (double of ₹ 1.64 crore). 
The DFO stated that a letter has been issued to the Mining Officer, Kangra (a subordinate 
office of UA) for deposit of penalty as pointed out by Audit.  
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.3.6 Non fulfilment of conditions of approvals and  irregular diversion of fund 
An additional condition for establishing a 500 hect are high altitude transition zone 
plantation to study the effect of global warming wa s imposed by the Government of 
Himachal Pradesh on M/s Jaypee Power Grid Limited ( UA) to compensate for the loss 
of a large number of trees 33 . An amount of ₹ 2.00 crore was deposited by the UA in four 
equal instalments of ₹ 0.50 crore during the period June 2009 to May 2012  with the 
APCCF-cum-Nodal Officer FCA in compliance of the above condition. 
A project implementation plan titled ‘High Altitude  Transition Zones (HATZs) in 
Himachal Pradesh: Long term studies to assess the e ffects of global warming and trials 
to rehabilitate degraded sites in this zone’ was pr epared by the HP Medicinal Plants 
Society in 2011 at a cost of ₹ two crore which was deposited by the UA. APCCF 
(Research and Training) Sundernagar was designated as project leader and HP Medicinal 
Plants Society functioning under the above office w as the executing agency for 
implementation of the project. As per the project report, the project was to be completed 
by March 2016 by dividing the project into two sub projects. The objectives of the project 
were to lay five permanent plots in high altitude t ransition zones to assess and monitor 
on a long-term basis the impact of climate change; to complete ecological and floristic 
baseline studies in these permanent plots; establis hment of nurseries of key species of 
high-altitude transition zones and rehabilitation t rials in 200 ha of degraded sites in this 
zone. 
An amount of 
₹ 2.22 crore was released to APCCF during the period 2009-10 to 2017-18 
by the PCCF (HoFF) for creation of HATZ. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the above project implementation plan prepared by HP 
Medicinal Plants Society was not implemented. Inste ad, an MoU was signed by HP 
Medicinal Plants Society with the Himalayan Forest Research Institute (HFRI) in 
August 2012 (1 
st  phase) and in July 2018 (2 nd  phase) for field survey in permanent plots, 
                                                           
33   Total 16,758 – 12,154 in Kinnaur Division and 4,604 in Rampur Division 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
64 | P a g e  
floristic survey including preparation of enriched floristic profiles permanent plots, 
standardisation of nursery techniques of high-altit ude species including collection of 
germplasm for multiplication etc. An amount of ₹ 21.00 lakh was released to HFRI for 
implementation of 1st  phase. The 2 nd  phase was signed for ₹ one crore and the project was 
to be completed by July 2025 . An amount of ₹ 59.80 lakh has been released to HFRI 
during the implementation of 2 nd  phase.   It was further noticed that the Departmen t did 
not carry out any plantations in the HATZs and neither were any plantation targets were 
fixed in the MoUs signed with HFRI. 
It was also noticed that 
₹ nine lakh were released to DFO Kullu for plantatio n in 
10 hectares during 2011-12 to 2013-14, however as p er information provided by the 
office of APCCF, no plantations have been carried out under the project.  
An amount of ₹ 11.03 lakh was also spent by the office of APCCF, out of which 
₹ 5.12 lakh was spent on hiring of research fellows for implementation of various 
components of HATZs. The details of the remaining expenditure were not made available 
to Audit. 
Thus, even after incurring an expenditure of 
₹ 1.01 crore, the Department could not carry 
out any plantation under HATZs and the additional c ondition of establishing a 500 Ha 
HATZ to study the effect of global warming remained unfulfilled. 
Audit noticed that Additional Chief Secretary (Fore sts) to the Government of Himachal 
Pradesh allocated ₹ 50 lakh each (October 2017) to Natural Resource Ma nagement 
Training and Development Society (NRMTDS) 34  for training and HP Eco-tourism 
Society (HP EcoSoc) for development of Eco-tourism sites in the state from HATZs 
funds. 
Consequently, PCCF transferred the above funds to N RMTDS and HP EcoSoc in 
January 2018. The balance funds of 1.69 crore (incl uding interest) were transferred to 
HPMPS for implementation of HATZ project. 
It was also noticed that NRMTDS further released 
₹ 25.00 lakh each to HP Forest 
Academy (HPFA) Sundernagar and Forest Training Inst itute (FTI) Chail. ₹ 25.00 lakh 
was expended by HPFA on purchase of new bus ( ₹ 18.80 lakh) and upgradation and 
maintenance of hostels ( ₹ 6.20 lakh), whereas the entire amount of ₹ 25.00 lakh was 
utilised by FTI on purchase of two new buses.   
The APCCF stated that the funds to NRMTDS and HP Ec oSoc were allotted as per the 
directions of the Administrative Department and pla ntations will be carried in a phased 
manner and the concerned CF/CCFs have been asked to prepare APOs in this regard. 
The reply was not acceptable as an amount of 
₹ one crore was diverted from the funds 
allocated for establishment of HATZ to the above-mentioned societies for other purposes, 
even though HATZs could not be established even after a period of 12 years. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
                                                           
34   A society to manage the Forest Training Institutes of HP State Forest Department. 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
65 | P a g e  
4.3.7 Non-deposit of funds deposited by user agenci es into CAMPA account 
The guidelines on State CAMPA issued by the MoEF&CC , GoI (August 2009) and 
Clause 4 (ii) of the Government of Himachal Pradesh  Notification (August 2009) 
provides that receipt of all monies from user agenc ies towards Compensatory 
Afforestation, Additional Compensatory Afforestation, Catchment Area Treatment Plan 
or for compliance of any other condition(s) stipulated by the Central Government, while 
according approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 shall be credited in the 
State CAMPA account. 
Rule 2.2 (i) and (ii) of HPFR 1971 Vol.– I stipulat es that every officer receiving money 
on behalf of the Government should maintain a cash book in form HPFR I and all 
monetary transactions should be entered in the cash  book as soon as they occur and 
attested by the head of the office in token of check.  
Audit noticed that funds amounting to 
₹ 19.27 lakh were lying in a savings account of 
State Bank of Patiala as of June 2021.This also included funds amounting to ₹ 5.72 lakh 
received from M/s. Ambuja Cements in 2014 35  on account of compliance of conditions 
imposed by the MoEF&CC. It was further noticed that no cashbook of the above amount 
has been maintained by the office. 
Non-deposit of funds received for compliance of con ditions imposed by MoEF&CC in 
Ad-hoc CAMPA account was contrary to the provisions  of MoEF&CC guidelines. 
Besides, due to non-maintenance of cash book, the source of the remaining funds and the 
purpose for which these were received could not be traced in audit. 
The DFO stated that the amount would be reconciled from records and vouchers and 
Audit would be apprised accordingly. 
The reply was not acceptable as depositing of funds  outside CAMPA account was 
contrary to rules and the fact remains that the fun ds were lying unutilised with the 
Division and the intended purpose for which these f unds were received could not be 
achieved. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.4 Other deficiencies 
During the audit, Audit noticed a number of general  deficiencies in the working of the 
Department, which have been discussed below: 
4.4.1  Construction of new Forest Rest Houses in violation of FCA (DFO Nachan) 
Audit came across cases where despite the requireme nts of approval under FCA, the 
process was never initiated as discussed below: 
Rule 11.8 of the Hand book of guidelines of FCA (2019) provides that any work relating 
or ancillary to conservation, development and manag ement of forests and wildlife, 
namely, the establishment of check- posts, fire lin es, wireless communications and 
                                                           
35   As per the reply submitted by the division. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
66 | P a g e  
construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary 
marks, pipelines or other like purposes, is not a n on-forest use and therefore, taking up 
such work in the forest land does not require diver sion under FCA. As such all State 
Governments should ensure that the basic spirit and essence of FCA is not to divert forest 
land for construction of residential buildings, bun galows, quarters etc. Bare minimum 
(operational) buildings, which are essential for ma nagement of forest and conservation 
of bio-wealth such as forest guard hut, check posts , range offices, small inspection 
bungalow (two-three room), un-tarred single lane roads etc., can be taken up in selected 
areas without causing damage/destruction to the for ests therein. But if the structures are 
large and would impact on conservation, prior permission under FCA would be required. 
The National Forest Policy clearly states that “No forest should be permitted to be worked 
without an approved working plan by the competent a uthority”. Working Plan provides 
for infrastructure development and maintenance of s taff quarters, offices, Forest Rest 
Houses (FRHs), bridle paths, roads, etc. for which full justification is to be given. 
Audit noticed that five new rest houses were constr ucted (under construction) in the 
Nachan Division during the period 2018-19 to 2021-22 having eight to nine rooms 36  each 
(including VIP suites and excluding kitchen and toi lets) at a cost of ₹ 6.03 crore as per 
details in Table 4.9. 
Table 4.9 Expenditure incurred on Forest Guesthouses 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. No. Name of FRH Sanctioned amount  Expenditure incurred  Status of work 
1 Dharotdhar 88,15,700 88,15,000 Completed 
2 Kelodhar 1,03,90,000 83,00,000 In progress 
3 Raingaloo 1,29,50,498 69,87,000 In progress 
4 Jach 1,32,27,488 20,00,000 In progress 
5 Nauna 1,49,00,000 45,00,000 In progress 
 Total 6,02,83,686 3,06,02,000  
Source: Divisional data 
However, as construction of large FRHs (having eight rooms including VIP rooms) was 
not covered under infrastructure ancillary to fores t management, prior approval under 
FCA Act was mandatory for construction of these FRHs. It was further noticed that there 
was no provision for construction of these FRHs in the Working Plan of the division.  
                                                           
36   1.  FRH Dharotdhar- VIP suites – one; Suites – thre e; Living room – two; Chowkidar room - one; 
Dormitory - one (one kitchen and seven toilets)  
2. FRH Kelodhar - VIP suites – one; Suites – four; Living room – two; Dormitory - one (one kitchen 
and eight toilets)  
3. FRH Raingaloo - VIP suites – one; Suites – four; Living room – two; Dormitory - one (one kitchen 
and six toilets) 
4. FRH Jach - VIP suites – one; Suites – three; Liv ing room – two; Chowkidar room - one; 
Dormitory - one (one kitchen and seven toilets) 
5. FRH Nauna - VIP suites – one; Suites – three; Li ving room – two; Chowkidar room - one; 
Dormitory -two (one kitchen and seven toilets) 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
67 | P a g e  
The CCF Mandi stated that while the new FRHs were n ot included in the operational 
Working Plan of the division, the same have been constructed on forest land from forestry 
management point of view with the approval of State Government. 
The reply was not acceptable as construction of lar ge FRHs without obtaining prior 
approval under FCA and against the prescription of the Working Plan was irregular and 
contrary to the provisions of the rules. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.4.2 Non-constitution of Working Plan Unit  
National Working Plan Code (NWPC), 2014 provides fo r constitution of permanent 
Working Plan Units (WPUs) for preparation of WPs to  be headed by a Working Plan 
Officer (WPO) of the rank of Conservator of Forest. For smaller states, deviation may be 
approved by the DGF&SS, MoEF&CC. WPO should be assisted by suitable staff as per 
details given below. 
Head (Policy level) – PCCF/APCCF (Working Plan) 
Field Supervisory unit – APCCF/ CCF (Working Plan) 
Field Functional unit – WPO should be assisted by m inimum of two Asst. Conservators 
of Forests (ACFs), four Range Forest Officers (RFOs ), 12 Foresters and one subject 
matter expert in each of the specialised fields suc h as remote sensing and GIS, 
biodiversity assessment, socio-economic analysis, s tatistics, taxonomy, ecological 
dynamics, soil science, etc. 
The responsibility of working plan preparation cann ot be transferred to the territorial 
DFO/CF of the forest division. 
Rule 31 of NWPC specifies that generally, one WPU m ay undertake the work of 
preparation/review of WP of four or five forest Divisions in a cycle of 10 years. 
Hence, at least eight WPUs would be required for pr eparation/revision of all WPs in 
respect of 37 Divisions in the State.  
Audit noticed that although the posts responsible f or policy making (PCCF) and field 
supervisory unit (APPCF) were created, no WPU has been established by the Department 
even after a period of seven years since the adopti on of the Code (April 2014) and the 
work of preparation of WP was still being carried o ut by the DFOs (Territorial) which 
was in violation of the Code. No additional staff has been provided to the DFOs and the 
work is carried out by the staff posted at the division. It was also noticed that even though 
the Department had requested the Government (Decemb er 2017) regarding the creation 
of WPU and posting of staff as per the provisions of NWPC, the same was not accepted 
by the Government.    
Preparation of WP by DFO (Territorial) and non-constitution of WPU was contrary to the 
provisions of NWPC and resulted in delay/non prepar ation of WPs as detailed in the 
subsequent paragraph. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
68 | P a g e  
The CCF (WP &S) Mandi stated that two offices of CF Working Plan (Central) at Mandi 
and CF Working Plan (North) at Palampur have been notified at field/ supervisory level. 
The fact remains that no WPU has been set up by the  Department and the WP was still 
being prepared by DFOs (Territorial).   
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.4.3 Status of Working Plans 
There are 37 territorial Divisions in the State whi ch are governed by working plans. 
Scrutiny revealed that only 23 WPs were in existenc e and the remaining 14 Divisions 
were functioning without working plans. These WPs w ere not revised even though a 
period ranging between two to 14 years had lapsed s ince expiry of the previous WP. 
Besides, extension by the MoEF&CC was either not given or has expired for these WPs. 
Management of forests without WP was in violation o f the NWP Code, besides causing 
unscientific impact on the growth and regeneration of forests.   
The CCF (WP&S) Mandi stated that preparation of WPs in 12 Divisions is under progress 
and would be completed soon. 
The fact remains that forests are being managed without WPs. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
4.5 Conclusion  
CA is one of the most important requirements under the FCA 1980 to compensate the 
loss of land and trees. The Department failed to id entify land banks for speedy disposal 
of FCA cases which resulted in non/partial/delay in  execution of CA. This resulted in 
cost escalation/ possible cost escalation in carryi ng out of CA in subsequent years. 
Further, CA schemes were prepared without anticipating future cost escalation of works, 
which resulted in short realisation of funds from U As and creating liability on the 
Department. There was lack of internal controls in the Department in implementation of 
CA scheme in letter and spirit as per the provisions of FCA. 
There was no evidence on record to show that a comprehensive scheme for changed CA 
location as well as justification for their change was prepared by the divisions as well as 
prior approval of the competent authority had been obtained for change in location of 
CA. 
There was lack of internal control mechanism in the  department, due to which the 
Department failed to ensure and monitor the complia nce of conditions stipulated in the 
in-principle and final approvals granted by MoEF&CC. Further, cases of violations/non-
compliance of conditions were not reported to MoEF& CC which also resulted in non-
levy of penalty on the defaulter.  It was also noticed that funds deposited for compliance 
of conditions imposed under FCA in two cases, were either misutilised or diverted for 
other purposes, which resulted in non-compliance of these conditions, besides defeating 
the purpose of FCA. Further, in some cases, the Dep artment failed to realise funds to 
ensure the compliance of additional conditions imposed by MoEF&CC. 

Chapter IV: Compensatory Afforestation Activities in Himachal Pradesh 
69 | P a g e  
4.6 Recommendations  
The Department may consider: 
• Identifying land banks for speedy disposal of FCA cases. 
• Mandatory and timely execution of CA as per the conditions stipulated in the FCA 
clearance cases to avoid cost escalation and pendency of CA. 
• Maintenance of a centralised database of FCA cases and CA achieved there against 
to arrive at the true position of achievement of CA  and regular monitoring to take 
necessary corrective actions. 
• Strict execution of comprehensive CA scheme formulated and submitted at the time 
of submission of FCA cases to ensure better survival of plantations. 
• Devising a robust internal control mechanism to ens ure and monitor the 
compliance of conditions imposed by MoEF&CC while according approvals under 
FCA. 
• Reviewing the cases to take appropriate action for fixing responsibility on the 
delinquent officials for cases of deviations from t he approved plans and 
investigating cases of possible misappropriation of funds. 
 

Chapter V 
Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  

71 | P a g e  
Chapter V 
Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
 
5.1 CAT plans 
In terms of Para 9.2 of the Handbook of Guidelines of FCA, a proposal for diversion of 
forest land for Irrigation/ Hydro-electric projects (HEPs) shall invariably be accompanied 
by a detailed CAT plan except in respect of small hydel projects (maximum up to 10 MW 
capacity), which are either canal head or run-of th e river projects and do not involve 
impounding of water/submergence of forest land.  
The CAT plan is an important and essential plan for  enhancing and maintaining the 
ecological health of the catchment area of the prop osed irrigation/ hydroelectric project 
through site-specific biological and engineering me asures for conservation of soil and 
moisture and management of water regime. Among other provisions, the measures should 
focus on arresting soil erosion, improving effective drainage in the area and rejuvenation 
of the degraded eco system in the catchment. CAT pl an shall be approved by the PCCF 
(HoFF), or any other officer authorised by him for the purpose. 
Chart 5.1: Salient Features of CAT plans 
 
Source: HP Forest Manual Vol. I 
5.2 Status of CAT plans in the State 
A list of 30 CAT plans operational in the State was  provided by the Chief Executive 
Officer, HP State Authority in November 2021. The status of expenditure incurred there 
against was not supplied to Audit despite several r eminders. It was stated that the 
information regarding the deposits and expenditure thereagainst has been called from the 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
72 | P a g e  
field offices for reconciliation of figures related  to funds deposited and expenditure 
incurred. This clearly indicates that the complete State-level information is not available 
with the Nodal officer. Non-availability/maintenance of centralised data of CAT plans at 
the Nodal Officer level shows lack of internal control and poor monitoring mechanism in 
the department.  
5.3 Short recovery of funds under CAT plans due to poor monitoring 
(i) The Additional Chief Secretary (Forests) to the  Government of Himachal Pradesh 
notified (September 2009) that the CAT plan size should be based on the actual extent of 
works to be done in the catchment but shall not be less than 2.5 per cent  of the total 
project cost. The CAT plan size would cover the out lay for all components/treatment 
measures, provisions for offsetting cost escalation , and other special provisions viz. 
Payments for Environmental Services (PES), Eco-Batt alion, Monitoring & Evaluation, 
Eco-tourism etc. Total Project Cost shall be the cost of the project proposal mentioned in 
the Techno-Economic Clearance 1 (TEC). 
Audit approached the Directorate of Energy, Governm ent of Himachal Pradesh for the 
information about the HEPs in the state, as the Dir ectorate is their controlling authority, 
and they provided a list of 25 HEPs. Audit scrutini sed list of 25 projects and records of 
HP State CAMPA and noted that the project cost of H EPs as per revised 
Techno-Economic Clearance (TEC) increased substantially in 14 HEPs and in one case, 
the details were not available. The CAT plans were to be revised based on the increased 
project cost as per the revised TEC and additional funds demanded from the UAs. It was 
noticed that the Department was not aware of the increase in project cost of HEPs as per 
revised TEC and thus failed to demand additional fu nds from UAs as well as revise the 
CAT plans accordingly. 
This resulted in non-realisation of additional fund s to the extent of a minimum of 
₹ 198.73 crore as detailed in Appendix 5.1 in 14 HEPs from the UAs as well as loss of 
environment value in catchment due to non-revision of CAT plans. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that the information regarding non-revision of 
CAT plans and deposit of funds was requisitioned from UAs and field offices and Audit 
will be apprised accordingly. The DFO Kullu also stated that the matter regarding deposit 
of additional amount of ₹ 16.90 crore (w.r.t. one UA) has been taken up with  Allain 
Duhagan Hydro Power Ltd. (UA). 
From the above, it is evident that despite there be ing huge financial implications, the 
Department was not even aware of the revision in th e project cost of HEPs and failed to 
demand funds for revision of CAT plans accordingly. 
(ii) As per FCA rules and notification (November 20 01), proposals for diversion of 
forest land for HEPs shall invariably be accompanied by a detailed CAT plan. However, 
in respect of small hydel projects (maximum up to 1 0 MW capacity), which are either 
                                                           
1  Techno Economic Clearance is granted to HEPs by C entral Electricity Authority in case the project 
cost is above ₹ 1,000 crore and by Directorate of Energy below the above amount. 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
73 | P a g e  
canal head or run-of the river projects without inv olving impounding of 
water/submergence of forest land, CAT plan will not be insisted upon. 
Audit noticed that final approval for diversion of forest land for non-forest purpose was 
granted by MoEF&CC in favour of three UAs for construction of HEPs 2, whose installed 
capacity was less than 10 MW (at the time of grant of final approval) during the period 
January 2011 to June 2012. Scrutiny of information collected from the Directorate of 
Energy, GoHP revealed that the revised TEC in respe ct of above three HEPs was 
accorded by Director of Energy and the installed ca pacity of these HEPs increased to 
more than 10 MW subsequently (before commissioning of HEPs). However, the Forest 
Department was not aware of the increased capacity of these HEPs and consequently no 
effort was made for formulation of CAT plans. Further, funds to the extent of a minimum 
of ₹ 8.48 crore as detailed in Appendix 5.2 in this regard were also not demanded from 
the UAs. This is a clear indication of absence of coordination between various authorities 
involved in the process of granting approvals for HEPs. 
Non-formulation of CAT plans of HEPs having capacity more than 10 MW was contrary 
to the provisions of FCA and State Government notif ication and resulted in 
non-realisation of CAT plan funds to the above exte nt. Besides, environment loss in the 
catchment could also not be prevented due to non-preparation of CAT plans. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that the information regarding non-formulation 
of CAT plans and deposit of funds was requisitioned  from UAs and field offices and 
Audit would be apprised accordingly. 
The reply is inadmissible as it is amply clear that  the Department was not aware of the 
HEPs which increased their capacity to above 10 MW after obtaining final approval under 
FCA and consequently failed to demand funds and ens ure formulation of CAT plans 
against these HEPs. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024).  
5.4 Case study of Bajoli Holi CAT plan 
In order to derive an assurance from the implementa tion of CAT plans, Audit selected 
one CAT plan for 360-degree analysis. For this purp ose, Bajoli Holi Hydro Electric 
Project was selected for the study. 
5.4.1 Introduction 
Approval for diversion of 75.304 ha of forest area for implementation of 180 MW Bajoli 
Hydro Electric Project (HEP) in favour of GMR Bajol i Holi Hydro Pvt. Ltd. (UA) in 
Bharmour forest Division was granted by MoEFCC in October 2012.  
                                                           
2  Raura HEP UA – M/S DLI Power (India) Pvt. Ltd. (e ight MW Kinnaur Division TEC – ₹ 94.91 crore 
CAT plan cost @ 2.5 per cent  of TEC - ₹ 2.37 crore); Rala HEP – M/S Taranda Hydro Power Lt d. 
(nine MW Kinnaur Division ₹ 95.79 crore CAT plan cost @ 2.5 per cent  of TEC - ₹ 2.39 crore) and 
Kuwarsi HEP – M/S V B Hydro Projects Ltd. (five MW Bharmour Division TEC - ₹ 148.50 crore 
CAT plan cost @ 2.5 per cent  of TEC - ₹ 3.71 crore). 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
74 | P a g e  
In accordance with the FCA rules and notification (November 2001), a detailed CAT plan 
costing ₹ 43 crore 3 was prepared on the basis of site-specific require ments and the 
guidelines laid by the Forest Department. The CAT plan provides an account of degraded 
forest areas in the free drainage catchment of the project and suggests various measures 
for their treatment. The main objective of CAT plan  is to mitigate and reduce various 
degradation processes, thereby minimising soil erosion in the free draining catchment of 
the proposed project in order to reduce silt in the Ravi river water. The plan also aims at 
treating and stabilising various degraded areas in the catchment with activities to reduce 
pressure on forests with active participation of human population dwelling in the area and 
undertaking biological and engineering treatment measures for prevention of soil erosion. 
It provides an insight into the quantum and variety  of activities to be undertaken in the 
programme as per the proposed plan to prevent catch ment degradation and soil erosion 
in the Ravi river basin. The physical and financial targets have been spread over a period 
of 11 years (2013-14 to 2024-25). A brief description of the project is given in Table 5.1 .  
Table 5.1: Details of CAT plan for detailed scrutiny 
Name of CAT plan GMR Bajoli Holi (180 MW) 
District Chamba 
Division Bharmour 
River Ravi 
Catchment area 902 km 2 
Amount of CAT plan ₹ 43 crore 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan 
 
                                                           
3  Total project cost was ₹ 1,693.93 crore and CAT plan @ 2.5 per cent  of the total project cost 
amounting to ₹ 43 crore was prepared. 


Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
75 | P a g e  
 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan  
5.4.2 Overview of CAT plan 
Chart 5.2: Details of components of Bajoli Holi CAT plan 
 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
76 | P a g e  
5.4.3 Afforestation measures 
A total amount of 
₹ 10.94 crore as detailed in the Table 5.2  was kept for afforestation 
measures. The following types of areas were proposed for afforestation:  
(i)  Evergreen forest blank detected through remote sensing. 
(ii)  Heavily grazed areas around habitations. 
(iii)  Blank area fit for bringing in vegetation and drain ing directly in the vicinity 
of diversion dam storage.   
Table 5.2: Details of projected expenditure  
Sr. No. Activities Amount (₹ in lakh) 
1 Afforestation & maintenance 496.16 4 
2 Energy plantation 270.30 
3 Enrichment plantation & maintenance 88.75 
4 Nursery development 89.30 
5 Subsidy Silviculture 52.50 
6 Pasture management 97.00 
 Total 1,094.01 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan 
5.4.3.1 Shortfalls in achievement of targets 
As per the CAT plan physical and financial targets were fixed for each component, which 
were to be achieved as per the timeline prescribed in the CAT plan. As is evident from 
the following observations, there have been shortfalls in carrying out the targets stipulated 
in the CAT plans, thus defeating the very purpose o f inclusion of these components in 
the CAT plans. Thus, the objectives envisaged in the CAT plans could not be achieved. 
(i) Afforestation and Maintenance  
Afforestation was to be done on 694 ha forest area w.e.f. 2 nd  year of the CAT plan 
implementation i.e., from 2014-15 and completed by 2017-18. A provision for 
maintenance of plantations for five years was made. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that against the total  target of afforestation of 694 hectares 
costing ₹ 3.41 crore to be completed by 2017-18, afforestati on in only 349 hectares 
(50 per cent ) had been done as of September 2021 at a cost of ₹ 1.83 crore (54 per cent ). 
There was a shortfall of 345 hectares (50 per cent ) in afforestation and an amount of 
₹ 1.58 crore (46  per cent ) was lying unutilised in CAMPA. Delay in carrying out 
afforestation resulted in additional requirement of  funds to the tune of ₹ 3.29 crore 5 to 
carry out plantation and maintenance in the balance  area of 345 ha as a result of 
enhancement in the cost of plantation. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation (Nov ember 2022), stated that the 
shortfall in plantations was due to shortage of field staff and the same would be achieved 
in due course of time.  
                                                           
4  Cost of plantation – ₹ 3.41 crore + cost of maintenance - ₹ 1.55 crore = Total cost of plantation and 
maintenance - ₹ 4.96 crore. 
5  Cost of plantation - ₹ 2.24 crore and cost of maintenance - ₹ 1.05crore. 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
77 | P a g e  
The reply is not acceptable as the objective of car rying out of plantations within the 
stipulated period under the provisions of the CAT p lan was not achieved, besides 
resulting in substantial cost escalation for carrying out balance plantations.  
Further, specific sites were suggested and the location of the plantation was also indicated 
in the CAT plan. Deviation from these sites was to be done in case of absolutely necessary 
circumstances by the DFO after spot inspection. 
Audit noticed that the plantations under the component were carried out at places which 
were not proposed under the CAT plan. No spot inspe ction was carried out by the DFO 
while effecting the change in areas which was contrary to the CAT plan provisions. The 
details of cases of deviation of plantation sites are detailed below in Table 5.3 . 
Table 5.3: Details of expenditure on afforestation 
Name of component  Total area of 
plantation (in ha) 
Plantation 
carried out 
(in ha) 
Area in which 
deviation 
noticed (in ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Afforestation 694 349 112 (32) 67.92 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan and divisional records, Figure in bracket shows percentage  
The DFO accepted (November 2022) the above audit observations.  
(ii)  Enrichment Plantation 6 
Enrichment plantation was to be carried out in a to tal of 270 ha 7 of degraded forest area 
in the catchment area at a cost of ₹ 88.75 lakh (including five-year maintenance cost o f 
₹ 30.23 lakh). The plantations were to be carried ou t from 2015-16 and completed by 
2018-19.  
It was noticed that plantations in only 130 ha 
8 (48  per cent ) were carried out at a cost 
of ₹ 58.31 lakh (65  per cent ) as of September 2021. Besides, an expenditure of 
₹ 12.67 lakh was incurred on the maintenance of the above plantations.  Thus, due to 
incurring expenditure way over and above the norms prescribed under the CAT plan, only 
₹ 17.77 lakh (20  per cent ) are available under the component of enrichment p lantation 
for carrying out the balance plantation in 140 ha ( 52  per cent ). Further, for carrying out 
enrichment plantation and its maintenance in the re maining 140 ha at the norms of 
2021-22, an additional amount of ₹ 1.08 crore 9 would be required by the Department. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation (Nov ember 2022), stated that the 
shortfall in plantations was due to shortage of field staff and the same would be achieved 
in due course of time.  
                                                           
6  Enrichment plantation is carried out in degraded forest area to increase stocking in already existing 
open forest and 800 plants per ha are planted under this component. 
7  Block –Barabancho; four beats – Bajol (five areas  – 80 ha), Nayagram (six areas – 110 ha), Yada 
(one area – 15 ha) and Surehi (three areas – 65 ha). 
8  2015-16 (Area – 30 ha, cost - ₹ 12.03 lakh); 2017-18 (Area – 20 ha, cost – ₹ 9.39 lakh); 2018-19 
(Area – 10 ha, cost – ₹ 4.12 lakh); 2019-20 (Area – 45 ha, cost – ₹ 20.37 lakh and 2020-21 (Area – 
25 ha, cost – ₹ 12.40 lakh). 
9   Cost of plantation - ₹ 0.76 crore and cost of maintenance - ₹ 0.32 crore. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
78 | P a g e  
The reply is not acceptable as not carrying out of plantations within the stipulated period 
was contrary to the provisions of the CAT plan, bes ides resulting in substantial cost 
escalation for carrying out the balance plantations. 
Audit also noticed that the plantations under the c omponent were carried out at places 
which were not proposed under the CAT plan. No spot inspection was carried out by the 
DFO while effecting the change in areas which was contrary to the CAT plan provisions. 
The details of cases of deviation of plantation sites are detailed in Table 5.4 . 
Table 5.4: Details of expenditure on enrichment plantation  
Name of 
component 
Total area of 
plantation  
(in ha) 
Plantation 
carried out 
(in ha) 
Area in which 
deviation 
noticed (in ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Enrichment 
plantation 270  130 42 (32) 21.15 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan and divisional records, Figure in bracket shows percentage 
The DFO accepted (November 2022) the above audit observations. 
(iii)  Energy Plantation 
Energy plantations over 240 ha 10  land in the vicinity of the habitations were to be carried 
out during the period 2014-15 to 2019-20 to fulfil the wood and fodder requirements of 
the local people at a total cost of ₹ 2.70 crore.  
Audit noticed that energy plantation in only 12 ha area (five  per cent ) was carried out 
during 2020-21 at a cost of ₹ 7.08 lakh (three  per cent ). Thus, there was a shortfall of 
228 ha (95 per cent ) in respect of energy plantation and an amount of ₹ 2.63 crore 
(97  per cent ) under the component was lying unutilised at the l evel of State CAMPA. 
Failure to carry out energy plantation was not only contrary to the provisions of the CAT 
plan, but also deprived the local people of wood and fodder requirements besides putting 
additional pressure on the surrounding forests. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation (Nov ember 2022), stated that the 
plantations will be done in due course of time.  
The reply is not acceptable as non-carrying out of energy plantations deprived the local 
population of the intended benefits proposed in the CAT plan. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
(iv) Nursery development 
Six new nurseries in the project vicinity were to b e developed and maintained under the 
CAT plan at a total cost of 
₹ 89.30 lakh. 
Audit noticed that an expenditure of ₹ 71.42 lakh was incurred during the period 2013-14 
to 2020-21 under the component ‘Nursery development’. However, none of the proposed 
six new nurseries was developed by the Department, which was irregular and contrary to 
the provisions of the CAT plan. 
                                                           
10   At 20 designated sites in the catchment. 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
79 | P a g e  
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation, sta ted (November 2022) that new 
nurseries were not created as there were sufficient nurseries to supply the plants.  
The reply is not acceptable as the provisions of CA T plan were not adhered to; besides 
the details of expenditure incurred on existing nur series, though called for, was not 
supplied to Audit.  
To summarise, the targets and achievements under th e components – Afforestation and 
Maintenance, Enrichment plantation, Energy plantati on and Nursery development are 
depicted in Chart 5.3 . 
Chart 5.3: Target vs. achievement  
 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan and divisional records; Figures in bracket show percentage 
5.4.4 Non-conducting of study for Payment for Envir onmental services and excess 
allocation of funds for Eco-tourism 
As per HP Government notification (September 2009), a provision of 10  per cent  of the 
total CAT plan outlay is to be earmarked for Payment for Environmental Services (PES) 
to the local communities and one  per cent  of the CAT plan budget should be earmarked 
for Eco-tourism. The PES is a tool to incentivise t he local communities for sustainable 
and environmentally friendly use of the catchment. The PES mechanism for the Bajoli 
Holi HEP catchment area was to be identified by con ducting a study on the issue and 
identify the most appropriate routes and activities under PES. The study was to be carried 
out in the first two years of the project and was to be approved by the Forest Department 
before implementation. The actual implementation of the PES mechanisms, so identified 
by the approved study, was to begin from the 5 th  year of implementation of the CAT plan 
(i.e., from 2018-19). The interventions under the Eco-tourism head would also be defined 
Afforestation and 
Maintenance 
Enrichment 
Plantation 
Energy Plantation Nursery 
Development 
694 
270 240 
6
349 (50)
130 (48)
12 (5)
0(0)
Target (Area in ha) Achievement 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
80 | P a g e  
through the PES study. The CAT plan also highlighte d the ecotourism potential in 
Barabanchho valley in the catchment area. A study was proposed to be carried out in the 
first two years of the project to assess the eco-to urism potential and requirements of the 
area and to suggest a modus operandi for operationalising eco-tourism. A total provision 
of ₹ 4.26 crore was earmarked for PES 11  and Eco-tourism. 
Audit noticed that no study was conducted to identi fy the PES mechanisms suitable for 
Bajoli Holi HEP catchment area as well as to assess  the eco-tourism potential and 
requirements of the area. The entire amount of ₹ one crore for conducting PES was lying 
unutilised with State CAMPA. It was further noticed that a provision of ₹ 3.25 crore was 
kept against Eco-tourism instead of ₹ 0.43 crore 12 , which resulted in excess provision of 
₹ 2.82 crore (655 per cent ). An expenditure of ₹ 0.75 crore was incurred on eco-tourism, 
which resulted in excess expenditure of ₹ 32.81 lakh (76  per cent ) over the stipulated 
allocation under the above component of CAT plan.  
Further, the entire expenditure on eco-tourism was incurred on sites outside the 
Barabanchho valley. Thus, the Department not only failed to carry out any study to assess 
the eco-tourism potential in the above valley but i nstead incurred expenditure over and 
above the stipulated allocation on sites, which were outside the area identified under the 
CAT plan for development of Eco-tourism.  
The DFO accepted the audit observation and stated t hat no studies on PES and 
eco-tourism were conducted. It was also stated that provision in excess of one per cent  of 
the CAT plan under eco-tourism was made as the area had high potential for eco-tourism. 
The reply is not acceptable as firstly no study was  carried out to assess the potential of 
the valley highlighted in the CAT plan. Secondly, the eco-tourism activities were carried 
out outside the area identified in the CAT plan and  excess expenditure over and above 
the fixed norms was incurred, which was contrary to  the Government notification and 
prescriptions of the CAT plan.  
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
5.4.5 Research, Training & Capacity build-up 
The Research, Training and Capacity build-up compon ent has items such as General 
Awareness/Publicity, Training and Participatory Action Research. 
5.4.5.1 General Awareness/ Publicity 
Mass awareness and education programme in the project area villages is a must to reduce 
anthropogenic pressure. Activities like opening of biodiversity register in every village 
and promotion of traditional farming, advertisement  of hazardous effect of fire through 
media, sign boards and public meetings are the important activities under this component. 
A provision of 
₹ 66 lakh was kept for General Awareness and Publici ty for the total 
period of implementation of the CAT plan with a lum p-sum provision of ₹ six lakh per 
                                                           
11   PES study - ₹ one crore and Eco tourism - ₹ 3.25 crore 
12   (One per cent  funds of CAT – one per cent  of ₹ 43 crore = ₹ 0.43 crore) 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
81 | P a g e  
year against Biodiversity education, Community awar eness, sign boards and public 
meetings. 
It was noticed that the entire allocation under the component was utilised during the first 
three years of the plan period i.e., during 2013-14 to 2015-16 instead of carrying out the 
activities during the entire duration of the plan (
₹ six lakh * 11 years) which was contrary 
to the provisions of the CAT plan. Further, the det ails of activities conducted including 
trainings were not provided to Audit, in the absenc e of which the authenticity of 
expenditure incurred under the component could not be verified. 
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
5.4.5.2 Non-imparting of Training to Forest Officer s/ Officials and Community  
A provision of ₹ 89 lakh for providing specialised training and stu dy tours for forest 
officials/ officers, who are executing the plan was kept in the CAT plan. The objective of 
this training component was to provide training to the officers and the staff to augment 
their skills, professional knowledge, and capacity building to be effective and efficient. 
Training for staff was to be organised at the Fores t Training Institutes of HP Forest 
Department by utilising services of resources perso ns from specialised institutions/ 
organisations in the field of soil and water conser vation, Information Technology, 
Environment, Socio- economic issues etc.  
It was noticed that an expenditure of only 
₹ 1.00 lakh has been incurred under the 
component during 2020-21 and no training has been p rovided to field staff for effective 
and efficient implementation of the CAT plan even after a period of eight years.  
The DFO accepted the audit observation.  
5.4.5.3 Non-conducting of Participatory Action Rese arch for Minimizing Negative 
Impact of Transhumance 13  
Chamba district is characterised by presence of tra nshumant groups 14  viz.- Gaddis  and 
Gujjars , due to the presence of high-altitude pastures. Th ese groups follow a routine of 
moving from place to place with the change of season, in a customary usage pattern, with 
their flocks. Regulations on grazing lands, size of  flocks permitted to graze in defined 
pastures, grazing rights, etc. are some of the problems frequently encountered in the area, 
relating to migratory grazers. For in-depth underst anding of the real issues involved, 
Participatory Action Research was to be carried out to provide workable solutions to the 
problems. A provision of ₹ 60 lakh was made for undertaking Participatory Act ion 
Research (PAR) for minimising the negative impact o f transhumance in the catchment 
and then implementing the good practices emerging o ut of this research. ₹ 10 lakh was 
to be expended on this purpose during the first  year (i.e. 2013-14) and the balance 
₹ 50 lakh was to be expended during the course of the remaining 10 years @ ₹ five lakh 
per year.  
                                                           
13   T he action or practice of moving livestock from one grazing ground to another in a seasonal cycle, 
typically to lowlands in winter and highlands in summer.  
14   Human groups practicing transhumance. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
82 | P a g e  
No effort was made to conduct PAR to minimise the n egative impact of transhumance 
and the entire amount remained unutilised as of November 2022. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation, sta ted (November 2022) that the 
research will be carried out in due course of time.  The fact remains that no research has 
been carried out so far. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
5.4.6 Infrastructural build-up and forest protectio n 
A total provision of ₹ 6.45 crore was made under the heads ‘Infrastructural build up’ and 
‘forest protection measures’. 
5.4.6.1 Non-carrying out of repair of boundary pill ars  
As per the CAT plan, the boundary pillars (BPs) of most of the DPFs 15  were erected 
randomly. At some places there were rows of BPs, while at other places the BPs were too 
distantly placed. A plan was to be prepared for con struction of large and intermediate 
BPs in all forests. All the BPs along the cultivati on were to be taken due care of and 
constructed with used Railway graders with GPS read ing. A sum of ₹ 64.00 lakh was 
kept under the component for the same. 
It was noticed that against the proposed construction of 2,185 boundary pillars 
16  (RF 17  – 
150, DPF – 2,035) of the Division, no boundary pill ars were constructed/maintained by 
the Department and the entire amount of ₹ 64.00 lakh was lying unutilised even after 
eight years which was contrary to the provisions of  the CAT plan, besides making the 
forest area more prone to encroachments. This is al so corroborated by the findings as a 
result of geo spatial studies carried out by the Ar yabhatta Geo-informatics & Space 
Application Centre (AGiSAC) 18  as indicated in subsequent Chapter on Geo spatial 
studies.  
The DFO stated (November 2022) that the repair of boundary pillars will be proposed in 
the new working plan which was being prepared in th e Division. The fact remains that 
no boundary pillars have been repaired in the Division. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
5.4.6.2 Fire protection – Non-construction of fire lines 
Where necessary, fire protection and control will b e entrusted to village level user 
groups/SHGs 19  and they would be incentivised by making suitable provision of monetary 
award for the work. Fire lines of length 39 km at a  total cost of ₹ 58.50 lakh were to be 
created under the component.  A provision of ₹ 74.34 lakh has been made for the first 
five years of the project under the component. 
                                                           
15   Demarcated Protected Forest 
16   In four beats of Barabanchho block 
17   Reserved forest  
18   A Centre functioning under the aegis of Himachal Pradesh Council for Science Technology and 
Environment, Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
19   Self Help Groups 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
83 | P a g e  
Audit noticed that during the first five years of t he plan (2013-14 to 2017-18), a sum of 
only ₹ 10.32 lakh was utilised under the component and ₹ 8.46 lakh was utilised during 
the subsequent three years (2018-19 to 2020-21). The balance funds of ₹ 55.56 lakh could 
not be used by the Department (September 2021) under the component though more than 
three years had lapsed since the proposed date of u tilisation of funds. It was further 
noticed that even after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 18.78 lakh, not even a single km of 
fire line could be created in the block which was n ot only contrary to the provisions of 
the CAT plan but also points towards ill-preparedne ss of the Division in dealing with 
forest fires. The details of components/activities under which the expenditure of 
₹ 18.78 lakh was incurred was not provided to Audit. 
The DFO stated (November 2022) that provision for c onstruction of fire lines will be 
made in the new working plan as per requirement. Th e fact remains that no fire lines as 
per the provisions of CAT plan have been constructed in the Division.   
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
5.4.6.3 Infrastructure development 
A total provision of 
₹ 6.45 crore was made under the following heads for forest protection 
measures.  
(i) Irregular expenditure on buildings 
Keeping in view the necessity of some more inspection huts and living quarters for field 
staff and the dilapidated condition of field staff huts and forest rest houses, a provision of 
₹ 1.80 crore was kept for construction of new buildi ngs and maintenance/furnishing of 
existing buildings.   
Audit noticed that 26 buildings outside the CAT plan area were constructed/repaired at a 
cost of 
₹ 49.35 lakh instead of those which were proposed to  be constructed in the 
catchment area in violation of the CAT plan prescriptions.  
Response of the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
(ii) Construction/repair of Roads, Paths and Bridge s outside the catchment area  
No motorable road would be constructed in the catch ment area as it would lead to 
increased siltation. Only bridle paths, inspection paths and foot bridges shall be 
constructed/maintained for which an amount of ₹ 91.15 lakh was kept. No major road 
shall be constructed in the scheme. 
It was noticed that 131 number of roads, paths and bridges outside the CAT plan area 
were constructed/repaired at a cost of 
₹ 1.31 crore instead of those which were proposed 
to be constructed in the catchment area, in violation of the CAT plan. Besides, an excess 
expenditure of ₹ 39.63 lakh was incurred under the component. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation, sta ted (November 2022) that 
constructions were carried outside the CAT plan are a keeping in view of needs and 
requirement of the local population. The reply is i nadmissible as the constructions were 
to be carried out as per the prescriptions of CAT plan.  
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
84 | P a g e  
(iii) Shortfall in operational support 
For efficient management of forest resources, a budget provision of 
₹ 117 lakh was made 
under the following components:  
Table 5.5: Details of operational support expenditure 
Sr. No Description Amount ( ₹ in lakh) 
1 Field vehicle/ Inspection vehicles 41 
2 Computers with printer and fax machine, photocopy m achine, 
scanner etc. 18 
3 GPS, Differential GPS 6 
4 Misc. office furniture almirahs, file racks etc 5  
5 Fire equipment 2 
6 Binoculars, Digital Camera, Forest Book 5 
7 R&M of vehicles and machinery for 5 years @ ₹ eight lakh per year 40 
 Total 117 
Source: Bajoli Holi CAT plan 
Audit noticed that against the budget provision of ₹ 1.17 crore, an amount of ₹ 14.16 lakh 
has been expended as of September 2021. No inspection vehicle was purchased for field 
visits during the implementation of the plan. The d etails of expenditure of ₹ 14.16 lakh 
were not provided to Audit. Non-purchase of essential equipment may hamper the smooth 
operationalisation of the CAT plan. 
The DFO accepted (November 2022) the audit observation.  
(iv) Non-distribution of Energy Saving Devices 
In order to address the monitoring problem of energy scarcity and its immediate adverse 
fall out on the forests, the local people were to be provided energy-efficient alternatives. 
Under the CAT plan, provision was made for distribution of energy saving devices to the 
BPL and weaker section families on a cost sharing p attern. Under this component, LPG 
connections, pressure cookers, fuel-efficient tando ors etc. were to be made available to 
the catchment dwellers, to reduce the pressure on t he adjoining forest and to inculcate a 
culture of energy efficiency and environmentally fr iendly approaches. A provision of 
₹ 50 lakh was made for the purpose. 
Audit noticed that no effort was made to provide en ergy saving devices to the BPL 
families and weaker sections to the inhabitants of the catchment area and the entire 
amount of ₹ 50 lakh was lying unutilised in the CAMPA account even after eight years. 
Non-providing of energy saving devices defeated the  purposes incorporated under the 
above component of the CAT plan as well as deprived  the beneficiaries of the intended 
benefits.  
The DFO stated (November 2022) that energy devices were not provided as there was no 
demand from the local population. The reply is not acceptable as no beneficiary survey 
to identify beneficiaries (catchment dwellers) was carried out by the Division.  
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
(v) Non-construction of Silt Observation Posts 
Two silt observation locations for regular monitoring of silt load coming into tributaries 
of sub-watersheds falling under high and very high categories were proposed under the 

Chapter V: Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plans  
85 | P a g e  
CAT plan. The intention was to ensure monitoring of  efficacy of implementation of 
various treatments measures suggested in the CAT plan. Monitoring would be undertaken 
for a period of five years and total provision unde r the component was ₹ 69 lakh. The 
entire setup of silt observation posts was to be completed by the year 2017-18. The project 
estimates as per the CAT plan are given below: 
a. Cost of two laboratories - 
₹ 10 lakh for silt analysis per laboratory = ₹ 20 lakh  
b. One hut at each site (@ ₹ five lakh) = ₹ 10 lakh  
c. Cost of hiring services of persons (@ one person  at each site) (Average salary - 
₹ 0.10 lakh for the next five years) = ₹ 12 lakh  
d. Cost for hiring services of supervisor (one pers on for all the sites) (Average salary 
₹ 0.15 lakh for next five years) = ₹ nine lakh  
e. Consumables for the measurement ₹ two lakh per year for next five years = 
₹ 10 lakh  
f. Training and up gradation of Data Collection, So ftware & Maintenance of 
Automatic Silt Observatory = ₹ eight lakh.  
Audit noticed that the Department failed to set up any silt observation posts as of 
September 2021 which resulted in non-monitoring of silt load coming into 
sub-watersheds and no data could be collected about  the efficacy of various treatment 
measures prescribed in the CAT plan and their implementation. 
The DFO, while accepting the audit observation, sta ted (November 2022) that silt 
observation posts will be constructed in due course of time. The reply is inadmissible as 
the fact is that no posts were constructed due to w hich monitoring of silt load and 
collection of data for efficacy of various treatments could not be carried out.  
5.4.7 Non-carrying out of Monitoring and Evaluation  
Under the CAT plan, Monitoring and Evaluation was to be developed as an in-built part 
of the project management for self-evaluation at specified intervals of time to ensure the 
field worthiness and efficacy of the CAT plan. The emphasis was to be on monitoring 
and impact studies of the works done under the CAT plan. This was to be done in the 
6th year of the implementation of the CAT plan (i.e., 2 018-19), in order to apply the 
findings/lessons learnt in the revision/ recasting of the CAT Action Plan in the remaining 
years. A provision of ₹ 2.97 crore was kept for monitoring and evaluation.  Under this 
component, independent consultants or third-party e valuation was to be done to make 
Base Line Survey, Mid-Term Survey and end of projec t survey/evaluation to find out 
effectiveness of CAT plan activities in the catchment area. 
Audit noticed that no monitoring and evaluation stu dies were carried out as of 
September 2021 for self-evaluation and mid-course c orrection and the entire amount 
remained unutilised with the State CAMPA. 
The DFO stated (November 2022) that third party monitoring in the Division was carried 
out by Himalayan Forest Research Institute. The reply is not acceptable as the third-party 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
86 | P a g e  
monitoring was to be done specifically to ensure ef ficacy of the CAT plan, whereas 
monitoring was carried out generally for the whole Division.   
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
 5.5 Conclusion 
The CAT plan is an important and essential plan for  enhancing and maintaining the 
ecological health of the catchment area of the prop osed irrigation/hydroelectric project. 
The data pertaining to operational CAT plans in the  State in terms of funds due from 
UAs, funds actually deposited, and expenditure incurred there against was not maintained 
by the Department which shows lack of monitoring me chanism. The Department was 
also unaware of the changes in the HEP project cost  and capacity after the grant of final 
approval and consequently failed to demand funds for revision/formulation of CAT plans, 
indicating a lack of coordination between various a uthorities involved in the approval 
process.  
In respect of CAT plan Bajoli Holi, the Division fa iled to achieve targets under the 
various components of afforestation within the stip ulated time period, which will result 
in considerable cost escalation in carrying out pla ntations in subsequent years. Further, 
plantation sites were changed without conducting si te inspection. The Division did not 
conduct studies prescribed under the CAT plan. Exce ss expenditure was incurred on 
eco-tourism that too, outside the area proposed und er the CAT plan without conducting 
any study. Important infrastructure works prescribe d under CAT plan such as repair of 
boundary pillars, construction of fire lines, distr ibution of energy saving devices and 
construction of silt observation posts were not eve n started by the Division. Besides, no 
monitoring and evaluation of the CAT plan implementation was carried out. 
5.6 Recommendations 
The Department may consider: 
• Maintenance of a centralised database of CAT plans in the State in terms of funds 
due from UAs, funds actually deposited, and expenditure incurred there against for 
regular monitoring. 
• Coordinating with other authorities to ensure monit oring of HEPs after grant of 
final approval to ascertain changes in project cost  and capacity to ensure timely 
formulation/ revision of CAT plans. 
• Regular monitoring and evaluation of CAT plans to e nsure that the prescriptions 
of the CAT plans are followed strictly and within the stipulated time period.  
 

Chapter VI 
Geospatial Studies on Compensatory 
Afforestation  

87 | P a g e  
Chapter VI 
 Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation 
6.1 Introduction 
Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation and Land Use Land Cover (LULC) 
in Reserved Forests1 (RFs)/ Demarcated Protected Forests 2 (DPFs) were carried out with 
the objective of strengthening the audit findings and for identification of cases of CA 
where there have been deviations from approvals. The study was carried out by using the 
services of Aryabhata Geo-Informatics and Space Application Centre (AGiSAC)
3, which 
functions as a nodal agency to facilitate the use of spatial and geo-spatial technologies 
for planning and developmental activities in the State. The study was carried out between 
October and December 2022. 
6.2 Geospatial study on Compensatory Afforestation 
The study on Compensatory Afforestation (CA) was carried out by using three different 
types of databases to find out the present and past scenario of the CA sites. 
1. Forest Classification done by Forest Survey of India- (To know the past Scenario) 
As per FSI, the forest classification is broadly classified into five classes as per details 
given in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Classification Scheme 
Very Dense Forest 
(VDF) 
All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cover) of 
canopy density of 70 per cent and above. 
 
Moderately Dense Forest 
(MDF) 
All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cover) of 
canopy density between 40 and 70 per cent. 
 
Open Forest (OF)/Open 
Degraded Forest (ODF) 
All lands with tree cover (including mangrove cover) of 
canopy density between 10 and 40 per cent. 
 
Scrub All forest lands with poor tree growth mainly of small or 
stunted trees having canopy density less than 10 per cent. 
 
Non-Forest (NF) Any area not included in the above classes.  
Source: Scheme of Classification as per FSI 
2. Land Use and Land Cover classification - (To know the present scenario) 
Land use is based on the functional dimension of land for different human purposes or 
economic activities, whereas land cover refers to the surface cover on the ground, whether 
                                                           
1  Reserved Forest (RF) is an area notified under the provisions of India Forest Act 1927 or the State 
Forest Acts and having full degree of protection. In RFs all activities are prohibited unless permitted. 
2  Demarcated Protected Forest (DPF) is an area notified under the provisions of India Forest Act 1927 
or the State Forest Acts having limited degree of protection. In Protected Forests (PFs), any existing 
rights of individuals or communities are not affected. 
3   Functioning under the aegis of H.P. Council for Science Technology and Environment 
(HIMCOSTE), Government of Himachal Pradesh. 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
88 | P a g e  
vegetation, urban infrastructure, water, bare soil or other; it does not describe the use of 
land, and the use of land may be different for lands with the same cover type. The 
extraction of vector layers
4 from satellite data are built-up; agriculture; green cover; 
grass/grazing; barren unculturable /waste/open; wetland/water bodies. 
3. Satellite Data to overview the Area of Interest (AoI) - (To know the present 
scenario). 
To conduct the geospatial study of CA sites and land use land cover in RFs/ DPFs (to 
verify the extent of encroachments), the data from satellite GEO Eye (launched in 2008 
and providing very high resolution of 0.50 meter) has been used for interpretation of Land 
Use Land Cover and encroachment status by using ARCGIS software. 
6.2.1 Scope and Methodology 
For the purpose of geospatial analysis, the services of an expert consultant (AGiSAC) 
were utilised and the exercise was carried out between October and December 2022. The 
analysis was conducted on the basis of secondary data
5 obtained from Geographic 
Information System (GIS) cell of HP Forest Department, field divisions of the 
Department and E-Green Watch6 portal. 22 CA sites were selected for geospatial studies 
on the basis of judgemental sampling, risk analysis 7 done by AGiSAC and the data 
available for downloading on E-Green Watch portal. Of these, shape files of 13 CA sites8 
were downloaded from E-Green Watch portal and nine sites were supplied by Divisions 
(which were also further cross verified with E-Green watch).  
The shape files (polygons) provided by the Forest Department were superimposed on FSI 
data (to analyse the accuracy of CA sites under different categories i.e., VDF, DF, OF, 
Scrub) and on satellite data to interpret
9 LULC in the present scenario in year 2020.  
                                                           
4  Vector layers/ Vectorisation - The conversion of satellite image to vector data (points, lines, and 
polygons) - Obtained from GEO EYE satellite image. 
5  FSI data for the years 2009 and 2019 was obtained from GIS cell of HP Forest Department and CA 
polygons were obtained from field divisions and E-Green Watch portal of the MoEFCC. The 
compartment (Forest compartment is the smallest unit of managemen
 t. A group of compartments 
make one block and several blocks forms a forest range ) level data for the purpose of carrying out 
g
eospatial study on land use and land cover in DPFs/ RFs was obtained from the GIS cell of the 
Forest Department. 
6  An e-Governance Portal for automation, streamlining & effective management of processes related 
to plantation & other Forestry works, with the supervision of Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), set up under the Chairmanship of Union Minister 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change by the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. 
7  Keeping in view issues like unclear images from satellite due to polygons falling in shadowy 
portion, cloud cover over the area etc. 
8  A shape file (in SHZ/KMZ/KML format) is a simple, non-topological format for storing the location 
and attribute information of geographic location of sites. Geographic features in a shape file can be 
represented by points, lines, or polygons (areas). 
9  Image Interpretation - Process of examining images and identifying and judging their significance 
by considering their location and extent. 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
89 | P a g e  
Chart 6.1: Methodology for study 
 
Source: AGiSAC 
6.2.2 Audit Findings from Geospatial study  
 
6.2.2.1 Status of uploading of polygons on E-Green Watch against Compensatory 
Afforestation sites 
MoEF&CC directed10 (January 2021) States to upload all data of plantations on E-Green 
Watch portal for efficient monitoring of work. The status of CA carried out during the 
period 2010-11 to 2020-21 and the number of CA sites for which polygons were uploaded 
in the nine test-checked Divisions is given in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Status of CA sites and Polygons 
(Area in hectare) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
No. of 
sites Area No. of sites for which polygons 
uploaded Area 
1 Kunihar 77 798 29 (38) 300 (38) 
2 Bharmour 54 570 49 (91) 508 (89) 
3 Chamba 49 566 30 (61) 352 (62) 
4 Dharamshala 8 157 7 (88) 156 (99) 
5 Kullu 36 569 9 (25) 30 (5) 
6 Seraj 29 284 12 (41) 87 (31) 
7 Kinnaur 174 705 0 0 
8 Chopal 39 359 2 (5) 20 (6) 
9 Nachan 8 246 1 (13) 15 (6) 
Total 474 4,254 139 (29) 1,468 (35) 
Source: E- green watch and divisional records; Figures in bracket show per cent 
From Table 6.2 , it is evident that CA was carried out in 474 sites over an area of 
4,254 hectare during the period 2010-11 to 2020-21, against which polygons of only 
                                                           
10  Vide Notification No. FC-11/79/2020 – FC dated 11 January 2021. 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
90 | P a g e  
139 CA sites (29 per cent) having area 1,468 (35 per cent) were uploaded in E-Green 
Watch portal. No polygons were uploaded by Kinnaur divison and the two 11 polygons 
uploaded by Chopal Division were found to be incorrect. 
Thus, the Department failed to upload the majority (71 per cent) of polygons of CA sites 
on E-Green Watch portal, which resulted in lack of effective monitoring of CA work.  
The Department during the proceedings of PAC held in August 2019 to discuss the report 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, General and Economic 
Sectors for the year ended 31 March 2013 (Government of Himachal Pradesh), stated that 
data is being uploaded on the E-Green Watch for concurrent monitoring and evaluation. 
However, it was noticed that the Department failed to upload 71 per cent of the polygons 
on the E-Green Watch portal. 
The DFOs Kullu and Nachan stated that remaining/ balance polygons would be uploaded 
on E-Green Watch portal shortly. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
6.2.2.2 Irregular/ Wasteful carrying out of Compensatory Afforestation outside 
Open Degraded Forest  
As per Para 2.3 of the Handbook of guidelines of FCA, any degraded forest land for the 
purpose of CA, selected by the State Government may be accepted by MoEF&CC only 
if the crown density of the area is below 40 per cent (open degraded forest). Further, 
MoEF&CC has directed States to upload all data of plantations on E-Green Watch portal 
for efficient monitoring of work.  
The results of Geospatial study and visual interpretation on 22 CA sites/polygons across 
seven Divisions are as per succeeding paragraphs. 
Table 6.3: CA in different Classes of Forests 
(Area in hectare) 
Name of 
Division 
No. of 
sites Total area Area under 
VDF 
Area under 
MDF 
Area 
under NF 
Area under 
ODF 
Bharmour 4 42.89 2.84 1.36 24.69 14.00 
Chamba 4 63.03 20.98 6.23 35.38 0.44 
Kullu 3 18.32 0 6.88 9.16 2.28 
Kunihar 4 70.29 10.29 40.92 9.5 9.58 
Seraj 4 25.42 9.46 5.01 6.13 4.82 
Dharamshala 2 53.24 17.11 15.35 19.64 1.14 
Nachan 1 16.56 0.09 0.58 0.13 15.76 
Total 22 289.75 60.77 76.33 104.63 48.02 
Per cent 100 21 26 36 17 
Source: Geospatial analysis of CA sites 
Analysis of 22 CA sites12  (290 Ha) as detailed in Appendix 6.1 revealed that plantation 
over an area of only 48 Ha (17  per cent ) was done in Open Degraded Forest and the 
                                                           
11  One polygon was located in Uttar Pradesh and one polygon was having area of 0.1 hectare against 
CA of 10 hectare. 
12  Out of total 22 sites, plantations in four CA sites (Kullu Division – three; Banjar Division - one) 
were carried out after 2019 and in these cases, polygons were superimposed on 2019 FSI data. In 
remaining 18 cases, polygons were superimposed on 2009 FSI data. 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
91 | P a g e  
remaining plantation of 242 Ha (83 per cent) was carried out in VDF (21 per cent), MDF 
(26 per cent) and NF (36 per cent). In nine CA sites 13 (41 per cent) having 124 ha area 
(43 per cent), 100 per cent of CA was carried outside Open Degraded Forest (one case 
shown in Image 1). For raising CA and maintenance of plantation in these areas, an 
expenditure of ₹ 2.64 crore 14 was incurred by the Department. Out of the above, 
₹ 1.22 crore (46 p er cent) was spent on carrying out CA in VDF/MDF and ₹ 0.95 crore 
(
36 per cent) was spent on CA in NF. Thus, funds amounting to ₹ 2.16 crore (82 p er cent) 
were spent on the plantations carried outside Open Degraded Forest. Execution of CA 
outside Open Degraded Forest land over an area of 242 Ha was contrary to the guidelines 
issued by MoEF&CC under FCA. This also resulted in irregular/ wasteful expenditure of 
₹ 1.22 crore in carrying out CA in MDF/VDF (where den
 sity of forest is already greater 
than 40 per cent) and also raises doubts over carrying out of CA in these areas (as dense 
forest already existed there). 
Image No. 1 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 
                                                           
13  Chuhar, Manglun, Jagat, Katwad, ChharuGarh, Bandhal, CFSShahpur, Baragarh III, Chadyar across 
six divisions 
14  Expenditure calculated for 22 sites as per norms prevalent during the year of plantation and 
maintenance.  


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
92 | P a g e  
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar 
Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS User Community  
The FSI 2009 Image 1 of the CA Site in the Division Dharamshala, Range-Shahpur, 
Beat-Shahpur confirms that 70.52 per cent of CA site falls under MDF/VDF. The 
Satellite Image 2 of the above site shows 93.25 per cent green cover in the year 2020. 
It was also noticed that against all the 22 CA site polygons that were uploaded on the 
E-Green Watch portal by Divisions, the land type of CA site was stated as notified 
degraded forest. This points to the fact that incorrect/misleading information was being 
uploaded on E-Green Watch as 83 per cent of CA was carried out outside Open Degraded 
Forest and no mechanism existed at the Department and MoEF&CC level to 
verify/validate the authenticity of implementation of CA scheme. 
It is pertinent to mention here that the FSI data regarding the extent of forest cover under 
various types was available with the GIS Cell of the Department up to the year 2019. 
However, the Department failed to utilise this data to identify land banks/ suitable CA 
sites in Open Degraded Forest areas of the State, as is evident from the fact that 
83 per cent of CA was carried out outside Open Degraded Forest.  
The DFO Kullu stated that the factual position will be ascertained after carrying out field 
inspection of sites. No replies were received from other Divisions. 
While accepting the audit observations during the exit conference, the PCCF stated that 
forest areas having dense lantana probably would have been treated as Very Dense 
Forest/Moderately Dense Forest by FSI while studying satellite images. It was also stated 
that in many instances, KML files provided by the field staff did not match with the actual 
location/site of the plantation. The reply was speculative in nature as the FSI publishes 
biennial India State of Forest Report for the whole country, which is based on regular 
nation-wide mapping of forest cover and is accessed by a wall-to-wall mapping exercise 
Image No. 2 
 
Image No. 3 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
93 | P a g e  
using remote sensing followed by extensive ground trothing. Further, the KML files were 
called from the respective divisions and cross-checked with E-Green Watch for verifying 
their authenticity. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
6.2.2.3 Selection of Compensatory Afforestation sites and change in location of 
Compensatory Afforestation sites 
CA has to be carried out in the designated CA site, for which a comprehensive CA scheme 
is formulated, approved and submitted to MoEF&CC. Based on the geospatial analysis, 
Audit noticed that out of 22 CA sites, location of 15 (68 per cent) sites having area 184 ha 
(63 per cent) was different from the approved CA scheme sites. 
Image No. 4 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 
 
 
 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
94 | P a g e  
Image No. 5  Image No. 6 
 
 
 
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2021, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
CA site as per approved CA scheme: Baragarh II. CA carried out at Baragarh III 
(Image 5) 
The FSI 2009 Image 4  of the CA Site in the Division Kullu, Range-Patlikuhl, 
Beat-Pankot confirms that 100 per cent of the CA site falls under MDF. The satellite 
Image 5 of the above site also shows 100 per cent green cover in the year 2020. 
It was also noticed that in the above 15 sites, CA in 147 ha area (80 per cent) was carried 
outside Open Degraded Forest.  The same issue was also commented upon in Para 3.8 
and is corroborated by geospatial studies. 
It was further noticed that in the remaining seven cases (32 per cent), where CA in 106 ha 
area was carried out as per the comprehensive CA scheme, CA in 95 ha area (90 per cent) 
was carried out outside the Open Degraded Forest. 
  


Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
95 | P a g e  
Image No. 7 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
96 | P a g e  
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, Aero GRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
The FSI 2009 Image 7  of the CA Site in the Division Chamba, Range-L/Chamba, 
Beat-Gudda confirms that 64.21 per cent of CA site falls under MDF/VDF. The satellite 
Image 8 of the above site shows 44.54 per cent green cover and 52.99 per cent grasslands 
in the year 2020. 
This clearly indicates that formulation of a comprehensive CA scheme appears to be a 
mere formality and no mechanism exists for selection of CA sites based on scientific data, 
as is evident from the fact that firstly, CA was being carried out outside Open Degraded 
Forest
 irrespective of whether the CA site was changed or not and secondly the CA site 
which was included in the scheme while seeking approval was not actually adhered to 
while executing the scheme. This shows that selection /change of CA sites (and the fact 
that it is being carried out outside
 Open Degraded Forest was not being monitored at 
PCCF (HoFF)/ MoEF&CC level. 
Image No. 8 Image No. 9 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
97 | P a g e  
The DFO Kullu stated that the factual position will be ascertained after carrying out field 
inspection of sites. No replies were received from other divisions.  
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
6.2.2.4  Difference in areas of polygons 
The area of polygons provided by the Divisions/ downloaded from E-Green Watch portal 
was compared with the area measured through geospatial study. Audit noticed that in two 
CA sites in Chamba Division, the area of CA site as per divisional records was 
significantly higher than the area measured through geospatial study as per details given 
below:  
Table 6.4 Difference in areas of polygons as per divisional records and geospatial study  
Name of 
the CA 
site 
Year of 
Plantation 
Area as 
per 
divisional 
records 
(APO) 
(in ha) 
Area as 
per 
geospatial 
study 
(in ha) 
Difference 
in area 
(in ha) 
Expenditure 
on plantation 
on area as 
per divisional 
record (APO) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Expenditure 
on plantation 
as per area 
measured in 
geospatial 
study 
(₹ in lakh) 
Excess 
expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
Kalwara 2013-14 15 11.27 3.73 (25) 13.73 10.32 3.41 (25) 
Katwad 2011-12 42 18.70 23.30 (55)  29.25 13.02 16.23 (55) 
Total 57 29.97  42.98 23.34 19.64 (46) 
Source: Divisional records and Geospatial analysis of CA sites; Figures in bracket show per cent  
Image No. 10 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
98 | P a g e  
Image No. 12 
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, Aero GRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
Images 11 and 12 confirm that the area of the CA site at Katwad, Division Chamba, 
Range Tikkari, Beat Tikkarigarsh was 18.70 hectare, whereas the same was 42 hectares 
in the divisional records.  
As is evident from the above, the area of the two CA sites measured through geospatial 
study was 25 per cent and 55 per cent less than the area in which plantation was shown 
to be carried out. Further, it was also noticed that in both the above mentioned CA sites, 
the expenditure incurred on carrying out CA was as per the area mentioned in the 
divisional records. This resulted in excess expenditure of 25 per cent and 55 per cent on 
plantation in these sites, besides creating doubts on the actual carrying out of afforestation 
at these CA sites.  
Response from the Government is awaited (February 2024). 
6.2.2.5 Cases of possible encroachments under Compensatory Afforestation site 
The CA sites were further superimposed on the satellite data of 2021 for the purpose of 
land use land cover classification. The results of visual interpretation are given in 
Table 6.5.  
Image No. 11 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
99 | P a g e  
Table 6.5 Encroachments in CA sites 
(Area in Ha.) 
Name of division No. of sites Total area Area under built up Area under agriculture 
No. of sites Area No. of sites Area 
Bharmour 4 42.89 2 0.06 3 7.28 
Chamba 4 63.03 2 0.02 3 1.85 
Kullu 3 18.32 0 0.00 1 1.29 
Kunihar 4 70.29 1 0.01 2 0.93 
Seraj 4 25.42 0 0.00 1 1.30 
Dharamshala 2 53.24 1 0.03 1 0.94 
Nachan 1 16.56 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Total 22 289.75 6 0.12 11 13.59 
Per cent 100 0.03 5 
Source: Geospatial analysis of CA sites 
Image No. 13 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 
 


Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
100 | P a g e  
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, 
AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS User Community 
Image No. 16 
 
Google Earth Image-2021: -Close Up view of encroachment in the above CA site.  
The satellite image of CA site (Image 14) in Division Chamba, Range U/Chamba, Beat 
Kalwara shows encroachments in 10.29 per cent (Agriculture in 10.20 per cent and 
Image No. 14 Image No.15 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
101 | P a g e  
built-up area in 0.09 per cent of CA site) of CA site. The close-up view of the above CA 
site as shown in Image 16 confirms the above fact. 
During geospatial study, construction (built up area) was noticed in six CA sites and 
practise of agriculture was noticed in 11 CA sites as detailed in Appendix 6.2. This shows 
that there is lack of fencing to protect CA sites from encroachment and also points to 
failure of field staff to carry out regular inspections to detect and prevent encroachments. 
The DFO Kullu stated that the factual position will be intimated after carrying out field 
inspections. No reply was received from other divisions. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
6.3 Geospatial studies on Land Use Land Cover in DPFs/ RFs 
There are 183 RFs spread over an area of 19,033 ha and 3,067 DPFs 15 spread over an 
area of 2,31,745 ha in the eight 16 test-checked divisions in the State as per information 
given by the GIS cell17 of the Forest Department.  
The results of visual interpretations of geospatial studies on Land Use Land Cover in 
RFs/DPFs carried out by AGiSAC in 10 RFs 18 (one)/ DPFs (nine) across five divisions 
are given below:  
Table 6.6 Encroachments in DPFs/RFs 
(Area in Ha.) 
Name of division No. of 
DPFs/RFs Total area Area under built up Area under agriculture 
Chopal 4 180.43 0.06 8.14 
Bharmour 2 125.54 0.02 1.97 
Nachan 2 69.21 0 4.85 
Kullu 1 38.94 0.05 2.19 
Kunihar 1 23.79 0 0.32 
Total 10 437.91 0.13 17.47 
Per cent 100 0.03 4 
Source: Geospatial analysis of DPFs/RFs 
During geospatial study, construction (built up area) was noticed in seven 19 RFs/ DPFs 
and practise of agriculture was noticed in all 10 RFs/ DPFs as detailed in Appendix 6.3. 
This shows that there is lack of boundary pillars to protect RFs/ DPFs from encroachment 
                                                           
15  This also includes Protected Forests (PFs). 
16  Except Kinnaur. 
17  The GIS Cell of the Forest Department is geo-referencing and digitising the forest area boundary 
on Survey of India toposheets of the scale 1:15,000. Till date forest boundary of 35 divisions has 
been digitised. However, ground validation of this digitised forest area is yet to be initiated. Further, 
since the digitised revenue record of the State is not available, the same has not been incorporated 
in the process of digitising. 
18  RF – One and DPFs – Nine. 
19  Bharmour – two; Chopal – four and Kullu – one.  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
102 | P a g e  
and also points to failure of field staff to carry out regular inspections to detect and 
prevent encroachments. 
Image No. 17 (RF) 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 


Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
103 | P a g e  
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community. 
Image No. 20 
 
Image No.18 Image No. 19 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
104 | P a g e  
The satellite Image 18  of compartment C-2 Mohanhadsar in RF 145 in Division 
Bharmour, Range Bharmour, Beat Hadsar shows encroachments in 0.84 per cent  
(Agriculture in 0.83 per cent and built-up area in 0.01 per cent  of RF) of the above 
compartment. The close-up view of the compartment as shown in Image 20 corroborates 
the above fact. 
Image No. 21 (DPF) 
 
Source: Forest Survey of India (FSI) assessment of Forest Cover-2009 
 
 


Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation  
105 | P a g e  
 
Source: ESRI, Maxar, GeoEye-2020, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, 
IGN, and the GIS User Community 
Image No. 24 
 
Image No. 22 Image No. 23 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh 
106 | P a g e  
The satellite Image 22 of compartment C-5 in DPF Siya in Division Bharmour, Range 
Swai, Beat Chanhouta shows encroachments in 5.24 per cent  (Agriculture in 
5.19 per cent and built-up area in 0.05 per cent of RF) of the above compartment. The 
close-up view of the compartment as shown in Image 24 corroborates the above fact. 
The DFO Nachan stated that field inspection will be carried out and action taken 
accordingly. No reply was received from other divisions. 
Further reply is awaited (February 2024). 
6.4  Conclusion 
CA is one of the most important requirements under FCA to compensate loss of land and 
trees. On a test check of CA sites using geospatial techniques, it was observed that the 
Department failed to carry out CA in Open Degraded Forest and in fact 47 per cent was 
done in VDF/MDF, which was a waste of public money and defeated the purpose of CA 
besides raising doubts over the actual CA carried out. It was also noticed that 
incorrect/inaccurate information regarding CA sites was being uploaded on E-Green 
Watch portal. Further, instances of difference in areas of CA sites as per E-Green Watch 
portal and as measured through geospatial analysis were noticed. Cases of possible 
encroachments in some of the CA sites were also noticed. To summarise, there was total 
lack of internal controls in the Department in implementation of the CA scheme in letter 
and spirit as per the provisions of the FCA, which raises concerns on the authenticity of 
the efforts of carrying out CA. 
Further, there is a possibility of encroachments in RFs/DPFs which needs to be verified 
by the Department by carrying out ground validation. 
6.5  Recommendations 
The Department may consider: 
• Utilising data available with their GIS cell to identify land banks/suitable CA sites 
under Open and Degraded Forest to ensure that CA is carried out as per the 
provisions of FCA. 
• Strengthening of the internal control mechanisms to ensure that  
 S
uitable CA sites based on scientific data are selected at the time of 
formulation of the CA scheme and CA is carried out only at the designated 
selected site; and  
 U
ploading correct/accurate information regarding the details of CA carried 
out on the E-Green Watch portal. 
• Investigating the cases where there was doubtful execution in MDF/ VDF areas 
and fixing of responsibility where required. 

Chapter VI: Geospatial Studies on Compensatory Afforestation 
107 | P a g e
• Analysing the process of selection of CA sites and reasons for the subsequent
change in location during execution. Responsibility may be fixed in cases where
locations of CA sites were changed unauthorisedly.
• Regular patrolling to ensure that CA sites and RFs/DPFs are kept free from
encroachments and investigation of cases of encroachments and prosecution of
defaulters as per the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
       (CHANDA MADHUKAR PANDIT) 
Shimla  Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
Dated: 27 August 2024   Himachal Pradesh 
Countersigned 
      (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU)      
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Dated:  6 September 2024

Appendices 

109 | P a g e  
Appendix 1.1 
(Refer paragraph 1.8) 
Details of Circles and Divisions of Forest Department in Himachal Pradesh 
Sr. 
No. Name of Circle Name of Division 
1. Bilaspur (2) 1.  Bilaspur 
2.  Kunihar* 
2. Chamba (5) 
1.  Bharmour* 
2.  Chamba* 
3.  Churah 
4.  Dalhousie 
5.  Pangi 
3. Dharamshala (3) 
1.  Dharamshala* 
2.  Nurpur 
3.  Palampur 
4. Hamirpur (3) 
1.  Dehra 
2.  Hamirpur 
3.  Una 
5. Kullu (4) 
1.  Kullu* 
2.  Lahaul 
3.  Parvati 
4.  Seraj* 
6. Mandi (5) 
1.  Jogindernagar 
2.  Karsog 
3.  Mandi 
4.  Nachan* 
5.  Suket 
7. Nahan (4) 
1.  Nahan 
2.  Paonta 
3.  Rajgarh 
4.  Renuka Ji 
8. Rampur (4) 
1.  Ani 
2.  Kinnaur* 
3.  Kotgarh 
4.  Rampur 
9. Shimla (5) 
1.  Chopal* 
2.  Rohru 
3.  Shimla 
4.  Shimla (Urban) 
5.  Theog 
10. Solan (2) 1.  Solan 
2.  Nalagarh 
*Selected Division for Performance Audit on Compens atory Afforestation in Himachal 
Pradesh 
 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
110 | P a g e  
Appendix 3.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.3) 
List of FCA cases approved during 2016-17 to 2020-21 in selected Divisions 
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals. Category Date of Final 
Approval Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
1 Kullu C/o Warehouse for the storage of EVM 
&VVPATs Others 11-Sep-20 0.028  0 0 
2 Kullu 33/11KV 2x1.6MVA Sub Station Lugvalley  Village 
Electricity 20-Nov-17 0.12  0.2  0.2  
3 Kullu Helipad for disaster management and rescue 
and tourism Others 31-Aug-18 0.2356  0.5  0.5  
4 Kullu Deluxe Integrated Cold Chain Pvt. Ltd. Others 27-Jul-20 0.3514  0 0 
5 Dharamshala Bus stand at Baba Baroh, district Kangra 
(HP) Others 05-May-17 0.4608  1 1 
6 Kinnaur Salti Masrang Hydro Electric project 
24 MW Hydel 10-Jan-18 0.6431  1.5  0 
7 Seraj Construction Of Sabji Mandi at Damothi Others 26-Feb-21 0.68  1.36  0 
8 Chamba Construction of 4 MW Daredi hydro 
Electric Project.Distt. Chamba HP Hydel 19-Jun-18 0.709  0.75  0 
9 Kullu PHINDRI 1.20 MW Hydel 10-Nov-20 0.734  0 0 
10 Kullu Daughter Booster Station for supply of 
CNG Others 22-Mar-17 0.7783  1.56  1.56  
11 Chamba 
Constriction of 33/132/220 KV GIS 
substation Mazra at Pukhari in Distt. 
Chamba (HP) 
Village 
Electricity 16-Jan-20 0.8052  1.6104  0 
12 Kullu Link Road from Sabzi Mandi Bandrol to 
village Kais Road 24-Feb-20 0.84  1.68  0 
13 Dharamshala HRTC workshop at Nagrota Bagwan Others 02-Mar-17 0.9036  2 2 
14 Chamba Construction of Joli Small Hydro Project Hydel 18-Dec-18 1.0284  1.05  0 
15 Kullu Link road to village Jathani Road 27-Feb-19 1.3226  2.66  2.66  
16 Kullu Link road to village Chaklani Road 06-Feb-18 1.3796  2.76  2.76  

Appendices 
111 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals. Category Date of Final 
Approval Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
17 Bharmour 
C/O 66/220 KV substation Hilling at Dalli, 
sub. Tehsil Holi under Bharmour forest 
Division of Distt. Chamba (HP) 
Transmission 
Line 22-Jan-21 1.5541  3.11  0 
18 Dharamshala Dharamshala Mcleodganj ropeway project Others 01-Jun-17 1.6958  2.07  0 
19 Kullu Bhatgranmoud to Khadihar Road Km 0/00 
to 3/440 Road 01-Aug-18 1.7118  3.5  3.5  
20 Chopal C/o Nao to Reoti Harijan Basti Road Road 27-Jan-20 1.9103  4 0 
21 Chamba C/O motorable link road from Devidehra to 
Mankot Road 14-Jul-20 2.05  4.1  0 
22 Kullu M/S Paras Stone Crusher Mining 12-Nov-18 2.1754  4.5  4.5  
23 Kullu C/O road from Soil to Tandla Road 14-Dec-18 2.39  4.78  4.78  
24 Nachan Construction of The Building for Govt. 
Degree College Thachi, Distt. Mandi (HP) Others 25-Jan-21 2.4836  4.9672  0 
25 Chopal C/o Harijan Basti Poshrah to Vashad Road Road 23-Dec-20 2.5467  5.5  0 
26 Kullu shilla trashi dachani road Road 18-Mar-20 2.61  5.5  0 
27 Kunihar New College Building, Barotiwala, District: 
Solan, HP School 04-Apr-18 2.72  5.44  0 
28 Chamba C/O Link road from Sui Mata temple to 
Village Maloona Road 03-Aug-18 2.77  5.55  0 
29 Seraj Govt.Degree College Gadagusain, Distt 
Kullu HP Others 17-May-19 2.8  4.5  4.5  
30 Nachan C/O Chail Janjehli to Bakhalwar Road 30-Aug-18 3.048  7.57  0 
31 Seraj Govt. College Sainj, Distt. Kullu, HP Others 29-Jul-19 3.1239  6.25  6.25  
32 Kullu Soiel Dashal Hydro Power Project Hydel 10-Jan-18 3.5863  3.5863  0 
33 Suket/Nachan C/O Segali to Burahta road  Road 25-Jan-21 3.77  7.54  0 
34 Chamba C/O Link road from Sach to Fatehpur Road 17-Feb-20 3.86  7.72  0 
35 Theog/Chopal  C/o Kuthar to Kanudhi Via Shai Kunch 
Neri RD 0/0 to 10/657 K.M Road 04-Dec-19 3.9205  15.35  0 
36 Chopal Sub Market Yard Antrawali (Nerwa) Others 20-Jun-17 4.0265  8.06  0 
37 Seraj Construction of Talara Bridge to Panavi 
Road Road 14-Jan-20 4.148  8.296  8.296  
38 Chamba C/O Link road from Simli to Fatehpur Road 27-Aug-20 4.36  8.72  0 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
112 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals. Category Date of Final 
Approval Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
39 Kullu Link road to Buai Road 17-Dec-18 4.514775  9.03  9.03  
40 Nachan Mathayanidhar to Nalbagi road Road 26-Mar-19 4.79  9.58  0 
41 Chopal khilar, Mandah to badroli Road 19-Mar-20 4.8652  10  0 
42 Chamba C/O link road from Parthoa to Sara Road Road 17-May-19 4.92  9.85  0 
43 Chopal C/O Sagroti Tikkari Maneoty road (portion 
Dhanta to Maneoty) Road 15-Jun-20 5.8027  12  0 
44 Dharamshala 
Reconstruction to two lanes for NH - 20 A 
(New NH - 303) km. 5/0 to 18/0 (Nagrota 
Bagwan - Ranital - Mubarikpur Road) 
Road 26-Jun-20 7.0713  14.15  0 
45 Chopal C/o Khokha Rewati Sheila Dakoli Road Road 27-Jan-20 8.0651  16.5  0 
46 Chopal C/O link road Dhadu Nala to Telar Road 18-Mar-20 8.0793  16.5  0 
47 Kullu Construction of Manali Ropeways  Others 07-Feb-20 8.9899  18  0 
48 Bharmour 66 KV Transmission line Salun to Dalli Transmission 
Line 18-Jan-19 9.876  20  0 
49 Kullu 33kV D/C Transmission line from Bhanag 
to prini in Distt. Kullu 
Transmission 
Line 02-Nov-18 10.9119  22  22  
50 Chamba Construction of Deothal Chanju (30 MW) 
HEP in Distt. Chamba (HP). Hydel 11-Oct-19 15.64  32  0 
51 Chamba 
C/O 132 kV LILO Kurtha- Bathri (132 kV) 
D/C Transmission Line to proposed 
33/132/220 kV GIS substation Mazra at 
Pukhari in Distt. Chamba  
Transmission 
Line 27-Nov-20 16.2746  32.5492  0 
52 Kinnaur 
66 kV D/C Transmission Line from 66/22 
kV GIS Switching Sub Station Urni to 
66/220 kV 2× 86 MVA and 220/400 kV 2× 
315 MVA GIS Pooling Sub Station at 
Wangtoo, District Kinnaur  
Transmission 
Line 25-Jun-18 20.4874  41  0 
53 Chopal 
C/O 66kv transmission line from 66kv sub-
station sainj to proposed 66/22kv sub-
station at chopal 
Transmission 
Line 06-Aug-20 20.9851  41.9702  0 
54 Chamba CHANJU-III (48 MW) Hydro-Electric 
Project in Chaurah Tehsil of Distt. Chamba  Hydel 11-Oct-19 25.98  52  0 

Appendices 
113 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals. Category Date of Final 
Approval Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
55 Bharmour 
Construction of 220 KV Double Circut 
Transmission Line from Holi- Bajoli HEP 
to 33/220/400 KV GIS pooling substation 
Lahal at Bharmour in Distt. Chamba 
Transmission 
Line 11-Dec-18 30.6321  61.5  0 
56 Chamba 
Construction of 220 KV D/C Transmission 
line from 33/132/220 KV GIS substation 
Mazra at Pukhari to 33/220 KV GIS sub 
station Karian in Distt. Chamba  
Transmission 
Line 16-Jan-20 43.023  87  0 
57 Kullu 
Two/Four Laning of Bajoura to Manali 
(From Km. 248.300 to Km. 310) section of 
NH-21 under NHDP-IVB  
Road 15-Sep-17 53.5242  108  108  
58 Bharmour/ 
Chamba 
Construction of 400 KV D/C Transmission 
line from 33/220/400 KV GIS pooling 
substation Lahal to 400 KV PGCIL pooling 
substation Chamera-II (Rajera in Distt. 
Chamba 
Transmission 
Line 20-Feb-19 78.8158  158  0 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
114 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.1 
(Refer paragraph 4.1.1) 
List of CA cases approved during 2006-07 to 2015-16 in selected Divisions  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
1 Bharmour For the extraction of Slates  Mining 03/08/2018 0.2186  0.91  0.91  
2 Bharmour For the extraction of Slates Mining 02/09/2010 0.4087  1 1 
3 Bharmour Const of Suinr HEP, Bharmour Ft. 
division. HEP 28/09/2007 1.0315  2.5  2.5  
4 Bharmour Construction of Urai to Samra road Road 22/09/2017 1.50  3 3 
5 Bharmour Const of Link road to village Kuthed Road 10/07/2009 1.6509  3.5  3.5  
6 Bharmour Five MW Kuwarsi HEP Road 07/06/2012 1.8525  4 4 
7 Bharmour Const of three MW Tulang Small HEP HEP 13/07/2007 1.9889  4 4 
8 Bharmour Const of Dibri-Aura road Bharmour Ft. 
Divn. Road 29/12/2009 2.1408  4.5  4.5  
9 Bharmour Construction of Motorable road from 
Bajol to Guwari  Road 26/10/2018 2.62  5.5  0 
10 Bharmour Const of Dalli to Sahan road (Kms 0/0 to 
6/780) Road 15/02/2010 2.71  5.5  5.5  
11 Bharmour Construction of road from Dam side to 
village Mindra Road 09/05/2016 3.2456  6.5  6.5  
12 Bharmour Construction of Urai to Ghator road Road 18/12/2018 3.33  13.32  0 
13 Bharmour Construction of Kuwarsi-II SHEP 
(five MW)  HEP 09/05/2014 3.3401  7 7 
14 Bharmour Const of Pilli to Sawai road Road 04/06/2012 3.5668  7.5  7.5  
15 Bharmour Construction of Holi-II (seven MW) 
Small HEP  HEP 27/04/2011 4.1595  8.5  8.5  
16 Bharmour Chirchind HEP Bharmour ft. division. HEP 03/11/2006 4.5222  10  10  
17 Bharmour Const of Nayagram to Bajol road  Road 21/07/2009 4.8072  10  10  
18 Bharmour Const of Harsar to Chobia road Road 18/10/2018 4.8352  29.34  0 

Appendices 
115 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
19 Bharmour Construction of Salun Small Hydro 
Electric Project HEP 16/03/2015 4.8764  10  10  
20 Bharmour Const of 4.50 MW Kurhed Small HEP HEP 11/06/2008 6.4347  13  13  
21 Bharmour Const. of transmission line Budhil SHEP T/Line 05/03/2010 21.6702  44  44  
22 Bharmour 70 MW Budhil HEP Bharmour  HEP 19/04/2006 27.9358  56  56  
23 Bharmour 240 MW Kuther HEP HEP 11/01/2013 61.4083  123  123  
24 Bharmour Construction of Bajoli Holi HEP (180 
MW)  HEP 20/10/2012 75.304  151  151  
25 Chamba Construction of Agriculture inputs Store, 
Mehla Misc 13/01/2017 0.04  0.5  0.5  
26 Chamba Construction of Aqarium house cum -
Museum centre  Misc 25/02/2016 0.05  1 0.5  
27 Chamba Office of Assistant Environmental 
Engineer at Sultanpur Misc 27/04/2012 0.084929  0.168  0.168  
28 Chamba C/o Home Guards Battalion office and 
transit CAMP (Baloo)  Misc 23/04/2013 0.1255  0.5  0.5  
29 Chamba Mining of Slates at Mauza Bhador, 
Chamba Ft. Division Mining 10/10/2006 0.16  0.5  0.5  
30 Chamba Extraction of Slates in Mauza TUR  Mining 23/06/2010 0.16  0.5  0.5  
31 Chamba Building playground and stadium at 
Satohar Misc 22/11/2010 0.2  0.5  0.5  
32 Chamba Self Employment Training Institute at 
mauza Karian  Misc 27/07/2011 0.32  1 1 
33 Chamba Manimahesh Stone crusher at Mauza 
Sultanpur  Mining 13/02/2009 0.34  1 1 
34 Chamba DAV School at Chamba, Chamba Ft. 
divn. Misc 04/08/2006 0.4211  1 1 
35 Chamba Five MW Dunali SHEP, Chamba Ft. 
Division HEP 15/01/2007 0.959  2 2 
36 Chamba Const. of Post Graduate college at 
Sultanpur Misc 17/08/2010 0.9879  2 2 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
116 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
37 Chamba C/o Model School Building at GSSS 
Bharian-Kothi Misc 22/09/2017 1.2  2.5  0 
38 Chamba Construction of Govt. Degree College 
Lyhlkothi  Misc 13/04/2017 1.2  2.5  2.5  
39 Chamba Extraction of sand, Stones & Bajri in 
mauza Baror  Mining 07/03/2011 1.3638  3 3 
40 Chamba M/s Himalayan Slate and Stones Mining 03/03/2008 1.392  3 3 
41 Chamba Construction of Link road to village Radi Road 18/06/2014 1.52  3.1  3.1  
42 Chamba Const of Devidehra to Bakatpur road  Road 16/04/2008 1.67  4 4 
43 Chamba Mohri-Nallah Kuthar road Road 25/03/2008 1.672  3.5  3.5  
44 Chamba Const of Kiani-Mauwa-Makolsu road Road 11/04/2008 1.72  3.5  3.5  
45 Chamba Const of two MW Dikleri small HEP at 
Sahoo  HEP 23/06/2010 1.9321  4 4 
46 Chamba Construction of Kiri-Banjal road  Road 22/08/2014 2.21  4.5  4.5  
47 Chamba Construction of  Sunara to Androond road Road 16/09/2010 2.22  4.5  4.5  
48 Chamba 4.5 MW Hul HEP, Ft. Division Chamba. HEP 18/07/2006 2.2346  4.5  4.5  
49 Chamba Construction of Hysrund small HEP 
(three MW) HEP 04/02/2015 2.413  6 6 
50 Chamba Const of Bhanera to Kolka road, Chamba  Road 17/03/2008 2.48  5 5 
51 Chamba Const of Rakh to Dhanara road  Road 25/03/2008 2.49  7 7 
52 Chamba Construction of Panela to Ghatred road  Road 22/02/2011 2.6  5.2  5.2  
53 Chamba Const of Jakhla Dhar Pukhara road Road 25/02/2011 2.612  5.25  5.25  
54 Chamba Construction of Sal-II (three MW) HEP  HEP 02/03/2012 2.6947  6 6 
55 Chamba Construction of Dunali to Kalance road Road 18/06/2014 2.73  5.5  5.5  
56 Chamba Addl Forest land for muck disposal sites 
(Chamera-III) HEP 09/07/2009 2.83  6 6 
57 Chamba Const of Ghum to Janjla road Road 17/06/2011 2.86  6 6 
58 Chamba Construction of Kalsuin to Tralla road  Road 15/04/2016 3.09  6.5  6.5  
59 Chamba Construction of Rajera-Gudda-Boga road  Road 26/09/2017 3.18  6.5  6.5  
60 Chamba Const of Dunali to Brehi road Chamba  Road 17/03/2008 3.402  7 7 
61 Chamba Const of road to village Sairna Tr. Line 02/06/2011 3.44  7 7 

Appendices 
117 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
62 Chamba Const of Parontha to Kureena Dhar road  Road 15/12/2009 3.58  8 8 
63 Chamba Construction of Sunara to Taggi road  Road 22/02/2011 3.6  7.2  7.2  
64 Chamba Construction of eight MW Upper Joiner-II 
HEP HEP 25/04/2014 3.8772  8 8 
65 Chamba Construction of Bakani to Dharebetta road  Road 20/07/2018 4.35  9 9 
66 Chamba Five MW Kurtha Small Hydro Electric 
Projec HEP 06/09/2012 4.7494  10  10  
67 Chamba Construction of Bakani to Kalwara road  Road 13/10/2010 4.75  9.5  9.5  
68 Chamba Const of Chamba-Sandooh road  Road 19/04/2010 4.868  10  10  
69 Chamba Bageigarh-Chanju-Jakhala-Sumra Road Road 16/08/2010 4.9126  10  10  
70 Chamba Kolka –Jatkari road, Chamba Forest 
division. Road 25/03/2008 4.94  10  10  
71 Chamba Construction of Kainthly to Jandrah road Road 24/06/2011 4.96  9.92  9.92  
72 Chamba Const of Suri to Kaila road (0/0 to 10/00)  Road 23/12/2009 5 10  10  
73 Chamba Link road from Mehla Bhagiar Huraid 
road  Road 22/09/2017 7.69  15.5  15.5  
74 Chamba Transmission line GIS S/Station Karrian 
to Rajera  T/Line 21/01/2013 11.45  23  23  
75 Chamba Const of 220 KV D/C Budhil Chamera-III 
Tr. Line  HEP 05/03/2010 12.744  25.5  25.5  
76 Chamba T/L from Belij Ka Nalla SHEP to Jarangta  Tr. Line 16/12/2009 18.025  36.1  36.1  
77 Chamba Tr. Line from Chamera-III Power Pooling 
Station at Rajera  Tr. Line  02/02/2011 19.174  38.5  38.5  
78 Chamba 132 Kv Trr. Line Kurthal (Tisaa) to 
Bhathri  Tr. Line 01/10/2007 20.756  42  42  
79 Chamba Chanju-II Hydro Electric Project HEP 15/01/2018 21.0557  21.0557  0 
80 Chamba Rajera to Kartar (Jalandhar) transmission 
line  T/ Line 22/09/2010 32  65  65  
81 Chamba Const of 36 MW Chanju-I HEP  HEP 15/06/2011 34.697  69.5  69.5  
82 Chopal RCC Bridge on Chopal Jhiknipul road  Road 11/08/2015 0.10  1 0 
83 Chopal Const of Chayali to Lower Devat road Road 01/09/2007 0.225  1.1  0 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
118 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
84 Chopal Const of Tarapur to Shanag road Chopal 
Ft.Divn. Road 25/03/2008 0.6  1.5  0 
85 Chopal Construction of Sub Station at Chopal 
(Lasta-Dhar) Misc 27/07/2012 0.6254  1.5  0 
86 Chopal Rinjet deyia road  Road 13/11/2006 0.8  2 0 
87 Chopal Nerwa to Obtawa road Road 24/10/2006 1.02  2 0 
88 Chopal Timvi-Lachog road Chopal Ft. Division. Road 24/10/2006 1.2  2.5  0 
89 Chopal Pehlog to Makrog road Ft. divn Chopal  Road 15/02/2007 1.326  3 0 
90 Chopal Badlog Jhina road, Chopal Ft. Division. Road 06/10/2006 1.368  3 3 
91 Chopal Const of Kiarno to Sarahan via Koti 
Dhanag road  Road 05/11/2007 1.38  3 3 
92 Chopal Const of Naura to Kulag road, Chopal 
forest division. Road 24/06/2011 1.476  9 9 
93 Chopal Construction of Link road Jangla to 
Harijan Basti Dewat  Road 08/02/2019 1.6071  3.2142  0 
94 Chopal Basara-Chanjan road, Chopal Ft. division. Road 01/11/2006 2.04  4.5  0 
95 Chopal Const of Nakora-Khadar road Chopal Ft. 
Divn. Road 05/11/2007 2.1  4.5  0 
96 Chopal Const of Sajnalla-Reuni-Lhangra road  Road 13/05/2011 2.115  13.5  13.5  
97 Chopal Const of Dhabbas Baggar road Road 16/05/2011 2.163  13.5  13.5  
98 Chopal Const of Batera to Kandal road  Road 18/04/2011 2.184  12  12  
99 Chopal Kuthardhar Mannu road Chopal Ft. divn. Road 01/09/2006 2.2  4.5  0 
100 Chopal Mashrain via Matraida road Road 07/12/2006 2.334  5 5 
101 Chopal Const of Kimachandrawali-Bijmal road Road 21/06/2007 2.385  2.5  0 
102 Chopal Const of Ranvi to Pauria road Chopal Ft. 
divn Road 06/11/2007 2.84  6 0 
103 Chopal Belag-Khokha road Chopal Ft. Division. Road 06/10/2006 2.859  6 0 
104 Chopal Const of Sarkali to kiari Shallan road  Road 21/04/2011 2.868  18  18  
105 Chopal Const of two MW Hamal Small HEP  HEP 11/08/2009 2.999  6 6 
106 Chopal Const of five MW Sainj Small HEP 
(Theog and Chopal) HEP 19/03/2008 3.39  7 7 

Appendices 
119 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
107 Chopal Construction of Shalvi HEP 4.75 MW  HEP 27/09/2012 3.4198  7 0 
108 Chopal Const of Mannu to Irra Road Chopal Ft. 
Divn. 1355 Road 25/03/2008 3.55  8 0 
109 Chopal Const of Mundochi to Navi road Chopal  Road 14/03/2008 3.9  8 0 
110 Chopal Const of  Ranvi to Chatta Dhar road  Road 05/11/2007 4.08  9 0 
111 Chopal Const of road Mashrain to Panchyat 
Headquarter Pouria  Road 05/11/2007 4.32  9 0 
112 Chopal Tikkari to Dhanat road Road 10/06/2013 4.93  10  10  
113 Chopal Const of Taranh-Banah road  Road 01/06/2007 4.95  10  10  
114 Chopal Link road from Champandli Chhamdhar 
to Chilla  Road 29/12/2014 4.9721  10  10  
115 Chopal Const of Kupvi to Mashot road Chopal 
Forest Division. Road 16/05/2011 4.98  10  10  
116 Chopal Const of Sarain to Jhakar road Chopal Ft. 
Division Road 01/06/2007 6.381  13  13  
117 Chopal Kupvi-Bhallu-Dhotali road Road 02/02/2007 7.57  15  15  
118 Chopal Const of Shirga to Shalan road Road 12/09/2012 7.833  16  10  
119 Chopal Rohana/Gumma to Bour road  Road 19/08/2014 9.2621  18.5  18.5  
120 Chopal Sarain-Pulbahal road  Road 07/12/2006 9.609  20  20  
121 D/shala Parking near Bhagsunag road at 
Maclodgang Misc. 13/02/2007 0.1275  0.3  0.3  
122 D/shala Five MW Iku-II Small HEP D/Shala 
Division HEP 11/03/2008 0.15  0.5  0.5  
123 D/shala Const of 33/11 KV Sub Station at Tota 
Rani Misc. 09/09/2008 0.159  0.5  0.5  
124 D/shala Const of link road from Sudher to Dhar Road 05/07/2011 0.3375  0.675  0.675  
125 D/Shala Construction of Link road from Indru   to 
Cholla Road 06/05/2017 0.3643  0.7286  0 
126 D/shala Parking near Narrowji Complex at 
Maclodgang Misc 13/03/2007 0.4443  1 1 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
120 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
127 D/shala Parking opposite Hotel Shahiba 
Maclodgang Misc 13/02/2007 0.45  1 1 
128 D/shala Link road to village Diayara Road 12/05/2008 0.5171  1.02  1.02  
129 D/shala Link road Naddi Bhachheter road D/Shala 
Ft. Division Road 04/04/2006 0.535  1.1  1.1  
130 D/shala Const of Kufri-Patialkar-Sarathana-
Rounkar road  Road 18/10/2007 0.591  1.2  1.2  
131 D/shala Widening/improvement of road from 
Nagrota to Mallan  Road 10/04/2007 0.6294  1.26  1.26  
132 D/shala Const of Link road from Charri to Throet  Road 20/01/2010 0.6433  1.5  1.5  
133 D/shala Const of link road from Harnera to 
Challian Road 07/11/2007 0.7162  1.13  1.13  
134 D/shala Const of link road from Salli to Kanol 
D/Shala Ft. Division Road 07/12/2007 0.7162  1.5  1.5  
135 D/shala Improvement and widening of existing 
Gagal Chatru road Road 31/08/2010 0.7305  1.5  1.5  
136 D/Shala Construction of Link road from Morchh 
to Gargoon  Road 06/05/2017 0.9012  2 0 
137 D/shala Const of Rehlu-Boru-Sarna road  Road 24/05/2010 0.9528  1.9  1.9  
138 D/shala Const of Darnu-Touhu-Bangrota road 
D/Shala  Road 08/10/2010 0.984  2 2 
139 D/shala Widening/Improvement of existing 
Matour-D/shala road Road 16/06/2011 1.08  2.2  2.2  
140 D/shala construction of Rirakmar to Ghatarda road  Road 01/02/2011 1.201  2.4  2.4  
141 D/shala Const of Satobari-Barnet road  Road 20/08/2007 1.2413  2.5  2.5  
142 D/Shala Const of Thana Bargran to Busal road, 
D/Shala Ft. Division Road 14/05/2013 1.275  2.55  2.55  
143 D/Shala Construction of link road to village 
Rajour Road 14/05/2013 1.3370  2.674  2.674  
144 D/shala Const of Thakurdwara to Badi Behi road Road 17/04/2008 1.607  3.5  3.5  

Appendices 
121 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
145 D/shala Const of Boh to Lam road D/Shala DFt. 
Division Road 20/01/2010 1.613  3.25  3.25  
146 D/Shala Const of Bhaled-Dulli-Kakra-Chamiara 
road, D/Shala Ft. Division Road 02/07/2013 1.7065  3.42  3.42  
147 D/Shala Const of Airla-Jandroh road Road 24/05/2019 1.708  3.416  0 
148 D/shala Const of Daulatpur-Jalari-Har-Kharat 
road Road 20/04/2010 2.0468  4.1  4.1  
149 D/shala Const of link road from Bara Khotha to 
Ankhar Kohla  Road 18/10/2007 2.16  5 5 
150 D/shala Const of Kutharna to Kareri road Road 15/02/2010 2.2577  4.5154  4.5154  
151 D/shala Const of Kareri Khas to Khari Behi road  Road 16/03/2010 2.511  5.5  5.5  
152 D/shala 5MW Manjhi –II HEP,D/Shala Ft. 
Division HEP 13/03/2007 2.7074  6 6 
153 D/shala Construction of 4.8 MW Manuni-II Small 
HEP  HEP 06/04/2011 3.0429  6.1  6.1  
154 D/shala Establishment of BSF Battalion at Banoi  Misc 06/04/2011 3.6069  7.5  7.5  
155 D/shala Const of four MW Brahl Small HEP at 
village Boh  HEP 27/06/2007 3.8  8 8 
156 D/shala Construcio of 3.6 MW Gaj-Garju Stage-1 
SHEP HEP 03/06/2011 3.8436  8 8 
157 D/Shala Construction of 2.00 MW Leond Small 
Hydro Electric Project  HEP 13/11/2015 3.9711  15.622  15.622  
158 D/Shala Construction of 5.00 MW Brahl Top 
SHEP HEP 09/05/2012 4.2405  8.5  8.5  
159 D/shala Const of 1.5 MW GAJ HEP in favour of 
Bhu Shingar  HEP 11/03/2008 4.447  9 9 
160 D/shala Const of five MW Baner Sangam Smal 
HEP  HEP 13/05/2011 4.5885  10  10  
161 D/Shala  Construction of Manuni (3.5 MW) Hydro 
Electric Project  Hydel 19/01/2017 1.417  5 5 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
122 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
162 Kinnaur Vocational Training Institute at Recong-
Peo  Misc 15/01/2007 0.0473  1 0 
163 Kinnaur Const of Police Post at Karcham Misc 20/08/2007 0.05  1 1 
164 Kinnaur Const of Bridge over Chooling Nallah Misc 05/12/2008 0.0601  1 1 
165 Kinnaur Three MW Shyang HEP Kinnaur, 
Kinnaur ft. Division HEP 15/02/2007 0.4496  1 1 
166 Kinnaur Installation of stone crusher (BRO Works 
only) Misc 01/09/2009 0.475  1 0 
167 Kinnaur Const of FIS Rispa in favour of I&PH 
Department  Misc 13/02/2009 0.54  1.2  1.2  
168 Kinnaur Const of Border out post at Kota Dongri 
in favour of ITBP  Misc 10/04/2008 0.5781  1.15  1.15  
169 Kinnaur Add. Land for C/o 1000 MW Karcham 
Wangtoo HEP  HEP 12/07/2018 0.7609  6 0 
170 Kinnaur Addl Ft. Land for the Const of 5MW 
Rakchad HEP HEP 01/10/2008 1.1783  2.5  0 
171 Kinnaur Establishment of ITBP Boarder Out Post 
(BOP) Chappan Misc 25/05/2016 1.20  2.5  2.5  
172 Kinnaur Extraction of river bed minerals in favour 
of Shri D.R.Negi Mining 26/07/2007 1.3819  2.79  0 
173 Kinnaur Extraction of river bed minerals in favour 
of Shri D.R.Negi Mining 24/05/2019 1.3918  2.0043  0 
174 Kinnaur Construction of Rangle to Miroo road  Road 21/05/2018 1.4971  6 0 
175 Kinnaur Addl. Land for Karcham Wangtoo 
(approach road) HEP 25/07/2008 1.6348  3.3  0 
176 Kinnaur Construction of 3 MW Pangi Mini HEP  HEP 19/04/2010 1.7888  3.6  0 
177 Kinnaur Const of Link road to village Thangi  Road 13/06/2008 2.015  4 4 
178 Kinnaur Const of Rukti-II Mini HEP  HEP 26/08/2009 2.2812  5 0 
179 Kinnaur Sholtu-Poonang road, Kinnaur ft. division Road 02/02/2007 2.5585  5.12  5.12  
180 Kinnaur Const of 3.00 MW Shaung SHEP  HEP 24/12/2009 2.7004  5.5  5.5  

Appendices 
123 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
181 Kinnaur Const of three MW Tangling Mini Hydro 
Electric Project  HEP 18/06/2007 2.7544  5.55  5.55  
182 Kinnaur Construction of 9.00 MW Rala HEP HEP 20/10/2011 2.86  6 0 
183 Kinnaur Const of link road to village Brua Road 10/04/2013 3.5418  7 0 
184 Kinnaur Const of 5.00 MW Brua Mini HEP 
Kinnaur  HEP 18/06/2007 3.7836  8 8 
185 Kinnaur M/s Panchor Wanger Homte HEP 31/05/2013 3.8572  8 8 
186 Kinnaur Construction of Chholtu to Jani road Road 02/07/2013 4.2017  8.5  0 
187 Kinnaur Construction of 8.00 MW Raura HEP HEP 03/01/2011 4.2017  9 9 
188 Kinnaur Construction of four MW Panvi Mini 
HEP  HEP 18/06/2007 4.2381  9 9 
189 Kinnaur Construction of 4.5 MW Melan Mini HEP  HEP 18/06/2007 4.4119  9 9 
190 Kinnaur 1000 MW Karcham Wangtoo HEP (add. 
Land) HEP 06/07/2006 4.7053  11  11  
191 Kinnaur 24 MW HEP Selti Masranag HEP 28/05/2013 4.7564  9.5  9.5  
192 Kinnaur C/o transmission line (from Brua and 
Shaung HEP) HEP 13/11/2014 4.7823  29  20  
193 Kinnaur Up-gradation of NH-22 to double lane 
specification  Road 30/07/2009 4.89  10  0 
194 Kinnaur Construction of Raura-II (20 MW) HEP  HEP 17/08/2012 4.8951  10  10  
195 Kinnaur Construction of Link road to Village 
Panvi Road 20/10/2006 4.919  10  10  
196 Kinnaur C/o road to surge Shaft, flushing tunnel 
(Baspa HEP) HEP 23/08/2013 6.719  7.35  7 
197 Kinnaur Up-gradation/widening of NH 22  Road 03/12/2010 7.2209  14.5  14.5  
198 Kinnaur GIS Pooling station Wangtoo Other 30/07/2014 7.9108  15.8216  10  
199 Kinnaur Const of Chhappan to Shipkila road Road 06/03/2009 9.504  19  13  
200 Kinnaur Const of Chaura to Majhgaon Rupi road Road 03/08/2017 12.5478  31  31  
201 Kinnaur Transmission line from switch yard 
sorang Tr. Line 03/08/2010 13.3445  28  28  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
124 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
202 Kinnaur 100 MW Sorang Hyrdo Electric Project 
Kinnaur  HEP 30/10/2006 14.4885  31  9 
203 Kinnaur Dumpti Link Road (CA transferred from 
WildLife Sarahan) Road 29/04/2013 16.3104  32.8566  0 
204 Kinnaur Const of Kashang Stage-II & III (130 
MW) HEP HEP 14/06/2011 17.6857  36  36  
205 Kinnaur Up-gradation/widening of NH 22 from 
373/00 to 395/210  Road 03/12/2010 21.7094  44  44  
206 Kinnaur Const of 22 KV TL on 66 KV Tower 
from Akpa to Pooh T/Line 28/09/2007 34.2867  69  20  
207 Kinnaur Const of Thangi Charrang Border road in 
favour of ITBP Road 09/07/2010 35.64  72  66  
208 Kinnaur Const of 100 MW Tidong-I Hydro 
Electric Project  HEP 18/06/2008 39.0546  79  20  
209 Kinnaur 
C/o Transmission Line from Tidong -I 
HEP Power House to LILO point of 
Kashang-Bhaba transmission Line at 
Purbani  
Tr. Line 22/11/2018 54.2927  109  0 
210 Kinnaur Const of T/L from Nathpa to Kashang  T/Line 14/07/2008 57.3881  115  115  
211 Kinnaur Widening /improvement of NH-22 (now 
NH-5) to NHDL  Road 06/11/2017 62.3604  63  63  
212 Kinnaur Const of 400 KV Tr. Line from K-W to 
Abdullapur Tr. Line 21/07/2009 63.2178  127  105  
213 Kinnaur Construction of Shongtong Karcham (402 
MW) HEP  HEP 14/11/2012 63.5015  128  128  
214 Kinnaur Laying of 66 Kv transmission line from 
Nathpa to Akpa Tr. Line 12/08/2003 73.02  146  146  
215 Kinnaur 1000 MW Karcham Wangtoo HEP HEP 17/11/2005 167.4246  273  268  
216 Kullu Const of Water Filter unit, Storage and 
Distribution Tank  Misc 02/04/2008 0.0144  0.03  0.03  
217 Kullu Const of Toilets at Kothi Misc 29/05/2012 0.0195  0.2  0.2  

Appendices 
125 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
218 Kullu Const of section store cum complaint 
office at Darka  Misc 08/11/2010 0.028  0.5  0.5  
219 Kullu Const of Toilets at Solang Misc 29/05/2012 0.03  0.36  0.36  
220 Kullu Const of Toilets at Marahi Misc 29/05/2012 0.0325  0.39  0.39  
221 Kullu Const of Toilets at Rohtang Misc 29/05/2012 0.0375  0.45  0.45  
222 Kullu Const of Govt Middle School Building at 
Ghandinagar  Misc 09/06/2009 0.04  0.08  0.08  
223 Kullu Link road to NH21 to Baragaon, Kullu ft. 
division Road 15/02/2007 0.0429  0.09  0 
224 Kullu Construction of Primary Health Centre 
building at Bhutti Misc 28/05/2013 0.0437  0.0874  0.0874  
225 Kullu Const of Primary Health Centre at Bran Misc 08/02/2012 0.06  0.12  0.12  
226 Kullu  Construction of LPG Godown at Bashing Misc 17/06/2011 0.112  0.5  0 
227 Kullu 
Const of 60 Mtrs Span Minor PMT bridge 
at Kms 8.800 linking Manali-Sarchu road 
to Army transit Camp  
Road 20/07/2010 0.1335  0.267  0.267  
228 Kullu 
Const of 21 Mtrs Span Minor PMT bridge 
& approaches at Kms 13.590 (kothi-II) on 
Manali-Sarchu road 
Road 05/03/2010 0.1586  0.3172  0.3172  
229 Kullu Construction of Challah to salatry Link 
Road  Road 15/05/2017 0.168  0.5  0 
230 Kullu Const of store at Kahla Bihal Phatin 
Jinder Kothin Sari Misc 02/04/2008 0.17  0.34  0.34  
231 Kullu Const of Police post and family quarters 
at Patilikuhal Misc 18/07/2012 0.1822  2.5  2 
232 Kullu Construction of Govt. Sr. Sec School 
Jagatsukh  Education  01/09/2012 0.2  0.4  0.4  
233 Kullu Constriction of Link road from 17 Mile to 
Village Rampur  Road 18/07/2017 0.2194  1 1 
234 Kullu Construction of Lift Irrigation and flow 
irrigation to Kharahal  I&PH 30/06/2017 0.22  0.5  0.5  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
126 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
235 Kullu Construction of Palchan –II bridge  Misc 04/03/2011 0.2253  0.4506  0.4506  
236 Kullu 
Construction of Bridge alongwith both 
side approaches at 17 mile (Gajan) over 
River Beas  
Road 28/01/2021 0.2604  1 0 
237 Kullu 
Augmentation of WSS Bashing Bihal and 
Data Centre for Hydrology Project-II in 
favour of I&PH Department 
Misc 05/08/2009 0.33  0.66  0 
238 Kullu One MW Chhor SHEP, Kullu Ft. Division HEP 15/03/2007 0.3584  0.7168  0.7168  
239 Kullu Sewerage Treatment Plant at Badoh Kullu 
Ft. Division Misc 31/08/2007 0.36  0.72  0.72  
240 Kullu 
Construction of Dhundi Bridge 224 Mtrs 
Span at 7.00 for approach to south portal 
by GREF 
Road 20/09/2012 0.3782  0.7564  0 
241 Kullu Construction of Link road from Alu 
ground to village Kalath  Road 03/05/2017 0.3903  0.8  0.8  
242 Kullu Construction of Government High School 
Palchan  Misc 25/02/2015 0.399  0.8  0 
243 Kullu Construction of link road from Dam site 
to village Gadiara  Road 14/03/2012 0.404  0.808  0.808  
244 Kullu Construction of Gas Insulated Sub Station 
at Phojal Misc. 26/02/2013 0.4285  1 1 
245 Kullu Const of 4.9 MW Baragran Small HEP  HEP 10/08/2007 0.4795  1 1 
246 Kullu Construction of 1.20 MW Kalath Small 
HEP  HEP 13/08/2012 0.5358  1.5  1.5  
247 Kullu Construction of 33 KV switching Station 
at Bhang (Palchan)  Misc 17/04/2017 0.6057  1.25  1.25  
248 Kullu 
Const of road from Kungi Nallah to 
Dunkhari Gahar Fallain, Kullu Forest 
Division 
Road 01/02/2010 0.626  1.5  1.5  
249 Kullu Sewerage Treatment Plant at Lanka 
Bakar, Kullu Ft. Division Misc 25/04/2007 0.65  1.3  0 

Appendices 
127 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
250 Kullu Enhancement of capacity of Suman 
Sarwari HEP HEP 29/03/2012 0.6717  1.5  1.5  
251 Kullu Manalsu Bridge-Palchan via Barua road   Road 15/06/2006 0.707  1.4142  1.4142  
252 Kullu 
Addl.forest land for the construction of 
1.593 Kms road from Jhakri to Meha 
(Bihal) 
Road 24/02/2011 0.7227  2 2 
253 Kullu Construction of Lower Aleo Small HEP  HEP 01/10/2014 0.7389  2.064  1.5  
254 Kullu Const. of 2.25 MW Beas HEP at 
Palachan, Kullu Ft. Division HEP 19/09/2007 0.7479  1.4958  1.4958  
255 Kullu Construction of muck dumping site in 
Manali-III Misc 23/05/2018 0.7682  2 0 
256 Kullu Anjani Mahadav Mandir, Kullu Ft. 
Division Misc 28/03/2007 0.8287  3.5  3.5  
257 Kullu Const of Neuli to Larikot (Rogimoure) 
road 1499 Road 28/08/2007 0.8875  2.045  2.045  
258 Kullu Const of 1.5 MW Haripur Nallah Small 
HEP HEP 02/11/2007 0.9583  2 2 
259 Kullu Dughilag-Dubkan Road Kullu Forest 
Division Road 01/02/2010 0.969  2 2 
260 Kullu Construction of 1.00 MW Rujag SHEP HEP 19/03/2012 0.9835  2 2 
261 Kullu Construction of 800 KW Pahali mini 
Hydro Power Project  HEP 31/08/2018 0.9919  0 2 
262 Kullu C/o Sarwari-III Small Hydro Electric 
Project (two MW)   HEP 15/01/2016 1.0171  2.05  0 
263 Kullu Construction of link road to village 
Bhanara Road 19/06/2012 1.056  2.5  2.01  
264 Kullu Construction of 2.5 MW Khalara HEP 
alongwith tr. Line HEP 22/03/2017 1.1925  2.5  2.5  
265 Kullu Realignment of Manali-Sarchu road  Road 26/02/2010 1.195  2.39  0 
266 Kullu Kharla to Churla road Kullu Ft. Division Road 09/05/2006 1.3  2.6  2.6  
267 Kullu Construction of Sheel 1.5 MW HEP  HEP 10/01/2020 1.3215  1.3215  0 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
128 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
268 Kullu Construction of Loran to Sarli road  Road 20/07/2012 1.358  3 3 
269 Kullu Improvement & Widening of Manali 
Sarchu road  Road 20/07/2012 1.4623  3 3 
270 Kullu Const of Bhekhali to Sari road Kullu 
Forest Division Road 02/03/2010 1.503  3.006  0 
271 Kullu Two MW Chakshi HEP, Kullu ft. 
division. HEP 28/03/2007 1.69  3.5  0 
272 Kullu Const of 4.50 MW Sarwari-II Hydro 
Electric Project  HEP 16/12/2008 1.8  4 4 
273 Kullu Field Firing Range at Pahnallah Kullu Ft. 
Division Road 18/08/2006 1.81  3.62  3.62  
274 Kullu Construction of road from Dhara to 
Runga  Road 21/05/2012 1.875  3.75  3.75  
275 Kullu Const of Churla to Khanipandhe road, 
Kullu Forest division Road 31/12/2009 1.883  4 4 
276 Kullu Construction of Multi-stories Car Parking 
and Bus Stand  Misc 18/09/2017 1.9831  3.9662  3.32  
277 Kullu Const of Fozal to Flain road Kullu Ft. 
Divn. 1419 Road 20/06/2007 2.0952  4.5  4.5  
278 Kullu Construction of WTP for augmentation of 
water Supply Scheme to Kullu Town I&PH 18/05/2016 2.1074  4.21  4.21  
279 Kullu Construction of Small Firing range at 
Bandrol  Misc 22/09/2017 2.14  4.28  4.28  
280 Kullu Const of 2.5 MW Suman Sarwari Hydro 
Electric Project  HEP 16/09/2008 2.2  4.5  0 
281 Kullu Construction of 4.8 MW Aleo-II HEP  HEP 11/10/2011 2.2026  4.4052  0 
282 Kullu Heli sking activities in Manali & Nagar 
ranges  Misc 18/12/2007 2.2083  15.08  4.5  
283 Kullu Const of five MW Gramong Hydro 
Electric Project  HEP 25/11/2011 2.2958  5 5 

Appendices 
129 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
284 Kullu Kais-Soir-Sor-Kotadhar road, Kullu ft. 
division Road 18/08/2006 2.3518  4.75  4.75  
285 Kullu Const of Link road from village Shanag to 
village Majhach  Road 12/11/2007 2.5549  5.1098  5.1098  
286 Kullu Construction of 2.6 MW Sharan HEP 
Kullu Division HEP 20/08/2007 2.5774  5.16  5.16  
287 Kullu Construction of 5.00 MW Kala Nao Top 
SHEP HEP 21/01/2019 2.628  2.628  0 
288 Kullu Karal Himri road, Kullu Ft. division Road 15/02/2007 2.7407  5 5 
289 Kullu Widening of Palchan Solang road, Kullu 
ft. Division Road 02/03/2007 2.8562  5.7124  5.7124  
290 Kullu Const of 9.00 MW Fozal HEP on Fozal 
Nalla  HEP 16/12/2008 2.885  6 6 
291 Kullu Construction of 2.00 MW Serai SHEP HEP 01/10/2015 2.9233  6 6 
292 Kullu Beas Kund HEP five MW  HEP 19/03/2008 2.9306  5.8612  5.8612  
293 Kullu Forest land for the establishment of camp                                                                                    Road 20/07/2012 3.0195  6.1  6.1  
294 Kullu Construction of Upper Babeli to Jindor 
road  Road 12/12/2019 3.054  7.23  0 
295 Kullu Establishment of stone crusher and 
Quarry Mining 22/11/2010 3.4  6.8  6.8  
296 Kullu Seobag-Gahar-Paharmeha road (0/00 to 
7/520)  Road 13/03/2007 3.5345  7.1  7.1  
297 Kullu Construction of 4.5 MW Kestha HEP HEP 09/05/2014 3.5739  17.5  0 
298 Kullu T/line from Baragoan Power House to 
Fozal Sub Station T/Line 01/08/2013 3.6414  7.5  6.712  
299 Kullu 
Construction of Snow Avalanche 
Protection structures at various locations 
on approach road to south portal of RT 
Misc 03/07/2015 3.8779  7.8  0 
300 Kullu Const of Nagujhor to Mashna Thach road Road 01/02/2010 3.88  8 0 
301 Kullu Const of Dohra Nalla to Barahar road, Ft. 
Divn Kullu Road 20/06/2007 3.89  7.8  7.8  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
130 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
302 Kullu Construction of Doghari Samana Tiun 
road Road 08/11/2010 4.2097  8.5  8.5  
303 Kullu 4.5 MW Sarbari SHEP, Ft. Division Kullu HEP 04/04/2006 4.23  8.46  8.46  
304 Kullu Pangan Shegli Kasheri Galoon upto 
Nayalang road Road 13/02/2007 4.499  9 9 
305 Kullu Const of Niyalang to Kasheri up to 
Galoon road Road 07/06/2012 4.5977  9.5  9.5  
306 Kullu Improvement & widening of road from 
Kullu to Karon Road 07/08/2013 4.83  9.86  9.86  
307 Kullu 
Const of Avalanche control structures on 
access road to South Portal of Rohtang 
Tunnel in favour of BRO 
Road 19/01/2008 6.1437  12.2874  12.2874  
308 Kullu C/o Tourism Infrastructure in Rohtang 
Marhi and Gulaba Misc 23/11/2015 7.425  15  15  
309 Kullu Const of 24 MW Baragaon SHEP area  HEP 07/06/2011 7.72  15.5  15.5  
310 Kullu 192 MW Allain Duhangan Hydro Electric 
Project Addl Land 9.55 ha Forest land HEP 08/04/2008 9.55  36.08  36.08  
311 Kullu Construction of 220 KV/DC Transmission 
Line  T/Line 12/07/2013 11.9611  24  24  
312 Kullu Laying of 220 KV D/C T/L fro Prini to 
Panarsa/Banala  HEP 15/04/2009 23  46.5  6.5  
313 Kullu Const of Rohtang Tunnel in Distt. Kullu 
and Lahaul Spiti  BRO 13/05/2008 40.1806  80.3612  65  
314 Kunihar Approach road to factory Site, Kunihar Ft. 
division Road 24/10/2006 0.19  0.38  0 
315 Kunihar Running of already established stone 
crusher at Sainwala Misc 21/04/2011 0.2819  0.6  0 
316 Kunihar Establishment of Stone Crusher at village 
And PO Bhumti,  Mining 28/08/2007 0.33  0.66  0.66  
317 Kunihar Construction of 1*3.15 MVA, 33/11 KV 
Sub-Station at Goela  HPSEB 15/09/2016 0.3386  0.7  0 

Appendices 
131 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
318 Kunihar Construction of Govt. Sr. Sec School Kot 
Beja  Misc 16/03/2010 0.668  1.5  0 
319 Kunihar Gagal Kashyalu road, Kunihar Ft. 
Division Road 24/08/2006 0.84  1.68  1.68  
320 Kunihar 400 KV D/C Tr. Line (Koldam) Tr. Line 22/04/2008 1.058  2.25  2.25  
321 Kunihar Jabal-Man-Bawasi road, Kunihar, Ft. 
Division Road 02/03/2007 1.15  2.3  2.3  
322 Kunihar Link road from Joharji to Kaba Kalan 
road Road 30/03/2007 1.176  2.5  0 
323 Kunihar 132 KV transmission line from kharsi to 
bagga Tr. Line 23/10/2009 1.3716  3 3 
324 Kunihar Const. of Link road Ghagar to Manju 
School Road 16/03/2010 1.967  4 0 
325 Kunihar Shalughat Templ to Bagga road, Kunihar 
Ft. division Road 23/08/2006 2.2651  5 2 
326 Kunihar Const of Rawan-Ki-Johri Dhariyana Sua 
road Kunihar Road 10/08/2007 2.456  5.12  5.12  
327 Kunihar Construction of road from Danoghat 
Sanjha Aara Neri Plata  Road 10/10/2017 3.8423  7.685  0 
328 Kunihar Const of Chheol Khad to Jaghoon road  Road 15/02/2010 3.95  7 7 
329 Kunihar Alternative road Gujrat Ambuja Cement Road 12/05/2006 4.06  8.12  8.12  
330 Kunihar Colony for resttlemnt of oustees  Misc 19/09/2006 4.36  10  10  
331 Kunihar Kharsi Shalughat Temple road Kunihar 
Ft. Division Road 23/08/2006 6.0916  13  0 
332 Kunihar Construction of Saryanj Ghadyach Keol 
Snog road Road 01/09/2006 7.1  14.2  14.2  
333 Kunihar M/S NMDC Ltd. for mining of lime stone  Mining 10/04/2015 84.36  173  0 
334 Kunihar Cement Plant at Baga, Kunihar Ft. 
Division Cement Plant 29/05/2006 104.6846  210  210  
335 Kunihar Cement Project by Jaypee (Lime stone) Cenemt Plant 02/06/2006 239.5096  479  479  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
132 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
336 Nachan Const. of Sub Market yard at Chail 
Chowk  Misc 14/09/2007 0.172  1 1 
337 Nachan Stone Crusher in favour of Abhishek 
Thakur, Nachan  Mining 06/12/2006 0.35  0.7  0.7  
338 Nachan Installation of DVOR at village Dadwas 
(Thachi) Misc 13/11/2007 0.3656  1 1 
339 Nachan Construction of LWSS Charri Khad to 
Tandi  Irrigation 01/05/2013 0.3727  0.7454  0.7454  
340 Nachan Construction of Gosadan in village 
Naguram Misc 28/03/2017 0.387  0.8  0 
341 Nachan LWSS NC/PC habitation from Sarachi, 
Kalahni  I&PH 21/04/2012 0.4314  0.86  0.86  
342 Nachan C/o LWSS Dadwas and its adjoining 
villages in GP Thachi Irrigation 07/10/2015 0.5384  1.0768  0 
343 Nachan Construction of 1.5 MW Surah Small 
Hydro Electric project HEP 08/12/2016 0.5655  1.13  0 
344 Nachan Sainj Bara Bata Seri Road, Nachan ft. 
division Road 09/05/2006 0.7  1.4  1.4  
345 Nachan Const of Thachi to Dadwas road Nachan 
Ft. Divn. Road 12/11/2007 0.77  2 2 
346 Nachan Construction of Lift Water Supply 
Scheme Kaligarh Bara  I&PH 09/08/2012 0.849  1.75  1.75  
347 Nachan Const of 3.5 MW Chachiot SHEP  HEP 26/05/2016 1.2228  2.5  0 
348 Nachan Const of 1.50 MW Grauhan HEP  HEP 14/05/2007 1.602  3.25  3.25  
349 Nachan Jachh-Lot via Jaryad road, Nachan ft. 
division Road 09/05/2006 1.73  3.46  3.46  
350 Nachan Construction of Sainj to Kasan road Km 
0/0 to 5/00 Road 10/02/2010 1.92  3.84  3.84  
351 Nachan Const of Motorable road from Jarol to 
Jughandh road  Road 21/04/2011 2.8001  5.6  5.6  

Appendices 
133 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
352 Nachan Const of Motorable road from Chakudhar 
to Chiuni Road 04/12/2007 2.93  5.86  5.86  
353 Nachan Const of Tandi to Nandi road, Nachan Ft. 
divn. Road 18/12/2007 3.46  6.92  6.92  
354 Nachan Diversion of 3.98 ha const of Kuklah to 
Bagi road Road 05/05/2010 3.98  8 8 
355 Nachan Basan to Somgad road, Nachan Forest 
Division Road 12/11/2007 4.04  8.08  8.08  
356 Nachan Const of Thalout to Panjan road Nachan 
Ft. Division 1224 Road 25/03/2008 4.4343  8.8886  8.8886  
357 Nachan Const of Thunag-Kelti road, Nachan Ft. 
Division 1163 Road 07/03/2008 4.7  10  10  
358 Nachan Moviseri Champaran road, Ft. Division 
Nachan Road 16/06/2006 4.96  10  10  
359 Nachan Const of Bhakli to Khola Nal Road 
Nachan Forest division Road 07/12/2010 7.89  16  16  
360 Nachan Const of Bounchhari Kandha road 
(Kms.0/0-15/130)  Road 11/05/2010 8.71  18  18  
361 Nachan Laying of 220 KV D/C T/L from Prini to 
Nalagarh  Tr. Line 15/05/2009 24.155  48.5  48.5  
362 Nachan  Laying of Tr. line from Parbati-II of 
NHPC to Koldam HEP  T/Line 30/11/2012 40.508  81  81  
363 Seraj Const of Tipadhar to Chanon road Road 07/12/2007 0.24  0.5  0.5  
364 Seraj Const of Thatibar-Sehali-Jauri road  Road 07/12/2007 0.45  1 1 
365 Seraj M/S Gargacharya Stone Crusher for stone 
Quarry  Mining 19/06/2012 0.9829  2 2 
366 Seraj Construction of Gulahdhar to Rambi road Road 19/07/2012 1.668  3.336  3.336  
367 Seraj Const of Link road from Bahu to Bachhut 
road  Road 12/12/2007 1.686  3.37  3.37  
368 Seraj Banjar-Khabal road, Seraj ft. division Road 07/12/2006 1.89  4 4 
369 Seraj Const of Banjar Dimber Chahri road  Road 17/04/2008 1.91  4 4 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
134 | P a g e  
Sr. No Division Name of Proposals Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in ha. CA stipulated CA 
achieved 
370 Seraj Construction of Bihar to Kothi Chahni 
road Road 28/06/2013 2.0400  4.08  4.08  
371 Seraj Construction of Murari Mata Stone 
Crusher for stone Quarry  Mining 26/06/2018 2.4  2.4  0 
372 Seraj Const of Jibhi to Tandi road Road 26/02/2010 2.5447  5.0894  5.0894  
373 Seraj Construction of Sidhwan (Tipudhar) to 
Thanicher road  Road 28/12/2015 2.576  5.152  5.152  
374 Seraj Salwar-Kanoon road, Seraj ft. division Road 23/06/2006 2.686  5.4  5.4  
375 Seraj Construction of Chalain to Devgarh road  Road 01/03/2019 4.227  8.5  0 
376 Seraj Const of Jibhi Seraj road within the 
jurisdiction of Seraj Ft. Division                                                                                                                              Road 13/06/2012 4.316  8.632  8.632  
377 Seraj Const of Ghiagi to Sajwar road  Road 20/04/2010 4.337  8.674  8.674  
378 Seraj Sapagni Kanda road, Seraj Ft. Division 
950 Road 30/05/2006 4.786  9.572  9.572  
379 Seraj Const of Naglari-Bandal-Sharchi road  Road 05/03/2010 5.76  11.52  11.52  
380 Seraj Laying of 400 KV D/C Parvati-II Parvati-
III Tr.line  HEP 12/01/2011 6.5115 
 13.023  13.023  
381 Seraj Construction of Dehuri-Shanad-Shrikot 
road Road 12/07/2017 6.9528 
 13.9056  8.4756  
382 Seraj  22 KV D/C transmission Line from 
Charor to Banala  T/Line 30/01/2017 12.62 
 25.5  25.5  
383 Seraj  Laying of Tr.line from Parbati-II of 
NHPC to Koldam HEP  T/Line 30/11/2012 75.996 
 152  152  
  

Appendices 
135 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.2 
(Paragraph 4.2.2) 
Cost escalation due to not carrying out of Compensatory Afforestation within stipulated time 
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposals Category  
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. CA stipulated Delay in 
years 
Funds 
deposited for 
CA and 
maintenance 
1 Bharmour  Construction of Motorable road from Bajol to Guwari  Road 26/10/2018 2.62  5.5  0.430137             9,82,080  
2 Bharmour  Construction of Urai to Ghator road Road 18/12/2018  3.33  13.32  0.284932           21,96,984  
3 Bharmour  Const of Harsar to Chobia road Road 18/10/2018 4.83 52  29.34  0.452055           40,21,181  
4 Chamba C/o Model School Building at GSSS Bharian-Kothi Misc 22/09/2017 1.2  2.5  1.523288             2,04,750  
5 Chamba Chanju-II Hydro Electric Project HEP 15/01 /2018 21.0557  21.0557  1.208219           59,21,849  
6 Chopal RCC Bridge on Chopal Jhiknipul road  Road 11/08/2015 0.10  1 3.641096               79,034  
7 Chopal Const of Chayali to Lower Devat road Road 01/09/2007 0.225  1.1  11.58904               79,534  
8 Chopal Const of Tarapur to Shanag road Chopal Ft. Division Road 25/03/2008 0.6  1.5  11.02466               90,557  
9 Chopal Construction of Sub Station at Chopal (Lasta-Dhar) Misc 27/07/2012 0.6254  1.5  6.682192             1,06,781  
10 Chopal Rinjet deyia road  Road 13/11/2006 0.8  2 12.38904               91,638  
11 Chopal Nerwa to Obtawa road Road 24/10/2006 1.02  2 12.44384             1,09,475  
12 Chopal Timvi-Lachog road Chopal Ft. Division. Ro ad 24/10/2006 1.2  2.5  12.44384             1,20,919  
13 Chopal Pehlog to Makrog road Ft. divn Chopal  Ro ad 15/02/2007 1.326  3 12.13151             1,05,457  
14 Chopal Construction of Link Road Jangla to Harijan Basti 
Dewat  Road 08/02/2019 1.6071 
 3.2142  0.142466             5,99,209  
15 Chopal Basara-Chanjan road, Chopal Ft. division Road 01/11/2006 2.04  4.5  12.42192             2,53,621  
16 Chopal Const of Nakora-Khadar Road Chopal Ft. Di vision  Road 05/11/2007 2.1  4.5  11.41096             3,80,878  
17 Chopal Kuthardhar Mannu road Chopal Ft. Division  Road 01/09/2006 2.2  4.5  12.58904             1,75,486  
18 Chopal Const of Kimachandrawali-Bijmal road Road  21/06/2007 2.385  2.5  11.7863             2,53,621  
19 Chopal Const of Ranvi to Pauria road Chopal Ft. Division Road 06/11/2007 2.84  6 11.40822             3,58,737  
20 Chopal Belag-Khokha road Chopal Ft. Division Roa d 06/10/2006 2.859  6 12.49315             2,77,178  
21 Chopal Construction of Shalvi HEP 4.75 MW  HEP 2 7/09/2012 3.4198  7 6.512329             7,47,238  
22 Chopal Const of Mannu to Irra Road Chopal Ft. Divn. 1355 Road 25/03/2008 3.55  8 11.02466             3,96,080  
23 Chopal Const of Mundochi to Navi Road Chopal  Ro ad 14/03/2008 3.9  8 11.05479             5,15,500  
24 Chopal Const of Ranvi to Chatta Dhar Road  Road 05/11/2007 4.08  9 11.41096             4,64,000  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
136 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposals Category  
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. CA stipulated Delay in 
years 
Funds 
deposited for 
CA and 
maintenance 
25 Chopal Const of road Mashrain to Panchyat Headquarter 
Pouria  Road 05/11/2007 4.32 
 9 11.41096             5,67,712  
26 D/Shala Construction of Link Road from Indru   t o Cholla Road 06/05/2017 0.3643  0.7286  1.90411                 9,296  
27 D/Shala Construction of Link Road from Morchh to Gargoon  Road 06/05/2017 0.9012  2 1.90411               37,185  
28 Kinnaur Vocational Training Institute at Recong- Peo  Misc 15/01/2007 0.0473  1 12.21644               47,745  
29 Kinnaur Installation of stone crusher (BRO Works  only) Misc 01/09/2009 0.475  1 9.586301             2,46,900  
30 Kinnaur Add. Land for C/o 1000 MW Karcham Wangtoo 
HEP  HEP 12/07/2018 0.7609 
 6 0.720548             8,06,910  
31 Kinnaur Extraction of river bed minerals in favour of Shri 
D.R.Negi Mining 26/07/2007 1.3819 
 2.79  11.69041             4,33,560  
32 Kinnaur Construction of Rangle to Miroo road  Ro ad 21/05/2018 1.4971  6 0.863014             8,06,910  
33 Kinnaur Addl. Land for Karcham Wangtoo (approach  road)  HEP 25/07/2008 1.6348  3.3  10.69041             3,37,920  
34 Kinnaur Construction of 3 MW Pangi Mini HEP  HEP  19/04/2010 1.7888  3.6  8.956164             3,98,664  
35 Kinnaur Const of Rukti-II Mini HEP  HEP 26/08/20 09 2.2812  5 9.60274             5,53,700  
36 Kinnaur Construction of 9.00 MW Rala HEP HEP 20/ 10/2011 2.86  6 7.452055             6,63,300  
37 Kinnaur Const of link road to village Brua Road 10/04/2013 3.5418  7 5.978082             7,74,200  
38 Kinnaur Construction of Chholtu to Jani Road Roa d 02/07/2013 4.2017  8.5  5.750685             8,70,400  
39 Kinnaur Up-gradation of NH-22 to double lane specification  Road 30/07/2009 4.89  10  9.676712           11,07,400  
40 Kinnaur 
C/o Transmission Line from Tidong -I HEP Power 
House to LILO point of Kashang-Bhaba 
transmission Line at Purbani  
Tr. Line 22/11/2018 54.2927 
 109  0.356164         2,09,94,490  
41 Kullu Link road to NH21 to Baragaon, Kullu ft. d ivision. Road 15/02/2007 0.0429  0.09  12.13151                 4,336  
42 Kullu  Construction of LPG Godown at Bashing Mis c 17/06/2011 0.112  0.5  7.794521               46,762  
43 Kullu Construction of Challah to salatry Link Ro ad  Road 15/05/2017 0.168  0.5  1.879452               78,453  
44 Kullu 
Augmentation of WSS Bashing Bihal and Data 
Centre for Hydrology Project-II in favour of I&PH 
Department 
Misc 05/08/2009 0.33 
 0.66  9.660274               47,440  
45 Kullu Construction of Dhundi Bridge 224 Mtrs Span at 
7.00 for approach to south portal by GREF Road 20/09/2012 0.3782 
 0.7564  6.531507               59,756  
46 Kullu Construction of Government High School Pal chan  Misc 25/02/2015 0.399  0.8  4.09863               87,304  

Appendices 
137 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposals Category  
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. CA stipulated Delay in 
years 
Funds 
deposited for 
CA and 
maintenance 
47 Kullu Sewerage Treatment Plant at Lanka Bakar, Kullu 
Ft. Division Misc 25/04/2007 0.65 
 1.3  11.94247               88,221  
48 Kullu Construction of muck dumping site in Manal i-III Misc 23/05/2018 0.7682  2 0.857534             1,87,081  
49 Kullu C/o Sarwari-III Small Hydro Electric Project (two 
MW)   HEP 15/01/2016 1.0171 
 2.05  3.210959             3,03,788  
50 Kullu Realignment of Manali-Sarchu road  Road 26 /02/2010 1.195  2.39  9.09863             1,88,811  
51 Kullu Const of Bhekhali to Sari Road Kullu Fores t Divn. Road 02/03/2010 1.503  3.006  9.087671             2,37,000  
52 Kullu Const of 2.5 MW Suman Sarwari Hydro Electric 
Project  HEP 16/09/2008 2.2 
 4.5  10.54521             4,45,089  
53 Kullu Construction of 4.8 MW Aleo-II HEP  HEP 11 /10/2011 2.2026  4.4052  7.476712             4,20,989  
54 Kullu Construction of 4.5 MW Kestha HEP HEP 09/0 5/2014 3.5739  17.5  4.89863           19,09,800  
55 Kullu 
Construction of Snow Avalanche Protection 
structures at various locations on approach road to 
south portal of RT 
Misc 03/07/2015 3.8779 
 7.8  3.747945             4,23,390  
56 Kullu Const of Nagujhor to Mashna Thach road Roa d 01/02/2010 3.88  8 9.167123             6,32,000  
57 Kunihar Approach road to factory Site, Kunihar Ft. 
division Road 24/10/2006 0.19 
 0.38  12.44384                 5,818  
58 Kunihar Running of already established stone crusher at 
Sainwala Misc 21/04/2011 0.2819 
 0.6  7.950685               67,954  
59 Kunihar Construction of 1*3.15 MVA, 33/11 KV Sub-
Station at Goela  HPSEB 15/09/2016 0.3386 
 0.7  2.542466             1,34,735  
60 Kunihar Construction of Govt. Sr. Sec School Kot  Beja  Misc 16/03/2010 0.668  1.5  9.049315             1,69,884  
61 Kunihar Const. of Link Road Ghagar to Manju Scho ol Road 16/03/2010 1.967  4 9.049315             2,39,500  
62 Kunihar Construction of road from Danoghat Sanjha Aara 
Neri Plata  Road 10/10/2017 3.8423 
 7.685  1.473973           14,91,995  
63 Kunihar M/S NMDC Ltd. for mining of limestone  M ining 10/04/2015 84.36  173  3.978082         1,10,03,480  
64 Nachan Construction of Gosadan in village Nagura m Misc 28/03/2017 0.387  0.8  2.010959               97,016  
65 Nachan C/o LWSS Dadwas and its adjoining villages in 
GP Thachi Irrigation 07/10/2015 0.5384 
 1.0768  3.484932             2,87,019  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
138 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposals Category  
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. CA stipulated Delay in 
years 
Funds 
deposited for 
CA and 
maintenance 
66 Nachan Construction of 1.5 MW Surah Small Hydro 
Electric project HEP 08/12/2016 0.5655 
 1.13  2.312329             1,75,582  
67 Nachan Const of 3.5 MW Chachiot SHEP  HEP 26/05/ 2016 1.2228  2.5  2.849315             1,28,100  
68 Seraj Construction of Murari Mata Stone Crusher for 
stone Quarry  Mining 26/06/2018 2.4 
 2.4  0.764384             3,92,832  
69 Seraj Construction of Chalain to Devgarh road  R oad 01/03/2019 4.227  8.5  0.084932           13,60,842  
Total funds deposited for CA and maintenance 6,79,03,056  
Funds required to carry out CA and maintenance against 69 cases over an area of 591 Ha (Tribal - 217 Ha, Non Tribal - 374 Ha) 15 ,50 ,90 ,218  
Cost escalation due to non carrying out of compensatory afforestation within stipulated time 8,71,87,162  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
139 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.3 
(Paragraph 4.2.3) 
Details of delay in execution of Compensatory Afforestation in 194 cases 
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
1 Chopal Rohana/ Gumma to Bour 
road  Road 19/08/2014 9.2621 18.5 1708700 0.04 1836532 86 8298 127832 
2 Kullu 
Improvement & widening 
of road from Kullu to 
Karon 
Road 07/08/2013 4.83 9.86 1110200 0.07 922857 37022 3 -187343 
3 Chamba Extraction of Slates in 
Mauza TUR  Mining 23/06/2010 0.16 0.5 44141 0.19 43107 6571 -1 034 
4 Chamba Const of 2 MW Dikleri 
small HEP at Sahoo  HEP 23/06/2010 1.9321 4 353130 0.19 344856 52568 -8 274 
5 D/shala 
Widening/Improvement 
of existing Matour-
D/shala road 
Road 16/06/2011 1.08 2.2 173800 0.21 201436 49564 2 7636 
6 Chamba Const of 36 MW Chanju-
I HEP  HEP 15/06/2011 34.697 69.5 7096506 0.21 6256599 137 8026 -839907 
7 Seraj 
Const of Jibhi Seraj road 
within the jurisdiction of 
Seraj Ft.                                                                                                                    
Road 13/06/2012 4.316 8.632 769133 0.22 791114 2484 89 21981 
8 Bharmour Five MW Kuwarsi HEP Road 07/06/2012 1.85 25 4 636576 0.23 438808 141828 -197768 
9 Kullu Const of 24 MW 
Baragaon SHEP area  HEP 07/06/2011 7.72 15.5 1224488 0.24 1419211 34920 0 194723 
10 Bharmour Const of Pilli to Sawai 
road Road 04/06/2012 3.5668 7.5 1070159 0.24 822765 2659 28 -247394 
11 Kinnaur 24 MW HEP Selti 
Masranag HEP 28/05/2013 4.7564 9.5 2264160 0.26 889162 35670 6 -1374998 
12 Kullu 
Construction of Primary 
Health Centre building at 
Bhutti 
Misc 28/05/2013 0.0437 0.0874 7668.731 0.26 8180 32 82 512 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
140 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
13 Chopal 
Const of Kupvi to Mashot 
road Chopal Forest 
Division. 
Road 16/05/2011 4.98 10 1624000 0.30 915620 225290 -708380 
14 D/shala Const of five MW Baner 
Sangam Smal HEP  HEP 13/05/2011 4.5885 10 819940 0.30 915620 225290 95680 
15 D/Shala Construction of 5.00 MW 
Brahl Top SHEP HEP 09/05/2012 4.2405 8.5 778209 0.31 779017 244690  808 
16 Bharmour Construction of Kuwarsi-
II SHEP(5MW)  HEP 09/05/2014 3.3401 7 1249394 0.32 830662 404670 -418732 
17 Chamba 
Office of Assistant 
Environmental Engineer 
at Sultanpur 
Misc 27/04/2012 0.084929 0.168 17154 0.35 15397 483 6 -1757 
18 Nachan 
Const of Motorable road 
from Jarol to Jughandh 
road  
Road 21/04/2011 2.8001 5.6 229166 0.36 512747 12616 2 283581 
19 D/shala Construction of 4.8 MW 
Manuni-II Small HEP  HEP 06/04/2011 3.0429 6.1 497150 0.41 558528 137427  61378 
20 D/shala Establishment of BSF 
Battalion at Banoi  Misc 06/04/2011 3.6069 7.5 693735 0.41 686715 16896 8 -7020 
21 D/shala Const of Kareri Khas to 
Khari Behi road  Road 16/03/2010 2.511 5.5 434500 0.46 474177 72281 39677 
22 Seraj Const of Naglari-Bandal-
Sharchi road  Road 05/03/2010 5.76 11.52 687919 0.49 993185 15139 6 305266 
23 Chamba Construction of Sal-II 
(three MW) HEP  HEP 02/03/2012 2.6947 6 612648 0.50 549894 172722 - 62754 
24 Kullu 
Construction of Gas 
Insulated Sub Station at 
Phojal 
Misc. 26/02/2013 0.4285 1 103439 0.51 93596 37548 - 9843 
25 Kullu 
Addl.forest land for the 
construction of 1.593 
Kms road from Jhakri to 
Meha (Bihal) 
Road 24/02/2011 0.7227 2 175825 0.52 183124 45058 7 299 
26 Bharmour Const of Dalli to Sahan 
road (Kms 0/0 to 6/780). Road 15/02/2010 2.71 5.5 635961 0.54 576758 89029 - 59204 

Appendices 
141 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
27 Chamba 
Manimahesh Stone 
crusher at Mauza 
Sultanpur  
Mining 13/02/2009 0.34 1 20800 0.55 72094 6258 5129 4 
28 Bharmour 240 MW Kuther HEP HEP 11/01/2013 61.408 3 123 19393669 0.64 13618505 4713461 -5775164 
29 Bharmour Const of Dibri-Aura road 
Bharmour Ft. Divn. Road 29/12/2009 2.1408 4.5 479531 0.67 471893 72842  -7639 
30 Nachan 
Const of Bhakli to Khola 
Nal Road Nachan Forest 
division 
Road 07/12/2010 7.89 16 601600 0.73 1464992 360464 863392 
31 Kullu 
C/o Tourism 
Infrastructure in Rohtang 
Marhi and Gulaba 
Misc 23/11/2015 7.425 15 1874250 0.77 1715580 10137 90 -158670 
32 Kinnaur 
Widening /improvement 
of NH-22 (now NH-5) to 
NHDL  
Road 06/11/2017 62.3604 63 28548450 0.82 8179227 84 93219 -
20369223 
33 Bharmour Construction of Bajoli 
Holi HEP (180 MW)  HEP 20/10/2012 75.304 151 19529804 0.86 16907470 69 83448 -2622334 
34 Chamba 
 Rajera to Kartar 
(Jalandhar) transmission 
line  
T/ Line 22/09/2010 32 65 5135000 0.94 5951530 14643 85 816530 
35 Kullu Construction of Small 
Firing range at Bandrol  Misc 22/09/2017 2.14 4.28 581431 0.94 468335 455319  -113096 
36 D/shala Const of 33/11 KV Sub 
Station at Tota Rani Misc. 09/09/2008 0.159 0.5 29211 0.98 36047 3129 68 36 
37 Kullu Construction of Govt. Sr. 
Sec School Jagatsukh  Education 01/09/2012 0.2 0.4 39576 1.00 37438 15019  -2138 
38 Chamba Construction of Kiri-
Banjal road  Road 22/08/2014 2.21 4.5 685500 1.03 510426 256266 -175074 
39 Chopal Const of 2.MW Hamal 
Small HEP  HEP 11/08/2009 2.999 6 523697 1.06 517284 78852 -64 13 
40 Kinnaur Const of Chaura to 
Majhgaon Rupi road Road 03/08/2017 12.5478 31 7017470 1.08 4024699 417 9203 -2992771 
41 Bharmour Const of Nayagram to 
Bajol road  Road 21/07/2009 4.8072 10 1156256 1.12 1048650 1618 70 -107606 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
142 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
42 Kullu Construction of Loran to 
Sarli road  Road 20/07/2012 1.358 3 280619 1.12 280788 112644 1 69 
43 Kullu 
Constriction of Link road 
from 17 Mile to Village 
Rampur  
Road 18/07/2017 0.2194 1 103389 1.12 109424 106383 6035 
44 Bharmour Const of Link road to 
village Kuthed Road 10/07/2009 1.6509 3.5 404490 1.15 367028 56655  -37463 
45 D/shala Const of link road from 
Sudher to Dhar Road 05/07/2011 0.3375 0.675 369505 1.16 61863 1943 1 -307642 
46 Kullu 
Construction of Lift 
Irrigation and flow 
irrigation to Kharahal  
I&PH 30/06/2017 0.22 0.5 49144 1.17 54712 53192 556 8 
47 Chopal 
Const of Naura to Kulag 
road, Chopal forest 
division. 
Road 24/06/2011 1.476 9 543336 1.19 824841 259083 2 81505 
48 Seraj M/S Gargacharya Stone 
Crusher for stone Quarry  Mining 19/06/2012 0.9829 2 158807 1.20 187192 75096  28385 
49 D/shala Construcio of 3.6 MW 
Gaj-Garju Stage-1 SHEP HEP 03/06/2011 3.8436 8 652000 1.25 733192 230296 8 1192 
50 Kullu Const of Toilets at Solang Misc 29/05/2012  0.03 0.36 24390 1.26 33695 13517 9305 
51 Kullu Const of Toilets at 
Marahi Misc 29/05/2012 0.0325 0.39 26422 1.26 36502 14644 10080 
52 Kullu Const of Toilets at 
Rohtang Misc 29/05/2012 0.0375 0.45 30487 1.26 42118 16897 11631 
53 Chopal Const of Dhabbas Baggar 
road Road 16/05/2011 2.163 13.5 876132 1.30 1237262 3886 25 361130 
54 Chopal Const of Sajnalla-Reuni-
Lhangra road  Road 13/05/2011 2.115 13.5 995079 1.30 1237262 3886 25 242183 
55 D/shala  Link road to village 
Diayara Road 12/05/2008 0.5171 1.02 60933 1.30 73536 6383 1 2603 
56 Nachan 
Const of Bounchhari 
Kandha road (Kms.0/0-
15/130)  
Road 11/05/2010 8.71 18 674820 1.31 1648116 405522 973296 

Appendices 
143 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
57 Nachan 
Diversion of 3.98 ha 
const of Kuklah to Bagi 
road 
Road 05/05/2010 3.98 8 433325 1.33 732496 180232 29 9171 
58 Chopal Const of Sarkali to kiari 
Shallan road  Road 21/04/2011 2.868 18 1398819 1.36 1649682 51816 6 250863 
59 D/shala Const of Daulatpur-
Jalari-Har-Kharat road Road 20/04/2010 2.0468 4.1 197834 1.37 375404 92369  177570 
60 Chopal Const of Batera to Kandal 
road  Road 18/04/2011 2.184 12 526455 1.37 1099788 345444  573333 
61 D/shala Const of Thakurdwara to 
Badi Behi road Road 17/04/2008 1.607 3.5 158497 1.37 252329 21903 93832 
62 Chamba Const of Devidehra to 
Bakatpur road  Road 16/04/2008 1.67 4 219756 1.38 288376 25032 686 20 
63 Kullu Enhancement of capacity 
of Suman Sarwari HEP HEP 29/03/2012 0.6717 1.5 140430 1.42 140394 56322 -36 
64 Chamba Kolka –Jatkari road, 
Chamba Forest division. Road 25/03/2008 4.94 10 465728 1.44 720940 62580 25 5212 
65 Kullu 
Construction of 2.5 MW 
Khalara HEP alongwith 
tr. Line 
HEP 22/03/2017 1.1925 2.5 331495 1.45 273560 265958  -57935 
66 Chopal 
Const of 5MW Sainj 
Small HEP (Theog and 
Chopal) 
HEP 19/03/2008 3.39 7 415137 1.45 504658 43806 8952 1 
67 Kullu Construction of 1.00 MW 
Rujag SHEP HEP 19/03/2012 0.9835 2 185844 1.45 187192 75096 13 48 
68 Chamba Const of Bhanera to 
Kolka road, Chamba  Road 17/03/2008 2.48 5 278764 1.46 360470 31290 817 06 
69 Chamba Const of  Dunali to Brehi 
road Chamba  Road 17/03/2008 3.402 7 448177 1.46 504658 43806 56 481 
70 Kullu 
Construction of link road 
from Dam site to village 
Gadiara  
Road 14/03/2012 0.404 0.808 75584.02 1.47 75626 303 39 42 
71 D/shala Five MW Iku-II Small 
HEP D/Shala Division. HEP 11/03/2008 0.15 0.5 460327 1.47 36047 3129 -424 280 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
144 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
72 D/shala Const of Kutharna to 
Kareri road Road 15/02/2010 2.2577 4.5154 356717 1.54 413439 10 1727 56722 
73 Nachan 
Construction of  Sainj to 
Kasan road Km 0/0 to 
5/00 
Road 10/02/2010 1.92 3.84 157874 1.56 351598 86511 193724 
74 D/shala construction of Rirakmar 
to Ghatarda road  Road 01/02/2011 1.201 2.4 195601 1.58 219958 69089 24357 
75 D/shala 
Const of link road from 
Salli to Kanol D/Shala Ft. 
Divn. 
Road 07/12/2007 0.7162 1.5 87635 1.73 108141 9387 2 0506 
76 Kullu 
Const of five MW 
Gramong Hydro Electric 
Project  
HEP 25/11/2011 2.2958 5 467765 1.77 467980 187740 2 15 
77 D/shala Const of Kufri-Patialkar-
Sarathana-Rounkar road  Road 18/10/2007 0.591 1.2 70108 1.87 86513 7510 164 05 
78 Chamba Construction of Bakani to 
Kalwara road  Road 13/10/2010 4.75 9.5 970000 1.88 819033 124849 -150967 
79 D/shala Const of Darnu-Touhu-
Bangrota road D/Shala  Road 08/10/2010 0.984 2 109600 1.90 183298 57574 73 698 
80 D/shala 
Improvement and 
widening of existing 
Gagal Chatru road 
Road 31/08/2010 0.7305 1.5 82200 2.00 137474 43181 55274 
81 D/shala Const of Satobari-Barnet 
road  Road 20/08/2007 1.2413 2.5 108916 2.03 180235 15645  71319 
82 Chamba 
Addl Forest land for 
muck disposal sites 
(Chamera-III) 
HEP 09/07/2009 2.83 6 529695 2.15 517284 78852 -124 11 
83 Bharmour Const of 4.50 MW 
Kurhed Small HEP HEP 11/06/2008 6.4347 13 1127153 2.22 1363245 21043 1 236092 
84 Chopal Const of Taranh-Banah 
road  Road 01/06/2007 4.95 10 682218 2.25 720940 62580 38 722 
85 Kullu Const of Toilets at Kothi Misc 29/05/2012 0.0195 0.2 15843 2.26 19854 9387 4011 
86 Kullu Construction of WTP for 
augmentation of water I&PH 18/05/2016 2.1074 4.21 359534 2.29 460675 4478 72 101141 

Appendices 
145 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
Supply Scheme to Kullu 
Town 
87 Kunihar 400 KV D/C Tr. Line 
(Koldam) Tr. Line 22/04/2008 1.058 2.25 116400 2.36 193982 2 9570 77582 
88 Seraj Const of Ghiagi to Sajwar 
road  Road 20/04/2010 4.337 8.674 517968 2.37 794963 2496 98 276995 
89 Chamba Const of Kiani-Mauwa-
Makolsu road Road 11/04/2008 1.72 3.5 163045 2.39 301749 45997 1 38704 
90 Kullu 
Const of store at Kahla 
Bihal Phatin Jinder 
Kothin Sari 
Misc 02/04/2008 0.17 0.34 11933 2.42 29313 4468 173 80 
91 Chamba Mohri-Nallah Kuthar 
road Road 25/03/2008 1.672 3.5 218081 2.44 301749 45997 83668 
92 D/shala Parking near Narrowji 
Complex at Maclodgang Misc 13/03/2007 0.4443 1 58423 2.47 72094 6258 1367 1 
93 D/shala 
Const of 1.5 MW GAJ 
HEP in favour of Bhu 
Shingar  
HEP 11/03/2008 4.447 9 422402 2.48 775926 118278 35 3524 
94 Seraj Const of Jibhi to Tandi 
road Road 26/02/2010 2.5447 5.0894 402193 2.51 466438 14 6509 64245 
95 D/shala Parking near Bhagsunag 
road at Maclodgang,  Misc. 13/02/2007 0.1275 0.3 19037 2.55 21628 1877 2 591 
96 D/shala Parking opposite Hotel 
Shahiba Maclodgang Misc 13/02/2007 0.45 1 58323 2.55 72094 6258 13771 
97 Seraj 
Laying of 400 KV D/C 
Parvati-II Parvati-III 
Tr.line  
HEP 12/01/2011 6.5115 13.023 1243655 2.64 1218901 4 88988 -24754 
98 Kullu Establishment of stone 
crusher and Quarry Mining 22/11/2010 3.4 6.8 537200 2.78 636453 255326  99253 
99 Kullu 
Const of section store 
cum complaint office at 
Darka  
Misc 08/11/2010 0.028 0.5 38291 2.81 46798 18774 85 07 
100 Kullu Construction of Doghari 
Samana Tiun road Road 08/11/2010 4.2097 8.5 671500 2.81 795566 31915 8 124066 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
146 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
101 D/shala 
Const of link road from 
Bara Khotha to Ankhar 
Kohla  
Road 18/10/2007 2.16 5 389801 2.87 431070 65710 412 69 
102 Bharmour Const of Suinr HEP, 
Bharmour Ft. division. HEP 28/09/2007 1.0315 2.5 160727 2.93 262163 40468 101436 
103 Kullu Const of Neuli to Larikot 
(Rogimoure) road.1499 Road 28/08/2007 0.8875 2.045 132191 3.01 176308 268 75 44117 
104 Kunihar 
Establishment of Stone 
Crusher at village And 
PO Bhumti,  
Mining 28/08/2007 0.33 0.66 35453 3.01 56901 8674 2 1448 
105 Kullu Construction of 1.20 MW 
Kalath Small HEP  HEP 13/08/2012 0.5358 1.5 151829 3.05 170142 85422 18313 
106 Kullu 
Const of 60 Mtrs Span 
Minor PMT bridge at 
Kms 8.800 linking 
Manali-Sarchu road to 
Army transit Camp  
Road 20/07/2010 0.1335 0.267 21093 3.12 24990 10025  3897 
107 Kullu 
Improvement & 
Widening of Manali 
Sarchu road  
Road 20/07/2012 1.4623 3 280620 3.12 340284 170844 59664 
108 Kullu Forest land for the 
establishment of camp                                                                                                        Road 20/07/2012 3.0195 6.1 570593 3.12 691911 34738 3 121318 
109 D/shala Const of four MW Brahl 
Small HEP at village Boh 
 HEP 27/06/2007 3.8 8 504692 3.18 689712 105136 1850 20 
110 Kullu 
Const of Dohra Nalla to 
Barahar road, Ft. Divn 
Kullu.  
Road 20/06/2007 3.89 7.8 613080 3.20 672469 102508 59389 
111 Nachan 
Laying of 220 KV D/C 
T/L from Prini to 
Nalagarh  
Tr. Line 15/05/2009 24.155 48.5 4219500 3.30 444497 7 1396170 225477 
112 Kullu Kharla to Churla road 
Kullu fty. Division. Road 09/05/2006 1.3 2.6 142629 3.32 187444 16271 44 815 
113 Chamba Const of Rakh to Dhanara 
road  Road 25/03/2008 2.49 7 384681 3.44 603498 91994 218 817 

Appendices 
147 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
114 Nachan 
Const of Thalout to 
Panjan road Nachan Ft. 
Divn..1224 
Road 25/03/2008 4.4343 8.8886 311289 3.44 813858 20 0251 502569 
115 D/shala 5MW Manjhi –II HEP, 
D/Shala Ft. divn. HEP 13/03/2007 2.7074 6 234733 3.47 517284 78852 28 2551 
116 Nachan 
Const of Thunag-Kelti 
road, Nachan Ft. 
Divn.1163 
Road 07/03/2008 4.7 10 391200 3.49 915620 225290 52 4420 
117 Kullu 
Const of 21 Mtrs Span 
Minor PMT bridge & 
approaches at Kms 
13.590(kothi-II) on 
Manali-Sarchu road 
Road 05/03/2010 0.1586 0.3172 25058 3.49 29689 1191 0 4631 
118 Chopal Kupvi-Bhallu-Dhotali 
road Road 02/02/2007 7.57 15 399988 3.58 1293210 197130 893222 
119 Kullu 
Const of road from Kungi 
Nallah to Dunkhari Gahar 
Fallain, Kullu Forest 
Divisdion. 
Road 01/02/2010 0.626 1.5 139238 3.58 140394 56322 1156 
120 Kullu Dughilag-Dubkan Road 
Kullu Forest Division. Road 01/02/2010 0.969 2 394300 3.58 187192 75096 -2 07108 
121 Chamba Five MW Dunali SHEP, 
Chamba Ft.Division. HEP 15/01/2007 0.959 2 70200 3.63 172428 26284 1022 28 
122 Kullu 
Const of Churla to 
Khanipandhe road, Kullu 
Forest division. 
Road 31/12/2009 1.883 4 316000 3.67 374384 150192 5 8384 
123 Nachan 
Const of Motorable road 
from Chakudhar to 
Chiuni 
Road 04/12/2007 2.93 5.86 240921 3.75 536553 132020  295632 
124 Nachan Installation of DVOR at 
village Dadwas (Thachi) Misc 13/11/2007 0.3656 1 32600 3.80 91562 22529 589 62 
125 Nachan 
Const of Thachi to 
Dadwas road Nachan Ft. 
Divn. 
Road 12/11/2007 0.77 2 80440 3.81 183124 45058 1026 84 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
148 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
126 Nachan Basan to Somgad road, 
Nachan Forest Division. Road 12/11/2007 4.04 8.08 328129 3.81 739821 182034  411692 
127 D/shala Const of link road from 
Harnera to Challian Road 07/11/2007 0.7162 1.13 70080 3.82 103465 25458  33385 
128 Chopal Badlog Jhina road, 
Chopal Ft. Division. Road 06/10/2006 1.368 3 132457 3.91 258642 39426 12 6185 
129 Nachan Const. of Sub Market 
yard at Chail Chowk  Misc 14/09/2007 0.172 1 35100 3.97 91562 22529 5646 2 
130 Kunihar 
Construction of Saryanj 
Ghadyach Keol Snog 
road 
Road 01/09/2006 7.1 14.2 711040 4.00 1224239 186616  513199 
131 Kunihar Gagal Kashyalu road, 
Kunihar Ft. Division. Road 24/08/2006 0.84 1.68 92298 4.02 144840 22079 52542 
132 Kullu Manalsu Bridge-Palchan 
via Barua road   Road 15/06/2006 0.707 1.4142 77590 4.22 121924 1858 5 44334 
133 Kinnaur Const of Kashang Stage-
II & III (130MW) HEP HEP 14/06/2011 17.6857 36 9691920 4.22 4887540 2525 148 -4804380 
134 Kullu 
Const of Govt Middle 
School Building at 
Ghandinagar  
Misc 09/06/2009 0.04 0.08 7426 4.23 7488 3004 62 
135 Chopal Const of Sarain to Jhakar 
road Chopal Ft.Division. Road 01/06/2007 6.381 13 748000 4.25 1190306 292877  442306 
136 Nachan Const of 1.50 MW 
Grauhan HEP  HEP 14/05/2007 1.602 3.25 130800 4.30 297577 73219 166777 
137 D/shala 
Widening/improvement 
of road from Nagrota to 
Mallan  
Road 10/04/2007 0.6294 1.26 81180 4.40 115368 28387  34188 
138 Kullu 
192 MW Allain 
Duhangan Hydro Electric 
Project Addl Land 9.55 
ha Forest land 
HEP 08/04/2008 9.55 36.08 1983606 4.40 3228274 8016 57 1244668 
139 Bharmour Const. of transmission 
line Budhil SHEP T/Line 05/03/2010 21.6702 44 4855537 4.50 4788955 1 428299 -66582 

Appendices 
149 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
140 Chamba M/s Himalayan Slate and 
Stones Mining 03/03/2008 1.392 3 84000 4.50 274947 86361 1 90947 
141 Kullu Construction of Palchan –
II bridge  Misc 04/03/2011 0.2253 0.4506 35597 4.50 51111 2566 1 15514 
142 Kullu 
Const of 4.50 MW 
Sarwari-II Hydro Electric 
Project  
HEP 16/12/2008 1.8 4 316000 4.71 374384 150192 5838 4 
143 Kullu Const of 9.00 MW Fozal 
HEP on Fozal Nalla  HEP 16/12/2008 2.885 6 474050 4.71 561576 225288 87 526 
144 Chopal Sarain-Pulbahal road  Road 07/12/2006 9. 609 20 737000 4.74 1831240 450580 1094240 
145 Kunihar Cement Project by Jaypee 
(Lime stone) 
Cenemt 
Plant 02/06/2006 239.5096 479 27449018 5.25 42931126 9408 373 15482108 
146 Kinnaur 
Construction of 
Shongtong Karcham (402 
MW) HEP  
HEP 14/11/2012 63.5015 128 14156800 5.4 15511016 81 78882 1354216 
147 D/shala 
Link road Naddi 
Bhachheter road D/Shala 
Ft. divn. 
Road 04/04/2006 0.535 1.1 70840 5.41 100718 24782 2 9878 
148 Kullu Beas Kund HEP five MW  HEP 19/03/2008 2.9306 5.8612 323136 5.45 548585 220 076 225449 
149 Kullu 
Widening of Palchan 
Solang road, Kullu ft. 
Division. 
Road 02/03/2007 2.8562 5.7124 285142 5.50 523536 16 4443 238394 
150 Seraj Const of Link road from 
Bahu to Bachhut road  Road 12/12/2007 1.686 3.37 201360 5.72 315419 12653 7 114059 
151 Kullu 
Const of Link road from 
village Shanag to village 
Majhach  
Road 12/11/2007 2.5549 5.1098 294916 5.81 478257 19 1863 183341 
152 Bharmour Chirchind HEP Bharmour 
ft. division HEP 03/11/2006 4.5222 10 1128932 5.83 1085650 27749 0 -43282 
153 Kullu Const of 1.5 MW Haripur 
Nallah Small HEP HEP 02/11/2007 0.9583 2 70190 5.83 187192 75096 117 002 
154 Chamba 
Mining of Slates at 
Mauza Bhador, Chamba 
Ft. Division 
Mining 10/10/2006 0.16 0.5 46522 5.90 54851 17729 8 329 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
150 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
155 Kullu 
Const. of 2.25 MW Beas 
HEP at Palachan, Kullu 
Ft. Division 
HEP 19/09/2007 0.7479 1.4958 87826 5.95 140001 5616 4 52175 
156 Kullu 
Sewerage Treatment 
Plant at Badoh Kullu Ft. 
Division 
Misc 31/08/2007 0.36 0.72 46669.12 6.01 67389 27035  20720 
157 Kullu 
Construction of 2.6 M.W 
Sharan HEP Kullu 
Division 
HEP 20/08/2007 2.5774 5.16 349330 6.04 482955 19374 8 133625 
158 Kinnaur Construction of Raura-II 
(20 MW) HEP  HEP 17/08/2012 4.8951 10 1105500 6.04 1298290 13481 30 192790 
159 Kullu Const of 4.9 MW 
Baragran Small HEP  HEP 10/08/2007 0.4795 1 54915 6.06 93596 37548 3868 1 
160 Chamba 4.5 MW Hul HEP, Ft. 
Division Chamba. HEP 18/07/2006 2.2346 4.5 157950 6.13 493659 159557  335709 
161 Kullu Const of Fozal to Flain 
road Kullu Ft. Divn.1419 Road 20/06/2007 2.0952 4.5 247680 6.20 421182 16896 6 173502 
162 Kunihar Cement Plant at Baga, 
Kunihar Ft. Division 
Cement 
Plant 29/05/2006 104.6846 210 19193450 6.26 19246290 6045 270 52840 
163 Kullu One MW Chhor SHEP, 
Kullu Ft. Divn. HEP 15/03/2007 0.3584 0.7168 48563 6.47 67090 26914  18527 
164 Kullu 
Seobag-Gahar-
Paharmeha road (0/00 to 
7/520)  
Road 13/03/2007 3.5345 7.1 480152 6.47 664532 26659 1 184380 
165 Kullu Karal Himri road, Kullu 
Ft. division. Road 15/02/2007 2.7407 5 301758 6.55 467980 187740 166222 
166 Kullu 
Pangan Shegli Kasheri 
Galoon upto Nayalang 
road 
Road 13/02/2007 4.499 9 493785 6.55 842364 337932 3 48579 
167 Kullu 
Const of Avalanche 
control structures on 
access road to South 
Portal of Rohtang Tunnel 
in favour of BRO 
Road 19/01/2008 6.1437 12.2874 761472 6.62 1219795 576709 458323 

Appendices 
151 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
168 Chopal Mashrain via Matraida 
road Road 07/12/2006 2.334 5 220094 6.74 467980 187740 2 47886 
169 Chopal 
Const of Kiarno to 
Sarahan via Koti Dhanag 
road  
Road 05/11/2007 1.38 3 181112 6.83 297816 140805 11 6704 
170 Kinnaur Construction of Link road 
to Village Panvi Road 20/10/2006 4.919 10 477450 6.87 935960 375480 458510 
171 Kullu Field Firing Range at 
Pahnallah Kullu Ft. Divn. Road 18/08/2006 1.81 3.62 198667 7.04 338818 135924  140151 
172 Kullu Kais-Soir-Sor-Kotadhar 
road, Kullu ft. division. Road 18/08/2006 2.3518 4.75 321229 7.04 444581 1783 53 123352 
173 Kinnaur Transmission line from 
switch yard sorang Tr. Line 03/08/2010 13.3445 28 3815824 7.08 3888976  2927512 73152 
174 Bharmour 70 MW Budhil HEP 
Bharmour  HEP 19/04/2006 27.9358 56 5511200 7.37 6270320 2589 888 759120 
175 Kullu 4.5 MW Sarbari SHEP, 
Ft. Division Kullu. HEP 04/04/2006 4.23 8.46 492255 7.41 791822 317656 299567 
176 Kullu 
Const of Water Filter 
unit, Storage and 
Distribution Tank  
Misc 02/04/2008 0.0144 0.03 2360 7.42 3403 1708 104 3 
177 Kinnaur construction of 8.00 MW 
Raura HEP HEP 03/01/2011 4.2017 9 918360 7.67 1168461 1213317  250101 
178 Kinnaur Up-gradation/widening of 
NH 22  Road 03/12/2010 7.2209 14.5 1605730 7.8 1973151 165 2199 367421 
179 Kinnaur 
Up-gradation/widening of 
NH 22 from 373/00 to 
395/210  
Road 03/12/2010 21.7094 44 4872560 7.75 6020618 490 2966 1148058 
180 Kullu Anjani Mahadav Mandir, 
Kullu Ft. Division. Misc 28/03/2007 0.8287 3.5 490329 8.44 396998 19931 8 -93331 
181 Kinnaur Const of 3.00 MW 
Shaung SHEP  HEP 24/12/2009 2.7004 5.5 462150 8.69 714060 741472  251910 
182 Kinnaur 
Const of 3 MW Tangling 
Mini Hydro Electric 
Project  
HEP 18/06/2007 2.7544 5.55 246900 9.21 759190 46201 5 512290 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
152 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No Division Name of Proposals. Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
ha. 
CA 
achieved 
CA and 
maintenance 
delay in 
years 
Expentiure 
on plantation 
and 
maintenance 
Funds 
required for 
balance 
maintenance 
Excess 
expenditure  
183 Kinnaur Const of 5.00 MW Brua 
Mini HEP Kinnaur  HEP 18/06/2007 3.7836 8 406000 9.21 1094328 665968 688328 
184 Kinnaur Const. of 4.5 MW Melan 
Mini HEP  HEP 18/06/2007 4.4119 9 462150 9.21 1231119 749214 768969 
185 Kinnaur 
Const of Border out post 
at Kota Dongri in favour 
of ITBP  
Misc 10/04/2008 0.5781 1.15 215667 9.40 159726 1202 37 -55941 
186 Kinnaur 
Three MW Shyang HEP 
Kinnaur, Kinnaur ft. 
Division 
HEP 15/02/2007 0.4496 1 42600 9.55 136791 83246 941 91 
187 Kinnaur 
Const of FIS Rispa in 
favour of I&PH 
Department  
Misc 13/02/2009 0.54 1.2 204512 9.55 155795 161776 -48717 
188 Kinnaur Sholtu-Poonang road, 
Kinnaur ft. division. Road 02/02/2007 2.5585 5.12 244311 9.58 700370 4262 20 456059 
189 Kinnaur Const of Bridge over 
Chooling Nallah Misc 05/12/2008 0.0601 1 51340 9.75 129829 134813 7 8489 
190 Kinnaur Const of T/L from 
Nathpa to Kashang  T/Line 14/07/2008 57.3881 115 11776000 10.14 149303 35 15503495 3154335 
191 Kinnaur 
1,000 MW Karcham 
Wangtoo HEP (add. 
Land) 
HEP 06/07/2006 4.7053 11 426000 10.16 1504701 91570 6 1078701 
192 Kinnaur Const of Link road to 
village Thangi  Road 13/06/2008 2.015 4 700414 10.22 519316 539252 -181098 
193 Kinnaur Const of 4 MW Panvi 
Mini HEP  HEP 18/06/2007 4.2381 9 462150 11.21 1168461 121331 7 706311 
194 Kinnaur 
Laying of 66 Kv 
transmission line from 
Nathpa to Akpa 
Tr. Line 12/08/2003 73.02 146 5966179 13.06 1997148 6 12153916 14005307 
Total 1377 2799 270383097  290706611 128732423 20323513 
  

Appendices 
153 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.4 
(Paragraph 4.2.5) 
Short realisation of funds from user agencies on account of cost escalation of Compensatory Afforestation 
Sr. 
No.  Name of FCA proposal Division Area 
diverted 
Date of 
final 
approval 
CA 
stipulated  
Amount 
deposited 
by UA 
Total 
Amount required to 
be realized (time lag 
of one financial year 
after final approval 
and increase in cost 
of material and 
labour in subsequent 
years) 
Amount 
Short 
realized 
1 New Model Degree College LyhlKothi 
CHAMBA (H.P.) Chamba 1.2 
 04/12/2017  2.5  250818  549407 298589  
2 C/o  D/shala Macleodganj ropeway D/shala 1.6958  06/01/2017  2.0731  350109  593332 243223  
3 Const of Sub Market Yard Antrawali (Nerwa)  Chopal 4.0265  20/06/2017  8.06  919230  2306813 1387583  
4 Const of Link road from Peej to village 
Chaklani Kullu 1.3796 
 06/02/2018  2.76  382053  734781 352728  
5 C/O road from Soil to Tandla Kullu 2.39  14/12/2018  4.78  929347  1368060 438713  
6 C/O Link road from Sui Mata temple to 
Village Maloona Chamba 2.77 
 03/08/2018  5.55  603735  1588438 984703  
7 T/Line from Holi. Bajoli HEP to GIS pooling 
substnLahal Bharmour 
 30.6321  11/12/2018  61.5  15302280  23283180 7980900  
8 C/o link road Sillaghrat to Uil Chamba 2.354  29/07/2019  4.7  947477  1511069 563592  
9 
 
Const of  400 KV D/C T/L Lahalto substation 
Chamera  II 
Bharmour  78.8158  20/02/2019  67.5  16503726  26223641 9719915  
Chamba 91.5  17253978  26187760 8933782  
10 C/o Hillatrashidachani road Kullu 2.61  18/03/2020  5.5  1070629  1574128 503499  
11 Mehla Bhagiar Hurid road under PMGSY Chamba 7.69  22/09/2017  15.5  2724232  3112025 387793  
12 Deori Shanad to Shrikot road Seraj 6.9528  12/07/2017  13.9056  1955464  3055678 1100214  
  Total   142.5166   285.8287  59193078  92088312 32895234  
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
154 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.5 
(Paragraph 4.2.7) 
Funds realised on account of departmental charges (government receipts) diverted to CAMPA funds 
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposal Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
Ha 
Departmental 
charges on CA 
as per scheme 
1 Chopal C/o Timvi Lachhag road road 24/10/2006  1.2  18079  
2 Chopal C/o Basara to Chanjan road road 01/11/2006  2.04  46599  
3 Chopal C/o Kuthar Dhar to Mannu road road 01/09/2006  2.2  25559  
4 Chopal Mashrain via Matralda road road 07/12/2006  2.334  32156  
5 Chopal C/o Belag Khokha Ruslah road road 06/10/2006  2.859  40737  
6 Chopal C/o Badlog to Jhina road road 06/10/2006  1.368  19293  
7 Chopal C/o Nerwa to Obtwa road road 24/10/2006  1.02  20065  
8 Chopal C/o Rauni to Pauria road road 06/11/2007  2.84  51303  
9 Chopal C/o Kupvi Bhallu Dhatalil road  road 02/02/2007  7.57  84012  
10 Chopal C/o Nakodar to Khadar road road 06/11/2007  2.1  54337  
11 Chopal C/o Pehlog to Makrog road road 15/02/2007  1.326  19293  
12 Chopal C/o Ranvi to Chatta Dhar road road 05/11/2007  4.08  81200  
13 Chopal C/o Taranh to Banah road road 01/06/2007  4.95  84727  
14 Chopal C/o Kimachandrwali to Bijmal road road 21/06/2007  2.385  46599  
15 Chopal C/o Mashrain to Panchyat HQ Poria via Thi araPandrara road road 05/11/2007  4.32  14671  
16 Chopal C/o Mundochli to Navi road road 14/03/2008  3.9  73500  
17 Chopal C/o Tarapur to Shanag road road 25/03/2008  0.6  12926  
18 Chopal C/o Pabas to Mashran road road 25/03/2008  4.932  89853  
19 Chopal C/o MW SainjSamall HEP HEP 19/03/2008  3.39  58850  
20 Chopal C/o Manu to Irra road road 25/03/2008  3.55  73850  
21 Chopal C/o 2.00 MW Hamal Hydel Electric Project Ltd HEP 11/08/2009  2.999  51303  
22 Chopal C/o Chayali to LawerDevat road road 01/09/2009  0.225  14516  
23 Chopal C/o Dhabas to Bagar road road 16/05/2011  2.163  124950  
24 Chopal C/o Antrawali to Pabanraod road 28/06/2011  4.51  81200  
25 Chopal C/o Kupvi to Mashot road road 16/05/2011  4.98  173588  
26 Chopal C/o Sarkali to KiariShallan road road 21/04/2011  2.868  85470  

Appendices 
155 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No. Division Name of Proposal Category 
Date of 
Final 
Approval 
Area in 
Ha 
Departmental 
charges on CA 
as per scheme 
27 Chopal C/o Sajnalla to ReuniKhagna Road road 13/05/2011  2.115  47407  
28 Chopal C/o Batera to Kandal Road road 18/04/2011  2.184  25559  
29 Chopal C/o Naura to kulag road road 24/06/2011  1.476  25853  
30 Chopal C/o Shirga to Shallan road road 10/09/2012  7.833  152672  
31 Chopal C/o MVA, 66/22 KV Sub. Station at Chopal PPSEDL 27/07/2012  0.6254  22420  
32 Chopal C/o Sagrati to Tikkari Maunty (Portion Ti kkari to Dhannat) road Road 23/07/2013  4.93  130650  
33 Chopal C/o Chhampandlia Chhamdhar to Chillaroad road 08/01/2015  4.9721  166250  
34 Chopal C/o RohanaGumma Bour road road 10/09/2014  9.2621  298900  
35 Chopal C/o RCC Bridge on Chopal Jhikipul road  r oad 27/08/2015  0.1  14516  
36 Kinnaur C/o 56 APO widening/improvement of NH 22  Road 10/10/2017  62.3604  4995979  
Total 7358842  
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
156 | P a g e  
Appendix 5.1 
(Refer paragraph 5.3) 
Non demand of additional funds under CAT Plans due to revision in Project cost/ revised TEC- ₹ 198.73 crore 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of 
Prjoect 
Name of CAT 
Plan 
Name of User 
Agencey 
Division(s) 
implement-
ing the CAT 
Plan 
Capacity 
of the 
Project  
Year of 
commencem 
ent of CAT 
plan 
Year of 
Commissioning 
of Project 
Project Cost  
as per initial 
TEC  
(in lakh) 
Cost of 
CAT Plan 
(in lakh) 
Amount 
deposited by 
user agency  
(in lakh) 
Balance 
yet to be 
deposited 
(in lakh) 
Project 
cost as per 
revised 
TEC 
(Final)  
(in lakh) 
Cost of 
CAT plan 
as per 
revised 
TEC (in 
lakh) 
Differential 
cost of CAT 
plan not 
demanded 
from UA  
(in lakh) 
1 Allian 
Duhangan AllianDuhangan A.D. Hydro 
Power Ltd. Kullu 192 
 2006-07 17/07/2010 24629.60 615.74 600.67 15.07 922 36 2305.90 1690.16 
2 Rampur HEP Rampur HEP SJVN Limited Rampur/ 
Luhri 412 
 2006-07 13/05/2014 93517.60 2337.94 2334.74316 3.20  204703 5117.58 2779.64 
3 Karcham-
Wangtoo HEP 
Karcham- 
Wangtoo HEP 
Jai Prakash 
Industries Ltd Kinnaur 1000 
 2006-07 26/05/2011 131080.04 3277.00 3194.40111 82. 60 590959 14773.98 11496.97 
4 Budhil Budhil Lanco Green 
Power Pvt Ltd Bharmour 70 
 2006-07 30/05/2012 19814.20 495.35 495.35 0.00 4188 0 1047.00 551.65 
5 Sorang Shorang HEP 
Himachal 
Shorang Power 
Ltd 
Kinnaur 100 
 2007-08 01/01/2021 25880.80 647.02 614.19 32.83 586 00 1465.00 817.98 
6 Neogal Neogal 
Om Power 
Corporation Pvt 
Ltd 
Palampur 15  2008-09 06/05/2013 2495.60 62.39 62.39 0.00 15269 3 81.73 319.34 
7 Patikari Patikari Everest Power 
Ltd Mandi/ Kullu 
 16  2009-10 06/02/2008 2285.20 57.13 49.32 7.81 12590 3 14.75 257.62 
8 SwaraKuddu SwaraKuddu 
Pabber Valley 
Power 
Corporation 
Ltd. HPSEB 
Rohru 110 
 2009-10 23/12/2020 29240.00 731.00 603.86 127.14 55 853 1396.33 665.33 
9 Kut Kut HEP 
Good Will 
Energy 
Enterprises Ltd 
 
Rampur 24  2009-10 19/12/2018 6688.40 167.21 167.2 0.01 19219 480.48 313.27 
10 Sainj HEP Sainj Sainj Hydro 
Electric Project 
 GHNP 100  2011-12 04/09/2017 44614.40 1115.36 1039.5 75.86 66 797 1669.93 554.57 
11 Baragaon Baragaon 
Kanchanjunga 
Power 
Company Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Kullu 24 
 2011-12 12/10/2015 16811.20 420.28 420.28 0.00 1748 1 437.03 16.75 
12 Upper Nanti Upper Nanti HEP  
M/S Nanti 
Hydro Power 
Pvt Ltd 
Rampur 13.5 
 2012-13 26/10/2017 8312.59 207.81 156 51.81 11448.1 4 286.20 78.39 

Appendices 
157 | P a g e  
Sr. 
No.  
Name of 
Prjoect 
Name of CAT 
Plan 
Name of User 
Agencey 
Division(s) 
implement-
ing the CAT 
Plan 
Capacity 
of the 
Project  
Year of 
commencem 
ent of CAT 
plan 
Year of 
Commissioning 
of Project 
Project Cost  
as per initial 
TEC  
(in lakh) 
Cost of 
CAT Plan 
(in lakh) 
Amount 
deposited by 
user agency  
(in lakh) 
Balance 
yet to be 
deposited 
(in lakh) 
Project 
cost as per 
revised 
TEC 
(Final)  
(in lakh) 
Cost of 
CAT plan 
as per 
revised 
TEC (in 
lakh) 
Differential 
cost of CAT 
plan not 
demanded 
from UA  
(in lakh) 
13 Wanger Homte  Wanger Homte 
M/S Panchhor 
Hydro Project 
Ltd. 
Kinnaur/ WL 
Sarahan 24.6 
 2013-14 15/02/2021 16400.00 410.00 103.5 306.50 274 50 686.25 276.25 
14 Chanju II Chanju II 
M/s Cosmos 
Hydro power 
pvt ltd. 
Chamba 19.8 
 NA 08/06/2021 16100.00 402.50 100 302.50 18324 458. 1 55.60 
     Total         10946.74 9941.40427 1005.34   30820.23 19873.49 
 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
158 | P a g e  
Appendix 5.2 
(Paragraph 5.3) 
Non-formulation of CAT Plans - ₹ 8.48 crore 
Sr.No. Name of 
Project 
Capacity 
in MW 
Date of 
accordance 
of TEC 
Project 
cost in 
Lakh as 
per TEC 
Construction 
period as 
approved in 
TEC in months 
Actual date of 
start of 
Construction 
Status (Date of 
commissioning, 
if commissioned) 
Project cost as 
per revised TEC 
(final) in Lakh 
Date of 
Accordance of 
revised TEC 
(final) 
Cost of CAT 
plan (2.5% of 
revised TEC) (in 
Lakhs) 
1 Raura 12 08/07/2002 9491 36 Sept, 2011 30/09/2019  9491 08/10/2015 237.29 
2 Kuwarsi II 15 29/05/2012 4088 24 July, 2015 22/12 /2019 9579 12/08/2014 239.48 
3 Rala 13 28/04/2016 9674 24 Nov, 2008 24/12/2019 1 4850 03/03/2018 371.25 
    Total 23253    33920  848.02 
 
  

Appendices 
159 | P a g e  
Appendix 6.1 
(Paragraph 6.2.2.2) 
22 CA sites selected for Geo-Spatial Study  
E-green 
GPS ID Division Name of CA 
Site 
Year of 
Plantation  
Area under 
VDF and 
MDF 
Expenditure 
under VDF 
&MDF 
Area 
under 
NF 
Expenditure 
on CA under 
Non Forest 
Area 
under 
ODF 
Expenditure 
on CA under 
ODF 
Total Area 
(as per 
polygons) 
Total 
Expenditure 
12218 Banjar Jalora 2014-15 5.07 464660 0.00 0 0.01 916 5.08 465577 
12219 Banjar Jalora 2014-15 6.50 595719 0.09 8248 2.08 190630 8.67 794597 
54702 Banjar Bhallan III 2020-21 0.00 0 5.57 609492 2.73 298728 8.30 908219 
23684 Banjar Chuhar 2015-16 2.90 271428 0.47 43990 0.00 0 3.37 315419 
16652 Bharmour Manglun 2015-16 1.32 147800 9.54 1068194 0.00 0 10.86 1215994 
16648 Bharmour Gudeth 2014-15 0.00 0 0.71 77888 10.68 1171617 11.39 1249506 
16649 Bharmour Jagat 2014-15 0.00 0 10.64 1167229 0.00 0 10.64 1167229 
16653 Bharmour Khanog 2015-16 2.88 322474 3.80 425486 3.32 371740.4 10.00 1119700 
9862 Chamba Kalwara 2013-14 10.83 991616 0.00 0 0.44 40287 11.27 1031904 
8790 Chamba Kathwad 2011-12 0.00 0 18.70 1302343 0.00 0 18.70 1302343 
8050 Chamba ChharuGhar 2011-12 1.56 108645 8.42 586402 0.00 0 9.98 695047 
21225 Chamba Bandhal 2011-12 14.82 1032124 8.26 575259 0.00 0 23.08 1607384 
17945 D/shala Dharamkot 2013-14 8.84 809408 9.77 894561 1.14 104381 19.75 1808350 
0000 D/shala CFS Shahpur 2012-13 23.62 2036375 9.87 850932 0.00 0 33.49 2887307 
19490 Kullu Patalsu III 2020-21 2.10 229790 0.80 87539 1.60 175078 4.50 492408 
19574 Kullu Tarapur III 2020-21 0.00 0 8.36 914785 0.68 74408 9.04 989193 
19605 Kullu Baragarh III 2020-21 4.78 523047 0.00 0 0.00 0 4.78 523047 
13454 Kunihar Beuli 2013-14 19.61 1795531 0.49 44865 4.83 442244 24.93 2282641 
13689 Kunihar Manan 2012-13 12.77 1100953 5.81 500903 1.33 114665 19.91 1716521 
4927 Kunihar Barota 2014-15 9.31 853252 3.20 293277 3.42 313440 15.93 1459969 
4926 Kunihar Chadyar 2012-13 9.52 820757 0.00 0 0.00 0 9.52 820757 
10884 Nachan Jabrat 2013-14 0.67 61347 0.13 11903 15.76 1443017 16.56 1516267 
Total 137 12164926 105 9463298 48 4741152 290 26369376 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
160 | P a g e  
Appendix 6.2 
(Paragraph 6.2.2.5) 
CA site-wise possible encroachment inside forest areas  
E green 
GPS ID 
Name of 
Division 
Name of CA 
Site 
Year of 
Plantation 
Built 
up 
area 
Area 
under 
River 
Wasteland/ 
rocky area Shrubs Green 
cover Agriculture Grassland Total 
Area 
Area 
Encroached 
Percentage 
Encroachment 
12218 Seraj Jalora 2014-15 0.00 0.00 0.95 0.00 4.13 0.00 0.00 5.08 0.00 0.00 
12219 Seraj Jalora 2014-15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 0.00 
54702 Seraj Bhallan III 2020-21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.25 5.87 1.30 0.88 8.30 1.30 15.66 
23684 Seraj Chuhar 2015-16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.75 0.00 0.62 3.37 0.00 0.00 
16652 Bharmour Manglun 2015-16 0.00 0.72 0.00 4.53 1.47 0.62 3.52 10.86 0.62 5.71 
16648 Bharmour Gudeth 2014-15 0.04 0.00 0.00 1.05 10.30 0.00 0.00 11.39 0.04 0.35 
16649 Bharmour Jagat 2014-15 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.81 4.86 4.95 10.64 4.88 45.86 
16653 Bharmour Khanog 2015-16 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.30 5.90 1.80 0.00 10.00 1.80 18.00 
9862 Chamba Kalwara 2013-14 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.11 1.15 0.00 11.27 1.16 10.29 
8790 Chamba Katwad 2011-12 0.00 0.05 3.73 3.64 4.56 0.00 6.72 18.70 0.00 0.00 
8050 Chamba ChharuGhar 2011-12 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.86 4.74 0.14 2.24 9.98 0.14 1.40 
21225 Chamba Bandhal 2011-12 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.28 0.56 12.23 23.08 0.57 2.47 
17945 D/shala Dharamkot 2013-14 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.79 17.01 0.00 0.95 19.75 0.00 0.00 
0000 D/shala CFS Shahpur 2012-13 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.30 31.23 0.94 0.99 33.49 0.97 2.90 
19490 Kullu Patalsu III 2020-21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.69 0.00 2.81 4.50 0.00 0.00 
19574 Kullu Tarapur III 2020-21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.12 1.29 3.63 9.04 1.29 14.27 
19605 Kullu Baragarh III 2020-21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.78 0.00 0.00 4.78 0.00 0.00 
13454 Kunihar Beuli 2013-14 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.61 13.32 0.00 0.00 24.93 0.00 0.00 
13689 Kunihar Manan 2012-13 0.01 0.00 0.00 7.16 11.36 0.00 1.38 19.91 0.01 0.05 
4927 Kunihar Barota 2014-15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 14.07 0.91 0.75 15.93 0.91 5.71 
4926 Kunihar Chadyar 2012-13 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.24 9.26 0.02 0.00 9.52 0.02 0.21 
10884 Nachan Jabrat 2013-14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.77 0.00 1.79 16.56 0.00 0.00 
Total 0.12 0.77 5.68 34.93 191.20 13.59 43.46 290 13.71 4.73 
 
  

Appendices 
161 | P a g e  
Appendix 6.3 
(Paragraph 6.3) 
Details of possible encroachments in DPFs/ RFs 
Name of 
Division 
Name of 
Range Name of Beat Name of Forest Compart-
ment 
Built up 
area 
Agri-
culture  
Total 
En-
croached 
Area 
Total Area 
Percentage 
of 
encroach-
ment 
Kullu Naggar Sajla PF 1/12 C-2, C-3 0.05  2.19   2.24  38.94  5.75  
Bharmour Swai Chanhouta DPF 15-Siya C-5 0.01  1.1   1.11  21.2  5.24  
Bharmour Bharmour Hadsar RF 145-Mohan Hadsar C-2 0. 01  0.87   0.88  104.34  0.84  
Chopal Sarain Sarain DPF Amta C-3 0.01  2.41   2.42  38.04  6.36  
Chopal Nerwa Dheleuna DPF Kahu C-4 A 0.03  2.62   2.65  51.35  5.16  
Chopal Nerwa Dheleuna DPF Kahu C-4 B 0.01  1  1.01  39.24  2.57  
Chopal Nerwa Khadar DPF Kahu C-7 0.01  2.11   2.12  51.80  4.09  
Kunihar Arki Bainj Hatti DPF D71 C-4 0  0.32   0.32  23.79  1.35  
Nachan Nachan Chachiot DPF ND-435 C-6 0  4.18   4.18  34.64  12.07  
Nachan Seraj Ghatadhar DPF OD-270 C-1B 0  0.67   0.67  34.57  1.94  
Total 0.13  17.47  17.60  437.91  4.02  
 
 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 

163 | P a g e  
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviations Full Form 
ACA Additional Compensatory Afforestation  
ACF Assistant Conservator of Forests 
ACS Additional Chief Secretary 
AGiSAC Aryabhatta Geo-informatics & Space Applicati on Centre  
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AOI Area of Interest 
APCCF Additional Principal Chief Conservator of For ests 
APO Annual Plan of Operation 
APR Actual Payee Receipts 
BP Boundary Pillar 
CA  Compensatory Afforestation  
CAF Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management and Planning 
Authority 
CAT Catchment Area Treatment  
CCF Chief Conservator of Forests 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DCF Deputy Conservator of Forest 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DFO Divisional Forest Officer 
DPF Demarcated Protected Forest 
FAC Forest Advisory Committee 
FCA Forest Conservation Act 
FD Fixed Deposit 
FRH Forest Rest House 
FSI Forest Survey of India 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GoI Government of India 
HATZ High Altitude Transition Zone 
HEP Hydro Electric Project 
HFRI Himalayan Forest Research Institute  
HoD Head of Department  
HoFF Head of Forest Force  
HP Himachal Pradesh 
HP Eco Soc Himachal Pradesh Eco-tourism Society  
HPFD Himachal Pradesh Forest Department 
HPFR Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules  
HPMPS Himachal Pradesh Medicinal Plants Society 

Performance Audit Report on Compensatory Afforestation in Himachal Pradesh  
164 | P a g e  
Abbreviations Full Form 
HPPWD Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department 
IA Implementing Agency 
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis 
IPA In-Principle Approval 
ISFR India State of Forest Report 
LULC Land Use Land Cover  
MDF Moderately Dense Forest 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate  Change 
MW Mega Watt 
NF Non Forest 
NPV Net Present Value 
NRMTDS Natural Resource Management Training and Development 
Society 
NWPC National Working Plan Code  
ODF Open Degraded Forest 
OF Open Forest 
PAR Participatory Action Research  
PCA Penal Compensatory Afforestation  
PCCF Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
PES Payment for Environmental Services 
REC Regional Empowered Committee 
RF Reserved Forest 
RFA Recorded Forest Area 
RFO Range Forest Officer 
RTI Right to Information 
SCAF State Compensatory Afforestation Fund  
SHG Self Help Group 
TEC Techno-Economic Clearance 
UA User Agency 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UT Union Territory 
VDF Very Dense Forest 
WP Working Plan 
WPO Working Plan Officer 
WPU Working Plan Unit 
 
 