Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit of 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri 
Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana 
including 
District Mineral Foundation Trusts in Gujarat 
  
Government of Gujarat 
Report No. 3 of 2025
(Performance Audit-Civil)


 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India on Performance Audit 
of Implementation of Pradhan Mantri  
Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana  
including  
District Mineral Foundation Trusts in Gujarat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Gujarat 
Report No. 3 of 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
i 
 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii-x 
Chapter - I 
Introduction and Audit Framework 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Audit Objectives 1.2 1 
Audit Criteria 1.3 1-2 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.4 2 
Audit Sampling 1.5 2-3 
Acknowledgement 1.6 3 
Legal Framework of DMF in Gujarat 1.7 3-4 
Institutional Arrangement and Planning for 
PMKKKY scheme 1.8 4 
Part - A 
Chapter – II 
Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
Registration of District DMF Offices as a Trust 2.1 5 
Updation of list of Directly Affected Areas 2.2 5 
Preparation of the list of Indirectly Affected Areas 2.3 6 
Identification of beneficiary/ people in Mining 
Affected Areas 2.4 6-7 
Engagement of minimum staff on contractual basis 2.5 7 
Macro analysis of DMFT Funds 2.6 8 
DMF contribution and expenditure for projects 
undertaken by DMF 2.6.1 8 
Utilisation of DMF Funds for Projects under 
PMKKKY scheme 2.6.2 9 
Utilisation of Environmental Compensation Fund 2.6.3 9-10 
DMF contribution and mechanism for 
collection 2.7 10-11 
Mechanism for Collection of receipts of DMF 
contribution 2.7.1 11-12 
Assessment, demand and collection of receipts 
under DMFs 2.7.2 12 
Accounting Treatment in DMFTs 2.7.3 12-13 
Implementation of PMKKKY Projects 2.8 13 
Categorisation of approved projects 2.8.1 13-14 
Monitoring mechanism under PMKKKY 
scheme 2.9 14-15 
Accountability and Transparency Mechanism 2.9.1 15 
Administrative setup of DMFs 2.9.2 15-16 
Meetings of the Executive Commit tee and 
Governing Council of DMFs 2.9.3 
 
16-17 
Preparation and approval of the Annual Report and 
Audited Accounts 2.9.4 17 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
ii 
 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Laying the Annual Report and Audited Accounts 
before State Legislative Assembly 2.9.5 17-18 
Conducting Social Audit of DMF 2.9.6 18-19 
Part - B 
Chapter – III 
Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
Institutional Arrangements and Planning in 
selected DMFs 3.1 21 
Registration of District DMF Offices as a Trust  3.1.1 21 
Updation of list of Directly Affected Areas of the 
selected DMFs 3.1.2 
 
21-22 
Preparation of Annual Plans 3.1.3 23-24 
Engagement of minimum staff on contractual basis 
in selected DMFs 3.1.4 
 
24-25 
Fund Management in selected DMFs 3.2 25 
Utilisation of DMF funds for projects under 
PMKKKY in selected DMFs 3.2.1 
 
25-26 
Investment of unutilised funds  3.2.2 26-27 
Assessment, demand and collection of receipts 
under selected DMFs 3.3 27 
Short collection of DMF - Major Minerals 3.3.1 27-28 
Short collection of DMF - Minor Minerals 3.3.2 29-30 
Collection of interest on outstanding DMF 
contribution 3.3.3 
 
30 
Implementation of Scheme to achieve desired 
outcomes by selected DMFs 3.4 
 
30-31 
Physical progress and cancellation of projects  3.4.1 31-32 
Inefficiencies in project approval 3.4.2 32 
Expenditure of DMF in High Priority Areas and 
Other Priority Areas 3.4.3 32-34 
Deficiencies in process of selection of the agency 
for work 3.4.4 34 
Award of project to the agency on nomination basis 
without inviting tender 3.4.4.1 34-35 
Splitting of work to by-pass the tender process 3.4.4.2 35-36 
Project for Blood Bank at Chhotaudepur 3.4.5 36-37 
Undue benefit of repeat order given to agency in 
order to utilise available funds 3.4.6 37-39 
Excess payment to agency for Educational 
Ceramic Chart project 3.4.7 40 
Monitoring and Evaluation by selected DMFs 3.5 40 
Meetings of the Executive Committee and 
Governing Councils of DMFs 3.5.1 41-42 
Adherence of provision of Scheduled Areas in 
implementation of DMF projects 3.5.2 
 
42 
Maintenance of Prescribed Registers 3.5.3 42-43 

Table of contents 
 
iii 
 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Preparation and approval of the Annual Reports 
and Audit Accounts in selected DMFs 3.5.4 43 
Information, Education and Communication 
Activities 3.5.5 43-44 
Conclusion  3.6 44 
Recommendations 3.7 44-45 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 
No. 
Subject Refer 
Paragraph 
Page No. 
I List of the sample of selected Districts, Talukas 
and Gram Panchayats for detailed review under 
Performance Audit  
1.5 47 
II Time taken for registration of District Mineral 
Foundation Trusts from the date of notification 
2.1 48 
Glossary of Abbreviations 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
Preface 
This Report for the period ended March 202 4 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Gujarat under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report contains significant results of the Performance Audit of 
“Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yoj ana including 
District Mineral Foundation Trusts” in Gujarat for the period  from 2016-17 to 
2023-24. The Audit has been carried out under the provisions of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971 and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 (amended in 
2020) issued thereunder by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The Performance Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
vi 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Executive Summary 
vii 
Executive Summary 
The Central Government launched Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan 
Yojana (PMKKKY)  in September, 2015 to ensure welfare of areas and people 
affected by mining related operations,  using the funds generated by District 
Mineral Foundations (DMFs). The Government of Gujarat (GoG) established 
32 DMFs in the State of Gujarat on 01 April 2016.  
The Gujarat Mineral Research and Development Society (GMRDS) is the 
Nodal agency which coordinates with the various DMFs in the State. The 
Geologist/ Asst. Geologist are responsible for assessment, demand and 
collection of DMF receipt. The GDMF Rules stipulate that payments towards 
contribution to the DMF shall be made along with payment of royalty and the 
amount payable to each DMF shall be credited into its bank account in the 
manner specified by the Government. 
The implementation of works/  projects under this scheme was carried through 
Line Departments/Executive Agencies (EA) such as, Taluka Development 
Officer (TDO); Executive Engineer (EE), Road & Building (R&B) Division; 
EE, Gujarat Water Supply & Sewerage Board (GWSSB) Divisions; Irrigation 
Divisions; Districts Education Offices etc. The DMF -State Nodal Unit within 
GMRDS compiles and updates the status of PMKKKY projects based on data 
received from 32 DMFs in Gujarat.  
The Performance Audit (PA) on ‘Implementation of the Pradhan Mantri 
Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) including District Mineral 
Foundation (DMF) Trust s’ was taken up for the period from 2016 -17 to   
2023-24. The PA was conducted based on  PMKKKY guidelines, Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Amendment Act, 2015 and 
Rules thereof, Gujarat District Mineral Foundations (GDMF) Rules, 2016, and 
other relevant criteria. The objectives of the PA were to review the planning 
and institutional arrangements of DMFs, fund management by DMFs, 
mechanism of the assessment and collection of DMF contribution, 
implementation of the PMKKKY projects and monitoring mechanism in 
place. Audit examined the records of the DMF -SNU and five DMFs of 
Bhavnagar, Mehsana, Devbhumi Dwarka, Porbandar and Surat for review of 
the effectiveness of implementation of PMKKKY scheme in the State of 
Gujarat. 
The results of the PA on review of the functioning of the DMF -SNU and the 
five selected DMFs including important findings and recommendation have 
been narrated in brief in the following paragraphs. 
Planning and Institutional Arrangement 
There was no specific deadline for the establishment of DMFs  as per GDMF 
Rules,2016. The Department took six to 48 months in registration of 32  DMFs 
from the date of Notification (01 April 2016) . The Directly Affected Village 
list in the two DMFs1 was not updated which led to various developmental and 
 
1  DMF (i) Devbhumi Dwarka and (ii) Porbandar. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
viii 
welfare project/  programmes not being carried out in 39 Directly Affected  
Villages. None of the villages in Gujarat were identified as Indirectly Affected 
Villages; thereby depriving them of benefit under PMKKKY scheme. No 
records pertaining affected people/  beneficiaries were available at DMFs. The 
Annual Plans were not prepared in prescribed time in five DMFs and hence 
expenditure worth ₹ 1.58 crore for preparation of Annual Plan was unfruitful. 
Further, the works were carried out under the project in the mining affected 
areas without approved Annual Plan since beginning of DMF to the year 
2023-24. The DMFs had not engaged the minimum staff required at the DMFs 
as decided by the State Level Coordination Committee which affected the  
day-to-day functioning of the DMFs. 
Fund Management 
As on March 2024,  the 32 DMFs of Gujarat received DMF contribution of 
₹1,608.08 crore, the expenditure incurred for projects under PMKKKY was  
₹756.62 crore (47.05  per cent ) and unutilized DMF contribution was  
₹851.46 crore (52.95  per cent ). The DMFs had incurred the expenditure of  
₹756.62 crore on High Priority Areas and Other Priority Areas as per the 
PMKKKY Guidelines. In High Priority Areas, 93 per cent of expenditure was 
incurred under five Heads, viz. Education, Welfare of women and children, 
Healthcare, Skill development and drinking water supply, with highest 43 per 
cent incurred in Education Head. On the remaining three Heads, viz. 
Environment Preservation, Sanitation and Welfare of aged and disabled 
people, only seven per cent of the expenditure was incurred. In Other Priority 
Areas, 76 per cent of expenditure was incurred on Physical Infrastructure and 
the remaining 24 per cent was incurred on Irrigation, Energy and Watershed 
Development, and Others. 
As per Monthly Progress Report (MPR) of March 2024 of five DMFs, Audit 
observed that ₹ 134.35 crore was incurred in 2,489 completed and under 
implementation projects against the sanctioned amount of ₹ 142.78 crore. 
However, in five DMFs, there was no expenditure on heads of welfare of aged 
and disabled people and there was negligible expenditure in heads of 
Environment Preservation and Energy and Watershed development.  
Audit noticed under -utilisation of the DMF contribution during 2016 -17 to 
2023-24. The underutilization of funds indicated that inadequate PMKKKY 
projects and expenditure were undertaken which did not commensurate with 
the yearly DMF contribution being received in Gujarat and in the five DMFs. 
Audit noticed that 65.36 per cent of the total in -principle approved projects in 
five DMFs were given administrative approval (AA) thereby converting these 
projects into actual projects which could be implemented under PMKKKY 
scheme. This conversion ratio was lowest of 49.83 per cent in case of DMF 
Mehsana and highest of 92.01 per cent in case of DMF Surat. Audit observed 
that in-principle approved projects were cancelled due to non -availability/ 
non-furnishing of T S from the line departments within prescribed time frame 
of three months and  the projects being taken up through other government 
schemes. Audit noticed that the E nvironmental Compensation Fund of  
₹ 83.61 crore out of total collection of ₹ 84.46 crore by the DMFs in Gujarat 
which were to be utilized for PMKKKY projects remained unutilized. Further, 

Executive Summary 
ix 
the DMF funds were not invested by four2 DMFs thereby not earning adequate 
interest on government funds, which is against financial prudence. 
Assessment, demand and collection of receipts under DMFs 
There were cases of non/short payment of DMF contribution in five DMFs, 
resulting in outstanding DMF contribution of ₹22.74 crore from major mineral 
leaseholders and ₹11.45 crore from minor mineral leaseholders. Further, four 3 
DMFs did not calculate the interest for the delay in payment of DMF 
contribution as per rules in the notices issued to the leaseholders. 
Implementation of scheme to achieve desired outcomes 
There were deficiencies in the process for selection of agency for work. Audit 
noticed instances of award of work worth ₹9.04 crore to agency on nomination 
basis without inviting tender leading to undue benefit. The project of Blood 
Bank at Chhotaudepur was not completed even after delay of more than four 
years and payment of ₹ 39.53 lakh done for project presently remained 
unfruitful. In DMF Devbhumi Dwarka, undue benefit of repeat order worth  
₹ 155.79 lakh was given to the agency. There was excess payment of ₹ 63 lakh 
in the work of installation of Educational Ceramic Chart in 42 schools under 
DMF Devbhumi Dwarka. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
The Executive Committee and the Governing Council meetings of the DMFs 
were not conducted as per the frequency prescribed in the GDMF Rules . The 
DMF Surat did not obtain the approval of the Gram Sabha prior to taking up 
projects and did not provide any Report on implementation of projects in the 
Scheduled Areas in Surat district which was not as per GDMF Rules. Four 
DMFs4 did not maintain the prescribed registers 5. GDMF Rules stipulate that 
the Governing Council shall approve the Annual Report and Audited accounts 
of the DMF within four months from the close of the previous year. Audit  
noticed that there were significant delays in preparation &  finalisation of 
Annual accounts and the Annual Reports of DMFs at District level. A total 32 
Annual Accounts and 30 Annual Reports were not prepared  (as on November 
2024). 
DMFs prepared and sent the Annual Report and Audited Accounts to  
DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar  since 2016-17 for onward submission to the State 
Government for laying the same before the State Legislative Assembly. Audit 
noticed that DMF -SNU had not submitted any of the Annual Reports and 
Audited Accounts prepared by DMFs to the State Government for laying 
before the Legislative Assembly. 
As per DMF Rules, Commissioner Geology and Mines had to propose the 
 
2  DMF (i) Devbhumi Dwarka, (ii) Bhavnagar, (iii) Mehsana and (iv) Surat. 
3  DMF (i) Porbandar, (ii) Bhavnagar, (iii) Mehsana and (iv) Surat. 
4  DMF (i) Devbhumi Dwarka, (ii) Bhavnagar, (iii) Mehsana and (iv) Surat. 
5 (i) Register of Mining related operations, (ii) Register of Receipt, (iii) Register of Expenditure,  
(iv) Register of Beneficiaries and (v) Register of various Committees. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
x 
Social Audit of DMFs, Audit noticed that Social Audit was not carried out by 
any of the five selected DMFs since establishment of DMFs upto March 2023. 
This led to non -assessment of the social impact of the projects executed by 
DMFs. 
Recommendations 
 
Recommendation 1: The DMFs should ensure the preparation of Annual 
Plans before the start of each financial year, in accordance with the GDMF 
Rules. 
 
Recommendation 2: The DMFs should establish a system to identify projects 
that address the needs of the broader public in mining -affected areas, 
ensuring the timely and effective utilization of DMF contributions. 
 
Recommendation 3: The DMFs should ensure the timely collection of all 
outstanding DMF contributions, along with the applicable interest, in line 
with the Rules. 
 
Recommendation 4: The Annual Report and Audited Accounts should be 
prepared by DMFs  and submitted by DMF -SNU on time to the State 
Legislative Assembly, with steps taken to initiate a Social Audit to assess the 
effectiveness of the projects. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction and Audit 
Framework 

 
1 
Chapter I - Introduction and Audit Framework 
 
1.1  Introduction 
The Government of India (GoI) launched (16 September 2015) a scheme of 
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY)  to ensure welfare 
of areas and people affected by mining related operations,  using the funds 
generated by District Mineral Foundations (DMFs). The objectives of  
PMKKKY scheme were: 
(a)  to implement various developmental and welfare projects/programs in 
mining affected areas, and these projects/programs will be complementing 
the existing ongoing schemes/projects of State and Central Government;  
(b)  to minimize/ mitigate the adverse impacts, during and after mining, on 
the environment, health and socio-economics of people in mining districts; 
and  
(c)  to ensure long -term sustainable livelihoods for the affected  people in  
mining areas. 
1.2 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit on implementation of ‘Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra 
Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) including District Mineral Foundation (DMF) 
Trusts’ was conducted to assess whether: 
(i) There are effective planning and institutional arrangements for the 
implementation of the scheme as per GDMF Rules, 2016/ PMKKKY 
Guidelines; 
(ii) Fund management of DMFT was economic and efficient; 
(iii) The system of assessment, demand and collection of receipts under 
DMF was reliable and efficient; 
(iv) The scheme was implemented effectively to achieve desired outcomes 
and could bring positive changes in the affected area and life of people; 
and 
(v) Monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the scheme was 
adequate and effective. 
1.3 Audit Criteria 
The audit findings are based on the criteria derived from the following sources: 
• PMKKKY guidelines and relevant notifications; 
• GDMF Rules, 2016 (as amended time to time); 
• MMDR Amendment Act, 2015; Mineral Concession Rules 1960;  
• Gujarat Minor Minerals Concession Rules, 2017; 
• Circulars on Rates of Royalty as provided by Government of India and 
Monthly price notification published by Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
alongwith Government Notifications and guidelines for royalty; 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
2 
• Gujarat Treasury Rules, Gujarat Purchase Policy 2016;  
• Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950 and Other Circulars and notifications 
for issued by Government of India (GoI) and Government of Gujarat 
(GoG). 
1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Government of Gujarat had notified the creation of the District Mineral 
Foundation (DMF) for 32 districts 1 out of 33 Districts of Gujarat on 01 April 
2016. The Performance Audit covering the period from April 2016 to March 
2024 was conducted from July 2023 to October 2023. Audit initially reviewed 
the records for the period from 2016-17 to 2022-23 of DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar 
and the five test-checked DMFs, viz. Bhavnagar, Mehsana, Devbhumi Dwarka, 
Porbandar and Surat. Thereafter, the information for the period 2023 -24 was 
called (November-2024) from the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar and accordingly the 
Report was updated. 
Audit reviewed the records to examine the creation of the DMF Trusts, the 
functioning of the DMFs and the areas of planning, fund management of the 
DMF contribution, the mechanism for assessment and collection of DMF 
contribution, the implementation of the  various PMKKKY projects and the 
monitoring of the DMFs and the projects executed under PMKKKY scheme. 
An Entry Conference was held (July 2023) with the Additional Chief Secretary, 
Industries and Mines Department (I&MD), Government of Gujarat (GoG) and 
Commissioner of Geology and Mining (CGM) wherein the audit scope, 
methodology and objectives were discusse d. The field audit included 
examination of records of the DMF-SNU at Gandhinagar and the five DMFs of 
Bhavnagar, Mehsana, Devbhumi Dwarka, Porbandar and Surat. Joint physical 
inspection of 149 PMKKKY projects were conducted with the representatives 
from the DMFs and Line Departments. The audit observations were issued to 
the respective units and the Exit Conference for the Performance Audit was held 
in October 2024. The replies, wherever received, were appropriately 
incorporated in the Report. 
1.5 Audit Sampling 
In order to arrive at a representative sample, all Districts were assigned weighted 
scores as per the following scoring methodology – DMFT Fund Collection  
(40 per cent weightage), DMFT Expenditure (40 per cent weightage), Number 
of Affected Areas (10 per cent weightage), and Tribal Population (10  per cent 
weightage).  
Five DMFs, viz. DMF Mehsana, Bhavnagar, Porbandar, Devbhumi Dwarka and 
Surat have been selected (three districts from high scoring, one district each 
from medium and low scoring districts) through stratified random sampling.  
Similarly, three Talukas2 for each district were selected (two talukas having 
highest completed projects and one taluka based on random sampling) and three 
 
1    DMFs have been established in 32 districts excluding Dang district as mining related operations are 
not undertaken there. 
2  Block of a district is named as Taluka in Gujarat. 

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Framework 
3 
Gram Panchayats from each selected taluka were selected based on random 
sampling. The list of the selected Districts, Talukas and Gram Panchayats is 
given in Appendix I.  
The Audit team, along with representatives from the sample DMF and the 
relevant Line Departments, carried out joint physical inspections of up to five 
projects executed under the PMKKKY scheme in the selected Gram 
Panchayats. The audit team also conducted beneficiary survey across 43 Gram 
Panchayats with 15 residents selected from each Gram Panchayat. However, in 
absence of unsatisfactory remarks from the beneficiaries regarding the 
implementation of the Scheme, observation on the same was not included in the 
Report. 
1.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the DMF-SNU 
at Gandhinagar and the DMFs of Bhavnagar, Mehsana, Devbhumi Dwarka, 
Porbandar and Surat, alongwith other project implementing agencies for 
PMKKKY scheme. 
1.7 Legal Framework of DMF in Gujarat 
As per Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) 
Amendment Act, 2015, the State Governments shall by notification establish a 
District Mineral Foundation (DMF) in every district in the country affected by 
mining operations. Further, the Rules for the functioning of the DMFs are to be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 9B, 15A and 15(4) of the Mines 
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957,  the Government of 
Gujarat (GoG) framed (01 April 2016) the Gujarat District Mineral Foundation 
(GDMF) Rules, 2016 as per the directions of the Government of India (GoI). 
The GoG also issued (01 April 2016) notification for establishment of DMF in 
32 Districts3 of Gujarat. 
The GDMF Rules, 2016 deemed to have come into force on 12  January 2015 
onwards and included various provisions related to composition, functions, and 
manner of working of the District  Mineral Foundation Trusts (DMFTs), 
regulation of the contributions made in DMF Fund and its utilization, records 
and registers to be maintained and audit and miscellaneous matters. 
Subsequently, t he Ministry of Mines, Government of India, issued revised 
PMKKKY Guidelines under Section 9(B)(3) of the MMDR Act, 1957, on 15 th 
January 2024, with new directions to ensure effective utilisation of funds by 
DMFs. These Guidelines supersede the order number 16/7/2015 -M.VI (Part) 
dated 16 September 2015, except with respect to things done or omitted to be 
done before such supersession. The Ministry directed the State Governments 
and Union Territories to incorporate the revised Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra 
Kalyan Yojana, 2024 (PMKKKY 2024) into the rules framed by them for 
District Mineral Foundations and to implement the said Scheme. 
 
3  In one district viz. Dang, no mining activities were undertaken. Thus, DMF was not established. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
4 
In accordance with the above Guidelines, the Gujarat DMF Rules, 2024 were 
notified on 12 December 2024 by Industries and Mines Department, 
Government of Gujarat. 
1.8 Institutional Arrangement and Planning for PMKKKY scheme 
The institution defined under PMKKKY for functioning of the scheme is the 
District Mineral Foundation (DMF). The GoG issued (01 April 2016) 
notification for establishment of DMF in 32 districts of Gujarat. The various 
aspects of institutional arrangement and planning are described below: 
Formation of DMF Trust:  DMF for districts were established through 
notification issued by the Government. It comprises of a Governing Council and 
Executive Committee. As per notification issued by the Government, DMF was 
to be registered as a Public Trust.  
Identification of Affected Areas: Affected Areas is an area which is affected by 
mining related operations. The Executive Committee (EC) identifies Affected 
Areas and classifies them between Directly and Indirectly Affected Areas. 
Identification of Affected People: Affected People means people affected by 
mining operations. Upon identification of Affected Areas, the EC shall prepare 
a list of Affected people which will be further classified into Affected Family, 
Displaced Family and any other Persons as appropriately identified by the Gram 
Sabha concerned.  
Identification of Beneficiaries: Beneficiaries means those Affected People who 
have been identified as beneficiaries of plans, programmes or projects.   
Annual Plan:  Annual Plan is prepared as per Rule 16 of  GDMF Rules by 
Executive Committee and approved by Governing Council . Annual Plan 
contains particulars of plans, programmes and projects including type, quantum, 
budget and time for completing the same. It shall  contain measurable time -
bound performance benchmarks for its implementation and consider the local 
needs and priorities of the Affected Areas. It shall also contain the details of the 
available fund allocated towards “ High Priority Areas” and “ Other Priority 
Areas.” 
Social Audit: The Rule 25 (2) of GDMF Rules stipulate that in addition to the 
financial audit, there may be an independent Social Audit by the G C in the 
manner specified by the S LCC. The parameters of such Social Audit may 
include coverage of mining affected people and families with respect to benefit 
sharing, timeliness of benefit payments, timeliness of developmental 
schemes/works undertaken, work completion rates, and any such related issues. 
Audit reviewed the records of DMF-SNU and the five DMFs in order to review 
the measures taken to strengthen the legal framework of PMKKKY.  
The Report has been prepared in two parts. Part A contains the observations 
relating to overall functioning of PMKKKY in the State and Part B contains the 
observations on implementation of PMKKKY in selected DMFs. The related 
observations, including the registration of district DMFs, updation of list of 
Directly Affected Areas, preparation of list of Indirectly Affected Areas, 
identification of beneficiaries in Mining Affected Areas, preparation of Annual 
Plans and the engagement of minimum required staff, are discussed in the 
following Chapters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part - A 
Chapter II 
Implementation of PMKKKY 
in overall State 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
Part A 
 
Chapter II 
 
Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
 
2.1 Registration of District DMF Offices as a Trust 
The GoG vide Notification dated 01 April 2016 established DMFs in 32 districts 
in the State. The Rule 3(2) of the GDMF Rules, 2016 stipulate d that upon 
issuance of notification under sub -rule (1), the Governing Council (GC) shall 
take action to get the DMF registered as a Public Trust for charitable purpose 
under sub-section (13) of Section 2 of the Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950.  
The State Level Co -ordination Committee (SLCC) also directed (November 
2016) that the Commissioner of Geology and Mines (CGM) is to initiate action 
for establishment of DMF as a Trust. An agency was appointed (December 
2016) for registration of DMF as a Trust. 
Audit observed that there was no specific deadline for the establishment of 
DMFs as per GDMF Rules, 2016. The Department took six to 48 months in 
registration of 32 DMFs in the State from the date of notification (01 April 2016) 
(Appendix II). 
 
2.2 Updation of list of Directly Affected Areas 
Rule 7 (2) (g) of GDMF Rules stipulates that E C has to prepare, maintain and 
update a list of Affected Area s and Affected People. Further, Rule 12 (1) of 
GDMF Rule s stipulates that the Affected Area s shall be classified into two 
categories of (a) Directly Affected Areas, and (b) Indirectly Affected Areas. 
As per Rule 12 (1) (a), Directly Affected Areas are areas where mining related 
operations (such as excavation, mining, blasting, beneficiation and waste 
disposal such as overburden dumps, tailing ponds, transport corridors, etc.) are 
located. 
The DMFs had prepared a list of Directly Affected villages, affected by mining 
related operations, for implementation of various developmental and welfare 
project/ programmes in these villages. The list of the affected villages was 
consolidated by DMF-SNU and approved by the GoG. As on 31 March 2024, a 
total of 2,103 villages were identified as Directly Affected villages in Gujarat.  
During audit of the selected DMFs, it was observed that certain villages, where 
active mining operations are ongoing, have not been included in the list of 
Directly Affected Villages. This exclusion raises significant concerns, as these 
villages are likely  to experience direct socio -economic and environmental 
impacts from mining activities. The detailed findings are discussed 
comprehensively in Para 3.1.2 of Part B of the Report. The omission of these 
villages from the list undermines the equitable allocation of DMF funds and the 
intended benefits for communities directly impacted by mining. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
6 
2.3 Preparation of the list of Indirectly Affected Areas 
Rule 12 (1) (b) provided that Indirectly Affected Areas shall be the areas where 
local population is adversely affected on account of economic, social and 
environmental consequences due to mining related operations. Such adverse 
effects could be by way of deterioration of water, soil and air quality, reduction 
in stream flows and depletion of ground water, congestion and pollution due to 
mining operations, transportation of minerals or increased burden on existing 
infrastructure and resources. 
The CGM directed (December 2019) all District Collectors to define Indirectly 
Mining Affected Villages as “villages falling under the radius of 5 KM of 
mining operations”. The Executive Committee (EC) of the DMF was to review 
the Directly Affected Areas and Indirectly Affected Areas and submit the 
revised list of villages (district, block -wise) under the category of “Directly 
Affected Areas and Indirectly Affected Areas”.  
Audit noticed that DMFs had not submitted  the list of Indirectly Affected 
Villages. Thus, as on March 2024, none of the villages in Gujarat were identified 
as Indirectly Affected Villages as per PMKKKY Guidelines/ GDMF Rules. 
This deprived the Indirectly Affected Areas/ villages from the benefits of 
various developmental and welfare project/programmes under PMKKKY. 
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (November 2024) 
that the requirements have been incorporated in the revised DMF Rules, 2024 
in accordance with the new guidelines issued in 2024. 
2.4 Identification of beneficiary/ people in Mining Affected Areas 
Paragraph 1 of PMKKKY guidelines stipulated for identification of Affected 
Areas and people to be covered under the PMKKKY. Paragraph 1.2 provided 
that the Af fected people include Directly Affected Persons, Affected Family, 
Displaced Family and Other Persons/ Families as identified by the concerned 
Gram Sabha. It also provided that DMF should prepare and maintain an updated 
list of such Affected Persons/ Local Communities.  
Similarly, Rule 13 of GDMF Rules stipulated that the EC should prepare a list 
of Affected People and update the list from time to time. Rule 14 of GDMF 
Rules stipulated that the EC should prepare a list of beneficiaries (Specific 
Individuals and a class of  population) and in case of Schedule Area 1, approval 
of the Gram Sabha should be required for identification of beneficiaries. 
Audit noticed that no list of Affected people/beneficiaries was prepared by any 
of the DMFs in Gujarat. Further, it was noticed that no instruction was issued 
by CGM/ DMF -SNU to the DMFs for preparation of such list of Affected 
people/ beneficiaries. 
 
1  Schedule Area includes tribal areas and the Scheduled Area as referred in Clause (1) of Article 244 of 
the Constitution of India. 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
7 
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (November 2024) 
that the requirements have been incorporated in the revised DMF Rules, 2024 
in accordance with the new Guidelines issued in 2024. 
2.5 Engagement of minimum staff on contractual basis 
Rule 7(2)(l) of the GDMF Rule s stipulate that EC shall appoint staff on 
contractual basis for the affairs of the DMF in accordance with the policies and 
the instructions of the Government. In the  first SLCC meeting, it was decided 
(November 2016) to appoint staff on contractual basis for DMFs. T he 
Committee suggested to categorise the districts based on receipt of fund from a 
particular District and mining affected areas before segregating districts into 
Clusters to decide the staff pattern. Accordingly, the districts were segregated 
into Clusters to decide the staff pattern by the SLCC was as shown in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Categorisation of districts and staff requirement 
Sl. 
No. 
Category Money value of 
contribution based 
on FY 2015-16 
Number of  
contractual 
staff 
requirement 
No. of Districts as per 
norms set by SLCC (based 
on contribution of FY 
2015-16) 
1 A ₹ 10 to ₹ 35 crore 6-7 05 
2 B ₹ 2 to ₹ 10 crore 4-5 11 
3 C Upto ₹ 2 crore 1-2 16 
Source: Records provided by DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
The details of the sanctioned posts, manpower posted and the vacancy in the 
DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar and overall DMFs in Gujarat are shown in Table 2.2.  
Table 2.2: Status of manpower as on 06 November 2024 
District  Sanctioned 
post 
Manpower 
Posted 
Post 
vacant  
Percentage 
of vacancy  
In all 32 Districts 116 66 50 43 
DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar 7 2 5 71 
Source: Records provided by DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
The overall shortage of staff in 32 DMFs was 43 per cent and the shortage at 
DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar was 71 per cent. 
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (November 2024) 
that the revision of the category of Districts would be made in the next SLCC 
meeting and DMFs will be notified shortly to fill the vacant post. Inadequate 
staffing at DMFs disrupted their day -to-day operations, further impeding their 
effectiveness in achieving the objectives of addressing the adverse impacts of 
mining and improving the socio-economic conditions of affected communities. 
Thus, the Department took six to 48 months in registration of DMFs as no 
deadline was set for establishment of DMFTs in GDMF Rules.  Non-updation 
of the list of Directly Affected Areas led to the exclusion of certain villages, 
thereby depriving them of essential development and welfare projects. 
Similarly, the non-preparation of the list of Indirectly Affected Areas/ Villages 
prevented these regions from availing the benefits of various developmental and 
welfare programs under PMKKKY. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
8 
2.6 Macro analysis of DMFT Funds 
The second objective of this Performance Audit was to evaluate whether the 
fund management of DMFT was carried out in an economic and efficient 
manner to support the scheme's implementation. Effective fund management is 
a fundamental requirement for achiev ing the objectives of the Scheme. The 
contribution received and expenditure for projects undertaken by DMFs, the 
mechanism for collecting and utilizing DMF funds, and the management of 
Environmental Compensation Fund under the PMKKKY Scheme are discussed 
below: 
2.6.1 DMF contribution and expenditure for projects undertaken by DMF 
As per notifications issued by the GoI and GoG and GDMF Rules, the amount 
of contribution to be made to DMF is a percentage based on the Royalty paid 
on Major and Minor minerals. The District Geologist/ Assistant Geologist 
makes the assessment and collecti on of the royalty for Major and Minor 
minerals and hence, is also the authority for assessment and collection of the 
DMF contribution thereon. 
As per the PMKKKY Guidelines and GDMF Rules, the DMF contribution is to 
be utilized for meeting the objectives of DMF. The DMF fund was to be utilized 
for implementation of various developmental and welfare projects in areas 
affected by mining operations. The DMF Fund status as on March 2024  is 
shown in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: DMF Fund status as on March 2024 
                                      (₹ in crore) 
Total no. 
of 
Districts 
Total no. of 
Districts in 
which DMF 
has been set 
up 
Amount 
collected in 
respect of coal 
and lignite 
Amount collected 
in respect of 
Major Minerals 
(other than coal 
and lignite) 
Amount 
collected in 
respect of 
minor 
minerals 
Total 
amount 
collected 
under 
DMF 
33 32 217.83 690.03 700.22 1,608.08 
Source: Information provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
As on March 2024, the total DMF contribution received in Gujarat across all 
DMFs and the expenditure incurred on various approved projects are shown in  
Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Details of DMF contribution received and expenditure 
incurred on approved projects 
Year DMF Contribution received during the 
year (₹ in crore) 
Expenditure during the year on 
approved projects (₹ in crore) 
2016-17 153.44 0 
2017-18 186.41 37.44 
2018-19 195.60 116.34 
2019-20 164.99 106.44 
2020-21 192.01 88.74 
2021-22 230.89 92.91 
2022-23 242.54 154.89 
2023-24 242.20 159.86 
Total 1,608.08 756.62 
Source: Information provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
9 
2.6.2  Utilisation of DMF Funds for Project under PMKKKY scheme 
The PMKKKY was implemented by the DMFs in 32 districts of the State using 
the fund accruing to the DMF. The DMF contribution collected is utilized for 
implementation of developmental and welfare projects/ works for the benefit of 
people in mining affected areas. It is essential to monitor both the physical and 
financial progress of these projects to ensure the effective achievement of 
PMKKKY's objectives. 
As on March 2024,  32 DMFs of Gujarat received DMF contribution of 
₹ 1,608.08 crore and the expenditure incurred for projects under PMKKKY was 
₹ 756.62 crore (47.05 per cent). 
Audit reviewed the overall pattern of expenditure in the State DMFs and 
observed that the gap between contribution and utilisation of the same was 
increasing on year -to-year basis. Chart 2.1 shows the year -wise contribution 
and expenditure details of Gujarat.  
Chart 2.1: Details of DMF contribution and expenditure of 32 DMFs of 
Gujarat
 
Source: Records provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
As on March 2024, the total unutilised DMF contribution was of ₹ 851.46 crore 
(52.95 per cent) in Gujarat. 
2.6.3  Utilisation of Environmental Compensation Fund  
The I&MD issued (September 2018) Government Resolution (GR) regarding 
imposing Environmental Compensation in case of illegal mining transportation 
and storage for causing damage to Environment.  
The GR stipulated that the Environmental Compensation will be in addition to 
penalties imposed by the I&MD under the Rules framed under the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 on the persons involved in 
illegal mining transportation and storage of any mineral in the State of Gujarat.  
The amount collected as Environmental Compensation Fund  (ECF) shall be 
deposited into a separate bank account. 
153.44
339.85
535.45
700.44
892.44 1123.33
1365.88
1608.08
0.00 37.44 153.77 260.21 348.96 441.87 596.76 756.62
153.44 302.41 381.67 440.22 543.49 681.47
769.12
851.46
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Unutilised DMF contribution of 32 DMFs
Total DMF fund available  (₹ in Cr.)
Total Expenditure (₹ in Cr.)
Unutilised DMF Fund at the end of the year (₹ in Cr.)

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
10 
The GR also specified that funds collected as Environmental Compensation 
must be utilized through the DMF Trust s for activities within the following 
scope: (a) drinking water supply, (b) environmental preservation and pollution 
control measures, (c) healthcare in High Priority Areas, and (d) other measures 
to enhance environmental quality in mining districts in  Other Priority Areas 
under the PMKKKY and the GDMF Rule s, 2016 for the restoration of the 
damage caused to the environment by illegal mining.  
A total of ₹ 62.12 crore2 of ECF was available with 32 DMFs in Gujarat upto 
March 2023 . Out of this fund, no utilisation was made since its collection. 
During the year 2023-24, 32 DMFs received ECF amounting to ₹  22.34 crore. 
Of this, an expenditure of ₹ 0.85 crore was incurred and ₹ 21.49 crore remained 
unutilized. Thus, total Environment Compensation Fund of ₹ 83.61 crore out of 
the collected fund of ₹ 84.46 crore remained unutilised. In the five selected 
DMFs, a total of ₹ 10.65 crore was collected towards ECF during 2023 -24 
which remained unutilised as on November 2024. 
Audit noticed that in spite of clear instructions of the I&MD, neither the DMFs 
of the State utilised the ECF upto March 2023  nor did the  
DMF-SNU/ competent authority at State level issue any instruction for its 
utilisation. Thus, the non-utilisation of funds resulted in under achievement of 
the objectives of the PMKKKY for stated scopes of High Priority Areas, Other 
Priority Areas and non-restoration of damage of environment made from the 
illegal mining in the State.  
The DMF -SNU accepted (October 2023) the observation and stated that 
instructions would be issued to the DMFs to utilize the ECF. Further, the DMFs 
of Porbandar, Devbhumi Dwarka, Mehsana and Surat replied (October 2023/ 
December 2023/ March 2024) that the ECF could not be utilised due to  
non-receipt of project proposals, non -conduct of EC and GC meetings and  
non-receipt of any instruction for utilisation of ECF from GoG. The reply of 
DMF Bhavnagar was awaited (November 2024). 
The latter reply is not acceptable as the GR issued by the GoG had already 
provided that the DMFs were to utilise the ECF on specified areas under 
PMKKKY scheme. As such, there was no need for any further instruction to be 
issued in this regard.  
2.7 DMF contribution and mechanism for collection 
The third objective of this Performance Audit was to evaluate the reliability and 
efficiency of the system for assessing, demanding, and collecting receipts under 
DMF. The observations related to this objective, including the mechanisms for 
collecting DMF contributions and the processes for assessment, demand, and 
receipt collection, are detailed in the following sections. 
The amount of contribution to be made to DMF is a percentage based on the 
royalty paid on Major or Minor minerals in view of notifications issued by GoI 
and GDMF Rules, 2016 respectively.  The details of the amount of DMF 
contribution for major and minor minerals are explained below. 
 
2   ₹ 59.77 crore from collection and ₹ 2.35 crore interest accrued thereof. 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
11 
Major Minerals 
As per GoI Notification (17 September 2015), the amount of DMF contribution 
in respect of major minerals other than coal and lignite should be 30 per cent of 
the royalty paid in respect of mining leases granted before 12 January 2015 and 
10 per cent  of royalty paid in respect of mining leases or prospecting  
license-cum mining leases granted on or after 12 January 2015. The I&MD 
circular (25 April 2018) stipulated that the District Collectors were required to 
collect DMF from the lease holders holding lease for major minerals other than 
Coal and Lignite from 17 September 2015 and from the lease holder holding 
lease for mineral Coal and Lignite from 01 April 2016. The Hon 'ble Supreme 
Court order dated 13 October 2017 stipulated that for the lease holder s, who 
have not made full payments of DMF contribution by 31 December 2017,  
interest at the rate of 15 per cent per annum from the due date, will be levied. 
Minor Mineral 
The Rule 21(1A) of GDMF Rules stipulates that the amount of DMF 
contribution should be 10 per cent  of the royalty paid in respect of minor 
minerals and the same was to be levied from 26 September 2016 onwards. As 
per Rule 54 of the Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2017, simple 
interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum was to be charged on any dues to 
Government which is delayed beyond thirty days from the due date (the date of 
payment of royalty) until payment of such amount. 
2.7.1 Mechanism for Collection of receipts of DMF contribution 
Rule 21(2) of GDMF Rules stipulates that to achieve seamless transfer without 
delays, payments towards contribution to the D MF should be made along with 
payment of royalty and the amount payable to each D MF should be credited 
into its bank account in the manner specified by the Government.  
Rule 20 of the GDMF Rules stipulated that DMFTs have to open bank account 
for DMF contributions. As per SLCC instruction (November 2016) for 
collection of the DMF contributions, the DMFTs were required to open Bank 
accounts for DMF contributions received from Major Mineral as well as for 
DMF contributions received from Minor Mi nerals. The DMF contribution is 
required to be credited into the Bank account of respective DMFTs.  
The Office of the Commissioner of Geology and Mining, Government of 
Gujarat (CGM) has been operating Integrated Lease Management System 
(ILMS) portal linked with the Cyber Treasury Portal for online collection of the 
revenue receipts of the Government including royalty on minerals.  
However, payment relating to non -tax revenue receipts, such as DMF 
contributions and credit thereof, to the respective Bank accounts of the DMFTs 
through Cyber Treasury Portal of Finance Department was not possible, as the 
portal did not have provision for this functionality. So, to facilita te payment of 
DMF contribution through ILMS, the CGM integrated the ILMS with the SBI 
E-pay portal, operative from 01 January 2021. After this integration, the DMF 
contributions were to be deducted automatically based on the Royalty payment 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
12 
and credited to the relevant DMF account. Sufficient credit by the leaseholder 
under the head of DMF in ILMS Portal is required, otherwise Royalty Pass 
could not be generated from 01 February 2021. An analysis on the assessment, 
demand and collection of fu nds in the case of five selected DMFs is covered 
under Para 3.3 of Part B of the Report. 
2.7.2 Assessment, demand and collection of receipts under DMFs 
The assessment of the DMF contribution on the royalty amounts, its demand 
and collection are important for the proper implementation of the PMKKKY 
scheme.  
Assessment of DMF contribution  
In case of every lease holder conducting mining operations, the royalty is 
payable to the State Government. Based on the amount of royalty paid, the DMF 
contribution is determined as a percentage of the royalty paid on Major or Minor 
minerals.  
In Gujarat, the data of royalty paid is captured in the online system of ILMS 
portal. Based on the amount of royalty paid as per ILMS, the leaseholder was 
required to pay the DMF contribution. Prior to 01 January 2021, the 
leaseholders paid DMF contributio n directly into bank accounts without any 
online mechanism to track payments linked to royalty paid. Subsequently, the 
DMF contribution to be paid was linked to ILMS and was deducted along with 
royalty. 
Audit observed that the manual records and registers for collection of DMF were 
not properly maintained in DMFs. Hence, the information of online royalty 
deducted as per ILMS and DMF contribution received for each leaseholder as 
provided by DMF office was relied upon for assessment of the DMF 
contribution payable by each lease -holder. An analysis on short collection of 
DMF contribution in case of five selected DMFs is covered under Para 3.3 of 
Part B of the Report. 
2.7.3 Accounting Treatment in DMFTs 
All the 32 DMFs are registered as Public Trusts. The Trusts maintain the books 
of accounts of the Fund as per the Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950. As per Rule 
20 and 21 of GDMF Rules, the receipts of the DMF contribution shall include  
DMF contribution from Major and Minor minerals, interest accrued in bank 
accounts and any other contribution determined by the Government. Further, 
the DMFs were to open bank accounts and the GC of DMFs shall approve the 
modalities for operation of bank accounts and investment of unutilized funds in 
banks. 
The SLCC directed (November 2016) each DMF for opening separate bank 
accounts for contribution of DMF for Major and Minor minerals and another 
bank account for routine administrative expenses of DMF. At the State level, an 
Endowment Fund and a Corpus Fund are kept which are funded through 
contributions from DMFs. The expenditure for the various projects approved 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
13 
and implemented under PMKKKY were made through the bank accounts for 
DMF contribution of Major and Minor minerals. 
Thus, the integration of ILMS with the SBI E -pay portal made the process of 
assessing DMF contributions satisfactory. However, instances of shortfalls in 
demand and collection of DMF contributions were observed in the selected 
DMFs, as detailed in Para 3.3 of Part B of the Report. 
2.8 Implementation of PMKKKY projects  
The fourth objective of the Performance Audit was to determine whether the 
Scheme was implemented effectively to achieve desired outcomes and could 
bring out positive changes in the affected area and life  of people. 
Implementation of works/ projects under this Scheme are carried out through 
various Line Departments/ Executive Agencies of Government/ Gram 
Panchayat. These Departments play a vital role in evolving effective and 
sustainable short-term and long-term strategies for overall development of the 
State.  
Chart 2.2 below shows the administrative procedure related to approval and 
implementation of the works / projects, which involved the following: 
Chart 2.2: Workflow of implementation of PMKKKY activities by DMFT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Information furnished by DMF-SNU. 
As per the information furnished by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar, the 32 DMFs 
sanctioned a total of 26,667 projects to be taken up under PMKKKY. Out of the 
above sanctioned projects, 14,516 (54 per cent) projects were completed, 3,141 
(12 per cent) projects were ongoing, 3,278 (12 per cent) projects were yet to be 
started and 5,732 (21 per cent) projects were scrapped/ cancelled. 
2.8.1 Categorisation of approved projects 
Paragraph 2(1) of PMKKKY Guidelines and Rules 16 (4) (a) and (b) of GDMF 
Rules, 2016 stipulated that at least 60 per cent of funds should be utilised under 
the eight specified heads3 of High Priority Areas and up to 40 per cent of funds 
under the four specified heads4 of Other Priority Areas. 
As on March 2024, a total expenditure of ₹ 756.62 crore had been incurred by 
32 DMFs and DMF -SNU for implementation of projects sanctioned under 
PMKKKY. Out of the total expenditure, a total of ₹ 566.13 crore (74.82  
 
3  1. Drinking water supply 2. Environment preservation and pollution control measures 3. Health Care 
4. Education 5. Welfare of Women and Children 6. Welfare of aged and disabled people 7. Skill 
development and 8. Sanitation. 
4  1. Physical infrastructure 2. Irrigation 3. Energy and Watershed Development and 4. Any other 
measures for enhancing environmental quality in mining district. 
Line 
Departments 
submit 
projects 
proposal to 
DMF
Submissio
n and 
approval 
of 
proposal 
by EC
Submissio
n and 
approval 
of 
proposal 
by GC
In-
principal 
approval of 
project and 
intimation 
to 
respective 
line 
department
Technical 
Sanction by 
the Line 
Department
Administrative 
Approval by 
EC 
Allocation 
of fund and 
execution of 
works 
/procuremen
t through 
Line 
department/ 
IAs

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
14 
per cent of total project expenditure) was incurred in High Priority Areas and 
the remaining ₹ 190.49 crore (25.18 per cent of total project expenditure) was 
incurred in Other Priority Areas. 
Audit analysed the details of overall expenditure on High Priority Areas which 
have been depicted in Chart 2.3. 
Chart 2.3: Head-wise percentage expenditure in High Priority Areas 
 
Source: Records provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
Out of the expenditure on projects/ works in High Priority Areas, 93.64 per cent 
of expenditure was incurred under five Heads, viz. Education, Welfare of 
women and children, Healthcare, Skill development and drinking water supply, 
with highest 43.42 per cent incurred in Education Head. On the remaining three 
Heads, viz. Environment Preservation, Sanitation and Welfare of aged and 
disabled people, only 6.36 per cent of the expenditure was incurred. 
Out of the expenditure on projects / works in Other Priority Areas, 75.85  
per cent  of expenditure was incurred on Physical Infrastructure and the 
remaining 24 .15 per cent was incurred on Irrigation, Energy and Watershed 
Development, and Others. 
2.9 Monitoring mechanism under PMKKKY scheme 
The fifth objective of this Performance Audit was to determine whether the 
monitoring and evaluation of the scheme's implementation were adequate and 
effective. The audit observations related to accountability and transparency 
11.41%
1.86%
13.13%
43.42%
12.81%
0.06%
12.87%
4.44%
High Priority Areas -Fund utilisation  
Drinking water supply
Environment
Health Care
Education
Welfare of women and
Children
Welfare of aged and Disabled
people
Skill Development
Sanitation

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
15 
mechanisms, including the conduct of EC and GC meetings, preparation and 
approval of Annual Reports and Audited Accounts, presentation of these 
documents before the State Legislative Assembly, and the conduct of Social 
Audits of DMF, are detailed in the following paragraphs. 
2.9.1 Accountability and Transparency Mechanism 
Rule 24 (2) of GDMF, Rules 2016 requires DMF to maintain an Income and 
Expenditure Statement and a Balance Sheet for every financial year, 
commencing from 01 April and ending on 31 March. As per Rule 25 (1) of 
GDMF, Rules 2016, the accounts of the DMFs require to be audited annually 
upon completion of financial year by Chartered Accountant appointed by the 
Governing Council from the list of qualified auditors notified by the Accountant 
General*. Audit observed that all the selected five DMFs appointed Chartered 
Accountants from the list of the empanelled Chartered Accountants issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The GoI Guidelines of January, 2024 provisioned for the audit of the accounts 
of the DMF by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG). This provision for 
audit of accounts of DMF by CAG was not there in earlier guidelines issued by 
GoI in September 2015. 
 
2.9.2 Administrative setup of DMFs 
The administrative setup of the D MFs is governed as per the GDMF Rules, 
2016. The DMF has a two-tier administrative structure comprising of State level 
and District level. The administrative structure at the State level and District 
level of the DMF is shown in Chart 2.4.  
Chart 2.4: Administrative set up of DMF 
Structure at State Level                Structure at District Level 
 
  Source: Records of State Level Coordination Committee provided by the DMF-SNU. 
The governance and administration of the District Mineral Foundation (DMF) 
in Gujarat involve multiple key entities and committees. The State Level 
Coordination Committee (SLCC), chaired by the Chief Minister and supported 
by the Commissioner of Geology an d Mining (CGM) as Member Secretary, 
oversees the coordination and timely transfer of funds to DMFs across districts. 
The Industries and Mines Department (IMD) supervises the CGM office, which 
manages state -wide mining activities. The Gujarat Mineral Resear ch and 
Development Society (GMRDS), designated as the State Nodal Authority in 
 
* List of empanelled Chartered Accountants issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Director, DMF as State Nodal Unit
Gujarat Mineral Research and  Development 
Society (GMRDS) as State Nodal Agency
Commissioner of Geology & Mining Gujarat
Industries & Mines  Department, GOG
State Level  Co-ordination Committee
Gram Panchayats
Geologist/Asst. Geologist (Coordinator)
District  Planning Officer
Executive Committee
Governing Council

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
16 
2016, facilitates DMF operations through its State Nodal Unit (DMF -SNU) 
based in Gandhinagar. At the district level, each DMF has a Governing Council 
(GC) and an Executive Committee (EC), both chaired by the District Collector, 
responsible for planning, ap proving, and monitoring projects. The District 
Planning Officer (DPO) manages fund disbursements, while the District 
Geologist ensures compliance with mining regulations and royalty collection. 
Additionally, Gram Panchayats identify and execute projects in mining-affected 
villages, ensuring grassroots involvement in DMF activities. 
The CGM issued (December 2019) guidelines for administrative clearances and 
standard procedures from project designing to project completion for the 
PMKKKY projects. It stipulated the procedure for stage-wise monitoring of the 
PMKKKY projects regarding the  progress of work, the work quality, 
community welfare and benefits generated by projects, etc. The  
monitoring/ inspection by the DMFs of the PMKKKY projects is done at two 
stages (i) during project implementation, and (ii) after the completion of the 
project. 
The DMFs monitor the implementation of the PMKKKY projects and submit 
Monthly Progress Report (MPR) to DMF -SNU, Gandhinagar providing the 
details of the projects approved by the EC & GC, projects approved for 
administrative approval, projects implemented, projects under execution, 
projects yet to commence and the projects ca ncelled. The MPR of DMFs also 
include the details of approved cost and expenditure incurred for various 
PMKKKY projects.  
The GDMF Rules provides the maintenance of certain records and submission 
of record to government etc. as detailed below which will help in monitoring 
and evaluation of DMF activities by the DMF as well as State Government.  
Maintenance of Records and Registers : Rule 24 stipulates that DMF should 
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records such as various types of 
registers.   
Financial Audit, Annual Report and Social Audit : Rule 25 stipulates that the 
accounts of DMF be audited annually upon completion of a financial year by 
Chartered Accountant. In addition to financial audit, an independent Social 
Audit is to be conducted and Annual Report is to be prepared. All these Reports, 
i.e. Financial Audit Report, Social Audit Report and Annual Report, are 
required to be laid before the State Legislative Assembly.  
2.9.3 Meetings of the Executive Committee and the Governing Council of 
DMFs  
As per GDMF Rules, t he Governing Council (GC) and the Executive 
Committee (EC) of each DMF shall meet at regular intervals to monitor and 
evaluate the functioning of the DMFs. Rule- 10 (1) and 9 (1) of GDMF Rules 
stipulate that EC and GC should meet at least once in every three months and 
once in a year5 respectively. It was observed during audit that the number of EC 
 
5  Vide Industries and Mines Department notification date 16th September 2017. 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
17 
meetings and GC meeting required to be held as per Rules were not conducted. 
The failure to conduct EC and GC meetings violated the Rules and led to several 
adverse consequences, including delays in plan approvals, underutilization of 
DMF contributions, inadequate record -keeping at DMFs, and delays in 
approving Annual Accounts and Reports. 
Further, Audit noticed that at State level a website was being operated by  
DMF-SNU which was integrated with the individual DMF websites and 
information of each DMFs. Audit reviewed the website of the DMF -SNU and 
observed (September 2023) that the  agenda, minutes and action taken reports 
with respect to meetings of the EC and the GC was not available in public 
domain which led to partial compliance of GDMF Rules.  
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (October 2023) that 
the information would be uploaded on websites as per the GDMF Rules. 
Audit reviewed the number of the EC and GC meetings held by the five DMFs 
and the observations on the same are discussed in detail in Para 3.5.1 of Part B 
of the Report. 
2.9.4 Preparation and approval of the Annual Report and Audited Accounts  
Rule 25 (3) of the GDMF Rules provides that every year, within three months 
from the date of closure of the financial year, the EC should prepare an Annual 
Report on its activities for the respective financial year and shall present before 
the GC for approval. Upon approval of Annual Report , it shall be submitted to 
the Government.  
Rule 6 (2)(c) of GDMF Rules stipulate that the Governing Council shall approve 
the Annual Report and Audited accounts of the DMF within period prescribed 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or four months from the close of the 
previous year. 
During scrutiny of records at DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar of 32 DMFs, Audit 
observed that there were significant delays in preparation & finalisation of 
Annual accounts and the Annual Reports  of DMFs at District level. A total 32 
Annual Accounts6 and 30 Annual Reports7 were not prepared (as on November 
2024).  
2.9.5 Laying the Annual Report and Audited Accounts before State 
Legislative Assembly 
Further, Rule 25 (4) of GDMF Rules provides that the accounts of the D MF, 
together with the Financial Audit Report, the Social Audit Report and the 
Annual Report shall be forwarded annually to the Government by the DMF. The 
Government shall cause the reports to be laid before the State Legislative 
Assembly. 
The DMFs prepared and sent the Annual Report and the audited Annual 
Accounts to the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar since 2016-17 for onward submission 
 
6   9 for 2022-23 and 23 for 2023-24. 
7   3 for 2021-22, 5 for 2022-23 and 22 for 2023-24. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
18 
to the State Government for laying the same before the State  Legislative 
Assembly.  
Audit however, noticed that DMF -SNU had not submitted any of the Annual 
Reports and Audited Accounts prepared by the DMFs to the State Government 
for laying before the Legislative Assembly. Consequently, the State 
Government and Legislative Assembly was de prived of the information about 
the works and activities executed under PMKKKY. 
The DMF, SNU replied (November 2024) that after compiling, the Annual 
Reports and Audited Accounts were submitted (5th February 2024) to Industries 
and Mines Department (IMD), GoG for laying before State Legislative 
Assembly. The IMD instructed (15th February 2024) that the Reports should be 
in Gujarati language as the Reports were in English language. The DMF, SNU 
instructed (29 th, February 2024) all District Collectors for the preparation of 
Reports in Gujarati language. The status of preparation/ submission of Reports 
as of November 2024 has not been intimated to Audit. 
2.9.6 Conducting Social Audit of DMF 
The SLCC in its meeting (November 2016) resolved that in the initial phase, 
Gujarat Minerals Research Development Society (GMRDS) would obtain the 
support of the Rural Development Department and request the Rural 
Development Department/ Panchayat Departmen t to conduct the Social Audit 
exercise of PMKKKY in the first year. After the completion of one year, it shall 
follow guidelines as proposed by the CGM. 
Audit observed that Social Audit was not carried out by any of the five selected 
DMFs since establishment of DMFs to March 2023. Audit also noticed that no 
specific directions and guidelines for conduct of Social Audit of DMFs were 
proposed by GMRDS / CGM upto March 2023. 
Thus, not only was the non -conduct of independent Social Audit against the 
GDMF Rules, but this also led to non -assessment of the social impact of the 
projects executed by DMFs. Thus, an independent evaluation of the PMKKKY 
Scheme through Social Audit remained pending. 
The DMF-SNU stated (November 2024) that the Social Audit of DMF has not 
been carried out due to shortage of manpower and COVID -19. Further, the 
Social Audit of DMF has been excluded from the revised draft rules of GDMF 
2024. 
The reply of DMF -SNU is not acceptable as only through timely conduct of 
Social Audit would the authorities concerned be made aware of the extent of 
their benefit sharing, timeliness of benefit payments, timeliness of 
developmental schemes/works undertaken, work completion rates, and any such 
related issues as envisaged in Rule 25 above, among the mining affected people 
and their families. 
The DMFs of Mehsana and Surat replied (December 2023/ April 2024) that 
Social Audit was not taken up due to non -receipt of instruction and guidelines 
from GMRDS/ CGM. The DMF Devbhumi Dwarka stated (October 2023) that 
proposal for Social Audit will be submitted in nex t EC and GC meetings. The 
DMF Porbandar stated (October 2023) that a proposal for conducting Social 

Chapter II: Implementation of PMKKKY in overall State 
19 
Audit was made (May 2018) to the District Development Officer, Porbandar, 
for which reply is awaited. The reply of DMF Bhavnagar on the observation is 
awaited (November 2024). 
The reply may be viewed in light of the fact that Rule 25 (2) of GDMF Rules 
stipulates that an independent Social Audit has to be carried out by the G C in 
the manner specified by the S LCC and by not ensuring that they are regularly 
conducted, the authorities concerned remains unaware of the extent to which 
the envisaged objectives of the Scheme are met. 
Thus, the Audit reviewed the relevant records to assess the effectiveness of 
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for DMFs and it was observed that the 
Executive Committee (EC) and Governing Council (GC) meetings, which are 
required by the GDMF Rules to ensure proper oversight, were not held as 
frequently as stipulated. This lack of regular meetings hindered timely decision-
making and project implementation. Additionally, there were significant delays 
in the preparation and submission of the Annual Report and Audited Accounts, 
which are essential for maintaining transparency and accountability in fund 
utilization. The DMF-SNU, responsible for coordinating the DMFs at the State 
level, failed to submit any Annual Report or Audited Accounts to the State 
Government for presentation before the Legislative Assembly, further 
undermining the accountability process. 
Moreover, the required Social Audits, which are critical for assessing the impact 
of the projects on local communities and ensuring public participation, were not 
conducted which indicates a gap in ensuring that the DMF funds were used 
effectively and in the best interest of the Affected communities. 
 
  

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
20 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part - B 
Chapter III 
Implementation of 
PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
Part B 
 
Chapter III 
 
Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
The observations pertaining to the objectives of the Performance Audit are 
categorised and discussed in detail in subsequent sections to highlight the 
strengths, weakness, and areas requiring improvement within the selected 
DMFs. 
3.1 Institutional Arrangements and Planning in selected DMFs 
The first objective of this Performance Audit was to evaluate whether effective 
planning and institutional arrangements were made by DMFT for the successful 
implementation of the scheme and achievement of the PMKKKY objectives. 
3.1.1 Registration of District DMF Offices as a Trust  
Delay in registration of 32 DMFs as Public Trust is already discussed in Part-A 
para 2.1. Detailed analysis of five selected DMFs is given in succeeding 
paragraphs: 
Audit reviewed the records of five DMFs and noticed that five DMFs took six 
to 30 months for registration as a trust as given in Table 3.1: 
Table 3.1: Details of registration of Trust of five DMFs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of DMFs Date of Registration 
of Trust 
Time taken in registration 
(months) 
1 Mehsana 20.04.2018 23 
2 Devbhumi Dwarka 05.10.2018 30 
3 Porbandar 21.09.2017 18 
4 Surat 28.09.2017 18 
5 Bhavnagar 29.09.2016 06 
Source: Records provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
The audit observed that DMFs took more time in registration of the District 
Mineral Foundation (DMF) as a Trust in the four districts mentioned above. 
DMFs replied that the primary reasons attributed to these delays include   
(1) non-completion of work related to registration of Trust by the agency 
appointed by DMF-SNU (2) inadequate staffing levels at the DMFs  (3) delays 
in obtaining the necessary consent from trustees and (4) delays in the application 
process for registration. 
The DMF-SNU and the DMFs accepted (October 2023 to December 2023) the 
facts and reiterated the reasons for the delay in registration of DMFs as Trusts. 
3.1.2 Updation of list of Directly Affected Areas of the selected DMFs 
As already discussed in Para 2.2 and 2.3 of Part A of the Report, the Directly 
Affected Areas and Indirectly Affected Areas needs to be prepared, maintained 
and updated by the EC. The details of Directly Affected Villages of the five 
selected DMFs are shown in Table 3.2. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
22 
Table 3.2: Directly Affected Villages in five DMFs 
Sl. No. Name of DMF Number of affected villages (as on 
March 2023)  
1. DMF Mehsana 40 
2. DMF Bhavnagar 108 
3. DMF Porbandar 67 
4. DMF Devbhumi Dwarka 30 
5. DMF Surat 73 
Source: Records provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
As per Rule 12 (1) (a), Directly Affected Areas are areas where mining related 
operations (such as excavation, mining, blasting, beneficiation and waste 
disposal such as overburden dumps, tailing ponds, transport corridors, etc.) are 
located. 
Audit observed that in DMF Devbhumi Dwarka, out of 67 villages where 
mining activities were under operation, 37 villages were not included in the list 
of Directly Affected villages as on 31 March 2023. This was due to the decision 
taken in GC meeting (December 2019) to only consider villages having DMF 
collection of more than ₹10.00 lakh yearly as Directly Affected Villages. Audit 
noticed that such decision of GC of DMF Devbhumi Dwarka to not include 
Directly Affected Villages based on monetary limit of DMF collection was not 
supported anywhere in the PMKKKY guidelines and GDMF Rules.  
Audit also noticed that DMFs of Porbandar had not included t wo villages 
(Kotda and Bhetkadi) in the list of mining affected villages,  though these 
villages were having mining and/or quarry leases for mining operation.  
Due to non -inclusion of the above villages in Directly Affected village list  in 
the two DMFs , the implementation of various developmental and welfare 
project/programmes in these 39 mining affected villages could not be carried 
out. 
The DMF Porbandar accepted the facts and replied (October 2023) that the 
proposal for inclusion of two villages was previously submitted  
(December 2020) to Director, DMF-SNU Gandhinagar. However, both villages 
continued to be excluded in the list  of affected villages. He also assured to 
submit a new proposal for the same to Director, DMF-SNU Gandhinagar. The 
reply of DMF Devbhumi Dwarka is awaited (November 2024). 
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (November 2024) 
that DMF Gujarat has not yet updated the list of Directly Affected Villages  
(the last updated list contains 2,103 villages). 
The reply may be seen in light of the fact that due to non-inclusion in the list of 
Affected villages, no development and welfare project/program could be carried 
out in these above mentioned 39 Affected villages.  
The fact that none of the villages in Gujarat were identified as Indirectly 
Affected villages as per PMKKKY Guidelines/ GDMF Rules by any of the 
DMFs has already been discussed in Para 2.3 of Part A of the Report. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
23 
 3.1.3 Preparation of Annual Plans 
Rule 15 (3) of the GDMF Rules stipulated that the EC is required to prepare the 
Annual Plan and submit it to the GC for approval. Annual Plans for the financial 
year other than the first Annual Plan shall be prepared and approved by the end 
of the fourth quarter of the previous financial year (i.e. by 31st March of previous 
financial year before commencement of financial year). 
The SLCC directed (November 2016) the CGM to appoint agency for 
preparation of Annual Plan and preparation of consolidated Annual Plan for 
five-year period from 2014 -15 to 2018 -19. The CGM instructed (September 
2017) the Collector of respective DMFs to hire the agencies at district level for 
preparation of Annual Plan under PMKKKY scheme. The CGM also provided 
(May 2018) the list of empanelled agencies to DMFs. After following the 
tendering process, the agencies were selected at district level by DMFs.  
Audit reviewed the details of the five DMFs in respect of preparation of Annual 
Plans and its approval. Audit noticed that Annual Plans were prepared from the 
year 2014-15 to 2018 -19 only and the Annual Plans for the year 2019 -20 to 
2023-24 were not prepared by any of the selected DMFs. Audit also reviewed 
the preparation and approval mechanism of the Annual Plans for the period 
2014-15 to 2018 -19 at five DMFs. It was observed that work order for 
preparation of Annual Plans for 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 were given  to various 
agencies in 2018. The details are provided in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Details of preparation of Annual Plans by five DMFs 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
DMF 
Date of 
work 
order to 
selected 
agency 
Stipulated 
date for 
submission 
of Draft 
Plan 
Actual 
date of 
Draft Plan 
submission 
Delay in 
submission 
of Draft 
Plan in 
Months 
Date of 
approval 
of Annual 
Plan by 
respective 
GC of 
DMF 
Payment 
made to 
agency for 
Annual 
Plan 
preparation 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Mehsana 16.10.2018 09.01.2019 02.12.2019 10 Yet to be 
approved 
12.86 
2 Bhavnagar 10.05.2018 22.09.2018 25.10.2019 13 01.01.2021 45.63 
3 Porbandar 14.05.2018 26.09.2018 30.01.2019 4 Yet to be 
approved 
56.21 
4 Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
10.05.2018 22.09.2018 18.03.2021 29 25.05.2021 10.08 
5 Surat 10.01.2018 25.05.2018 08.08.2018 2 Yet to be 
approved 
33.25 
Total 158.03 
Source: Records provided by the respective DMFs. 
As per the GDMF Rules, the Annual Plan for the next financial year was to be 
prepared prior to commencement of the financial year.  During audit, it was 
noticed that all the five selected DMFs had not prepared the annual plan prior 
to commencement of respective financial year. As the plans were prepared after 
the year of plan, the expenditure incurred on preparation of Annual Plan wor th 
₹1.58 crore was unfruitful. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
24 
The Annual Plans for 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 of DMFs of Bhavnagar and 
Devbhumi Dwarka had been approved by the respective G C of DMFs in 
January 2021 and May 2021 respectively i.e. after completion of the respective 
years/ period of the Annual Plan with delay of 33 month and 37 months 
respectively from the stipulated date of approval of Annual Plan for 2018 -19 
(i.e. 31 March 2018). In respect of DMFs of Mehsana, Porbandar and Surat, the 
Annual Plans  from the year 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 is yet to be approved 
(November 2024) by the GC of respective DMF.  
Audit also noticed that in absence of approved Annual Plans, the  five test 
checked DMFs carried out their activities based on proposal received from the 
various government departments/ gram panchayats which were approved from 
respective EC/ GC of DMFs. The CGM issued (December 2019), the guidelines 
for administrative clearance and standard process required from project 
designing to project completion to be followed by the DMFs. However, the fact 
remained that the DMFs carried out the project/ work in the mi ning affected 
areas without prior approved Annual Plan from its establishment to 2023-24.  
The DMFs of Bhavnagar, Devbhumi Dwarka and Mehsana replied (November/ 
October / December 2023) that there were delays in selection of agency for work 
and further agency delayed preparation of Annual plan. DMF Porbandar and 
Surat replied (November 2023/ October 2024) that Annual plan for the period 
2019-20 to 2021-22 was not prepared due to COVID -19 pandemic. The reply 
of DMF Surat was awaited (September 2024). Further, the DMF-SNU accepted 
the facts and replied (October 2023) that despite the annual plans not being 
prepared by DMFs for t he year  2019-20 onwards, the work related to the 
projects of the districts were implemented. Further, it stated that instructions 
would be issued to DMFs to prepare and implement Annual plan.  
The reply of the DMFs and the DMF -SNU reiterated the facts and reasons for 
delay in preparation of Annual Plans. It is also pertinent to mention that though 
PMKKKY works/ projects have been carried out by DMFs; the same were 
without any approved Annual Plans. 
3.1.4 Engagement of minimum staff on contractual basis in selected DMFs 
Lapses in engagement of minimum staff on contractual basis is already 
discussed in Part-A Para 2.5. Detailed analysis of five selected DMFs is given 
in succeeding paragraphs: 
The details of the sanctioned posts, manpower posted and the vacancy in the 
five DMFs are shown in Table 3.4:  

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
25 
Table 3.4: Status of manpower 
District  Sanctioned 
post 
Category Manpower 
Posted 
Post 
vacant  
Percentage 
of vacancy  
Porbandar 7 A 2 5 71 
Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
7 A 5 2 28 
Mehsana 3 C 1 2 67 
Bhavnagar 5 B 3 2 40 
Surat 4 B 2 2 50 
Source: Records provided by DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
In the five DMFs, the shortage of contractual staff was ranging between 28 per 
cent and 71 per cent. Further, audit also noticed that even though there was a 
significant increase in collection of DMF contributions from the year 2016 -17 
(₹ 27.72 crore) to 2023-24 (₹ 43.49 crore) of 5 selected DMFs , the staff 
remained inadequate. This may affect the day-to-day functioning of DMFs.  
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar accepted the facts and replied (October 2023) that 
the revision of the category of districts would be made in next SLCC meeting 
and DMFs will be notified shortly to fill the vacant post.  
3.2 Fund Management in selected DMFs 
The second audit objective of this Performance Audit was to assess whether 
fund management of D MFT was economic and efficient in implementation of 
the scheme. Fund Management is the basic criteria to achieve the envisaged 
objective in implementation of the scheme.  
3.2.1 Utilisation of DMF funds for project under PMKKKY in selected 
DMFs 
Under-utilisation of DMF funds for projects under PMKKKY is already 
discussed in Part-A para 2.6.2 Detailed analysis on utilisation of DMF funds for 
projects in selected DMFs is discussed below:  
Audit reviewed the overall pattern of expenditure in five DMFs and observed 
that the gap between contribution and utilisation of the same was increasing on 
year-to-year basis. Chart 3.1 shows the year-wise contribution and expenditure 
details of the five DMFs:  

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
26 
Chart 3.1: Details of DMF contribution and expenditure of five DMFs 
 
  Source: - Records provided by the DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar 
As on March 2024, in case of the five DMFs a total of 57.82 per cent of DMF 
contribution collected remained unutilised. The reasons cited for the 
underutilisation of funds were delayed conduct of meetings of the EC and GC 
of the DMFs, COVID-19 pandemic, etc.  
3.2.2 Investment of unutilised funds  
As per Rule 20 (4) of GDMF Rules, the GC of the DMFs may approve 
investment of any unutilised fund in the bank accounts of DMF so that the 
investments may be liquidated at any time and there is no risk to principal 
amount so invested. 
Audit reviewed the details of the bank account, investment and unutilised funds 
available year -wise for the five DMFs. The details of year -end DMF 
contribution and funds available for investment for these five DMFs are given 
below in Table 3.5: 
Table 3.5: Year-wise details of DMF contribution and Expenditure of five 
DMFs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
balance of 
DMF 
contribution 
DMF 
Contribution 
received 
during the 
year 
Total fund 
available 
for 
utilisation 
Total 
Expenditure 
Year-end 
balance of 
Unutilised DMF 
contribution 
2016-17 0.00 27.72 27.72 0.00 27.72 
2017-18 27.72 33.70 61.42 0.74 60.68 
2018-19 60.68 44.50 105.18 24.00 81.18 
27.72
61.42
105.92
141.36
178.89
224.61
275.03
318.52
0.00 0.74 
24.74 
48.46 
70.49 83.94 
115.96 134.35 
27.72
60.68 81.18
92.90
108.40
140.67
159.07
184.17
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Unutilised DMF contribution of five DMFs
Total DMF fund available  (₹ in Cr.)
Total Expenditure (₹ in Cr.)
Unutilised DMF Fund at the end of year (₹ in Cr.)

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
27 
Year Opening 
balance of 
DMF 
contribution 
DMF 
Contribution 
received 
during the 
year 
Total fund 
available 
for 
utilisation 
Total 
Expenditure 
Year-end 
balance of 
Unutilised DMF 
contribution 
2019-20 81.18 35.44 116.62 23.72 92.90 
2020-21 92.90 37.53 130.43 22.03 108.40 
2021-22 108.40 45.72 154.12 13.45 140.67 
2022-23 140.67 50.42 191.09 32.02 159.07 
2023-24 159.07 43.49 202.56 18.39 184.17 
Total   318.52   134.35   
Source: Information received from DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar. 
As can be seen, from above Table that unutilised funds increased from ₹27.72 
crore in 2016 -17 to ₹184.17 crore in 2023 -24. Audit noticed that all the five 
DMFs operated four bank accounts; of which the bank account for DMF 
contribution for major minerals was operated as Current account; whereas the 
remaining three bank accounts for (i) DMF contribution for minor minerals,  
(ii) ECF and (iii) Contingency account for routine operations of DMF were 
maintained as saving accounts. Audit noticed that only DMF Por bandar had 
opened an auto -sweep account for investment of the unutilised DMF 
contribution whereas the remaining four DMFs of Surat, Devbhumi Dwarka, 
Mehsana and Bhavnagar did not open any fixed deposit for investment of 
unutilised amounts.  
Further, apart from the DMF contribution, the total amount collected under ECF 
in all these five DMFs were also maintained under saving accounts with banks 
and were not invested in fixed deposits.  
Thus, unutilised DMF contribution was not invested as per Rule 20 (4) in such 
manner that it may be liquidated at any time and had no risk to the principal 
amount so invested. This has led to not earning adequate interest on government 
funds.  
The reply of the DMFs is awaited (November 2024). 
3.3 Assessment, demand and collection of receipts under selected DMFs 
The third objective of this Performance Audit was to evaluate the reliability and 
efficiency of the system for assessing, demanding, and collecting receipts under 
DMF. On scrutiny of the records of five DMFs, Audit observed short collection 
of DMF contribution from leaseholders of Major minerals and Minor minerals. 
Further, the methodology for collection of the outstanding DMF contribution 
from concerned leaseholders was deficient as DMFs did not collect interest on 
delayed payment. The audit findings on the same are discussed below. 
3.3.1 Short collection of DMF - Major Minerals 
In Gujarat, the DMF contribution on Major Minerals other than Coal/ Lignite 
was applicable from 17 September 2015 onwards and in case of Coal/ lignite it 
was from 01 April 2016 onwards. In all the five DMFs, Audit collected the 
information of online royalty deducted as per ILMS for the period from  

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
28 
17 September 2015 to 31  March 20231 and DMF paid for the same period by 
leaseholders. 
Based on the information provided by the five DMFs, there was no Major 
Mineral Lease at DMF Mehsana. Further, in case of leaseholders for Major 
Mineral of DMF Bhavnagar there was no DMF contribution amount  
outstanding. In case of the three DMFs of Porbandar, Devbhumi Dwarka and 
Surat, Audit reviewed the Royalty deducted and DMF contribution as submitted 
by the DMFs and observed that the DMF contribution was not in required 
proportion of the Royalty received. The details are provided in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Details of outstanding DMF contribution of Major Mineral for 
the period 2015-2023 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
DMF office 
No. of 
leases for 
major 
minerals 
No. of leases 
conducting 
mining 
operations 
No. of leases 
with outstanding 
DMF 
contribution 
Total amount 
of outstanding 
DMF 
contribution  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Porbandar 111 71 23 4.03 
2 Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
152 110 49 18.43 
3 Surat 6 3 2 0.28 
Total 269 184 74 22.74 
Source: Data provided by respective DMFs. 
It was observed that 74 leaseholders 2  had to contribute ₹ 86.50 crore in 
respective DMFs. However, the contribution stood at ₹ 63.76 crore only. This 
resulted in less contribution of ₹ 22.74 crore in these DMFs. Thus, the DMF 
contribution collection mechanism was not proper which led to considerable 
amount of outstanding DMF contribution for Major Minerals at three DMFs. 
The DMF Porbandar accepted the facts and replied (November 2023) that 
recovery of outstanding DMF contribution of ₹15.52 lakh has been made  
fully/ partially in seven cases. However, the supporting documents are yet to be 
provided (November 2024). For remaining Leaseholders notices  
(October 2023) were issued for payment of outstanding DMF contribution. The 
DMF Devbhumi Dwarka replied (December 2023) that two Leaseholders3 have 
paid DMF contributions. However, the supporting documents for recovery and 
details thereof are yet to be provided. The DMF Surat accepted the facts and 
replied (December 2023) that Leaseholders were instructed about reconciliation 
of outstanding DMF. 
Thus, the DMFs accepted the fact that DMF contribution for Major Minerals 
was short collected. However, the fact remains that the outstanding DMF 
contribution was yet to be recovered from concerned Leaseholders even after 
issue of notices. 
 
1  In this regard, information for the year 2023 -24 called (November 2024) for from DMF -SNU, 
Gandhinagar is awaited. Therefore, the observation relates to the data for the period from 17 September 
2015 to 31 March 2023. 
2  Ignoring outstanding DMF contribution of less than ₹ 500. 
3  (i) Lease No. ML 3002004821 and (ii) Lease No. ML 3002010421. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
29 
3.3.2 Short collection of DMF - Minor Minerals 
In Gujarat, the DMF contribution on Minor Minerals was applicable from  
26 September 2016 onwards. In all the five DMFs, Audit collected the 
information of online Royalty deducted as per ILMS for the period from  
26 September 2016 to 31  March 20234 and DMF paid for the same period by 
Leaseholders. 
Based on the information provided the five DMFs, Audit reviewed the Royalty 
deducted and DMF contribution as submitted by the DMFs and observed that 
the DMF contribution was not in the required proportion of the Royalty 
received. The details are provided in Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: Details of outstanding DMF contribution of Minor Minerals 
upto March 2023 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
DMF office 
No. of leases/ 
permit for 
minor minerals 
No. of leases/ 
permit 
conducting 
mining 
operations 
No. of leases/ 
permit with 
outstanding 
DMF 
contribution 
Total 
amount of 
outstanding 
DMF 
contribution 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Porbandar 445 339 76 0.10 
2 Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
98 94 8 0.09 
3 Surat 1757 1620 828 5.07 
4 Bhavnagar 327 290 120 0.61 
5 Mehsana 277 261 161 5.58 
Total 2904 2604 1193 11.45 
Source: Data provided by respective DMFs. 
It was observed that 1,193 leaseholders 5  paid DMF contribution of ₹22 crore 
against the payable contribution of ₹33.45 crore in respective DMFs. Thus, 
DMF contribution and collection process was inadequate, leading to a 
considerable amount of 34 per cent uncollected DMF contributions for Minor 
Minerals in five DMFs. 
The DMF Mehsana accepted the facts and replied (December 2023) that after 
reconciling the outstanding DMF contribution, the recovery would be made. 
The DMF Devbhumi Dwarka replied (December 2023) that three leaseholders6 
have paid full amount of outstanding DMF contribution. However, did not 
furnish the supporting documents for the same. Further, DMF Devbhumi 
Dwarka stated that one leaseholder7 has paid DMF contribution in bank account 
of DMF Jamnagar, which would be transferred to the bank account of the DMF 
Devbhumi Dwarka. The replies of DMF Bhavnagar, Porbandar, and Surat are 
awaited (November 2024). 
 
4  In this regard, information for the year 2023 -24 called (November 2024) for from DMF -SNU, 
Gandhinagar is awaited. Therefore, the observation relates to the data for the period from 26 September 
2016 to 31 March 2023. 
5   Ignoring outstanding DMF contribution of less than ₹ 500. 
6   (i) Quarry Lease No. QL 3003009215 (ii) Quarry Lease No. QL 3003009015 and (iii) Quarry Lease 
No. ML 3004000604. 
7  (i) Quarry Lease No. QL 3001001315. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
30 
The DMFs accepted the fact that DMF contribution for Minor Minerals was 
short collected and recoverable from concerned leaseholders. 
3.3.3 Collection of interest on outstanding DMF Contribution 
As per I&MD circular (25 April 2018) in case of delay in payment of DMF 
contribution for Major Minerals, interest of 15 per cent per annum from the due 
date was to be levied. Further, in case of delay in payment of DMF contribution 
for Minor Minerals interest of 18 per cent per annum from the due date was to 
be levied. 
Audit noticed that only DMF Devbhumi Dwarka has raised notice of ₹8.73 crore 
for interest recoverable from leaseholders on account of delay in payment of 
DMF contribution. The remaining DMFs of Porbandar, Surat, Bhavnagar and 
Mehsana had not raised notices for interest recoverable from respe ctive 
leaseholders having outstanding DMF contribution which resulted in  
non-compliance of IMD circular.  
3.4 Implementation of Scheme to achieve desired outcomes by selected  
DMFs 
The fourth audit objective of Performance Audit was whether the Scheme was 
implemented effectively to achieve desired outcomes and could bring positive 
changes in life of Affected People after implementation of Scheme. 
The PMKKKY Scheme  was envisaged for the implementation of various 
developmental and welfare projects/ programmes in mining Affected Areas. 
Thus, implementation of the projects under the PMKKKY Scheme to achieve 
the desired benefit of public at large is a major component fo r success of the 
PMKKKY Scheme. A detailed review of projects executed by five selected 
DMFs revealed several issues, indicating deviations from the intended 
framework and objectives. These observations highlight areas where the DMFs 
have not adhered to pr escribed guidelines or where inefficiencies in project 
execution have occurred.  
1. Improper Allocation of Funds: 
Instances were noted where expenditures in Higher Priority Areas and 
Other Priority Areas  were not aligned with the stipulated percentages. 
This misallocation undermines the prioritization framework intended to 
ensure balanced and equitable development in mining-affected areas. 
2. Procedural Irregularities: 
Significant procedural lapses were identified in the initiation and 
execution of projects, including: 
• Delays in Obtaining Technical Sanction : Approval from the 
relevant Line Departments was not secured in a timely manner, 
causing delays in project implementation. 
• Scope Changes: Modifications in the originally sanctioned scope 
of work led to inconsistencies and potential inefficiencies. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
31 
• Overlap with Other Schemes : Some projects undertaken by the 
DMFs were also being executed under other schemes, leading to 
duplication of efforts and potential misallocation of resources. 
• Non-commencement of Projects: In certain cases, projects could 
not be initiated despite allocation, highlighting inefficiencies in 
planning and execution. 
These findings collectively point to weaknesses in governance, planning, and 
adherence to guidelines within the selected DMFs.  
In the five selected DMFs, out of 386 completed projects a total of 149 
completed projects were selected for audit, having project cost ranging between 
₹ 0.35 lakh to ₹ 20.00 lakh. Details of these projects is shown in Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Details of the project selected in Performance Audit 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of selected Blocks No. of completed 
project in 
selected in 
Districts 
Range of 
Project cost 
(₹ in Lakh)   
1 Bhavnagar Umrala, Shihor & Mahuva 12 5.00 to 9.99  
2 Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
Kalyanpur, Khmabhaliya & 
Dwarka  
41 0.95 to 20.00  
3 Mehsana Satlasna, Vijapur & Becharji 20 0.50 to 5.47 
4 Porbandar Ranavav, Kutiyana & 
Porbandar 
36 1.00 to 15.80 
5 Surat Mandavi, Mahuva & Bardoli 40 0.35 to 6.93 
Total 149  
Source: Records provided by respective DMFs. 
Audit reviewed the records of the projects implemented by the five DMFs and 
also conducted joint physical inspections of these 149 completed projects. Audit 
observed deficiencies in tender process and selection of implementing agencies, 
non-completion of works, and implementation of works outside affected areas, 
instances of projects implemented for private benefit rather than public benefit, 
instances of undue benefit to agency and instances of excess payment for works. 
The audit observations are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
3.4.1 Physical progress and cancellation of projects 
As per the administrative  procedure for the approval and expenditure of 
projects, the line departments had submitted proposals with estimated project 
costs for the in-principle approval of the GC of the respective DMF. Following 
this, the Technical Sanction (TS), with detailed cost estimates, was prepared by 
the line department. In some cases, projects were cancelled if they were taken 
up under other government schemes or if there was a delay in receiving the TS 
from the line departments for more than three  months from the date of  
in-principle approval. Administrative Approval (AA) was given by the 
Chairperson of EC of DMF for projects to be executed under the PMKKKY 
based on the approved cost estimates. The respective line departments or gram 
panchayats were then informed for execution. 
Audit reviewed the records of the projects in case of the five DMFs with respect 
to projects with in -principle approval, cancelled projects prior to AA, projects 
approved with AA having approved cost, completed projects, projects under 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
32 
implementation, projects yet to commence and cancelled projects during 
execution of work. As on March 2024, the details of the same for the five DMFs 
are shown in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Status of PMKKKY projects of five DMFs as on March 2024 
DMF In 
principle 
approved 
projects 
Cancelled 
prior to 
AA 
Projects 
not 
initiated 
for AA 
Projects 
given 
AA 
Conve
rsion 
Ratio 
(in %) 
Status of projects after approval 
of AA 
Complet
ed 
projects 
Under 
imple
menta
tion 
Projects 
to start 
execution 
Cance
lled 
Mehsana 293 11 136 146 49.83 77 68 1 0 
Bhavnagar 581 56 228 297 51.12 52 155 61 29 
Porbandar 1,531 274 308 949 61.99 423 8 482 36 
Devbhumi 
Dwarka 1,890 774 1 1,115 58.99 944 3 161 7 
Surat 1,127 90 0 1,037 92.01 739 20 242 36 
 Total 5,422 1,205 673 3,544 65.36 2,235 254 947 108 
Source: Monthly Progress Reports of respective DMFs. 
3.4.2  Inefficiencies in project approval 
Audit noticed that for the five selected DMFs, a total of 3,544 projects were 
approved for execution by providing Administrative approval (AA) out of 5,422 
in-principle approved projects. Rest of the projects were either cancelled or not 
initiated yet due to not receiving AA approval from EC concerned of the 
respective DMF. Thus, only 65.36 per cent of the total in -principle approved 
projects in five DMFs were given AA, thereby converting these projects into 
actual projects which could be implemented under PMKKKY scheme. This 
conversion ratio was lowest at 49.83 per cent in case of DMF Mehsana and 
highest at 92.01 per cent in case of DMF Surat. 
As per Rule 16(4) of GDMF Rules, the total sanctioned amount of the project 
should not exceed 1.5 times of the available DMF contribution / fund. Audit 
observed that Chairperson of GC DMF Devbhumi Dwarka in principle 
approved (October 2017) a total of 1,052 projects amounting to ₹59.83 crore as 
against the available fund of ₹ 4.36 crore (upto September 2017). This was 13.72 
times of the available DMF fund, which exceeded the limit of 1.5 times 
prescribed under GD MF Rules. Subsequently, 637 projects amounting to 
₹43.61 crore out of the 1052 projects approved in October 2017 were cancelled 
by GC. The reason for cancellation of above 637 projects as stated by DMF 
Devbhumi Dwarka was that these were unnecessary projects and TS was not 
available. 
3.4.3 Expenditure of DMF in High Priority Areas and Other Priority Areas  
To achieve the envisaged objective of the PMKKKY scheme, DMF has to 
consider the rules and instruction of categorisation of the particular project/ 
programme under the sector of High Priority Areas or Other Priority Areas at 
the time of sanctioning the project proposal received from the line departments. 
Audit reviewed the records of five DMFs for selection and approval of projects 
/ works under PMKKKY to examine categorisation of projects. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
33 
During test-check of Monthly Progress Report  (MPR) of March 2024 of five 
DMFs, Audit observed that ₹134.35 crore was incurred in 2,489 completed & 
under implementation projects against the sanctioned amount of ₹ 142.78 crore. 
Further, it was observed that the five DMFs had not covered all areas of High 
Priorities and Other Priorities as detailed in Table 3.10. 
Table 3.10: Details of projects covering the areas of both priorities  
(Figures in percentage) 
Percentage of sanctioned cost of completed and ongoing projects on areas of both Priorities  
Areas Priorities Mehsana Bhavnagar Porbandar Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
Surat 
Drinking 
water supply 
High 
Priority 
Area 
8.83 26.22 9.35 17.37 10.55 
Environment 
preservation 
and pollution 
control 
measures 0 0 0 0 2.29 
Health care 14.36 0 1.95 3.18 31.11 
Education 16.56 43.70 31.13 42.40 19.23 
Welfare of 
Women and 
Children 12.76 9.19 23.24 7.09 1.33 
Welfare of 
aged and 
disabled 
people 0 0 0 0 0 
Skill 
development- 0 0 9.97 2.41 4.13 
Sanitation 7.12 0 2.18 0.60 1.47 
Sub-Total 
(High 
Priority Area) 
 
59.63 79.11 77.83 73.05 70.12 
Physical 
infrastructure 
Other 
Priority 
Area 
40.37 0 21.72 26.38 29.71 
Irrigation 0 20.89 0.09 0 0.17 
Energy and 
Watershed 
Development 0 0 0 0.58 0 
Any other 
measures for 
enhancing 
environmental 
quality in 
mining 
district 0 0 0.36 0 0 
Sub-Total 
(Other 
Priority Area) 
 
40.37 20.89 22.17 26.95 29.88 
Total   100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 
Source: Records provided by DMF-SNU Gandhinagar. 
It could be seen from the above that major expenditure in case of DMFs of 
Bhavnagar, Porbandar and Devbhumi  Dwarka was on Education. In case of 
DMF Mehsana it was on Physical Infrastructure and in case of DMF Surat, on 
Healthcare. The expenditure by the five DMFs was mainly concentrated on a 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
34 
few Heads, such as (i) Education, (ii) Healthcare, (iii) Physical Infrastructure, 
and (iv) Drinking Water Supply.  
DMFs of Mehsana, Bhavnagar, Porbandar and Devbhumi Dwarka had not taken 
up any project related to Environment Preservation and Pollution Control 
Measures. It was also noticed that there was negligible expenditure in the two 
Heads of (i) Energy and Watershe d Development, and (ii) Others. Further, no 
expenditure/ project was on the Head of Welfare of Aged and Disabled people, 
leading to potential deprivation of benefits to the beneficiaries of Affected 
villages. 
The DMFs of Porbandar, Devbhumi Dwarka and Surat replied (October 2023) 
that projects in various Heads of High Priority and Other Priority Areas were 
not taken up due to non -receipt of the proposals, non -approval of projects and 
also due to cancellation of  in-principle approved projects. The reply of DMF 
Bhavnagar was awaited (November 2024). 
Thus, the lapses in project execution highlight significant shortcomings in 
planning, coordination, and oversight mechanisms. Delays in initiating and 
completing projects, inadequate monitoring, poor coordination between DMFs 
and line departments, and inef ficient utilization of funds have collectively 
undermined the intended objectives of the Scheme. These issues not only delay 
the delivery of benefits to the Affected communities but also raise concerns 
about the effectiveness and accountability of the over all implementation 
process. To address these gaps, it is imperative to strengthen institutional 
frameworks, enhance interdepartmental coordination, and implement robust 
monitoring systems for timely and effective project execution. 
3.4.4 Deficiencies in process of selection of the agency for work 
As per the SLCC direction (November 2016), the DMFs were to follow the 
guidelines of the Government and comply with the Gujarat State Purchase 
Policy 2016. Thus, the process for invitation of tender, award of work and 
selection of agency for work was to be  done as per the extant Government 
guidelines. Audit observed instances where the DMFs awarded works to an 
agency without inviting tender leading to undue benefit to agency. The 
observations are discussed below. 
3.4.4.1 Award of project to the agency on nomination basis without inviting 
tender 
The GoG introduce d (November 2006) e -procurement8 policy in all the 
Government Departments, Boards and Corporations etc. of the State 
Government with effect from 01 June 2007 for transaction value of ₹ 10 lakh 
and above. Subsequently, transaction value for e -procurement was reduced 
(July 2011) from ₹ 10 lakh to ₹ 5 lakh and above.  
On review of records related to process of award of works/ projects by DMF 
Devbhumi Dwarka, it was noticed that the G C approved (October 2017) four 
 
8  e-procurement is the process wherein the physical tendering policy is carried out online using the 
internet and associated technologies.  

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
35 
projects which were awarded without invitation of tender. The details of 
projects are shown in Table 3.11: 
Table 3.11: Details of projects awarded without inviting tender 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Name GC in -
principle 
approved cost  
Work 
order 
date 
Name of 
agency 
Work 
awarded 
based on  a 
tender 
invited at 
Narmada 
district in 
month 
Remarks 
1 Terafill tank of 1000 
litre capacity in 57 
schools  
₹1.71 crore August 
2018 
Veer 
Enterprises, 
Bardoli 
September 
2017 
The agency 
requested DPO 
to award these 
works with 
reason stated 
that similar 
project carried 
out in Narmada 
District through 
tendering 
process. DMF 
Devbhumi 
Dwarka awarded 
these projects to 
the same agency 
without 
tendering 
process. 
2 Playing equipment 
in 57 Primary 
schools  
₹3.13 crore 
(₹5,50,000 per 
unit) 
July 
2018 
Veer 
Enterprises, 
Bardoli 
January 
2018 
3 Educational 
Ceramic Charts 
(ECC) in 57 Primary 
schools  
₹1.71 crore 
(₹3,00,000 per 
Unit) 
March 
2018 
Veer 
Enterprises, 
Bardoli 
September 
2017 
 
4 Educational 
Ceramic Charts 
(ECC) in 55 
Anganwadi 
₹1.43 crore 
(₹2,60,000 per 
unit) 
February 
2018 
Veer 
Enterprises, 
Bardoli 
Source: Records provided by DMF Devbhumi Dwarka. 
Audit observed that the cost of each of these four projects was more than  
₹5 lakh and hence required invitation of open tender as per policy. However, 
the DMF Devbumi Dwarka accorded administrative approval and awarded 
(between March 2018 to August 2018) these works to the M/s. Veer Enterprises, 
Bardoli (agency) accepting the req uest that similar works 9 were carried out by 
the agency in Narmada District following the tendering process. 
This non -adherence to the procurement policy deprived DMF Devbhumi 
Dwarka in obtaining competitive rates and also  led to undue benefit to the 
agency. Further, Audit also observed excess payment of ₹ 63 lakh in one of the 
above works, which is discussed under Para 3.4.8 of this Report. 
The reply of DMF Devbhumi Dwarka is awaited (November 2024). 
3.4.4.2 Splitting of work to bypass the tender process 
The I&MD, GoG  issued (February 2021) a  Resolution regarding method of 
procurement of goods through Government e-Marketplace (GeM) portal for all 
Government Organisations. The Clause 7 of ibid Resolution stipulates that any 
work having financial limit of procurement of goods above ₹  5 lakh may be 
procured through Open Bid (Tender) and/ or Reverse Auction process and the 
work having the financial limit of procurement of goods below ₹ 5 lakh may be 
procured through GeM suggested L1. 
 
9  In Narmada district tender was invited (between September 2017 and January 2018 ) for the similar 
project. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
36 
The Education Department submitted (January 2021) a TS for the project of 
installation of CCTV cameras in 50 schools to the DMF Devbhumi Dwarka. The 
DMF Devbhumi Dwarka accorded (January 2021) AA for the  project of 
installation of CCTV cameras  in 34 Primary and Secondary Schools  of the 
district for amount of ₹1.06 crore. The District Level Purchase Committee 
(DLPC) decided (March 2021) to procure the items through GeM.  
The Education Department issued (March 2021) work orders to five agencies 
for installation of CCTV cameras in schools. The project was completed (April 
2021). The details of work assigned to agencies is as shown in Table 3.12. 
Table 3.12: Installation of CCTV cameras works awarded to the agencies 
Sl. No. Agency Name Amount (₹ in lakh) 
1 Advantage Networking & Solutions Pvt. Ltd. 14.99 
2 Asian System, Ahmedabad 21.23 
3 Genious Enterprise, Ahmedabad 23.77 
4 Global Infosystems, Ahmedabad 27.44 
5 Shakti Enterprise, Ahmedabad 18.21 
 Total 105.64 
Source: Records provided by DMF Devbhumi Dwarka. 
Audit observed that though the total value of the work was ₹ 1.06 crore, the 
Education Department did not invite an open tender on GeM portal. Instead, the 
Education Department split the components required for CCTV cameras at 
various schools in such a manner that they did not have to invite open tender on 
GeM portal and procured through GeM suggested L -1. Audit noticed that the 
items were split and comparison sheet from GeM portal was kept wherein the 
L-1 in each case remained below ₹ 5 lakh. Further, there were instances wherein 
the procurement of one single item was done at two different time on same date 
and two separate lowest bidders were selected in such a manner that the overall 
value of one single order remained below ₹ 5 lakh. 
Thus, due to non-invitation of open tender for the project having estimated cost 
of ₹ 1.06 crore, the possibility of not receiving competitive rates for the project 
cannot be ignored. Finally, the overall work was executed at ₹ 1.06 crore 
through five diff erent agencies against established Procurement Rules and 
Regulations. 
The DMF Devbhumi Dwarka replied (November 2023) that the project was 
awarded to the five agencies who were suggested by GeM as L-1.  
The reply is not acceptable as the work should have been awarded through open 
tender and splitting up the work was against the GoG approved purchase policy. 
3.4.5 Project for Blood Bank at Chhotaudepur 
The DMF-SNU had taken up  (October 2018) a project of setting up a Blood 
Bank along with manpower and operation for a period of three years at 
Chhotaudepur District at the cost of ₹ 3.74 crore based on a proposal received 
(October 2018) from Gujarat State Council of Blood Transfusion (GSCBT) 10 
considering that the district does not have a Blood Bank.  
DMF-SNU has issued a work order (28  February 2019) for the project to the 
GSCBT as a Project Implementing Agency (PIA). As per the time period 
 
10  A society working under the Commissioner of Health, Government of Gujarat. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
37 
provided in the work order, the infrastructure and procurement of equipment 
was to be completed within a period of six months and operations were to 
commence from 9 months onwards for a total period of three years from the 
issue of the work order. 
The DMF-SNU, Gandhinagar released 1 st instalment of ₹ 7.50 lakh to the PIA 
on 08  May 2019  for civil and refurbishment of Blood Bank building. The 
Collector of Chhotaudepur allocated the land & building in the district hospital 
to setup and operationalize the DMF Blood Bank. The same was handed over 
(November 2019) for the establishment of Blood Bank, which was found to be 
in dilapidated condition. The GSCBT obtained September 2019 and January 
2020 the estimate s11 of civil and electricity work from Roads and  Buildings 
Division, Chhotaudepur at the cost of ₹ 50.17 lakh.  The GSCBT requested  
(January 2020) DMF-SNU to revise the cost of infrastructure work to ₹  50.17 
lakh from ₹ 25.00 lakh which was approved (February 2020). Thus, the project 
cost was increased from ₹ 3.74 crore to ₹ 3.99 crore.  
As per GoI instructions (July 2021), no sanction or approval of any expenditure 
out of DMF Fund shall be done at the State level. In view of the above, the 
DMF-SNU decided (November 2021) to transfer the project to the DMF 
Chhotaudepur for further execution. 
Audit noticed that subsequent to approval of revised cost for infrastructure in 
February 2020, the PIA did not contact the DMF -SNU till November 2021 
which had resulted in non -operationalisation of the project. The DMF 
Chhotaudepur informed (October 2023) that civil and electrical work at the 
identified building had been completed and funds worth ₹ 25.16 lakh for civil 
work and ₹ 6.87 lakh for equipment had been released (February 2022 and June 
2022 respectively ). However, the necessary Blood Bank equipment  had not 
been purchased, and while the Blood Bank was initially expected to become 
operational by February 2024, the project in Chhotaudepur district remained 
non-functional as of September 2024.  
Thus, delay in work execution by the Project Implementing Agency (PIA), and 
lack of coordination between the DMF and the PIA resulted in significant delays 
in completing the critical Blood Bank project in Chhotaudepur district. Despite 
an expected timeline (August 2020) of six months after approval of the revised 
estimates (February 2020), for infrastructure development and equipment 
procurement, the required equipment had not yet been procured. Furthermore, 
the Blood Bank, which was to be operational withi n nine months (November 
2020), remains non -functional and the beneficiaries deprived of the intended 
healthcare services despite expenditure of ₹ 39.53 lakh. 
DMF-SNU accepted the delay and replied (November 2024) that the project is 
under progress. 
3.4.6 Undue benefit of repeat order given to agency in order to utilise 
available funds 
The GC of DMF Devbhumi  Dwarka approved (October 2017) the project of 
installation of Physical Exercise Equipment (PEE) in all the 16 Affected villages 
 
11  Estimate received in September 2019- ₹16.25 lakh and in January 2020- ₹33.92 lakh. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
38 
of the district at the cost of ₹ 2.40 crore (₹ 15.00 lakh per set of PEE ). The 
primary approval (September 2019) and TS (October 2019) was accorded by 
District Sport Officer (DSO). The DMF Devbhumi Dwarka accorded (October 
2019) AA for the project in 16 villages. 
As land was available at only five villages, the District Sports Officer invited 
(July 2020) tender for installation of PEE in five 12 villages out of 16 villages. 
After following the tender process, the DSO issued (July 2020) work order to 
M/s. Shri Veer Enterprises, Bardoli (agency) at the tender cost of ₹ 15.03 lakh 
per set of PEE. On the basis of request (November 2020) received from  Gram 
Panchayat of these five villages for additional five items13 of ₹ 4.67 lakh in place 
of a solar illuminated block of ₹ 3.59 lakh, the DMF approved (November 2020) 
the revised cost of ₹ 16.11 lakh for these villages. The work at five villages was 
completed (March 2021) by the agency at cost of ₹ 80.58 lakh. 
Subsequently, out of remaining 11 villages, the DSO intimated (March 2021) 
that four villages14 requested to cancel the projects as the Gram Panchayats did 
not have land for installation of P EE and seven villages 15 requested for 
additional thirteen items 16 costing ₹ 11.34 lakh in place of solar illuminated 
block and main gate costing ₹ 4.11 lakh. DMF approved (March 2021) this 
proposal and issued a new work order to the above agency for installation of 
PEE in seven villages at the rate of ₹ 22.26 lakh inste ad of ₹ 15.03 lakh per 
village. The work at seven villages was completed (April 2021) by the agency 
at cost of ₹ 155.79 lakh. 
Audit observed that: 
• The AA by DMF Devbhumi Dwarka for providing PEE at all 16 mining 
Affected villages in district was improper as there was no availability 
of land at four villages which should have been ascertained before 
according approval. 
• As per Gujarat State Purchase Policy 2016, repeat order can be placed 
to existing agency of not more than 50 per cent of the original contract 
value / quantity. Audit noticed that the agency was given an order for  
₹ 155.79 lakh for PEE at seven villages on nomination basis without 
tender which led to undue benefit to agency. Further, the value of repeat 
order given to the agency of ₹ 155.79 lakh for PEE at seven villages 
was more than 207 per cent of the original contract value of ₹ 75.15 
lakh for PEE at five villages.  
Thus, though total approved amount for project was spent due to appropriations 
in cost and requirements of villages and undue benefit was extended to the 
agency due to non-invitation of tender and repeat order being placed. This was 
against financial prudence and established Rules for award of work. 
 
12  (i) Raan, (ii) Mevasa, (iii) Mahavedia, (iv) Gorinja and (v) Batisa. 
13  Two Ganesh slide, two chest press and one combination of 4 in 1 set. 
14  (i) Keneddy, (ii) Bhogat, (iii) Virpur and (iv) Mota Asota. 
15  (i) Kanchanpur, (ii) Dharampur, (iii) Pachhtar, (iv) Paneli, (v) Gaangdi, (vi) Lamba and (vii) Gandhvi. 
16  Three seated puller, three chest press, three ganesh slide, three 4 seat swing and 300 Sq.ft. Paver block. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
39 
Audit also conducted (August 2023) the joint physical inspection of four 
projects17 under test-checked villages. The photographs as shown below: 
  
Open Gym in Dharmpur at Khambhaliya Taluka  
Photograph taken on 11.08.2023 
Open Gym in Kanchanpur at Khambhaliya Taluka 
Photograph taken on 10.08.2023 
  
Project of Open Gym in Gorinja at Dwarka Taluka. Photograph taken on 23.08.2023 
  
  
Project of Open Gym in Jam Batisa at Dwarka Taluka. Photograph taken on 24.08.2023 
 
Audit observed that most of the equipment were in  deteriorated condition and 
some of the equipment were uprooted.  As per the Administrative approval, the 
maintenance of the equipments was the responsibility of the Gram Panchayats. 
Thus, lack of proper maintenance and monitoring by Gram Panchayat resulted 
in project not benefitting general public at large. 
The reply of DMF Devbhumi Dwarka is awaited (November 2024). 
 
17  (i) Dharampur, (ii) Gorinja, (iii) Kanchanpur and (iv) Jam Batisa. 


Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
40 
3.4.7 Excess payment to agency for Educational Ceramic Chart project 
The DMF Devbhumi Dwarka accorded (February 2018) AA for ₹1.43 crore for 
the project of installation of Educational Ceramic Chart (ECC) in 55 schools 
and it was decided that the work shall be implemented by M/s. Veer Enterprises, 
Bardoli (a gency) considering that the agency had executed the same work 
(September 2017)  in Narmada District where it was selected through tender 
process. The work order was issued (March 2018) to the agency. Subsequently, 
DMF Devbhumi Dwarka revised  (July 2018) AA for project of installation of 
Educational Ceramic Chart (ECC) at 55 schools with the cost o f ₹1.65 crore at 
the rate of ₹3.00 lakh per ECC. 
The work was completed (June 2018) at 42 schools and the status of remaining 
works were not found in records produced to Audit. The DMF Devbhumi  
Dwarka had issued the final payment order (August 2018) and a total of  
₹ 1.26 crore was paid to the agency. 
Audit observed that in Narmada District, the a gency had carried out work of 
ECC and indoor game equipment kit  at the rate of ₹2.60 lakh per school18 
whereas for the works executed under PMKKKY at 42 schools, the agency had 
installed only the ECC.  
Thus, due to deficient scrutiny of the estimate for the project by DMF Devbhumi 
Dwarka, the work of ₹ 1.50 lakh per ECC was paid at ₹ 3 lakh per ECC to the 
agency. This resulted in excess payment of ₹ 63.00 lakh 19 to the agency apart 
from the undue benefit to agency in award of work at nomination basis. 
The reply of DMF Devbhumi Dwarka is awaited (October 2024). 
The above findings indicate that the Scheme is not being implemented 
effectively by the selected DMFs. 
3.5 Monitoring and Evaluation by selected DMFs 
The fifth audit objective of the Performance Audit was whether monitoring and 
evaluation of the implementation of the scheme was adequate and effective.  
Monitoring and evaluation play a pivotal role in ensuring the success of projects 
and programs. By systematically collecting and analysing data, monitoring and 
evaluation provides valuable insights into the progress and effectiveness of 
implementation. Its  primary objective is to identify the strengths and 
weaknesses and areas that require improvement, enabling informed decision -
making and strategic planning to achieve the objective of the scheme. 
The audit observations pertaining to the five selected DMFs are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
18   ECC at the rate of ₹1.50 lakh per unit and indoor game equipment kit  at the rate of ₹1.10 lakh per 
unit. 
19  ₹1.5 lakh *42 schools=₹63.00 lakh. 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
41 
3.5.1 Meetings of the Executive Committee and the Governing Council of 
DMFs  
Audit reviewed the number of the EC and GC meetings held by the five DMFs 
and the details are provided in Table 3.13 below: 
Table 3.13: Details of Executive Committee and Governing Council 
meetings of five DMFs 
Name of 
the DMF 
Date of 
Registration 
of DMF 
Number of EC 
meetings: 
Number of GC meetings: 
To be held 
as per 
Rules20 
Actually 
held 
To be held 
as per 
Rules21 
Actually 
held 
Mehsana 20.04.2018 19 3 4 2 
Porbandar 21.09.2017 22 7 5 5 
Surat 28.09.2017 22 13 5 10 
Bhavnagar 29.09.2016 26 4 6 3 
Devbumi 
Dwarka 
15.10.2018 17 12 4 7 
Total  106 39 24 27 
Source: Information provided by DMFs. 
In respect of EC meetings, Audit observed that only 39 EC meetings were held 
against 106 EC meetings to be held after the registration of the respective DMF 
trusts. In none of the five DMFs, the EC meetings were held as per the frequency 
mentioned in the GDMF Rules. The shortfall in the EC meetings for the five 
DMFs ranged from 29 to 85 per cent.  
In respect of GC meetings, Audit observed that the GC meetings were held as 
per the frequency mentioned in GDMF Rules at DMF Porbandar, Surat and 
Devbhumi Dwarka. However, the GC meetings were not held as per the 
frequency of meetings mentioned in GDMF Rules at Mehsana and Bhavnagar. 
Thus, non-conducting of EC and GC meetings was against Rules and also had 
corresponding impact of delayed approval of plans, underutilization of DMF 
contribution, non-maintenance of adequate records at DMFs, delayed approval 
of Annual Accounts and Annual Reports, etc. 
The DMFs of Mehsana and Porbandar accepted (December 2023/ October 
2023) the facts and assured compliance to GDMF Rules in future. DMF 
Devbhumi Dwarka replied (October 2023) that there was structural change in 
composition of the GC in 2021-22 and subsequently EC and GC meetings were 
conducted conjointly so that issues, if any, can be resolved quickly for benefit 
of the affected people at the earliest. The DMF Surat accepted the facts and 
replied (October 2024) that the meetings were not conducted due to a s hortage 
of staff during 2016 -17 & 2017 -18 and of COVID -19 during 2019 -20 to  
2021-22. The reply of DMFs of Bhavnagar is awaited. (October 2024). 
 
20  EC meeting for the quarter in which the DMF was registered has been ignored. 
21  GC meeting for the year in which the DMF was registered has been ignored.  

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
42 
The reply of DMF Devbhumi  Dwarka is not acceptable as EC meeting was 
required to be held at least once every three months whereas the GC meeting 
was to be held only once a year. Thus, if both the GC and EC meetings shall be 
held conjointly, then in that case there shall be shortfa ll in EC meetings as per 
GDMF Rules. This is evident from the fact that from 2021 -22 onwards, three 
EC meetings were held against eight EC meetings to be held.  
3.5.2 Adherence of provision of Scheduled Areas in implementation of 
DMF projects 
Rule 19 of the GDMF Rules stipulate that the process to be adopted for 
utilization of PMKKKY funds in the Scheduled Areas shall be guided by the 
provisions contained in Article 244 read with Schedule V and Schedule VI to 
the Constitution relating to administration of the Scheduled Areas and Triba l 
Areas and the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996 and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. 
Rule 14 (2) of GDMF Rules stipulate that approval of the Gram Sabha shall be 
required for identification of beneficiaries. Rule 16(1) provided that in case of 
a Scheduled Area, approval of the Gram Sabha shall be required for formulation 
and implementation of all plans, programmes  and projects. Under Rule 17(5) 
related to implementation of Annual Plan, it was stipulated that in Scheduled 
Areas, after completion of every financial year, the report of the work 
undertaken in each village in each financial year  should be furnished to the 
respective Gram Sabha. 
Audit reviewed the implementation of the above provisions related to Scheduled 
Areas in the five DMFs. Audit noticed that only DMF Surat had Scheduled 
Areas and observed that the Line Departments submitted the proposal of 
projects of Mandavi, Mahuva and Ba rdoli blocks to the DMF Surat without 
consent of the project obtained from the Gram Sabha and the proposal was 
accepted by the DMF. The DMF did not call for the consent of the Gram Sabha 
from the Line Departments though these blocks were covered in Schedul ed 
Areas of Surat district.  
Audit also observed that DMF Surat had not furnished any report on the work 
undertaken in each village in each financial year to the respective Gram Sabha 
after completion of every financial year.  
Thus, non-obtaining of Gram Sabha approval prior to taking up projects and not 
providing any report on implementation of works/ projects led to non-adherence 
of GDMF Rules. Further, this restricted the decision -making process and 
participation of Gram Sabha in developmental w orks/ projects in Scheduled 
Areas. 
DMF Surat replied (September 2023) that the requisite procedure in respect of 
the projects carried out in Schedule Areas has not been followed so far. 
However, the same will be implemented henceforth. 
3.5.3 Maintenance of Prescribed Registers 
Rule 24(1) of the GDMF Rules stipulate that the D MF should maintain proper 
accounts and relevant records with respect to all its activities. The DMFs are 
required to maintain the registers namely: - (a) Register of Mining related 

Chapter III: Implementation of PMKKKY in Selected DMFs 
43 
Operations, (b) Register of Receipt (c) Register of Expenditure (d) Register of 
Beneficiaries, and (e) Register of various Committees. 
On review of the records being maintained at five DMFs, Audit observed that 
the above-mentioned registers and records were not maintained by four DMFs 
of Devbhumi Dwarka, Mehsana, Surat and Bhavnagar whereas DMF Porbandar 
maintained the same in electronic format. The above -mentioned registers are 
important documents for various information in respect of DMF i.e. receipts, 
expenditure, beneficiary, mining related operations and various Committees. In 
absence of the Register of Receipt, particulars of all pay ments made to DMFs, 
including payment made by persons holding mineral concessions, Audit could 
not ascertain correctness of date wise payment/ contribution made to DMF by 
individual lease/  concession holder  and interest leviable in cases of  
non-payment/ short payment or delayed payment to District DMF. 
The DMF -SNU replied (October 2023) that instructions would be issued to 
DMFs to maintain the prescribed registers and records as per the guidelines. The 
DMFs of Devbhumi Dwarka, Mehsana and Surat accepted (October/ December 
2023/ October 2024) the observation and assured that prescribed registers will 
be maintained. The reply of DMF of Bhavnagar on the observation was awaited 
(November 2024). 
3.5.4 Preparation and approval of the Annual Reports and Audited 
Accounts in selected DMFs 
This paragraph discusses the preparation and approval of the Annual Report and 
Audited Accounts for the selected DMFs, as referenced in detail in Part-A, para 
2.9.4. 
Audit reviewed the preparation of Annual Accounts and the Annual Report and 
its approval at the five DMFs. Based on information provided, Audit observed 
that the Accounts of the DMFs for the period 2016-17 to 2022-2322 were audited 
by Chartered Accountants with delay ranging from one month to 40 months and 
the Annual Reports of the DMFs were approved with delay ranging from two 
to 44 months. 
Thus, the DMFs did not prepare and approve the Annual Reports and Audited 
Accounts in time as per provisions of the GDMF Rules. Further, it also resulted 
in delayed communication of the financial and physical performance of the 
DMF for the financial year to various stakeholders and general public. 
The replies of five DMFs on the observation was awaited (November 2024). 
3.5.5 Information, Education and Communication Activities  
As already discussed in para 2.9.3 of Part A of the Report, e very DMF shall 
maintain a website wherein certain basic information 23 must be provided and 
 
22  In this regard, information for the year 2023 -24 called (November 2024) for from DMF -SNU, 
Gandhinagar which is awaited. Therefore, the observation relates to the data for the period from 2016-
17 to 2022-23. 
23  Composition of the DMF including particulars of members of the GC and the EC, particulars of 
affected areas and affected people, quarterly contribution made to DMF, Agenda, minutes and action 
taken reports with respect to meetings of GC and EC, Annual Plan, Annual Report, Audit Report and 
implementation status or progress of all the plans, programmes and projects being undertaken by the 
DMF, including description of work, details of beneficiaries, estimated cost, name of implementing 
agencies, expected date of commencement and com pletion along with the Physical and Financial 
Progress Report of the approved plans, programmes and projects. 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
44 
updated on a periodic basis and shall include agenda, minutes and action taken 
reports with respect to meetings of the SLCC. 
Audit reviewed the website of the  five DMFs and observed (September 2023) 
that the following information/facts has not been made available on the website 
of the DMFs which led to partial compliance of GDMF Rules:  
• Agenda, minutes and action taken reports with respect to meetings of the 
EC and the GC were not uploaded on the individual DMF websites. 
However, this information was available on the DMF-SNU website which 
could be accessed only by employees of DMFs. Thus, the information about 
EC and GC of each DMFs was not available in public domain. 
• Annual Plan, Annual Report and Audit Report were not available on the 
website of the individuals DMFs. 
Thus, the above lapses indicate that monitoring and evaluation of the 
implementation of the scheme by the selected DMFs was not adequate and 
ineffective. 
3.6 Conclusion  
The Performance Audit highlighted several issues in the implementation of the 
PMKKKY. Firstly, non-updation of lists of Directly Affected Villages, along 
with the non -identification of Indirectly Affected Villages and beneficiaries, 
hindered the effective welfare of communities impacted by mining activities. 
As a result, the funds generated by District Mineral Fou ndations (DMFs) for 
PMKKKY projects remained largely underutilized. Additionally, the 
Environmental Compensation Fund, meant to address the enviro nmental 
damage caused by illegal mining, also went unused. 
A comprehensive Social Audit is essential to assess the equitable distribution of 
benefits, the timely disbursement of payments, and the prompt completion of 
development projects under the Yojana. Since Social Audit was not conducted 
as per GDMF Rules 2016, it led to non -assessment of the social impact of the 
projects executed by the DMFs. 
When implementing the revised Gujarat DMF Rules, 2024, it is crucial to 
address these shortcomings to enhance the effectiveness of the Yojana. 
3.7 Recommendations  
 
Recommendation 1: The DMFs should ensure the preparation of Annual 
Plans before the start of each financial year, in accordance with the GDMF 
Rules. 
 
Recommendation 2: The DMFs should establish a system to identify projects 
that address the needs of the broader public in mining -affected areas, 
ensuring the timely and effective utilization of DMF contributions. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
46 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix 
47 
 
 
List of the sample of selected Districts, Talukas and Gram Panchayats for detailed 
review under Performance Audit 
 (Referred to in Paragraph No. 1.5) 
List of Selected Districts, Blocks & Gram Panchayats 
District Block Gram Panchayat 
1. Bhavnagar 1. Umrala 1. Umarala 
2. Hadmatala 
3. Golarama 
2. Shihor 1. Jambala 
2. Piparla 
3. Juna jaliya 
3. Mahuva 1. Bhadra 
2. Nana Asarna 
3. Moda 
2. Devbhumi Dwarka 1. Kalyanpur 1. Khakhrada 
2. Kalyanpur 
3. Premsar 
2. Khmabhaliya 1. Dhrampur 
2. Kanchanpur 
3. Vinjalpar 
3. Dwarka  1. Gorinja 
2. Jam batisa 
3. Vasai 
3. Mehsana 1. Satlasna 1. Hadoi 
2. Samrapur 
3. Vedasama 
2. Vijapur 1. Devpura 
2. Sanghpur 
3. Dhanpuri (Ghatu) 
3. Becharji 1. Suraj 
4. Porbandar 1. Ranavav 1. Narena 
2. Digvijaygadh 
3. Yadotra 
2. Kutiyana 1. Bildi 
2. Vadala 
3. Dhruvada 
3. Porbandar 1. Pata 
2. Ambarama 
3. Kolikhada 
5. Surat 
 
 
 
 
1. Mandavi 1. Titoi 
2. Un 
3. Vankla 
2. Mahuva 1. Aamchak 
2. Jol 
3. Velanpur 
3. Bardoli 1. Vaghecha 
2. Kadod 
3. Miyavadi 
Appendix I 

Report No. 3 of 2025 (Implementation of PMKKKY including DMFTs in Gujarat) 
48 
 
 
Time taken for registration of District Mineral Foundation Trusts from the date of 
notification 
 (Referred to in Paragraph No. 2.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of District 
Mineral Foundation 
Date of 
Registration of 
Trust 
Time taken in months from the 
date of notification on 01.04.2016 
1 Ahmedabad 31.03.2017 12 
2 Amreli 08.07.2018 27 
3 Anand 19.05.2017 13 
4 Aravalli 27.03.2019 36 
5 Banaskantha 10.09.2018 29 
6 Bharuch 28.03.2017 12 
7 Bhavnagar 29.09.2016 06 
8 Botad 29.09.2016 06 
9 Chhotaudepur 22.12.2016 9 
10 Dahod 27.05.2017 14 
11 Devbhumidwarka 05.10.2018 30 
12 Gandhinagar 16.02.2018 22 
13 Girsomnath 12.07.2017 15 
14 Jamnagar 21.06.2018 27 
15 Junagadh 12.06.2017 14 
16 Kachchh 05.01.2017 9 
17 Kheda 07.04.2017 12 
18 Mehsana 20.04.2018 23 
19 Mahisagar 22.09.2017 18 
20 Morbi 20.09.2017 17 
21 Narmada 14.02.2017 10 
22 Navsari 03.08.2018 28 
23 Panchmahal 25.05.2017 14 
24 Patan 20.04.2020 48 
25 Porbandar 21.09.2017 18 
26 Rajkot 19.07.2017 15 
27 Sabarkantha 28.03.2018 24 
28 Surat 28.09.2017 18 
29 Surendranagar 23.08.2017 17 
30 Tapi 10.05.2017 13 
31 Vadodara 29.10.2016 7 
32 Valsad 18.07.2018 27 
 
Appendix II 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
49 
 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
AA Administrative Approval 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
CGM Commissioner of Geology and Mining 
DLPC District Level Purchase Committee 
DMF-SNU District Mineral Foundation, State Nodal Unit 
DMFT District Mineral Foundation Trust 
DPO District Planning Officer 
DSO District Sports Officer 
EA Executive Agency 
EC Executive Committee 
ECC Educational Ceramic Chart 
ECF Environmental Compensation Fund 
EE Executive Engineer 
GC Governing Council 
GDMF Gujarat District Mineral Foundation 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
GMRDS Gujarat Mineral Research and Development Society 
GR Government Resolution 
GSCBT Gujarat State Council of Blood Transfusion 
GWSSB Gujarat Water Supply & Sewerage Board 
IBM Indian Bureau of Mines 
ILMS Integrated Lease Management System 
IMD Industries and Mines Department 
MMDR Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
MPR Monthly Progress Report 
PIA Project Implementing Agency 
PMKKKY Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana 
PEE Physical Exercise Equipment 
R&B Roads & Buildings 
SLCC State Level Co-ordination Committee 
TDO Taluka Development Officer 
TS Technical Sanction 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/gujarat/en 
 
 
 
