 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Performance Audit on Integrated Financial 
Management System - Kerala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
(Performance Audit - Civil) 

 
 
 
 
 
 Report of the Comptroller and  
Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit on Integrated Financial  
Management System - Kerala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No.4 of 2025 
(Performance Audit-Civil) 
 
 

 
(i) 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Preface  (v) 
Executive summary  (vii) 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
Evolution of the Integrated Financial Management 
System-Kerala 1.1 1 
Organisational Structure 1.2 1 
System Architecture 1.3 2 
Modules of IFMS-K suite of applications 1.4 4 
Audit Objectives 1.5 5 
Audit Criteria 1.6 5 
Audit scope and methodology 1.7 5 
Acknowledgment 1.8 7 
Report structure 1.9 7 
CHAPTER II: PROJECT PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Introduction 2.1 9 
Shortfall in the conduct of review meetings 2.2 9 
Absence of Service Level Agreement and 
comprehensive documentation in implementation 
2.3 10 
Absence of physical and financial targets  2.4 11 
Absence of specific Head of Account for booking 
expenditure 2.5 12 
Failure to undertake Business Process Re -
engineering Exercise 2.6 12 
Deviations from Agile principles in Project 
development 2.7 13 
Absence of documentation on legacy data migration 2.8 14 
Absence of mechanism for Acceptance Testing 2.9 15 
Non-development of modules envisaged in 
Functional Requirement Specification 2.10 15 
Non–development of functionality based on 
requirements 2.11 16 
Inadequacy of change management process 2.12 17 

 
(ii) 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Absence of Requirement Traceability Matrix and 
Performance Metrics 2.13 18 
CHAPTER III: BUDGET MANAGEMENT  
Introduction 3.1 19 
Deficiencies in the Automation/  Integration in the 
Budget Monitoring System (BMS) 
3.2 20 
Deficiencies in the Budget 2.0 application 3.3 21 
Deficiencies in the Budget Allocation and 
Monitoring System (BAMS) 
3.4 24 
CHAPTER IV: RECEIPT MANAGEMENT  
Introduction 4.1 31 
Unreconciled balances in pooling account of banks  4.2 32 
Non-development of functionality for auto - 
calculation of interest. 
4.3 33 
Deficiencies in defacement of challans 4.4 34 
Deficiencies in refund of E-challans 4.5 37 
Deficiencies in refund of M-challans (Manual 
Challan)  
4.6 39 
Other observations on refund of M-Challans 4.7 41 
CHAPTER V: EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT  
Introduction  5.1 43 
Deficiencies in the CoreTIS application 5.2 44 
Deficiencies in Bill Discounting System (BDS)  5.3 48 
Shortfalls in Human Resource Management System 
– SPARK 
5.4 50 
Deficiencies in Employee data management and 
salary processing 
5.5 53 
Irregular processing of salary of employees who 
retired/ superannuated, took voluntary retirement, 
died while in service, declared invalid from service 
5.6 57 
Absence of mechanism for monitoring of utili sation 
certificate of Grants-in-Aid  
5.7 57 
Deficiencies in Effective Management of Issuance of 
Letter of credit (EMLI) 
5.8 58 

 
(iii) 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
CHAPTER VI: ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT MANAGEMENT 
Introduction  6.1 59 
Risk due to execution of back end script for monthly 
e-Treasury accounts 
6.2 59 
Short/ Excess credit of SGST revenue due to non -
reconciliation of GST transactions 
6.3 60 
CHAPTER VII: CORE TREASURY SAVINGS BANK (TSB)  
Introduction 7.1 65 
Non-migration of Personal Deposit accounts from 
Treasury Information System to Treasury Savings 
Bank 
7.2 65 
Non-updation of ‘Know Your Customer’ details in 
Treasury Savings Bank 
7.3 66 
Passing of cheques without signature verification 7.4 67 
Absence of Maker-Checker process for transactions 
below ₹50,000 
7.5 68 
Non-adherence of RBI directions on validity of 
cheques 
7.6 69 
Lack of validation control resulted in negative 
balance in various accounts 
7.7 69 
Lack of system control for the operations of Personal 
Deposit accounts and closure of inoperative accounts 
7.8 70 
Incorrect resumption of funds from TSB Accounts to 
common head of account 
7.9 71 
CHAPTER VIII: INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY 
CONTROLS 
Introduction 8.1 73 
Non-conducting of System testing by third party 8.2 74 
Non-reception of Safe to Host Certificate 8.3 74 
System permits Multiple Login 8.4 74 
Usage of unsupported DB2 Data base Management 
System 
8.5 75 
Delay in implementation of Single Sign-On 8.6 75 
Non-identification as Critical Information 
Infrastructure 
8.7 76 
Non-formulation of Data Retention Policy 8.8 77 

 
(iv) 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Absence of Business continuity/ Disaster 
management plan 
8.9 77 
Ineffectiveness of software error reporting 
mechanism 
8.10 80 
Absence of Database Administrator 8.11 81 
Non-levy of liquidated damage charges from 
Database Administrator service provider 
8.12 82 
Appendices 85 
Glossary of Abbreviations 141 
 
 

 
(v) 
 
PREFACE 
 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India for the year ended March 202 3 has been prepared 
for submission to the Governor of Kerala under Article 
151(2) of the Constitution of India, for being laid before 
the State Legislature. 
This Report contains the results of Performance Audit on 
Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
covering the period from 2016-17 to 2022-23. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those which  
came to notice in the course of the Performance Audit 
conducted during April 2022 to June 2023, September 
2023 to October 2023 and June 2024 to July 2024.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
(vii) 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Why we did this Audit? 
The Integrated Financial Management System-Kerala (IFMS-K) is a web based 
financial accounting system developed by National Informatics Centre (NIC) to 
achieve effective financial management of the State by integrating financial 
transaction of Government with all stakeholders such as Finance Department, 
Treasury Department, Administrative and Line Departments, Accountant 
General (Accounts & Entitlement), Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Banks. 
The project was expected to make budgeting processes more efficient, improve 
cash flow management, strengthen Management Information Systems, improve 
accuracy and timeliness in accounts preparation, bring about transparency and 
efficiency in public delivery systems, better financial and Human Resource 
management etc. 
Considering the importance of IFMS -K in rendering data to Government on a 
real time basis for monitoring and for policy making, CAG took up this 
Performance Audit covering the activities during 2016-23.  Of the ten modules, 
five modules viz., Budget Management, Receipt Management, Expenditure 
Management, Accounts and Audit Management and Core Treasury Savings 
Bank (CoreTSB) were selected for scrutiny.  The objectives of this Audit were 
to ascertain whether (1) project planning, system development and 
implementation procedures were adequate and effective  (2) objective of the 
system to bring effective financial control over budget allocation, receipt and 
expenditure management of the State Government was achieved and (3)  
Information System Controls and Security Controls in place were adequate and 
effective in asset safeguarding and ensuring data integrity and provide for secure 
and uninterrupted treasury operations. 
What we found? 
Due to absence of a Service Level Agreement (SLA), the government could not 
provide a strong foundation for the implementation of the project. Review 
meetings chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary (Finance) entrusted with the 
implementation of the project, became the forum for raising Change Requests 
based on stakeholder inputs. These review meetings failed to manage the project 
effectively, as documentation regarding the status of change requests and 
actions taken remained unavailable, leading to dependence o n the System 
Integrator.  
Contrary to the envisaged Software Development Life Cycle model, the 
modules continued to be developed in a piecemeal manner by NIC extending 
over a period of eight years. The decisions taken during the IFMS -K review 
meetings were relied upon as the sole action points for further development. 
Audit found that the details in respect of data migration tools employed and log 
analysis were not available with the department. Signed pre-migration and post-
migration reports confirming the completeness of migration, exception reports 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
(viii) 
(errors/ integrity error reports) generated during data migration and its 
rectification and confirmation obtained by treasuries were also not available. 
Acceptance Test Plan was not prepared and there was no secure test 
environment segregated from the development and p roduction environments. 
No third -party professional testing agency was entrusted with the Final 
Acceptance Testing. 
Strong Room Operation Management and Liability Management sub module s 
which are part of fund management were not developed. Out of the 251 
requirements specified in the approved Functional Requirements Specification, 
100 requirements were not developed. These requirements were not addressed 
during the IFMS review meetings also.  
Kerala Treasury Code/ Kerala Financial Code and budget manuals were not 
amended to align with re-engineered business processes. Thus, the government 
failed to form an action plan on Business Process Re -engineering and amend 
Codal provisions prior to making systemic changes. 
The process of budget preparation is not fully automated in Budget Monitoring 
System application and the access to it has been limited to the Chief Controlling 
Officers level. The Budget 2.0 application lacked  validation control to restrict 
the additional authorisation up to the savings in other units of appropriation. The 
modification subsequently made by AG (A&E) in the expenditure figures were 
not reflected in Budget 2.0 application.  
The system lacked validation control to prevent re -appropriation of excess/ 
savings from one unit of appropriation to another, or resumption of funds 
surrendered by the Controlling/ Disbursing officers after the close of the 
financial year. There is no provision in the system to analyse probable savings 
within the grant and to calculate supplementary demands for Grant required for 
regularising the additional authorisation. 
Budget Allocation and Monitoring System database showed that the system 
allowed booking of negative figures in  respect of budget ‘Allotted Amount’ 
under specified ‘Head_ID’s. Negative figures in the Budget allotted amount 
were noticed in 11 instances in respect of 10 DDOs. 
The functionality of auto calculation of penal interest for delayed credit of 
money to government account by agency banks has not been developed. Timely 
defacement of challans is not done and o nly 44 per cent of challans have been 
defaced. No time limits are set for processing refund applications and 31 per 
cent of applications are pending disposal. 
Expenditure module had deficiencies, such as the absence of sanction orders or 
proceedings within the system due to which the Treasury had to rely on physical 
copies of the bills for processing payments.  The HR application - SPARK 
contained inconsistent and invalid data which defeated the objective of the 
system. 

Executive Summary 
 (ix)   
In the Accounts and Audit module, there existed  a risk due to unprofessional 
backend access to the database, which allowed stored procedures to be executed 
by manually editing ‘date’ variables. The system is not capable of reconciling 
GST transactions which resulted in unreconciled amount of GST. 
Core Treasury Savings Bank module had deficiencies, such as the non -
migration of accounts from TIS to TSB and the lack of system controls for 
closing inoperative PD accounts. Negative balances were noticed in 3 ,136 
accounts maintained in TSB. Non-capturing of KYC details for accounts, issues 
in signature verification and absence of maker-checker process for transactions 
below ₹50,000 increased the likelihood of unintentional errors and possibility 
of malpractices during the operation of these accounts.  
Government failed to carry out third -party independent testing and did not 
conduct a security audit for any IFMS-K applications. Also, the system 
permitted multiple logins across various web -based applications. The state 
budget application was operating on an unlicensed version of DB2. No Database 
Administrator was available and the Business Continuity/ Disaster Management 
Plan was also not devised.  
What we recommend? 
We have made 46 recommendations as given below: 
PROJECT PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION 
➢ Government should initiate the process to conduct Business Process Re-
engineering and complete it in a timely manner to ensure synergy between 
existing processes and new processes. 
➢ Government should fix timelines for implementation of various 
functionalities of the different functionalities in IFMS-K. 
➢ Government should formulate a Requirement Traceability Matrix and a 
Performance SLA to ensure timely completion of requests raised and assure 
minimum performance standards. 
BUDGET MANAGEMENT 
➢ Government should initiate the automation of the BMS and its integration 
with the Budget application in a timely manner. 
➢ Government may augment the budget module to accurately identify savings 
within grants and develop a system to monitor and track any additional 
authorisations to ensure timely regularisation of expenditure. 
➢ Government should initiate steps to automate budget module to continuously 
track and update figures in the heads of accounts while keeping a trail of the 
changes made. Figures booked by the AG (A&E) need to be captured in the 
budget module for improving efficiency and accuracy in the budgeting 
process. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
(x) 
➢ Government should establish a time frame for developing the functionality 
for additional fund request in the BAMS at the DDO/ SCO level. 
➢ Government should conduct a review of all reports generated by the BAMS 
to ensure that they align with requirements and accurately reflect financial 
data. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for opening the new sub head under the 
Public Works Deposit head for improved transparency and precise tracking 
of funds. 
RECEIPT MANAGEMENT 
➢ Government should develop a functionality to periodically secure account 
statements from banks via the e-Treasury system  to enable system based 
cross verification, auto detection of transaction errors and synchronised 
settlement. Government should recover the amount lying in the pooling 
accounts from the banks and responsibility may be fixed for not obtaining 
monthly statements and account statements. 
➢ Government should develop a functionality in IFMS-K to auto calculate and 
claim interest and liquidated damages from banks for delayed credit of 
money to Government account. 
➢ Government should modify the application to ensure that every challan 
defaced is stamped with unique defacement number and the total defaced 
amount do not exceed the challan amount. 
➢ Application's self-sufficiency may be ensured by including comprehensive 
reporting on refund requests to identify lapses and take corrective actions. 
GRN needs to be included in receipts generated by integrated departments.   
➢ Government should fix a time frame for refund procedures on sale of stamps 
to be made online. 
➢ Government should implement a functionality in IFMS-K to provide partial 
refund in the Treasury so that the concerned departments can draw bills only 
for the sanctioned amount. 
➢ Government should develop a functionality  in IFMS -K to map the DDO 
codes while accepting the challans through the CREDIT. 
EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT 
➢ Government should implement a validation system to ensure completeness 
of data and documents before submission, reducing errors and improving 
process efficiency.   
➢ Government should upgrade the CoreTIS application to incorporate facilities 
to allow the Treasury Officer to monitor pending bills at the Accountant 
level, access detailed reports on bill status and required actions, and review 
Accountant objections to ensure accountability and prevent delays. 

Executive Summary 
 (xi)   
➢ Government should fix a time frame for integration of SPARK with treasury 
systems for efficient DDO-DSC approval. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for software modification to ensure 
uploading of sanction order for passing bills. 
➢ Government should strengthen the system to prevent the issuance of advance 
bills in violation of the guidelines and implement automatic interest charges 
for delayed settlement of advances. 
➢ The system should be updated to ensure that bills are not routed through BDS 
when the original debit head pertains to a deposit head of account. 
➢ A separate weekly report of unsettled bills may be generated with detailed 
bill s pecifications, DDO information, and an age analysis to prioritise 
overdue cases. 
➢ Government should implement validation checks to ensure data consistency 
and accuracy by enforcing unique identifiers ( e.g., PEN and GPF numbers) 
and validating mandatory fields like PAN. 
➢ Government should implement validation check to ensure that e -TSB 
accounts are created only once per unique PEN. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for integration of SPARK with software 
of KPSC for recording details of departmental exams. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for software modification to restrict the 
LWA period to five years. 
➢ Government should implement a functionality in SPARK to mark end of 
service event in employee data and to process further payments to ex -
employees only after this is specifically permitted by the DDO in the system. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for updation of the EMLI application to 
capture additional information. 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT MANAGEMENT 
➢ Government should enhance the IFMS -K system to enable automatic 
reconciliation of scrolls from the RBI and GSTN, facilitating the generation 
of a Memorandum of Error. 
CORE TREASURY SAVINGS BANK  
➢ Government should take necessary action to reconcile and  migrate data to 
TSB in a time-bound manner. 
➢ Government should initiate action to mandatorily update the KYC details of 
customers in TSB system. 
➢ Government should update the system by making it mandatory to capture the 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
(xii) 
signature of all customers in the database and ensure that cheques are passed 
only after verification against signature captured. 
➢ Government should initiate action to enable maker -checker process for 
transactions below ₹50,000 in TSB system  to prevent unauthorised or 
fraudulent transactions. 
➢ Government should implement measures to prevent negative balances in 
TSB accounts in order to curb fraudulent transactions and proper testing 
needs to be conducted to ensure the same. 
➢ Governement should initiate action to specifically accomodate all the 
operations of PD accounts in IFMS-K. 
➢ Government should update the  TSB module , so that on resumption the 
amounts are credited to the concerned heads of account  from where the 
expenditure was initially incurred. 
INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY CONTROLS 
➢ Government should limit user sessions to single login per account and a 
single account from a computer at a time to enhance security. 
➢ Government should fix a timeline for completing the data migration and 
ensure supported Database Management Systems are used. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame to notify IFMS -K as a Critical 
Information Infrastructure. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame to implement a Data Retention Policy. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame to establish a far DR and also for settling 
the claim of NIC. 
➢ Government should fix a time frame for Disaster Recovery Plan. 
➢ Periodic DR drills may be scheduled, conducted and recorded and post-drill 
analysis may be undertaken to review the lessons learned. 
➢ A ticket based online issue reporting mechanism should be designed for 
entire suite of applications in IFMS -K, categorising issues based on nature 
and urgency and fixing timeline for resolution. 
➢ Government may expedite follow-ups with the firm and promptly recover the 
amounts due by enforcing contractual obligations. 
Government’s response to audit recommendations 
Government, while responding to the Audit observations, assured necessary 
corrective action wherever required. Audit acknowledges and apprecia tes the 
corrective action taken/ proposed by the Government to bring required controls 
and facilities in IFMS-K to address issues pointed out in this report. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 

 
 
 

 
1 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Evolution of the Integrated Financial Management System -
Kerala  
Department of Finance (DoF) of Government of Kerala (GoK) is the custodian 
of State exchequer and is responsible for (i) overall management of State 
finances from budget preparation to allocation, (ii) budget control through 
continuous monitoring of expenditure and revenue and (iii) ensuring that debt 
obligations are met. The Directorate of Treasuries keeps accounts of receipts 
and payments made to/ by the State Government/ Departments and plays a key 
role in supporting the D epartment of Finance in passing bills as per budget 
provision and generation of monthly accounts. 
The computerisation of treasury processes in Kerala began in 2000 with a 
distributed standalone system called Treasury Information System (TIS) which 
laid the foundation for more advanced systems. By 2014, the State transitioned 
to a centralised system viz. Core Financial Management System (CFMS), 
significantly enhancing the efficiency and integration of financial operations. 
Building on the progress of CFMS, the Department of Finance launched the 
Integrated Financial Management System-Kerala (IFMS-K) project in 2015-16, 
aiming to further streamline and modernise treasury functions. IFMS-K aims to 
achieve effective financial management for the State by integrating the financial 
transactions of the State Government with all key stakeholders, including  
Department of Finance, Department of Treasuries, different Administrative and 
line Departments, Accountant General (Accounts & Entitlement) [AG(A&E)]1, 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), and various banks. The project aimed to enhance 
the efficiency of budgeting processes, improve cash flow management, 
strengthen Management Information Systems (MIS), ensure greater accuracy 
and timeliness in accounts preparation, promote transparency and efficiency in 
public delivery systems and improve financial and human resource 
management. 
1.2   Organisational Structure 
The Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Finance, leads and oversees the 
department at Government level, to ensure that implementation of the project 
aligns with the State's financial goals  and policies.  The Department of 
Treasuries, under the administrative control of the Department of Finance, plays 
a crucial role in the project, being primarily responsible for the receipt and 
payment of money on behalf of Government and maintaining accounts. 
 
1  Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
2 
1.3 System Architecture 
Development of the IFMS-K suite of applications was entrusted to the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). IFMS -K designed as a centralised web -based 
financial accounting system integrating transactions among the stakeholders 
and the public. Multiple Database Management Systems (DBMS) ranging from 
proprietary systems like IBM's DB2, which forms the backbone of all treasury 
applications to open-source alternatives such as PostgreSQL and Maria DB are 
brought together in IFMS -K. The network infrastructure compris es KSWAN, 
BSNL, Treasury Intranet, Railtel and the State Data Centre. IFMS -K provides 
access to users through web portals and mobile applications, serving both 
internal stakeholders and the public.  
The overall solution architecture of IFMS-K is given in Exhibit 1.1. 
  

Introduction 
 3   
Exhibit 1.1- Architecture of IFMS-K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: DPR on CFMS).  
Users/ 
Stakeholders 
Citizens/ Public 
• All Govt Departments  
• DoT 
•        Employees and        
       Pensioners 
• Other Departments 
Internal 
Stakeholders 
• Accountant General 
• RBI 
• Agency Banks 
• MoF (GOI) 
External 
Stakeholders 
State ICT policy, guidelines and strategy 
Budget 
Revenue 
Expenditure 
Stamp 
 Employee 
BDS 
Pensioner 
User 
Core TSB 
Expenditure 
Management 
Accounts and 
Audit 
Management 
Cash 
Management 
Fund 
Management 
Stamp 
Management 
User 
Management 
Databases 
Delivery 
Channel 
 IFMS 
Applications 
Portals 
Treasuries 
Integrated 
departments 
applications 
Mobile 
applications 
Network 
Infrastructure 
KSWAN 
 BSNL 
 Treasury 
Intranet 
State Data 
Centre 
RAILTEL 
Modules and Database 
Modules 
Guidelines/ 
Framework 
State government Rules/ Policies, Codal Provisions 
like Budget manual, Treasury Code, Account Code, 
Circulars and GOs 
System 
integrators and 
developers 
Portal developed and managed by NIC 
based on inputs from Finance and treasury 
for IFMS applications. 
Portal developed and managed by various System 
Integrators based on inputs from concerned 
Departments for integrated applications. 
 
Pension Management 
Budget 
Management 
Receipt 
Management 
Core TSB 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
4 
1.4 Modules of IFMS-K suite of applications 
To ensure interaction between multiple systems within the departments 2 and 
with other stakeholding departments/  agencies, and to promote a unified 
approach to managing the State’s finances , t en modules were developed in 
IFMS-K suite of applications  based on basic functionality and 18 applications 
were developed under these modules. The modules and their applications are 
given in Table 1.1.  
Table 1.1 
Statement showing various modules and its applications 
Sl. 
No. 
Modules Applications 
1. Budget Management BMS (Budget Monitoring System) 
Budget 2.0 
BAMS (Budget Allocation and Monitoring System) 
2. Receipt Management e-Treasury 
CREDIT (Cash Remittance and Deposit in Treasury) 
3. Expenditure 
Management 
BIMS (Bill Information and Management System) 
SPARK (Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for 
Kerala) 
CoreTIS (Core Treasury Information System) 
EMLI (Effective Management of Issuance of Letters of 
Credit) 
BDS (Bill Discounting System) 
4. Accounts and Audit 
Management 
iAMS ( Integrated Accounts Management System)  - 
(middleware solution for pushing data to the VLC and 
rendering accounts to AG)  
5. Cash Management WaMS (Ways and Means System) 
iSoFT (Information System of Financial Transactions) 
6. Fund Management e-Ledger (Electronic Ledger Management System)  
7. Core Treasury 
Savings Bank 
Core TSB (Treasury Savings Bank)  
8. Pension Management PIMS (Pension Information and Management System) 
9. User Management  UMAS (User Management and Administration System) 
10. Stamp Management CRA (Central Record Keeping Agency) E-stamping 
 
2  Department of Finance and Department of Treasuries. 

Introduction 
 5   
1.5 Audit Objectives  
The Performance Audit (PA) on IFMS-K sought to ascertain whether: 
i. project planning, system development and implementation 
procedures were adequate and effective; 
ii. objective of the system to bring effective financial control over 
budget allocation, receipt and expenditure management of the State 
Government was achieved; and 
iii. Information System Controls and Security Controls in place were 
adequate and effective in asset safeguarding and ensuring data 
integrity and provide for secure and uninterrupted treasury 
operations. 
1.6  Audit Criteria  
The criteria for PA were derived mainly from 
▪ Kerala Financial Code  
▪ Kerala Treasury Code 
▪ Kerala Budget Manual 
▪ Kerala Service Rules 
▪ To-be and Functional Requirement Specification (FRS) document 
of IFMS-K 
▪ Generally accepted principles of Information Systems Governance, 
development and maintenance 
▪ Government Orders, Notifications, Guidelines and Circulars issued 
by the State Government/ Government of India from time to time. 
1.7 Audit scope and methodology 
The PA was conducted during April 2022 to June 2023, September 2023 to 
October 2023 and June 2024 to July 2024 covering the period 2016-17 to 2022- 
23. Audit focused on five modules and its 12 applications relating to Department 
of Finance and Department of Treasuries for detailed scrutiny.  
The module and application wise details are as given in Table 1.2. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
6 
Table 1.2 
 Modules and applications examined in Performance Audit 
Module Application Managed by 
Budget Management BMS 
Budget 2.0  
BAMS 
Department of Finance  
Receipt Management e-Treasury 
CREDIT 
Department of Treasuries  
Expenditure Management BiMS 
CoreTIS 
Department of Treasuries 
BDS 
SPARK 
EMLI 
Department of Finance 
Accounts and Audit Management iAMS Department of Treasuries 
Core TSB Core TSB 
Audit methodology included the following. 
• Analysis of documents related to project implementation 
• Analysis of data from the databases of selected modules 
• Analysis of application controls 
• Test check of records of selected treasuries  
Audit objectives, criteria and scope were discussed with the Principal Secretary, 
Department of Finance in an Entry Conference (June 2022). An Exit Conference 
was conducted (February 2023) with the Principal Secretary, Department of 
Finance and the findings were discussed. 
For detailed scrutiny, out of the 23 District Treasuries in the State, six 3 District 
Treasuries were selected based on expenditure booked for the period 2018 -21. 
124 sub-treasuries out of 61 sub -treasuries under the selected six District 
Treasuries were also selected. e-Treasury, being the online facility for revenue 
collection of GoK was also selected for scrutiny. Field units were visited to 
identify manual intervention due to incomplete integration and to gain insight 
on data collection process. 
 
3  District Treasury Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur, Kollam, Malappuram, Wayanad and Pala. 
4  Sub Treasury Kuravil angad, Kollam, Vythiri, Chelakkara, Wandoor, Meenachil, Varkala, 
Sulthan Bathery, Chavakkad, Perinthalmanna, Vellayambalam and Pension Payment Sub 
Treasury Kollam.  

Introduction 
 7   
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co -operation and assistance extended by the State 
Government and NIC in the conduct of this Performance Audit. 
1.9 Report structure  
The audit findings are grouped under the following chapters: 
➢ Chapter II :  Project Planning, Development and Implementation 
➢ Chapter III :  Budget Management 
➢ Chapter IV :  Receipt Management 
➢ Chapter V :  Expenditure Management 
➢ Chapter VI :  Accounts and Audit Management 
➢ Chapter VII :  Core Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) 
➢ Chapter VIII :  Information System Security Controls 
 

 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
PROJECT PLANNING, 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 

 
 
 

 
9 
CHAPTER-II 
PROJECT PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS -K) in Kerala, initiated by 
Government of Kerala and  led by the  Department of Finance , aimed to 
integrate all financial transactions relating to  Government of Kerala . The 
review meetings chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) of  
Department of Finance, entrusted with ensuring the implementation of the 
project, became the forum for raising Change Requests based on stakeholder 
inputs. These review meetings failed to manage the project effectively, as the 
status of change requests and actions taken on th e decisions were not 
documented, leading to continued dependence throughout the 
implementation on the System Integrator (SI)5. Government did not enter into 
a Service Level Agreement (SLA) with SI though such an agreement was 
executed for a similar project. Absence of comprehensive documentation led 
the project which commenced eight years ago to extend indefinitely.  
2.1 Introduction. 
The IFMS-K project aims to integrate all financial transactions of GoK in real-
time, and to ensure financial discipline. Evolving from the Core Financial 
Management System (CFMS) introduced in 2011 -12, IFMS-K was developed 
by the National Informatics Centre (NIC). IFMS Review Committee chaired by 
ACS, Department of Finance was formed to oversee all the aspects of project's 
implementation with the meetings required to be scheduled every week.  
2.2    Shortfall in the conduct of review meetings 
The review meetings were key to implementation of the project, ensuring 
adherence to timelines, addressing challenges, and making necessary 
adjustments. The deficiencies noticed in project management are discussed in 
the subsequent paragraphs.  
Audit noticed that d uring the three financial years from 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, 
only 30 review meetings were conducted against the requirement of 156 6 
meetings (19.23 per cent). Audit identified gaps of up to 10 months between 
consecutive meetings in two instances. It was also noticed that the decisions 
made in the review meetings were not periodically reviewed, and Action Taken 
Reports (ATR) on the decisions were not available in the department.  
Audit observed that the above shortfalls made  it difficult to measure actual 
completion of tasks against the set deliverables.  The implementation timeline 
was set by the Review Committee in April 2015 as 14 months , whereas the 
project is still ongoing. 
 
5  A system integrator helps combine different technologies into one working system.  
6  3 (years) x 52 (number of weeks in a year). 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
10 
Government stated (November 2024) that regular review committee meetings 
were conducted under the chairmanship of the Additional Chief Secretary, 
Department of Finance. In each such meeting, targets were fixed for each and 
every entity and the action taken was reviewed or discussed in the very next 
meeting. 
The reply is not tenable, as review meetings were not conducted in the frequency 
stipulated and documentation is not available regarding ATRs on decisions 
taken during the meetings. Further, the inordinate delay of eight years from the 
initial timeline set, clearly establishes the failure in monitoring the 
implementation effectively.  
2.3  Absence of  Service Level Agreement and comprehensive 
documentation in implementation 
NIC, being a Total Solution Provider  (TSP) and having developed treasury 
systems from 2004 , was entrusted with the development of IFMS -K without 
competitive tendering. Guidelines issued (September 2009) by the Information 
Technology Department on e -Governance initiatives implemented by 
Government departments stipulate that,  in case project is executed by TSP, a 
detailed Service Level Agreement (SLA) should be signed with the agency. The 
SLA must clearly specify in detail the scope of the work, deliverables with time 
schedule, monitoring mechanism for supervising the service levels, penalties for 
failure to deliver as per the prescribed SLAs and other requirements as specified 
in the guidelines.  
Audit noticed that: 
1) Government did not enter into SLA with NIC, in the absence of which 
key performance benchmarks viz., secure timely deliverables, timelines 
of project implementation, and monitoring mechanisms for supervising 
service levels were not established. This deficiency persisted throughout 
the implementation, as no such targets were set during review meetings 
also. 
 
2) The task of preparation of Functional Requirement Specification (FRS) 
was entrusted to SeMT 7 and NIC was advised to prepare System 
Requirement Specification (SRS) based on the FRS. Both FRS and SRS 
were to be completed by July 2015. Though FRS was prepared by SeMT 
and was approved in August 2015 , NIC did not prepare any SRS. In 
addition, Functional Audits could not be conducted by third party 
Auditor (STQC8) due to lack of SRS.  
The Administrative Reforms Commission, Government of Kerala also 
highlighted in its 11th report (January 2021)  that due to absence of SLA, 
penalties covering deliverables, timeframes and performance of applications 
delivered by TSP were not defined and the departments ended up in a 
disadvantageous situation after spending considerable amount of time and 
 
7  State e-Governance Mission Team. 
8  Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification Directorate.  

Project Planning, Development and Implementation  
11 
money. Failure to follow FRS resulted in modules envisaged therein not being 
developed as pointed in Paragraph 2.10 of this Report. 
Government stated (March 2023) that usually NIC does not execute SLA with 
the user departments and To-Be and FRS prepared by SeMT was not approved 
as it was not easy to develop the drastic changes in the modules necessitated due 
to change request from various domains. Government further stated (November 
2024) that on formulation of IFMS -K, SLA was not entered into and now the 
initial target points have been completed and applications started functioning in 
core environment.  
Government reply stating NIC does not execute SLA and To-Be and FRS 
prepared by SeMT was not approved is factually incorrect as NIC has executed 
(May 2014) SLA with Government of Kerala for the implementation of “e - 
District MMP in Kerala” and the FRS prepared by SeMT was approved in the 
review meeting (August 2015).  
2.4 Absence of physical and financial targets  
As per the adopted practice, NIC accesses the requirement on procurement of 
hardware and networking devices and software licences based on functional/ 
modification request from the stakeholders, which are further discussed in the 
review meetings. Thereafter, administrative sanction for incurring expenditure 
is accorded by the Department of Finance. The requirements raised by NIC were 
further referred to the Technical Committee and purchase is effected by 
tendering. As such, in the absence of SLA, physical as well as financial targets 
were not set by the Department. Similarly, such targets were not set in the 
review meetings also.  
The year -wise details of expenditure and component wise cost incurred for 
IFMS-K project is as detailed below in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1 
          Year wise Expenditure         Component wise cost incurred 
Period Expenditure  Component name Expenditure 
(₹ in crore)  (₹ in crore) 
Upto 2014-15 4.42 
 
Far Disaster Recovery site, 
Near Disaster Recovery site 
2.20 
2015-16 1.37  Hardware 3.22 
2016-17 1.64  Networking 1.53 
2017-18 3.65  Training 0.06 
2018-19 0.73  Software purchase 14.98 
2019-20     4.08  Security auditing/ testing 0.12 
2020-21 1.06 
 
Payment to NIC for 
developers 
8.85 
2021-22 9.30 
 
Database Administrator and 
System Administrator 
charges 
1.47 
2022-23 8.05  AMC 1.02 
 
Total 
 
34.30 
 Others 0.85 
 Total 34.30 
(Source: Calculated by Audit from the records made available). 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
12 
Total cost of the Project amounted to ₹34.30 crore (March 2023). Purchase of 
software for ₹14.98 crore (43.67 per cent) constituted the major share of the 
project. 
Absence of physical and financial targets hinders monitoring and evaluation of 
progress against the objectives of the project.  
2.5  Absence of specific Head of Account for booking expenditure 
List of Major and Minor Heads of Account 9 provides that the d etails of each 
Scheme/ Project/ Programme, etc., as the case may be, shall be indicated at the 
sub-head level below the standard minor head. Likewise, at the detailed head 
and object head levels, details of sub -schemes or activities and object of 
expenditure shall be indicated respectively.  
Audit observed that no specific sub -head of account  was allotted for meeting 
expenditure relating to the implementation of IFMS -K and the expenditure is 
being booked under Major heads of account 2054 -Treasury and Accounts 
Administration, 3451 -Secretariat-Economic services etc. In the absence of a 
separate sub-head of account, Audit could not ascertain the amount expended 
against the amount allotted for the project. 
Government stated (July 2023) that new sub -heads have been opened 10 for 
distinct classification of IFMS-K. The sub-heads were opened under the heads 
3451-00-090-88 and 2054-00-095-93.  
However, Audit observed that even though expenditure was booked under the 
head 2054-00-095-93 from the year 2023 -24 onwards, no expenditure is seen 
booked under the head 3451-00-090-88 till date (August 2024). 
2.6 Failure to undertake Business Process Re -engineering 
Exercise 
An organisation changing from a manual to a computerised environment would 
conduct a Business Process Re -engineering (BPR) exercise. BPR involves re-
engineering of the existing processes and introduction of new processes where 
necessary, to ensure synergy of these processes with electronic systems. 
The guidelines of Mission Mode Project issued by GoI (July 2010) on Treasury 
Computerisation envisaged that each State/ Union Territory  is required to 
prepare an action plan covering inter alia the changes required in procedures, 
practices, codes, manuals and laws such as provision for use of digital 
signatures, file formats, transfer of funds electronically etc., with explicit 
timelines to ensure achievement of these objectives. Accordingly, when 
amendment to Codal provisions is required, Government would first issue the 
Government Order and mention therein that updation of Codal provisions will 
be undertaken.   
 
9    Para 4.1 read with Note below para 3.1 of General Directions. 
10  GO(Rt) No.1318/2023/Fin dated 22 February 2023. 

Project Planning, Development and Implementation  
13 
Audit observed that neither Kerala Treasury Code, Kerala Financial Code and 
Kerala Budget Manual were amended to align with the re -engineering of the 
business process, nor any action plan was formed to amend codal provisions 
prior to making systemic changes. 
Government stated (November 2024) that treasury department will take 
necessary action to initiate the process to conduct BPR and complete it in a 
timely manner. 
Recommendation No. 1 
Government should initiate the process to conduct Business Process Re-
engineering and complete it in a timely manner to ensure synergy between 
existing processes and new processes. 
2.7  Deviations from Agile principles in Project development 
Government claimed that IFMS-K adopted the Agile11 Software Development 
Methodology, which allowed tasks identified in weekly review meetings to be 
discussed, finalised, and assigned for development in a continuous manner 
throughout the project lifecycle. However, it was seen that instead of following 
Agile methodology, the development of modules was done on an incremental 
basis on decisions made in  review meetings. This shift in methodology lacked 
formal task identification, prioritisation, and documentation. Thus, the project, 
which was initially proposed to be completed within two years , deviated 
significantly from the timeline resulting in incomplete modules and delays. 
Key deviations from Agile principles as outlined in the Agile IndEA Framework 
issued by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (2019), as 
identified by Audit, is given in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2 
Critical Elements and findings 
Sl. 
No. 
Deviations from Critical 
Elements in Agile 
methodology 
Remarks 
1. Absence of Timelines The project did not follow structured timelines, such 
as Agile “Waves and Surges,” leading to unstructured 
development cycles. 
2. Undefined Roles Critical roles like the Arch -Dev-Ops Process 
Engineer, essential for guiding Agile practices and 
coordination, were not defined. 
3. Lack of Iterative Records  No documentation of surges or iterations, their tasks, 
and completion timelines was maintained, 
undermining Agile's iterative approach. 
4. Lack of Backlog The absence of an updated product backlog hampered 
task prioritisation and adaptability. 
 
11  A project management approach that focuses on iterative development, where tasks are 
divided into small stages, allowing for continuous collaboration, feedback, and flexibility to 
adapt to changes throughout the project lifecycle. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
14 
Sl. 
No. 
Deviations from Critical 
Elements in Agile 
methodology 
Remarks 
5. Absence of Feedback 
Mechanism 
Regular workshops and stakeholder consultations  
vital for continuous feedback, were not conducted. 
6. Lack of Progress Tracking 
mechanism 
There was no mechanism to track progress through 
Key Performance Indicators  aligned with project 
goals. 
Government stated (November 2024) that at this stage of rollout of applications, 
it is not practically feasible to review the model being continued.  
The reply is not tenable as the absence of essential elements outlined in Agile 
IndEA framework has led to inefficienc ies and risks in implementation as 
brought out in Paragraphs 2.10 and 2.11. 
2.8 Absence of documentation on legacy data migration  
As per the Technical Guide on Data  Migration12, during legacy data migration, 
the tools were to be identified and tested, log was to be verified for errors and 
mitigation and  pre-migration and post -migration reports are to be generated 
confirming completeness of migration. The reports were to be signed by an 
authorised official along with the personnel from migration team. 
Audit noticed that the data from individual standalone servers ( Treasury 
Information System) in treasuries were migrated to the core treasury platform 
during the initial phase of IFMS -K. However, for migrating the  data, the 
treasury neither adopted a data migration technology / migration plan nor 
constituted a dedicated migration team with well -defined roles and 
responsibilities.   
Audit observed that details in respect of data migration tools employed , log 
analysis, signed pre -migration and post -migration reports confirming the 
completeness of migration  etc., were not available with the Department. 
Exception reports (errors/  integrity error reports) generated during data 
migration and rectification and confirmation obtained from treasuries were not 
available. Problems faced in IFMS -K due to data migration has been included 
in Paragraph 7.2 of this Report.  
Government stated (November 2024) that earnest efforts were taken by the 
treasury official to migrate error free data to the core platform. The reply is not 
tenable as the discrepancies related to data migration pointed out as stated above 
have not yet been resolved.   
 
12  Issued by Committee on IT, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.  

Project Planning, Development and Implementation  
15 
2.9 Absence of mechanism for Acceptance Testing 
Government of Kerala issued guidelines (September 2009) 13 for 
implementation of e-governance projects in the state which inter-alia provides 
for a proper mechanism for Acceptance Testing before deployment of 
applications in the production server as stated below:- 
(a)  The Acceptance Test Plan (ATP) shall be ready by the time the 
Application Software is developed. The test plan shall include sample 
data for testing and expected results and the plan should be approved 
by all relevant parties.  
(b)  The test environment should be secure and shall be segregated from 
the Development and the Production environment. The Acceptance 
testing shall be conducted by a team of functional experts nominated 
by the IT Division of the Department/ Organisation. 
c) The software developer shall not do the Final Acceptance Testing. The 
Final Acceptance Testing should be conducted by a third party who is 
a professional testing agency and should be selected through 
transparent tendering process.  
Audit scrutini sed the mechanism of testing of applications available and 
observed that criteria specified in the guidelines were not followed and no 
dedicated software testers were involved by NIC.  
Absence of such dedicated testers compromis ed the thoroughness and 
effectiveness of the testing process , which is evidenced by the existence of 
negative balance in Treasury Savings Bank accounts which has been 
commented in Paragraph 7.7 of this Report. 
Government stated (November 2024) that now for every new change to be 
made/ incorporated in the IFMS -K, acceptance testing against the Functional 
Requirement is being done and the occurrence of negative balance in the 
accounts is restricted now.  
The reply is not tenable as non-adherence to the guidelines, which mandated the 
engagement of a dedicated testing team and professional testing agency , 
adversely affected  the effective validation of the system's readiness and 
reliability.  
2.10  Non-development of modules envisaged in Functional 
Requirement Specification 
For the implementation of IFMS -K, the FRS prepared by SeMT, envisaged 
development of seven modules and NIC developed ten modules. The modules 
that were envisaged and the modules that were developed are as given in Table 
2.3. 
 
13  GO(P) No.24/2009/ITD. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
16 
Table 2.3  
Modules envisaged Vs Modules developed 
Sl. 
No. 
Modules Envisaged Sl. 
No. 
Modules Developed 
1 Budget Management 1 Budget Management 
2 Receipt Management 2 Receipt Management 
3 Stamp Management 
3 Expenditure Management 4 Expenditure Management 
5 Pension Management 
4 Accounts and Audit Management 6 Accounts Management 
5 Cash Management 7 Cash Management 
6 Fund and Liability Management 8 Fund Management 
7 Strong Room Operation 
Management 
9 Core TSB 
10 User Management 
(Source: FRS document). 
Audit noticed that the Liability Management sub module which was part of 
Fund Management module and the module for Strong Room Operation 
Management were not developed. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the sub module Liability 
Management And Strong Room Operation Management  have been kept in 
abeyance as far as treasury department is concerned. The reply is not tenable as 
absence of these  modules would lead to inefficiencies in tracking financial 
obligations and increased risk in treasury operations. 
 2.11  Non–development of functionality based on requirements  
Audit verified five modules in IFMS -K namely Budget module, Receipt 
module, Expenditure module, Accounts module and CoreTSB module.  Except 
CoreTSB, the other four modules are part of  FRS. On verification of the 
requirements for the four modules in FRS against the functionalities that are 
implemented in IF MS-K, it was noticed that many functionalities envisaged 
were not developed. The details are given in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4 
Number of functionalities not developed 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Module/ sub-modules No. of envisaged 
requirements 
No. of 
requirements not 
developed 
1 Budget Preparation, Resource 
estimation & Budget Approval 
71 37 
2 Budget Allocation 10 7 
3 Budget Re-appropriation/ Re-
Allocation 
26 12 

Project Planning, Development and Implementation  
17 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Module/ sub-modules No. of envisaged 
requirements 
No. of 
requirements not 
developed 
4 Receipt Online Collection 21 1 
5 Payment at Department’s counter/  
Field Officer/ FRIENDS 
11 2 
6 Refund 10 6 
7 Bill preparation and submission 27 9 
8 Bill processing and payment 24 8 
9 Accounts Preparation/ Compilation 51 18 
 Total 251 100 
(Source: FRS document). 
Out of the 251 requirements specified in the approved FRS, 100 requirements 
were not developed in IFMS -K. Additionally, these requirements were not 
addressed during the IFMS review meetings also. The shortfalls in IFMS-K due 
to non -development of these functionalities are discussed in the subsequent 
chapters. 
Government stated (November 2024) that some functionalities are under 
development stage and some items can be introduced in the long run with 
detailed discussion with the authorities concerned.  
Recommendation No. 2 
Government should fix timelines for implementation of various 
functionalities of the different functionalities in IFMS-K. 
2.12 Inadequacy of change management process  
In IT organisations, the change management process is normally used to manage 
and control changes to assets, such as software, hardware, and related 
documentation. Change controls are needed to ensure that all changes to system 
configurations are authorised, tested, documented and controlled so that the 
systems continue to support business operations in the manner planned, and that 
there is an adequate documentation of changes. 
Audit noticed that based on the decisions in the weekly review meetings, 
frequent changes  were made in the software versions. Audit observed that 
details such as the dates and reasons for carrying out version changes were not 
available on record. Further, there was no record of testing and acceptance of 
the amendments carried out in the software.  
Government stated (November 2024) that a change request procedure and 
standard operation procedure are under preparation for tracking the 
modifications in the software development.  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
18 
The reply is not tenable as change management process is essential to track 
future changes and for testing  and is an integral part in implementation of the 
project.  
2.13  Absence of Requirement Traceability Matrix and 
Performance Metrics  
Requirement Traceability Matrix ( RTM) is a document  that maps and traces 
user requirement with test cases. It captures all requirements proposed by the 
client and requirement traceability in a single document. Further, it is necessary 
that web applications respond quickly to the user request for efficient operation. 
This requires that the application, database and server components are designed 
and configured to deliver fastest response time which would be specified in the 
form of Performance metrics involving multiple factors14 in Performance SLA. 
Performance metrics based on uptime, service availability, response time, 
MTTR15  etc., were to be specified to regulate the performance under all possible 
ranges. 
Audit observed that neither RTM nor performance metrics assuring minimum 
specified performance was available for IFMS-K project. Absence of an RTM 
led to department not being able to readily ascertain the tasks pending 
development from time to time in terms of requirements. In the absence of 
RTM, Audit could not confirm whether all the requirements specified in the 
FRS or in change requests were finally brought into the application.  
Audit further observed that c riteria for monitoring application performance 
during normal course and peak load time should have been made as there are no 
yardsticks to assess performance of the system.  
Government stated (November 2024) that the treasury department will carry out 
the recommendations to formulate a RTM to ensure timely completion of 
requests raised by the department to NIC. Regarding absence of performance 
metrics, Government stated (March 2023) that the Treasury central server was 
upgraded on the recommendation of the technical committee after verification 
of analytical report in May 2022 as there were some performance issues reported 
which mainly affected transactions and data processing . Government further 
stated (November 2024) that the matter would be taken up with NIC.  
Recommendation No. 3 
Government should formulate a Requirement Traceability Matrix and a 
Performance SLA to ensure timely completion of requests raised and assure 
minimum performance standards. 
 
14  Transaction volume, CPU utilisation, response time ranges and number of users . 
15  Mean Time to Repair. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
BUDGET 
MANAGEMENT 

 
 
 

 
19 
CHAPTER-III 
BUDGET MANAGEMENT   
The objective of Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS-K) is to 
integrate Finance and Treasury management functions to ensure effective 
budgetary control in expenditure management. This could not be ensured 
as the budget estimation module was limited to Chief Controlling Officer 
(CCO) level and not integrated with Human Resources (HR) application 
and the entirety  of estimation was not automated. The Budget 2.0 
application could not accurately evaluate savings within the grant leading 
to excessive additional authorisations. Voucher Level Computerisation 
(VLC) System of Office of AG (A&E) was not integrated with the Budget 
2.0 application and the business rules were not properly mapped in the 
BAMS module leading to incurring expenditure without proper budget 
provisions. 
3.1 Introduction.  
IFMS-K aims to provide effective financial control over budget estimation, 
budgeting, and the allocation of the approved budget for the State 
Government. The core applications involved in this process are:  
➢ Budget Monitoring System (BMS ): Used for budget estimation, 
receiving proposals from the CCOs etc. 
➢ Budget 2.0 : Utilised by the Department of Finance for budget 
preparation, additional authorisation, supplementary demand for 
grant etc. 
➢ Budget Allocation and Monitoring System (BAMS) : Employed 
for allocating the budget up to Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
(DDO) level. 
The data flow in the budget applications starts with the Chief Controlling 
Officers (CCOs)  providing the budget estimates, to the Administrative 
Department through the BMS. The Department of Finance after scrutinising 
the estimates received through Administrative Departments, uploads the 
data into the Budget 2.0 for the preparation of the State Budget. Once the 
budget is passed by the Legislature, the allocation of the budget is managed 
through the BAMS up to the level of DDO. Budget data from the 
Department of Finance are also ported into the VLC system of Accountant 
General (A&E). Based on the allocated budget, DDOs raise bills and 
forward them to the respective Treasuries for processing and payment to the 
beneficiaries. The major/ sub-major head wise transaction data generated in 
each District Treasur y is electronically transferred by the Director of  
Treasuries monthly to AG (A&E). AG (A&E) then ports this data into 
different sets of tables in the VLC system. The AG (A&E) prepares the 
monthly Accounts (monthly Appropriation and monthly Civil Accounts) 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
20 
and Annual Accounts (Appropriation Accounts and Finance Accounts) of 
the State Government from the VLC data.  
The process of budget estimation and execution is given in Exhibit 3.1  
below: 
Exhibit 3.1 
Process of budget estimation and execution 
 
 
Budget estimates up to the CCO level are done manually 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
                                                    
3.2 Deficiencies in the A utomation/ Integration in the Budget 
Monitoring System (BMS) 
As per para 12 of Kerala Budget Manual (KBM), ‘Preparation of the budget’ 
marks the first of the budgetary stages which is a purely executive function. 
As per  circulars issued by Department of Finance, all Heads of Department 
(HOD) shall submit the budget estimates to the Department of Finance 
before mid-September that year. The HODs prepares estimates based on the 
estimates submitted by Regional/  District Officers and the Administrative 
Department, after scrutinising the estimates submitted by HODs, forward it 
to Department of Finance for further scrutiny. The Department of Finance 
captures this process through the BMS application of Budget module.  
Audit observed gaps in automation/  integration of budget preparation 
process in the BMS as given below:  
1)    Sub Controlling Officers (SCOs) and DDOs submit their estimates 
manually to CCOs, who consolidate them in prescribed formats and 
upload them into the BMS. Non-capture of estimates by the BMS from 
the primary level indicates incomplete automation of business rules. It 
was also noticed that the proposals for plan schemes are still submitted 
in physical formats, bypassing the BMS application entirely. 
2)    Since the BMS lacks integration with the Budget 2.0 application, the 
Department of Finance manually download s departmental estimates 
 
DDOs 
Chief 
Controlling 
Officer (CCOs) 
Administrative 
Department/ 
Department of 
Finance  
 
Legislature 
Sub 
Controlling 
Officers 
(SCOs) 

Budget Management  
21 
figures from the BMS, scrutinises them, and issue s final orders 16 on 
Part I and Part II estimates by January and re -uploads into the Budget 
2.0 as proposals. Before issuing final orders, the estimation is 
required17 to be communicated to Administrative Departments for 
seeking subsequent proposals, if any. The communication of estimates 
and subsequent proposals between the Department of Finance and 
Administrative Departments are conducted manually, highlighting 
significant gaps in automation and system integration. 
Government stated (November 2024) that steps are being taken to address 
the deficiencies with the authorities concerned and to devise a long -term 
solution. The workflow for integrating the BMS with the Budget 3.0 to 
capture proposals has been prepared and is in the developmental stage, with 
implementation expected in the near future. 
The reply is not tenable as automation/ integration of budget preparation 
process was to be incorporated at the implementation stage itself and in a 
comprehensive manner. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Government should initiate the automation of the BMS and its integration 
with the Budget application in a timely manner. 
3.3  Deficiencies in the Budget 2.0 application    
Budget 2.0 is the application for preparing the Budget of the Kerala 
Government. This software manages budget activities like Budget 
Estimation, Preparation of Budget, Preparation of Budget Documents, and 
post budget activities like Additional Authorisation, Supplementary 
Demands for grants , Contingency Fund Management, Re-appropriation of 
Funds, Resumption, Regularisation of Funds, surrender of savings and 
preparation of Alteration Memorandum. 
The final approved estimates prepared by Department of Finance  are 
manually entered into the Budget 2.0 application as estimate against 
proposals and then the Annual Finance Statement and supporting documents 
are generated. 
Prior to the financial year 2021 -22, expenditure amounts were manually 
entered into the Budget system, based on data furnished by the CCOs 
concerned. In 2021-22, a new feature was implemented in the Budget system 
for automatically capturing expenditure figures from the BAMS. Therefore, 
the audit analysis of the Budget data covers the financial years 2021-22 and 
2022-23 only.  The deficiencies noticed are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
16   Para 50 of KBM. 
17   Para 48 of KBM. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
22 
3.3.1  Limitation of the system in restr icting Additional 
Authorisation  
Para 95(3) of the Kerala Budget Manual  stipulates that when an additional 
appropriation is required urgently and no savings are foreseen, the authority 
concerned should apply to the Administrative Department in Government 
for permission to incur the expenditure. The Administrative Department with 
the concurrence of the Department of Finance , authorises the expenditure, 
and informs the Accountant General, through the  Department of Finance , 
that provision will be made later, either by re-appropriation, or by obtaining 
a supplementary grant. The grant as a whole should not be exceed ed before 
the supplementary grant has been made by the Legislature.  
Authorisation of additional funds and re -appropriation of budget is carried 
out by the Budget Section in Department of Finance based on the requests 
received from HODs/  COs after obtaining approvals from respective 
Administrative Departments. The fund so authorised is released through the 
Budget 2.0 application. 
Audit verified the data in demand table18 of the Budget 2.0 application 
database and found that in the capital head for the year 2021-22 under Grant 
XII – Police, the expenditure exceeded the overall grant even though the 
additional expenditure was not regularised by the Legislative Assembly 
under seven heads as given in Appendix 3.1. 
Audit observed that the Budget 2.0 application lacks validation controls to 
restrict additional authorisation up to the limit of savings available in other 
units of appropriation, after the final session of the Legislative Assembly for 
the financial year has been concluded. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the Additional authorisation is 
being provided for incurring expenditure against unavoidable items for 
which immediate savings could not be located for re -appropriation. 
However, all possibilities shall be explored to develop modules in budget 
and the BAMS applications for avoiding the occurrences of excess grant due 
to non-regularisation of additional expenditure incurred. 
The reply is not tenable, as proper validation controls would have ensured 
that expenditure under a specific head of account does not exceed the overall 
grant and the system should restrict the expenditure under a head up to the 
savings available for re-appropriation. 
Recommendation No. 5    
Government may augment the budget module to accurately identify 
savings within grants and develop a system to monitor and track any 
additional authorisations to ensure timely regularisation of expenditure. 
 
18  Table that captures head-wise approved grant, re-appropriation, supplementary grant, 
expenditure, additional expenditure etc. 

Budget Management  
23 
3.3.2 Absence of controls to validate and limit expenditure in 
salary heads  
Audit noticed that no validation control existed to check for budget 
availability prior to incurring expenditure in salary heads resulting in excess 
expenditure. The excess expenditure incurred during 2021 -22 attributed to 
salary heads are detailed in Appendix 3.2. 
Government stated (November 2024) that as per GO(P) No.49/74/Fin dated 
01 March 1974, excess disbursement relating to salaries, wages and pension 
is exempted from the purview of appropriation on the good intention that 
payment under these items should not be interrupted for want of funds. 
However, a more realistic approach shall be taken in budget estimation to 
avoid excess expenditure against budget provision under these items. 
The fact remains that Government has failed to tap into the potential of the 
data available in SPARK for predicting trends in salary disbursement.  
3.3.3 Discrepancy between e xpenditure in the books of  
Accountant General (A&E) and Budget Data    
The AG (A&E) prepares Monthly Accounts from the electronic data 
rendered by the Directorate of Treasuries. Adjustments to expenditure are 
made by AG (A&E) through Transfer Entries based on requests from the 
Treasuries. Recovery of Overpayments (ROP), reflected as negative 
expenditure, is carried out by the Directorate of Treasuries after expenditure 
has been incurred under the respective head. AG (A&E) also undertakes 
annual adjustments for specific heads of accounts. Since re -appropriation is 
done through the Budget 2.0 application, the final expenditure booked under 
each head of account by AG (A&E) must align with the figures in the Budget 
2.0 to ensure accurate re-appropriation. 
Audit cross -checked the expenditure data captured in the Budget 2.0 
application with that of Books of Accounts maintained by AG (A&E) for the 
year 2021-22 and 2022 -23 and noticed that out of 7,263 heads of account, 
2,653 heads showed discrepancies between the expenditure amount booked 
by AG (A&E) and the Budget 2.0 data. In 14 of these heads, the differences 
exceed ₹50 crore. Audit test checked these 14 heads of account and found 
that the discrepancies were due to non -capturing of Recovery of 
Overpayment (ROP) booked by Treasuries and modifications/ alterations 
made by AG (A&E) through Transfer entries in the Budget 2.0.  
Illustrative cases:  
1. 5054-03-337-97 Kerala State Transport Project (World Bank 
Aided): Difference due to Transfer Entry by AG 
The expenditure shown under the head 5054-03-337-97 Kerala State 
Transport Project (World Bank Aided) in the Budget 2.0 for 2021 -22 was 
₹644.54 crore. However, the books of AG (A&E) recorded only ₹391.64 
crore, resulting in a discrepancy of ₹252.90 crore. Audit analysis revealed 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
24 
that AG (A&E) made a Transfer Entry, as per th e letter from the District 
Treasury Officer, to transfer back an amount of ₹252.90 crore to this head 
which was initially credited under the head 2075. This overstatement of 
expenditure in the Budget 2.0 could have been avoided if there is integration 
between the Budget 2.0 and the VLC.  
2. 2700-01-800-99 Interest and pension on Capital expenditure:  
Annual adjustment by AG 
As per books of AG (A&E), ₹8.57 crore and ₹9.00 crore were booked under 
the head 2700 -01-800-99 in 2021-22 and 2022-23 respectively. But no 
amount of expenditure was shown in the Budget 2.0 for these heads. These 
amounts represent the pension and interest contributions of Departmental 
Commercial Undertakings which were adjusted by AG (A&E) as Annual 
Adjustment. 
From the above it can be concluded that the modification subsequently made 
by AG (A&E) in the expenditure figures are not reflected in the Budget 2.0 
application. As IFMS-K system could not ascertain the exact savings under 
the heads, savings were not surrendered. Illustrative cases of savings which 
were not surrendered during 2021 -22 and 2022-23 is detailed in Appendix 
3.3. 
Government stated (November 2024) that for recovery of overpayment, a 
new feature has been developed for CCOs in the BAMS.  
The reply is not tenable as Government has not developed any system for 
integration of the final expenditure booked by AG (A&E) with the budget 
figures.  
Recommendation No. 6 
Government should initiate steps to automate budget module to 
continuously track and update figures in the heads of accounts while 
keeping a trail of the changes made and figures booked by the AG (A&E) 
need to be captured in the budget module for improving efficiency and 
accuracy in the budgeting process. 
3.4 Deficiencies in the Budget Allocation and Monitoring 
System (BAMS) 
After Budget is passed and Appropriation Bill is enacted, Administrative 
Departments, in consultation with the Department of Finance , divide the 
appropriation against each head of account among Chief Controlling 
Officers (CCOs) concerned. CCOs allocate the grants to SCOs and SCOs to 
DDOs as per requirement in due course. DDOs are responsible for making 
expenditure within the allocated amount. The distribution of budget 
provision is being done through a web-based application, namely the BAMS. 
BAMS envisages online allocation  of budget provision up to the level of 
DDO. The deficiencies noticed in the BAMS application are given below:  

Budget Management  
25 
3.4.1 Absence of functionality for Additional Fund request in 
the BAMS  
After the initial allotment to SCO/ DDO, subsequent release of funds by the 
CCOs are based on request from the DDO/ SCO for meeting the expenditure. 
When the amount provided under a unit is insufficient, expenditure can be 
incurred through re -appropriation or through additional authorisation of 
funds. 
Audit noticed that no functionality exists in the BAMS module for making 
request for re-appropriation, additional authorisation, surrender or 
resumption of funds  by the DDOs/  SCOs. Whenever additional fund is 
required, DDOs/ SCOs make request for balance funds  by way of 
correspondence through letter/  e-mail to their respective Administrative 
Departments and the Administrative Department approaches the Department 
of Finance  through e -office for sanctioning funds either through re -
appropriation or through additional authorisation . Lack of functionality for 
post-budgetary activities in the IFMS -K prevented DDOs from submitting 
proposals for additional funds through the system and hindered CCOs from 
ensuring the availability of funds within the Grant for re-appropriation. 
Government stated (November 2024) that an additional fund request module 
in the BAMS for online submission of additional authorisation proposals 
from CCO to the Finance Department has already been developed and is 
under testing stage. The scope of extending the facility to DDOs/  SCOs for 
submission of proposals to CCO will be examined. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Government should establish a time frame for developing the functionality 
for additional fund request in the BAMS at the DDO/ SCO level. 
3.4.2 Non-mapping of Business Rules of Kerala Budget Manual 
in the BAMS  
As per Para 84 of the Kerala Budget Manual, the Department of Finance 
holds exclusive powers for re -appropriation between minor heads within a 
grant, while re-appropriation between subordinate heads under a minor head 
is delegated to Administrative Departments and Chief Controlling Officers. 
Para 93(1) states that re-appropriation and resumption of savings can only be 
ordered by the competent authority until the end of the financial year. 
Audit noticed: 
• that currently all re-appropriation/ additional authorisation/ surrender of 
funds even between subordinate heads are done by the Department of 
Finance. The system is not allowing re -appropriation of funds between 
subordinate heads by Administrative Department/  CCOs, though there 
is provision for it in Kerala Budget Manual. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
26 
• on verifying re -appropriation and surrender data from the VLC, that 
more than 75 per cent of re-appropriation and more than 90 per cent of 
surrender entries were made after the close of the financial year. The re-
appropriation and surrenders effected during 2021 -22 and 2022-23 are 
given in Table 3.1 below. 
Table 3.1 
Reappropriation Orders 
 
Surrender Orders 
From To No. of 
orders 
No. of 
entries 
 
From To No. of 
orders 
No. of 
entries 
01-04-2022 31-03-2023 339 1,258  01-04-2022 31-03-2023 3 483 
After the close of the FY 
01-04-2023 to  
30-06-2023 
70 3,781  
After the close of the FY 
01-04-2023 to  
30-06-2023 
68 13,773 
(Source: The VLC data of AG (A&E)). 
Government replied (November 2024) that: 
• the delegation of re-appropriation powers is currently limited due to 
technical constraints in the Budget 3.0 and the BAMS systems, but 
the Department of Finance is developing a new module in the BAMS 
to streamline re -appropriation proposals and enable further 
delegation after consultations and legislative approval. 
• re-appropriation after the financial year's closure primarily 
regularises additional expenditures already incurred, with necessary 
certifications issued by the Finance Secretary to the Accountant 
General annually. 
The reply regarding re-appropriation after the financial year's closure is not 
tenable as it involves adjustments for expenditure already incurred without 
prior approval.  
3.4.3  Absence of controls in the Budget Allocation and 
Monitoring System (BAMS) to validate and limit 
expenditure within allotments 
An analysis of the Head of Account -wise19 allotment and expenditure by 
DDOs from 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, it was noticed that IFMS -K system 
permitted DDOs to book expenditure that exceeded the allotment made by 
the Controlling Officers.  
Audit observed during database analysis that in respect of 117 instances, in 
various Head _IDs excluding pay object heads (01,  02), expenditure was 
booked by DDOs in excess of the allotted amount. DDO -wise details of 
 
19   Table: ‘DDO_HEAD_ALLOCATION_SUMMARY’ in the BAMS application. 

Budget Management  
27 
Head_IDs in which expenditure was booked more than the allotted amount 
are detailed in Appendix 3.4. 
Due to absence of validation controls in the system to limit the expenditure 
within the allotment, the DDOs could incur excess expenditure in violation 
of the provision of the budget manual.  
Government stated (November 2024) that fruitful remedial measures for 
rectifying the same will be taken up with concerned officials in a time bound 
manner. 
The reply is not tenable, as the lack of functionality/  validation controls 
resulted in expenditure being incurred over and above the allotted limits.  
3.4.4 Discrepancies in reports g enerated by the Budget 
Allocation and Monitoring System (BAMS) 
Audit observed several discrepancies in the reports generated by the BAMS, 
which adversely affect the reliability and accuracy of budget allocation and 
monitoring processes. Deficiencies were identified in the following reports: 
• Head-wise Expenditure Report: This report is designed to generate 
Head of Account -wise details for a financial year, displaying 
available provisions, allocated amounts, and expenditure. However, 
inaccuracies like allocated amounts exceeding the available 
provisions were found in the report whereas the inaccuracy was not 
found in the database table 20 indicating flaws in data validation and 
report generation. 
• Allocation Expenditure Report : This report generates CCO -wise 
details of budget allocation and expenditures. Audit noticed that the 
original CCO and cross-mapped CCOs21 were shown with identical 
budget and expenditure amounts for cross -mapped Head of 
Accounts. This duplication made it impossible to ascertain which 
CCO was allocated the budget and the corresponding expenditure.  
• Analysis of data 22 (October 2023) showed that the system allowed 
booking of negative figures  in respect of budget ‘Al lotted Amount’ 
under specified Head_IDs. It was observed that the report generated23 
also showed the Budget/ received amount in negative figures 24. The 
negative figure appearing in Reports generated through the BAMS 
establishes that it is unreliable. 
Illustrative cases are given below in Table 3.2. 
 
20   From ‘CCO_HEAD_ALLOCATION_ SUMMARY’ database table in the BAMS. 
21  CCO of a different department who has to spend part of the budget allocated under a 
head of account along with Original CCO in some schemes. 
22   In ‘CCO_HEAD_ALLOCATION_ SUMMARY’ table related to the BAMS application. 
23   Allocation-Expenditure Report in the BAMS. 
24   ‘CCO wise Over Expenditure Report’ in the BAMS. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
28 
Table 3.2 
Illustrative cases of budget amount in negative value 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO Code Head of 
Account 
Allotted 
amount 
(₹) 
Allocated 
amount 
Expen
diture 
1 2021-22 020A 
Director of 
Agriculture 
2401-0-109-61-
1-0-0-P-V 
(-) 
79,03,28,000 
0 0 
2 2021-22 250A 
Chief 
Conservator 
of Forests 
2406-2-110-38-
1-0-0-P-V 
(-) 
2,00,00,000 
0 0 
(Source: CoreTIS database). 
The negative budget amount appearing in Head _IDs are detailed in 
Appendix 3.5.  
Government stated (November 2024) that fruitful remedial measures would 
be taken up with the concerned officials to rectify these discrepancies in a 
time-bound manner. It was also stated that efforts are being made to enhance 
the system’s functionality to ensure accurate report generation and data 
reliability. 
Recommendation No. 8 
Government should conduct a review of all reports generated by the 
BAMS to ensure that they align with requirements and accurately reflect 
financial data. 
3.4.5    Non-inclusion of sub-heads in Public Works Deposit head  
Para 15.1.1 of Kerala Public Works Account Code  stipulates that deposits 
received/ recoveries made from the work bills of the contractors are 
classified under the sub-heads i) Cash deposits of contractors as security, ii)  
Deposits for works to be done, iii) Sums due to contractors on closed 
accounts, iv) Sums due to other Governments on closed accounts and v) 
Miscellaneous deposits below the minor head of account 8443-108 Public 
Works Deposit. 
As per Finance Accounts 2022 -23, the amount outstanding under the head 
8443-108 Public Works Deposit as on 31 March 2023 was ₹2,872.10 crore.  
Treasuries lack information about the various factors that contribute to the 
accumulation of these balances  due to non -integration of the sub -heads 
outlined in the Kerala PW Account Code into the IFMS -K system. 
Consequently, all funds received for the aforementioned items are 
consolidated under minor head ‘108-Public Works Deposit s’, without 
identifying the nature of the items.  

Budget Management  
29 
Government stated (November 2024) that new sub -heads will be opened 
under the  head 8443 -00-108-PW deposit after analy sing the technical 
feasibility of operating the new sub-head under the existing minor head.  
Recommendation No. 9  
Government should fix a time frame for opening the new sub -head under 
the Public Works Deposit head for improved transparency and precise 
tracking of funds. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECEIPT 
MANAGEMENT 

 
 
 

 
31 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECEIPT MANAGEMENT   
Government receipts are collected through e -Treasury and CREDIT 
applications. Large amounts remain idle in pooling accounts which remain 
unreconciled for years. Functionality to auto -calculate penal interest for 
delayed credit of money to government account by agency banks has not 
been developed, even though provided for in the agreements entered with 
banks by the Government. Timely defacement of challans is not done and 
only 44 per cent of challans have been defaced. 
4.1  Introduction  
Article 4 to 39 of Chapter II of KFC Volume I stipulates conditions in respect 
of receipts, their collection and checks involved. Government receipts 
include tax and non-tax revenue. The collection of receipts and remittance to 
concerned heads of account is ensured through cash/ e-payment. 
The process of cash collection and its remittance to treasury is as given in 
Exhibit 4.1. 
Exhibit 4.1 
  Process of cash collection and remittance to treasury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CREDIT is the treasury side application for transactions involving cash/  
cheque remittance on behalf of Government of Kerala. Along with the 
conventional mode of payments directly at the cash counter, IFMS-K permits 
online payment through the e-Treasury wherein internet banking facility of 
ten banks25 and three26 payment gateways are integrated.   
A total of 10,74,45,441 challans amounting to ₹2,83,901.64 crore was 
collected as government revenue through the e-Treasury and the CREDIT 
application of treasury for the period from 2016 -17 to 2022-23. On receipt 
of money, challans are generated via both applications and accounted for in 
the GRASKL27 (Revenue) database which stores data regarding all the 
 
25  Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, Canara Bank, Federal Bank, IDBI Bank, Indian Bank, 
Indian Overseas Bank, Punjab National Bank, State Bank of India and Union Bank of 
India. 
26  Debit/ Credit/ UPI, QR Code and EPOS. 
27   Government Receipt Accounting System, Kerala. 
E-treasury  
(E-Challan) 
 
CREDIT  
(M-Challan) 
 
GRASKL 
Database 
Government 
accounts 
Payee 
 
Direct 
online 
Physical 
cash at 
treasury 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 32   
government receipts. These challans are submitted to the offices concerned 
to avail services. The public can submit online refund application in case of 
any excess/ wrong remittance made via the e-Treasury and track status of the 
refund claims. In case of challans remitted through the CREDIT, refund can 
be initiated through manual submission of refund application to the DDO 
concerned. Further, e-Treasury is also integrated with 24 applications of 20 
Departments as given in Appendix 4.1 whereby the public can access the 
Departmental portals for services.  
Scrutiny of applications in the receipt management system revealed the 
following deficiencies. 
4.2 Unreconciled balances in pooling account of banks  
The payments made through the e-Treasury are routed via various banks and 
gateways for final credit to the heads of account concerned. For this purpose, 
Government (February 2015) empowered banks to hold pooling accounts in 
favour of Government transactions, which needed to be maintained as per 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  made between treasury and banks. 
As per the MoU, the revenue collected each day in these pooling accounts 
are required to be transferred to Government account the next day. The bank 
needs to provide account statement to prove that no government money 
remains unaccounted and there is no misappropriation by banks. 
Audit noted that Treasury Department had entered MoU with 10 banks and 
three payment gateways. However, the banks and gateways were not regular 
in submitting Monthly Statements as prescribed. Audit found  from the 
available monthly statements that unreconciled balances were held in banks 
as stated below: 
• State Bank of India ( SBI) has been holding ₹21.77 crore  as un -
reconciled opening balance for the month of January 2022 which has 
increased to ₹24.29 crore for the month of July 2022. 
• Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank  and IDBI have been holding 
₹1.62 crore, ₹19.21 lakh and ₹4.43 lakh respectively as un-reconciled 
opening balances for the month of January 2022. 
Despite the prolonged retention of these amounts by the banks, they have not 
provided necessary Account Statements to Department of Treasury and 10 
pooling accounts in the 10 participating banks and three payment gateways 
remain un-reconciled.  
Audit observed that no provision was inbuilt in the system to capture the 
Monthly Statement from the bank directly into the system.  
Government stated (November 2024) that three banks had submitted the 
Account Statement on unreconciled balances in pooling account and steps 
have been taken to remit the amount to Government accounts. 
Communication has been given from Treasury department and RBI to the 
banks for reconciling figures. 

Receipt Management  
33 
Reply is not tenable as Government’s response addresses past discrepancies 
but lacks a proactive mechanism to ensure automation to capture the monthly 
statements directly from banks to prevent recurrence  which establishes 
significant gaps in functionalities.  
Recommendation No. 10 
• Government should develop a functionality to periodically secure 
account statements from banks via the e-Treasury system to enable 
system based cross -verification, auto detection of transaction 
errors and synchronised settlement.  
• Government should recover the amount lying in the pooling 
accounts from the banks and responsibility may be fixed for not 
obtaining monthly statements and account statements. 
4.3 Non-development of functionality for auto -calculation of 
interest 
The MoU entered with banks provides prerequisites for effective integration 
of internet banking of banks with e-Treasury. The participating bank should 
remit funds every day, electronically or by RTGS28 or by any other payment 
mechanism acceptable to RBI on the next working day to the e -Treasury 
account with RBI. Four conditions are to be followed in case of delayed fund 
transfer such as interest for delayed period beyond the permissible period 29, 
liquidated damages for delays beyond the due date  @ one per cent plus of 
bank rate and delay -cum-calculation sheet needs to be submitted to the e -
Treasury officer by the participating bank and the agreed liquidated damages 
shall be paid before fifth working day of the next month. It was also 
prescribed that under no circumstances, the participating bank shall hold the 
principal amount collected beyond a period of five working days from the 
due date of payment. 
Audit noticed that banks did not submit any delay -cum-calculation sheet to 
e-Treasury officers. No functionality was developed in e -Treasury 
application to calculate the interest  for delay in remittance of government 
funds. As per data received from NIC, liquidated damages calculated at the 
rate of 5.25 per cent30 per annum for the delayed transaction pertaining to 
the period 2016-17 to 2022-23 amounted to ₹1.0531 crore. 
Government stated (November 2024) that as per RBI directions, banks are 
showing transaction date and settlement date. The treasury and bank system 
has been integrated with e -Kuber32 system. Hence, data is being received 
daily from e-Kuber to treasury.  
 
28  Real Time Gross Settlement.  
29  Presently to be ‘T+1’ day excluding ‘Put Through Date’ or transaction date. 
30   4.25 per cent Bank rate + 1 per cent. 
31  Transaction Amount x [Delay/365] x [(Bank rate + 1) / 100]. 
32 Core banking system developed by RBI for electronic transfer of funds in Government 
transactions. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 34   
The reply is not tenable as  although the data regarding transaction date and 
settlement date are available, no provision is enabled in the system to auto 
calculate the interest for the delay period beyond the permissible limit.   
Recommendation No. 11 
Government should develop a functionality in IFMS-K to auto calculate 
and claim interest and liquidated damages from banks for delayed credit 
of money to Government account.  
4.4 Deficiencies in defacement of challans 
The Treasury Department (December 2021) instructed all DDOs to deface 
e-challan once the service for which the particular e -challan generated is 
provided, so that it cannot be reused.  
During defacement, a watermark is stamped on the face of the challan stating 
that the challan has been defaced for the amount along with defacement date, 
defacement number, remarks and User ID. The details of defacement are 
stored centrally in the database and are reflected in all subsequent instances 
when the challan is used. As a result, the defaced challan becomes unusable 
for any further services from Government.  By implementing this 
mechanism, Government aimed to prevent fraudulent practices and maintain 
the integrity of receipts and transactions. The challan amount is refundable 
upto the value of the remaining undefaced portion of the challan. The process 
flow of defacement and refund process are as given in Exhibit 4.2.  
Exhibit 4.2 
Process flow of Defacement and Refund process  
 
  
e-challan produced to 
Department for Service 
Access e-Treasury website and select 
Refund request 
DDO logs in e-Treasury 
module and checks veracity of 
challan in e-Treasury 
Provide GRN No. and Amount to 
identify challan and generate refund 
request along with Bank A/c details 
Deface challan prior to 
providing service 
DDO checks veracity of refund 
claim and passes orders and 
approves for refund if found proper 
e-Treasury Officer sanctions refund 
for credit to custmoers bank A/c 
and is passed on to RBI for final 
credit to beneficiaries 
G 
R 
A 
S 
K 
L 
Defacement 
 Refund 

Receipt Management  
35 
When an e-challan is produced to DDO for any service, the DDO verifies the 
e-challan in the e-Treasury application and defaces it prior to providing the 
required service.  Refund can be availed for those e-challan for which service 
has not been availed. Refund request can be raised in the e -Treasury 
application by providing the necessary details.  Once the DDO verifies and 
approves the refund claim, the e -Treasury officer sanctions the refund for 
crediting it to the customer’s bank account.  
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in defacement and refund of 
challans as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.4.1 Discrepancies in defacement reports and data analysis 
The application provides for the MIS report ‘Defacement Report’. The 
details of defacement are captured in tables of the GRASKL database in the 
e-Treasury modules. 
Audit noticed that the application could not generate the reports for the years 
2016-17, 2017-18 and 2022-23. Further, Audit scrutiny of Defacement report 
generated revealed that out of 3,04,97,837 challans received during the 
period 2018-19 to 2021-22, only 1,01,39,579 were defaced (33.25 per cent) 
by departments, as per e-Treasury defacement report thereby 2,03,58,258 e-
challans amounting to ₹14,232.26 crore remained not defaced as detailed in 
Appendix 4.2.  
On verification of database tables used for receipts and defacement of 
challans for the period 2018 -19 to 2021 -22, Audit noticed that out of  
7,01,96,745 challans generated amounting to ₹1,69,629.76 crore, only 
3,47,29,797 challans were defaced (49.47  per cent) leaving the balance of  
3,54,66,948 challans amounting to ₹1,48,384.52 crore not defaced. The year-
wise detail is given in Appendix 4.3. 
Audit observed that the defacement report generated by system did not match 
with data analysis conducted by Audit. 
Government stated (November 2024) that defacement reports for the year 
2016, 2017 etc. are available in treasury now.  
Reply is not tenable as although some reports have been generated, the 
department has not  explained the discrepancies between the Defacement 
report and the source database. Further the report for 2022-23 has not been 
generated. 
4.4.2 Defacement of challans over and above challan amount 
A challan can be defaced completely or to the extent of service provided, 
thereby enabling full or partial defacement. Multiple partial defacements are 
possible against a challan, but the total defaced amount should be restricted 
to the challan amount. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 36   
On verification of treasury data for the period from 2016 -17 to 2021 -22, 
Audit noticed that out of 3,73,73,538 challans amounting to ₹26,739.15 crore 
that were defaced, 14,608 challans amounting to ₹25.59 crore were defaced 
for ₹56.59 crore. An illustrative case is given in Exhibit 4.3. 
Exhibit 4.3.  
 
The challan number KL012520520201819M amounting to ₹3.42 lakh is seen 
defaced for ₹6.84 lakh.  
Government stated (March 2023) that the issue of incorrect defacement has 
been reported to NIC for making corrections/ rectification and the same is in 
progress. It was further stated that the error came because of fetching the data 
from an intermediate table and shared into the new database table33. 
On re-verification of treasury data for the period 2016 -17 to 2021-22 in the 
new table reported by Government, it was seen that the issue of incorrect 
defacement was resolved to some extent. However, the issue still persisted  
in 258 challans amounting to ₹1.84 crore. These challans were seen defaced 
for ₹3.48 crore . On further analysis of data for 2022 -23, out of 93,56,945 
challans amounting to ₹8,553.17 crore that were defaced, it was seen that in 
respect of two challans amounting to ₹5.20 lakh the challans were defaced 
for ₹10.39 lakh. The details are provided in Appendix 4.4. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the issue has  been resolved. 
However, Audit noticed that the issue persists for the challans as detailed  
above.  
 
33  Receipt_defaced_details. 


Receipt Management  
37 
4.4.3  Failure to capture defacement details in challans 
On verification of treasury data for the period from 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, 
Audit observed that 14,376 challans amounting to ₹53.80 crore pertaining to 
head of account ‘0030 -01-800-99-00 Legal benefit funds stamp’ were 
defaced by the department. It was seen that even though defacement numbers 
were generated for these challans in the underlying database table, these 
challans were not seen defaced with the watermark details in e -Treasury 
portal.  
It was seen that Government had rectified the same at the instance of Audit.  
4.4.4   Absence of uniqueness in defacement numbers 
Any challan defaced should have a unique autogenerated defacement 
number to ensure that it could be used to trace the exact challan and amount 
defaced.  
Audit observed that for the period from 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, a total of  
15,04,384 defacement numbers were used for defacing 33,09,145 challans. 
Out of the above, 21 defacement numbers were used more than 50 times for 
defacement of challans  as detailed in Appendix 4.5. Audit further noticed 
that defacement numbers contain a sequential number and the year of 
defacement while some contain a sequential number alone. This points to 
multiple methods of generation of defacement number through various 
processes. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the issue has been resolved.  
However, Audit on reverification found that the deficiency persists.  
Recommendation No. 12 
Government should modify the application to ensure that every challan 
defaced is stamped with unique defacement number and the total defaced 
amount do not exceed the challan amount.   
4.5   Deficiencies in refund of E-challans 
Article 36 of Kerala Financial Code Vol I stipulates that when an application 
for a refund is received for any revenue item, the officer who recorded the 
original revenue should locate the relevant records, verify the claim, and 
issue the refund order. The refund details must be recorded against the 
original receipt to prevent any accidental duplicate of refund claims. 
e-Treasury has a facility for online submission of refund request. The 
claimant can submit the request for refund against a Government Reference 
Number (GRN) 34 through the option ‘refund request’ in e -Treasury portal 
and can track the status of refund. On refund of challan, a watermark is 
 
34  GRN is a unique reference number generated against a challan for identifying the challan 
in the database. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 38   
stamped on the face of the concerned E -challan as ‘Refunded for Rs….. ’. 
Multiple refunds are  possible against a single challan until the unused 
amount of challan is exhausted. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies. 
4.5.1  Incomplete Generation  of Refund Reports  and non -
recording of GRN in receipts   
a) The year -wise status of refund request received, as per refund report 
generated in e-Treasury, is detailed in Appendix 4.6. It was revealed that the 
e-Treasury is not generating the reports for the periods 2017-18 and 2018-19 
and for the period 2022 -23. It was seen that only department -wise monthly 
reports could be generated. 
b) Audit noticed that 20 integrated departments did not provide GRN for the 
receipts, which is essential for claiming refund. Thus, the public who were 
provided such receipts would not be able to claim refund, if needed. For 
example, the Revenue Land Information System (ReLIS) ap plication of 
Revenue Department which is an online platform used for the payment of 
land tax, transfer of registry etc., does not record the GRN of challan in the 
generated receipt.    
Government stated (November 2024) that GRN is being sent to customer’s 
mobile through SMS. 
The reply is not tenable as a complete report regarding refund requests is 
essential to identify lapses and take corrective action. Further , the non- 
inclusion of GRN in receipts of integrated department would prevent the 
submission of refund claim.   
4.5.2   Other deficiencies noticed in refund of challans 
Audit noticed that:  
a) in three cases the refunded amount was greater than the actual challan 
amount by ₹0.13 lakh.  
b) in case of 151 challans amounting to ₹13.53 lakh, though the refund status 
shown in e-Treasury as ‘pending with department for approval’, in the 
challans it was watermarked as ‘Refunded’. 
c) in five challans, the defaced value displayed in Refund Request page was 
higher than the actual challan amount of ₹12.96 lakh. 
It was seen that Government had rectified the same at the instance of Audit.  
4.5.3 System deficiency in processing of refund requests  
Audit observed that in the case of 72 challans which were already refunded 
for its entire amount of ₹29.36 lakh, subsequent refund request s were  

Receipt Management  
39 
submitted. Some of these challans were not seen watermarked as refunded 
even though refunds were issued.  
 
Government stated (March 2023) that the issue pointed out by Audit has now 
been rectified which has been confirmed in audit. However, Audit noticed 
another instance 35 where the issue persisted. Government stated in 
November 2024 that the issue has been resolved.  
 
On verification, it was observed that the above case was rectified. However, 
though the instances pointed out were rectified, the repeated occurrence of 
such instances indicates that the system lacks controls to restrict the request.  
Recommendation No. 13 
Application's self-sufficiency may be ensured by including comprehensive 
reporting on refund requests to identify lapses and take corrective actions. 
GRN  needs to be included in receipts generated by integrated 
departments.  
4.6 Deficiencies in refund of M-challans (Manual Challan)   
The refund of government revenue through treasury (other than e-Treasury) 
is made based on written request received from claimant through the DDO 
concerned. On verification of original challan remittance by DDO, a sanction 
order for refund is forwarded to treasury.  The treasury again rechecks the 
remittance and enables provision through refund entry 36 for DDO to draw 
bill in the BIMS application for processing the refund request. The DDO 
draws bill which is subsequently passed in treasury for final credit to refund 
claimant. Test check revealed the following shortfalls with respect to 
refunds: 
4.6.1  Wrong classification of refund on Judicial Stamps  
In the Finance Accounts, negative figure appears as receipt under the head 
of account 0030-01-101 (Court fee realised in stamp).  
Audit observed that this was due to misclassification of refund on account of 
Stamps judicial - Sale of Stamps (0030 -01-102-10) under the head  ‘Court 
fees realised in stamps’ (0030-01-101-10 Deduct Refunds).  
In the sanction order for refund of court fee, the sanctioning authority 
wrongly classified the heads, and the serial number of stamps used were not 
specified. The Treasury does not insist for serial number of stamps used and 
without verification allows the refund entry for drawing bills to the same 
head specified in the sanction order, which resu lts in wrong classification.  
Further, the system has no functionality to track the original receipt and head 
 
35  KL015177959202122E. 
36  Refund entry is a facility in CREDIT application through which allocation of amount 
were made available to DDO for drawing refund amount.  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 40   
of account to which the refund is made. As no validation control is available 
in CREDIT software to ensure the same, there is a risk of multiple refund in 
case the sanction order and certificate of payment is presented to treasury 
again. 
Government stated (November 2024) that as the implementation of the 
online platform for the sale of stamps will come into existence by 2025, it is 
expected that the refund procedures will also become completely online and 
the issues would be resolved. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Government should fix a time frame for refund procedures on sale of 
stamps to be made online. 
4.6.2  Lack of provision for ‘Refund Entry’ for partial refund 
Audit observed that in the case of partial refund requests processed through 
the CREDIT application  for which corresponding government receipt 
challan details are available, treasury is only able to provide refund entry for 
the whole challan amount. Hence, treasury is making ‘refund entry’ for the 
whole challan amount even in cases of partial refund req uest of challan 
amounts. As a result, BIMS application allows submission of bills by DDO 
for refund for entire amount without restriction to the partial amount 
requested for refund. 
Government stated (March 2023) that the treasury officer is only confirming 
the challan available at Treasury for the refund. The Department concerned 
can fully or partially refund the challan. Government further stated 
(November 2024) that provision is available in offline mode to process 
partial refund requests. 
The reply is not tenable as the CREDIT system has no facility to provide 
partial refunds and the Treasury officer can only provide a refund of the 
whole challan amount even in case of partial refund requests.  
Recommendation No. 15  
Government should implement a functionality in IFMS -K to provide 
partial refund in the Treasury so that the concerned departments can draw 
bills only for the sanctioned amount.  
4.6.3   Non-mapping of DDO code 
Audit observed that Treasury, while taking receipts through challans in 
CREDIT the entry is made as ‘general receipt’ instead of specifically 
mapping it against the  DDO concerned. At the time of refunds, s ince the 
Treasury is not able to map the DDO code, it reports the case to Treasury 
Directorate for locating the DDO code to the respective challan.  

Receipt Management  
41 
Government stated (November 2024) that selecting DDO code while 
accepting the general receipts by the treasury department is not practical at 
present as those challans only contain the purpose of remittance and 
depositor details. 
 
The reply is not tenable as non-updation of DDO code in challans results in 
unwanted correspondence and delay in refund. 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Government should develop a functionality in IFMS-K to map the DDO 
codes while accepting the challans through the CREDIT. 
4.7  Other observations on refund of M-Challans 
• No acknowledgement is being given to the claimant as and when a 
refund request is being raised.  
• The claimants of refund have no assurance that their claims were 
raised by the respective DDO or have any knowledge of the status of 
their refund claim. 
• The status of refund of manual challan cannot be tracked. 
Government stated (March 2023 and November 2024) that the DDO has to 
satisfy himself before giving a refund to the customer and as such DDO 
concerned is responsible for acknowledgement, status of refund, assurance 
to claimants and time period for settling claims.  
The manual intervention in the refund procedure as stated by Government is 
time consuming and defeats the purpose of implementation of IFMS -K. 
Further, Government failed to take remedial measures even though 19 
months have passed since its initial response and eight years from inception 
of IFMS-K. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
EXPENDITURE 
MANAGEMENT 

 
 
 

 
43 
CHAPTER-V 
EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT   
 
In the Expenditure management module, bill processing applications 
enable the DDOs to generate bills electronically and allow treasury to 
process and approve the bills and forward electronic payment advice to 
banking interface. Deficiencies in the applications such as delay in 
processing bills, shortfalls in officer level controls in bill processing, lack 
of integration between SPARK Human Resource application and treasury 
system, shortfalls in Bill Discounting System, non-settlement of advance 
bills posed major hurdles in attaining the objective of implementing IFMS-
K. 
5.1  Introduction  
The Core Treasury Information System (CoreTIS) is an integral part of the 
expenditure management module through which the bills of all departments 
are processed in Treasury. The CoreTIS centrally manages the functioning 
of all treasury systems to have a Single Source of Truth . Bills generated 
through various applications like the BIMS for contingent bills, the SPARK 
for Human Resource management, the EMLI and Bill Discounting System 
(BDS) for work related claims  and other integrated applications are 
populated in the CoreTIS. After Treasury approval, electronic advice is sent 
to e-Kuber system of RBI or Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) for crediting the 
amount to the beneficiary’s account. 
The process of bill creation, bill processing and bill payment in IFMS -K is 
shown in Exhibit 5.1 below:  
 Exhibit 5.1 
Bill payment process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TSB 
Salary, Non-Salary and PD 
accounts bills  
e-Kuber 
Transfer to beneficiary accounts in 
various banks 
Payment 
1) Accountant-Entry of bill 
Confirm that Bill Amount <= Balance Sanctioned Amount/    
Allocation 
2)   DDO-Verifies the bill generated and submits to treasury 
1) Accountant-Verifies the bill and supporting documents 
 
2)  Treasury Officer- Verifies the bill and authorises it for 
payment 
 
Bill 
Processing 
in Treasury 
Bill 
Preparation 
by 
Departments 
Submission 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 44   
During bill preparation, the department's Accountant prepares the bill, and 
the DDO verifies and submits it to the treasury for approval. At the treasury, 
the Accountant reviews the claim with the supporting documents before 
forwarding it to the Treasury Officer. The Treasury Officer then verifies and 
authorises the bill for payment. The payment is effected to concerned TSB 
account if it is Salary, Non-salary and PD accounts bills and effected to bank 
account of beneficiaries through the e-Kuber system in case of other bills. 
For the period from 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, 2,23,53,931 bills amounting to 
₹9,63,001.01 crore were passed for payment as detailed in Appendix 5.1.  
5.2  Deficiencies in the CoreTIS application  
Scrutiny of the application revealed the following deficiencies: 
5.2.1   Delay in processing of bills for payment in Treasuries 
As per notification (January 2013) issued by Directorate of Treasuries in 
accordance with the Kerala Right to Service Act 2012 , specific time limits 
have been prescribed for the processing of bills in Treasuries. The maximum 
time limit prescribed for processing any bill is seven days.  
On analysis of the data from the CoreTIS ( October 2023) for the period from 
2016-17 to 2022 -23, Audit noticed significant delay in processing various 
bills. The delays were arrived by calculating the difference between the 
bill_pass_date37 and bill_received_date 38 captured in the CoreTIS and the 
findings are outlined as follows:- 
• Out of 69.67 lakh Contingent bills authorised for payment through 
Treasuries, the time taken to process 15.16 lakh  bills (21.76 per cent) 
were more than seven days.  
• Out of 104.24 lakh  Salary Payment bills authorised for payment 
through Treasuries, the time taken to process 9.31 lakh bills (8.93 per 
cent) were more than seven days. 
• Out of 33.54 lakh Non-Salary bills authori sed for payment through 
Treasuries, the time taken to process 4.14 lakh bills (12.35 per cent) 
were more than seven days. 
Delay in the above cases ranged from seven to more than 365 days. 
Though a First In First Out (FIFO) model is envisaged in the FRS, it was not 
implemented in the treasury application. In respect of contingent payment 
bills, copy of the bills with vouchers need to be produced physically at 
treasury to authorise the payment to the recipient . Audit noticed that in the 
case of contingent bills, there is no provision in the Treasury system  to 
capture the date of submission of physical copy at treasuries and to 
automatically reject the bills if the physical submission of bills along with 
 
37 The date when the bill is approved at treasury. 
38 The date when the bill is received at treasury. 

Expenditure Management  
45 
vouchers are delayed by more than the prescribed number of days. Also, 
sanction order details which is the pre -requisite for authorising contingent 
bills were not available in the system against the bill as pointed out in 
Paragraph 5.2.4 of this Report which also augments the delay. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the Department of Treasuries will 
explore the possibility of implementing a check system with built -in 
verification for required fields and documents before submission, tracking 
submission dates with alerts for approa ching due dates to prevent delays, 
generating regular reports on pending bills to identify and address 
bottlenecks, and providing clear information and checklists for required 
documents to reduce rejection and delays.  
Recommendation No. 17 
Government should implement a validation system to ensure 
completeness of data and documents before submission, reducing errors 
and improving process efficiency. 
5.2.2 Officer level control shortfalls in bill processing   
DDOs utilise bill preparation  applications such as BIMS, SPARK, etc., to 
generate bills, which are then electronically received in the treasuries and 
displayed in the CoreTIS application's dashboard for verification by the 
dealing Accountant. The Accountant of the treasury, through the application,  
checks the bills and verifies the supporting documents. For contingent bills, 
the physical copies of the bills, along with vouchers, need to be examined. If 
the bill and supporting documents are found to be in order during scrutiny, 
they are forwarded to the Treasury Officer for approval. Once the bill is 
verified and approved by the officer, payment is made. 
In the system of bill processing in Treasury, Audit observed that: 
• Only bills scrutinised at accountant level are available in Officer’s 
dashboard. Thus, the pendency of the bills at the Accountant level 
cannot be watched by the Officer and there is no report generation 
for Treasury Officer on the status of bills received in Treasuries. 
• The dealing Accountant has the authority to raise objections on any 
bill and return it to the respective DDOs from where the bill 
originated without being submitted to the Treasury Officer for 
countersigning. If a bill is rejected by the Accountant , it is directly 
forwarded to the DDOs without allowing the Treasury Officer to 
review the objection made by the Accountant. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the Department of Treasuries will 
explore the possibility to upgrade CoreTIS in IFMS -K to allow Treasury 
Officer to monitor pending bills at the Accountant level, access detailed 
reports on bill status and required actions and review Accountant’s objection 
to ensure accountability and prevent delays.  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 46   
Recommendation No. 18 
Government should upgrade the CoreTIS application to incorporate 
facilities to allow the Treasury Officer to monitor pending bills at the 
Accountant level, access detailed reports on bill status and required 
actions, and review Accountant objections to ensure accountability and 
prevent delays. 
5.2.3 Absence of integration between SPARK and Treasury 
system for DDO-DSC registration process   
Government issued (December 2020)  detailed guidelines regarding the 
registration of the DDOs in SPARK and BIMS. A newly designated or newly 
posted DDO immediately after taking charge as DDO, has to register his/ her 
Digital Signature Certificate (DSC) with the DDO code of the office in BIMS 
application. The registration details thus created will be readily made 
available in the CoreTIS application of corresponding treasur y. This has to 
be approved by the treasury to activate the DDO privilege in BIMS 
application. 
Audit observed that while the registration details are accessible to the 
Treasury Officer in CoreTIS, essential documents such as the DDO 
appointment order and report of transfer of charge are not available online. 
Consequently, DDOs are physically submitting these documents along with 
a printout of the DDO -DSC registration form to the treasury for approval. 
Though these details are recorded in SPARK, the lack of integration between 
SPARK and treasury systems led to delays and manual intervention, 
complicating the DDO-DSC approval process. 
Government stated (November 2024) that necessary software modifications 
will be incorporated in the treasury applications in the next phase of software 
upgradation.  
Recommendation No. 19 
Government should fix a time frame for integration of SPA RK with 
treasury systems for efficient DDO-DSC approval. 
5.2.4 Absence of sanction order/ proceedings in bill creation  
The sanction order/ proceedings from the competent authority is required for 
bill creation. In the bill preparation system, DDOs create bills using a 
physical copy of the sanction order and the order numbers are recorded 
against the bill. System includes provisions to scan and upload th e sanction 
orders, though it is not mandatory. An analysis of the bill data showed that 
the sanction order reference data often contained Null or unreliable data 
instead of a valid sanction order number. A few illustrative bill data are given 
in Appendix – 5.2. 

Expenditure Management  
47 
Government stated (November 2024) that necessary software provision to 
ensure uploading of the scanned copy of sanction order will be made 
mandatory for the bill passing.  
Recommendation No. 20 
Government should fix a time frame for software modification to ensure 
uploading of sanction order for passing bills. 
5.2.5 Incorrect DDO code in the report generated  
The DDO code in Treasury applications is a 10 -digit code. The first four 
digits depict the code of treasury assigned to the DDO, the next three digits 
depict the Department code and the last three digits are unique for that 
particular DDO.  
Audit observed that the report generated through ‘Bill-wise Search’ displays 
incorrect DDO code consisting of 13 digits.  
Government stated (March 2023 and November 2024) that the data is to be 
analysed in detail to identify the issue and necessary corrective measures will 
be taken immediately on identifying the same.  
The fact remains that even after initiation of the project in 2015 and a lapse 
of 17 months from the initial Government reply, no action has been taken to 
address the issue. Populating incorrect DDO codes renders the report 
unfruitful.  
5.2.6  Non-settlement of advance bills 
As per Article 99 of KFC Vol I, advances drawn for specific purposes must 
be adjusted with detailed bills and vouchers within three months. If the 
adjustment bill is not submitted on time, the entire advance is recoverable, 
with 18 per cent interest from the drawal date to recovery. 
In January 2020, the government issued guidelines to ensure timely 
settlement of advances: 
• The BIMS should capture the Permanent Employee Number (PEN) 
of employees to prevent new advances without settling previous 
ones. 
• A maximum of 10 advances are allowed; if the first advance exceeds 
three months, further advances are not permitted. 
• No further advances will be allowed if previous advances remain 
unsettled in the same department. 
As of  31 March 2023, ₹190.22 crore in temporary advances remained 
unsettled, with ₹188.36 crore (99 per cent ) drawn before April 2022, 
indicating the system allowed advances contrary to these guidelines. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 48   
Government stated (November 2024) that the primary level discussions are 
going on to develop a novel system to implement automatic interest charges 
for the delayed settlement of advances. Strict instructions are issued to all 
the Treasury Officers to make sincere efforts for settling the pending 
advances made by the DDOs under each Treasury jurisdiction.  
Recommendation No. 21 
Government should strengthen the system to prevent the issuance of 
advance bills in violation of the guidelines and implement automatic 
interest charges for delayed settlement of advances. 
5.3    Deficiencies in Bill Discounting System (BDS)  
Government introduced BDS which facilitates the contractors/ suppliers to 
get their bills cleared at a discounted rate from banks on the guarantee of a 
Promissory Note (PN) issued by Government.  
Government, on receiving bills from contractors/  suppliers for a month, 
schedules a future date for settling the bills of th at month, called the 
Scheduled date of p ayment. Process flow of BDS is shown in Exhibit 5.2 
below: 
Exhibit 5.2 
Process flow of BDS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The process begins with contractor or supplier submitting application for Bill 
Discounting to the DDO and the DDO e-submits the bill to treasury. Upon 
receipt of the bill, the treasury debits the functional head of account of the 
department and transfer credits to the suspense head. Subsequently, 
Department of Finance issues PN to the contractor, who in turn submits it in 
the Bank, for enabling bank to discount the bills. The bank subsequently 
discounts the bill and transfers amounts to the contractor’s  account. On the 
Application submitted 
by Contractor/ Supplier 
for Bill Discounting to 
DDO based on 
scheduled date of 
payment fixed by 
Finance Department 
Banks settles the amount 
of credit provided to 
contractor against the 
Promissory Note 
DDO initiates via 
BDS application 
Form I and Form II 
for onward 
submission to bank 
On scheduled date of 
payment Finance 
Department transfers amount 
mentioned in Promissory 
Note along with half of 
Discounting Charges 
charged by bank subject to a 
maximum of 5% per annum 
Bank shall verify 
the account details 
of contractor and 
send confirmation  
Bank Discounts the 
Promissory Note 
and credits account 
of contractor/ 
supplier 
DDO shall e-submit 
bill to treasury for 
transfer crediting 
amount to relevant 
suspense heads  
Finance 
Department 
issues 
Promissory 
Note 
Treasury 
transfer credits 
the amount to 
relevant 
suspense heads 
DDO intimates via 
Form III to Finance 
Department to issue 
Promissory Note 
Form I – Account details of Contractor/ 
Supplier 
Form II – Details of bills put up for BDS 
Form IV – Details of discounting 
done by bank along with interest 
rate, discount charge etc. 
Form III – Details of bills 
opted for BDS by contractor 

Expenditure Management  
49 
Scheduled date of p ayment, the government transfers amounts to the bank 
along with applicable discounting charges39 and the suspense head is cleared. 
Audit observed following deficiencies in the implementation of BDS as 
detailed below: 
5.3.1    Absence of validation control to restrict bill discounting of 
Deposit Work Bills 
BDS facilitates the contractors to get their bills cleared at a discounted rate 
on priority and with assurance. Deposit works are works where upfront 
amount is made available for the work concerned. 
On scrutiny, Audit noticed that the deposit works made during the audit 
period were included in BDS even though Government receives advance 
payments from departments to facilitate project execution. Audit observed 
that deposit work bills being cleared unde r BDS were causing  additional 
burden to the Government via discount charges being reimbursed. During 
the period 2016 -2023, 611 deposit work bills amounting to  ₹211.26 crore 
were cleared through BDS for which government paid discount charges of 
₹3.20 crore. 
The Government (November 2024) stated that deposit work bills might get 
cleared in BDS due to the lack of familiarity among DDOs. The reply is not 
tenable as the fund for clearing deposit work bills are already available for 
disbursement, eliminating the need for BDS.  
Recommendation No. 22 
The system should be updated to ensure that bills are not routed through 
BDS when the original debit head pertains to a deposit head of account.  
5.3.2 Delay in submission and accounting of BDS bills in 
treasury 
As per guidelines40 issued by Government of Kerala, Government shall, after 
receiving bills for a month, schedule a date for settling the bills of the month.  
On the Scheduled date of payment, Government shall settle the bills and pass 
on the credit to the account of contractors/suppliers.   
Five suspense head of accounts were opened for settling of BDS bills and 
three heads for settling claims against discounting charges. Audit observed 
that in the BDS application there is no provision to ensure settlement of bills 
by debiting functional head of account and crediting the suspense accounts 
before scheduled date of payment. This led to suspense account lying 
unsettled for prolonged period.  For the period from 2017-18 to 2022-23 the 
total suspense pending settlement was ₹403.2 7 crore as detailed  in  
 
39  Half the discounting charges up to a maximum of five per cent per annum of the bill 
amount. 
40  GO(P) No.63/2022. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 50   
Appendix – 5.3.  Out of this ₹302.85 crore was pending settlement against 
PN issued and ₹100.42 crore against discount charges claimed.   
The suspense heads remained unsettled due to inordinate delay in settlement 
of bills in treasury which prevented the transfer of credit from functional 
head to suspense head before the scheduled date of payment. A few instances 
of delay in settlement of suspense account are given in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1 
Illustrative cases of delay in settlement of suspense account 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill No. Scheduled Date 
of Payment 
Date of recoupment of 
suspense head of 
account 
Difference 
(No. of days) 
1 850 25-01-2023 24-03-2023 58 
2 1650 22-02-2022 31-03-2022 37 
3 2203 23-04-2021 05-01-2022 257 
(Source: Report generated from BDS application). 
Government stated (November 2024) that now the workflow of the system  
is re-shuffled and transfer crediting is carried out before the issuance of PN 
in order to perform settlement at that instance. It was also stated that   
directions are delivered to the concerned DDO for settling the bills at the 
earliest.  
Recommendation No. 23 
A separate weekly report of unsettled bills may be generated with detailed 
bill specifications , DDO information, and an age analysis to prioritise 
overdue cases.  
5.4  Shortfalls in Human Resource Management System – 
SPARK 
Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Kerala ( SPARK) is an 
integrated Personnel, Payroll and Accounts information system designed to 
manage the data of employees working under Government of Kerala.  
Every employee is assigned with a unique six -digit Permanent Employee 
Number (PEN) generated by the system and serves as an identifier of each 
employee. The system captures and stores the personal information, present 
service details and contact information of the employee. In addition, the 
system also stores various details related to employee salaries, deductions 
from their salaries and bank account information.  
The system further facilitates the processing of monthly salary bills for each 
employee and streamlines the payment of salaries from the Treasury. The 
Kerala Service Rules govern a set of regulations pertaining to the general 
conditions of service, pay fix ation, leave, joining time and other important 
aspects concerning Government employees in Kerala.  

Expenditure Management  
51 
A detailed scrutiny of the system has uncovered several deficiencies under 
employee registration , career events , monthly salary processing and 
retirement which are given in the succeeding paragraphs: 
5.4.1   Absence of validation checks during registration 
Employee data is captured in the ‘employeepersonneldetails’ table that 
includes personal information like employee code, name, designation, 
address, date of birth, date of joining service etc. This is the master table for 
employees where entries are made by DDOs when an employee joins the 
government service. The system allots PEN on registering the employee and 
thereafter PEN will be the unique code to identify the employee in the 
SPARK database . Audit analysis of the data in this table showed that 
inconsistent data continued to reside in the database due to absence of 
validation checks as detailed in succeeding paragraphs: 
5.4.1.1  Failure to detect  multiple Permanent Employee Number  
for same employee  
Audit noticed that multiple PENs are allotted for the same employee, even 
with same PAN and Voter ID. Illustrative cases of employees with multiple 
PEN are given in Table 5.2.  
Table 5.2 
Illustrative cases of employees with multiple PEN 
PEN Name Present 
Dept 
Present 
Office 
Date of 
birth 
PAN Date Of 
Joining 
905166 Abhishek V 16B 14070413 06-11-1993 BVDPA4614F 01-06-2020 
908010 Abhishek V 16B 14070413 06-11-1993 BVDPA4614F 01-06-2020 
763520 Ajith K S 530 19010004 23-10-1991 IGNPS8508C 17-02-2020 
887405 Ajith K S 530 19010004 23-10-1991 IGNPS8508C 17-02-2020 
(Source: SPARK database). 
Government stated (November 2024) that efforts to avoid duplication 
through SPARK 2.0 software will be ensured. 
5.4.1.2  Deficiencies relating to capturing of  Permanent Account 
Number   
Audit analysis of the data showed that out of 8,28,063 employee records, 
2,72,076 (33  per cent ) records contain junk value in Permanent Account 
Number (PAN) field or did not contain the details of PAN. Audit also noticed 
duplicate PAN value in 6,374 records.  
Government stated (November 2024) that the Department has not yet 
implemented online PAN updates. It was also stated that this feature will be 
integrated in the next generation HR software, SPARK 2.0.  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 52   
5.4.1.3 Failure to detect duplicate or invalid GPF numbers  
Audit noticed that the database table contained 13,049 records with same  
General Provident Fund (GPF) (Kerala) numbers and contained records with 
invalid GPF (Kerala) numbers. Illustrative details are given in Table 5.3 and 
Table 5.4. 
Table 5.3 
Duplication in GPF number 
PEN Name PF Account No. Date of Joining 
105923 Krishanan Kutty N AIT279287 13-07-2001 
175717 Geetha K U AIT279287 26-03-2001 
623209 Ajikumar M AJ19982 15-06-2001 
620565 Sreenivasan K C AJ19982 07-07-1999 
(Source: SPARK database). 
Table 5.4 
Illustrative cases of invalid GPF numbers 
EMPCD Name PF Account No. Date of joining 
895557 Nabeel Hussain M M Dr not received 27-08-2020 
813669 Vija Das oooo 06-10-2017 
864563 Rincy Jose notget 14-06-2019 
(Source: SPARK database). 
Government stated (November 2024) that, for old data, corrections are made 
based on the data received from office of the AG  (A&E). Now, the data 
shared via API from the GPF application of AG (A&E) is being updated in 
SPARK.  
5.4.1.4 Other inconsistencies   
• There were 78 records where the date of birth (DOB) was the same 
as the date of joining the Government service (Appendix – 5.4). 
• In 89 records the DOB was later than the date of joining the 
Government service ( Appendix – 5.5). Further in one record the 
DOB is 30 September 2032. 
• There were 231 records where the difference between DOB and the 
date of joining was less than 18 years, implying that these employees 
had joined service before the age of 18 years (Appendix – 5.6). 
• In 12,801 records, it was noticed that the year of DOB or the year of 
date of joining is 1900. Illustrative cases are as shown in Appendix 
– 5.7. 

Expenditure Management  
53 
Audit on test check noticed that in some cases the ‘Present Service Details’ 
page of the employees throws an error message and the ‘Service History’ 
page provides nil or partial information.  
Government stated (November 2024) that instructions were issued to lock 
all records of each and every employee in SPARK, after verifying the same 
with the actual data available in the service book of the employee before 
sanctioning the increment of the employee. 
Recommendation No. 24 
Government should implement validation checks to ensure data 
consistency and accuracy by enforcing unique identifiers ( e.g., PEN and 
GPF numbers) and validating mandatory fields like PAN. 
5.4.2 Multiple employee treasury savings bank accounts opened 
against Permanent Employee Number    
Government introduced (June 2019) a new type of TSB account namely, e -
TSB for the disbursement of pay and allowances of all Government 
employees. It was further provided that new e -TSB accounts would be 
opened for all employees with data from SPARK as KYC for opening the 
account. The e-TSB account thus generated would be automatically updated 
in SPARK. As the new e-TSB account generated is based on PEN, only one 
account should be created for a government employee. 
Audit observed that in 20 cases out of 5,23,389 cases, instead of opening one 
e-TSB account for a PEN of an employee from SPARK, multiple accounts 
were opened as shown in Appendix – 5.8.  
Government stated (November 2024) that the duplicate e-TSB accounts were 
opened due to automatic generation of e -TSB account based on PEN from 
SPARK and opened manually based on request from employees. Now the 
extra accounts are identified and deleted.   
Recommendation No. 25 
Government should implement validation check to ensure that e -TSB 
accounts are created only once per unique PEN. 
5.5   Deficiencies in Employee data management and salary 
processing  
During the course of their employment, government employees experience 
various career events including leaves, promotions, increments, 
departmental exams etc. The career event record s in SPARK contribute to 
the professional development of government employees. The following 
deficiencies were noticed in the recording of career events of employees in 
SPARK. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 54   
5.5.1 Non-availability of  details of Departmental Exam in 
SPARK   
Rule 12 of Kerala Service Rules stipulates that a pass in Departmental Tests 
is necessary  for successful completion of probation, making an officer 
eligible for increment or for confirmation in any post and as a qualification 
for continuance in the post.    
An analysis of SPARK data found that out of 8,28,063 employees, 
departmental exam pass details were recorded for only 1,40,561 employees, 
leaving 6,87,502 employees' details unrecorded. Furthermore, 1,16,341 
records had missing certificate numbers and dates. 
In the ‘increment sanctioned details ’ table, records of 4,20,803 employees 
were available. However, for 2,94,298 employees, second and subsequent 
increments were sanctioned without verifying the departmental exam pass 
details in SPARK.  
Government stated (November 2024) that the best suited recommendation is 
to fetch the data from KPSC41 website/ database to SPARK as and when an 
employee passes the mandatory departmental exams. For this, the integration 
of SPARK with software of KPSC is being planned to implement through 
SPARK 2.0. 
Recommendation No. 26  
Government should fix a time frame for integration of SPARK with 
software of KPSC for recording details of departmental exams. 
5.5.2  Irregular sanction of Leave Without Allowance (LWA) for 
a continuous spell of more than five years  
Employees of the State Government were eligible for availing Leave 
Without Allowance (LWA) either for engaging in better employment or for 
joining spouse as per Appendix XII A and Appendix XII C of Kerala Service 
Rule-Vol I. Up to 04 November 2020, employees could avail LWA for 20 
years in their entire service with a spell of continuous five years. However, 
Government42 had amended the rule provision, there by the LWA has been 
fixed to a maximum of five years in the entire service of a government 
servant from 05 November 2020 onwards. On verification of 921 records of 
LWAs availed by the state government employees after 05 November 2020, 
Audit observed the following discrepancies in implementing the order:  
 
41  Kerala Public Service Commission.  
42  Vide order No.83/2020/Fin dated 30 December 2020. 

Expenditure Management  
55 
(i) Irregular Sanction of LWA for more than five years in a spell 
It was noticed that in the cases of two employees in Directorate of Health 
Services, leaves beyond five years were sanctioned as detailed below in 
Table 5.5. 
Table 5.5 
Sanction of LWA for more than five years 
Sl. No PEN From Date To Date No. of days 
1 891402 01-01-2022 31-12-2027 2,191 
2 820736 01-01-2022 31-12-2027 2,191 
(Source: SPARK database). 
(ii) Irregular sanction of LWA for employees who had already 
availed five years’ leave in their entire service 
It was noticed that in 14 cases, employees who had already availed the LWA 
for five years before 05 November 2020, were again sanctioned LWA as 
detailed in Appendix – 5.9. 
The analysis reveals that the current SPARK system lacks the capability to 
enforce the rule provision stipulated by Government regarding the limitation 
of the entire Leave Without Allowance (LWA) to a maximum of five years.  
Government stated (November  2024) that necessary software changes are 
being enabled within the system so as to restrict the LWA period to five 
years.  
Recommendation No. 27 
Government should fix a time frame for software modification to restrict 
the LWA period to five years. 
5.5.3     Deficiencies in Monthly salary processing 
The monthly salary bill processing through the SPARK system involves 
three steps: salary initiation, bill making, and e -submission of bills to 
treasury for payment. The first step, salary initiation,  is the process of 
creating the payroll for employees within the SPARK system. Once the 
salary initiation is completed, the next step is bill making. During this phase, 
the system generates the salary bill based on the verification of the salary 
details in payroll for the employees. Finally, after the bill is prepared, it is 
electronically submitted to the treasury concerned for payment.  Audit 
noticed the following deficiencies:  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 56   
5.5.3.1 Incorrect mapping of House Rent Allowance  Class of 
locality of the offices 
Pay Revision Order (February 2021) stipulates that House Rent Allowance 
(HRA) is payable as a percentage of basic pay based on the class of locality 
in which the office is situated.  
Test check in the SPARK database for the audit period of the monthly 
salaries drawn by officials of five offices located in Civil Station Kasargode 
in Chengala Grama Panchayath revealed that HRA was paid at the rate of 
six per cent of the basic pay classifying the location as Class C instead of 
Class D in which HRA is payable at the rate of four per cent only. 
The incorrect mapping of HRA class in the database resulted in excess 
payment of HRA amounting to ₹14.75 lakh for the test checked offices as 
detailed in Appendix-5.10. 
Audit also observed that the table ‘OFFICES’ in SPARK data which contains 
the fields ‘TALUK’,  ‘VILLAGE’ and ‘LOCALBODY’ did not have 
information on the location of the office in 7,494 out of 48,012 records, 
though it was relevant for regulating HRA class.   
Government stated (November 2024) that strict instructions have been issued 
to all DDOs for checking and curtailing the practise of irregular drawing of 
allowance through SPARK and making the concerned DDOs personally 
accountable for the irregular drawing of allowance if occurred. 
The reply is not tenable, as the application must be strengthened to map the 
HRA class, so that such cases are prevented in the future. 
5.5.3.2  Irregular processing of salary of employees who were on 
Leave Without Allowances   
Analysis of SPARK database with respect to Leave Without Allowance 
(LWA) availed showed that during the audit period, in 18 Departments, 
payroll for processing salary was generated for 54 employees  during their 
LWA period.  
Audit cross verified six cases with the data available in CoreTIS database 
and found that salary was processed for the employees as detailed in 
Appendix-5.11, resulting in ineligible salary amounting to ₹4.48 lakh being 
paid. 
Deficiency of the system in detecting and excluding LWA cases resulted in 
inclusion of employees on LWA in the payroll. 
Government stated (November 2024) that necessary software modification 
will be proposed in the next version of SPARK. 

Expenditure Management  
57 
5.6  Irregular processing of salary of employees who retired/ 
superannuated, took voluntary retirement, died while in 
service, declared invalid from service 
On analysis of data of 1,17,286 employees  under 147 departments, who 
retired or took voluntary retirement from service or bec ame invalid or died 
while in service, it was noticed that in 228 cases under 30 departments , 
payrolls for processing salary were generated for these employees after they 
exited from Government service as mentioned above. 
Audit cross verified this with salary bills passed in CoreTIS and found that 
in four cases salaries were processed, which resulted in drawing of ineligible 
salary amounting to ₹6. 59 lakh as detailed in Appendix-5.12. It was 
observed that SPARK application does not have a feature to mark the end of 
service of an employee. As a result, salary was processed to these employees. 
Government stated (November 2024) that already SPARK provided option 
for processing salary of employees, who retired/  superannuated/ died while 
in service.  
Recommendation No. 28 
Government should implement a functionality in SPARK to mark end of 
service event in employee data and to process further payments to ex -
employees only after this is specifically permitted by the DDO in the 
system. 
5.7  Absence of mechanism for monitoring of utilisation 
certificate of Grants-in-Aid  
Article 210 of the Kerala Financial Code (Vol I) provides that the authority 
sanctioning grant-in-aid has to stipulate, in every order sanctioning the grant, 
a time limit not exceeding one year from the date of sanction for utilisation 
of the grant and a t ime limit of nine months for the submission of audited 
accounts. The Utilisation Certificate (UC) should be furnished within three 
months from the date of receipt of audited accounts. The UCs for grants -in-
aid exceeding ₹2 lakh have to be forwarded to the AG (A&E), Kerala. UCs 
outstanding beyond the specified period i ndicates absence of assurance on 
utilisation of grants for intended purposes.  
Audit noticed that the controls for monitoring of the utilisation of grants was 
not made part of IFMS -K. Tracking funds drawn on grant -in-aid bills were 
not facilitated as there was no provision for monitoring the submission of 
UCs.  
Government stated (November 2024) that a new feature called 'Grant-in-aid 
Monitoring Module', which is integrated with BiMS and WAMS software 
applications and is currently in the testing phase. Under the system, the 
Administrative Department can sanction the next grant to a Grant -in-Aid 
Institution only after UC for the previous grant has been submitted via the 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 58   
WAMS application. By the introduction of the new feature accurate 
monitoring of grant in aid will be possible. 
Government may fix a timeline for updating the system to enable the above 
features. 
5.8  Deficiencies in Effective Management of Issuance of Letter 
of credit (EMLI) 
EMLI is a web -based application, which was introduced by Department of 
Finance for automating the issuance of Letter of Credit (LOC) based on the 
bills submitted by the works executed departments.  
5.8.1  Non-recording of Contractor Details in Database 
Audit analysed the contractor information maintained in the EMLI database. 
Total number of contractors as per the EMLI database is 31,810. Essential 
details such as Aadhaar numbers, GSTIN (Goods and Services Tax 
Identification Number) and PAN were not mandatorily captured in the 
database. 
Aadhaar details were not recorded for 31,761 contractor s, GSTIN field 
remained blank for 3,668 contractors and junk values were detected in PAN 
for 183 contractors. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the EMLI system will be updated 
to capture additional information such as Aadhar number and GSTINs.  
Recommendation No. 29 
Government should fix a time frame for updation of the EMLI application 
to capture additional information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
MANAGEMENT 

 
 
 

 
59 
CHAPTER-VI 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT MANAGEMENT   
 
Integrated Accounts Management System (iAMS) is envisaged to 
streamline the preparation and submission of treasury account to the AG 
(A&E). There is a risk of backend access to the database of iAMS, which 
allows stored procedures to be executed by manually editing ‘date’ 
variables. Further, the system lacks capability to reconcile GST 
transactions which resulted in unreconciled amount of GST. 
 
6.1 Introduction 
Accounts Management is a systematic process of recording the monthly 
accounts received from treasuries and verifying the account information 
obtained. Integrated Accounts Management System ( iAMS) is utilised to 
streamline the preparation and submission of Treasury accounts to the AG 
(A&E). After completing closing procedures of treasury such as day close, 
cash close, treasury close etc., the system facilitates transfer of data to the 
VLC system of the Accountant General through the iAMS.  
IFMS-K envisaged that AG (A&E) should be able to prepare Monthly 
Accounts through the system itself and furnish the same online to 
Department of Finance.  
6.2  Risk due to execution of back end script for monthly e -
Treasury accounts  
The monthly consolidation of the accounts of e-Treasury (Core Treasury) is 
transferred electronically to the VLC system for the preparation of monthly 
accounts. Audit noticed that consolidation process is done through execution 
of a set of scripts  and stored procedures provided by NIC in the backend. 
Scripts and database stored procedure were executed every month after 
editing the defined date range manually in the backend of CoreTIS, TSB and 
GRASKL databases.  
Audit observed that backend access of database for execution of script and 
stored procedures for manually editing the ‘date’ variables poses risk of data 
errors and manipulation.  
The issue has been rectified at the instance of Audit and Government stated 
(November 2024) that monthly consolidation of e -Treasury accounts is 
processed through the iAMS application now. 
 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 60   
6.3  Short/ Excess credit of SGST revenue due to non -
reconciliation of GST transactions 
The Central government simplified the indirect taxation system with the 
introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST) by integrating the tax systems 
of the Central and State Governments. The key agencies involved in the 
process of GST transactions are Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), 
Banks and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).   
The components of GST include: 
1. State Goods and Services Tax (SGST): This portion of tax collected is 
entirely receivable by the State and accounted under Major Head 0006. 
2. Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST): This portion of tax collected 
is initially retained by the Central Government under Major Head 0005 
and is later shared between the Central and State Governments as per 
the recommendations of the Finance Commission. 
3. Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST): This portion of tax 
collected by the Central Government under Major Head 0008 is 
equally shared between the Central and State Governments depending 
on the final destination of goods or services delivered.  
Taxpayers uses GST portal for remitting tax due and on completion of 
payment through banks, a unique identification number called CIN (Challan 
Identification Number) is generated to identify the challan against which 
payment is made. The electronic scroll of all the CINs thus generated are 
shared by GSTN and RBI to the State Accounting Authority (e -Treasury). 
RBI credits the amount in the Consolidated Fund of the State as per the e -
scroll sent to the accounting authority (e-Treasury). 
The treasury has to reconcile the SGST figures on the basis of e -scrolls 
submitted by RBI with the scrolls received from GST portal. If any 
discrepancy is found, e-Treasury is required to intimate the mismatch to RBI 
via Memorandum of Errors (MoE) for corrective measures. RBI then 
addresses the issues in MoE and if any amount is receivable by the State, 
RBI credits the Consolidated Fund of the State. In case of excess credit 
already provided, a refund procedure would be initiated. 
In case of missing CINs in any of the scrolls received by e -Treasury, the 
reconciliation mechanism involved is depicted in Exhibit 6.1 below:  
 
 
 
 
 

Accounts and Audit Management  
61 
Exhibit 6.1 
Reconciliation by e-Treasury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit noticed from the figures of AG (A&E) that there are differences in the 
State Goods and Services Tax figures in respect of Government of Kerala 
between the amount credited to the State’s account by RBI and the 
corresponding amounts booked as receipts by e -Treasury of the State. The 
year wise split up of differences is depicted below in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1 
Year wise differences in GST collection   
(₹ in crore) 
Year RBI figure e-Treasury figure Difference 
2017-18 5,491.67 5,212.79 278.88 
2018-19 8,269.92 8,260.52 9.40 
2019-20 9,456.52 9,214.04 242.48 
2020-21 8,338.23 8,311.38 26.85 
2021-22 9,886.75 9,860.06 26.69 
     (Source: Records of AG (A&E)) 
Audit analysed (August 2022) data tables of scrolls received from RBI and 
GSTN for the period from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 and noticed the following 
lapses against which MoEs were not generated by e-Treasury. 
a) 48,449 CINs amounting to ₹204.72 crore reported by GSTN did not 
appear in RBI e-scroll indicating probable shortage in SGST credit to 
the State. 
b) 7,38,903 CINs with SGST component amounting to ₹5,750.09 crore 
reported by RBI had no matching CINs in GSTN indicating chances 
of excess SGST credit received by State. 
GSTN > RBI 
MoE raised to 
RBI. 
If RBI figure is 
found to be under 
reported the 
amount is credited 
to CFS by RBI 
 
Differential amount 
booked under minor head 
500-RAT below the major 
head 0006 –SGST and 
MoE raised to RBI. 
If RBI figure is found to be 
over report ed, refund is 
initiated from Receipt 
Awaiting Transfer (RAT)  
else if RBI figure stands, 
amount parked under RAT 
is transferred to final Head 
RBI > GSTN 
CIN 
from 
RBI 
CIN 
from 
GSTN 
Reconciliation 
by e-Treasury 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 62   
Government stated (December 2022) that NIC has developed a system for 
online generation of MoE and on generation certain CINs were found 
missing and this was intimated to RBI. Later, Government stated (March 
2023) that e -Treasury received the required files from RBI and as per this 
SGST collected by Federal Bank has gone to another state. Final direction 
from RBI to Federal Bank is awaited to settle the issue. Government further 
stated (November 2024) that the delay in developing the MoE will not affect 
the GST revenue of the State. 
Based on the reply Audit restored the treasury data including the updated 
files of RBI and on further analysis (April 2023) observed that: 
a) 3,054 CINs with SGST component amounting to ₹8.16 crore were still 
missing in RBI scroll up  to March 2023. Out of 3,054 CINs, 2,190  
CINs amounting to ₹7.17 crore related to transactions of Federal Bank 
and the remaining 864 CINs amounting to ₹0.99 crore related to six43 
banks. The month -wise split up of the missing CINs is detailed in 
Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2 
Details of SGST component of CINs missing in RBI scroll 
Year Month No. of CINs SGST (₹) 
2018 September 2 9,850 
December 13 1,56,065 
2020 September 4 11,778 
December 2 5,000 
2021 February 1 35,642 
July 2 540 
2022 April 1 35,011 
November 1,065 3,11,00,402 
December 1,125 4,05,98,637 
2023 March 839 96,56,543 
Total 3,054 8,16,09,468 
       (Source: GRASKL database). 
b) 8,43,230 CINs with SGST component amounting to ₹6,521.12 crore  
(Appendix 6.1) reported by RBI have no matching CINs in the data 
shared by GSTN as detailed in Table 6.3. 
 
 
 
 
43  Canara Bank -100, IDBI-3, SBI-3, Bank of Maharashtra-4, UCO Bank-15 and RBI -739. 

Accounts and Audit Management  
63 
Table 6.3 
Details of RBI CINs with no matching CIN in e-treasury 
Year No. of RBI CINs with no matching 
CIN in e-Treasury 
SGST (₹ in crore) 
2017-18 32,535 189.87 
2018-19 68,742 529.83 
2019-20 2,10,814 1,378.54 
2020-21 3,448 4.84 
2021-22 4,25,660 3,665.98 
2022-23 1,02,031 752.06 
Total 8,43,230 6,521.12 
(Source: GRASKL database). 
The replies of Government are not tenable as failure on the part of Director 
of Treasuries under the administrative control of Department  of Finance to 
make timely reconciliation of GST receipts reported by GSTN and RBI 
resulted in non-compliance with guidelines and loss of GST revenue to the 
State. Further, absence of functionality in IFMS -K system to automatically 
reconcile scrolls from both the RBI and GSTN, and to  generate 
Memorandum of Error (MoE) based on such reconciliation, highlights a 
system deficiency. 
Recommendation No. 30 
Government should enhance the IFMS -K system to enable automatic 
reconciliation of scrolls from the RBI and GSTN, facilitating the 
generation of a Memorandum of Error. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
CORE TREASURY 
SAVINGS BANK (TSB) 

 
   
 

 
65 
CHAPTER-VII 
CORE TREASURY SAVINGS BANK (TSB)   
 
TSB provides facilities for both Savings Bank (SB) operations and Fixed 
Deposits. This application also handles the operation and maintenance of 
Personal Deposit (PD) accounts. However, TSB had deficiencies, such as 
non-migration of accounts from Treasury Information System (TIS) to 
TSB and the lack of system controls for closing inoperative PD accounts. 
Negative balances in many accounts, non -capturing of KYC details for 
accounts, deficiency in signature verification and absence of maker -
checker process for transactions below ₹50,000 were noticed. 
7.1 Introduction 
TSB Accounts are being maintained in the Treasuries in accordance with 
Rule 37(3) of Kerala Treasury Code . There are two categories of TSB 
accounts viz., Individual TSB accounts (Savings Bank accounts, Fixed 
Deposit accounts, Pensioners Savings Bank accounts, Employees Treasury 
Savings Bank accounts etc.) and Institutional TSB Accounts [Social Security 
Pension accounts, Special Treasury Savings Bank account (STSB), Treasury 
Public account (TPA), Plan Scheme TSB account (PSTSB) etc.]. 
Government employees open ETSB accounts to get their salary credited into 
their account and the Pensioners open PTSB account to get their pensions 
credited. Fixed Deposit (FD) account holders can open TSB account to get 
their interest credited automatically into their TSB Account. 
The operation and maintenance of PD accounts are also done through TSB 
application. PD Accounts are in the nature of banking accounts which enable 
designated Drawing Officers to incur expenditure for specific purposes 
pertaining to a scheme. 
The deficiencies noticed in the operation of TSB are detailed in succeeding 
paragraphs: 
7.2 Non-migration of Personal Deposit a ccounts from 
Treasury Information System to Treasury Savings Bank 
Rule 282(5)(d) of Kerala Financial Code Vol.I provides  that the 
Administrators (deposit holders) of personal accounts should close the 
Personal Deposit (PD) Accounts at the end of the financial year and credit 
the unspent balances back to the Consolidated Fund under the expenditure 
Heads of Accounts concerned. However, if any PD accounts are not operated 
for a period of three completed financial years the same shall be closed. 
Before the evolution of TSB System in 2016, PD accounts were maintained 
in the then standalone Treasury Information System (TIS). The PD accounts 
maintained in TIS needed to be migrated to the new TSB system. However, 
Audit noticed that non-migrated PD Accounts including deposits of 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 66   
educational institutions existed even after eight years, in test-checked 
Treasuries. 
From the details  made available to Audit by Directorate of Treasuries 
(January 2023), in four District Treasuries, out of six selected District 
Treasuries, there exists non-migrated personal deposit accounts which were 
non-operational from the year 2000 onwards. Details of  the PD accounts 
which were not migrated to the TSB amounting to ₹9.62 crore  are detailed 
in Appendix - 7.1.  
Government stated (March 2023) that a team have been constituted to speed 
up the process of rectifying the defects existing in PD accounts and efforts 
are in pro gress. Government further stated (November 2024) that the 
evaluation process of reconciliation has already been started and reviewed at 
the Directorate level at regular intervals. 
Recommendation No. 31 
Government should take necessary action to reconcile and migrate data to 
TSB in a time-bound manner. 
7.3 Non-updation of ‘Know Your Customer’ details in 
Treasury Savings Bank  
The RBI has issued guidelines  as part of ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC) 
principle relating to identification of depositors and advised the banks to put 
in place systems and procedures to help control financial frauds, identify 
money laundering and suspicious activities, and for scrutiny/  monitoring of 
large value cash transactions.  
KYC is essential for verifying individuals or corporations for opening 
accounts. Officially valid d ocuments for KYC purpose include passport, 
driving licence, voters’ ID card, PAN card, Aadhaar issued by UIDAI and 
job card issued by NREGA signed by a State Government official. 
Audit noticed that  the master table in the CoreTSB database contains 
19,11,074 unique customer IDs, along with three key columns to record 
essential KYC details: ID card, Aadhaar, and PAN. Data analysis revealed 
that KYC details were missing for 5,98,498 customers (31 per cent). Further, 
it was observed that there was duplication of values, junk values etc., in 
Aadhaar and PAN as given in Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1 
Details of customers linked with Aadhar and PAN 
Description  Aadhaar PAN 
No. of customers having 8,98,907 11,50,171 
No. of customers having unique and proper 8,42,693 9,77,775 
No. of customers having duplicate values       56,085 1,28,451 

Core Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) 
67 
Description  Aadhaar PAN 
No. of customers having junk values               129 43,945 
(Source: CoreTSB database). 
Analysis also revealed that:  
• 27,025 number of Aadhaar numbers were repeated for 56,085 
customers. For instance, a number ‘999999999999’ is repeated 373 
times. Also, there were 129 junk values in these columns. 
• 56,874 PANs were repeated for 1,28,451 customers. Also, there were 
43,945 number of customers with junk value for PANs. 
The reports generated from the TSB system also indicate that customer KYC 
details are not completely updated. There was no mechanism in place for 
periodic updation of KYC as well as for categorisation of customers based 
on risk associated. 
Government stated (March 2023) that Aadhaar based e -KYC updation for 
TSB customers is in development stage. Government further stated 
(November 2024) that the progress of updation of the same is reviewed on a 
monthly basis at the Directorate level. 
Recommendation No. 32 
Government should initiate action to mandatorily update the KYC details 
of customers in TSB system. 
7.4 Passing of cheques without signature verification 
In core banking, a Customer ID is a unique identifier assigned to each 
customer, enabling the system to consolidate and manage all accounts, 
transactions, and services related to that customer under a single profile. This 
ensures accurate record-keeping and reporting against individual customers.  
Further, every TSB account holder is eligible to operate his account using 
cheques issued to him. The cheque being a bearer instrument could be issued 
to anyone the account holder wishes and the bearer can encash it from the 
counter in the treasury. The primary evidence proving the authenticity of the 
cheque is that it is being properly signed by the account holder. 
Audit scrutini sed cheque based transactions data regarding Savings Bank 
(SB) and pensioner SB account types for the period 2016-17 to 2022-23 and 
noticed that out of 19,11,074 unique Customer IDs generated, additional 
details consisting of photo and signature against Customer IDs were 
available only for 9,93,895. Among these, photos were not available in 
60,162 cases and signatures were not available in 24,800 cases. On 
verification of the cheque passing functionality in TSB system, Audit 
observed that the space provided for showing signature  in system was very 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 68   
small and it was impossible to verify the details of the signature with such a 
small portion provided on screen. 
Audit identified cases where the processing of cheques was done without 
proper signature verification as detailed in Appendix 7.2. 
Analysis revealed that: 
• Out of 3,01,71,498 number of cheque transactions, signatures were not 
verified in 94,30,119 number of transactions. 
• There were 7,95,535 number of cheque transactions passed in the bank 
amounting to ₹18,291.3 6 crore with no signature available in the 
database. 
Government stated (November 2024) that strict instructions have been issued 
to all treasury officers to verify the existing signature and update the missing, 
if any, after collecting fresh KYC form. All internal inspection teams have 
been instructed to mon itor this procedure in their inspections as an item.  It 
was also stated that size and clarity of scanned image will be increased in the 
upcoming version of the proposed TSB 2.0. 
Recommendation No. 33 
Government should update the system by making it mandatory to capture 
the signature of all customers in the database and ensure that cheques are 
passed only after verification against signature captured.   
7.5 Absence of Maker-Checker process for transactions below 
₹50,000 
Maker-Checker is a control that requires two separate people to authorize a 
transaction. The first official is responsible for creating the request (known 
as the maker), while the second official checks and approves the activity 
(known as the checker). This process hel ps to protect banking business and 
also employees from making unintended errors or deviating from process. 
Once Maker -Checker has been enabled, all eligible maker transactions 
performed will be transferred to a pre -selected pool of checkers for 
authorisation.  
Audit observed that in TSB, no maker-checker exists for transactions below 
₹50,000. The teller being the maker also authorises the payment thereby 
acting as the checker too. This payment is never checked or verified again in 
the system to ascertain the correctness of payments. 
During the period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, there were 2,61,53,918 number of 
cheque transactions amounting to ₹53,989 .39 crore under ₹50,000. Out of 
these, 6,77,159 transactions amounting to ₹1,259.58 crore were authorized 
without a signature being available in the system for verification as detailed 
in Appendix 7.3. 

Core Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) 
69 
Government stated  (March 2023 and November 2024) that although the 
maker is passing the cheque and making payment, the instruments are again 
verified by the S avings Bank passing officer after the payment is over and 
before doing the day close activities. Also, during the compilation of 
monthly accounts thorough checking is done in each treasuries and in 
District Treasuries. 
The reply is not tenable as the system is not enabled for maker -checker 
process for amounts below ₹50,000.  Government’s contention that the 
instruments are again verified by the passing officer after the payment is over 
is of no consequence as the payment has already been effected.  
Recommendation No. 34 
Government should initiate action to enable maker -checker process for 
transactions below ₹50,000 in TSB system  to prevent unauthorised or 
fraudulent transactions. 
7.6   Non-adherence of RBI directions on validity of cheques  
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 35A of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, Reserve Bank directs that starting from 01 April 2012, 
banks are not allowed to pay cheques, drafts, pay orders, or banker’s cheques 
that are presented more than three months after the date on the instrument. 
On verification of cheque based transactions of all types of accounts in TSB 
for the period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, Audit observed that out of 3,71,58,824 
cheque transactions, 3,157 number of cheques were honoured after the 
validity period of  three months and 53 cheques were honoured after a year.   
This indicates that RBI direction on validity of cheques is not incorporated 
in the TSB applications which led to acceptance of expired cheques 
undermining the reliability and integrity of the TSB’s cheque processing 
system. 
Government stated (November 2024) that strict instructions were issued to 
all the Treasury Officers to avoid passing of time barred instruments. 
The reply is not tenable as the system should primarily be equipped with 
functionality to prevent passing of time barred instruments. 
7.7 Lack of validation control resulted in negative balance in 
various accounts 
On scrutiny of the CoreTSB database, Audit observed that 3,136 numbers of 
TSB accounts were seen transacting with negative balance  for the period 
from 2016-17 to 2022-23 as detailed in Appendix - 7.4. It was seen that the 
negative figures varies from (-)1,02,53,77,000 to (-)3.   
The type-wise split-up details of negative figures in TSB accounts is detailed 
in Appendix - 7.5. Further, verification of TSB accounts for the last working 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
 70   
day of the financial year for the audit period , revealed that 31 accounts as 
detailed in Appendix - 7.6 transacted in negative balances on that particular 
day.  
Failure in proper testing of applications before deployment and absence of 
proper acceptance testing of applications were detailed in Paragraph 2.9 of 
this Report. 
Government stated (November 2024) that a provision is made available to 
block the negative balances in all types of accounts now. This error happened 
due to the corrections made in accounts. These type corrections are also 
restricted now.  
Recommendation No. 35 
Government should implement measures to prevent negative balances in 
TSB accounts in order to curb fraudulent transactions and proper testing 
needs to be conducted to ensure the same. 
7.8 Lack of  s ystem control for the operations of Personal 
Deposit accounts and closure of inoperative accounts 
Audit observed that as on 31 March 2023, there were balances amounting to 
₹7.72 crore remain ing unspent in 107 PD Accounts under the Head 8443 -
00-106. However, treasuries did not take any action under Rule 282(5)(d) of 
Kerala Financial Code, to credit the unspent balances back to the 
consolidated fund. Out of the 107 PD Accounts, it was noticed that 26 PD 
Accounts amounting to ₹1.31 crore were inoperat ive for more than three 
years as detailed in Appendix - 7.7.  
Audit observed that n o system control exists in the Treasury modules to 
generate reports about the PD account balance going to be lapsed.  Separate 
module in IFMS-K for the operation of PD accounts was also not available.   
Government stated  (March 2023) that the  Department will explore the 
possibility of designing a new module exclusively for the operation of PD 
accounts and necessary provision will be enabled. 
However, Government had already envisaged a module for the operation of 
PD accounts in the approved FRS. As the requirements in FRS were not 
tracked through the review meetings, the functionality is not developed for 
managing the PD accounts. 
Government stated (November 2024) that modifications are expected to be 
hosted with upcoming version. 
Recommendation No. 36  
Governement should initiate action to specifically accomodate all the 
operations of PD accounts in IFMS-K.  

Core Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) 
71 
7.9 Incorrect resumption of funds  from TSB Account s to 
common head of account 
As per para 3.10 of General Directions contained in List of Major and Minor 
Heads (LMMH) of Controller General of Accounts , recoveries of 
overpayments pertaining to previous year/ years under revenue expenditure 
are to be recorded under distinct Minor Head (Deduct Recoveries of 
Overpayments) below the concerned major/ sub major head from where the 
expenditure was initially incurred.  
Audit observed that during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23, the resumed funds 
pertaining to revenue expenditure heads were credited to a common head of 
account (2075-00-911-Deduct Recoveries of Overpayments ), instead of 
crediting to  concerned heads from where the expenditures were initially 
incurred.   
During 2022-23, ₹6,243 crore was resumed into the common head of account 
and the reason for not crediting to the concerned heads of account was stated 
as inability to identify heads of account from where original debit was made 
as the TSB system is not modified to capture the revenue/ capital expenditure 
head of account to which the resumed amount is to be credited.  
Government stated (November 2024) that the modifications are expected to 
be hosted with upcoming version. 
Recommendation No. 37  
Government should update the TSB module , so that on resumption the 
amounts are credited to the concerned heads of account from where the 
expenditure was initially incurred. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
INFORMATION SYSTEM 
SECURITY CONTROLS 

 
 96   
 

 
73 
CHAPTER-VIII 
INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY CONTROLS 
The Department failed to conduct third party independent testing. Security 
Audit was not conducted for some IFMS-K applications. The budget 
application used for the state budget was running in an unlicensed DB2 
version. The system allowed multiple logins  in various web -based 
applications. IFMS-K is not identified as Critical Information Infrastructure 
(CII) under GoI guidelines. Disaster Recovery (DR) Plan and Data Retention 
Policy were not formulated and far DR centre to ensure data protection is not 
available.  
8.1 Introduction. 
IFMS-K plays vital role in managing and safeguarding details of funds and 
transactions of Government of Kerala , making it a potential target  for internal 
and external threats. Security controls are , therefore, crucial to ensure the 
protection of financial assets and sensitive information of Government and the 
public. Identification of vulnerabilities for enhancing security controls and 
ensuring compliance with applicable regulations and standards is essential i n 
protecting financial assets, maintain integrity of financial transactions and 
uphold public trust in the system. 
Key areas of security controls of information systems are: 
➢ Physical security: Ensures that only authorised personnel have access 
to sensitive areas and that appropriate security measures are in place. 
➢ Information Security: Protects against unauthorised access, data 
breaches, and cyber-attacks. 
➢ Network and Network Infrastructure Security: Detects and responds to 
any suspicious activity. 
➢ Internal Controls and Processes: Ensures that adequate controls are in 
place to prevent fraud, errors, or misappropriation of funds. 
➢ Compliance with Regulatory Requirements: Compliance with relevant 
regulations, such as Government Accounting Standards, RBI 
guidelines, IT Act and any specific regulatory requirements. 
➢ Incident Response and Business Continuity: Evaluates incident 
response plans, disaster recovery procedures, and business continuity 
strategies to ensure that appropriate measures  are in place to respond 
to and recover from security incidents or disruptions in operations. 
Security lapses noticed during audit of IFMS -K are detailed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
74 
8.2  Non-conducting of System testing by third party  
Government of India guidelines  (January 2009) for Indian Government 
websites stipulates that each website/ application must undergo a security audit 
from empanelled agencies and clearance prior to hosting and also after addition 
of new modules.  
Audit observed that no such third -party independent testing of the IFMS -K to 
identify design flaws was performed for assurance on the reliability  of the 
system. 
Government stated (March 2023) that third party security testing of applications 
under the direct control of the Department of Finance have been initiated.  
While noting the action initiated by State Government, the fact remains that 
security testing has not been undertaken for the applications managed by 
Department of Treasuries.  
8.3 Non-reception of Safe to Host Certificate  
Government direction (October 2015) stipulates that ‘Safe to Host’ security 
audit certificate is mandatory for any websites to be hosted at State Data Centre. 
Government further reiterated  (April 2019) the requirement of ‘Safe to Host’ 
security audit certificate for all e -governance application, from CERT -In44 
empaneled security auditing agency. 
Audit observed that Safe to Host certificates were not received for any of the 
IFMS-K applications. Further, though the a pplications maintained by 
Department of Treasuries have been security audited , those maintained by 
Department of Finance have not been security audited.  
Government stated  (March 2023) that  the treasury applications are security 
audited and subsequent versions are being audited by STQC. ‘Safe to Host ’ 
certificate would be furnished by Treasury Department. Further, in case of other 
IFMS-K applications security auditing status and ‘Safe to Host ’ certificate 
would also be furnished. 
While noting the reply, the fact remains that the Safe to Host Certificate has not 
been arranged for the last eight years.  
8.4 System permits Multiple Login  
Simultaneous multiple logins from a single computer and same user logging in 
from different systems simultaneously  are to be disabled in all web -based 
applications having public access to internet for security reasons. 
Audit observed that multiple logins were allowed with no IP restrictions and the 
users could access applications from multiple computers simultaneously 
regarding applications managed by Department of Finance. Test check (BIMS, 
 
44  Indian Computer Emergency Response Team.  

Information System Security Controls 
75 
BAMS) also revealed that internet -based applications permitted multiple user 
sign in. This lapse has made the applications vulnerable to security incidents. 
Government stated (March 2023) that IP binding is not possible for Internet 
based applications and possible only for Intranet applications.  
The reply is not tenable. The Audit comment is not about IP binding of Internet 
based applications but about simultaneous login with same username and 
password from different computers which can be restricted.  
Recommendation No. 38 
Government should limit user sessions to single login per account and a single 
account from a computer at a time to enhance security. 
8.5 Usage of unsupported DB2 Database Management System 
Unsupported software lacks vendor support and access to regular updates and 
security patches leaving the organisation vulnerable to potential software bugs, 
security vulnerabilities, and other technical issues. Use of unsupported software 
potentially impacts effective management of data, streamlin ing of processes, 
and integration with critical applications or databases.  
Audit observed that the Budget 2.0 application used for the preparation of State 
Budget in Department of Finance was running in an unsupported DB2 version 
8 of IBM. As per official website of IBM, extended support of DB2 version 8 
ended on 30 April 2012. 
Government stated (November 2024) that steps for database migration is in 
progress.  
Recommendation No. 39 
Government should fix a timeline for completing the data migration and 
ensure supported Database Management Systems are used. 
8.6 Delay in implementation of Single Sign-On  
Single Sign-On (SSO) is a technology that lets users log in to multiple 
applications and websites with one set of credentials. SSO makes the 
authentication process more efficient for users.  
During IFMS -K review meeting  (April 2017) it was decided to implement 
proper security features in IFMS-K using Single Sign-On. NIC was to provide 
technical opinion on the matter. In the IFMS-K review meeting (July 2017), the 
Department of Treasuries was directed to complete the Lightweight Directory  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
76 
Access Protocol (LDAP) 45 and SSO in all applications of treasury within two 
weeks.  
Audit observed that even after a lapse of eight years, SSO is not completed.  
Government stated  (December 2022 and March 2023) that LDAP for intra -
treasury was started implementing during the beginning of year 2018 and was 
later disabled during 2020 -21 due to server issues. Later, after installation of 
new servers during 2021 -22, AEBAS 46 based OTP for multi -factor 
authentication was enabled in the Intra -treasury applications and implemented 
SSO using Parichay for internet-based applications during the current financial 
year and hence there was no undue delay in the implementation of SSO for 
IFMS-K applications.  
The reply is not tenable, as this does not fulfill the purpose of Single Sign -On.  
Audit verified various intra -treasury applications ( eg: CoreTIS, CoreTSB, 
CRA, PIMS etc.) during July 2024 and noticed that the users had to still login 
to these modules separately each time.  For the internet -based applications 
(BIMS, BAMS, WAMS etc.) of IFMS -K, even though NIC’s SSO is 
implemented, it was optional . For certain other applications such as SPARK, 
BDS etc., the NIC’s SSO was not implemented.   
8.7 Non-identification as Critical Information Infrastructure  
Information Technology Act, 2000  defines Critical Information Infrastructure 
(CII) as a computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall 
have debilitating impact on national security, economy, public health or safety. 
The Information Technology (National Critical Info rmation Infrastructure 
Protection Centre (NCIIPC)47 and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) 
Rules, 2013 mandates that the basic responsibility for protecting CII system 
shall lie with the agency running that CII . The NCIIPC has identified 
Government among others as critical sector and laid down guidelines for 
identification of CIIs based on a set of parameters such as the total number of 
transactions per day, the value of all types of transactions per day, number of 
connected devices and network size, number of customers of different 
categories etc. NCIIPC shall monitor and forecast national level threats to CII 
for situational awareness for early warnings alerts . IFMS-K qualifies to be 
identified and notified as CII.   
Audit observed that the department was yet to assess the criticality of the system 
and take measures to notify IFMS -K as a CII under GoI guidelines , depriving 
the project of an enhanced security infrastructure commensurate with its 
significance. 
 
45  An open, vendor -neutral, industry standard application protocol for accessing and 
maintaining distributed directory information services over an Internet Protocol (IP) 
network. 
46  Aadhaar Enabled Biometric Attendance System. 
47  NCIIPC is an organisation of the Government of India created under Sec tion 70A of the IT 
Act, 2000 and designated as the national nodal agency for Critical Information Infrastructure 
Protection vide Gazette Notification G.S.R 18(E) dated 16 January 2014.  

Information System Security Controls 
77 
Government stated (November 2024) that steps for notifying IFMS -K as a CII 
under Government of India guidelines are in the initial phase of discussion with 
NIC.  
Recommendation No. 40 
Government should fix a time frame to notify IFMS -K as a Critical 
Information Infrastructure. 
8.8  Non-formulation of Data Retention Policy 
Data protection is the process of safeguarding important information from 
corruption, compromise or loss. It is a set of strategies and processes used to 
secure the privacy, availability, and integrity of the data. A data protection 
strategy is vital for a ny organisation that collects, handles, or stores sensitive 
data. A successful strategy can help prevent data loss, theft, or corruption and 
can help minimise damage caused in the event of a breach or disaster.  A Data 
Retention Policy (DRP) has to have provisions for classification of data, risk 
assessment of data, data retention period, data security aspects, disposal of data 
once the retention period is over and ensure that the data centre architecture 
supports the DRP. 
Audit observed that the department is yet to formulate an appropriate Data 
Retention Policy (DRP) . There were no documents available regarding the 
period for which the transactional data would be retained in live database and 
as of how the data pertaining to lapsed period is to be handled. 
Government stated (November 2024) that an appropriate Data Retention Policy 
specifying the period for which the transactional data would be retained in live 
database and management of the data pertaining to lapsed period shall be 
formulated sooner after deliberation with the stakeholders. 
Recommendation No. 41 
Government should fix a time frame to implement a Data Retention Policy. 
8.9 Absence of Business continuity/ Disaster management plan  
Disaster Recovery (DR) aims at protecting the organisation from the effects of 
significant catastrophic events. It allows the organisations to quickly resume 
mission-critical functions after a disaster. The goal for any organisation with 
DR is to continue operating as close to normal as possible in case of system 
crash, calamities like theft, fire, floods, etc.  
As part of the implementation of Government Receipts Accounting System 
(GRAS), servers and other IT equipment were procured and installed at State 
Data Centre -1 (SDC -1)48 as primary Data Centre and National Data Centre 
(NDC), New Delhi as Far Disaster Recovery (DR) site on 31 January 2014. 
 
48  Co-Bank Tower, Thiruvananthapuram. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
78 
However, later, new server and IT equipment were installed at SDC -249, and 
made operational from May 2021 as primary Data Centre. Four servers and one 
Network Attached Storage (NAS) were shifted to SDC -1, and database 
replication started there as near DR site from 09 January 2022. 
8.9.1  Non-availability of Far Disaster Recovery Centre and  futile claim 
of service charges 
A Far DR site should be located at a significant distance from the primary site 
or production environment. This geographic separation helps to mitigate the risk 
of a single point of failure. It ensures that if a disaster such as a natural calamity 
or infrastructure failure affects the primary  site, the Far DR site remains 
unaffected, allowing critical operations to continue. Far DR site plays a vital 
role in ensuring the resilience, data protection, and continuous operations of 
treasuries, particularly in the face of unforeseen disasters or disruptions.  
The IT equipment installed at NDC, New Delhi for far DR could not conduct 
real time data transfer and the Technical Committee in its meeting (May 2021)  
recommended that the far DR at NDC, New Delhi to be discarded and the 
equipment installed there is to be disposed of as scrap. 
Audit noticed that initially no charges were levied for  Data Centre Services at 
NDC, New Delhi. Later, it was informed by NIC that, starting from 01 August 
2018, DR services would be provided on  payment basis, with payments 
required in full advance for the services. Therefore, NIC claimed an amount of 
₹0.83 crore for hosting the Far DR at NDC, New Delhi. 
Audit observed that due to non -availability of Far DR, real time data transfer 
could not be ensured. 
Government stated (November 2024) that the Kerala State IT Mission has 
already allotted space for setting up a Far DR at Secunderabad and the 
configuration process is underway. Government also stated that communication 
with NIC is going on to settle the issue without any financial commitment to 
Government.  
Recommendation No. 42 
Government should fix a time frame to establish a Far DR and also for settling 
the claim of NIC. 
8.9.2  Absence of a Disaster Recovery Plan 
A Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) is a documented strategy that outlines the steps 
and procedures to be followed to recover critical systems, data, and operations 
in the event of a disaster or major disruption. It provides a roadmap for an 
organisation to effectively respond, recover, and resume normal operations 
following an incident. As per MeitY 50 guidelines on Disaster Recovery Best 
 
49  Technopark Campus, Thiruvananthapuram. 
50  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India. 

Information System Security Controls 
79 
Practices, while documenting DR Plan, Departments should take a holistic view 
and focus on recovering the application services and not just servers. The 
technical recovery plan for each application/ service should be documented in a 
way that all the activities that need to be performed during  recovery should be 
defined in a sequential manner.  
Audit observed that the Department has not formulated and documented any 
Disaster Recovery Policy or Business Continuity Plan. 
Government stated (November 2024) that Disaster Recovery Plan is being 
prepared as part of ISO 27001 Certification process.  
Recommendation No. 43 
Government should fix a time frame for Disaster Recovery Plan. 
8.9.3  Non-conducting of Disaster Recovery drill 
DR Drill is a routine  activity done by an organisation to check if there is 
business continuity in case the Data Centre is down due to an unexpected event. 
Conducting a proper disaster recovery drill involves a systematic and well -
planned approach to simulate a real disaster scenario and test the effectiveness 
of the treasury's disaster recovery plan. 
Audit observed that there was no record of periodic test check conducted to 
determine whether recovery plans would work in case of any disaster. Details 
of training to IT personnel to respond effectively in emergency situations were 
also not produced. 
Government stated (March 2023) that DR drill was conducted on 09 July 2022 
by shifting the database connection to the Near DR location at SDC-1 and work 
on it and switch back to Production  site (SDC-2). A full -fledged Near DR 
implementation work is going on a war footing. Once it is implemented, the 
treasury operation can resume in a short time from Near DR if the production 
DR at SDC-2 fails.  
Recommendation No. 44 
Periodic DR drills may be scheduled, conducted and recorded and post-drill 
analysis may be undertaken to review the lessons learned.  
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
80 
8.10 Ineffectiveness of software error reporting mechanism 
Department of Treasuries introduced (August 2020) a software error reporting 
mechanism wherein error reporting was colour -coded as Red, Yellow and 
White Report s with descending order of importance of software issues and 
urgency for remedial action as stated below: 
• Red report - Software issues of serious nature or issues relating to 
financial transactions that demanded immediate corrective and 
preventive action or there would be damage. 
• Yellow report- Important software issues both financial, non-financial 
that require appropriate software intervention, but demand no 
immediate corrective and preventive action as there is no immediate 
damage due to the existence of the issue. 
• White Report- Suggestion for software modification and upgradation 
for enhancing system efficiency and quality of service delivery and 
suggestion and information on best practices. 
The reports e -mailed were to be prominently superscribed indicating the 
category of report so as to ensure priority action on such reports. The reports 
were to be finally addressed by Information System Management Cell (ISMC) 
who shall maintain a register for recording and monitoring the software changes 
reported to NIC. 
Audit observed that most of the communication regarding software issues were 
unofficially dealt with. Neither the pendency of tasks nor details of issues raised 
could be ascertained. It was also observed that though a mechanism of error 
reporting existed in the treasury , there was no mechanism in Department of 
Finance to deal with the same. 
  

Information System Security Controls 
81 
Government stated  (March 2023) that all software issues reporting from 
treasuries are classified as Red, Yellow and White according to their 
importance. A register is set up for this purpose. Also, the issues reported are 
recorded through the e -office file system and necessary steps were taken for 
resolution.  
The reply is not tenable.  Audit scrutinised the register maintained at Directorate 
of Treasuries and found that only one entry has been recorded. Further, no e-
file has been opened exclusively for error reporting. Moreover, the e-office file 
system is used for movement of online files. As such, through the e -office 
system, the ISMC would not be able to trace the pendency of tasks and details 
of all issues raised. Further, recording and monitoring the software changes 
could not be achieved through e-office. 
Recommendation No. 45 
A ticket based online issue reporting mechanism should be designed for entire 
suite of applications in IFMS -K, categori sing issues based on nature and 
urgency and fixing timeline for resolution. 
8.11 Absence of Database Administrator  
Database Administrator (DBA) is responsible for performance, integrity, and  
security of a database. A DBA is essential in disaster recovery standpoint also. 
DBA has tools to establish controls over the database and the ability to override 
these controls.  
As per clause 19 of the agreement with the supplier of DB2 database51, they will 
provide training on DBA through IBM for three officials from Treasury 
department to get certificate on DBA. As per Government order (September 
2013), NIC shall provide one exclusive DBA from NICSI for one year from the 
date of installation and the trained DBA shall be with department for a period 
of five years. 
  
 
51  M/s RP Techsoft International Pvt. Ltd. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala  
82 
Audit observed that Treasury department did not nominate anyone for the 
training and hence there is no certified DBA in the department. Instead, the 
department hired DBA from M/s RP Techsoft International Private Limited on 
a monthly payment basis. The service of DBA was discontinued by M/s RP 
Techsoft International Private Limited from 16 August 2019 and the post of 
DBA has been vacant in the Treasury Department since August 2019. Since 
then, the Department is depending on NIC for DBA activities.  
Government stated (March 2023) that seven treasury officials were given basic 
training in DBA for six days with the support of IBM and it is expected that 
DBA services may be made available through them gradually. Moreover, in a 
recent tender process, the department hired 50 Man Day support as DBA for 12 
months without any extra cost w.e.f. 01 February 2023 from another vendor of 
IBM. 
The reply is not tenable as for a database where transaction data is of critical 
financial nature and of high volume, the availability of full -time, fully trained 
and experienced  DBA who can operate database in a secure and error -free 
manner is essential.  
8.12 Non-levy of liquidated damage charges from Data base 
Administrator service provider 
Government granted (January 2019) permission to hire the service of Database 
Administrator provided by M/s RP  Techsoft International Pvt. Ltd. (at the rate 
of ₹85,000 + GST per month). The period of contract was for one year from 24 
October 2018 to 23 October 2019. Clause 9.1 of Agreement with M/s RP  
Techsoft International Pvt. Ltd. stipulates that, the contractor should invariably 
provide a suitable substitute in the event of the incumbent DBA leaving the job 
due to his personal reasons.  Any delay in providing a suitable substitute beyond 
three working days would attract liquidated damages at the rate of ₹10,000 per 
day on the contracting agency. 
Audit observed that even though the service of DBA was discontinued from 16 
August 2019 , Treasury department did not take any steps to levy liquidated 
damages from the contracting agency.  The failure of the Treasury department 
in levying liquidated damages for the delay of 66 days 52 from the firm had 
resulted in loss of ₹6.60 lakh to Government. 
  
 
52  16 August 2019 to 23 October 2019. 

Information System Security Controls 
83 
Government stated (November 2024) that the matter had been brought to the 
notice of the firm and steps in connection with availing the refund is in progress. 
Recommendation No. 46 
Government may expedite follow-ups with the firm and promptly recover the 
amounts due by enforcing contractual obligations. 
Thiruvananthapuram,                                          (VISHNUKANTH P B)
The 10 June 2025         Accountant General
(Audit II), Kerala
Countersigned
New Delhi, (K. SANJAY MURTHY)
The 01 July 2025   Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 

 
 

 
85 
Appendix – 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.1) 
Limitation of the system in restricting Additional Authorisation 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of Account Net 
budget 
Expenditure Sub-head description Additional 
Authorisation  
Unregularised 
Additional 
Authorisation 
1 4055-00-207-92-4-P-V 3.35 4.82 Construction of 
building for new 
police stations 
1.47 1.47 
2 4055-00-207-92-7-P-V 0 0.09 Construction of 
lower subordinate 
quarters 
0.09 0.09 
3 4055-0-207-92-12-P-V 1.12 1.70 Kerala police 
academy 
0.58 0.58 
4 4055-0-207-92-20-P-V 0.73 0.79 Integrated Training 
Centre- 
Construction Works 
0.06 0.06 
5 4055-0-207-88-0-P-V 0 11.89 Installation of 
CCTV cameras in 
Police Stations 
11.89 11.89 
6 4055-0-207-97-1-P-V 0 0.44 Major Works 0.44 0.44 
7 4055-0-207-94-0-N-V 0.25 0.49 Projects under 
Legislative Assembly 
Constituency Asset 
Development 
Scheme (LAC-ADS) 
0.24 0.24 
Total 14.77 14.77 
(Source: Budget database). 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
86 
Appendix – 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.2) 
Absence of controls to validate and limit expenditure in salary heads 
 
(₹ in crore) 
Grant No. Head of Account Budget 
Net 
Expenditure Head 
Description 
Excess  
XIII-Jails 2056-00-101-99-0-1-2-N-V 8.41 18.15 DA 9.74  
2056-00-101-99-0-1-3-N-V 4.18 6.18 HRA 2.00  
2056-00-101-99-0-2-5-N-V 1.65 7.55 Daily Wages 5.90 
XXVIII-Misc Eco. Services 3475-00-106-99-0-1-2-N-V 4.02 6.08 DA 2.06  
XXXI-Animal Husbandry  2403-00-101-98-0-1-2-N-V 17.20 41.46 DA 24.26  
2403-00-101-97-0-1-2-N-V 10.62 14.61 DA 3.99  
XL-Ports 3051-02-001-98-0-1-2-N-V 5.15 6.13 DA 0.98  
(Source: Budget database). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
87 
Appendix – 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.3) 
Discrepancy between expenditure in the books of Accountant General (A&E) and 
Budget Data 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Grant 
No. 
Head of Account Final 
Budget 
Expenditure Final savings not 
surrendered 
2021-2022 15 5054-03-337-97-V-P 644.54 391.64 252.90 
2021-2022 41 5055-00-800-79-V-P 50.00 1.23 48.77 
2021-2022 26 2245-80-102-95-V-P 58.25 44.00 14.25 
2021-2022 22 4217-01-800-99-V-P 12.02 1.95 10.07 
2021-2022 24 2230-01-103-60-V-P 62.05 52.47 9.58 
2021-2022 37 2851-00-106-34-V-P 38.00 28.93 9.07 
2021-2022 29 4702-00-101-65-V-P 12.00 3.64 8.36 
2021-2022 22 2217-80-800-60-V-P 9.66 1.66 8.00 
2021-2022 24 2230-01-103-46-V-P 25.04 17.24 7.80 
2021-2022 17 4202-01-203-67-V-P 20.50 13.83 6.67 
2022-2023 18 2210-05-105-52-V-P 68.00 62.38 5.62 
2022-2023 29 2435-01-101-85-V-P 26.15 24.31 1.84 
2022-2023 27 2425-00-108-47-V-P 4.55 3.10 1.45 
2022-2023 37 4854-01-190-98-V-P 2.21 0.95 1.26 
2022-2023 38 2700-01-800-99-V-NP 10.20 9.00 1.20 
2022-2023 32 2404-00-102-79-V-P 5.00 3.82 1.18 
   (Source: VLC data of AG (A&E) and Budget Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
88 
Appendix – 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.4.3) 
Absence of controls in the Budget Allocation and Monitoring System to validate and 
limit expenditure within allotments 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO 
Code 
CO 
Code 
DDO Code HeadID Head of Account Allotted 
Amount (₹) 
Expenditure 
Amount (₹) 
1 2016-17 140A 140A00 0102140001 41938 2404-0-102-75-0-5-3-N-V 13,000 13,330 
2 2016-17 140A 140A00 0104140005 11821 2404-0-1-99-0-5-3-N-V 77,872 81,063 
3 2016-17 210A 210A00 0104210011 1856 2039-0-1-99-0-45-0-N-V 0 74,600 
4 2016-17 830A 830A00 0104830001 42761 2225-3-277-99-0-12-0-P-V 15,00,00,000 20,00,00,000 
5 2016-17 200A 200A01 0105520017 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 1,81,440 2,15,040 
6 2016-17 330A 330A00 0201330117 31608 2230-3-101-99-0-28-0-N-V 57,358 63,258 
7 2016-17 620A 620A02 0203620014 1823 2030-3-1-95-0-5-4-N-V 0 2,000 
8 2016-17 460A 460A00 0301460241 1967 2041-0-1-99-0-5-4-N-V 1,52,223 1,63,073 
9 2016-17 360A 360A00 0305360600 5401 2210-1-102-98-0-5-3-N-V 2,390 2,445 
10 2016-17 500A 500A03 0502500001 38026 2047-0-103-87-0-0-0-N-V 2,69,84,925 2,70,96,391 
11 2016-17 200A 200A04 0502520033 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 34,200 36,600 
12 2016-17 020A 020A00 0601020012 28726 4435-1-101-97-0-0-0-P-V 0 25,00,000 
13 2016-17 530A 530A00 0801530001 2983 2055-0-109-99-0-5-3-N-V 9,91,018 9,92,526 
14 2016-17 780A 780A00 0801780001 42549 2062-0-104-99-0-5-4-N-V 95,000 97,741 
15 2016-17 030A 030A05 0803030033 36574 2403-0-103-84-0-0-0-P-V 72,000 72,250 
16 2016-17 250A 250A08 1002250002 12509 2406-1-102-99-0-5-4-N-V 21,000 30,000 
17 2016-17 210A 210A06 1010210005 1849 2039-0-1-99-0-5-4-N-V 14,521 15,702 
18 2016-17 280A 280A08 1102280067 5476 2210-1-110-99-0-24-0-N-V 8,400 55,789 
19 2016-17 200A 200A08 1302520018 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 2,19,680 2,36,880 
20 2016-17 200A 200A08 1306470002 24524 2230-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 74,880 79,080 
21 2016-17 150A 150A00 1401150001 7770 2210-6-104-99-0-6-0-N-V 1,99,855 2,09,115 
22 2016-17 200A 200A09 1402520037 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 2,36,380 2,41,080 
23 2016-17 650A 650A10 1506650004 39782 2225-1-102-96-0-0-0-P-V 0 1,77,000 
24 2016-17 650A 650A10 1506650004 37422 2225-1-277-99-0-12-0-N-V 0 11,01,750 
25 2016-17 210A 210A12 1601210001 1849 2039-0-1-99-0-5-4-N-V 39,054 40,837 
26 2016-17 210A 210A13 1801210002 1856 2039-0-1-99-0-45-0-N-V 0 11,268 
27 2016-17 250A 250A06 1801250008 21219 4406-1-800-91-0-0-0-P-V 14,75,494 14,87,747 
28 2016-17 330A 330A00 1801330001 9763 2230-3-101-99-0-45-0-N-V 7,962 7,981 

Appendices 
89 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO 
Code 
CO 
Code 
DDO Code HeadID Head of Account Allotted 
Amount (₹) 
Expenditure 
Amount (₹) 
29 2016-17 530A 530A00 1901530002 2991 2055-0-109-99-0-45-0-N-V 2,53,00,000 2,53,67,228 
30 2016-17 61BA 61BA13 2203470002 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 16,20,000 16,46,133 
31 2016-17 200A 200A08 2301470002 24524 2230-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 2,34,000 2,46,000 
32 2016-17 200A 200A08 2301520002 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 77,280 87,600 
33 2016-17 200A 200A08 2306520040 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 1,39,320 1,46,040 
34 2016-17 200A 200A08 2306520141 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 83,250 96,240 
35 2016-17 59EA 59EA00 190159E008 40192 5054-1-800-97-0-0-0-N-C 1,07,729 10,49,434 
36 2016-17 59EA 59EA00 190159E008 39992 5054-5-337-97-0-16-0-P-V 0 2,21,47,716 
37 2016-17 59EA 59EA00 120259E149 16394 5054-1-800-99-0-0-0-P-V 7,27,630 10,59,695 
38 2016-17 16FA 16FA00 010416F037 39773 2202-2-105-95-0-0-0-P-V 0 70,000 
39 2016-17 67DF 67DF00 011167D042 42035 2052-0-90-66-0-0-0-N-V 3,00,000 4,00,000 
40 2016-17 16BA 16BA02 030116B255 24946 2204-0-101-97-0-34-0-N-V 0 1,000 
41 2016-17 59EA 59EA00 030159E360 42644 5054-1-337-95-0-0-0-P-V 9,79,01,634 34,67,13,280 
42 2016-17 59EA 59EA00 030159E360 39992 5054-5-337-97-0-16-0-P-V 10,02,90,698 12,32,76,525 
43 2016-17 490A 490A21 080416B218 44121 2204-0-102-99-0-34-3-N-V 1,85,476 1,86,863 
44 2016-17 180B 180A08 140159D001 44156 2015-0-109-99-0-34-3-N-V 7,744 18,000 
45 2016-17 16FA 16FA00 150616F172 43909 2202-2-1-94-0-34-3-N-V 0 6,500 
46 2017-18 030A 030A03 0511030002 44517 2403-0-109-96-0-34-3-P-V 52,300 53,650 
47 2017-18 390A 390A04 0601390005 9580 2230-1-103-99-0-5-3-N-V 14,023 15,278 
48 2017-18 61BA 61BA07 1103520030 24576 2235-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 8,40,000 8,70,000 
49 2017-18 360A 360A00 1401360001 32657 2210-1-102-96-11-0-0-N-V 8,142 29,071 
50 2017-18 660A 660A09 1401660001 39661 2225-2-277-37-0-0-0-P-V 18,01,750 18,02,800 
51 2017-18 59BA 59BA02 010159B029 3351 2059-80-1-97-0-5-3-N-V 7,700 10,850 
52 2017-18 240A 240A03 090516B045 38137 2405-0-800-92-0-12-0-N-V 0 750 
53 2017-18 16BA 16BA06 100516B069 3807 2202-1-102-98-0-0-0-N-V 0 13,140 
54 2017-18 59BA 59BA08 111059B002 38846 4202-1-800-88-0-0-0-N-V 44,86,018 83,02,900 
55 2018-19 650A 650A02 0307650668 8994 2225-1-800-57-0-0-0-P-V 4,31,741 4,45,436 
56 2018-19 460A 460A00 0703460003 1989 2041-0-102-99-0-45-0-N-V 1,75,223 1,83,779 
57 2018-19 320A 320A06 0806320017 24573 2210-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 12,070 12,535 
58 2018-19 090A 090A07 1003090005 47239 3456-0-1-78-0-0-0-P-V 0 2,82,500 
59 2018-19 320A 320A09 1305320040 24573 2210-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 1,629 2,363 
60 2018-19 16AA 16AA00 150116A028 29906 2202-3-800-69-0-0-0-P-V 0 20,000 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
90 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO 
Code 
CO 
Code 
DDO Code HeadID Head of Account Allotted 
Amount (₹) 
Expenditure 
Amount (₹) 
61 2019-20 200A 200A01 0106520001 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 3,83,160 3,84,000 
62 2019-20 740A 740A03 0502740003 48705 2043-0-101-97-0-45-0-N-V 58,929 63,911 
63 2019-20 740A 740A03 0502740003 48882 2043-0-101-97-0-5-3-N-V 4,320 4,664 
64 2019-20 760A 760A00 0601760001 24432 2217-5-1-69-0-34-0-P-V 0 1,66,162 
65 2019-20 020A 020A04 0706020045 17750 2401-0-102-90-0-34-0-P-V (-)28,62,781 39,39,661 
66 2019-20 200A 200A05 0810520016 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 74,280 75,120 
67 2019-20 860A 860A07 1109860003 48096 2235-2-103-56-0-0-0-P-V 90,403 90,628 
68 2019-20 210A 210A09 1301210001 49473 2039-0-1-88-0-0-0-P-V 26,61,030 28,58,869 
69 2019-20 81AA 350A08 1301350003 23947 2851-0-103-64-0-0-0-P-V (-)1,97,500 1,70,000 
70 2019-20 61BA 61BA10 1508470021 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 90,000 1,20,000 
71 2019-20 240A 240A00 1601240004 11967 2405-0-1-99-0-5-3-N-V 12,458 13,857 
72 2019-20 16BA 16BA03 050116B048 3819 2202-1-104-99-0-5-4-N-V 13,432 13,500 
73 2019-20 01BA 01BA21 110801B063 41872 2014-0-800-86-0-5-3-N-V 12,711 14,510 
74 2019-20 16BA 16BA11 160316B413 47245 2202-2-1-80-0-0-0-P-V 0 10,000 
75 2020-21 030A 030A01 0101030003 11616 2403-0-102-99-0-45-0-N-V 2,931 3,000 
76 2020-21 210A 210A01 0104210004 1856 2039-0-1-99-0-45-0-N-V 2,71,157 2,76,657 
77 2020-21 770A 770A01 0104770004 17341 2054-0-95-99-0-19-0-P-V 13,731 14,000 
78 2020-21 200A 200A04 0504520003 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 0 720 
79 2020-21 61BA 61BA04 0602470001 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 15,00,000 24,00,000 
80 2020-21 860A 860A07 1101860001 50040 2235-2-102-28-0-0-0-P-V 4,09,762 4,10,333 
81 2020-21 61BA 61BA09 1401470001 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 27,00,000 30,90,000 
82 2020-21 61BA 61BA09 1404470002 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 4,50,000 7,50,000 
83 2020-21 61BA 61BA10 1506470024 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 2,40,000 8,70,000 
84 2020-21 650A 650A10 1506650021 35347 2225-1-283-89-0-0-0-P-V 1,19,70,000 1,19,95,000 
85 2020-21 61BA 61BA10 1508470021 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 2,10,000 3,30,000 
86 2020-21 680A 61BA11 1603520008 24576 2235-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 0 3,60,000 
87 2020-21 680A 61BA11 1603520012 24576 2235-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 1,50,000 3,00,000 
88 2020-21 61BA 61BA11 1604470002 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 13,50,000 16,80,000 
89 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 36256 5051-2-200-83-0-0-0-P-V 2,69,19,130 2,95,53,363 
90 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 34695 5051-80-800-62-0-0-0-P-V (-)41,24,962 25,93,929 
91 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 16368 5051-80-800-98-0-19-0-P-V 3,36,894 10,17,222 

Appendices 
91 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO 
Code 
CO 
Code 
DDO Code HeadID Head of Account Allotted 
Amount (₹) 
Expenditure 
Amount (₹) 
92 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 24201 5051-80-800-98-0-24-0-P-V 28,42,524 30,96,088 
93 2020-21 61BA 61BA11 1703470001 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 9,60,000 11,70,000 
94 2020-21 61BA 61BA11 1707520035 24576 2235-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 90,000 3,90,000 
95 2020-21 61BA 61BA09 2102470001 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 9,00,000 12,90,000 
96 2020-21 61BA 61BA09 2108470002 24525 2235-2-192-50-0-0-0-N-V 3,60,000 5,70,000 
97 2020-21 61BA 61BA01 020261B851 2450 2053-0-94-99-0-5-4-N-V 15,000 22,020 
98 2020-21 59DC 59DA08 040459D005 31567 2700-27-101-98-0-18-0-N-V 26,20,158 26,88,648 
99 2020-21 59DA 59DA08 060159D013 13572 2701-80-1-97-0-5-4-N-V 25,000 50,000 
100 2020-21 16BA 16BA10 150716B020 39699 2202-2-109-70-0-0-0-P-V 82,13,350 83,81,150 
101 2020-21 16BA 16BA11 160516B316 24501 2202-1-191-50-0-0-0-N-V 32,000 51,000 
102 2021-22 280A 280A02 0101280014 25331 2210-6-101-49-0-34-0-P-V 8,85,832 8,87,832 
103 2021-22 360A 360A00 0304360433 5401 2210-1-102-98-0-5-3-N-V 5,300 5,796 
104 2021-22 650A 650A18 0503650021 40016 2225-1-277-57-0-34-0-P-V 8,82,786 9,89,546 
105 2021-22 700A 700A00 0602700001 3210 2058-0-1-99-0-5-3-N-V 9,374 10,374 
106 2021-22 200A 200A06 1010520018 24575 2230-2-198-50-0-0-0-N-V 19,560 20,520 
107 2021-22 280A 280A10 1401280009 23905 2210-1-110-47-0-34-0-P-V 12,23,354 13,91,677 
108 2021-22 180B 180A08 1401630003 44156 2015-0-109-99-0-34-3-N-V 7,500 9,000 
109 2021-22 020A 020A09 1403020027 12822 2415-1-277-98-0-34-0-P-V 21,439 22,967 
110 2021-22 650A 650A10 1508650024 35347 2225-1-283-89-0-0-0-P-V 1,35,70,000 1,36,30,000 
111 2021-22 61EA 61BA05 080461B013 1706 2029-0-800-92-0-0-0-N-V 49,932 51,150 
112 2021-22 59DE 59DE04 140459D017 31287 2700-5-101-99-0-0-0-N-V 1,75,280 2,53,160 
113 2021-22 01BA 01BA10 150501B010 43906 2014-0-800-93-0-34-3-N-V 5,568 20,795 
114 2022-23 01BA 01BA05 090401B805 37599 2014-0-800-88-0-5-3-N-V 11,014 12,507 
115 2022-23 280A 280A15 2001280011 25317 2210-6-101-49-0-24-0-P-V 173 999 
116 2022-23 59DD 59DA03 010759D001 14641 3075-60-800-97-0-0-0-N-V 3,40,900 16,87,397 
117 2022-23 020A 020A05 0804020016 39714 2401-0-107-78-0-0-0-P-V 3,59,468 3,70,838 
Total 49,21,28,606 87,03,10,422 
(Source: CoreTIS Database). 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
92 
Appendix – 3.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.4.4) 
Discrepancies in reports generated by the Budget Allocation and Monitoring System 
(BAMS) 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
CCO 
Code 
CO Code DDO Code Head 
ID 
Head of Account Allotted 
Amount (₹) 
Expenditure 
Amount (₹) 
1 2016-17 320A 320A11 1502320051 6079 2210-2-101-97-0-4-1-N-V (-)7,400 0 
2 2017-18 520B 520B1090 1901995031 43613 3604-0-200-87-5-0-0-N-V (-)3,480 0 
3 2019-20 020A 020A04 0706020045 17750 2401-0-102-90-0-34-0-P-V (-)28,62,781 39,39,661 
4 2019-20 81AA 350A08 1301350003 23947 2851-0-103-64-0-0-0-P-V (-)1,97,500 1,70,000 
5 2019-20 16BA 16BA06 101216B339 44307 2202-1-112-90-2-0-0-P-V (-)16,000 0 
6 2019-20 16BA 16BA02 030316B793 44307 2202-1-112-90-2-0-0-P-V (-)17,361 25,813 
7 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 14385 3051-2-102-99-0-4-1-N-V (-)35,826 42,087 
8 2020-21 59EA 59EA07 160159E017 14463 3054-1-1-98-0-5-1-N-V (-)974 2,513 
9 2020-21 540A 540A02 1605540004 34695 5051-80-800-62-0-0-0-P-V (-)41,24,962 25,93,929 
10 2021-22 61BA 61BA11 160361B004 52839 2210-6-101-11-3-0-0-N-V (-)75,000 0 
11 2021-22 16BA 16BA13 220516B500 47263 2202-1-112-89-0-0-0-P-V (-)39,001 0 
(Source: CoreTIS Database). 
  

Appendices 
93 
Appendix – 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1) 
Applications in e-treasury 
 
Sl. No. Name of Department Sl. No. Application 
1 Registration 1 PEARL 
2 Revenue 2 RELIS 
3 Motor Vehicle 3 VAHAN 
4 SARATHI 
4 Mining and Geology 5 Mining and Geology 
5 High Court 6 Virtual Court 
6 GST 7 GSTN 
8 KVATIS 
7 PWD 9 PRICE 
10 Rest House 
8 Lottery 11 LOTIS 
9 Electrical Inspectorate 12 Electrical Inspectorate 
10 Labour 13 Labour 
11 Police 14 POLAPP 
15 Traffic e-chalan 
12 Legal Metrology 16 Legal Metrology 
13 Food Safety 17 Food Safety 
14 Civil Supplies 18 Civil Supplies 
15 Drugs Control 19 Drugs Control 
16 Excise 20 Excise 
17 Fisheries 21 Fisheries 
18 Industrial Training 22 Industrial Training 
19 IT Mission 23 Service Plus 
20 KSIDC 24 KSWIFT 
(Source: Records of Finance Department). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
94 
Appendix – 4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.1) 
Discrepancies in defacement reports and data analysis 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Total 
Challan 
Total 
Challan 
Amount 
No of non 
Defaced 
Challan 
Non Defaced 
Challan 
Amount 
No of 
Defaced 
Challan 
Defaced 
Challan 
Amount 
2018-19 1 0.003 0 0 1 0.003 
2019-20 65,10,956 3,861.20 42,49,368 2,942.96 22,61,588 918.24 
2020-21 1,13,44,423 7,612.53 77,29,289 5,810.69 36,15,134 1,801.84 
2021-22 1,26,42,457 7,501.88 83,79,601 5,478.61 42,62,856 2,023.27 
Total 3,04,97,837 18,975.613 2,03,58,258 14,232.26 1,01,39,579 4,743.353 
(Source: Report generated from E-treasury application). 

Appendices 
95 
Appendix – 4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.1) 
Discrepancies in defacement reports and data analysis 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Total E-
challans 
E-
challan 
Amount 
Total E-
challan not 
Defaced 
Total E-
challan 
amount 
not 
defaced 
Total M-
challans 
M-challan 
Amount 
Total M-
challan not 
Defaced 
Total M-
challan 
amount 
not 
defaced 
2016-17 22,300 22.62 19,907 14.69 11,80,078 11,622.50 10,57,554 11,233.86 
2017-18 61,83,483 4,073.10 45,59,295 2,812.86 45,58,754 41,782.68 36,64,118 37,945.58 
Total  62,05,783 4,095.72 45,79,202 2,827.55 57,38,832 53,405.18 47,21,672 49,179.44 
2018-19 91,50,603 4,649.27 51,03,126 3,171.46 34,06,075 37,153.14 24,91,762 33,273.37 
2019-20 1,15,28,925 5,509.68 62,48,263 4,086.69 31,96,064 36,468.63 22,37,464 32,572.56 
2020-21 1,66,96,589 7,689.84 76,97,047 5,792.26 24,20,425 31,179.02 16,37,493 28,541.31 
2021-22 2,12,34,802 7,862.93 83,17,049 5,420.70 25,63,262 39,117.25 17,34,744 35,526.17 
Total 5,86,10,919 25,711.72 2,73,65,485 18,471.11 1,15,85,826 1,43,918.04 81,01,463 1,29,913.41 
2022-23 2,28,00,855 10,388.29 1,43,58,795 6,170.00 25,03,226 46,382.70 15,88,341 42,047.82 
Grand 
Total 
8,76,17,557 40,195.73 4,63,03,482 27,468.66 1,98,27,884 2,43,705.92 1,44,11,476 2,21,140.67 
(Source: GRASKL Database). 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
96 
Appendix – 4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.2) 
Defacement of challans over and above challan amount 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Name  No. of 
challans 
Total Receipt 
Amount (₹) 
Defaced Amount 
(₹) 
1 Additional Sub Treasury, Ernakulam 11 26,12,520 48,63,650 
2 Core Treasury 182 69,76,804 1,33,50,812 
3 District Treasury, Alappuzha 1 3,000 6,000 
4 District Treasury, Kannur 2 5,24,000 10,48,000 
5 District Treasury, Kottayam 1 19,453 38,900 
6 District Treasury, Palghat 1 3,60,000 5,60,000 
7 District Treasury, Irinjalkuda 1 1,36,700 2,73,400 
8 District Treasury, Muvattupuzha 2 1,63,000 3,26,000 
9 Principal Sub Treasury, East Fort 1 1,10,000 2,20,000 
10 Sub Treasury, Kazhakkoottam 2 4,03,000 8,06,000 
11 Sub Treasury, Murikkassery 2 6,88,400 13,76,800 
12 Sub Treasury, Nooranad 2 10,870 15,908 
13 Sub Treasury, Angamaly 1 2,40,000 3,42,000 
14 Sub Treasury, Areacode 1 3,10,000 6,20,000 
15 Sub Treasury, Balussery 1 2,00,000 4,00,000 
16 Sub Treasury, Chadayamangalam 1 2,850 5,700 
17 Sub Treasury, Chalakudy 1 2,05,000 2,23,600 
18 Sub Treasury, Changaramkulam 2 3,38,000 6,76,000 
19 Sub Treasury, Chavakkad 6 8,80,596 17,61,192 
20 Sub Treasury, Chavara 1 7,070 14,140 
21 Sub Treasury, Iritty 1 12,800 12,900 
22 Sub Treasury, Kasaragod 1 12,500 25,000 
23 Sub Treasury, Kayamkulam 1 1,60,000 3,20,000 
24 Sub Treasury, Kolenchery 1 10,580 21,160 
25 Sub Treasury, Konni 1 3,000 6,000 
26 Sub Treasury, Kozhencherry 1 10,00,000 20,00,000 
27 Sub Treasury, Kunnamkulam 1 1,15,000 2,30,000 
28 Sub Treasury, Kunnathunad 1 9,350 10,132 
29 Sub Treasury, Kuthiathode 1 1,36,000 2,70,000 
30 Sub Treasury, Malayinkil 2 1,57,080 2,39,160 
31 Sub Treasury, Mananthavady 1 85,000 1,70,000 
32 Sub Treasury, Manjeri 1 15,000 30,000 
33 Sub Treasury, Mannarkkad 1 200 3,695 

Appendices 
97 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Name  No. of 
challans 
Total Receipt 
Amount (₹) 
Defaced Amount 
(₹) 
34 Sub Treasury, Mattanchery 4 8,03,060 14,44,730 
35 Sub Treasury, Mattannur 1 2,670 2,820 
36 Sub Treasury, Nileswar 1 6,50,000 13,00,000 
37 Sub Treasury, North Parur* 1 44,505 89,010 
38 Sub Treasury, Payyannur 1 9,600 19,200 
39 Sub Treasury, Pooyappally 1 600 1,717 
40 Sub Treasury, Rajakumary 1 5,050 6,925 
41 Sub Treasury, Shornur 2 3,38,550 3,68,500 
42 Sub Treasury, Taliparamba 1 9,600 19,200 
43 Sub Treasury, Thalappilly 1 12,000 1,00,000 
44 Sub Treasury, Thalassery 6 4,85,600 9,71,200 
45 Sub Treasury, Tirur 2 1,15,570 2,31,910 
46 Sub Treasury, Vadakara 1 49,200 49,300 
47 Sub Treasury, Valancherry* 1 4,75,000 9,50,000 
 Total 260 1,89,08,778 3,58,20,661 
(Source: GRASKL Database). 
* Data relating to the year 2022-23.   

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
98 
Appendix – 4.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.4) 
Absence of uniqueness of defacement numbers 
(Source: GRASKL Database). 
  
Sl. No. Period Defacement 
Number 
Count 
1 2019-20 5398804201920 123 
2 2019-20 5416041201920 93 
3 2019-20 4674912201920 90 
4 2019-20 5495896201920 90 
5 2019-20 5500610201920 80 
6 2019-20 4627505201920 78 
7 2019-20 5341504201920 63 
8 2019-20 5498840201920 58 
9 2019-20 4673661201920 55 
10 2019-20 5510691201920 54 
11 2020-21 3572799202021 123 
12 2020-21 1370052202021 112 
13 2020-21 8170531202021 93 
14 2020-21 1416973202021 93 
15 2020-21 7068756202021 74 
16 2020-21 1717078202021 71 
17 2020-21 3781034202021 65 
18 2020-21 7362548202021 57 
19 2020-21 3107167202021 52 
20 2020-21 3477273202021 53 
21 2022-23 3988506202223 51 

Appendices 
99 
Appendix – 4.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.5.1) 
Incomplete Generation of Refund Reports 
Year No of 
Offices 
No of 
Refund 
Request 
No of 
GRN 
Requested 
Refund 
Amount in 
Total (₹) 
No of 
Officer 
Approval 
No of e- 
Treasury 
Officer 
Approval 
Total 
Refund 
Amount 
(₹) 
Processed 
(Per cent) 
Pending 
(Per cent) 
2016-17 1 1 1 5,000 1 1 5,000 100 0 
2019-20 213 1,415 1,415 78,87,795 878 865 65,95,353 61.13 38.87 
2020-21 568 10,909 10,896 7,97,59,936 7,128 7,072 6,47,39,715 64.83 35.17 
2021-22 779 16,118 16,058 16,65,66,003 11,778 11,750 13,95,90,771 72.90 27.10 
Total 1,561 28,443 28,370 25,42,18,734 19,785 19,688 21,09,30,839 69.22 30.78 
(Source: Report generated from e-Treasury application). 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
100 
Appendix – 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1) 
Bill passed in various categories 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Salary/ Non salary Contingent Pension Total 
No. of 
bills 
Amount  No. of 
bills 
Amount  No. of 
bills 
Amount  Total bills Total 
Amount 
2016-17 17,60,547  32,460.85  6,28,049  45,379.41  45,390  4,293.62  24,33,986  82,133.88 
2017-18 20,92,506  38,938.68  9,09,798  67,492.57  2,74,158  18,886.65  32,76,462  1,25,317.90 
2018-19 21,08,338  40,324.70  10,28,297  68,648.35  2,94,507  18,673.49  34,31,142  1,27,646.54 
2019-20 19,49,984  40,767.82  10,77,029  65,127.05  2,47,622  18,462.61  32,74,635  1,24,357.48 
2020-21 16,68,958  36,726.85  10,91,991  97,194.53  1,65,789  18,320.19  29,26,738  1,52,241.57 
2021-22 23,08,901  54,324.63  11,28,800  96,570.55  2,50,255  25,751.83  36,87,956  1,76,647.01 
2022-23 18,89,075 49,817.60 11,02,812 99,950.80  3,31,125 24,888.23  33,23,012 1,74,656.63 
Total 1,37,78,309 2,93,361.13 69,66,776 5,40,363.26 16,08,846 1,29,276.62 2,23,53,931 9,63,001.01 
(Source: CoreTIS database). 
 
 
  

Appendices 
101 
Appendix – 5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Absence of sanction order/ proceedings in bill creation  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill Control Code Bill 
Nature 
Treasury 
Code 
DDO Code Date of 
Passing 
Sanction 
Order No. 
Sanction 
Order Date 
Amount  (₹) 
1 16220603003700251800 CGT +2206 2206030037 23-11-2016 /16 26-10-2016 25,000 
2 16200465000700209567 CGT +2004 2004650007 30-09-2016 /2015 28-09-2016 1,87,500 
3 16150552034900790633 MCC +1505 1505520349 28-03-2017 work 28-03-2017 3,00,000 
4 16081044001200134270 CGT +0810 0810440012 17-08-2016 0000 09-08-2016 2,40,066 
5 16140768007200188450 CGT +1407 1407680072 29-09-2016 0 19-09-2016 55,350 
6 16170361B01000113696 CGT +1703 170361B010 16-08-2016 
 
25-07-2016 18,985 
7 16110159C00600520242 DEP +1101 110159C006 25-02-2017 
 
20-02-2017 3,00,000 
8 17111043000200547109 CGT +1110 1110430002 24-10-2017 Proceedings 
Attached 
12-10-2017 48,60,000 
9 17010814000900824008 CGT +0108 0108140009 16-01-2018 /2017-18 22-12-2017 3,14,500 
10 17060529000800800677 CGT +0605 0605290008 19-12-2017 /chl 18-12-2017 1,00,000 
11 17220403001101077339 CGT +2204 2204030011 27-02-2018 ...../18 26-02-2018 26,400 
12 17130216F01800992371 SCP +1302 130216F018 12-02-2018 xxxx 27-01-2018 20,000 
13 17010752065901314341 LGP +0107 0107520659 31-03-2018 
  
11,57,944 
14 17020252001800401112 CGT +0202 0202520018 25-08-2017 0 19-08-2017 2,58,600 
15 17010716F01100678737 GRP +0107 010716F011 24-11-2017 Nil 29-08-2017 2,23,255 
16 18100572000100878367 CGT +1005 1005720001 13-12-2018 nil 01-04-2018 18,47,355 
17 18200199600100744932 CGT +2001 2001996001 07-11-2018 pay bill 01-11-2018 1,65,408 
18 18100572000101099055 CGT +1005 1005720001 25-01-2019 nil 01-04-2018 26,868 
19 18130216F01801270987 CGT +1302 130216F018 14-03-2019 xxxxxx 23-02-2019 18,500 
20 18140152012400104148 LGP +1401 1401520124 26-05-2018 
  
41,28,957 
21 18100572000100966406 CGT +1005 1005720001 24-12-2018 Nil 01-04-2018 71,414 
22 18020616A60001497253 EBT +0206 020616A600 27-03-2019 0 18-01-2019 70,000 
23 19120177000101261258 MCC +1201 1201770001 13-02-2020 lic 13-02-2020 92,87,264 
24 19130152000100229983 MCC +1301 1301520001 14-06-2019 Jacob J 
Mandumpal 
14-06-2019 7,47,519 
25 19230665001001437981 CGT +2306 2306650010 12-03-2020 m/ 09-03-2020 3,75,000 
26 19220403001100628785 CSP +2204 2204030011 30-09-2019 ............/19 27-09-2019 32,500 
27 19040416B53601271765 CGT +0404 040416B536 24-02-2020 00 14-02-2020 10,000 
28 20150509000500260667 CGT +1505 1505090005 22-06-2020 cs1 16-06-2020 1,23,94,463 
29 20050261B02100828135 CGT +0502 050261B021 28-12-2020 of 
Enadimang 
alam GP 
25-09-2020 5,00,000 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
102 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill Control Code Bill 
Nature 
Treasury 
Code 
DDO Code Date of 
Passing 
Sanction 
Order No. 
Sanction 
Order Date 
Amount  (₹) 
30 20151952009501376384 CGT +1519 1519520095 29-03-2021 malappuram 
pmc 2020-21 
21-03-2021 2,30,000 
31 20100259B00200846750 CGT +1002 100259B002 24-12-2020 Bims/2016 21-12-2020 11,371 
32 20220403000401031150 CSP +2204 2204030004 06-03-2021 .........../2020 03-02-2021 1,25,000 
33 20081152002901445594 GRP +0811 0811520029 31-03-2021 0 30-03-2021 94,000 
34 20070416F01301059201 CGT +0704 070416F013 27-02-2021 0 21-01-2021 40,000 
35 21010459C00600107027 DVP +0104 010459C006 14-06-2021 null 
 
27,37,40,652 
36 21230359E00100090968 DVP +2303 230359E001 08-06-2021 null 
 
7,56,61,417 
37 21180402003900806683 CGT +1804 1804020039 27-12-2021 Wayanad 
Package   
various sch 
18-12-2021 1,44,500 
38 21070965000300368620 CGT +0709 0709650003 13-09-2021 m 03-09-2021 82,275 
39 21011503009100463540 CGT +0115 0115030091 01-10-2021 
 
29-09-2021 75,000 
40 21220403000400500225 CSP +2204 2204030004 10-11-2021 .............../21 08-10-2021 32,800 
(Source: CoreTIS Database). 
  

Appendices 
103 
Appendix – 5.3 
(Reference: Para 5.3.2) 
Delay in submission and accounting of BDS bills in treasury 
(₹ in crore) 
Head of 
Account 
 Year 
 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
8782-00-102-96-01 
Opening 
Balance 
0 (-)13.44 (-)41.54 (-)23.03 (-)30.20 (-)34.51 
Disbursement 1,584.88 1,094.37 1,100.34 2,049.47 2,383.16 2,291.27 
Receipt 1,571.44 1,066.27 1,118.85 2,042.30 2,378.85 2,309.66 
Balance (-)13.44 (-)41.54 (-)23.03 (-)30.20 (-)34.51 (-)16.12 
8782-00-102-96-02 
Opening 
Balance 
0 (-)0.13 (-)1.14 (-)6.58 (-)38.67 (-)16.34 
Disbursement 16.38 9.99 12.36 39.51 33.81 41.95 
Receipt 16.25 8.98 6.92 7.42 56.14 5.30 
Balance (-)0.13 (-)1.14 (-)6.58 (-)38.67 (-)16.34 (-)52.99 
8782-00-102-95-01 
Opening 
Balance 
0 0 0 0 (-)342.08 (-)246.74 
Disbursement 0 0 0 794.03 46.34 83.62 
Receipt 0 0 0 451.95 141.68 517.58 
Balance 0 0 0 (-)342.08 (-)246.74 187.22 
8782-00-102-95-02 
Opening 
Balance 
0 0 0 0 461.93 (-)17.98 
Disbursement 0 0 0 1,199.40 579.47 0 
Receipt 0 0 0 1,661.33 99.56 116.81 
Balance 0 0 0 461.93 (-)17.98 98.83 
8782-00-102-95-03 
Opening 
Balance 
0 0 0 0 (-)27.59 (-)40.25 
Disbursement 0 0 0 27.59 12.66 1.58 
Receipt 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Balance 0 0 0 (-)27.59 (-)40.25 (-)41.83 
8782-00-108-92-01 Opening 
Balance 
0 0 0 0 0 (-)4.80 
Disbursement 0 0 0 0 4.80 150.41 
Receipt 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Balance 0 0 0 0 (-)4.80 (-)155.21 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
104 
Head of 
Account 
 Year 
 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
8782-00-108-92-02 Opening 
Balance 
0 0 0 0 0 (-)78.06 
Disbursement 0 0 0 0 78.06 60.32 
Receipt 0 0 0 0 0 6.86 
Balance 0 0 0 0 (-)78.06 (-)131.52 
8782-00-108-92-03 
Opening Balance 0 0 0 0 0 (-)1.64 
Disbursement 0 0 0 0 1.64 3.96 
Receipt 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Balance 0 0 0 0 (-)1.64 (-)5.60 
(Source: Handbook of DDR heads of AG(A&E)). 
{Total suspense account lying unsettled: 16.12 + 52.99 + 41.83 + 155.21 + 131.52 + 5.60 = ₹403.27 Crore}

Appendices 
105 
Appendix – 5.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.1.4 Bullet 1) 
General inconsistencies noticed - Date of birth same as date of joining 
 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designation Present 
Office 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
1 794895 Ariya S Pillai 280 2141 06010002 30-01-2017 30-01-2017 
2 792581 Kiran S Gopinath 280 7845 21064563 20-01-2017 20-01-2017 
3 779711 Vaysakh M 16D 0310 00000000 25-07-2016 25-07-2016 
4 787152 Sherin Alias Arthungal 280 1011 18040028 16-06-2016 16-06-2016 
5 762027 Gokul K M 995 26 09064587 07-12-2015 07-12-2015 
6 762749 Faseela P E 330 0041 08080003 01-12-2015 01-12-2015 
7 762746 Anitha Mol K R 330 0041 08080003 01-12-2015 01-12-2015 
8 759327 Sumod Kumar K K 250 1303 NCK43000 11-11-2015 11-11-2015 
9 713676 Soumya Sivan 01B 17 11030031 01-10-2013 01-10-2013 
10 712339 Sarika L S 440 2141 01130083 01-08-2013 01-08-2013 
11 339792 Shiny R 330 2253 03050539 19-12-2012 19-12-2012 
12 163598 Shaju T A 530 2127 00000000 17-12-2012 17-12-2012 
13 700599 Shiny P Sonny 440 2141 13020018 27-08-2012 27-08-2012 
14 700602 Lini Balan 440 2141 13020018 27-08-2012 27-08-2012 
15 702350 Sukanya Mani 440 2141 01130083 27-08-2012 27-08-2012 
16 612274 Prakashan T 01B 5569 20010001 27-12-2010 27-12-2010 
17 589430 Aliamma M P 630 2600 02040312 20-09-2010 20-09-2010 
18 589414 Sobha K N 630 2600 02040312 16-09-2010 16-09-2010 
19 211450 Abdu Salam K 380 1879 00000000 23-03-2007 23-03-2007 
20 267493 Sajid P 530 4113 00000000 01-09-2005 01-09-2005 
21 123302 Sajeev O S 61D 0889 03030658 18-02-2005 18-02-2005 
22 268210 Sooraj C Mathew 530 4113 05030013 24-01-2005 24-01-2005 
23 604142 Saffiya O 020 2158 17010009 01-10-2003 01-10-2003 
24 171267 Suresh Kumar V 530 4113 14010001 24-02-2003 24-02-2003 
25 133107 PK Narayanaswami 61D 0889 21040003 25-01-2003 25-01-2003 
26 133327 EM Ramlath 61D 0890 11030014 22-01-2003 22-01-2003 
27 133323 Mallika Devi G 61D B050 00000000 17-10-2002 17-10-2002 
28 132799 Beena A R 61B 0890 00000000 10-10-2002 10-10-2002 
29 132687 Chandran P 61D 0890 20010001 09-10-2002 09-10-2002 
30 132879 Manoj Kumar K 61D 0890 10020006 07-10-2002 07-10-2002 
31 133373 Prabhakaran K 61D 0889 10020009 29-10-2001 29-10-2001 
32 217289 Lilly 16B 2035 17050464 01-01-2000 01-01-2000 
33 279034 Joyees John 16B 0931 09050467 22-11-1999 22-11-1999 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
106 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designation Present 
Office 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
34 665049 Muhammad Asslam 01B 6333 07040010 23-04-1999 23-04-1999 
35 430132 TR Sudeer 16B 0931 02030161 19-08-1998 19-08-1998 
36 121647 Anil Kumar S 530 2200 06010001 01-06-1998 01-06-1998 
37 108599 Harikumar R 530 2200 01040030 27-01-1998 27-01-1998 
38 133300 Kanjanavally V S 61D B050 11040007 07-08-1997 07-08-1997 
39 596232 Kunju Mon M 16B 0932 01080132 02-06-1997 02-06-1997 
40 121454 Santhosh Kumar K P 530 2171 19010085 01-04-1997 01-04-1997 
41 132953 Jayakumar V S 61D 0890 03030658 30-09-1996 30-09-1996 
42 138081 Vilber Raj V 530 2200 06010001 04-04-1994 04-04-1994 
43 506991 Prem Kumar S 16B 5046 04040525 01-07-1993 01-07-1993 
44 122131 Salas T J 530 2200 06010001 15-03-1993 15-03-1993 
45 121967 Prakash Babu V K 530 2200 06010001 22-03-1989 22-03-1989 
46 133246 Mohanan C V 61B B039 06010029 24-01-1985 24-01-1985 
47 123335 Bava A K 61B B039 10021139 18-06-1984 18-06-1984 
48 778929 Dhanlekshmi M R 520 2106 12030821 31-05-1984 31-05-1984 
49 118008 Vinodhababu V M 530 2158 11030001 07-12-1983 07-12-1983 
50 115489 Shivasankara Pillai C 530 2200 03010065 31-03-1982 31-03-1982 
51 675389 Gracy P C 16B 9990 15020359 02-06-1980 02-06-1980 
52 429641 Arun Prakashj R 59E 4022 59031231 15-05-1980 15-05-1980 
53 136325 Arun 530 2200 01040107 20-12-1979 20-12-1979 
54 675322 Skaria E M 16B 0945 15020359 06-06-1979 06-06-1979 
55 430325 Ayisha Beevi M 16B 0932 02030161 10-05-1979 10-05-1979 
56 214239 Sreedevi J 680 7232 01010001 23-01-1979 23-01-1979 
57 430330 Alavikutty Konnengal 16B 0931 02030161 05-08-1978 05-08-1978 
58 133052 Balan K 61D B020 00000000 12-10-1977 12-10-1977 
59 128283 Padmanabhan P 59B 4021 59023620 14-09-1977 14-09-1977 
60 121184 Kunhikrishnan K 530 2200 19040002 08-09-1977 08-09-1977 
61 168823 Kuttappan PP 530 5124 13010004 03-01-1976 03-01-1976 
62 584141 Rajesh M N 240 7458 23070016 13-03-1974 13-03-1974 
63 121844 Purushan K 530 5124 06010001 05-04-1973 05-04-1973 
64 121711 Soman P 530 5117 06010001 05-04-1973 05-04-1973 
65 645963 Ajai S Kumar 16B 0952 05010125 21-03-1972 21-03-1972 
66 139321 Kunji Raman M 530 4114 16010003 27-09-1971 27-09-1971 
67 430309 Mariyam Pandikkad 16B 0931 02030161 29-05-1970 29-05-1970 
68 672483 Miridulakumari 440 6670 00000000 03-05-1970 03-05-1970 
69 261321 Sumangala K B 330 2253 07020001 08-05-1969 08-05-1969 
70 155559 Unnikrishnan N 61B 4566 15030004 15-04-1965 15-04-1965 

Appendices 
107 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designation Present 
Office 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
71 169471 Azeez K K 530 1516 11040056 02-05-1961 02-05-1961 
72 526241 Molly M T 59C 4008 59011510 14-11-1958 14-11-1958 
73 485490 Ubaid M 16B 1093 15050525 25-08-1956 25-08-1956 
74 430306 Abdul Kadar Parambil 16B 0931 15091404 01-07-1955 01-07-1955 
75 200005 Unnikrishnan K 67C 0176 01010001 28-07-1954 28-07-1954 
76 258674 Sivanandan 59B 4021 59022500 21-10-1953 21-10-1953 
77 258941 Ramadevi T G 16B 0931 11030168 19-10-1953 19-10-1953 
78 171900 Lathika Kumari Amma J 16D 0040 02020001 27-05-1951 27-05-1951 
(Source: SPARK Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
108 
Appendix – 5.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.1.4 Bullet 2) 
Date of birth later than date of joining Government Service 
 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designat
ion 
Employee 
Type 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
1 834610 Remya Chandran 440 3044 4 25-05-2018 10-05-2018 
2 854716 Biju R 380 6712 2 25-01-2019 29-01-2018 
3 778429 Sneha Ramachandran 280 2028 2 31-03-2019 23-10-2017 
4 803501 Surya S 330 2253 1 17-05-2017 03-05-2017 
5 808553 Hari Kumar C 380 6712 1 10-07-2017 10-07-2016 
6 771694 Biju P K 630 2600 2 05-03-2016 05-10-2015 
7 751619 Suresh Kumar V 530 4113 4 20-05-2015 19-01-2015 
8 744695 Leela Kalappuraparambu 020 4321 1 30-04-2019 15-06-2010 
9 701231 Ambily S 280 2015 4 27-06-2012 01-10-2009 
10 667644 Sardar 030 7129 1 11-11-2011 01-01-2009 
11 405445 Babu P 360 1290 1 30-09-2032 23-09-2006 
12 343160 Sabira Parayil 16B 0931 1 27-05-2007 06-12-2005 
13 158936 KJ 16B 2065 1 12-12-2000 01-01-2000 
14 361281 Sidhik T M 280 2200 1 01-05-2010 18-08-1999 
15 405521 Thulasidasan K 360 2059 1 31-08-2012 26-06-1998 
16 366908 Pradeep Kumar K 440 8957 1 31-05-2019 09-06-1998 
17 158266 Babu A V 61B 9501 1 05-11-1996 22-01-1996 
18 188902 Mohana Chandran Nair M P 530 4108 1 22-11-1996 20-04-1995 
19 158941 Radhakrishnan V K 660 2574 1 21-10-1995 02-01-1995 
20 209341 Radhamony V 280 2063 1 18-12-2012 27-04-1994 
21 194806 Narayanankutty S 16F 22 1 16-08-2014 17-02-1994 
22 300721 Vijayakumari C 280 2064 1 31-05-2016 21-01-1994 
23 101903 Prasannakumar K K 67D 0041 1 30-05-1997 01-01-1994 
24 510208 Radhamma T 440 2063 1 14-10-1995 17-07-1993 
25 502813 Devika Rani V R 16B 8001 1 31-05-1996 16-09-1991 
26 143407 Vijayan V T 530 2200 1 10-05-1994 05-11-1990 
27 158296 Unnikrishna Pillai N 61B 3644 1 20-10-1995 10-09-1990 
28 572240 Mohamed Ayyoob P K 16B 0944 1 01-01-2000 11-07-1990 
29 177404 Gracamma Varghese 550 2271 1 05-06-1995 15-02-1990 
30 629534 Thomas T Dr 060 1082 1 28-05-2011 16-10-1989 
31 114817 Balachandran Nair M B 530 5087 1 05-11-1996 01-11-1988 
32 430308 Abdul Hameed Chenappurath 16B 0931 1 06-03-1996 06-08-1988 
33 250758 P P Mary 16B 0946 1 26-05-1998 06-07-1988 

Appendices 
109 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designat
ion 
Employee 
Type 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
34 346594 Ramachandran M 61B 3644 1 04-04-1991 27-07-1987 
35 212997 Remeshan  Minikki 680 1156 1 30-06-2013 12-05-1987 
36 185748 Rajan K 280 1068 1 19-11-1988 09-02-1987 
37 427339 Rajasekharan P 61B 4566 1 24-11-2012 11-12-1986 
38 108016 Yoossufali  K N 61B 3616 1 20-07-2013 04-10-1986 
39 538246 Mary Joseph Arackal 16B 8080 1 31-03-2016 01-08-1986 
40 660340 Remadevi T 16B 8080 1 01-04-2014 25-06-1986 
41 549554 No Name 16B 0944 1 01-01-1990 27-11-1985 
42 586676 Chandrika Devi S 61B 1914 1 28-09-1995 24-10-1985 
43 345429 Gopalan P 16B 0931 1 15-06-1995 08-02-1985 
44 123339 Raman C R 61B B049 1 19-12-1985 30-01-1985 
45 175162 Ramani R 16B 0001 1 20-03-1989 26-10-1984 
46 164413 Baby E 01B 011 2 05-11-1986 09-10-1984 
47 516027 Mohammed M 16B 2156 1 02-10-1986 03-07-1984 
48 251605 K Yesoda 16B 0934 1 15-10-1995 20-06-1984 
49 133508 Madanamohanan M K 61D B020 1 20-05-1986 07-06-1984 
50 204680 Kasu A 630 2606 1 15-06-1985 27-02-1984 
51 284100 David P S 16B 0935 1 16-08-2012 09-01-1984 
52 128720 Haridas V 59B 4025 1 30-11-1995 08-12-1983 
53 104797 Abdul Gafoor 61B 9505 1 20-04-1984 22-09-1983 
54 422443 Mariamma Mathew  C 16B 5576 1 28-11-2013 15-06-1983 
55 230000 Jamal P A 030 0677 1 13-04-1989 24-12-1982 
56 254158 Janaky Ammal  K S 16B 0931 1 19-11-1995 20-12-1982 
57 181908 Santha K B 16B 0935 1 23-02-1986 06-06-1982 
58 344870 P Abdusalam 16B 0931 1 24-11-1995 27-01-1982 
59 207400 Bhaskaran PV 210 8575 1 20-08-1983 12-10-1981 
60 129580 Clement K V 59B 4024 1 05-10-1995 01-10-1981 
61 121843 Gopinathan M 530 3030 1 31-03-2012 01-09-1981 
62 289041 Annamma Punnoose 16B 5576 1 31-03-2014 17-07-1981 
63 132744 Abraham P U 61D B020 1 21-06-1984 15-06-1981 
64 164257 Emgalse N 01B 010 1 13-11-1985 15-06-1981 
65 345866 Ayisha Karuvarathodi 16B 0952 1 01-06-1995 09-06-1981 
66 128651 Abdul Latheef T P 59B 3560 1 16-06-2014 22-08-1980 
67 200824 Sekharan K 350 1753 1 26-11-1982 18-08-1980 
68 676464 Mathew P M 16A 3589 1 24-08-2012 04-10-1979 
69 570463 Alavi Kakkamoolakkal 16B 8001 1 05-09-1985 16-07-1979 
70 342646 C Indira 16B 0931 1 13-11-1995 26-10-1978 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
110 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present 
Department 
Designat
ion 
Employee 
Type 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
Joining 
71 430135 Madhssodaran SD 16B 0934 1 12-07-1998 12-07-1978 
72 268330 P R Madhu Kumar 530 4113 1 08-11-1985 01-12-1977 
73 135181 Indira M M 460 32 1 08-10-1982 25-04-1977 
74 104799 Rajendran Nair D 61B 9505 1 11-05-1982 09-09-1976 
75 132956 Kochumaman M 61B B049 1 18-11-1985 01-09-1975 
76 673865 Jayaari C 440 1970 1 30-08-1976 12-02-1975 
77 149364 Gopalan K 530 4113 1 12-09-1992 15-09-1973 
78 251736 V C Xavier 16B 0951 1 01-12-1976 03-06-1968 
79 270990 Mohanadas G 280 2200 1 01-06-1967 09-01-1966 
80 147864 Ammad N P 530 3489 1 07-04-1968 15-03-1963 
81 144498 Adul Latheef K K 530 4115 1 07-06-1962 07-12-1961 
82 139559 Sasikumar P 530 1516 1 26-06-1959 14-05-1959 
83 355069 Joykutty 530 3030 1 25-05-1959 04-02-1959 
84 672899 Rahumath O 16B 2574 1 18-06-1956 01-06-1956 
85 224306 Rugmini Amma E 16B 8901 1 28-11-1958 01-08-1954 
86 137452 Sunny Joseph 530 3489 1 02-01-1962 07-02-1950 
87 130433 Sankarannair K 59C 4007 1 07-11-1999 21-01-1946 
88 154047 Jyothi Prasad N 250 0038 1 02-05-1965 06-10-1940 
89 274567 Chithra C G 16B 5570 1 22-05-1965 23-10-1922 
(Source: SPARK Database). 
  

Appendices 
111 
Appendix – 5.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.1.4 Bullet 3) 
Difference between date of birth and date of joining was less than 18 years 
 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
1 804129 Maria Femina C Francis 01-06-2017 02-06-2017 1 0 
2 759448 Anjali T 01-11-2015 02-11-2015 1 0 
3 713096 Ratheesh R S 19-09-2013 20-09-2013 1 0 
4 262376 Kochumol K K 23-10-1978 27-10-1978 4 0 
5 716557 Dinesh K K 15-11-2013 25-11-2013 10 0 
6 174167 Padma Kumari C 03-05-1985 01-07-1985 59 0 
7 778927 Sreejith M 30-05-2016 03-08-2016 65 0 
8 685294 Asharaf A K 20-05-2013 01-08-2013 73 0 
9 754518 Deepa VM 25-04-2015 14-07-2015 80 0 
10 346583 P Radha 27-04-1986 28-07-1986 92 0 
11 758482 Thomas Mathew 24-04-2015 01-08-2015 99 0 
12 505263 Ajikumar K 21-03-2010 14-07-2010 115 0 
13 893455 Sivadas A M 05-06-1980 01-10-1980 118 0 
14 645458 Nandini P K 10-05-1993 10-09-1993 123 0 
15 638036 Vijayalakshmi Meethalekandiyil 15-04-2011 03-09-2011 141 0 
16 715415 Fayas C H 19-05-2013 09-10-2013 143 0 
17 872136 Sudha S 01-04-2019 27-08-2019 148 0 
18 346355 Sethumadhavan 15-11-1995 13-04-1996 150 0 
19 260517 Aneesha A 20-01-1982 09-07-1982 170 0 
20 346608 Subrahmanian   C 08-04-1996 27-09-1996 172 0 
21 706629 Rosmey James 03-05-1985 01-11-1985 182 0 
22 713590 Pramod Karakkandi 10-03-2013 15-09-2013 189 1 
23 818423 Sajimon N 10-05-2017 28-11-2017 202 1 
24 158389 Saleem P V 20-05-2006 08-12-2006 202 1 
25 646104 Muralidharan M P 01-04-2011 09-11-2011 222 1 
26 852006 Vasantha M 20-04-2018 19-12-2018 243 1 
27 123709 Souphyamol T M 17-03-2012 30-11-2012 258 1 
28 138130 Rajan Punnathiriyan 16-03-1998 01-12-1998 260 1 
29 644087 Venugopalan P C 25-08-1956 21-05-1957 269 1 
30 686451 Surendran Nair G 08-04-1960 18-03-1961 344 1 
31 610183 Chandrika P 10-06-1987 01-06-1988 357 1 
32 132729 Sanil Kumar K R 07-08-2002 07-08-2003 365 1 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
112 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
33 820655 Reji S L 03-05-1974 01-06-1975 394 1 
34 144557 Rajan P C 25-05-1961 23-07-1962 424 1 
35 196627 K G Girija 21-05-1996 17-09-1997 484 1 
36 561334 Geetha V K 30-11-1979 01-06-1981 549 2 
37 636288 Hasainar K 02-05-1988 01-01-1990 609 2 
38 759012 Shiji Joseph 28-01-1978 01-01-1980 703 2 
39 244182 Mridula S 11-05-1990 07-07-1992 788 2 
40 100158 Sreekantan Nair M 30-05-1979 24-08-1981 817 2 
41 670140 Jatyakumasr 25-05-1988 06-02-1991 987 3 
42 604390 Viji 10-01-1981 08-11-1983 1032 3 
43 227386 Subhramonian P 15-05-1976 01-05-1979 1081 3 
44 501642 Shivarama P V 04-12-1957 05-12-1960 1097 3 
45 148187 Abdul Rahiman K 19-12-1971 12-08-1975 1332 4 
46 277311 Laila P 21-10-1954 13-08-1958 1392 4 
47 301111 Saffiya Cheeroth 11-05-1989 03-05-1993 1453 4 
48 652297 AB 12-12-1984 12-02-1989 1523 4 
49 346364 Antony J 01-01-1997 24-10-2001 1757 5 
50 342229 Pathumma N 20-05-1991 15-07-1996 1883 5 
51 131087 Pramod Pareth 20-05-1996 22-10-2001 1981 5 
52 136188 Asokan Thampy C 01-04-1952 01-02-1958 2132 6 
53 196996 Sunathamma KK 10-05-1995 31-05-2001 2213 6 
54 104167 Resmi K R 12-05-2000 16-06-2006 2226 6 
55 605198 Subaida Beevi N M 02-05-1956 31-07-1962 2281 6 
56 344532 Vaheeda EM 01-05-1977 30-08-1983 2312 6 
57 132838 Muraleedharan N 01-06-1990 01-10-1996 2314 6 
58 132698 Babu P P 20-05-1996 08-10-2002 2332 6 
59 291441 Ambika A 25-05-1962 11-11-1968 2362 6 
60 208453 Subaida Beevi A 20-05-1970 01-02-1977 2449 7 
61 346414 Naveen UN 31-05-1994 28-05-2001 2554 7 
62 257098 Reghunathana M C 01-06-1990 13-06-1997 2569 7 
63 154107 Jaya Kumar R 25-05-1996 16-06-2003 2578 7 
64 569683 Seenath N T K 04-01-1985 01-06-1992 2705 7 
65 165215 KKK 01-10-1990 18-09-1998 2909 8 
66 684838 Beatries 31-05-1957 31-05-1965 2922 8 
67 135638 Padmanabhan T 15-03-1983 01-04-1991 2939 8 
68 825812 Simon R 28-05-1962 04-09-1970 3021 8 

Appendices 
113 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
69 841267 Prajeesh Raj R P 19-02-1992 30-07-2000 3084 8 
70 203632 Sumathi Devi K 30-11-1983 12-06-1992 3117 9 
71 489891 Ummer Vadakkan 15-07-1951 14-08-1960 3318 9 
72 211934 Premalatha L 22-11-1986 19-01-1996 3345 9 
73 227273 Puhspavally K 10-05-1994 16-08-2003 3385 9 
74 498102 Sosamma C G 22-04-1973 01-08-1982 3388 9 
75 389006 Anish Kumar C A 26-12-1974 06-07-1984 3480 10 
76 132910 Viswambharn 14-06-1991 25-01-2001 3513 10 
77 375754 Santha P K 09-02-1980 29-09-1989 3520 10 
78 125291 Gopalan T K 05-11-1962 01-07-1972 3526 10 
79 158573 XY 11-11-1990 10-10-2000 3621 10 
80 226470 Seetha Lekshmi K D 31-05-1979 24-07-1989 3707 10 
81 609685 Sudheer V N 03-12-1997 23-05-2008 3824 10 
82 134868 Padmavathi Amma A 25-05-1972 20-02-1983 3923 11 
83 100193 Nirmala D 13-05-1972 21-02-1983 3936 11 
84 491427 Anithakumari V M 05-04-1997 21-02-2008 3974 11 
85 673594 XX 01-01-1990 17-02-2001 4065 11 
86 747422 Mohammed Sanofar S 09-02-1989 06-04-2000 4074 11 
87 652416 Kayyakutty M 26-11-1943 14-02-1955 4098 11 
88 389129 Beena GL 01-06-1997 28-08-2008 4106 11 
89 324378 Mohammed Haneefa N P 10-10-1967 07-01-1979 4107 11 
90 178825 Ashokan P T 01-06-1959 08-09-1970 4117 11 
91 598234 Shyju P 24-07-1999 10-11-2010 4127 11 
92 346095 Durga Devi Vellat 01-06-1959 01-10-1970 4140 11 
93 679643 Mary Anitha Ruben 30-05-1985 05-12-1996 4207 12 
94 146733 Jacob N K 10-02-1972 01-09-1983 4221 12 
95 862826 Geetha Lakshmi K 29-12-1971 02-08-1983 4234 12 
96 618125 Naseema Beevi P 09-09-1957 25-07-1969 4337 12 
97 230896 Kuriakose Abraham 27-11-1987 30-10-1999 4355 12 
98 783024 Fathimath Shanima K 28-01-1988 01-01-2000 4356 12 
99 164236 Hareendran Nair V 10-06-1991 24-05-2003 4366 12 
100 158930 Jim 01-01-2000 02-02-2012 4415 12 
101 219308 Jaseentha P X 28-06-1965 01-08-1977 4417 12 
102 868013 Mohammed Abdul Rasheed T P 10-10-1964 15-11-1976 4419 12 
103 133571 Parameswaran H 03-05-1964 04-09-1976 4507 12 
104 170989 Lekshmi Paru 20-04-1941 04-02-1954 4673 13 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
114 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
105 279581 Premaja Poyilil 16-03-1968 02-01-1981 4675 13 
106 837686 Jes Mathew 16-02-1987 01-01-2000 4702 13 
107 230840 Mohammed M K 09-11-1950 17-10-1963 4725 13 
108 178728 Gangadharan C 15-09-1954 01-01-1968 4856 13 
109 464330 George K Peter 30-05-1958 12-10-1971 4883 13 
110 245640 Gopalan A P 01-07-1949 14-11-1962 4884 13 
111 204054 Sreekumar T N 21-04-1983 16-09-1996 4897 13 
112 467251 Joy K Paul 13-04-1958 12-10-1971 4930 14 
113 105196 Shaji E K 30-05-1991 08-12-2004 4941 14 
114 632769 Anntrisa Varghese 08-11-1999 10-06-2013 4963 14 
115 384175 Sainudeen M 01-04-1963 01-11-1976 4963 14 
116 565053 Jolly A K 04-01-1972 07-08-1985 4964 14 
117 645608 Gayathri K G 21-05-1976 01-01-1990 4973 14 
118 564908 Dinesh D K 02-02-1997 16-09-2010 4974 14 
119 687360 Usha J 18-06-2001 02-02-2015 4977 14 
120 165554 Beena Rani R 09-04-1975 15-12-1988 4999 14 
121 357011 Omana TV 03-11-1966 16-07-1980 5004 14 
122 606329 Sinimol Z A 26-03-1976 01-01-1990 5029 14 
123 668064 Manju T S 22-03-1976 01-01-1990 5033 14 
124 464180 Vijayakumari N 12-12-1958 11-10-1972 5052 14 
125 687186 Sabithamol P M 11-01-1998 14-12-2011 5085 14 
126 227142 Sureshan K 23-11-1955 08-11-1969 5099 14 
127 464340 Mariamma M Kurian 25-07-1961 12-07-1975 5100 14 
128 645610 Biju B K 07-01-1976 01-01-1990 5108 14 
129 465300 Musthafa 21-05-1966 02-06-1980 5126 14 
130 346429 Sneha Prabha UP 15-07-1963 29-08-1977 5159 14 
131 151356 Yohannan K M 08-05-1963 02-07-1977 5169 14 
132 288599 Agnes Matew 27-05-1971 26-07-1985 5174 14 
133 555964 Isbella Joseph 21-05-1991 24-07-2005 5178 14 
134 593071 Mary Femy Louiz 16-05-1984 13-08-1998 5202 14 
135 495133 Sainaba P 01-07-1951 01-11-1965 5237 14 
136 810576 Adheesh S Neduvila 04-04-1991 18-08-2005 5250 14 
137 464338 Rosamma Sebastian 30-05-1960 25-10-1974 5261 14 
138 226328 Unni V 12-06-1953 26-11-1967 5280 14 
139 219211 Rose Preethy P R 01-05-1973 27-10-1987 5292 14 
140 458573 Joy K Jose 27-05-1972 06-01-1987 5337 15 

Appendices 
115 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
141 605742 Indumol VA 15-05-1975 01-01-1990 5345 15 
142 713399 Geethu S Nandan 12-01-1999 11-09-2013 5356 15 
143 641222 Celia A George 01-11-1990 01-07-2005 5356 15 
144 370364 Jayanandan K P 01-02-1966 09-10-1980 5364 15 
145 774845 Sudha R 24-08-1974 01-06-1989 5395 15 
146 401972 Leela K 11-09-1968 26-07-1983 5431 15 
147 272490 Kunjamina K V 19-12-1953 13-11-1968 5443 15 
148 149167 Valsala K A 10-12-1957 06-11-1972 5445 15 
149 187084 Radhakrishnan Nair V 25-04-1965 25-04-1980 5479 15 
150 130792 Suresh M K 30-05-1973 07-06-1988 5487 15 
151 575608 Vikraman M 30-05-1959 01-07-1974 5511 15 
152 158719 Kunju Pillai P 19-09-1952 07-11-1967 5527 15 
153 555575 Mahesh Kumar Yadav 05-01-1998 23-03-2013 5556 15 
154 183526 Nadarajan V 04-12-1952 01-03-1968 5566 15 
155 568672 Rasheeda P S 20-08-1980 01-01-1996 5612 15 
156 439004 Ummer N 01-04-1994 19-08-2009 5619 15 
157 687084 Vijaya Kumar R 25-05-1965 01-11-1980 5639 15 
158 226672 Padmakumar K S 25-05-1969 02-11-1984 5640 15 
159 513120 K Appu 06-05-1965 03-11-1980 5660 16 
160 262998 Suresh Naduthody 06-05-1966 07-12-1981 5694 16 
161 672842 Sumathi 21-09-1995 17-06-2011 5748 16 
162 305932 John P J 20-05-1958 01-03-1974 5764 16 
163 344930 Amina T P 07-10-1954 20-07-1970 5765 16 
164 230982 Bharathi K 27-08-1941 24-06-1957 5780 16 
165 231716 Govindan K V 09-05-1948 10-03-1964 5784 16 
166 201723 Hiranmayi K R 10-05-1975 18-03-1991 5791 16 
167 138973 Sajeev T R 24-05-1969 01-04-1985 5791 16 
168 160965 Ramachandan K 01-07-1967 09-05-1983 5791 16 
169 745681 Anchitha MK 11-02-1994 01-01-2010 5803 16 
170 214396 Rajalekshmi Amma S 28-05-1959 23-04-1975 5809 16 
171 158790 Narayanan Nair K K 04-04-1952 01-03-1968 5810 16 
172 178845 Chandu E K 10-08-1966 26-07-1982 5829 16 
173 560538 Jeena George A 30-05-1977 20-06-1993 5865 16 
174 226066 Sudhakumari K 30-05-1958 03-07-1974 5878 16 
175 137471 Abu K 01-07-1949 05-08-1965 5879 16 
176 659835 Preetha Mol P K 22-11-1983 01-01-2000 5884 16 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
116 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
177 697801 Subhadra R 20-04-1960 01-06-1976 5886 16 
178 611341 Mary Mathew 23-09-1955 19-11-1971 5901 16 
179 735634 Arun A Ravi 12-05-1998 11-07-2014 5904 16 
180 190600 Hari Prasad G 20-05-1964 01-08-1980 5917 16 
181 136185 Ayyappan R 09-10-1971 01-01-1988 5928 16 
182 805656 Lathikakumari G 01-05-1963 26-07-1979 5930 16 
183 645770 Teji 16-04-1995 15-07-2011 5934 16 
184 158980 Renga Swamy K 17-05-1953 22-08-1969 5941 16 
185 364731 Abraham P G 31-05-1958 25-09-1974 5961 16 
186 137465 Baburaj A P 14-11-1956 30-03-1973 5980 16 
187 337844 Iysha K M 21-02-1954 31-07-1970 6004 16 
188 357667 Vilasini C 27-12-1959 23-07-1976 6053 17 
189 421184 Hamza A P 12-07-1948 11-02-1965 6058 17 
190 634394 Surajadevi T M 30-05-1955 01-01-1972 6060 17 
191 805980 Anupriya M R 09-10-1998 29-05-2015 6076 17 
192 674761 Abu A K 28-12-1942 18-08-1959 6077 17 
193 877387 Muhammedali M K 05-04-1965 01-12-1981 6084 17 
194 694033 Nasheeda M 21-04-1990 01-01-2007 6099 17 
195 751809 Joseph V Jinoge 16-10-1998 02-07-2015 6103 17 
196 207331 Rajan K 26-01-1951 18-10-1967 6109 17 
197 121242 Rajeevan Puthussery 22-05-1976 15-03-1993 6141 17 
198 480342 K S Girija 03-05-1964 16-03-1981 6161 17 
199 194047 Rasheed S 02-05-1960 05-04-1977 6182 17 
200 133758 Varghese A 10-11-1964 22-10-1981 6190 17 
201 547202 Antony P J 14-04-1952 01-04-1969 6196 17 
202 192754 Ali C K 25-02-1949 17-02-1966 6201 17 
203 221071 Merly Noronha 19-03-1959 19-03-1976 6210 17 
204 642716 Subhash E 15-10-1983 22-10-2000 6217 17 
205 201515 Suseela K 12-03-1963 01-04-1980 6230 17 
206 238403 Paulose P T 05-01-1955 01-02-1972 6236 17 
207 122263 Sukumaran Nair 09-10-1948 12-11-1965 6243 17 
208 888444 Suresh Babu P B 05-05-1964 12-06-1981 6247 17 
209 631871 Sobhiyamol S 30-05-1980 10-07-1997 6250 17 
210 262869 X 12-05-1979 23-06-1996 6252 17 
211 259289 Sahira E 01-06-1959 15-07-1976 6254 17 
212 688222 Suresh T P 27-04-1984 18-06-2001 6261 17 

Appendices 
117 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name DOB DOJ Difference 
between DOB 
& DOJ (days) 
Difference 
in years 
213 510614 T 10-11-1982 02-01-2000 6262 17 
214 764677 Ramesh V 08-05-1998 06-07-2015 6268 17 
215 238957 Santha Kumari K K 03-11-1955 01-01-1973 6269 17 
216 108972 Divakaran Nair M 28-09-1948 28-11-1965 6270 17 
217 161687 Ponnan R 18-02-1953 01-05-1970 6281 17 
218 527265 Mahendra Mohan C V 15-05-1957 19-08-1974 6305 17 
219 715107 Sudheer M S 30-05-1973 25-09-1990 6327 17 
220 343167 K R Viswanathan 03-10-1965 17-02-1983 6346 17 
221 497857 Smt Juby Scaria 16-08-1982 01-01-2000 6347 17 
222 149205 Girija K 15-05-1959 30-09-1976 6348 17 
223 536659 Rosamma M A 08-06-1957 04-11-1974 6358 17 
224 100001 Vijayakumar T 01-11-1950 30-03-1968 6359 17 
225 223355 Rajani B 01-06-1958 06-11-1975 6367 17 
226 126264 Usha Kumari S 25-03-1967 30-08-1984 6368 17 
227 224594 Geetha E P 10-02-1967 18-07-1984 6368 17 
228 106723 Rajan K K 20-10-1958 01-04-1976 6373 17 
229 647563 Safiya V 20-05-1960 01-11-1977 6374 17 
230 332357 Radhalakshmi V 25-02-1978 16-08-1995 6381 17 
231 163306 Chandran 11-07-1959 01-01-1977 6384 17 
(Source: SPARK Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
118 
Appendix – 5.7 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.1.4 Bullet 4) 
Date of birth or date of joining is 1900 
 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present  
Office 
DOB DOJ 
1 883096 Anupama K P 16020435 02-11-1988 01-01-1900 
2 851910 Raju 13030393 01-01-2000 01-01-1900 
3 876257 Feba M R 04010134 07-03-1988 01-01-1900 
4 851760 Khairunneesa K V 15100877 30-01-1989 01-01-1900 
5 823478 Anusha M K 16010004 17-11-1988 01-01-1900 
6 827500 Lasitha Manapadan 19010001 27-04-1982 01-01-1900 
7 858822 Sreelakshmy K B 23070107 31-05-1987 01-01-1900 
8 838913 Santhi K R 07060116 27-04-1990 01-01-1900 
9 848679 Maheshkumar S 04050044 22-03-1989 01-01-1900 
10 897698 Revathy M 14030017 05-10-1990 01-01-1900 
11 888206 Sreechithra M 09020035 01-06-1978 01-01-1900 
12 689300 Jomol Jose 06070053 23-03-1990 01-01-1900 
13 880419 Sureshbabu K S 13020108 25-06-1969 01-01-1900 
14 859161 Kunjumol Abraham 10050010 30-04-1962 01-01-1900 
15 870100 Retheesh Kukar E R 06010004 27-05-1980 01-01-1900 
16 838058 Anil Kumar A 07060035 29-05-1970 01-01-1900 
17 854745 Anjali Karthyayani L 01020004 30-05-1993 01-01-1900 
18 899036 Midhun N B 11010062 29-05-1990 01-01-1900 
19 847890 Savitha P T 13030710 24-12-1985 01-01-1900 
20 899037 Nidhin Angels M 11010062 23-04-1984 01-01-1900 
21 872071 Sethulekshmy S 07030311 10-12-1982 01-01-1900 
22 893929 Sherin J K 23070011 24-08-1995 01-01-1900 
23 863690 Shihabudheen 15180727 22-09-1987 01-01-1900 
24 849346 Shiji M 22020011 25-05-1981 01-01-1900 
25 868867 Remas Babu R 18030066 13-05-1966 01-01-1900 
26 108349 Sureshkumar K 01110042 01-01-1900 08-02-2006 
27 122514 Valsa C V 13010001 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 
28 122516 Valsala Kumari M 13010001 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 
29 125106 Thomas C J 01010042 01-01-1900 24-05-2006 
30 193199 Mary Joseph 08010002 01-01-1900 21-11-1983 
31 346533 KH Muhammed Navaz 15040005 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 
32 650698 Radha Devi V 12080609 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 
33 572878 Pratheesh K K 14040008 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 

Appendices 
119 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Name Present  
Office 
DOB DOJ 
34 101652 Anil Kumar T N 01010001 01-01-1900 17-05-2005 
35 125132 Anas Mon M A 01110042 01-01-1900 02-01-1900 
36 126624 Kishorelal P S 01110042 01-01-1900 12-06-2006 
37 126627 Mohandas K 01110042 01-01-1900 26-06-2006 
(Source: SPARK Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
120 
Appendix – 5.8 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.2) 
Multiple employee treasury savings bank accounts opened against  
Permanent Employee Number 
Sl. 
No. 
ETSB Account No. PEN Beneficiary Account 
No. 
Beneficiary  
Name 
Name 
1 799012600000029 100209 67073513078 Ajayakumar A R Ajayakumar A R 
2 799012600114701 100209 67073513078 Ajayakumar A R Ajayakumar A R 
3 799012600000031 100294 67005320268 Sadhana S Nair Sadhana S Nair 
4 799012600506590 100294 701110100016625 Sadhana S Nair Sadhana S Nair 
5 799012600006378 103566 10300100412818 Rajan S Jr Rajan S Jr 
6 799012600009473 103566 10300100412818 Sheeja S Rajan S Jr 
7 799012600003738 107292 67076016108 Pradeep K S Pradeep K S 
8 799012600004746 107292 799010100000730 Pradeep K S Pradeep K S 
9 799012600004554 215051 1507104000010423 Gadha C Gadha C 
10 799012600517218 215051 1507104000010420 Gadha C Gadha C 
11 799012600003067 239543 705070100001888 Remeshkumar R Remeshkumar R 
12 799012600003098 239543 705090100001143 Sreemol V R Remeshkumar R 
13 799012600004836 761492 67357197572 Abhijith PC Abhijith PC 
14 799012600004841 761492 67357197572 Abhijith PC Abhijith PC 
15 799012600095934 774995 20360764397 Sreedharan Nair C Sreedharan Nair C 
16 799012600114090 774995 20360764397 Sreedharan Nair C Sreedharan Nair C 
17 799012600098597 790203 35338984457 Vijith P V Vijith P V 
18 799012600004815 790203 799010100109691 Vijith P V Vijith P V 
19 799012600009166 794227 799010100106715 Sajana K V Shameerath N 
20 799012600459513 794227 20200303225 Shameerath N Shameerath N 
21 799012600004576 805938 799010100076509 Smitha A Smith A 
22 799012600517247 805938 200101011003982 Smith A Smith A 
23 799012600004595 808767 31405727005 Neethu K Neethu K 
24 799012600004624 808767 99980102399503 Neethu K Neethu K 
25 799012600004644 810705 799010100086747 Sivi C V  Sivi C V 
26 799012600469926 810705 67195481353 Sivi C V Sivi C V 
27 799012600004669 810906 799010100092255 Dhanya Dileep  Dhanya Dileep 
28 799012600470038 810906 20412129531 Dhanya Dileep Dhanya Dileep 
29 799012600004695 815659 799010100095360 Remya B R Remya B R 
30 799012600473086 815659 33949683347 Remya B R Remya B R 
31 799012600004717 817427 799010100098905 Babumon S  Babumon S 
32 799012600104506 817427 67043242841 Babumon S Babumon S 
33 799012600004733 819316 799010100100731 Saleena Abdulsalam  Saleena Abdulsalam 

Appendices 
121 
Sl. 
No. 
ETSB Account No. PEN Beneficiary Account 
No. 
Beneficiary  
Name 
Name 
34 799012600004839 819316 10910100167459 Saleena Abdulsalam Saleena Abdulsalam 
35 799012600010042 851906 99980107577400 Anandu Vijayan Anandu Vijayan 
36 799012600010043 851906 37971006210 Ranjith M Anandu Vijayan 
37 799012600004855 862667 37782573932 Jayaram C P Sudha T 
38 799012600114141 862667 37782573932 Sudha T Sudha T 
39 799012600114184 866054 005700100159251 Bindhu M Bindhu M 
40 799012600114243 866054 005700100159251 Bindhu R Bindhu M 
(Source: CoreTSB Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
122 
Appendix – 5.9 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.5.2 (ii)) 
Irregular sanction of LWA for employees who had already availed five years’ leave in 
their entire service 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN Department Leave type From date To date No. of 
days 
1 371735 Indian Systems of Medicine LWA as per App XII C 03-03-2021 25-07-2021 145 
2 379367 Health Services LWA as per App XII A 07-06-2021 06-07-2021 30 
3 402799 Health Services LWA as per App XII A 23-12-2020 31-10-2021 313 
4 403997 Education - Technical LWA as per App XII A 18-08-2021 15-12-2021 120 
5 403997 Education - Technical LWA as per App XII A 16-12-2021 29-12-2021 14 
6 483079 Animal Husbandry LWA as per App XII A 08-04-2021 21-04-2022 379 
7 584274 Enquiry Commissioner and 
Special Judge 
LWA as per App XII A 21-09-2021 31-10-2021 41 
8 601820 Dairy Development LWA as per App XII A 01-08-2021 31-08-2021 31 
9 620999 Administration of Justice -
Judiciary 
LWA as per App XII C 19-04-2022 18-05-2022 30 
10 903688 PWD-Irrigation LWA as per App XII A 01-01-2021 28-01-2021 28 
11 918168 Revenue LWA as per App XII A 20-11-2020 19-02-2021 92 
12 918636 Education - Technical LWA as per App XII C 27-09-2021 10-12-2021 75 
13 926499 Medical Education LWA as per App XII C 07-09-2021 15-11-2021 70 
14 930408 PWD-Irrigation LWA as per App XII C 11-03-2022 08-06-2022 90 
(Source: SPARK Database). 
  

Appendices 
123 
Appendix – 5.10 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.5.3.1) 
Incorrect mapping of House Rent Allowance Class 
Sl. No. Name of Office Amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
1 District Collectorate, Kasaragod 4.50 
2 RTO, Kasaragod 5.53 
3 District Registrar Office, Kasaragod 1.03 
4 District Treasury, Kasaragod 3.32 
5 District Office of Mining and Geology, Kasaragod 0.37 
 Total 14.75 
(Source: SPARK database). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
124 
Appendix – 5.11 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.5.3.2) 
Irregular processing of salary of employees who were on Leave Without Allowances  
 
Sl. 
No. 
PEN  Department/ 
Office 
Nature 
of leave 
Period of 
leave 
Month/ 
year for 
which 
salary 
processed 
Bill control code Salary 
Amount 
processed 
(₹) 
1 620866 Administration of 
Justice-Judiciary/ 
Motor Accidents 
Claims Tribunal, 
Kottayam 
LWA as 
per App 
XII C 
 
04-02-2021 
to 
03-02-2022 
 
9/2021 34994579788981889641 52,500 
2 830727 
 
Medical Education/ 
Medical College 
Hospital, 
Gandhinagar, 
Kottayam 
LWA as 
per App 
XII C 
 
24-04-2018 
to 
23-04-2023 
 
5/2018 
to 
7/2018 
63142379819397875689 
(5/2018) 
99,382 
3 681124 
 
Education 
(Collegiate)/ Sree 
Krishna College 
LWA as 
per App 
XII A 
30-06-2016 
to 
27-12-2016 
7/2016 
to 
11/2016 
53467079839187878452 
(6/2016) 
1,32,030 
4 795553 
 
Medical Education/ 
Medical College 
Hospital, 
Gandhinagar, 
Kottayam 
LWA as 
per App 
XII A 
02-08-2019 
to 
01-08-2024 
09/2019 
to 
11/2019 
63142379809072875869 
(09/2019) 
1,06,350 
5 790971 
 
Registration/ 
Kalayapuram Sub 
Registrar Office 
LWA as 
per App 
XII A 
01-08-2021 
to 
31-07-2022 
8/2021 60259579789090877795 28,200 
 
6 757328 
 
Treasuries/ District 
Treasury Kottayam 
 
LWA as 
per App 
XII C 
25-03-2019 
to 
24-03-2024 
1/2022 78524679779875917146 29,198 
 
Total 4,47,660 
(Source: SPARK database). 
 
 
  

Appendices 
125 
Appendix – 5.12 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.6) 
Irregular processing of salary of employees who retired/ superannuated, took voluntary 
retirement, died while in service, declared invalid from service 
 
Sl. 
No 
PEN  Department/ Office Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
retirement/ 
Voluntary/ 
death/ invalid 
Month/ 
year for 
which 
salary 
processed 
Bill control 
code 
Ineligible 
Salary 
Amount (₹) 
1 132194  Education –
Technical/ Central 
Polytechnic College, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
26-12-1973 
 
01-05-2021 
(Voluntary) 
6/2021 5454457978 
9370884777 
60,138 
 
2 682523 Education (General)/ 
Thundathil Madhava 
Vilasom HSS 
30-10-1971 
 
03-07-2021 
(Death) 
9/2021 3176727978 
9078799766 
74,529 
3 293874 Education (General)/ 
St Marys H S 
Vallarpadam 
01-06-1962 
 
31-05-2018 
(Retirement) 
6/2018 7061257981929
3886095 
88,690 
 
4 352573 Health Services/ 
CHC Manambur 
 
17-05-1966 
 
18-10-2017 
(Invalid) 
11/2017 to 
06/2018 
5074607982 
8873804799 
(11/2017) 
5074607981 
9374829963 
(6/2018) 
4,35,974 
Total 6,59,331 
(Source: SPARK database). 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
126 
Appendix – 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Short/ Excess credit of SGST revenue due to non-reconciliation of GST transactions 
 
Year Month No. of CINs SGST (₹) 
2017 7 1 10 
2017 8 9 80,957 
2017 9 6 18,86,366 
2017 10 27,654 1,49,22,95,201 
2017 12 7 39,986 
2018 1 114 18,44,387 
2018 2 1 26,910 
2018 3 4,743 40,25,18,460 
2018 4 2 23,976 
2018 8 8,181 32,23,95,642 
2018 9 15,387 1,56,26,32,418 
2018 10 42,292 3,34,18,02,679 
2018 11 1 10,48,707 
2018 12 2 39,023 
2019 1 1 946 
2019 2 2,163 4,98,56,113 
2019 3 713 2,04,86,838 
2019 4 28,016 97,51,46,769 
2019 5 1 25 
2019 6 1 25 
2019 8 2 499 
2019 9 1 53,136 
2019 10 56,057 2,82,78,22,254 
2019 11 7,918 18,20,32,006 
2019 12 50,027 4,24,71,94,384 
2020 1 40,461 3,61,93,93,459 
2020 3 28,330 1,93,37,49,074 
2020 6 2 1,961 
2020 7 3 17,888 
2020 8 1 3,20,718 
2020 10 4 1,772 
2021 1 3,436 4,44,26,931 
2021 2 2 36,30,177 

Appendices 
127 
Year Month No. of CINs SGST (₹) 
2021 4 1 217 
2021 6 1 250 
2021 7 55,371 3,77,79,25,997 
2021 8 1,00,703 4,96,22,88,724 
2021 9 56,161 4,87,94,19,041 
2021 10 72,224 6,77,70,73,791 
2021 11 55,427 6,50,31,30,443 
2021 12 43,398 5,41,57,43,357 
2022 1 42,374 4,34,42,15,555 
2022 4 24,394 2,45,98,22,873 
2022 6 10,771 1,05,83,59,990 
2022 8 50,182 3,58,49,64,305 
2022 9 714 2,46,79,049 
2022 10 2,644 7,57,64,221 
2022 11 6,067 12,85,14,506 
2023 1 7,257 18,85,00,306 
2023 3 2 12,500 
Total 8,43,230 65,21,11,84,822 
(Source: GRASKL Database). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
128 
Appendix – 7.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.2) 
Non-migration of Personal Deposit accounts from Treasury Information System to 
Treasury Savings Bank 
PD Account (8443-00-106) 
Sl. 
No. 
PD Code Institution Balance  
Amount (₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Parent Treasury 
1 19/1 DPI Thiruvananthapuram 3,68,75,114 16-04-2016 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
2 23/1 UPS Kuzhivilla 10,691 25-11-2016 ST Kazhakkoottom 
3 30/01 Engineering College 
Thiruvananthapuram 
49,76,578 27-12-2016 ST Engineering College 
4 30/04 Engineering College (CD) 1,70,90,753 27-12-2016 ST Engineering College 
5 39/1 Govt. School of Nursing 51,94,645 23-12-2016 ST Medical College 
6 69/1 Directorate of Handloom 25,116 06-04-2006 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
7 69/2 Handloom 34,150 02-04-2009 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
8 142/1 DMO 91,957 11-01-2013 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
9 151/1 Health Ministers Welfare Fund 6,906 19-10-2015 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
10 186/1 Farm Information Bureau 2,500 15-06-2004 ST Vellayambalam 
11 249/1 Charitable Endowment 1,76,79,956 09-08-2016 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
12 343/1 Managing Director (ENCOS) 45,084 10-11-2000 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
(shifted to 104) 
13 1047/1 Dental College 51,06,425 15-10-2016 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
14 93/1 Fathima Matha National College 
Kollam 
1,58,800 14-06-2016 DT Kollam 
15 36/1 PD A/C of PRO MGR Friends  
Janasevanakendram 
4,71,898 28-09-2012 DT Malappuram 
16 81/1 University of Calicut 74,72,876 10-03-2016 DT Malappuram 
17 271/1 HANTEX (-)33,607 11-02-2016 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
18 2120/1 SBI (HBA Loan) (-)58,854 10-02-2016 DT Thiruvananthapuram  
  Total 9,51,50,988 
 
        
Deposits of Education Institutions (8443-00-123)  
Sl. 
No. 
PD Code Institution Balance  
Amount (₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Parent Treasury 
1 91/1 HSS Kamaleswaram 683 29-03-2005 Principal ST 
2 94/1 Model Boys HS 13 28-12-2006 Principal ST 
3 114/1 UPS Ambalathara 859 17-06-2008 Principal ST 
4 121/1 UPS Nedumangad 1,500 10-08-2015 Principal ST 
5 132/1 RFT and VHSS Valiyathura 1,364 13-06-2007 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
6 174/1 Govt. UPS Vanchiyoor 585 26-06-2015 Addl ST Vanchiyoor 

Appendices 
129 
Sl. 
No. 
PD Code Institution Balance  
Amount (₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Parent Treasury 
7 202/1 AM High School Thirumala 24,506 15-03-2011 ST Vellayambalam 
8 206/1 Concordia UPS Peroorkada 2,030 18-12-2010 ST Vellayambalam 
9 229/1 Pre-primary Teachers Institute 
Cottonhill 
115 20-03-2014 ST Vellayambalam 
10 242/1 Central Polytechnic 
Thiruvananthapuram 
2,200 28-06-2006 ST Vellayambalam 
11 293/1 Govt. College Karyavattom 7,39,692 22-03-2010 ST Kazhakkoottom 
12 318/1 College for Engineering 
Thiruvananthapuram 
2,500 13-03-2001 DT Thiruvananthapuram 
13 404/1 Govt. UPS Perumthura 368 03-08-2009 By Cash 
14 2036/1 GHSS Bharathannoor 8,815 18-06-2014 ST Kilimannoor 
15 2097/1 SST College of Music 
Thiruvananthapuram 
195 27-09-2014 Principal ST 
16 2103/1 Govt. Model BHSS Thycaud  135 23-08-2005 Principal ST 
17 2134/1 Govt. HSS Peroorkkada 1,700 28-06-2006 ST Vellayambalam 
18 2117/1 ST Marys HSS Vettucaud 615 06-09-2007 Principal ST 
19 2294/1 Govt. Model BHSS Thycaud  2,400 12-06-2012 Principal ST 
20 1027/1 GHSS Ashtamudi 20,500 09-06-2016 DT Kollam 
21 772/1 Principal GBHSS Manjeri 19,154 26-05-2015 DT Malappuram 
22 540/1 Lourde Matha HSS Pallikkunnu 90,377 21-12-2016 DT Wayanad  
  Total 9,20,306 
 
   
  Grand Total 9,60,71,294 
 
  
(Source: Data received from Directorate of Treasuries). 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
132 
Appendix – 7.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.7) 
Lack of validation controls resulted in negative figures in various accounts 
 
Year Count of records Sum of amount (₹) 
2016-17 132 (-)27,37,05,087 
2017-18 170 (-)10,51,39,915 
2018-19 281 (-)1,00,54,18,203 
2019-20 852 (-)1,56,60,25,644 
2020-21 1,195 (-)55,20,89,143 
2021-22 495 (-)26,02,00,729 
2022-23 11 (-)2,10,83,336 
 Total 3,136 (-) 3,78,36,62,057 
(Source: CoreTSB Database). 
  

Appendices 
133 
Appendix – 7.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.7) 
Lack of validation controls resulted in negative figures in various accounts 
 
 Type of Accounts No. of accounts in 
Negative balance 
01 - Treasury Savings Bank (TSB) 1,769 
02 – Treasury Public Account  23 
03 – Treasury Security Account  14 
04 – Pensioners Treasury Savings Bank  581 
14 – Special Treasury Saving Bank  642 
15 – Journalist PTSB 5 
17 – 106- Personal Deposit 1 
18 – 123- Personal Deposit  2 
19 – Civil Court Deposit  1 
21 – Social Security Pension Account  44 
26 – Employees Treasury Savings Bank 52 
29 – Salary Deduction Treasury Savings Bank 1 
30 – Local Government Treasury Savings Bank  1 
Total 3,136 
  (Source: CoreTSB database) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
134 
Appendix – 7.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.7) 
Lack of validation controls resulted in negative figures in various accounts 
 
Sl. No. Account No. Account Balance (₹) Date 
1 701010100012969 (-)4,62,567 31-03-2020 
2 703011400000384 (-)5,947 31-03-2020 
3 704041400000023 (-)2,413 31-03-2020 
4 708011400000050 (-)64,58,462 31-03-2018 
5 711041400000077 (-)1,08,000 31-03-2018 
6 711081400000098 (-)15,698 31-03-2020 
7 713031400000003 (-)1,09,95,400 31-03-2020 
8 717080100000004 (-)98,806 31-03-2017 
9 719010100011788 (-)1,301 31-03-2017 
10 719071400000187 (-)16,620 31-03-2020 
11 720041400000018 (-)1,04,10,306 31-03-2018 
12 721040100002064 (-)829 31-03-2021 
13 799010100080720 (-)99,422 31-03-2021 
14 799011400000072 (-)49,63,724 31-03-2021 
15 799011400000894 (-)53,955 31-03-2020 
16 799011400001498 (-)4,38,489 31-03-2018 
17 799011400001707 (-)5,36,741 31-03-2020 
18 799011400001724 (-)1,03,686 31-03-2020 
19 799011400001931 (-)14,56,986 31-03-2020 
20 799011400001974 (-)2,75,871 31-03-2018 
21 799011400002176 (-)20,000 31-03-2018 
22 799011400002636 (-)6,200 31-03-2018 
23 799011400003099 (-)1,84,985 31-03-2018 
24 799011400003552 (-)14,360 31-03-2020 
25 799011400003959 (-)63,29,480 31-03-2020 
26 799011400004030 (-)2,18,571 31-03-2020 
27 799011400005312 (-)22,06,34,000 31-03-2020 
28 799012100000384 (-)7,09,150 31-03-2021 
29 799012100001542 (-)3,50,700 31-03-2021 
30 799013000000475 (-)12,35,243 31-03-2023 
31 799011400000072 (-)3,220 31-03-2023 
(Source: CoreTSB Database) 
  

Appendices 
135 
Appendix – 7.7 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.8) 
Lack of system control for the operation of Personal Deposit accounts and closure of 
inoperative accounts  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
 PD Accounts inoperative for more than three years  
1 602 - Sub Treasury, 
Alappuzha 
251413 Official Receiver District 
Court, Alappuzha 
799011700000304 3,075 10-02-2017 
2 1305 - Sub Treasury, 
Thalappilly 
1585761 Kerala Kalamandalam 799011700000533 4,15,141 16-02-2017 
3 1101 - District 
Treasury Ernakulam 
(Kakkanad) 
1792365 Official Receivers Office 
Ernakulam 
799011700000685 3,33,072 10-03-2017 
4 1208 - Sub Treasury, 
Kothamangalam 
706369 M A College of 
Engineering, 
Kothamangalam 
799011700000170 1,030 29-03-2017 
5 1110 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
1798095 Dist Medical Office of 
Health Ernakulam 
799011700000756 1,71,700 24-05-2017 
6 1301 - District 
Treasury, Thrissur 
1776277 Thrissur Development 
Authority 
799011700000267 13,72,271 18-07-2017 
7 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
1789499 Fathima Matha National 
College, Kollam 
799011700000633 1,53,300 20-12-2017 
8 1507 - Sub Treasury, 
Nilambur 
588209 DFO, Nilambur North 
(167) 
799011700000119 12,50,272 21-04-2018 
9 2102 - Sub Treasury, 
Ottappalam 
1794376 Special Tahsildar LR 
Office, Ottapalam 
799011700000720 42,184 26-04-2018 
10 104 - Sub Treasury, 
Vellayambalam 
1799570 Guru Gopinath, 
Natanagramam 
799011700000820 32,004 26-06-2018 
11 1003 - Sub Treasury, 
Devikulam 
1778127 Divisional Forest Office 
Munnar 
799011700000289 307 07-11-2018 
12 1601 - District 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
1795526 Forest Tribunal, 
Kozhikode 
799011700000737 6,77,370 16-11-2018 
13 1906 - Sub Treasury, 
Pazhayangadi 
1711935 Sub Treasury, 
Pazhayangady 
799011700000396 1,750 06-03-2019 
14 104 - Sub Treasury, 
Vellayambalam 
1759000 Divisional Forest 
Officer, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
799011700000188 35,275 26-03-2019 
15 706 - Sub Treasury, 
Harippad 
700729 Sub Treasury, Haripad 799011700000151 1 29-04-2019 
16 201 - District Treasury, 
Kattakkada 
26382 Christian College, 
Kattakada 
799011700001047 4,28,494 28-05-2019 
17 702 - Sub Treasury, 
Chengannur 
270867 Sub Treasury 
Chenganoor 
799011700001052 10,073 14-06-2019 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
136 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
18 1303 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Thrissur 
664135 Kerala Agricultural 
University Vellanikkara 
799011700001056 1,56,366 19-09-2019 
19 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
895080 Sub Treasury Punalur 799011700001060 794 17-10-2019 
20 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
2444292 SBT Kottarakkara 799011700001062 1,950 17-10-2019 
21 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
2444282 HANVEEV 799011700001057 4,081 17-10-2019 
22 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
2444289 SBI Kollam 799011700001061 72,060 17-10-2019 
23 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
2444284 HANTEX 799011700001058 76,903 17-10-2019 
24 801 - District Treasury, 
Kottayam 
1786158 District Hospital 
Kottayam 
799011700000558 26,66,764 04-03-2020 
25 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
1788380 A.A Rahim Memorial 
Govt. District Hospital 
Kollam 
799011700001035 64,670 13-03-2020 
26 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
1781388 Govt. Victoria Hospital 
Kollam 
799011700000432 51,44,330 25-03-2020 
 
                                                                                  Total 1,31,15,237 
 
 
 Other inoperative accounts  
27 301 - District Treasury 
Kollam 
2479172 Secretary Khadi and 
Village Industries Board 
799011700001034 404 27-04-2020 
28 605 - Sub Treasury, 
Cherthala 
1017163 Principal NSS College 
Cherthala 
799011700000287 7,065 30-09-2020 
29 101 - District Treasury, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
1753864 Kumaranasan National 
Inst of Culture 
Thonnakkal 
799011700000069 18,942 22-01-2021 
30 1803 - Sub Treasury, 
Sulthan Bathery 
1620962 Senior Supdt RGMRHSS 
Noolpuzha 
799011700000295 2,12,765 27-01-2021 
31 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
382927 District Development 
Office for Scheduled 
Castes Kollam 
799011700000593 3,009 12-02-2021 
32 112 - Sub Treasury, 
Vikas Bhavan 
1774899 Election Commission 
TVPM 
799011700000258 8,831 26-02-2021 
33 1901 - District 
Treasury, Kannur 
660774 Finance Officer Kannur 
University 
799011700000417 92,083 12-03-2021 
34 1804 - Sub Treasury, 
Mananthavady 
1823455 Revenue Divisional 
Office Mananthavady 
799011700000851 4,61,285 17-04-2021 
35 104 - Sub Treasury, 
Vellayambalam 
1758999 Divisional Forest Officer 
Thiruvananthapuram 
799011700000187 1,210 07-07-2021 
36 703 - Sub Treasury, 
Kayamkulam 
1119586 Milad-E-Sherief 
Memorial College 
Kayamkulam 
799011700001105 63,244 14-07-2021 

Appendices 
137 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
37 404 - Sub Treasury, 
Punalur 
1789180 Sreenarayana College, 
Punalur 
799011700000723 14,42,162 16-08-2021 
38 101 - District Treasury, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
1751595 Deputy Labour 
Commissioner 
Trivandrum 
799011700000028 1,87,403 01-09-2021 
39 1105 - Sub Treasury, 
Mattanchery 
936981 P.H.C. Thiruvankulam 799011700000657 7,19,361 03-09-2021 
40 1406 - Sub Treasury, 
Kollengode 
1587853 Divisional Forest Office 
Nenmara 
799011700000385 16,49,449 05-10-2021 
41 1401 - District 
Treasury, Palakkad 
426782 Divisional Forest Office 
Palakkad 
799011700000374 51,895 12-10-2021 
42 1110 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
1815476 Govt Industrial Training 
Centre Edappally 
799011700000832 3,300 11-11-2021 
43 2003 - Sub Treasury, 
Nileswar 
595410 I.T.C.(S.C.D.D.) 
Cheruvathur 
799011700000414 2,700 18-11-2021 
44 1601 - District 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
1800539 Govt ITC SCDD Elathur 799011700000780 11,100 09-12-2021 
45 1303 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Thrissur 
1760147 Women Poly Technic 
College Nedupuzha 
799011700000204 2,345 06-01-2022 
46 305 - Sub Treasury, 
Kundara 
1784649 T K M College of Arts 
and Science 
799011700000637 3,000 19-01-2022 
47 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
1798010 Regional Joint Labour 
Commissioner Kollam 
799011700000758 3,10,754 20-01-2022 
48 702 - Sub Treasury, 
Chengannur 
270784 Sree Narayana College 
Chengannur 
799011700000039 4,000 22-01-2022 
49 305 - Sub Treasury, 
Kundara 
1789451 Industrial Training 
Institute Chandanathope 
799011700000632 840 02-02-2022 
50 1906 - Sub Treasury, 
Pazhayangadi 
1711930 I.T.C.(S.C.D.D.), Madai 799011700000772 1,600 03-02-2022 
51 1901 - District 
Treasury, Kannur 
962661 Port Office Azhikkal 799011700000874 18,725 23-02-2022 
52 305 - Sub Treasury, 
Kundara 
1784649 T K M College of Arts 
and Science 
799011700000523 18,695 03-03-2022 
53 304 - Sub Treasury, 
Chathanoor 
874525 Sree Narayana College 
Chathannoor 
799011700000530 500 27-03-2022 
54 601 - District Treasury, 
Alappuzha 
1784014 Deputy Director of Dairy 
Development Alappuzha 
799011700000520 96,680 08-04-2022 
55 1005 - Sub Treasury, 
Thodupuzha 
1779066 Grama Soubhagya 
Vanchiyoor 
799011700000321 1,12,286 28-04-2022 
56 1306 - Sub Treasury, 
Chavakkad 
1142978 Sub Jail Chavakkad 799011700000684 34,334 24-05-2022 
57 2203 - Sub Treasury, 
Thalassery 
793219 Govt. Brennen College 
Hostels Dharmadam 
799011700000391 4,501 08-06-2022 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
138 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
58 1301 - District 
Treasury, Thrissur 
1758835 Govt, Engg College 
Hostel TSR 
799011700000178 32,540 14-06-2022 
59 1303 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Thrissur 
1821152 Caldian Syrian H S S 
TSR 
799011700000852 40,690 15-06-2022 
60 301 - District Treasury, 
Kollam 
2445928 Intustrial Training 
Institute for Woman 
799011700000686 220 18-06-2022 
61 101 - District Treasury, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
1774876 General Administration 
Department 
799011700000256 67,780 01-07-2022 
62 1101 - District 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
(Kakkanad) 
1801906 Kerala Khadi and Village 
Industries Board 
799011700000786 18,12,770 05-07-2022 
63 1602 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
1782133 Govt. Arts & Science 
College KDE 
799011700000478 6,28,440 07-07-2022 
64 106 - Sub Treasury, 
Attingal 
1182087 Taluk Office, 
Chirayilkeezhu 
799011700001131 28,682 26-07-2022 
65 106 - Sub Treasury, 
Attingal 
1182087 Taluk Office, 
Chirayilkeezhu 
799011700001132 1,26,691 26-07-2022 
66 801 - District Treasury, 
Kottayam 
1789066 Official Receiver, 
Kottayam 
799011700000621 67,14,003 01-09-2022 
67 1404 - Sub Treasury, 
Chittur 
1847234 Training Superintendent 
Govt, ITC SCDD 
799011700000900 1,700 29-09-2022 
68 101 - District Treasury, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
1813288 Govt. School of Nursing, 
TVPM 
799011700000828 42,750 20-10-2022 
69 1906 - Sub Treasury, 
Pazhayangadi 
1711903 GVHSS, Neruvambram 799011700000790 1,93,796 03-11-2022 
70 1701 - District 
Treasury, 
Thamarassery 
1789191 Govt. College, 
Kodencherry 
799011700000626 16,34,212 09-11-2022 
71 1110 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
1812809 Administration General 
and Official Trustee 
799011700000829 3,27,182 14-11-2022 
72 1401 - District 
Treasury, Palakkad 
426686 Govt. School of Nursing, 
Palakkad 
799011700000377 53,500 16-11-2022 
73 202 - Sub Treasury, 
Neyyattinkara 
1904412 Principal Santhom 
Malankara Arts and 
Science College 
799011700000994 2,18,160 24-11-2022 
74 2001 - District 
Treasury, Kasaragod 
1799590 Collectorate, Kasaragod 799011700000899 9,42,054 24-11-2022 
75 202 - Sub Treasury, 
Neyyattinkara 
1756131 KNM Govt Arts 
&Science College, 
Kanjiramkulam 
799011700000130 8,13,378 25-11-2022 
76 2004 - Sub Treasury, 
Hosdurg 
661321 Govt. School of Nursing, 
Kanhangad 
799011700000642 38,000 03-12-2022 

Appendices 
139 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
77 1401 - District 
Treasury, Palakkad 
426844 Govt Teacher Training 
Institute (Women) 
Ambikapuram, Palakkad 
799011700000367 1,081 05-12-2022 
78 1605 - Sub Treasury, 
Feroke 
1787020 Farook College 799011700000627 13,99,857 08-12-2022 
79 1203 - Sub Treasury, 
Piravom 
494652 Principal BPC College, 
Piravom 
799011700000231 4,47,536 13-12-2022 
80 1205 - Sub Treasury, 
Kolenchery 
450648 St. Peter`s College 
Kolenchery 
799011700000228 21,54,677 13-12-2022 
81 1206 - Sub Treasury, 
Koothattukulam 
524376 Technical High School, 
Elanji 
799011700000824 1,00,179 16-12-2022 
82 2003 - Sub Treasury, 
Nileswar 
595408 I.T.I.Nileswaram 799011700000413 1,200 20-12-2022 
83 1106 - Sub Treasury, 
Mulamthuruthy 
533955 Technical High School, 
Mulanthuruthy 
799011700000804 1,63,689 21-12-2022 
84 1404 - Sub Treasury, 
Chittur 
1815461 Govt. Teacher Training 
Institute, Chittur 
799011700000833 24,961 10-01-2023 
85 601 - District Treasury, 
Alappuzha 
1790352 District Khadi and 
Village Industries Office 
Alappuzha 
799011700000767 30,77,496 11-01-2023 
86 1110 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
1783429 Govt. Law College 
Hostel 
799011700000501 7,144 16-01-2023 
87 101 - District Treasury, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
1751646 Labour Commissioner 
TVPM 
799011700000031 1,98,75,613 16-01-2023 
88 209 - Sub Treasury, 
Vellanad 
1878226 Bishop Jesudasan CSI 
Arts and Science College 
799011700000981 2,67,480 20-01-2023 
89 1601 - District 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
1796548 Regional Joint Labour 
Commissioner 
Kozhikode 
799011700000742 7,40,607 20-01-2023 
90 1601 - District 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
1781695 Govt. Homoeopathic 
Medical College 
Hospital 
799011700000457 38,000 27-01-2023 
91 205 - Sub Treasury, 
Parassala 
1783362 NKM HSS 
Dhanuvachapuram 
799011700000502 3,72,925 31-01-2023 
92 801 - District Treasury, 
Kottayam 
1788283 Medical College - Zonal 
Limb Fitting Centre 
799011700000607 13,46,004 03-02-2023 
93 1401 - District 
Treasury, Palakkad 
1779675 C M Govt Music College 
Hostel, Palakkad 
799011700000364 1,451 17-02-2023 
94 1108 - Sub Treasury, 
Tripunithura 
1799743 Govt. Ayurveda College 
Hostel 
799011700000771 11,40,015 17-02-2023 
95 1112 - Sub Treasury, 
Palluruthy 
1784916 Principal, Aquinas 
College, Edakochi 
799011700000526 35,65,761 27-02-2023 
96 304 - Sub Treasury, 
Chathanoor 
874510 Sree Narayana 
Politechnic 
799011700000433 6,850 01-03-2023 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
140 
Sl. 
No. 
Treasury Customer 
ID 
Name of Account 
Holder 
Account Number Account 
Balance 
(₹) 
Last 
Transaction 
Date 
97 1601 - District 
Treasury, Kozhikode 
412522 Govt Law College, 
Hostel 
799011700000394 15,988 04-03-2023 
98 1801 - District 
Treasury, Wayanad 
1878282 N M S M Goverment 
College, Kalpetta 
799011700000612 1,62,718 04-03-2023 
99 1403 - Sub Treasury, 
Alathur 
1200712 Principal S N College, 
Alathur 
799011700000476 10,46,492 07-03-2023 
100 605 - Sub Treasury, 
Cherthala 
1017162 Principal St Michaels 
College, Cherthala 
799011700000284 26,118 09-03-2023 
101 1404 - Sub Treasury, 
Chittur 
1780433 Govt. College hostel, 
Chithur 
799011700000403 1,322 10-03-2023 
102 209 - Sub Treasury, 
Vellanad 
1878226 Bishop Jesudasan CSI 
Arts and Science College 
799011700000973 5,09,578 16-03-2023 
103 1110 - Additional Sub 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
1781637 MCRV Hostel 799011700000479 351 18-03-2023 
104 402 - Sub Treasury, 
Kottarakara 
1785235 Govt. Poly Technic, 
Ezhukone 
799011700000534 3,98,269 23-03-2023 
105 507 - Sub Treasury, 
Thiruvalla 
1779097 DB College Thiruvalla 799011700000647 6,250 28-03-2023 
106 1101 - District 
Treasury, Ernakulam 
(Kakkanad) 
314818 Reg Joint Labor Commr. 
EKM 
799011700000729 79,02,166 30-03-2023 
107 1501 - District 
Treasury, Malappuram 
223984 Govt. College, 
Malappuram 
799011700000131 10,000 31-03-2023 
Total 7,71,88,031  
   (Source: Data received from Directorate of Treasuries).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOSSARY OF 
ABBREVIATIONS 

 
142 
 
 
 

 
141 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviations Full Form 
AEBAS Aadhar Enabled Biometric Attendance System 
AG(A&E) Accountant General (Accounts & Entitlement) 
BAMS Budget Allocation and Monitoring System 
BDS Bill Discounting System 
BIMS Bill Information and Management System 
BMS Budget Monitoring System  
BPR Business Process Reengineering 
CCO Chief Controlling Officer 
CERT-In Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
CFMS Core Financial Management System 
CREDIT Cash Remittance and Deposit in Treasury 
DBA Data Base Administrator 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DoT Department of Treasuries 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Disaster Recovery 
DRP Data Retention Policy 
EMLI Effective Management of Letter of credit Issuance 
GoK Government of Kerala 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GSTIN Goods and Services Tax Identification Number 
IFMS-K Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
KYC Know Your Customer 
LDAP Light Weight Directory Access Protocol 
LMMH List of Major and Minor Heads 
MoE Memorandum of Error 
NDC National Data Centre 
NIC National Informatic Centre 
OTP One Time Password 
PD Accounts Personal Deposit Accounts 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial Management System - Kerala 
142 
Abbreviations Full Form 
PSTSB Plan Scheme Treasury Savings Bank 
ROP Recovery of Overpayment 
RTM Requirement Traceable Matrix 
SCO Sub Controlling Officer 
SDC State Data Centre 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SPARK Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Kerala 
SSO Single Sign On 
STQC Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification 
STSB Special Treasury Savings Bank 
TIS Treasury Information System 
TPA Treasury Public Account 
TSB Treasury Savings Bank 
VLC Voucher Level Computerisation 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/kerala/en 
 
 
 
 
 