 
 
Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India 
on 
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors 
for the year ended 31 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tripura  
Report No. 2 of 2024 

 

 
i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Particulars Paragraph(s)  Page(s) 
Preface   v 
Overview   vii 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Authority for Audit 1.2 1 
Planning and Conduct of Audit 1.3 2 
Significant Audit Observations 1.4 3 
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 
Introduction 2.1 5 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit on “Solid Waste Management in Urb an 
Areas of Tripura” 
2.2 6 
LABOUR DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit on “Welfare of Building and Other  
Construction Workers” 
2.3 62 
TRIBAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Excess expenditure 
2.4 92 
TRIBAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Excess expenditure 
2.5 94 
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR  
Introduction 3.1 97 
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Implementatio n of 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme in Tripura” 
3.2 98 
FOREST DEPARTMENT 
Sand Mining in Tripura 
3.3 115 
PUBLIC WORKS (WATER RESOURCE) DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 
3.4 131 
PUBLIC WORKS (BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
Non recovery of dues from the contractor 
3.5 134 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) 
DEPARTMENT 
Extra expenditure 
3.6 137 
  

 
ii  
Particulars Paragraph(s)  Page(s) 
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 4.1 141 
Introduction 4.1.1 141  
Investment in PSEs 4.1.2 141  
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 4.1.3 143 
Special support and guarantees to PSEs during the year 4.1.4 144 
Accountability framework 4.1.5 145 
Arrears in finalisation of accounts 4.1.6 146 
Placement of Separate Audit Reports 4.1.7 147 
Investments made by State Government in PSEs whose accounts 
are in arrears 4.1.8 148 
Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 4.1.9 148 
Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of 
Investment 4.1.10 152 
Winding up of non-working PSEs 4.1.11 153 
Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSEs 4.1.12 153 
Follow up action on Audit Reports 4.1.13 155 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura Tourism Development Corporation Limited) 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Swadesh Darsh an 
Scheme” 
4.2 158 
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR  
General  5.1 201 
Trend of Revenue Receipts 5.1.1 201 
Revenue and return filling trends 5.1.2 204 
Analysis of arrears of revenue 5.1.3 207 
Evasion of tax detected by the department 5.1.4 207  
Pendency of refund cases 5.1.5 208 
Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issu es raised by 
Audit 5.1.6 209 
Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the  
departments/ Government 5.1.7 210 
Results of Audit 5.1.8 211 
Coverage of this report 5.1.9 211 
FINANCE (EXCISE AND TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight 
on GST Payments and Return Filing” 
5.2 212 

 
iii  
 
Particulars Paragraph(s)  Page(s) 
CHAPTER VI: FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS  
Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 6.1 245 
Monitoring 6.2 247 
Outstanding Inspection Reports 6.3 247 
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 6.4 248 
Response of the Government/ departments towards audit 6.5 248 
APPENDICES  
Appendices -- 251-348 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2023 has been prepared for submissio n to the Governor of 
Tripura under Article 151 of the Constitution of In dia for being laid on the 
floor of the State legislature.  
2. This Report contains significant results of Subj ect Specific Compliance audit 
and Compliance Audit of departments of the Governme nt of Tripura under 
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors including depa rtments of Urban 
Development, Labour, Tribal Welfare, Agriculture an d Farmers Welfare, 
Forest, Public Works (Water Resource), Public Works  (Building), Public 
Works (Roads & Building), Tourism and Finance (Exci se & Taxation) 
Departments. 
3. The cases mentioned in this Report are those whi ch came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the year 2022-23 as wel l as those which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be dealt with  in the previous Reports. 
Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2022-2 3 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. The Report has been finalised a fter considering the 
response of the Government Departments, wherever received. 
4. Audit has been conducted in conformity with Audi ting Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
PREFACE 

OVERVIEW  

vii  
OVERVIEW 
 
CHAPTER-I  
INTRODUCTION 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the performance audits and tes t audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Tripura pertaining  to Social, Economic and 
Revenue Sectors. The primary purpose of this Report  is to bring to the notice of the 
State Legislature, significant results of audit.  
Out of 1,668 auditee units, 129 units were planned for audit during 2022-23. After 
carrying out risk assessment and keeping in view th e available manpower, 45 units 
were actually audited during 2022-23 involving an expenditure of 
₹ 643.60 crore 
This Report inter alia contains two Performance Audits titled “Solid Waste  
Management in Urban Areas of Tripura” and “Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers” and three Subject Specific Co mpliance Audits titled 
“Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidh i Scheme in Tripura”, 
“Swadesh Darshan Scheme” and “Department’s Oversigh t on GST Payments and 
Return Filing” and six Compliance Audit paragraphs. 
CHAPTER-II 
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Performance Audit on “Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Tripura”  
Waste is a product or substance which is no longer suited for its intended use. Wastes 
are generally classified into Municipal Solid Waste  (MSW), bio-medical waste 
(BMW), Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste, e-w aste, plastic waste, 
slaughterhouse waste, industrial waste, and hazardo us waste by virtue of their nature. 
They are also classified as biodegradable, non- bio degradable, combustible, dry and 
inert based on their characteristics.  
Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) in urban ar eas has emerged as one of 
the biggest challenges that our country faces today . The situation is aggravated by 
rapid urbanisation. Inadequate management of waste has significant negative 
externalities in terms of public health and environ mental outcomes. Besides, it has an 
adverse impact on the aesthetic appearance of the surroundings. 
There are 20 Urban Local Bodies 
1 (ULBs) responsible for implementation of the 
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 (SWM Rules, 2016) in Tripura. The estimated 
                                                           
1  One Municipal Corporation; 13 Municipal Councils and six Nagar Panchayats 

Overview  
viii  
solid waste generation in these ULBs was 2290.14 To nnes Per Day (TPD) during 
2017-23. Out of the above, 2,115.05 TPD of waste we re being collected, of which 
1319.48 TPD were being processed. Plastic waste acc ounted for 317.63 Tonnes Per 
Annum (TPA). The ULBs generated 2,314 TPA of constr uction and demolition 
waste and 49.03 TPA of e-waste during 2017-22. 
The Central Government has the power to take necess ary measures for protecting and 
improving the quality of the environment, subject t o the provisions of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Judicial interv entions have had a significant 
impact on SWM. 
None of the sampled ULBs had prepared short-term, l ong-term, and contingency 
plans during 2017-23 for adopting a systematic appr oach to SWM. In the absence of 
these plans, the objectives of municipal solid wast e management to be achieved over 
specific planning horizons and the details of speci fic actions that need to be 
implemented were not highlighted. Despite massive a wareness campaigns, use of 
banned plastic carry bags, non-coverage of 100 per cent  door to door collection and 
non-segregation of waste at source, littering of wa ste/ garbage on roadside/street were 
noticed. The principles of adopting 3R approach whi ch helps to reduce quantity of 
waste, cost associated with its handling, and its e nvironmental impacts were missing.  
There was wide variation between the actual waste g eneration and the model waste 
generation which impacted proper implementation of SWM in absence of authentic 
estimation of waste. 
The sampled ULBs collected user charges of 
₹ 1.25 crore only against the demand of 
₹ 37.41 crore for the period from 2019-20 to 2022-23 resulting in loss of irrecoverable 
revenue of ₹ 36.16 crore.  Segregation of waste at source was e ither not followed or 
being partially followed in the sampled ULBs. Wides pread lack of dustbins in public 
places resulted in littering of waste leading to un hygienic condition, unhealthy odour 
and contamination of the environment. Non-availabil ity of material recovery facilities 
resulted in failure to recover the recyclables and to convert waste into new materials 
and objects by segregating dry and wet waste. Non-r ecognition of informal waste 
pickers and collectors and their non-integration wi th authorised pickers/ collectors 
resulted in failure of their participation in SWM. Acute shortage of auto tippers, 
pushcarts, etc . led to ineffectiveness and inefficiency in collec tion and transportation 
of municipal solid waste. Despite imposing ban by t he State and the GoI, single use 
plastic carry bags, flex, plastic spoons, etc . were being sold and used in the markets. 
Due to non-availability of fencing around the dumpi ng yard/ landfills, stray animals/ 
cattle/ pigs were seen feeding at solid waste dumping yard/ landfills and found pulling 
out or scattering/ consuming food waste that was pa cked in plastic bags creating 
untidy and unhygienic surroundings apart from consuming plastic. Non-availability of 
slaughterhouses even in Agartala Municipal Corporat ion (AMC) led to killing of 
animals such as goats, chickens/ ducks on the open roadsides/ streets and in the 
market places. 
 

Overview 
ix 
Except AMC no other sampled ULBs  has obtained auth orisation or consent 
certificate from Tripura State Pollution Control Bo ard for establishment of dumping 
ground/ landfills and tertiary waste processing cen tres in violation of the Rules. The 
sampled ULBs are yet to identify land for setting u p of sanitary landfills. Faulty 
selection and operation of landfill/ dumping yard s ites posed serious threat to public 
health and environment. 
The Government constituted State Level Advisory Bod y (SLAB) for monitoring of 
execution of SWM projects and the first review meet ing was held in April 2017. But 
information/ record regarding subsequent meetings o f SLAB was not made available 
to audit for scrutiny. Although 18 meetings of Stat e Level Committee (SLC) were 
held upto September 2022 through video conferences,  but compliance/ action taken 
reports by different departments were not found on records.  Non constitution of ward 
level committee was indicative of deficiencies in monitoring of SWM activities by the 
ULBs such as segregation, collection, transportatio n, street sweeping, drain cleaning, 
prohibition of littering, etc . by the ULBs.  
Non-availability of public health officer, sanitary  officer, sanitary sub inspector, 
environmental engineer for SWM in the ULBs led to i neffective implementation of 
SWM activities. Establishment of Micro Composting C entres, dumping grounds, 
tertiary waste processing centres, etc . without environmental clearance was not only a 
violation of Manual but was also fraught with sever e environmental and health 
hazards.  There was absence of assessment of environmental impact in the ULBs. 
Recommendations  
 The Government should ensure that the ULBs prepare short term plans aligned 
with the long-term planning and implementation apart from contingency plan. 
 Adoption of principles of 3R approach, which helps to reduce quantity of waste, 
cost associated with its handling, and its environm ental impacts should be 
ensured.  
 The Government should ensure that all households pa y user charges for 
door-to-door collection of municipal solid waste in segregated manner.  
 The Government may explore the feasibility for invo lvement of private parties 
and citizens for effective segregation of waste at source.  
 The Government may consider identifying garbage vul nerable points and the 
ULBs may develop mobile applications that allow cit izens to take pictures of 
garbage littering hot spots and upload it using the  mobile app and take timely 
corrective action for collection of such littered garbage.  
 The Government may consider for creation of material recovery facilities near 
landfills and dumping ground to facilitate segregation of dry and wet waste.  
 The Government should consider and initiate appropr iate strategies for 
involvement of informal waste pickers in solid wast e management with 
authorised ones.  

Overview  
x 
 The Government should ensure that the ULBs obtain a uthorisation from the 
TSPCB for setting up landfills, processing faciliti es, etc. as per Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016.  
 The Government may explore the feasibility of estab lishing sanitary landfills 
for all ULBs for disposal of inert materials remaining after processing.  
 The Government should activate monitoring committee s and strengthen 
control mechanisms in Solid Waste Management . 
 The Government may consider the appointment of publ ic health officer, 
sanitary officer, sanitary sub inspector and enviro nmental engineer in the 
ULBs for effective implementation of SWM activities.  
 Government should ensure for attaining environmenta l clearance from SPCB 
before establishment of processing facilities.  
 The Government may consider for undertaking an eval uation study by 
engaging third party to assess the impact of environment.  
Paragraph 2.2 
LABOUR DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit on “Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers” 
Under Section 27 (2) of the Building and Other Cons truction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (BO CW Act), the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India has the right and privileg es to access/ demand the production 
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and to inspe ct any office of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Board. The Gover nment of India (GoI) enacted 
(August 1996), the BOCW Act and Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1996 (Cess Act). The aim of the Acts was to provide safety, health and 
welfare measures for the benefit of building and ot her construction workers through 
levy/ collection of cess. The provisions of the BOC W Act covered “every 
establishment which employs or had employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, ten or more building workers in any buildin g or other construction work”. 
Further, the Act provided that every building worker between the age group of 18 to 60 
years who was not a member of any welfare fund esta blished under any law and had 
completed a period of ninety days of service during  the preceding twelve months as a 
construction worker in the State could be registered as a ‘beneficiary’. 
The GoI framed (November 1998) BOCW Rules, 1998 and  Cess Rules, 1998. As 
required under BOCW Act, the Government of Tripura (GoT) notified (August 2002) 
Tripura Building and Other Construction Workers (Re gulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Rules, 2001 (TBOCW Rules). T he collection of BOCW cess 
was fixed at the rate of one per cent  on the cost of construction. 
The State Government constituted (January 2007) the  Tripura Building & Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Board (the Board). 

Overview 
xi 
Section 264 of TBOCW Rules enshrined the powers, du ties and functions of the 
Board which inter alia  includes all matters connected with the administra tion of the 
fund and grant of benefits to the beneficiaries und er the Act and rules made there 
under; submission of annual budget to Government for sanction, submission of annual 
report to Government on the activities of the Board , annual audit of accounts of the 
Board in accordance with the provisions of the Act,  speedy settlement of claims and 
sanction of advances and other benefits and proper and timely recovery of any amount 
due to the Board, etc.  
Non-existence of effective mechanism to measure, ma nage and monitor the 
registration of establishments under the Act was no ticed and BOC workers were not 
identified or encouraged for registration.  
Cases of short-collection and non-deposit of labour  cess by cess collecting authorities 
were noticed due to non-assessment of cess by the A ssessing Officers. Besides, 
non-deduction of advance cess by the building plan approving authorities were also 
noticed. 
Due to non-reporting of accidents/ incidents couple d with non-appointment of Safety 
Officer by the employer, investigation/ enquiry for  ensuring health and safety norms 
were not initiated. 
In absence of inspection reports/ notes, the Depart ment failed to verify and take 
corrective measures towards implementation of healt h/ safety norms, identification of 
eligible willing BOC workers and establishments for  registration as required under 
BOCW Act. Besides, shortage of inspecting staff and  absence of planning for 
inspection were also noticed which adversely affected the inspection activities. 
There were delays in settlement of claims under var ious welfare schemes in absence 
of any fixed time frame for disbursement process. F urther irregularities were noticed 
in providing financial assistance under COVID-19 sc heme due to non-maintenance of 
updated and comprehensive database of registered beneficiaries by the Board. 
Monitoring was inadequate because the State Governm ent did not re-constitute the 
State Advisory Committee since February 2008 for advising on the matters arising out 
of the administration of the Act and the Board did not ensure submission of periodical 
returns from the employers for obtaining the inform ation like the details of the 
workers entitled to be registered, information abou t the maximum number of building 
workers employed on any day during the year, total number of days of engagement of 
building workers, etc . There were deficiencies in internal control of th e Board like 
non conducting of Social Audit, non-submission of a nnual budgets, annual returns to 
the State Government and non-constitution of grievance redressal mechanism. 
Recommendations 
The Government may consider to; 
 constitute an Expert Committee at the earliest to a dvice for making the State 
Rules consistent with the Central Acts; 

Overview  
xii  
 adopt suitable mechanism to ensure identification a nd registration of all the 
construction workers and establishments in the Stat e, both in public and 
private sector;  
 maintain a database of registered workers and establishments;  
 adopt suitable mobile application for easy issuance  of MCs to construction 
workers; 
 ensure that cess collectors and assessment officer are made accountable for 
ensuring that the cess amount is duly assessed, rea lised and remitted to the 
Board in timely manner;  
 ensure advance collection of cess in respect of the  private constructions 
through building plan approving authorities i.e. UL Bs and monitor the same 
with the Urban Development Department on a regular basis; 
 ensuring appointment of a Safety Officer adopting s uitable mechanism for 
timely reporting of accidents/ incidents and conduc ting investigation/ enquiry 
at accident sites with proper documentation; 
 make quarterly/ annual inspection plans based on ri sk profile and volume of 
the construction sites taking into consideration ma npower availability for 
inspection;  
 adopt suitable mechanism for effective monitoring o f inspection activities and 
review the inspection reports regularly; 
 adopt innovative ideas for creating mass awareness; 
 adopt a mechanism for timely disposal of claims;  
 re-constitute the State Advisory Committee;  
 constitute the grievance redressal mechanism; and  
 ensure regular submission of periodical returns from the employers.  
Paragraph 2.3 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
TRIBAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Excess expenditure 
Failure of verification of genuineness of applicati ons for hostellers’ scholarship at the 
school/ institute level, District and Department le vels led to excess payment of 
₹ 1.97 crore to the day scholars at the hostellers’ rate. 
Paragraph 2.4 
Excess expenditure 
Payment of pre-matric scholarship at the revised rate to beneficiaries for eight months 
for the year 2019-20 instead of at the pre-revised rate resulted in extra expenditure of 
₹ 94.59 lakh.  
Paragraph 2.5 

Overview 
xiii 
CHAPTER-III 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Implementatio n of Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme in Tripura” 
Pradhan Mantri-Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) Scheme  is a central sector 
scheme with 100 per cent  funding by the Government of India (GoI), being 
implemented under the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT)  mode. The Scheme aims to 
provide farmers having cultivable land with financi al support of 
₹ 6,000 per annum 
per farmer family payable in three equal instalment s of ₹ 2,000 each in every four 
months. The scheme was effective from December 2018  for transfer of benefit to 
eligible beneficiaries. 
Initially the scheme was admissible only to Small a nd Marginal Farmers (SMF) with 
combined landholding upto two hectors. The revised scheme guidelines (June 2019) 
extended the benefits to all farmer families irrespective of the size of their holdings.  
Land holding (cultivable land) is the main criteria  to avail the benefit. Agriculture 
land used for non-agriculture purposes are not cove red under the scheme. Similarly, 
farmers falling under certain specified categories of higher economic status are not 
covered under the scheme. Aadhaar (Unique Biometric Identification Number) seeded 
bank account of beneficiary is mandatory 
 for release of all instalments with effect 
from December 2019. 
Non-linking of land records with Unique Biometric I dentification Number, Mobile 
number, Bank accounts of the respective landowners led to disbursement to the 
ineligible beneficiaries. Undue financial benefits were extended to the ineligible 
beneficiaries even after the date of approval of th eir ineligibility. Improper 
verification/ validation of farmers’ requisite docu ments resulted in irregular 
disbursement to the Government employees, IT payees , farmers not-possessing 
agricultural land, duplicate bank account holders, ineligible farmers having bank 
accounts outside the State. Benefit was also denied  to the eligible beneficiaries due to 
non-approval of SRFs by the Department, pendency of  Unique Biometric 
Identification Number correction, short disbursemen t of first instalment. Inadequate 
monitoring and insufficient physical verification r esulted in payment to the ineligible 
beneficiaries. 
Recommendations 
For proper implementation of the scheme, the Government may consider to; 
 link the land records with the Unique Biometric Ide ntification Number, bank 
details and mobile number of the respective landowners; 
 properly scrutinise the self-declaration forms to w eed out the ineligible 
applicants; and 

Overview  
xiv  
 strengthen the monitoring mechanism at block, district and State levels. 
Paragraph 3.2 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
FOREST DEPARTMENT 
 
Sand Mining in Tripura 
Forest revenue is one of the sources of non-tax rev enue of the State Government.  
Royalty from sand mining lease holders is the major  revenue of the Forest 
Department. During the period 2016-17 to 2022-23, t he Forest Department collected 
revenue of 
₹ 27.67 crore from royalty of sand mining activities , whereas the total 
revenue of the Department was ₹ 103.17 crore. 
The sand in Tripura has been classified as ‘Riverin e resources’. As of March 2023, 
2,05,747 cum river sand was available in Tripura. R iver sand mining is a widespread 
practice as habitations concentrates along the rive rs and the mining locations are 
preferred near the markets or along the transportat ion route.  Excessive removal of 
sand may significantly distort the natural equilibr ium of the river stream channel.  It 
can damage private and public properties as well as aquatic habitats. 
In order to have a control on sand mining in Tripur a, the State Government, in 
exercise of  power conferred by section 15 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1957 (Central Act 67 of 1957), fr amed (September 2014) Tripura 
Minor Mineral Concessions (TMMC) Rules, 2014 for re gulating the grant of mining 
leases and other concessions in respect of minor mi nerals (including sand) in the 
State. TMMC Rules 2014 is the only legal framework to control the extraction of 
river sand in the State. 
Audit of sand mining revealed that non-establishmen t of District Mineral Foundation, 
and non-contribution to National Minerals Explorati on Trust resulted in non-
realisation of revenue. Mining Blocks were allotted  outside the mining sites identified 
in District Survey Report in violation of guideline s issued by Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
Inadequate monitoring resulted in instances of unau thorised sand mining, use of 
machinery and extraction of sand beyond permissible  limit thereby increasing the 
chances of the soil erosion of riverbed, non-submis sion of half-yearly compliance 
report for Environment Clearance and other prescrib ed reports/ returns by the 
proponents to the Tripura State Pollution Control B oard and the Department 
respectively. 
Recommendations 
The Government may consider to: 
 establish the District Mineral Foundation and amend  TMMC Rules, 2014 in 
line with MMR, 2015 to realise DMF; 
 allotting the mining blocks within those identified in the District Survey Report; 

Overview 
xv 
 c ollect royalty for contribution to the National Minerals Exploration Trust; 
 p revent unauthorised mining and use of machinery for extraction of sand; and 
 e nsure effective monitoring of sand mining. 
Paragraph 3.3 
PUBLIC WORKS (WATER RESOURCE) DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 
Failure to ensure quality control by the Engineering Officers coupled with 
lackadaisical approach of the Department for rectification of the technical defects led 
to unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 3.09 crore on partially constructed headworks of th e 
Minor Irrigation scheme (rainwater storage project) and additional liability of 
₹ 0.72 crore on rectification of defective works. 
P
aragraph 3.4 
PUBLIC WORKS (BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
Non recovery of dues from the contractor 
The Executive Engineer, Public Works (Building) Department, Capital Complex 
Division did not recover the dues (₹ 1.62 crore) from the contractor being the value of 
u
nused departmentally supplied steel not returned by the contractor, rent charges of 
plant, empty bitumen drums and taxes. 
Paragraph 3.5 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
Extra expenditure 
The Executive Engineer, Public Works Department (Roads & Buildings), 
Dharmanagar Division did not take steps for obtaining confirmation on publication of 
the first call of tender in the newspapers, from the Information and Cultural Affairs 
Department in violation of the State Government’s instructions. That led to the 
cancellation of the first call of tender and awarding of the work at a higher rate in the 
subsequent call which led to extra expenditure of ₹ 0.93 crore. 
P
aragraph 3.6 
CHAPTER-IV 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (STATE PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
 
Functioning of Public Sector Enterprises 
As on 31 March 2023, the State of Tripura had 16 Public Sector enterprises (PSEs) 
(15 working and one non-working). Out of 15 working PSEs, 14 are Government 
companies and one is Statutory Corporation. As on 31 March 2023, the investment of 
the State Government (capital and long-term loans) in 16 PSEs was ₹ 1,881.79 crore 
i
n the form of equity (₹ 1,652.33 crore) and long term loans (₹ 229.46 crore).  

Overview  
xvi  
The State Government investment ( ₹ 1,881.79 crore) as on 31 March 2023 consisted 
of 87.81 per cent  towards capital and 12.19 per cent  in long-term loans as against the 
investment of ₹ 1,675.55 crore as on 31 March 2019 consisting of 8 7.69 per cent  
(capital) and 12.31 per cent (long-term loans). 
Paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 
As per the information furnished by the PSEs, durin g 2022-23 the State Government 
provided budgetary support of ₹ 303.85 crore in the form of capital ( ₹ 43.15 crore), 
Loans (₹ 100 crore) and grants/ subsidy ( ₹ 160.70 crore). 
Paragraph 4.1.4 
As per the latest finalised accounts of PSEs as on 30 September 2023, the aggregate 
paid-up capital and accumulated losses of 15 working PSEs were ₹ 1,613.60 crore and 
₹ 1,485.57 crore respectively. Analysis of investmen t and accumulated losses of these 
PSEs revealed that the accumulated losses (net of f ree reserves) of four working PSEs 
(₹ 1,057.82 crore) had completely eroded their paid-up capital ( ₹ 845.99 crore). 
Paragraph 4.1.9.2 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura Tourism Development Corporation Limited) 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Swadesh Darshan Scheme” 
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS) -Integrated Develo pment of Theme Based 
Tourist Circuits in the Country  is the flagship scheme of the Ministry of Tourism 
(MoT), Government of India (GoI) for development of  the tourism infrastructure 
in the country. The MoT, GoI launched this Centrall y funded scheme in 
January 2015.   
Two tourist circuits namely Agartala Tourist Circui t and the Unakoti Tourist 
Circuit were approved (December 2015) by the MoT for the State 
Poor management of the SDS fund by the Tripura Tour ism Development Corporation 
resulted in underutilisation of funds and refund of  ₹ 1.80 crore to the MoT. Interest 
income earned on the SDS Fund aggregating to ₹ 1.03 crore was not remitted back to 
the MoT.  
Despite lapse of seven years and after an aggregate  expenditure of ₹ 85.67 crore 
incurred since the inception of the SDS, the object ive of promoting tourism by way of 
increasing the footfall of tourist, etc . remained unfulfilled due to the following 
reasons: 
Deficient planning of the State Government in under taking the infrastructural creation 
projects which were non-compliant to Statutory laws , international ramifications, 
territorial jurisdiction disputes, environmental im plications, etc . resulted in 
derailment/ delayed completion and/or dropping of t he several project/ project 
Components by the MoT.  

Overview 
xvii 
Irregularity in selection of the PMC as well defici ent services rendered by the PMCs 
resulted in (a) derailment of nine high valued infr astructure creation SDS projects 
leading to infructuous expenditure of ₹ 8.57 crore and (b) dropping of the project/ 
project components of ₹ 34.75 crore. 
Undue delays in entrustment of the infrastructure c reation projects to the 
Implementing Agencies as well as in invitation of t enders in respect of the same 
resulted in delays in completion of the projects ranging from six months to 57 months. 
Creation of nine Log-Huts in excess of the quantiti es sanctioned by MoT, deficient 
planning leading  to recasting of the estimates, no n-utilisation of the Log-Huts 
resulted in idle expenditure of ₹ 2.33 crore and unauthorised expenditure of 
₹ 4.13 crore. 10 out of the 18 Log-Huts created by t he Forest Department was lying 
unutilised for over two to five years.  
Deficient planning and non-utilisation of the asset s procured under the Adventure 
Tourism Theme of the SDS resulted in idle/infructuous expenditure of 
₹ 4.03 crore 
Deficient monitoring mechanism prevalent in the TTD CL resulted in the improper 
up-keep/ maintenance of various assets created unde r SDS thereby leading to 
infructuous/ idle expenditures of ₹ 9.64 crore. 
Recommendations 
The State Government may consider to; 
 develop a sound planning policy for the development and implementation of the 
infrastructure creation projects with consideration  of factors like 
(a) compliance with the statutory laws (b) internat ional ramifications, 
territorial jurisdiction disputes and environmental  implications, etc. in 
consultation with the other stakeholders namely Forest Department, ASI, etc.;  
 exercise due diligence and ensure compliance with t he codal provisions in the 
selection of the Project Management Consultants (PMCs);  
 mitigate the procedural delays in the entrustment o f the execution work to the 
State Government Implementing Agency (IA) as well a s in the invitation of 
tenders in respect of the same;  
 ensure the professional management of the financial  resources, tracking and 
monitoring of the project fund lying with the other  IAs and submission of 
accurate UCs; and  
 strengthen its Monitoring Mechanism to ensure prope r up-keep/maintenance 
of various assets created and timely completion of the projects.  
Paragraph 4.2 

Overview  
xviii  
CHAPTER-V 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
General 
During the year 2022-23, the revenue raised by the State Government was 
₹ 3,402.03 crore which was 18.58 per cent  of the total Revenue Receipts. The balance 
81.42 per cent  of the revenue receipts during 2022-23 was receive d from the GoI in 
the form of State share of Union Taxes and Duties a nd Grants-in-Aid. The collection 
of own revenue increased by ₹ 511.61 crore during 2022-23 as compared to previou s 
year and the rate of growth of own revenue increase d to 17.70 per cent in 2022-23 as 
compared to 10.41 per cent  during 2021-22. Revenue Receipts of the State incr eased 
by 3.95 per cent from ₹ 17,613.95 crore in 2021-22 to ₹ 18,309.01 crore in 2022-23. 
Paragraph 5.1.1 
Although target of Revised Estimates was not achiev ed in 2019-20, actual collection 
was more than the target as projected in the RE for  the years 2020-21 and 2021-22. In 
2022-23, the actual collection was less than the RE by ₹ 0.03 crore only. 
Paragraph 5.1.2 (i) 
Arrear of revenue increased from ₹ 62.12 crore at the end of March 2022 to 
₹ 161.24 crore at the end of March 2023. The arrear of revenue outstanding for more 
than five years also increased from ₹ 37.12 crore to ₹ 45.63 crore during the same 
period. 
Paragraph 5.1.3 
In the last ten years’ Audit Reports, 23 paragraphs  involving ₹ 52.46 crore featured in 
the Audit Reports, of which 21 paragraphs involving  ₹ 46.60 crore had been accepted 
by the State Government. Out of this, only ₹ 1.37 crore (2.94 per cent ) was recovered. 
Paragraph 5.1.6.2 

Overview 
xix 
FINANCE (EXCISE & TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing” 
The introduction of Goods and Service Tax (GST) has  replaced multiple taxes levied 
and collected by the Centre and States. GST, which came into effect from 
1 July 2017, is a destination-based consumption tax on the supply of goods or services 
or both levied on every value addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy 
GST on a common tax base.  Central GST (CGST) and S tate GST (SGST)/ Union 
Territory GST (UTGST) are levied on intra-State sup plies, and Integrated GST 
(IGST) is levied on the inter-State supplies. 
Section 59 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax (TGST) Act, 2017 stipulates GST as 
a self-assessment based tax, whereby the responsibi lity for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing r eturns is vested with the taxpayer.  
The GST returns must be filed online regularly on t he common GST portal, failing 
which penalties will be payable.  Even if the busin ess has had no tax liability during a 
particular tax period, it must file a nil return ma ndatorily. Further, Section 61 of the 
TGST Act read with Rule 99 of the Tripura Goods and  Service Tax Rules (TGST 
Rules), 2017 stipulate that the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related 
particulars furnished by taxpayers, communicate dis crepancies to the taxpayers and 
seek an explanation. 
This Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was t aken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commercial Taxes Organisation, Tri pura (Department) in this new 
tax regime. 
Audit find that documentation of essential oversigh t functions of charges such as 
scrutiny of returns, audit of taxpayers and taxpaye r’s compliance was poor and not 
amenable to evaluation.  As such, the functions of the charges were not fully carried 
out in an organised manner. 
Further, out of the 235 high value data inconsisten cies identified by Audit the 
Department responded to 191 cases. Of these, 140 ca ses constituting 59.57 per cent , 
turned out to be compliance deficiencies amounting to 
₹ 68.65 crore. A relatively 
higher rate of mismatches deficiencies was noticed in ITC availment, tax paid, etc . 
The Department has not responded to 44 cases of inc onsistencies, which has an 
identified mismatch of ₹ 16.64 crore. 
Detailed audit of GST returns also suggested signif icant non-compliance. In 30 out of 
30 cases examined, granular records were not forthc oming, which constituted a 
significant scope of limitation.  In ten out of 30 cases examined, were liable to pay 
interest on delay payment of tax (cash component) a mounting to ₹ 0.30 crore. A 
relatively higher rate of deficiencies was noticed in 32 identified mismatch of ITC 
availed and discharge of tax liability with a risk exposure of ₹ 27.27 crore. 

Overview  
xx  
From a systemic perspective, the Department needs t o strengthen the institutional 
mechanism in the Charges to establish and maintain effective oversight on return 
filing, taxpayer compliance, tax payments, cancella tion of registrations and recovery 
of dues from defaulters. 
Recommendations 
The Department may; 
 formulate SOP or prescribe detail procedures for se lection of scrutiny cases 
and fix targets, so that an optimum number of cases  can be scrutinised in every 
financial year before the cases became time barred; 
 ensure timely verification of cancellation of regis trations to prevent undue loss 
of tax revenue and unfair tax practices; 
 formulate detail selection procedures for cases for  conduct of audit so that an 
optimum number of cases can be audited in every financial year; 
 urgently pursue where inconsistencies and deviations were pointed out by Audit 
and result there-of may be intimated to Audit; and  
 initiate remedial action for all the compliance dev iations brought out in this 
report before they get time barred. 
Paragraph 5.2 
CHAPTER-VI 
Follow Up of Audit Observations 
As of September 2023, 84 paragraphs (60 paragraphs and 24 performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2006-07 to 2019-20 were awaiting 
discussion by the Public Accounts Committee. Of the se, explanatory notes on 
66 paragraphs (50 paragraphs and 16 performance aud its) have not yet been received 
from the departments.  
Paragraph 6.1.1(a) 
As of September 2023, 17 paragraphs (12 paragraphs and five performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2014-15 to 2019-20 were awaiting 
discussion by the Committee on Public Undertakings.  Of these, explanatory notes on 
13 paragraphs (nine paragraphs and four performance  audits) have not yet been 
received from the departments. 
Paragraph 6.1.1(b) 
Analysis of the position of outstanding IRs showed that 2,437 paragraphs included in 
328 IRs issued during the last five years up to 202 2-23 were pending for settlement as 
of September 2023. Of these, even the first reply h ad not been received in respect of 
905 paragraphs involving 114 IRs in spite of repeated reminders. 
Paragraph 6.3 

Overview 
xxi 
There are 2,437 paragraphs involving ₹ 3,162.34 crore relating to 328 IRs issued 
during the last five years 2018-19 to 2022-23 which  remained outstanding at the end 
of 30 September 2023 under Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors. 
Paragraph 6.5  

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 

Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 1 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the Performance Audit, Subject  Specific Compliance Audit and 
test audit of transactions of various departments o f the Government of Tripura 
pertaining to Social, Economic and Revenue. 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to t he notice of the State Legislature, 
significant results of audit. The findings of audit  are expected to enable the Executive 
to take corrective action, to frame appropriate pol icies as well as to issue directives 
that will lead to improved financial management and  contribute to better governance. 
Auditing standards require that the materiality lev el for reporting should be 
commensurate with the nature, volume and magnitude of transactions.  
This chapter in addition to explaining the planning  and coverage of audit, provides a 
synopsis of significant instances of non-compliance  with applicable laws, rules, 
regulations, various orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities. 
1.2 Authority for Audit 
This office functioned as a Branch Office of the Ac countant General, Assam from 
1967. Since 18 November 1974, it has been functioni ng as an independent office. 
Following a restructuring of cadres in 1984, the au dit functions were entrusted to the 
office of the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura a nd the Accounts and Entitlement 
functions were entrusted to the Accountant General (A&E), Tripura. 
Under the directions of the C&AG, the office of the  Principal Accountant General 
(Audit), Tripura conducts audit of government depar tments, Public Sector 
Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies and other Instituti ons 1 under Social, Economic, 
Revenue and General Sectors, which are spread all o ver the State. The Principal 
Accountant General (Audit) is assisted by two Deputy Accountants General. 
The authority for audit is derived from the Article s 149 and 151 of the Constitution of 
India and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Du ties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971 (C & AG’s (DPC) Act). Under Sect ion 13 of the C & AG’s (DPC) 
Act the office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit) has been entrusted with the 
audit of all expenditure incurred from the Consolid ated Fund of Government of 
Tripura. This office conducts audit of revenue rece ipts of the Government of Tripura 
under Section 16 of the C & AG’s (DPC) Act. This of fice conducts supplementary 
audit of the Balance Sheet of all State Government companies under Section 
143 (6) (a) of the Companies Act, 2013. This office  is responsible for audit of 
accounts of autonomous bodies and authorities falli ng under Section 14, 15, 19 (2), 
19 (3) and 20 (1) of C&AG’s (DPC) Act. 
                                                           
1 Audit of World Bank assisted projects, Asian Devel opment Bank assisted projects, etc . 

Chapter I: Introduction  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 2 
Besides these, this office is also responsible for the audit of accounts of Tripura Tribal 
Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) constitu ted under the provision of 
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. The Audit Repor t on the accounts of the Council 
is prepared separately for laying before the Counci l . The C&AG prescribes  the 
principles and methodologies for various audits in the Auditing Standards and the 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts (Amendments), 2020. 
1.3 Planning and conduct of Audit 
Audit process commences with the assessment of risk of the departments based on the 
expenditure incurred, criticality/ complexity of ac tivities, priority accorded for the 
activity by the Government, level of delegated fina ncial powers, assessment of 
internal controls, concerns of stakeholders, previo us audit findings, etc . Based on this 
risk assessment, frequency and extent of audit are decided and an annual audit plan is 
formulated to conduct audit.  
After completion of each audit, Inspection Report ( IR) containing audit findings is 
issued to the Head of the unit with a request to fu rnish replies within one month of 
receipt of the IR. Wherever replies are received, a udit findings are either settled or 
further action for compliance is advised. Significa nt audit observations pointed out in 
these IRs, which require attention at the highest l evel in the Government, are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit Report which a re submitted to the Governor of 
Tripura under Article 151 of the Constitution of In dia for causing them to be laid on 
the Table of the State Legislature. 
Audit Plan is prepared in such a way that it fits into the long term and short term goals 
of audit in consonance with the overall “Vision and  Mission” of the Supreme Audit 
Institution of India. It has been prepared after ca rrying out risk assessment and 
keeping in view the available manpower. Elements of  the Audit Quality Management 
Framework (AQMF) viz . materiality, inputs from Voucher Level Computeris ation 
(VLC), financial size of the units, data from vario us e-governance initiatives taken by 
government, flagship programme undertaken by audite es, press criticism/ electronic 
media coverage, expected audit impact and continuou s improvement based on past 
experience, etc . were taken into account to the extent possible wh ile framing out the 
plan. A sector wise analysis of government spending , investment policy of the 
government in infrastructure development, industria lisation and socio-economic 
activities alongwith due consideration of possible audit impact were taken into 
account in prioritising auditee units for preparing the audit plan. 
Considering the availability of resources, focus ha s been given in areas of high 
financial risk than to thinly spreading out the res ources throughout the Government 
activities. This would have better socio-economic i mpact and add value to 
governance. 

Chapter I: Introduction  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 3 
Out of 1,668 2 auditee units, 129 3 units were planned for audit during 2022-23. After  
carrying out risk assessment and keeping in view th e available manpower, 45 4 units 
were actually audited during 2022-23 involving an expenditure of ₹ 643.60 crore. 
1.4 Significant Audit Observations 
During the year 2022-23, the State Government had i ncurred an expenditure of 
₹ 20,730.40 crore against the respective budget prov ision of ₹ 30,455.82 crore under 
Social, Economic and General Sectors. Sector wise b udget and expenditure for the 
year 2022-23 are depicted in the Charts 1.1  and 1.2. 
  
Source : Appropriation Accounts 2022-23 
This Report, inter alia, contains two Performance Audits titled “Solid Waste  
Management in Urban Areas” and “Welfare of Building  and Other Construction 
Workers” and three Subject Specific Compliance Audi ts titled “Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN)”, “Swa desh Darshan Scheme” 
and “Department’s oversight on GST Payments and Ret urn Filing”, and six 
Compliance Audit paragraphs on major findings of au dit from test check of the 
transactions of 45 units in the Social, Economic, R evenue and General Sectors 
involving an expenditure of ₹ 643.60 5 crore during 2022-23. Significant audit findings 
are discussed in the respective succeeding chapters.  
                                                           
2 As on 31 March 2022 {excluding Local Bodies (PRIs and ULBs), units under Central Government 
and Banks} 
3 Social Sector: 43 units, Economic Sector: 55 units , Economic Sector (PSU): three, Revenue 
Sector: 22 units and General Sector: six units 
4 Social Sector: 11 units, Economic Sector: 19 units , Economic Sector (PSU): five units, Revenue 
Sector: three units and General Sector: seven units 
5 Social Sector: ₹ 57.46 crore, Economic Sector: ₹ 108.10 crore, Economic Sector (PSU): ₹ 254.07 
crore, Revenue Sector: ₹ 191.22 crore and General Sector: ₹ 32.74 crore 
14724.34 
4864.91 
10866.57 
Chart 1.1: Sector-wise Budget 
Estimates for 2022-23 
(₹ in crore )
Social Sector Economic Sector 
General Sector 
9866.78 
3281.54 
7582.08 
Chart 1.2: Sector-wise 
Expenditure for 2022-23 
(₹ in crore )
Social Sector Economic Sector 
General Sector 

CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 5 
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 
2.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report deals with the fin dings of audit of Government units 
under Social Sector. 
The total budget allocation and expenditure of the departments under Social Sector 
during the years 2022-23 are given in Table 2.1.1 . 
Table: 2.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Social Sector 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure 
Education (Higher)  320.29  207.39  
Education (School)  2,293.72  1,448.23  
Education (Social)  1,436.03  1,303.01  
Education (Elementary) 1,173.31  780.14  
Education (Youth Affairs and Sports)  124.21  99.50  
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs  150.74  125.71  
Family Welfare and Preventive Medicine  898.74  560.25  
Health  743.95  447.24  
Health (AGMC & GBP) 206.59  164.98  
Labour Organisation  15.82  12.33  
Panchayati Raj  472.80  428.52  
Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation)  475.68  346.99  
Relief and Rehabilitation  696.13  79.51  
Rural Development  3,230.99  2,437.90  
Tribal Welfare (Research)  15.80  5.68  
Kokborok and other Minority Languages  1.49  1.24  
Tribal Welfare  811.74  611.34  
Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation and Particularl y 
Vulnerable Tribal Group 52.91  33.43  
Urban Development  1,299.51  659.87  
Welfare of Scheduled Castes  135.48  51.49  
Welfare of Minorities  80.75  26.03  
OBC Welfare  75.32  32.58  
Skill Development  12.34  3.42  
Total number of departments = 23 14,724.34  9,866.78  
Source : Appropriation Accounts 2022-23 
We audited 11 units during 2022-23 under this Secto r covering expenditure of 
₹ 57.46 crore (including of the previous years). 
This Chapter contains two Performance Audits titled  “Solid Waste Management in 
Urban Areas” and “Welfare of Building and Other Con struction Workers” under 
Urban Development and Labour Departments along with  two Compliance Audit 
Paragraphs under the Tribal Welfare Department invo lving money value of 
₹ 2.92 crore. 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 6 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
2.2 Performance Audit on “Solid Waste Management in  Urban Areas of 
Tripura” 
 
2.2.1 Introduction 
Waste is a product or substance which is no longer suited for its intended use.  Wastes 
are generally classified into municipal solid waste  (MSW), bio-medical waste 
(BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) waste, e-w aste, plastic waste, 
slaughterhouse waste, industrial waste, and hazardo us waste by virtue of their nature. 
They are also classified as biodegradable, non- bio degradable, combustible, dry and 
inert based on their characteristics.  
Municipal solid waste management (MSWM) in urban ar eas has emerged as one of 
the biggest challenges that our country faces today .  The situation is aggravated by 
rapid urbanisation. Inadequate management of waste has significant negative 
externalities in terms of public health and environ mental outcomes.  Besides, it has an 
adverse impact on the aesthetic appearance of the surroundings. 
There are 20 urban local bodies 
6 (ULBs) responsible for implementation of the Solid  
Waste Management Rules, 2016 (SWM Rules, 2016) in T ripura. The estimated solid 
waste generation in these ULBs was 2,290.14 tonnes per day (TPD) during 2017-23. 
Out of the above, 2,115.05 TPD of waste were being collected, of which 1,319.48 TPD 
were being processed. Plastic waste accounted for 3 17.63 tonnes per annum (TPA). 
The ULBs generated 2,314 TPA of construction and de molition waste and 49.03 TPA 
of e-waste during 2017-22. 
The Central Government has the power to take necess ary measures for protecting and 
improving the quality of the environment, subject to the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. Judicial interventions 
7 have had a significant impact on SWM. 
The regulatory framework governing the management o f different types of waste is 
given in Appendix 2.2.1 . 
Chart 2.2.1 depicts the role of various authorities at all leve ls in planning, execution, 
and monitoring of MSW management. 
                                                           
6  One municipal corporation; 13 municipal councils and six nagar panchayats 
7  (a) Municipal Council, Ratlam vs . Shri Vardichand and others (1980) – Supreme Court  opined 
that lack of finances cannot be the reasons for not discharging statutory duties. 
 (b) B.L. Wadhera vs . Union of India (1994) – Supreme Court issued dire ctives to Delhi 
Municipal Corporation regarding the collection, tra nsportation and disposal of garbage and 
hospital waste. © Ms. Almitra Patel vs . Union of India (1996) - Supreme Court constituted  a 
committee to look SWM in Class I cities i.e . cities with a population of over one lakh. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 7 
Chart 2.2.1: Role of various authorities in MSW management  
 
Source : Manual on MSWM, 2016 
• SWM was one of the 18 functions devolved to the ULB s under Article 243 (12 th  
Schedule) of the Constitution of India. Chapter XI (Section 169 to 180) of the 
Tripura Municipal Act, 1994 mandates management of solid waste as an 
obligatory function of the ULBs. The 14 th  and 15 th  Finance Commissions 
identified SWM as one of the core sectors besides w ater supply, sewerage, and 
storm water drainage. 
The process of waste management is depicted below: 
 
Source : MSW Manual, 2016 
The waste that is generated should be segregated an d collected at source.  Thereafter, 
it should be transported and processed in accordanc e with the principles of reduce, 
reuse, and recycle (3R).  The inert material remain ing after processing must be safely 
disposed of in the sanitary landfills.  The process  of segregation to disposal of waste 
management    is the responsibility of the ULBs. 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 8 
2.2.2 Organisational set-up 
The Urban Development Department (UDD), headed by t he Secretary to the 
Government of Tripura is the nodal department for t he governance of all ULBs in the 
State. He is assisted by the Director, UDD. The org anisational structure with respect 
to functioning of the ULBs is given in Appendices 2.2.2 (A) and 2.2.2 (B) . 
2.2.3 Audit objectives 
The performance audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• “strategy and planning” of solid waste management i n urban areas is 
commensurate with the wastes generated and concurre nt with the prevailing legal 
framework; 
• municipal tasks  associated with solid waste management including co llection, 
segregation, storage, transportation, disposal, and  social inclusion of informal 
waste workers were effective, efficient, and economical; 
• planning, construction, commissioning, operation, a nd maintenance  of solid 
waste management projects in ULBs was effective, ef ficient, and financially 
sustainable; and 
• monitoring and evaluation of solid waste management system including adequacy 
of awareness creation, citizen engagement for effec ting behavioral change, 
complaint redressal mechanism for citizens, assessment of environmental impacts 
and implementation of the “Internal control and mon itoring mechanism” was 
adequate and effective. 
2.2.4 Audit scope, methodology and sampling 
The PA on ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas’ w as conducted during 
September 2022 to June 2023. The period of audit co verage was April 2017 to March 
2023. The audit methodology involved examination of the records relating to SWM in 
the Directorate of UDD, Tripura State Pollution Con trol Board (TSPCB) and selected 
ULBs. Besides, document analysis, response to audit  queries and collection of 
photographic evidence during field inspection carri ed out. Entry Conference was held 
on 22 September 2022 with the Secretary, UDD in whi ch audit methodology, scope, 
objectives, and criteria were explained. Draft audi t findings were issued to the 
Government in July 2023 for response. Significant f indings were discussed (3 August 
2023) with the Secretary, UDD in an Exit Conference. The views and responses of the 
Government were duly incorporated wherever appropriate. 
Out of 20 ULBs spread in the eight districts, the o nly Municipal Corporation 
(Agartala MC), five Municipal Councils (Dharmanagar , Ambassa, Kailashahar, 
Teliamura and Belonia) and two Nagar Panchayats (So namura and Amarpur) were 
selected using simple random sampling. One Nagar Pa nchayat (Sabroom) was taken 
up at the request of the Government during Entry Co nference. The details of the nine 
selected sampled ULBs are shown in Appendix 2.2.3 . 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 9 
2.2.5 Audit criteria 
The criteria for evaluating the performance of SWM were derived mainly from: 
Central Acts and Rules: 
• The Environment (Protection) Act and Rules, 1986 
• Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
• Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2000 
• Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000   
• Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2016 is sued by GoI in April 
2016 and The Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016 
• Performance parameters set out in Service Level Ben chmarking (SLB) 
guidelines. 
• Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016 
• Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
• Guidelines of Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2017 
• E-Waste Management Rules, 2016 
• Manual for Common Municipal Solid Waste Management Facility (CMSWMF) 
• Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughterhouse) Rules, 2001 
State Acts and Rules: 
• Tripura Municipal Act, 1994 
• Tripura Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handl ing) Cleanliness and 
Sanitation Rules, 2019 
• Agartala Municipal Corporation Solid Waste Management Regulation, 2017 
Instructions, guidelines, policies issued by Central Pollution Control Board, State 
Pollution Control Board, Government of India / State Government on solid waste 
management from time to time. 
2.2.6 Audit findings 
 
Audit Objective 1: To assess whether “strategy and planning” of solid waste 
management in ULBs is commensurate with the solid w astes generated and 
concurrent with the prevailing legal framework. 
2.2.6.1 Strategy and planning 
The framework for administration and management of SWM in India is broadly 
divided into three tiers - Central, State and Local  Government.  Other stakeholders 
that play a crucial role are households, businesses , industries, informal sectors, 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 10 
non-governmental organisations (NGOs), community-ba sed organisations (CBOs), 
self-help groups (SHGs), etc.   Involvement of all these stakeholders is necessar y at 
several stages of SWM.  The role and responsibiliti es of stakeholders involved in the 
process of SWM in urban areas are shown in Appendix 2.2.4 . 
2.2.6.1(i) State Policy and strategy on integrated SWM  
Clause 11(a) (b) of SWM Rules, 2016 (notified on 8 April 2016) stipulated that the 
Secretary, UDD should prepare the State Policy, con sistent with these rules, National 
Policy on SWM and National Urban Sanitation Policy of the MoUD, by April 2017. 
Audit observed (April 2023) that the “Tripura Solid  Waste Management Policy” was 
notified by the Government in October 2018. Examina tion of the policy revealed that 
the following issues were not indicated in the Stat e Policy as envisaged in the 
National Policy: 
• Role and responsibilities of the informal sector of  waste pickers, waste collectors 
and recycling industry, 
• Master plan of every city/ town in the State for se tting up of solid waste 
processing and disposal facilities, 
• Establishment of common regional sanitary land fill  for a group of cities and 
towns falling within a distance of 50 km (or more) from the regional facility on a 
cost sharing basis, 
• Capacity building of local bodies in managing solid  waste, segregation and 
transportation or processing of such waste at source, and 
• Starting of a scheme on registration of waste pickers and waste dealers. 
Thus, the State Policy was not consistent with the National Policy on SWM and 
National Urban Sanitation Policy of the MoUD. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that-  
• The informal waste pickers are mostly seen in Agart ala.  These waste pickers sell 
waste to small localised kawariwallas, who intern s ells the waste to big recyclers 
at Agartala. 
• Due to acute financial constraints and non-availabi lity of resource/ technical 
person at ULB level State Government decided to pre pare a DPR for solid waste 
management centrally at State level. 
• Setting up of sanitary landfill requires huge financial support. 
• The Directorate had engaged several orientation wor kshops by inviting various 
Solid Waste Management Expert and Resource persons who are acknowledged 
by Ministry to explore low-cost solid waste managem ent model.  Additionally, 
several exposure visit and training sessions to dif ferent successful SWM 
implementing State and cities has been conducted. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 11 
However, the Government was silent about non-inclus ion of the issues in the State 
Policy as pointed out by audit.  Thus, integration of informal waste pickers, 
preparation of master plan of every city, establish ment of common regional sanitary 
landfills, etc . were not ensured. 
2.2.6.1(ii) Municipal Solid Waste Management plan  
 
2.2.6.1(ii)(a) Short-term and long-term action plan    
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM), 2016 (Paras 1.4.5 and 
1.4.6) emphasises that the ULBs are to prepare a de tailed SWM plan with short-term 
(five years) and long-term (20-25 years) action pla ns apart from contingency plans. 
The short-term plan should lead to achievement of t he long-term plan.  Local 
authorities should ensure that short-term plans ali gned with the long-term planning 
and implementation.  As per para 5.4 ibid , contingency plans are to prepare for 
appropriate storage of waste, to tide over situatio ns of non- performance of 
processing/ treatment/ disposal facilities. 
Manual on MSWM, 2016 (Para 1.4.4.1) provides for co nstitution of a core team or 
advisory team (internal stakeholders) involving dep artments 
8 concerned with SWM 
services for developing the SWM plan and involvemen t of the community (external 
stakeholders comprising households, informal sectors, NGOs, CBOs, SHGs, women’s 
groups, secondary schools and college students, etc .), in SWM planning and 
implementation.  
However, no such core team or advisory team involvi ng internal/ external 
stakeholders was constituted in any of the sampled ULBs for developing the MSWM 
plan during 2017-23.  
None of the sampled ULBs had prepared short-term, l ong-term and contingency plans 
during 2017-23 for adopting a systematic approach t o SWM. In the absence of these 
plans, the objectives of municipal solid waste mana gement to be achieved over 
specific planning horizons and the details of speci fic actions that need to be 
implemented could not be identified.  In this regar d, the following deficiencies were 
observed: 
• The ULBs adopted population estimation/ per capita method to arrive at average 
waste generated by a specific class of generators w ithout collecting samples 
continuously for a period of seven days at multiple  representative locations 
within the jurisdiction of ULB during summer, winte r and rainy seasons as 
envisaged in the Manual on MSWM, 2016. Thus, estima tion of waste generation 
was unrealistic. 
                                                           
8  (i) Commissioner or Chief Executive of the ULB (i i) Head of the SWM Department 
(iii) Environment Engineer in the SWM Department (i v) Head of the Town Planning Department 
(v) Head of Water Supply, Public Health or Sanitati on and Sewerage Department (vi) Head of the 
Accounts Department, (vii) Ward level official in the SWM Department 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 12 
• The ULBs did not ensure the financial viability of the MSWM system and its 
sustainability overall.  The Government had to borr ow loan from NABARD for 
construction of tertiary waste processing plants.  Further, due to scarcity of funds, 
the sampled ULBs are lacking vehicles for transport ation of waste as per 
requirements. 
• The gap analysis of the information on heavy machin eries/ vehicles ( e.g.  
compactors, JCB, front loader, bob cat, cesspool, d umper placer, tipper truck/ 
auto, hand cart with six PVC bucket of 40 ltr. Capa city, etc .) for collection of any 
form of waste/ silt/ dust, etc . from households, commercial establishments, stree t 
sweepings, secondary storage bins, etc . was not done.  As a result, the 
identification of key shortfalls in achieving the d esired level of services remained 
unassessed. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that a DPR on SWM was centrally prepared 
by the Directorate covering all ULBs. The scope of the DPR was limited to the 
availability of funds and allocation of the Ministr y.  The 15 th  FC grants and other 
schemes of Central and State Governments including Department of Development of 
North Eastern Region (DONER), Ministry of Jal Sakti , etc . had been revoked to 
obtain funds and none of them had turned out to fin ancially support the needs of the 
State in this regard. 
The Government, however, was silent on preparation of short term, long-term, 
contingencies plans and constitution of core team i nvolving stakeholders in 
management of solid waste.  
2.2.6.1(ii)(b) Preparation of DPR for Solid Waste M anagement  
As per paragraph 7.2 and 7.3 of Swachh Bharat Missi on (SBM) guidelines, ULBs 
were to prepare DPRs for Solid Waste Management (SW M) of their city in 
consultation with the State Government.  
Audit noticed that the UDD prepared a DPR centrally  for all ULBs instead of 
preparing for each respective ULBs. The following d eficiencies were noticed in the 
DPR. 
• The number of shops, commercial establishments, hot els, restaurants, banquet 
halls, large markets (vegetables, meat and fish), s lums and other informal 
settlements, industries and their profile, health c are establishments, 
slaughterhouses, land use plan, physical infrastruc ture, roads, storm waste 
management, sewage management, etc. was not included in the DPR as 
envisaged in para 5.2.3 of Manual on MSWM, 2016. 
• Generation of solid waste from public buildings suc h as places of public worship, 
industrial buildings, community centres, etc.  and existing quantity of unprocessed 
solid waste dumped in landfill sites in and around the city were not estimated in 
the DPR. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 13 
• Population estimation/ per capita method was adopte d to arrive at average waste 
generated.  Thus, the waste assessment did not capt ure and include temporal 
fluctuations (festivals/ functions like social, eco nomic, religious, political, etc . 
during summer, winter, and rainy seasons) in generation of waste.  
Besides, the following gap analysis was not done as  envisaged in para 5.2.3 of 
Manual on MSWM, 2016: 
• Manpower and vehicle requirement for door-to-door c ollection, street sweeping 
and drain cleaning; 
• Sufficiency of secondary collection bins; 
• Gaps in awareness among city residents and civic authorities; and 
• Gaps in institutional structure. 
Thus, the DPR prepared centrally by the Department was deficient in management of 
SWM in the ULBs. As a result, the assessment of gen eration of waste, capital and 
O&M expenses, etc. were unrealistic as discussed in Paragraphs 2.2.6.1(vi)  and 
2.2.6.2(i) . 
The Government admitted (December 2023) the fact of limited scope of DPR.  
2.2.6.1(iii) Service Level Benchmarks - Targets and  achievement in sampled 
ULBs  
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has set Servic e Level Benchmarks (SLBs) 
at the national level for service provision in four  key sectors –water supply, sewerage, 
SWM and storm water management. Monitoring performa nce and improvement is 
envisaged as the goal of the SLB. MoUD defined a co mmon minimum framework for 
monitoring and reporting on performance indicators,  of which eight performance 
indicators pertained to SWM as detailed in Appendix 2.2.5 . 
Analysis of SLB declarations (2021-22) by eight 9 sampled ULBs in respect of these 
performance indicators (except efficiency in redres sal of customer complaints) 
showed that extent of segregation, recovery of soli d waste, scientific disposal, and 
cost recovery of solid waste of the sampled ULBs we re significantly below the 
benchmarks.  
There was wide variation of benchmarks especially i n respect of extent of household 
coverage, segregation, recovery and scientific disp osal of municipal solid waste, 
which is shown in the Table 2.2.1 . 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
9  Sonamura Nagar Panchayat has not prepared SLB 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 14 
Table 2.2.1: Average achievement of SLBs shown by the eight sampled ULBs and 
observed by Audit 
Performance indicator 
Average achievement 
reported by the 
sampled ULBs to GoI  
Average achievement 
observed by audit as 
per data provided by 
the ULBs 
Household level coverage of SWM 
services through door-to-door collection 
of waste 
89 62 
Efficiency of collection of municipal 
solid waste 81 81 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid 
waste 86 24 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 52 33 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal 
solid waste 39 0 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 48 31 
The status of SLB in respect Agartala Municipal Cor poration (AMC) is shown in 
Chart 2.2.2 .  
Chart 2.2.2: Comparison of achievements (in percentage) shown by the AMC in the SLB 
with status observed by audit as per data provided by AMC 
 
Source:  City solid waste action plan (CSWAP) and information furnished by the AMC 
The achievements (in percentage) shown by the eight  sampled ULBs in the SLB and 
actual status as observed by audit is shown in Appendix 2.2.6 .  
The data on SLBs as reported by sampled ULBs and the data provided to audit did not 
match.  However, the correctness of the achievement s against benchmark declared by 
ULBs could not be ascertained as no documentary evi dence/ records was available in 
support of their claims.  Hence, SLBs reported by the ULBs were not dependable. 
The Government stated (December 2023) that operatio nalisation of all the targeted 
waste treatment plants coupled with primary waste c ollection by women SHGs and 
100 100 
80 
100 100 100 
75 
50 
63 60 
100 100 95 
10 
90 
0 0.23 
36 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Efficiency of 
collection of 
municipal solid 
waste 
Extent of cost 
recovery in 
SWM services 
Extent of 
municipal solid 
waste recovered 
Extent of 
Scientific 
disposal of 
municipal solid 
waste 
Extent of 
segregation of 
municipal solid 
waste 
Household level 
coverage of 
solid waste 
management 
services 
Targeted Performance as per SLB norms 
Achievement  reported by AMC to GoI 
Achievement observed by audit as per data provided by AMC 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 15 
processing of solid waste in various segments (dry,  wet, etc. ) have already started 
changing scenario and is expected to meet all SLBs very shortly.  
2.2.6.1(iv) Information, Education and Communicatio n activities  
As per para 1.3 of Manual on MSWM, 2016, the ULBs s hould plan for an effective 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) camp aign to promote the concept 
of 3Rs to minimise waste generation.  
As per para 1.4.5.13 ibid , the IEC 
10  campaign should not only target households, 
shops, and commercial and institutional premises, b ut also all other stakeholders such 
as municipal officials, elected representatives, sc hools, NGOs, the informal sectors, 
media, etc . to ensure their participation in managing city wa ste by discharging their 
role effectively. 
The status of various modes of communication used i n sampled ULBs is given in 
Table 2.2.2 . 
Table 2.2.2: Modes of communication used for IEC activities by the nine sampled ULBs 
during 2017-23  
Modes of communication used Percentage (No.) of ULBs conducted the mode 
of communication used for IEC activities 
Audio 44 (4) 
Video 22 (2) 
Mass communication 44 (4) 
Wall Paintings 100 (9) 
Schools 67 (6) 
Hoardings 67 (6) 
Street Jatras 56 (4) 
Pamphlets 67 (6) 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
It may be seen from Table 2.2.2  that the percentage of mode of communication 
adopted for IEC activities in Audio, video, mass communication, and street Jatras were 
less as compared to wall paintings, hoardings, pamp hlets, etc . Besides, the following 
issues relating to IEC were not addressed: 
• Domestic hazardous waste includes both toxic and bio-medical wastes.  However, 
neither State level authorities nor ULB level autho rities notified and publicised 
list of domestic hazardous wastes. Special wastes i ncluding domestic hazardous 
wastes can pose a substantial or potential threat t o health and environment 
because of their constituents such as ignitability, reactivity, etc .  
• e-waste consists of different components that are b oth hazardous and non-
hazardous.  Hence, e-waste should be segregated at source and should not be 
                                                           
10   IEC activities as per paragraph 15(zg) of SWM Rul es, 2016: (i) not to litter (ii) minimise generatio n 
of waste (iii) reuse the waste to extent possible ( iv) practice segregation of waste into bio-
degradable, non- biodegradable, sanitary waste and domestic hazardous waste (v) practice home 
composting, vermin composting and biogas generation  or community participation (vi) wrap 
securely used sanitary waste (vii) storage of segre gated waste in different bins. (viii) hand over 
segregated waste to waste pickers and (ix) pay mont hly user fee or charges to waste collectors or 
local bodies for SWM. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 16 
mixed with solid waste.  However, no specific IEC a ctivity focused on e-waste 
segregation. 
• As per para 1.4.5.13 of Manual on MSWM, 2016, an ef ficient waste management 
programme, regardless of the strategy, requires sig nificant cooperation from 
waste generators and active community participation .  The sampled ULBs except 
AMC, Amarpur MC and Sabroom NP, however, did not en courage community 
participation adequately. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the ULBs are performing massive 
campaigns with citizens through public awareness ac tivities i.e.  sports, rallies, stage 
drama, print media advertisement, wall paintings, s ensitisation meeting held with 
school, clubs, etc . Besides, many walkathons were arranged with banne rs, flexes and 
placards depicting various Swachhta message e.g.  banning of single use plastic bags, 
etc . which received a wide participation and appreciat ion from different sections of 
society. The Government further stated that total 1 60 women SHGs organised IEC 
activities to aware citizens to achieve 100 per cent  door to door collection and ensure 
100 per cent  source segregation of waste. 
The fact, remains, that despite massive awareness c ampaigns, restrictions on plastic 
carry bag usages, 100 per cent  door to door collection and segregation of waste a t 
source, non-littering of waste/ garbage on roadside / street, could not be ensured 
during the period covered by audit. Thus, the behav ioural change of the citizens did 
not improve to the desired extent. 
2.2.6.1(v) Absence of efforts for waste minimisatio n  
Manual on MSWM, 2016 (para 2.1) prescribes a step-w ise approach in order of 
environmental priority for different waste manageme nt options with prevention 11  
being most preferred option and disposal the least preferred. It is closely linked to 3R 
approach, which helps to reduce quantity of waste, cost associated with its handling, 
and its environmental impacts. The Manual also stip ulates that waste minimisation 
strategies require policy interventions at national , State, and local levels.  ULBs were 
to play a pioneering role by reducing the amount of  waste to be managed.  Step-wise 
approach in order of environmental priority for different waste management options is 
shown in Chart 2.2.3 . 
                                                           
11   Waste prevention known as source reduction which means using less material to get a job done. 
Waste prevention methods help create less waste before recycling. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 17 
Chart 2.2.3: Step-wise approach in order of environmental priority for different waste 
management options  
 
Source : Manual on MSWM, 2016 
As per information furnished by the UDD, out of 2,1 15.05 TPD of wastes generated 
during 2017-23, 799.38 TPD (38 per cent)  were deposited at landfill/ dump sites 
without processing in all 20 ULBs.  
In respect of the nine sampled ULBs during the peri od, out of 1,204.28 TPD of 
wastes, 347.88 TPD (29 per cent)  were deposited at landfill/ dump sites without 
processing. It was observed that, as of March 2023,  recycling of waste was done by 
Agartala Municipal Corporation (AMC) and composting  of wastes was done in only 
two of the sampled ULBs 
12 . The sampled ULBs had neither waste to energy/  
incineration facilities nor sanitary landfills during the period coved by audit. Thus, 3R 
approach in minimising the amount of waste to be di sposed were not followed 
adequately. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that extensi ve awareness and raids on 
single use plastic, 3Rs of waste management, i.e.  Reduce, Reuse & Recycle, supply of 
colour coded dustbins, etc. were done. 
The fact remained that recycling and composting was  being done by AMC only and 
Sabroom NP has started composting from July 2022. T he other sampled ULBs have 
                                                           
12   AMC and Sabroom NP 
Waste minimisation and sustainable 
use of multi-use of products (e.g.  reuse 
of carry bags of packaging jars) 
At Source Reduction & Reuse 
Processing, non-biodegradable waste to 
recover commercially valuable 
materials ( e.g.  plastic, paper, metal, 
glass, e-waste recycling) 
Recycling 
Processing biodegradable waste to 
recover compost ( e.g . windrow 
composting, in vessel composting, 
vermi composting) 
Composting 
Recovering energy before final 
disposal of waste ( e.g . RDF bio-
methanation, co-processing of 
combustible non-biodegradable dry 
fraction of MSW and incineration)  
Waste to Energy 
Safe disposal of inert residual waste at 
sanitary landfills after recycling and 
reuse to the maximum extent possible. 
 Landfills 
Most preferred  
Less preferred 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 18 
not done recycling and composting during the period  covered by audit. Thus, the 
principles of adopting 3R approach in minimising th e amount of waste to be disposed 
and reducing the public health and environmental risks were not adequately ensured.  
2.2.6.1(vi) Assessment and generation of waste  
A reliable assessment of different kinds of waste generated in the city limit is essential 
for planning and effective implementation of SWM. Para 3.3.6 of Manual on MSWM, 
2000, stipulates that data on waste generation, wei ght and volume should be collected 
by each authority for application in its own area of operation.  
Para 1.4.3.3.1 of Manual on MSWM, 2016 stipulated t hat for the purpose of long-
term planning, average amount of waste disposed by a specific class of generators 
may be estimated only by averaging data from severa l samples. These samples are to 
be collected continuously for a period of seven day s at multiple representative 
locations within jurisdiction of ULB, in each of th ree main seasons’ viz ., summer, 
winter and rainy seasons. Waste should be aggregate d over seven-day period, 
weighed and averaged. These quantities could then be extrapolated to entire ULB, and 
per capita generation assessed.  
It was observed (April 2023) that the ULBs adopted population estimation/ per capita 
method to arrive at average waste generation. It wa s found that there were wide 
variation ( Appendix 2.2.7 ) in waste generation during 2021-22 between model 
waste generation as per the Manual and actual waste  generation, which ranged from 
15 per cent  to 69 per cent  as shown in the Chart 2.2.4 . 
Chart 2.2.4: Variation of waste generation in the sampled ULBs 
 
Further, analysis of waste generation as projected in the DPR and actual waste 
generation by the sampled ULBs revealed that there was less generation of waste in 
270 
24 12 8 13 11 6 3 7
230 
14 7 3 4 4 4 1 3
15% 
42% 45% 
58% 
69% 
58% 
41% 
57% 
58% 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
Total model generation (in TPD) 
Actual waste generation as per the ULBs (in TPD) 
Percentage of variation of waste generation in respect of total model generation 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 19 
the ULBs as compared to the estimation provided in the DPR during 2021-22.  The 
percentage of waste generation was less by 26 per cent  (77.93 TPD) to 70 per cent  
(9.32 TPD) as shown in Table 2.2.3 . 
Table 2.2.3: Showing less generation of waste by the sampled ULBs as compared to DPR 
during 2021-22 
Sl. 
No. Name of ULB 
Waste 
generation 
as per DPR 
(in TPD) 
Actual waste 
generation as 
per ULBs (in 
TPD) 
Difference 
(in TPD) 
Percent of less 
generation of waste 
as compared to 
DPR 
1 Agartala Municipal 
Corporation 299.85 221.92 77.93 26 
2 Dharmanagar MC 26.33 9.87 16.46 63 
3 Kailashahar MC 13.44 4.92 8.52 63 
4 Ambassa MC 9.70 3.39 6.31 65 
5 Teliamura MC 13.22 3.90 9.32 70 
6 Belonia MC 12.15 4.49 7.66 63 
7 Amarpur NP 6.82 3.55 3.27 48 
8 Sabroom NP 4.12 1.48 2.64 64 
9 Sonamura NP 7.22 2.77 4.45 62 
Source : DPR for Solid Waste Management in Tripura prepared by UDD and data furnished by ULBs 
It may be seen from the Chart 2.2.4 and Table 2.2.3  that, in absence of authentic 
estimation of waste, there was wide variation between the actual waste generation and 
the model waste generation which impacted proper implementation of SWM. 
The Government stated (December 2023) that in the r ecent past all ULBs engaged a 
third party agency to carry out waste characterisation and estimation. 
However, nothing was on record regarding collection of waste as samples for a period 
of seven days at multiple representative locations within jurisdiction of ULB, in each 
of three main seasons’ viz ., summer, winter and rainy seasons.  
Conclusion  
None of the sampled ULBs had prepared short-term, l ong-term, and contingency 
plans during 2017-23 for adopting a systematic appr oach to SWM. In the absence of 
these plans, the objectives of municipal solid wast e management to be achieved over 
specific planning horizons and the details of speci fic actions that need to be 
implemented were not highlighted.  Despite massive awareness campaigns, use of 
banned plastic carry bags, non-coverage of 100 per cent  door to door collection and 
non-segregation of waste at source, littering of wa ste/ garbage on roadside/ street 
were noticed. The principles of adopting 3R approac h which helps to reduce quantity 
of waste, cost associated with its handling, and it s environmental impacts were 
missing.   There was wide variation between the actual waste generation and the model 
waste generation which impacted proper implementati on of SWM in absence of 
authentic estimation of waste. 
Recommendations 
i.  The Government should ensure that the ULBs prepare short term plans aligned 
with the long-term planning and implementation apart from contingency plan. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 20 
ii.  Adoption of principles of 3R approach, which helps to reduce quantity of waste, 
cost associated with its handling, and its environm ental impacts should be 
ensured.  
Audit Objective 2:  To assess whether municipal tas ks associated with solid waste 
management including segregation, collection, stora ge, transportation, disposal 
and social inclusion of informal waste workers were  effective, efficient and 
economical.  
2.2.6.2 Financial management 
 
2.2.6.2(i) Unrealistic assessment of requirement of  funds 
As per para 1.4.5.6.2 of Manual on MSWM 2016, Munic ipal Solid Waste 
Management (MSWM) services are sustainable only if they are financially viable on a 
stand-alone basis.  Therefore, the assessment of financial viability is an important step 
in planning any SWM system.  
Audit observed that the UDD prepared centrally a DP R for solid waste management 
in respect of all 20 ULBs for the period of 2020-25 .  A comparison between the 
assessment of financial requirements for 20 ULBs as  per DPR and the actual 
expenditure incurred by nine sampled ULBs in the pe riod of preceding five years is 
shown in Table 2.2.4 . 
Table 2.2.4: Comparison between the assessment of financial requirements for 20 ULBs 
as per DPR and the actual expenditure incurred by nine sampled ULBs 
Financial requirement of capital cost and 
O&M cost for five years (during 2020-25) in 
20 ULBs as per DPR (₹ in crore) 
Capital expenditure and O&M expenditure on 
SWM for preceding five years (during 2018-23) 
in the nine sampled ULBs (₹ in crore) 
Capital O&M cost Capital O&M expenditure 
38.80 96.35 30.34 115.73 
Source : DPR prepared by UDD and Information furnished by ULBs 
It would be seen from the Table 2.2.4  that the requirement of capital expenditure as 
per DPR in 20 ULBs was ₹ 38.80 crore and O&M expenditure was ₹ 96.35 crore for 
2020-25 and the nine sampled ULBs incurred ₹ 30.34 crore towards capital 
expenditure and ₹ 115.73 crore on O&M during 2018-23.   
Thus, the assessment of requirements of fund for 20  ULBs for 2020-25 was not 
realistic as compared to the expenditure incurred b y the nine sampled ULBs during 
2018-23, since trend of expenditure on preceding ye ars was not taken into 
consideration in the DPR.  
No reply was received from the Government (February 2024). 
2.2.6.2(ii) Fund availability and expenditure  
As per Clause 15(x) of SWM Rules, 2016, ULBs are re quired to make adequate 
provisions of funds for capital investment as well as operation and maintenance of 
SWM services in annual budget. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 21 
Audit observed that eight 13  out of nine sampled ULBs had neither prepared annu al 
budget nor made any provisions of funds for capital  investment and O&M of SWM 
services during 2017-23. Although, the AMC prepared  annual budgets, however, it 
did not make any provision for funds for capital investment and O&M for SWM. As a 
result, the actual requirement of funds for the pur pose could not be analysed and 
ensured its availability.  The expenditure on SWM w ere utilised from various Central 
Government grants 14  and State Government programme 15  as per requirement. The 
sampled ULBs executed works on SWM from SBM for con struction of tertiary 
centres, segregation centres, procurement of SWM eq uipment, payment of wages to 
SHG members for door-to-door collection of garbage,  cleaning of toilets, awareness 
generation activities on “Swachhata Hi Seva”, ban o f single use plastic and plastic 
mukta bharat, etc . During 2017 to 2023, the sampled ULBs utilised ₹ 12.68 crore 
from SBM for SWM. But no amount was found to have b een utilised by the sampled 
ULBs for SWM purposes from JNNURM and AMRUT. 
The overall availability of funds and expenditure o n SWM in the sampled ULBs for 
2017-23 are given in Chart 2.2.5 . 
Chart 2.2.5: Overall fund available vs expenditure on SWM for 2017-23 in the sampled 
ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
It can be seen from Chart 2.2.5  that the expenditure on SWM activities has decreased 
during 2021-22 and 2022-23 as compared to 2020-21 since no such capital investment 
was made by the ULBs.  However, the overall expendi ture has increased substantially 
during the period. The expenditure on SWM increased  during 2020-21 due to 
construction of tertiary centres, procurement of tr icycles, SHG toolkits, e-rickshaw, 
et c.  
                                                           
13   Dharmanagar MC, Kailashahar MC, Ambassa MC, Telia mura MC, Belonia MC, Amarpur NP, 
Sonamura NP and Sabroom NP.  
14   Fourteenth Finance Commission (14th FC) grants, F ifteenth Finance Commission (15th FC) grants, 
Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM). 
15   Tripura Urban Employment Programme (TUEP) and own  sources (Municipal Fund) 
188.96 192.70 200.32 179.21 
390.50 
315.08 
13.73 24.69 24.71 43.50 22.85 30.32 
7% 
13% 
 12% 
24% 
6% 
10% 
0% 
5% 
10% 
15% 
20% 
25% 
30% 
0.00 
50.00 
100.00 
150.00 
200.00 
250.00 
300.00 
350.00 
400.00 
450.00 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Total expenditure of the ULBs 
Expenditure on SWM 
Percentage of SWM expenditure in respect of total expenditure 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 22 
It was noticed that there was an unspent balance of ₹ 132.36 crore at the end of March 
2023 in respect of nine sampled ULBs as detailed in  Appendix 2.2.8 . The capital 
expenditure and total expenditure on SWM in the sam pled ULBs for 2017-23 are 
shown in Chart 2.2.6 . 
Chart 2.2.6: Capital expenditure vs O&M expenditure on SWM for 2017-23 in the 
sampled ULBs  
 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
It can be seen  from Chart 2.2.6  that: 
• The percentage of capital expenditure in respect of  total expenditure on SWM 
was 20 per cent during 2017-18 to 2022-23 in the sampled ULBs.  
• The above indicates that the Government had not dev ised adequate strategies for 
creating the required capital investment for SWM.  
• Resultantly, the issue of recycling of solid waste had not received due attention 
and ULBs did not utilise even the available fund ₹ 132.36 crore for creation of 
assets for SWM activities up to March 2023. 
Further, it was observed that  
The Government replied (August 2023) that the grant s received from Ministry for 
Swachh Bharat Mission Urban (Phase- I) during 2014- 2022 was 
₹ 61.99 crore while 
the grants allocated for Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0 was ₹ 85.30 crore and added that 
the scope of SWM is vast and to properly implement the entire scope, a large financial 
support is required. The allocation of Ministry in this regard to Tripura is meagre and 
no additional financial support was received from t he State Government during 
Phase - I.  
However, the fact remains that the ULBs did not uti lise the available fund of 
₹ 132.36 crore towards SWM activities which remained unspent as of March 2023.  
2.2.6.2(iii) Levy and collection of user charges fr om the households  
As per Clause 15(f) of SWM Rules 2016, the ULBs sha ll prescribe from time to time 
user fee as deemed appropriate and collect the fee from the waste generators on its 
own or through authorised agency. The ULBs fixed ra tes of user charges to be 
collected from the households from the year 2019-20.  
O&M expenditure on SWM 
= 128.57 crore i.e. 80% 
Capital expenditure on 
SWM = 31.24 crore 
i.e. 20% 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 23 
No demand of user charges was found on records in t he sampled ULBs.  However, as 
per information/ data 16  furnished by the sampled ULBs, audit calculated th e demand 
of user charges for ₹ 37.41 crore for the year 2022-23 of which ₹ 1.25 crore 
(3.34 per cent ) was collected by the ULBs as of March 2023.  This  indicated an 
irrecoverable loss of ₹ 36.16 crore due to non-levy and non-realisation of  user fees 
due from all the households as detailed in Appendix 2.2.9 . 
Due to inefficient revenue collection, ULBs failed to collect ₹ 36.16 crore which 
could have been utilised for O&M and capital expend iture and also loan of 
₹ 13.02 crore from NABARD (for construction of terti ary processing facilities) at the 
interest rate of 2.75 per cent  per annum could have been avoided.   
The Government replied (August 2023) that special a ttention would be given to 
collect user charges not only from households but a lso from all other commercial and 
government establishments to guard revenue loss. St ate had already notified user 
charge collection rates and ULBs had also notified their user charge collection rates.  
Measures like tagging register of ordinary resident  (ROR), property tax, trade license, 
etc . would be adopted by ULBs to ensure collection of user charges.  The Government 
also stated that the enforcement of user charges co llection from all sources of waste 
generation was a tedious task which ULBs were tryin g to enforce by involving all 
stakeholders. 
2.2.6.2(iv) Non-levy of user charges for C&D waste from bulk generators  
As per Clause 4(5) of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2 016, every waste generator 
shall pay relevant charges for collection, transpor tation, processing and disposal as 
notified by the authorities designated by the State Government.  
Audit observed that except AMC, none of the sampled  ULBs had notified prescribed 
rate, norms for collection of C&D waste from C&D wa ste generators 17 . AMC 
collected user charges of ₹ 27.86 lakh for C&D waste from C&D waste generators  
during 2018-23. Therefore, the eight sampled ULBs f ailed to collect user charges as 
of March 2023 which indicates that the ULBs were no t pro-active in generation of 
their own revenue and were not stringent towards violators. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the ULBs were requested to adopt and 
notify "The Construction & Demolition Waste Managem ent Policy, 2019" that was 
notified by State which prescribed rate, norms for collection of C&D waste from 
C&D waste generators. 
2.2.6.2(v) Non levy/ collection of user charges fro m railway authorities  
Provisions of SWM Rules, 2016 are also applicable t o industrial townships, areas 
under the control of Indian Railways, airports, air bases, Ports and harbours, defence 
establishments, special economic zones, etc .  As such, user fees should be collected 
from those authorities. 
                                                           
16   No. of households, rate of user charges per house holds per month 
17   Owners, entrepreneurs, builders, contractors, ind ividual, etc . are the bulk generators 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 24 
Audit found that in two 18  sampled ULBs, areas under the control of Indian Ra ilways 
were within the municipal urban limits.  However, t he waste generated within the 
railway premises were neither handed over to the UL Bs nor the ULBs insisted the 
Railway Authority to hand over the waste and pay th e user fee for waste generation 
from the Indian Railways as stipulated in SWM Rules .  The Station Superintendent, 
Dharmanagar Railway Station stated (September 2023)  that contractual labours 
collected wastes/ garbage from railway station prem ises and its’ colony and dumped 
in a selected place for disposal.  
Thus, the ULBs were sustaining loss of revenue for non-levy of user fees on the 
Railway Authorities. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the India n Railways authorities would be 
communicated to hand over their solid waste in lieu of user charges. 
2.2.6.2(vi) Non collection of spot fines  
As per Section 179 of Tripura Municipal Act, 1994 w hoever deposits or throws or 
causes or permits to be deposited or thrown any sol id wastes on any place in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act shall, subject to such rules and regulations 
as may be made in this behalf, be punishable with f ine which shall not be less than 
five hundred rupees or more than five thousand rupees for each of such offences.  
In exercise of the power conferred on UDD by Rule 6 (24) and Rule 8.1 of the Tripura 
Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Cle anliness and Sanitation 
Rules, 2019, UDD notified (July 2019) the rates of penalties/ fines to be imposed by 
ULBs for violation of the rules as shown in Appendix 2.2.10 . 
Audit observed that none of the sampled ULBs had co llected spot fines for littering 
from individual households, community-based organis ations, market complexes, etc . 
who failed to comply with the provision of SWM Rule s. Photographs 2.2.1  to 2.2.3  
show littering of wastes from individual households, market complexes, etc . 
   
Photograph 2.2.1: Littering 
of wastes near Abhaynagar 
Photograph 2.2.2: Littering of 
wastes near Lake 
Chowmuhani bazar 
Photograph 2.2.3: Littering of 
wastes near PAG Office 
                                                           
18   Agartala Municipal Corporation and Dharmanagar Mu nicipal Council 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 25 
This indicates that the provisions of Tripura Munic ipal Act, 1994 and Tripura 
Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Cle anliness and Sanitation 
Rules, 2019 were not implemented properly to deal with the issue.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that it had al ready notified user charge 
collection rates and ULBs had also notified their u ser charge collection rates. The 
Government further stated that measures like taggin g ROR, property tax, trade 
license, etc . were being adopted by the ULBs to ensure collecti on of user charges.  
Discrete enforcement of user charges collection fro m all sources of waste generation 
was a tedious task which became more difficult due to non-involvement of elected 
representatives in enforcement.  However, efforts t o impose spot fines would be 
made. 
2.2.6.2(vii) Resource expenditure gap 
The MSWM system will become financially viable/ sus tainable if there are increases 
in collection of user charges, sales of recyclable material and compost.  This will 
reduce the resource-expenditure gap.  Hence, strict enforcement of levy and collection 
of user charges is essential to reduce resource-exp enditure gap.  However, the levy 
and collection of user charges from the households,  user charges for C&D waste, 
sales of recyclable material and compost,  etc . were found to be deficient in the 
sampled ULBs as discussed in preceding paragraphs.  The impact thereof is the 
increase in the gap between generation of revenue a nd the expenditure in relation to 
SWM activities during 2017-23.  The resource-expend iture gap increased from 
₹ 12.90 crore (2017-18) to ₹ 28.38 crore (2022-23) in the sampled ULBs as shown  in 
Chart 2.2.7 . 
Chart 2.2.7: Revenue vs  Expenditure gap related to SWM ( ₹ in crore) in the sampled 
ULBs 
 
Source : Information provided by ULBs 
It can be seen from Chart 2.2.7  that the expenditure on SWM increased significantl y 
during 2020-21 as compared to previous years due to  construction of tertiary centres, 
procurement of tricycles, SHG toolkits, plastic gra nulating machines, e-rickshaw, et c.  
However, revenue receipt on SWM had not increased c orrespondingly with increase 
of total expenditure during the last five years whi ch was indicative of weak financial 
0.83 1.00 1.38 2.18 2.40 1.95 
13.73 
24.70 24.71 
43.65 
22.92 
30.32 
12.90 
23.70 
 23.33 
41.47 
20.52 
28.38 
0.00 
10.00 
20.00 
30.00 
40.00 
50.00 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Total revenue receipt on SWM 
Total expenditure on SWM 
Resource gap (total expenditure - total revenue receipt) 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 26 
management by the ULBs.  This gap is being met out by ULBs from their own 
revenue (property tax, license fee, water tax, stal l rent, etc .), grants from Central 
Finance Commission and Swachh Bharat Mission.  Howe ver, property tax was 
revised in January 2016, which was based on Annual Property Value (APV).  Water 
charges were revised in May 2014 from ₹ 30 to ₹ 40 in respect of domestic 
connection and ₹ 250 to ₹ 300 in respect of commercial connection. 
Table 2.2.5  shows total revenue collection and revenue from SW M charges of the 
sampled ULBs except Kailashahar Municipal Council 19  during 2018-19 to-2022-23. 
Table 2.2.5: Total revenue collection vs  revenue from SWM charges during  2018-19 to 
2022-23 in eight sampled ULBs 
Year Total revenue collection 
(₹ in crore) 
SWM charges 
(₹ in crore) 
Percentage of SWM charges in 
respect of total revenue collection 
2018-19 21.98 1.00 5 
2019-20 28.02 1.36 5 
2020-21 30.44 2.14 7 
2021-22 34.23 2.35 7 
2022-23 34.33 1.89 6 
Total 149 8.74 6 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
It can be seen from Table 2.2.5 that the total revenue collection such as property  tax, 
license fee, water tax, stall rent, etc . in respect of the sampled ULBs was in increasing 
trend during 2018-19 to 2022-23 while the user char ges for SWM did not increase 
substantially during the period.  This indicated th at due attention was not given by the 
ULBs to increasing the user charges. 
No reply was received from the Government (February 2024).  
2.2.6.3 Segregation of waste 
For segregation of solid waste, SWM Rules, 2016 pro vide that ULBs should create 
public awareness through information, education and  communication campaign and 
educate the waste generators to practice segregatio n of waste into bio-degradable, 
non-biodegradable (recyclable and combustible), san itary waste and domestic 
hazardous wastes at source. 
The eight sampled ULBs declared that they had achie ved SLBs from 55 per cent  to 
100 per cent  for segregation of waste during 2021-22. However, the data on SLB 
provided by ULBs revealed that the eight 
20  sampled ULBs segregated waste from 
zero per cent  to 95 per cent  which is shown in Chart 2.2.8 .  
                                                           
19   Kailashahar Municipal Council did not furnish the  information 
20   Sonamura Nagar Panchayat did not prepare SLB  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 27 
Chart 2.2.8: Status of SLB on extent of segregation on municipal solid waste during 
2021-22 
 
Source : City solid waste action plan (CSWAP) of the sampl ed ULBs and information furnished by the 
ULBs 
Assessment of segregation of waste in the sampled U LBs revealed that wastes were 
dumped without segregation at dumping grounds under  Amarpur Nagar Panchayat, 
Sonamura Nagar Panchayat, Ambassa Municipal Council  and Agartala Municipal 
Corporation as shown in Photographs  2.2 .4 to  2.2.7 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.4: Waste were dumped 
unsegregated at Amarpur dumping ground 
Photograph 2.2.5: Waste were dumped 
unsegregated at Sonamura dumping ground 
100 100 
65 
100 100 
55 65 
100 
0.23 
95 
3 6
84 
0 0 4
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Achievement reported by ULB to GoI 
Achievement observed by audit as per data provided by the ULB 
Targeted Performance as per SLB norms 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 28 
  
Photograph 2.2.6: Waste were dumped 
unsegregated near Bhowliabosti under 
Ambassa Municipal Council 
Photograph 2.2.7: Waste were dumped 
unsegregated at DC Nagar dumping ground 
under Agartala Municipal Corporation 
The issues with regard to segregation of waste is t he sampled ULBs is discussed 
below.  
2.2.6.3(i) Segregation of waste at source/ househol d level 
Manual on MSWM, 2016 (para 2.2.1.2) stipulates that  ULBs must accord highest 
priority for segregation of waste at source. 
Further, Manual on MSWM, 2000 (paras 18.3 and 18.4) and 2016 (para 2.1.4) specify 
that one of the methodologies is providing incentiv es in the form of rewards/ grants/ 
subsidies to ensure proper segregation of waste at source. 
It was, however, observed that out of nine sampled ULBs, segregation at source was 
not followed in four 
21  ULBs and partially followed in five 22  ULBs. Further, even the 
domestic hazardous waste was getting dumped in land fills. Wastes are collected from 
households in mixed mode by primary collector and t ransferred to the secondary 
segregation centres. Thereafter, some dry wastes li ke plastic, bottle, cardboard, 
packing material, rubber, etc. partially segregated and waste from roadside, marke ts, 
hotels, restaurants, etc . transported to the open dumping grounds.  
Audit did not notice any instances of incentive/ di sincentive mechanism to promote 
segregation of waste in any of the sampled ULBs. Th is indicates the lack of initiative/ 
adequate measures on the part of the ULBs in promoting segregation of waste. 
Thus, due importance to segregation of waste at sou rce was not given by the ULBs 
during the period of audit. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that primary c ollection from source of waste 
generation by involving Women SHG and allied equipm ent is being done by all 
ULBs. Basic waste segregation into dry & wet catego ry is being enforced at the 
source and various IEC activities targeting waste s egregation at source has already 
been carried out in large scale to aware citizens. The Government also stated 
                                                           
21   Kailashahar MC, Ambassa MC, Teliamura MC and AMC 
22   Amarpur NP, Sabroom NP, Sonamura NP, Belonia MC a nd Dharmanagar MC 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 29 
(December 2023) that the ULBs have been requested t o device unique mechanism to 
incentivise citizens in case they handover proper segregated waste. 
2.2.6.3(ii) Non-issuance of bins  
According to Paragraph 7.10.6 of Guidelines for Swa chh Bharat Mission (Urban), 
2017, ULBs were advised to distribute two colour coded bins per household.  
Audit observed that five sampled ULBs 23  distributed colour coded bins among 12,965 
out of 27,114 households for segregation of waste a t source and the bins were being 
used by the households. Other four sampled ULBs 24  did not distribute any bins for 
source segregation. As the colour bins were not giv en to the households of four 
sampled ULBs, segregation at source was absent in t hose ULBs although as per SLB, 
the ULBs are required to segregate 100 per cent  at source.  
Thus, highest priority was not accorded by the Gove rnment to segregate waste at 
source which would ensure that waste was less conta minated and could be efficiently 
collected and transported for further effective processing.  
The Government replied (December 2023) that there w as no earmarked fund from 
central assistance from the said item therefore onl y a fraction of the amount required 
has been placed to ULBs for the said activity from central grants under SBM-U. 
However, ULBs have been encouraged to carry out the  same activity to fulfil the gap 
from their own revenue. 
2.2.6.3(iii) Non-segregation of domestic hazardous waste  
As per Clause 15(i)(j) of SWM Rules, 2016, ULBs are  required to establish waste 
deposition centres for domestic hazardous 25  waste and give directions to waste 
generators to deposit domestic hazardous wastes at the centres for its safe disposal. 
Manual on MSWM, 2016 indicates different kinds of d omestic hazardous waste. As 
domestic hazardous waste included both toxic and bi o-medical wastes, it needs to be 
classified as per schedule II of Hazardous and Othe r Wastes (Management and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016. 
Audit observed that both State and ULBs did not not ify and publicise list of items 
classified as domestic hazardous waste to be segreg ated at source. Consequently, the 
quantity of domestic hazardous waste generated was not assessed and the 
contaminated mixed waste reached the open dumping g round or landfills. Sampled 
ULBs also did not establish separate waste depositi on centres for domestic hazardous 
waste.  
Audit found that in all the sampled ULBs, the un-se gregated MSW which include 
domestic hazardous waste such as batteries, glass p ieces, etc . were disposed in the 
landfills during the period covered under audit.  
                                                           
23   Belonia MC, Dharmanagar MC, Amarpur NP, Sonamura NP and Sabroom NP 
24   Agartala Municipal Corporation, Kailashahar MC, A mbassa MC and Teliamura MC 
25   Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) is any unwanted household product label led as flammable, 
toxic, corrosive, or reactive.  The most common pro ducts include aerosols, anti-freeze, asbestos, 
fertilizers, motor oil, paint supplies, photo chemicals, poisons, and solvents, etc.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 30 
It was seen that waste had hazardous wastes such as  broken bottles made of glass, 
brake fluid, diesel fuel, etc. as shown in Photographs 2.2.8  and 2.2.9 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.8: Bottles made of glass shown 
at DC Nagar dumping ground under AMC 
Photograph 2.2.9: Brake fluid, diesel fuel, 
etc. shown near Amarpur dumping ground 
Thus, the possibility of seeping underground and co ntaminating the ground water 
apart from air and soil pollution could not be ruled out. 
The Government stated (December 2023) that the excl usive list of domestic 
hazardous waste is under preparation by TSPCB and a dmitted the fact for not having 
deposition centres for hazardous waste and added th at to address the same in all 
ULBs, a lot of funds is required which is yet to be decided upon.  
2.2.6.3(iv) Non-segregation of sanitary waste  
As per clause 4 (1)(b) of SWM Rules, 2016, every wa ste generator shall wrap 
securely the used sanitary waste like diapers, sani tary pads, etc . in the pouches 
provided by the manufacturers or brand owners of th ese products or in a suitable 
wrapping material as instructed by the local authorities and shall place the same in the 
bin meant for dry waste or non- bio-degradable waste. 
Audit observed (May 2023) that none of the sampled ULBs emphasised segregation 
and disposal of sanitary waste which are not collec ted separately as required under 
SWM Manual, 2016.  
Due to non-segregation of sanitary waste, possibili ty of causing long term 
deterioration of water and soil quality, pathogens 
26  in the environment, etc . cannot be 
ruled out. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that in a si milar manner as for the case of 
domestic hazardous waste, sanitary wastes are segre gated at waste processing plants 
of ULBs. 
The fact remains that no efforts were made to separ ate sanitary waste from other 
waste at source. 
                                                           
26   A pathogen is any organism that causes disease. V iruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites are all 
examples of pathogens. 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 31 
2.2.6.4 Storage facilities 
 
2.2.6.4(i) Inadequate storage facilities  
Clause 3 of Schedule II of MSW (Management & Handli ng) Rules, 2000 stipulates 
that the municipal authorities shall establish and maintain storage facilities for solid 
waste in such a manner that unhygienic and insanita ry conditions were not created. 
Further, the storage facility was to be established  by considering quantities of waste 
generation in a given area and the population densi ty placed in an area that is 
accessible to users; waste stored are not exposed t o open atmosphere and bins for 
storage of bio-degradable wastes shall be painted g reen, white for storage of 
recyclable wastes and black for storage of other wastes. As per Schedule-II (Clause 4) 
of the above Rules, the storage facilities set up b y the municipal authorities shall be 
daily attended for clearing of wastes. The bins or containers wherever placed shall be 
cleaned before they start overflowing.  
The sampled ULBs had provided green open containers  on roadsides.  During field 
inspection of nine ULBs, it was observed (May-June 2023) that none of the ULBs 
placed different coloured containers at one particu lar place.  Due to non-provision of 
adequate number of secondary storages, people depos ited garbage on the roadside.  
The open-air temporary storage bins created insanit ary conditions, besides emanating 
unhealthy odor in the surroundings.  
Further, it was seen that the containers overflowed  with solid waste and were 
scattered on the roadside as shown in the Photographs 2.2.10 and  2.2.11 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.10: Overflow of dustbins at 
Abhaynagar under AMC 
Photograph 2.2.11: Garbage deposited at 
roadside under Battala Flyover (Pillar No. 
39) under AMC 
There were no adequate containers/ bins with requir ed storage, nor the wastes cleaned 
regularly during 2017-23 leading to unhygienic and insanitary condition, bad smell, 
contamination of the environment for the nearby res idents which is indicative of lack 
of required initiative on the part of ULBs and the Department for providing 
need-based storage bins and regular cleaning of waste.   


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 32 
The Government replied (December 2023) that door to  door waste collection across 
all 334 wards involving women SHG are in place. Cit izens are requested through IEC 
activity to hand over waste to SHG instead of litte ring public places.  Placing of bins 
in large quantity is not pragmatic as citizens beco mes reluctant to handover waste to 
women SHG, thus, resulting in non- generation of us er charge.  To procure large 
number of bins shall involve huge financial requirement. 
The fact remains that waste was not collected from all the households and waste was 
accumulated on the road sides as evidenced in the a bove photographs.  Further, 
reluctance of citizens to handover waste to women S HG was indicative of lack of 
awareness of the citizens. 
2.2.6.4(ii) Non-setting up of material recovery fac ilities  
As per Clause 15 (h) of SWM Rules, 2016, the local authorities shall set up material 
recovery facilities (MRF) for sorting of recyclable materials. 
As per status and timelines prescribed in Tripura S olid Waste Management Policy, 
2018, the MRF should be established and completed b y December 2018. Audit 
observed (May 2023) that except AMC, no other sampl ed ULBs set up MRF for 
sorting of recyclable materials to enable authorised waste pickers and waste collectors 
to separate recyclables from the waste for processing. 
Thus, non-availability of MRF resulted in failure t o recover the recyclables and 
convert waste into new materials and objects.  
The Government replied (December 2023) that the ter tiary waste treatment plant was 
targeted to treat both dry and wet streams of waste  and thus shall cater to the purpose 
of material recovery facility. Agartala Municipal C orporation has functional MRF in 
PPP mode. On the other hand, the 13 registered recy clers in Agartala have their own 
MRFs which are frequently procuring wastes from our  ULBs and are dependent on 
them. Therefore, setting up of separate standalone material recovery facility may not 
be reasonable. 
The fact remains that the Tripura Solid Waste Management Policy, 2018, envisaged to 
establish and complete MRF by December 2018. Moreov er, MRF facilitates to 
recycling the waste which in turn the ULBs will have a scope to earn revenue. 
2.2.6.5 Collection of waste 
Paras 10.3 and 10.4 of Manual on MSWM, 2000, state that ULBs shall arrange for the 
collection of domestic, trade and institutional, fo od/ biodegradable waste, recyclable 
waste material/ non-biodegradable waste besides dom estic hazardous/ toxic waste 
from doorstep or community bins or waste deposition centres specially established for 
the purposes. A waste collection system is therefor e necessary to ensure that waste 
stored at source is collected regularly and it is n ot disposed of on the streets, drains, 
water bodies, etc .  
The following deficiencies were noticed in the sampled ULBs for collection of waste. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 33 
2.2.6.5(i) Street sweeping and cleaning on daily ba sis  
Para 2.4.2 of Manual on MSWM, 2016 stipulates that it is necessary to have a 
well-planned, time-bound daily system for street sw eeping including adequate staff 
and equipment.  Street sweepers were instructed to report daily for duty at designated 
locations and such locations should have provisions  for storing street sweeping 
equipment. 
It was seen in the nine sampled ULBs that out of 88 2 km. of roads, ULBs did not 
carry out street sweeping of 664 km. (75 per cent ) on daily basis during 2022-23 as 
shown in Table 2.2.6. 
Table 2.2.6: Statement showing street sweeping in nine sampled ULBs on daily basis 
during 2022-23 
Name of ULB No. of 
wards 
Total road distance 
in the ULB (in km.) 
Daily coverage of road 
sweeping (in km.) 
Percentage of 
coverage 
AMC 51 501 138 28 
Dharmanagar MC 25 165 11 7 
Kailashahar MC 17 32 18 56 
Ambassa MC 15 10 5 50 
Teliamura MC 15 10 5 50 
Belonia MC 17 22 15 70 
Amarpur NP 13 33 5 15 
Sabroom NP 9 52 15 29 
Sonamura NP 13 57 5 9 
Total 175 882 218 25 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
It may be seen from the Table 2.2.6  that the sampled ULBs covered the daily 
sweeping of 218 km. out of 882 km. (25 per cent ) during 2022-23. Thus, short 
coverage of sweeping resulted in accumulation of ga rbage on the roads and 
consequent environmental pollution in and around th e roads. Further, the ULBs did 
not ensure planning, time-bound daily system for st reet sweeping covering the entire 
streets. The ULBs attributed the deficiencies to shortage of equipment and manpower. 
The ULBs requested the UDD to provide vehicles whic h have not been provided as 
yet. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that sweepin g and cleaning of all major 
roads including the back lanes are being done on daily basis under Agartala Municipal 
Corporation. For remaining ULBs, cleaning of roads is being done by manual 
taskforce and limited machineries. All major roads are cleaned daily while the back 
lanes and other connecting roads are cleaned intermittently as and when required. 
The fact remained that the roads apart from major roads were not cleaned regularly. 
2.2.6.5(ii) Non integration of informal waste colle ctors in waste management  
As per Clause 15(c) of SWM Rules, 2016, the State G overnment requires to provide 
broad guidelines regarding integration of waste pic kers or informal waste collectors 
with SWM system. It is the duty of the ULBs to esta blish system to recognise 
organisations of informal waste collectors and esta blish a system to facilitate their 
participation in SWM including door-to-door collect ion. As per status and timelines 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 34 
prescribed in Tripura Solid Waste Management Policy , 2018, the ULBs should 
establish a system for recognising informal waste p ickers and collectors and their 
integration with authorised waste pickers and collectors by December 2018.  
However, the sampled ULBs have not yet established the system to recognise 
informal waste pickers/ collectors to facilitate th eir participation in SWM along with 
staff of ULBs and 86 SHGs in the sampled ULBs. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that the inf ormal waste pickers are mostly 
seen in Agartala, and 13 number of recyclers are re gistered at Agartala and efforts are 
being taken to empanel them to the newly constructed Tertiary Waste Treatment Plant 
for effective segregation and inclusion of informal  sector into the waste management 
scenario. 
2.2.6.5(iii) Personal Protection Equipment 
As per Clause 15 (zd) of SWM Rules, 2016, ULBs shal l ensure that operator of a 
facility provides personal protection equipment (PP E) including uniform, hand 
gloves, raincoats, appropriate footwear and masks t o all workers handling solid waste 
and same are used by workforce. 
The sampled ULBs provided fluorescent jackets, hand  gloves, masks, raincoats, 
footwear, etc . to the labourers/ workers and SHGs during 2019 to  2023 for collection 
of waste from the households and bins. Audit observ ed (May 2023) that despite 
providing PPE, the waste handlers hardly used the s ame. Non-utilisation of PPE is 
risky and may lead to serious health hazards.  
Thus, there was absence of adequate awareness about  the health risk associated in 
non-use of the PPE and inadequate monitoring on the  part of ULBs/ Department for 
non-use of PPE in handling solid waste by the waste handlers.  
Photograph 2.2.12  shows non-wearing of PPE during waste handling. 
  
Photograph 2.2.12: Garbage collection staff under AMC without protective equipment 
The Government replied (December 2023) that Persona l Protection Equipment & 
safety toolkits are being given to all frontlines S afai Karmacharis on regular basis as 
and when required.  


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 35 
However, Government was silent on non-use of PPE in  handling solid waste by the 
waste handlers.  
2.2.6.5(iv) Non-operation and maintenance of screen ing of solid waste  
As per instruction of the National Green Tribunal ( NGT) (January 2019), all States 
and Union Territories may ensure that all drains ar e tapped with appropriate measures 
(wire nets, etc. ) and no solid waste or plastic waste is allowed to  reach river, lake, 
water bodies, ponds, etc .  
It was, however, observed that huge quantity of sol id waste and plastic waste kept on 
the river side and plastic was floating on the rive r as shown in the Photographs 
2.2.13  and 2.2.14 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.13: Garbage deposited near Howrah River near Battala under AMC 
 
Photograph 2.2.14: Garbage floating in Kathakhal river near Abhoynagar bridge under AMC 
Due to not taking up appropriate measure such as ta pping of drains with wired nets, 
etc.  solid waste or plastic waste reached to the river which got polluted and became 
unusable by the public.  
The Government replied (December 2023) that a combi nation of bio-remediation of 
drains and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) are targe ted to cover most of the waste 
water generation of all ULBs. These projects are ei ther in tendering stage or initial 
work have started and upon completion of these proj ects the overall scenario shall 
change permanently. 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 36 
2.2.6.6 Transportation of waste  
Transportation plays a vital role in SWM services.  Depending on the local conditions 
and location of landfill site, ULBs use different t ypes of vehicles such as pushcarts, 
auto tippers, tractors, tipper trucks, and light co mmercial vehicles, etc . for collection 
and transportation of waste. 
2.2.6.6(i) Shortage of vehicles for door-to-door co llection  
The State Solid Waste Management Policy, 2018 envis aged use of auto tippers, 
pushcarts and tricycles for door-to-door collection  of solid waste. The normative 
standards prescribed under the policy for door-to-d oor waste collection is given 
below:  
i. one auto tipper is required for 1,000 households .  
ii. one pushcart is required for 160 households. 
iii. one tricycle is required for 240 households. 
The status of availability of auto tippers, pushcarts, and tricycles in the sampled ULBs 
is given in Table 2.2.7. 
Table 2.2.7: Status of availability of auto tippers, pushcarts and tricycles in the sampled 
ULBs as of March 2023 
Mode of 
transportation Category of ULB 
No. of vehicles 
required as per 
normative 
standards 
No. of 
vehicles 
available 
Shortage 
Percentage 
of 
shortage 
Auto tipper 
AMC 136 53 83 61 
MCs 38 14 24 63 
NPs 8 2 6 75 
Pushcart AMC 851 182 669 79 
MCs 232 134 98 42 
Tricycle AMC 568 84 484 85 
MCs 155 60 95 61 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
There was an acute shortage of auto tippers, pushca rts, and tricycles in the ULBs.  
Shortage of vehicles up to 85 per cent  is indicative of ineffectiveness and inefficiency 
in collection and transportation of municipal solid waste. 
The Government while admitting the fact stated (Dec ember 2023) that the total 
financial requirement for procuring SWM vehicles ar e huge and there is no fund 
source for the same in 19 ULBs except Agartala MC. AMC has the support of ADB 
loan, JnNURM and other source for procurement of SWM vehicles. The remaining 19 
ULBs have been requested to purchase the same from the other schemes/ 15 th  FC/ 
own source as per requirements. 
2.2.6.6(ii) Transportation of solid waste in open v ehicles  
Clause 4 of Schedule II of MSW (Management and Hand ling) Rules, 2000 envisages 
that vehicles used for transportation of wastes sha ll be covered.  Waste should not be 
visible to public, nor exposed to open environment preventing their scattering. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 37 
Audit noticed (December 2022-May 2023) that vehicle s used for solid waste 
transportation in AMC were not covered as shown in Photographs 2.2.15  to 2.2.17 . 
   
Photograph 2.2.15: 
Transporting garbage without 
cover 
Photograph 2.2.16: 
Transporting garbage without 
cover near old jail road 
Photograph 2.2.17: Transporting 
garbage without cover near 79 
Tilla 
Thus, the transported waste was visible and exposed  to an open environment.  These 
uncovered vehicles emanated odor during transportat ion and scattered the waste 
causing inconvenience to public besides defeating t he very purpose of hygienic 
transfer of solid waste from one place to other.  
The Mechanical Division of AMC is responsible for m anagement of solid waste 
including transportation of waste and monitoring of  vehicles in AMC area.  But no 
monitoring was found done by the Division during 20 17-23 leading to unhygienic 
transfer of solid waste from one place to another. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the covered and compartmentalised waste 
collection vehicles such as Ambikapur style tricycl es and battery-operated e-rickshaw 
had been procured and distributed to the ULBs to address the issue. 
However, details of procurement, distribution and u tilisation of the vehicles were not 
furnished in Audit. 
2.2.6.6(iii) Use of transportation vehicles without  authorisation  
As per Section 39, 55 and 56 of Motor Vehicle (MV) Act, 1988, a transport vehicle 
shall not be deemed to be validly registered for th e purpose of Section 39 of MV Act, 
1988, unless it carries a certificate of fitness is sued by the prescribed authority to the 
effect that the vehicle complies with all the requi rements of Act and Rules made there 
under.  The ULBs were to obtain the fitness certifi cate from the Regional Transport 
Officers (RTOs) concerned.  
Audit noticed (May-June 2023) that in nine sampled ULBs, the vehicles used for 
SWM activities did not have valid fitness, insuranc e and registration as detailed 
below; 
• 175 out of 184 vehicles (95 per cent ) have no valid fitness certificates, 
• 178 vehicles have no valid insurance, and 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 38 
• 118 vehicles were neither registered with the Regio nal Transport Offices (RTO) 
of the State nor from other States. 
The above deficiencies highlighted the absence of i nternal control mechanism within 
the Department. 
The Government while admitting the fact stated (Dec ember 2023) that all ULBs shall 
be requested to comply with MV Act 1988. 
2.2.6.6(iv) Non-monitoring of transportation vehicl es through GPS  
Transportation of solid waste from source of genera tion to the authorised destination 
is important to ensure its proper disposal. SWM Man ual, 2016 stipulates that 
communication technologies such as Global Positioni ng System (GPS), Geographic 
Information System (GIS) are to be integrated as pa rt of monitoring of SWM system. 
A GPS can be synchronised with the GIS to monitor a nd track waste transportation 
vehicles and identify any irregularities in waste movement (Clause 2.3.12.1 of Manual 
on MSWM, 2016). 
Further, as per Clause 1.3 and 6.1.1 of Manual on M SWM, 2016, Management 
Information System (MIS) should be set up to record  and monitor all information or 
data on MSWM and is the best way to ensure achievem ent of target through a 
computerised MIS and should be linked to the Geogra phic Information System (GIS) 
to show real-time spatial information such as movem ent of vehicle, secondary 
collection, bin pick up and transportation to proce ssing and disposal sites can also be 
linked to GIS system. 
Audit observed (December 2022-April 2023) that vehi cles were not provided with 
GPS. Though MIS was developed by the ULBs under Swa chh Bharat Mission 
scheme, but it was not integrated with GIS and Gene ral Packet Radio Service (GPRS) 
indicating deficiency in proper monitoring of movem ent of vehicles, secondary 
collection, bin pick up and transportation to processing and disposal of waste. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that Agartal a Smart city has developed an 
Integrated Command Control Centre (ICCC) where ther e is provisions to track a 
vehicle using GIS and General Packet Radio Service (GPRS). Agartala shall 
implement the same as per available scope and finan cial support in due course of 
time. Setting up of vehicle tracking system, procur ement of necessary hardwires and 
setting up a monitoring unit for individual ULBs is a big financially inclusive task. 
The reply is not acceptable as lack of finances can not be reasons for not discharging 
statutory duties as opined by the Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Council, 
Ratlam vs . Shri Vardhan and others (1980).  
2.2.6.7 Processing of Municipal Solid Waste  
Treatment and processing of segregated waste stream s not only reduces operational 
costs but also increases the efficiency of the process.  
As per information furnished by the UDD, the detail s of solid waste generated, 
collected, and processed in the State and nine samp led ULBs for the period 2017-23 
are given in Table 2.2.8 and Table 2.2.9 respectively. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 39 
Table 2.2.8: Details of solid waste generated by all 20 ULBs in Tripura during 2017-23 
(in TPD ) 
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
Waste generated 433.20 445.72 411.32 333.90 332.90 333.10 2290.14 
Collected 372.50 389.46 380.80 317.69 321.50 333.10  2115.05 
Uncollected 60.70 56.26 30.52 12.40 11.40 0.00 171. 28 
Processed 148.40 150.10 253.60 214.00 220.28 333.10  1319.48 
Waste to landfill 224.10 239.36 127.20 107.50 101.2 2 0.00 799.38 
Percentage of 
processing 40 39 67 67 69 100 62 
Source : Data furnished by the UDD and Annual Report on SWM by CPCB, Delhi 
The data provided by the Department regarding asses sment of quantity of solid waste 
generation lacks credibility because the Department  has shown same quantity of 
waste generated, collected, and processed during 20 22-23 and the percentage of 
processing was shown as 100 per cent  for all ULBs in the State and no waste was 
transported to landfill. But it is noticed from the  information furnished by nine 
sampled ULBs to audit that 159.43 TPD of waste was sent to landfills during 2022-23 
as given in Table 2.2.9. 
Table 2.2.9: Details of solid waste generated by nine sampled ULBs during 2017-23  
(in TPD ) 
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
Waste generated 183.37 206.79 216.35 233.71 256.28 210.11 1306.61 
Collected 164.29 187.22 196.92 214.9 238.93 202.02 1204.28 
Uncollected 19.08 19.57 19.43 18.81 17.35 8.10 102. 34 
Processed 129.52 150.19 151.54 174.54 203.32 42.59 851.70 
Waste to landfill 34.77 37.03 45.38 40.36 35.62 159 .43 352.59 
Percentage of 
processing 79 80 77 81 85 21 71 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
Nine sampled ULBs had shown that 159.43 TPD of wast e was sent to landfills during 
2022-23 which was not consistent with the overall p osition of 20 ULBs during the 
year. 
The processing facility for producing compost in AM C became non-functional from 
2016 due to termination of the private agency engag ed for the purpose.  The 
construction of tertiary waste processing centres i n eight sampled ULBs was taken up 
between November 2020 and June 2021 out of which fi ve have been completed and 
three centres are in progress. Except Sabroom Nagar  Panchayat, no completed waste 
processing centre has started processing as of Marc h 2023. Therefore, 71 per cent  
processing of solid waste as shown by the sampled U LBs during 2017-23 remained 
doubtful in audit due to wrong reporting by the Dep artment as well as the sampled 
ULBs and dubious model of assessing quantity of solid waste generated. 
The sampled ULBs declared that they had achieved SL Bs (2021-22) from 10  per cent  
to 80 per cent  for recovery of solid waste, but Audit observed th at in actual 
zero  per cent  to 60 per cent  recovery of solid waste was done, which is shown i n 
Chart 2.2.9 .  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 40 
Chart 2.2.9: Status of SLB (in percentage ) on extent of municipal solid waste recovery in 
sampled ULBs  
 
Source:  City solid waste action plan (CSWAP) of the sample d ULBs and information furnished by the 
ULBs 
The Government replied (December 2023) that total s olid waste generation in 20 
ULBs is 333.1 TPD and 16 tertiary waste treatment p lants were being constructed. 
Additionally, 85 secondary waste sorting & segregat ion centre in 20 UBLs are 
functional.   
However, Government was silent on inflated data of waste processing shown by the 
Department and the nine sampled ULBs. 
2.2.6.8 Disposal of solid waste  
Schedule II (6) of the MSW (Management and Handling ) Rules, 2000 provides that 
land filling of mixed waste shall be avoided unless  the same is found unsuitable for 
waste processing and the landfill sites shall meet the specifications as given in 
Schedule-III of MSW Rules.  
As per clause 1.2.3 of Manual on MSWM, 2016, decent ralised system of SWM 
reduces the cost incurred for the collection, trans portation, and disposal of waste by 
the ULBs. 
The sampled ULBs declared that they had achieved SL Bs (2021-22) from 10  per cent  
to 80 per cent  for the extent of scientific disposal of solid was te, but Audit observed 
that in actual there was zero  per cent  scientific disposal of solid waste in all the ULBs  
as there was no sanitary landfill in the sampled UL Bs. The details are shown in the 
Table 2.2.10. 
 
 
 
 
63 
80 
15 
80 
50 55 65 
10 
90 
2
18 
35 44 
0
33 40 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Achievement reported by ULB to GoI 
Achievement observed by audit as per data provided by the ULB 
Targeted Performance as per SLB norms 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 41 
Table 2.2.10: Status of SLB on extent of scientific disposal of solid waste in the sampled ULBs  
(in per cent) 
Name of ULB Targeted Performance 
as per SLB norms   
Achievement reported 
by ULB to GoI 
Actual status as 
observed by audit 
Agartala Municipal Corporation 100 60 0 
Amarpur NP 100 100 0 
Ambassa MC 100 0 0 
Belonia MC 100 100 0 
Dharmanagar MC 100 55 0 
Kailashahar MC 100 0 0 
Sabroom NP 100 0 0 
Teliamura MC 100 0 0 
Source:  City solid waste action plan (CSWAP) of the sample d ULBs, information furnished by the 
ULBs and physical inspection by audit 
Audit observed in the sampled ULBs that the landfil l sites received mixed waste in 
violation of the above Rules.  
The following deficiencies were noticed in the sampled ULBs for disposal of waste. 
2.2.6.8(i) Incineration of Municipal solid waste at  landfills  
Schedule II (1) (vii) of MSW (Management and Handli ng) Rules, 2000 envisages that 
waste garbage, dry leaves should not be burnt. Nece ssary precautions should be taken 
to reduce nuisance of odour, flies, rodents, birds menace and fire hazard by the 
municipal authorities.  
The Government of Tripura issued notification (May 2017) to impose ban/prohibition 
on open burning of waste on lands, including landfi ll sites by any person including 
local body, any organisation, etc . in the whole State in compliance with the NGT 
order. Any person or body responsible for burning o f waste, shall be liable to pay 
environmental compensation of 
₹ 5,000 in case of simple burning, while ₹ 25,000 in 
case of bulk wastes burning.  
It was observed that solid waste was burnt at landf ills in Belonia Municipal Council 
and Sabroom Nagar Panchayat as evidenced from Photographs  2.2.18  and 2.2.19 : 
  
Photograph 2.2.18: Fire at dumping yard of 
Belonia MC 
Photograph 2.2.19: Fire at dumping yard of 
Sabroom NP 
Audit noticed that the ULBs had not made any provis ions for treatment of fire 
management at landfill sites. Burning of solid waste was not only a violation of MSW 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 42 
Rules and but was also fraught with severe environm ental and health hazards. No 
precautionary measures were found to be taken by th e ULBs for such hazard. Further, 
no action was initiated by the ULBs to impose penalty for such burning incidence. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that the dumps ite of Sabroom NP had already 
been remediated and the work order for remediation of dumpsite of Belonia MC had 
been issued and work would be commenced shortly. 
However, the Government remained silent on the issu e of burning of waste at 
landfills.   
2.2.6.8(ii) Capping layer of earth covering waste a nd leachate treatment  
As per Schedule 1 (Clauses ii and iii of C) of SWM Rules, 2016, wastes shall be 
covered immediately or at the end of each working d ay with minimum 10 cm of soil, 
inert debris or construction material. Prior to mon soon season, an intermediate cover 
of 40-65 cm thickness of soil should be placed on landfill with proper compaction and 
grading to prevent infiltration during monsoon.  
Audit observed (March 2023) in sampled ULBs that no  such capping layer of earth 
covering was made during 2017-23 over waste neither  daily nor prior to monsoon 
season to avoid erosion of leachates at landfills s ites. Audit found that the dumping 
ground of DC Nagar under AMC, the collected waste r emained dumped in the 
dumpsite and became like mountain of MSW with four big heaps of waste. As the 
dumpsite gets old, it poses a threat to public heal th, and it damages the environment 
due to leachate formation as can be seen in Photographs  2.2.20 and  2.2.21 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.20: Leachates at Dumping 
yard at DC Nagar under AMC 
Photograph 2.2.21: Dumping yard under 
Amarpur NP 
The Government replied (December 2023) that it has adopted 3-tier zero landfill 
approach therefore earth covering waste and leachat e treatment shall not be required 
further. 
The fact remained that huge wastes were dumped in t he dumping grounds of the 
sampled ULBs, and leachates formation was noticed i n the DC Nagar dumping yard 
under AMC. 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 43 
2.2.6.9 Management of Plastic Waste, E-Waste, Const ruction & Demolition 
Waste and other Waste 
 
2.2.6.9(i) Plastic Waste Management  
Single Use Plastics referred to as disposable plast ics (use and throw items), are 
commonly used for plastic packaging and include items intended to be used only once 
before they are thrown away or recycled.  These inc lude, among other items, carry 
bags, food packaging, bottles, straws, containers, cups, and cutlery.  
Plastic waste, especially littering of single use p lastic, poses severe environmental 
problems, moreover, there is frequent water logging of different areas due to blockage 
of drains and canals by plastic waste.  
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,  GoI notified (February 2011) 
the Plastic Waste Management (Management and Handli ng) Rules, 2011 (PWM 
Rules, 2011).  It was replaced by the Plastic Waste  Management Rules, 2016 (PWM 
Rules, 2016) notified (March 2016) by GoI. These ru les should apply to every waste 
generator, local body, manufacturer, importer and producer. 
As per information furnished (May 2023) by the TSPC B, 317.63 tons of plastic waste 
was generated and the same quantity of waste i.e. 317.63 tons of plastic waste was 
collected and processed by the ULBs during 2017-22. 
Audit observed that there was no collection and seg regation of plastic waste in 
Amabassa MC, Kailashahar MC, Belonia MC and Amarpur NP during 2018-22.  
The generation of plastic waste (in TPA) during 201 7-18 to 2021-22 in all the ULBs 
is shown in Chart 2.2.10 . 
Chart 2.2.10: Generation of plastic waste (in TPA) during 2017-18 to 2021-22 
 
It can be seen from Chart 2.2.10  that the generation of plastic waste was in increasing 
trend from 2017-18 to 2021-22.  This indicates that  the PWM rules were not enforced 
properly by the ULBs. 
The Government stated (December 2023) that communic ation to handover plastic 
waste to PWD has been issued to all ULBs. 
But the Government was silent on generation of plastic in large scale. 
28.05 26.2 32.1 
61.65 
169.63 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 44 
2.2.6.9(i)(a) Use of banned plastic  
As per Clause 4(b) of PWM Rules, 2016, no vendor sh ould use plastic carry bags or 
products made of recycled plastic and such bags sho uld not be used for storing, 
carrying, dispensing or packaging ready to eat or drink food stuff. 
Government of Tripura notified (March 2015) ban on manufacture, supply, sale and 
usage of plastic carry bags, banners, buntings, fle x, plastic flags, plastic plates, cups, 
plastic spoons, cling films and plastic sheets made of thermocol and plastic.  
MoEF&CC, GoI issued (August 2021) notification rega rding ban on the manufacture, 
use, sale, import and handling of Single Use Plastic (SUP) items from 1 July 2022. 
Audit observed (May 2023) that plastic carry bags o r containers were being used for 
packing food stuffs, vegetables, etc . It indicates that PWM Rules were not being 
enforced fully resulting in availability of banned plastics in the markets for carrying 
materials other than garbage as shown in Photograph 2.2.22 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.22: Use of plastic carry bags in markets 
Despite imposing ban by the State and the GoI, sing le use plastic carry bags, flex, 
plastic spoons, etc . were being sold and used in the markets due to la xity in 
enforcement of ban as well as PWM Rules.  This indi cates that the Government was 
not serious in implementing the PWM Rules.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that frequent raids were being conducted by 
the ULBs and not only SUP items were being ceased b ut also fines were being 
imposed on violators. ULBs were encouraging citizen s and shopkeepers to adopt the 
habit of alternate SUP items. 
The fact, however, remains that the eight sampled U LBs had not conducted frequent 
and regular raids during 2018-19 to 2022-23. Dharma nagar MC, Ambassa MC, 
Amarpur and Belonia MC did not conduct any raid dur ing 2018-19 to 2021-22. 
Similarly, Teliamura MC, Kailashahar MC and Sabroom  NP did not conduct any raid 
during 2022-23. No raid was conducted by Sonamura N P during 2018-19 and 
2020-21. AMC did not furnish any information regarding conduct of raid.  


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 45 
2.2.6.9(i)(b) Non-use of plastic of alternative use rs 
Clause 5(b) of PWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that the municipal authorities/ local 
bodies should encourage use of plastic waste (prefe rably the plastic waste which 
cannot be further recycled) for road construction a s per Indian Roads Congress (IRC) 
guidelines or energy recovery or waste to oil, etc . IRC has also issued guidelines for 
use of waste plastic in hot bituminous mixes in wea ring course (IRC-SP-98-2013) for 
road construction works as plastic waste have great  potential for use in bituminous 
construction.  
Audit observed that none of the sampled ULBs adopte d use of plastic waste in 
formation of roads/ energy recovery/ waste to oil, etc . However, the Smart City 
Mission, Agartala had constructed around 0.68 km bi tuminous with plastic road from 
Boy’s Bodhjung School to Women’s College during 2021-22. But Audit did not come 
across any instance that seized plastic and plastic  waste were being transmitted by 
ULBs to the State Public Works Department (PWD) or any such organisations for 
usage in laying roads indicating lack of initiation by ULBs. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that communica tion had been issued to all 
ULBs to handover plastic waste to the State PWD. 
2.2.6.9(i)(c) Alternative of Single Use Plastic  
In compliance of NGT order, the Science, Technology  & Environment Department, 
Government of Tripura has prepared (June 2022) an action plan for implementation of 
PWM Rules, 2016 in the State. The action plan for a lternative of SUP is shown in 
Appendix 2.2.11 . The Science, Technology & Environment Department will look 
after the entire mission of phasing out of the SUP as nodal department in terms of 
policy making, monitoring of implementation, explor e the scope or develop new 
technology which will provide adequate alternatives  and to popularise them among 
the entrepreneurs. As per the action plan, ULBs sho uld identify at least one SHG and 
train it to start manufacturing alternative items a nd promote alternatives of SUP in 
various markets, shopping malls, rail stations, bus  stations, etc . The UDD has been 
designated as nodal department for implementation of action plan in urban areas. 
The sampled ULBs stated (May 2023) that the SHG gro ups were identified and 
encouraged/ motivated for production of alternative s items. But no such alternative of 
SUP has been produced by any SHG.  
Thus, alternative of SUP as proposed in the action plan has not yet been implemented 
by the UDD in urban areas despite availability of f unds of 
₹ 132.36 crore in the 
sampled ULBs as of March 2023. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that Dharman agar is producing cloth and 
paper bags in markets recently and the remaining UL Bs are requested to replicate the 
same. 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 46 
2.2.6.9(i)(d) Ingestion of plastic by cattle/ pigs  
As per Schedule II (1) (viii) of MSW (Management an d Handling) Rules, 2000, stray 
animals should not be allowed to move around waste storage facilities or at any other 
place in the city or town and should be managed in accordance with the State laws. 
Further, as per Schedule I (B)(i) & (iii) to MSW (M anagement and Handling) Rules, 
2016, landfill site shall be fenced or hedged and p rovided with proper gate to monitor 
incoming vehicles, to prevent entry of unauthorised  persons and stray animals. The 
landfill site should have inspection facilities, we igh bridge facility, fire protection 
equipment, etc . 
Audit noticed that there was no fencing around the dumping yard/ landfills, nor any 
inspection facility, weighbridge facility, fire protection equipment, etc.  in the sampled 
ULBs.  Stray animals/ cattle/ pigs were seen feedin g at solid waste dumping yard/ 
landfills and found pulling out or scattering/ consuming food waste that was packed in 
plastic bags creating untidy and unhygienic surroun dings apart from consuming 
plastic as may be seen in Photographs 2.2.23 and  2.2.24 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.23: Stray animals feeding 
plastic waste at DC Nagar dumping yard 
under AMC 
Photograph 2.2.24: Stray animals feeding 
plastic waste at dumping yard of Belonia MC 
During field inspection, one cattle owner stated 27  that four cattle died due to 
consumption of food waste packed in plastic bags in  open dumping ground under 
Belonia Municipal Council.  The dumping ground is l ocated adjacent to a habitation 
of three families.  During interview, a lady inhabi tant stated that due to bad odour and 
flies they were residing in unhealthy atmosphere an d facing difficulties even in taking 
food.  
The Animal Resource Development Department informed  (May 2023) audit that 
surgeries of 10 cases of ingestion of plastic by st ray animals/ cattle were conducted 
during 2017-20, all the 10 animals had died.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that all ident ified legacy dumpsites were 
being remediated and solid waste generated by each ULB would be treated in their 
                                                           
27   https://bit.ly/3RN7R5C 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 47 
solid waste processing facilities which were either  already operationalised or under 
construction. Further, a mechanism to tackle litter ing in public places was in place, 
the notified byelaws had the provision to impose fi ne on violators for littering public 
place. However, enforcement of the same was facing extensive resistance from 
various sections of the society including the elect ed bodies. Once enforcement takes 
its force the above issue can be addressed efficiently. 
But the Government did not mention about the constr uction of fencing around the 
dumping yard/ landfills, inspection facility, weigh bridge facility, fire protection 
equipment, etc. 
2.2.6.9(ii) E-waste Management  
E-waste (Management & Handling) Rules were notified  in 2011 and came into force 
with effect from 1 May 2012.  This was replaced by E-waste Management Rules, 
2016 which came into effect from 1 October 2016.  T hese rules are applicable to 
every producer, consumer/ bulk consumer, collection  centre, dismantler and recycler 
of e-waste involved in manufacture, sale, and purch ase and processing of electrical 
and electronic equipment or components specified in  Schedule-I of E-waste 
Management Rules, 2016 including their components, consumables, parts and spares 
which make product operational. 
2.2.6.9(ii)(a) Non-handling of e-waste  
Schedule IV of E-waste Management Rules, 2016 stipu lates the responsibilities of 
municipal authorities/ local bodies as 
• to ensure that e-waste if found to be mixed with MS W is properly segregated, 
collected and channelised to authorised dismantler or recycler; and 
• to ensure that e-waste pertaining to orphan product s is collected and channelised 
to authorised dismantler or recycler. 
As per information furnished (May 2023) by the TSPC B, 49.04 TPA of e-waste was 
generated and the same quantity of waste i.e. 49.04 TPA of e-waste was collected and 
processed by the ULBs during 2018-22. 
Audit observed (April 2023) that none of the sample d ULBs handled e-waste during 
2017-23.  No e-waste was handed over separately by the households to waste 
collectors in any of the sampled ULBs.  The waste collectors also did not insist/ direct 
the households regarding segregation and separate c ollection of e-waste.  ULBs did 
not collect and channel e-waste to authorised disma ntlers/ recyclers.  Since e-waste 
was not handed over separately by the households th ese were getting mixed with 
municipal solid waste. 
However, analysis of data furnished by TSPCB reveal ed that the two private 
authorised 
28  e-waste agencies collected and transmitted the e-w aste to outside the 
State for recycling after procuring from different offices and shops .  The sampled 
                                                           
28   (1) M/s Green Partners, Agartala (2) Karo Shamvha v Pvt. Ltd. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 48 
ULBs had not made any assessment for generation of e-waste.  Hence, the data 
provided by TSPCB for generation, collection, and s egregation of e-waste by the 
ULBs was not authentic in absence of assessment and  non-handling of e-waste.  
Therefore, the ULBs had a little role in collection  and segregation of e-waste 
indicating non-compliance of E-Waste Management Rules. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that though a part of the e-waste had already 
been recycled by the ULBs but still there are other  options to explore in the said field. 
ULBs and Government offices would now be requested to empanel authorised 
agencies to take away the e-waste generated in the offices and extend support to 
recycle other private and public e-waste being generated in ULBs’ jurisdiction. 
The fact remained that the no e-waste was handled b y the sampled ULBs as of 
March 2023. 
2.2.6.9(iii) Management of Construction and Demolit ion (C&D) Waste 
Clause 4.6 of Manual on MSWM, 2000 stipulates that C&D waste, being inert in 
nature does not create chemical or biochemical poll ution. Hence, maximum effort 
should be made to reuse and recycle them. It was on ly in 2016 that separate rules viz ., 
Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules,  2016 for Management of 
C&D waste was notified by GoI. In the meantime, GoI  issued (January 2021) 
guidelines for strategic management of C&D waste. 
As per information furnished (May 2023) by the TSPC B, 2,314 tonne of C&D waste 
was generated by the ULBs during 2018-22. The C&D w aste generated was not 
recycled or reused since ULBs are yet to establish C&D waste processing facilities/ 
plants. The TSPCB informed (May 2023) audit that th e ULBs were dumping the inert 
C&D waste in low lying areas for land development. But low-lying areas were not 
specified by the TSPCB, and huge quantity of C&D wa ste were seen dumped on 
roadsides specially in AMC areas creating environme ntal hazards as can be seen in 
Photographs 2.2.25 and  2.2.26 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.25: C&D waste deposit site 
near Abhaynagar bridge under AMC 
Photograph 2.2.26: C&D waste deposit site 
near Katakhal river behind Pragati school 
under AMC 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 49 
The Government replied (August 2023) that due to fi nancial crunch and 
non-availability of private players, the C&D plant could not be set up.  
2.2.6.9(iii)(a) State Policy for Construction and D emolition Waste 
As per Clause 9 (1) of C&D Waste Management Rules 2 016, Secretary in charge of 
the Department shall prepare their policy document with respect to management of 
C&D waste in accordance with provisions of rules wi thin one year from date of 
notification of rule i.e., from February 2017. 
The Government of Tripura, UDD had notified a State  Policy for C&D Waste 
Management in December 2019 i.e. after a lapse of two and half years of the 
notification of rules by the GoI. As per the policy, the ULBs were to prepare plans and 
procedures for management of C&D waste within their jurisdictions.  
But no action plan was prepared by the sampled ULBs  even after lapse of three years 
the C&D waste was not processed for reuse. Reasons for non-development of action 
plans were not on records. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that as per th e request of Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and Central Public Health & Environmental 
Engineering Organisation an action plan for setting  up a C&D Waste Management 
plant for all ULBs centrally at Agartala had been p repared and submitted to MoHUA 
for approval. 
2.2.6.9(iii)(b) Non-use of C&D Waste for constructi on works  
Clause 11 of C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016 stipu lates that Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) and Indian Roads Congress (IRC) shall be responsible for preparation 
of code of practices and standards for use of recyc led materials and products of 
construction and demolition waste in respect of con struction activities and the role of 
IRC shall be specific to the standards and practice s pertaining to construction of 
roads. IRC-121-2017 provides for use of C&D waste in road works. 
The TSPCB intimated (May 2023) that 2,314 ton of C& D waste 29  was generated and 
collected during 2018-22. Audit observed that none of the sampled ULBs had utilised 
C&D waste in construction of road works resulting i n dumping of C&D wastes in 
open area causing hazards to the environment. 
The Government stated (December 2023) that setting up a proper C&D waste 
management plant, a suitable land has been identifi ed and demarked for C&D plant at 
Bodhjungnagar, Agartala and an Action Plan has been  submitted to Ministry and 
extensive persuasion is being done to receive funds  from Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) under SBM-U 2.0. 
2.2.6.9(iv) Non-construction of slaughterhouses  
Rule 3(1) of Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slau ghterhouses) Rules, 2001 
stipulates that no person should slaughter any anim al within a municipal area except 
                                                           
29   The figures for 2022-23 are under compilation by TSPCB. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 50 
in a slaughterhouse recognised or licensed by the c oncerned authority empowered 
under the law for the time being in force to do so. 
Construction and maintenance of slaughterhouse is o ne of the 18 functions of ULBs. 
But it was noticed in audit that slaughterhouses we re not constructed by the ULBs in 
the State, even the AMC did not have slaughterhouse  and the animals such as goats, 
chickens, ducks, etc . were slaughtered in the market places or on the open roadsides.  
Thus, absence of slaughterhouses in the ULBs would not only provide scope for 
activities such as illegal slaughtering within the urban limits in contravention to the 
Rule ibid  but also result in hazards to public health as wel l as contamination of 
environment and cruelty to animals in public places.  
The Tripura High Court directed (February 2022) the  State Government to ban the 
sale of meat products in public places and streets.  Despite banning order, open 
slaughtering of animals and sale of meat in public places/ streets were taken place in 
AMC areas in violation of Rules as well as direction of the High Court. 
Audit found that some of the open slaughtering of a nimals/ chickens and sale of meat 
on the roadside/ markets under AMC areas are shown in Photographs 2.2.27 to 
2.2.30 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.27: Open slaughtering at GB 
bazar, Agartala 
Photograph 2.2.28: Open slaughtering at 
Bhuturia, Agartala 
  
Photograph 2.2.29: Open slaughtering of 
chickens at Lake Chowmohani Market, 
Agartala 
Photograph 2.2.30: Open slaughtering near 
G.B. Bazar, Agartala 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 51 
The Government replied (August 2023) that AMC had already identified suitable land 
at Bodhjung Nagar and prepared a DPR for the same t hough the financial assistance 
for setting up the same was not finalised. Setting up of a modern abattoir/ 
slaughterhouse is a big financial inclusive task wh ile on the other hand in most of the 
ULBs slaughtering of cattle is decentralised and pe tty meat retailers are slaughtering 
animals in low quantity. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as th e ‘Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Slaughterhouse) Rules, 2001’ do not allow to slaughter any animal within a 
municipal area except in a slaughterhouse recognise d or licensed by the concerned 
authority empowered under the law for the time being in force to do so. 
Conclusion 
The sampled ULBs collected user charges of 
₹ 1.25 crore only against the demand of 
₹ 37.41 crore for the period from 2019-20 to 2022-23 resulting in loss of irrecoverable 
revenue of ₹ 36.16 crore.  Segregation of waste at source was e ither not followed or 
being partially followed in the sampled ULBs. Wides pread lack of dustbins in public 
places resulted in littering of waste leading to un hygienic condition, unhealthy odour 
and contamination of the environment. Non-availabil ity of material recovery facilities 
resulted in failure to recover the recyclables and to convert waste into new materials 
and objects by segregating dry and wet waste. Non-r ecognition of informal waste 
pickers and collectors and their non-integration wi th authorised pickers/ collectors 
resulted in failure of their participation in SWM. Acute shortage of auto tippers, 
pushcarts, etc . led to ineffectiveness and inefficiency in collec tion and transportation 
of municipal solid waste. Despite imposing ban by t he State and the GoI, single use 
plastic carry bags, flex, plastic spoons, etc . were being sold and used in the markets. 
Due to non-availability of fencing around the dumpi ng yard/ landfills, stray animals/ 
cattle/ pigs were seen feeding at solid waste dumping yard/ landfills and found pulling 
out or scattering/ consuming food waste that was pa cked in plastic bags creating 
untidy and unhygienic surroundings apart from consuming plastic. Non-availability of 
slaughterhouses even in AMC led to killing of anima ls such as goats, chickens/ ducks 
on the open roadsides/ streets and in the market places.  
Recommendations  
i.  The Government should ensure that all households pay user charges for door-
to-door collection of municipal solid waste in segregated manner. 
ii.  The Government may explore the feasibility for invo lvement of private parties 
and citizens for effective segregation of waste at source. 
iii.  The Government may consider identifying garbage vul nerable points and the 
ULBs may develop mobile applications that allow cit izens to take pictures of 
garbage littering hot spots and upload it using the  mobile app and take timely 
corrective action for collection of such littered garbage. 
iv.  The Government may consider for creation of material recovery facilities near 
landfills and dumping ground to facilitate segregation of dry and wet waste. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 52 
v.  The Government should consider and initiate appropr iate strategies for 
involvement of informal waste pickers in solid wast e management with 
authorised ones. 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether planning, cons truction, commissioning, 
operation and maintenance of waste management proje cts in ULBs was effective, 
efficient and financially sustainable. 
2.2.6.10 Inadequate infrastructure for processing  
Schedule I of MSW (Management and Handling) Rules 2 000 provides time schedule 
of December 2003 or earlier for setting up of proce ssing and disposal facilities.  
Clause 22 of SWM Rules, 2016 read with Schedule I o f MSW Manual, 2000 make 
ULB authorities responsible for compliance to crite ria specified for timely setting up 
of waste processing and disposal facilities and the ir monitoring, improvement of 
existing landfill site as well as identification of landfill sites for future use and making 
sites ready for operation.  
As per Clause 15(v) of SWM Rules, 2016, ULBs should  facilitate construction, 
operation and maintenance of solid waste processing  facilities and preference shall be 
given to decentralised processing to minimise trans portation cost and environmental 
impacts such as bio-methanation, micro composting, vermin composting, anaerobic 
digestion or any other appropriate processing for b io-stabilisation of bio-degradable 
wastes.  
Rule 22 of SWM Rules, 2016 specifies the time frame  for setting up solid waste 
processing facilities (Tertiary waste processing centre) by local bodies below one lakh 
population within three years from the date of noti fication of the Rules i.e.  in 
April 2019.  
It was observed that four ULBs under West Tripura D istrict namely Agartala 
Municipal Corporation, Mohanpur Municipal Council ( MC), Ranirbazar Municipal 
Council and Jirania Nagar Panchayat were using Debendra Chandra Nagar Processing 
site with a capacity of 250 MT for treatment and di sposal of solid waste.  Average 
daily generation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) of these four ULBs was 263 MT. 
Dharmanagar MC has a processing site with capacity of nine TPD for treatment and 
disposal of solid waste and generation of MSW was 1 3.65 TPD.  Remaining seven 
ULBs have identified landfill sites and constructio n of tertiary centres with capacity 
of 10 TPD each in those ULBs and generation of MSW in these seven ULBs were 
between 1.48 TPD and 7.00 TPD.  The capacity of lan dfill sites in these seven ULBs 
were adequate.  On the other hand, the capacity of landfill sites in AMC and 
Dharmanagar MC were not adequate in respect of waste generation. 
AMC had constructed waste processing centre in 2012 . The processing facility for 
producing compost in AMC became non-functional from  2016-17 due to termination 
of the private agency engaged for the purpose. Howe ver, AMC produced huge 
quantity of compost through windrow composting proc ess before 2016-17, which 
remained unsold and stacked at processing centre fo r more than six years. However, 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 53 
the actual quantity of compost produced was not fur nished to audit. AMC informed 
(June 2023) audit that the processing of fresh wast e started from November 2022 and 
11,847 MT was processed upto March 2023. But the quantity of compost sold was not 
furnished to audit. 
Thus, compost remaining unused/ unsold for prolonge d period, the possibility of 
degradation of the quality cannot be ruled out. The accumulation of compost is shown 
in the Photograph 2.2.31 . 
 
Photograph 2.2.31: Accumulation of compost at DC Nagar waste processing centre under AMC  
The other eight sampled ULBs identified suitable si te for construction of tertiary 
waste processing centres during 2020-21.  The statu s of construction of tertiary waste 
processing centres in respect of eight sampled ULBs are given in Table 2.2.11. 
Table 2.2.11: Statement showing the status of construction of tertiary processing centres 
as of June 2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of ULB Date of work 
order 
Estimated 
cost 
Work 
order 
value 
Expenditure 
Physical 
status of the 
work 
1 Dharmanagar 
MC 04-01-2021 1.49 1.32 0.98 Completed 
2 Kailashahar MC 08-04-2021 1.49 1.33 1.47 Complete d 
3 Ambassa MC 05-05-2021 1.30 1.16 1.34 Completed 
4 Teliamura MC 21-01-2021 1.49 1.49 0.80 In progres s 
5 Belonia MC 28-06-2021 1.48 1.22 0.98 In progress 
6 Amarpur NP 24-02-2021 1.49 1.49 0.50 In progress 
7 Sonamura NP 22-03-2021 1.49 1.18 1.49 Completed 
8 Sabroom NP 19-11-2020 1.49 1.34 1.34 Completed 
Source : Information furnished by the ULBs 
Out of eight tertiary centres, construction of five  centres had been completed and 
three centres were in progress as of June 2023. It was noticed that though the five 
tertiary waste processing centres had been complete d but not operationalised for 
processing due to lack of adequate machineries as s hown in P hotographs 2.2.32  and 
2.2.33 .  


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 54 
  
Photograph 2.2.32: Tertiary waste processing 
centre, Ambassa not yet operationalised 
Photograph 2.2.33: Tertiary waste 
processing centre, Sonamura not yet 
operationalised 
The Government replied (August 2023) that an agency  had already been engaged by 
the AMC to restart the operation of DC Nagar plant which was now operational and 
added that the situation would improve after operat ionalisation of all targeted SWM 
processing facilities for other remaining ULBs. 
2.2.6.10(i) Establishment and operation of landfill s/ tertiary centres without 
authorisation  
As per clause 15(y) of SWM Rules 2016, ULBs should obtain authorisation for 
setting up waste processing, treatment or disposal facility, if the volume of waste is 
exceeding five metric tons per day including sanitary landfills from the State Pollution 
Control Board. 
The sampled ULBs (except AMC) had not obtained any authorisation or consent 
certificate from the TSPCB for establishment of dum ping ground/ landfill and tertiary 
waste processing centres. TSPCB informed (May 2023) audit that the ULBs had 
been requested (April 2023) to apply for obtaining authorisation under SWM 
Rules, 2016. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that consent c ertificate from the Tripura State 
Pollution Control Board for establishment of tertia ry waste processing plants were 
being perused by ULBs. 
2.2.6.10(ii) Non-setting up of sanitary landfills  
Clause 11 (j) and 12 (a) of SWM Rules, 2016 provide s that the State and district 
authorities should facilitate identification and al location of suitable land for sanitary 
landfill for setting up solid waste processing and disposal facilities to local authorities 
within one year from the date of notification of the Rules. 
Audit observed (May 2023) that the sampled ULBs did  not have sanitary landfill sites 
for disposal of inert materials remaining after pro cessing.  The ULBs are yet to 
identify land for setting up sanitary landfills.  


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 55 
The Government replied (December 2023) that keeping  in mind the acute financial 
constraints and non-availability of resource/ techn ical person at ULB level, the State 
Government decided to adopt a 3-tier zero landfill solid waste management approach.  
This system enables non requirement of sanitary lan dfill as the inert that shall be left 
out after processing shall be used for low land fil ing and for use as a base soling for 
road construction. 
However, during audit it was noticed that the waste s remaining after segregation were 
disposed in the dumping ground as evidenced in the Photographs 2.2.34  and 2.2.35 . 
  
Photograph 2.2.34: Remining wastes after 
segregation were disposed in the dumping 
ground at DC Nagar dumping station under 
AMC 
Photograph 2.2.35: Remining wastes after 
segregation were disposed in Tertiary waste 
processing center under Sabroom NP 
2.2.6.10(iii) Faulty selection and operation of lan dfill/ dumping yard sites 
Schedule III of MSW (Management and Handling) Rules , 2000 and Schedule I 
(A)(vii) of SWM Rules, 2016 lay down criteria for s election of sites for landfills such 
as, landfill site should be 100 meter away from riv er, 200 metre from a pond, 
highways, habitations, religious place and water su pply wells and 20 km. away from 
airports or airbase. As per Schedule I (ix) of SWM Rule 2016, a buffer zone should be 
maintained around solid waste processing and dispos al facility, exceeding five tonnes 
per day of installed capacity. This should be maint ained within the total area of the 
solid waste processing and disposal facility in con sultation with SPCB. As per the 
SBM handbook paragraph 3.13, buffer zone should be 100 meters for sites accepting 
50 tonnes waste per day, and up to 500 meters for l arge sites. It is necessary to 
prevent new residential and commercial development in a buffer zone around such 
locations. 
The status of landfill sites is depicted in Chart 2.2.11 . 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 56 
 
Audit observed from the GIS data that the sampled U LBs selected landfill sites for 
SWM in deviation to SWM Rules as discussed below: 
• None of the sampled ULBs (nine landfills) declared a buffer zone of development 
around the landfills. 
• In four sampled ULBs 30 , habitations were developed within 200 meters from  
landfills. 
• Two ULBs 31  had landfills located near National/ State highway s, i.e.,  within 200 
meters. 
Landfill/ dumping ground of Kailashahar MC is locat ed 50 meters away from a 
school and 100 meters away from another school. It was noticed in audit that two 
schools had been established in 2007 and 2018 respe ctively, while the dumping 
ground was set up after establishment of the school s i.e. in March 2019. The school 
authorities complained TSPCB for shifting the landfill elsewhere as it generates odour 
to the surrounding areas.  But no action was taken by TSPCB. Further, neither did 
Kailashahar Municipal Council (KMC) obtain the envi ronmental clearance from the 
TSPCB nor the TSPCB ask the KMC for the same.  
• One ULB 32  had landfill located within 200 meters of river/ n allah and water 
bodies resulting in leachate flowing to water bodie s during rainy seasons causing 
water pollution. 
• One ULB 33  had landfill located within 20 kms from airport/ air base. 
Landfills with GIS data showing violations of SWM R ules are depicted in 
Photographs 2.2.36 to  2.2.39 . 
                                                           
30   Kailashahar MC, Belonia MC, Amarpur NP and Sonamu ra NP  
31   Kailashahar MC and Amarpur NP 
32   Sonamura NP 
33   Agartala Municipal Corporation 
0
0
8
9
9
5
7
8
9
9
9
1
0
0
4
2
1
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Buffer zone declared 
Proposal for buffer zone sent by the ULB 
20 Km away from Airport/Airbase 
200 m away from water supply wells 
200 m away from public parks 
200 m away from habitations 
200 m away from highway 
200 m away from pond 
100 m away from river 
Chart 2.2.11: Status of landfill sites in sampled ULBs 
Yes No 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 57 
  
Photograph 2.2.36: One road passing through 
within 100 meters, school within 100 meters and 
habitation present within 200 meters 
Photograph 2.2.37: One road passing 
through within 100 meters 
  
Photograph 2.2.38: One PHC within 100 
meters, water body within 200 meters and 
habitation present within 200 meters 
Photograph 2.2.39: One National highway 
within 100 meters, and habitation present 
within 300 meters 
Thus, the above landfills/ dumpsites identified and  operated by the sampled ULBs 
were susceptible to environmental hazards which was  indicative of ineffective 
management of solid waste. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that 13 identi fied legacy waste dumpsites of 
13 ULBs were in a process of being remediated using SBM-U 2.0 grants. Dumpsite of 
Sabroom NP had already been remediated so far.  
However, the Government was silent on the selection  and operation of landfills/ 
dumpsites adjacent to habitation, water body, natio nal highway, etc . as pointed out by 
audit. 
Good Practice - Remediation of legacy waste of Hapania Dumpsite, Agartala 
Scientific closure of abandoned open dumping yard a t Hapania under AMC 
remediated in August 2022. Various stages of remedi ation of legacy waste at Hapania 
Dumpsite, Agartala is shown in Photographs 2.2.40 to  2.2.43 . 


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 58 
  
Photograph 2.2.40: Before Remediation of 
Hapania, Agartala Municipal Corporation  Photograph 2.2.41: During Remediation 
  
Photograph 2.2.42: After Remediation  Photograph 2.2.43: Being developed as a 
park  
Conclusion  
Except AMC no other sampled ULBs has obtained authorisation or consent certificate 
from TSPCB for establishment of dumping ground/ lan dfills and tertiary waste 
processing centres in violation of the Rules. The s ampled ULBs are yet to identify 
land for setting up of sanitary landfills. Faulty s election and operation of landfill/ 
dumping yard sites posed serious threat to public health and environment.  
Recommendations 
i.  The Government should ensure that the ULBs obtain a uthorisation from the 
TSPCB for setting up landfills, processing faciliti es, etc. as per Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016. 
ii.  The Government may explore the feasibility of estab lishing sanitary landfills 
for all ULBs for disposal of inert materials remaining after processing . 
  


Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 59 
Audit Objective 4: To assess whether Monitoring and  evaluation of waste 
management system including adequacy of awareness c reation, citizen 
engagement for effecting behavioural change, complaint redressal mechanism for 
citizens, assessment of environmental impacts and i mplementation of the 
“internal control and monitoring mechanism was adequate and effective  
2.2.6.11 Institutional mechanism for monitoring of solid waste management  
 
2.2.6.11(i) Inadequate monitoring of SWM by State L evel Advisory Body 
Government constituted State Level Advisory Body (S LAB) for proper 
implementation of Solid Waste Management Rules, 201 6 in March 2017. The 
Principal Secretary, Urban Development Department i s the Ex-Officio Chairman of 
the Body and representatives from MoEF, MoRD, CPCB, TSPCB, etc . as Members of 
SLAB. The SLAB should meet at least once in every six months to review the matters 
related to implementation of these rules, State pol icy and strategy on solid waste 
management and give advice to State Government for taking measures that are 
necessary for expeditious and appropriate implementation of these rules. Copies of the 
review report shall be forwarded to the TSPCB for necessary action. 
Further, the Government has constituted (February 2 019) State Level Committee 
(SLC) to monitor the implementation of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 under 
the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary on regular basis.  
It was observed that the first review meeting of SL AB was held in April 2017. But 
information/record regarding subsequent meetings of  SLAB to monitor for 
improving SWM practices and execution of SWM projec ts was not made 
available to audit for scrutiny. The TSPCB intimate d (May 2023) audit that the 
information regarding meetings of SLAB was not available with them. 
However, scrutiny of minutes of meeting of SLC reve aled that 18 meetings were held 
upto September 2022 through video conference. But c ompliance/ action taken reports 
by different departments such as single use banned plastics, segregation of waste at 
source, 100 per cent  door to door collection of waste, etc ., were not found on records. 
Thus, effectiveness of monitoring at the State leve l for proper implementation of 
SWM Rules, 2016 remained questionable. 
2.2.6.11(ii) Monitoring at ULB level 
As per para 6.1 of Manual on MSWM, 2016, ward level  committees should be 
constituted for ensuring and monitoring SWM service s including segregation, 
collection, transportation, street sweeping, drain cleaning, and prohibition of littering. 
However, in the sampled ULBs, ward level committees  were not constituted 
indicating deficiencies in monitoring of SWM activi ties such as segregation, 
collection, transportation, street sweeping, drain cleaning, etc . Reasons for 
non-constitution of ward committees, however, were not on records. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that formation  of ward level committees 
would be notified as per available guidelines. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 60 
2.2.6.11(iii) Constraint of manpower  
Para 1.4.5.4 of Manual on MSWM, 2016 stipulates tha t ULBs should have an SWM 
cell or SWM department having staff with technical and managerial skills specific to 
SWM like public health officer, sanitary officer, j unior engineer, sanitary sub 
inspector, environmental engineer for SWM and sanitation activities. 
There was no dedicated SWM cell in the sampled ULBs  having adequate staff with 
technical and managerial skills. It was seen that o ne Junior Engineer in each ULB had 
been designated as nodal officer for overseeing the  activities of SWM in addition to 
their routine works. 
Besides, there was no public health officer, sanita ry officer, sanitary sub inspector, 
environmental engineer for SWM and sanitation activ ities in the sampled ULBs 
(AMC has a health officer). Hence, constraint  of manpower in the ULBs was one of 
the obstacles for effective implementation of SWM activities.  
The Government while admitting the fact stated (December 2023) that decision would 
be taken. 
2.2.6.11(iv) Facilities without environmental clear ance  
GoI notification (September 2006) and Manual for Co mmon Municipal Solid Waste 
Management Facility (CMSWMF) stipulate obtaining en vironment clearance from 
SPCB before establishment of processing facilities. 
The sampled ULBs had not obtained environmental cle arance for construction of 
Micro Composting Centres (MCCs), dumping grounds, t ertiary waste processing 
centres, etc . from TSPCB. Thus, establishment of MCCs, dumping grounds, tertiary 
waste processing centres, etc . without environmental clearance was not only a 
violation of Manual but was also fraught with sever e environmental and health 
hazards. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that most of  the facilities for processing 
Solid Waste are constructed recently and added that  wherever the facilities are 
operationalised, ULBs are in process of obtaining clearance from TSPCB. 
The fact remained that as per Manual for CMSWMF, th e ULBs should obtain 
clearance before establishment of processing facilities. 
2.2.6.11(v) Environment and health impact assessmen t  
Para 22 of Manual on MSWM, 2000 envisages that impr oper handling of solid wastes 
creates potential risks to environment and health. More serious impact is transfer of 
pollution to water, ground water and air. Air pollu tion is caused due to burning of 
wastes, either in open air, or in plants that lack effective treatment facilities from 
gaseous effluents. 
Audit observed that no such environment and health impact assessment was made by 
the ULBs. Besides, the Department had not undertake n any evaluation study during 
2018-23 to assess the impact of environment and imp lementation of internal control 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 61 
and monitoring mechanism in SWM activities. Further , TSPCB also did not conduct 
any study to assess the environmental impact of eig ht sampled ULBs except DC 
Nagar dumping ground under AMC.  TSPCB reported tha t the quality of ground 
water, air and noise were within the prescribed sta ndard limit of Bureau of Indian 
Standard, 2012, Central Pollution Control Board, 20 09 and Central Pollution Control 
Board (Rule 3(1) & 4(1)) respectively. 
The Government replied (December 2023) that the lan dfills of Kamalpur, Teliamura, 
Hapanaia of AMC, Panisagar, Sabroom, Khowai are alr eady remediated. The 
remaining 10 identified dumpsites of 10 ULBs are in  the final stage of remediation 
and also added that this shall drastically improve the environmental impact. 
However, Government was silent on environment and health impact assessment. 
Conclusion  
The Government constituted SLAB for monitoring of e xecution of SWM projects and 
the first review meeting was held in April 2017. Bu t information/ record regarding 
subsequent meetings of SLAB was not made available to audit for scrutiny. Although 
18 meetings of SLC were held upto September 2022 th rough video conferences, but 
compliance/ action taken reports by different depar tments were not found on records.  
Non constitution of ward level committee was indicative of deficiencies in monitoring 
of SWM activities by the ULBs such as segregation, collection, transportation, street 
sweeping, drain cleaning, prohibition of littering, etc . by the ULBs.  
Non-availability of public health officer, sanitary  officer, sanitary sub inspector, 
environmental engineer for SWM in the ULBs led to i neffective implementation of 
SWM activities. Establishment of MCCs, dumping grou nds, tertiary waste processing 
centres, etc . without environmental clearance was not only a vi olation of Manual but 
was also fraught with severe environmental and health hazards.  There was absence of 
assessment of environmental impact in the ULBs. 
Recommendations 
i.  The Government should activate monitoring committee s and strengthen 
control mechanisms in Solid Waste Management . 
ii.  The Government may consider the appointment of publ ic health officer, 
sanitary officer, sanitary sub inspector and enviro nmental engineer in the 
ULBs for effective implementation of SWM activities.  
iii.  Government should ensure for attaining environmenta l clearance from SPCB 
before establishment of processing facilities. 
iv.  The Government may consider for undertaking an eval uation study by 
engaging third party to assess the impact of environment. 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 62 
LABOUR DEPARTMENT 
2.3 Performance Audit on “Welfare of Building and O ther Construction 
Workers” 
 
2.3.1 Introduction 
Under Section 27 (2) of the Building and Other Cons truction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (BO CW Act), the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India has the right and privileg es to access/ demand the production 
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and to inspe ct any office of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Board.  The Gove rnment of India (GoI) enacted 
(August 1996), the BOCW Act and Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1996 (Cess Act).  The aim of the Acts was  to provide safety, health and 
welfare measures for the benefit of building and ot her construction workers through 
levy/ collection of cess.  The provisions of the BO CW Act covered “every 
establishment 
34  which employs or had employed on any day of the pr eceding twelve 
months, ten or more building workers in any buildin g or other construction work”.  
Further, the Act provided that every building worker between the age group of 18 to 60 
years who was not a member of any welfare fund esta blished under any law and had 
completed a period of ninety days of service during  the preceding twelve months as a 
construction worker in the State could be registered as a ‘beneficiary’. 
The GoI framed (November 1998) BOCW Rules 35 , 1998 and Cess Rules 36 , 1998. As 
required under BOCW Act, the Government of Tripura (GoT) notified (August 2002) 
Tripura Building and Other Construction Workers (Re gulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Rules, 2001 (TBOCW Rules).  The collection of BOCW cess 
was fixed at the rate of one per cent 37  on the cost of construction. 
The State Government constituted (January 2007) the  Tripura Building & Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Board (the Board). 
Section 264 of TBOCW Rules enshrined the powers, du ties and functions of the Board 
which inter alia  includes all matters connected with the administra tion of the fund and 
grant of benefits to the beneficiaries under the Ac t and rules made there under; 
submission of annual budget to Government for sanct ion, submission of annual report 
to Government on the activities of the Board, annua l audit of accounts of the Board in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act, speedy s ettlement of claims and sanction of 
                                                           
34   Establishment means any establishment belonging t o, or under the control of, Government, anybody 
corporate or firm, an individual or association or other body of individuals which or who employs 
building workers in any building or other construct ion work; and includes an establishment 
belonging to a contractor but does not include an i ndividual who employs such workers in any 
building or construction work in  relation to his o wn residence, the total cost of such construction 
not being more than ₹ 10 lakh. 
35   Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulati on of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Rules 1998 
36   Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare C ess Rules 1998 
37   The rate was fixed in the TBOCW rules which was n otified in August 2002. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 63 
advances and other benefits and proper and timely r ecovery of any amount due to the 
Board, etc.  
2.3.2 Organisational set-up 
The Labour Department is headed by the Secretary. U nder him, the Labour 
Commissioner, Joint Labour Commissioner, Deputy Lab our Commissioner are 
functioning for overall administration and enforcem ent of the Act.  At district level, 
all District Labour Officers and Labour Inspectors were functioning under the Labour 
Commissionerate.  The Department is responsible for  registration of establishments, 
assessment of cess and inspection of establishments. 
The Board is headed by a chairperson who would be a ppointed by the State 
Government. Apart from representatives from the GoT  and member representatives 
from various establishments, the Secretary of the Board is the Chief Executive Officer 
of the Board.  The Board is mainly responsible for collection of cess, administration 
and investment of funds, registration of workers as  beneficiaries, formulation of 
schemes and ultimate disbursement of benefits to the beneficiaries. 
The organisational set-up of the Board is depicted in Chart 2.3.1 . 
Chart 2.3.1: Organisational set-up of the Board and other agencies involved in the 
welfare of BOC workers  
 
 
 
 
2.3.3 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit on “Building and Other Constr uction Workers’ was taken up 
with the objectives to get a reasonable assurance that; 
Other Department i.e  
ULBs 
Responsible for 
collection of advance 
cess at the time of 
approval of building 
plans, deduction of cess 
at source from the 
contractors’ bill and 
deposit the cess amount 
to the Board. 
 
Other Government 
Departments/ PSU 
bodies 
Responsible for 
deduction of cess at 
source from the 
contractors’ bill and 
deposit the cess amount 
to the Board. 
Labour 
Department 
Responsible for 
registration of 
establishments, 
beneficiary, 
assessment of cess 
and inspection of 
establishments, etc .
 
Secretary 
Chairperson 
Administrative Office 
Tripura Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare 
Board 
Responsible for administration 
and investment of funds, 
collection of cess, formulation of 
schemes and ultimate 
disbursement of benefits to the 
beneficiaries 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 64 
a.  the rules notified by the Government under the Act are consistent with the 
spirit of both the Acts 38 ; 
b.  there was effective system for registration of establishments and beneficiaries; 
c.   the cess assessment, collection, and transfer of c ollected cess to the Fund was 
efficient; 
d.  Government prescribed appropriate health and safety  norms and could ensure 
an environment of compliance to those norms by employer; 
e.  Government implemented transparent and effective sy stem of inspections to 
check evasion of Labour cess and compliance to heal th and safety norms by 
the employers and 
f.  The administration and utilisation of fund on imple mentation of welfare 
scheme by the Board was efficient and effective and  as per Act and rules 
framed by the State Government. 
2.3.4 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the following sources of criteria:  
i.  Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulatio n of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (BOCW Act); 
ii.  Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess Act 1996 (Cess Act); 
iii.  Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess Rules, 1998 (BOCW Rules); 
iv.  Tripura Building and Other Construction Workers’ (R egulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2001 (TBOCW Rules). 
v.  General Financial Rules; 
vi.  Orders issued by the Supreme Court from time to time; and 
vii.  Guidelines, circulars, notifications, and orders is sued by the GoI/ State 
Government from time to time. 
2.3.5 Audit Scope, sample and methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted during April 20 23 to June 2023 and covered 
the period from the year 2017-18 to 2022-23. 
Two districts (West Tripura District and South Trip ura District), six welfare schemes 
(Education, Marriage, Death, Major ailments, Assist ance during COVID-19 and 
Awareness), four working divisions {Agartala Divisi on-III, PWD (R&B) 
39 ; Tripura 
Housing and Construction Board; Belonia Division PW D (DWS 40 ) and Belonia 
Division PWD (R&B)}, four Urban Local Bodies (Agart ala Municipal Corporation, 
Mohanpur Municipal Council, Belonia Municipal Counc il and Santirbazar Municipal 
Council), 235 registered beneficiaries, 69 unregist ered BOC workers, eight registered 
                                                           
38   Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulat ion of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and Building and Other Construction Workers’ Cess Act, 1996 
39   Public Works Department (Roads & Buildings) 
40   Drinking Water & Sanitation 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 65 
establishments (Sri Arun Kumar Dey, Sri Goutam Bani k, Sri Subir Datta, Sri Sajal 
Deb, Sri Bijan Bhuiyan, Sri Kamal Dey, Sri Pankaj M allik and Sri Bikash Saha) and 
eight unregistered establishments (Sri Jasoda Lal R oy, Sri Dinesh Banik, Sri Shibu 
Saha, Smt. Jhuma Podder, Sri Shankar Kanti Saha, Sr i Jiban Krishna Kar, Sri Gathan 
Datta and Sri Niraj Kumar Dhar) were selected for a udit.  The details of sampling 
adopted are given in Appendix 2.3.1 . 
An Entry conference was held on 30 June 2023 at the  level of the Secretary, Labour 
Department.  
Audit methodology involved scrutiny of records of Labour Department, Board as well 
as works’ executing units, survey of beneficiaries including unregistered BOC 
workers, survey of registered and unregistered esta blishments, physical verification at 
work sites, etc .  Replies to audit memos furnished by the Labour D epartment and the 
Board, and information/ data collected through surv ey questionnaires were used as 
evidence in audit. 
Reply received (September 2023) from the Government  was suitably incorporated in 
the report. Exit Conference was held on 5 October 2 023 with the Secretary, Labour 
Department. 
2.3.6 Acknowledgement 
Office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit),  Tripura acknowledges the co-
operation extended by the Labour Department and the  Board during conduct of the 
Performance Audit. 
2.3.7 Financial management 
As per Rule 268 of the TBOCW Rules, the Welfare Boa rd fund constitutes of grants 
or loans or advances, if any, made to the Board by the Central Government, all 
contributions paid by the beneficiaries and all sum s received by the Board under the 
Cess Act and rules made there under may be credited .  The fund was required to be 
spent for the welfare of building and other constru ction workers on schemes like 
pension, maternity benefits, disability pension, pa yment for funeral assistance, 
medical assistance, financial assistance for educat ion and marriage of children and 
accidents, etc.  
During 2017-23, the main source of income of the Bo ard was cess levied and 
collected under Cess Act, interest received from th e investments and registration and 
contribution fees received from the registered construction workers. 
During 2017-18 to 2022-23 the Board received/ collected a 
₹ 230.58 crore wherein cess 
collected contributed major portion (72 per cent ) of the receipts.  This included the 
interest earned during the period on FDs of ₹ 55.57 crore.  Besides, as on March 2023, 
the Board invested ₹ 315.64 crore 41  in Fixed Deposits (FD) and ₹ 52.99 crore 42  was 
lying in the Savings Bank (SB) Accounts. 
                                                           
41   ₹ 161.98 crore was invested in Fixed Deposit at the opening of 2017-18 
42   Opening and closing balance of savings bank accou nt during 2017-23 was ₹ 9.51 crore and 
₹ 52.99 crore  respectively. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 66 
Out of the total receipt of ₹ 230.58 crore, expenditure of the Board was only ₹ 51.81 
crore (22.43 per cent) of the total receipts as detailed in Table 2.3.1 . 
Table 2.3.1: Fund position of the Board during 2017-23 
(₹ in lakh) 
Receipts Expenditure 
Year Labour 
cess 
Beneficiary 
registration 
& 
subscription 
Interest 
on FD & 
SB 
account 
Other 
fund 43  Total 
Beneficia 
ries’ 
Welfare 
schemes 
Establishment 
expenditure 
including office 
contingency 
Awar 
eness Total 
2017-18 2218.02 145.35 1380.17 3.25 4723.27 682.65 12.53 0 695.18 
2018-19 2420.48 108.87 1042.08 1.25 3572.68 694.45 13.61 0 708.06 
2019-20 1752.25 70.60 1306.70 0 3129.55 975.44 15.53 0 990.97 
2020-21 2079.28 94.86 744.37 0 2918.51 1278.42 18.19 0 1296.61 
2021-22 3744.39 84.71 897.07 25.00 4751.17 830.62 41.18 0 871.80 
2022-23 4381.00 74.47 472.28 11.65 4939.40 572.72 7.31 38.45 618.48 
Total 16595.42 578.86 5842.67 41.15 23058.10 5034.30 108.35 38.45 5181.11 
The percentage of fund utilised on various welfare schemes ranged between 11.60 per 
cent  (minimum during 2022-23) and 43.80 per cent  (maximum during 2020-21) 
against total receipts during the respective years as shown in the Chart 2.3.2 . 
 
From Chart 2.3.2  it was seen that compared to the total receipts, t he fund utilised on 
various welfare schemes was very poor and insufficient. 
Reasons for poor utilisation of fund for welfare schemes were mainly attributed to; 
a)  low rate of registration of beneficiaries and establishments; 
b)  not incurring any expenditure on awareness programm es during 2017-18 to 
2021-22 except only ₹ 38.45 lakh was spent on awareness campaign during 
2022-23; and 
c)  non-revision 44  of the rates of financial assistance provided by t he Board under 
different welfare schemes considering the increasing price index/ inflation.  
                                                           
43   This includes Grant-in-Aid from Labour Directorat e and GoI against e-Shram fund, Pradhan Mantri 
Shram Yogi Maan-dhan ( PM -SYM ) scheme fund. 
44   Rates were revised only once in October 2022 duri ng the period covered by audit i.e . 2017-23. 
3746.79 3572.68 
3129.55 2918.51 
4751.17 4939.4 
682.65 694.45 975.44 1278.42 830.62 572.72 
0
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Chart 2.3.2: Expenditure incurred on different welfare schemes 
against total receipts during 2017-23 ( ₹ in lakh) 
Total Receipts Beneficiary Welfare Schemes 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 67 
Further, the following irregularities were also noticed in the audit; 
• as per Section 25 of the BOCW Act, every year the B oard should prepare budget 
for the next financial year showing the estimated r eceipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the State Government.  
But in violation of the BOCW Act, the Board did not  prepare annual budget 
during 2017-2023 (except for the year 2017-18).  Th erefore, expenditure 
budgeting against the available fund was totally ab sent and the Board parked the 
fund in savings account and fixed deposits. 
• the Board did not assess the year-wise cess receiva ble and as such, it failed to 
identify the instances of non-deposition/ non-trans fer of labour cess by the 
collectors as mentioned in Paragraphs 2.3.8.3(i)  and 2.2.8.3(ii) . 
• the Board did not prepare budget in respect of long -term liabilities that would 
arise due to pension schemes. 
• year-wise break up of maturity and re-investment of  the cess fund in the form of 
Fixed Deposits (FDs) are not maintained by the Boar d.  Further, the Board has 
not submitted its annual accounts to Principal Acco untant General (audit) as 
mentioned in Paragraph 2.3.8.8(i) .  Therefore, opening and closing balances of 
each year could not be derived by audit. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at these issues would be taken 
care of by the Board in future. 
2.3.8 Audit findings 
 
Objective 1: Whether the rules notified by the Gove rnment under the Act are 
consistent with the spirit of both the Acts 
 
2.3.8.1 Disparity between BOCW Act and TBOCW Rules 
(i) Section 5(1) of BOCW Act stipulates that the Go vernment may constitute one or 
more expert committees consisting of persons specially qualified in building and other 
construction works for advising the Government to make rules under the Act.  
Further, Section 41 of BOCW Act stipulated that aft er considering the 
recommendation of the expert committee, the State G overnment was to frame rules in 
respect of safety and health of building workers. 
However, no such provision had been adopted by the State Government in TBOCW 
rules and such expert committee was not formed (September 2023). 
This indicated that State Government framed rules i nitially as well without any expert 
committees provisioned in the BOCW Act.  This furth er implies that rules which 
invariably required technical input/ consultation i n respect of safety and health of 
building workers ( viz . fire protection, health safety, lifting appliance , gears, ramps, 
concrete work, demolition, etc. ) were framed in absence of expert committees as 
required under Section 41 of the BOCW Act. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 68 
(ii) Section 4(2)(e) of BOCW Act inter alia  includes that State Government may 
nominate members to represent the building workers in the State Advisory Committee 
(SAC).  Whereas Rule 10(e) of TBOCW Rules provides that four persons, out of 
whom at least one should be woman, to be nominated by the State Government 
representing the Building and other Construction Work as Members. 
Thus, there was the disparity between the provision s of the Act and the Rules adopted 
by the State Government. 
It was noticed that the representation from the sid e of the construction workers was 
not clearly mentioned in the notification issued (F ebruary 2015) on reconstitution of 
the last SAC in contravention of the aforesaid provision of the Act. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at the provision was not 
incorporated in the concerned State Rules. However,  the issue would be examined as 
per audit observation. 
Recommendation 
The Government may consider to constitute an Expert  Committee at the earliest to 
advice for making the State Rules consistent with the Central Acts. 
Objective 2: Whether there was effective system for  registration of establishments 
and beneficiaries 
 
2.3.8.2 Implementation of Acts and Rules 
 
2.3.8.2(i)  Registration of BOC workers 
Rule 269 of TBOCW Rules provides that every buildin g worker in the age group of 
18 years to 60 years who is not a member of any wel fare fund established under any 
law and has completed a period of 90 days of servic e during the previous year as 
construction worker in the State can be registered as a beneficiary.  As per Rule 270, a 
certificate from the employer or the contractor cer tifying that the applicant is a 
building worker, is required along with application  for registration (Form XXVII). 
Rule 270(4) and Rule 272 ibid  requires that a registration fee of ₹ 20 is to be 
deposited by the worker at the time of registration  along with the monthly 
contribution of ₹ 20. 
Supreme Court directed (January 2009) the State Gov ernments to ensure a proper 
mechanism to identify/ register the beneficiaries. Further, based on the directives of 
the Supreme Court, Paragraph 6.1 of Guidelines of M ission Mode Project (MMP) for 
Building and other Construction Workers Advisory issued (July 2020) by the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment, Government of India (Mini stry, GoI), stipulated for 
registration of all left out unregistered BOC worke rs within three months’ time 
period. 
 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 69 
The deficiencies noticed in the process of registra tion of beneficiaries are discussed 
below. 
• Up-to-date and comprehensive database having comple te and accurate 
information about registered beneficiaries was not available.  This led to failure 
in measuring, managing, and monitoring of alive, de ad, shifted, active (who 
continued their membership subscription) and inacti ve (who discontinued their 
membership subscription) registered beneficiaries.  During 2017-23, there was 
an increasing trend in registration of beneficiarie s from 0.97 lakh in 2017-18 to 
1.16 lakh in 2021-22.  But due to identification of  active and inactive 
beneficiaries, the number of registered beneficiari es drastically dropped to 0.38 
lakh in 2022-23 when digitisation of the active ben eficiaries started.  The trend 
of registered beneficiaries during 2017-23 45  depicted in Chart 2.3.3 .  
 
Further audit noticed that due to such incomplete, outdated, and inaccurate 
database of registered beneficiaries there were ins tance of denial of financial 
assistance provided under COVID-19 scheme to the in active beneficiaries as 
discussed in Paragraph 2.3.8.6(ii) . 
• Section 15 of the BOCW Act states that every employ er shall maintain a 
register 46  showing the details of employment of beneficiaries  employed in the 
building or other construction works and the Secretary of the Board or any other 
officer duly authorised by the Board can inspect th e same without prior notice .  
During survey (May 2023) of 16 sampled establishmen ts, it was noticed that 
248 out of 257 construction workers ( i.e.  96 per cent ) employed under them 
remained unregistered.  Moreover, none of the emplo yers maintained the 
register regarding details of engagement of BOC wor kers, etc . for inspection, 
which violated the provisions of Section 15 of the BOCW Act.  The Board did 
not conduct any inspections as per the above provis ion for such non- 
compliance during 2017-23.  Besides, there was no m echanism in place to 
prepare any quarterly/ annual inspection plan to en sure periodical inspection of 
each establishment/ worksite which has been discussed in Paragraph 2.3.8.5(i) . 
                                                           
45   Total number of registered beneficiaries at the e nd of each financial year 
46   Form XV as prescribed under Rule 240 of TBOCW Rul es 
97122 
103708 
107317 
110195 
116338 
38136 
0
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Chart 2.3.3: Trend of registered beneficiaries 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 70 
• Further, in absence of monthly returns (Form XXXII) 47  from the registered 
establishments, neither the District Labour Offices  nor the Board was in a 
position to identify the unregistered BOC workers e ngaged by those 
establishments resulting in non-registration of eligible workers. 
• Survey of 69 sampled unregistered BOC workers revea led that all of them were 
eligible for registration and were willing to get registered.  This indicated failure 
of both the Department and the Board due to non-ens uring of maintenance of 
register by the employers for engagement of BOC wor kers, submission of 
monthly returns by the employers as well as ineffec tive awareness activity {as 
mentioned in Paragraphs 2.3.8.8(ii)  and 2.3 .8.6(iv)}  resulting in non-
identification and registration of eligible unregistered BOC workers. 
• No mechanism was adopted by the Department and the Board to ensure that the 
workers employed in the works executed by the State  Government departments/ 
PSUs/ autonomous bodies, got registered as benefici aries.  The existing system 
of registration facilitates the willing workers onl y and therefore, the Department 
and the Board failed to reach out to all the potential BOCW workers to get them 
registered. 
• The Board did not set up any targets for registerin g the construction workers to 
monitor the achievement/ progress during 2017-23. 
• Information regarding the unregistered eligible wor kers/ beneficiaries employed 
in building or other construction works were not ob tained by the Department 
and the Board through inspections.  Further, there was no mechanism in place 
for ensuring that the workers of an establishment i nspected by the Labour 
Inspector were got registered as beneficiaries. 
Thus, non-adoption of any mechanism by the Board as  prescribed in the TBOCW 
Rules as well as non-adherence to the directions of  the Supreme Court to identify the 
unregistered workers resulted in denial of welfare benefits to the willing and eligible 
construction workers who did not/ could not register themselves. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that since 
inception, District Offices had not maintained regi sters properly for registered 
beneficiaries which led to failure in maintaining c onsolidated and comprehensive data 
base as well identifying alive, dead, and inactive beneficiaries. However, since April 
2022 the beneficiary registration was being done th rough online portal to avoid 
duplicate registration cases and to include the dat abase. The Government further 
stated that reasons for non-registration of BOC wor kers were mainly due to lack of 
awareness and lack of pro-active initiative from th e registering authority. The 
Department would emphasise for special drive for re gistration of workers. The 
Government had also issued instructions to the conc erned officers/ Inspectors for 
strict adherence to submit inspection reports regularly. 
                                                           
47   Number and name of the worker(s) to be registered  as per Rule 273(2) of TBOCW Rules 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 71 
2.3.8.2(ii) Non-implementation of online migration certificate 
Paragraph 6.2.2 of Guidelines of Mission Mode Project (MMP) for Building and other 
Construction Workers Advisory issued (July 2020) by  the Ministry, GoI stipulated 
developing a system for issuing online Migration Ce rtificate (MC) to the migrating 
labour by the respective State Welfare Boards (SWBs ) in the following ways i.e. 
(i) online application/ telephonic application from  registered mobile number for 
Migration Certificate (ii) issue online Migration C ertificate (MC) automatically and 
instantaneously on his/ her registered mobile numbe r without asking any reason or 
without denial (iii) de-register him/ her from thei r register and shift his/ her data to 
migrated category (iv) destination States/ SWBs to honour MC on uploading and 
issue re-registration number counting him as their own registered worker 
(v) destination States/ SWB to honour all his benef its and to continue them until 
further migration/ renewal.  
The Ministry, GoI informed (September 2015) the Sup reme Court in the writ 
petition 
48  that the Ministry is introducing Universal Access Number (UAN) to be 
provided to every construction worker, so that if h e or she migrates from one State to 
another, the benefit of registration does not get lost, nor does the construction workers 
need to get registered in other States. 
Further, pursuant to the direction (March 2018) of Supreme Court, the Director 
General, Labour Welfare of the Ministry, GoI instru cted all the State Governments 
and Union Territories to comply with the ‘Model Sch eme for the welfare of BOC 
Workers’ which included allotment of Unique Identif ication Number (UIN) to the 
registered BOC workers and upload complete details on State web portal and National 
BOCW portal. 
Audit observed that no system had been adopted by t he Board for issuing of online 
MC as stipulated in the MMP. Audit survey revealed that 17 out of 69 unregistered 
BOC workers i.e  25 per cent of them were migrant labourers.  The District Labou r 
Officer, West Tripura District informed (July 2023)  audit that the migrant workers 
were not registered with the Board. 
It was also seen in audit that no initiative had be en taken by the Board for providing 
UAN/ UIN to registered BOC workers (September 2023) .  There were no recorded 
reasons for non-introduction of UAN/ UIN by the Boa rd or any compliances on 
development of online MC which had a scheduled impl ementation timeline of three 
months from the date of issue of the GoI’s direction. 
Thus, due to non-providing of online/ mobile facili ty for issuance of MC as well as 
UAN/ UIN, the Board failed to provide continuity of services to the already registered 
workers migrating to and from the State.  This woul d, further, have an adverse impact 
on the portability of welfare benefits to the migrant workers. 
                                                           
48   Writ Petition (Civil) No. 318 of 2006 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 72 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at issue had been referred to the 
Government of India for guidance and implementation  of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court’s mandate. 
2.3.8.2(iii) Registration of establishments 
Section 7 of the BOCW Act stipulates that every emp loyer shall apply to the 
registering officer for registration of the establi shment 
49  within 60 days from such 
commencement.  Further, Rule 23 of TBOCW Rules spec ifies the manner of making 
application for registration of an establishment.  
The Supreme Court directed (March 2018) all State G overnments to put in place and 
strengthening the registration machinery both for t he registration of establishments as 
well as registration of construction workers in a s pecific time frame to be decided by 
the respective State Governments, but at the earliest.  In the absence of the registration 
of establishments involved in construction activiti es, it would be extremely difficult 
for the authorities under the BOCW Act to implement the provisions of labour laws. 
It was noticed in audit that; 
i.  The Department did not maintain database on the reg istration of establishments 
during 2017-23 due to which the year wise details o f registered establishments 
were neither available with the Department nor with  the Board.  Though, in the 
two sampled districts, as of March 2023, 730 ( i.e., 254 under West Tripura 
District and 476 under South Tripura District) esta blishments were stated to be 
registered by the respective district offices; but no database with specified 
50  
detailed list/ information was maintained by the district offices also. 
In absence of such comprehensive database of the re gistered establishments, the 
Board failed to monitor changes in the management/ ownership (if any) of those 
establishments. 
ii.  The registration of establishments was being done m anually in a prescribed 
format which included information relating to the e mployers and workers under 
them.  However, registration of establishments was made online 51  since April 
2022.  Though the registration of establishments ha d been made online 52 , no 
mechanism to ensure registration of all eligible es tablishments had been put in 
place such as linking with the Government and plann ing authorities (including 
local bodies in the State) undertaking and authoris ing construction activities 
which was essential to identify prospective establi shments to be covered under 
the Act.  Further, during audit survey (May 2023) o f sampled eight unregistered 
                                                           
49   Establishment means any establishment belonging t o, or under the control of Government, anybody 
corporate or firm, an individual or association or other body of individuals which or who employs 
building workers in any building or other construct ion work; and includes an establishment 
belonging to a contractor but does not include an i ndividual who employs such workers in any 
building or construction work in  relation to his o wn residence, the total cost of such construction 
not being more than ₹ 10 lakh. 
50   Such as registration number, date of registration , etc . 
51   Through online portal: swaagat.tripura.gov.in 
52   Only 21 establishments were registered through on line mode as of July 2023. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 73 
establishments/ construction sites, it was noticed that two establishments 
remained unregistered despite knowing the requireme nt of establishment’s 
registration with the Board.  The balance six estab lishments did not even know 
requirement of registration.  Those establishments remained unregistered though 
they were engaging 10 to 42 workers at the work sites. 
Thus, the Department and the Board did not put in p lace a mechanism to ensure 
that all the establishments get registered, as required under the Act. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that Department 
had failed to establish a mechanism for effective m onitoring of establishment 
registration.  However, measures would be taken in consultation with the IT 
Department to effectively design an online Applicat ion/Module for registration of 
establishment. 
Conclusion 
Non-existence of effective mechanism to measure, ma nage and monitor the 
registration of establishments under the Act was no ticed and BOC workers were not 
identified or encouraged for registration. 
Recommendations  
The Government may consider:  
• To adopt suitable mechanism to ensure identificatio n and registration of all the 
construction workers and establishments in the State, both in public and private 
sector; 
• To maintain a database of registered workers and establishments; 
• To adopt suitable mobile application for easy issua nce of MCs to construction 
workers. 
Objective 3: Whether cess assessment, cess collection and transfer of collected cess 
to the fund was efficient 
 
2.3.8.3 Assessment and collection of the cess 
 
2.3.8.3(i) Non -assessment of cess receivable and c ess paid 
Section 4 (1) of the Cess Act stipulates that “Ever y employer shall furnish such return 
to such officer or authority, in such manner and at  such time as may be prescribed”.  
Section 4 (2) of the Cess Act, further, states that  “If any person carrying on the 
building or other construction work, liable to pay the cess, fails to furnish any return 
under sub-section (1), the officer or the authority  shall give a notice requiring such 
person to furnish such return before such date as m ay be specified in the notice”.  
Further, Section 5 of the Cess Act specifies the ma nner of assessment of cess by the 
authority after making such inquiry, if he thinks f it, on the particulars stated in the 
returns and finally, passing of assessment order st ipulating specified time on which 
cess shall be paid by the employer. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 74 
Audit observed that though the Department notified (May 2018) Cess Assessing 
Officers (Superintending Engineers of Public Works Department and Rural 
Development Department, Chief Executive Officer/ Executive Officer of Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs), etc .), there was no record to show that cess assessmen t orders were 
passed specifying the cess due, cess paid, balance amount payable, cess to be 
deducted and collected by various entities.  As suc h, the gap (if any) between cess 
receivable and received could not be measured and m anaged by the Department/ 
Board.  Though the Department issued notification, no penal provision and/ or 
accountability was fixed upon the Assessing Officer s by the Board for non-
assessment of cess.  
Besides, the Board had issued instructions (in 2006  and 2008) that one per cent cess 
had to be collected on the estimated cost while app roving the building plans by the 
ULBs.  However, no such mechanism had been evolved for assessment of cess 
recoverable in respect of building plans approved b y the ULBs and the ULBs did  
not deduct/ collect any cess on estimated cost of t he construction work while 
sanctioning building plans.  In case of four sample d ULBs, audit observed that 
₹ 89.14 crore was not deducted while approving the b uilding plans as discussed in  
Paragraph 2.3.8.3(iii) . 
Thus, due to non-assessment of cess due to be paid as well as absence of proper 
mechanism towards timely deposition of labour cess,  instances of delayed deposition 
and short/ non deposition of labour cess of ₹ 2.74 crore by the sampled three PWD 
Divisions and two ULBs were noticed in audit as dis cussed in Paragraph 2.3.8.3(ii) .  
Also, the Board/ Department did not impose penalty (at the rate of two per cent  for 
every month) on the seven sampled 53  defaulting cess collectors/ depositors for their 
undue delay (beyond 30 days) in deposition of cess amount. 
In reply, Government stated (September 2023) that r ecently an order was issued to all 
Assessing Officers and Cess Collectors to furnish i nformation on amount of cess 
collected and deposited to the Board during the per iod 2017-23.  Also, the Board has 
recently developed an online cess collection portal  for timely and hassle-free 
deposition of labour cess by the Government departm ents/ PSUs/ private 
organisations which would automatically impose pena lty in case of delayed 
remittance. 
2.3.8.3(ii) Non-receipt of Cess fund 
Rule 5 (3) of the Building and Other Construction W orkers’ Welfare Cess Rules, 
1998 (Cess Rules) provides that the cess collected should be remitted to the Board 
within 30 days of its collection.  Section 8 of the  Cess Act also provides that if any 
employer fails to pay any amount of cess within the  time specified in the order of 
assessment, such employer shall be liable to pay in terest on the amount to be paid at 
the rate of two per cent for every month.  Section 9 of the Cess Act provide s that if 
                                                           
53   Division-I, PWD (R & B); Division-III, PWD(R&B); Belonia Division, PWD (R&B); Belonia 
Division-IV, PWD (Water Rsource) (WR); Santirbazar Division, PWD (R&B), Belonia Municipal 
Council, Santirbazar Municipal Council 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 75 
any amount of cess is not paid within the date specified in the order of assessment, the 
authority may impose a penalty not exceeding the amount of cess. 
Audit found that five of the sampled units (three w orking Divisions 54  of State PWD 
and two ULBs 55 ) collected ₹ 2.74 crore of the cess during 2017-23, but the sam e was 
not deposited to the Board, as detailed in Appendix 2.3.2 .  The undeposited amount 
by the PWD Divisions was lying with the State Treas ury and in case of ULBs, the 
undeposited amount was lying in the DDO’s bank accounts. 
Audit observed that the Board had not adopted any m echanism to monitor deduction 
of cess and depositing the same by the deductor.  C onsequently, the Board failed to 
assess and impose any penalty against the delayed d eposition/ non-deposition of the 
cess amount . 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at Board recently instructed all 
the District Labour Officers to conduct field visit  within their respective jurisdictions 
and to submit the comprehensive reports in view of assessing the pending cess 
amounts in the defaulting units. 
2.3.8.3(iii) Non-collection of advance cess  
As per notification issued (December 2006 and Febru ary 2008) by the Department, 
the ULBs should deduct one per cent  cess on the estimated cost of the approved 
construction work.  It is stipulated that every app lication of such approval should be 
accompanied by a crossed demand draft for one per cent on the estimated cost of 
construction work (in case of works with the estima ted cost more than 
₹ 10 lakh) in 
favour of the Board as indicated in sub rule 4 of Rule 4 of Cess Rules.  
Further, ULBs were also instructed by the Departmen t to submit regular reports on 
plans approved by the ULBs for large construction p rojects to the Labour 
Commissioner. 
It was seen in audit that no such reports were subm itted by the ULBs. After issuance 
of such instruction, the Labour Commissioner of the  Department also did not follow-
up/ monitor the submission of reports as well as no n-deduction of advance cess on 
approved plans by the ULBs.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed that during 2017-2 3 four sampled ULBs 
56  had issued 
approval of plans (exceeding estimated cost of ₹ 10 lakh) for building and other 
construction works involving 29,96,114.045 57  sqm plinth area but they did not levy 
advance cess in respect of the plans so approved. 
On the basis of plinth area and minimum constructio n cost per sqm, the total non-
collection of advance cess has been worked out to be 
₹ 89.14 crore ( Appendix 2.3.3) . 
                                                           
54   Belonia PWD (R&B) Division- ₹ 1.23 crore; Belonia PWD (WR) Division- ₹ 0.16 crore; 
Santirbazar PWD (R&B) Division- ₹ 1.21 crore 
55   Santirbazar Municipal Council- ₹ 0.08 crore; Belonia Municipal Council-₹ 0.08 crore 
56   Agartala Municipal Cooperation (AMC), Mohanpur Mu nicipal Council, Belonia Municipal Council 
and Santirbazar Municipal Council 
57   29,45,745.425 sqm. plinth area of RCC structure a nd 50,368.62 sqm. plinth area of load bearing 
structure 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 76 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th e Board recently took up the 
matter with Urban Development Department/ ULBs for deduction of cess on 
estimated cost of the work while approving private building plans. 
Conclusion 
Cases of short-collection and non-deposit of labour  cess by cess collecting authorities 
were noticed due to non-assessment of cess by the A ssessing Officers.  Besides, non-
deduction of advance cess by the building plan appr oving authorities were also 
noticed. 
Recommendations 
The Government may consider: 
• to ensure that cess collectors and assessment offic er are made accountable for 
ensuring that the cess amount is duly assessed, rea lised and remitted to the 
Board in timely manner; 
• to ensure advance collection of cess in respect of the private constructions 
through building plan approving authorities i.e. UL Bs and monitor the same 
with the Urban Development Department on a regular basis.  
Objective 4: Whether Government prescribed appropri ate health and safety norms 
and could ensure an environment of compliance to th ose norms by 
employer 
 
2.3.8.4 Safety measures 
 
2.3.8.4(i) Non-appointment of Safety Officer 
Rule 209 (3) of TBOCW Rules provides that wherever number of workers employed 
by single employer is less than 500, such employers  may form a group and appoint a 
common Safety Officer for such group of employers. Duties of safety officer were to 
advise and assist the employer in the fulfilment of  his obligations, statutory or 
otherwise concerning prevention of personal injurie s and maintaining a safe working 
environment. 
During audit survey of 16 sampled establishments (e ngaging six to 42 construction 
workers), it was found that no Safety Officer was a ppointed by the employers in 
violation of Rule 209 (3) of TBOCW Rules.  Moreover , during 2017-23, financial 
assistance was provided to 107 registered beneficia ries being accident victims as 
discussed in Paragraph 2.3.8.4(ii) .  In absence of Safety Officer(s), not only these 
accident cases were left un-investigated in respect  of non-compliance of safety and 
health norms but also identification of issues rela ted to occupational diseases 
contraction, advisory on safety issue, framing of s afety rules, etc . could not be 
ensured. 
Besides, Rule 251(2) stipulates that an inspector o f the Department may issue show 
cause notice or warning to employers regarding the safety, health or welfare of 
building workers which was not done by the Department. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 77 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at steps would be taken to ensure 
the appointment of Safety Officer as per rule.  Fur ther, direction was given to all 
enforcement machineries for implementation of the provision rigorously. 
2.3.8.4(ii) Non-reporting of accidents 
Section 39 of the BOCW Act, prescribed notice to be  given by an employer if any 
accident/ incidents happened in the jurisdiction of  his establishment.  On receipt of 
such notice, the authority was to investigate or inquiry as it considered necessary.  
As per information furnished (April 2023) by the Bo ard to audit, 107 beneficiaries in 
the State being accident victims were provided with  financial assistance during 
2017-23 on the basis of applications received from the beneficiaries.  However, only 
four accident cases were reported during 2017-23 wh ere all the four accident victims 
succumbed to death as stated by the Labour Directorate in July 2023.  
This indicates that all the accident/ incident case s were not reported to the Labour 
Directorate.  Besides, since the above four expired  workers were not registered as 
beneficiaries under the Board, the death benefits t o the expired workers could not be 
extended by the Board. 
Further, the Department did not have any documents viz . investigation/ enquiry report, 
etc . of the accident sites.  It indicated that the Dep artment did not make any 
investigation of accident cases (including 107 case s where accident benefits were 
given as well as four accident cases which were rep orted) as required under Section 
39 of BOCW Act and therefore, it failed to find out  the reasons for accidents, non-
compliance of safety norms, etc . to prevent repetition of the accidents in the wor k 
sites.  
While accepting the facts in the Exit Conference, t he Secretary stated (October 2023) 
that the issue would be streamlined shortly. 
Conclusion 
Due to non-reporting of accidents/ incidents couple d with non-appointment of Safety 
Officer by the employer, investigation/ enquiry for  ensuring health and safety norms 
were not initiated. 
Recommendation 
The Government may consider ensuring appointment of  a Safety Officer adopting 
suitable mechanism for timely reporting of accident s/ incidents and conducting 
investigation/ enquiry at accident sites with proper documentation.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 78 
Objective 5: Whether Government implemented transpa rent and effective system of 
inspections to check evasion of Labour cess and com pliance to health 
and safety norms by the employers 
 
2.3.8.5 Inspection 
 
2.3.8.5(i) Inadequacy of inspections 
According to Rule 251 of the TBOCW Rules, an Inspec tor may, inter alia , examine a 
construction site or place or premises used for a b uilding or other construction work.  
She/ He may issue of show-cause notice or warning t o employers regarding safety, 
health or welfare of building workers provided unde r the BOCW Act or the TBOCW 
Rules and enquired into the cause of any accident o r dangerous occurrence due to any 
operation connected with or incidental to such buil ding or other construction work, or 
of non-compliance with any of provisions of the Act  and Rules and give directions in 
this regard. 
As per information furnished to audit, the Labour I nspectors under District Labour 
Offices conducted 723 inspections in four districts  under TBOCW Rules in different 
districts during 2017-23 as shown in Table 2.3.2 . 
Table 2.3.2: District wise position of inspections conducted under TBOCW Rules by the 
Labour Inspectors during 2017-23 
Name of the 
Districts 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
Unakoti 10 15 12 10 15 20 82 
Khowai 12 14 3 2 10 11 52 
Gomati 209 124 128 37 17 23 538 
South Tripura 11 9 8 6 10 7 51 
Total 242 162 151 55 52 61 723 
Source : Information furnished by the Labour Directorate 
Audit observed that; 
• In four Districts ( viz . West Tripura, North Tripura, Sepahijala and Dhala i) no 
inspections were conducted in the last six years. 
• Though the Department informed audit that 723 inspe ctions had been conducted 
during 2017-23, the inspection reports/ notes were not documented/ maintained.  
In absence of inspection reports/ notes, the findin gs of the inspections conducted 
by the Inspectors could not be verified. Further, t here was no record either at 
District level or State level on the corrective mea sures enforced as a follow-up of 
these inspections. 
• Audit found in the survey of 16 sampled work sites/  establishments that 
Department did not conduct any inspections during 2017-23. 
• The Department did not put any mechanism in place/ prepare any quarterly/ 
annual inspection plan to ensure periodical inspect ion of each establishment/ 
work site by the Inspectors. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 79 
Inadequacy of inspections resulted in non-registrat ion of eligible and willing BOC 
workers, non-registration of establishments, non-assurance of health and safety norms 
by the employers and non-investigation of accident cases which were discussed in 
Paragraphs 2.3.8.2(i), 2.3.8.2(iii), 2.3.8.4(i)  and 2.3.8.4(ii) respectively. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that all the 
District Labour Officers had been cautioned for neg ligence of duties in undertaking 
inspections and verification as per Act and Rules.  Additionally, the Labour Officers 
had been directed to take up inspection which would be monitored. 
2.3.8.5(ii) Shortage of manpower for inspection 
Section 43 (1)(a) of the BOCW Act provides that Ins pector may assess facilities such 
as drinking water, latrines, urinals, first aid and  canteen provided by the employer for 
the workers.  Besides, it may be ensured that norma l working hours were fixed, and 
overtime was paid where the workers were deployed f or additional hours over and 
above the normal working hours.  Further, each esta blishment should be periodically 
inspected by the Inspector. 
Availability of the manpower against the sanctioned  strength ranged between 
78 per cent  (in 2017-18) and 54 per cent (in 2022-23) in the State as shown in 
Table 2.3.3 . 
Table 2.3.3: Details showing vacant posts in the Labour Department  
Year 
Labour Officer Labour Inspector 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men-in-
position 
Percentage of 
availability of 
manpower 
against the 
sanctioned 
strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men-in-
position 
Percentage of 
availability of 
manpower 
against the 
sanctioned 
strength 
2017-18 10 08 80 68 53 78 
2018-19 10 07 70 68 52 76 
2019-20 10 04 40 68 52 76 
2020-21 10 00 00 68 52 76 
2021-22 10 00 00 68 49 72 
2022-23 10 09 90 68 37 54 
Source: Information furnished by the Labour Directorate 
It can be seen from Table 2.3.3  that there were vacancies in the post of Labour 
Inspectors and Labour Officers.  There was no Labou r Officer in the entire State 
during 2020-22, thereby affecting the monitoring of  inspections conducted by the 
Labour Inspectors.  As pointed out in Paragraph 2.3.8.5(i) , yearly average of 
inspections carried out drastically came down from 185 during 2017-20 to 53 during 
2020-22. 
Year wise position of availability of Labour Inspec tors, number of inspections carried 
out and quantity of plinth area approved by the sam pled ULBs under the two sampled 
districts 
58  are shown in Charts 2.3.4  and  2.3.5 . 
                                                           
58   West Tripura District and South Tripura District 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 80 
 
Audit observed that in West Tripura district, despi te of availability of labour 
inspectors, no inspection was carried out during 20 17-23 though plinth area approved 
by the ULBs had an increasing trend. 
 
In South Tripura District, the number of Inspectors  and number of inspections carried 
out decreased while plinth area approved by the ULBs was increased during 2017-23. 
Further, it was noticed that there was only one Chi ef Labour Officer against the 
sanctioned strength of two during the period of 201 7-20.  Thereafter, the post 
remained vacant during the period of 2020-23. 
304987.43 
439686.29 473735.97 524121.79 
645434.78 
482921.78 
0 0 0 0 0 0
9 9
10 10 
9
6
0
2
4
6
8
10 
12 
0
100000 
200000 
300000 
400000 
500000 
600000 
700000 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Chart 2.3.4: Trend showing quantity of plinth area approved, 
availability of Labour Inspectors and number of inspections carried 
out under West Tripura District 
Total sqm building plan approved by sampled two ULBs under the District 
No. of inspections carried out 
No. of labour inspectors 
14342.32 18359.85 17096.03 15469.19 27731.28 17824.28 
11 
9
8
6
10 
7
4 4 4 4
3
2
0
2
4
6
8
10 
12 
0.00 
5000.00 
10000.00 
15000.00 
20000.00 
25000.00 
30000.00 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Chart 2.3.5: Trend showing quantity of plinth area approved, 
availability of Labour Inspectors and number of inspections carried out 
under South Tripura District 
Total sqm building plan approved by sampled two ULBs under the District 
No. of inspections carried out 
No. of labour inspectors 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 81 
Shortage of inspecting staff led to inadequacy of i nspections apart from poor 
monitoring and non-enforcement of relevant Acts and Rules by the Department.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at Department would pursue the 
matter for filling up of all vacant post of Labour Officers and Labour Inspectors. 
Conclusion 
In absence of inspection reports/ notes, the Depart ment failed to verify and take 
corrective measures towards implementation of healt h/ safety norms, identification of 
eligible willing BOC workers and establishments for  registration as required under 
BOCW Act.  Besides, shortage of inspecting staff an d absence of planning for 
inspection were also noticed which adversely affected the inspection activities.  
Recommendations 
The Government may consider to; 
• make quarterly/ annual inspection plans based on ri sk profile and volume of 
the construction sites taking into consideration ma npower availability for 
inspection; 
• adopt suitable mechanism for effective monitoring o f inspection activities and 
review the inspection reports regularly. 
Objective 6: Whether administration and utilisation  of fund on implementation of 
welfare schemes by the Board was efficient and effe ctive and as per 
Act and rules framed by the State Government 
 
2.3.8.6 Implementation of welfare schemes 
Section 22 read with Section 24 (2) of the BOCW Act , stipulates that cess collected is 
required to be spent for the welfare of constructio n workers on schemes, i.e.,  
maternity benefits, pension, advances for purchase and construction of houses, 
disability pension, payments of financial assistanc e, medical assistance, financial 
assistance for education and marriage of children. Moreover, pursuant to the direction 
of the Supreme Court (March 2018), the Ministry, Go I framed a Model Welfare 
Scheme which included life and disability care, hea lth and maternity cover, education 
to the wards of the BOC workers, housing, pension, skill development and awareness 
programmes. 
It was noticed in audit that the Board implemented 11 welfare schemes for registered 
workers under the Act.  Details of expenditure incu rred on the welfare schemes along 
with number of beneficiaries benefited during 2017-23 are shown in Chart 2.3.6 . 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 82 
Chart 2.3.6: Number of Beneficiaries and amount spent on the welfare schemes during 
2017-23 
 
2.3.8.6(i) Non-fixation of timeframe for disposal o f requests for financial 
assistances  
As per direction given by the Supreme Court (Januar y 2010), the benefits under the 
Acts must be extended to the registered workers wit hin a stipulated time frame, 
preferably within six months 59 . 
Scrutiny of 145 sampled applications under three sa mpled schemes 60  (i.e.  Education, 
Marriage and Major Ailments) revealed that timelines for scrutiny, sanction/ rejection, 
and disbursement of financial assistance under the schemes were not fixed by the 
Board/ Department upto November 2022 61 .  It was seen in audit that the time taken by 
the Board for sanctioning of financial assistance after receipt of applications under the 
schemes ranged between 13 days and 460 days.  Furth er, there were 74 instances out 
of selected 145 cases where time taken to extend th e benefits were beyond six months 
as detailed in Table 2.3.4. 
Table 2.3.4. Time taken by the Board for disposal of applications for financial assistance 
Name of the 
Schemes 
Total number 
of applications 
selected for 
audit scrutiny 
Time taken for sanctioning the 
applications from the receipt of 
applications 
Number of cases 
where time taken 
beyond 180 days i.e  
six months in 
extending benefit 
Minimum  
(in days) 
Maximum  
(in days) 
Education 60 94 460 33 
Marriage 59 49 399 32 
Major ailment 26 31 277 09 
                                                           
59   Except in case of extending assistance under deat h benefit where timeframe was stipulated to be 60 
days under Model Welfare Scheme as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.8.6(iii)  
60   Excluding COVID assistance and awareness schemes as assistance was not given based on the 
applications for these two schemes and also death b enefit which was discussed under Model 
Welfare Scheme at Paragraph 2.3.8.6(iii)  
61   The Board fixed timeframe of 20 days for disposal  of applications 16 November 2022 
Educa 
tion 
Marri 
age 
Mater 
nity 
Major 
Ailme 
nt 
Accid 
ent 
Pensi 
on Death Funer 
al 
COVI 
D-19 
Skill 
Devel 
opme 
nt 
Awar 
eness 
Amount         (In Lakh) 3193.61 253.5 4.43 76.08 5.1 119.2 93 16.15 1200 73.23 38.45 
No. of beneficiaries 104414 2174 90 789 107 3707 456 320 40000 1000 0
104414 
2174 90 789 107 3707 456 320 
40000 
1000 0
0
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
0
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
Amount 
(In Lakh) 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 83 
Thus, there were abnormal delays in disbursing the schemes’ benefit to the applicants 
due to non-fixation of timelines for disposal of ap plications.  Further, there was no 
grievance redressal mechanism in place both at Stat e and District levels where 
beneficiaries could lodge complaints for such delays. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that due to 
manual processing (collection, scrutiny, rectificat ion, resubmission, etc .) of all the 
applications for availing scheme benefits, disburse ment of benefits take time.  
However, the Board adopted an online portal (https: //bocwtripura.in/) for speedy 
disbursement of financial assistance from now onwar ds. A timeframe of 20 days after 
receipt of applications was set by the Board in Nov ember 2022 for settlement of 
claims. Further, it was ensured that the matter wou ld be taken care of by the Board in 
future. 
2.3.8.6 (ii) Implementation of financial assistance  provided under COVID-19 
scheme 
The State Government decided (March 2020) to extend  a benefit of ₹ 3,000 per 
beneficiary under COVID-19 Emergency Relief Scheme to 40,000 beneficiaries 
involving a total amount of ₹ 12 crore to be paid from the available fund with t he 
Board.  As of March 2020, 1,07,317 BOC workers were  registered under the Board; 
but compliance of the State Government’s decision t o provide COVID-19 assistance 
to 40,000 beneficiaries resulted in deprival of balance 67,317 beneficiaries. Moreover, 
the Board neither maintained bank account details o f the registered beneficiaries in a 
database nor made any effort to collect bank accoun t details of the inactive 
beneficiaries.  Also, the Department/ Board did not  further pursue with the State 
Government to cover the remaining 67,317 beneficiar ies despite availability of huge 
fund with the Board.  
Further, out of 40,000 beneficiaries, the payment m ade to 721 beneficiaries was not 
successful due to incorrect bank accounts’ informat ion.  Rectification of bank 
accounts were done for only 28 beneficiaries (out o f 721 beneficiaries) and 
accordingly payment was made to them and the remain ing 693 beneficiaries were 
deprived of the financial assistance under COVID-19 scheme.  
It was noticed in audit that: 
• the Board did not maintain comprehensive and update d database 
62  of the 
beneficiaries and therefore, it failed to maintain the bank account details of the 
beneficiaries 
• the Department/ Board did not fix any criteria (except availability of active bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries) regarding the select ion of 40,000 beneficiaries 
under COVID–19 emergency relief scheme out of 1,07, 317 registered BOC 
workers. 
                                                           
62   Including active bank account details  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 84 
Scrutiny of the records related to 18,467 63  beneficiaries under two sampled districts 
(West Tripura and South Tripura) revealed that; 
a)  there were four instances (all under West Tripura D istrict) where financial 
assistance of 
₹ 3,000 (in each case) was transferred twice to the same 
beneficiaries’ bank accounts resulting in excess payment of ₹ 12,000. 
b)  there were 1,638 64  instances (transaction involving payments of ₹ 49.14 lakh (@ 
₹ 3,000 each) of mismatch in beneficiaries’ names ag ainst the same registration 
numbers as per the beneficiaries’ list submitted by the Board to the bank and list 
of registered workers furnished by the Board to Aud it (which did not contain 
beneficiaries’ bank account numbers).  As such, pay ment of ₹ 49.14 lakh made 
to persons other than the registered beneficiaries was irregular. 
c)  there were 257 instances 65  of payments made twice to the same beneficiary 
registration number resulting in irregular disbursement of ₹ 7.71 lakh.  
In absence of comprehensive database (such as detai ls of bank account number, 
Unique Biometric Identification Number, etc .), the Board did not ensure authenticity 
of the payees before making payments and hence, the  possibility of extending 
financial assistance to the ineligible persons could not be ruled out. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that it had 
happened due to lack of effective database and ther efore, the Board had to rely on 
incomplete and outdated information which led to mi stake in remote verification 
process (such as over phone/ WhatsApp) during pande mic situation.  It further stated 
that need of speedy disbursement and inadequate mon itoring had contributed to the 
providing financial assistance to ineligible person s and duplications in extending the 
assistance took place due to processing of huge num ber of beneficiaries’ information 
only through MS Office.  This also indicated that t he Board did not have any 
Database Management System. 
2.3.8.6(iii) Implementation of Model Welfare Scheme   
As per Supreme Court’s judgement (March 2018), the State Boards were to 
implement Model Welfare Scheme (MWS) for welfare of  the construction workers in 
the State.  The instances of non-compliance with th e criteria of MWS are detailed 
below: 
(i)  According to MWS, the benefits under death and disa bility was to be paid 
within 60 days. Test check of 24 sampled applicatio ns revealed that death 
benefit was paid within stipulated 60 days in only four ( i.e.  17 per cent) cases. 
In remaining 20 ( i.e.  83 per cent)  cases, there were delays (beyond 60 days) 
ranging from 25 days to 373 days.  
(ii)  Paid maternity leave, ranging from 90 days to 26 weeks, for up to two deliveries 
was to be provided.  It was seen in audit that the scheme was formulated and 
                                                           
63   13,634 beneficiaries under West Tripura District and 4,833 beneficiaries under South Tripura District 
64   1,608 instances under West Tripura District and 3 0 instances under South Tripura District 
65   West Tripura District: 255 and South Tripura Dist rict: two 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 85 
launched 66  in October 2022 by the Board.  However, no benefic iary claimed the 
benefit under that scheme upto March 2023.  
(iii)  According to the MWS guidelines, the Board was to f ormulate schemes to 
provide transit accommodation, labour shed, mobile toilets, etc .  However, no 
such scheme to provide transit accommodation, labou r shed, mobile toilets, etc.  
for the predominant migratory BOC workers was formu lated by the Board 
(April 2023).  
(iv)  Ceiling of 10 per cent  expenditure on skill development, out of the total  cess 
collected amount in previous year, was to be adhere d to. It was seen that during 
the period covered in audit, only ₹ 0.73 crore was spent only in 2020-21 for skill 
development of 915 workers against the total amount  of cess collected of 
₹ 17.52 crore during 2019-20 i.e.,  only 4.17 per cent.  However, the Board did 
not conduct any skill development training during 2017-20 and 2021-23.  
While admitting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that the Board 
had adopted an online portal for speedy disbursemen t of financial assistance and a 
timeframe of 20 days after receipt of applications was set by the Board in November 
2022 for settlement of claims.  It also added that for providing transit accommodation, 
labour sheds, mobile toilets, etc . a proposal would be placed before the Board in th e 
upcoming Board’s meeting.  With reference to skill development programme, the 
Government stated during Exit Conference that thoug h the beneficiaries were being 
paid stipend and were being distributed kits like m asonry, the workers were reluctant 
to get trained.  However, efforts would be made to increase skill development 
trainings. 
2.3.8.6(iv) Lack of awareness among the BOC workers  
The direction issued by the Supreme Court (January 2010), inter alia,  stated that 
awareness should be created on registration of BOC workers and the benefits 
available under the BOCW Act.  There should be effe ctive use of media, All India 
Radio and Doordarshan for awareness regarding the A ct, the benefits available 
thereunder and the procedures for availing the benefits. 
Further, pursuant to the judgement (19 March 2018) of the Supreme Court, the 
Ministry, GoI prepared Model Welfare Scheme for BOC Workers and action plan (for 
strengthening implementation machinery).  This also  includes awareness generation 
among BOC workers. 
It was noticed in audit that during 2017-22, no exp enditure was incurred by the Board 
on awareness activities and only 
₹ 38.45 lakh was spent on awareness during 
2022-23. 
However, as per information furnished by the Board,  registration camps were 
conducted by the field functionaries of the Labour Department and flex, festoons on 
                                                           
66   Maternity leave with pay of maximum three months shall be provided to the female registered 
construction worker who has been working as constru ction worker for not less than one year at the 
minimum rate of wages in respect of unskilled BOCW workers as notified by the Department.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 86 
welfare schemes were displayed at prominent places of market areas, motor stands, 
Blocks/ Gram Panchayat/ Village Council offices for mass awareness; though no such 
documentary evidence 67 / report supporting the awareness campaign conducte d by the 
Board during 2017-22, was available on records. 
The Board issued a work order (in December 2022) to  a third party (M/s Boom Box 
Animation, Agartala selected through open tendering  process) which conducted 
various awareness activities like roadside drama, r oad show by publicity van, 
branding on vehicles, printing and distribution of leaflets, hoarding, etc. in the State at 
a cost of 
₹ 38.45 lakh during 2022-23. 
During survey of 69 unregistered construction workers, it was noticed that 61 per cent  
of them were not aware about the various schemes ru n by the Board and balance 
39 per cent  workers were aware of only two to five schemes out  of 11 schemes 
implemented by the Board.  Further, 20 per cent  workers were not aware about the 
existence of the Board as discussed in succeeding Paragraph 2.3.9.2 .  The surveyed 
unregistered workers expressed their willingness to  become registered beneficiaries 
with the Board after audit team explained the schem e benefits to them.  This 
corroborated the fact that awareness activities con ducted by the Board/ Department 
were not effective. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) th at for providing transparent, time 
bound, social security benefits to the registered c onstruction workers State 
Government had decided to take up special drive for  awareness generation and mass 
registration of the eligible construction workers. 
Conclusion 
There were delays in settlement of claims under var ious welfare schemes in absence 
of any fixed time frame for disbursement process.  Further irregularities were noticed 
in providing financial assistance under COVID-19 sc heme due to non-maintenance of 
updated and comprehensive data base of registered beneficiaries by the Board.  
Recommendations 
The Government may consider; 
• to adopt innovative ideas for creating mass awareness; and 
• to adopt a mechanism for timely disposal of claims. 
2.3.8.7 Monitoring  
 
2.3.8.7(i) Non-formation of State Advisory Committe e 
Section 4(1) of BOCW Act provides that the State Go vernment had to constitute a 
committee viz ; the State Advisory Committee (SAC) to advise the State Government 
on such matters arising out of the administration o f the Act.  The SAC had to conduct 
meetings at least once in six months. 
                                                           
67   Voucher, photograph/ report of awareness campaign , etc . 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 87 
Audit observed that though the State Government had  notified the TBOCW Rules in 
August 2002, the SAC was constituted in February 20 15 whose term expired in 
January 2018 and last meeting of the SAC was held i n January 2016.  After January 
2018, SAC was not re-constituted (September 2023) a nd thus, no meeting was held 
for more than seven years (September 2023). 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (Se ptember 2023) that proposal for 
reconstitution of the Committee was under process. 
2.3.8.7(ii) Non-submission of returns by the regist ered establishments  
As per Rule 242 of the TBOCW Rules, every employer shall send annually a return 68  
relating to establishment to the Registering Office r having jurisdiction so as to reach 
the return not later than 15 th  February following each calendar year.  Further, R ule 
272(2) of TBOCW Rules stipulates submission of mont hly returns by the employers 
to the Secretary of the Board (or any other officer  authorised by him) in Form XXXII, 
showing details of workers entitled to be registere d as well as those who left the 
service during the preceding month.  
Scrutiny revealed that none of the employers carryi ng out building or other 
construction works, had furnished the annual and mo nthly returns during 2017-23.  
Moreover, the registering officers of the Department as well as Secretary of the Board 
failed to enforce and ensure submission of such returns by the employers.  As a result, 
the Board had no information about the details of the workers entitled to be registered, 
information about the maximum number of building wo rkers employed on any day 
during the year, total number of days of engagement of building workers, etc . 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that the steps 
would be taken to ensure non-recurrence of the same in future. 
2.3.8.7(iii) Intimation of notice of commencement a nd completion of building 
and other construction works 
As per Section 46 of the BOCW Act, an employer shall, at least thirty days before the 
commencement of any building or other construction work, a written notice 69  send or 
cause to be sent to the Inspector having jurisdicti on in the area where the proposed 
building or other construction work is to be execut ed and in case of any change in the 
particulars furnished, the employer shall intimate the change to the Inspector within 
two days of such change.  Further, as per Section 4 8 of the BOCW Act, where an 
employer fails to give notice of commencement of th e building or other construction 
work, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a t erm which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or both. 
                                                           
68   In Form XXV 
69   The name and situation of the place where the bui lding or other construction work is proposed to be 
carried on, the name and address of the person who is undertaking the building or other construction 
work, the nature of the work involved and the facil ities, including any plant and machinery, 
provided, the number of workers likely to be employ ed during the various stages of building or 
other construction work, the approximate duration of the work, etc.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 88 
Audit observed that though none of the registered e stablishments had intimated the 
actual date of commencement and completion as per t he provisions of the Act, the 
Board had not taken any steps to obtain such inform ation from the establishments nor 
imposed any penalty on employers failing to provide such notices. 
In absence of such intimation for commencement of w ork by the employers, 
establishments carrying out building and other cons truction activities remained 
outside the monitoring purview of the Board. 
While accepting the facts, the Government stated (S eptember 2023) that the issue 
would be taken up with all concerned departments an d organisations for strict 
enforcement of the Act. 
2.3.8.8 Internal Control 
 
2.3.8.8(i) Audit of the Board 
 As per Section 27(1) of the BOCW Act, the accounts of the Board were to be 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of I ndia.  But the Board did not 
submit its annual accounts for the period from 2017 -18 to 2022-23 to the 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura for audit. 
 Specific direction was given (March 2018) by the Ho n’ble Supreme Court in 
response to a writ petition 70  to conduct the Social Audit on the implementation of 
the Act so that in future there is better and more effective and meaningful 
implementation of the Act.  The matter had been dis cussed in the Monitoring 
Committee meeting held (May 2018) under the Chairma nship of Director 
General, Labour Welfare of Ministry, GoI and includ ed in Model Welfare 
Scheme circulated by the GoI for compliance by Stat e/ UT Governments.  The 
objective of Social Audit was to visit ongoing cons truction sites, inform the 
workers about their entitlements as per the Act, id entify eligible workers but not 
registered and facilitating workers for filing grievances, etc . 
Scrutiny revealed that no Social Audit had been con ducted by the Board during 
2017-23 which resulted in non-achievement of the objectives of social audit. 
The Government assured (September 2023) that issue of social audit would be taken 
care of by the Board in future. 
2.3.8.8(ii) Other deficiencies 
The following deficiencies in internal control of the Board were noticed in audit: 
• annual action plans and perspective plans were not prepared by the Board 
though the Board was responsible for implementation  of various welfare 
schemes for the construction workers. 
• Section 57 of the BOCW Act provides that every Boar d should furnish from 
time to time to the Central and State Governments s uch returns as they may 
                                                           
70   WP 318 of 2006 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 89 
require.  The State Government prescribed submissio n of annual report and 
annual budget by the Board to oversee the proper implementation of the Act and 
functioning of the Board.  Further, as per Section 26 of the Act, every year the 
Board should prepare its annual report, giving a fu ll account of its activities 
during the previous financial year and submit the same to the State Government, 
But the Board had neither submitted annual budgets (except for the year 
2017-18) nor annual reports to the State Government . Also, the Board/ 
Department did not set any annual and/ or long-term  target for registration of 
establishments and beneficiaries, inspections, cond ucting awareness 
programmes, etc.  Therefore, the Board could not effectively assess its activities/ 
achievements against any performance indicators.  
• the Board did not prepare any annual action report to review/ monitor their own 
performance and gap-up the deficiencies. 
• the Board did not prescribe any return format for t he cess deductor ( i.e.,  urban 
local bodies, etc.  who were authorised to approve the buildings plans and collect 
cess on the estimated construction cost) indicating  the number of buildings/ 
approved construction plans along with estimated co st of construction works to 
ensure that the cess collected by them was being deposited to the Board. 
• effective mechanism for collection of cess was abse nt and comprehensive 
database on registered establishments and beneficia ries, ongoing construction 
works (both public and private, etc.  was not maintained by the Board. 
• the Supreme Court of India directed (February 2012)  that every Welfare Board 
should hold its meeting at least once in every two months and submit the 
minutes to the Secretary (Labour) of the Government  quarterly, so that the 
implementation of the schemes could be reviewed periodically. During 2017-23, 
the Board held only 12 board meetings (33 per cent ) against required 36 
meetings.  Therefore, implementation of the schemes  was not reviewed 
periodically. 
• grievance redressal mechanism was not constituted b oth at the district level and 
State level which could be a potential source of in formation regarding lacuna/ 
shortfall in various activities of the Board. 
The Government replied (September 2023) that necessary steps would be taken by the 
Board to comply all these issues. 
Conclusion 
Monitoring was inadequate as the State Government d id not re-constitute the State 
Advisory Committee since February 2008 for advising  on the matters arising out of 
the administration of the Act and the Board did not  ensure submission of periodical 
returns from the employers for obtaining the inform ation like the details of the 
workers entitled to be registered, information abou t the maximum number of building 
workers employed on any day during the year, total number of days of engagement of 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 90 
building workers, etc .  There were deficiencies in internal control of t he Board like 
non conducting of Social Audit, non-submission of a nnual budgets, non-submission 
of annual accounts, annual returns to the State Gov ernment and non-constitution of 
grievance redressal mechanism. 
Recommendations 
The Government may consider; 
• to re-constitute the State Advisory Committee; 
• to constitute the grievance redressal mechanism; and 
• to ensure regular submission of periodical returns from the employers and 
regular submission of annual accounts of the Board to the Principal 
Accountant General (Audit), Tripura for audit. 
2.3.9  Audit Survey  
 
2.3.9.1 Audit survey of establishments 
Summary of audit findings during survey (May 2023) of 16 (eight registered and eight 
unregistered) establishments are given in Chart 2.3.7. 
 
Further, it was noticed that; 
• Out of 257 BOC workers employed at the 16 work site s, only nine (3.5 per cent ) 
workers were found registered with the Board. 
Whether the 
contractor/ 
agency 
knows about 
the 
requirement 
of 
Registration 
of 
Establishme 
nt with 
TBOCW 
Welfare 
Board? 
Whether the 
work/ 
contractor 
was a 
Registered 
Establishme 
nt under 
TBOCW 
Welfare 
Board? 
Whether 
copy of 
Registration 
Certificate 
was 
displayed at 
work site? 
Whether the 
moving 
parts of 
machineries/ 
tools/ 
fixtures like 
gears, 
pullys, 
ropes, 
fastening 
belts etc. 
were 
periodically 
checked 
conformin… 
Whether 
there is any 
dedicated 
safety officer 
deployed at 
the work 
site? 
Whether 
DLO/ 
Labour 
inspector 
visited the 
work site? 
Whether 
any incident/ 
accident 
occurred at 
the work 
site? If yes, 
when? 
Whether the 
contractor/ 
agency is 
aware that 
any incident/ 
accident is 
required to 
be reported 
immediately 
to Labour 
Department 
?
Yes 10 8 0 5 0 0 0 15 
No 6 8 16 11 16 16 16 1
10 
8
5
0 0 0
15 
6
8
16 
11 
16 16 16 
1
0
2
4
6
8
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
Number of respondents 
Chart 2.3.7: Survey of Establishments 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 91 
• Neither the Board nor the Urban Local Body collects  cess from private 
establishment. 
• None of the establishments displayed the board ment ioning the rate of wages, 
hours of work and name of inspector having jurisdic tion as required under Rule 
238 of the TBOCW Rules.  
• None of the registered establishments had received the assessment order passed 
by the Assessment Officer.  
2.3.9.2 Audit survey of un-registered BOC workers 
Summary of audit findings during survey (May 2023) of 69 unregistered BOC 
workers are given in Chart 2.3.8 . 
Chart 2.3.8 : Survey of unregistered BOC workers  
 
It was also noticed that; 
• 39 per cent  workers who stated that they were aware about the schemes were 
actually aware of only two to five schemes out of 1 1 schemes those were being 
implemented by the Board. 
• Though 80 per cent  workers were aware about the existence of the Boar d, only 
one per cent  of them have approached the Board for registration. 
  
75% 
20% 
99% 
61% 
0% 
25% 
80% 
1% 
39% 
100% 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 
Whether migratory labour from 
outside state? 
Whether the workers were aware 
about the existence of the Board? 
Whether the workers approached for 
beneficiary registration with the 
Board? 
Whether the workers were aware 
about the welfare schemes? 
Whether workers were interested to 
get registered with he Board? 
No 
Yes 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 92 
TRIBAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
2.4 Excess expenditure 
 
Failure of verification of genuineness of applicati ons for hostellers’ scholarship at 
the school/ institute level, District and Departmen t levels led to excess payment of 
₹ 1.97 crore to the day scholars at the hostellers’ rate. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA), Government of In dia (GoI) introduced (July 2012) 
a centrally sponsored scheme of Pre-matric Scholars hip for needy Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) students studying in classes IX and X. The obj ective of the scheme was to 
support parents of ST children for education of the ir wards studying in classes IX and 
X so that the incidence of drop-out, especially in the transition from elementary to the 
secondary stage is minimised. Paragraph 6 of the sc heme guidelines provided that the 
day scholars were entitled for scholarship at lower  rates as compared to the hostellers. 
The MoTA revised the rate of scholarship from the a cademic session 2019-20 with 
effect from 1 December 2019 as given in Table 2.4.1 . 
Table 2.4.1: Rates of Scholarship  
(in ₹) 
Item 
Day Scholars Hostellers 
Pre-revised 
rate 
Revised 
rate 
Pre-revised 
rate 
Revised 
rate 
Scholarship for 10 months ( per 
month ) 150 225 350 525 
Books and Ad hoc  Grant ( per 
annum ) 750 750 1000 1000 
As per paragraphs 8 and 9 of the scheme guidelines,  the scholarship will be payable 
for 10 months in an academic year from April or fro m the month of admission, 
whichever is later, to the month in which the examinations are completed, at the end of 
the academic year, with the condition that if the s cholar secures admission after the 
20 th day of a month, the amount will be paid from the mo nth following the month of 
admission.  
Section 10 (ii) of the scheme guidelines states tha t, if a student is found to have 
obtained scholarship by false statement, his/ her s cholarship will be cancelled 
forthwith and the amount of scholarship paid will b e recovered, at the discretion of the 
State Government/ UT Administration. The student co ncerned will be blacklisted and 
debarred for scholarship in any scheme forever. 
The Scheme is implemented through the National Scho larship Portal (NSP) in the 
State. As per mechanism in the NSP, the application  will be generated by the 
applicants through the NSP portal along with requis ite information and documents, 
followed by three level log-in credentials for application processing and verification in 
this portal as detailed in Chart 2.4.1 . 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 93 
Chart 2.4.1: Three levels application processing and verification mechanism 
 
Scrutiny (December 2022) of the data of Tribal Welf are Department, Government of 
Tripura pertaining to Pre-matric ST scholarship rev ealed that during 2017-22, 
6,653 applicants (2,292 boys and 4,361 girls) were extended the excess benefit of 
₹ 1.97 crore as hostellers scholarship. However, the se students were studying in 
schools/ institutes which did not have any hostel f acility as detailed in 
Appendix 2.4.1 , and thus, were eligible only for day scholars’ scholarship. 
It was further noticed that, during 2018-22, while studying in the same school in 
classes IX and X, the students claimed day scholar rate in class IX and hotelier rate in 
class X 71 . 
Therefore, failure on the part of the Department to  verify the genuineness of student 
applications for hostellers’ scholarship at the ins titute level, the District and 
Department levels led to excess payment of hostelle rs’ scholarship of ₹ 1.97 crore to 
the student of institutes/ schools which had no hostel facility.  
The Government stated (March 2023) that the institu te level would be instructed to 
verify whether the students were hosteller or day s cholar and liability would be fixed 
upon them in case of discrepancies. The reply of th e Government, however, is silent 
on the failure to verify at the District and Directorate level. 
Recommendation: 
The government should ensure proper verification of  the scholarship applications 
at the institute, District and Department levels to prevent payment of scholarships to 
ineligible students. 
  
                                                           
71   During 2018-19: 343 students, 2019-20: 151 studen ts; 2020-21: 155 students and during 2021-22: 
225 students.  
School/ 
Institute 
•After applied by the applicant, the concerned school's/ ins titute's authority 
verify the authenticity of requisite documents alongwith s ubmitted 
application. After verification, the same forwareded to th e District Welfare 
Officer (DWO) concerned for further processing and verification.
District 
Welfare  
Officer 
•The application received after scrutiny by School/ Institu te is to be verified by 
the DWO at district level concerned. After verification, the same to be 
forwarded to the Directorate level for verification and payment.
Tribal 
Welfare 
Department 
•After verification of the application at Directorate level , the payment to be 
made to the beneficiary concerned through the online Comput erised Treasury 
Operation System (CTOS).

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 94 
TRIBAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.5 Excess expenditure 
 
Payment of pre-matric scholarship at the revised ra te to beneficiaries for eight 
months for the year 2019-20 instead of at the pre-r evised rate resulted in extra 
expenditure of ₹ 94.59 lakh. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA), Government of In dia (GoI), introduced (with 
effect from 1 July 2012) a centrally sponsored sche me (funding pattern of 90:10 
between Centre and State Governments) of Pre-Matric  Scholarship for needy 
Scheduled Tribe (ST) students studying in classes IX and X. As per paragraph 8 and 9 
of Pre-Matric (ST Category) scheme guidelines, the scholarship will be payable for 
10 months in an academic year from April or from the month of admission, whichever 
is later, to the month in which the examinations ar e completed, at the end of the 
academic year with the condition that if the schola r secures admission after the 
20 th day of a month, the amount will be paid from the mo nth following the month of 
admission. Further, in case of renewal of scholarsh ip, it will be paid from the month 
following the month upto which scholarship was paid  in the previous year. As per 
paragraph 6 of pre-matric (ST category) scheme guid elines (effective from 
1 July 2012), day scholars were entitled for schola rship at lower rates as compared to 
the hostellers.  
The MoTA revised (20 December 2019) the rate of sch olarship in respect of Day 
Scholars and Hostellers from the academic session 2 019-20 which was effective from 
1 December 2019, as given in Table 2.5.1 . 
Table 2.5.1: Rate of scholarship (pre-revised and revised)  
(in ₹) 
Item 
Day Scholars Hostellers 
Pre-
revised 
rate 
Revised 
rate 
Pre-
revised 
rate 
Revised 
rate 
Scholarship (per month) 150 225 350 525 
Books and Ad hoc Grant (per annum) 750 750 1,000 1, 000 
Scrutiny (May 2023) of data provided (August 2022) to Audit by the Tribal Welfare 
Department, Government of Tripura revealed that for  the year 2019-20, 3,589 and 
7,391 students totalling to 10,980 were extended be nefit of scholarship as hostellers 
and day scholars, respectively in all districts across the State. 
As per revised rate of the MoTA, the scholarship should be paid at pre-revised rate for 
eight months (from April to November 2019) and at r evised rate for two months (for 
December 2019 and January 2020). But the Department  disbursed (last payment on 
7 December 2020) the scholarship for all 10 months (from April to January) based on 
revised rate instead of the pre-revised rate for th e first eight months. This resulted in 
an extra expenditure of ₹ 94.59 lakh. The details of the category-wise and d istrict-

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 95 
wise excess payment of pre-matric scholarship for t he year 2019-20 are given in 
Appendices 2.5.1  and 2.5.2. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2023) that, in the financial year 2019-20, 
Pre-matric scholarship for ST students had been giv en at revised rate for all the 
10 months. The scholarship amount could not be frag mented into month-wise in the 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP) due to which the scholarship had been paid at 
revised rate for 10 months. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable becau se the Department did not make 
any efforts to avoid excess payment of scholarship amount by taking up the matter 
with the MoTA prior to disbursement of the scholars hip amounts. It was only after 
being pointed out by Audit that the Department info rmed (April 2023) the matter to 
the MoTA. In response, the MoTA had informed (Decem ber 2023) that 
₹ 85.13 lakh 
(being 90 per cent  of ₹ 94.59 lakh) would be deducted from the next release of funds. 
Recommendation: 
The government should ensure payment of scholarship  to eligible students as per 
the applicable rates to avoid excess payment.  

CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR 

 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 97 
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
3.1 Introduction  
This Chapter deals with the findings of audit on th e State Government units under 
Economic Sector. 
The details of the total budget allocation and expe nditure of the departments under 
Economic Sector during the years 2022-23 are given in Table 3.1.1 . 
Table 3.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Economic Sector (Non-PSEs)  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure 
Co-operation Department 54.32  46.98  
Public Works (Roads and Buildings) Department 1,734.52  1,295.45  
Power Department 385.96  357.13  
Public Works (Water Resource) Department 475.96  152.37  
Information, Cultural Affairs Department 79.10  68.33  
Industries and Commerce Department 211.93  148.01  
Industries & Commerce (Handloom, Handicrafts and 
Sericulture) Department 
44.08  35.97  
Fisheries Department 165.87  77.00  
Agriculture Department 608.61  404.35  
College of Agriculture  8.95 6.65 
Horticulture Department 155.94  95.24  
Animal Resource Development Department 216.80  145.31  
Forest Department 471.92  270.36  
Science, Technology and Environment Department 23.90  23.10  
Factories and Boilers Organisation 4.36  3.23  
Information Technology Department 155.66  138.69  
Tourism Department 67.03  13.37  
Total number of Departments = 17 4,864.91  3,281.54  
Source : Appropriation Accounts 2022-23 
We audited 19 units during 2022-23 under this Secto r, covering expenditure of 
₹ 108.10 crore (including expenditure of the previous years). 
This Chapter contains one Subject Specific Complian ce Audit on “Implementation of 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN)” under  Agriculture Department, 
one long Draft Paragraph on “Sand Mining in Tripura” under the Forest Department and 
three compliance audit paragraphs under Public Works (Water Resource), Public Works 
(Building) and Public Works (Roads and Building) Departments involving money value 
of ₹ 9.81 crore. 
  

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 98 
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
3.2 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Implement ation of Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme in Tripura” 
 
3.2.1 Introduction 
 
3.2.1.1 Overview of the Scheme 
Pradhan Mantri-Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) Scheme is a central sector scheme 
with 100 per cent  funding by the Government of India (GoI), being implemented under 
the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode.  The Scheme aims to provide farmers having 
cultivable land with financial support of 
₹ 6,000 per annum per farmer family payable 
in three equal instalments of ₹ 2,000 each in every four months.  The scheme was 
effective from December 2018 for transfer of benefit to eligible beneficiaries. 
Initially the scheme was admissible only to small a nd marginal farmers (SMF) with 
combined landholding upto two hectors.  The revised  scheme guidelines (June 2019) 
extended the benefits to all farmer families irrespective of the size of their holdings.  
Land holding (cultivable land) is the main criteria to avail the benefit. Agriculture land 
used for non-agriculture purposes are not covered under the scheme. Similarly, farmers 
falling under certain specified categories of highe r economic status are not covered 
under the scheme. Unique Biometric Identification N umber seeded bank account of 
beneficiary is mandatory  for release of all instalments with effect from December 2019. 
3.2.1.2 Organisational set-up 
In Tripura, PM-KISAN scheme is implemented through the Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare Department, Government of Tripura (GoT) as the nodal department.  Under 
the Department, a State Nodal Officer at the rank o f Director has been appointed. 
Chart 3.2.1 illustrates the organisational set-up of implementation of PM-KISAN. 
Chart 3.2.1: Organisational set-up for implementation of PM-KISAN 
Source: Information furnished by the Department  
Secretary,  Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department 
Director/State Nodal Officer 
Deputy Director of Agriculture/District Nodal Officer 
Superintendent of Agriculture/Sub-Divisional Nodal Officer 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 99 
3.2.1.3 Transaction flow 
Financial benefit of the scheme is transferred to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries, 
held in destination banks, through the accredited b ank of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (MAC&FW), Governmen t of India (GoI) and the 
sponsoring bank of the State Government 
72 , using the Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS).  The banking transaction is managed and monitored by National 
Payments Corporation of India (NPCI). The transaction flow is given in Chart 3.2.2 . 
Chart 3.2.2: Transaction flow 
 
Source: PM-KISAN guidelines 
3.2.1.4 Audit objectives 
The audit objectives were to assess the: 
⮚ efficiency and effectiveness of the system put in p lace for identification and 
verification of beneficiaries by the State Government. 
⮚ financial management of the scheme including proces sing of payments to the 
beneficiaries, DBT, refunds, and their accounting; and 
⮚ efficiency and effectiveness of the monitoring mechanisms for the scheme. 
3.2.1.5 Audit scope, methodology and sampling 
The SSCA on implementation of PM-KISAN was conducted covering the period from 
2018-19 to 2022-23.  Audit examined the records of the Directorate of Agriculture 
(DoA), Deputy Director of Agriculture (DDA) of the three sampled districts and 
Superintendent of Agriculture (SA) of six sub-divis ions.  Besides, beneficiary survey 
was conducted in the sampled districts. 
For conducting the audit, three 
73  out of eight districts (38 per cent ) in the State was 
selected through random sampling process taking saturation level as the criteria.  From 
the three sampled districts, six blocks 74  (two blocks from each of the three sampled 
                                                 
72   State Bank of India 
73   Sepahijala, Khowai and North Tripura Districts 
74   Mohanbhog and Charilam under Sepahijala District,  Padmabil and Teliamura under Khowai District 
and Panisagar and Laljuri under North Tripura District 
At Central level, 
sanctioned amount is 
transferred to 
Accredited bank 
Thereafter it goes to 
Sponsoring bank of 
State Governments 
(generally the same as 
for MNREGA scheme) 
Then transferred to 
corresponding 
Destination Banks 
(may be a 
scheduled bank, 
Post office, rural 
bank, cooperative 
bank or any other 
financial 
institution)
Amount is 
credited to 
beneficiary 
farmer's 
account. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 100 
districts) were selected for the audit. From each of the six sampled blocks, 18 villages 
(three villages from each of the sampled blocks) we re selected for the purpose of the 
audit.  Selection of both the blocks and villages w ere done through simple random 
sampling method. 
In addition, 270 beneficiaries (15 beneficiaries fr om each of the 18 sampled villages) 
were selected through simple random sampling for verification of beneficiary records. 
3.2.2 Audit findings 
 
Audit objective 1 To assess the efficiency and effe ctiveness of the system put in 
place for identification and verification of beneficiaries by the 
State Government 
 
3.2.2.1 Non-approval of self-registered farmers 
Paragraph 3.3.1 of the User Manual for PM KISAN portal stipulates that a facility for 
approval of self-registered farmers has been provid ed to both State and district level 
users.  It is the responsibility of State Governmen t to verify the applications of the 
farmers submitted online. State Government need to ensure that the farmer is legitimate 
and is eligible for registration under the scheme.  The method of self-registration 
process of the scheme is shown in Chart 3.2.3 . 
Chart 3.2.3: Self-registration process 
Source : User Manual of PM-KISAN portal 
Farmers have been provided with the facility of sel f-registering themselves under 
PM-KISAN scheme.  The farmers who have self-registe red themselves by adopting 
any of the above methods were to be approved by the State Nodal Officer (SNO). The 
State approved farmers’ records will then pass through the entire process of validation 
to proceed with the payments.  
Scrutiny of the status report of self-registered farmers (SRFs) of the State revealed that 
a sizeable number of SRFs were pending for approval as depicted in the Chart 3.2.4 . 
Registration 
Self-registration by eligible 
farmers through online mode 
Through Farmers’ Corner in PM-
KISAN web portal 
Through PM-KISAN Mobile App 
Through the Common Service Centres 
(CSCs), 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 101 
Chart 3.2.4: Status of SRFs as of March 2023 
 
Source: PM-KISAN portal  
Thus, due to non-approval of SRFs by the Department, 15,350 farmers (as on 21  March 
2023) were denied the intended scheme benefits. 
The SNO informed (March 2024) audit that the Department did not deploy manpower 
to clear the pending applications. 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t approval of SRF requires 
physical presence of the farmer along with related documents for verification in the 
Sub-Division/ Block.  The approval of SRFs is continuing and the pendency is getting 
reduced and is 11,854 as of December 2023. 
The reply is not acceptable because the Department did not take appropriate steps like 
deployment of adequate manpower, fixing timeframe f or clearance of pendency etc.   
Therefore, only 3,496 pending cases (23 per  cent ) were cleared during the period from 
March 2023 to December 2023. 
3.2.2.2 Non-linking of land records with Unique Bio metric Identification 
Number, bank account and mobile number 
Paragraph 6.3 of the operational guidelines of the scheme stipulates that the existing 
land-ownership system in the concerned State will b e used for identification of 
beneficiaries.  Accordingly, it is of utmost import ance that the land records are clear 
and updated.  State will expedite the progress of d igitisation of the land records and 
linking the same with Unique Biometric Identification Number and bank details of the 
beneficiaries. 
Further, Revenue Department, Government of Tripura decided (July 2011) that the 
Unique Biometric Identification Number card number of the land holders should be 
incorporated in Computerised Khatian and Manual Kha tian at the end of address of 
each land holder.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed that though the la nd records were fully computerised 
and digitised by the Directorate of Land Records an d Settlement (DLR&S), Revenue 
0
5000 
10000 
15000 
20000 
25000 
30000 
35000 
40000 
Total farmers 
registered 
Approved Rejected Pending for 
approval 
39938 
17464 
7124 
15350 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 102 
Department, Government of Tripura, the land records were not linked with the Unique 
Biometric Identification Number number, bank accoun t and mobile number of the 
respective landowners.  The DLR&S informed (Decembe r 2021) audit that the 
programme for Unique Biometric Identification Numbe r seeding with the Record of 
Rights (RoR) 75 , integration of bank account details and mobile nu mbers was under 
process.  However, the reasons for non-linking the land records with Aadhar, mobile 
number and bank account number were not provided. 
Due to non-linking of the land records with the Uni que Biometric Identification 
Number, bank details, etc . of the respective landowners, the eligibility of the scheme 
beneficiaries were not properly ensured. 
In reply, Government stated (December 2023) that the issue is being pursued with the 
DLR&S. Further, a comprehensive farmer database of the State with the land linking 
and Geo-referencing of village map is now under pre paration which may take 
considerable time.  But the Government remained sil ent on the timelines for 
completion of the process. 
3.2.2.3 Selection of ineligible beneficiaries 
Paragraph 3 and Paragraph 4.1 (a) and (b) of the op erational guidelines of the scheme 
stipulates that a landholder farmer’s family is def ined as “a family comprising of 
husband, wife and minor children who own cultivable  land as per land records of the 
concerned State”. Only one member from the defined farmer family is entitled to the 
scheme benefits.  All institutional landholders and  farmer families in which one or 
more of its members, inter alia , belong to following categories shall not be eligible for 
the benefit under the scheme. 
● Former and present Ministers/ State Ministers and f ormer/ present Members of 
Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha/ State Legislative Assemblie s/ State Legislative 
Councils, former and present Mayors of Municipal Co rporations, former and 
present Chairpersons of District Panchayats 
● All serving or retired officers and employees of Ce ntral/ State Government 
ministries/ offices/ departments and their field un its, Central or State Public 
Sector Enterprises (PSEs) and attached offices/ Aut onomous Institutions under 
Government as well as regular employees of the Local Bodies (excluding Multi-
Tasking Staff/ Class IV/ Group D employees) 
● All superannuated/ retired pensioners whose monthly  pension is ₹ 10,000 or 
more (excluding Multi-Tasking Staff/ Class IV/ Group D employees) 
● All persons who paid Income Tax in last assessment year. 
                                                 
75   The ROR is the primary record of land that proves the rights on land belongs to a particular landowner 
of that property. The right to record holds the information of property transactions. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 103 
●  Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Ch artered Accountants, and 
Architects registered with professional bodies and carrying out profession by 
undertaking practices. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that there were ineligible beneficiaries under PM-KISAN 
scheme in the State as discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.2.3(i) to  3.2.2.3(iv) . 
3.2.2.3(i) Payment to ineligible beneficiaries 
Paragraph 4.7 of the User Manual for PM KISAN porta l stipulates that, in case, a 
farmer dies or is identified as ineligible at any p oint of time by the State/ field 
functionaries, the portal has been equipped with th e function to permanently stop 
processing any future payments under this scheme to this farmer.  This can be done by 
‘Death/ Ineligibility Cases’ window provided in the correction module. Paragraph 4.8 
of the User Manual stipulates that if the farmer’s records have been marked as ‘Death/ 
Ineligibility Cases’, it must be approved by the SN O to mark them for permanent 
deletion from the system.  
Scrutiny of the database of PM-KISAN revealed that 2911 beneficiaries were found to 
be ineligible up to March 2023 due to various reaso ns (untraceable, not having land 
ownership, beneficiaries do not belong to State, re tired or serving government 
employees, and other exclusion criteria). Out of 2, 911 beneficiaries, 2,763 ineligible 
beneficiaries were extended the benefit amounting to 
₹ 4.18 crore 76 , 127 beneficiaries 
did not receive any instalment and ineligibility of remaining 21 77  were revoked by the 
SNO.  The district-wise number of ineligible beneficiaries detected, and total payments 
credited to their accounts are given in Appendix 3.2.1 . 
It was further noticed that out of the ₹ 4.18 crore, ₹ 4.44 lakh was credited to 173 
beneficiaries even after the date of ineligibility request made by the field functionaries.  
This included ₹ 3.60 lakh credited to 151 beneficiaries due to non -implementation of 
‘Stop Payment activities’ after acceptance of ineligibility by the SNO. 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t stop payment activities were 
revamped and continued with verification of opened lots by the district level and the 
process of recovery was also under implementation w ith support of the sponsoring 
banks.  365 stop payment activities had been perfor med by the SNO level during the 
period from April 2022 to March 2023. 
The reply is not acceptable as a huge amount of ben efit was extended to ineligible 
beneficiaries.  Ineligibility requests of the field  functionaries were also not accepted 
promptly.  Further, the stop payment activities wer e not implemented in the cases of 
151 ineligible farmers. 
                                                 
76   This includes ₹ 4.96 lakh credited to 43 government employees sepa rately mentioned in 
Paragraph 3.2.2.3(ii) . 
77   Out of 21 beneficiaries, seven beneficiaries rece ived payment after revocation, payment of four 
beneficiaries was under process and payment status of remaining 10 beneficiaries was not available 
in the payment database. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 104 
3.2.2.3 (ii) Payment to the employees of Government  of Tripura 
Cross-check of the PM-KISAN database with Human Res ource Management System 
(HRMS) managed by the Finance Department, Governmen t of Tripura revealed that 
337 out of 2,44,072 beneficiaries were State Govern ment employees (Group B and 
Group C).  Out of 337 beneficiaries, 297 (88 per cent ) were registered through 
departmental login and the remaining through self-r egistration.  A payment of 
₹ 47.84 lakh was paid to 337 ineligible beneficiarie s upto March 2023 in violation of 
scheme guidelines.  The district-wise beneficiaries  detected in audit, and total 
payments credited to their accounts are given in Appendix 3.2.2 . 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) that the DDAs are instructed to carry 
out verification if any of those are still active in the portal. However, inbuilt mechanism 
is functional now for removal of all those defaulte rs. Agriculture Department would 
take up the matter with the related departments to take appropriate action for recovery 
of the money from them. 
3.2.2.3(iii) Payment to beneficiaries post their de ath 
Scrutiny of the database of PM-KISAN revealed that 1155 beneficiaries were marked 
as dead up to March 2023. Out of 1,155, ₹ 54.20 lakh was credited to 848 beneficiaries 
post their death.  The district-wise number of deceased beneficiaries detected, and total 
payments credited to their accounts are given in Appendix 3.2.3 . 
It was also noticed that ₹ 2.36 lakh, out of ₹ 54.20 lakh, was credited to 111 
beneficiaries after the date of their ineligibility request made by the field functionaries.  
This consisted of ₹ 2.08 lakh credited to 97 beneficiaries due to non- implementation 
of ‘Stop Payment activities’ after acceptance of ineligibility by the SNO. 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t stop payment activities were 
revamped and continued with verification of opened lots by the district level and the 
process of recovery was also under implementation w ith support of the sponsoring 
banks. 365 stop payment activities had been perform ed by the SNO level during the 
period from April 2022 to March 2023. 
The reply is not acceptable as a huge amount of ben efit was extended to beneficiaries 
post their death.  Ineligibility requests of the field functionaries were also not accepted 
promptly. Further, the stop payment activities were not implemented in the cases of 97 
deceased farmers. 
3.2.2.3(iv) Financial benefit to Income Tax payee f armers 
Scrutiny of the database of the PM-KISAN revealed that 1,693 income taxpayers were 
registered as beneficiaries.  The district-wise number of income tax payee farmers and 
total payments credited ( ₹ 2.27 crore) to the accounts of 1,637 beneficiaries are detailed 
in Appendix 3.2.4 . Out of 1,693 beneficiaries, 56 78  beneficiaries did not receive any 
instalment. 
                                                 
78   The beneficiaries were identified as IT payee bef ore disbursement of the scheme benefit. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 105 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) that the process of recovery from the 
income taxpayers is under implementation with the s upport of the sponsoring banks 
and also, such individuals are de-registered in por tal through inbuilt mechanism after 
physical verification.  A payment of about ₹ 17 lakh had been recovered from ineligible 
farmers. 
The reply is not acceptable because lapses in scrutiny of applications and approval led 
to extending the scheme benefits to the ineligible beneficiaries. 
3.2.2.4   Ineligible beneficiaries noticed out of the sample d beneficiaries 
 
3.2.2.4(i) Beneficiaries received benefits without land ownership 
Paragraph 3 of the operational guidelines of the sc heme stipulates that a landholder 
farmer’s family is defined as “a family comprising of husband, wife and minor children 
who owns cultivable land as per land records of the  concerned State”.  The existing 
land-ownership system should be used for identification of beneficiary for calculation 
of benefit. 
In 29 cases, land ownership was found in favour of persons other than the beneficiaries. 
But those beneficiaries received the scheme benefit  of 
₹ 6.74 lakh without land 
ownership.  Details are shown in the Appendix 3.2.5 . 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t 38,047 farmers are cultivating 
in their ancestral piece of land and the matter was also discussed with the PM-KISAN 
Division, GoI. GoI modified the guidelines and uplo ading of land details is not 
mandatory in seven States including Tripura.  Besid es, a detailed survey was being 
conducted for preparation of a comprehensive farmer  database having land linked to 
their activity.  Out of 29 objected beneficiaries, a random verification was conducted 
against six cases. The Government, however, did not  take action in respect of the 
remaining 23 beneficiaries. 
3.2.2.4(ii) Benefits extended to the beneficiaries holding non-agriculture land 
Paragraph 1 of operational guidelines of the scheme  provides income support to all 
landholding farmers’ families in the country, having cultivable land. 
Scrutiny of the self-declaration forms (SDFs) of sa mpled beneficiaries along with 
relevant documents revealed that benefits were disb ursed to seven beneficiaries of 
₹ 1.82 lakh who did not possess agricultural land, in violation of the scheme guidelines.  
Details are shown in the Appendix 3.2.6 . 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) that the de-registration of ineligible 
beneficiaries after physical examination is being done to remove all such cases and the 
Deputy Director of Agricultures (DDAs), Superintend ent of Agricultures (SAs) 
including Village Nodal Officers (VNOs) were direct ed to verify such cases and over 
17,652 cases were made ineligible and de-registered from the portal. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 106 
3.2.2.5   Denial of benefit to the beneficiaries 
 
3.2.2.5(i) Short disbursement of instalments 
Paragraph 5.4 of the operation guidelines of the sc heme regarding methodology for 
calculation of benefit stipulates that the benefici aries, whose names are uploaded in 
PM-KISAN portal by the State in a particular four-m onth period/ trimester, shall be 
entitled to receive benefit for that trimester and for further instalments pertaining to the 
subsequent trimesters for that financial year. 
Further, as per the instructions issued (June 2019)  by the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (MAC&FW), Government of India (GoI), release of 
benefits to the beneficiaries should commence from the four-monthly period in which 
their names have been identified and the data uploa ded in PM-KISAN portal during 
the same period and subsequent release of instalments would be done for the remaining 
four-monthly periods of that financial year onwards. 
However, it was noticed in the status report (March  2023) of the beneficiary that as 
many as 1,106 beneficiaries registered under the scheme were not extended the benefit 
of first instalment of 
₹ 22.12 lakh pertaining to the trimester during whic h they were 
registered. Besides, first to fourth instalments am ounting to ₹ 1.34 lakh were not 
released to 19 beneficiaries. As such, short disbursement of instalment of ₹ 23.46 lakh 
(i.e.,  ₹ 22.12 lakh plus  ₹ 1.34 lakh) was made to 1,125 beneficiaries (1,106 beneficiaries 
plus  19 beneficiaries). Details are shown in Appendix 3.2.7 . 
In reply, Government stated (December 2023) that re quest for fund transfers (RFTs) 
against opened lots were finally signed and uploaded in due time by the State.  Further, 
there was no role to be played by the State. 
The reply is not acceptable as the SNO inadequately monitored the PM-KISAN portal-
interface wherein option namely ‘Overall Summery Re port’ under ‘Report’ provides 
period-wise details of payments made to the farmers  and also gives the details of 
farmers registered during a trimester, the records which were validated along with 
number of farmers who were paid the due instalments  during that trimester.  As such, 
the SNO’s inadequate supervision/ monitoring relati ng to post RFT activities viz. , 
disbursement to actual number of beneficiaries agai nst RFT 
79  raised, subsequent 
corrective actions pertaining to non-paid beneficia ries, etc.  led to such short 
disbursements. 
3.2.2.5(ii) Non-authentication of beneficiaries’ re cords with unique biometric 
identity 
Paragraph 10.2 of operational guidelines of the sch eme stipulates that the Scheme is 
being implemented through an Unique Biometric Ident ification Number linked 
electronic data base containing details of all memb ers of the families of the farmers 
whose names appear in the land records.  For transf er of the financial benefits to the 
                                                 
79   Authority could not furnish the instalment wise R FTs raised for the beneficiaries, though called for  
(December 2023). 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 107 
eligible farmers, Unique Biometric Identification N umber shall be collected for all 
beneficiaries, since payment shall be done only on the basis of Unique Biometric 
Identification Number seeded database. 
Further, the Ministry advised (March 2019) the State Governments and nodal officers 
(PM-KISAN) to make all out efforts for Unique Biome tric Identification Number 
seeding of database.  The Ministry also allowed the  State Governments to spend fund 
from the administrative expenses released by the Go I under the scheme, if they hired 
the agencies authorised by the UIDAI who could unde rtake Unique Biometric 
Identification Number authentication of beneficiaries by going from house to house. 
Scrutiny of the unique biometric identity Status Re port (June 2023) revealed that 
21,061 out of 28,050 records rejected during unique  biometric identity authentication 
were corrected while 6,989 records were pending for  correction.  It was also noticed 
that 1,856 out of 8,349 invalid unique biometric id entities were corrected and 6,493 
records were pending for correction.  Moreover, the  State did not hire any agency for 
Unique Biometric Identification Number authentication. 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) that the Directorate is supporting to 
resolve all techno-digital issues.  Therefore, the dedicated agency involving huge 
expenditure was not considered by the Department.  A 40 days’ duration campaign is 
planned from 6 December 2023 to 15 January 2024 to include the last mile eligible 
farmer in the scheme. 
Audit objective 2 To assess financial management of  the scheme including 
processing of payments to the beneficiaries, DBT, refunds, and 
their accounting 
 
3.2.2.6 Transfer to doubtful/ ineligible bank accou nts 
 
3.2.2.6(i) Disbursement of scheme benefits to the d oubtful beneficiaries 
The Ministry instructed (February 2019) that the fi eld functionaries, while taking the 
declarations from the beneficiaries for not being in the exclusion category and consent 
for use of their Unique Biometric Identification Nu mber, should ensure that the 
information captured related to names, Unique Biome tric Identification Number 
number, bank account number and IFSC Code should be accurate. 
Further, before launching the scheme, the Chief Secretary (CS), Government of Tripura 
instructed (February 2019) the Department to collec t IFSC code of all banks of the 
State from the lead Bank Managers and circulate to all field functionaries. 
Scrutiny of the payment database of PM-KISAN reveal ed that 337 beneficiaries of 
sampled districts possessed bank accounts outside 80  the State of Tripura wherein 
₹ 43.50 lakh were credited as scheme benefit to such beneficiaries (up to March 2023).  
District-wise such disbursements are shown in the Table 3.2.1. 
 
                                                 
80   Worked out on the basis of IFSC of Banks 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 108 
Table 3.2.1: District-wise disbursement of instalments to the bank accounts outside 
State 
Name of the 
district 
Number of 
untraceable/ 
ineligible 
beneficiaries 
Number of 
instalments 
disbursed 
Amount involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Khowai 25 188 3.76 
North Tripura 205 1,784 35.68 
Sepahijala 107 203 4.06 
Total 337 2,175 43.50 
Source : SNO and beneficiary status report on PM-KISAN web portal  
Further, the concerned field functionaries (Deputy Directors of Agriculture) replied 
(September-October 2023) that the beneficiaries men tioned in Table 3.2.1 were  
ineligible/ untraceable.  Moreover, the documents a s proof of their residency in 
Tripura, such as ration card, Permanent Resident of  Tripura Certificate (PRTC), land 
records, etc . of those beneficiaries have not been furnished to audit. 
In absence of residential proof of the beneficiarie s, ₹ 43.50 lakh was disbursed to the 
doubtful beneficiaries. 
In reply, Government stated (December 2023) that re gistration under the scheme was 
continued under multi-facet mode, verification of s uch cases under SNO was also 
continued along with de-registration of ineligible cases.  As of now, 2,912 such 
individuals 
81  were identified and made ineligible in Khowai, Nor th Tripura and 
Sepahijala Districts respectively. The process of screening in accordance with existing 
guidelines of the scheme was continued and expected  to be completed by 15 January 
2024. But the Government reply remained silent on identification of 337 beneficiaries 
having bank accounts outside State. 
3.2.2.6(ii) Benefit credited into wrong bank accoun t 
Test check of handwritten grievances revealed that PM-KISAN benefits in respect of 
30 beneficiaries, ₹ 3.62 lakh were credited to wrong bank accounts.  A s a result, the 
beneficiaries were deprived from getting the scheme  benefits.  Details are shown in 
Appendix 3.2.8 . 
In reply, Government stated (December 2023) stated that the PM-KISAN scheme 
initially was guided for distribution of benefit through the bank account and the process 
continued up to third instalment.  Subsequently, fu nd transfer was adopted under 
Aadhaar Based Payment System (ABPS) mode and correction made for bank accounts 
was not active in the portal at present.  As such, the SNO had no role to play for 
correction of bank accounts. 
The reply is not acceptable because the SNO could get the bank accounts corrected by 
pursuing the matter with the banks.  Further, the g rievances could not be redressed 
within two weeks of time by State/ District Level Grievances Monitoring Committees 
as stipulated in the scheme guidelines. 
                                                 
81   940 in Khowai District, 711 in North Tripura Dist rict and 1,261 in Sepahijala District 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 109 
3.2.2.6(iii) Release of instalments to the benefici aries having the same Bank 
account number 
Paragraph 4.1 of the operation guidelines of the sc heme stipulates that State 
Government should prepare database of eligible beneficiary landholder farmer families 
in the villages capturing the Name, Age, Gender, Category (SC/ ST), Unique Biometric 
Identification Number, Bank Account Number, IFSC Code.  
Scrutiny of the PM-KISAN database revealed that by pre-fixing zeros (to the extent of 
six zeros) to the same bank account number, multiple beneficiaries were registered and 
after registration, financial benefits of ₹ 10.80 lakh ranging from one instalment to 13 
instalments were released to 156 beneficiaries whic h were ineligible/ not traceable/ 
PFMS rejected beneficiaries out of 169 beneficiarie s belonging different groups of 
same bank account during the period from February 2019 to March 2023.  Details are 
shown in Appendix 3.2.9 .  
Therefore, ₹ 10.80 lakh was irregularly disbursed to 156 inelig ible/ inactive 
beneficiaries. 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (De cember 2023) that those were 
mostly related to funds transfer during 2019 and 2020 up to third instalment.  It added 
that fund transfer was then adopted under Aadhaar B ased Payment System (ABPS) 
mode and correction mode for bank accounts was not active.  Awareness campaign 
regarding linking of bank accounts with Unique Biometric Identification Number was 
being continued. 
The reply is not acceptable as the cases were found for 4 
th  instalment to 13 th instalment 
during 2021, 2022 and 2023. 
3.2.2.7 Refund of funds 
Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) issued (April 20 21) by the GoI provides 
framework/ mechanism for recovery of funds, which h as been credited to ineligible/ 
death/ income tax/ wrong account beneficiaries and refund of money from State 
account to Central Department account through ‘Non-Tax Receipts portal (NTRP)’. 
Scrutiny of the bank account opened by the Departme nt for return of scheme benefits 
revealed that the Department had recovered 
₹ 10.71 lakh (1.53 per cent ) from the 
ineligible beneficiaries (up to March 2023) against  ₹ 6.99 crore 82  which was required 
to be recovered from ineligible beneficiaries.  On the contrary, recovery status report 
of the PM KISAN portal revealed that only ₹ 3.24 lakh was recovered (May 2023) 
from the ineligible beneficiaries and was also communicated to the State Level Bankers 
Committee.  Thus, recovery of funds transferred to ineligible beneficiaries was very 
slow. Further, it also showed that the recovery cases were not mapped correctly in the 
PM-KISAN portal in violation of the SoP. 
                                                 
82   ₹ 6.99 crore= ₹ 4.18 crore { Paragraph 3.2.2.3(i)}  plus ₹ 0.54 crore { Paragraph 3.2.2.3(iii)}  plus 
₹ 2.27 crore { Paragraph 3.2.2.3(iv )} 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 110 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t after deregistration of the 
farmers, it poses some challenges to make recovery of benefit transferred to their 
accounts.  All necessary steps for recovery had bee n completed and almost ₹ 17 lakh 
had already been credited to the State recovery acc ount.  Recovery in the government 
account was continued. 
The reply is not acceptable because the rate of rec overy was very slow and moreover, 
the Department did not reconcile the mismatch of re covery amounts as shown in the 
portal with recovery reflected in the bank account opened for the purpose. 
3.2.2.8 Failed transactions 
A transaction is considered as failed when the tran saction is returned or rejected by 
bank or NPCI.  The payment response against each record is received from PFMS from 
Banks/ NPCI and the same is passed on to PM-KISAN p ortal.  A report is made 
available to the States where they can see the list of failed transactions with the reason 
of failure against each record.  
As per the Scheme portal, opportunity would be opened to the States for correction of 
the bank account details on receipt of response fro m PFMS as “transaction failure”.  
The records which need no bank account correction w ill be processed by the system 
automatically. 
Analysis of the Transaction Failure report generate d from the PM-KISAN portal 
revealed 3,032 failed transactions during 2018-23.  The reasons and number of 
transaction failures are indicated in Table 3.2.2 . 
Table 3.2.2: Detail of reasons for failed transactions as of March 2023  
Sl. No Reasons No. of cases Percentage 
1 Account blocked or frozen 165 5.44 
2 Unique Biometric Identification Number 
number not mapped to account number 140 4.62 
3 Account closed 2,217 73.12 
4 Account closed or transferred 40 1.32 
5 Account under litigation 4 0.13 
6 Non-existence of account 68 2.24 
7 Other reasons for failed transactions 83   398 13.13 
Total 3,032 100 
Source : PM-KISAN database 
It can be seen from Table 3.2.2 that  2,634 out of 3,032 failed transactions (87 per cent ) 
were related to bank accounts and 68 failed transac tions (2.24 per cent ) were due to 
inaccurate data entry by the Department.  It was ob served that details of failed 
                                                 
83   Unique Biometric Identification number de-seeded from NPCI mapper by bank - customer to contact 
his/ her bank, Account Holder Expired, Document Pen ding for Account Holder turning Major, 
Inactive Unique Biometric Identification Number, In valid account type (NRE/ PPF/ CC/ Loan/ FD), 
etc . 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 111 
transactions were not shared with the beneficiaries and no attempt was made to obtain 
their correct bank details. 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t the awareness campaign 
regarding linking of bank accounts with Aadhar was being continued for completion 
of e-KYC to avoid transaction failure. 
3.2.2.9 Non-utilisation of administrative expenses 
Paragraph 8.3 of operational guidelines of the scheme stipulates that 0.125 per cent  for 
the amount of instalments transferred to beneficiaries, can be transferred by the Centre 
to the State Government to cover the expenditure on  their Project Monitoring Units 
(PMUs) and for meeting other related administrative  expenses including cost to be 
incurred for procurement of stationary, field verification, filling of prescribed formats, 
their certification and its uploading as well as in centive for field functionaries, 
publicity, etc . 
Further, the Ministry had also allowed the State Go vernments to spend fund from the 
administrative expenses released by the GoI under t he scheme, if they hired the 
agencies authorised by the UIDAI who could undertak e Unique Biometric 
Identification Number authentication of beneficiaries by going from house to house. 
During 2018-19 to 2022-23, the Department received 
₹ 51.08 lakh, for meeting the 
administrative expenses.  Out of ₹ 51.08 lakh, the Department could utilise only ₹ 34.59 
lakh leaving a balance of ₹ 16.49 lakh as of March 2023. 
It was, however, noticed in audit that no publicity had been made in spite of availability 
of adequate fund during the years 2020-21 and 2021- 22 to create better awareness 
among the farmers on the coverage and inclusion/ exclusion criteria of the scheme. 
In reply (December 2023), the Government stated that expenditure of the said fund was 
committed against different digital activities incl uding issuance of public notice 
through print and electronic media as per need basi s.  Further, no additional fund had 
been allocated during the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 .  The Department decided to 
utilise the unspent balance towards organising spec ial campaign scheduled during the 
period from 6 December 2023 to 15 January 2024. 
Audit objective 3: To assess efficiency and effecti veness of the monitoring 
mechanisms for the scheme 
 
3.2.2.10 Monitoring Committee not constituted 
Paragraph 7.1 of operational guidelines of the sche me stipulates that there should be 
stratified review/ monitoring mechanism at National / State/ District levels.  The 
National Level Review Committee (NLRC) should be headed by the Cabinet Secretary.  
The States should notify the State and District Level Review/ Monitoring Committees. 
It was noticed that State and District Level Review/ Monitoring Committees were not 
constituted during 2018-19 to 2022-23.  This indica tes that there was inadequate 
monitoring at the State and District levels for effective implementation of the Scheme.  

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 112 
This aspect assumes greater importance, given the i rregularities in identification of 
beneficiaries, payment to 5,542 ineligible benefici aries amounting to ₹ 7.42 crore, 
denial of benefits to beneficiaries, etc . as discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.2.3(i) , 
3.2.2.3(ii) , 3.2.2.3(iii) and  3.2.2.3(iv) . 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t there were 539 Village Nodal 
Officers, 58 Block Nodal Officers and eight Distric t Nodal Officers activated across 
the State.  Besides, the Secretary of Agriculture a nd Farmers Welfare, Director of 
Agriculture review the progress at a regular interv al and monitor the implementation 
of the scheme.  However, the grievance monitoring committee headed by the Secretary, 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Tripura at State l evel and District Magistrate & 
Collector in the district level had been constituted in January 2022.  
The reply is not acceptable because ₹ 7.42 crore had been disbursed to ineligible 
beneficiaries due to inadequate monitoring at State, District and Block levels.  
3.2.2.11 Physical verification of beneficiaries 
Paragraph 10.5 of operational guidelines of the sch eme stipulates that the State is 
required to undertake physical verification of around five per cent  of the beneficiaries 
for the eligibility during the year.  The State is required to conduct the physical 
verification of the beneficiaries randomly selected  by the Ministry.  Details of those 
beneficiaries are made available on the PM KISAN portal for verification.  
It was noticed (September 2023) in audit that no ph ysical verification as stipulated in 
the guidelines was conducted during the year 2019-20.  However, physical verification 
was conducted during 2020-21 and 2021-22 
84  and the result of verification is shown in 
Table 3.2.3 . 
Table 3.2.3: Year-wise details of physical verification conducted during 2020-22 
Year 
Verific 
ation 
percen 
tage 
Total Reported 
eligible 
Reported 
ineligible 
/ Death 
Verification 
conducted 
(4)+(5) 
Verification 
pending 
(3)-(6) 
Shortfall 
(in percentage) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
2020-21 5 10,137 8,084 679 8,763 1,374 13.55 
2021-22 10 19,234 12,516 1,052 13,568 5,666 29.45 
Total  29,371 20,600 1,731 22,331 7,040 43.01 
Source: Records furnished by the SNO  
From Table 3.2.3 , it can be seen that the State had conducted only 43 per cent  of the 
total randomly selected beneficiaries. 
The SNO informed (November 2023) that the physical verification was not conducted 
during the year 2022-23 as Ministry did not set target for the same. 
If the State had completed the physical verificatio n of remaining beneficiaries, then 
ineligible beneficiaries could have been weeded out.  
                                                 
84   Ministry selected 10 per cent  instead of five per cent  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 113 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) tha t target and selection of random 
farmer for physical verification during the year 20 22-23 had not been made available 
in the portal by the GoI.  However, the Department was continuing the completion of 
the remaining 5,745 physical verification of 2020-2 1 and 2021-22 for saturation of 
more farmers under the scheme during the special ca mpaign scheduled during 
6 December 2023 to 15 January 2024. 
3.2.2.12 Excess advertisement cost paid to the news paper agencies  
Paragraph 8.1 of operation guidelines of the scheme  stipulates that there will be a 
dedicated Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at State level to monitor and coordinate with 
the Central Government with regard to implementation of Income Support Scheme.  It 
shall also undertake publicity campaign (Information, Education and Communication-
IEC) in the State. 
The SNO published advertisement of the self-declaration form (SDF) for information, 
awareness and seeking applications from the eligibl e farmers for availing benefits 
under the scheme. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that the SNO paid 
₹ 15.48 lakh for display of 
advertisement in the newspapers against the admissible amount of ₹ 10.83 lakh {as per 
clause 12 and 13 of Tripura Advertisement Guideline s (Third Amendment), 2014 85 }.  
This resulted in excess payment of ₹ 4.65 lakh to newspaper agencies as depicted 
Appendix 3.2.10 . 
In reply, the Government stated (December 2023) that scheme was implemented with 
participation of people that requires wide publicit y of the benefit/ guidelines/ 
instructions of the Ministry.  The State was very scrupulous in spending administrative 
fund.  The payment towards advertisement costs were  made through the Information 
and Culture Affairs Department as per related norms of the State Government. 
The reply is not acceptable as excess payment of ₹ 4.65 lakh was paid in violation of 
the Tripura Advertisement Guidelines (Third Amendment), 2014. 
3.2.3 Conclusion  
Non-linking of land records with Unique Biometric I dentification Number, Mobile 
number, Bank accounts of the respective landowners led to disbursement to the 
ineligible beneficiaries.  Undue financial benefits  were extended to the ineligible 
beneficiaries even after the date of approval of th eir ineligibility.  Improper 
verification/ validation of farmers’ requisite docu ments resulted in irregular 
disbursement to the Government employees, IT payees , farmers not-possessing 
agricultural land, duplicate bank account holders, ineligible farmers having bank 
accounts outside the State.  Benefit was also denied to the eligible beneficiaries due to 
non-approval of SRFs by the Department, pendency of Unique Biometric Identification 
                                                 
85   Rate of advertisement of category A, B & C newspa pers was ₹ 75, ₹ 65 & ₹ 50 per  column per  
centimetre (Black and White) respectively. The rate of coloured advertisement was 45 per cent above 
the rate of black & white advertisement and negotiable case to case basis. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 114 
Number correction, short disbursement of first instalment. Inadequate monitoring and 
insufficient physical verification resulted in payment to the ineligible beneficiaries. 
3.2.4 Recommendations 
For proper implementation of the scheme, the Government may consider to; 
• link the land records with the Unique Biometric Ide ntification Number, bank 
details and mobile number of the respective landowners. 
• properly scrutinise the self-declaration forms to w eed out the ineligible 
applicants in a time bound programme; and 
• strengthen the monitoring mechanism at block, district and State levels.  
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 115 
FOREST DEPARTMENT 
3.3 Sand Mining in Tripura 
 
3.3.1 Introduction 
Forest revenue is one of the sources of non-tax rev enue of the State Government.  
Royalty from sand mining lease holders is the major revenue of the Forest Department. 
During the period 2016-17 to 2022-23, the Forest De partment collected revenue of 
₹ 27.67 crore from royalty of sand mining activities , whereas the total revenue of the 
Department was ₹ 103.17 crore.  The total revenue of the Forest Dep artment vis-à-vis  
receipts from the sand mining activities during 2016-23 is shown in Chart 3.3.1 . 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department  
The sand in Tripura has been classified as ‘Riverin e resources’.  As of March 2023, 
2,05,747 cum river sand was available in Tripura. R iver sand mining is a widespread 
practice as habitations concentrates along the rive rs and the mining locations are 
preferred near the markets or along the transportation route.  Excessive removal of sand 
may significantly distort the natural equilibrium o f the river stream channel.  It can 
damage private and public properties as well as aquatic habitats. 
In order to have a control on sand mining in Tripura, the State Government, in exercise 
of power conferred by section 15 of the Mines and M inerals (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1957 (Central Act 67 of 1957), fr amed (September 2014) Tripura 
Minor Mineral Concessions (TMMC) Rules, 2014 for re gulating the grant of mining 
leases and other concessions in respect of minor minerals (including sand) in the State.  
TMMC Rules 2014 is the only legal framework to cont rol the extraction of river sand 
in the State. 
3.3.2 Organisational set-up  
The Principal Secretary, Forest Department, Governm ent of Tripura is the 
administrative head and overall, in charge of the D epartment.  The Principal Chief 
11.01 9.76 
11.96 
13.82 
19.45 
21.35 
15.83 
3.12 3.11 3.61 4.97 
1.78 
4.31 
6.78 
0.00 
5.00 
10.00 
15.00 
20.00 
25.00 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Chart 3.3.1: Status showing the total collection of forest revenue and 
revenue receipt from sand mining during 2016-23 (₹ in crore) 
Total revenue of the Forest Department Receipts from the sand mining 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 116 
Conservator of Forests (PCCF) is the Head of the De partment and Head of Forest 
Forces.  The PCCF is responsible for policy decisio n making, budgetary control, 
direction, and overall working of the Department.  The PCCF is assisted by the 
Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests ( APCCF)/ Chief Conservator of 
Forests (CCFs)/ Deputy Chief Conservator of Forests  (DCFs)/ Conservator of Forests 
(CFs) at headquarter level. 
The District Forest Officers (DFOs) at district level and Sub-Divisional Forest Officers 
at Sub-division level are responsible for monitorin g the activities of sand mining and 
collection of royalty/ revenue from the sand mining  activities at the district level and 
sub-division level, respectively.  The procedures for approval of sand mining plans are 
given in Chart 3.3.2 . 
Chart 3.3.2: Flow chart showing procedures for approval of sand mining plan 
 
3.3.3 Audit objectives 
The audit was conducted to get a reasonable assurance that; 
a.  the procedures for approval of sand mining plans an d process of execution of 
lease agreements were as per provisions contained in the relevant act and rules, 
•The applicant/ project proponent first submits the sand min ing plan/proposal to the 
Range Officer (RO) under the Sub-divisional Forest Officer (SDFO) for approval.
•After field verification of the mining location, the RO forw ards the mining plan to 
the SDFO, if deemed appropriate.
•The SDFO forwards the mining plan to the Sub-Divisional Magi strate (SDM) for 
obtaining no objection certificate (NoC) in favour of appli cant/ project proponent 
of the sand mining plan/ proposal.
•After receiving the NoC from the SDM, the SDFO forwards the mi ning plan to the 
DFO.
•The DFO forwards the sand mining plan along with the supporti ng documents to 
the PCCF for approval.
•After scrutiny the required documents along with checking t he GPS coordinates as 
quoted in the sand mining plan, if deemed appropriate, the PC CF approves the 
mining plan and sends back to the concerned DFO for obtaining Environmental 
Clearance (EC) from the State Level Environment Impact Asse ssment Authority 
(SEIAA).
•After receiving the EC from the SEIAA, the applicant/ projec t proponent signs 
lease agreement with the DFO.
•The applicant/ project proponent applies to the Tripura Sta te Pollution Control 
Board (TSPCB) for obtaining Consent to Establish (CTE) and C onsent to Operate 
(CTO) for sand mining work.
•The mining lease agreement get registered by the proponent a nd the RO in the 
office of the Sub-Register under Revenue Department and the reafter, RO issues 
permit in favour of applicant/project proponent of the approved sand mining plan.

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 117 
b.  an effective monitoring mechanism was in place to prevent illegal mining. 
3.3.4 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteri a derived from the following 
sources:  
i.  Tripura Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2014, 
ii.  Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, 
iii.  National Mineral Exploration Trust Rules, 2015, 
iv.  Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines, 2016, and  
v.  District Survey Report (DSR), and  
vi.  Government orders, notifications, departmental manual/ policies/ rules and 
regulations, etc . 
3.3.5 Audit scope, sample and methodology 
Audit methodology involved test check of the records of the offices of the PCCF at the 
State level; DFOs of two sampled districts (Unakoti  and South Tripura Districts) at 
district level; two Forest Sub-Divisions (Kumarghat  and Kailashahar) under the 
Unakoti District and three Forest Sub-Divisions (Sabroom, Bagafa and Trishna Wildlife 
Sanctuary (WLS)) under South Tripura District.  Besides, joint physical verification of 
56 randomly selected sand mining sites of the sampl ed districts were also conducted 
with the departmental officials. 
The draft report was issued to the State Government  in November 2023 and 
Government’s reply was received in March 2024.  The  audit findings were discussed 
(March 2024) at the level of the Principal Secretar y, Forest Department where senior 
officers of the Department were also present.  The views expressed by the Department 
during the discussion were suitably incorporated in  the report along with the 
Government’s reply. 
Audit objective 1: Whether the procedures for appro val of sand mining plans and 
process of execution of lease agreements were as pe r provisions 
contained in the relevant act and rules 
3.3.6.1 Non-establishment of the District Mineral F oundation 
Tripura Minor Mineral Concession (TMMC) Rules, 2014  were framed under the 
provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Development a nd Regulation) Act, 1957 to 
regulate the grant of mining leases and other conce ssions in respect of the minor 
minerals (including sand) in Tripura.  As per Secti on 9B of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (as amended in January 2015), the State 
Government had to establish/ constitute by notifica tion a trust as a non-profit body to 
be called the District Mineral Foundation (DMF).  T he objective of the DMF shall be 
to work for the interest and benefit of persons, and the affected areas by mining related 
operations in such manner as may be prescribed by t he State Government.  The idea 
behind the contribution being that local mining affected communities mostly tribal and 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 118 
among the poorest in the country, also have the rig ht to benefit from natural resources 
at entrusted from where they live.  
Further, the Government of India framed (January 20 15) the Mines and Minerals 
(Contribution to District Mineral Foundation) Rules, 2015.  The rules provide that every 
holder of a mining lease or a prospecting licensee-cum-mining lessee shall, in addition 
to the royalty, pay to the Mines and Minerals Found ation of the district in which the 
mining operations are continued, an amount at the rate of (a) ten per cent  of the royalty 
paid in terms of the Second Schedule to the Mines a nd Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957) in respect o f mining leases or prospecting 
licence-cum-mining lease granted on or after 12 January 2015. 
The State received 
₹ 27.67 crore as royalty from sand mining during the period 2016-17 
to 2022-23 against which ₹ 2.77 crore should have been collected and paid to the DMF 
as shown in Table 3.3.1 . 
Table 3.3.1: Details of royalty received vis a vis  amount to be collected for DMF 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Amount of royalty received 
from sand mining 
Amount to be collected and paid 
(10 per cent  of the royalty) to the DMF 
2016-17 3.12 0.31 
2017-18 3.11 0.31 
2018-19 3.61 0.36 
2019-20 4.97 0.50 
2020-21 1.78 0.18 
2021-22 4.31 0.43 
2022-23 6.78 0.68 
Total  27.67 2.77 
Source : Information furnished by the Forest Department 
Audit observed that the State Government, did not f rame the District Mineral 
Foundation Rules, 2015 (June 2023).  Consequently, the State Government did  not 
realise ₹ 2.77 crore during 2016-23.  Thus, the objective of  creation of DMF for the 
interest and benefit of persons, and the affected a reas by mining related operations, 
could not be achieved.  
The Government replied (March 2024) that in Tripura  Minor Mineral Concessions 
Rules, 2014 (TMMC Rules), there was no provision of the District Mineral Foundation 
and hence, no efforts had been taken.  The Department, however, assured (March 2024) 
that steps for amendment of the TMMC Rules would be considered. 
3.3.6.2 Non-realisation of royalty for contribution  to National Mineral 
Exploration Trust Fund 
Section 9C of the Minor Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 as amended 
in 2015 stipulates that: (1) The Central Government  shall, by notification, establish a 
trust, to be called the National Mineral Exploratio n Trust (NMET).  (2) The object of 
the trust shall be to use the funds accrued to the trust for the purposes of regional and 
detailed exploration in such manner as may be presc ribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The composition and functions of the trust shal l be such as may be prescribed by 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 119 
the Central Government. (4) The holder of a mining lease or a mineral concession shall 
pay to the trust, a sum equivalent to two  per cent  of the royalty paid in terms of the 
Second Schedule, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
Rule 7 (3) of the National Mineral Exploration Trus t Fund Rules, 2015 states that the 
holder of a mining lease and prospecting license cum mining lease shall make payment 
for the contribution of trust fund of amount payabl e under sub-section 4 of section 9C 
of the Act to the State Government simultaneously w ith payment of the royalty. 
Rule 7(6) of the National Mineral Exploration Trust  Rules, 2015 stipulates that the 
responsibility of collection and depositing the amount so collected in the trust fund and 
maintaining necessary accounts to be shared with the Central Government shall be that 
of the State Government. 
Test check of the records revealed that during 2016-23, the Department did not collect 
two per cent  of the royalty amounting to 
₹ 55.34 lakh (two per cent  on ₹ 27.67 crore) 
from the sand mining lease holders for contribution  to the NMET Fund because there 
is no provision in the TMMC Rules for realisation of contribution to the NMET fund. 
The Government replied (March 2024) that in TMMC Ru les, there was no provision 
for National Mineral Exploration Trust and hence, n o efforts had been taken.  The 
Department assured (March 2024), at the instance of  Audit, that steps for amendment 
of TMMC Rules would be considered in accordance with the provisions of The Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (as amended in 2015). 
3.3.6.3 Allotment of mining blocks not identified i n the District Survey Report 
As per Paragraph 7 (iii) (a) and Annexure (X) of no tification 86  and Sustainable Sand 
Mining Management Guidelines, 2016 issued by the Mi nistry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Government of India ( GoI), a District Survey 
Report (DSR) of sand mining or river-bed mining and  mining of other minor minerals 
had to be prepared for each district of the State.  The DSR will guide systematic and 
scientific utilisation of natural resources, so tha t present and future generation may be 
benefited at large. 
The purpose of the DSR is to identify the areas of aggradations or deposition where 
mining can be allowed and identification of areas o f erosion and proximity to 
infrastructural structures and installations where mining should be prohibited .  The 
period of district survey report was for five years .  Further, the State Level Expert 
Appraisal Committee in their 24 
th meeting (September 2020) recommended that mining 
should be done only in areas/ stretches identified in the DSR suitable for mining and so 
certified by the Sub-Divisional Level Committee after site visit. 
As per DSR, 2018 of Unakoti District, 52 sand minin g blocks were identified for 
extraction of sand in the district.  Audit scrutiny  of the records and information 
furnished by the District Forest Officer (DFO), Unakoti, revealed that with the approval 
                                                 
86   No. SO-141(E) of January 2016 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 120 
of the PCCF, the DFO, Unakoti had allotted total 56  sand mining blocks.  Out of 56 
blocks approved, 30 sand mining blocks were not identified in the DSR.  Details of the 
sand mining blocks allotted beyond the DSR are shown in Appendix 3.3.1 . 
Thus, the Department violated the instructions of M oEF&CC, GoI and Sustainable 
Sand Mining Management Guidelines, 2016 while allotting the sand mining blocks. 
Extraction of sand in areas beyond the sand mining blocks identified in the DSR had 
caused weakening of river embankment and erosion of  riverbed as detailed in the 
subsequent case studies.  It may also cause negative impact on aquatic ecosystem of the 
area. 
The Government replied (March 2024) that the matter  had been taken up with the 
Member-Secretary, State Level Environment Impact As sessment Authority (SEIAA)/ 
State Level Expert Appraisal Committee (SEAC).  It added that the SEAC in its 10 
th  
meeting (August 2023) had decided to consider the c reation of new Block IDs and 
Moujas for mining plans till the finalisation of new District Survey Report (DSR). 
The reply is not acceptable as 30 unidentified sand mining blocks were approved by the 
Department during the period from September 2019 to  April 2022, i.e.,  much earlier 
than the holding of 10 th  meeting of SEAC in August 2023. 
3.3.6.4 Unauthorised sand mining  
Rule 3(1) of TMMC Rules envisages that no person sh all undertake any mining or 
quarrying operations in any area except under and i n accordance with the terms and 
conditions of a mining lease or mining permit, as the case may be, granted in accordance 
with the provisions of these rules. 
During joint physical verification (June-October 20 23) in the two sampled districts, it 
was noticed that there were 10 cases 
87  of illegal/ unauthorised sand mining sites with 
the stacks of sand and machines.  A few photographs  of the Illegal sand mining sites 
are shown in Photographs 3.3.1 to 3.3.10 .  Details of approximate quantity of sand 
found at sites and value of loss of royalty are given in Appendix 3.3.2 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
87   These 10 cases were not included in the 56 random ly selected sand mining sites 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 121 
Sites of illegal sand mining 
Location of illegal sand mining and approx. quantity of sand found at site  
  
Photograph 3.3.1: Indira Colony, near School 
Playground, Fatikroy, Kumarghat, Unakoti, 500 
cum 
Photograph 3.3.2: Near approved sand 
mining site of Parijat Singha, Bilaspur, 
Gournagar, Kailashahar, Unakoti, 400 cum 
  
Photograph 3.3.3: Near approved sand mining 
site of Jail Sing Debbarma, Panchamnagar, 
Chandipur, Kailashahar, Unakoti, 350 cum 
Photograph 3.3.4: Near the approved sand 
mining site of Jail Singh Debbarma, 
Panchamnagar, Chandipur, Kailashahar, 
Unakoti, 300 cum 
  
Photograph 3.3.5: Near Kamranga Bari bridge 
at Chaintail, Chandipur, Kailashahar, Unakoti, 
600 cum 
Photograph 3.3.6: Illegal Sand Mining site 
under Abhaya Range of Trishna WLS, 
Trishna, South Tripura District, 700 Cum 


Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 122 
  
Photograph 3.3.7: Santibazar of Bagafa Range 
under SDFO, Bagafa, South Tripura, 3500 cum 
Photograph 3.3.8: Kakulia Range under 
SDFO, Bagafa, South Tripura, 200 cum 
  
Photograph 3.3.9: Near Madhya Pilak High 
School under, Joliabari, Kakulia Range under 
SDFO, Bagafa, South Tripura, 2000 cum 
Photograph 3.3.10: Paschim Ludhua of 
Satchand Range under SDFO Sabroom, 
South Tripura, 500 cum 
Illegal mining indicates, inadequate patrolling/ lapse of departmental monitoring by the 
concerned SDFOs which resulted in loss of Governmen t revenue of ₹ 7.72 lakh as 
shown in Appendix 3.3.2  and caused serious damages to the environment.  Fu rther, 
analysis of Google Earth Images 88  for a considerable period ranging from February 
2016 to October 2023 are shown in Appendix 3.3.3 . Besides, illegal sand mining had 
adversely affected the water level of Muhuri River under South Tripura District.  Two 
case studies regarding decrease in water level of Muhuri river of South Tripura District 
due to illegal and unscientific sand mining are given below: 
Case Study 1 
The Executive Engineer (EE), Drinking Water & Sanitation (DWS), Division, Belonia, South 
Tripura District informed (September 2022) the DFO,  South Tripura District that the water 
level in the Muhuri river had decreased due to unsc ientific sand mining.  Consequently, the 
required amount of raw water was not entering smoot hly inside the intake well of Surface 
Water Treatment Plant (SWTP) on Muhuri River, near Ratan Mani Setu, Belonia, through its 
pockets due to descending water level of Muhuri River. 
                                                 
88   As per availability of images in the Google Earth  


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 123 
During joint physical verification (September 2023) of SWTP with the representative of EE, 
DWS Division, Belonia, it was noticed that the water level of the Muhuri river level was far 
lower than the openings/ pockets of intake well of the SWTP and water was not entering 
inside the well on its own. 
To ensure smooth inflow of water into the intake we ll, water was being pumped into the 
intake well through a syphon so that supply of drinking water could be ensured in the Belonia 
town and its adjoining area.  The present status of intake well and water level is depicted in 
Photograph 3.3.11 .  
 
Photograph 3.3.11: SWTP over Muhuri River, Belonia, South Tripura  
Case Study 2 
The Assistant Engineer (AE), DWS Sub-Division, Jola ibari of South Tripura 
District had informed (March 2019) the EE, DWS Divi sion, Belonia about the 
decrease in water level of Muhuri river.  The AE al so informed (December 2021) 
the DFO, South Tripura District about lifting of sand by unknown persons in Muhuri 
River, which had led to the formation of scouring 89  in the river.  Further, the 
residents of North Jolaibari area had submitted (Ap ril 2021 and December 2021) 
representations to the PCCF about the extraction of  sand in Muhuri River adjacent 
to intake well of mini SWTP at Jolaibari.  It was a lleged that due to lifting of the 
sand from the Muhuri river the mini SWTP and lift i rrigation scheme had been 
affected.  The PCCF directed (December 2021) the DFO, South Tripura District to 
investigate the matter.  During joint investigation carried out (January 2022) by the 
SDFO, Bagafa and the AE, DWS Sub- Division, Jolaibari, it was found that that  
machines were used by unknown persons for lifting o f sand from the Muhuri river 
near Water Pump Resource area of mini SWTP at Jolia bari.  But follow-up action 
taken on the investigation was not be made available to audit. 
                                                 
89   Removal of sediments from the riverbed or bank 


Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 124 
The Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM), Santir Bazar, South Tripura District had 
also received (January 2022) a complaint from the l ocal people of North Jolaibari 
regarding lifting of Sand from the Muhuri River near the Mini SWTP, Jolaibari by 
one licensed proponent of sand mining due to which residents were not getting 
drinking water.  To investigate the matter a team w as constituted by the SDM, 
Santirbazar with the Deputy Collector and Magistrat e, Jolaibari; AE, DWS Sub-
division, Jolaibari; Range Officer, Jolaibari; and Tehsildar, Jolaibari Tehsil.  After 
conducting enquiry, the team reported (February 202 2) that the lifting of sand had 
been carried out by one proponent within 135 metre of the intake well of mini 
SWTP, Jolaibari and 195 metre from the Kakulia brid ge and National Highway.  
The enquiry team recommended to cancel the license of the proponent.  Based on 
the recommendation of the enquiry team, license of the proponent was cancelled. 
 
Photograph 3.3.12: Mini SWTP over Muhuri river, Joliabari  
The Department stated (March 2024) that the forest officials were on regular vigil and 
assured that patrolling would be further strengthened to prevent illegal sand mining. 
3.3.6.5 Non-compliance of Rules and Guidelines of S and Mining 
 
3.3.6.5(i) Permission granted for extraction of San d without Consent to Operate 
from the Tripura State Pollution Control Board 
MoEF&CC, GoI constituted (November 2018) the State Level Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA), Tripura.  The State G overnment notified (January 
2019) the Tripura State Pollution Control Board (TSPCB) to act as a Secretariat of the 
SEIAA, Tripura. 
Rule 6 of the TMMC Rules provides that Forest Depar tment, Government of Tripura 
approves the mining plans of proponents and sends t hem to the SEIAA for 
Environmental Clearance (EC) and accordingly, Conse nt to Operate (CTO) is to be 
issued by the TSPCB to the proponents. 
Test check of the records of DFO, South Tripura Dis trict revealed that the following 
proponents had been given permission for extraction of sand but the proponents did not 
obtain the CTO from the TSPCB.  Details of the permission for extraction of sand and 
total quantity extracted by these proponents were shown in Table 3.3.2. 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 125 
Table 3.3.2: Cases where permission was granted for extraction of sand without CTO 
Name of the 
proponents 
Name of 
the SDFO 
Block 
ID 
Permit issued for 
extraction of sand 
(in cum) 
Sand extracted 
(in cum) 
Apaito Mog Bagafa ST-69 500 500 
Nirmal Malla Bagafa ST-84 4,000 4,000 
Total quantity 4,500 4,500 
The proponents did not obtain the Consent to Operat e from the TSPCB but the DFO, 
South Tripura District issued the permits to the pr oponents for extraction of sand 
violating the provisions of the TMMC Rules.  
While accepting the fact, the Government replied (March 2024) that the sand mining in 
those locations had been stopped.  However, the Dep artment did not take any action 
against the concerned DFO for irregular issue of permits. 
3.3.6.5(ii) Stamp duty and Registration fees not le vied due to non-registration of 
lease agreements 
As per Section 17 (d) of the Indian Registration Ac t, 1908, leases of immovable 
property from year to year, or for any term exceedi ng one year, or reserving a yearly 
rent, shall be registered.  
Further, the lease agreement so executed should be got registered with the Revenue 
Department with proper stamp duty on consideration on price of royalty.  The 
supplementary agreement for the extended period is required to be registered with the 
Revenue Department. 
Test check of the records in the sampled districts revealed that after expiry of initial 
lease period of two years of eight proponents under  Unakoti District lease agreements 
were executed between the DFO and the proponents fo r another two years.  But the 
proponents did not get the agreements for second te rm, registered as per Rule 24 of 
TMMC Rules. 
Therefore, the State Government sustained loss of revenue of 
₹ 1.31 lakh on Stamp duty 
and Registration fees, due to non-registration of s upplementary sand mining lease 
agreements during 2016-23. 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (Ma rch 2024) that the supplementary 
agreement for the extended period would be made. 
3.3.6.5(iii) Permission issued for extraction of sa nd beyond the limit prescribed 
in the CTO and EC 
The sand mining plan, EC, and CTO of each proponent  fixed the prescribed limit for 
extraction of sand per year according to the deposition of sand and also considering the 
erosion of riverbed and diversion of flow of water in river.  
Test check of the records revealed that five proponents had been granted permission by 
the DFO, South Tripura District for extraction of sand beyond their prescribed quantity 
per year as indicated in the relevant ECs and CTOs.   Details of prescribed quantity, 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 126 
actual extraction, and excess extraction of sand beyond the limit prescribed in the ECs 
and CTOs are shown in Table 3.3.3. 
Table 3.3.3: Excess extraction of sand  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the 
proponent  
Block 
ID No.  
Forest 
Sub-
Division 
Permissible 
quantity in a 
year (in cum)  
Permission issued 
by the Forest 
Department for 
extraction of sand 
in a year 
(in cum)  
Excess 
extraction 
(in cum)  
1 Kamal Shil ST-48 Sabroom 426.375 1,500 1,073.625  
2 Tutul Laskar ST-51 Sabroom 583.725 1,500 916.275  
3 Sasanka 
debnath ST-53 Sabroom 687.110 3,000 2,312.890  
4 Jadu Nath ST-44 Sabroom 283.500 1,500 1,216.500  
5 Basu Deb 
Das ST-63 Sabroom 389.920 1,500 1,110.080  
Total excess extraction of sand beyond 
the permissible limit 2,370.630 9,000 6,629.370  
1.   
From Table 3.3.3, it may be seen that the DFO, South Tripura issued  permission for 
extraction sand beyond the prescribed limit which r esulted in excess extraction of 
6,629.370 cum sand. 
Extraction of sand in excess of limit prescribed in  the ECs and CTOs may cause the 
erosion of the riverbed and diversion of flow of wa ter in river.  The reasons for giving 
the permission beyond the prescribed limit by the D FO, South Tripura District in 
violation of terms and conditions of ECs and CTOs, were not found on records. 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (Ma rch 2024) that issue of granting 
permission beyond the limit had happened by mistake  and it assured that henceforth, 
no new permission beyond the limit prescribed in the CTO and EC would be granted.  
3.3.6.5(iv) Extraction of sand without demarcation of sand mining sites 
As per Rule 16(i) and 19 of TMMC Rules and terms an d conditions of EC issued by 
the SEIAA, mining should be done only in areas/ str etches identified in the District 
Level Survey Report suitable for mining and mining should begin only after pucca pillar 
marking the boundary of lease area is erected at th e cost of the lease holder after 
certification by the Forest Department. 
During joint physical verification (June-July and O ctober 2023) it was found that 10 
out of 56 selected sites in Unakoti  and South Tripura Districts, prescribed area was not 
demarcated with pillars by the lease holders (detai ls shown in Appendix 3.3.4 ).  Non 
demarcation of sites may lead to extraction of sand beyond the specified area. 
The Government replied (March 2024) that all extrac tion sites were identified and 
demarcated by pillar.  The reply is not acceptable because during joint physical 
verification 10 out of 56 selected sand mining sites had not been found demarcated with 
the pillars. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 127 
3.3.6.5(v) Non-realisation of penalty for extractio n of sand outside the specified 
area 
Test check of the records of the DFO, South Tripura  District revealed that the Range 
Officer, Hrishyamukh Range had submitted a demarcat ion report (February 2022) of 
sand mining sites of 14 proponents under Belonia Be at near Muhuri river.  As per the 
report submitted by the Range Officer, six out of t he 14 proponents had lifted 14,614 
cum of sand outside their actual designated land as mentioned in their mining plans, in 
violation of Rule 16(i) and 19 of TMMC Rules and terms and conditions of the ECs. 
It was further noticed that the DFO had imposed pen alty (July 2022) of ₹ 10.23 lakh 
against all the six proponents, out of which four p roponents had deposited 
penalty (₹ 6.45 lakh) and the remaining two proponents 90  did not deposit the penalty 
(₹ 3.78 lakh).  This resulted in non-realisation of penalty of ₹ 3.78 lakh. 
While accepting the fact, the Government replied (M arch 2024) that reminder would 
be issued for recovery of penalty from the defaulters. 
3.3.6.5(vi) Use of machinery for sand mining 
As per paragraph 7 of the approved sand mining plan, no machinery should be allowed 
in case of riverbed mining.  The sand mining should be manual with the help of spade, 
hands shovel in which the riverbed materials would be collected in its existing form. 
However, explanation below Rule 16 of the TMMC Rule s, provides that mining 
operations include the erection of machinery laying of tracks or construction of a road 
in connection with the working of the mine. 
During joint physical verification (June-October 20 23) of 56 randomly selected sand 
mining sites it was found that in 54 cases machiner y were used, and in two cases both 
the machinery and manual method were used for extraction of river sand in violation of 
approved sand mining plans as shown in Photographs 3.3.13 to  3.3.16 . Details are 
given in Appendix 3.3.4 . 
  
Photograph 3.3.13: Use of machinery (Pump 
Machine) at Pecharthal Range under SDFO, 
Kumarghat, Unakoti 
Photograph 3.3.14: Use of machinery 
(Pump Machine) at Kumarghat Range 
under SDFO, Kumarghat, Unakoti 
                                                 
90    (a) Shri Santhosh Nath of Uttar Sonaichari (4) Sand Mines, Block-ID – ST 21A ₹ 1,68,210 
 (b) Shri Subrata Das of Uttar Sonaichari (5) Sand Mines, Block-ID – ST 20C ₹ 2,09,930 


Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 128 
  
Photograph 3.3.15: Use of machinery (Pump 
Machine) at Abhaya Range under Wildlife 
Warden, Trishna WLS 
Photograph 3.3.16: Use of machinery 
(Pump Machine) at Hrishyamukh Range 
under SDFO, Bagafa, South Tripura 
These lease holders violated the terms and conditio ns of approved sand mining plans 
thereby increasing the chances of soil erosion in the riverbed. 
Due to lifting of sand by machinery, the embankment  of river became weak and 
unstable.  But the Department did not take any acti on against the defaulters due to 
incorporation of the “explanation” clause below Rule 16 of TMMC Rules. 
In reply,  the Government stated (March 2024) that the ‘explanation’ below Rule 16 (1) 
(h) of the TMMC Rules provided that mining operations should include the erection of 
machinery, laying of tracks or construction of a road in connection with the working of 
the mine.  The Department agreed (March 2024) to th e suggestions made by the audit 
to prohibit the use of machineries for extraction o f sand as the pumping of sand from 
the riverbed for extraction of sand damages the riv ers’ eco-system, and the 
‘explanation’ clause be appropriately modified by amending the TMMC Rules. 
Audit objective 2: Whether the effective monitoring  mechanism for sand mining 
were in place to prevent illegal mining 
 
3.3.7 Inadequate monitoring 
 
3.3.7.1 Non-submission half-yearly compliance repor t for prior stipulated 
Environmental Clearance conditions to the State Pollution Control Board 
As per the terms and conditions stipulated in the E C issued by the SEIAA and 
Enforcement & Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining , 2020 issued by the 
MoEF&CC, GoI, the proponents are required to submit half-yearly compliance reports 
for prior stipulated EC terms and conditions (in hard and soft copies) to the TSPCB on 
1st  June and 1 st  December of each Calendar Year. 
Further, in the 29 th  meeting of State Level Expert Appraisal Committee (SERC) it was 
decided that the all the reports and data pertainin g to prior stipulated EC terms and 
conditions should be submitted to the Member Secretary, SEIAA for needful action by 
the supervising authorities/ committees/ regulators. 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 129 
However, in all the 56 randomly selected sand mining sites, none of the proponents had 
submitted half yearly compliance reports to the TSPCB (district-wise details shown in 
Appendix 3.3.4) which indicated that the Department did not evolve any monitoring 
mechanism for compliance of terms and conditions of  EC.  The SEIAA and TSPCB 
also did not ensure the compliance of terms and con ditions of EC.  Details of action 
taken by the SEIAA and TSPCB for ensuring submissio n of half yearly compliance 
reports by the proponents were not furnished, though called for (April 2024) by audit. 
The Department assured (March 2024) that the matter regarding non-submission of half 
yearly compliance report would be taken up with the  State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) for ensuring compliance. 
3.3.7.2 Non-submission of reports and returns by th e proponents 
Rule 41(3) of TMMC Rules, 2014 stipulates that ever y lessee or permit holder shall 
submit every month to the PCCF/ DFO or authorised o fficer a true and correct return 
for minor minerals in FORM-H by the 5 th  Day of the following month to which it 
relates. 
Rule 16(1)(b) of TMMC Rules, 2014 stipulates that t he lessee shall submit a quarterly 
royalty statement in FORM-I to the competent authority by 15 July, 15 October,  
15 January and 15 April for the preceding quarter respectively. 
Rule 16(1)(n) of TMMC Rules, 2014 stipulates that t he lessee shall submit an annual 
return on mineral raised, despatched, royalty paid,  manpower employed, etc . in 
FORM-J to the PCCF/ CCF/ DFO as the case may be, by the 20 April for the preceding 
financial year. 
However, test check of the records revealed that no ne of the proponents of randomly 
selected 24 sand mines in Unakoti District had submitted the above-mentioned returns 
during 2016-23.  In South Tripura District, only one out of 32 randomly selected cases 
had not submitted the reports and returns to the co mpetent authority (details shown in 
Appendix 3.3.4) .  Therefore, the actual quantity of sand extracted, despatched, royalty 
paid, workforce employed, etc . could not be ascertained in audit. 
Non-submission of mandatory returns by the proponen ts indicated lack of monitoring 
by the departmental officers which led to unauthorised sand mining and loss of revenue, 
use of machinery, etc . as detailed in Paragraphs 3.3.6.5  and 3.3.6.6(vi) . 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (March 2024) that the action would be 
taken by the DFOs for submission of reports and returns by the proponents. 
3.3.7.3 Inadequate inspection of sand mining sites 
As per Rule 16.1(k) of TMMC Rules, 2014 read with t he terms and conditions of EC, 
lease holder shall keep a correct account of date w ise quantity of minerals mined out, 
dispatched from the mine, mode of transport, regist ration number of vehicle, person 
in-charge of vehicle and mine plan.  This should be  produced before officers of the 
Central Government and the State Government for inspection.  

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 130 
During the joint physical verification (June-Octobe r 2023) of 56 randomly selected 
sand mining sites under two sampled districts, it w as noticed that the lease holders of 
40 sites have not maintained records relating to qu antity of sand extracted, dispatched 
from the mine (date wise) which indicated that the Departmental officers had not 
conducted inspection of mining sites, in violation of the TMMC Rules and conditions 
of EC.  The details are shown in Appendix 3.3.4. 
Non-maintenance of accounts of sand mining by the p roponents coupled with non-
inspection by the departmental officers indicated  inadequate monitoring of the mining 
sites by the Department, which led to unauthorised sand mining and loss of revenue. 
The Government replied (March 2024) that the monito ring would be ensured by 
conducting review meetings at the District/ State L evels and physical site inspections, 
visits, etc . 
3.3.8 Conclusion 
Audit of sand mining revealed that non-establishmen t of District Mineral Foundation, 
and non-contribution to National Minerals Exploration Trust resulted in non-realisation 
of revenue.  Mining Blocks were allotted outside the mining sites identified in District 
Survey Report in violation of guidelines issued by MoEF&CC. 
Inadequate monitoring resulted in instances of unau thorised sand mining, use of 
machinery and extraction of sand beyond permissible  limit thereby increasing the 
chances of the soil erosion of riverbed, non-submis sion of half-yearly compliance 
report for Environment Clearance and other prescrib ed reports/ returns by the 
proponents to the TSPCB and the Department respectively. 
3.3.9 Recommendations 
It is recommended that the Government should; 
1.  establish the District Mineral Foundation and amend  TMMC Rules, 2014 in 
line with MMR, 2015 to realise DMF; 
2.  allot the mining blocks within those identified in the District Survey Report; 
3.  collect royalty for contribution to the National Minerals Exploration Trust; 
4.  prevent unauthorised mining and use of machinery for extraction of sand;  
5.  fix responsibility on officers for granting permission to extract sand (i) without 
the CTO and (ii) beyond the quantity prescribed in the CTO and EC; and  
6.  ensure effective monitoring of sand mining. 
 
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 131 
PUBLIC WORKS (WATER RESOURCE) DEPARTMENT  
3.4 Unfruitful expenditure 
 
Failure to ensure quality control by the Engineerin g Officers coupled with 
lackadaisical approach of the Department for rectif ication of the technical 
defects led to unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 3.09 crore on partially constructed 
headworks of the Minor Irrigation scheme (rainwater  storage project) and 
additional liability of ₹ 0.72 crore on rectification of defective works.  
The work ‘Rainwater storage project/ Minor Irrigation (MI) scheme at Kashari Cherra 
under Rajnagar Block, South Tripura/ SH: Construction of earth dam, under sluice and 
pipe outlet (excluding spillway, diaphragm wall and steel gate)’ was awarded (October 
2011) to a contractor at his tendered value of ₹ 2.74 crore. As per divisional records, 
the work commenced in November 2011 and was completed in April 2017. Against the 
value of work done, the contractor was paid ₹ 2.81 crore (upto January 2019). In 
addition to the above, ₹ 0.28 crore 91  was incurred towards construction of steel gate of 
the MI scheme, which was executed separately by another contractor. 
Test check (May 2022) of records of the Executive E ngineer (EE), Public Works 
department (Water Resource){PWD (WR)}, Division-IV, Belonia revealed that, Chief 
Engineer (CE), PWD (WR), Superintending Engineer (S E), WR Circle-III along with 
the EE visited the project during September 2017 an d noticed that the earthen dam of 
the scheme in down-stream side had been eroded due to heavy rainfall and pressure of 
seepage water and outlet sluice valve had been open ed for passing out of stored water 
thereby preventing the further erosion of the earthen dam. The Assistant Engineer (AE), 
WR Sub-Division-1 (under the jurisdiction of WR Div ision IV) requested 
(September 2017) the agency to rectify the erosion of earthen dam, with the intimation 
to the EE. After that, the EE instructed (January 2 021) the contractor to rectify all the 
defects within three months from the date of issue of the instructions failing which full 
security deposit deducted from his bills would be f orfeited. But the contractor did not 
rectify the defects citing that the Division had al ready certified (August 2017) that the 
work had been completed as per specifications in th e measurement book of the work 
and moreover, the defect liability period of one year to be reckoned from the completion 
of the work was already completed. 
After a period of more than six years of detecting the defects by the CE in September 
2017, the Department formed (February 2022) a techn ical committee to submit the 
remedial measures for completion of the MI scheme a nd the committee in its report 
(March 2022) stated the technical causes for failur e of the scheme as absence of 
 
                                                 
91   There was expenditure of ₹ 84.25 lakh for steel gates of three rainwater harvesting projects (including 
Kashari Cherra project) and therefore, average cost  for construction of steel gate for this project wa s 
taken as ₹ 28.08 lakh ( i.e . ₹ 84.25 lakh/3) 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 132 
quality 92  construction. The Chief Engineer (CE), PWD (WR) ap proved (March 2022) 
the proposal and the Department prepared (October 2 022) the estimate for the work 
‘Construction of spillway, abutment wall, etc . including balance work of earthen dam’ 
and based on the estimate the work was awarded (Dec ember 2023) to another 
contractor. The detailed estimate and the agreement  of the second work included two 
items ( i.e.  earth cutting and earth filling) to rectify the defects of the work done by the 
previous contractor, valued ₹ 0.72 crore 93 . 
Audit observed that the concerned JE/ AE/ EE did not adequately ensure quality aspect 
of work executed by the first contractor leading to the avoidable defects pointed out by 
the technical committee. Moreover, the Department d id not timely assess the reasons 
and quantum of defects to be rectified. Without suc h assessments, the AE and EE 
instructed the contractor to rectify the defects af ter certification by them of work 
completion as per the specification and after completion of defect liability period. 
The status (May 2022) of the construction work of p artially completed headworks of 
the scheme is shown in Photographs 3.4.1 , 3.4.2 and  3.4.3 . 
  
Photograph 3.4.1: Earthen dam, Reservoir 
and under sluice at upstream side 
Photograph 3.4.2: Affected portion of earthen 
dam, steel gate control room over vertical 
shaft at downstream side 
                                                 
92   Absence of core wall material of required charact eristics, improper compaction of soil, settlement/ 
slipping of a part of dam and huge seepage caused b y quick and unscientific priming of water in the 
dam before construction of toe drain, huge leakage of water through joints of spun pipe (outlet pipe), 
steep slope of downstream earth surface of the dam,  absence or improper laying and connection of 
horizontal and vertical sand filter, use of improper quality of filter material, etc . 
93   {Item at Sl.1 of the estimate: 21,482 cum (qty.) x ₹ 134.90 (rate) i.e . ₹ 28.98 lakh plus  item at Sl. 3(a) 
of the estimate: 20,148 cum (qty.) x ₹ 200.10 (rate) i.e . ₹ 40.31 lakh} plus tender premium (3.30 per 
cent ) = ₹ 71.58 lakh 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 133 
 
Photograph 3.4.3: Seepage of water through Steel gate control room and under sluice at 
downstream side 
Para 53.4 of CPWD Works Manual, 2007 provides that the direct responsibility for 
ensuring proper quality of work as per approved specifications rests with the Executive 
Engineer, Assistant Engineer, and Junior Engineer. The Superintending Engineer shall 
be overall responsible for management of quality system and procedures for the works 
under his charge. 
Therefore, failure to ensure quality control by the  Engineering Officers during the 
execution of headworks by the first contractor coup led with lackadaisical approach of 
the Department for assessment and rectification of the technical defects led to unfruitful 
expenditure of 
₹ 3.09 crore 94  on partially constructed headworks of the MI scheme and 
additional liability of ₹ 0.72 crore on rectification of defective works. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2024) that, some portion of the dam had been 
kept bare without turf for taking up the second pha se work i.e.  spillway and its allied 
works. Rainfall occurred resulting in flash flood a nd the bare top of the dam had been 
got affected. No further damage had been taken plac e due to precautionary measures 
taken by releasing water from the reservoir and the re was no unfruitful expenditure 
because the scheme would be commissioned within one and half year. 
The reply is not acceptable to audit as the work wa s completed (April 2017) without 
ensuring proper quality by the departmental enginee rs contrary to the manualised 
provision. The Department also could not act agains t the defaulting contractor due to 
incorrect certification on completion of work. Besi des, it did not take timely and 
appropriate response for rectification of the defec ts noticed (September 2017) in the 
work executed by the first contractor. 
Recommendations: 
1 The Government may fix responsibility of the office r concerned for failure in 
ensuring quality control in execution of the project; and  
2 ensure quality control during execution of projects  to avoid additional 
expenditure on rectification of defective works and  timely completion of the 
projects. 
                                                 
94   Value of the work done by the first contractor: ₹ 2.81 crore plus expenditure on construction of steel 
gate: ₹ 0.28 crore 


Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 134 
PUBLIC WORKS (BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
3.5 Non recovery of dues from the contractor 
 
The Executive Engineer, Public Works (Building) Department, Capital Complex 
Division did not recover the dues ( ₹ 1.62 crore) from the contractor being the 
value of unused departmentally supplied steel not r eturned by the contractor, 
rent charges of plant, empty bitumen drums and taxes. 
The Executive Engineer, Public Works (Building) Dep artment, Capital Complex 
Division (EE, CCD) awarded (November 2009) the cons truction work of “Composite 
Tripura Legislative Assembly Building and New Secre tariat Building at New Capital 
Complex, Agartala, Tripura/ Package-3/ Infrastructu re Work (Phase-II)” to a 
contractor 95  at a tendered value of ₹ 37.78 crore, i.e.  25.77 per cent  above the estimated 
cost of ₹ 30.04 crore with a stipulation to complete the wor k within 24 months, i.e , 
November 2011. The work commenced in November 2009 and was completed in March 
2018. The total value of work done was ₹ 40.40 crore (including extra items of ₹ 1.09 
crore) upto 20 th  RA and final bill. Of these, ₹ 39.42 crore 96  was paid (11 September 
2018) to the contractor. 
Test check (June 2021) of records of the EE, CCD revealed that, there was non-recovery 
of dues of 
₹ 1.62 crore from the contractor as detailed in Appendix 3.5.1 . Audit noticed 
recoverable dues against departmentally supplied st eel, rent charges of Asphalt Drum 
Mix Plant and empty bitumen drums as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
(i)  Non-recovery against departmentally supplied steel 
Para 25.3.1(2)(iv)(c) of CPWD Manual, 2007 stipulat es that “theoretical consumption 
statement for steel bars should be prepared along with every running bill”. As per Clause 
98(d) of the agreement concluded with the contracto r, steel was supplied by the 
Department as per the rates as shown in Table 3.5.1 . 
Table 3.5.1: Rates of departmentally issued materials 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Recovery rate (in ₹) Unit 
1. Tor Steel (8 mm to 16 mm) 36,883  MT 
2. Tor Steel (20 mm and above) 36,779  MT 
Clause 98(e)(i) of the agreement also stipulated fo r recovery of departmentally issued 
steel at double the issue rate if the balance/ unut ilised quantity ( i.e . difference between 
quantity issued and quantity consumed as per theoretical consumption plus  five per cent  
wastage) of steel were not returned by the contractor. 
Against six 97  agreement items (AI) of work, 921.106 MT steel was  consumed. 
However, no theoretical consumption statement again st the departmentally supplied 
                                                 
95   Shri Bimalendu Chakraborty 
96   ₹ 38,82,02,787 (19 th  RA bill) and ₹ 60,00,000 (20 th  RA bill) 
97   AI 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 12 (detail in Appendix 3.5.2 ) 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 135 
steel was prepared by the Sub-Divisional Officer an d the Divisional Officer passed 98  
the bills without preparation of theoretical consumption statement. 
Audit noticed that ₹ 39.20 lakh was not recovered by the Division again st the quantity 
of balance unused steel not returned by the contrac tor. The details of the balance 
quantity of steel and the money value involved calculated at double the issue rate as per 
the agreement are shown in Appendix 3.5.2 . It was found that balance quantity of steel 
issued against six AIs of work not returned by the contractor was 53.161 MT (issued 
quantity of 974.163 MT minus  consumed quantity of 921.002 MT including five per 
cent wastage) instead of 14.516 MT as calculated by the Division. Thus, there was a 
short recovery of ₹ 39.20 lakh. 
(ii) Non-recovery of rent charges of Asphalt Drum M ix Plant 
As per Clause 78.2 of the agreement, the contractor  shall make his own arrangements 
to equip himself with all machinery and special tools and plant for the speedy and proper 
execution of the work and the Department does not u ndertake responsibility towards 
their supply. 
As per Clause 78.3 of the agreement, the Department shall supply such of the machinery 
that may be available on hire basis but their suppl y cannot be demanded as matter of 
right and no delay in progress can be attributed to  such non-supply of the plant by the 
Department. The hire charges for the machinery hand ed over to the contractor will be 
recovered at the rate prevalent at the time of supply. The contractor will have to execute 
a supplemental agreement with the Executive Enginee r at the time of supply of the 
machinery. Clause 78.4 of the agreement provided th at the acceptance of departmental 
machinery on hire was optional to the contractor. 
Hence, the supply of plant, equipment, and labour m andatorily by the Department was 
not stipulated in the agreement with the contractor. 
As per the decision taken in the review meeting (11  March 2014) of the Engineer-in-
Chief and instructions (14 March 2014) of the Superintendent Engineer, 4 
th  circle to the 
EE, Mechanical Division, PWD (R&B), the Asphalt Dru m Mix (ADM) plant at 
Damdamia alongwith all related equipment and access ories were handed over to the 
contractor and recovery of rent of ADM plant and ac cessories, etc . had to be made by 
the EE, CCD. The upkeep & maintenance and operation of the plant should be borne by 
the Division. The plant was returned (4 May 2016) b y the contractor and the EE, 
Mechanical Division requested (12 March 2014) the E E, CCD to recover the hiring 
charges ( ₹ 9,603 per day as per rate fixed by Mechanical Division of the State PWD) of 
the plant from the contractor. 
It was, however, noticed in audit that the contract or had used the ADM plant for 780 
days during 15 March 2014 to 4 May 2016, but hiring  charges of the plant was not 
                                                 
98   The Sub-Divisional Officer is responsible for pre paration of the theoretical consumption statement 
and it is approved by the Divisional Officer. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 136 
recovered by the Division from the contractor, whic h resulted in non-recovery of 
₹ 74.90 lakh 99  in violation of provision of agreement.  
(iii)  Short recovery of empty bitumen drum 
As per Clause 98 (d) of the agreement, empty bitume n drum should be returned to the 
Assistant Engineer/ Capital Complex Sub Division No .1. In the event of non-return of 
the empty bitumen drum, the contractor should be charged ₹ 100 for each empty bitumen 
drum. 
It was noticed that 441.557 MT bitumen was issued in 2,729 
100  bitumen drums and out 
of which 875 empty bitumen drums were recovered. Th erefore, balance 1,854 empty 
bitumen drums valued ₹ 1.85 lakh 101  remained unrecovered from the contractor (June 
2023). 
Thus, the EE, CCD did not recover the dues of 
₹ 1.62 crore from the contractor being 
the value of unused departmentally supplied steel n ot returned by the contractor, rent 
charges of plant, empty bitumen drums and taxes. 
The matter was reported to the Government in July 2 023. In reply, the Government 
stated (January 2024) that the amount to be recovered for departmentally issued unused 
steel not returned by the contractor is 
₹ 10.70 lakh instead of ₹ 39.20 lakh and recovery 
rate for hiring charge of ADM plant was ₹ 6,812 per day instead of ₹ 9,603 per day. The 
reply is not acceptable as the Department had not t aken into account the five per cent  
wastage on the total steel used as per the agreemen t and the rate of recovery for rent 
charges of ADM plant was ₹ 9,603 per day (instead of ₹ 6,812) as mandatory supply of 
plant and equipment by the Department was not stipu lated in the agreement with the 
contractor. The Department also failed (January 2024) to furnish the reason for delay in 
payment of final bill to the contractor for over fi ve years ( i.e, from the date of 
preparation of final bill on 6 September 2018). 
Recommendations: 
1 The Government may take action against the officer( s) concerned after fixing 
responsibility for failure to recover the value of unused departmentally supplied 
steel not returned by the contractor, rent charges of plant, empty bitumen drums 
and taxes. 
2 The Government may establish a system to ensure tha t financial interests of the 
State are always protected during execution of the projects.   
                                                 
99   ₹ 74,90,340 (for 780 days during 15 March 2014 to 4 May 2016 @ ₹ 9,603 per day) 
100   441.557 MT of Bitumen requires 2,729 barrels as it was seen from the store indents that 10.0316 MT 
of Bitumen was issued in 62 barrels 
101   ₹ 1,854 x ₹ 100= ₹ 1,85,400 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 137 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
3.6 Extra expenditure  
The Executive Engineer, Public Works Department (Ro ads & Buildings), 
Dharmanagar Division did not take steps for obtaini ng confirmation on 
publication of the first call of tender in the newspapers, from the Information and 
Cultural Affairs Department in violation of the State Government’s instructions. 
That led to the cancellation of the first call of tender and awarding of the work at 
a higher rate in the subsequent call which led to extra expenditure of ₹ 0.93 crore. 
The State Government adopted (May 2007) the Central  Public Works Department 
(CPWD) Works Manual to the State Public Works Department (PWD) subject to some 
modifications/ alterations in the CPWD Works Manual. As per Para 17.1(1) of CPWD 
Works Manual, 2014, wide publicity should be given to the Notice Inviting Tender 
(NIT) and tenders must be invited in the most open and public manner possible by 
advertisement on the website/ press. As per instructions (May 2007) issued by the State 
Government 102 , the advertisement for NITs shall be sent by the E xecutive Engineer 
(EE) to the Directorate of Information and Cultural  Affairs (ICA) Department, 
Government of Tripura for insertion in the press well in advance and a watch should be 
kept by the EE on publication of advertisement in t hose newspapers where 
advertisements are being released by the ICA Department. Newspapers cuttings in each 
case should be collected by the EE and kept on record as a proof of publicity achieved 
as far as possible. 
The PWD accorded (December 2016) the administrative  approval and expenditure 
sanction of 
₹ 9.15 crore for the work “Improvement of Bagbassa-D harmanagar road 
from intermediate lane to double lane/ SH: Widening , BM, carpeting, protection wall, 
etc.  portion from Ch.0.00 Km. to Ch. 8.00 Km.” The Chie f Engineer (CE), Public 
Works Department (Roads and Building) {PWD (R&B)}ac corded (January 2017) 
technical sanction of ₹ 9.15 crore for the work. 
Scrutiny (January 2022) of records of the Executive  Engineer (EE), PWD (R&B), 
Dharmanagar Division revealed that the EE invited ( February 2017) the tender {( vide 
Press Notice Inviting Tender (PNIT) dated 28 Februa ry 2017 with last date of 
submission of bid on 30 March 2017}.PNIT was upload ed (1 March 2017) on the 
website (https://tripuratenders.gov.in). In respons e, three bids were received and the 
first lowest bidder 103  quoted rate of 5.57 per cent  below the estimated cost ( ₹ 8.89 crore) 
put to tender. During evaluation of tender and subm itting the same along with the bid 
documents, to the CE, PWD (R&B), the EE and Superintending Engineer, First Circle, 
PWD (R&B) stated (August 2017-September 2017) that the rate quoted by the first 
lowest bidder might be accepted as the quoted rate was favourable to the Department. 
Although the EE had sent the NIT to the Directorate  of ICA Department, Government 
                                                 
102   Issued vide Government of Tripura, PWD’s notification No. F.15(2)/MC-PWD dated 30 May 2007 
103   M/s N. G. Bhattacharjee Construction Co. 

Chapter III:  Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 138 
of Tripura for publication in the newspapers but th e EE did not (i) keep watch of 
publication of the advertisement in newspapers and (ii) collect the newspapers’ cuttings 
for keeping on record as a proof of publicity, in v iolation of the State Government’s 
instructions. The Chief Engineer (CE) (December 201 7) cancelled the first call of 
tender due to non-submission of confirmation from t he ICA Department, Government 
Tripura on publication of NIT in the newspapers, by the EE. 
After that, the EE invited (January 2018) the second call of tender through e-tendering 
by uploading the PNIT on the website and by publish ing the PNIT in newspapers 
through ICA Department. Out of two bids received in  second call, the first lowest bid 
was found informal as the bidder had not furnished the earnest money as per terms and 
conditions of the NIT. The CE cancelled the tender as the rate quoted by second lowest 
bidder was found high (11.67 per cent  above the estimated cost of ₹ 8.89 crore put to 
tender) and ordered (July 2018) to call the tender for third time. 
The EE invited (November 2018) the third call of te nder through e-tendering by 
uploading the PNIT on the website and by publishing the PNIT in newspapers through 
ICA Department. In the third call of tender (November 2018), eight bidders participated 
during the tendering process and the first lowest bidder 104  quoted ₹ 9.32 crore i.e.  4.89 
per cent  above the estimated cost of ₹ 8.89 crore put to tender. On acceptance of lowest 
quoted rate by the CE, the EE issued (August 2019) work order to the lowest bidder 
with a stipulation to complete the work by six months. The work commenced in August 
2019 and was completed in January 2021. The total v alue of work done was ₹ 9.44 
crore (including extra items valued ₹ 0.26 crore) and the same was paid (March 2021) 
to the contractor. 
Thus, the EE, PWD (R&B), Dharmanagar Division did n ot take steps for obtaining 
confirmation on publication of the first call of tenders in the newspapers, from the ICA 
Department in violation of the State Government’s i nstructions. That led to the 
cancellation of the first call of tender and awardi ng of the work at a higher rate in the 
subsequent call with the involvement of extra expenditure 
105  of ₹ 0.93 crore. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2023) that the EE, PWD (R&B), Dharmanagar 
Division had issued press notice to the ICA Departm ent for press publication, which 
was never received by the ICA Department. It also a dded that cancellation of e-tender 
in the first call due to non-publication of the NIT  in newspapers was strictly in 
compliance with the guidelines as issued by the Government. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per State Government’s instructions (May 2007) 
the duty of the EE,PWD (R&B), Dharmanagar Division was not only limited to making 
request with the Director, ICA  Department, Government of Tripura for release of 
advertisement but the EE should also (i) keep watch of publication of the advertisement 
in the newspapers and (ii) collect the newspapers’ cuttings for keeping on record as a 
proof of publicity. 
                                                 
104   Shekhar Ch. Podder, Contractor 
105   ₹ 8.89 crore x [4.89-(-5.57)] per cent  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 139 
The matter was again taken up (July 2023) with the State Government. The Secretary 
accepted the facts and also assured (December 2023)  that the Department would issue 
necessary directions for ensuring the publication of tender notices in the newspapers. 
Recommendation: 
The Government may fix responsibility of the office rs concerned for the lapse and 
also to ensure timely implementation of the project s thereby avoiding the cost 
escalation.  

CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(State Public Sector Enterprises) 

Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 141 
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR  
(STATE PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES)  
4.1 Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 
 
4.1.1 Introduction  
The State Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) consist of State Government Companies 
and Statutory Corporations. The PSEs are establishe d to carry out activities of 
commercial nature and occupy an important place in the State economy. As on 31 
March 2023, there were 16 PSEs (including one non-w orking) in Tripura. The details 
of the PSEs in Tripura as on 31 March 2023 are given in Table 4.1.1 . 
Table 4.1.1: Total number of PSEs  as on 31 March 2023  
Type of PSEs Working PSEs Non-working 
PSEs 106  Total  
Government Companies 107  14  1108  15 109  
Statutory Corporations  1  -  1  
Total  15  1  16  
None of these PSEs were listed on the Stock Exchang e. During the year 2022-23, two 
new PSEs were incorporated and no existing PSE was closed down.  
4.1.2 Investment in PSEs 
 
4.1.2.1 State Government’s investment in PSEs 
The State’s investment in its PSEs was by way of sh are capital/ loans and special 
financial support by way of revenue grants.  
As on 31 March 2023, the investment of the State Go vernment (capital and long-term 
loans) in 16 PSEs was 
₹ 1,881.79 crore 110  in the form of equity ( ₹ 1,652.33 crore) and 
long term loans ( ₹ 229.46 crore).   
The State Government investment ( ₹ 1,881.79 crore) as on 31 March 2023 consisted 
of 87.81 per cent  towards capital and 12.19 per cent  in long-term loans as against the 
investment of ₹ 1,675.55 crore as on 31 March 2019 consisting of 8 7.69 per cent  
(capital) and 12.31 per cent (long-term loans). A graphical presentation of Stat e 
Government investment in PSEs during last five year s (2018-19 to 2022-23) has been 
given in Chart 4.1.1 . 
                                                 
106   Non-working PSEs are those which have ceased to carry on their operations.  
107  Government companies include Other Companies refer red to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the 
Companies Act, 2013.  
108  Tripura State Bank Limited  
109  Does not include two new PSE’s - Tripura Nature Tr ails and Resort Limited (incorporated on 
21 November 2022) and Tripura Power Transmission Li mited (incorporated on 19 January 2023) 
whose first accounts are not finalised as on 30 September 2023.  
110  Investment figures are provisional and as provided  by the PSEs excepting three PSEs (Sl. No. A.8, 
A.9 and A.14 of Appendix 4.1.1 ), investment figures for which have been adopted f rom their 
finalised accounts for 2022-23.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 142 
 
As can be seen from Chart 4.1.1  that, the State Government’s investment in PSEs 
during last five years showed an increasing trend. The State’s investment grew by 
12.31 per cent  (₹ 206.24 crore) from ₹ 1,675.55 crore in 2018-19 to ₹ 1,881.79 crore 
in 2022-23.  
During 2022-23, out of 14 111  working PSEs where State Government had made direc t 
investment, eleven PSEs incurred loss ( ₹ 321.03 crore) and three PSEs earned profit 
(₹ 0.89 crore) as per their latest finalised accounts  ( Appendix 4.1.1 ). None of the 
three profit making PSEs had declared any dividend.  There was no recorded 
information about the existence of any specific pol icy of the State Government 
regarding payment of dividend by the PSEs.  
The State Government’s investment (historical value ) in PSEs had eroded by 
11.92 per cent  in 2022-23, and the accumulated losses ( ₹ 1,118.89 crore 112 ) of four 
PSEs 113  had completely eroded the State’s investment ( ₹ 845.99 crore) in their paid-up 
capital, as per their latest finalised accounts.  
4.1.2.2 Total Sector-wise investment in PSEs 
Details of the total investment of State Government  and Other Stakeholders (Central 
Government, Holding Companies, Banks, Financial Ins titutions, etc .) in PSEs under 
various important sectors at the end of 31 March 20 19 and 31 March 2023 has been 
given in Table 4.1.2 .  
                                                 
111  Excluding Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited (pro fit earned: ₹ 20.25 crore), which had no 
direct investment from the State Government 
112  Net after adjusting the Free Reserves ( ₹ 61.07 crore) of PSE at serial No. A8 of Appendix 4.1.1  
113  Serial No. A5, A8, A13 and B1 of Appendix 4.1.1  
1469.25 1508.00 1561.92 1609.18 1652.33 
206.30 206.35 206.05 262.40 229.46 
1675.55 1714.35 1767.97 
1871.58 1881.79 
0.00 
200.00 
400.00 
600.00 
800.00 
1000.00 
1200.00 
1400.00 
1600.00 
1800.00 
2000.00 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart 4.1.1: State's total investment in PSEs 
Equity Long Term Loans Total 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 143 
Table 4.1.2: Sector-wise details of total investments 114  in PSEs  
(₹ in crore)  
Name of Sector  
Government/ 
Other  
Companies  
Statutory 
Corporations  Total Investment  
2018-19  2022-23  2018-19  2022-23  2018-19  2022-23  
Power  742.35  1,464.69  0.00  0.00  742.35  1,464.69  
Manufacturing  404.96  499.33  0.00  0.00  404.96  499.33  
Financing  144.62  144.62  0.00  0.00  144.62  144.62  
Service  148.94  205.65  163.03  163.96  311.97  369.61  
Agriculture & Allied  72.95  103.72  0.00  0.00  72.95  103.72  
Miscellaneous  8.86  30.12  0.00  0.00  8.86  30.12  
Total  1,522.68  2,448.13  163.03  163.96  1,685.71  2,612.09  
Source:  PSEs data  
It can be seen from Table 4.1.2  that as compared to 2018-19, the combined 
investment of State Government and Other Stakeholde rs increased by ₹ 926.38 crore 
(55 per cent ) during 2022-23, major portion (94 per cent ) of which pertained to the 
Power Sector ( ₹ 722.34 crore), Manufacturing Sector ( ₹ 94.37 crore) and in Service 
Sector ( ₹ 57.64 crore).  
The increase in investment under the Power sector w as mainly due to the net increase 
in borrowings ( ₹ 722.24 crore 115 ) availed by power sector companies from various 
sources during the period of five years (2018-23).  Increase in the investment under 
Manufacturing sector was attributable to additional  equity infusion by the State 
Government to Tripura Jute Mills Limited ( ₹ 86.53 crore) and Tripura Small 
Industries Corporation Limited ( ₹ 7.84 crore) over the period of four years (2019-23).   
Similarly, the investment in the Service sector inc reased mainly due to additional 
equity contribution ( ₹ 57.49 crore) provided by the State Government to T ripura 
Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation Li mited ( ₹ 56.31 crore) and 
Tripura Road Transport Corporation ( ₹ 1.18 crore) during the said period.  
4.1.3 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
The figures in respect of equity and loans provided  by the State Government as per 
the records of PSEs should agree with the correspon ding figures appearing in the 
Finance Accounts of the State. In case of differenc es in the figures, the PSEs 
concerned and the Finance Department should carry o ut reconciliation of differences.  
The position in this regard as on 31 March 2023 is given in Table 4.1.3 .  
                                                 
114  Investment figures are provisional and as provided  by the PSEs excepting the PSEs, which had 
finalised their up-to-date accounts as at 30 September of 2019 and 2023 respectively. 
115  State Government: ₹ 23.41 crore; Central Government: ₹ 482.40 crore and Others: ₹ 216.43 crore 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 144 
Table 4.1.3: Equity, loans outstanding as per the Finance Accounts vis-à-vis  records of 
PSEs  
(₹ in crore)  
Outstanding in 
respect of  
Amount as per Finance 
Accounts  
Amount as per 
records of PSEs  Difference  
Equity  1,593.00 1,652.33 59.33  
Loans  156.90 229.46 72.56  
Source:  Finance Accounts 2022-23 and PSEs records  
As on 31 March 2023, there were unreconciled differ ences in the figures of equity 
(₹ 59.33 crore) and loan ( ₹ 72.56 crore) as per two sets of records. The diffe rences in 
equity occurred in respect of 13 PSEs 116  falling under Agriculture and Allied Sector 
(four PSEs), Service Sector (four PSEs), Manufactur ing Sector (two PSEs), Power 
Sector (two PSEs) and Finance Sector (one PSE).   
As regards Loan figures, the Finance Department dis burses the loans to various 
Departments of the State Government for different s ectoral activities and booked the 
amount sector-wise in the Finance Accounts. In turn , the Departments disburse these 
loans to respective PSEs functioning under their ad ministrative control. Hence, 
PSE-wise figures of State Government loans provided  to various PSEs are not 
available in the State Finance Accounts. However, t he State Government loan figure 
booked in the Finance Accounts ( ₹ 156.90 crore) pertained to the PSEs under Power 
Sector ( ₹ 156.75 crore) and Service Sector ( ₹ 0.15 crore).  
The State Government and the PSEs concerned may take concrete steps to reconcile 
the differences in a time-bound manner. The Government should correct the system 
of recording the funding provided to PSEs in the St ate Finance Accounts and the 
Finance Accounts be updated.  
4.1.4 Special support and guarantees to PSEs during  the year 
The State Government provides financial support to PSEs in various forms through 
annual budgetary allocations.  The summarised detai ls of budgetary outgo towards 
equity, loans and grants/ subsidies in respect of P SEs for the three years ended 
2022-23 are given in Table 4.1.4 . 
 
                                                 
116  PSEs at Sl. Nos. A.1 to A.12 and B.1 of Appendix 4.1.1  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 145 
Table 4.1.4: Details regarding budgetary support to PSEs  
(₹ in crore)  
Particulars  
2020-21  2021-22  2022-23 
No. of 
PSEs  Amount  No. of 
PSEs  Amount  No. of 
PSEs  Amount  
Equity capital outgo from 
budget  6  52.34  6  46.86  6  43.15 
Loans given from budget  -  -  1  56.36  1  100.00 
Grants/ subsidy from budget  2  71.18  4  120.71  4   160.70 
Total Outgo 117  8  123.52  10  223.93  10  303.85  
Guarantees issued  -  -  1  100  1  175.00  
Guarantee commitment  -  -  -  -  -  -  
Source:  Figures as provided by the PSEs  
It can be seen from Table 4.1.4  that, the State Government had provided a total 
budgetary support of ₹ 303.85 crore to PSEs during 2022-23, which was hig her by 
₹ 180.33 crore (145.99 per cent ) as compared to the financial support provided dur ing 
2020-21.  
The major beneficiaries of budgetary outgo during 2 022-23 were Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited (loan: ₹ 100 crore, grant/ subsidy: ₹ 129.09 crore), 
Agartala Smart City Limited (grant/ subsidy: ₹ 25.27 crore), Tripura Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (equity : ₹ 14.82 crore) and Tripura 
Jute Mills Limited (equity: ₹ 12.53 crore).  
4.1.5 Accountability framework 
The audit of the financial statements of a Company in respect of financial years 
commencing on or after 1 April 2014 is governed by the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (Act) and audit of the financial statemen ts in respect of financial years that 
commenced earlier than 1 April 2014 continued to be  governed by the Companies 
Act, 1956. The new Act has brought about increased Regulatory Framework, wider 
Management responsibility and higher Professional Accountability.  
4.1.5.1 Statutory Audit/ Supplementary Audit 
Statutory Auditors appointed by the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India 
(C&AG), audit the financial statements of a Governm ent Company. In addition, 
C&AG conducts the Supplementary Audit of these fina ncial statements under the 
provisions of Section 143 (6) of the Act.  
Audit of Statutory Corporations is governed by thei r respective Legislations. The 
State of Tripura had only one Statutory Corporation  (Tripura Road Transport 
Corporation), which was working. The C&AG is the so le auditor of this Corporation 
in terms of Section 19 (2) of the Comptroller and A uditor General’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 read with Sect ion 33(2) of the Road Transport 
Corporations Act, 1950.  
                                                 
117  Actual number of PSEs, which received equity, loan s, grants/ subsidies from the State Government. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 146 
4.1.5.2 Role of Government and Legislature 
The State Government exercises control over the aff airs of these PSEs through its 
administrative departments. The Government appoints  the Chief Executive and 
Directors on the Board of these PSEs.  
The State Legislature also monitors the accounting and utilisation of State 
Government investment in the PSEs. For this purpose , the Annual Reports of State 
Government Companies together with the Statutory Au ditors’ Reports and comments 
of the C&AG thereon are to be placed before the Leg islature under Section 394 of the 
Act. Similarly, the Annual Reports of Statutory Cor porations along with the Separate 
Audit Reports of C&AG are required to be placed bef ore the Legislature as per the 
stipulations made under their respective governing Acts. The Audit Reports of C&AG 
are submitted to the Government under Section 19A o f the C&AG’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  
4.1.6 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
Financial statements of the Companies are required to be finalised within six months 
from the end of the relevant financial year i.e . by end of September in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 96 (1) of the Compan ies Act. Failure to do so may 
attract penal provisions under Section 99 of the Ac t. Similarly, the accounts of 
Statutory Corporations, are to be finalised, audite d and presented to the Legislature as 
per the provisions of their respective Acts.  
Timely finalisation of accounts is important for th e State Government to assess the 
financial health of the PSEs and to avoid financial  misappropriation and 
mismanagement. Persistent delay in finalisation of accounts is fraught with the risk of 
fraud and leakage of public money going undetected apart from violation of the 
provision of the Companies Act, 2013.  
Table 4.1.5  provides the details relating to finalisation of a ccounts by working PSEs 
as of 30 September 2023.  
Table 4.1.5: Position relating to finalisation of Accounts of working PSEs 
Sl. No. Particulars 2018-19  2019-20  2020-21  2021-22  2022-23  
1.  Number of working PSEs  14  15 118  15  15  15 
2.  Number of Accounts finalised during 
the year  16  16 119  13  18  13 
3.  Number of Accounts in arrears  21  24  26  23  25  
4.  Number of Working PSEs with 
arrears in Accounts  12  13  14  12  12  
5.  Extent of arrears (number in years)  1 to 4 
years  
1 to 4 
years  
1 to 5 
years  
1 to 6 
years  
1 to 7 
years  
                                                 
118  Included Tripura Power Generation Limited which wa s incorporated on 28 January 2015.  
119  Included four arrear accounts of Tripura Power Gen eration Limited (2015-16 to 2018-19).  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 147 
As could be noticed from Table 4.1.5  that the accounts of only three 120  out of 15 
working PSEs were up-to-date as on 30 September 202 3. Remaining 12 working 
PSEs had a backlog of total 25 accounts for periods  ranging from one to seven years. 
The oldest Accounts in arrears was since 2016-17 (s even Accounts), which related to 
‘Tripura Horticulture Corporation Limited’ as detailed in Appendix 4.1.1 .  
The administrative departments concerned have the r esponsibility to oversee the 
activities of these entities and to ensure that the ir accounts are finalised and adopted 
by the PSEs within the stipulated period.   
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura h ad been taking up the matter 
regularly with the PSEs 121  and the administrative departments 122  concerned for 
liquidating the arrears of accounts of PSEs. Howeve r, the State Government and the 
PSEs concerned could not address the issue to clear  all pendency of accounts of the 
PSEs in a time bound manner.  
4.1.7  Placement of Separate Audit Reports 
Timely placement of SARs in the State Legislature i s important to ensure timely 
reporting on the functioning of the Corporation to the stakeholders and fix 
accountability of the Management for its performance.   
Tripura Road Transport Corporation (TRTC) was the o nly Statutory Corporation in 
the State of Tripura covered under the audit purvie w of C&AG. The Accounts of 
TRTC have been finalised upto 2019-20 and Separate Audit Reports (SARs) of the 
C&AG on these Accounts have also been issued. The SARs on the Accounts of TRTC 
have been placed (7 July 2023) in the State Legisla ture upto the accounting year 
2019-20.  
Recommendations:  
a.  The State Government may set up a special cell to o versee the clearance of 
arrears of PSE-accounts and set the targets for ind ividual PSEs, which may be 
monitored by the cell; 
b.  The State Government may ensure that existing vacan cies in the accounts 
department of PSEs are timely filled up with person s having domain expertise 
and experience; and  
c.  The PSEs may get the figures of equity and loans re conciled with the State 
Government Departments and arrear of accounts are cleared.  
                                                 
120  Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited, Tripura Power  Generation Limited and Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited.  
121  May, October, December 2022 and March 2023  
122  June 2022 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 148 
4.1.8 Investments made by State Government in PSEs whose accounts are in 
arrears 
The State Government had invested ₹ 65.75 crore in six PSEs (equity: ₹ 65.75 crore 
and loans: Nil) during the years for which these PS Es had not finalised their accounts 
as detailed in Table 4.1.6 .  
Table 4.1.6: Investment by State Government in PSEs having accounts in arrears  
(₹ in crore)  
Sl.  
No.  Name of PSE  
Accounts 
finalised 
upto  
Accounts 
pending 
finalisation  
Investment by State  
Government during the 
period of arrears  
Equity  Loans  
1  Tripura Horticulture 
Corporation Limited 
 2015-16  2016-17 to 
2022-23  5.70  0.00  
2  Tripura Tea Development 
Corporation Limited 
 2021-22  2022-23  6.30  0.00  
3  Tripura Rehabilitation 
Plantation Corporation 
Limited 
 
2020-21  2021-22 & 
2022-23  
6.50  0.00  
4  Tripura Jute Mills Limited  2021-22  2022-23  12 .53  0.00  
5  Tripura Small Industries 
Corporation Limited  2018-19  2019-20 to 
2022-23  19.90 
 0.00  
6  
Tripura Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Limited  
2021-22 2022-23 14.82 
 0.00  
Total  65.75  0.00  
In the absence of accounts and their subsequent aud it, it could not be verified if the 
investments made and the expenditure incurred have been properly accounted for and 
the purpose for which the amount was invested was achieved or not.   
The Government may consider not giving further fina ncial assistance to the PSEs 
having backlog of Accounts until the accounts are made as current as possible.  
The Government may consider setting up a special ce ll under the Finance 
Department to oversee the expeditious clearance of arrears of accounts of PSEs. 
Where there is lack of staff expertise, Government may consider outsourcing the 
work relating to preparation of accounts and take a ction against Company 
Management responsible for arrears of accounts. 
4.1.9 Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 
The financial position and working results of worki ng PSEs as per their latest 
finalised accounts as on 30 September 2023 are deta iled in Appendix 4.1.1 . Table 
4.1.7  provides the comparative details of working PSEs t urnover and State GSDP for 
a period of five-year ending 2022-23.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 149 
Table 4.1.7: Details of working PSEs -turnover vis-à-vis GSDP  
(₹ in crore)  
Particulars  2018-19  2019-20  2020-21  2021-22  2022-23  
Turnover 123  1,024.88  1,289.82  1,742.31  1,878.68  2077.17  
GSDP 124  49,823.32  54,151.12  53,504.12  62,550.44  72,635.62  
Percentage of 
Turnover to GSDP  2.06 2.38 3.26 3.00 2.86 
As can be seen from Table 4.1.7  that the turnover of the working PSEs and the GSDP  
have shown an increasing trend during the five year s under reference excepting the 
marginal decline ( ₹ 647.00 crore) in the GSDP during 2020-21. The year -wise 
percentage of State PSE turnover to GSDP, however, has shown decreasing trend 
during recent two years (2021-22 and 2022-23). This  was mainly due to the fact that 
the growth of PSE-turnover during last two years (2 021-22 and 2022-23) was not 
commensurate with the pace of increase in the GSDP during the said two years.   
The increase in State PSE-turnover ( ₹ 198.49 crore) during 2022-23 was mainly 
driven by the growth of ₹ 108.39 crore in the turnover of one power sector c ompany 
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited) fro m ₹ 1,562.76 crore (2021-22) to 
₹ 1,671.15 crore (2022-23).  
4.1.9.1 Key parameters  
Some other key parameters of PSEs performance as pe r their latest finalised accounts 
as on 30 September of the respective year are given in Table 4.1.8 .  
Table 4.1.8: Key Parameters of PSEs 
(₹ in crore)  
Particulars  2018-19  2019-20  2020-21  2021-22  2022-23  
Debt  297.10  491.07  532.56  770.73  933.14  
Turnover 125  1,024.88  1,289.82  1,742.31  1,878.68  2,077.17  
Debt/ Turnover Ratio  0.29:1  0.38:1  0.31:1  0.41:1  0.45:1  
Interest Payments  1.21  6.97  12.89  14.40  26.02  
Accumulated losses  1,028.84  1,120.95  1,055.60  1,181.86  1,485.57 126  
Debt-Turnover Ratio  
A low debt-to-turnover ratio (DTR) demonstrates a g ood balance between debt and 
income. Conversely, a high DTR can signal of having  too much of debt against the 
income of PSEs from core activities. Thus, the PSEs  having lower DTR are more 
likely to comfortably manage their debt servicing and repayments.   
                                                 
123  Turnover of working PSEs as per their latest final ised accounts as on 30 September of respective 
year  
124  GSDP figures as per MoSPI  
125  Turnover of working PSEs as per their latest final ised accounts as on 30 September of the 
respective year  
126  Overall accumulated losses of 15 working PSEs afte r taking into account the accumulated losses of 
11 PSEs ( ₹ 1,765.45 crore) and accumulated profits of four PSEs ( ₹ 279.88 crore) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 150 
PSE Debt  
It can be noticed from Table 4.1.8  above that during the period of five years 
(2018-23), the PSEs debt had increased by 
₹ 636.04 crore (214.08 per cent ) from 
₹ 297.10 crore (2018-19) to ₹ 933.14 crore (2022-23).The major increase in the P SE 
debts was during 2019-20 ( ₹ 193.97 crore) and 2021-22 ( ₹ 238.17 crore), which was 
mainly attributable to the increase of ₹ 196.60 crore (2019-20) and ₹ 235.40 crore 
(2021-22) in the long term debts of Tripura State E lectricity Corporation Limited. A 
major portion (99.37 per cent ) of PSE debts during 2022-23 pertained to Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited ( ₹ 798.83 crore) and Tripura Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited ( ₹ 128.41 crore).  
It can further be seen from Table 4.1.8  that during 2018-23, the PSE Turnover had 
grown by ₹ 1,052.29 crore (102.67 per cent ) from ₹ 1,024.88 crore (2018-19) to 
₹ 2,077.17 crore (2022-23). However, more than 80 per cent  ( ₹ 1,671.15 crore) of 
PSE Turnover ( ₹ 2,077.17 crore) during 2022-23 was contributed by one power sector 
PSE (Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited).  
During the five years (2018-23), the Debt to Turnover Ratio has increased from 0.29:1 
(2018-19) to 0.45:1 (2022-23), which indicated dete riorated position of PSEs in 
servicing and repayment of their long-term debts as compared to previous years.  
Further, the accumulated losses of PSEs during 2018 -23, had also increased by 
₹ 456.73 crore (44.39 per cent ) from ₹ 1,028.84 crore (2018-19) to ₹ 1,485.57 crore 
(2022-23), which was a drain on the financial resou rces of the State.  Three PSEs 127  
contributed 99.81 per cent  ( ₹ 1,482.58 crore) of the overall accumulated losses of 
PSEs during 2022-23.  
4.1.9.2 Erosion of capital due to losses 
The aggregate paid-up capital and accumulated losses of 15 working PSEs as per their 
latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2023 w ere ₹ 1,613.60 crore and 
₹ 1,485.57 crore respectively (Appendix 4.1.1) .   
Analysis of investment and accumulated losses of th ese PSEs revealed that the 
accumulated losses (net of free reserves) of four w orking PSEs ( ₹ 1,057.82 crore) had 
completely eroded their paid-up capital ( ₹ 845.99 crore) as detailed in the Table 4.1.9 .  
                                                 
127  Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited ( ₹ 803.57 crore), Tripura Jute Mills Limited ( ₹ 390.97 
crore) and Tripura Road Transport Corporation ( ₹ 288.04 crore)  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 151 
Table 4.1.9: PSEs with erosion of paid up capital  
(₹ in crore)  
Name of PSE  Year of 
Accounts  
Paid up 
capital  
Accumulated  
losses  
Tripura State Electricity Corporation 
Limited 
 
2022-23  665.76  742.50*  
Tripura Road Transport Corporation  2019-20  163.96  288.04  
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited 
 
2021-22  16.17  27.04  
Agartala Smart City Limited 2021-22 0.10  0.24  
Total  845.99 1,057. 82 
*Net after adjusting ‘free reserves’ of ₹ 61.07 crore  
Accumulation of huge losses by these PSEs had erode d public wealth, which is a 
cause of serious concern and the State Government n eeds to review the working of 
these PSEs to either improve their profitability or close their operations.  
The overall position of losses 128  incurred by working PSEs during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
are depicted in Chart 4.1.2 . 
 
(Figures in brackets show the number of working PSEs in respective years)   
From Chart 4.1.2 , it can be seen that the working PSEs incurred los ses during all the 
five years under reference and had shown an increas ing trend after 2019-20. The 
losses of working PSEs during last five years were mainly driven by the losses 
incurred by the power sector PSEs. The overall loss es of working PSEs, which were 
highest during 2022-23 ( ₹ 299.89 crore) were mainly contributed by the losse s 
(₹ 284.33 crore) of Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited.   
                                                 
128  As per the latest finalised accounts of working PS Es as on 30 September of the respective year  
205.10 (14) 
75.83 (15) 87.24 (15) 
115.41 (15) 
299.89 (15) 
0.00 
50.00 
100.00 
150.00 
200.00 
250.00 
300.00 
350.00 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart 4.1.2: Overall Position of losses of working PSEs (No. of 
working PSEs) 
Overall Position of losses incurred by working PSEs during last five years 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 152 
During the year 2022-23, out of 15 working PSEs, fo ur PSEs earned an aggregate 
profit of ₹ 21.14 crore and eleven PSEs incurred loss of ₹ 321.03 crore. The details of 
major contributors to overall profits and losses of  working PSEs are given in 
Table 4.1.10 .  
Table 4.1.10: Major contributors to profits and losses of working PSEs  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSE  Latest finalised 
accounts  Profit (+)/ loss (-) 
Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited  2022-23 (+) 20.25 
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  2022-23 (-) 284.33 
Tripura Jute Mills Limited  2021-22 (-) 16.03 
Tripura Small Industries Corporation Limited  2018-19 (-) 7.98 
4.1.9.3 Return on Capital Employed 
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) is a profitabilit y metric that measures the long 
term profitability and efficiency of the total capi tal employed by a company. 
Companies create value when they generate returns on the capital employed. ROCE is 
an important decision metric for long term lenders.  ROCE is calculated by dividing a 
company’s earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) by the capital employed 129 .   
During 2022-23, the overall Capital Employed in 15 working PSEs as per their latest 
accounts was ₹ 1,122.24 crore. The ROCE of 14 out of these 15 PSE s ranged from 
(-) 192.90 per cent  (Tripura Jute Mills Limited) to (+) 15.71 per cent  (Tripura Natural 
Gas Company Limited). ROCE of two SPSE (Tripura Roa d Transport Corporation 
and Agartala Smart City Limited) was not workable d ue to complete erosion of the 
Capital Employed. Further, out of 15 working PSEs, only three PSEs 130  had positive 
ROCE (Appendix 4.1.1 ).  
4.1.10 Return on Investment on the basis of Present  Value of Investment   
The Rate of Real Return (RORR) measures the profitability and efficiency with which 
equity and similar non-interest bearing capital hav e been employed, after adjusting 
them for the time value. To determine the Rate of R eal Return on Government 
Investment (RORR), the investment of State Governme nt 131  in the form of equity, 
interest free loans and grants/ subsidies given by the State Government for operational 
and management expenses less disinvestments (if any ) has been considered, and 
indexed to their Present Value (PV) and summated. T he RORR is then calculated by 
dividing the ‘profit after tax’ (PAT) by the sum of  the PV of the Government 
investment.  
                                                 
129  Capital employed = Paid up share capital plus accu mulated profits plus free reserves &surplus plus 
long term loans minus accumulated losses and deferred revenue expenditure  
130  PSEs at Sl. No. A.11, A.12 and A.14 of Appendix 4.1.1  
131  As per the records of PSEs  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 153 
During 2022-23, out of 15 working PSEs, eleven PSEs  incurred loss ( ₹ 321.03 crore) 
and only four PSEs earned profits 132  (₹ 21.14 crore) (Appendix 4.1.1). On the basis of 
return on historical value, the State Government in vestment eroded by 11.92 per cent  
during 2022-23. On the other hand, the Rate of Real Return where the present value of 
investment is considered, the State Government investment eroded by 4.57 per cent  as 
shown in Appendix 4.1.2 .  This difference in the percentage of investment erosion 
was on account of adjustments made in the investmen t amount for the time value of 
money.  
4.1.11 Winding up of non-working PSEs  
As on 31 March 2023, there was only one non-working  PSE ( viz . Tripura State Bank 
Limited), which had been non-functional since 1971. The said PSE was in the process 
of liquidation under Section 248 of the Companies A ct, 2013 133  since 1971. Since the 
PSE was neither contributing to the State economy n or meeting the intended 
objectives of its formation, the liquidation proces s to wind up this PSE needs to be 
expedited.  
4.1.12 Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSEs  
During October 2022 to September 2023, 11 working P SEs (all Companies) had 
forwarded 13 accounts to the Principal Accountant G eneral (Audit), Tripura. Eleven 
accounts of nine Companies were selected for Supple mentary Audit during the year 
while Non-Review Certificates (NRC) were issued aga inst remaining two accounts of 
two Companies.  The audit reports of Statutory Audi tors appointed by the C&AG and 
the supplementary audit conducted by the C&AG indic ated that the quality of 
maintenance of State PSE accounts needs to be impro ved substantially.  The details of 
aggregate money value of comments of Statutory Audi tors and the C&AG are given 
in Table 4.1.11 .  
Table 4.1.11: Impact of audit comments on working Companies  
(₹ in crore)  
Sl.  
No.  Particulars  
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
No. of 
accounts  Amount No. of 
accounts  Amount  No. of 
accounts  Amount  
1.  Decrease in profit  1  0.11 4  7.05 1  3.26 
2.  Increase in loss  4  0.75 3  11.87 6  7.93 
3.  Non-disclosure of 
material facts  1  150.37 0  0.00 2  91.26 
4.  Errors of 
classification  0  0.00 0  0.00 0  0.00 
During the year, the Statutory Auditors had given q ualified certificates on all the 
13 accounts of 11 companies.  There were four insta nces of non-compliance with the 
Accounting Standards in three accounts.  The audit comments were based on the 
                                                 
132  As per the latest finalised accounts of working PS Es as on 30 September 2023  
133  The Companies Act, 2013 replaced the erstwhile Com panies Act, 1956 with effect from 1 April 
2014. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 154 
non-compliance with IND AS-109 (Financial Instrumen ts), AS-5 (Net profit or loss 
for the period, prior period items and changes in t he Accounting Policies), AS-17 
(Segment Reporting) and AS-29 (Provisions, Continge nt Liabilities and Contingent 
Assets).   
The only Statutory Corporation in the State ( viz . Tripura Road Transport Corporation) 
for which the C&AG is the sole auditor, had not for warded any accounts during the 
reporting period to the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura.   
4.1.12.1  Gist of some of the important comments of the statutory auditors and CAG in 
respect of accounts of the PSEs are as under:  
Tripura Handloom & Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (2021-22)  
 ‘Expenditure ( ₹ 17.28 crore)’ was understated by ₹ 1.76 crore due to 
non-accounting of outstanding expenses/ claims pert aining to the current year 
contrary to the principles of accounting on accrual  basis, resulting in the 
understatement of ‘Loss for the year’ by ₹ 1.76 crore with the corresponding 
understatement of ‘Current Liabilities’ to the same extent.  
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (2022-23)  
 ‘Liabilities for Deposit Works ( ₹ 125.58 crore)’ was overstated by ₹ 7.07 crore 
(net) due to inappropriate inclusion of the fictiti ous assets (debit balances: 
₹ 5.11 crore) and fictitious liabilities (credit bal ances: ₹ 12.18 crore) being carried 
forward for the periods prior to the financial year  2010-11 without any supporting 
details/ documents and hence, the same should have been written back. This has 
correspondingly resulted in the overstatement of ‘L oss for the year’ to the same 
extent.  
 The Company has irregularly booked an amount aggreg ating to ₹ 43.86 crore as 
‘Grant Receivable against R-APDRP Expenditure-Other  Non-Current Assets 
(Note 5)’ towards (a) Depreciation against R-APDRP assets created out of PFC 
Loan, (b) Communication Expenses, (c) Professional and Testing charges, etc . 
relating to R-APDRP Scheme works, which was not jus tified pending conversion 
of the PFC Loan into Grant by the PFC.  
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2021-22)  
 ‘Capital Work-in-Progress’ was overstated by ₹ 9.36 crore due to inclusion of the 
capital cost of various Tangible Assets which were already completed as on 31 
March 2022 and hence, same should have been transfe rred to ‘Tangible Assets’ 
and depreciation charged accordingly. This resulted  in understatement of 
‘Tangible Assets’ (Gross Block) by ₹ 9.36 crore each.   
Tripura Rehabilitation and Plantation Corporation Limited (2020-21)  
 ‘Sheet rubber ( ₹ 0.85 lakh kg @ ₹ 105 per kg: ₹ 0.90 crore)’ under Inventories 
(refer ‘Notes on Accounts’ para VIII ) represents the value of Sheet Rubber Stock 
derived based on the purchase price of latex ( ₹ 105 per kg) prevailing at the end of 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 155 
2020-21 thereby completely ignoring the processing cost incurred in bringing the 
inventories to their present location and condition, which is not in conformity with 
the provisions of ‘Accounting Standard 2: Valuation  of Inventories’. This has 
resulted in understatement of ‘Inventories’ by ₹ 0.17 crore with corresponding 
overstatement of ‘Cost of Material consumed’ and ‘L oss for the year’ to the same 
extent.  
 ‘Office building: ₹ 0.73 crore’ under Fixed Assets represents the thre e storied 
office building occupied by the Company as its Head quarters since January 2015. 
The Company had considered the useful life of the B uilding as 30 years 
(depreciation charged: ₹ 9.50 per cent  per annum) instead of 60 years (applicable 
depreciation rate: 4.87 per cent per annum) as prescribed under the Companies 
Act. 2013 (refer Part C para 5, item 1(a) of Schedule II ). Further, depreciation 
was not charged on the building during 2015-16 to 2 017-18. Thus, there was an 
overall short charging of depreciation to the exten t of ₹ 0.09 crore (current 
period-over charged: ₹ 0.02 crore; prior-period short charged: ₹ 0.11 crore). This 
has resulted in overstatement of ‘Office Building’ by ₹ 0.09 crore with 
corresponding understatement of the ‘Loss for the year’ to the same extent.  
4.1.13 Follow up action on Audit Reports 
 
4.1.13.1 Submission of Explanatory notes 
The Reports of the C&AG represent the culmination o f the process of audit scrutiny. 
It is, therefore, necessary that they elicit approp riate and timely response from the 
executive.  The Finance Department, Government of T ripura had issued (July 1993) 
instructions to all administrative departments to s ubmit replies (explanatory notes) to 
paragraphs/ performance audits included in the Audi t Reports of the C&AG within a 
period of three months of their presentation to the  Legislature, in the prescribed 
format without waiting for any questionnaires from the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (COPU).  The position of receipt of re plies/ explanatory notes to 
paragraphs/ performance audits pending to be receiv ed from the State Government/ 
administrative departments concerned is given in Table 4.1.12 .  
Table 4.1.12: Explanatory notes not received (as on 30 September 2023)  
Year of the 
Audit Report 
(Commercial/ 
PSEs)  
Date of 
placement of 
Audit Report 
in the State 
Legislature  
Total performance audits 
and paragraphs included in 
the Audit Report  
Number of performance audits/ 
paragraphs for which explanatory 
notes were not received  
Performance 
audits  Paragraphs  Performance 
audits  Paragraphs  
2014-15  23-03-2016 1  2  Nil  2  
2015-16  15-03-2017 1  Nil  1  Nil  
2016-17  23-11-2018 1  1  1  1  
2017-18  30-08-2019 1  4  1  4  
2018-19  17-03-2022 0  2  0  2  
2019-20  28-03-2022 1  0  1  0  
Total  5  9  4  9  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 156 
From Table 4.1.12 , it can be seen that out of 14 paragraphs/ perform ance audits, 
explanatory notes to 13 paragraphs/ performance aud its in respect of three 
departments, which were commented upon, were awaited (September 2023).  
The issue of pendency of furnishing of suo motu  replies to audit paras was taken up 
(June 2022) with the Secretary, Tripura Legislative  Assembly and Finance 
Department, Government of Tripura with the request to take steps so that the 
departments concerned furnish the suo motu  replies and the pendency can be reduced. 
Moreover, the list of outstanding paras were also f orwarded to the Finance 
Department and the department concerned in June 2023.  
4.1.13.2 Discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
The status of performance audits and paragraphs rel ating to PSEs that appeared in the 
State Audit Reports and discussed by the COPU as on  30 September 2023 was as 
given in Table 4.1.13 .  
Table 4.1.13: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports 
vis-à-vis  discussed by COPU as on 30 September 2023  
Audit of 
Report 
Year  
Number of performance audits/ paragraphs  
Appeared in Audit Reports  Discussed by COPU  
Performance audits  Paragraphs  Performance audits  Paragraphs  
2013-14  1  3  1  3  
2014-15  1  2  Nil  Nil  
2015-16  1  Nil  Nil  Nil  
2016-17  1  1  Nil  Nil  
2017-18  1  4  Nil  Nil  
2018-19  0  2  Nil  Nil  
2019-20  1  Nil  Nil  Nil  
Total  6  12  1  3  
4.1.13.3 Compliance to Reports of COPU 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) to 58 recommendations pertaining to latest 10 Reports of 
the COPU presented to the State Legislature between  November 2010 and 
February 2015 have not been received (September 2023) as indicated in Table 4.1.14 . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 157 
Table 4.1.14: Compliance to COPU reports  
Sl. No.  
COPU 
Report 
Number  
Date of 
Placement in 
the State 
Assembly  
Based on Audit 
Report for the year  
Total no. of 
recommenda-
tions in COPU 
report  
No. of 
recommendations  
where ATNs not 
received  
1  41  
01.11.2010  
2000-01  5  5  
2  42  2006-07  3  3  
3  43  2002-03  8  8  
4  44  1989-90  9  9  
5  45  
06.03.2012  
2006-07  8  8  
6  46  2007-08  5  5  
7  47  2007-08  1  1  
8  48  On spot study tour by 
COPU at TFDPC  5  5  
9  49  25.02.2014  2008-09  10  10  
10  50  20.02.2015  2004-05  4  4  
Total     58  58  
The above Reports of COPU contained recommendations  in respect of compliance 
audit paragraphs pertaining to five departments of the State Government, which 
appeared in the Reports of the C&AG for the years 1989-90 to 2008-09.  
Recommendation; 
State Government should review and revamp the mecha nism of responding to audit 
observations. The Government may ensure that explan atory notes to audit 
paragraphs/ performance audits and ATNs on the reco mmendations of COPU are 
provided as per the prescribed time schedule and th e loss/outstanding advances/ 
overpayments flagged in audit recovered within the prescribed period to enable 
accountability for public finances.  
  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 158 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura Tourism Development Corporation Limited) 
4.2  Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Swadesh Darshan Scheme”  
 
4.2.1 Introduction  
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS) - Integrated Devel opment of Theme Based 
Tourist Circuits 134  in the Country  is the flagship scheme of the Ministry of 
Tourism (MoT), Government of India (GoI) for the de velopment of the tourism 
infrastructure in the country. The MoT, GoI launche d this Centrally funded 
scheme in January 2015.  
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme is envisioned to synergi se with other Government 
of India schemes like Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Skill India, Make in India, etc. 
with the idea of positioning the Tourism sector as a major engine for job creation, 
driving force for economic growth, building synergy  with various sectors to 
enable tourism to realise its potential. The main o bjectives of the Scheme, inter 
alia, includes the following:  
• to position tourism as a major engine of economic growth and job creation. 
• develop circuits having tourist potential in a planned and prioritised manner. 
• promote cultural and heritage value of the country to generate livelihood in 
the identified region. 
• to create employment through active involvement of local communities, etc . 
4.2.2 Implementation of Swadesh Darshan Scheme in t he State of Tripura  
Tripura is a hilly North-Eastern State of India ble ssed with natural rich 
topography, unique geographical location with tropi c of cancer passing through 
its heart. The State, an abode of rich floral and f aunal biodiversity, unique 
landscapes and moderate climate throughout the year  has immense potential for 
tourism. The total tourist’s inflow (both domestic as well as foreign nationals) in 
the State commencing from the financial year 2015-1 6 to March 2023 was 
29.75 lakh. 
The 
MoT, GoI sanctioned creation of two tourist circuit s under the SDS in Tripura 
namely (a) Development of North-East circuit: Agart ala– Sepahijala– Melaghar– 
Udaipur– Amarpur– Tirthamukh– Mandirghat– Dumboor- Narikel Kunja– 
Gandacherra– Ambassa (Agartala Tourist Circuit)  at a sanctioned cost of 
₹ 99.59 crore in the year 2015-16, and (b) Developme nt of North- East circuit: 
Surmacherra- Unakoti- Jampui Hills- Gunabati- Bhuba neshwari- Matabari- 
                                                 
134  Tourist circuit is defined as a route on which at l east three major tourist destinations falling in 
different towns, villages or cities are located but  not separated by a long distance. It should 
have well defined entry and exit points.  A tourist  who enters should get motivated itself to 
visit all the places identified on the circuit.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 159 
Neermahal- Boxanagar- Chottakhola- Pilak- Avangcher ra (Unakoti Tourist Circuit) 
at a sanctioned cost of  ₹ 64.99 crore in the year 2018-19.  
• The Agartala Tourist Circuit comprised 11 different  tourist destinations which 
was subsequently revised to 10 135  destinations.  The sanctioned cost of the said 
circuit was revised (August 2020) to ₹ 82.85 crore. The total expenditure on 
Agartala Tourist Circuit was ₹ 73.75 crore (March 2023). 
• The Unakoti Tourist Circuit comprised 11 different tourist destinations which 
was subsequently revised (March 2022) to 10 136  destinations with a sanctioned 
cost of ₹ 50.38 crore which was further revised (July 2022) to ₹ 44.83 crore. 
The total expenditure on Unakoti Tourist Circuit wa s ₹ 11.92 crore 
(March 2023).  
The State Tourism Department is the administrative department for promotion of 
tourism in the State.  Tripura Tourism Development Corporation Limited 
(TTDCL) is the nodal agency for implementation of SDS in the State.  
4.2.3 Audit objectives  
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on the  implementation of the SDS 
was conducted with a view to get a reasonable assurance that: 
• the SDS funds were utilised judiciously, and the to urist circuits so created in 
the State out of the SDS funds resulted in the augm entation of the tourists’ 
inflows in the State,  
• the identified tourist circuits in the State compri sing all the project 
components therein were executed in an economic, ef ficient, effective, and 
coordinated manner, and  
• there existed proper monitoring mechanisms for ensu ring the achievement of 
scheme objectives. 
4.2.4 Audit scope, methodology and sampling 
The SSCA covered implementation of the scheme in th e State with due emphasis 
on the development of the two tourist circuits name ly (a) Agartala Tourist Circuit and 
(b) Unakoti Tourist Circuit from the scheme's incep tion in January 2015 to March 
2023.  The records of the Directorate of Tourism (DoT), Go vernment of Tripura 
(GoT); TTDCL, and other State Government implementi ng agencies, etc . were 
examined during the audit.   Besides, joint physical inspection of the sites w as also 
conducted in coordination with the audited entities.   
An Entry Conference was held in July 2023 at the le vel of the Secretary, Tourism 
Department, Government of Tripura, and the officers of the TTDCL wherein the audit 
objectives, criteria and scope of audit were explai ned. The audit findings were 
                                                 
135  Dropped destination being Raishyabari comprising o f six Project components involving Sanctioned 
Project cost of ₹ 1.39 crore. 
136  Dropped destination being Matabari comprising of 1 0 Project components involving Sanctioned 
Project cost of ₹ 13.93 crore . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 160 
discussed at the level of the Secretary, Tourism De partment, Government of Tripura, 
and the officers of TTDCL in an Exit Conference hel d in March 2024. The views 
expressed by the Government during the Exit Confere nce and the replies (April 2024) 
furnished post Exit conference have been suitably i ncorporated in the relevant 
observations. 
A total of 
19 Projects (to the extent of 100 per cent ) out of the 19 projects/ 
projects’ components valuing ₹ one crore or more of both the tourist circuits 
identified under the SDS were selected for the deta iled audit scrutiny.  The details 
of the projects selected for the audit scrutiny dur ing SSCA are given in 
Appendix 4.2.1 .  
4.2.5 Audit criteria  
The following criteria were applied for the SSCA:  
• Scheme guidelines and instructions  issued by the MoT, GoI.  
• Instructions  issued by the State Government. 
• Terms and conditions of the sanction letters of the  scheme issued by the 
MoT, GoI. 
• General Financial Rules, 2017 (GFR, 2017), Central Vigilance Commission 
(CVC) guidelines, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) guidelines.  
4.2.6 Audit findings 
 
Objective 1: The SDS funds were utilised judiciously, and the tourist circuits 
so created in the State out of SDS funds resulted i n the 
augmentation of tourists' inflows in the State 
 
4.2.6.1 Utilisation of SDS Fund 
The SDS guidelines, 2017 provided that the SDS fund  to the State Government will 
be released as under: 
Sl. No. Instalment Percentage 
1 First 
30 per cent  of the project cost on submission of the work 
orders, Good for Construction (GFC), DPR with GFC, 
statutory approvals from the respective agencies fo r 
construction initiation and detailed Bills of Quantities (BoQs) 
2 Second 30 per cent  of the project cost after receipt of Utilisation 
Certificate (UC) for the first instalment 
3 Third 25 per cent  of the project cost after receipt of UC for the 
second instalment 
4 Fourth 10 per cent  of the project cost on completion of the work and 
receipt of UC 
5 Fifth 
Five per cent  of the project cost after successful Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) of toilet, Tourist Facilitation C entre 
(TFC), cafeteria facilities for one year as certifi ed by an 
independent agency 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 161 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that out of ₹ 84.39 crore (being in excess of the 
revised sanctioned cost by ₹ 1.54 crore) received for Agartala Tourist Circuit during 
the period from 2015-16 to 2022-23, the TTDCL could utilise 87  per cent  of the funds 
so received ( i.e . ₹ 73.75 crore) during the period and surrendered ₹ 11.54 crore to the 
MoT.  Out of ₹ 18.37 crore received ( i.e . 41 per cent  of revised sanctioned cost of 
₹ 44.83 crore) during 2018-19 to 2022-23 for Unakoti  Tourist Circuit, the TTDCL 
could utilise 64.90  per cent (i.e. ₹ 11.92 crore) of the fund so received during the sa id 
period.  Further, the TTDCL refunded ₹ 1.80 crore to the MoT in respect of the 
Unakoti Tourist Circuit. Audit further observed tha t, notwithstanding the 
aforementioned percentage utilisation of the SDS fu nds, the utilisation of the SDS 
fund was marred with significant delays ranging fro m 11 to 57 months. In respect of 
the Unakoti Tourist Circuit, the TTDCL could not ob tain the subsequent release of 
SDS funds from the MoT.  The delay in utilisation/ non-release of subsequent 
instalment of SDS fund was attributable to several project management issues which 
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that at the ini tial stage, there was no 
engineering wing for implementation of works under SDS and it had to depend upon 
other State Government departments like Rural Devel opment Department, Public 
Works Department, etc . Further, Engineering wing of the TTDCL started fu nctioning 
from 2020-21. Moreover, all the work orders were is sued in the year 2020 and the 
progress of works were hampered due to restrictions  imposed during the Covid 19 
pandemic.  
The reply is not acceptable because the low utilisa tion of the fund was primarily 
attributable to failure on the part of TTDCL to und ertake the implementation of the 
sanctioned projects immediately and/ or delays in execution of the projects. 
4.2.6.1(i) Non-refund of interest income to the MoT   
As per Rule 230 (8) of General Financial Rules, 201 7 (GFR, 2017), all interest or 
other earnings against grant or other advances shou ld be mandatorily remitted to the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  In this regard, clause  9 of the sanction letters issued by 
the MoT,  inter alia , states that the TTDCL will not keep the amount re leased by the 
Central Government unutilised for more than six mon ths.  In case, the funds are not 
utilised by such time, the same shall have to be su rrendered to the Central 
Government along with the interest earned, if any. 
Audit observed that the TTDCL had earned interest i ncome on SDS fund aggregating 
to ₹ 4.23 crore during the period from August 2016 to M arch 2023. However, the 
TTDCL had remitted interest income to the tune of ₹ 3.22 crore only to the MoT.  
Besides, interest income of ₹ 0.02 crore earned on the SDS fund was still lying 
(October 2023) with the SDFO, Ambassa. Thus, the TT DCL, in violation of the 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 162 
aforesaid provision, did not refund ₹ 1.03 crore 137  of interest income earned on SDS 
fund to the MoT (October 2023).  
The Government assured (April 2024) that henceforth  the above instructions would 
be strictly followed. 
4.2.6.1(ii) Submission of inaccurate Utilisation Ce rtificates  
SDS Guidelines, 2015 provide that subsequent instal ments of the SDS fund will be 
released only on the receipt of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) in respect of the previous 
instalments disbursed. 
The details of the sanctioned project cost, quantum  of SDS fund released to the 
Implementing Agencies (IAs), expenditure incurred a s well as the incorrect UCs sent 
to the MoT in respect of nine out of the 19 sampled  projects is depicted in 
Table 4.2.1 . 
Table 4.2.1: Statement showing the details of sanct ioned project cost, SDS fund 
released to the IAs, expenditure and UCs sent to th e MoT for the period up to 
October 2023  
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Project name Project 
cost 
Fund place 
d to the IAs  Expenditure  UCs sent 
to MoT 
Difference  
(f)-(e) 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) 
1 Light & Sound Show 
at Ujjayanta Palace 8.28 5.60 5.50 
(5.33+0.17) 5.60 0.10 
2 
Border Ceremony 
Facility Project at 
Akhaura 
9.05 9.05 5.44 9.05 3.61 
3 
Sepahijala Log-Huts - 
10 Nos.  (Constructed 
5 Nos), 
4.15 
4.02 4.02 4.43 0.41 
4 
Udaipur- Tepania Log 
hut 
(3 Nos.) 
1.24 
5 Ambassa Destination : 
Log Huts (3 Nos.) 1.24 
6 
Baramura Destination: 
Log Huts- (10 Nos.) 
 (Constructed 5 Nos.) 
4.15 
7 Melaghar Destination 3.90 3.56 2.02 3.46 1.44 
8 
Narikel Kunja 
Destination: 16 Nos. 
of Log Huts 
7.05 7.40 7.40 5.61 (-) 1.79 
9 Signage- Agartala 
Circuit 1.11 0.74 0.50 0.86 0.36 
Total   24.88 29.01  
                                                 
137  ₹ 1.03 crore = ₹ 1.01 crore interest income earned lying with TTDCL  plus  ₹ 0.02 crore interest 
income earned on the funds lying with SDFO, Ambassa 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 163 
It can be seen from the Table 4.2.1  that as against the expenditure of ₹ 17.48 crore in 
respect of eight projects mentioned in Sl. No. 1 to  7 and Sl. No. 9, the TTDCL had 
furnished inaccurate UCs to the MoT by overstating the utilisation of the fund to an 
extent of ₹ 5.92 crore.  Further, in respect of the project me ntioned at Sl. No. 8, the 
TTDCL had furnished inaccurate UCs to the MoT by wa y of understating the 
expenditure to an extent of ₹ 1.79 crore. 
Audit observed that SDS fund of ₹ 2.43 crore was released to the Executive Engineer, 
Agartala Division No.1, Public Works Department (Ro ads and Buildings), GoT 
(Division-1, Agartala), for execution of the Border  Ceremony Facility project at 
Akhaura, Agartala.  The said fund of ₹ 2.43 crore was unutilised, and it had already 
been lapsed (October 2023) for want of revalidation .  Besides, SDS fund amounting 
to ₹ 0.24 crore placed with the IA namely the State Pub lic Works Department (PWD) 
and Rural Development Department (RDD) for signage project component remained 
unutilised for four years (October 2023). Hence, incorrect UCs in respect of the above 
cases were furnished to the MoT. 
Thus, the TTDCL, after disbursement of funds to the IAs for execution of the projects 
entrusted to them, failed to effectively account for and monitor the utilisation of funds 
by the IAs. Failure on the part of the TTDCL to do so resulted in the submission of 
incorrect UCs. 
The Government, while admitting the fact, stated (March 2024) that the UCs had been 
submitted based on the SDS fund disbursed to the ex ecuting agencies.  The 
Government assured (April 2024) that henceforth, the UCs would be sent to the MoT, 
GoI based on the UCs received from the executing agencies.  
4.2.6.1(iii) Inflow of tourists in the State  
The tourists’ inflows/ tourists’ footfall is the ke y indicator for ascertaining the present 
status of   tourism of a Country/ State/ Place and the generation of the potential 
revenue in respect thereof. The details of the year -wise tourist arrivals in the State 
during the period from 2015-16 to 2022-23 are depicted in Table 4.2.2 . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 164 
Table 4.2.2: Tourists’ footfall in Tripura during the period 2015-16 to 2022-23 
Source : Information furnished by the TTDCL 
It can be seen from Table 4.2.2  that prior to the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemi c, 
the tourists’ inflow (both domestic as well as fore ign) in the State was 5.86 lakh 
whereas the tourists’ inflow during 2022-23 was a m eagre 2.85 lakh which was not 
even 50 per cent  of the total tourists visiting the State immediate ly prior to outbreak 
of the Covid-19 pandemic. 
The Government stated (April 2024) that the tourism  sector had been most affected 
during Covid-19 pandemic and all the tourist destin ations had less footfall as the 
entry points of the State were closed.  It was furt her stated that the State 
Government’s recent initiatives of nominating Soura v Ganguly as the brand 
ambassador of Tripura Tourism, introduction of the Light and Sound show at 
Ujjayanta Palace for 365 days in a year, etc . would further boost the tourists’ inflow in 
the State. 
However, the fact remains that the tourists’ footfa ll in the financial year 2022-23 was 
not even at par  with the pre covid period level notwithstanding ex penditure of the 
SDS funds to the tune of ₹ 85.67 crore 138  over a period of eight years towards the 
implementation of the Scheme.  Further, many projec ts/ project components were not 
fully developed (October 2023) while some of the co mponents were dropped. As a 
result, the intended benefits of improved infrastru ctures envisaged under the Scheme 
for the purpose of promotion of tourism in the State is yet to be achieved.  
 
 
 
                                                 
138  Expenditure of ₹ 73.75 crore in respect of Agartala Tourist Circuit plus  expenditure of ₹ 11.92 crore 
in respect of Unakoti Tourist Circuit till 2022-23 
Financial 
year (FY)  
No. of tourists’ inflow 
(overnight visited) 
Increase in 
domestic 
tourist footfall 
vis a vis 
previous FY 
(in 
percentage) 
Increase in 
foreign tourist 
footfall  
vis a vis 
previous FY 
(in 
percentage) 
Increase in 
total tourist 
footfall  
vis a vis  
previous FY 
(in 
percentage) 
Decrease in 
total tourist 
footfall vis a vis 
pre-Covid 
period 
(2019-20) 
(in percentage)  
Domestic  Foreign Total 
2015-16  3,63,828 35,619 3,99,447 - - - - 
2016-17  3,80,578 39,229 4,19,807 4.60 10.14 5.10 - 
2017-18  4,03,394 80,094 4,83,488 6.00 104.17 15.17 - 
2018-19  4,16,860 1,12,955 5,29,815 3.34 41.03 9.58 - 
2019-20  4,31,142 1,54,993 5,86,135 3.43 37.22 10.63 - 
2020-21  74,344 1 74,345 -82.76 -100.00 -87.32 -87.32 
2021-22  1,96,820 36 1,96,856 164.74 3,500.00 164.79 -66.41 
2022-23  2,49,712 35,137 2,84,849 26.87 97,502.78 44.70 -51.40 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 165 
Objective 2: The identified tourist circuits in the  State comprising all the project 
components therein were executed in an economic, ef ficient, 
effective, and coordinated manner.  
4.2.6.2 Execution of infrastructural creation proje cts  
The project-wise project management issues viz . deficient planning in respect of 
obtaining prior site clearance from the Forest depa rtment and the Archaeological 
Survey of India (ASI), lack of monitoring of the pr oject works, deficiency in 
agreements of the project entrusted, etc.  by the TTDCL in the construction of SDS 
projects works leading to infructuous expenditure, delay in project completion and 
expenditure on extra items, etc.  are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2.6.2(i) Irregularity in selection of Project Man agement Consultant (PMC) 
and  deficiencies in services provided by the PMCs 
A. Irregularity in the selection of the PMC:   Project Management Consultant 
(PMC) plays an important role in the successful com pletion of construction projects 
by providing services right from the stage of conce iving the Project to the final stage 
of its completion.   
The provisions of clause (xxi) of rule 173 of the G FR, 2017, inter alia , provide that 
when a limited or open tender results in only one effective offer, it shall be treated as a 
single tender contract.  Further, Rule 194 of the G FR, 2017 also provides that the 
selection by direct negotiation/nomination, on the lines of single tender mode of 
procurement of goods, is considered appropriate onl y under exceptional 
circumstances such as: (i) tasks that represent a n atural continuation of previous work 
carried out by the firm; (ii) in case of an emergen cy situation, situations arising after 
natural disasters, situations where timely completi on of the assignment is of utmost 
importance; and (iii) situations where execution of the assignment may involve use of 
proprietary techniques or only one consultant has requisite expertise, etc .  
Rule 194 of GFR, 2017 states that full justificatio n for single source selection should 
be recorded in the file and approval of the compete nt authority be obtained before 
resorting to such single-source selection. 
It was noticed (October 2023) in audit that the TTD CL had invited (July 2015) 
Request for Proposal (RFP) on a very short notice o f seven days  for the purpose of 
selection of a PMC for rendering professional servi ces for specific projects including 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and costing, etc . for tourist destinations/ circuits 
under NE circuit of SDS. It was further observed th at in the selection of  PMC, M/s 
Luit Valley Engineering Private Limited, Guwahati, was the only qualified bidder for 
selection as PMC.  However, the State Government in  violation of the provisions of 
Rule 173 and Rule 194 of GFR, 2017, proceeded with the finalisation of the RFP on a 
single tender basis without recording any justifica tions in respect thereof. As such, 
M/s Luit Valley Engineering Private Limited was sel ected as PMC for the SDS 
Projects.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 166 
Thus, lack of due diligence and transparency in the  selection process of the PMC as 
well as undue haste on the part of the State Govern ment resulted in the loss of 
opportunity of selection of a competent PMC from ac ross the spectrum of PMCs 
available across the Country.   
The Government, on the issue of the irregular selec tion of the PMC, replied (April 
2024) that out of two bidders, the work was awarded  to the lowest bidder i.e . Luit 
Valley Engineering Private Limited, Guwahati.   
The reply of the Government, on the issue of select ion process of the PMC, is not 
acceptable because (i) in response to RFP invited b y the TTDCL, two bidders had 
submitted their bids of which one of the bidder’s t echnical bid was treated as non-
responsive due to non-submission of requisite paper s and earnest money.  Further, the 
State Government finalised the RFP on a single bid basis without recording any 
justifications and awarded (August 2015) the work t o the only qualified bidder i.e ., 
M/s Luit Engineering Private Limited, Guwahati.  
B. Deficient services rendered by the PMC: The DPRs so prepared by the 
selected PMC were defective since 46 project compon ents valuing ₹ 34.75 crore were 
dropped by the MoT.  Besides, due to the defective DPR prepared by the said PMC, 
the implementation of nine 139  projects valuing ₹ 58.70 crore were adversely affected/ 
dropped or are on the verge of being dropped by the  MoT. The deficient services 
rendered by the selected PMC are discussed in the s ubsequent paragraph. The State 
Government failed to initiate any penal action agai nst the PMC for the deficient 
services rendered. This was indicative of poor monitoring on the part of the PMC. 
The Government, on the issue of deficient services rendered by the PMC, admitted 
(March 2024) that there were some shortcomings in t he projects prepared by the 
PMC.  The Government in its reply also stated (Apri l 2024) that some of the projects 
had been dropped by the MoT due to sanction of fund s under other schemes in the 
same destination to avoid duplication.  
4.2.6.2(ii) Execution of the infrastructural projec ts 
 
A. Delay in completion of the SDS Projects 
SDS guidelines, 2015 stipulate that invitation and finalisation of all tenders for the 
projects shall be completed within three months fro m the date of the sanction of the 
projects. 
Further, the SDS sanction letters issued to the State Government in respect of both the 
Circuits, inter alia , provide that the project should be commissioned w ithin a 
maximum period of 30 months from the date of issue of sanction.  
                                                 
139  Border Ceremony Facility project at Akhaura, (b) B oxanagar project, (c) Light and Sound Show 
project, (d) Infrastructure facilities at Jampui Hills and Highest peak, (e) Bhubaneshwari temple and 
other ASI protected areas projects, (f) Unakoti pro ject, (g) Chottakhola project, (h) Surmacherra 
projects and (i) Avangcherra projects 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 167 
The overall delay in completion of the SDS projects  under both the Agartala Tourist 
Circuit and Unakoti Tourist Circuit is summarised in Appendix 4.2.2. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed  that :  
• there were delays in entrustment of the infrastructure creation projects in respect 
of the Agartala Tourist Circuit to other State IAs ranging from six months to 
44 months from the date of the sanction of the project by the MoT.  
• as against three months stipulated in the SDS guide lines, there were delays in 
finalisation of the tender ranging from five months  to 56 months and from 
14 months to 43 months in case of Agartala Tourist Circuit and Unakoti Tourist 
Circuit respectively.  
• the delays in completion of the projects under the Agartala Tourist Circuit, as 
against the sanction letter stipulated period of 30  months, ranged from 11 
months to 57 months. Further, the delays in completion of the projects under the 
Agartala Tourist Circuit, as against the scheduled time completion period as per 
the respective agreements, ranged  from nine to 36 months respectively. 
• none of the projects in respect of the Unakoti Tour ist Circuit were completed 
(October 2023) notwithstanding expiry of a period o f 32 months from the 
stipulated period in the sanction letter. 
B. Implementation of projects in respect of Agartal a Tourist Circuit 
1. Light and Sound Show project at Ujjayanta Palace  
Ujjayanta Palace is a favoured tourist destination in the State of Tripura. Ujjayanta 
Palace is now a state museum, popularly known for i ts display of lifestyle, arts and 
cultural artefacts, and utility crafts of communities residing in Northeast India.  
The creation of the Light & Sound Show project at U jjayanta Palace, Agartala was 
sanctioned (December 2015) at a cost of ₹ 8.28 crore by  the MoT, GoI. The main 
objective of the said project was to exhibit the Li ght and Sound Show on the right 
façade of the Ujjayanta Palace building in order to  showcase the heritage and culture 
of Tripura. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that: 
• Defective DPR prepared by the earlier PMC:  The TTDCL after many 
deliberations, entrusted (November 2019) the execut ion of the project to the 
Implementing Agency (IA) namely, Agartala Smart Cit y Limited (ASCL) with 
inordinate delay of over four years.  The DPR for t he said project prepared by the 
earlier PMC was not based on the actual site-survey and thus could not be utilised 
by the ASCL. The DPR for the project had to be prep ared afresh by the ASCL by 
its existing PMC i.e . Tata Consulting Engineer Limited for 
₹ 17.35 lakh.  The 
preparation of the fresh DPR resulted in excess expenditure of ₹ 17.35 lakh. 
• Delay in completion of the project vis a vis the sc heduled time completion: As 
against the scheduled time completion period of six  months, the ASCL completed 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 168 
the project with inordinate delay of nine months (M arch 2023) at a cost of 
₹ 5.33 crore. 
Audit further observed that:  
• Deficient planning:  The TTDCL, as such, did not have the requisite tec hnical 
expertise for execution of the said project of such  scale. Notwithstanding, the 
TTDCL spent considerable time in the tendering and retendering process for 
execution of the said project by itself. The TTDCL,  eventually, entrusted the 
execution work to ASCL with an inordinate delay of over four years.  This was 
indicative of deficient planning on the part of bot h the State Government as well 
as the TTDCL.  
• Delay of 22 months in finalisation of tender by ASC L:  As against the scheme 
guidelines, 2015 requiring the finalisation of tend er within three months from the 
sanction of the project by the MoT, the tender floa ted (November 2020) by the 
ASCL for the project was finalised (December 2021) with an inordinate delay of 
almost two years. 
• Inclusion of inadmissible item in contract agreemen t : Notwithstanding, the 
specific SDS guidelines stipulation of the expendit ure, if any, incurred in respect 
of the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the asset s created under the SDS to 
be borne by the State Government, the ASCL entered into an agreement for O&M 
of the project for ₹ 80 lakh from the SDS fund which was an inadmissible item. 
• Extension of undue favour to the contractor: The provisions of clause No. 46 of 
the General Conditions of the Contract (GCC), inter alia , provides that where the 
contractor fails to complete whole of the works or any part thereof within the 
stipulated time period, recoveries i.e.  Liquidated Damages (LD) shall be made 
from the Running Account Bills (RA Bills) of the Co ntractor at the prescribed 
rates. It was observed that the contractor took almost 18 140  months for completion 
of the said project.  However, ASCL could not curb the delay tactics of the 
contractor by way of invocation of the aforementioned clause No. 46 of the GCC. 
This resulted in extension of undue benefit to the contractor.  
The Government replied (April 2024) that the delay was mainly attributable to (a) its 
limited expertise in implementation of such projects, and (b) time taken in selection of 
the implementing agency as well as finalisation of the script for the project.  
The reply is not acceptable since the Department fa iled to take into consideration the 
fact that it had no expertise in executing such tec hnical projects of a large scale at the 
inception/ planning stage itself .  Instead, it spent considerable time in tendering an d 
retendering for execution of the project by itself and finally entrusted the work to the 
ASCL. This resulted in the time overrun of the project for over five years.  
 
                                                 
140  Since the contractor applied for the third extensi on of time (EoT) for the period up to 30 July 2023 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 169 
2. Border Ceremony Facility project at Akhaura   
The creation of the Border Ceremony Facility (BCF) project comprising of 11 project 
components at the Integrated Check post (ICP), Akha ura, Agartala, West Tripura 
was sanctioned (December 2015) by the MoT at a cost  of ₹ 9.25 crore 141  
(Appendix 4.2.3 ). The objective of the creation of the said infras tructural facilities 
was to enable the tourists to watch the beating ret reats ceremony of both Border 
Security Force (Indian side) and the Border Guard of Bangladesh (BGB) at ICP on the 
lines of the Indo-Pak Wagah Border . The TTDCL entrusted (January 2016) the 
execution of the BCF project to the PWD. The tender  for the construction of the 
Conference block, Way-side amenities (Cafeteria) in cluding site development work 
under Group-I part of the BCF project was floated i n August 2016. After finalisation 
of the tender, the work order was issued (December 2016) to the contractor at a 
contract value of ₹ 3.83 crore ( i.e . 22 per cent  above the estimated cost) with the 
scheduled time completion period of 18 months i.e . by 28 June 2018. 
The tender for the construction of the covered gall ery with barrack {earlier named as 
Open Air Theatre (OAT)}, toilet block, gate, and si te development work under 
Group-II part of the BCF project was floated in Sep tember 2019.  The PWD issued 
(June 2020) the work order to the contractor at a c ontract value of ₹ 3.96 crore 
(i.e ., 17 per cent  above the estimated cost) with scheduled completio n period of 
12 months i.e ., by 16 June 2021. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that :  
• Suspension of the construction work midway:  The construction works at the ICP 
site was suspended since 4 March 2019 due to object ions raised by the Border 
Guards of Bangladesh (BGB).  The cafeteria with the  reduced scope up to single 
storey, was completed after a delay of 11 months on  31 May 2019 against the 
scheduled date of completion (28 June 2018).  In re spect of the Covered 
gallery with barrack, only 24 piling and six pile-c aps had been completed by 
28 September 2021.  The said works remained suspended (October 2023) after an 
expenditure of ₹ 5.44 crore 142 . 
• Temporary closure of the project by MoT:  The MoT advised (June 2022) the 
State Government to close the balance work and to c omplete the same out of the 
State Fund when permission to resume the work is gr anted by the BGB.  The 
MoT also advised the State Government to hand over the completed tourist 
facilities under the SDS at ICP to the Land Port Au thority of India (LPAI) for 
operation.  Accordingly, conference block (only com pleted structure of ground 
floor 143  and incomplete first floor) and the cafeteria with toilet block were handed 
over to the LPAI on 4 May 2023. The facilities hand ed over to the LPAI was not 
being used for the tourists’ facilities. 
                                                 
141  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 1) 
142  ₹ 5.44 crore = ₹ 3.54 crore incurred in respect of the Group-I plus  ₹ 1.11 crore incurred in respect of 
the Group-II of the BCF Project plus  ₹ 0.79 crore in respect of Extra item 
143  Except the finishing work, doors, windows, shutter s, etc.  fittings, sanitary fittings, water supply 
facilities and electrification work 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 170 
Audit further observed that: 
• Deficient planning on the part of the PMC and the S tate Government:  The 
execution of the BCF project at Akhaura, ab initio , was marred with the deficient 
planning on the part of the State Government and th e PMC. Both the State 
Government and the PMC failed to take into consider ation namely (a) the tourist 
potential of the site, (b) the international ramifi cation/ defense potential 
associated with the constructions at site nearing t he neighbouring country. As 
such, the DPR for the project prepared by the PMC w as defective. This resulted 
in the failure on the part of the State Government to provide encumbrance-free 
land to the executing agency. 
• Inordinate delay in tendering process: There were inordinate delay of six 
months to three years in according the approval for  the Technical Sanction (TS)/ 
Expenditure Sanction (ES) of the said project, ther eby leading to inordinate 
delays in finalisation of the tendering process. 
• Infructuous expenditure:   The total expenditure in respect of BCF project 
(October 2023) stood at 
₹ 5.44 crore. The BCF project, being incomplete over  
seven years and the chances of resumption of the balance work being uncertain as 
well as the completed facilities with the reduced s cope not being utilised for the 
tourists’ facilities, the entire expenditure of ₹ 5.44 crore became infructuous. 
The status of the project during joint inspection i s depicted in Photographs 4.2.1 
and  4.2.2 . 
  
Photograph 4.2.1: The Conference block (Project Cos t: ₹ 3.12 crore) abandoned mid-way after 
constructions upto first floor 
  
Photograph 4.2.2: The State-of-the-Art Cafeteria wi th toilet block lying idle ( ₹ 1.8 crore 144 ) for 
over four years and being used by BSF Jawans 
                                                 
144  ₹ 1.80 crore = cafeteria ( ₹ 1.40 crore) plus toilet-block ( ₹ 0.40 crore) 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 171 
The Government admitted the fact and replied (April  2024) that the intended 
objectives of the BCF project could not be realised  due to the objections raised by the 
Bangladesh Border Guard (BGB) since the project sit es fell within 150 yards of the 
international border. As such, the conference block  and the OAT could not be 
constructed. Furthermore, as per the directives of the MoT, GoI, the conference Block 
with the reduced scope, cafeteria, toilet block, etc . were handed over to the LPAI. 
Thus, the fact remains that the expenditure of ₹ 5.44 crore became infructuous and the 
intended objective of creating a gallery for watchi ng the beating retreats could not be 
achieved. 
3. Development of Sepahijala Project 
The development of Sepahijala was planned under two  projects - creation of log-huts 
at Sepahijala and execution of different components  at Melaghar.  The creation of 
log-huts has been discussed in Paragraph 4.2.6.2(iii) . The creation of the 
development works at Melaghar and Neermahal project s comprising of 11 project 
components was sanctioned (December 2015) by the Mo T at a cost of 
₹ 3.56 crore 145  
(Appendix 4.2.3 ). The execution work of the creation of the develo pment works at 
Melaghar and Neermahal projects was entrusted (2016) to the PWD. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that:  
• Delay in completion of the project:  The tender for the construction of the 
development works was floated in December 2016.  Th e PWD awarded 
(March 2017) the work to the contractor at a contra ct value of  
₹ 3.17 crore (at 
19.51 per cent  above the estimated cost).  The scheduled period o f completion of 
the work was 18 months i.e ., by 9 September 2018.  The execution of the 
components viz . (a) jetties, (b) Open Air Stage/ Theatre (OAT) in cluding gallery 
at Rajghat, (c) site development at Neermahal and Rajghat end, (d) Ticket counter 
and food kiosk and (e) RC retaining wall were compl eted with a delay of over 
18 months.   
Audit further observed that:  
• Foreclosure of the contract:  The Contractor requested (May 2020) for the 
foreclosure of the contract (after receiving paymen t of 
₹ 1.39 crore) citing his 
inability to continue the work at the originally co ntracted rate in view of 
prevalent high market price.  This was approved to by the PWD on 21 January 
2021.  
• Execution of works outside the scope of the agreeme nt:  The nodal agency 
instead of focusing on the original scope of the wo rk, had asked the contractor 
to do extra works and extra items of the works.  Th ese were not covered under 
the scope of the original contract agreement but we re executed on the verbal 
instructions of the higher authority.  These included (a) VIP room refurbished as 
a childcare room, (b) painting of Neermahal during International Tourism Mart 
                                                 
145  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 2) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 172 
(ITM) and (c) refurbishment of royal kitchen as VIP  room at a cost of ₹ 35.97 
lakh 146 .  Moreover, extra items of works aggregating to ₹ 27.06 lakh were also 
executed under the contract.  
• Retendering of the works leading to time over-run a nd cost over-run:  
Subsequent to the cancellation of the contract in January 2021, two fresh tenders 
were invited in February 2021 and March 2021 respec tively for the construction 
of Souvenir Shop and Welcome Gate at Neermahal.  The works were completed 
with a delay of eight months in August 2022 and han ded over to the TTDCL.  
The payment made for the construction-work of the S ouvenir Shop and 
Welcome Gate at Neermahal aggregated to ₹ 62.10 147  lakh.  Thus, these two 
works which were originally sanctioned for ₹ 22.94 lakh were executed at a cost 
of ₹ 63.70 lakh due to delay in execution and focusing on other items of works. 
• Deficient planning leading to infructuous expenditu re:  Constructions of OAT 
and Souvenir Shop at Rajghat were not need-based si nce these assets were lying 
unutilised for the period ranging from one to four years and at present the 
facilities so created is not in a usable condition ( Photographs 4.2.3 to  4.2.4 ). 
  
Photograph 4.2.3: The Green Room of the 
OAT 
Photograph 4.2.4: The first building with the 
climbers on the opening door i.e.,  Souvenir 
Shop lying unutilised for over one year. 
Further, the TTDCL failed to commence the operation  of these facilities 
(October 2023).  Besides, the construction work of the second jetty near 
Neermahal Access Point was suspended midway after i ncurring ₹ 12.03 lakh on 
the verbal instructions of the higher authority. As  such, expenditure on OAT 148 , 
(₹ 57.23 lakh 149 ), Souvenir Shop ( ₹ 18.32 lakh) and second jetty at Neermahal 
access point ( ₹ 12.03 lakh) totalling to ₹ 87.58 lakh became infructuous. 
                                                 
146  ₹ 35.97 lakh = ₹ 1.36 lakh (VIP room refurbished as Child Care Room) plus  ₹ 21.99 lakh (Painting 
of Neer Mahal during ITM) plus  ₹ 12.62 lakh (refurbishment of Royal Kitchen as VIP room) 
147  ₹ 62.10 lakh = ₹ 17.50 lakh (Souvenir Shop) plus  ₹ 44.60 lakh (Gate) 
148  i.e ., Open-Air Theatre involving components viz.  Site clearance, Site Development, Construction of 
open stage, open gallery, toilet, retaining wall, etc.  
149  ₹ 57.23 lakh= ₹ 14.88 lakh (Construction of Open Air Theatre at Ra jghat) plus  ₹ 19.35 lakh (Site 
Development at Rajghat End) plus  ₹ 11.37 lakh (Gallery at Rajghat) plus  ₹ 11.63 lakh (RC retaining 
wall) 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 173 
• Blocking of SDS Fund due to poor monitoring:   After payment of ₹ 2.02 crore 
(total execution ₹ 2.10 crore) to contractors by the PWD, the balance  SDS fund 
of  ₹ 1.54 crore was lying unutilised with PWD since May  2023 (October 2023) 
and had not been remitted back to the TTDCL.  Due t o poor monitoring, the 
Department failed to recoup the unutilised SDS fund from the PWD. 
On the issue of non-utilisation of the OAT of the M elaghar project, the Government 
replied (April 2024), that the OAT was being used f or hosting cultural programmes 
and it was being managed by the Samitis  (Societies) comprising the local people.  On 
the issue of non-utilisation of the Souvenir Shop, it informed (April 2024) that the 
said Souvenir Shop would be inaugurated shortly.  O n the issue of SDS fund of 
₹ 1.54 crore lying with the PWD, it stated (April 20 24) that the PWD had been 
directed to submit UC and refund the unutilised funds. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable since  the OAT and Souvenir shop so 
constructed were lying unutilised as it was in unus able condition since four years and 
one year respectively. Further, no records relating  to handing over of OAT to the 
Samitis  were furnished. Besides, poor monitoring on the pa rt of the Department 
resulted in blocking of SDS fund for ₹ 1.54 crore lying with the PWD.   
C. Implementation of projects in respect of Unakoti  Tourist Circuit awaiting 
the completion  
1. Construction & Development of Tourism infrastruc ture project at Surmacherra 
The ‘Construction and development of tourism infras tructure at Surmacherra, Dhalai 
District, Tripura’ project comprising creation of 1 7 tourists’ facilities/ project 
components in the vicinity of Surmacherra waterfall was sanctioned (August 2018) by 
the MoT for  6.72 crore. The TTDCL issued (July 2020) the work o rder to the 
contractor at a contract value of ₹ 6.49 crore (11.79 per  cent  above the estimated cost) 
with completion period of 18 months from the date o f issue of work order i.e.  by 20 
January 2022. 
Audit observed that:  
• Non-completion of the project /Non-commencement of the project 
Components’ work : In spite of three time -extensions accorded by the MoT up 
to December 2023, the physical progress of works wa s 72.43 per cent 
(October 2023) and the works of the four project co mponents namely (a) solar 
power station (b) solar pump, (c) rock climbing and  (d) bouldering climbing 
wall with sanctioned cost of 
₹ 1.41 crore were not started (October 2023). 
The reasons for non-completion of the project (October 2023) after the expiry of 
32 months from the date of issue of SDS sanction le tter’s stipulated period of 
30 months was mainly attributed to (a) Covid-19 pan demic turmoil of 
14 months period from July 2020 to August 2021, (b)  stoppage of the work on 
account of jote  land issues, (c) material mobilisation issues due to National 
Highway (NH) construction work during the rainy sea son, and (d) delays by the 
contractor. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 174 
• Execution of work outside the scope of the agreemen t : Four substituted items 
(₹ 0.44 crore) against agreement items ( ₹0.31 crore) and 10 extra items 
(₹ 0.43 crore) earlier not included in the scope of t he contract, was approved by 
the TTDCL in September 2023 and were executed by th e contractor.  As such, 
out of the total payment ₹ 4.66 crore made to the contractor, the work outsid e 
the scope of the agreement aggregating to ₹ 0.87 crore was executed. 
• Deficient services rendered by the PMCs:  The DPRs prepared by both 150  the 
PMCs were defective since the same was not based up on the actual 
site-condition. As such, this necessitated the inco rporation of substituted items 
and extra items of work ( ₹ 0.56 crore) in the scope of the agreement.   
• Extension of undue benefit to the contractor : During joint physical inspection 
with the officials of TTDCL (September 2023), Audit  observed that the work of 
the approach road connecting the steel foot bridge constructed in the vicinity of 
the Surmacherra waterfall was of sub-standard quali ty. Therefore, the approach 
road connecting to the steel foot bridge was washed  away by rain within a few 
days of its construction. 
TTDCL, instead of penalising the Contractor by way of deduction of liquidated 
damages, approved extra items of work valued for 
₹ 0.20 crore in the name of 
road protection work out of which work valuing ₹ 0.14 crore was excluded later 
from the scope of the contract.  This resulted in e xtension of undue benefit to 
the Contractor. 
The status of the project during joint inspection i s depicted in Photographs 4.2.5 and  
4.2.6 . 
  
Photograph 4.2.5: The last stretch of the 
approach road leading to the steel foot 
bridge which was washed away by first 
rain 
Photograph 4.2.6: The steel foot bridge 
constructed to get a better view of the 
Surmacherra Waterfall 
                                                 
150  M/s Luit Valley Engineering Pvt. Limited, Guwahati  (First PMC) and M/s Engineers Project (India) 
Limited (EPIL) (Second PMC) 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 175 
The Government replied (April 2024) that the work o f rock climbing and bouldering 
climbing wall could not be taken up since the rocks  on testing were found to be 
immature and were not safe for such exercise.  Furt her, the road connecting to the 
steel bridge which had been washed away due to rain s was repaired. The solar power 
station, solar lights and 63 KV A DG sets were installed.  
Thus, the reply of the State Government affirms the  audit observation that proper 
feasibility study was not conducted based on the actual site-survey prior to conceiving 
the said project. 
2. Jampui Hills and Highest peak, North Tripura Dis trict 
The “Construction and development of tourism infras tructure at Jampui Hills and 
Highest Peak, North Tripura District” project compr ising of 12 tourist facilities 151 / 
project components was sanctioned (August 2018) by the MoT for ₹ 6.48 crore. The 
TTDCL issued the work order to the contractor in November 2020 at a contract value 
of ₹ 6.34 crore (14.50 per cent  above the estimated cost) with the scheduled time 
completion period being 12 months i.e.,  by 17 November 2021.   
Audit observed that: 
• Territorial jurisdiction dispute/ site-clearance is sue:  The construction work 
could not be carried out by the contractor due to t he objections on the territorial 
jurisdiction raised (July 2021) by Mizoram.  Furthe r, the construction work of 
the way-side amenities at Hmunpui village, Jampui H ills and Welcome Gate at 
Kanchanpur road, Jampui Hills could not be carried out due to encroachment of 
the site by local inhabitants and requirement of al ignment of the NH.  The 
construction of viewpoints, the integrated complex and parking was stopped by 
the State Forest Department (October 2022) on the g round of non-production of 
the "No-Objection Certificate (NoC)" for constructions in the biodiversity area. 
• Deficient services rendered by the PMC:  Obstruction/ interruption in the 
execution of work mid-way on account of territorial  jurisdiction dispute/ site-
clearance issue was indicative of the fact that DPR  had been prepared by the 
PMC without taking into consideration the actual si te-condition. As such, the 
DPR prepared for the project was defective on accou nt of deficient services 
rendered by the PMC. 
• Infructuous expenditure : The TTDCL could not resolve above stated issues 
and the work was not started at these three sites ( October 2023).  The future of 
these incomplete works (expenditure: ₹ 0.43 crore) remains uncertain and the 
expenditure of ₹ 0.43 crore became infructuous.  
The status of the project during joint inspection i s depicted in Photographs 4.2.7 and  
4.2.8 . 
                                                 
151  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 9) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 176 
  
Photograph 4.2.7: The Integrated Complex at 
Phuldungsei lying abandoned 
Photograph 4.2.8: The viewpoint at the 
highest peak lying abandoned 
In reply, the Government stated (April 2024) that t he construction of different 
components like integrated complex building, welcom e gate, retaining wall, pathway, 
photo viewpoint, etc . had been taken up.  But the Forest Department had  raised 
objection (October 2022) since the site of the proj ect fell within the biodiversity 
heritage sites and the Government dropped the proje ct. It added that the abandoned 
project would be handed over to the Tripura Nature Trails and Resorts Limited 152 . 
The reply is not acceptable since both the State Go vernment as well as the PMC, 
while conceiving the project, failed to take into c onsideration the site clearance as 
well as the territorial jurisdiction issues with the neighbouring State.  
Thus, the failure on the part of the Government to do so resulted in the dropping of 
the project and thereby rendering the expenditure of ₹ 0.43 crore infructuous. 
3. Chottakhola Project, South Tripura District  
The “Construction and development of tourism infras tructure at Chottakhola, South 
Tripura district, Tripura” project comprising the v arious components 
153  namely 
(a) gazebo both for park and picnic Spot, (b) outdo or sitting (c) solar illumination, 
(d) public conveniences, etc . was sanctioned (August 2018) by the MoT for 
₹ 5.65 crore.  The TTDCL issued (August 2020) the work order to th e contractor at a 
contract value of ₹ 5.80 crore (18 per cent  above the estimated cost) with a scheduled 
time completion period of 15 months from the date o f issue of work order i.e.  by 
14 November 2021. 
Audit observed that: 
• Inordinate delay of 11 months in submission of esti mates and deviation for 
execution of extra item : The Forest Department directed (September 2021) t he 
TTDCL to execute the work using local eco-friendly material instead of any 
concrete structure.  After 11 months from the date of issue of directives by the 
Forest Department, the TTDCL submitted the tentativ e extra item statement of 
                                                 
152  A newly established PSU under Forest Department, G overnment of Tripura entrusted with the 
responsibility of the development of Eco-Tourism in  the State with the involvement of the local 
people 
153  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 3) 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 177 
₹ 1.01 crore for the construction of the project com ponents viz . (a) 10 gazebos, 
(b) three public conveniences and (c) three angling platform outdoor sitting with 
Shelter, etc . with the eco-friendly materials to its PMC for ap proval.  The said 
deviation for extra item valuing ₹ 1.01 crore was approved by the PMC and 
subsequently by the TTDCL and the State Government in March 2023.  
• Delay in completion of the project/ non-commencemen t of the project 
component work:  The overall physical progress of the project stood  at 
77.66 per cent  (August 2023) whereas the two project components n amely 
(a) solar illumination and (b) solar powered boats (five numbers) with 
sanctioned costs of ₹ 0.87 crore were not executed.  The total payment m ade to 
the contractor stood at ₹ 3.17 crore (October 2023). 
The inordinate delay in completion of the project b y 32 months (October 2023) 
was attributable to (a) 12 months’ Covid-19 pandemi c period, (b) delay of 
nine 154  months in completion of the work by the contractor , and (c) delay of 
over 10 months in approval of the estimates for ext ra items by both TTDCL and 
PMC which was necessitated on account of use of eco -friendly materials in lieu 
of RCC constructions. 
The Government, on the issue of non-commencement of  the ‘solar illumination’ and 
‘solar power boats’ works of the said project, stat ed (March 2024) during the Exit 
Conference, that the solar illumination work had be en completed. Solar power boat 
work could not be taken up because the area was surrounded by the trees and pebbles. 
It further stated that the project had been concept ualised in consultation with the 
Forest Department.  However, the Forest Department later directed for use of 
eco-friendly material in place of RCC constructions .  The Government informed 
(April 2024) that penalty for delay in completion o f work would be imposed as per 
terms and conditions of the agreement. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Government, due to consideration of the ambitious 
and unviable project components such as solar power  boat, had to drop the said 
project component which were planned for increasing  the tourists’ inflow. This was 
indicative of poor feasibility studies by both the PMC and the Department as it was 
found that the area was surrounded by the trees and pebbles.  
4. Avangcherra project, South Tripura District  
The “Construction and development of tourism infras tructure at Avangcherra, South 
Tripura District” project comprising of 16 various tourists’ facilities 
155 / components 
was sanctioned (August 2018) by the MoT for ₹ 8.60 crore. The TTDCL issued 
(July 2020) the work order  to contractor at a cont ract value of ₹ 7.40 crore 
(4.45 per cent  above the estimated cost) with a scheduled time co mpletion period of 
18 months from the date of issue of work order i.e.  by 30 January 2022. 
                                                 
154  Reckoned from the date of 1 September 2021, the sa id being the restoration of normalcy post 
second phase of Covid-19 pandemic 
155  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 4) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 178 
Audit observed that:   
• Insignificant physical progress:  the overall physical progress of the project 
(August 2023) was 45.02 per cent  with the insignificant progress in respect of 
six 156  ( Appendix 4.2.3 ) project components with the sanctioned costs of 
₹ 4.97 crore. The total payment to the contractor wa s ₹ 2.17 crore 
(October 2023). 
• Inordinate delay/ Non-completion of the project:  As against the stipulated 
period of 30 months as envisaged in the sanction le tter of MoT, the project 
remained incomplete (October 2023) even after 32 mo nths from the date of 
issue of SDS sanction letter.  The delay was attrib utable to (a) taking seven 
months for selection of the second PMC 157  for preparation of the concept plan, 
DPR, estimates, etc . afresh for the project, (c) delay of over 12 mont hs by the 
TTDCL in providing the drawings for all the project  components to the 
contractor, (d) delay of over six months by the TTD CL in framing the design, 
estimates, etc . for constructions using eco-friendly materials in  lieu of RCC 
constructions, (e) delay of 13 158  months on account of Covid-19 pandemic. 
The status of the project during the joint inspecti on is depicted in Photographs 4.2.9 
and  4.2.10 . 
  
Photograph 4.2.9: The incomplete crossover 
bridge lying at Avangcherra Eco-Park 
Photograph 4.2.10: The incomplete 
Tourist Facilitation Centre at 
Avangcherra Eco-Park 
The Government replied (March 2024) that the ‘aeria l forest walkway’ component 
had been completed and the cross over bridge compon ent was nearing completion.  
The Government stated (April 2024) that penalty for  delay in completion of work 
would be imposed as per terms and conditions of the agreement. 
The fact remains that remaining five identified com ponents of the project valuing 
₹ 2.07 crore remained incomplete even after two year s from the scheduled 
completion date as per the work order issued to the contractor.   
                                                 
156  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 5) 
157  M/s Engineers Project (India) Limited (EPIL) 
158  The period of 13 months being reckoned from August  2020 to August 2021 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 179 
5. Boxanagar project, Sepahijala District  
The “Construction and development of tourism infras tructure at Boxanagar 
159 , 
Sepahijala District” project  comprising of 12 various tourists’ facilities 160 / 
components was sanctioned by the MoT (August 2018) for ₹ 5.57 crore.  The 
provisions of Section 20B of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 (as amended in 2010), sta tes that every area beginning 
at the limit of the prohibited area in respect of e very ancient monument of national 
importance under Sections 3 and 4 of the Act ibid  and extending to a distance of 200 
meters in all directions shall be the regulated are a in respect of every ancient 
monument and archaeological site and remains. 
The work for the construction work was awarded (Nov ember 2020) to the contractor 
at an agreement cost of ₹ 3.97 crore (7.98 per cent  above the estimated cost) with the 
scheduled time completion period being 12 months i.e. 26.11.2021. 
Audit observed that: 
• Deficient Planning on the part the State Government  and the PMC: Both the 
State Government and the PMC failed to take into co nsideration, the necessity of 
obtaining the site-clearances prior to conceiving t he project and framing the DPR 
for the project. As such, the DPR so framed by the PMC was defective since the 
same was not based on the actual site-survey. 
• Non-compliance with the statutory provisions of AMA SR Act, 1958:   The 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)’s permission w as not obtained prior to 
commencement of the execution work.  Further the si te for construction was 
within 200 metres of the ASI site.  As such, ASI, U daipur Sub-circle, Tripura 
office requested (May 2023) the TTDCL to stop the o ngoing unauthorised 
constructions (ground floor of the Tourist Interpretation Centre (TIC)) in violation 
of the provisions of AMASR Act, 1958. Thus, not com plying the provisions of 
AMASR Act, 1958 and non- obtaining the statutory cl earances resulted in 
suspension of the construction work midway. This re ndered the expenditure of 
₹ 0.57 crore infructuous. 
The status of the project during joint inspection i s depicted in Photographs 4.2.11 
and  4.2.12 . 
                                                 
159  Boxanagar is situated 40 km. from the city of Agar tala in the north-western part of Sonamura 
sub-division on the edge of the border with Banglad esh.  Boxanagar has tremendous tourist 
potential in the sense that the recent excavations during the period 2001-2004 led to the discovery 
of a massive brick-built ancient Buddha Stupa, a ch aitya griha and a monastery.  This discovery 
reflects the art, architecture, and religious aspects of ancient Tripura. 
160  Details given in Appendix 4.2.3  (Sl. No. 6) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 180 
  
Photograph 4.2.11: Ancient Remains of 
Buddha Stupa at Boxanagar 
Photograph 4.2.12: Construction-works at 
Boxanagar Site lying suspended since May 
2023 
The Government replied (April 2024) that the constr uction of different components 
like TIC building161 , ticket counter, retaining wall, culvert had been taken up. But the 
ASI raised objections since the project site fell w ithin 200 meters. It further stated 
that the State Government had taken a strong view o f the objections raised by the ASI 
officials in a meeting held in August 2023 under th e chairmanship of the Hon’ble 
Minister, Tourism Department in the presence of the representatives of the ASI. 
The reply is not acceptable since both the State Go vernment as well as the PMC 
failed to take into considerations the statutory pr ovisions of the law of the land and 
the necessity of obtaining the requisite site clearances from the appropriate authority.  
6.  Creation of tourist infrastructure facilities in ASI protected areas. 
The creation of the two tourist infrastructure faci lities in ASI protected areas namely 
the “Conservation and development works in ASI prot ected areas in Unakoti” project 
comprising 16 various tourists’ facilities/ compone nts and (b) “Conservation and 
development works in ASI protected areas in Tripura  at Gunabati Temple, 
Bhubaneshwari Temple, Mahadeb Bari and Pilak Site –  02” project comprising 
17 various tourists’ facilities/ components  was  sanctioned (August 2018) by the 
MoT respectively for ₹ 7.86 crore {revised  (July 2022) to ₹ 4.61 crore} and for 
₹ 3.68 crore {revised (July 2022) to ₹ 1.65 crore} respectively. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that:  
• The TTDCL, in respect of the ASI Project at Unakoti , awarded (November 2022) 
the work to the contractor at a contract cost of ₹ 4.13 crore (15.89 per cent  above 
the estimated cost) with the scheduled time of completion being 12 months i.e . by 
22 November 2023. 
• The TTDCL, in respect of other project in ASI prote cted areas in Tripura at 
Gunabati Temple, Bhubaneshwari Temple, Mahadeb Bari  and Pilak Site– 02, 
awarded (November 2022) the work to the contractor at a contract value of 
                                                 
161  The TIC is a single-story building which is to be constructed for giving refreshment to the tourists 
who visits in the ancient Remains at Boxanagar. 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 181 
₹ 2.44 crore (18.50 per cent  above the estimated cost) with a completion period  
of 12 months i.e . by 27 November 2023. 
Audit observed that: 
• Non-compliance with the statutory provisions:  The execution work in respect of 
the aforementioned two projects, except for the cre ation of Wayside Amenities at 
Manu in respect of ASI project at Unakoti, could no t be commenced for want of 
statutory clearances under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and Biodiversity 
Act, 2002 since the sites for creation of the propo sed tourists’ facilities fell within 
the Biodiversity Heritage Sites (BHS). The TTDCL, a s such, failed to obtain the 
requisite site clearances and/ or NOC from the Forest Department. 
• Deficient Planning and deficient services rendered by the PMC:  Both the State 
Government as well as the PMC failed to take into c onsideration the necessity of 
obtaining the statutory clearances while conceiving  the project and framing the 
DPR respectively for the said project. The DPR, as such, prepared by the PMC 
was defective since the same was not based on the actual site-survey. 
• Unauthorised change in the scope of the work and th e resultant deviation from 
the contract:   In respect of creation of only one component of w ayside amenities 
at Manu in respect of ASI project at Unakoti valuin g 
₹ 1.48 crore, the State 
Government, without seeking the permission of the MoT changed (May 2023) the 
scope of the agreement by ₹ 0.38 crore (being 25.60 per cent  of the project 
component cost)  for the purpose of creation of another floor for ac commodating 
tourist, separate kitchen and retaining wall. 
Audit further observed that:   
• The MoT issued (April 2023) a directive for droppin g the project in case of non-
receipt of the NOC by the State Government for cons truction in ASI protected 
areas, by April 2023. 
• The State Government, eventually, approved (July 20 23) shifting of six project 
components of the project in ASI areas at Unakoti v aluing ₹ 2.85 crore to an 
alternative place at Sonamukhi where suitable land was available.   
• The State Government requested (June 2023) the MoT for sanction for 
implementation of the project components sanctioned  for the Bhuvaneswari 
Temple namely parking, outdoor sitting and two publ ic conveniences to another 
destination namely Bandaur (Udaipur).  
• The approval of the MoT for shifting the project co mponents sanctioned for the 
two projects in the ASI areas to Sonamukhi and Band aur was not received 
(October 2023). 
The Government replied (April 2024) that initially ASI was the implementing agency 
for Unakoti project, but it failed to float tender due to mismatch of Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme and ASI guidelines. After that, in July 2022  the whole project was handed 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 182 
over to the Tourism Department. As the site fell wi thin the forest land, the Forest 
Department did not issue the NOC to TTDCL. As such, the project components of the 
aforementioned two projects in the ASI protected ar eas were shifted to nearby 
Sonamukhi and Bandaur sites with due intimation to the MoT in July 2023.  
The reply is not acceptable since the State Governm ent, while conceiving the project, 
failed to take into consideration the statutory pro visions of the law of the land and the 
necessity of obtaining the requisite site clearance s/ NOC from the appropriate 
authority. 
Thus, deficient planning at the feasibility study s tage itself by both the PMC as well 
as the Department resulted in shifting the project components to another sites and the 
consequent non-completion of the project October 2023). 
4.2.6.2 (iii) Creation of log-huts across the State   
The State Government, with a view to promote eco-to urism conceived (2016) 
construction of 54 log-huts at different tourist de stinations in Tripura. The MoT 
sanctioned the creation of 54 log-huts for ₹ 22.80 crore which was revised (August 
2020) to 42 log-huts with the revised sanctioned cost of ₹ 17.83 crore.  These log-huts 
were to be created at (a) Sepahijala (10), (b) Tepa nia (3), (c) Narikel Kunja (16), (d) 
Baramura (10) and (e) Ambassa tourist destinations (03). 
4.2.6.2(iii)(a) Idle/ Infructuous expenditure of ₹ 2.33 crore 162  
The construction of 18 log-huts was entrusted (Sept ember 2016-November 2016) to 
the State Forest Department.  The Forest Department  submitted (July 2016) an 
estimate of ₹ 18.19 lakh for each log-hut with the scheduled per iod of completion of 
two months and the same was approved by the TTDCL in September 2016.  
(i) Model log-hut at Khumulwng Eco Park: Of the 18 log-huts, the creation of one 
model log-hut at Khumulwng Eco Park was later entru sted (November 2016) to the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (T TAADC). The TTAADC 
commenced (June 2017) the work with a delay of over  seven months and completed 
(November 2019) with a delay of over 30 months for ₹ 18.19 lakh. 
During joint physical inspection with the officials  of TTAADC and TTDCL, it 
appeared that the log-hut had not been utilised sin ce its creation.  It was observed that 
the log hut was in an uninhabitable condition.  Fur ther, the flooring was found to be 
defective, and all the furniture therein was missin g. Thus, non-utilisation of the 
log-hut for over four years led to wasteful expenditure of ₹ 18.19 lakh.  
                                                 
162  Infructuous expenditure  (Khumulwng = ₹ 18.19 lakh plus Baramura = ₹ 106.07 lakh plus Dinning 
Hall cum Kitchen= ₹ 14.11 lakh) plus  Idle Expenditure  (Hatipara= ₹ 32.35 lakh plus 
Ambassa= ₹ 62.03 lakh) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 183 
  
Photograph 4.2.13: The model log-hut at Khumulwng E co Park lying unused for over four 
years 
ii. Model log-hut at Salbagan, Hatipara  
One model log-hut developed by the Forest Departmen t at Salbagan, Hatipara near 
Agartala for ₹ 32 lakh, was completed in January 2018 with a dela y of 11 months and 
inaugurated with a delay of over nine months in October 2018.  
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) revealed that 
the said model hut was not being used for tourism p urposes and instead the same was 
being used by the Forest Department.  All the furni ture were shifted for personal use 
in the staff quarter and offices of the Forest Depa rtment.  Thus, the log-hut created at 
an expense of ₹ 32 lakh was not utilised for the intended purpose of creating facility 
for the tourists.  
  
Photograph 4.2.14: The model log-hut at 
Salbagan Eco Park not being put to use for 
tourism purpose over five years 
Photograph 4.2.15: Furniture of log-hut 
being used in the staff quarter 
iii . Log-huts at Ambassa Eco Park  
As against the stipulated period of completion of t wo months, three log-huts at 
Ambassa Eco Park, Dhalai District, were completed ( July 2018) by the Forest 
Department with a delay of over 20 months and cost-overrun of  ₹ 7.48 lakh.  Further, 
the log-huts were inaugurated with a delay of 33 months on 03 May 2021. 
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) revealed that 
these log-huts, though in good habitable condition,  were not being used for the 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 184 
tourism purpose. The same were being used by the Fo rest Department as a rest house 
for over five years which led to idle expenditure o f ₹ 62 lakh on construction of these 
log-huts.  
  
Photograph 4.2.16: Log-huts at Ambassa Eco Park not being put to use for tourism 
purpose over five years 
iv. Log-huts at Baramura Eco Park  
As against the scheduled completion period of two m onths, five log-huts at Baramura 
Eco park, Khowai District, were completed (July 201 8) for 
₹ 1.06 crore with a delay 
of over 20 months and cost-overrun of ₹ 15 lakh.  Further, these log-huts were 
inaugurated with a delay of 20 months on 8 February 2020.  
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) revealed that 
of the five log-huts, three log-huts had been damag ed significantly over the years 
owing to the termites and became unserviceable sinc e November 2021.  Further, two 
log-huts were unserviceable since July 2023.  As such, all the five log-huts were lying 
in unserviceable condition (October 2023). 
Further, dining hall cum kitchen constructed for ₹ 14.11 lakh (December 2018) had 
been damaged significantly over the period of two y ears for want of proper upkeep/ 
maintenance.  Thus, the entire expenditure of ₹ 1.20 crore on construction of log-huts 
and dining hall cum kitchen was infructuous.   
  
Photograph 4.2.17: Log-huts at Baramura Eco Park lying unserviceable for over two 
years 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 185 
  
Photograph 4.2.18: Dining hall cum kitchen at Baramura Eco Park lying damaged and 
unserviceable for over two years 
The TTDCL accorded Administrative Approval (AA) and  Expenditure Sanction (ES) 
(September -November 2016) to the Forest Department  for operation and 
maintenance as well as revenue sharing of these 18 log-huts. Audit observed that the 
agreement was executed only for 13 log-huts at Sepa hijala, Tepania and Baramura. 
The log-hut at Khumulwng Eco Park could not be util ised for any purpose due to 
uninhabitable condition and log-hut at Hatipara was found being utilised by the Forest 
Department.  
Thus, out of 18 log-huts, five log-huts were not ut ilised for over four years, i.e.,  since 
their creation, and five log-huts have become inhab itable. Audit further observed that 
the reasons for non-utilisation of the log-huts was  attributable to (a) non-handing 
over/ taking over of the log-huts, (b) failure on t he part of the TTDCL to enter into 
agreement with the Forest Department for ensuring t he utilisation of the log-huts and 
(c) poor monitoring by the TTDCL to ensure optimum utilisation of the log-huts for 
the tourist purposes. 
As such, expenditure of ₹ 1.38 crore 163  incurred on the log-huts, etc . was rendered 
infructuous with idle expenditure of ₹ 0.94 crore 164 . This also included an excess 
expenditure of ₹ 0.51 crore 165  in creation of 18 log-huts due to the delays in th e 
construction of the same. 
The Government replied (April 2024) that all the lo g-huts situated at Khumulwng, 
Ambassa, Hatipara, Baramura, Tepania and Sepahijala  would be formally handed 
over to the Forest Department and these log huts wo uld be operated and managed by 
the Forest Department through Tripura Nature Trails and Resorts Limited.  
The reply is not acceptable since 10 out of 16 log- huts created by the Forest 
Department were found being used by Forest Departme nt itself. As such, 10 log-huts 
                                                 
163  Infructuous Expenditure ( Khumulwng = ₹ 18.19 lakh, Baramura = ₹ 106.07 lakh and Dining Hall 
cum Kitchen= ₹ 14.11 lakh) 
164  Idle Expenditure  (Hatipara= ₹ 32.35 lakh and Ambassa= ₹ 62.03 lakh) 
165  ₹ 51.46 lakh = Salbagan = ₹ 14.16 lakh plus  Ambassa = ₹ 7.48 lakh plus  Baramura = ₹ 15.14 lakh 
plus  Tepania = ₹ 5.51 lakh plus  Sepahijala = ₹ 9.17 lakh 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 186 
were not being used for the tourists’ purpose for w hich the Government did not take 
any appropriate steps.   
4.2.6.2(iii)(b) Unauthorised expenditure  
The TTDCL floated (June 2020) a tender for the “Man ufacture, Supply, Erection, and 
Commissioning of 33 log-huts including electrical, sanitary and plumbing and 
supporting infrastructure at various tourist destin ations”. It was noticed that the 
revised sanction for 42 log-huts was issued in August 2020 { discussed in Paragraph 
4.2.6.2(iii) (a) }.  However, the TTDCL without modifying the scope of the sanction 
went ahead with the tender procedure and issued (De cember 2020) the work order. 
Thus, it exceeded the sanction limit by nine log-hu ts, for which no approval was 
obtained from the MoT. 
The work order was issued (December 2020) at a cont ract value of ₹ 8.20 crore 
(35.80 per cent  below the estimated cost put to tender) with the s cheduled completion 
period of six months i.e . by 15 June 2021.  The contractor completed 15 log -huts at 
Narikel Kunja with a delay of 17 166  months and handed over the same on 17 
November 2022 against the stipulated date of comple tion on 15 June 2021.  Audit 
observed that eight log-huts at Narikel Kunja and 1 0 log-huts at Chabimura remained 
incomplete even after delay of 29 months (October 2 023).  The contractor was paid 
₹ 7.40 crore (October 2023). 
Further, the PMC did not prepare even the plans pro perly. As such, it required 
revision within one month from the date of issue of work order in January 2021.  This 
resulted in deviations from the scope of the agreem ent for ₹ 1.90 crore. The deviation 
being 23.21 per cent  of the contract value required prior/ post-facto s anction of the 
MoT. The TTDCL did not obtain approval for this deviation. 
Thus, creation of the extra nine log-huts as well a s the deviations resulted in 
unauthorised expenditure of ₹ 4.13 crore 167 . 
The Government replied (April 2024) that during the execution of log huts it had been 
observed that total floor area must be increased fr om 42.34 sqm. to 47.25 sqm. 
Accordingly, a revised drawing and deviation statem ent for ₹ 1.90 crore had been 
prepared and got approved by the State Government.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable since the DPR so prepared by the PMC 
was not based on the actual site-condition and thus  necessitated recasting of estimates 
and the resultant deviations.  Failure on the part of the PMC to do so resulted in said 
deviation for ₹ 1.90 crore. Besides, the Government’s reply was si lent on the 
propriety for creation of nine log-huts in excess of the sanctioned quantities. 
 
                                                 
166  Inclusive of delay of nine months being solely att ributable to the second phase Covid-19 pandemic 
turmoil during the period from December 2020 to August 2021. 
167  ₹ 4.13 crore = the unit cost of ₹ 24.84 lakh for creation of one log-hut under the c ontract X nine 
log-huts plus  deviations aggregating to ₹ 1.90 crore . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 187 
4.2.6.2(iii)(c) Operation of the log-huts  
(i) Operation of the log-huts at Narikel Kunja  
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) in respect of 
the operation of 23 log-huts revealed that: 
• Deficient lease agreement : SDS Sanction letter stipulates that the TTDCL sha ll 
not rent/ lease or transfer property without the permission of the MoT. 
The operation of 15 log-huts at Narikel Kunja touri st destination, in violation of 
SDS Sanction letter, was leased out (October 2022) to an agency without 
obtaining the sanction of the MoT at a lease rental  revenue of 
₹ 0.45 crore per 
annum.  The average occupancy rate of the 15 log-hu ts from January 2023 to 
August 2023 was only 30.25 per cent .  The agency had adopted dynamic tariff 
rate for the log-huts. The base tariff rate being e xhibited on-line was in the range 
of ₹ 3,570 to ₹ 4,552 and the agency had charged tariff as high as  ₹ 7,039 in the 
peak season. The dynamic tariff was steep when comp ared to the tariff rate of 
₹ 2,240 for the log-huts of the same designs, specif ications and amenities being 
operated by the TTDCL itself.  Even such high tarif f rate was exclusive of the 
additional tariff of ₹ 1,000 each for accommodating children below 12 yea rs.  
Further, as the tariff did not include boarding and  no other facilities being 
available, it may be difficult to promote Narikel K unja as an attractive tourist 
destination.  
  
Photograph 4.2.19: The State-of-the-art log-huts adding beauty to the panoramic 
Narikel Kunja tourist destination 
Further, eight log-huts were nearing their completi on and not handed over 
(October 2023) to the TTDCL by the Contractor. 
The Government stated (April 2024) that the log-hut s of Narikel Kunja were leased 
out to the private agency and there is no scope lai d down in the agreement for 
controlling the room tariff by the TTDCL. The reply  of the Government is not 
acceptable since the Government, while protecting i ts own financial interest, failed to 
safeguard the interest of the tourists’ interests as envisaged under the SDS. 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 188 
(ii) Operation of the log-huts at Chabimura tourist  destination  
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) of 10 log-
huts at the Chabimura tourist destination (involvin g the expenditure of ₹ 2.48 crore) 
revealed that  the log-huts were being developed without site deve lopment and proper 
approach road leading thereto were not need-based a nd as such seemed to be on the 
higher sides  due to the remoteness of the said area and the absence of basic amenities 
like health-care facilities, eateries, etc . 
  
Photograph 4.2.20: The unbuilt muddy 
approach road leading to log-huts at 
Chabimura 
Photograph 4.2.21: Log- hut being 
developed amidst wild grasses and jungles 
at Chabimura 
The Government replied (April 2024) that tender pro cess for leasing out the log huts 
at Chabimura had been started. The lessee would arr ange food facilities and other 
itineraries for the guests/ tourists. It further st ated that regarding the security issues of 
Log-Huts at Chabimura, the Superintendent of Police , Gomati District had been 
requested to set up a police outpost. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable due t o (a) lack of tourist potential for 
overnight stay at the Chabimura tourist destination , (b) the remoteness of the area as 
well as (c) non-availability of the basic facilitie s like eateries, health-care facilities, 
security, etc . the creation of 10 log-huts at Chabimura appeared  to be on the higher 
side.  
4.2.6.2(iv) Procurement under SDS/ Adventure Touris m theme  
The MoT sanctioned ₹ 10.31 crore (December 2015) for procurement of var ious 
items, viz. Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs), paddle boats, Fi bre Reinforced Plastic 
(FRP) boats, speed motor boats, water scooter/ jet- skies, etc.  under the “Adventure 
Tourism” theme. The sanctioned cost was later revis ed (August 2020) to ₹ 5.07 crore. 
Audit observed that as against the sanctioned cost of ₹ 5.07 crore, the TTDCL 
procured 33 items valuing ₹ 5.22 crore as detailed in Table 4.2.3 .  


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 189 
Table 4.2.3: The details of procurement made in respect of Adventure Tourism/ Eco-
Tourism under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
Sl. 
No. 
Procurement 
description 
Qty. 
(in 
No.) 
Amount ( ₹) Date of 
supply 
Placed at 
destination initially 
1.   
Procurement of water 
scooters 
1 25,60,488 12-12-2019 Dumboor 
2.   1 25,60,488 16-01-2021 Dumboor 
3.   4 99,34,989 26-04-2021 
Narikel Kunja-01; 
Udaipur Nagar 
Panchayat-02; 
Ujjayanta Palace 
lake-01 
4.   Procurement of 4-
seater paddle boat 4 6,24,400 03-12-2019 Sepahijala lake 
5.   Procurement of 10–
12-seater rescue boats 2 42,05,556 17-03-2020 Chabimura and 
Narikel Kunja 
6.   
Procurement of 20-
seater 40 HP speed 
boats 
4 1,03,51,112 17-03-2020 Chabimura and 
Narikel Kunja 
7.   
Procurement of 20-
seater 50 HP speed 
boats 
6 1,58,87,400 17-03-2020 Chabimura and 
Narikel Kunja 
8.   
Procurement of 
battery-operated 
vehicles 
11 60,96,490 07-07-2019 
Ujjayanta palace-03; 
Akhaura Border-02; 
Khumulwng-03; 
Sepahijala -02; 
Durgabari-01 
Total 33 5,22,20,923   
4.2.6.2(iv)(a) Infructuous expenditure 
(i) Infructuous expenditure in respect of water sco oters procured under the 
Adventure Tourism theme  
Out of the aforementioned 33 items procured under “ Adventure Tourism” theme, the 
TTDCL, as against the sanctioned cost of 
₹ 17 lakh, had procured (December 2019 to 
April 2021) six water scooters valuing ₹ 1.51 crore. The details of water-scooter lying 
idle/ unused at various tourist destinations are depicted in Table 4.2.4 . 
Table 4.2.4:  The details of water scooter lying idle/ unused at various tourist  
destinations  
Item procured Qty. 
(in No.)  
Lying idle for 
(as of October 
2023) 
Lying idle at Remarks 
Water scooter- 
six Nos. 
(Sanctioned cost 
₹ 0.17 crore, 
Procurement cost 
₹ 1.51 crore) 
1 12 months Jagannath 
Dighi, Udaipur 
Out of six water scooters 
procured, only two were in 
working condition. As 
such, expenditure of ₹ 1.01 
crore on procurement of the 
four water-scooters was 
rendered infructuous. 
1 16 months Laxminarayan 
Dighi, Agartala 
2 Over 12 
months Narikel Kunja 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 190 
The TTDCL had placed six water scooters at the disp osal of individual/ Samiti  
(Society) at various 168  tourist destinations by entering into lease agreem ents for their 
day to day operation. Audit observed that lease ren t of ₹ 0.02 crore was outstanding 
(October 2023) for the period from February 2022 to July 2023. 
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) revealed that 
two jet-skies/ water scooters were lying unutilised  at Narikel Kunja 
(Photograph 4.2.24)  for want of necessary repair and maintenance by th e TTDCL.  
The water scooters at Jagannath Dighi and Laxminarayan Dighi were kept in a packed 
condition. 
   
Photograph 4.2.22: Jet-skie 
lying unutilised at 
Jagannath Dighi, Udaipur 
Photograph 4.2.23: Jet-skie 
lying unutilised at 
Laxminarayan Dighi, Agartala 
Photograph 4.2.24: Jet-skies, 
with tyres submerged in water, 
lying unutilised at Narikel 
Kunja 
(ii) Infructuous expenditure in respect of motor bo ats procured under the 
Adventure Tourism theme  
The TTDCL, as against the sanctioned cost of ₹ 3.64 crore, had procured (March 
2020) 12 motor boats valuing ₹ 3.04 crore under the Adventure Tourism theme. The 
details of motor boats lying idle/ unused at variou s tourist destinations are depicted in 
Table 4.2.5 . 
                                                 
168  Narikel Kunja, Jagannath Dighi at Udaipur and Laxm inarayan Dighi at Agartala 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 191 
Table 4.2.5: The details of motor boats lying idle/ unused at various tourist destinations 
Item procured 
Qty. 
(in 
No.) 
Descriptio 
n of idle 
item (in 
No.) 
Lying 
idle for 
(as of 
October 
2023) 
Lying idle 
at Remarks 
10–12-seater fast 
rescue boats, 
20-seater 40 HP 
speed motor 
boats, 20-seater 
50 HP speed 
motor boats 
02 Two Nos. 
40 HP 
24 months Maharani 
Barrage 
Out of 12 motor 
boats only two 
were in working 
condition. 
Due to improper 
upkeep/ 
maintenance of the 
assets, the 
expenditure of 
₹ 2.52 crore for 
procurement of the 
10 speed motor 
boats was rendered 
infructuous 
. 
02 One No. 50 
HP 
Over 10 
months Narikel 
Kunja One No. 40 
HP 
Over 10 
months 
06 Four Nos. 
50 HP 
Over 15 
months 
Chabimura 
Two Nos. 
Rescue 
Boat 
Over 15 
months 
The TTDCL placed all the 12 speed motor boats at th e disposal of individual/ Samiti  
(Society) at various 169  tourist destinations by entering into lease agreem ents for their 
day to day operation. Audit observed that lease ren t of ₹ 0.06 crore was outstanding 
(October 2023) for the period from February 2021 to July 2023. 
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTDCL (September 2023) revealed that: 
a)  Two of the 20-seater speed motor boats were lying u nused/ idle at Maharani 
Barrage, Gomati District since December 2021 ( Photograph 4.2.25) . The 
reason for non-utilisation was attributed to the de arth of tourists, which implies 
that the speed boats were placed without doing any survey for their use. Further, 
prolonged non-use will render the expenditure on these motor boats infructuous. 
b)  Two 20 seater speed motor boats were damaged at the  Narikel Kunja for more 
than 10 months (October 2023) and lying unutilised/  idle due to maintenance 
issues ( Photograph 4.2.26) . 
c)  Four speed motor boats and two rescue speed motor b oats were damaged and 
lying unutilised/ idle (October 2023) at Chabimura due to maintenance issues 
pending for more than 15 months ( Photograph 4.2.27) . 
                                                 
169  Narikel Kunja, Jagannath Dighi at Udaipur and Laxm inarayan Dighi at Agartala 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 192 
   
Photograph 4.2.25: 20-seater 
40 HP speed boats lying idle at 
Maharani Barrage 
Photograph 4.2.26: 50 HP 20-
seater speed boat lying damaged 
at Narikel Kunja Tourist 
Destination 
Photograph 4.2.27: 50 HP boats 
and Rescue boats lying damaged 
at Chabimura Tourist 
Destination 
Thus, out of 12 motor boats, 10 motor boats placed at the tourist destinations were 
lying unutilised. Further, the TTDCL also did not h ave any plan for the regular up-
keep/ maintenance of these assets for ensuring their smooth operation. 
(iii) Infructuous expenditure in respect of battery  operated vehicles procured 
under the Adventure Tourism theme  
As against the sanctioned cost of ₹ 1.38 crore, the TTDCL procured (July 2019) 
11 Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs) valuing ₹ 0.61 crore.  The details of BOVs 
lying idle/ unused at various tourist destinations are depicted in  Table 4.2.6 . 
Table 4.2.6: The details of BOVs lying idle/ unused at various tourist destinations  
Item 
procured 
Quantity 
(in No.)  
Lying idle 
for (as of 
October 
2023) 
Lying idle at Remarks 
BOVs 
03 
Over 48 
months 
Ujjayanta Palace, 
Agartala 
Out of 11 BOVs, 
only two were in 
working condition. 
Thus, failure of the 
TTDCL in ensuring 
the regular utilisation 
of the procured 
BOVs, rendered the 
expenditure of ₹ 0.50 
crore on 
procurement of the 
BOVs, infructuous. 
 
01 Akhaura Border (ICP), 
Agartala 
02 Khumulwng Eco Park 
02 Sepahijala wildlife 
Sanctuary 
01 Durgabari Tea garden 
Audit observed that the BOVs procured by the TTDCL were not need-based. The 
TTDCL, post procurement of BOVs, had requested (Oct ober 2019) various 
Government agencies for utilisation of these assets . However, none of the 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 193 
Government agencies responded to TTDCL’s request for taking over these BOVs. As 
such, the TTDCL did not have a plan for utilisation  of the procured BOVs. Finally, 
the TTDCL placed them at various tourist destinatio ns  without entering into any 
operation and maintenance (O&M) contract and/ or le ase agreement with the State 
agency.  Besides, absence of the O&M contract also deprived the TTDCL of the 
opportunity of ensuring the smooth operation of these assets. 
During joint physical inspection with the officials  of TTDCL (September 2023), it 
was noticed that out of the 11 BOVs procured for ₹  0.61 crore, nine were not being 
put to use for the period ranging from one to three  years and were lying idle for want 
of necessary repair/ renewal and maintenance ( Photographs 4.2.28 to  4.2.30) . 
   
Photograph 4.2.28: Two 
BOVs at Sepahijala 
destination lying in a 
condemnable state for over 
a year 
Photograph 4.2.29: BOVs 
lying unused at 
Khumulwng destination 
for over two years 
Photograph 4.2.30: BOVs 
lying idle at Ujjayanta 
Palace for over three years 
for want of necessary 
repairs/ renewals 
The Government replied (March 2024) that the BOVs c ould not be used for almost 
two years due to lockdown during the Covid-19 Pande mic and therefore, the batteries 
got discharged and had almost become unserviceable/  unusable. The Government 
further informed that the Department might consider  outsourcing the operation of 
these BOVs to the outside agencies. 
4.2.6.2(iv)(b) Idle expenditure 
The TTDCL approved (May 2022) paragliding project i n Jampui Hills-Tlaksih and 
paramotoring project in Chabimura/ Neermahal/ Dumboor lake and accordingly made 
a procurement i.e.  paramotoring and paragliding of 
₹ 0.57 crore 170  for adventure 
tourism from the other project fund.  Further, for the purpose of augmenting/ 
strengthening adventure tourism in the State, the Alpine Wanderers Pvt. Ltd. proposed 
(May 2021) imparting of training for paragliding an d paramotoring sports for 
₹ 0.29 crore 171 .  
                                                 
170  ₹ 57 lakh = ₹ 33.80 lakh for para motoring plus  ₹ 23.20 lakh towards paragliding. 
171  ₹ 29 lakh = ₹ 18.8 lakh towards imparting Training in paraglidin g plus  ₹ 10.20 lakh towards 
imparting training in paramotoring. 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 194 
The TTDCL decided that 50 per cent  of the expenditure would be financed by 
TTDCL from SDS fund and the balance 50 per cent  would be borne by the trainees. 
Audit observed that: 
• The TTDCL had released 
₹ 0.21 crore during the period 2020-22 for the 
purpose of training to five local youths who comple ted their training during the 
period from January 2022 to February 2022. 
• Paragliding project was inaugurated (September 2022) in Jampui Hills.  
• Apart from imparting training to five local youths,  the TTDCL did not create 
basic infrastructure like approach road, ticket cou nter, resting place, proper 
signage, etc .  Further, considering the faraway location of the  paragliding 
project, proper advertisement and awareness campaig n was required for its 
successful continuance.  In the absence of all thes e preparations, the project 
remained in operation for merely three months and o nly 25 tourists took part in 
paragliding adventure. 
• Moreover, paramotoring at Chabimura and Neermahal w as not commenced 
(October 2023) due to the non-finalisation of site. 
• The five Pilots along with two Ground staff (Marshall) were being paid monthly 
remuneration since September 2022 from the TTDCL’s own fund without 
performing any duty.   
Thus, the entire expenditure of ₹ 78 lakh 172  towards paragliding and paramotoring 
sports under the Adventure Tourism Theme was rendered wasteful. 
The Government replied (March 2024) that the Govern ment needs to make a 
conscious review of the project components such as paragliding and paramotoring 
sports since the same did not seem feasible on acco unt of geographical location of the 
State as well as tourists’ inflow in the State.  It  further stated that, the State 
Government, instead, needs to focus its attention o n the development of basic tourist 
facilities in the State.  The Government, however, informed (April 2024) that 
paragliding activity at Jampui Hills had resumed from January 2024.  
The reply of the Government was, however, silent on  the number of tourists utilising 
the paragliding activity to assess its commercial viability and its impact on increase of 
tourist’s inflow. 
4.2.6.2(v) Poor implementation of the Signage compo nent and lack of publicity 
for the tourist destinations 
Appropriate advertisement/ publicity and/ or signag e systems are important to make 
travelling a seamless experience.  For disseminatio n of information pertaining to the 
other tourist destinations falling on a tourist circuit to the tourists visiting a particular 
                                                 
172  ₹ 78 lakh = ₹ 11.82 lakh incurred towards training in para glidi ng sports plus  ₹ 8.88 lakh incurred 
towards training in para motoring sports plus  procurement of ₹ 57 lakh made from another project 
fund. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 195 
tourist place, distribution of leaflets/ brochures is a very convenient and yet 
economical mode of publicity. 
Signage may broadly be classified into four categor ies as per their purpose: namely 
(a) information, (b) direction, (c) identification and (d) emergency.  Accessible 
information through well-designed wayfinding and si gnage systems, under the 
aforementioned categories of signage, remains an ar ea of immense concern and 
development. 
The DPR prepared by the PMC provided for the “Insta llation of 1,481 Signage 
across various Tourist Destinations in the State” as detailed in Table 4.2.7.  
Table 4.2.7: Details of the sanctioned cost and signages to be installed under the tourist 
circuits  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Circuit Sanctioned cost Revised 
sanctioned Cost 
Number of 
Signage 
Agartala Circuit 1.19 
(December 2015) 
1.11 
(August 2020) 675 
Unakoti Circuit 1.09 
(August 2018) 
1.01 
(July 2022) 806 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that:  
• The TTDCL, since the inception of the SDS in the St ate, had not prepared any 
leaflets/ brochures for the advertisement or public ity of the tourist destinations 
falling on the two tourist circuits. 
• The TTDCL had disbursed (February 2019) ₹ 0.25 crore 173  to the PWD and 
RDD. However, the said fund was lying unutilised (October 2023). 
• The TTDCL, after an inordinate delay of 39 months 174 , floated (July 2019) the 
first tender for installation of 675 Signages acros s various Tourist Destinations in 
Agartala Tourist Circuit.  
• The details of the invitation of tenders in respect  of signage project component 
under the tourist circuits, tendered value, expendi ture incurred, numbers of 
signages installed, etc . are given in Table 4.2.8 .  
                                                 
173  ₹ 24.50 lakh =₹ 24.20 lakh to the PWD and ₹ 0.30 lakh to RDD 
174  The period of 39 months being reckoned from March 2016 being the target date for finanlisation of 
tender for the projects as per the SDS guidelines. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 196 
Table 4.2.8: Details of tender and expenditure incurred in respect of Signages installed 
under the tourist circuits 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
the 
Circuit 
Tender Tendered 
value 
Expendi-
ture 
Number 
of 
signage 
Remarks 
Agartala 
Circuit 
1st 
(September 
2019) 
0.45 0.17 70 
Cancelled on 25 
February 2021 due to 
non-performance of 
obligations  
Agartala 
Circuit 
2nd 
(September 
2021) 
0.33 0.39 36 
Payment for additional 
six Signage inclusive 
of ₹ 0.07 crore  
Unakoti 
Circuit 
3rd 
(August 
2022) 
0.29 0.29 25 Work was awarded 
(August 2022) to two L 
1 bidder at contract 
value of ₹ 0.29 crore 
each. 
0.29 0.29 
(Pending) 25 
Audit further observed that:  
• Deficient planning:  The TTDCL failed to plan for resorting to the advertisement/ 
publicity of the other tourist destinations falling  on its tourist circuits by way of 
preparation and distribution of leaflets/ brochures  detailing the importance/ 
salient features of tourist destinations and accessibility thereto. 
The implementation of the signage project component  delayed for over 39 
months ab initio  was also marred by deficient planning . The TTDCL failed to 
assess that the installation of signage across vari ous destinations in the State 
required a lot of work involving considerable time for (a) concept and approval of 
design, (b) approval of the appropriate authority f or installation at various 
locations, (c) preparation of signages and (d) thei r proper placement across the 
State.  
• Failure on the part of the first contractor to perf orm his obligations for installing 
675 signages across various tourist destinations in  Agartala tourist Circuit was 
primarily attributable to the failure of the TTDCL to provide location and content 
of the signage in respect of 349 locations for over  four months after the 
commencement of the work. 
• Poor monitoring:  The TTDCL also failed to effectively monitor the w ork of the 
respective contractors and mitigate delays in respe ct of the second and third 
tenders. 
• Non-utilisation of the SDS fund: The details of the SDS fund in respect of the 
signage project component lying unutilised (October  2023) is enumerated in 
Table 4.2.9 . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 197 
Table 4.2.9: Details of un-utilised funds in respect of Signage Project component  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the 
Circuit  Sanctioned cost  Revised 
sanctioned cost  Expenditure  Unutilised funds 
(October 2023) 
Agartala 
Circuit  
1.19 
(December 2015)  
1.11 
(August 2020)  0.50  ₹ 0.61 175  
Unakoti 
Circuit  
1.09 
(August 2018)  
1.01 
(July 2022)  ₹ 0.64  ₹ 0.37 176  
It can be seen that ₹ 98 lakh could not be utilised for over five years (October 2023) 
due to poor implementation of the signage project component. 
Joint physical inspection with the officials of TTD CL (September 2023) further 
revealed that the signage installed by the contract or in respect of the first tender was 
informative ( Photograph 4.2.31 ).  The signage developed by the contractors in 
respect of the second and third tenders was not inf ormative both in terms of the 
distance of the tourist destination from the point of signage and the availability of 
amenities like accommodation, food joints, health-c are services, etc. 
(Photograph 4.2.32 ). 
  
Photograph 4.2.31: The informative 
signage installed at Amarpur Tourist 
Lodge. 
Photograph 4.2.32: The Signage installed in 
Jampui Hills depicting four pictures of 
Tourist Destinations without any further 
information in respect of the same. 
The Government  replied (April 2024) that on accoun t of slow progress of the 
contractor in respect of the first contract for ins tallation of 675 Signages was 
cancelled and accordingly second and third tenders were invited for speedy 
installation of Signages across the State. The cont ractors under the second and third 
                                                 
175  ₹ 61.41 lakh = Fund of ₹ 111 lakh disbursed towards the signage component o f Agartala Circuit – 
(₹ 16.92 lakh payment made to the contractor under th e first tender + ₹ 32.67 lakh payment made to 
the contractor under the second tender) 
176  ₹ 37.01 lakh = ₹ 101 lakh being the sanctioned cost for signage com ponent in respect of Unakoti 
Circuit minus  (Agreement cost of ₹ 57.46 lakh for installation of 50 signages in Unak oti Circuit + 
Deviation of ₹ 6.53 lakh in respect of the second tender. 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 198 
contract have completed their work. The Government further assured that in future 
signages constructed would be more informative. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable since  the Signage Project Component 
work under SDS suffered significant time overrun on account of deficient planning by 
TTDCL to assess the installation of Signages across  the state, failure to obtain 
necessary site clearances/ NOCs from the respective  municipal corporations as well 
as inordinate delays in submission of the approved concept and design of signages to 
the Contractor in respect of the first contract. 
Objective 3: There existed proper monitoring mechanisms for ensu ring the 
achievement of the scheme objectives   
 
4.2.6.3 Monitoring mechanism  
To execute the projects economically and efficientl y as well as to watch the physical 
and financial progress of the projects, effective m onitoring is an essential pre-
requisite. The following deficiencies were noticed in monitoring the implementation 
of tourism projects sanctioned by the MoT.  
There were delays ranging from six months to 44 mon ths in entrustment of the 
infrastructure creation projects to the implementin g agencies (IAs) by the TTDCL.  
There were delays ranging from nine months to 36 mo nths in completion of the 
Agartala Tourist Circuit and Unakoti Tourist Circui t projects against time frame 
stipulated in the respective agreements.  There wer e cases of non-obtaining statutory 
clearances and non-compliances with the law of the land leading to the derailment of 
SDS projects. There were cases of inaccurate submis sion of UCs against the SDS 
fund. 
The TTDCL, after placement of SDS fund with the IAs  for execution of the SDS 
projects failed to supervise the execution work of the projects.  The TTDCL failed to 
adhere to the provisions of GFR 2017, etc . thereby leading to irregularity in selection 
of PMC as well as non-refund of interest income on the SDS Fund. Assets procured 
under the Water Sports/ Adventure Tourism theme of the SDS were not put to use due 
to non-maintenance for the period ranging from six months to 15 months. Ten log-
huts set up were not being utilised for the period ranging from two to five years.  
4.2.6.4 Conclusion 
Despite lapse of seven years and after an aggregate  expenditure of 
₹ 85.67 crore 
incurred since the inception of the SDS, the objective of promoting tourism by way of 
increase in the footfall of tourists and creation o f local employment remained 
unfulfilled due to the following reasons: 
• Deficient planning of the State Government in under taking the infrastructural 
creation projects which were non-compliant to statu tory laws, international 
ramifications, territorial jurisdiction disputes, e nvironmental implications, etc.  
resulted in derailment/ delayed completion and/or d ropping of the several 
project/ project Components by the MoT.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 199 
• Irregularity in selection of the PMC as well defici ent services rendered by the 
PMCs resulted in (a) derailment of nine high valued  infrastructure creation SDS 
projects which led to infructuous expenditure of ₹ 8.57 crore and (b) dropping 
of the project/ project components of ₹ 34.75 crore. 
• Undue delays in entrustment of the infrastructure c reation projects to the IAs as 
well as in invitation of tenders in respect of the same resulted in delays in 
completion of the projects ranging from six months to 57 months. 
• Poor management of the SDS fund by the TTDCL resulted in underutilisation of 
funds and refund of ₹ 13.34 crore to the MoT. 
• Deficient monitoring mechanism prevalent in the TTD CL resulted in the 
improper up-keep/ maintenance of various assets cre ated under SDS thereby 
leading to infructuous/ idle expenditure of ₹ 9.64 crore. 
4.2.6.5 Recommendations 
The State Government may consider to: 
• develop a sound planning policy for the development  and implementation of 
the infrastructure creation projects with considera tion of factors like 
(a) compliance with the statutory laws (b) internat ional ramifications, 
territorial jurisdiction disputes and environmental  implications, etc. in 
consultation with the other stakeholders namely Forest Department, ASI, etc.; 
• exercise due diligence and ensure compliance with t he codal provisions in the 
selection of the Project Management Consultants; 
• mitigate the procedural delays in the entrustment o f the execution work to the 
State Government Implementing Agencies (IAs) as wel l as in the invitation of 
tenders in respect of the same; 
• ensure the professional management of the financial  resources, tracking and 
monitoring of the project fund lying with the other  IAs and submission of 
accurate UCs; and 
• strengthen its monitoring mechanism to ensure prope r up-keep/ maintenance 
of various assets created and timely completion of the projects.  

CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR 
  

 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 201 
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR 
 
5.1 GENERAL 
 
5.1.1 Trend of Revenue Receipts 
The Tax and Non-tax Revenue raised by Government of  Tripura during the year 
2022-23, the net proceeds of State’s share of Union  Taxes and Duties assigned to the 
State and Grants-in-aid received from the Governmen t of India (GoI) during the year 
and the corresponding figures for the preceding four years are given in Table 5.1.1 . 
Table 5.1.1: Trend of revenue receipts  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Particulars 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
I. Revenue raised by State Government 
Tax Revenue 1,765.91  2,101.79  2,332.44  2,616.31  2999.68  
Non-tax Revenue 372.20  271.65  285.49  274.11  402.35  
Total 2,138.11  2,373.44  2,617.93  2,890.42  3,402.03  
Increase over previous 
year (per cent) 11.62 11.01 10.30 10.41 17.70 
II. Receipts from the GoI 
Net proceeds of State 
Share of Union Taxes 
and Duties 
4,888.95  4,211.78  4,218.45  6,077.52  6,724.23  
Grants-in-aid  5,003.83  4,416.37  6,456.02  8,646.01  8,182.75  
Total 9,892.78  8,628.15  10,674.47  14,723.53  14,906.98  
III. Total Revenue 
Receipts of the State 
Government (I and II)  
12,030.89  11,001.59  13,292.40  17,613.95  18,309.01  
IV. Percentage of I to III 17.77 21.57 19.69 16.41 18.58 
Source : Finance Accounts 
 
Table 5.1.1  and Chart 5.1.1 indicates that during the year 2022-23, the revenue raised 
by the State Government was ₹ 3,402.03 crore which was 18.58 per cent  of the total 
9892.78 
8628.15 
10674.47 
14723.53 14906.98 
2138.11 2373.44 2617.93 2890.42 
3402.03 
82.23 78.43 80.31 83.59 
81.42 
17.77 21.57 19.69 16.41 18.58 
0.00 
20.00 
40.00 
60.00 
80.00 
100.00 
0.00 
2000.00 
4000.00 
6000.00 
8000.00 
10000.00 
12000.00 
14000.00 
16000.00 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
(in per cent) 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart 5.1.1: State and Central share in total revenue 
Revenue from GoI 
State's own revenue 
Share of revenue from GoI to total revenue 
Share of State's own revenue to total revenue 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 202 
Revenue Receipts. The balance 81.42 per cent  of the revenue receipts during 2022-23 
was received from the GoI in the form of State shar e of Union Taxes and Duties and 
Grants-in-Aid. The collection of own revenue increa sed by ₹ 511.61 crore during 
2022-23 as compared to previous year and the rate o f growth of own revenue 
significantly increased to 17.70 per cent  in 2022-23 as compared to 10.41 per cent  
during 2021-22. Revenue Receipts of the State incre ased by 3.95 per cent from 
₹ 17,613.95 crore in 2021-22 to ₹ 18,309.01 crore in 2022-23.  
5.1.1(a) Tax Revenue  
During 2022-23 collection of Tax revenue had increa sed by 
₹ 383.37 crore 
(14.65 per cent ) over the previous year. The details of Tax Revenu e raised during the 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23 are indicated in Table 5.1.2 
Table 5.1.2: Components of Own Tax Revenue during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Head of revenue 2018-19  2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23  
Increase (+) or 
decrease (-) of 
actual in 2022-23 
over 2021-22 
(per cent ) 
Sales Tax/ Value 
Added Tax (VAT) 361.95 435.88 403.19 463.12 463.57 0.10 
Goods and Service Tax 977.44 1026.63 1056.01 1282.6 9 1459.01 13.75 
State Excise 214.35 231.70 287.36 319.60 368.11 15. 18 
Stamps and 
Registration Fees 51.32 61.67 69.53 89.65 102.53 14.36 
Taxes on Vehicles 83.50 97.14 97.41 103.22 117.55 1 3.88 
Other Taxes on Income 
and Expenditure 43.87 43.59 41.00 41.75 37.99 (-) 9.01 
Land Revenue 5.29 12.98 9.85 8.94 12.59 40.83 
Other Taxes and Duties 
on Commodities and 
Services 
27.93 161.58 255.84 273.37 402.49 47.23 
Taxes & Duties on 
Electricity 0.01 30.54 112.09 33.74 35.60 5.51 
Others 0.25 0.08 0.16 0.23 177  0.24 178  4.35 
Total 1765.91 2101.79 2332.44 2616.31 2999.68 14.65 
Source : Finance Accounts 
Goods and Service Tax : The reason attributed by the Finance (Excise and Taxation) 
Department for increase of collection of Goods and Service Tax (13.75 per cent ) was 
due to more collection of SGST and IGST than that of previous year. 
State Excise : The reason attributed by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department for 
increase of collection of State Excise (15.18 per cent ) was due to growth in excise 
revenue collection. 
Other taxes on Income & Expenditure : The reason attributed by the Department for 
decrease of collection (9.01 per cent ) was due to no revision in the rate of Profession 
                                                 
177   Tax on Agriculture Income ( ₹ 0.04 crore), Taxes on Immovable Property other tha n Agricultural 
Land ( ₹ 0.19 crore) 
178   Tax on Agriculture Income ( ₹ 0.20 crore), Taxes on Goods and Passengers ( ₹ 0.04 crore) 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 203 
Tax during the year 2022-23 and less collection from Salary and Wages earners during 
the year. 
Stamp and Registration Fees : The Revenue Department attributed the reason for 
increase of collection (14.35 per cent ) to increase in land value at a flat rate of five per 
cent  on yearly basis and selling and purchasing of land. 
Land Revenue : The reason attributed by the Land Revenue Department for increase of 
collection of Land Revenue (40.83 per cent ) was due to increase in number of mutation, 
diversion and correction of land records. 
Taxes on Vehicles : Transport Department attributed the reason for incr ease of 
collection (13.88 per cent ) to increase of registration of vehicles and regul ar 
enforcement drive throughout the State by the Motor  Vehicle Inspectors in 
collaboration with Police/ Traffic Police and other officers/ officials. 
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.2 ), despite requested (August 2023), did 
not furnish (October 2023) the reasons for variatio ns in Tax Receipts with respect to 
the previous year. 
5.1.1(b) Non-tax Revenue 
During 2022-23 collection of Non-tax revenue had in creased by 
₹ 128.23 crore 
(46.78 per cent ) over the previous year. The details of the Non-Ta x Revenue raised 
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 are indicated in Table 5.1.3 . 
Table 5.1.3: Components of Non-tax Revenue during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Head of revenue 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23  
Increase (+)/ 
decrease (-) of 
actual in 2022-23 
over 2021-22 
(per cent ) 
1 Interest Receipts 146.11 19.25 18.11 24.43 22.93 (-) 6.14 
2 Industries 92.81 100.27 89.56 86.62 161.94 86.95 
3 Police 71.77 65.13 75.79 82.77 122.42 47.90 
4 Public Works 5.06 4.95 6.94 6.67 6.11 (-) 8.40 
5 Forestry and Wildlife 11.96 13.82 19.45 21.35 15. 83 (-) 25.85 
 6 Water Supply and Sanitation  1.88 1.25 1.28 1.87 1.46 (-) 21.93 
7 Misc. General Services 6.18 20.44 44.11 23.70 29. 71 25.36 
8 Other Administrative 
Services 4.71 8.29 5.22 7.07 6.58 (-) 6.93 
9 Medical and Public Health 3.97 8.94 1.88 1.73 3.5 4 104.62 
10 Crop Husbandry 3.56 2.98 2.54 2.33 2.94 26.18 
11 Animal Husbandry 2.07 2.05 1.57 1.30 1.42 9.23 
12 Housing 2.07 2.16 2.03 2.23 2.57 15.25 
13 Education, Sports, Art and 
Culture 1.78 1.05 1.04 0.76 2.98 292.11 
14 Stationery and Printing 2.00 2.15 1.50 1.06 1.46  36.45 
15 Others 179  16.27 18.92 14.47 10.22 20.46 100.20 
 Total 372.20 271.65 285.49 274.11 402.35 46.78 
Source : Finance Accounts 
                                                 
179  Comprising 27 Major Heads including dividends and profits 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 204 
Stationery and Printing : The reason attributed by the G.A (Printing & Stat ionery) 
Department for increase in collection (36.45 per cent ) was due to increase in number 
of requisition of printing papers or other printing  materials by the Government 
Department/ PSUs/ Boards/ Government Institutions, etc . 
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.3 ), despite requested (August 2023), did 
not furnish (October 2023) the reasons for variations in Non-tax Revenue Receipts with 
respect to the previous year. 
5.1.2 Revenue and return filing trends 
 
5.1.2(i) GST Revenue of Government of Tripura: Comp arison between budget 
estimates and actual receipts 
The comparison of budget estimates and the correspo nding actual collection of Goods 
and Service Tax (GST) during the period from 2019-2 0 to 2022-23 are shown in 
Table 5.1.4 . 
Table 5.1.4: Revenue from GST during 2019-20 to 2022-23 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Budget Estimates (BE) Revised Estimates (RE) Actuals 
State GST State GST State GST 
2019-20 1,149.74  1,149.74  1,026.63  
2020-21 1,310.70  984.80  1,056.01  
2021-22 1,122.67  1,250.51  1,282.69  
2022-23 1,425.58  1,459.04  1,459.01  
Source : Information furnished by office of the Principal Accountant General (A&E), Tripura  
It may be seen from Table 5.1.4  that, although target of RE was achieved for the 2020-
21 and 2021-22, actual collection was less than the target as projected in the RE for the 
years 2019-20 and 2022-23. The State’s GST collecti on steadily increased over the 
years from ₹ 1,026.63 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 1,459.01 crore in 2022-23. 
5.1.2(ii) Bi-monthly compensation received from Uni on Government 
The bi-monthly compensation received from Union Gov ernment under GST 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 180  for the year 2022-23 is given in Table 5.1.5 . 
Table 5.1.5: Bi-monthly compensation received from Union Government for the year 
2022-23  
(₹ in crore) 
Month Provisional Compensation  Shortfall (+)/ Excess (-), if 
any Due Received 
April-May 77.31  Nil  (+) 77.31  
June-July 63.73 181  Nil  (+) 63.73  
Total 141.04  Nil  (+) 141.04  
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
                                                 
180  An act to provide compensation to the States for t he loss of revenue arising on account of 
implementation of the GST in pursuance of the 101 Constitutional Amendment Act, 2016 
181  The five year transition period after adoption of GST on 1 July 2017 came to an end on 30 June 2022. 
With this, the era of GST Compensation that the State Government were entitled has ended. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 205 
5.1.2(iii) Trends of Integrated GST apportionment t o the State and its cross 
utilisation 
The Integrated GST (IGST) collected will be apporti oned between the Centre and the 
State where the goods or services are consumed. The  revenue will be apportioned to 
the Centre at the CGST rate, and the remaining amou nt will be apportioned to the 
consuming State. 
The trends of IGST apportionment to the State and i ts cross utilisation are given in 
Table 5.1.6 . 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore)  
IGST component 2019-20 2020-21  2021-22  2022-23 
IGST 182  apportioned to the State as per 
Section 17 of IGST Act, 2017 15.30 124.17 103.55 163.70 
IGST provisionally/ ad- hoc 
apportioned to the State 32.52 74.82 61.68 45.50 
IGST cross utilised between   
SGST 183  as IGST (-) 30.90 (-) 42.96 (-) 57.15 (-) 80.88 
IGST as SGST (+) 644.58 (+) 531.32 (+) 788.16 (+) 8 99.40 
Apportionment of IGST – Transfer of 
Interest Compound to SGST    0.28 
Source: Information furnished by office of the Principal Accountant General (A & E), Tripura 
5.1.2(iv) Registration under GST  
The total registrant under GST as on 31 March 2023 were 30,394, of which normal 
taxpayers were 27,767 which accounted for 91.36 per cent  and composition taxpayers 
were 1,586 which accounted for 5.22 per cent . The category wise registrations under 
GST is given in Table 5.1.7 . 
Table 5.1.7: Details of GST registrations upto 31 March 2023 
Category of Registrant  No. of Registrants  Percentage of total  
Normal taxpayers  27,767  91.36 
Composition taxpayers  1,586  5.22 
Tax Deductors at Source  994  3.27 
Tax Collectors at Source  37  0.12 
Input Service Distributors  0 0.00 
Others (Casual, NRTP, OIDAR) 184  10  0.03 
Total Registrants  30,394  100 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
5.1.2 (v) GST Return filing pattern of GSTR-1 and G STR-3B  
The trends of filling of GSTR-1185  and GSTR-3B 186  as on 31 March 2023 for the period 
                                                 
182  IGST: It is a tax collected by the Central Government for an inter-State sale 
183  SGST: It is a tax collected by the State Government for an intra-State sale 
184  Non-Resident Taxable Person (NRTP), Online Informa tion Data Access and Retrieval Services 
(OIDAR). 
185  GSTR-1: It is a sales return that is required to b e filed by every GST registered person 
186  GSTR-3B: It is a self-declared consolidated summar y return of inward and outward supplies which 
is required to be filed by a registered person electronically on the GST common portal 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 206 
from April 2022 to March 2023, as compiled from the  summary reports shared by 
GSTN, have been depicted in the Table 5.1.8 . 
The filling of GSTR-I for April 2022 was 89.73 per cent while that of March 2023 was 
98.50 per cent . It was noticed that on an average about 90 per cent  tax payers filed their 
GSTR-I returns during 2022-23.  
Table 5.1.8: Details of return filing (GSTR-I and GSTR-3B) during 2022-23  
Return 
Types GSTR-I GSTR-3B 
Months Due for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
(in 
percent 
age) 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed as 
on 31 
March 
2023 
Return 
filing 
(in 
percent 
age) 
Return 
filed by 
due date 
Percentage 
of return 
filed by due 
date 
April 2022 18,977 17,029 89.73 18,977 17,350 91.43 NA** i NA 
May 2022 19,277 17,254 89.51 19,277 17,553 91.06 NA  NA 
June 2022 19,361 17,428 90.02 19,361 17,752 91.69 N A NA 
July 2022 19,402 17,379 89.57 19,402 17,687 91.16 N A NA 
August 2022 19,474 17,616 90.46 19,474 17,867 91.75  NA NA 
September 
2022 
19,641 18,007 91.68 19,641 17,989 91.59 NA NA 
October 
2022 
19,543 17,890 91.54 19,543 17,895 91.57 NA NA 
November 
2022 
19,594 18,023 91.98 19,594 18,036 92.05 NA NA 
December 
2022 
19,346 18,126 93.69 19,346 18,089 93.50 NA NA 
January 
2023 
19,719 18,038 91.48 19,719 18,043 91.50 NA NA 
February 
2023 
18,241 18,021 98.79 18,241 17,982 98.58 NA NA 
March 2023 18,289 18,015 98.50 18,289 17,932 98.05 NA NA 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
**NA-Not available  
5.1.2(vi) Revenue earning from top 10 commodities/ services  
The details of the revenue earning from top 10 comm odities/ services during 2022-23 
are given in the Table 5.1.9 . 
Table 5.1.9: Revenue from top 10 commodities/ services during 2022-23  
(₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  Name of commodity  SGST collections  
Total  Ranking  
1 Cement & Products  71.91  1 
2 Automobile  46.09  2 
3 Iron & Steel  45.79  3 
4 Food Items 37.73  4 
5 Tobacco & Products  33.24 5 
6 Electricals  23.49  6 
7 Tyres & Tube  19.50  7 
8 Petroleum Products 16.97  8 
9 Machinery  16.25  9 
10  Pharmaceutical & Medicines  16.18  10 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 207 
Sl. 
No.  Name of Services  Total  Ranking  
1 Works Contract 65.66  1 
2 Telecommunication & Postal/ Courier  20.95  2 
3 Health/ Heath Care  17.36 3 
4 Insurance 14.67  4 
5 Banking & financial Institutions  13.27  5 
6 Consultancy 2.37  6 
7 Infrastructure (Construction)  2.20  7 
8 Manpower  1.86  8 
9 Advertising 1.24  9 
10  Rental & Lease  1.11  10 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
5.1.3 Analysis of arrears of revenue 
The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 2023 on account of Taxes/ VAT, GST and Taxes 
and Duties on Electricity stood at 
₹ 161.24 crore, of which, ₹ 45.63 crore was 
outstanding for more than five years, as detailed in Table 5.1.10 . 
Table 5.1.10: Arrears of revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Head of 
revenue 
Total amount outstanding as on 
31 March 
Amount outstanding for more than 
five years as on 31 March 
2022 2023 2022 2023 
1 Taxes/ VAT 45.33 53.43 37.12 33.41 
2 GST 16.79 13.08 - 12.22 
3 Taxes and 
Duties on 
Electricity 
- 94.73 - - 
Total 62.12 161.24 37.12 45.63 
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise& Taxation) Department.  
It may be seen from Table 5.1.10 that arrear of revenue increased from ₹ 62.12 crore 
at the end of March 2022 to ₹ 161.24 crore at the end of March 2023. The arrear of 
revenue outstanding for more than five years also i ncreased from ₹ 37.12 crore to 
₹ 45.63 crore during the same period. 
5.1.4 Evasion of tax detected by the department 
The details of cases of evasion of tax detected by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) 
Department, cases finalised and the demands for add itional tax raised as reported by 
the Department, etc . are given in Table 5.1.11 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 208 
Table 5.1.11: Evasion of tax 
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
As on 31 March 2022, 1,135 cases of evasion of tax/  VAT were outstanding.  During 
2022-23, 310 cases of evasion of tax had been detec ted under Tripura VAT Act, 2004 
and GST Act, 2017 taking the total pending cases to  1,445. Of these, assessments/ 
investigation of only 319 (22.08 per cent ) cases were completed and additional demand 
including penalty, etc . of ₹ 3.42 crore was raised during the year 2022-23. Consequently, 
1,126 cases were pending as on 31 March 2023. 
Government should put in place a mechanism to expedite the disposal of cases pending 
for finalisation. 
5.1.5 Pendency of refund cases 
The details of the claims for refund received and r efunds made under GST, VAT and 
State Excise are shown in Table 5.1.12 . 
Table 5.1.12: Details of pendency of refund cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
GST Sales Tax / VAT  State Excise Total 
No. of 
Cases Amount  No. of 
cases  Amount No. of 
cases Amount  No. of 
cases Amount  
1 Claims outstanding 
at the beginning of 
the year 
1 0.04 
 1 0.05  - -  2 0.09  
2 Claims received 
during the year 36 4.07  14  8.34  20 0.22  70 12.63  
3 Refunds made 
during the year 29 1.57  4 0.65  17 0.21  50 2.43  
4 Balance 
outstanding at the 
end of the year 
7* 
 1.94 **  11  7.74  3 0.01  21* 9.69**  
*One case has been rejected  
** One refund amount of ₹ 0.60 crore has been rejected  
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
During 2022-23, the State Government refunded ₹ 2.43 crore under GST, Sales Tax 
and State Excise in 50 cases. Claims in respect of 36 cases of GST for ₹ 4.07 crore, 14 
cases of Sales Tax (VAT) for ₹ 8.34 crore and 20 cases of State Excise for ₹ 0.22 crore 
of refund were received during the year. Of these, 29 cases of GST for ₹ 1.57 crore, 
four cases of VAT for ₹ 0.65 crore and 17 cases of State Excise for ₹ 0.21 crore have 
been refunded during the year 2022-23. 
Head of 
revenue 
Cases 
pending as 
on 
31 March 
2022 
Cases 
detected 
during 
2022-23 
Total 
Number of cases in which 
assessment/ investigation 
completed and additional 
demand with penalty, etc . 
raised 
Number of 
cases pending 
for finalisation 
as on 
31 March 2023 No. of cases (₹ in crore ) 
Tax/ VAT 1,027  51  1,078  52  0.68  1,026  
GST 108  259  367  267  2.74  100  
Total 1,135  310  1,445  319  3.42  1,126  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 209 
5.1.6 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with th e issues raised by Audit 
In order to analyse the effectiveness of the departments/ Government in addressing the 
issues highlighted in the Inspection Reports (IRs)/  Audit Reports, the action taken on 
the paragraphs and performance audits featured in the Audit Reports of the last ten years 
by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department has b een evaluated. The results are 
included in this Audit Report. 
The succeeding Paragraphs 5.1.6.1 and  5.1.6.2 explain the performance of the Finance 
(Excise & Taxation) Department with reference to cases detected in the course of local 
audit during the last ten years and the cases included in the Audit Reports for the years 
2013-14 to 2022-23. 
5.1.6.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of the outstanding IRs duri ng the last ten years, paragraphs 
included in those reports and their status as on 30  June 2023 in respect of Finance 
(Excise & Taxation) Department are tabulated in Table 5.1.13 . 
Table 5.1.13: Position of IRs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year  Inspection Report  Paragraphs  Money Value  
2013 -14  13  45  3.53  
2014 -15  13  63  12.55  
2015 -16  17  42  7.91  
2016 -17  14  62  5.52  
2017 -18  11  60  6.76  
2018 -19  13  46  6.47  
2019 -20  10  58  5.68  
2020 -21  4 30  1.58  
2021 -22  1 7 7.19  
2022 -23  0 0 0 
Total  96  413  57.19  
The age-wise break up of outstanding IRs and Paragr aphs for 2013-14 to 2022-23 as 
on 30 June 2023 is shown in Table 5.1.14 . 
Table 5.1.14: Age wise break up of outstanding IRs 
(₹ in crore) 
Years  Inspectio n Report  Paragraphs  Money value  
0-3 years  5 37  8.77  
4-6 years  34  164  18.91  
7-9 years  44  167  25.98  
10 years  13  45  3.53  
Total  96  413  57.19  
It is evident from Table 5.1.14 that between a range of zero to three years, five IRs and 
37 paragraphs remained outstanding, between four to  six years, 34 IRs and 164 
paragraphs and between seven to nine years, 44 IRs and 167 paragraphs remained 
outstanding and 13 IRs and 45 paragraphs remained outstanding for more than 10 years 
as on 30 June 2023. This indicates the fact that the efforts taken by the Department for 
settlement of the outstanding IRs are rather slow and inadequate.  Necessary steps may 
be taken to increase the pace of settlement in this regard. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 210 
5.1.6.2 Recovery in accepted cases 
The position of paragraphs included in the Audit Re ports of the last ten years, those 
accepted by the Department and the amount recovered during the year 2022-23 and the 
cumulative position of recovery of accepted cases a s on 31 March 2023 are shown in 
Table 5.1.15 . 
Table 5.1.15: Position of recovery of accepted Audit paragraphs of Audit Reports 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money 
value of the 
paragraphs  
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
including 
money value 
Money 
value of 
accepted 
paragraphs  
Amount 
recovered 
during 
2022-23 
Position of 
recovery of 
accepted 
cases as of 
2023 
2010-11 3 187  3.12 3 3.12 * 188  0.44  
2011-12 1 0.87 1 0.87 Nil  0.07  
2012-13 1 1.51 1 1.51 Nil  0.22  
2013-14 3 189  11.17 3 6.06 Nil  0.24  
2014-15 2 0.39 2 0.39 Nil  0.28  
2015-16 2 0.46 2 0.46 Nil  Nil  
2016-17 4 190  31.87 3 31.73 Nil  0.01  
2017-18 3 1.77 3 1.77 0.04  0.05  
2018-19 3 1.30 2 0.69 Nil  0.06  
2019-20 1 191  @ 1 @ 192  Nil  Nil  
Total 23 52.46 21 46.60 0.04 1.37  
It is evident from Table 5.1.15 that the progress of recovery even in accepted cases was 
very slow.  During the last ten years, 23 paragraphs involving ₹ 52.46 crore featured in 
the Audit Reports, of which 21 paragraphs involving  ₹ 46.60 crore had been accepted 
by the State Government. Out of this, only ₹ 1.37 crore (2.94 per cent ) was recovered. 
The Department should pursue and monitor prompt rec overy of the dues involved in 
accepted cases within a specified timeframe. It would not only enable better compliance 
with relevant rules, but would also augment Government revenues. 
5.1.7 Actions taken on the recommendations accepted  by the department/ 
Government 
The draft Performance Audits (PAs) conducted by the  office of the Principal 
Accountant General (Audit) are forwarded to the concerned departments with a request 
to furnish the replies. These Performance Audits are also discussed in Exit Conference 
and the departments’ views are incorporated/ consid ered while finalising the Audit 
Report. 
Four performance audits on Finance (Excise & Taxati on) Department, Transport 
Department and Revenue Department have featured in the last five years’ Audit Reports 
                                                 
187  Including one Performance Audit 
188  ₹ 17,685 recovered during 2022-23 
189  Including one Performance Audit 
190  Including one Performance Audit 
191  One Subject Specific Compliance Audit Report (SSCA) 
192  ₹ 12,041 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 211 
during 2014-15 to 2019-20. The number of recommenda tions and their status is given 
in Table 5.1.16 . 
Table 5.1.16: Details of recommendations of PAs and their status 
Year of 
Report 
Name of the performance 
audit 
No. of 
recommendations  
Status (as on September 
2023) 
2014-15 
IT Audit on 
Computerisation of Land 
Records. 
3 
The PA had not been 
discussed in Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC). 
2015-16 
Collection of Revenue from 
outsourced Activities in 
Motor Vehicle Tax. 
4 The PA had been discussed 
by PAC on 17 June 2022  
2016-17 
System and Procedures in 
force in the Taxes and 
Excise Organisation 
regarding Excise Duty 
3 The PA had not been 
discussed in PAC 
Border Area Development 
Programme 3 The PA had not been 
discussed in PAC 
Table 5.1.16  indicates that discussion of Performance Audits ha d not been made in 
PAC in timely manner which led to loss of importanc e of audit observations with the 
passage of time. 
5.1.8 Results of audit  
 
Position of local audit conducted during the year 
Test check of the records of two units of Motor Vehicles/ Transport Department during 
the year 2022-23 revealed under assessment/ short levy/ loss of revenue/ non-realisation 
of outstanding revenue of 
₹ 27.51 crore in two cases. No reply has been receiv ed 
(September 2023) from both the units. 
5.1.9 Coverage of this report 
This Chapter contains one Subject Specific Complian ce Audit titled “Department’s 
Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing” under Finance Department. 
  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 212 
FINANCE (EXCIXE AND TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
5.2 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Departmen t’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing”  
 
5.2.1 Introduction 
The introduction of Goods and Service Tax (GST) has  replaced multiple taxes levied 
and collected by the Centre and States. GST, which came into effect from 1 July 2017, 
is a destination-based consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied 
on every value addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common 
tax base.  Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/ Union Territory GST (UTGST) 
are levied on intra-state supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on the inter-state 
supplies. 
Section 59 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax (TGST) Act, 2017 stipulates GST as 
a self-assessment based tax, whereby the responsibi lity for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing r eturns is vested with the taxpayer.  
The GST returns must be filed online regularly on t he common GST portal, failing 
which penalties will be payable.  Even if the busin ess has had no tax liability during a 
particular tax period, it must file a nil return ma ndatorily. Further, Section 61 of the 
TGST Act read with Rule 99 of the Tripura Goods and  Service Tax Rules (TGST 
Rules), 2017 stipulate that the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related 
particulars furnished by taxpayers, communicate dis crepancies to the taxpayers and 
seek an explanation.  
This Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was t aken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commercial Taxes Organisation, Tri pura (Department) in this new 
tax regime. 
5.2.2 Audit objectives 
This audit was oriented towards providing assurance on the adequacy and effectiveness 
of systems and procedures adopted by the Department  with respect to tax compliance 
under GST regime.  Audit of ‘Department’s oversight  on GST Payments and Return 
filing’ was taken up with the following audit objectives to seek a reasonable assurance 
on:  
 Whether the rules and procedures were designed to s ecure an effective check on 
tax compliance and were being duly observed by taxpayers; and 
 Whether the scrutiny procedures, internal audit and other compliance functions of 
the Charges were adequate and effective. 
5.2.3 Audit methodology and scope 
This SSCA was predominantly conducted based on data  analysis, which highlighted 
risk areas and red flags pertaining to the period July 2017 to March 2018.  Through data 
analysis a set of 13 deviations were identified acr oss the domains of input tax credit 
(ITC), discharge of tax liability, registration and  return filing.  Such deviations were 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 213 
followed up through a Centralised Audit  (Limited Audit) 193 , whereby these deviations 
were communicated to the relevant State departmental field formations and action taken 
by the jurisdictional formations on the identified deviations was ascertained without 
involving field visits. The centralised audit was s upplemented by a Detailed Audit  
involving field visits for verification of records available with the jurisdictional field 
formations. Returns and related attachments and information were accessed through the 
state GST Portal as much as feasible to examine data/ documents relating to taxpayers 
(viz . registration, tax payment, returns and other departmental functions).  The detailed 
audit also involved accessing relevant granular rec ords from the taxpayers such as 
invoices through the respective field formations.  This apart, compliance functions of 
the departmental formation such as scrutiny of retu rns, action on late filers and non-
filers, cancellation of registration and internal a udit were also reviewed in selected 
charges.  
The review of the scrutiny of returns by the Depart ment and verification of taxpayers’ 
records covered the period from July 2017 to March 2018, while the audit of the 
functions of 10 selected charges covered the period  July 2017 to March 2021.  The 
SSCA covered only the State administered taxpayers.   The field audit was conducted 
from April 2022 to January 2023. 
An Entry conference of this SSCA was held on 9  March 2022 with the Commissioner 
of Taxes, Tripura in which the audit objectives, sa mple selection, audit scope and 
methodology were discussed.  The Exit Conference was held on 10 May 2023 with the 
Commissioner of Taxes during which the audit findin gs were discussed.  The 
Commissioner of Taxes stated that the matters under  audit observation would be 
examined and results thereof would be intimated in due course. Significant findings 
were discussed with the Secretary, Finance Departme nt, Government of Tripura in a 
meeting held on 5 June 2024. The views and response s of the Government were duly 
incorporated wherever appropriate. 
5.2.4 Audit Sample 
A data-driven approach was adopted for planning as also to determine the nature and 
extent of substantive audit.  The sample for this S SCA comprised a set of deviations 
identified through data analysis for centralised au dit that did not involve field visits; a 
sample of taxpayers for detailed audit that involve d field visits and scrutiny of 
taxpayers’ records at departmental premises; and a sample of Charges for evaluating 
the compliance functions of the departmental field formations. 
There were three distinct parts of the SSCA as under: 
(i)  Part I- Audit of Charges 
Ten Charges (out of total 15) having jurisdiction o ver one or more than one selected 
sample of cases for detailed audit were considered as the sample of charges for 
evaluation of their oversight functions. 
                                                 
193  Centralised Audit did not involve seeking taxpayer ’s granular records such as financial statements 
related ledger accounts, invoices, agreements, etc .  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 214 
(ii)  Part II –Centralised Audit 
The sample for Centralised Audit was selected by identification of high-value or high-
risk deviations from rules and inconsistencies between returns through data analysis for 
evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the  scrutiny procedure of the Taxes 
Organisation.  Accordingly, 235 (cases) were selected for Centralised Audit under this 
SSCA. 
(iii)  Part III-Detailed audit 
It was conducted by accessing taxpayers’ records through Charges for evaluation of the 
extent of tax compliance by taxpayers.  The sample of taxpayers for Detailed Audit was 
selected based on risk parameters such as excess IT C, tax liability mismatch, 
disproportionate exempted turnover to total turnove r and Irregular ITC reversal.  The 
30 taxpayers selected for Detailed Audit comprised Large 
194 , Medium 195  and Small 196  
strata taxpayers as well as taxpayers selected randomly. 
The details of sample for Centralised Audit, Detail ed Audit and Audit of Charges 
selected for this SSCA are brought out in Appendices 5.2.1 , 5.2.2  and 5.2.3 .  
5.2.5 Audit criteria  
The source of audit criteria comprised the provisions contained in the TGST Act, IGST 
Act, and Rules made there under.  
In addition, the notifications and circulars issued  by State Tax Department relating to 
filing of returns, notifying the effective dates of filing of various returns, extending due 
dates for filing returns, rates of tax on goods and services, payment of tax, availing and 
utilising ITC, scrutiny of returns and oversight of tax compliance and scrutiny of returns 
and cancellation of registrations, etc . also formed part of the audit criteria. 
5.2.6 Audit findings  
The audit findings are categorised into the following three categories: 
 Oversight on Charge functions– Audit of Charges 
 Centralised Audit (Limited Audit) 
 Detailed Audit 
5.2.6.1 Oversight on Charge functions– Audit of Cha rges  
The role of Charges is to provide oversight for ens uring compliance by taxpayers in 
respect of accuracy of the taxable value declared, calculation and payment of tax 
liabilities, filing of returns, etc . For evaluating the functions of the charges, the audit 
areas include (i) scrutiny of returns (ii) action o n late-filers and non-filers 
(iii) cancellation of registration and (iv) internal audit. 
                                                 
194  First strata comprise large taxpayers – top two per cent  of taxpayers based on turnover 
195  Second strata comprise medium taxpayers – next eight per cent  of taxpayers based on turnover 
196  Third strata comprise small taxpayers – remaining 90 per cent  of taxpayers 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 215 
5.2.6.1(i) Deficient monitoring mechanism on return  scrutiny 
As per section 61 (1) of the TGST Act, 2017 the proper officer may scrutinise the return 
and related particulars furnished by the registered  person to verify the correctness of 
the return and inform him of the discrepancies noti ced, if any, in such manner as may 
be prescribed and seek his explanation thereto.  
Year-wise information relating to scrutiny of returns during the period from 2017-18 to 
2020-21 was called for in August 2022 and again in December 2022 from 10 selected 
charges.  
Out of a sample of 10 charges (Charge-I to VIII, Teliamura and Bishalgarh), audit could 
not verify the overseeing mechanism on return scrut iny in eight Charges as neither 
records nor data were provided to Audit. 
The Superintendent of Taxes, Charge-V stated (November 2022) that 1,536 and 1,776 
returns were scrutinised during the FYs 2019-20 and  2020-21 respectively. 
Subsequently, ASMT-10 was issued to 96 taxpayers an d response received from 51 
taxpayers during FY 2019-20. Again, ASMT-10 was iss ued to 74 taxpayers and 
response received from 43 taxpayers during FY 2020-21; but the charge office failed to 
take follow-up action during both the FYs.   
The Superintendent of Taxes, Teliamura stated (July  2023) that 396 and 1,380 returns 
were scrutinised during the FYs 2019-20 and 2020-21  respectively. Subsequently, 
ASMT-10 were issued to 32 taxpayers and responses received from 10 taxpayers during 
FY 2019-20. Again, ASMT-10 was issued to 115 taxpay ers and responses received 
from seven taxpayers during FY 2020-21; but the charge office failed to take action on 
remaining taxpayers during both the FYs.  
Moreover, no Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for  scrutiny of returns had been 
introduced in the Taxes Organisation till date (March 2023). 
Despite intimation/ persuasion to respective charge  offices on December 2022 again, 
remaining eight charges did not furnish any reply r egarding scrutiny of returns till 
(July 2023). 
Audit also could not verify the same due to non-mai ntenance of monthly MIS reports/ 
data related to returns scrutiny in the state GST portal (boweb).  
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Secretary instructed the Commissioner of Taxes to sought information 
from the remaining eight charges and made available to Audit early.  
Recommendation 1 
The Department may formulate SOP or prescribe detai l procedures for selection of 
scrutiny cases and fix targets, so that an optimum number of cases can be scrutinised 
in every financial year before the cases became time barred.  
The Department accepted the recommendation and woul d formulate an SOP for 
selection of scrutiny cases and fix targets. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 216 
5.2.6.1(ii) Lack of action on late-filers and non-f ilers 
Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 68 of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates 
issue of a notice in Form GSTR-3A requiring filing of return within fifteen days if the 
taxpayer had failed to file the return within the d ue date. Further, Section 62 of TGST 
Act, 2017 read with Rule 100 of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates that in case the taxpayer 
fails to file the returns even after such notice, the proper officers may proceed to assess 
the tax liability of the said person to the best of  their judgment, taking into account all 
the relevant material which is available or gathere d and issue an assessment order in 
Form ASMT-13.  
Filing of returns is related to payment of tax as the due date for both the actions are the 
same, which implies risk of non-payment of tax/ penalty in the case of non-filers.   
Year-wise information relating to action taken on l ate-filers and non-filers during the 
period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 was called for in Au gust 2022 and again in 
December 2022  from 10 selected charges.  
The Superintendent of Taxes, Teliamura stated (November 2022) that 62 (FY 2019-20) 
and 265 (FY 2020-21) cases of late filers/ non-file rs were identified. Subsequently, 
51 taxpayers filed returns within 15 days after iss ue of notice during 2019-20 and 
245 taxpayers filed returns within 15 days after is sue of notice during 2020-21. The 
Superintendent further stated (July 2023) that rema ining 11 (62-51) non-filers and 20 
(265-245) non-filers had filed returns for the period 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively.  
Further, nil response (November 2022) of the Superi ntendent of Taxes, Charge-V, 
revealed that no action had been initiated against late filers/ non-filers during the FYs 
2017-18 to 2020-21.  Requisite information was not provided by the remaining eight 
charges (July 2023). 
Audit also could not verify the same due to non-mai ntenance of monthly MIS reports/ 
data related to non-filers/ late filers in the state GST portal (boweb). 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Secretary instructed the Commissioner of Taxes to sought information 
from the remaining eight charges and made available to Audit early.  
5.2.6.1(iii) Non-furnishing of information on cance llation of registration 
Section 45 of the TSGST Act read with Rule 81 of th e TSGST Rules, 2017 specify 
that any person whose registration was cancelled sh ould file final return in FORM 
GSTR-10 within three months of the date of cancella tion or date of order of 
cancellation, whichever is later.  Field formation/  Superintendent of taxes is 
responsible for suo moto  cancellation of registration of non-filers.  
Year-wise information relating to the verification mechanism on cancellation of 
registration of defaulters during the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 was called for in 
August 2022 and again in December 2022 from 10 selected charges.   
The Superintendent of Taxes, Teliamura stated (July 2023) that number of requisitions 
received for cancellation from taxpayers were 28, 5 3 and 22 during 2018-19, 2019-20 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 217 
and 2020-21 respectively and number of suo moto  cancellation initiated were 96 and 
82 during 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively. But the  authority did not issue any 
cancellation order (REG-19) to the taxpayers from w hich requisition for cancellation 
were received during 2018-21. Tax Authority complet ed 96 and 82 cancellation 
procedures ( suo moto ) during 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively.  
No response had been furnished by the remaining nine charge offices (July 2023). 
Due to non-furnishing of information/ record by mos t of the selected charges, the 
effectiveness of verification mechanism on cancella tion of registration of defaulters 
by the tax authorities could not be assessed. 
Audit also could not verify the same due to non-mai ntenance of monthly MIS reports/ 
data related to cancellation of registration in the state GST portal (boweb). 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Secretary instructed the Commissioner of Taxes to sought information 
from the remaining nine charges and made available to Audit early.  
Recommendation 2 
The Department may ensure timely verification of ca ncellation of registrations to 
prevent undue loss of tax revenue and unfair tax practices. 
The Department accepted the recommendation and would take steps to timely scrutinise 
all cases of cancellation of registration. 
5.2.6.1(iv) Deficient action on internal Audit 
As per Section 65 of the TGST Act, 2017 the Commiss ioner or any officer authorised 
by him, by way of a general or a specific order, ma y undertake audit of any registered 
person for such period, at such frequency and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
Section 2 (13) of the TGST Act, 2017, defines “Audi t” as the examination of records, 
returns and other documents maintained or furnished  by the registered person under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law for the time being in force 
to verify the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed and input tax 
credit availed, and to assess his compliance with the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder. 
Year-wise information relating to the status of aud it conducted by the tax authorities 
during the FYs 2017-18 to 2020-2021 was called for in August 2022 from selected 
10 charges. 
From the reply it became evident that Charge-II pre pared audit plan to audit 
51 taxpayers during the year 2020-21, but did not execute.  Charge-IV prepared plan to 
audit 70 taxpayers during 2020-21 and audited 50 taxpayers. But no audit function was 
initiated by both the charge offices during 2017-18 to 2019-20. Teliamura charge stated 
(July 2023) that 25 taxpayers were selected for GST  audit, of which audit of six 
taxpayers had been completed. 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 218 
Intimation was again made to the respective tax aut horities in December 2022, but no 
further response had been received (July 2023). 
Due to non-furnishing of information in most of the  cases, the audit functions 
performed by the charge offices could not be assessed. 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Secretary instructed the Commissioner of Taxes to sought information 
from the remaining seven charges and made available to Audit early. 
Recommendation 3 
The Department may formulate detail selection proce dures for cases for conduct of 
audit so that an optimum number of cases can be audited in every financial year. 
The Department accepted the recommendation and woul d work out detail procedure 
for selection of cases for internal audit. 
5.2.6.2 Inconsistencies in GST returns -Centralised  audit 
Audit analysed GST returns data pertaining to 2017- 18 as made available by GSTN.  
Rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies b etween GST returns filed by 
taxpayers were identified on a set of 13 parameters , which can be broadly categorised 
into two domains - ITC and Tax payments.  
Out of the 13 prescribed GST returns 
197 , the following basic returns that apply to normal 
taxpayers were considered for the purpose of identi fying deviations, inconsistencies 
and mismatches between GST returns/ data: 
 GSTR-1: monthly return furnished by all normal and casual registered taxpayers 
making outward supplies of goods and services or bo th and contains details of 
outward supplies of goods and services.  
 GSTR-3B: monthly summary return of outward supplies  and input tax credit 
claimed, along with payment of tax by the taxpayer to be filed by all taxpayers 
except those specified under Section 39(1) of the A ct.  This is the return that 
populates the credit and debits in the Electronic C redit Ledger and debits in 
Electronic Cash Ledger. 
 GSTR-6: monthly return for Input Service Distributo rs providing the details of 
their distributed input tax credit and inward supplies. 
 GSTR-8: monthly return to be filed by the e-commerce operators who are required 
to deduct TCS (Tax collected at source) under GST, introduced in October 2018. 
                                                 
197  GSTR-1, GSTR-3B, GSTR-4 (taxpayers under the Compo sition scheme), GSTR-5 (non-resident 
taxable person), GSTR-5A (Non-resident OIDAR servic e providers), GSTR-6 (Input service 
distributor), GSTR-7 (taxpayers deducting TDS), GSTR-8 (E-commerce operator), GSTR-9 (Annual 
Return), GSTR-10 (Final return), GSTR-11 (person ha ving UIN and claiming a refund), CMP-08, 
and ITC-04 (Statement to be filed by a principal/ job-worker about details of goods sent to/ received 
from a job-worker). 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 219 
 GSTR-9: annual return to be filed by all registered  persons other than an Input 
Service Distributor (ISD), Tax Deductor at Source/ Tax Collector at Source, Casual 
Taxable Person and Non-Resident taxpayer.  This document contains the details of 
all supplies made and received under various tax he ads (CGST, SGST and IGST) 
during the entire year along with turnover and audit details for the same.  
 GSTR-9C: annual audit form for all taxpayers having  a turnover above ₹ 5 crore 
in a particular financial year.  It is basically a reconciliation statement between the 
annual returns filed in GSTR-9 and the taxpayer's a udited annual financial 
statements. 
 GSTR-2A: a system-generated statement of inward sup plies for a recipient.  It 
contains the details of all B2B transactions of sup pliers declared in their Form 
GSTR-1/5, ISD details from GSTR-6, details from GST R-7 and GSTR-8 
respectively by the counterparty and import of good s from overseas on bill of 
entry, as received from ICEGATE Portal of Indian Customs. 
The data analysis pertaining to State jurisdiction on the 13 identified parameters and 
extent of deviations/ inconsistencies observed are summarised in Table 5.2.1.  
Table 5.2.1: Summary of state data analysis 
Sl. 
No Parameter Algorithm used Number of 
deviations 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Mismatch in 
availing of ITC  
ITC available as per GSTR-2A with all its 
amendments was compared with the ITC 
availed in GSTR-3B in Table 4A(5) 
(accrued on domestic supplies) considering 
the reversals in Table 4B(2) but including 
the ITC availed in the subsequent year 
2018-19 from Table 8C of GSTR-9.  
25 11.69  
2 
Mismatch in 
availing of ITC 
under Reverse 
Charge 
Mechanism 
(RCM). 
RCM payments in GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) 
was compared with ITC availed in GSTR-9 
Table (6C+6D+6F). In case where GSTR-9 
was not available, RCM liability in GSTR-
3B Table 3.1(d) was compared with GSTR-
3B Table {4(A)(2) +4(A)(3)}  
25 1.37 
 
3 
Mismatch in 
availing of ITC 
under RCM 
without payment  
RCM liability declared in GSTR-9 Table 
4G was compared with ITC availed in 
GSTR-9 Table (6C+6D+6F). In cases 
where GSTR-9 was not available, RCM 
payments in GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) was 
compared with GSTR-3B 4(A) (2) and 4A 
(3). 
3 0.03  
4 
Incorrect 
availment of ISD 
credit  
ISD received in GSTR-9 Table 6G was 
compared with ITC transferred in GSTR-6 
(sum of Table 5A +Table 8A +Table 9A of 
GSTR-6) of the distributor. In cases where 
GSTR-9 is not available then GSTR-3B 
24 1.14 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 220 
Sl. 
No Parameter Algorithm used Number of 
deviations 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Table 4(A)(4) compared with sum of Table 
5A +Table 8A +Table 9A of GSTR-6.  
5 Incorrect ISD 
credit reversal  
GSTR-9 Table 7B/7H of the recipients was 
compared with sum of Table 8A (negative 
figures only) and Table 9A (negative figures 
only) of their GSTR-6S. 
01 0.0002  
6 
Mismatch in ITC 
availed between 
annual returns 
and financial 
statement (Table 
12F of GSTR-
9C)  
Positive entries in Table 12F of GSTR-9C 25 19.81 
 
7 
Reconciliation 
between ITC 
declared in 
annual return 
with expenses in 
financial 
statements 
(Table 14T of 
GSTR-9C)  
Positive entries in Table 14T of GSTR-9C 24 82.90  
8 
Mismatch in 
turnover 
between annual 
return and 
financial 
statement (Table 
5R of GSTR-9C) 
 
Negative figure in Table 5R of GSTR-9C  25 581.50  
9 
Mismatch in 
taxable turnover 
between annual 
return and 
financial 
Statements 
(Table 7G of 
GSTR-9C)  
Negative figure in Table 7G of GSTR-9C  6 2.78  
10 
Mismatch in tax 
paid between 
books of 
accounts and 
annual return 
(Table 9R of 
GSTR-9C)  
Negative figure in Table 9R of GSTR-9C  25 3.06 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 221 
Sl. 
No Parameter Algorithm used Number of 
deviations 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
11 Undischarged 
Tax liability  
Greater tax liability between GSTR-1 
(Tables 4 to 11) and GSTR-9 (Tables 4N, 10 
and 11) was compared with tax paid details 
in GSTR-3B Table {3.1(a) + 3.1(b)}. In 
cases where GSTR-9 was not available, tax 
paid in GSTR-3B was compared with 
GSTR-1 liability. The amendments and 
advance adjustments declared in GSTR-1 
and GSTR-9 were duly considered.  
25 18.33  
12 
Cases where 
GSTR-3B not 
filed but GSTR-
1 or GSTR-2A 
available 
Taxpayers who have not filed GSTR-3B but 
have filed GSTR-1 or where GSTR-2A is 
available, indicating taxpayers carrying on 
the business without discharging tax. 
02 0.87 
 
13 
Short payment of 
interest on 
delayed 
payments. 
Interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent  
on cash portion of tax payment on delayed 
filing of GSTR-3B vis-à-vis  interest 
declared in GSTR-3B Table 6.1.  
25 2.31  
 Total 235 725.80  
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Department acknowledged and accepted the fact. 
5.2.6.2(i) Non-submission of reply by the departmen t 
Audit selected a sample of 235 cases from amongst the top deviations/ inconsistencies 
in each of the 13 parameters for the year 2017-18.  The audit queries were issued to the 
respective Charges in April 2022 without further sc rutiny of taxpayer’s records.  The 
audit check in these cases was limited to verifying  the Department action on the 
identified deviations/ mismatches.   
Initial responses were yet to be received for 44 in consistencies out of 
235 communicated to the charges in April 2023, whic h represent a risk exposure of 
₹ 16.64 crore as given in Table 5.2.2. 
Table 5.2.2: Reply not received 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Audit Dimension 
Sample 
Department’s 
Reply not 
received 
Percentage 
Number Amount of 
mismatch Number Amount  Number Amount  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 Mismatch in availing of ITC  25 11.69  4 1.36  16 11.63  
2 Mismatch in availing of ITC 
under Reverse Charge 
Mechanism (RCM)  
25 1.37 
 1 0.19  4 13.87  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 222 
Sl. 
No.  
Audit Dimension 
Sample 
Department’s 
Reply not 
received 
Percentage 
Number Amount of 
mismatch Number Amount  Number Amount  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
3 Mismatch in availing of ITC 
under RCM without 
payment  
03 0.03 
 0 0  0 0  
4 Incorrect availment of ISD 
credit  24 1.14  8 0.09  33.33 7.89  
5 Incorrect ISD credit reversal.  01 0.0002  01 0.0002  100 100  
6 Mismatch in ITC availed 
between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 
12F of Form 9C) 
25 19.81 
 5 0.24  20 1.21  
7 Reconciliation between ITC 
declared in annual return 
with expenses in financial 
statements (Table 14T of 
Form 9C) 
24 82.90 
 2 3.58  8.33 4.32  
8 Mismatch in turnover 
between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 
5R of Form 9C) 
25 581.50 
 2 5.08  8 0.87  
9 Mismatch in taxable 
turnover between annual 
return and financial 
statements (Table 7G of 
Form 9C) 
06 2.78 
 03 1.63  50 58.63  
10 Mismatch in tax paid 
between books of accounts 
and annual return (Table 9R 
of Form 9C) 
25 3.06 
 5 0.49  20 16.01  
11 Undischarged tax liability 25 18.33  05 1.97  20 10.75  
12 Cases where GSTR 3B not 
filed but GSTR-1 or GSTR-
2A is available. 
02 0.88 
 02 0.88  100 100  
13 Short payment of interest on 
delayed payment. 25 2.31  06 1.13  24 48.92  
 Total 235 725.80  44 16.64 18.72 2.29  
Considering that the overall rate of conversion of inconsistencies into compliance 
deviations as brought out in the next paragraph. Th e Tax Department is required to 
expedite verification of these cases as a priority.  Details of these cases are listed in 
Appendix 5.2.4 . The top five cases in terms of money value where re sponse is yet to 
be received, is given in Table 5.2.3 . 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 223 
Table 5.2.3: Top five (5) cases in terms of money value where response is yet to be received  
Recommendation 4 
Department may urgently pursue the 44 out of 235 ca ses where inconsistencies and 
deviations were pointed out by Audit and result there-of may be intimated to Audit. 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) the Secretary, Finance  Department, Government of 
Tripura while accepting the recommendation, the Sec retary instructed the 
Commissioner of Taxes that replies may be sought fr om the concerned charges and 
made available to the Audit at the earliest. 
5.2.6.2(ii) Results of centralised audit 
Based on responses to the Audit Queries received fr om the Department, the extent to 
which 11 parameters translated into compliance devi ations is summarised in 
Appendix 5.2.5 . 
5.2.6.2(iii) Summary of Centralised Audit 
Audit noticed deviations from the provisions of the Act in 140 cases (Col. No. 6, 8, 10, 
12, 14 of Appendix 5.2.5 ) involving mismatch of ITC/ tax liability involving an amount 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Trade Name Dimension Charge 
Mismatch 
amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
1 16AABCN206 
6M1ZC 
M/s Narendrapur 
Tea Company 
Private Limited 
Mismatch in turnover 
between annual return 
and Financial Statements 
(Table 5R of Form 
GSTR-9C). 
Dharmanagar 3.68 
 
2 16AAICS0296 
H1Z7 
M/s 
Schlumberger 
Solutions Private 
Limited 
Reconciliation between 
ITC declared in annual 
return with expenses in 
financial statements 
(Table 14T of Form 
GSTR-9C) 
Charge-V 3.47 
 
3 16AHDPS9448 
L2ZL 
M/s Ashirbad 
Gas Agency 
Mismatch in turnover 
between annual return 
and Financial Statements 
(Table 5R of Form 
GSTR-9C). 
Charge-I 1.39 
 
4 16AABAT1839 
L2Z8 
M/s Tripura 
Cricket 
Association 
Short payment of interest 
on delayed payment Charge-V 0.86 
 
5 16CXJPS3809 
M1ZU 
M/s Loknath 
Rubber 
Mismatch in taxable 
turnover between annual 
return & financial 
statement (Table 7G of 
GSTR-9C) 
Udaipur 0.72 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 224 
of ₹ 68.65 crore (Col. No 7, 9, 11, 13 and 15 of Appendix 5.2.5 ) constituting 
73.29 per cent  of the 191 cases of inconsistencies/ mismatches fo r which the 
Department provided responses. Relatively higher ra tes of deviations were noticed in 
risk parameters such as short/ non-payment of interest, ITC mismatch and availing ITC 
under RCM, etc .  
In 42 (Col. No. 4 of Appendix 5.2.5 ) out of 191 cases, constituting 21.99 per cent , 
where the Department’s reply was acceptable to Audit and had valid explanations.  
In three cases (Col. No. 20 of Appendix 5.2.5 ) constituting 1.57 per cent , the 
Department stated that it was examining the underlying deviation of ₹ 0.01 crore (Col. 
No. 21 of Appendix 5.2.5 ). In the remaining six cases (Col. No. 18 of Appendix 5.2.5 ), 
constituting 3.14 per cent , though the Department did not accept the deviations pointed 
out by Audit, its contention was not borne out by evidence and thus, was not amenable 
to verification by audit.  
Illustrative cases for each dimension of Centralise d audit (for compliance deviation 
pertaining to cases of recovery, ASMT-10, SCN issued and under correspondence with 
taxpayer) is given in Table 5.2.4 . 
Table 5.2.4: Illustrative case of dimension of Centralised audit 
Sl. 
No Dimension GSTIN Trade name Jurisdictional 
charge 
Mismatch  
(₹ in 
crore) 
Action 
taken 
1 Mismatch in 
availing of ITC  
16ADNPR5 
161K1Z1 
M/s Liza 
Traders Bishalgarh 0.17 ASMT-
10 issued 
2 
Mismatch in 
availing of ITC 
under Reverse 
Charge 
Mechanism 
(RCM) 
16BOKPD1 
877D1Z2 
M/s 
Swarupananda 
Rubber 
Enterprise 
Belonia 0.32 ASMT-
10 issued 
3 
Mismatch in 
availing of ITC 
under RCM 
without 
payment 
16AHFPC2 
767G1ZJ 
M/s New 
Standard 
Medical 
Agency 
Charge-VI 0.006 ASMT-
10 issued 
4 
ISD credit 
incorrectly 
availed by the 
recipients 
16AAACO0 
054F1ZZ 
M/s Oriental 
Structural 
Engineers 
Pvt.Ltd 
Belonia 0.34 ASMT-
10 issued 
5 
Mismatch of 
ITC availed 
between 
annual returns 
and financial 
statement 
16AADCB1 
615J1ZZ 
M/s Brite 
Rubber 
Processor 
Private Ltd. 
Charge-III 
14.69 
DRC-3 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 225 
Sl. 
No Dimension GSTIN Trade name Jurisdictional 
charge 
Mismatch  
(₹ in 
crore) 
Action 
taken 
(Table 12F of 
GSTR-9C) 
6 
Reconciliation 
between ITC 
declared in 
annual return 
with expenses 
in financial 
statements 
(Table 14T of 
GSTR-9C) 
16AAICP23 
79N1ZT 
M/s 
Progressive 
Automobiles 
Pvt. Ltd 
Charge-I 
21.98 ASMT-
10 issued 
7 
Mismatch in 
turnover 
between 
annual return 
and financial 
statements  
(Table 5R of 
GSTR-9C) 
16BBTPS03 
96G2Z2 
M/s Santoshi 
Traders. Ambassa 
1.98 ASMT-
10 issued 
8 
Mismatch in 
taxable 
turnover 
between 
annual return 
and financial 
statements  
(Table 7G of 
GSTR-9C) 
16ADNPP3 
687N1ZM 
M/s 
Planetorium Charge-II 0.60 ASMT-
10 issued 
9 
Mismatch in 
taxpaid 
between books 
of accounts 
and returns 
(Table 9R of 
GSTR-9C) 
16AQUPB8 
439Q1ZW 
M/s Nilotpal 
Bose Kailasahar 0.03 SCN 
10 
Undischarged 
tax liability 16AACCT2 
964M1ZY 
M/s Tripura 
State 
Electricity 
Corporation 
Ltd. 
Charge-I 8.10 ASMT-
10 issued 
11 
Short payment 
of interest on 
delayed 
payments 
16CAOPM5 
025R1Z0 
M/s Subir 
Majumder Udaipur 0.02 SCN 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 226 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Department acknowledged and accepted the facts.  
Illustrative cases for each dimension from the Table 5.2.4 
 
(i) Dimension - Mismatch in availing of ITC 
GSTR-2A is a purchase related dynamic tax return th at is automatically generated for 
each business by the GST portal, whereas GSTR-3B is  a monthly return in which 
summary of outward supplies along with ITC declared  and payment of tax are 
self-declared by the taxpayer.  
To analyse the veracity of ITC utilisation, relevant data were extracted from GSTR-3B 
and GSTR-2A for the year 2017-18, and the ITC paid as per suppliers’ details was 
matched with the ITC credit availed by the taxpayer.  The methodology adopted was to 
compare the ITC available as per GSTR 2A with all its amendments and the ITC availed 
in GSTR-3B in Table 4A (5) 
198  considering the reversals Table 4B (2) 199  but including 
the ITC availed in the subsequent year 2018-19 from Table 8C of GSTR 9. 
Audit observed that in case of M/s Liza Traders (GS TN-16ADNPR5161K1Z1) under 
Bishalgarh charge, the ITC available as per GSTR-2A was ₹ 0.0002 crore and the ITC 
availed in Table 4A (5) of GSTR-3B was ₹ 0.17 crore.  This resulted in mismatch of 
ITC availed amounting to ₹ 0.17 crore which was intimated to the Superintende nt of 
Taxes in May 2022.  In response (June 2022), the Superintendent stated that ASMT-10 
issued seeking the reasons for the discrepancy had been issued. Latest position of action 
taken along with supporting documents may be furnished to audit. 
(ii) Dimension- Mismatch in availing of ITC under R everse Charge 
Mechanism (RCM) 
Reverse Charge Mechanism the liability to pay tax i s fixed on the recipient of supply 
of goods or services instead of the supplier or pro vider in respect of certain categories 
of goods or services or both under Section 9(3) or Section 9(4) of the TGST Act, 2017 
and under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of Section 5 of the IGST Act, 2017. 
GSTR-9 is an annual return to be filed once for eac h financial year, by the registered 
taxpayers who were regular taxpayers, including SEZ  units and SEZ developers.  The 
taxpayers are required to furnish details of purcha ses, sales, input tax credit or refund 
claimed, or demand created, etc . 
To analyse the veracity of ITC availed on tax paid under Reverse Charge Mechanism 
(RCM) for the year 2017-18, the datasets pertaining  to GSTR-3B and annual return 
GSTR-9 were compared to check whether the ITC avail ed on RCM was restricted to 
the extent of tax paid.  The methodology adopted was to compare the RCM liability in 
                                                 
198  All other eligible ITC 
199  Other ITC reversed 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 227 
GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) 200  with ITC availed in GSTR-9 Table 6C 201 , 6D 202  and 6F 203 .  
In cases where GSTR-9 was not available, RCM liability in GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) was 
compared with the ITC availing part of GSTRR-3B 4A (2) 204  and 4A (3) 205 .  
Audit observed that in case of M/s Swarupananda Rub ber Enterprise (GSTN-
16BOKPD1877D1Z2) under Belonia charge, the ITC avai lable in Table 3.1(d) of 
GSTR-3B was ₹ 0.13 crore and the ITC availed in Table 4A (2) & (3) of GSTR-3B was 
₹ 0.45 crore resulting in mismatch of ITC availed amounting to ₹ 0.32 crore which was 
intimated to the Superintendent of Taxes during May  2022.  In response (June 2022), 
the Superintendent stated that ASMT-10 seeking the reasons for the discrepancy had 
been issued.  Latest development along with supporting documents may be furnished.  
(iii) Dimension - Mismatch in availing of ITC under  RCM without payment 
The extent of availing of ITC under RCM for the yea r 2017-18 without discharging 
equivalent tax liability or in other words, short payment of tax under RCM was analysed 
by comparing the datasets pertaining to GSTR-3B and annual return GSTR-9 to check 
whether the tax has been discharged fully on the activities/ transactions under RCM.  In 
cases where GSTR-9 was filed, the RCM liability dec lared in Table 4G 206  of GSTR-9 
was compared with ITC availed in Table (6C+6D+6F) o f GSTR-9.  In cases where 
GSTR-9 was not available, RCM payments in GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) 207  was compared 
with GSTR-3B 4(A) (2) 208  and 4A (3) 209 . 
Audit observed (December 2022) that in case of M/s New Standard Medical Agency 
(GSTN-16AHFPC2767G1ZJ) under Charge-VI, RCM payment s in Table 3.1 (d) of 
GSTR-3B was ₹ 0 and compare with Table 4A(2) + 4A(3) of GSTR-3B of ₹ 0.006 
crore. This resulted in excess availment of ITC on RCM without payment of tax 
amounting to ₹ 0.006 crore.  
The matter was intimated to the Superintendent of T axes during December 2022.  In 
response (July 2023), the Superintendent stated tha t ASMT10 was issued to the 
taxpayer. Latest development along with supporting documents may be furnished.  
(iv)  Dimension – Incorrect availment of ISD credit 
To analyse whether the ITC availed by the taxpayer is in excess of that transferred by 
the Input Service Distributor (ISD), ITC availed as  declared in the returns of the 
taxpayer is compared with the ITC transferred by th e ISD in their GSTR 6.  The 
methodology adopted was to compare Table 6G 210  of GSTR-9 or Table 4(A)(4) 211  of 
                                                 
200  Inward supplies (liable to reverse charge) 
201  Inward supplies receive from unregistered persons liable to reverse charge 
202  Inward supplies received from registered persons liable to reverse charge 
203  Import of services 
204  Import of services 
205  Inward supplies (liable to reverse charge) 
206  Inward supplies on which tax is to be paid on reverse charge basis 
207  Inward supplies (liable to be reverse charge) 
208  Import of services 
209  Inward supplies liable to be reverse charge other than Import of Goods and Services 
210  ITC received from ISD 
211  Inward supplies from ISD 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 228 
GSTR-3B of the recipient taxpayers under the jurisdiction of this State with the sum of 
Table 5A 212 , Table 8A 213 , and Table 9A 214  of GSTR-6 of the respective ISD.  
In case of M/s Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. L td. (GSTN-16AAACO0054F1ZZ) 
under Belonia Charge, audit observed (May 2022) that the ITC availed in Table 6G of 
GSTR-9 was ₹ 0.54 crore and the ITC transferred by the ISD in Table (5A+8A+9A) of 
GSTR-6 was ₹ 0.20 crore.  This resulted in incorrect availment of ITC transferred by 
the ISD amounting to ₹ 0.34 crore which was intimated to the Superintendent of taxes.  
In response (June 2022), the Superintendent stated that ASMT-10 seeking the reasons 
for the discrepancy had been issued. Latest develop ment along with supporting 
documents may be furnished.  
(v)  Dimension - Mismatch in ITC availed between annual return and financial 
statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
Table 12 of GSTR-9C reconciles ITC declared in annu al return (GSTR-9) with ITC 
availed as per audited Annual financial statement or books of accounts. Column 12F of 
this Table deals with unreconciled ITC. 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by  the taxpayer as required under the 
rule 80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017 in form GSTR-9C for the year 2017-18 was analysed 
at data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC declared in the Annual 
Return with the Financial Statements.  
Unreconciled ITC of 
₹ 15.92 crore declared in Table 12F of GSTR-9C being  ITC 
availed in GST returns in excess of eligible ITC ba sed on financial statements, in case 
of M/s Brite Rubber Processor Private Ltd. (GSTN-16 AADCB1615J1ZZ) under 
Charge III was noticed and communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in May 2022.  
In response (November 2022), the Superintendent of Taxes stated that after final 
scrutiny the deviated ITC amount detected was  ₹ 14.69 core and the taxpayer deposited 
the same amount through DRC-03. On being satisfacto ry after audit scrutiny of the 
reply, the case was not further pursued.   
(vi)  Dimension- Reconciliation between ITC declared in a nnual return with 
expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of GSTR-9C)   
Table 14 of GSTR-9C reconciles ITC declared in annu al return (GSTR-9) with ITC 
availed on expenses as per audited Annual financial  statement or books of accounts.  
Column 14T of this table deals with unreconciled ITC. 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by  the taxpayer as required under the 
rule 80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017 in form GSTR-9C for the year 2017-18 was analysed 
at data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC declared in the Annual 
Return with the expenses reported in the Financial Statements.  
Unreconciled ITC of ₹ 21.98 crore declared in Table 14T of GSTR-9C being  ITC 
availed in GST returns in excess of eligible ITC based on expenses reported in financial 
                                                 
212  Distribution of the amounts of eligible ITC for the tax period 
213  Mismatch of ITC reclaimed and distributed 
214  Redistribution of ITC distributed to a wrong recipient 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 229 
statements, in case of M/s Progressive Automobiles Private Ltd  ( GSTN-
16AAICP2379N1ZT)  under Charge-I was noticed and intimated to the Superintendent 
of Taxes during May 2022.  In response (November 20 22), the Superintendent stated 
that ASMT-10 seeking the reasons for the discrepanc y had been issued. Latest 
development along with supporting documents may be furnished.   
(vii) Dimension- Mismatch in turnover between annua l return and financial 
statements (Table 5R of GSTR-9C) 
Table 5 of GSTR-9C is the reconciliation of turnove r declared in audited annual 
financial statement with turnover declared in annua l turnover (GSTR-9).  Column 5R 
of this table captures the unreconciled turnover between the annual return GSTR-9, and 
that declared in the Financial Statement for the year after the requisite adjustments.  
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under rule 
80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017 in form GSTR-9C for the y ear 2017-18 was analysed at 
data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in turnover reported in the Annual 
Return vis-à-vis  the Financial Statements.  The unreconciled amount in cases where the 
turnover declared in GSTR-9 is less than the financ ial statement indicates non-
reporting, under-reporting, short-reporting, omissi on, error in reporting of supplies 
leading to evasion or short payment of tax. It coul d also be a case of non-reporting of 
both taxable and exempted supplies.  
Audit observed (April 2022) unreconciled turnover i n Table 5R of GSTR-9C 
amounting to 
₹ 1.98 crore was issued to the Superintendent of Tax es, Ambassa in 
respect of M/s  Santoshi Traders (GSTN-16BBTPS0396G2Z2). In respons e (April 
2022), the Superintendent stated that DRC-07 on the  differences in the turnover had 
been issued. Latest development along with supporting documents may be furnished.   
(viii) Dimension - Mismatch in taxable turnover bet ween annual return and 
financial statements (Table 7G of GSTR-9C) 
Table 7 of GSTR-9C is the reconciliation of taxable turnover. Column 7G of this table 
captures the unreconciled taxable turnover between the annual return GSTR-9 and that 
declared in the financial statement for the year after the requisite adjustments. 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by  the taxpayer as required under the 
rule 80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017 in Form GSTR-9C for the year 2017-18 was analysed 
at data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in taxable turnover reported in 
the Annual Return vis-à-vis  the Financial Statements.  The unreconciled amount  in 
cases where the taxable turnover in GSTR-9 is less than the financial statement 
indicates non-reporting, under-reporting, short-rep orting, omission, error in reporting 
of taxable supplies.  It could also be on account o f non-reporting of both taxable and 
exempted supplies. 
Audit observation on undischarged taxable turnover in Table 7G of GSTR-9C 
amounting to 
₹ 0.60 crore was issued to the Superintendent of Tax es, Charge-II in 
respect of M/s Planetorium (GSTN-16ADNPP3687N1ZM) i n May 2022. In response 
(July 2023), the Superintendent stated that ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer seeking the 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 230 
reasons for the discrepancy.  Latest development along with supporting documents may 
be furnished.  
(ix) Dimension - Mismatch in tax paid between books  of accounts and annual 
returns (Table 9R of GSTR-9C) 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under rule 
80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017 in form GSTR-9C for the y ear 2017-18 was analysed at 
data level to review the extent of identified misma tch in tax paid between the Annual 
Return and the books of account.  Table 9 of the fo rm 9C attempts to reconcile the tax 
paid by segregating the turnover rate-wise and comparing it with the tax discharged as 
per annual return GSTR-9. The unreconciled amounts could potentially indicate tax 
levied at incorrect rates, incorrect depiction of taxable turnover as exempt or vice versa  
or incorrect levy of CGST/ SGST/ IGST.  There can also be situations wherein supplies/ 
tax declared are reduced through amendments (net of  debit notes/ credit notes) in 
respect of the 2017-18 transactions carried out in the subsequent year from April to 
September 2018.  Consequential interest payments - both short payments and payments 
under incorrect heads - also need to be examined in this regard.  
Unreconciled payment of tax declared in Table 9R of  GSTR-9C amounting to 
₹ 0.03 crore in case of M/s Nilotpal Bose (GSTN- 16A QUPB8439Q1ZW) under 
Kailasahar Charge was noticed and intimated to the Superintendent of Taxes during 
May 2022. In response (June 2022), the Superintende nt stated that show cause notice 
(SCN) seeking the reasons for the discrepancy had b een issued.  Latest development 
along with supporting documents may be furnished. 
(x) Dimension – Undischarged tax liability 
GSTR-1 depicts the monthly details of outward suppl ies of Goods or Services.  These 
details also assessed by the taxpayer and mentioned  in annual return GSTR-9 in the 
relevant columns.  Further, taxable value and tax paid thereof also shown in GSTR-3B.  
To analyse the undischarged tax liability, relevant  data were extracted from GSTR-1 
and GSTR-9 for the year 2017-18 and the tax payable  in these returns was compared 
with the tax paid as declared in GSTR-9. Where GSTR -9 was not available, a 
comparison of tax payable between GSTR-1 and GSTR-3 B was resorted to. The 
amendments and advance adjustments declared in GSTR -1 and GSTR-9 were also 
considered for this purpose. 
For the algorithm, Tables 4 to 11 of GSTR-1 and Tables 4N, 10 and 11 of GSTR-9 were 
considered.  The greater of the tax liability betwe en GSTR-1 and GSTR-9 was 
compared with the tax paid declared in Tables 9 and 14 of GSTR-9 to identify the short 
payment of tax. In the case of GSTR-3B, Tables 3.1(a) 
215  and 3.1(b) 216  were considered. 
During audit, it was observed that in case of M/s T ripura State Electricity Corporation 
Ltd.( GSTN- 16AACCT2964M1ZY) under Charge-I, the ta x payable in Table 4 to 11 
of GSTR-1 was nil and the tax payable declared in T ables 4N, 10 and 11 of GSTR-9 
                                                 
215  Outward taxable supplies (other than zero rated, nil rated and exempted) 
216  Outward taxable supplies (Zero rated) 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 231 
was ₹ 8.10 crore.  Tax paid as per GSTR-9 was nil.  This  resulted in mismatch of tax 
liability amounting to ₹ 8.10 crore.  The matter was intimated to the Superintendent of 
Taxes in May 2022.  In response (November 2022), th e Superintendent stated that 
ASMT-10 seeking the reasons for the discrepancy had been issued. Latest development 
along with supporting documents may be furnished.  
(xi) Dimension - Short payment of interest on delay ed payments 
Section 50 of the TGST Act, 2017 stipulates that ev ery person liable to pay tax in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made there under but fails to pay 
the tax or any part thereof to the Government within the period prescribed, shall for the 
period for which the tax or any part thereof remain s unpaid, pay interest at the rate 
notified. 
The extent of short payment of interest on account of delayed remittance of tax during 
2017-18 was identified using the tax paid details in GSTR-3B and the date of filing of 
the GSTR-3B. Only the net tax liability (cash component) has been considered to work 
out the interest payable. 
Audit observed that in case of M/s Subir Majumder ( GSTN-16CAOPM5025R1ZO) 
under Udaipur charge, having interest due of ₹ 0.02 crore and interest paid as per cash 
ledger and GSTR-3B was nil.  This resulted in a sho rt payment of Interest amounting 
to ₹ 0.02 crore which was intimated to the Superintende nt of Taxes in May 2022.  In 
response (June 2022), the Superintendent stated that show cause notice (SCN) seeking 
the reasons for the discrepancy had been issued. La test development along with 
supporting documents may be furnished.  
5.2.6.3 Analysis of causative factors 
Considering the Department’s response to 191 cases out of the sample of 235 data 
deviations/ inconsistencies, the factors that caused the data deviations/ inconsistencies 
are as follows: 
5.2.6.3 (i) Deviations from GST law and rules 
Out of the 235 deviations summarised in Appendix 5.2.5 , the Department had accepted 
the audit observations or initiated examination in 140 cases involving an amount of 
₹ 68.65 crore. Out of the cases, the Department has recovered ₹ 15.51 crore 
(Appendix 5.2.6)  in four cases, issued SCN in eight cases for ₹ 1.66 crore 
(Appendix 5.2.7) , issued notice conveying discrepancies to the taxp ayer in Form 
ASMT-10 in 58 cases for ₹ 39.03 crore (Appendix 5.2.8)  and was in correspondence 
with the respective taxpayers or issued DRC-01A in 63 cases amounting to ₹ 8.82  crore 
(Appendix 5.2.9) . 
Illustrative cases of two high values: 
(i)  Audit observed that in case of taxpayer M/s Minamat i Enterprise having GSTIN-
16AIOPD3768J1ZW, the tax liability as shown in GSTR -1 was ₹ 0.54 crore and 
payment of tax as per GSTR-3B was ₹ 0.07 crore. Thus, this resulted in short 
payment of tax amounting to ₹ 0.47 crore. The methodology adopted was to 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 232 
consider Tables 4 to 11 of GSTR-1 and Tables 4N, 10  and 11 of GSTR-9. The 
greater of the tax liability between GSTR-1 and GST R-9 was compared with the 
tax paid declared in Tables 9 and 14 of GSTR-9 to i dentify the short payment of 
tax. In the case of GSTR-3B, Tables 3.1(a) 217  and 3.1(b) 218  were taken into account.   
On this being pointed out in Audit (December 2022), the  Superintendent of Taxes, 
in response (July 2023), stated that notice was served to the taxpayer under Section 
70 of TGST Act, 2017. Latest development along with supporting documents may 
be furnished 
(ii)  Audit observed (May 2022) that in case of taxpayer M/s Antar Enterprise having 
GSTIN-16AOOPM8961L1Z2, the ITC available as per GST R-2A was ₹ 0.0002 
crore and the ITC availed in Table 4A (5) of GSTR-3 B was ₹ 0.62 crore. The 
methodology adopted was to compare the ITC available as per GSTR-2A with all 
its amendments and the ITC availed in GSTR-3B in Ta ble 4A (5) 219   considering 
the reversals in Table 4B (2) 220  but including the ITC availed in the subsequent 
year 2018-19 from Table 8C of GSTR-9. This resulted in mismatch of ITC availed 
of ₹ 0.62 crore.  
In response (15 June 2022), the Superintendent of t axes, Bishalgarh stated that 
ASMT-10 had been issued to the taxpayer. Latest dev elopment along with 
supporting documents may be furnished.  
5.2.6.4 Cases where Department’s reply was not acce pted to Audit 
Out of the 235 non-compliance cases, Department replies not accepted by audit in seven 
cases amounting to ₹ 3.63 crore.  In these cases, the Department only f orwarded 
explanation of the taxpayers without explicitly com menting on the audit observations 
and relevant documents.  Details of these cases along with the Audit rebuttal are given 
in Appendix 5.2.10 .  Two rebuttal cases are discussed below: 
(i)  Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual returns and Books of accounts of 
₹ 0.60 crore declared in Table 12F of GSTR-9C was no ticed in case of M/s Panna 
Motors (GSTIN- 16AAHFP2649D1ZC ), under Charge-IV, which was communicated 
to the Superintendent of Taxes in May 2022.  In res ponse (November 2022), it was 
stated that before 09.10.2019, taxpayers used to cl aim ITC on a self-declaration basis 
in Table 4(A) of GSTR-3B with no compulsion to reco ncile the ITC figure with the 
GSTR-2A.  The amount of ITC which was not reflected  in GSTR-2A was treated as 
provisional credit.  The plea is not acceptable, si nce under Section 16 of TGST Act 
2017 the tax authority has to scrutinise the eligib ility of ITC availed by the taxpayer. 
Further, supporting documents such as purchase invo ices were not furnished. In 
absence of relevant documents audit could not verif y the authenticity. Latest 
development along with supporting documents may be furnished.  
                                                 
217  Outward taxable supplies (other than zero rated, nil rated and exempted) 
218  Outward taxable supplies (Zero rated) 
219  All other eligible ITC 
220  Other ITC reversed 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 233 
Short payment of interest on delay payment of tax w as notice in case of taxpayer 
M/s Everest Infra Energy Ltd (GSTN-16AABCE7178B1ZT),) under Charge-IV having 
interest due of ₹ 0.07 crore and interest paid as per cash ledger an d GSTR-3B was nil, 
which was communicated to the Superintendent of Tax es in May 2022. In response 
(November 2022), it was stated that GSTR-3B filing due date was extended upto 
February 2019 vide notification No-31/2018. However , no such notification was 
found issued by the State Tax Department and CBIC n otification No. 31/2018 dated 
6 August 2018 does not pertains to extension of GSTR-3B filing due date.  
5.2.6.5 Detailed audit of GST returns  
In a self-assessment regime, the onus of compliance  with the law is on the taxpayer. 
The role of the Department is to establish and main tain an efficient tax administration 
mechanism to provide oversight. With a finite level  of resources, for an effective tax 
administration, to ensure compliance with law and c ollection of revenue, an efficient 
governance mechanism is essential. An IT driven com pliance model enables 
maintaining a non-discretionary regime of governance on scale and facilitates a targeted 
approach to enforce compliance. 
From an external audit perspective, Audit also focu sed on a data-driven risk-based 
approach. Thus, apart from identifying inconsistenc ies/ deviations in GST returns 
through pan-State data analysis, a detailed audit of GST returns was also conducted as 
a part of this review. A risk-based sample of 30 ta xpayers was selected for this part of 
the review. The methodology adopted was to initiall y conduct a desk review of GST 
returns and financial statements filed by the taxpayers as part of the GSTR-9C and other 
records available in the back-end system to identify potential risk areas, inconsistencies/ 
deviations and red flags. Desk review was carried o ut in office of the PAG (Audit), 
Tripura. Based on desk review results, detailed aud it was conducted in Commercial 
Taxes Organisation, Tripura field formations by requisitioning corresponding granular 
records of taxpayers such as financial ledgers, invoices, etc . to identify causative factors 
of the identified risks and to evaluate compliance by taxpayers.  
5.2.6.5(i) Scope limitation (Non-production of reco rds) 
The Department provided access through the GST port al application-the back-end 
system of the State Tax Department (boweb) to Audit in its premises. 
Audit teams downloaded various returns of selected samples of taxpayers for 
verification of returns. Although, no granular reco rds relating to the taxpayers were 
provided by the Department.  
The details of non- production of records are summarised in the following paragraphs: 
Non-production : During the desk review of taxpayers’ records avail able in the back-
end system, Audit identified the risks related to excess ITC and tax liability mismatches 
for detailed examination. On the ITC dimension, the  mismatches were identified by 
comparing GSTR-3B with GSTR-2A and GSTR-9, and the declarations made in Table 
12 and 14 of GSTR-9C. On the tax liability dimension, the mismatches were identified 
by comparing GSTR-3B with GSTR-1 and GSTR-9 and the  declarations in Table 5, 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 234 
Table 7 and Table 9 of GSTR-9C. However, in 30 samp led cases, the Department did 
not produce the corresponding granular records such  as the tax invoices, financial 
statements, credit & debit notes, etc . required for examining the causative factors for 
mismatches of ITC and tax liability. Audit requisit ioned these granular records of the 
taxpayers through the respective Charges. The juris diction-wise non- production of 
records is summarised in Table 5.2.5.  
Table 5.2.5: Non-production of records  
Jurisdictional 
charge 
Sample No of cases where records were not 
provided 
Number of taxpayers Number of taxpayers 
Charge-I 2 2 
Charge-II 3 3 
Charge-III 1 1 
Charge-IV 1 1 
Charge-V 4 4 
Charge-VI 4 4 
Charge-VII 2 2 
Charge-VIII 7 7 
Bishalgarh 5 5 
Teliamura 1 1 
Total 30 30 
The granular records were not produced in 100 per cent  of cases, as a result deviation/ 
mismatches amounting to ₹ 27.27 crore could not be examined in detail by Audit. 
5.2.6.5(ii) Audit findings 
As brought out in the previous paragraphs, detailed  audit involved a desk review of 
GST returns and other basic records to identify risks and red flags, which were followed 
up by field audit to identify the extent of non-compliance by taxpayers and action taken 
by the departmental field formations. Non-complianc e by taxpayers at various stages 
ultimately impacts the veracity of returns filed, u tilisation of ITC and discharge of tax 
payments. The audit findings are categorised under (a) Returns, (b) Utilisation of ITC, 
(c) Discharge of tax liability and (d) Other findings. 
5.2.6.5(ii)(a) Returns 
 
(i)  Non-payment of interest on delayed payment 
Section 50 (1) of the TGST Act, 2017 stipulates that every person who is liable to pay 
tax in accordance with the provisions of this Act o r the rules made thereunder, but 
fails to pay the tax or any part thereof to the Government within the period prescribed, 
shall for the period for which the tax or any part thereof remains unpaid, pay, on his 
own, interest at, such rate, not exceeding eighteen per cent, as may be notified by the 
Government.  
As per CBIC notification 221  vide F.No.CBEC-20/01/08/2019-GST dated 18 
                                                 
221  There was no such notification from the State Tax Department 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 235 
September 2020, the taxpayer is liable to pay interest only on net cash tax liability i.e  
cash component, if there is delay in payment of tax. 
Scrutiny of GSTR-3B returns for the period 2017-18 filed by 30 taxpayers of 10 Charge 
offices revealed that 10 taxpayers of five charge offices submitted returns with delay as 
enumerated in Appendix 5.2.11 . The taxpayers were liable to pay interest on dela y 
payment of tax (cash component) of ₹ 0.30 crore. 
When this was pointed out in Audit (July 2022), the  Department in reply (July 2023) 
stated that in case of four taxpayers 222 , DRC-01A was issued for recovery of due 
interest. In case of another four taxpayers 223 , intimation of discrepancy in Form ASMT-
10 was issued.  In case of one taxpayer M/s Laxmi Narayan Traders ( GSTIN-
16AACFL8969P1ZD) step would be taken for recovery o f interest due. In case of 
another taxpayer M/s Sentu Dey  (GSTIN-16AZIPD6343A2ZT ), the case has been 
under court sub-judice .   
Latest position of recovery of outstanding interest  along with supporting documents 
may be furnished to audit. 
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Department accepted the audit observat ion and assured to take necessary 
action at the earliest. 
(ii)  Non-filing of annual return (GSTR-9) and Reconcilia tion Statement 
(GSTR-9C)  
Section 44(1) of TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 80 (1) of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates 
that every registered person other than person payi ng tax under Sec 51 or 52 shall 
furnish an annual return in Form GSTR-9 for every financial year electronically in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed on or before t he thirty-first day of December 
following the end of such financial year .  
Further, sub-section (2) of Section 44 of the Act a nd read with Rule 80 (2) of TGST 
Rules, 2017 every registered person who is required  to get his accounts audited in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 35 shall furnish, a copy of 
the audited annual accounts and a reconciliation st atement, reconciling the value of 
supplies declared in the return furnished for the f inancial year with the audited annual 
financial statement and such other particulars as m ay be prescribed, duly certified in 
form GSTR-9C, electronically.   
In this regard, every registered person whose aggregate turnover during a financial year 
exceeds 
₹ two crore should get his account audited as specified under Section 35 (5) of 
the TGST Act, 2017 and read with Rule 80 (3) of TGST Rules, 2017.  
Further, as per Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 wh ere a registered person fails to 
furnish a return under section 39 or 44 or 45, a no tice shall be issued to him to furnish 
                                                 
222  GSTIN-16BIMPS7519H1ZQ, 16AAACR6117Q2Z0, 16AAKCA582 3G1ZQ & 
16AVEPS7445N2ZU 
223  GSTIN-16ATVPS5284L1ZL,16AARFK7454M1ZJ, 16AACFU6266 G1Z1 & 16APDPR6406H1ZV 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 236 
such return within fifteen days in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
The Finance Department, Government of Tripura vide notification NO.F. 1- 11 (91)-
TAX/ GST/ 2020 dated 17 March 2020 extended the due date for filing annual returns 
up to 7 February 2020. 
Audit noticed that in three out of 30 cases examined, the taxpayers did not file GSTR-9 
and GSTR-9C despite their annual turnover crossed 
₹ two crore threshold exemptions 
limits as given in Table 5.2.6.  
Table 5.2.6: Non-filing of annual return (GSTR-9) 
Charge GSTIN Legal Name 
Total turnover 
as per GSTR 
3B 
(₹ in crore) 
Due date of 
filing GSTR-
9/9C 
Date of 
filing 
GSTR 
9/9C 
Charge-
VIII 16ACUPP3799B1Z1  
Doraiah 
Palimpati 2.85 07.02.2020 Not 
filed 
Bishalgarh 16AARFK7454M1ZJ K. K. R. Jv 
Partnership  
29.56 07.02.2020 Not 
filed  Bishalgarh 16AZIPD6343A2ZT Sentu Dey 6.22 07.02.2020 Not 
filed  
The matter was intimated to the respective Superint endent of Taxes in July 2022 and 
December 2022. The Department in reply stated (July 2023) that in case of Taxpayer 
(GSTIN-16ACUPP3799B1Z1) notice in Form GSTR-3A issu ed to the taxpayer. In 
case of the remaining two taxpayers no reply has been furnished to audit (July 2023). 
Latest developments along with supporting documents may be furnished.   
5.2.6.5(ii)(b) Mismatch relating to ITC 
Input Tax Credit means the Goods and Services Tax p aid by a taxable person on 
purchase of goods and/ or services that are used in the course or furtherance of business. 
To avoid cascading effect of taxes, credit of taxes paid on input supplies can be used to 
set-off for payment of taxes on outward supplies.  
Section 16 and 17 of the TGST Act, 2017 prescribe t he eligibility and conditions to 
avail ITC. Credit of CGST cannot be used for payment of SGST/ UTGST and credit of 
SGST/ UTGST cannot be utilised for payment of CGST.  Rule 36 to 45 of the TGST 
Rules, 2017 prescribes the procedures for availing and reversal of ITC. 
Audit analysed the dataset of GSTR-2A in respect of  selected taxpayers along with 
datasets of GSTR-3B, GSTR-9 and GSTR-9C filed by th e taxpayers and noticed 
mismatches of input tax credit among returns. Audit could not examine mismatches in 
detail since relevant granular records were not produced by the Department.  
Audit observed 26 instances of ITC related mismatches, amounting to ₹ 26.47 crore out 
of 30 sampled cases examined. The deficiencies were  due to availing ITC irregularly, 
availing ineligible ITC and non or short reversal o f ITC. Hence, these cases remain as 
mismatches. The details of mismatches in input tax credit noticed by Audit are given in 
Table 5.2.7. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 237 
Table 5.2.7: Mismatch in input tax credit claimed by taxpayers 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
Charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
1 Mismatch between ITC 
availed in 3B and ITC 
availed in GSTR-2A:  
To analyse, the data were 
extracted from GSTR-9/ 
GSTR-3B and GSTR-2A, 
and the ITC paid as per 
suppliers’ details was 
matched with the ITC credit 
availed by the taxpayer and 
compare the ITC available 
as per GSTR-2A with all its 
amendments and the ITC 
availed in GSTR-3B in 
Table 4A(5) considering the 
reversals in Table 4B(2) but 
including the ITC availed in 
the subsequent year 2018-
19 from Table 8C of GSTR-
9 (Appendix 5.2.12) .  
20 7 13.34 
 On this being pointed out in 
Audit (August 2022), ASMT-
10 was issued to two 
taxpayers M/s NBCC (India) 
Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAACN3053B1Z3) & 
M/s Evac Engineering 
Projects Pvt. Ltd (GSTIN-
16AACCE9137D1ZT). 
Registration were suspended 
in case of two taxpayers 
M/s Tirthamoyee Traders Pvt. 
Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAECT9428J1ZX) & 
M/s Abhijit Saha (GSTIN-
16ATVPS5284L1ZL). Notice 
served to one taxpayer 
M/s Sterling and Wilson Pvt. 
Ltd. (GSTIN-
16AAACS9939D1Z7). In all 
cases, latest development 
along with supporting 
documents may be furnished.  
 
In case of taxpayer 
M/s Sankar Saha (GSTIN-
16AVWPS6181K1ZK) the 
Department in reply (July 
2023) stated that actual excess 
of ITC was ₹ 0.02 crore 
against the audit objected 
amount of ₹ 0.11 crore. 
Further, it stated that the 
computation was done as per 
the reply furnished by the 
taxpayer against the ASMT10 
issued to him. In another case 
M/s Samaresh Chowdhury 
(GSTIN-
16AXDPC0281F1Z1), there 
was no excess of ITC as 
computed by the tax authority 
against the audit objected 
amount of ₹ 0.11 crore. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 238 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
Charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
However, in both cases no 
supporting documents were 
forwarded. Latest position 
along with supporting 
documents in support of their 
claimed may be furnished to 
audit.   
In case of taxpayer 
M/s Satyam Rubber Industries 
(GSTIN-
16ACAFS0417M1Z7), 
Department stated (July 2023) 
that the taxpayer had reversed 
ITC for ₹ 3.70 crore in the 
month of April 2018 and also 
realised ₹ 0.16 crore as tax, 
interest and penalty after all 
adjustments. Invoices for the 
remaining amount of ITC 
₹ 0.44 crore claimed by the 
taxpayer during FY 2017-18 
had been uploaded and 
amended by the supplier on or 
before March 2019 vide CBIC 
order No-02/2018-Central 
Tax dated 31 December 2018. 
However, no supporting 
documents for the recovery of 
₹ 0.44 crore has been 
furnished by the Department. 
In this regard it is stated that 
supporting documents may be 
furnished for recovery of the 
ITC amount of ₹ 0.44 crore.   
In case of four taxpayers viz : 
M/s Delwara Steel (GSTIN-
16AAFCK1502P1ZI), 
M/s ITD Cementation India 
Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAACT1426A1Z2), 
M/s Rajesh Saha (GSTIN-
16AVEPS7445N2ZU) & 
M/s Tata Play Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAGCS9294M1ZI) the 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 239 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
Charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
Department in reply (July 
2023) stated that all relevant 
records submitted by the 
taxpayers were checked and 
found satisfactory.  However, 
no documents were forwarded 
to audit. Hence, audit could 
not verify the authenticity in 
absence of relevant 
documents. In all cases, 
supporting documents related 
to the latest reply may be 
furnished to audit. 
In case of three taxpayers 
M/s Maupasa Saha (GSTIN-
16BIMPS7519H1ZQ), 
M/s NPCC Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAACR6117Q2Z0) & 
M/s Doraiah Palimpati 
(GSTIN-
16ACUPP3799B1Z1) the 
Department in reply (July 
2023) stated that the 
taxpayers were issued 
summon u/s 70 of TGST Act 
2017.  
One taxpayer M/s ABM 
Rubber Industries Pvt. Ltd 
(GSTIN-
16AAKCA5823G1ZQ) was 
issued DRC-01A and 
suspended the registration. 
In all cases, latest 
development along with 
supporting documents may 
be furnished. 
In case of another four 
taxpayers 
224  it was stated (July 
2023) that ASMT10 were 
issued and suspended their 
registrations. All supporting 
documents related to the latest 
                                                 
224  GSTIN-16AACFU6266G1Z1, 16APDPR6406H1ZV, 16ASAPS825 0N1Z8 & 16AZIPD6343A2ZT 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 240 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
Charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
reply may be furnished to 
audit.  
2 Mismatch of ITC in ECL 
than declared in annual 
return:   
ITC claimed gets credited to 
ECL of the taxpayer through 
GSTR-3B. Table 6A of 
GSTR-9, which is the sum 
total of ITC availed in R3B 
is auto populated. Through 
Table 6B to 6H, the 
taxpayer provides 
bifurcation of the ITC 
availed in form of inputs, 
input services, and capital 
goods. Table 6J of GSTR-9 
brings out the difference of 
ITC actually availed 
through 3Bs, and ITC 
entered in Table 6B to 6H. 
A negative figure in 6J is 
indicative of excess 
availment of ITC 
(Appendix 5.2.13) . 
3 2 1.23 
 On this being pointed out in 
audit, the Department in 
reply (July 2023) stated that 
the taxpayer M/s Abhijit 
Saha (GSTIN-
16ATVPS5284L1ZL) had 
furnished a reply against the 
notice issued in Form 
ASMT-10 and after careful 
examination, it was found 
that the reply of the taxpayer 
was valid. But no supporting 
documents were furnished to 
audit. In absence of 
supporting documents audit 
could not establish its 
authenticity. Thus, all 
supporting documents may 
be furnished to audit. 
In case of the remaining two 
taxpayers 
225 , it was stated 
(July 2023) that the 
taxpayers were issued 
summon u/s 70 of TGST Act 
2017 for examination of 
records. Latest development 
along with supporting 
documents may be furnished 
to audit. 
3 Mismatch in ITC availed 
under RCM (with 
payment of tax):  
Data of Table 3.1 (d) of 
GSTR-3B, which contains 
the details of inward 
supplies that are liable to 
reverse charge, was 
compared with RCM ITC 
availed in GSTR-9 Table 
1 1 0.0071 
 The matter was intimated to 
the concerned tax authority 
in July 2022 and December 
2022, but no reply had been 
furnished to Audit till date 
(July 2023). Reply may be 
furnished to audit.  
                                                 
225  M/s NPCC Ltd (GSTIN- 16AAACR6117Q2Z0) & M/s Tata Play Ltd (GSTIN-16AAGCS9294M1ZI) 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 241 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
Charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
6C+6D+6F (Appendix 
5.2.14) . 
4 Mismatch of ITC between 
Annual Return (GSTR9) 
and audited Financial 
Statements (Table 14T of 
GSTR9C)  
Table 14T of GSTR-9C 
compares expenses incurred 
on inputs, capital goods and 
any other expenses with the 
input tax credit availed and 
highlight any excess 
availing of input tax credit 
on account of ineligible 
credit (Appendix 5.2.15) . 
2 1 11.90 
 On this being pointed out in 
Audit (July 2022), the 
Superintendent of Taxes 
issued (July 2023) intimation 
of discrepancies in Form 
ASMT-10 to the two 
taxpayers 
226 . 
Latest development along 
with supporting documents 
may be furnished to audit.  
 Total 26 11 26.47   
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Department accepted the audit observat ion and assured to take necessary 
action at the earliest. 
5.2.6.5(ii)(c) Mismatches relating to discharge of tax liability   
The taxable event in the case of GST is supply of g oods and/ or services. Section 9 of 
the TGST Act, 2017 is the charging section authorising levy and collection of tax called 
State/ Centre Goods and Services Tax on all intra-S tate supplies of goods or services 
or both, except on supply of alcoholic liquor for h uman consumption, on value 
determined under section 15 of the Act ibid and at such rates not exceeding 20 per cent  
under each Act, i.e ., CGST Act and TGST Act.  Section 5 of the IGST ve sts levy and 
collection of IGST on interstate supply of goods and services with Central Government 
with maximum rate of 40 per cent .  
Audit scrutinised GSTR-1, GSTR-3B and GSTR-9 return s filed by the taxpayers for 
the year 2017-18 and noticed mismatch in discharge of tax liability by comparing the 
tax liability furnished in the returns. Out of 30 sampled cases examined, Audit observed 
four instances of discharge of tax related mismatched amounting to ₹ 0.80 crore. Audit 
could not examine these mismatches in detail since relevant granular records were not 
produced by the Department. The details of mismatches are given in Table 5.2.8. 
 
 
                                                 
226  M/s NBCC (India) Ltd (GSTIN-16AAACN3053B1Z3) & M/s  ITC Ltd Company (GSTIN-
16AAACI5950L1ZD)  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 242 
Table 5.2.8: Mismatch related to discharge of tax liability 
Sl. 
No. Parameter  
No. 
of 
cases  
No. of 
charge 
office  
Amount of 
mismatch 
(₹ in crore)  
Remarks 
1 Mismatch in tax 
liability on comparing 
greater of the tax 
liability of GSTR-1, 
GSTR-9 with reference 
to Tax payment in 
GSTR-9:  
GSTR-1 and GSTR-9 for 
the year 2017-18 and the 
tax payable in these 
returns was compared 
with the tax paid in 
GSTR-9 (Appendix 
5.2.16).  
2 2 0.11 
 In case of the taxpayer 
M/s ABM Rubber 
Industries Pvt. Ltd (GSTIN-
16AAKCA5823G1ZQ), it 
was stated (July 2023) that 
DRC-01A was issued as 
well as audit u/s 65 of TGST 
Act 2017 was under 
process. Latest 
development along with 
supporting documents may 
be furnished.  
In case of taxpayer 
M/s Sabita Paul  (GSTIN-
16AKCPP0564E1ZF), no 
reply has been furnished to 
Audit (July 2023). Reply 
along with supporting 
documents may be 
furnished to audit.  
2 Unreconciled turnover 
and tax payment:   
Figures under Table 7G 
and 9R indicate mismatch 
of taxable turnover and 
tax paid respectively 
between annual return 
and the financial 
statements (Appendix 
5.2.17). 
2 1 0.69 
 On this being pointed out in 
Audit (July 2022), the 
Department in reply (July 
2023) stated that intimation 
of discrepancy in Form 
ASMT-10 had been issued 
to the taxpayer 
227 . Latest 
development along with 
supporting documents may 
be furnished to audit.   
 Total 4 3 0.80   
In the meeting (5 June 2024) with the Secretary, Fi nance Department, Government of 
Tripura, the Department accepted the audit observat ion and assured to take necessary 
action at the earliest. 
5.2.6.5(ii)(d) Other findings-Classification of goo ds & services 
The Finance Department, Government of Tripura notif ication No.1/ 2017-State Tax 
(Rate) dated 28 June 2017 has fixed the rate of taxes of various goods under GST based 
on the Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) clas sification and schedules. 
Similarly, the Finance Department, Government of Tr ipura notification No.11/2017– 
                                                 
227  M/s NBCC (India) Ltd (GSTIN-16AAACN3053B1Z3)  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 243 
State Tax (Rate) dated 28 June 2017 has fixed the rate of taxes of various services under 
GST based on the scheme of classification of Service Accounting Code (SAC). Further, 
Finance Department notification No. 2/ 2017– State Tax (rate) dated 28 June 2017 
specified goods which are exempted in the course of  intra-state business. Besides, as 
per Finance Department, Government of Tripura vide notification No. F.1.11(91)-Tax/ 
GST/ 2017 (Part-III) dated 29 June 2017 specified t hat a registered person having 
annual turnover of ₹ 1.5 crore & above in the preceding financial year shall mention 
the digits of Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) Codes in a tax invoice issued 
by him.  
Audit cross-examined the classification of supplies  declared by the taxpayers in 
registration form, returns of GSTR-9, rate of taxes of goods & services notified by the 
Finance Department, Tripura and tax invoices. In five cases out of 30 cases examined, 
Audit observed discrepancies in classification of s upplies and rate of taxes as detailed 
in Appendix 5.2.18 .  
Audit could not verify the correctness of classific ation of supplies and rate of taxes in 
the absence of the tax invoices.  
The matter was intimated to the Superintendent of T axes in July 2022 and December 
2022 with the request to examine at their end. The Department in reply (July 2023) 
stated that ASMT10 issued to the four taxpayers 228  and their registration were 
suspended. But, in case of one taxpayer M/s NBCC (I ndia) Ltd  ( GSTIN-
16AAACN3053B1Z3) no reply has been furnished (July 2023). In all cases, latest 
development along with supporting documents may be furnished.  
Recommendation  5 
The Department may initiate remedial action for all  the compliance deviations 
brought out in this report before they get time barred.  
5.2.7 Conclusion 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Dep artment’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing disclosed that documenta tion of essential oversight 
functions of charges such as scrutiny of returns, a udit of taxpayers and taxpayer’s 
compliance was not proper and not amenable to evalu ation.  As such, the functions of 
the charges were not fully carried out in an organised manner. 
Further, out of the 235 high value data inconsisten cies identified by Audit the 
Department responded to 191 cases. Of these, 140 ca ses constituting 73.29 per cent , 
turned out to be compliance deficiencies amounting to 
₹ 68.65 crore. Relatively higher 
rates of deviations were noticed in risk parameters  such as short/ non-payment of 
interest, ITC mismatch and availing ITC under RCM, etc . The Department has not 
responded to 44 cases of inconsistencies, which has  an identified mismatch of 
₹ 16.64 crore.  
                                                 
228  GSTIN-16AAECT9428J1ZX, 16AARFK7454M1ZJ, 16AACFU626 6G1Z1 & 16ASAPS8250N1Z8 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 244 
Detailed audit of GST returns also suggested signif icant non-compliance. In 30 out of 
30 cases examined, granular records were not forthc oming, which constituted a 
significant scope of limitation.  In ten out of 30 cases examined, were liable to pay 
interest on delay payment of tax (cash component) a mounting to ₹ 0.30 crore. A 
relatively higher rate of deficiencies was noticed in 30 identified mismatch of ITC 
availed and discharge of tax liability with a risk exposure of ₹ 27.27 crore 229 . From a 
systemic perspective, the Department needs to stren gthen the institutional mechanism 
in the Charges to establish and maintain effective oversight on return filing, taxpayer 
compliance, tax payments, cancellation of registrat ions and recovery of dues from 
defaulters. 
5.2.8 Summary of recommendations  
1.  The Department may formulate SOP or prescribe detail procedures for selection 
of scrutiny cases and fix targets, so that an optim um number of cases can be 
scrutinised in every financial year before the cases became time barred. 
2.  The Department may ensure timely verification of ca ncellation of registrations 
to prevent undue loss of tax revenue and unfair tax practices. 
3.  The Department may formulate detail selection procedures for cases for conduct 
of audit so that an optimum number of cases can be audited in every financial 
year.  
4.  The Department may urgently pursue where inconsistencies and deviations were 
pointed out by Audit and result there-of may be intimated to Audit. 
5.  The Department may initiate remedial action for all  the compliance deviations 
brought out in this report before they get time barred. 
 
                                                 
229  Total money value of Table 5.2.8  plus  Table 5.2.9  
                                                 

CHAPTER VI:  
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 

Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 245 
CHAPTER VI 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
6.1 Follow-up action on earlier Audit Reports 
 
6.1.1 Explanatory notes not submitted 
Finance Department of the Government of Tripura iss ued instructions (July 1993), to 
the administrative departments to initiate, suo motu, positive and concrete action in all 
audit paragraphs and reviews featuring in the Audit  Reports of Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (C&AG) regardless of wheth er the cases are taken up for 
examination by Public Accounts Committee (PAC)/ Com mittee on Public 
Undertakings (COPU) of the Tripura Legislative Asse mbly or not and to furnish 
detailed notes indicating the corrective/ remedial action taken or proposed to be taken 
by them within a period of three months of the pres entation of Audit Reports to the 
Legislature. 
Serious irregularities noticed in audit are include d in the Audit Reports of the C&AG 
and presented to the State Legislature. 
(a) Public Accounts Committee  
As of September 2023, 84 paragraphs (60 paragraphs and 24 performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2006-07 to 2019-20 230  were awaiting 
discussion by the PAC. Of these, explanatory notes on 66 paragraphs (50 paragraphs 
and 16 performance audits) have not yet been receiv ed from the departments. The 
position of pendency of receipt of suo motu  replies on paragraphs/ performance audits 
of the last five years Audit Report awaiting discus sion by PAC is shown in 
Table 6.1.1 . 
Table 6.1.1: Position of pending suo motu replies on paragraphs/ performance audits 
of Audit Reports awaiting discussion by PAC 
Year of 
Report 
Total paragraphs/ performance 
audits awaiting discussion 
Suo-motu  reply 
received Suo-motu  reply not received  
2015-16 6 Nil  6 
2016-17 10 1  9 
2017-18 9 2 7 
2018-19 10 Nil  10 
2019-20 6 1 5 
Table 6.1.1  presents the position of suo motu replies received/ not received pertaining 
to paragraphs/ performance audits of Audit Reports pending discussion by PAC for 
the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20.  The department s largely responsible for not 
submitting explanatory notes were Public Works Depa rtment (26), Agriculture 
(seven), Finance Department (six), Revenue Department (four) amongst others. 
The issue of pendency of furnishing of suo motu  replies to audit paras was taken up 
(June 2022) with the Secretary, Tripura Legislative  Assembly and Finance 
Department, Government of Tripura with the request to take steps so that the 
departments concerned furnish the suo motu  replies and the pendency can be reduced. 
                                                           
230  Audit Report for the year 2019-20 was placed in the State Legislature 28 March 2023. 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 246 
Moreover, the list of outstanding paras was also fo rwarded to the Finance Department 
and the department concerned in June 2023. 
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of September 2023, 17 paragraphs (12 paragraphs and five performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2014-15 to 2019-20 
231  were awaiting 
discussion by the COPU. Of these, explanatory notes  on 13 paragraphs (nine 
paragraphs and four performance audits) have not ye t been received from three 
departments. The departments responsible for not su bmitting explanatory notes on 
paragraphs were Industries and Commerce Department (eight), Power Department 
(four) and Forest Department (one). 
The issue of pendency of furnishing of suo motu  replies to audit paras was taken up 
(June 2022) with the Secretary, Tripura Legislative  Assembly and Finance 
Department, Government of Tripura with the request to take steps so that the 
departments concerned furnish the suo motu  replies and the pendency can be reduced. 
Moreover, the list of outstanding paras were also f orwarded to the Finance 
Department and the department concerned in June 2023. 
6.1.2 Action taken on the recommendations of the Pu blic Accounts Committee/ 
Committee on Public Undertakings  
The administrative departments are required to take  suitable action on the 
recommendations made in the Reports of the PAC/ COP U presented to the State 
Legislature. Following the circulation of the Repor ts of the PAC/ COPU, Heads of 
Departments are to prepare comments on action taken  or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations of the PAC/ COPU and submit the sam e to the State Assembly 
Secretariat.  
(a) Public Accounts Committee 
As of September 2023, Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 162 recommendations of the 
PAC made between 2010-11 and 2022-23 were awaited f rom the administrative 
departments concerned, of which, 54 pertained to Fi nance (Excise and Taxation) 
Department, 27 to Public Works (Roads and Building)  Department, 11 to Social 
Welfare and Social Education Department, nine to Ur ban Development Department, 
seven to Transport Department, six each to Education (Higher) Department, Industries 
& Commerce Department, Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation) Department 
and Education (School) Department, five to Health a nd Family Welfare Department, 
four each to Fisheries Department and Animal Resour ce Development Department 
and 17 ATNs to other departments.  All these depart ments are required to expedite 
submission of ATNs to the PAC without further delays.  
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of September 2023, ATNs on 58 recommendations of  the COPU made between 
2009-10 and 2014-15 were awaited from the administr ative departments concerned, 
of which, 22 to Industries and Commerce Department (Tripura Jute Mills Ltd.: seven, 
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.: ei ght, Tripura Small Industries 
                                                           
231  Audit Report for the year 2019-20 was placed in the State Legislature 28 March 2023. 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 247 
Corporation Ltd.: four, Tripura Tea Development Cor poration Ltd.: two and Tripura 
Handloom & Handicraft Development Corporation: one) , 13 each to the Forest 
Department (Tripura Forest Development and Plantation Corporation Ltd.) and Power 
Department (Tripura State Electricity Corporation L imited), seven to the Tribal 
Welfare Department (Tribal Rehabilitation in Planta tion & Primitive Group 
Programme) and three to the Transport Department (T ripura Road Transport 
Corporation). There is need for all these departmen ts/ companies to submit ATNs 
without further delays to take the things to their logical end. 
6.2 Monitoring 
The following committees were formed at the Government level to monitor the follow 
up action on Audit Reports and PAC/ COPU’s recommendations. 
6.2.1 Departmental Monitoring Committee 
Departmental Monitoring Committees (DMCs) were form ed (April 2002) by all 
departments of the Government under the chairmanshi p of the departmental 
Secretaries to monitor the follow up action on Audi t Reports and PAC/ COPU 
recommendations. The DMCs are to hold monthly meeti ngs and to send progress 
reports on the issue every month to the Finance Department. 
Details about meetings of the DMCs during 2022-23, though requested (July 2023), 
were not furnished (October 2023). 
6.2.2 Apex Monitoring Committee 
An Apex Monitoring Committee was formed (April 2002 ) at the State level under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to monitor the follow up action on Audit Reports 
and PAC/ COPU’s recommendations. 
Details about meetings of the Apex Monitoring Commi ttee during 2022-23, though 
requested (July 2023), were not furnished (October 2023). 
6.3 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura c onducts periodical inspections of 
government departments to test check transactions a nd verify the maintenance of 
accounts and other records according to prescribed rules and procedures. Audit 
observations on financial irregularities and defici encies in maintenance of initial 
accounts noticed during local audit and not settled  on the spot are communicated to 
the audited entities and to the higher authorities through Inspection Reports (IRs). The 
more serious irregularities are reported to the Gov ernment. The Government 
instructed (July 1993) that the first reply to the IRs should be furnished within one 
month from the date of receipt of IR. 
Analysis of the position of outstanding IRs showed that 2,437 paragraphs included in 
328 IRs issued during the last five years up to 202 2-23 were pending for settlement as 
of September 2023. Of these, even the first reply h ad not been received in respect of 
905 paragraphs involving 114 IRs in spite of repeat ed reminders. The year-wise 
break-up of the outstanding IRs and the position of  response thereto is given in 
Table 6.3.1 . 
 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
 248 
Table 6.3.1: Position of Outstanding IRs where first reply have not been received  
Years No. of outstanding First reply had not been received 
IRs Paras IRs Paras 
2018-19 98 639 17 129 
2019-20  48 373 12 111 
2020-21 86 665 45 332 
2021-22 48 357 23 168 
2022-23 48 403 17 165 
Total 328 2,437 114 905 
As a result, the following important irregularities  commented upon in those IRs were 
not addressed as of September 2023. 
Table 6.3.2: Irregularities not addressed 
Nature of irregularities Number of 
cases 
Amount involved  
(₹ in crore ) 
Excess/ Irregular/ Avoidable/ Unfruitful/ Wasteful/  
Unauthorised/ Idle expenditure  390 543.95  
Blocking of funds 114 439.66  
Non-recovery of excess payments/ overpayments 118 1 27.96  
Under assessment 74 10.71  
Loss of Revenue 149 158.33  
Misappropriation/ Suspected misappropriation 8 6.52  
Others 1,616 1,873.90  
Total 2,469 3,161.03  
It is evident from Table 6.3.2  that 2,469 cases for ₹ 3,161.03 crore involving audit 
observations on blocking of funds, excess/ over pay ments, loss of revenue, under 
assessment, excess/ irregular/ wasteful/ idle expen diture, etc . remained un-addressed 
by the departments concerned, which is a matter of serious concern. 
6.4 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
As per the Office Memorandum dated 14 July 1993 iss ued by the Government of 
Tripura, the Departmental Audit Committees (DACs) are required to be constituted by 
each Department with the Secretary of the Departmen t as Chairman, Head of the 
Department as Member and one Officer of the rank of  Deputy Secretary from the 
Finance Department as Member and Deputy Accountant General, Tripura as 
Convener. The DACs are to monitor the progress in d isposal of the outstanding audit 
paras and IRs issued by the Principal Accountant Ge neral (Audit), Tripura. Audit 
Committee Meeting was not held during 2022-23. 
6.5 Response of the Government/ departments towards  audit 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura c onducts periodical inspection of 
the government departments to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance 
of important accounts and other records as prescrib ed in the rules and procedures. 
These inspections are followed up with IRs incorpor ating irregularities detected 
during the inspection and not settled on the spot, which are issued to the heads of the 
offices inspected, with copies to the next higher a uthorities for taking prompt 
corrective action.  The heads of the offices/ Gover nment are required to promptly 
comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions 
and report compliance through initial reply to the Principal Accountant 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura  
249 
General (Audit) within one month from the date of issue of the IRs. Serious financial 
irregularities are reported to the heads of the departments and the Government. 
There are 2,437 paragraphs involving ₹ 3,162.34 crore relating to 328 IRs issued 
duri
ng the last five years 2018-19 to 2022-23 which remained outstanding at the end 
of 30 September 2023 under Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors. The 
year-wise position of outstanding IRs, paragraphs and money value involved for the 
last five years as on 30 September 2023 are given in Table 6.5.1. 
Table 6.5.1: Details of pending IRs 
Position of IRs Outstanding as of September 2023 Total 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Number of IRs pending 
for settlement 98 48 86 48 48 328 
Number of outstanding 
audit observations 639 373 665 357 403 2,437 
Money value involved 
(₹ in crore) 498.46
 538.14 1,207.85 233.98 683.91 3,162.34 
The details in Table 6.5.1 indicates that the departments were not serious in taking 
necessary action for final settlement of such cases. 
It is recommended that the Government may review the matter and ensure that an 
effective system exists for sending replies to Audit within the prescribed time frame. 
Agartala      (RANENDU SARKAR) 
The: 31 December 2024  Accountant General (Audit), Tripura 
Countersigned 
New Delhi      (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The: 15 January 2025  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

APPENDICES 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 251 
Appendix 2.2.1 
Regulatory framework governing the management of different types of waste 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.1) 
Type of waste Regulatory framework 
Municipal solid waste 
• MSW (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 
• Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2000 
• Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2016 
• Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
Biomedical waste 
• The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998 
• The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2016 
Plastic waste • Plastic Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011 
• Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
E-waste • E-waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011 
• E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 
Construction & Demolition 
waste 
• Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 
2016 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 252 
Appendix 2.2.2 (A) 
Organisational structure of Urban Development Department 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.2) 
 
Appendix 2.2.2 (B) 
Organisational structure of elected members of ULBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.2) 
 
 
Secretary to the Government of Tripura, 
Urban Development Department 
Director, Urban Development Department 
Municipal 
Commissioner, Agartala 
Municipal Corporation 
Chief Executive 
Officers, 
Municipal 
Councils 
Executive 
Officers, Nagar 
Panchayats 
Agartala Municipal 
Corporation 
Mayor 
Deputy Mayor 
Corporators 
Municipal Council 
Chairperson 
Vice Chairperson 
Councillors 
Nagar Panchayat 
Chairperson 
Vice Chairperson 
Members 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 253 
Appendix 2.2.3 
Statement showing the details of sampled ULBs  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.4) 
Sl. No.  Name of ULBs Area (in 
Sq. Km.) District Population No. of Wards 
1 Agartala Municipal Corporation 76.50 West 
Tripura 5,34,201 51 
2 Dharmanagar Municipal Council  10.69 North 
Tripura 41,086 23 
3 Ambassa Municipal Council 14.77 Dhalai 15,907 15 
4 Kailashahar Municipal Council 6.19 Unakoti 23,271  15 
5 Teliamura Municipal Council 3.75 Khowai 23,038 15  
6 Belonia Municipal Council 5.74 South 
Tripura 21,176 15 
7 Sonamura Nagar Panchayat 4.13 Sepahijala 12,592 1 1 
8 Amarpur Nagar Panchayat 8.55 Gomoti 11,887 11 
9 Sabroom Nagar Panchayat 5.06 South 
Tripura 6,764 09 
Source : ULBs 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 254 
Appendix 2.2.4  
Statement showing the responsibilities of stakeholders involved in process of SWM 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.1) 
Institution/ stakeholders Role and responsibilities in SWM 
Central Government (MoEFCC, 
MoUD and CPCB) 
Framing of laws and rules; policies and norms; guid elines; 
manuals; and technical assistance; financial suppor t; 
monitoring the implementation of laws and rules. 
State Government (UDD headed 
by Principal Secretary/Secretary 
and SPCB headed by Member 
Secretary) 
Policy framing, monitoring implementation of laws a nd rules in 
metropolitan cities; state policy and SWM strategy;  guidelines, 
manuals, and technical assistance; financial suppor t; reporting 
on SLBs to the MoUD; capacity building of local bod ies; 
granting consent to set up treatment and disposal activities. 
District Magistrate & Collector 
assisted by Additional District 
Magistrate 
Review the performance of ULBs on waste management 
process; facilitate identification and allotment of  suitable land 
for solid waste processing and disposal facilities. 
ULBs (headed by Municipal 
Commissioner or Chief 
Executive Officers/ Executive 
Officers) 
Implementation of MSW Rules, providing SWM services ; 
preparation of SWM plan; framing by-laws; levy and collection 
of fees; financing SWM system; creating public awar eness; 
and involvement of informal sector in SWM. 
Informal Sector (waste 
recyclers, non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs), 
community-based organisations 
(CBOs) and private partners) 
Resource recovery and recycling at different stages ; providing 
support to the local recycling industry; involvemen t of 
community; creating awareness; collection and trans portation of 
waste; and technology providers. 
Source : Manual on MSWM, 2000 and 2016 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 255 
Appendix 2.2.5  
SLB performance indicators and benchmarks pertaining to SWM 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.1(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Performance indicator Unit as percentage of 
Benchmark 
(in 
percentage)  
1 Household level coverage of SWM 
services 
households and establishments 
covered by daily doorstep collection 
system 
100 
2 Efficiency of collection of municipal 
solid waste 
total waste collected against waste 
generated within the project area 100 
3 Extent of segregation of municipal 
solid waste 
households and establishments that      
segregate their waste 100 
4 Extent of municipal solid waste 
recovered 
quantum of waste collected, which is         
either recycled or processed 80 
5 Extent of scientific disposal of 
municipal solid waste 
waste disposed in a sanitary landfill 
against    
total quantum of waste disposed 
in landfills and dumpsites 
100 
6 Extent of cost recovery in SWM 
services 
recovery of all operating expenses 
related to SWM services that the ULB 
can meet from the operating revenues 
of sources related exclusively to 
SWM 
100 
7 Efficiency in redressal of customer 
complaints 
total number of SWM related 
complaints resolved against total 
number of SWM complaints received 
within 24 hours 
80 
8 Efficiency in collection of SWM 
user charges 
current year revenues collected 
against total operating revenues for the 
corresponding period 
90 
Source : Manual on MSWM, 2016 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 256 
Appendix 2.2.6  
Comparison of achievements (in per cent ) shown by the sampled ULBs in the Service 
Level Benchmark with actual status as observed by audit 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.1(iii)} 
Name of ULB Service Level Benchmark 
Targeted 
Performance 
as per SLB 
norms 
Achievement 
shown by 
ULB  
Achievemen 
t observed 
by audit as 
per data 
provided by 
the ULB 
Agartala 
Municipal 
Corporation 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 1 00 75 95 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 50 10 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 63 90 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal solid 
waste 100 60 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid waste 100 100 0.23 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 100 36 
Dharmanagar 
Municipal 
Council 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 1 00 70 82 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 11 13 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 50 44 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal solid 
waste 100 55 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid waste 100 100 84 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 100 96 
Kailashahar 
Municipal 
Council 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 1 00 60 82 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 13 71 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 55 0 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal solid 
waste 100 0 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid waste 100 55 0 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 70 13 
Ambassa 
Municipal 
Council 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 1 00 70 88 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 15 3 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 15 18 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal solid 
waste 100 0 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid waste 100 65 3 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 75 42 
Teliamura 
Municipal 
Council 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 1 00 100 64 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 43 12 
Source : City solid waste management plan and information furnished by ULBs 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 257 
Appendix 2.2.6 (concld.)  
Comparison of achievements (in per cent ) shown by the sampled ULBs in the Service 
Level Benchmark with actual status as observed by audit 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.1(iii)} 
Name of 
ULB Service Level Benchmark 
Targeted 
Performanc 
e as per 
SLB norms 
Achieveme 
nt reported 
by ULB to 
GoI 
Achievement 
observed by 
audit as per 
data provided 
by the ULB 
 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 10 40 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal 
solid waste 100 0 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid 
waste 100 100 4 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 100 69 
Belonia 
Municipal 
Council 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid 
waste 100 100 82 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 100 62 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 80 35 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal 
solid waste 100 100 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid 
waste 100 100 6 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 100 69 
Amarpur 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid 
waste 100 100 80 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 100 28 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 80 2 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal 
solid waste 100 100 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid 
waste 100 100 95 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 100 80 
Sabroom 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
Efficiency of collection of municipal solid 
waste 100 70 78 
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 100 50 46 
Extent of municipal solid waste recovered 80 65 33 
Extent of Scientific disposal of municipal 
solid waste 100 0 0 
Extent of segregation of municipal solid 
waste 100 65 0 
Household level coverage of solid waste 
management services 100 70 93 
Source : City solid waste management plan and information furnished by ULBs  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 258 
Appendix 2.2.7  
Variations in per capita estimation indicated by ULBs and as worked out by Audit for 2021-22 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.1(vi)} 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Base 
year 
Populati 
on as of 
2011 
census 
Year Population 
Residual 
refuse 
(col 
e*0.3) 
Commercial 
refuse  
(col e*0.10) 
Street 
sweeping 
(col 
e*0.05) 
Institution 
al refuse 
 (col 
e*0.05) 
Total in 
Kg/day 
(f+g+h+i 
) 
Total 
model 
generation 
(in TPD) 
Waste 
generation 
by ULB in 
TPD 
Percentage of 
variation of 
waste 
generation in 
respect of total 
model 
generation 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) 
1 Agartala 438,408 2021-22 5,39,302 161790.6 53930. 2 26965.1 26965.1 269651 269.65 230 15 
2 Dharmanagar 40,677 2021-22 48,074 14422.2 4807.4 2403.7 2403.7 24037 24.04 13.85 42 
3 Kailashahar 24,049 2021-22 24,926 7477.8 2492.6 1 246.3 1246.3 12463 12.46 6.8 45 
4 Ambassa 16,978 2021-22 16,079 4823.7 1607.9 803.9 5 803.95 8039.5 8.04 3.39 58 
5 Teliamura 20,778 2021-22 25,134 7540.2 2513.4 125 6.7 1256.7 12567 12.57 3.9 69 
6 Belonia 19,820 2021-22 21,433 6429.9 2143.3 1071. 65 1071.65 10716.5 10.72 4.49 58 
7 Amarpur 10,634 2021-22 12,106 3631.8 1210.6 605.3  605.3 6053 6.05 3.55 41 
8 Sabroom 7,007 2021-22 6,936 2080.8 693.6 346.8 34 6.8 3468 3.47 1.48 57 
9 Sonamura 11,141 2021-22 13,117 3935.1 1311.7 655. 85 655.85 6558.5 6.56 2.765 58 
Source:  Information/records furnished by the sampled ULBs  
Note1:  minimum consideration taken for calculation (indic es 0.3, 0.10 and 0.05 used in columns f, g, h and i ) as per para 3.3.6.2 of Manual on MSWM, 2000 and para 1.4.3.3 of 
Manual on MSW, 2016 for 3.5 per cent population growth. 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 259 
Appendix 2.2.8 
Status of total available fund, overall expenditure and expenditure on SWM in sampled 
ULBs during 2017-23 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.2(ii)} 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of ULB Year Total fund 
available 
Expenditure 
during the year 
Closing 
balance 
Expenditure 
on SWM 
Agartala 
Municipal 
Corporation 
2017-18 16,673.07  13,672.60  3,000.47  1,106.19  
2018-19 18,980.41  14,774.38  4,206.03  2,106.62  
2019-20 21,550.96  15,289.44  6,261.52  2,067.56  
2020-21 19,729.18  13,724.47  6,004.71  3,842.63  
2021-22 36,678.33  30,749.91  5,928.42  1,466.03  
2022-23 34,519.02  24,096.86  10,422.16  2,305.40  
Dharmanagar 
Municipal 
Council 
2017-18 878.31  738.35  139.96  96.72  
2018-19 1,408.66  1,117.86  290.80  105.63  
2019-20 1,329.54  828.11  501.43  104.84  
2020-21 813.55  345.02  468.53  152.45  
2021-22 2,382.42  1,836.35  546.07  207.73  
2022-23 1,820.34  1,347.60  472.74  287.23  
Amabassa 
Municipal 
Council 
2017-18 665.45 
 344.08  321.36  11.45  
2018-19 780.58  324.64  455.94  10.22  
2019-20 975.47  513.91  461.56  46.19  
2020-21 1,099.06  630.78  468.28  51.86  
2021-22 1,636.00  1,061.65  574.35  80.72  
2022-23 1,677.15  1,179.53  497.62  49.99  
Kailshahar 
Municipal 
Council 
2017-18 1,804.43  1,219.00  585.43  50.94  
2018-19 1,107.82  437.82  670.00  63.01  
2019-20 1,342.07  676.81  665.26  98.98  
2020-21 1,299.85  707.07  592.78  85.95  
2021-22 1,906.82  1,297.00  609.82  80.65  
2022-23 1,334.40  767.71  566.69  74.03  
Teliamura 
Municipal 
Council 
2017-18 610.29 
 461.33  148.96  3.44  
2018-19 634.00  423.26  210.74  29.40  
2019-20 860.82  403.78  457.04  10.06  
2020-21 1,101.00  598.91  502.09  2.51  
2021-22 1,565.59  806.52  759.07  8.94  
2022-23 166.78  110.04  56.74  2.06  
Belonia 
Municipal 
Council 
2017-18 724.81  553.10  171.71  39.79  
2018-19 703.91  548.25  155.66  41.70  
2019-20 883.01  612.85  270.16  49.71  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 260 
Appendix 2.2.8 (Concld.) 
Status of total available fund, overall expenditure and expenditure on SWM in sampled 
ULBs during 2017-23 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.2(ii)} 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of ULB Year Total fund 
available 
Expenditure 
during the year 
Closing 
balance 
Expenditure 
on SWM 
 
2020-21 854.68  520.27  334.41  96.38  
2021-22 1,458.54  1,152.26  306.28  155.64  
2022-23 2,309.82  2,010.98  298.84  61.94  
Amarpur Nagar 
Panchayat  
2017-18 2,408.57  967.06  1,441.51  27.98  
2018-19 1,597.18  674.96  922.22  62.18  
2019-20 1,236.67  745.05  491.61  47.53  
2020-21 1,085.23  616.83  468.39  38.77  
2021-22 1,282.51  779.18  503.33  77.46  
2022-23 593.08  270.90  322.18  72.57  
Sabroom Nagar 
Panchayat  
2017-18 782.15  476.70  305.45  9.74  
2018-19 708.57  482.61  225.96  23.03  
2019-20 587.70  407.73  179.97  26.00  
2020-21 560.34  390.19  170.15  49.60  
2021-22 1,251.14  878.81  372.33  124.46  
2022-23 1,340.16  1,174.72  165.44  87.50  
Sonamura 
Nagar 
Panchayat  
2017-18 852.63  463.99  388.64  26.92  
2018-19 842.73  486.32  356.41  27.32  
2019-20 847.29  554.04  293.25  20.17  
2020-21 784.61  387.71  396.90  29.75  
2021-22 854.69  488.48  366.21  83.49  
2022-23 983.24  550.11 433.13  91.62  
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
Note : Total unspent balance as of 31 March 2023 is ₹ 1,3235.54 lakh (i.e ₹ 10,422.16 + ₹ 472.74 + ₹ 497.62 + 
₹ 566.69 + ₹ 56.74 + ₹ 298.84 + ₹ 322.18 + ₹ 165.44 + ₹ 433.13) 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 261 
Appendix 2.2.9 
Status of levy and collection of user charges for SWM (2019-20 to 2022-23) in sampled 
ULBs 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.2(iii)} 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of ULB Year Opening 
Balance 
Rate of 
user 
fee for 
SWM 
(per 
month) 
Total No. of 
households 
D2D 
collection to 
be levied 
from all 
households  
Demand Collection Short 
realisation 
Agartala 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0 40 1,06,370 510.58 510.58 31.51 479.07 
2020-21 479.07 50 108,158 648.95 1,128.01 65.89 1,0 62.12 
2021-22 1,062.12 60 109,678 789.68 1,851.81 71.50 1 ,780.31 
2022-23 1,780.31 60 138,958 1,000.50 2,780.80 16.91 2,763.89 
Dharmanagar 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0.00 60 11,360 13.63 13.63 2.85 10.78 
2020-21 10.78 60 11,594 83.48 94.26 9.94 84.32 
2021-22 84.32 60 11,693 84.19 168.51 12.11 156.39 
2022-23 156.39 60 1,1693 84.19 240.58 28.89 211.69 
Kailashahar 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0.00 50 6,578 12.79 12.79 2.16 10.62 
2020-21 10.62 60 7,103 12.79 23.41 3.72 19.69 
2021-22 19.69 60 7,151 51.49 71.17 5.07 66.11 
2022-23 66.11 60 7,151 51.49 117.60 5.47 112.13 
Ambassa 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0.00 50 4,405 4.41 4.41 0.80 3.61 
2020-21 3.61 60 4,655 33.52 37.12 1.23 35.89 
2021-22 35.89 60 4,710 33.91 69.80 1.25 68.55 
2022-23 68.55 60 4,710 33.91 102.46 1.80 100.66 
Teliamura 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0.00 50 6,353 9.53 9.53 3.00 6.53 
2020-21 33.44 50 6,425 38.55 71.99 8.40 63.59 
2021-22 173.32 30 6,506 23.42 196.74 10.80 185.94 
2022-23 253.00 30 6,506 23.42 276.42 13.16 263.26 
Belonia 
Municipal 
Council 
2019-20 0.00 50 6,532 26.13 26.13 13.10 13.03 
2020-21 13.03 50 6,617 39.70 52.74 23.15 29.59 
2021-22 29.59 50 6,692 40.15 69.74 26.14 43.61 
2022-23 43.61 50 6,692 40.15 83.76 27.12 56.64 
Amarpur 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
2019-20 0.00 50 3,591 1.80 1.80 0.31 1.49 
2020-21 1.49 50 3,637 21.82 23.31 7.74 15.57 
2021-22 15.57 50 3,658 21.95 37.52 9.83 27.69 
2022-23 27.69 50 2,870 17.22 44.91 9.40 35.51 
Sabroom 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
2019-20 0.00 50 2,099 8.40 8.40 3.94 4.46 
2020-21 4.46 50 2,179 13.07 17.53 8.91 8.62 
2021-22 8.62 50 2,207 13.24 21.87 9.24 12.63 
2022-23 12.63 50 2,207 13.24 25.87 12.11 13.76 
Sonamura 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
2019-20 0.00 50 3,473 17.37 17.37 3.49 13.87 
2020-21 13.87 50 3,473 20.84 34.71 1.30 33.41 
2021-22 33.41 50 3,473 20.84 54.25 6.48 47.77 
2022-23 47.77 50 3,476 20.86 68.62 10.22 58.40 
Source : Information furnished by ULBs 
Note: Total short realisation as of 31 March 2023 is ₹ 3,615.94 lakh (i.e. ₹ 2,763.89+ ₹ 211.69+ ₹ 112.13+ ₹ 100.66 + ₹ 
263.26+ ₹ 56.64+ ₹ 35.51+ ₹ 13.76 + ₹ 58.40)  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 262 
Appendix 2.2.10 
Rate (s) of penalties/ fines to be imposed by ULBs as per the Rules 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.2(vi)} 
Rule No Description of Rules Municipal 
Corporation (in ₹) 
Municipal 
Councils (in ₹) 
Nagar 
Panchayats  
(in ₹) 
4.1 to 4.4 Littering on roads/streets 200 200 200 
4.4 
Nuisance 
Spiting 100 100 100 
Urinating 200 200 200 
Defecating in open space 500 500 500 
5.1 and 5.2 
For delivering waste that is 
not segregated and not 
stored in separate bins: 
Individual 
Bulk  
100 
500 
100 
500 
100 
500 
5.8 
For not storing & delivering 
construction and demolition 
waste in segregated manner 
1000 1000 1000 
5.11 For burning waste 500 500 500 
7.3 
For a vendor/ hawker 
without a container/ waste 
basket 
200 200 200 
For a vendor/ hawker who 
does not deliver waste in a 
segregated manner as 
specified 
100 100 100 
7.5 For littering/ defecation by 
pet/ owned animals 500 500 500 
7.6 
For not cleaning-up after 
public gathering/ event 
within 4 hours 
5000 5000 5000 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 263 
Appendix 2.2.11 
Action plan for alternative of Single Used Plastic (SUP) 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.6.9(i)(c)} 
Sl. 
No. SUP items 
Approx. Qty. of 
SUP items used 
per year 
Proposed alternatives of SUP 
items 
Approx. Qty. of 
items to be 
produced per 
year as 
alternative 
1 Ear buds with 
plastic sticks 12,000 Nos. Bamboo/ wooden sticks 12,000 Nos. 
2 Plastic sticks for 
balloons 5.5 lakhs Nos. Bamboo/ wooden sticks 5.5 lakhs Nos.  
3 Plastic flags  50,000 Nos. Paper/ Cloth flags 50, 000 Nos. 
4 Plastic candy 
sticks 4.6 lakhs Nos. Bamboo/ wooden sticks 4.6 lakhs Nos.  
6 
Polystyrene 
(Thermocol) for 
decoration 
10,000 kg Paper/ Cloth for decoration 10,000 kg 
7 Plastic cup & 
plates 
Plastic Cup=6 
lakhs Nos. Plastic 
Plates=Nil. 
Paper/ Mud cup, Plates made 
of banana, shawl, areca nut 
leaves 
Paper/ Mud cup 
= 6 lakhs Nos. 
8 Plastic straws 41,000 Nos. Bamboo/Paper Straw 
Bamboo/Paper 
Straw = 41,000 
Nos. 
9 
Plastic cutlery 
items such as 
forks, spoons, 
knives, trays 
12 lakhs Nos. 
cutlery items 
Bamboo/ wooden forks, 
spoons, knives 
12 lakhs Nos. 
cutlery items 
10 Plastic stirrers 5000 Nos. Bamboo/ wooden stirre rs 5000 Nos. 
11 Plastic carry bags 70 Tons 
Paper bags, clothes bags, jute 
bags, crochet bags, muslin 
bags, Biodegradable plastic 
bags, plastic bags above 120 
micron 
70 Tons 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 264 
Appendix 2.3.1 
Sampling adopted for the Performance Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.5) 
Sl. 
No. Aspect Selection criteria Sample selected 
1 Selection of districts 
Based on the highest amount of cess collection and 
expenditure on various welfare schemes by the 
Board 
Out of eight districts, two districts were selected namely,  
a)  West Tripura District and  
b)  South Tripura District 
2 Selection of schemes 
Based on highest amount of financial assistance 
given to the beneficiaries and one scheme ( i.e.,  
awareness) with zero beneficiary involvement was 
also selected to assess the extent to which the 
Department and the Board generated awareness 
among the BOCW workers about the welfare 
schemes. 
Out of 11 welfare schemes implemented by the Board,  six schemes were 
selected namely- 
a)  Education 
b)  Marriage 
c)  Death 
d)  Major Ailments 
e)  Assistance during COVID-19 
f)  Awareness (zero beneficiary involvement) 
3 Selection of units 
Based on highest expenditure on works within the 
sampled districts. 
 
 
 
Based on highest area and population of the Urban 
Local Bodies within the sampled districts. 
Four Working Divisions namely- 
a)  Division-III, PWD (R&B) (under West Tripura District) 
b)  Tripura Housing and Construction Board (under West Tripura District) 
c)  Belonia Division, PWD (R&B) (under South Tripura District) 
d)  Belonia Division, PWD (DWS) (under South Tripura District) 
Four Urban Local Bodies namely- 
a)  Agartala Municipal Corporation (under West Tripura District) 
b)  Mohanpur Municipal Council (under West Tripura District) 
c)  Belonia Municipal Council (under South Tripura District) 
d)  Santirbazar Municipal Council (under South Tripura District) 
4 Selection of registered 
beneficiaries 
Through random sampling from the applications of 
the beneficiaries within the sampled districts. 
235 registered beneficiaries were selected from two  sampled districts, who 
received financial assistance from the Board under the five selected schemes. 
5 
Selection of unregistered 
BOC workers 
Through random sampling based on availability and 
willingness of the beneficiaries at the sampled 
worksites. 
69 unregistered BOC workers in two sampled district s were randomly selected 
for survey. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 265 
Appendix 2.3.1 (concld.) 
Sampling adopted for the Performance Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.5) 
Sl. 
No. Aspect Selection criteria Sample selected 
6 Selection of 
Establishments 
Through random sampling within the sampled 
districts. 
Eight registered and eight unregistered establishme nts were selected 
randomly for survey from the two sampled districts. 
Eight selected registered establishments are- 
Sl. No. Name of the agency District 
1 Sri Arun Kumar Dey West Tripura 
2 Sri Goutam Banik West Tripura 
3 Sri Subir Datta West Tripura 
4 Sri Sajal Deb West Tripura 
5 Sri Bijan Bhuiyan South Tripura 
6 Sri Kamal Dey South Tripura 
7 Sri Pankaj Mallik South Tripura 
8 Sri Bikash Saha South Tripura 
Eight selected unregistered establishments are- 
Sl. No. Name of the agency District 
1 Sri Jasoda Lal Roy West Tripura 
2 Sri Dinesh Banik West Tripura 
3 Sri Shibu Saha West Tripura 
4 Smt. Jhuma Podder West Tripura 
5 Sri Shankar Kanti Saha South Tripura 
6 Sri Jiban Krishna Kar South Tripura 
7 Sri Gathan Datta South Tripura 
8 Sri Niraj Kumar Dhar South Tripura 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 266 
Appendix 2.3.2 
Labour cess collected from the contractors by the sampled units but not deposited to the 
Board 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.8.3(ii)}  
(₹ in lakh)  
Name of the Office 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
Santirbazar Municipal 
Council 0.27 
 1.46  0.14  2.35  1.88  2.24  8.34  
Belonia  Municipal 
Council 2.15 
 0.41  1.22  0.67  1.72  2.19  8.36  
PWD (WR), Div. IV, 
Belonia 0
 0 5.67  8.51  1.62   0 15.80 
PWD (R&B), Belonia 
Division 33.17 
 33.21  24.72  23.73  7.83   0 122.66  
PWD (R&B), 
Santirbazar Division 14.14 
 14.12  17.97  36.21  36.49   0 118.93  
Total  49.73  49.20  49.72  71.47  49.54  4.43  274.09  
 
 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 267 
Appendix 2.3.3 
Non-collection of advance cess by the ULBs 
{(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.8.3(iii)}  
I.  Agartala Municipal Corporation 
(Amount in ₹) 
  RCC structure Load bearing structure 
Year 
Total plinth area 
approved (in 
square metre) 
Plinth area rate 
(per sq. metre) 
Amount of approved 
plinth area 
(Col.2 X Col.3) 
Cess to be deducted 
(at the rate of one 
per cent approved 
plinth area) 
Total plinth 
area 
approved (in 
square metre) 
Plinth 
area rate 
(per sq. 
metre) 
Amount of 
approved 
plinth area 
(Col.6 X Col.7) 
Cess to be deducted 
(at the rate of one 
per cent approved 
plinth area) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
2017-18 2,97,768 30,000 8,93,30,40,000 8,93,30,400 6,236 21,500 13,40,74,000 13,40,740 
2018-19 4,31,063 30,000 12,93,18,90,000 12,93,18,90 0 5,037 21,500 10,82,95,500 10,82,955 
2019-20 4,64,151 30,000 13,92,45,30,000 13,92,45,30 0 5,663 21,500 12,17,54,500 12,17,545 
2020-21 5,17,621 30,000 15,52,86,30,000 15,52,86,30 0 3,559 21,500 7,65,18,500 7,65,185 
2021-22 6,36,522 30,000 19,09,56,60,000 19,09,56,60 0 6,212 21,500 13,35,58,000 13,35,580 
2022-23 4,72,307 30,000 14,16,92,10,000 14,16,92,10 0 6,424 21,500 13,81,16,000 13,81,160 
      84,58,29,60,000 84,58,29,600     71,23,16,500 71,23,165 
II.  Belonia Municipal Council 
RCC structure Load bearing structure 
2017-18 11,051.685 30,000 33,15,50,550 33,15,506 74 9.63 21,500 1,61,17,045 1,61,170 
2018-19 16,675.387 30,000 50,02,61,610 50,02,616 19 8.4 21,500 42,65,600 42,656 
2019-20 12,204.863 30,000 36,61,45,890 36,61,459 21 0.99 21,500 45,36,285 45,363 
2020-21 10,179.437 30,000 30,53,83,110 30,53,831 15 0.948 21,500 32,45,382 32,454 
2021-22 22,289.181 30,000 66,86,75,430 66,86,754 50 8.749 21,500 1,09,38,104 1,09,381 
2022-23 11,961.492 30,000 35,88,44,760 35,88,448 37 2.783 21,500 80,14,835 80,148 
      2,53,08,61,350 2,53,08,614     4,71,17,250 4,71,173 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 268 
Appendix 2.3.3 (concld.) 
Non-collection of advance cess by the ULBs 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.8.3(iii)}  
(Amount in ₹) 
III.  Mohanpur Municipal Council 
 RCC structure Load bearing structure 
Year 
Total plinth area 
approved (in 
square metre) 
Plinth area rate 
(per sq. metre) 
Amount of approved 
plinth area 
(Col.2 X Col.3) 
Cess to be deducted 
(at the rate of one 
per cent approved 
plinth area) 
Total plinth 
area 
approved (in 
square metre) 
Plinth 
area rate 
(per sq. 
metre) 
Amount of 
approved 
plinth area 
(Col.6 X Col.7) 
Cess to be deducted 
(at the rate of one per 
cent approved plinth 
area) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
2017-18 983.43 30,000 2,95,02,900 2,95,029 0 0 0   
2018-19 3,586.29 30,000 10,75,88,700 10,75,887 0 0 0   
2019-20 3,870.31 30,000 11,61,09,300 11,61,093 51.6 6 21,500 11,10,690 11,107 
2020-21 2,941.79 30,000 8,82,53,700 8,82,537 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 2,700.78 30,000 8,10,23,400 8,10,234 0 0 0 0 
2022-23 4,190.78 30,000 12,57,23,400 12,57,234 0 0 0 0 
      54,82,01,400 54,82,014       11,107 
IV.  Santirbazar Municipal Council 
  RCC structure Load bearing structure 
2017-18     7,62,30,183 7,62,302     0 0 
2018-19     4,21,45,979 4,21,460     17,42,784 17,4 28 
2019-20     13,47,52,814 13,47,528     23,25,774 23 ,258 
2020-21     14,78,86,300 14,78,863     44,89,217 44 ,892 
2021-22     14,46,00,035 14,46,000     24,36,989 24 ,370 
2022-23     16,46,99,904 16,46,999     0 0 
      71,03,15,215 71,03,152     1,09,94,764 1,09,948 
Grand total (I+II+III+IV) 89,14,38,772  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 269 
Appendix 2.4.1 
Statement showing the year-wise and district-wise details of payment of hostellers’ 
scholarship to the students in which the schools/ institutions had no hostel facility 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4) 
Year District Category  
No. of students 
paid hostel 
scholarship 
without hostel 
facility in school 
Scholars 
hip rate 
for 
hosteller  
Amount 
disbursed 
at hosteller 
rate 
Scholars 
hip rate 
for day 
scholar 
Amount to be 
disbursed at 
day scholar 
rate 
Excess 
amount 
disbursed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4x5) 7 8 (4x7) 9 (6-8) 
2017-18  
Dhalai Boys 1 4,500 4,500 2,250 2,250 2,250 
Girls 3 4,500 13,500 2,250 6,750 6,750 
Gomati Boys 76 4,500 3,42,000 2,250 1,71,000 1,71,000 
Girls 163 4,500 7,33,500 2,250 3,66,750 3,66,750 
Khowai Boys 95 4,500 4,27,500 2,250 2,13,750 2,13,750 
Girls 193 4,500 8,68,500 2,250 4,34,250 4,34,250 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 14 4,500 63,000 2,250 31,500 31,500 
Girls 68 4,500 3,06,000 2,250 1,53,000 1,53,000 
Sepahijala Boys 52 4,500 2,34,000 2,250 1,17,000 1,17,000 
Girls 45 4,500 2,02,500 2,250 1,01,250 1,01,250 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 9 4,500 40,500 2,250 20,250 20,250 
Girls 27 4,500 1,21,500 2,250 60,750 60,750 
Unakoti Boys 5 4,500 22,500 2,250 11,250 11,250 
Girls 24 4,500 1,08,000 2,250 54,000 54,000 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 235 4,500 10,57,500 2,250 5,28,750 5,28,750 
Girls 231 4,500 10,39,500 2,250 5,19,750 5,19,750 
Total: 1,241   55,84,500   27,92,250 27,92,250 
Total Boys: 487   21,91,500   10,95,750 10,95,750 
Total Girls: 754   33,93,000   16,96,500 16,96,500 
2018-19  
Dhalai Boys 19 4,500 85,500 2,250 42,750 42,750 
Girls 51 4,500 2,29,500 2,250 1,14,750 1,14,750 
Gomati Boys 101 4,500 4,54,500 2,250 2,27,250 2,27,250 
Girls 267 4,500 12,01,500 2,250 6,00,750 6,00,750 
Khowai Boys 135 4,500 6,07,500 2,250 3,03,750 3,03,750 
Girls 284 4,500 12,78,000 2,250 6,39,000 6,39,000 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 12 4,500 54,000 2,250 27,000 27,000 
Girls 26 4,500 1,17,000 2,250 58,500 58,500 
Sepahijala Boys 85 4,500 3,82,500 2,250 1,91,250 1,91,250 
Girls 76 4,500 3,42,000 2,250 1,71,000 1,71,000 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 7 4,500 31,500 2,250 15,750 15,750 
Girls 26 4,500 1,17,000 2,250 58,500 58,500 
Unakoti Boys 0 4,500 0 2,250 0 0 
Girls 20 4,500 90,000 2,250 45,000 45,000 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 160 4,500 7,20,000 2,250 3,60,000 3,60,000 
Girls 218 4,500 9,81,000 2,250 4,90,500 4,90,500 
Total: 1,487  66,91,500  33,45,750 33,45,750 
Total Boys: 519  23,35,500  11,67,750 11,67,750 
Total Girls: 968  43,56,000  21,78,000 21,78,000 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 270 
Appendix 2.4.1 (contd...) 
Statement showing the year-wise and district-wise details of payment of hostellers’ 
scholarship to the students in which the schools/ institutions had no hostel facility 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4) 
Year District Category  
No. of students 
paid hostel 
scholarship 
without hostel 
facility in school 
Scholarshi 
p rate for 
hosteller 
(revised 
rate)  
Amount 
disburse 
d at 
hosteller 
rate 
Scholarship 
rate for day 
scholar (pre 
revised 
rate) 
Amount to 
be 
disbursed at 
day scholar 
rate 
Excess 
amount 
disbursed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4x5) 7 8 (4x7) 9 (6-8) 
Payment for eight months 
2019-20  
Dhalai Boys 13 5,200 232  67,600 1,950 233  25,350 42,250 
Girls 80 5,200 4,16,000 1,950 1,56,000 2,60,000 
Gomati Boys 59 5,200 3,06,800 1,950 1,15,050 1,91,750 
Girls 133 5,200 6,91,600 1,950 2,59,350 4,32,250 
Khowai Boys 138 5,200 7,17,600 1,950 2,69,100 4,48,500 
Girls 251 5,200 13,05,200 1,950 4,89,450 8,15,750 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 26 5,200 1,35,200 1,950 50,700 84,500 
Girls 85 5,200 4,42,000 1,950 1,65,750 2,76,250 
Sepahijala Boys 63 5,200 3,27,600 1,950 1,22,850 2,04,750 
Girls 86 5,200 4,47,200 1,950 1,67,700 2,79,500 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 18 5,200 93,600 1,950 35,100 58,500 
Girls 57 5,200 2,96,400 1,950 1,11,150 1,85,250 
Unakoti Boys 5 5,200 26,000 1,950 9,750 16,250 
Girls 25 5,200 1,30,000 1,950 48,750 81,250 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 155 5,200 8,06,000 1,950 3,02,250 5,03,750 
Girls 205 5,200 10,66,000 1,950 3,99,750 6,66,250 
Total: 1,399  72,74,800  27,28,050 45,46,750 
Total Boys: 477  24,80,400  9,30,150 15,50,250 
Total Girls: 922  47,94,400  17,97,900 29,96,500 
 
                                                           
232  ₹ 525 x 8 + ₹ 1,000 annual books and Ad-hoc grant= ₹ 5,200 
233  ₹ 150 x 8 + ₹ 750 annual books and Ad-hoc grant= ₹ 1,950 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 271 
Appendix 2.4.1 (contd...) 
Statement showing the year-wise and district-wise details of payment of hostellers’ 
scholarship to the students in which the schools/ institutions had no hostel facility 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4) 
Year District Category  
No. of students 
paid hostel 
scholarship 
without hostel 
facility in school 
Scholarshi 
p rate for 
hosteller 
(revised 
rate)  
Amount 
disburse 
d at 
hosteller 
rate 
Scholarship 
rate for day 
scholar (pre 
revised 
rate) 
Amount to 
be 
disbursed at 
day scholar 
rate 
Excess 
amount 
disbursed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4x5) 7 8 (4x7) 9 (6-8) 
Payment for two months 
2019-20 
Dhalai  Boys  13  1,050 234  13,650  450 235  5,850  7,800  
Girls 80 1,050 84,000 450 36,000 48,000 
Gomati Boys 59 1,050 61,950 450 26,550 35,400 
Girls 133 1,050 1,39,650 450 59,850 79,800 
Khowai Boys 138 1,050 1,44,900 450 62,100 82,800 
Girls 251 1,050 2,63,550 450 1,12,950 1,50,600 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 26 1,050 27,300 450 11,700 15,600 
Girls 85 1,050 89,250 450 38,250 51,000 
Sepahijala Boys 63 1,050 66,150 450 28,350 37,800 
Girls 86 1,050 90,300 450 38,700 51,600 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 18 1,050 18,900 450 8,100 10,800 
Girls 57 1,050 59,850 450 25,650 34,200 
Unakoti Boys 5 1,050 5,250 450 2,250 3,000 
Girls 25 1,050 26,250 450 11,250 15,000 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 155 1,050 1,62,750 450 69,750 93,000 
Girls 205 1,050 2,15,250 450 92,250 1,23,000 
Total: 1,399  14,68,950  6,29,550 8,39,400 
Total Boys: 477  5,00,850  2,14,650 2,86,200 
Total Girls: 922  9,68,100  4,14,900 5,53,200 
Grand Total 1,399  87,43,750  33,57,600 53,86,150 
Boys 477  29,81,250  11,44,800 18,36,450 
Girls 922  57,62,500  22,12,800 35,49,700 
                                                           
234  ₹ 525 x 2= ₹ 1,050 
235  ₹ 225 x 2= ₹ 450 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 272 
Appendix 2.4.1 (concld.) 
Statement showing the year-wise and district-wise details of payment of hostellers’ 
scholarship to the students in which the schools/ institutions had no hostel facility 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4) 
Year District Category  
No. of students 
paid hostel 
scholarship 
without hostel 
facility in school 
Scholars 
hip rate 
for 
hosteller  
Amount 
disbursed 
at hosteller 
rate 
Scholars 
hip rate 
for day 
scholar 
Amount to be 
disbursed at 
day scholar 
rate 
Excess 
amount 
disbursed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4x5) 7 8 (4x7) 9 (6-8) 
2020-21  
Dhalai Boys 1 6,250 6,250 3,000 3,000 3,250 
Girls 43 6,250 2,68,750 3,000 1,29,000 1,39,750 
Gomati Boys 42 6,250 2,62,500 3,000 1,26,000 1,36,500 
Girls 101 6,250 6,31,250 3,000 3,03,000 3,28,250 
Khowai Boys 139 6,250 8,68,750 3,000 4,17,000 4,51,750 
Girls 250 6,250 15,62,500 3,000 7,50,000 8,12,500 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 13 6,250 81,250 3,000 39,000 42,250 
Girls 56 6,250 3,50,000 3,000 1,68,000 1,82,000 
Sepahijala Boys 21 6,250 1,31,250 3,000 63,000 68,250 
Girls 33 6,250 2,06,250 3,000 99,000 1,07,250 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 14 6,250 87,500 3,000 42,000 45,500 
Girls 53 6,250 3,31,250 3,000 1,59,000 1,72,250 
Unakoti Boys 3 6,250 18,750 3,000 9,000 9,750 
Girls 20 6,250 1,25,000 3,000 60,000 65,000 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 118 6,250 7,37,500 3,000 3,54,000 3,83,500 
Girls 146 6,250 9,12,500 3,000 4,38,000 4,74,500 
Total: 1,053   65,81,250   31,59,000 34,22,250 
Total Boys: 351   21,93,750   10,53,000 11,40,750 
Total Girls: 702   43,87,500   21,06,000 22,81,500 
2021-22  
Dhalai Boys 8 6,250 50,000 3,000 24,000 26,000 
Girls 128 6,250 8,00,000 3,000 3,84,000 4,16,000 
Gomati Boys 133 6,250 8,31,250 3,000 3,99,000 4,32,250 
Girls 304 6,250 19,00,000 3,000 9,12,000 9,88,000 
Khowai Boys 90 6,250 5,62,500 3,000 2,70,000 2,92,500 
Girls 211 6,250 13,18,750 3,000 6,33,000 6,85,750 
North 
Tripura 
Boys 13 6,250 81,250 3,000 39,000 42,250 
Girls 63 6,250 3,93,750 3,000 1,89,000 2,04,750 
Sepahijala Boys 34 6,250 2,12,500 3,000 1,02,000 1,10,500 
Girls 52 6,250 3,25,000 3,000 1,56,000 1,69,000 
South 
Tripura 
Boys 22 6,250 1,37,500 3,000 66,000 71,500 
Girls 77 6,250 4,81,250 3,000 2,31,000 2,50,250 
Unakoti Boys 5 6,250 31,250 3,000 15,000 16,250 
Girls 31 6,250 1,93,750 3,000 93,000 1,00,750 
West 
Tripura 
Boys 153 6,250 9,56,250 3,000 4,59,000 4,97,250 
Girls 149 6,250 9,31,250 3,000 4,47,000 4,84,250 
Total: 1,473  92,06,250  44,19,000 47,87,250 
Total Boys 458  28,62,500  13,74,000 14,88,500 
Total Girls 1,015  63,43,750  30,45,000 32,98,750 
Grand Total 6,653  3,68,07,250  1,70,73,600 1,97,33,650 
Grand Total Boys: 2,292  1,25,64,500  58,35,300 67,29,200 
Grand Total Girls: 4,361  2,42,42,750  1,12,38,300 1,30,04,450 
Source : Database of Pre-Matric Scholarship from Tribal Welfare Department 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 273 
Appendix 2.5.1 
Statement showing payment of excess scholarship for the year 2019-20 (as on 7 December 2020) 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5) 
Category  Nos. of 
beneficiaries  
Rate of 
Scholarship  
Total 
Scholarship 
extended 
Scholarship to be extended to students Annual Books 
and Ad-hoc 
Grant 
Total 
scholarship to 
be extended 
Excess 
scholarship 
extended 
for eight months 236  as 
per pre revised rate 
for two months 237 as 
revised rate 
1 2 3 4 (2x3) 5 6 7 8 (5+6+7) 8 (4-8) 
Hosteller 3,589 ₹ 6,250 238  ₹ 2,24,31,250  ₹ 1,00,49,200  
(₹ 350x3,589x8)  
₹ 37,68,450  
(₹ 525 x 3,589x2)  
₹ 35,89,000  
(₹ 1,000x3,589)  ₹ 1,74,06,650  ₹ 50,24,600  
Day 
scholar 7,391 
₹ 3,000 239  ₹ 2,21,73,000  ₹ 88,69,200  
(₹ 150x7,391x8)  
₹ 33,25,950  
(₹ 225 x 7,391x2)  
₹ 55,43,250 
(₹ 750x7,391)  ₹ 1,77,38,400  ₹ 45,34,600  
Total: 10,980  ₹ 4,46,04,250  ₹ 1,89,18,400  ₹ 70,94,400  ₹ 91,32,250  ₹ 3,51,45,050  ₹ 94,59,200  
Source : Database provided by the Departmental 
                                                           
236  From April 2019 to November 2019 
237  December 2020 and January 2021 
238  (₹ 525x10) + ₹ 1,000 = ₹ 6,250 
239  (₹ 225x10) + ₹ 750 = ₹ 3,000 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 274 
Appendix 2.5.2 
Statement showing district wise excess payment of Pre-Metric scholarship to beneficiaries under Schedule Tribe category for the year 
2019-20 (as on 7 December 2020) 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5) 
(in ₹) 
District Category Nos. of 
beneficiaries 
Monthly 
pre-
revised  
rate 
Monthly 
revised 
rate 
Total 
Scholarship 
extended 
Scholarship to be 
extended for eight months 
(from April to Nov. 2019) 
as per pre revised rate 
Scholarship to be 
extended for two months 
(Dec. 2020 and Jan. 2021) 
as revised rate 
Total 
scholarship to 
be extended 
Excess 
scholarship 
extended 
1 2 3 4 5 6=(3x5) x10 7= (3x4) x 8 8= (3x5) x 2 9= (7+8) 10= (6-9) 
Dhalai Hosteller 283 450 625 17,68,750 10,18,800 3,53,750 13,72,550 3,96,200 
Day scholar 1,497 225 300 44,91,000 26,94,600 8,98, 200 35,92,800 8,98,200 
Gomati Hosteller 643 450 625 40,18,750 23,14,800 8,03,750 31,18,550 9,00,200 
Day scholar 1,215 225 300 36,45,000 21,87,000 7,29, 000 29,16,000 7,29,000 
Khowai Hosteller 727 450 625 45,43,750 26,17,200 9,08,750 35,25,950 10,17,800 
Day scholar 762 225 300 22,86,000 13,71,600 4,57,20 0 18,28,800 4,57,200 
North 
Triprua 
Hosteller 426 450 625 26,62,500 15,33,600 5,32,500 20,66,100 5,96,400 
Day scholar 378 225 300 11,34,000 6,80,400 2,26,800  9,07,200 2,26,800 
Sepahijala Hosteller 351 450 625 21,93,750 12,63,600 4,38,750 17,02,350 4,91,400 
Day scholar 774 225 300 23,22,000 13,93,200 4,64,40 0 18,57,600 4,64,400 
South 
Tripura 
Hosteller 332 450 625 20,75,000 11,95,200 4,15,000 16,10,200 4,64,800 
Day scholar 1,805 225 300 54,15,000 32,49,000 10,83 ,000 43,32,000 10,83,000 
Unakoti Hosteller 107 450 625 6,68,750 3,85,200 1,33,750 5, 18,950 14,9,800 
Day scholar 369 225 300 11,07,000 6,64,200 2,21,400  8,85,600 2,21,400 
West Tripura Hosteller 714 450 625 44,62,500 25,70,400 8,92,500 34,62,900 9,99,600 
Day scholar 590 225 300 17,70,000 10,62,000 3,54,00 0 14,16,000 3,54,000 
Districts/ 
Place from 
Other States 
Hosteller 6 450 625 37,500 21,600 7,500 29,100 8,40 0 
Day scholar 1 225 300 3,000 1,800 600 2,400 600 
Total 10,980      4,46,04,250 2,62,24,200 89,20,850 3,51,45,050 94,59,200 
Source: Database provided by the Departmental  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 275 
Appendix 3.2.1 
District-wise ineligible beneficiaries detected as of March 2023 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.3(i)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district 
No. of 
ineligible 
beneficiaries 
detected 
Total payments credited to ineligible beneficiaries 
No. of farmers 
received minimum 
one instalment 
No. of 
instalments 
received 
Total  
payments 
1 Dhalai 48  45  292  5,84,000  
2 Gomati 1,202  1,100  6,373  1,27,46,000  
3 Khowai 137  127  1,116  22,32,000  
4 North Tripura 638  633  5,885  1,17,70,000  
5 Sepahijala 131  112  706  14,12,000  
6 South Tripura 119  117  1,026  20,52,000  
7 Unakoti 16  15  138  2,76,000  
8 West Tripura 620  614  5,358  1,07,16,000  
Total  2,911  2,763  20,894  4,17,88,000  
Source:  Database furnished by SNO 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 276 
Appendix 3.2.2 
Employees of State Government registered under PM KISAN Scheme as of March 2023 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.3(ii)} 
(in ₹) 
SL 
No. Name of the district 
No. of 
government 
employee 
registered 
No. of 
installments 
received 
Amount paid to the 
government employee 
1 Dhalai 16 123 2,46,000 
2 Gomati 59 413 8,26,000 
3 Khowai 21 162 3,24,000 
4 North Tripura 67 489 9,78,000 
5 Sepahijala 81 550 11,00,000 
6 South Tripura 33 227 4,54,000 
7 Unakoti 17 122 2,44,000 
8 West Tripura 43 306 6,12,000 
Total  337 2,392 47,84,000 
Source:  Database of SNO and HRMS 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 277 
Appendix 3.2.3 
District-wise death beneficiaries reported as of March 2023 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.3(iii)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district 
No. of death 
beneficiaries 
reported 
Total payments credited to death beneficiaries post 
death 
No. of beneficiaries 
received minimum 
one instalment 
No. of 
installments 
received 
Total 
payments 
1 Dhalai 226 164 534 10,68,000 
2 Gomati 65 49 163 3,26,000 
3 Khowai 111 93 324 6,48,000 
4 North Tripura 267 138 376 7,52,000 
5 Sepahijala 135 116 338 6,76,000 
6 South Tripura 144 111 365 7,30,000 
7 Unakoti 74 60 226 4,52,000 
8 West Tripura 133 117 384 7,68,000 
Total  1,155 848 2,710 54,20,000 
Source:  Database furnished by SNO 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 278 
Appendix 3.2.4 
District-wise income tax payee farmers as of March 2023 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.3(iv) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district 
Total No. of 
income tax 
payee 
farmers 
No. of income tax 
payee farmers 
received minimum 
one instalment 
No. of 
instalments 
received by 
income tax 
payee farmers 
Total fund 
received by 
income tax 
payee farmers 
1 Dhalai 85 84 600 12,00,000  
2 Gomati 211 202 1,327 26,54,000  
3 Khowai 116 109 766 15,32,000  
4 North Tripura 326 319 2,222 44,44,000  
5 Sepahijala 326 308 2,037 40,74,000  
6 South Tripura 263 258 1,849 36,98,000  
7 Unakoti 86 82 668 13,36,000  
8 West Tripura 280 275 1,890 37,80,000  
Total  1,693 1,637 11,359 2,27,18,000  
Source:  Database furnished by SNO 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 279 
Appendix 3.2.5 
Details of ownership of land in different name against 29 cases and amounts disbursed 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.4(i)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Registration No. Name as per Self Declaration Forms Name as per land records No. of Instalments  
(@ ₹ 2,000) 
Amount paid as of September 
2023 
1 TR157513785 Khokan Choudhury Abinash Ch. Sarkar 1 3 26,000 
2 TR270675058 Loknath Debbarma Haradhan Debbarma 11  22,000 
3 TR155226944 Nabarun Chowdhury Nityananda Chowdhur y 13 26,000 
4 TR157523492 Tutan Chowdhury Khirud Chowdhury 3 6, 000 
5 TR144179261 Gayati Debbarma Chandra Nath Debbarma  13 26,000 
6 TR144352240 Kshebukrai Debbarma Nishan Debbarma 1 3 26,000 
7 TR277706808 Biswarai Debbarma Ramabali Debbarma 1 0 20,000 
8 TR226326617 Rabindra Debnath Madan Mohan Debnath 13 26,000 
9 TR147656995 Jitendra Debbarma Ramcharan Debbarma 13 26,000 
10 TR226397442 Radha Nath Debbarma Brajendra Ch. De bbarma 13 26,000 
11 TR292339071 Badhan Debbarma Jamini Debbarma 7 14 ,000 
12 TR270062130 Sunil Debbarma Bhuban Ch. Debbarma 9  18,000 
13 TR226397367 Juddha Mani Debbarma Manicharan Debb arma 13 26,000 
14 TR289268653 Sujit Bhowmik Subhash Ch.Bhowmik 8 1 6,000 
15 TR145638762 Harun Miah Sultan Miah 13 26,000 
16 TR289268742 Rina Bala Das Satayajit Das 8 16,000  
17 TR224411178 Ashutosh Nath Ananda Mohan Debnath 1 3 26,000 
18 TR153808472 Shankar Debnath Thakur Mani Nath 13 26,000 
19 TR226381357 Sunati Das Rajendra Kr. Das 13 26,00 0 
20 TR226379313 Kamakhya Das Jogesh Ch. Das 13 26,00 0 
21 TR226394424 Amulya Kumar Das Hara Kumar Das 13 2 6,000 
22 TR278141464 Nikhil Nath Nanda Kumar Nath 10 20,0 00 
23 TR117738625 Hiralal Nuniya Budhua Nuniya 13 26,0 00 
24 TR156669937 Ranai Malakar Prahlad Malakar 13 26, 000 
25 TR152681663 Bharat Halam Nun Halam 13 26,000 
26 TR224367016 Niyaj Ali Alim Miah 13 26,000 
27 TR211805684 Armuj Ali Rakib Ali 13 26,000 
28 TR268385322 Abdul Hachib Abdul Hashim 11 22,000 
29 TR152779090 Akhil Das Abani Mohan Das 13 26,000 
Total No. of instalments and amount paid 337 6,74,000 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 280 
Appendix 3.2.6 
Disbursement of fund to non-agriculture land holders 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.4(ii)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Registration No. Name of 
beneficiaries 
Name of Village 
block & district 
No. of 
instalments 
@ of 
₹ 2000) 
Amt. received 
as of 
September 
2023 
1 TR144401106  Dhanchandra Kalai  Brahmachhara, 
Teliamura, Khowai 
13  26,000  
2 TR145614019 Sunil Sarkar 13 26,000 
3 TR152865633 Budha Laxmi 
Debbarma 
Uttar Pulinpur , 
Teliamura, Khowai 13 26,000 
4 TR148587956 Anil Debbarma Chakmaghar, 
Teliamura, Khowai 13 26,000 
5 TR152595562 Chanshwari 
Debbarma  Ratanpur , 
Padmabil, Khowai 
13 26,000 
6 TR226363678  Bel Pati Debbarma  13  26,000  
7 TR148878971 Nanda Lal Roy 
Pekuchhara, 
Panisagar, 
North Tripura 
13 26,000 
Total 91 1,82,000 
Source:  Records furnished by SA and PM-KISAN portal 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 281 
Appendix 3.2.7 
Short disbursement of instalments 
{Reference Paragraph 3.2.2.5(i)} 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
District 
Number of 
beneficiary 
not 
receiving 
1st 
instalment  
Amount 
Number of 
beneficiary 
not 
receiving 
1st and 2nd 
instalment 
Amount  
Number of 
beneficiary 
not 
receiving 
1st, 2nd and 
3rd 
instalment 
Amount  
Number of 
beneficiary 
not 
receiving 
1st, 2nd, 3rd 
and 4th 
instalment 
Amount  
Amount of 
non 
receiving of 
multiple 
instalments 
(Column 
6+8+10) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
1 Dhalai 123 2,46,000  0 0  0 0  3 24,000  24,000  
2 Gomati 44 88,000  0 0  0 0  0 0  0 
3 Khowai 109 2,18,000  1 4,000  1 6,000  1 8,000  18,000  
4 North Tripura 250 5,00,000  1 4,000  1 6,000  0 0  10,000  
5 Sepahijala 402 8,04,000  0 0  1 6,000  5 40,000  46,000  
6 South Tripura 94 18,8,000  0 0  0 0  2 16,000  16,000  
7 Unakoti 19 38,000  0 0  0 0  0 0  0 
8  West Tripura 65 1,30,000  0 0  2 12,000  1 8,000  20,000  
 Total  1,106 22,12,000  2 8,000  5 30,000  12 96,000  1,34,000  
Source:  Beneficiary Status Report 
Note: Total beneficiaries = 1,106+2+5+12 =1,125; Total amount involved = ₹ 22,12,000+  ₹ 1,34,000=  ₹ 23,46,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 282 
Appendix 3.2.8 
Scheme benefits credited to wrong bank account 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(ii)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name Name of districts  
and blocks 
Registration 
No 
Wrong  
account Correct bank account  Amt. credited into 
wrong bank account 
01. Sudhir Chandra Nath SNO, Agartala TR125006083 * *1631 8044020001531 14,000  
02.  Madan Debnath  Sepahijala Bishramganj,  TR291152993  **6323  8027020006923  8,000  
03. Babul Nath North Tripura, Panisagar TR288169577  **0006 8080026000008 2,000  
04. Nripendra Nath -do- TR125980779 **1267 80900120 01367 14,000  
05. Mantulal Das -do- TR152772200 **3220 0035120600 003002 12,000  
06. Premananda Nath -do- TR145737494 **2048 8077012 312948 14,000  
07. Hanif Uddin -do- TR211859036 **3485 00061206000 3458 12,000  
08. Manimohan Sinha -do- TR152644130 **2063 8086029 002083 12,000  
09. Harekrishna Saha -do- TR268611508 **6535 305600 76126 4,000  
10. Kirendra Das -do- TR151001143 **3138 0006120600 03183 20,000  
11. Sudhanya Reang North Tripura, 
Kanchanpur  TR155237829 **1308 32771527690 18,000  
12. Nirbai Ray Reang -do- TR224436837 **0575 00 161 2060000757 16,000  
13. Nitai Chandra Bhowmik -do- TR125052941 **8468 8 087020003055 6,000  
14. Joy Babu Reang -do- TR278251110 **5285 38059179 534 10,000  
15. Lalmohan Reang -do- TR144148288 **2344 80760200 04270 18,000  
16. Dai Borani Reang -do- TR147585935 **0227 808401 2588733 18,000  
17. Adeda Khatun -do- TR285040145 **2639 0 64910032 848 4,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 283 
Appendix 3.2.8 (concld.) 
Scheme benefits credited to wrong bank account 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(ii)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name Name of districts  
and blocks 
Registration 
No. 
Wrong  
account Correct bank account  Amt. credited into 
wrong bank account 
18. Alena Khatun -do- TR285916931 **4928 3630028796 2 4,000  
19. Amena -do- TR285912867 **4671 41830933156 4,000  
20. Anjuna Khatun -do- TR285918180 **7751 684102120 078013 4,000  
21. Anuwara Begum -do- TR285730665 **7802 394526601 3 4,000  
22. Arjun Das -do- TR270709674 **4390 0770010224390  12,000  
23. Bipul Kumar Chakma -do- TR125057855 **4270 2905 01000004270 18,000  
24. Milan Chakma -do- TR154281992 **0219 0048120600 00218 20,000  
25. Biswa Karma Debbarma Khowai, Teliamura TR117731 644 **5305 8031012034515 6,000  
26. Kehetra Mohan Debbarma -do- TR145829424 **0377 81030115003377 20,000  
27. Dhan Kumar Debbarma -do- TR152797434 **0503 810 3011400368 8,000  
28. Arun Debnath -do- TR146990167 **1642 8031020001 692 20,000  
29. Sujit Debbarma -do- TR226378889 **3964 81030200 03969 20,000  
30. Niru Kumar Debbarma -do- TR145832088 **0180 810 3020003108 20,000  
 Total amount credited in wrong bank account  3,62,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 284 
Appendix 3.2.9 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on Web 
Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactiv 
e beneficiary ( ₹) 
1 TR144378550 Shameshwar 
Chakma Dhalai 002812060001917 12 Yes 24,000 
 
2 TR144250916 Raramati Reang Dhalai 002812060001917  13 No  
3 TR144095758 Bishwajit 
Debbrama Dhalai 005912060000055 9 Yes 18,000 
 
4 TR224434988 Ramba Bati Reang Dhalai 0059120600000 55 12 No  
5 TR261856462 Dibana Tripura Dhalai 28320110015742 2 Yes 4,000  
6 TR144102184 Smt Sabita Reang Dhalai 2832011001574 2 7 No  
7 TR288719780 Samsera Begum Sepahijala 000011830931 499 2 Yes 4,000  
8 TR288720468 Subham Biswas Sepahijala 000118309314 99 7 Yes 14,000  
9 TR288719630 Som Murmu Sepahijala 011830931499 2 Y es 4,000  
10 TR288720471 Thetan Baske Sepahijala 001183093149 9 2 Yes 4,000  
11 TR224366233 Narayan Ch. Das Khowai 1372010172509  10 Yes 20,000  
12 TR154604859 Dipak Das Khowai 1372010172509 11 Ye s 22,000  
13 TR124952856 Gopal Yadab North Tripura 1098771722 6 7 No  
14 TR124935443 Rina Malakar North Tripura 109877172 26 3 Yes 6,000  
15 TR144364473 Dwijendra Chandra 
Nath North Tripura 000612060006549 13 No 
 
16 TR226396468 Dwigendra Kumar 
Debnath North Tripura 612060006549 5 Yes 10,000 
 
17 TR211741027 Fulajan Bibi North Tripura 000612061 115611 3 No  
18 TR225929603 Fuljan Bibi North Tripura 0006120611 15611 3 Yes 6,000  
19 TR288632487 Arsad Ali Gomati 000036026591054 1 Y es 2,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 285 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on Web 
Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
20 TR288634729 Arsad Ali Gomati 0000036026591054 1 Yes 2,000  
21 TR288631830 Arsad Ali Gomati 36026591054 7 Yes 1 4,000  
22 TR288633348 Arsad Ali Gomati 00036026591054 1 Ye s 2,000  
23 TR288631832 Arsad Ali Gomati 036026591054 1 Yes 2,000  
24 TR288632488 Arsad Ali Gomati 00000036026591054 4  Yes 8,000  
25 TR288631831 Arsad Ali Gomati 0036026591054 1 Yes  2,000  
26 TR288680587 Gulesa Gomati 000036546833048 5 Yes 10,000  
27 TR288684019 Gulesa Gomati 00036546833048 4 Yes 8 ,000  
28 TR288684326 Gulesa Gomati 0036546833048 4 Yes 8, 000  
29 TR288684020 Gulesa Das Gomati 00000036546833048 1 Yes 2,000  
30 TR288680588 Gulesa Gomati 036546833048 4 Yes 8,0 00  
31 TR288676381 Gulesa Khatun Gomati 000003654683304 8 4 Yes 8,000  
32 TR288634725 Anita Singha Gomati 0036220910445 1 Yes 2,000  
33 TR288634726 Anita Singha Gomati 00036220910445 1  Yes 2,000  
34 TR288632484 Anita Singha Gomati 036220910445 4 Y es 8,000  
35 TR288631767 Anita Singha Gomati 0000036220910445  1 Yes 2,000  
36 TR288635533 Anita Singha Gomati 0000003622091044 5 4 Yes 8,000  
37 TR288613890 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 036407302573 1 Yes 2,000  
38 TR288613891 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 00036407302573 1 Yes 2,000  
39 TR288615733 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 000000364073025 73 4 Yes 8,000  
40 TR288615596 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 000036407302573  1 Yes 2,000  
41 TR288614684 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 36407302573 4 Y es 8,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 286 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on Web 
Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
42 TR288615643 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 0036407302573 4  Yes 8,000  
43 TR288684091 Golai Singha Gomati 038708519216 4 Y es 8,000  
44 TR288684082 Anjuna Khatun Gomati 000000387085192 16 1 Yes 2,000  
45 TR288676337 Chanu Singha Gomati 0000038708519216  5 Yes 10,000  
46 TR288684093 Gopal Singha Gomati 00038708519216 4  Yes 8,000  
47 TR288684012 Dulal Singha Gomati 0038708519216 1 Yes 2,000  
48 TR288676254 Anwar Gomati 000037543662566 1 Yes 2 ,000  
49 TR288676255 Anwor Alam Gomati 037543662566 4 Yes  8,000  
50 TR288683944 Anwor Hosen Gomati 0000037543662566 4 Yes 8,000  
51 TR288680551 Anwor Ali Gomati 0037543662566 4 Yes  8,000  
52 TR288684042 Anwor Hosen Gomati 00037543662566 4 Yes 8,000  
53 TR288615732 Anika Roy Gomati 039536940684 1 Yes 2,000  
54 TR288613893 Asmita Roy Gomati 0039536940684 1 Ye s 2000  
55 TR288613884 Agrina Roy Gomati 000039536940684 1 Yes 2,000  
56 TR288613895 Asusant Roy Gomati 00039536940684 1 Yes 2,000  
57 TR288613894 Asmitarl Roy Gomati 0000003953694068 4 1 Yes 2,000  
58 TR288614685 Asmira Roy Gomati 00000035254278751 1 Yes 2,000  
59 TR288614683 Aligum Begum Gomati 0035254278751 1 Yes 2,000  
60 TR288612292 Anjuma Begum Gomati 0000035254278751  1 Yes 2,000  
61 TR288612289 Agnian Begum Gomati 035254278751 1 Y es 2,000  
62 TR288680584 Firoz Gandhi Gomati 0000003593146759 2 4 Yes 8,000  
63 TR288676388 Jahar Ali Gomati 035931467592 7 Yes 14,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 287 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on 
Web Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
64 TR288683969 Bhutku Singha Gomati 00035931467592 7 Yes 14,000  
65 TR288613892 Asdikal Mandal Gomati 00000037008680 449 1 Yes 2,000  
66 TR288615593 Afrinal Mandal Gomati 00003700868044 9 1 Yes 2,000  
67 TR288615730 Adrasal Mandal Gomati 0037008680449 1 Yes 2,000  
68 TR288612291 Alkitar Mandal Gomati 00000370086804 49 1 Yes 2,000  
69 TR288676333 Bisho Khatun Gomati 000039439536750 1 Yes 2,000  
70 TR288676332 Bisho Ghosh Gomati 00039439536750 4 Yes 8,000  
71 TR288680558 Bisho Bibi Gomati 00000039439536750 1 Yes 2,000  
72 TR288684285 Bisho Begum Gomati 0000039439536750 4 Yes 8,000  
73 TR288684057 Injila Khatun Gomati 00035916759991 1 Yes 2,000  
74 TR288684104 Injila Khatun Gomati 000035916759991  1 Yes 2,000  
75 TR288684336 Injila Bibi Gomati 00000035916759991  1 Yes 2,000  
76 TR288684335 Injila Begum Gomati 0000035916759991  4 Yes 8,000  
77 TR288635858 Jalima Khatun Gomati 0035652983828 1  Yes 2,000  
78 TR288615651 Gaji Nesa Gomati 00035652983828 1 Ye s 2,000  
79 TR288615823 Gani Hali Gomati 035652983828 1 Yes 2,000  
80 TR288632969 Jhari Nesa Gomati 0000035652983828 1  Yes 2,000  
81 TR288684327 Hafij Uddin Gomati 00036160362926 1 Yes 2,000  
82 TR288684371 Jasian Begum Gomati 0036160362926 1 Yes 2,000  
83 TR288680623 Kalima Khatun Gomati 000036160362926  1 Yes 2,000  
84 TR288684292 Faraj Md Gomati 036160362926 1 Yes 2 ,000  
85 TR288633356 Damij Uddin Gomati 00000032744330184  1 Yes 2,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 288 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on 
Web Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
86 TR288633420 Dilip Das Gomati 0000032744330184 5 Yes 10,000  
87 TR288676406 Jahidul Gomati 00000034959259984 7 Y es 14,000  
88 TR288684330 Hasibul Rahaman Gomati 0000349592599 84 7 Yes 14,000  
89 TR288684193 Amila Khatun Gomati 0034959259984 7 Yes 14,000  
90 TR288632489 Asakalu Singha Gomati 00000382870257 76 7 Yes 14,000  
91 TR288634745 Gopen Das Gomati 00038287025776 1 Ye s 2,000  
92 TR288633354 Bikas Singha Gomati 038287025776 1 Y es 2,000  
93 TR288684109 Jaki Alam Gomati 000037987986722 5 Y es 10,000  
94 TR288684060 Jaina l Haque Gomati 0037987986722 4  Yes 8,000  
95 TR288684090 Gariman Nesha Gomati 000000379879867 22 1 Yes 2,000  
96 TR288684370 Janki Pal Gomati 000037988351214 7 Y es 14,000  
97 TR288683964 Avinash Kumar Gomati 0037988351214 4  Yes 8,000  
98 TR288680541 Anik Singha Gomati 0035945859298 7 Y es 14,000  
99 TR288684005 Anil Ch. Singha Gomati 035945859298 7 Yes 14,000  
100 TR288676329 Bikash Pal Gomati 0000035945859298 7 Yes 14,000  
101 TR288680544 Anit Singha Gomati 035874511943 7 Y es 14,000  
102 TR288684016 Gopali Singha Gomati 00000358745119 43 1 Yes 2,000  
103 TR288676557 Kalpita Singha Gomati 0000003587451 1943 4 Yes 8,000  
104 TR288684282 Bhamal Singha Gomati 00000036061894 852 1 Yes 2,000  
105 TR288684049 Baburam Singha Gomati 0000036061894 852 1 Yes 2,000  
106 TR288684094 Gopali Singh Gomati 000003650013303 7 4 Yes 8,000  
107 TR288684056 Holika Debnath Gomati 0000003650013 3037 4 Yes 8,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 289 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on 
Web Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
108 TR288684434 Jyotish Ch. Singha Gomati 000031533 012613 6 Yes 12,000  
109 TR288632527 Dhiren Sharma Gomati 00000315330126 13 1 Yes 2,000  
110 TR288631835 Ataur Rahaman Gomati 00000326112101 90 1 Yes 2,000  
111 TR288633351 Ataur Rahaman Gomati 00032611210190  6 Yes 12,000  
112 TR288680583 Fesi Ahammed Gomati 36069586974 7 Y es 14,000  
113 TR288684211 Kafiluddin Gomati 0000036069586974 7 Yes 14,000  
114 TR288680594 Hamidul Rahaman Gomati 000375910061 30 1 Yes 2,000  
115 TR288680534 Ajima Khatun Gomati 000003759100613 0 7 No  
116 TR288613950 Ganga Hemram Gomati 000003864302989 1 4 Yes 8,000  
117 TR288614688 Dipu Hemram Gomati 0000003864302989 1 4 Yes 8,000  
118 TR288676385 Intajul Haque Gomati 00003500917768 4 6 Yes 12,000  
119 TR288684059 Islam Uddin Gomati 0035009177684 1 Yes 2,000  
120 TR288683978 Dalkhua Asiruddin Gomati 0038518263 734 7 Yes 14,000  
121 TR288680593 Hamid Raza Gomati 000038518263734 1  Yes 2,000  
122 TR288684004 Anand Kr. Sah Gomati 00037028644996  1 Yes 2,000  
123 TR288684238 Arbind Kumar Gomati 000037028644996  7 Yes 14,000  
124 TR288683936 Alo Davi Singha Gomati 032744714660  1 Yes 2,000  
125 TR288676250 Alo Davi Singha Gomati 003274471466 0 5 Yes 10,000  
126 TR241067755 Jalin Mala Tripura Gomati 004312060 002202 12 No  
127 TR193406240 Atindra Tripura Gomati 004312060002 202 11 Yes 22,000  
128 TR288631766 Alpan Gomati 036020246514 5 Yes 10, 000  
129 TR288635532 Alpan Gomati 36020246514 4 Yes 8,00 0  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 290 
Appendix 3.2.9 (contd…) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on 
Web Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
130 TR288631842 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 036934673413 4 Yes 8,000  
131 TR288633357 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 0003693467341 3 1 Yes 2,000  
132 TR288633358 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 0036934673413  4 Yes 8,000  
133 TR288632529 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 0000369346734 13 1 Yes 2,000  
134 TR288635780 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 36934673413 4  Yes 8,000  
135 TR288632528 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 0000036934673 413 4 Yes 8,000  
136 TR288635781 Dhoda Mahammad Gomati 0000003693467 3413 4 Yes 8,000  
137 TR288676265 Bapi Singha Gomati 0000034902197987  4 Yes 8,000  
138 TR288684053 Bapi Singha Gomati 034902197987 1 Y es 2,000  
139 TR288683999 Aditya Singha Gomati 00034902197987  4 Yes 8,000  
140 TR288684089 ganiju minj Gomati 000037190476044 1 Yes 2,000  
141 TR288684051 badirna mnj Gomati 00037190476044 1  Yes 2,000  
142 TR288676408 janiha minj Gomati 037190476044 1 Y es 2000  
143 TR288680556 Basida Khatun Gomati 036311971190 1  Yes 2,000  
144 TR288684435 Jyotish Ch. Singha Gomati 000363119 71190 1 Yes 2,000  
145 TR288632070 Idrish Alam Gomati 0000032549234325  7 Yes 14,000  
146 TR288614681 Ala Uddin Gomati 000032549234325 7 Yes 14,000  
147 TR288684015 Ganu Banu Gomati 0000036308064039 4  Yes 8,000  
148 TR288684023 Hali Md Gomati 00000036308064039 4 Yes 8,000  
149 TR288680540 anesul kadri Gomati 000039324209430  1 Yes 2,000  
150 TR288684172 ajad Gomati 0039324209430 1 Yes 2,0 00  
151 TR288613883 Afsana Gomati 00038797813224 4 Yes 8,000  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 291 
Appendix 3.2.9 (concld.) 
Groups of beneficiaries holding same bank account number vis-à-vis disbursement of instalment (as of March 2023) 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.6(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Reg. No Farmer Name District Bank Account No. 
No. of 
instalment 
disbursed 
Rejected or Ineligible 
as per Beneficiary 
Status Report on 
Web Portal 
Irregular 
disbursement to 
Ineligible/Inactive 
beneficiary ( ₹) 
152 TR288348214 Ful Banu Gomati 0038797813224 4 Yes  8,000  
153 TR288676262 Babul Sharma Gomati 0033143857377 7  Yes 14,000  
154 TR288680554 Babita Sharma Gomati 00033143857377  7 No  
155 TR211839107 Sandhya Rani 
Jamatia Gomati 004212060004137 10 Yes 20,000 
 
156 TR224435573 Dayal Sadhan 
Jamatia Gomati 004212060004137 10 Yes 20,000 
 
157 TR288632491 Ashiya Khatun Gomati 00000340186584 25 4 Yes 8,000  
158 TR288635535 Ashiya Khatun Gomati 00003401865842 5 4 Yes 8,000  
159 TR289220165 Ayasa Parbin Gomati 32466040593 7 N o  
160 TR289221398 Sahadath Hossain Gomati 32466040593  1 Yes 2,000  
161 TR289221324 Md Sajid Gomati 35131914347 1 Yes 2 ,000  
162 TR289221333 Niranjan Pal Gomati 35131914347 1 Y es 2,000  
163 TR289223134 Khatuna Begum Gomati 35949218603 1 Yes 2,000  
164 TR289223834 Khatun Gomati 35949218603 1 Yes 2,0 00  
165 TR144255349 Sarpa Laxmi 
Tripura South Tripura 003912060009449 13 No 
 
166 TR144133379 Sadhan kumar 
Tripura South Tripura 003912060009449 13 Yes 26,000 
 
167 TR179347257 Bhairab Sing 
Reang South Tripura 663902010000015 13 Yes 26,000 
 
168 TR179348181 Bipa Ray Reang South Tripura 663902 010000015 13 No  
169 TR117701517 Mukta Dhan 
Murasing South Tripura 663902010000015 13 No 
 
 Total 10,80,000  
 Source:  Database furnished by the SNO and Web Portal 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 292 
Appendix 3.2.10 
Disbursement of excess payment to different newspaper agencies   
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2.12) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the agency Category 
Admissible 
amount to be 
paid 
Amount paid Excess paid 
1 Ajker Fariad B 37,664  52,164  14,490  
2 Bartaman Tripura B 41,633  55,755  14,123  
3 Daily Desher Katha B 1,09,610  1,85,493  75,884  
4 Dainik Ganadoot B 55,010  76,167  21,158  
5 Dainik Sambad A 1,19,543  1,75,329  55,682  
6 Ganasambad Patrika B 51,188  67,500  16,313  
7 Jagaran B 63,473  86,940  23,468  
8 Manush Patrika B 74,393  1,03,005  28,613  
9 Pragati Sambad B 55,801  77,263  21,462  
10 Syandan Patrika A 1,81,965  2,67,036  85,071  
11 Tripura Darpan B 52,553  72,765  20,213  
12 Tripura Observer B 1,06,880  1,47,987  41,108  
13 Tripura Times B 78,488  1,08,675  30,188  
14 Vivek B 54600  72,000  17,400  
Total 1,08,2801  1,54,8079  4,65,173  
Source:  Information furnished by SNO 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 293 
Appendix 3.3.1 
List of Sand Block IDs issued in the Unakoti District beyond the District Survey Report 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.3) 
Sl. 
No. 
Forest 
Department’s. 
Sl. No. 
Block ID 
Number 
Project Proponent 
name Mouza name SDFO/ WLW 
Date of 
approval by 
the PCCF 
1 F/SM/33/19 UNA-53 Sanjay Paul Purba Ratachhara Ku marghat 24-09-2019 
2 F/SM/12/19 UNA-54 Dibakar Chakraborty Manu Kumarg hat 24-09-2019 
3 F/SM/15/19 UNA-55 Rahul Das Pabiachara Kumarghat 24-09-2019 
4 F/SM/16/19 UNA-56 Debashis Datta Paschim Ratachar a Kumarghat 24-09-2019 
5 F/SM/13/19 UNA-57 Nalini Kanta Das Pabiachara Kum arghat 24-09-2019 
6 F/SM/14/19 UNA-58 Masebbir Ali Sarada Chara Kumar ghat 24-09-2019 
7 F/SM/58/19 UNA-60 Jamal Khan Dhanbilash Kailashah ar 02-11-2019 
8 F/SM/57/19 UNA-61 Tasid Ali Dhanbilash Kailashaha r 02-11-2019 
9 F/SM/60/19 UNA-63 Subadhan Debbarma Fultali Kaila shahar 02-11-2019 
10 F/SM/61/19 UNA-64 Biswajit Debnath 
(Unit-I) Kamrangabari Kailashahar 02-11-2019 
11 F/SM/62/19 UNA-65 Gourab Sinha Radhanagar Kailas hahar 02-11-2019 
12 F/SM/206/20 UNA-67 Bidyut Roy Dhanichara Kumargh at 19-12-2020 
13 F/SM/231/21 UNA-67 Usha Rani Das Pabiachara Kuma rghat 02-03-2021 
14 F/SM/175/20 UNA-69 Bipul Bhattacharjee PurbaRata chhara Kumarghat 08-12-2020 
15 F/SM/203/20 UNA-70 Sourav Shil Halai Cherra Kail ashahar 19-12-2020 
16 F/SM/207/20 UNA-71 Ananta Nama Chhantail Kailash ahar 19-12-2020 
17 F/SM/204/20 UNA-72 Ramekbal Goyala Samrurpar Kai lashahar 19-12-2020 
18 F/SM/205/20 UNA-73 Ajit Deb Manu Valley Kailasha har 19-12-2020 
19 F/SM/258/21 UNA-76 Narayan Sarkar Halaichara Kai lashahar 10-05-2021 
20 F/SM/230/21 UNA-77 Fuzail Ahamed Kailashahar Kai lashahar 02-03-2021 
21 F/SM/273/21 UNA-78 Sanku Dey Chantail Kailashaha r 24-06-2021 
22 F/SM/323/22 UNA-82 Parindra Debnath Kumarghat Ku marghat 18-07-2022 
23 F/SM/306/22 UNA-83 Biswajit Sinha Chantail Kaila shahar 11-04-2022 
24 F/SM/307/22 UNA-84 Parijat Singha Bilashpur Kail ashahar 11-04-2022 
25 F/SM/305/22 UNA-85 Aminul Haque & 
others Chantail Kailashahar 11-04-2022 
26 F/SM/341/22 UNA-86 Sabita Das (Dey) Saidabari Ku marghat 10-11-2022 
27 F/SM/320/22 UNA-87 Sajal Debnath & 
Akamad Ali PurbaRatacherra Kumarghat 27-06-2022 
28 F/SM/309/22 UNA-89 Dipu Rani Debbarma Dhanbilash  Kailashahar 11-04-2022 
29 F/SM/310/22 UNA-90 Suhael Ahmed 
Choudhury Chantail Kailashahar 11-04-2022 
30 F/SM/308/22 UNA-91 Bikash Sawachi Chantail Kaila shahar 11-04-2022 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 294 
Appendix 3.3.2 
Loss of revenue due to illegal sand mining 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sampled 
district 
Name of 
the Sub-
Division 
under the 
District 
Location of illegal sand mining 
Approx. 
quantity of 
sand found 
at site (in 
cum) 
Rate 
of 
royalty 
per 
cum 
(in ₹) 
Loss of 
royalty 
(in ₹) 
1 Unakoti  Kumarghat Indira Colony, near School 
Playground, Fatikroy, Kumarghat 500 
85.26 
42,630 
 
2 Unakoti  Kailashahar 
Near approved sand mining site of 
Parijat Singha, Bilaspur Gournagar 
Kailashahar 
400 34,104 
 
3 Unakoti  Kailashahar 
Near the approved sand mining site 
of Jail Singh Debbarma, 
Panchamnagar, Chandipur, 
Kailashahar 
350 29,841 
 
4 Unakoti  Kailashahar 
Near approved sand mining site of 
Jail Sing Debbarma, Panchamnagar, 
Chandipur, Kailashahar 
300 25,578 
 
5 Unakoti  Kailashahar Near Kamranga Bari Bridge at 
Chaintail, Chandipur, Kailashahar 600 51,156 
 
6 South 
Tripura  
Trishna 
WLS  
Abhaya Range of Trishna Wildlife 
Sanctuary (WLS) 700 59,682 
 
7 South 
Tripura  Bagafa  Santirbazar under Bagafa Range 3,500 2,98,4 10 
 
8 South 
Tripura  Bagafa  Near Madhaya Pilak High School 
under Joliabira Kakulia Range 2,000 1,70,520 
 
9 South 
Tripura  Bagafa  Kakulia Range 200 17,052 
 
10 South 
Tripura  Sabroom  Paschim Ludhua under Satchand 
Range 500  42,630 
 
Total 7,71,603  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 295 
Appendix 3.3.3 
Details of illegal sand mining sites found during joint physical verification under two selected districts and their Google Earth images 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No 
Location of Illegal 
Sand Mining with 
GPS Coordinates 
Google Earth Pictures Picture during Physical 
Verification 
Period of illegal 
sand mining. 
1 
Photograph 1 : Indira 
Colony, near School 
Playground, Fatikroy, 
Kumarghat, Unakoti, 
500 cum 
*LA-24.184602 
**LO-92.026275 
 
December 2021 
 
February 2022 
 
June 2023 
December 2021 to June 2023 
2 
Photograph 2 : Near 
approved sand mining 
site of Parijat Singha, 
Bilaspur, Gournagar, 
Kailashahar, Unakoti, 
400 cum 
LA-24.267243 
LO-92.025011 
 
December 2018 November 2021 
 
July 2023 
July 2023 


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 296 
Appendix 3.3.3 (contd.) 
Details of illegal sand mining sites found during joint physical verification under two selected districts and their Google Earth images 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No 
Location of Illegal 
Sand Mining with 
GPS Coordinates 
Google Earth images Picture during Physical 
Verification 
Period of illegal 
sand mining. 
3 
Photograph 3 : Near 
approved sand mining 
site of Jail Sing 
Debbarma, 
Panchamnagar, 
Chandipur, 
Kailashahar, Unakoti, 
350 cum 
LA-24.216005 
LO-91.986051  
December 2021 
 
November 2022 
 
July 2023 
December 2021 to July 2023 
4 
Photograph 4 : Near 
the approved sand 
mining site of Jail 
Singh Debbarma, 
Panchamnagar, 
Chandipur, 
Kailashahar, Unakoti, 
300 cum 
LA -24.216514 
LO-91.986382 
 
December 2016 
 
November 2022 
 
July 2023 
December 2016 to July 2023 


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 297 
Appendix 3.3.3 (contd.) 
Details of illegal sand mining sites found during joint physical verification under two selected districts and their Google Earth images 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No 
Location of Illegal 
Sand Mining with 
GPS Coordinates 
Google Earth images Picture during Physical 
Verification 
Period of 
illegal sand 
mining. 
5 
Photograph 5:  Near 
Kamranga Bari bridge 
at Chaintail, 
Chandipur, 
Kailashahar, Unakoti, 
600  cum 
LA-24.30436 
LO-92.011862 
Not available Not available 
 
July 2023 
July 2023 
6 
Photograph 6 : Illegal 
Sand Mining site under 
Abhaya Range of 
Trishna WLS, Trishna, 
South Tripura District, 
700 Cum 
LA-23.255893 
LO-91.488564 
 
 
February 2022 
 
December 2022 
 
October 2023 
February 2022 to October 2023 


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 298 
Appendix 3.3.3 (contd.) 
Details of illegal sand mining sites found during joint physical verification under two selected districts and their Google Earth images 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Location of Illegal 
Sand Mining with 
GPS Coordinates 
Google Earth images Picture during Physical 
Verification 
Period of illegal 
sand mining. 
7 
Photograph 7:  
Santibazar of Bagafa 
Range under SDFO, 
Bagafa, South 
Tripura, 3500 cum 
LA-
23.297660 
LO-91.558794 
 
January 2022 
 
December 2022 
 
September 2023 
January 2022 to September 2023 
8 
Photograph 8: 
Kakulia Range under 
SDFO, Bagafa, South 
Tripura, 200 cum 
LA -
23.238957 
LO-91.627383 
 
February 2020 
 
February 2022 
 
September 2023 
February 2022 to September 
2023 


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 299 
Appendix 3.3.3 (concld.) 
Details of illegal sand mining sites found during joint physical verification under two selected districts and their Google Earth images 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.6.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Location of Illegal 
Sand Mining with 
GPS Coordinates 
Google Earth images Picture during Physical 
Verification 
Period of 
illegal sand 
mining. 
9 
Photograph 9:  Near 
Madhya Pilak High 
School under, 
Joliabari, Kakulia 
Range under SDFO, 
Bagafa, South 
Tripura, 2000 cum 
LA -
23.214217 
LO-91.584597 
 
November 2018 
 
January 2022 
 
September 2023 
November 2018 to September 
2023 
10 
Photograph 10 : 
Paschim Ludhua of 
Satchand Range 
under SDFO 
Sabroom, South 
Tripura, 500 cum 
LA-23.053134 
LO-91.731576 
 
February 2016 
 
February 2022 
 
October 2023 
February 2016 to October 
2023 
*LA: Latitude**LO: Longitude 


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 300 
Appendix 3.3.4 
Statement showing status of observance of TMMC Rules and EC/ sand mining plan 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.3.6.5(iv), 3.3.6.5(vi), 3.3.7.1, 3.3.7.2, 3.3.7.3 ) 
(Percentage to the total sand mining sites shown in parenthesis ) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
South Tripura District Unakoti District 
No. of sand 
mining sites 
visited 
Yes  No  Partially  
No. of sand 
mining 
sites visited 
Yes No Partially  
1 
Whether Area of sand mining was demarcated with pil lar or 
boundary marks (as per terms and conditions of EC and TMMC 
Rules, 2014) 
32 30 
(93.75) 
2 
(6.25) 
0 
(0.00) 24 16 
(66.66) 
8 
(33.33) 
0 
(0.00) 
2 Whether machineries were used for extraction of san d (as per 
approved sand mining plan) 32 32 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 
0 
(0.00) 24 22 
(91.66) 
2 
(8.33) 
0 
(0.00) 
3 
Whether the lessee has submitted the monthly return (in Form -
H) on minerals raised to the PCCF/DFO/CCF, as the ca se may 
be, by 15 th  Day of the following month (as per Rule 41(3) of 
TMMC Rules, 2014) 
32 31 
(96.88) 
1 
(3.12) 
0 
(0.00) 24 0 
(0.00) 
24 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 
4 
Whether the lease has submitted the quarterly royalty statement 
(in Form-I) to the Competent Authority by 15 July, 15 
October, 15 January and 15 April for the preceding quarters 
respectively (as per Rule 16(1)(b) of TMMC Rules, 2014) 
32 31 
(96.88) 
1 
(3.12) 
0 
(0.00) 24 0 
(0.00) 
24 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 
5 
Whether the lease has submitted the annual return o n minerals 
raised, despatched, royalty paid, manpower employed , etc . (in 
Form-J) to the PCCF/DFO/CCF, as the case may be, by the 2 0 
April for the preceding financial year (as per Rule  16(1)(n) of 
Rule TMMC Rules, 2014) 
32 31 
(96.88) 
1 
(3.12) 
0 
(0.00) 24 0 
(0.00) 
24 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 301 
Appendix 3.3.4 (concld.) 
Statement showing status of observance of TMMC Rules and EC/ sand mining plan 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.3.6.5(iv), 3.3.6.5(vi), 3.3.7.1, 3.3.7.2, 3.3.7.3) 
(Percentage to the total sand mining sites shown in parenthesis ) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
South Tripura District Unakoti District 
No. of sand 
mining sites 
visited 
Yes  No  Partially  
No. of sand 
mining 
sites visited 
Yes No Partially 
6 
Whether the proponent submitted half-yearly complia nce 
reports as per terms and conditions stipulated in p rior 
Environmental Clearance in hard and soft copies to the Tripura 
State Pollution Control Board on 1 June and 1 Decem ber of 
each calendar year (as per terms and conditions of EC) 
32 0 
(0.00) 
32 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 24 0 
(0.00) 
24 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 
7 
Whether any date-wise record was maintained by the lessee of 
sand mining to keep correct account of quantity of mineral 
mined out during the year and which is required to be 
produced before Officer-in-Charge of Central/State 
Government for inspection. (as per terms and conditions of EC 
and Rule 16.1 (k) of TMMC Rules, 2014) 
32 15 
(46.87) 
17 
(53.13) 
0 
(0.00) 24 1 
(4.17) 
23 
(95.83) 
0 
(0.00) 
8 
Whether inspection of records maintained by the les see were 
done by any Officer of the Forest Department or Cen tral or 
State Government. (as per terms and conditions of E C and 
Rule 16.1(k) of TMMC Rules, 2014) 
32 0 
(0.00) 
32 
(100) 
0 
(0.00) 24 (0.00) 24 
(100) (0.00) 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 302 
Appendix 3.5.1 
Statement showing recoverable dues from the contractor 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Amount 
1 Total value of work done upto 20 th  RA & Final bill 40,40,26,407  
2 Less – Paid upto 19 th  RA bill 38,82,02,787  
3 Less- Part payment made against 20 th  RA & Final bill of ₹ 1,35,64,129 60,00,000  
4 Total payment made (Sl. No. 2 plus 3) 39,42,02,787  
5 Balance amount to be paid against 20 th  RA & Final bill of ₹ 1,35,64,129 (Sl. 
No. 1 minus 4) 
98,23,620  
 Recoveries to be made from contractor  
6 Departmentally issued steel used and recovery to be made 41,83,292  
7 Departmentally issued unused steel not returned by the contractor (recovery 
to be made at double the issue rate) as calculated by Audit 
39,19,612  
8 Recovery of hiring charges of ADM 240  plant  74,90,340  
9 Recovery against empty bitumen drums  1,85,400  
10 Income Tax @ one per cent  on ₹ 98,23,620 98,236  
11 Labour Cess @ one per cent ₹ 98,23,620 98,236  
12 CGST and SGST @ two per cent  on ₹ 98,23,620 1,96,472  
 Total recoveries to be made from contractor ( sum  of Sl. No. 6 to 12) 1,61,71,588  
 
                                                           
240  Asphalt Drum Mix Plant 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 303 
Appendix 3.5.2 
Statement showing recoveries to be made by the division against balance unreturned quantity of steel by the contractor 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5) 
Parti-
culars  
Quantity of steel used as calculated by Audit (in MT)  Calculation shown by the Division 
(in MT)  
Quantity 
lying with 
contractor 
as 
calculated 
by audit 
(in MT)  
Money 
value 
involved 
(in ₹) 
Retain-
ing wall 
Road-
side 
drain 
CD & Under pass 
Covered 
car 
parking 
Boundary 
wall Total 
Allowable 
wastage of 
5 per cent  
Grand 
total 
Quantity 
issued 
(in MT)  
Quantity 
used 
(in MT)  
Quantity 
lying with 
contractor 
(in MT)  
AI No. 6 9 4 7 12 5 5  --  -- --   -- --  --  --  --  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11 (9+10)  12 13 14 15 (12-11) 16 
20 mm to 32 mm  
32 mm 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 16.393  0.000 16.393 0.820 17.213 16.505  
193.493  
0.000 
8.955 8.955 x 
₹ 36,779 
28 mm 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.511  0.000 0.511 0.026 0.537 0.745  0.000 
25 mm 16.244  0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 16.244 0.812 17 .056 20.150  2.282  
20 mm 93.182  2.398  0.000 23.441  19.481  5.654  0.620  144.776 7.239 152.015 158.375  0.000 
Total 109.426 2.398   23.441 19.481 22.558 0.620 177.924 8.896 186.820 195.775 193.493 2.282 8.955 658711.89 
8 mm to 16 mm  
16 mm 40.409 5.707 2.201 52.368 26.739 6.914 4.086 138.424 6.921 145.345 156.983 
766.154  
4.785  
44.206 44.206 x 
₹ 36,883 
12 mm 127.755  83.739  18.939  24.478  15.349  5.530  46.923  322.713 16.136 338.849 356.180  1.196  
10 mm 66.901  42.923  16.133  8.777  8.413  11.713  15.804  170.664 8.533 179.197 184.810  0.000 
8 mm 2.022  1.980  12.794  7.358  3.236  9.575  30.455  67.420 3.371 70.791 80.415  6.253 
Total 237.087 134.349 50.067 92.981 53.737 33.732 97.268 699.221 34.961 734.182 778.388 766.154 12.234 44.206 3260899.80 
Grand 
total 346.513 136.747 50.067 116.422 73.218 56.290 97.888 877.145 43.857 921.002 974.163 959.647 14.516 53.161 3919611.69 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 304 
Appendix 4.1.1  
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2023 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Sector / name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employ 
ed* 
Return 
on capital 
employed 
Percentag 
e return 
on capital 
employed 
# 
Manpo 
wer 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
A. Working Government Companies                       
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED                         
1 Tripura Forest 
Development & 
Plantation 
Corporation 
Limited 
2020-21 2022-23 9.20 0.00 108.93 0.00 43.13 -0.02 0 .00 118.13 -0.22 -0.19 139 
2 Tripura 
Horticulture 
Corporation 
Limited 
2015-16 2020-21 4.74 0.00 -3.85 0.00 41.28 -0.08 4. 41 0.89 -0.08 -8.99 54 
3 Tripura Tea 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
2021-22 2023-24 58.15 0.00 -29.14 0.00 12.18 -2.25 0.00 29.01 -2.25 -7.76 845 
4 Tripura 
Rehabilitation 
Plantation 
Corporation 
Limited 
2020-21 2023-24 8.85 0.00 1.78 0.00 18.69 -4.22 0.2 2 10.63 -4.22 -39.70 131 
Sector wise total   80.94 0.00 77.72 0.00 115.28 -6.57 4.63 158.66 -6.77 -4.27 1169.00 
FINANCING                           
5 Tripura Industrial 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2021-22 2023-24 16.17 128.41 -27.04 0.00 6.89 -1.67  47.36 117.54 -1.38 -1.17 47 
Sector wise total   16.17 128.41 -27.04 0.00 6.89 -1.67 47.36 117.54 -1.38 -1.17 47 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 305 
Appendix 4.1.1 (contd.)  
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2023 
(Reference: paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Sector / name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employ 
ed* 
Return 
on capital 
employed 
Percentag 
e return 
on capital 
employed 
# 
Manpo 
wer 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
MANUFACTURING                         
6 Tripura Jute Mills 
Limited  
2021-22 2022-23 398.23 1.05 -390.97 0.00 0.24 -16.0 3 44.20 8.31 -16.03 -192.90 121 
7 Tripura Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
Limited  
2018-19 2022-23 67.62 0.21 -62.48 0.00 8.13 -7.98 0 .07 5.35 -7.98 -149.16 71 
Sector wise total   465.85 1.26 -453.45 0.00 8.37 -24.01 44.27 13.66 -24.01 -175.77 192 
POWER                           
8 Tripura State 
Electricity 
Corporation 
Limited  
2022-23 2023-24 665.76 798.83 -803.57 61.07 1671.15  -284.33 7.07 722.09 -260.35 -36.06 3057 
9 Tripura Power 
Generation Limited 
2022-23 2023-24 0.10 0.00 -0.02 0.00 0.00 -0.01 0.0 0 0.08 -0.01 -12.50 0 
Sector wise total   665.86 798.83 -803.59 61.07 1671.15 -284.34 7.07 722.17 -260.36 -36.05 3057 
SERVICES                           
10 Tripura Handloom 
and Handicrafts 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
2021-22 2023-24 176.15 4.27 -158.38 0.00 5.66 -4.37  8.05 22.04 -4.37 -19.83 147 
11 Tripura Urban 
Transport 
Company Limited  
2021-22 2023-24 0.90 0.00 2.06 0.00 0.26 0.02 0.00 2.96 0.03 1.01 1 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 306 
Appendix 4.1.1 (contd.)  
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2023 
(Reference: paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Sector / name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnove 
r 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employe 
d* 
Return 
on capital 
employed 
Percentag 
e return 
on capital 
employed 
# 
Manpo 
wer 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
12 Tripura Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2021-22 2023-24 13.67 0.00 -1.72 0.00 4.50 0.35 0.0 0 11.95 0.39 3.26 65 
13 Agartala Smart 
City Limited 
2021-22 2023-24 0.10 0.00 -0.24 0.00 0.00 -0.07 0.0 0 -0.14 -0.07 Not 
workable 
28 
Sector wise total   190.82 4.27 -158.28 0.00 10.42 -4.07 8.05 36.81 -4.02 -10.92 241 
MISCELLANEOUS                         
14 Tripura Natural 
Gas Company 
Limited 
2022-23 2023-24 30.00 0.12 167.11 0.00 263.59 20.25  0.00 197.23 30.98 15.71 16 
Sector wise total   30.00 0.12 167.11 0.00 263.59 20.25 0.00 197.23 30.98 15.71 16 
Total A (All sector wise working 
Government companies) 
  1449.64 932.89 -1197.53 61.07 2075.70 -300.41 111.38 1246.07 -265.56 -21.31 4722 
B. Working Statutory corporation                       
SERVICES                           
1 Tripura Road 
Transport 
Corporation 
2019-20 2022-23 163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
149 
Sector wise total   163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
149 
Total B (All sector wise working 
Statutory Corporation) 
  163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
149 
Grand Total (A+B)   1613.60 933.14 -1485.57 61.07 2077.17 -299.89 116.23 1122.24 -265.04 -23.62 4871 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 307 
Appendix 4.1.1 (concld.)  
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2023 
(Reference: paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Sector / name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employ 
ed* 
Return 
on capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed# 
Manp 
ower 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
C. Non working Government companies           
FINANCING                           
1 Tripura State Bank 
Limited 
Non functional and in the process of liquidation. 
Sector wise total   0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Total C (All sector wise non working 
Government company) 
  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Grand Total (A+B+C)   1613.60 933.14 -1485.57 61.07 2077.17 -299.89 116.23 1122.24 -265.04 -23.62 4871 
@ Paid up capital includes ‘share application money pending allotment’. 
*Capital Employed  represents Shareholders’ Fund (Net worth) plus Long Term Borrowings; where, Shareholders’ Fund represents ‘Paid up Share Capital plus Accumulated Profit and Free 
Reserves & Surplus minus Accumulated Loss and Deferred Revenue Expenditure. 
#Percentage of Return on Capital Employed  is calculated by dividing SPSE’s Earnings before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) by the Capital Employed.  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 308 
Appendix -4.1.2  
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.10) 
(₹ in crore)  
Financial 
Year 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the 
beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by the 
State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Interest free 
loan 
converted 
into equity 
during the 
year 
Grants/ 
subsidies 
given by the 
State 
Government 
for 
operational 
and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Disinvestment 
by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average 
rate of 
interest 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover 
cost of 
funds for 
the year 
Total 
earnings/profit 
after tax 
(PAT) for the 
year 
A B C D E F G H I J K= I x 
(1+J/100) 
L= I 
xJ/100 M 
Upto 1999-
2000 0.00 156.02 2.58 0.00 0.00 0.00 158.60 158.60 12.25  178.03 19.43 -10.90 
2000-01 178.03 20.44 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.44 198. 47 10.82 219.95 21.47 -11.00 
2001-02 219.95 25.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 25.33 245. 28 10.35 270.66 25.39 -25.62 
2002-03 270.66 15.53 9.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 24.66 295. 32 7.08 316.22 20.91 -8.52 
2003-04 316.22 18.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 18.35 334. 57 9.92 367.76 33.19 -8.45 
2004-05 367.76 22.99 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 22.99 390. 75 9.17 426.58 35.83 -18.99 
2005-06 426.58 23.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 23.40 449. 98 8.56 488.50 38.52 -19.11 
2006-07 488.50 36.22 11.04 0.00 45.00 0.00 92.26 58 0.76 8.46 629.90 49.13 -16.33 
2007-08 629.90 29.07 4.78 0.00 50.00 0.00 83.85 713 .75 8.27 772.78 59.03 -9.50 
2008-09 772.78 31.13 30.50 0.00 28.06 0.00 89.69 86 2.47 8.00 931.47 69.00 -19.84 
2009-10 931.47 25.79 16.50 0.00 139.56 0.00 181.85 1,113.32 7.98 1,202.16 88.84 -1.97 
2010-11 1,202.16 13.27 0.00 0.00 108.94 0.00 122.21  1,324.37 8.88 1,441.97 117.60 -4.36 
2011-12 1,441.97 27.29 75.85 0.00 64.05 0.00 167.19  1,609.16 8.41 1,744.49 135.33 -104.98 
2012-13 1,744.49 30.94 0.00 0.00 63.43 0.00 94.37 1 ,838.86 8.44 1,994.06 155.20 -103.46 
2013-14 1,994.06 41.27 0.00 0.00 110.09 0.00 151.36  2,145.42 8.53 2,328.43 183.00 -137.51 
2014-15 2,328.43 38.88 12.00 0.00 128.31 0.00 179.1 9 2,507.62 13.18 2,838.12 330.50 -139.06 
2015-16 2,838.12 38.48 0.00 0.00 88.79 0.00 127.27 2,965.39 12.95 3,349.41 384.02 -148.41 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 309 
Appendix 4.1.2 (concld.)  
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.10) 
(₹ in crore)  
Financial 
Year 
Present value 
of total 
investment at 
the beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by the 
State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Interest free 
loan 
converted 
into equity 
during the 
year 
Grants/ 
subsidies 
given by the 
State 
Government 
for 
operational 
and 
administrativ 
e expenditure 
Disinvestmen 
t by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investme 
nt at the 
end of the 
year 
Averag 
e rate of 
interest 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover 
cost of 
funds for 
the year 
Total 
earnings/profit 
after tax 
(PAT) for the 
year 
A B C D E F G H I J K= I x 
(1+J/100) 
L= I 
xJ/100 M 
2016-17 3,349.41 60.74 13.25 0.00 87.28 0.00 161.27  3,510.68 7.50 3,773.98 263.30 -129.39 
2017-18 3,773.98 30.53 0.00 0.00 77.35 0.00 107.88 3,881.86 7.50 4,173.00 291.14 -201.89 
2018-19 4,173.00 34.81 0.00 0.00 70.77 0.00 105.58 4,278.58 7.16 4,584.93 306.35 -218.15 
2019-20 4,584.93 49.89 0.00 0.00 83.82 0.00 133.71 4,718.64 7.89 5,090.94 372.30 -93.57 
2020-21 5,090.94 52.34 0.00 0.00 71.18 0.00 123.52 5,214.46 7.67 5,614.41 399.95 -108.99 
2021-22 5,614.41 46.86 0.00 0.00 120.71 0.00 167.57  5,781.98 7.50 6,215.63 433.65 -141.22 
2022-23 6,215.63 43.15 100.00 0.00 160.70 0.00 303. 85 6,519.48 7.55 7,011.70 492.22 -320.14 
TOTAL             2,686.39           
 
Year Total earnings/ 
loss in 2022-23 
Investment by the State 
Government as per total of the 
column H above 
Return on State 
Government investment on 
the basis of historical value 
Present value of State 
Government investment at 
the end of 2022-23 
Real return on State Government 
investment considering the 
present value of investments 
  A B C D E 
2022-23 -320.14 2,686.39 -11.92 7,011.70 -4.57 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 310 
Appendix 4.2.1  
Statement of Projects selected for detailed audit scrutiny  
(Reference: paragraph 4.2.4) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Project/ Component  Implementing 
Agency (IA)  
Sanctioned 
Cost  Expenditure  
AGARTALA CIRCUIT i.e.   SDS 1.0 Phase-I  
1. Light and Sound show at Ujjayanta 
Palace, Agartala CEO, ASCL 8.29  5.50 241  
 Border Ceremony Facility Project at ICP Akhaura, Ag artala   
2. Conference Block PWD 3.12  
5.44  3. Wayside amenity (cafeteria) PWD 1.40  
4. Open air theatre PWD 2.95  
Sepahijala   
5. Pedal boats and eco-friendly battery-
operated vehicle TTDCL 1.05  0.17  
6. Log huts (10 Nos.) Forest Dept. 4.15  1.00  
Melaghar   
7. Construction of open-air stage/theatre at 
Rajghat 
PWD 1.07  2.02 242  
Udaipur   
8. Log huts (3 Nos.) Forest Dept. 1.24  0.61  
Narikel Kunja   
9. Log huts (16 Nos.) TTDCL 7.05  7.40  
Ambassa   
10. Log huts (3 Nos.) Forest Dept. 1.24  0.62  
Baramura   
11. Log huts (10 Nos.) Forest Dept. 4.15  1.06  
Mandirghat   
12. Procurement of Motorised Speed Boats TTDCL 1.11  0.52  
UNAKOTI CIRCUIT  
1. 
Construction and Development of Tourism 
Infrastructure at Surmacherra, Dhalai 
District, Tripura 
 
L1 Contractor vide 
Tendering process 
 6.72  4.66  
2. 
Construction and Development of Tourism 
infrastructure at Jampui Hills and Highest 
Peak, North District, Tripura 
 
-do- 6.48  0.43  
3. 
Construction and Development of Tourism 
infrastructure at Chottakhola, South 
District, Tripura 
-do- 5.66 
 3.17  
4. 
Construction and Development of Tourism 
infrastructure at Avangcherra, South 
District, Tripura 
-do- 8.61 
 2.17  
                                                           
241  (₹ 5.33 crore + ₹ 0.17 crore)  
242  It involves expenditure on other project component s executed alongwith sampled components by IA at 
Melaghar destination detailed in relevant paragraph of report. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 311 
Appendix 4.2.1 (concld.) 
Statement of Projects selected for detailed audit scrutiny  
(Reference: paragraph 4.2.4) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Project/ Component  Implementing 
Agency (IA)  
Sanctioned 
Cost  Expenditure  
UNAKOTI CIRCUIT  
5. 
Construction and Development of 
Tourism infrastructure at Boxanagar, 
Sepahijala District, Tripura 
-do- 5.58 
 0.57  
6. 
Conservation and Development 
works in ASI protected areas in 
Tripura at Unakoti 
-do- 4.61 
 0.52  
7. 
Conservation and Development 
works in ASI protected areas in 
Tripura at Bhubaneshwari temple, 
Mahadeb Bari, and Pilak site 02  
-do- 1.65 
 0 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 312 
Appendix 4.2.2 
Overall delay in completion of the SDS projects. 
{Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6.2(ii )} 
A.  Statement of delays in the tendering process and delays in completion of the 
projects in respect of Agartala Tourist Circuit under SDS  
Project Name 
Sanctioned 
Project cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Delay in 
entrustment of 
the Project by 
TTDCL 
(in months) 
Delay in 
Tendering 
(in months) 
Delay in 
completion of 
project beyond 
SDS stipulated 
30 months  
(in months) 
Delay in 
completion 
of project 
from the 
Schedule 
date of 
completion 
(in months) 
Light & Sound Show 
Project at Ujjayanta 
Palace 
828.50 44 56 57 9 
Border Ceremony Facility at Akhaura 
Conference Block 312.34 0 5 Incomplete Incomplete 
Wayside Amenity 
(Cafeteria) 140.37 0 5 11 11 
Open Air Theatre 295.01 42 243  42 Incomplete Incomplete 
Development of Sepahijala 
Log Huts- 10 Nos. 
( constructed 5 Nos.) 414.54 6244  6 17 245  36 
Melaghar Destination:  
Open Air Stage/Theatre 
at Rajghat 
107.44 0 8 20 18 
Udaipur Destination 
Log hut (3 Nos.) 124.36 6 6 17 36 
Narikel Kunja 
Destination:  16 Nos. of 
Log Huts 
704.72 - 51 53 246  17 
Ambassa Destination:  
Log Huts (3 Nos.) 124.36 6 6 17 36 
Baramura Destination: 
Log Huts- (10 Nos.)  414.54 6 6 17 36 
                                                           
243  AA & ES dated September 2019 being taken in to consideration for the purpose  
244  Log-Huts were developed internally by the Forest D epartment, GoT. Thus, Work order dated 19 September  
2016 being taken in to consideration. 
245  Proposed Handing over/ Taking over dated 26 Novemb er 2019 being taken in to consideration for the 
computation of delays in Completion of the Log-Hut Projects. 
246  Handing over/ Taking over dated 17 November 2022 b eing taken in to consideration for the computation of 
delays in Completion of the Log-Hut Projects. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 313 
Appendix 4.2.2 (concld.) 
Overall delay in completion of the SDS projects. 
{Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6.2(ii )} 
B.  Statement of delays in the tendering process and delays in respect of the  projects 
under Unakoti Circuit awaiting their completion till October 2023 
Project Name 
Revised 
Project cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Delay in 
Tendering 
process 
(in months) 
Delays beyond 
the SDS 
stipulated 30 
months in r/o 
Projects 
awaiting 
completion 
(in months) 
Delays beyond 
schedule date of 
completion in r/o 
Projects awaiting 
completion 
(in months) 
Surmacherra, Dhalai 
District, Tripura Project 671.80  14 Incomplete  
32 
Incomplete  
21 
Jampui Hills and Highest 
Peak,  North District, 
Tripura Project 
648.12 14 Incomplete  
32 
Incomplete  
23 
Chottakhola,  South 
District, Tripura Project 565.60 14  Incomplete  
32 
Incomplete  
23 
Avangcherra,  South 
District, Tripura Project 860.54 14  Incomplete  
32 
Incomplete  
21 
Boxanagar,  Sepahijala 
District, Tripura Project 557.55 17 Incomplete  
32 
Incomplete  
23 
ASI protected areas in 
Tripura at Unakoti 
Project 
461.05 43 Incomplete  
32 - 
ASI protected areas in 
Tripura at 
Bhubaneshwari temple, 
Mahadeb Bari and Pilak 
site 02  Project 247  
165.33 43 Incomplete  
32 - 
                                                           
247 The said Project has been shifted to the Bandaur Site. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 314 
Appendix 4.2.3 
Component-wise details of projects 
{Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6.2(ii )} 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Details of the 
component 
Sanctioned 
Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Details of the component 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
1. Border Ceremony Facility at Akhaura 
(a) 62.5 KVA DG set  0.06 (g) Site development  0.48 
(b) Conference block  3.12 (h) Site filling   0.42 
(c) Way-side amenities 
(cafeteria):  
1.40 (i) Signage  0.05 
(d) Open Air Theatre 
and/or Covered Gallery 
with barracks  
2.95 (j) Solid water and liquid waste 
management  
0.03 
(e) Toilet block 0.38 (k) Solid waste management  0 .02 
(f) RC Retaining wall  0.34   
2. Development of Sepahijala (Melaghar) 
(a) 1. Two Jetties  0.37, (b) Signage at Neer Mahal  palace   0.05 
  2.Gate 0.06 (c) 1. Site development  0.25 
  3. Open Air 
Stage/Theatre at Rajghat 
 
1.07   2. Ticket Counter & Food Kiosk 
with Toilet  block  
0.63 
  4. Site development  0.25 3. RC Retaining Wall  0 .49 
  5. Souvenir shop  0.17 4. Signage at Neer Mahal ( Access 
point) plus Contingency @ Three 
per cent  i.e . ₹ 10,38,684 
0.05 
  6. Signage at 
Melaghar, 
0.06   
3. Chottakhola, South Tripura District 
(a) Gazebos both for 
Park & Picnic Spot-10 
numbers  
1.00 (g) Welcome gate- 3 numbers  0.40 
(b) Outdoor sitting  0.03 (h) Compound fencing  0.4 1 
(c) Solar illumination  0.41 (i) Angling platform-3  numbers   0.24 
(d) Public convenience-
3 numbers 
0.91 (j) Floating jetty  0.15 
(e) Souvenir shop and 
Cafeteria  
0.99 (k) Pathways 0.64 
(f) Solar powered boats-
5 numbers  
0.47   

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 315 
Appendix 4.2.3 (contd.) 
Component-wise details of projects 
{Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6.2(ii )} 
Sl. 
No. 
Details of the 
component 
Sanctioned 
Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Details of the component 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
4. Avangcherra, South Tripura District 
(a) Tourist facilitation 
centre  
0.83 (i)  Solid waste Management 0.14 
(b) Camping ground 
with infrastructure 
development  
1.16 (j) Crossover bridge  0.40 
(c) Adventure activity 
zone comprising of 
aerial forest walkway 
and high rope course  
2.90 (k) Gazebos -4 numbers  0.80 
(d) Landscaping  0.17 (l) Outdoor sitting arrangeme nt 
with shelter  
0.14 
(e) Parking  0.12 (m) Public convenience - 2 
numbers  
0.36 
(f) Compound fencing 
and Gate  
0.42 (n) Drinking water facility  0.13 
(g) Floating jetty  0.15 (o) Solar powered boat – 5  
numbers  
0.30 
(h) Internal pathway  0.32 (p) Solar illumination  0.27 
5. Avangcherra, South Tripura District 
 
a) Camping ground with 
infrastructure 
development  
1.16 (d) Gate and Floating Jetty  0.17 
 
(b) Adventure activity 
zone comprising of 
aerial forest walkway 
and High Rope course  
2.90 (e) Solar powered boat  0.30 
 (c) Landscaping  0.17 (f) Solar Illumination  0.27 
6. Boxanagar, Sepahijala District 
(a) Tourist Interpretation 
Centre with rest rooms  
1.15 (g) Retaining wall  0.42 
(b) two public 
convenience  
0.36 (h) Solar illumination of pathways 
and ruins  
0.20 
(c) Solid waste 
management  
0.09 (i) Pathway  0.19 
(d) Signage  0.15 (j) Parking  0.46 
(e) Outdoor sitting with 
shelter  
0.11 (k) Landscaping  0.31 
(f) Boundary wall  0.29 (l)  Approach road (1.90 km ) 1.83 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 316 
Appendix 4.2.3 (concld.) 
Component-wise details of projects 
{Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6.2(ii )} 
 
Sl. 
No. Details of the component 
Sanctioned 
Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Details of the component 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
7. ASI Protected areas in Unakoti Project  
(a) Camping ground with 
infrastructure development 
0.95 (i) Barricading of rock relief base 0.39 
(b) cafeteria 0.83  (j) Landscaping 0.25 
(c) visitor centre  0.66 (k) Open Air Theatre  0.77  
(d) Pathways with lookout 
points  
0.47 (l) Entrance Gateway and Security 
Fencing 
0.50 
(e) Public convenience and 
drinking water  
0.29  (m) Parking 0.51 
(f) Solar power station  0.13  (n) Outdoor sitting  0.19 
(g) Solid waste management 0.14 (o) CCTV  0.16 
(h) Signage 0.15 (p) Wayside amenity at Manu 1.48 
8. ASI protected areas in Tripura at Bhubaneshwari temple, Mahadeb Bari and Pilak site -2 Project  
Gunabati Temple 
(a) Parking 
0.39 Pilak 
(a) Signage 
0.07 
(b) Signage 0.07   
Bhubaneshwari Temple 
(a) Parking  
 
0.39 
  
(b) Outdoor Sitting 0.19   
(c) Public Toilet – 2 Nos 0.29   
(d) Signage 0.08   
(e) Landscaping 0.18   
9. Tourism Infrastructure at Jampui Hills & Highest Peak, North Tripura District, Tripura  
Highest Peak 
(a) Integrated Complex with 
Cafe, Toilets and Drinking 
Water 
1.15 
Jampui Hills 
(a) Wayside Amenities – 02 
numbers 
1.94 
(b) Parking, 0.31 (b) Signage  0.08 
(c) Pathways 0.32 (c) Welcome Gate (3 Nos.) at 
Jampui Hills Tourist Destination 
and components 
0.78 
(d) View Point (04 Nos.) 0.51   
(e) Solar Illumination 0.12   
(f) Signage & Welcome Gate 0.05   
(g) Solid Waste Management 0.05   
(h) Approach Road 1.03   
(i) Landscaping 0.12   

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 317 
Appendix 5.2.1 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
1 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AABCR7176C1ZG 31,06 ,575  
2 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AGKPS6915Q1ZH 20,49 ,260  
3 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16ACYPN3961F1Z3 22,93 ,443  
4 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAGCM9000M2ZB 97,63 ,937  
5 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16ACAPR9009C2ZT 81,10 ,711  
6 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACN7335C2ZR 84,45 ,369  
7 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACB8516F1ZX 20,20 ,106  
8 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AABCB5691A1Z0 33,46 ,514  
9 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACS4457Q1ZT 51,57 ,146  
10 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16ACVPL7331G2Z9 26,7 5,980  
11 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AABCT9162G1Z8 20,5 3,608  
12 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AADCC8088Q1ZV 21,8 7,661  
13 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACB5985C1ZS 25,0 5,926  
14 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAHCS4907J1Z5 90,6 9,433  
15 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AMWPS2574H1ZC 1,55 ,70,309  
16 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACH1766P1Z8 28,9 2,811  
17 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAACB2100P1Z0 21,5 6,024  
18 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AADCB0274F1Z3 20,7 5,155  
19 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AATPI9627C1ZG 16,7 4,854  
20 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16ABKPH9660C2ZM 57,0 6,878  
21 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AOOPM8961L1Z2 62,1 3,118  
22 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AAIFD9949B1ZA 43,1 0,706  
23 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16ADNPR5161K1Z1 16,5 4,413  
24 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16AHYPS5603C1Z3 21,4 7,211  
25 Mismatch in availing of ITC 16CJLPS9964H1ZB 97,3 9,348  
26 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AABFU822 6H1Z4 18,90,447  
27 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16ABRPC515 2H1ZO 1,57,148  
28 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AGKPS678 4P1Z8 1,51,770  
29 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM without 
payment 16AVLPS3607F1ZH 15,30,925 
 
30 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AUPPD553 8D1ZO 18,57,916  
31 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16ABVPR429 8K1ZL 64,588  
32 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AGGPS721 9F1Z9 2,79,410  
33 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AXQPM199 3D1Z5 1,15,703  
34 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AWEPS250 8P1Z3 58,934  
35 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AMLPB988 4A1ZZ 1,72,726  
36 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AGOPB087 5A1ZS 7,95,939  
37 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AKHPP560 6N2ZP 2,20,442  
38 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AAIPG271 2M1ZS 1,57,944  
39 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16BWLPM628 0L1ZW 1,56,085  
40 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16IEKPS752 9A1Z6 63,054  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 318 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
41 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16APFPD008 6F1ZB 2,02,680  
42 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16BBBPR840 7B1ZW 1,13,351  
43 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16ANOPR594 0H1ZJ 1,29,192  
44 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16CDFPP637 3P1ZR 65,564  
45 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16BOKPD187 7D1Z2 31,94,450  
46 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AAECV568 5K1ZQ 4,47,974  
47 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16BVWPG596 7L1ZL 1,37,935  
48 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AXOPR006 1P1ZW 11,32,627  
49 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16AADCA170 1E1ZG 2,37,838  
50 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM 16ADGPG370 7P1ZD 3,88,033  
51 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM without 
payment 16AAYFM0066C1Z9 48,065 
 
52 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM without 
payment 16AHFPC2767G1ZJ 56,584
 
53 Mismatch in availing of ITC under RCM without 
payment 16APFPD0086F1ZB 2,02,680 
 
54 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAACG1376N1 ZF 51,600  
55 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AJVPS9821K3 Z6 29,16,644  
56 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAACB1534F1 Z9 1,11,383  
57 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AJVPS9821K1 Z8 31,14,062  
58 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AABCI6363G1 ZM 1,95,158  
59 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16ABMPC7975P1 ZT 6,870  
60 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAACR9627B1 ZJ 29,829  
61 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAACN4165C2 ZT 37,756  
62 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAGFR5098F1 ZY 3,66,911  
63 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AAECS0547D1 ZP 15,996  
64 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AUVPS7891N1 Z6 1,26,542  
65 Incorrect availment of ISD credit  16AKCPP0569K1 ZX 1,73,218  
66 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16ALFPR0409Q1Z R 21,804  
67 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16BOOPD2768H1Z Q 18,948  
68 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16EGQPS4235F1Z 1 7,284  
69 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AGOPB0875A1Z S 3,57,553  
70 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AAACP0485D1Z R 29,209  
71 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AAACP0486A1Z W 8,890  
72 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AAACO0054F1Z Z 34,46,165  
73 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16APSPC0681E1Z 0 2,26,355  
74 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AVRPS2556H1Z 1 7,463  
75 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16CGJPS6416H1Z 3 25,245  
76 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16AKGPH1829J1Z 6 14,652  
77 Incorrect availment of ISD credit 16BXUPS3357J1Z N 1,17,086  
78 Incorrect ISD credit reversal. 16AAACU5552C1ZM 1 ,535  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 319 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
79 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 16ABZPR9070P1ZB 5,20,506 
 
80 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 16AJVPS9821K1Z8 33,26,387 
 
81 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 16AJVPS9821K3Z6 29,16,644 
 
82 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AARFP9176F1ZM 12,49,041 
 
83 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAACJ6716F1ZR 3,45,965 
 
84 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16ADMPR1514P1Z3 2,93,222 
 
85 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16ACDFS0034M1Z7 2,89,008 
 
86 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AADCB1615J1ZZ 15,92,72,880 
 
87 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16ABTPD7579D1ZA 21,40,264 
 
88 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AGYPD4613L1Z1 12,39,032 
 
89 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAFFK5678K1ZT 4,31,441 
 
90 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAHFP2649D1ZC 59,92,445 
 
91 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAACN4165C2ZT 25,16,579 
 
92 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AUPPD5538D1ZO 8,49,856 
 
93 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AABCJ2967K1ZA 3,79,767 
 
94 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAACC1206D1ZJ 10,44,972 
 
95 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AGGPS7209H1Z7 2,82,396 
 
96 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AEUPC6174R2ZL 10,18,070 
 
97 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAMFB4919K1Z5 3,07,033 
 
98 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAECM7627A1ZQ 7,02,207 
 
99 Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAACO0054F1ZZ 56,76,675 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 320 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
100  Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAACN9991J1ZV 36,94,677 
 
101  Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16BRLPB7270C1Z0 5,31,813 
 
102  Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAECP6347E2ZF 20,39,805 
 
103  Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR 16AAOFB3786C2ZC 10,70,606 
 
104  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return 
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of 
GSTR-9C) 
16AAICP2379N1ZT 21,97,59,490  
105  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR-9C) 
16AADCB1615J1ZZ 16,00,77,112  
106  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16ADDFS5228C1ZC 85,84,167  
107  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16ABTPD7579D1ZA 21,40,263  
108  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AGYPD4613L1Z1 12,39,032  
109  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACN7335C2ZR 19,36,78,436  
110  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAHFP2649D1ZC 59,92,445  
111  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AABCV8616R1ZM 27,52,591  
112  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACN4165C2ZT 25,16,580  
113  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AABCD5534A1Z8 20,72,099  
114  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAICS0296H1Z7 3,46,52,060  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 321 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
115  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AACPY3301Q1ZD 12,00,745  
116  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACS8577K1ZS 1,82,64,285  
117  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACG1395D1ZX 1,23,08,688  
118  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AGOPS1768B3Z5 66,43,625  
119  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAECT8071H1Z5 12,26,28,998  
120  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACT3910D1ZV 1,18,35,437  
121  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAECM5260H1ZJ 37,19,602  
122  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AADCM7418C1ZQ 31,45,658  
123  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AASFP3517B1ZC 15,63,214  
124  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAHFD1317J1ZO 13,86,125  
125  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACO0054F1ZZ 56,76,604  
126  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AAACN9991J1ZV 36,94,677  
127  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual return  
with expenses in financial statements (Table 14T of  
GSTR 
16AADCA1701E1ZG 34,79,648  
128  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR-9C) 16AACCT2964M1ZY 8,10,28,456 
 
129  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AAYPN9135H1Z1 1,66,23,743 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 322 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
130  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AHDPS9448L2ZL 1,39,27,543 
 
131  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AHBPS0347L1Z8 6,63,39,720 
 
132  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16BVOPS4814A1ZK 6,37,48,516 
 
133  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AGQPD2870F1ZF 3,57,67,400 
 
134  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16ALCPR2085D1Z9 7,40,84,696 
 
135  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16ADCPP1754F1ZQ 1,68,97,652 
 
136  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AAATB1459N2ZK 12,79,96,216 
 
137  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AABCR4365D1ZL 1,35,88,836 
 
138  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AAACJ9366R1ZQ 41,36,83,616 
 
139  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (table 5R of GSTR 16ADNPP3667J1ZY 4,65,54,500 
 
140  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16ADZPD8745R1ZD 3,98,54,992 
 
141  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16ABDFM0295M1Z0 2,41,23,700 
 
142  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AHDPS9177J1ZO 1,44,00,855 
 
143  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AAACD4950B1Z5 6,88,87,456 
 
144  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AACCR1459F1ZJ 5,07,36,684 
 
145  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AGXPD1103G1ZQ 3,02,93,852 
 
146  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AABFN2612E1ZV 2,23,93,020 
 
147  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AAALT1090R1ZG 4,45,95,67,600 
 
148  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16BBTPS0396G2Z2 1,97,70,468 
 
149  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AKPPM6463J1ZK 4,32,65,556 
 
150  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16BYVPB6641Q1ZM 1,51,99,423 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 323 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
151  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16AABCN2066M1ZC 3,68,33,200 
 
152  Mismatch in turnover between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 5R of GSTR 16ABUPD8206A1ZX 1,94,37,752 
 
153  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16ADNPP3687N1ZM 60,12,941  
154  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16ACHPB8490N1Z5 26,28,637  
155  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16BOIPM6430F1Z0 28,84,940  
156  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16AULPS6278H1ZY 48,32,053  
157  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16CXJPS3809M1ZU 71,87,494  
158  Mismatch in taxable turnover between Annual return and 
financial statement (Table 7G of form 9C) 16ALHPD4424F2ZI 43,25,798  
159  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR-9C) 16BISPS1173F3ZW 28,28,872 
 
160  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AJVPS9821K3Z6 15,01,589 
 
161  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ACYPN3961F1Z3 5,90,852 
 
162  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AGQPB8513P1ZW 1,76,855 
 
163  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ADBPM1599A1ZT 5,68,544 
 
164  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAECP0139L1ZF 7,69,244 
 
165  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ACHPB8490N1Z5 4,75,146 
 
166  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ALZPD7384A2ZT 6,97,448 
 
167  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ABTPD7585P1ZN 5,75,655 
 
168  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AIZPT3346F1ZO 5,58,220 
 
169  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAAFK8412G1ZL 2,15,404 
 
170  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AABFN2612E1ZV 11,98,638 
 
171  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AADCC8088Q1ZV 2,09,050 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 324 
Appendix 5.2.1 (contd.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTIN Amount 
172  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAALT1090R1ZG 36,35,222 
 
173  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAACH1766P1Z8 5,35,175 
 
174  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAACB2894G1ZQ 1,91,310 
 
175  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AHTPS0439H1ZY 1,42,091 
 
176  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAACO0054F1ZZ 1,21,96,429 
 
177  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AAJFK4131F1ZM 12,15,375 
 
178  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ALGPS5040P1ZM 3,91,227 
 
179  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AQUPB8439Q1ZW 3,09,420 
 
180  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ACNPL8894J1ZP 5,15,594 
 
181  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AHWPB1217B1ZU 4,29,514 
 
182  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16ALHPD4424F2ZI 3,74,022 
 
183  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
annual return (Table 9R of GSTR 16AALFD5298C1ZB 3,02,628 
 
184  Undischarged tax liability 16ADTPR9412K1ZT 34,74,42 9  
185  Undischarged tax liability 16AACCT2964M1ZY 8,10,28, 459  
186  Undischarged tax liability 16BISPS1173F3ZW 44,93,35 3  
187  Undischarged tax liability 16AJVPS9821K3Z6 18,24,00 6  
188  Undischarged tax liability 16AYCPS4460J1Z6 39,81,61 3  
189  Undischarged tax liability 16AHKPS7896K1Z9 29,41,35 1  
190  Undischarged tax liability 16AAACD2086J1ZP 47,79,94 6  
191  Undischarged tax liability 16ACHPB8490N1Z5 35,68,40 5  
192  Undischarged tax liability 16AAACC1206D1ZJ 20,79,94 3  
193  Undischarged tax liability 16ALZPD7384A2ZT 48,93,65 1  
194  Undischarged tax liability 16AWWPS9217R1Z5 2,21,72, 638  
195  Undischarged tax liability 16ECZPS1470K1ZQ 20,50,39 4  
196  Undischarged tax liability 16AAECS4335F1ZJ 46,15,56 2  
197  Undischarged tax liability 16AADCS2469K1Z2 92,75,62 8  
198  Undischarged tax liability 16AIOPD3768J1ZW 46,71,42 4  
199  Undischarged tax liability 16AGKPS6781J1ZN 28,03,14 0  
200  Undischarged tax liability 16AVJPS0342P2Z3 23,11,31 1  
201  Undischarged tax liability 16ALGPS5058P1ZC 38,91,45 9  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 325 
Appendix 5.2.1 (concld.) 
Sample for Limited Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Amount 
202 Undischarged tax liability 16AAACH1766P1Z8 26,1 5,784  
203 Undischarged tax liability 16AAACP0485D1ZR 18,3 7,913  
204 Undischarged tax liability 16AWMPC1865H1ZI 41,3 0,535  
205 Undischarged tax liability 16APWPB8993A1ZI 29,3 8,888  
206 Undischarged tax liability 16AALFD5298C1ZB 26,6 2,514  
207 Undischarged tax liability 16AEQPC9882E1Z4 20,7 0,624  
208 Undischarged tax liability 16AAALS7791L1Z9 22,3 7,894  
209 Cases where GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 or 
GSTR-2A is available 16AABCF7508A1Z4 23,80,854 
 
210 Cases where GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 or 
GSTR-2A is available 16ALXPC4257H1ZT 63,73,269 
 
211 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AACCE4248H1ZR 4,25,785  
212 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6APIPD8924K2ZL 2,70,580  
213 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAJPK1451A1ZA 2,99,966  
214 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AADCD4705H1ZX 1,79,129  
215 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6BOFPS2897F2ZH 6,35,812  
216 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments  16AABCE7178B1ZT 7,53,752  
217 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAACU5559K1ZY 1,93,123  
218 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AOZPD8303G1ZR 3,08,820  
219 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AABCN7761P1ZU 15,09,214  
220 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AABAT1839L2Z8 85,65,176  
221 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AABCO9053D1ZL 37,00,434  
222 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAACJ5184F1ZN 9,80,299  
223 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAECT8071H1Z5 6,13,004  
224 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6ABVPR4143H1Z8 2,48,466  
225 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AANFR5923L1ZO 1,95,742  
226 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAFFL7288Q1ZE 2,37,175  
227 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AGSPA4256G1ZE 2,76,324  
228 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AUOPB4946Q1ZY 1,73,759  
229 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAECP9270C1ZG 2,26,124  
230 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6ABBFS3770R1ZK 1,75,882  
231 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6AAACO0054F1ZZ 16,83,973  
232 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6BSAPP2622Q1ZG 8,56,215  
233 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6BPZPS0267Q2ZO 2,23,554  
234 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6FFVPS0438P1ZF 1,58,184  
235 Short payment of Interest on delayed payments 1 6CAOPM5025R1Z0 1,70,231  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 326 
Appendix 5.2.2 
List of 30 selected taxpayers for detailed audit under SSCA 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4)  
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdiction 
Name Date of Regd. GSTIN Name of taxpayer 
1 Charge-I 01.07.2017 16AAACI5950L1ZD I T C Ltd Com pany 
2 Charge-I 01.07.2017 16AAACN3053B1Z3 NBCC (India) Ltd 
3 Charge-II 09.07.2017 16AKEPP5587B1Z2 Gouranga Cha ndra Paul 
4 Charge-II 01.07.2017 16AAECT9428J1ZX Tirthamoyee Traders Private Ltd 
5 Charge-II 01.07.2017 16ATVPS5284L1ZL Abhijit Saha  
6 Charge-III 01.07.2017 16ADVPP8961D1ZW Bijan Kumar  Paul 
7 Charge-IV 01.07.2017 16ADNPP3650P1ZV Dulal Chandr a Paul 
8 Charge-V 01.07.2017 16AAACS9939D1Z7 Sterling And Wilson Private Ltd 
9 Charge-V 02.07.2017 16AAAGM0289C1ZM Ministry Of R ailways 
10 Charge-V 06.07.2017 16AADCS1107J1ZN Schlumberger  Asia Services Ltd 
11 Charge-V 02.07.2017 16ACAFS0417M1Z7 Satyam Rubbe r Industries 
12 Charge-VI 01.07.2017 16AACFL8969P1ZD Laxmi Naray an Traders 
13 Charge-VI 01.07.2017 16AACCE9137D1ZT Evac Engine ering Projects Private Ltd 
14 Charge-VI 01.07.2017 16AVWPS6181K1ZK Sankar Saha  
15 Charge-VI 01.07.2017 16AXDPC0281F1Z1 Samaresh Ch owdhury 
16 Charge - VII 01.07.2017 16BIMPS7519H1ZQ Maupasa Saha 
17 Charge - VII 01.07.2017 16ABAFM3265G1ZG Maa TripureswariAsset Reconstruction 
Consultancy Services 
18 Charge - VIII 08.08.2017 16AAACR6117Q2Z0 National Projects Construction 
Corporation Ltd 
19 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16AAKCA5823G1ZQ Abm Rub ber Industries Private Ltd 
20 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16AAACT1426A1Z2 ITD Cem entation India Ltd 
21 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16AAFCK1502P1ZI Delwara  Steel Industries Private Ltd 
22 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16AVEPS7445N2ZU Rajesh Saha 
23 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16AAGCS9294M1ZI Tata Pl ay Ltd 
24 Charge - VIII 01.07.2017 16ACUPP3799B1Z1 Doraiah Palimpati 
25 Bishalgarh 29.08.2017 16AARFK7454M1ZJ K. K. R. J v Partnership 
26 Bishalgarh 01.07.2017 16AZIPD6343A2ZT Sentu Dey 
27 Bishalgarh 01.07.2017 16AACFU6266G1Z1 Uttam Trad ing 
28 Bishalgarh 01.07.2017 16APDPR6406H1ZV Uttam Roy 
29 Bishalgarh 01.07.2017 16ASAPS8250N1Z8 Mati Lal S aha 
30 Teliamura 01.07.2017 16AKCPP0564E1ZF Sabita Paul  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 327 
Appendix 5.2.3 
List of sample for charge audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4) 
Sl. No. Name of charge 
1 Charge-I 
2 Charge-II 
3 Charge-III 
4 Charge-IV 
5 Charge-V 
6 Charge-VI 
7 Charge-VII 
8 Charge-VIII 
9 Bishalgarh 
10 Teliamura 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 328 
Appendix 5.2.4 
Department reply not received  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.2(i)}  
 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 
Mismatch in availing ITC 
16AABCR7176C1ZG Charge-I 31,06,575  
2 16AAACB8516F1ZX Charge-V 20,20,106  
3 16AABCB5691A1Z0 Charge-V 33,46,514  
4 16AAACS4457Q1ZT Charge-V 51,57,146  
5 Mismatch in availing ITC under RCM 16AABFU8226H1Z 4 Charge-I 18,90,447  
6 
Incorrect availment of ISD credit 
16AAACG1376N1ZF Charge-I 51,600  
7 16AAACB1534F1Z9 Charge-II 1,11,383  
8 16AABCI6363G1ZM Charge-III 1,95,158  
9 16ABMPC7975P1ZT Charge-III 6,870  
10 16AAGFR5098F1ZY Charge-V 3,66,911  
11 16AAECS0547D1ZP Charge-V 15,996  
12 16AUVPS7891N1Z6 Charge-V 1,26,542  
13 16BOOPD2768H1ZQ Charge - VII 18,948  
14 Incorrect reversal of ISD credit  16AAACU5552C1Z M Charge-I 1,535  
15 
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual 
return and financial statements (Table 12F 
of GSTR-9C) 
16ABZPR9070P1ZB Charge-I 5,20,506 
 
16 16ADMPR1514P1Z3 Charge-II 2,93,222  
17 16ACDFS0034M1Z7 Charge-II 2,89,008  
18 16AAACC1206D1ZJ Charge-V 10,44,972  
19 16AGGPS7209H1Z7 Charge-V 2,82,396  
20 Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
annual return with expenses in financial 
statement (Table 14T of Form GSTR 9C) 
16AAICS0296H1Z7 Charge-V 3,46,52,060 
 
21 16AACPY3301Q1ZD Charge-V 12,00,745  
22 Mismatch in turnover between annual 
return and financial statements (Table 5R 
of GSTR-9C) 
16AHDPS9448L2ZL Charge-I 1,39,27,543 
 
23 16AABCN2066M1ZC Dharmanagar 3,68,33,200  
24 Mismatch in taxable turnover between 
annual return & financial statement (Table 
7G of GSTR-9C) 
16AULPS6278H1ZY Bishalgarh 48,32,053 
 
25 16CXJPS3809M1ZU Udaipur 71,87,494  
26 16ALHPD4424F2ZI Udaipur 43,25,798  
27 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and Annual Return (Table 9R of 
GSTR- 9C) 
16BISPS1173F3ZW Charge-I 28,28,872 
 
28 16ALZPD7384A2ZT Charge-V 6,97,448  
29 16ABTPD7585P1ZN Charge-V 5,75,655  
30 16AIZPT3346F1ZO Charge-V 5,58,220  
31 16AAAFK8412G1ZL Charge-V 2,15,404  
32 
Undischarged tax liability 
16ADTPR9412K1ZT Charge-I 34,74,429  
33 16BISPS1173F3ZW Charge-I 44,93,353  
34 16AAACD2086J1ZP Charge-III 47,79,946  
35 16AAACC1206D1ZJ Charge-V 20,79,943  
36 16ALZPD7384A2ZT Charge-V 48,93,651  
37 Cases where GSTR 3B was not filed but 
GSTR 1 or GSTR2A is available 
16AABCF7508A1Z4 Charge-I 23,80,854 
 
38 16ALXPC4257H1ZT Belonia 63,73,269  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 329 
Appendix 5.2.4 (concld.) 
Department reply not received  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.2(i)}  
 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
39 
Short payment of interest on 
delayed payment 
16AACCE4248H1ZR Charge-I 4,25,785 
40 16APIPD8924K2ZL Charge-I 2,70,580 
41 16AAACU5559K1ZY Charge-V 1,93,123 
42 16AOZPD8303G1ZR Charge-V 3,08,820 
43 16AABCN7761P1ZU Charge-V 15,09,214 
44 16AABAT1839L2Z8 Charge-V 85,65,176 
 Total    16,64,28,470  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 330 
Appendix 5.2.5 
Summary of deficiencies and compliance deviations  
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.2.6.2(ii), 5.2.6.2(iii)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Audit Dimension 
Summary of deficiencies Summary of compliance Deviations   
Cases 
where reply 
received 
Department 
reply 
accepted by 
audit 
Accepted by Department including cases where action 
is yet to be initiated. 
Departme 
nt reply 
not 
acceptable 
to audit 
(rebuttal) 
Total 
Department 
reply not 
furnished 
with 
appropriate 
documentar 
y evidence. 
Department 
stated they are 
examining the 
audit AQ. With valid 
explanation Recovered ASMT-10 SCN 
issued 
Under 
correspond 
ence with 
taxpayer 
Sl. 
No 
Dimension No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
1 Mismatch in availing 
of ITC  21 10.33 03 2.25 0 0 8 2.42 0 0 05 1.92 4 2.93 17 7.27 01 0.81 0 0 
2 Mismatch in availing 
of ITC under RCM. 24 1.18 2 0.34 0 0 12 0.62 0 0 9 0.21 0 0 21 0.83 0  0 1 0.01 
3 
Mismatch in availing 
of ITC under RCM 
without payment 
3 0.03 0 0 0 0 01 0.01 0 0 02 0.02 0 0 03 0.03 0 0 0 0 
4 Incorrect availment of 
ISD credit  16 1.05 01 0.01 0 0 08 0.70 0 0 05 0.33 0 0 13 1.03  02 0.007 
 0 0 
5 
Mismatch in ITC 
availed between annual 
return and financial 
statements (Table 12F 
of 9C) 
20 19.57 06 1.82 1 14.69 04 1.07 02 0.31 06 1.08 01 0.60 14 17.75 
248  0 0 0 0 
6 
Reconciliation between 
ITC declared in annual 
return with expenses in 
financial statements 
(Table 14T of 9C) 
22 79.32 12 53.68 0 0 04 23.26 0 0 05 2.17 0 0 09 2 5.43 01 0.21 0 0 
 
                                                           
248  Including ₹ 14.69 crore (Col. No. 7) recovered amount will not be further pursued. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 331 
Appendix 5.2.5 (contd.) 
Summary of deficiencies and compliance deviations  
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.2.6.2(ii), 5.2.6. 2(iii)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Audit Dimension 
Summary of deficiencies Summary of compliance Deviations   
Cases where 
reply 
received 
Department 
reply 
accepted by 
audit 
Accepted by Department including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated. 
Departme 
nt reply 
not 
acceptable 
to audit 
(rebuttal) 
Total 
Department 
reply not 
furnished 
with 
appropriate 
documentar 
y evidence. 
Department 
stated they 
are examining 
the audit AQ. With valid 
explanation Recovered ASMT-10 SCN 
issued 
Under 
correspond 
ence with 
taxpayer 
Sl. 
No 
Dimension No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
7 
Mismatch in turnover 
between annual return 
and financial 
statements (Table 5R 
of 9C) 
23 -249  05 - 0 - 09 - 0 - 07 - 0 - 16 - 0 - 02 - 
8 
Mismatch in taxable 
turnover between 
annual return and 
financial 
statements(Table 7G of 
9C) 
03 -
250  2 - 0 - 01 - 0 - 0 - 0 - 1 - 0 - 0 - 
9 
Mismatch in tax paid 
between books of 
accounts and annual 
returns (Table 9R of 
9C)) 
20 2.57 07 0.34 0 0 03 1.38 01 0.03 08 0.80 01 0.02 13 2.23 0 0 0 0 
                                                           
249  Total unreconciled turnover (TO) in Table 5R of GS TR 9C in the 25 cases is ₹ 581.50 crore, out of which department’s reply in r espect of mismatched TO of ₹ 5.08 crore 
in two cases yet to be received, in five cases invo lving mismatched TO of ₹ 62.59 crore valid explanation were provided by the  Department and the compliance deviation 
in the remaining eighteen (18) cases involving mismatched TO of ₹ 513.83 crore have been observed. 
250  Total unreconciled taxable turnover (TTO) in Table  7G of GSTR 9C in the six cases is ₹ 2.78 crore, out of which Department’s reply in res pect of mismatched TTO of ₹ 
1.63 crore in three cases yet to be received, in tw o cases involving mismatched TTO of ₹ 0.55 crore valid explanation were provided by the Department and the 
compliance deviation in the remaining one case involving mismatched TTO of ₹ 0.60 crore have been observed.   

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 332 
Appendix 5.2.5 (concld.) 
Summary of deficiencies and compliance deviations  
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.2.6.2(ii), 5.2.6. 2(iii)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Audit Dimension 
Summary of deficiencies Summary of compliance Deviations   
Cases where 
reply 
received 
Department 
reply 
accepted by 
audit 
Accepted by Department including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated. 
Departme 
nt reply 
not 
acceptable 
to audit 
(rebuttal) 
Total 
Department 
reply not 
furnished 
with 
appropriate 
documentar 
y evidence. 
Department 
stated they are 
examining the 
audit AQ. With valid 
explanation Recovered ASMT-10 SCN 
issued 
Under 
correspond 
ence with 
taxpayer 
Sl. 
No. 
Dimension No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
10 Undischarged tax 
liability 20 16.36 04 1.22 03 0.82 04 8.93 04 1.30 04 1.87 0 0 15 12.92 1 2.22 0 0 
11 
Short payment of 
interest on delayed 
payments 
19 1.18 0 0 0 0 04 0.64 01 0.02 12 0.42 01 0.08 18 1.16 01 0.02 0 0 
Total 191 131.59 42 59.66 4251  15.51 58 39.03 8 1.66 63 8.82 07 3.63 140 68.65 6 3.27 3 0.01 
 
                                                           
251  Since the amount were already recovered, these four cases will not be further pursued 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 333 
Appendix 5.2.6 
Recovered Amount (DRC-03) 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)}  
Sl. 
No. Dimension  GSTIN  Charge  Amount (in 
₹) Form No.  
1 
Mismatch of ITC availed 
between annual returns and 
financial statement (Table 
12F of GSTR-9C) 
16AADCB1615J1ZZ 
 Charge-III 14,68,52,251  DRC-03  
2 
Undischarged tax liability 
16AEQPC9882E1Z4 Udaipur 20,70,624  DRC-03  
3 16AAALS7791L1Z9  Udaipur 22,37,894  DRC-03  
4 16AYCPS4460J1Z6 Charge-II 39,81,613  DRC-03  
Total 15,51,42,382   
 
 
Appendix 5.2.7 
Show cause notice (SCN) issued 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)} 
 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Mismatch of ITC availed between 
annual return and financial statements 
(Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
16AAECP6347E2ZF Kailasahar 20,39,805 
 
2 16AAOFB3786C2ZC Kailasahar 10,70,606  
3 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and annual return (Table 9R 
of GSTR-9C) 
16AQUPB8439Q1ZW 
 Kailasahar 3,09,420  
4 
Undischarged tax liability 
16AIOPD3768J1ZW Charge - VIII 46,71,424  
5 16AGKPS6781J1ZN Charge - VIII 28,03,140  
6 16AAACH1766P1Z8 Charge - VIII 26,15,784  
7 16APWPB8993A1ZI Kailasahar 29,38,888  
8 Short payment of interest on delay 
payment. 16CAOPM5025R1Z0 Udaipur 1,70,231  
Total 1,66,19,298  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 334 
Appendix 5.2.8 
ASMT-10 issued 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)}  
 
Sl. 
No. Dimension  GSTN  Charge  Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 
Mismatch in availing of ITC 
16AATPI9627C1ZG Bishalgarh 16,74,854  
2 16ABKPH9660C2ZM Bishalgarh 57,06,878  
3 16AOOPM8961L1Z2 Bishalgarh 62,13,118  
4 16ADNPR5161K1Z1 Bishalgarh 16,54,413  
5 16AHYPS5603C1Z3 Bishalgarh 21,47,211  
6 16AGKPS6915Q1ZH Charge-II 20,49,260  
7 16ACVPL7331G2Z9 Charge-VI 26,75,980  
8 16AABCT9162G1Z8 Charge-VI 20,53,608  
9 
Mismatch in availing of ITC under 
RCM 
16ABRPC5152H1ZO Charge-II 1,57,148  
10 16AGKPS6784P1Z8 Charge-II 1,51,770  
11 16ABVPR4298K1ZL Charge-VI 64,588  
12 16BBBPR8407B1ZW Ambassa 1,13,351  
13 16ANOPR5940H1ZJ Ambassa 1,29,192  
14 16CDFPP6373P1ZR Belonia 65,564  
15 16BOKPD1877D1Z2 Belonia 31,94,450  
16 16AAECV5685K1ZQ Bishalgarh 4,47,974  
17 16BVWPG5967L1ZL Bishalgarh 1,37,935  
18 16AXOPR0061P1ZW Dharmanagar 11,32,627  
19 16AADCA1701E1ZG Dharmanagar 2,37,838  
20 16ADGPG3707P1ZD Dharmanagar 3,88,033  
21 Mismatch in availing of ITC under 
RCM without payment 16AHFPC2767G1ZJ Charge-VI 56,584 
 
22 
Incorrect availment of ISD credit 
16AJVPS9821K1Z8 Charge-II 31,14,062  
23 16AKCPP0569K1ZX Charge-VI 1,73,218  
24 16ALFPR0409Q1ZR Charge-VI 21,804  
25 16AAACO0054F1ZZ Belonia 34,46,165  
26 16APSPC0681E1Z0 Belonia 2,26,355  
27 16AVRPS2556H1Z1 Belonia 7,463  
28 16CGJPS6416H1Z3 Bishalgarh 25,245  
29 16AKGPH1829J1Z6 Bishalgarh 14,652  
30 Mismatch of ITC availed between 
annual return and financial 
statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
16AEUPC6174R2ZL Charge-VI 10,18,070  
31 16AAMFB4919K1Z5 Charge-VI 3,07,033  
32 16AAACO0054F1ZZ Belonia 56,76,675  
33 16AAACN9991J1ZV Bishalgarh 36,94,677  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 335 
Appendix 5.2.8 (concld.) 
ASMT-10 issued 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)}  
 
                                                           
252  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 4,32,65,556 
253  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 1,51,99,423 
254  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 8,10,28,456 
255  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 1,66,23,743 
256  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 6,63,39,720 
257  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 6,37,48,516 
258  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 3,57,67,400 
259  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 3,98,54,992 
260    Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 1,94,37,752 
261  Unreconciled taxable turnover in Table 7G of GSTR-9C is ₹ 60,12,941 
Sl. 
No. Dimension  GSTN  Charge  Amount 
(in ₹) 
34 Reconciliation between ITC 
availed in Annual returns with 
expenses in financial statements 
(Table 14T of GSTR-9C) 
16AAICP2379N1ZT Charge-I 21,97,59,490  
35 16AAACO0054F1ZZ Belonia 56,76,604  
36 16AAACN9991J1ZV Bishalgarh 36,94,677  
37 16AADCA1701E1ZG Dharmanagar 34,79,648  
38 
Mismatch in turnover between 
annual return and financial 
statement (Table 5R of GSTR 9C) 
16AKPPM6463J1ZK Belonia - 252  
39 16BYVPB6641Q1ZM Belonia - 253  
40 16AACCT2964M1ZY Charge-I - 254  
41 16AAYPN9135H1Z1 Charge-I - 255  
42 16AHBPS0347L1Z8 Charge-II - 256  
43 16BVOPS4814A1ZK Charge-II - 257  
44 16AGQPD2870F1ZF Charge-II - 258  
45 16ADZPD8745R1ZD Charge-VI - 259  
46 16ABUPD8206A1ZX Teliamura - 260  
47 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
(Table 7G of GSTR 9C) 16ADNPP3687N1ZM Charge-II - 261  
48 Mismatch in tax paid between 
books of accounts and annual 
return (Table 9R of GSTR-9C) 
16AAACO0054F1ZZ Belonia 1,21,96,429  
49 16AAJFK4131F1ZM Belonia 12,15,375  
50 16ALGPS5040P1ZM Dharmanagar 3,91,227  
51 
Undischarged tax liablility 
16ECZPS1470K1ZQ Charge-VI 20,50,394  
52 16AACCT2964M1ZY Charge-I 8,10,28,459  
53 16AVJPS0342P2Z3 Belonia 23,11,311  
54 16ALGPS5058P1ZC Belonia 38,91,459  
55 
Short payment of interest on delay 
payment 
16AABCO9053D1ZL Charge-VI 37,00,434  
56 16AAACO0054F1ZZ Belonia 16,83,973  
57 16BSAPP2622Q1ZG Belonia 8,56,215  
58 16BPZPS0267Q2ZO Bishalgarh 2,23,554  
 Total   39,03,37,044  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 336 
Appendix 5.2.9 
Under correspondence with taxpayers 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)}  
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 
Mismatch in availing ITC 
16AAGCM9000M2ZB  Charge-III 97,63,937  
2 16ACYPN3961F1Z3 Charge-II 22,93,443  
3 16AAACH1766P1Z8 Charge - VIII 28,92,811  
4 16AAACB2100P1Z0 Charge - VIII 21,56,024  
5 16AADCB0274F1Z3 Charge - VIII 20,75,155  
6 
Mismatch in availing of ITC under 
RCM 
16AGGPS7219F1Z9 Charge-VI 2,79,410  
7 16AWEPS2508P1Z3 Charge - VII 58,934  
8 16AMLPB9884A1ZZ Charge - VII 1,72,726  
9 16AGOPB0875A1ZS Charge - VIII 7,95,939  
10 16AKHPP5606N2ZP Charge - VIII 2,20,442  
11 16AAIPG2712M1ZS Charge - VIII 1,57,944  
12 16BWLPM6280L1ZW Charge - VIII 1,56,085  
13 16IEKPS7529A1Z6 Charge - VIII 63,054  
14 16APFPD0086F1ZB Charge - VIII 2,02,680  
15 Mismatch in availing of ITC under 
RCM without payment 
16AAYFM0066C1Z9 Charge-VI 48,065  
16 16APFPD0086F1ZB Charge - VIII 2,02,680  
17 
Incorrect availment of ISD credit 
16AJVPS9821K3Z6 Charge-II 29,16,644  
18 16EGQPS4235F1Z1 Charge - VIII 7,284  
19 16AGOPB0875A1ZS Charge - VIII 3,57,553  
20 16AAACP0485D1ZR Charge - VIII 29,209  
21 16AAACP0486A1ZW Charge - VIII 8,890  
22 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
annual return and financial 
statements (Table 12F of GSTR-
9C) 
16AJVPS9821K1Z8 Charge-II 33,26,387 
 
23 16AJVPS9821K3Z6 Charge-II 29,16,644  
24 16AARFP9176F1ZM Charge-II 12,49,041  
25 16ABTPD7579D1ZA Charge-III 21,40,264  
26 16AAFFK5678K1ZT Charge-III 4,31,441  
27 16AAECM7627A1ZQ Charge - VIII  7,02,207  
28 Reconciliation between ITC 
availed in annual return with 
expenses in financial statement 
(Table 14T of Form GSTR 9C) 
16AAACT3910D1ZV Charge - VIII  1,18,35,437 
 
29 16AAECM5260H1ZJ Charge - VIII  37,19,602  
30 16AADCM7418C1ZQ Charge - VIII  31,45,658  
31 16AASFP3517B1ZC Charge - VIII  15,63,214  
32 16AAHFD1317J1ZO Charge - VIII  13,86,125  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 337 
Appendix 5.2.9 (concld.) 
Under correspondence with taxpayers 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.3(i)} 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
33 
Mismatch in turnover between 
annual return and financial 
statement (Table 5R of GSTR 9C)  
16BBTPS0396G2Z2 Ambassa -
262  
34 16AHDPS9177J1ZO Charge - VII - 263  
35 16AAACD4950B1Z5 Charge - VII - 264  
36 16AACCR1459F1ZJ Charge - VII - 265  
37 16AGXPD1103G1ZQ Charge - VII - 266  
38 16AABFN2612E1ZV Charge – VII - 267  
39 16AAALT1090R1ZG Charge - VIII - 268  
40 
Mismatch in tax paid between 
books of accounts and annual 
return (Table 9R of GSTR-9C)  
16AJVPS9821K3Z6 Charge-II 15,01,589 
 
41 16ACYPN3961F1Z3 Charge-II 5,90,852  
42 16AABFN2612E1ZV Charge - VII 11,98,638  
43 16AADCC8088Q1ZV Charge - VII 2,09,050  
44 16AAALT1090R1ZG Charge - VIII  36,35,222  
45 16AAACH1766P1Z8 Charge - VIII 5,35,175  
46 16AAACB2894G1ZQ Charge - VIII  1,91,310  
47 16AHTPS0439H1ZY Charge - VIII  1,42,091  
48 
Undischarged tax liability 
16AJVPS9821K3Z6 Charge-II 18,24,006  
49 16AHKPS7896K1Z9 Charge-II 29,41,351  
50 16AAECS4335F1ZJ Charge - VII 46,15,562  
51 16AADCS2469K1Z2 Charge - VII 92,75,628  
52 
Short payment of interest on delay 
payment. 
16AAJPK1451A1ZA Charge-II 2,99,966  
53 16AADCD4705H1ZX Charge-II 1,79,129  
54 16BOFPS2897F2ZH Charge-II 6,35,812  
55 16AAACJ5184F1ZN Charge - VII 9,80,299  
56 16AAECT8071H1Z5 Charge - VII 6,13,004  
57 16ABVPR4143H1Z8 Charge - VII 2,48,466  
58 16AANFR5923L1ZO Charge - VII 1,95,742  
59 16AAFFL7288Q1ZE Charge - VII 2,37,175  
60 16AGSPA4256G1ZE Charge - VIII 2,76,324  
61 16AUOPB4946Q1ZY Charge - VIII 1,73,759  
62 16AAECP9270C1ZG Charge - VIII 2,26,124  
63 16ABBFS3770R1ZK Charge - VIII  1,75,882  
Total 8,81,77,085  
 
                                                           
262  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 1,97,70,468 
263  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 1,44,00,855 
264  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 6,88,87,456 
265  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 5,07,36,684 
266  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 3,02,93,852 
267  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 2,23,93,020 
268  Unreconciled turnover in Table 5R of GSTR-9C is ₹ 4,45,95,67,600 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 338 
Appendix 5.2.10 
Audit rebuttal 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.4) 
Sl. 
No.  Dimension GSTN Charge Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 
Mismatch in availing ITC 
16AADCC8088Q1ZV Charge - VII 21,87,661  
2 16AAACB5985C1ZS Charge - VII 25,05,926  
3 16AAHCS4907J1Z5 Charge - VII 90,69,433  
4 16AMWPS2574H1ZC Charge - VII 1,55,70,309  
5 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
annual return and financial 
statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
16AAHFP2649D1ZC Charge-IV 59,92,445 
 
6 
Mismatch in tax paid between books 
of accounts and annual return (Table 
9R of GSTR-9C) 
16AGQPB8513P1ZW Charge-II 1,76,855 
 
7 Short payment of interest on delay 
payment 16AABCE7178B1ZT Charge-IV 7,53,752 
 
Total 3,62,56,381  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 339 
Appendix 5.2.11 
Delay in submission of returns 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(a)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Jurisdictional 
charge Return Period Due Dates Filing Date Cash 
Setoff 
Delay 
(in days) 
Interest 
Rate 
(in per 
cent ) 
Interest due 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1 16ATVPS5284L1ZL Charge-II 
September 2017 20-10-2017 12-01-2018  2,51,120  84 18 10,402.56  
December 2017 20-01-2018 03-02-2018  1,96,926  14 18 1,359.59  
February 2018 20-03-2018 24-05-2018  2,18,739  65 18 7,011.63  
2 16AACFL8969P1ZD Charge-VI November 2017 20-12-2017 14-06-2018  23,090  176 18 2,004.08  
December 2017 20-01-2018 18-06-2018  60,846  149 18 4,470.93 
3 16BIMPS7519H1ZQ Charge - VII 
July 2017 20-08-2017 29-08-2017  23,21,330  9 18 10,302.88  
August 2017 20-09-2017 21-09-2017  8,96,014  1 18 441.86  
September 2017 20-10-2017 24-10-2017  14,92,882  4 18 2,944.86  
4 16AAACR6117Q2Z0 Charge - VIII 
August 2017 20-09-2017 21-09-2017 2,89,626  1 18 142.82  
October 2017 20-11-2017 26-11-2017  48,939  6 18 144.80  
November 2017 20-12-2017 21-12-2017  3,56,653  1 18 175.88  
5 16AAKCA5823G1ZQ Charge - VIII 
September 2017 20-10-2017 25-05-2018 25,431  217 18 2,721.46  
October 2017 20-11-2017 16-06-2018 1,57,004 208 18 16,104.73  
December 2017 20-01-2018 26-06-2018  1,52,112  157 18 11,777.21 
6 16AVEPS7445N2ZU Charge - VIII 
August 2017 20-09-2017 14-10-2017  1,41,050  24 18 1,669.41  
September 2017 20-10-2017 23-10-2017  2,47,050  3 18 365.49  
November 2017 20-12-2017 22-12-2017  29,851  2 18 29.44  
December 2017 20-01-2018 19-02-2018  1,88,467  30 18 2,788.27  
 March 2018 20-04-2018 23-04-2018  2,36,547  3 18 349.95  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 340 
Appendix 5.2.11 (concld.) 
Delay in submission of returns 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(a)} 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Jurisdictional 
charge Return Period Due Dates Filing Date Cash 
Setoff 
Delay 
(in days) 
Interest 
Rate 
(in per 
cent ) 
Interest due 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
7 16AARFK7454M1ZJ Bishalgarh 
September 2017 20-10-2017 03-05-2018  12,180  195 18 1,171.28  
October 2017 20-11-2017 03-05-2018  85,260  164 18 6,895.54  
November 2017 20-12-2017 29-05-2018  41,18,920  160 18 3,24,999.71  
December 2017 20-01-2018 16-08-2018  2,12,205  208 18 21,767.00  
January 2018 20-02-2018 07-09-2019 87,81,444  564 18 24,42,444.36  
8 16AZIPD6343A2ZT Bishalgarh February 2018 20-03-2018 21-03-2018  10,18,800  1 18 502.42  
9 16AACFU6266G1Z1 Bishalgarh 
August 2017 20-09-2017 27-09-2017  1,69,125  7 18 583.82  
September 2017 20-10-2017 16-11-2017  1,93,025  27 18 2,570.14  
October 2017 20-11-2017 26-12-2017  2,87,794  36 18 5,110.32  
November 2017 20-12-2017 24-01-2018  5,30,133  35 18 9,150.24  
December 2017 20-01-2018 16-02-2018  4,69,842  27 18 6,255.97  
January 2018 20-02-2018 17-03-2018  11,05,476  25 18 13,629.15  
February 2018 20-03-2018 20-04-2018  14,53,368  31 18 22,218.61  
March 2018 20-04-2018 19-05-2018  17,74,130  29 18 25,372.48  
10 16APDPR6406H1ZV Bishalgarh 
September 2017 20-10-2017 24-11-2017  7,33,063  35 18 12,652.86  
October 2017 20-11-2017 27-11-2017  5,56,819  7 18 1,922.16  
February 2018 20-03-2018 21-03-2018  3,87,102  1 18 190.89  
March 2018 20-04-2018 24-05-2018  1,00,448  34 18 1,684.22  
 Total 29,74,329.02  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 341 
Appendix 5.2.12 
Mismatch in ITC claimed by the taxpayers  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(b)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
GSTR3B  
ITC Availed 
(in ₹) 
GSTR2A  
ITC eligible 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
(3B - 2A)  
(in ₹) 
GSTR9_8D 
table 
(in ₹) 
1 16AAACN3053B1Z3 Charge-I 11,33,59,340 7,82,00,636  3,51,58,704 -3,75,44,226 
2 16AAECT9428J1ZX Charge-II 6,52,31,317 5,44,84,535  1,07,46,783 -1,07,62,663 
3 16ATVPS5284L1ZL Charge-II 2,13,48,290 1,73,90,438  39,57,851 -54,290 
4 16AAACS9939D1Z7 Charge-V 1,82,32,211 1,61,75,967 20,56,244 -21,20,712 
5 16ACAFS0417M1Z7 Charge-V 5,48,58,440 1,18,14,537 4,30,43,900 -4,17,02,774 
6 16AACCE9137D1ZT Charge-VI 47,28,036 36,37,782 10, 90,253 -8,89,644 
7 16AVWPS6181K1ZK Charge-VI 20,92,103 9,79,211 11,1 2,892 -65,163 
8 16AXDPC0281F1Z1 Charge-VI 34,93,160 23,85,526 11, 07,634 -3,77,972 
9 16BIMPS7519H1ZQ Charge - VII 1,00,48,378 59,76,40 5 40,71,973 -22,93,960 
10 16AAACR6117Q2Z0 Charge - VIII 1,73,24,761 1,26,3 0,435 46,94,325 -41,04,268 
11 16AAKCA5823G1ZQ Charge - VIII 64,18,696 51,10,29 0 13,08,405 -13,82,065 
12 16AAACT1426A1Z2 Charge - VIII 1,30,48,416 1,01,0 7,279 29,41,136 -26,07,482 
13 16AAFCK1502P1ZI Charge - VIII 34,77,204 9,72,098  25,05,105 -2,44,71,740 
14 16AVEPS7445N2ZU Charge - VIII 25,85,282 18,02,72 2 7,82,559 -9,51,965 
15 16AAGCS9294M1ZI Charge - VIII 1,90,87,475 76,42, 629 1,14,44,845 -11,01,616 
16 16ACUPP3799B1Z1 Charge - VIII 50,59,536 24,76,69 4 25,82,842 0 
17 16AACFU6266G1Z1 Bishalgarh 17,74,478 15,19,818 2 ,54,660 -1,31,774 
18 16APDPR6406H1ZV Bishalgarh 1,23,39,720 1,10,25,1 33 13,14,587 -12,17,138 
19 16ASAPS8250N1Z8 Bishalgarh 73,83,485 44,57,843 2 9,25,642  4,41,622 
20 16AZIPD6343A2ZT Bishalgarh 5,70,211 2,54,402 3,1 5,809 0 
Total amount 13,34,16,149   
Appendix 5.2.13 
Mismatch of ITC in ECL 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(b)}  
Charge GSTIN Table 6A figure Table 6I figure Table 6J figure 
(₹ in crore) (₹ in crore) (₹ in crore) 
Charge-II 16ATVPS5284L1ZL  2.19  2.13  -0.06  
Charge - VIII  16AAACR6117Q2Z0  1.73  1.67  -0.06  
Charge - VIII  16AAGCS9294M1ZI  2.02  0.91  -1.11  
Total amount -1.23  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 342 
Appendix 5.2.14 
Mismatch of ITC under RCM (with payment)  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(b)}  
Charge  GSTIN  
GSTR3B 
Table - 3.1(d) 
(in ₹) 
GSTR9 
Table 
(6C+6D+6F) 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
(in ₹) 
Bishalgarh 16APDPR6406H1ZV 44,44,435 45,15,634 -71,199 
 
 
Appendix 5.2.15 
Mismatch of ITC availed in annual returns and financial statements 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(b)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Charge Name GSTIN 
GSTR-9C 
Table 14S Table 14R Table 14T 
(14S-14R) 
1 Charge -I 16AAACI5950L1ZD 89.31  88.27  1.04  
2 Charge-I 16AAACN3053B1Z3 10.86  0 10.86  
Total  11.90  
 
 
Appendix 5.2.16 
Short discharged of tax liability 
 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(c)} 
GSTIN Charge 
GSTR 1 
Tax 
liability 
(in ₹) 
GSTR 9 
Tax 
liability 
(in ₹) 
Greater value 
of Tax liability 
between 
GSTR1 or 
GSTR9 
(in ₹) 
GSTR 9 
Tax 
payment 
(in ₹) 
Short tax 
payment 
(6-5) 
(in ₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
16AAKCA5823G1ZQ Charge-VIII 66,79,769  67,06,023  67,06,023 66,58,404  -47,619 
16AKCPP0564E1ZF Teliamura 54,27,993  43,42,743  54,27,993 43,42,743  -10,85,250 
Total -11,32,869 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 343 
Appendix 5.2.17 
Un-reconciled taxable turnover and payment of tax 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(c)} 
Table 7 (GSTR-9C) 
Jurisdiction GSTIN 
Figure from Table 7E Figure from 
Table 7F 
Figure from 
Table 7G 
(in ₹) (in ₹) (in ₹) 
Charge-I 16AAACN3053B1Z3  1,04,99,94,946 1,05,16,13,914 16,18,968 
Table 9 (GSTR-9C)  
Charge-I GSTIN 
Figure from Table 9P  Figure from 
Table 9Q 
Figure from 
Table 9R (9Q-9P)  
(in ₹) (in ₹) (in ₹) 
16AAACN3053B1Z3  13,62,90,670 13,10,05,668 -52,85,002 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 344 
Appendix 5.2.18 
Taxpayers with discrepancies in classification of supplies and rate of taxes 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(d)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
Evaluation revealed 
HSN/ SAC 
code as 
declared in 
Registration 
Form 
HSN/ SAC 
code as per 
notification of 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura  
Description of goods/ 
services 
Rate of tax 
declared in 
GSTR9 
(in per cent ) 
Rate of tax as 
per Finance 
Department, 
Tripura 
notification 
(in per cent ) 
Remarks  
1 16AAACN3053 
B1Z3 Charge-I 
440410 9954 Works Contract Services 12, 15 & 18 18 
SAC code was not same as 
declared in registration Form and 
Finance Department, Tripura. 
Besides, in GSTR9 the taxpayer 
paid tax at the rate of 12  per cent , 
15  per cent & 18 per cent  but the 
service was taxable with a single 
rate of 18  per cent  as per Finance 
Department, Tripura.   
440406 997211 Renting of Immovable 
Property Services 
Nil 18 
The taxpayer claimed exemption as 
declared in GSTR 9 though service 
was taxable at 18  per cent  as per 
Finance Department, Tripura 
2 16AAECT9428 
J1ZX Charge-II 
87120010 8712 
Bicycles and other cycles 
(including delivery 
tricycles), not motorised. 
5, 12, 18 & 
28 
12 The taxpayer dealt with goods 
taxable at 12  per cent  & 18  per 
cent  as per Finance Department, 
Tripura, but paid tax in four slabs 
of five per cent , 12  per cent , 18  per 
cent  and 28  per cent . 
72151000 7215 All bars and rods, of iron 
or non-alloy steel 18 
76041039 7604 Aluminium bars, rods and 
profiles 18 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 345 
Appendix 5.2.18 (contd.) 
Taxpayers with discrepancies in classification of supplies and rate of taxes 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(d)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
Evaluation revealed 
HSN/ SAC 
code as 
declared in 
Registration 
Form 
HSN/ SAC 
code as per 
notification of 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura  
Description of goods/ 
services 
Rate of tax 
declared in 
GSTR9 
(in per cent ) 
Rate of tax 
as per 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura 
notification 
(in per cent ) 
Remarks  
   
76109030 7610 
Aluminium structures 
(excluding prefabricated 
buildings of heading 9406) 
and parts of structures (for 
example, bridges and 
bridge-sections, towers, 
lattice masts, roofs, 
roofing frame works, 
balustrades, pillars and 
columns); aluminum 
plates, rods, profiles, tubes 
and the like, prepared for 
use in structures.  
18 
 
23040010 2304 
Oilcake and other solid 
residues, whether or not 
ground or in the form of 
pellets, resulting from the 
extraction of soya bean oil 
5 
9101110 9101 
Wristwatches, pocket-
watches and other watches, 
including stop-watches, 
with case of precious metal 
or of metal clad with 
precious metal 
18 
17031000 1703 Molasses 28 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 346 
Appendix 5.2.18 (contd.) 
Taxpayers with discrepancies in classification of supplies and rate of taxes 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(d)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
Evaluation revealed 
HSN/ SAC 
code as 
declared in 
Registration 
Form 
HSN/ SAC 
code as per 
notification of 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura  
Description of goods/ 
services 
Rate of tax 
declared in 
GSTR9 
(in per cent ) 
Rate of tax as 
per Finance 
Department, 
Tripura 
notification 
(in per cent ) 
Remarks  
   
73229010 73229010 
Radiators for central 
heating, not electrically 
heated, and parts thereof, 
of iron or steel, etc . 
 
18 
 
25161100 2516 Granite crude or roughly 
trimmed 
5 
25140000 2514 
Slate, whether or not 
roughly trimmed or merely 
cut, by sawing or 
otherwise, into blocks or 
slabs of a rectangular 
(including square) shape. 
5 
25151210 2515 Marble and travertine, 
crude or roughly trimmed. 
5 
85287100 8528 
Monitors and projectors, 
not incorporating 
television reception 
apparatus; reception 
apparatus for television, 
etc. 
28 
85437099 8543 
Electrical machines and 
apparatus, having 
individual functions not 
specified or included 
elsewhere in this Chapter 
18 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 347 
Appendix 5.2.18 (contd.) 
Taxpayers with discrepancies in classification of supplies and rate of taxes 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(d)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
Evaluation revealed 
HSN/ SAC 
code as 
declared in 
Registration 
Form 
HSN/ SAC 
code as per 
notification of 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura  
Description of goods/ 
services 
Rate of tax 
declared in 
GSTR9 
(in per cent ) 
Rate of tax as 
per Finance 
Department, 
Tripura 
notification 
(in per cent ) 
Remarks  
 
  85442010 8544 
Insulated wire, cable 
(including co-axial cable) 
and other insulated electric 
conductors, whether or not 
fitted with connectors; 
optical fibre cables, etc . 
 
18 
 
440165 - Broadcasting Service 18 
3 16AARFK7454 
M1ZJ Bishalgarh 440410 9954 Works Contract Services - 18 
The SAC code and rate of tax 
could not be cross verified since 
the taxpayer did not file GSTR9C. 
4 16AACFU6266 
G1Z1 Bishalgarh 40121100 4012 
Retreaded or used 
pneumatic tyres of rubber; 
solid or cushion tyres, tyre 
tread sand tyre flaps, of 
rubber. 
5 18 
As declared in GSTR9, taxpayer 
paid tax at five per cent.  But the 
goods were taxable at the rate of 
18  per cent  as per Finance 
Department, Tripura.  
5 16ASAPS8250 
N1Z8 Bishalgarh 
96161010 9616 
Scent sprays and similar 
toilet sprays, and mounts 
and heads therefore; 
powder-puffs, etc . 5, 12, 18 & 
28 
28 As per GSTR9 the taxpayer paid 
tax at five per cent , 12 per cent , 18  
per cent  & 28  per cent . But as per 
Finance Department, Tripura no 
such goods were found taxable at 
five per cent . 34011190 3401 
Soap; organic surface- 
active products and 
preparations for use as 
soap, in the form of bars, 
cakes, pieces or shapes, 
etc . 
18 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 348 
Appendix 5.2.18 (concld.) 
Taxpayers with discrepancies in classification of supplies and rate of taxes 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.6.5(ii)(d)}  
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge 
Evaluation revealed 
HSN/ SAC 
code as 
declared in 
Registration 
Form 
HSN/ SAC 
code as per 
notification of 
Finance 
Department, 
Tripura  
Description of goods/ 
services 
Rate of tax 
declared in 
GSTR9 
(in per cent ) 
Rate of tax as 
per Finance 
Department, 
Tripura 
notification 
(in per cent ) 
Remarks  
   22021090 2202 Waters, Including Mineral 
Waters and aerated 
Waters, etc . 
 12  
19041090 1904 Puffed rice, commonly 
known as Muri, flattened 
or beaten rice, etc . 
Nil 
39199090 3919 
Self-adhesive plates, 
sheets, film, foil, tape, strip 
and other flat shapes, of 
plastics, whether or not in 
rolls, etc . 
18 
 