 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand  
for the year ended 31 March 2022 
 
 
 
 
Government of Jharkhand 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
(Performance Audit) 


 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand  
for the year ended 31 March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Jhark hand 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
(Performance Audit) 

 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Heading  Paragraph Page 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary 1-9 
Chapter-1: Introduction  
Background  1.1 11 
Why we selected this topic?  1.2 11 
Organizational set up  1.3 12 
Audit Objectives  1.4 13 
Audit Criteria  1.5 14 
Audit Scope and Methodology  1.6 14 
Sample and Sampling Methodology  1.7 15 
Entry and Exit Conference  1.8 16 
Structure of the Report  1.9 16 
Acknowledgement  1.10 16 
Chapter-2: Allotment of mining leases  
Grant of leases of minor minerals 
(non-auction cases) 2.1 17 
Management of mining leases  2.2 26 
Non-lapsing/cancellation of 
inoperative leases 2.3 29 
Grant of mining leases through auction  2.4 30 
Recommendations  2.5 33 
Chapter-3:  Revenue Realisation and Management of S and 
Ghats   
Trend of Revenue  3.1 35 
Assessment, levy and collection of 
royalty  3.2 36 
Production beyond limit of Mining 
Plan/Environmental Clearance/ 
Consent to Operate  
3.3 39 
Management of Sand Ghats  by 
JSMDC  3.4 40 
Recommendations 3.5 49 
Chapter-4: Sustainable and Scientific Mining  
Mining Plan  4.1 52 
Environmental Clearance  4.2 86 
Transportation of minerals  4.3 91 
Recommendations 4.4 97 
Chapter-5: Conclusion  
Conclusion 99 
 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
ii  
Appendices  
Appendix 
No. 
Details Reference to 
Paragraph  Page 
2.1 Lease was granted on insufficient 
documents 2.1.3 103 
2.2 Irregular grant of extension of lease 
period 2.2.3 106 
4.1 
Excess extraction of stone excavated 
by lessee (within lease area: kml 
matched with lease area) 
4.1.4.1 112 
4.2 
Excess extraction of stone (Outside 
lease area: kml matched with lease 
area) 
4.1.4.1 117 
4.3 
Excess extraction of stone excavated 
by lessee (kml not matched with 
lease area) 
4.1.4.1 122 

 
 
 
PREFACE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared under Article 151 of the Constitution of I ndia for 
submission to the Governor of Jharkhand for being l aid before the 
State Legislative Assembly. 
A Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals  in 
Jharkhand, covering the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22, was carried 
out during November 2022 to October 2023 considerin g the 
significant impact of mining activities on the reve nue, development 
and mines affected areas and people.  
The Report has been prepared in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  

 
 
  
Executive Summary 

 
Executive Summary 
About the Report 
Jharkhand is endowed with abundant mineral resources but there has been a 
declining trend in revenue contributions from the mineral sector to the State. 
Issues relating to irregularities in grant of mineral concessions, unscientific 
and unsustainable mining practices by lease holders  etc. , have prominently 
featured in both print and electronic media. 
Therefore, there was a need to assess the State Gov ernment’s efficacy in 
enforcing provisions of applicable Acts and Rules framed thereunder by the 
Central and the State Government to tackle such lapses. Further, considering 
the significant impact of mining activities on the revenues and development 
of the State, a Performance Audit on the Management  of Minor 
Minerals in Jharkhand (2017-22), was conducted during November 2022 to 
October 2023.  
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether appropriate 
systems were being adopted to facilitate sustainabl e and scientific mining, 
mining leases/licenses were granted, renewed or can celled in accordance 
with the applicable provisions; management of mines  and minor minerals 
in the State was adequate and effective etc . 
As part of the Performance Audit, six district mini ng offices were selected 
for detailed examination, besides audit of the Jhar khand State Mineral 
Development Corporation Limited (JSMDC). This Perfo rmance Audit 
aimed to identify areas that require corrections an d improvement in the 
management of minor minerals in the State. 
Main Audit Conclusions 
Significant audit observations that emerged with re gard to management of 
minor minerals are as follows:   
Grant and management of leases  
• The Department could not institute a check and bala nce mechanism to 
ensure that the Deputy Commissioners (DCs) do not grant leases for the 
mining area beyond their authority. Mining lease ov er an area of three 
Ha. and above was required to be put to e-auction. However, in one case, 
DC, Sahibganj granted the mining lease (4.74 Ha. on  raiyati  land) over 
the area beyond his authority. In another case, DMO, Sahibganj not only 
entertained the application for mining lease over a n area of 3.136 Ha. 
but also  issued LoI by arbitrarily reducing the area to 2.833 Ha. without 
any request from the applicant for reduction of the lease area.  
• In DMOs, Chatra and Palamu, eight leases of stone were granted based 
on the reports of Circle Officer wherein nature of land was described as 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
2 
Gair-Mazarua Parti Kadim, patthar pahar, tand-II, purani parati and 
dhanhar-II. Audit observed that these leases were granted on the land 
which were Jungle Jhar, as per revenue records  and fell under the 
category of forest land under the provisions of the Forest Conservation 
Act, 1980. 
• The Department had no system in place to identify defaulters during 
grant of new leases and to detect nature of land use, resulting in grant of 
mining leases on forest land. These cases eventually resulted in irregular 
grant or renewal or extension of mining leases in the State. 
• Further, though the lessees had discontinued mining operations over a 
mineralised area of 276.99 acre in two test-checked districts for a 
continuous period of more than one year during 2017-23, these leases 
were neither declared lapsed nor cancelled. As a result, these inoperative 
leases remained idle, leading to blockage of State revenue and affecting 
mineral development. 
(Paragraphs 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.2.1, 2.2.3 and 2.3) 
Delay in auction process  
• Progress of auction of mineral blocks was very slow with only 
3.77 per cent (11 out of 292 blocks) auction completed during 2018-23. 
It was due to lack of monitoring by the Department and deficiencies in 
planning, which restricted effective conduct of auctions in a phased and 
time bound manner. As a result, minor mineral blocks with potential 
resources remained idle, leading to blockage of revenue.  
(Paragraph 2.4.1) 
Trend of Revenue 
• Revenue receipts from minor minerals declined significantly, from 
₹1,082.44 crore in 2017–18 to ₹697.73 crore in 2021–22. Furthermore, 
t
he share of minor mineral receipts in the State’s total revenue also saw 
a decline, dropping from 5.36 per cent in 2017–18 to 2.23 per cent in 
2021–22. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
Deficiencies in Automation  
• An IT based mineral administration system, the Jharkhand Integrated 
Mines and Minerals Management System (JIMMS), was introduced 
(May 2015) with the objective of simplifying complex mining 
processes. Despite lapse of more than seven years, automation of records 
was found to be incomplete during audit, due to unavailability of crucial 
records and consequently, the goal of encapsulating all crucial 
data/information in one platform, remained unachieved. For instance, 

Executive Summary 
3 
JIMMS has the provision to generate lease maps on Google 
Application using coordinates, which could assist the Department in 
monitoring the mining operation through generated maps. However, 
in 47 cases, coordinates required were not filled while in 15 cases, 
coordinates filled were insufficient, preventing the generation of 
satellite images and hindering monitoring of mining activities. 
• Royalty leviable on stone boulders was determined by their intended 
uses. However, modules in the system lacked capability to identify 
the specific uses. Rules mandate annual assessment of royalty 
payable by lessees, but JIMMS lacked necessary tools for this 
purpose.  Due to these constraints, JIMMS could not be 
comprehensively used for assessment and collection of revenue by 
the Department. 
(Paragraph 3.2.1)  
Leakage of Revenue 
• There was leakage of revenue due to short levy of royalty including 
District Mineral Foundation Trust funds of ₹ 7.53 crore in 30 cases 
d
uring the period October 2019 to January 2022 and non realisation of 
dead rent of ₹ 2.23 crore in 15 cases during the period March 2016  to 
March 2022. Further, between April 2014 and July 2023, 26 lessees in 
four districts extracted 33.21 lakh m³ of minor minerals beyond the 
permissible limits. Although these lessees were liable to pay penalty 
amounting to ₹ 205.21 crore for unauthorised extraction of mineral s, 
District Mining Offices of respective districts did not impose and collect 
the penalty.  
(Paragraphs 3.2.2, 3.2.3 and 3.3)  
Management of Sand ghats 
• The State Government notified (August 2017) the Jharkhand State Sand 
Mining Policy, 2017 for effective guidance and management of sand 
mining in the State, in an environmentally sustainable and socially 
responsible manner. According to the Policy, the management of sand 
ghats of Category-2 in the State was handed over to the Jharkhand State 
Mining Development Corporation (JSMDC) for a period of five years 
w.e.f 16 August 2017, which was later extended for three years from 
August 2022. 
• The Directorate of Mines provided (November 2017) JSMDC with a list 
of Category-2 sand ghats numbering a total of 177 ghats in 19 districts, 
which was later updated (March 2022) to 608 ghats in 23 districts. 
JSMDC initiated the process to operationalise 389 sand ghats but it 
could operate only 21 ghats. The reasons for this included not ensuring 
timely preparation of Mining Plans (MP), and delay in submission of 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
4 
proposals to the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
(SEIAA) for grant of Environmental Clearance (EC). Due to 368 non-
operative ghats, the State Government suffered potential losses of 
₹ 70.92 crore from these g
 hats having an area of 9,782.55 acres. 
• Since all Category-2 sand ghats in the State have been exclusively 
operated by the JSMDC from October 2018, the royalty received from 
the sand as reported by the Department should have matched the figures 
reported by the JSMDC. However, significant discrepancies were 
observed in the royalty amounts for the period 2019–2022, with 
differences ranging from ₹ 82.55 lakh to ₹ 7.61 crore, for which no 
j
ustification was provided to audit. 
(Paragraphs 3.4.1, 3.4.3 and 3.4.4.1) 
Approval and implementation of Mining Plan/ Progressive Mine 
Closure Plan 
• The Mining Plan (MP) serves as the basis for scientific and sustainable 
mining practices. In 64 of 74 test-checked cases of fresh lease, granted 
during February 2009 to March 2022, only the approved MPs and 
conditional approval letters were provided to Audit without supporting 
evidence of site inspections or dates of submission of MPs by applicants. 
This lack of documentation raises concerns about the thoroughness and 
transparency of the review and approval process. 
• Out of 138 Mining Plans for 74 test checked stone leases, 120 plans were 
produced before Audit. Audit observed that 54 per cent (65 out of 120) 
of test checked Mining Plans were approved by non-designated 
authorities. According to the JMMC Rules, approval of the MP should 
be given after thorough investigation but in nine cases these were either 
approved on the same day or on the very next day of submission, 
indicating lack of thorough investigation. Further, the approved MPs 
contained unreliable information viz., incorrect surface plans, incorrect 
coordinates of boundary pillars, overlapping lease areas, incorrect 
estimation of mineable and non-mineable reserves, incorrect estimation 
of ground water tables.  
• The lease area is categorised into two parts: Mining Pit Area, containing 
mineable reserves for excavation and non-mineable resources in form of 
benches; and Safety Barrier of 7.5 meter zone around the pit area that 
holds only non-mineable resources, which is not available for mining. 
The audit calculated that a total of 83.87 lakh tonnes of non-mineable 
resources in 14 out of 25 cases should have been blocked within safety 
barriers, against which only 53.21 lakh tonnes were earmarked in the 
Mining Plans, leading to an overstatement of mineable resources to an 

Executive Summary 
5 
extent of 30.66 lakh tonnes. This resulted in irregular accounting of 
mineable reserves worth ₹ 34.96 crore within the mining pit area.  
(
Paragraphs 4.1.1, 4.1.2 and 4.1.3) 
• Mining in non-mineable area of the lease is an irregular practice. Audit 
observed that 55 (87 per cent) out of 63 leases had side walls with steep 
slopes, instead of the recommended gentle slope. This resulted in 
irregular excavation of non-mineable resources without creating 
benches and safety barriers. Lessees also excavated beyond the 
allowable depth, vertically infringing on non-mineable resources, with 
pit depths exceeding permissible limits by 2.5 to 50 meters ( i.e., 11 to 
494 per cent).  
• Besides, in 14 out of 22 cases, lessees extracted minerals from 
15.44 hectares (Ha.) that was outside the lease area.  Excavation beyond 
lease area could have been monitored through satellite images of lease 
area generated through kml files, updating coordinates of each boundary 
pillar in JIMMS portal.  These were not ensured in 63 test checked 
stone leases. 
• Audit estimated extraction volumes by measuring excavated areas in 
Google Earth and multiplying them with depths observed during joint 
physical verification, adjusting for trapped volumes in slopes and haul 
roads.  It is observed that lessees had underreported stone excavation by 
93.53 lakh m
3 in 13 leases out of 63 test checked leases. This was 
validated by Birsa Institute of Technology (BIT) Sindri, which was 
engaged by audit for volume calculation of excavated minerals in stone 
quarries for these 13 mines. BIT, Sindri used AutoCAD Civil 3D 
software for calculating the total extraction and reported excess 
extraction (after deduction the production quantities during the period) 
at 95.51 m
3 i.e., 2.12 per cent more than the quantity estimated by Audit. 
The potential financial implication of underreporting of mineral 
extraction (93.53 lakh m
3) was estimated at ₹ 292.75 crore.   
• I
n deviation of applicable provisions , against yearly requirement of 
20 per cent, Department of Mines and Geology, Government of 
Jharkhand conducted yearly sectional measurements of only 0.68 to 
3.17 per cent of the existing minor mineral leases in six test checked 
districts during the period 2017-22.  
•  In 46 out of 63 cases, either the boundary pillars were entirely absent 
(30) or was only partially present (16). Furthermore, in 62 out of 
63 leases across the sampled districts, the mandated 7.5-meter safety 
barrier was reduced, with actual widths ranging from 0 to 7 meters.  
(Paragraph 4.1.4.1) 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
6 
• To mitigate the adverse impact of mining on the environment, 
plantations were to be placed on the safety barriers of mining leases.  
Accordingly, lessees were required to plant the recommended quantity 
of trees in grid pattern on safety barriers. Audit found that in 61 out of 
63 test-checked leases across sampled districts, only 2,225 trees were 
planted against the proposed 74,676, resulting in a shortage of tree 
plantation ranging from 20 to 100 per cent. Further, air, water, and noise 
monitoring stations were not found established within the lease area to 
monitor the levels of pollution.   
(Paragraph 4.1.4.2) 
• Every mine is required to have a Mine Closure Plan which is of two 
types: Progressive mine closure plan for the purpose of providing 
protective, reclamation and rehabilitation measures in a mine or part 
thereof; and Final mine closure plan for the purpose of 
decommissioning, reclamation and rehabilitation of a mine or part 
thereof after cessation of mining and mineral processing operations. 
Audit observed that in 61 out of 63 test checked stone leases (in two 
cases MPs not produced), though the progressive mine closure plans 
were submitted along with the MP, the same were not complied 
with. Further, the final mine closure plans were not submitted in 12 of 
63 test-checked cases, where lease period had expired during the period 
from May 2019 to July 2023. 
(Paragraph 4.1.5) 
Environmental Clearance 
• Absence of any system to cross-verify the documents submitted by the 
applicant on Parivesh Portal enabled applicants to obtain ECs from 
SEIAA under B2 (0-5 Ha.) category based on fake contiguous 
certificates instead of ECs under B2 (5 to 25 Ha.) category. After 
obtaining leases on these fake certificates, lessees had excavated 
6.35 lakh m
3 of stone (as of March 2024) valuing ₹ 19.88 crore 
u
nauthorisedly during 2022-23 and 2023-24.  
 (Paragraph 4.2.1) 
• While 29 per cent (171) of the participants of the beneficiaries’ survey, 
conducted by Audit during November 2022 to October 2023 reported 
that mining activities provided them with employment, 68 per cent (407) 
expressed concerns that their quality of life had deteriorated due to 
environmental damage, destruction of agricultural field, depletion of the 
water table, damaged roads and the absence of any restoration works. 
 (Paragraph 4.2.3) 
 

Executive Summary 
7 
Transportation of minerals 
• The Department of Mines and Geology (DMG) registered 
72,449 vehicles as of 28 March 2023, but none of these vehicles was 
equipped with Radio Frequency Identification/ Global Positioning 
System (RFID/GPS) or any other vehicle tracking system even after a 
lapse of five years. The Department relied on permits and challans 
system in the absence of comprehensive systems to detect unauthorized 
movements of vehicles, overloading, transportation on unregistered 
vehicles etc. 
(Paragraph 4.3.1) 
• The overall system for transportation of minerals did not provide an 
assurance that it could prevent illegal transportation of minerals. Audit 
test checked weighbridge report of seven dealers of stone chips and 
found that in 85 per cent of cases, transporting challans issued through 
JIMMS were unavailable. 
• In case of 28 vehicles, 35 initial challans were followed by 50 additional 
challans that were issued before the expiry of the previous challans, due 
to lacunae in JIMMS, leading to risk of misutilisation of challans. 
(Paragraph 4.3.1.1) 
• Audit noticed instances of (i) misutilisation of transporting challans for 
transportation of stone extracted illegally from an area other than the 
area under lease, and (ii) transportation of closing stock of stone lying 
at quarry site of the expired leases. 
(Paragraph 4.3.1.2) 
Audit Recommendations  
In order to ensure sustainable and scientific mining of minor minerals and 
to boost the revenue of the State, the Government/Department may: 
1. implement a system of online application of mining lease and put 
in place a procedure for issuing/obtaining centralised royalty 
clearance certificates through JIMMS. The Department may also 
ensure integration of JIMMS with online land records; 
2. take necessary steps to cancel leases granted on Jungle Jhar/ 
forest land and restore legal status of such land;  
3. cancel inoperative leases and expedite auctioning process of 
mineral blocks for revenue augmentation and mineral 
development in the State;  
4. fix responsibility on erring officers who violated provisions of the 
relevant Acts and Rules by misreporting the nature of land to be 
leased for mining; 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
8 
5. assess reasons for decrease of sand reserves in inoperative sand 
ghats and take comprehensive measures to augment Government 
revenue from minor minerals by operationalizing sand ghats;  
6. fix responsibility on erring officials who did not verify rates of 
royalty applicable to boulders dispatched to crushers for making 
chips and adhere to provisions of the Act/Rules for collection of 
correct royalty and penalty;  
7. make concerted efforts to rectify shortcomings of JIMMS 
including formulating a mechanism for submission of Mining 
Plans through JIMMS for transparency and documentary 
evidence;  
8. formulate a manual for appraisal of Mining Plans on minor 
minerals in line with the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) Manual 
on appraisal of Mining Plan (2014), to establish a standardized 
procedure for processing, examination and scrutiny of Mining 
Plans; 
9. ensure submission of kml files of lease area created through 
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) survey alongwith 
the Mining Plans, ensure submission of these files to SEIAA, 
update repository of kml files thereon for monitoring through 
satellite imagery and enforce the progressive mine closure plan as 
proposed in the MPs. Also ensure that a final mine closure plan 
is submitted by lessees, and approved by the District Mining 
Officers (DMOs) for its implementation; 
10. conduct detailed investigation to work out the exact volume of 
under-reported minerals extracted and make provisions in JMMC 
Rules, 2004 in line with Rule 34A of Mineral Conservation and 
Development Rules (MCDR), 2017 for carrying out drone survey 
of minor mineral leases throughout the State for checking 
instance of excess excavation by lessees and imposing penalties 
accordingly; 
11. establish inter-departmental coordination among DMG, Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, State Environment 
Impact Assessment Authority, Central Ground Water Board and 
Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board for compliance of 
conditions of MPs and ECs;  
12. implement system for periodic survey for identification and 
reconstruction/restoration of damaged assets due to mining 
activities;  
 

Executive Summary 
9 
13. implement a comprehensive system by integrating all aspects of 
transportation of minerals (weighing, tracking, monitoring etc.) 
to effectively monitor and plug illegal transportation of minerals; 
and 
14. ensure installation of weighbridges in dealer/lease areas with 
facilities for authentically fetching weighment data for 
transporting challans on a real-time basis.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 

 
Chapter  
  
Introduction 
1.1  Background 
Mineral as defined under Section 3(ad) of the Mines  and Mineral 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR Act) i ncludes all 
minerals except mineral oils. Management of mineral  resources is the 
responsibility of both the Central and State Govern ment 1. Minerals can be 
divided into two categories i.e. , Major and Minor Minerals. Minerals 
defined in the First Schedule (including notified m inerals in the Fourth 
Schedule) of the MMDR Act are interpreted as major minerals in Rules 
framed under the MMDR Act. As per Section 3(e) of t he Act, ibid , minor 
minerals include building stone, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand etc.  and 
any other minerals notified by the Central Government.  
Section 15 of the Act ibid  empowers a State Government to make rules for 
regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining lease s or other mineral 
concessions in respect of minor minerals and for th e purposes connected 
therewith.  
The Government of Jharkhand (GoJ) has framed Jharkh and Minor Mineral 
Concession (JMMC)  Rules,  2004 for regulating grant of quarry leases, 
mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals. A 
list of minor minerals is annexed with JMMC Rules a s Schedule-2  
and 2 
(क). 
The Department of Mines and Geology, Government of Jharkhand 
implemented (May 2015) an IT based mineral administ ration system 
through a software application named the Jharkhand Integrated Mines and 
Minerals Management System (JIMMS) with an objectiv e to simplify the 
assessment procedure. As per JIMMS  portal, there were total 599 working 
leases of minor minerals in Jharkhand as of November 2023.  
1.2  Why we selected this topic? 
Issues relating to irregularities in grant of miner al concessions by the State 
Government, unscientific and unsustainable mining p ractices by stone 
mining lease holders, non-settlement of sand ghats  etc . have prominently 
featured in both print and electronic media. 
Therefore, the topic ‘Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand’ was 
selected to assess the State Government’s efficacy in enforcing provisions 
                                                 
1  Entry 54 of the Union List (List I) and entry 23 of the State List (List-II) of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
1 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
12  
of the applicable Act and Rules framed thereunder b y the Central and the 
State Governments to tackle the highlighted issues.  
1.3  Organizational set up 
At the Government level, the Secretary, Department of Mines and Geology 
(Department), GoJ is responsible for the administra tion of the Act and 
Rules. The Secretary is assisted by two Joint Secre taries, two Deputy 
Secretaries and three Under Secretaries. The Department is divided into two 
functional entities under the charge of Director, G eology and Director, 
Mines. 
The Director, Mines, is responsible for the adminis tration of the Act and 
Rules. He is assisted by an Additional Director, Mines, (ADM), two Deputy 
Directors, Mines (DDM) and two Assistant Mining Officers (AMOs) at the 
Headquarters’ level. The State is divided into six Circles 
2, each under the 
charge of a DDM. The Circles are further divided in to 24 District Mining 
Offices 3, each under the charge of a DMO/AMO. The DMOs/AMOs  are 
responsible for levy and collection of royalty and other mining dues. They 
are assisted by Mining Inspectors (MIs). DMOs and M Is are authorized to 
(i) inspect the mining lease areas, (ii) review the  production and (iii) check 
the dispatch of minerals. 
The Director, Geology is responsible for detailed g eological exploration of 
minerals, geo technical studies & analysis of miner als and preparation of 
mineral blocks for auction with reference to Minerals (Evidence of Mineral 
Contents) Rules, 2015. The Director, Geology is ass isted by an Additional 
Director, four Deputy Directors, three Assistant Di rectors and five 
Geologists at the headquarters level. Jharkhand als o has a State Geological 
Laboratory and a Geological Training Institute unde r the charge of an 
Additional Director, Geology. The State is divided into five Circles 
4, each 
under the charge of a Deputy Director, Geology. The  Circles are further 
divided into 14 District Geological Offices 5, each under the charge of an 
Assistant Director, Geology. These Assistant Direct ors are further assisted 
by Geologists. 
                                                 
2 South Chotanagpur Circle (Ranchi), North Chotanagpu r Circle (Hazaribagh), Kolhan 
Circle (Chaibasa), Santhal Pargana Circle (Dumka), Dhanbad Circle and Palamu Circle 
(Medininagar). 
3 Bokaro, Chaibasa, Chatra, Deoghar, Dhanbad, Dumka,  Garhwa, Giridih, Godda, 
Gumla, Hazaribagh, Jamshedpur, Jamtara, Khunti, Kod erma, Latehar, Lohardaga, 
Pakur, Palamu, Ramgarh, Ranchi, Sahibganj, Saraikela–Kharsawan and Simdega. 
4  Kolhan, North Chotanagpur, Palamu, Santhal Pargana and South Chotanagpur. 
5  Bokaro (for Bokaro and Dhanbad districts), Chaiba sa, Deoghar (for Deoghar and 
Jamtara districts), Dumka (for Dumka and Godda dist ricts), Hazaribagh (for Chatra, 
Hazaribagh and Ramgarh districts), Jamshedpur, Guml a (for Gumla and Simdega 
districts), Koderma (for Giridih and Koderma distri cts), Latehar, Lohardaga, 
Medininagar (for Garhwa and Palamu districts) Ranch i (for Ranchi and Khunti 
districts), Sahibganj (for Pakur and Sahibganj districts) and Saraikela–Kharsawan. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
13 
The organizational set-up is depicted in the Chart 1.1 . 
Chart- 1.1: Organizational Set-up of the Department 
1.4  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit (PA) was undertaken to ascertain whether:  
i)  mining leases or licenses were granted, renewed, cl osed and cancelled 
in accordance with the provisions of the relevant Act and Rules; 
ii)  management of mines of minor minerals in the State was adequate and 
effective to ensure systematic, sustainable & scien tific mining and to 
augment and safeguard revenue; and 
iii)  adequate internal controls and co-ordination existe d between various 
Departments involved in mining activities to address environmental and 
ecological concerns; prevent illegal mining and leakage of revenue. 
Director, Geology 
Additional Director, Geology 
(Hq.) 
 
Additional Director, 
Geology 
Five Circles 
(Each under charge of Dy. 
Director, Geology) 
State Geological  
Laboratory, 
Hazaribagh 
Geological Training 
Institute, Hazaribagh 
 
14  District Geology Offices 
(Each under charge of Assistant Director of 
Geology) 
Director, Mines 
Additional Director, Mines (Hq.) 
Six Circles 
(Each under charge of Dy. 
Director , Mines)  
Two Assistant Mining 
Officers (Hq.) 
24 District Mining Offices 
(Each under charge of District/ 
Assistant Mining Officer) 
 
Four Dy. Directors, Geology 
(Hq.) 
Three Assistant Directors-cum 
Senior Geologists 
 
Five Geologists 
(Hq.) 
 
Dy. Director, 
Mines 
Dy. Director, 
Mines (Hq.) 
Secretary , 
Department of Mines and Geology  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
14  
1.5  Audit Criteria 
The Audit Criteria have been derived from the following sources: 
• The MMDR Act, 1957 with amendments; 
• Minor Mineral Conservation and Development Rules (M MCDR), 
2010; 
• Jharkhand Minor Mineral Concession (JMMC) Rules, 20 04 with 
amendments; 
• Jharkhand Minor Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2017; 
•  Jharkhand State Sand Mining Policy, 2017; 
•  Jharkhand Minor Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Cont ents) Rules, 
2018; 
• Jharkhand Minerals (Prevention of Illegal Mining, T ransportation and 
Storage) Rules, 2017; 
• The Bihar and Orissa Public Demands Recovery (BOPDR) Act, 1914; 
• Notifications, orders and circulars issued by the G overnment and the 
Department. 
1.6  Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the period of five ye ars from 2017-18 to 
2021-22. Audit involved scrutiny of records at the State level units 
(Departments and Directorates), selected district m ining offices and joint 
physical verification (JPV). 
Audit scrutinized the following broad areas: 
• allocation and auction of minor minerals, trend of revenue and 
exploration of minerals; 
• the role of associated agencies like State Environm ental Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA), Jharkhand State Pollu tion Control 
Board (JSPCB) etc ., and their coordination with the Department;  
• the role of Jharkhand State Mineral Development Cor poration Ltd. 
(JSMDC) in view of Jharkhand State Sand Mining Policy, 2017; 
• Mining plans and information available on JIMMS, in  respect of 
74 mining leases of minor minerals;  
•  Mining plans of 63 stone leases in six sampled dis tricts (out of 
24 districts in Jharkhand) through Joint Physical V erification (JPV), 
examination of mining lease area through Keyhole Ma rkup Language 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
15 
(kml) files 6 on Google Earth pro and information available on 
Geographical Information System (GIS) etc .; and 
• beneficiary survey of 597 mines affected people in six sampled 
districts. 
1.7  Sample and Sampling Methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the Department and JSMDC. 
Details of sampling of minerals, units and methodology used therein are 
as under: 
Minerals:  During 2017-22, out of total royalty from minor mi nerals 7, 
95 per cent  was realized from stone alone  so six 8 out of 24 District Mining 
Offices were selected based on  royalty collected from stone quarrying for 
detailed audit analysis. Representation of sampled districts on the map of 
Jharkhand is as under: 
Picture- 1.1: Showing six sampled districts on the map of Jharkhand  
 
JSMDC: Under a new sand mining policy of August 2017, JSMD C was 
made deemed lessee for regular and adequate supply of sand at a reasonable 
price to common people of the State. However, only 21 out of 608 
Category-2 sand ghats  were in operation during the audit coverage period . 
                                                 
6  kml file is a format used to display geographical  data in Earth browser such as Google 
Earth. 
7  Stone metal, Brick earth, Sand, China Clay, Dolom ite, Morrum  etc . 
8  Chaibasa, Chatra, Dhanbad, Pakur, Palamu and Sahi bganj. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
16  
A detailed review of JSMDC was carried out by Audit to assess the reasons 
for the operation of only 3.45 per cent  of commercial sand ghats. 
1.8  Entry and Exit Conference 
Entry Conference was held on 25 August 2022 with th e Secretary, 
Department of Mines and Geology, GoJ, wherein objec tives, scope and 
methodology were explained. The Exit Conference was  held with the 
Secretary of the Department on 22 July 2024. The Se cretary stated that the 
data pertaining to observations/suggestions were under verification and the 
detailed reply/comments would be furnished after ex amination. However, 
detailed replies in respect of the audit observatio ns made have not been 
received despite several reminders issued between M arch 2024 and 
May 2025 (July 2025). 
1.9  Structure of the Report 
This report is structured on the basis of findings that emerged during audit. 
The audit findings have been reported under the following chapters: 
Chapter-2: Allotment of mining leases; 
Chapter-3:  Revenue realisation and Management of Sand Ghats ; 
Chapter-4: Sustainable and Scientific mining; and  
Chapter-5: Conclusion. 
1.10 Acknowledgement 
The Performance Audit was conducted between Novembe r 2022 and 
October 2023. Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended 
by the Department, JSMDC, State Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA) and the test checked District Min ing Offices in 
conducting the PA. 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
Allotment of mining leases 

 
Chapter  
  
Allotment of mining leases 
Section 15 of the MMDR Act, 1957 empowers a State Government to make 
rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral 
concessions in respect of minor minerals and for th e purposes connected 
therewith. Accordingly, the GoJ framed the Jharkhan d Minor Mineral 
Concession (JMMC) Rules, 2004 which have been amend ed from time to 
time. According to JMMC Rules, 2004 lease in respec t of stone, morrum  
and soil over raiyati  land up to three hectares (Ha.) is granted by the Deputy 
Commissioner (DC) and leases in other cases of minor minerals irrespective 
of area and title of land, are granted through e-auction by the Director, Mines 
under the provisions of Jharkhand Minor Minerals (A uction) Rules, 2017 
(JMMAR, 2017) framed (notified on 16 August 2017) by GoJ. 
2.1 Grant of leases of minor minerals (Non-auction cases)9 
A flow chart depicting the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) required to 
be adopted for grant of mining lease of minor minerals in non-auction cases 
by DCs is shown in Chart-2.1 . 
Chart-2.1: SOP for non-auction cases of grant of mining leases for 
minor minerals 
An application in Form “A” along with the prescribe d documents is submitted 
for obtaining mining lease of minor minerals to the  District Mining Officer 
(DMO). After checking the completeness of the appli cation, DMO may either 
accept, or out rightly reject the application within 30 days of its receipt. 
 
After obtaining required verification from the Forest Department, Land Revenue 
Department and consent of the concerned gram sabha , DMO issues a Letter of 
Intent (LoI) within 120 days from the receipt of th e application, otherwise the 
application becomes deemed rejected, after being time barred. 
 
Applicant of a mining lease is required to submit a  Mining Plan (MP) and a 
Progressive Mine Closure Plan for approval. The app licant is also required to 
obtain Environmental Clearance (EC) from competent authority for prevention 
of air, water pollution and environmental conservation. 
 
Mining lease grant order is issued within 30 days a fter submission of MP and 
EC. On deposit of the sum relating to preliminary expenses, security deposit and 
financial assurance, lease deed is executed within 90 days from the date of issue 
of grant order, otherwise the grant order stands ca ncelled. After this, applicant 
has to obtain Consent to Establish (CTE) and Consen t to Operate (CTO) from 
JSPCB before starting mining operations. 
                                                 
9  Grant of mining leases by Deputy Commissioner ove r raiyati  land. 
2 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
18  
Audit noticed from the data/information available o n JIMMS portal 
(November 2023) that a total of 599 leases of minor minerals were operating 
in the State. 
Scrutiny of data/information furnished by six DMOs 
10  revealed that 
89 mining leases of minor minerals were granted dur ing 2017-22. Out of 
these 89 cases, Audit test checked 40 cases (45 per cent of the total leases 
granted during the audit coverage period). Besides these, Audit also test 
checked 79 other cases, where mining lease was granted pre-2017 but these 
leases were either operational or had been renewed during the audit period 
(2017-22). Details of mining leases in test checked  districts are shown in 
Table-2.1. 
Table-2.1: Showing details of minor minerals leases in test checked 
districts as on 31 March 2022 
District No. of operating 
leases of minor 
minerals as on 
31.03.2022 
No. of mining 
leases granted 
during 2017-22 
No. of leases test 
checked out of no. 
of mining leases 
granted during 
2017-22 
No. of leases test 
checked allotted 
prior to 2017 
(part of sampled 
leases) 
Chaibasa 11 00 00 10 
Chatra 13 03 02 08 
Dhanbad 62 12 12 12 
Pakur 51 24 07 20 
Palamu 54 30 04 21 
Sahibganj 78 20 15 08 
Total 269 89 40 79 
Total leases test checked 119 
Source: information provided by DMOs 
During the examination of these 119 cases, Audit no ticed several 
irregularities in 44 cases of grant of mining lease s, which are shown in 
Table-2.2 and discussed in detail in subsequent paragraphs. 
Table-2.2: Showing brief of irregularities in grant of minor minerals  
Sl. 
No.  
Brief of irregularities District No. of 
Cases 
1 
The Deputy Commissioner (DC) was not competent to g rant 
mining lease over an area above three Ha. of Raiyati land 11  but the 
same was granted by the DC.  (Paragraph 2.1.1.1)  Sahibganj  
1 
2 Mining lease was granted where DMO suo moto  reduced the 
applied area.  (Paragraph 2.1.1.2)  1 
3 
Mining lease was granted over forest land against the provisions of 
Rule 5(3) of JMMC Rules, 2004 and Forest Conservation Act 1980.  
(Paragraph 2.1.2)  
Palamu 7 
Chatra 1 
4 Mining lease was granted on i ncomplete set of mandatory 
documents. (Paragraph 2.1.3)  
Chaibasa  4 
Chatra 4 
Dhanbad 6 
Pakur 4 
Palamu 1 
Sahibganj  11 
                                                 
10   Chaibasa, Chatra, Dhanbad, Pakur, Palamu and Sahi bganj. 
11    Nature of land (belongs to individual) as shown in Register 2, a government revenue 
record. 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
19  
Table-2.2: Showing brief of irregularities in grant of minor minerals  
Sl. 
No.  
Brief of irregularities District No. of 
Cases 
5 
Mining lease was granted to the defaulters. (Paragraph 2.1 .3 
bullets)  
Dhanbad 2 
Pakur 2 
Total  44 
2.1.1  Irregular grant of leases 
Audit observed frequent changes in the JMMC Rules, 2004 in respect of 
grant of lease of stone quarries. Period-wise chang es in Rules and their 
impact on lease applications and authority of DC to grant mining lease over 
raiyati land is explained below:  
• JMMC Amendment Rules, 2017: During 02 March 2017 to  
11 December 2017 
(i)  Application for mining lease below five Ha. of raiyati land could be 
made to the DC who was empowered to grant the same. 
(ii)  Any applications, for grant of lease over an area exceeding five Ha. 
of raiyati  land that were pending on the date the amendment c ame 
into effect, became deemed ineligible, except those cases where LoI 
had been issued subject to a condition that applica nt would have to 
submit MP and EC within 180 days from the date of notification i.e. , 
01 September 2017 otherwise it would be deemed rejected. 
• JMMC (2nd  Amendment) Rules, 2017:  During 12 December 2017 
to 13 March 2019 
(i)  Application for mining lease below five Ha. of raiyati land could be 
made to the DC and he was empowered to grant the same. 
(ii)  All pending applications for mining leases irrespec tive of area over 
raiyati land became deemed ineligible except those cases where LoI 
had been issued subject to a condition that applica nt would have to 
submit MP and EC within 180 days from the date of notification i.e. , 
12 December 2017 otherwise it would be deemed rejected. 
• JMMC (Amendment) Rules, 2019: From 14 March 2019 to till date  
(i)  DC can grant mining lease for stone, morrum  and soil only over 
raiyati land having area up to three Ha. 
Under the provisions of Rule 62 of the JMMC Rules, 2004, an applicant 
could file an appeal before the Mines Commissioner for review of rejection 
of application, within 60 days of the rejection ord er or within 75 days of 
deemed rejection.  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
20  
From the scrutiny of lease files in DMO, Sahibganj, Audit noticed  two cases 
where leases for minor minerals were irregularly gr anted as discussed 
below: 
2.1.1.1 Irregular grant of mining lease over an are a of three Ha.  
An applicant had applied (September 2017) for stone  mining lease over an 
area of 4.74 Ha. of raiyati land for which DMO, Sahibganj issued LoI 
(October 2017). Meanwhile the second amendment to J MCC Rules was 
issued (12 December 2017) vide which the applicant had to submit the MP 
& EC within 180 days from the date of issue of LoI.  Since the applicant 
failed to submit the MP and EC by the due date of 1 1 June 2018, his 
application became deemed rejected (June 2018). How ever, it was noted 
that despite being deemed rejected, the applicant a pplied for EC to SEIAA 
in October 2019, which was subsequently granted in November 2019.  
In the meantime, Rule 9(1) ( 
ङ) of JMMC Rules, 2004 was again amended 
(w.e.f. 28 September 2020), stating that if an appl ication for mining lease 
could not be disposed of due to non-submission of M P and EC within 180 
days from the date of issue of LoI, and if there wa s no fault on the part of 
the applicant for delay, the Mines Commissioner may  consider the 
application on the merit of the case.  
The applicant filed (October 2020) a revision petit ion before the 
Mines Commissioner, Jharkhand who, after review, re manded back 
(22 December 2020) the case to the DC, Sahibganj wi th a direction to 
examine the matter afresh, subject to the submission of statutory clearances 
as per the provisions laid down in the JMMC Rules. In response to the 
instructions of the Mines Commissioner, DC, Sahibga nj granted 
(February 2021) mining lease on the basis of propos al note presented 
(December 2020) by DMO, Sahibganj. Subsequently, le ase deed was 
executed (April 2021) for the period from 08 April 2021 to 07 April 2031. 
Audit observed that the applicant filed review peti tion after deemed 
rejection of the application, which was remanded ba ck to DC, Sahibganj 
with a direction to examine the matter afresh. The DMO, Sahibganj, 
however, misinterpreted the order and recorded that the Commissioner had 
not held the applicant responsible for delay in getting the EC and forwarded 
the proposal note to the DC. Audit, however, notice d that the delay was on 
the part of the applicant as he had applied (October 2019) for EC after lapse 
of 10 months when the application had already become deemed rejected. As 
such, DMO, Sahibganj presented incorrect and mislea ding fact in his 
proposal note forwarded to DC, Sahibganj, who grant ed (February 2021) 
the lease without verifying the intent/content of orders of the Commissioner. 
Audit further observed that in terms of Rule 9(1) o f JMMC (Amendment) 
Rules, 2019, the DC was not competent to grant mini ng lease over an area 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
21  
of three Ha. and above. Mining lease over an area o f three Ha. and above 
was required to be put to e-auction. However, DC, S ahibganj granted the 
mining lease (4.74 Ha. on raiyati  land) over the area beyond his authority in 
gross violation of Rules ibid . Compliance to the procedure for grant of lease 
over areas of three Ha. and above, through e-auction, could have generated 
higher revenue. 
2.1.1.2 Grant of mining lease by irregular reductio n in applied area 
An applicant had applied (02 March 2019) for mining lease over an area of 
3.136 Ha. on raiyati  land for which DMO, Sahibganj issued (June 2019) LoI 
for an area of 2.833 Ha. and EC was issued in Octob er 2019. The mining 
lease was granted by DC, Sahibganj and grant order was issued by 
DMO, Sahibganj (July 2021). Subsequently, lease dee d was executed 
(August 2021) for the period of 10 years from the d ate of execution of 
lease deed.  
Audit observed that in terms of Rule 9(1) of JMMC ( Second Amendment) 
Rules, 2017 and Rule 9(1) of JMMC (Amendment) Rules , 2019 effective 
from 14 March 2019, all applications for mining lease over an area of three 
Ha. and above should have become deemed ineligible and those areas 
should have been settled through e-auction. However, DMO, Sahibganj not 
only entertained the application but also  issued LoI by arbitrarily reducing 
the area to 2.833 Ha. without any request from the applicant for reduction 
of the lease area. Thus,  reduction in the applied area was indicative of 
connivance between the district administration and applicant to circumvent 
the provisions for grant of lease through e-auction . Responsibility for 
misleading competent higher authorities and grantin g undue favour to the 
applicant, needs to be fixed. 
2.1.2 Irregular grant of lease over forest land 
Rule 5(3) of JMMC Rules, 2004 stipulates that no mi ning lease will be 
granted on protected and conserved forests without prior approval of the 
Central Government. Further, MoEFCC issued letter (F.No.11-28/2005-FC, 
GoI) stating that the legal status of any land reco rded as forest or Jungle 
Jhar  in revenue records could not be changed without the prior approval of 
the Central Government as per provisions of the For est Conservation (FC) 
Act, 1980. The GoJ conducts surveys for updating the nature of lands. Based 
on these surveys, the nature of land is periodicall y updated, replacing the 
old ones from the date of notification. New survey document would become 
effective only after it is notified, without which,  such document would not 
be valid. 
In DMOs, Chatra and Palamu, eight leases of stone w ere granted on the 
basis of reports of Circle Officer (CO) wherein nature of land was described 
as Gair-Mazarua Parti Kadim, patthar pahar, tand-II, p urani parati and  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
22  
dhanhar-II . Audit examined these cases and observed that these leases were 
granted on the land which were Jungle Jhar and fell under the category of 
forest land under the provisions of the FC Act, 1980. Details of examination 
of these leases are shown in Table-2.3. 
Table-2.3: Cases of Irregular grant of mining leases over forest land 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Details of lease and Date of 
Grant 
District Nature of 
land as per 
CO’s 
Report 
Audit observation 
A.  Audit scrutinised the cases due to complaints of villagers found in the records 
1 
Ravi Shankar Singh, 
Mauza-Kharwadih, Circle- 
Chhatarpur, Old Khata  
No- 18 and Plot No.- 515 
Palamu 
 
Patthar 
Tand-II 
and 
Dhanhar-II 
 
Scrutiny of cadastral map ( year 
1915-16), which was based on the old  
survey report revealed that the nature 
of land was depicted/ symbolized as 
Jungle Jhar . 
2 
Ashutosh Stone Mines, 
Mauza-Dalkoma, Circle- 
Hunterganj, Khata No.- 31 
& 34, Plot No. 223 & 
221/238, Date of grant- 
09.06.2014 
Chatra 
 
Gair 
Mazarua-
Parti 
Kadim 
12  
From the i nquiry report (November 
2022) of Sub- Divisional Officer 
conducted at the instance of villagers’ 
complaint, Audit noted that nature of 
land was described as Jungle Jhar in 
the revenue records, but DMO did not 
take any action against the lessee.  
B.  Audit scrutinised the cases misreporting of nature of land by the CO on the basis of 
un-notified new survey report 
3 
Raj Kumar Khurana, 
Mauza- Munkeri, Circle- 
Chhatarpur, old Khata No.- 
218, Plot No.-1480, Date of 
grant-07.08.2013 
Palamu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patthar  
In response to the Audit queries 
Assistant Settlement Officer, Palamu 
informed that the nature of land in 
four cases could not be ascertained as 
the Khatiyan was torn. Audit noticed 
that the nature of land as reported by 
the CO was based on a new survey 
re port that had not been notified. 
However, scrutiny of cadastral map 
(year 1915-16), which was based on 
the old survey report revealed that the 
nature of land was depicted/ 
symbolised as Jungle Jhar .  
4 
Chandra Bhusan, Mauza- 
Munkeri Circle- 
Chhatarpur, old Khata No.- 
218, Plot No.- 1505 & 
1507. Date of grant- 
15.02.2016 
Patthar 
pahar  
5 
Mahadeo Construction 
Mauza- Munkeri, Circle- 
Chhatarpur, old Khata No.- 
218, Plot No.- 2751, Date of 
grant- 21.12.2015 
Purani 
Parti, Gai. 
Aam 
6 
Anup Singh, Mauza- 
Munkeri, Circle- 
Chhatarpur, old Khata No.- 
218, Plot No. 110, Date of 
grant- 21.12.2015 
Pahari 
                                                 
12   A nomenclature of nature of land. 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
23  
Sl. 
No.  
Details of lease and Date of 
Grant 
District Nature of 
land as per 
CO’s 
Report 
Audit observation 
7 
Shyam Stone Mines, 
Mauza- Karmakala, old 
Khata No.- 152, Plot No.- 
994, Date of grant- 
09.06.2015 
Palamu Patthar In this case, 
Assistant Settlement 
Officer , Palamu informed that the 
nature of land was changed from 
Jungle Jhar  (as shown in old survey 
report) to Patthar Pahar  in the new 
survey report. However, the CO 
reported the nature on the basis of 
new survey report that had not been 
notified.   
8 
Ramashish Singh, Mauza- 
Madhya, Circle- 
Chhatarpur, old Khata No.- 
40, Plot No.- 653(P), Date 
of grant- 27.02.2016 
Patthar 
Pahar 
The CO reported the nature of land as 
Patthar Pahar  on the basis of new 
survey report, however, Audit 
checked and observed tha t in 
Jharbhoomi 13  portal the nature of 
land was still shown as Jungle Jhar . 
In all these six cases (Sl. No. 3 to 8) the nature of land was misreported on the basis of a new 
survey report which was not notified (as of October 2023) hence should not have been taken into 
consideration. 
In view of the above, effecting the change in the l egal status of the land 
recorded as Jungle Jhar  in revenue records, without prior approval of the 
Central Government was in violation of the FC Act, 1980. 
Audit also noticed that though the Department had introduced an automated 
system (JIMMS) for simplification of the complex mi ning process and 
records, but the facility for online application for mining lease/renewal had 
not been provided. Besides this there was also no integration of the JIMMS 
with the data of the Department responsible for mai ntaining land records. 
Resultantly, DMOs were dependent on CO’s report for  ascertaining the 
nature and use of land, for granting/not granting mining leases. 
In reply, DMO, Palamu informed (June 2024) that a c ommittee was 
constituted by DC, Palamu for examining the cases p ointed out by Audit. 
The Committee had found that all the seven leases were irregularly granted 
over forest land. Out of these seven leases, one lease has expired, six leases 
were cancelled, and action was being taken to fix t he responsibility on the 
erring officials. No reply regarding the remaining one case has been 
received either from the Department or from the DMO. 
2.1.3 Incomplete set of mandatory documents 
Under the provisions of Rule 9(1) of JMMC Rules, 20 04 a person had to 
apply for mining lease of minor minerals along with  a set of documents 
prescribed under Rule 9(2) to 9(8) like two separate affidavits, valid Royalty 
                                                 
13   Web-portal of Revenue and Land Reforms Department , GoJ. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
24  
Clearance Certificate 14  (RCC), letter of consent of landlords etc . Rule 9(9) 
also stipulates that the competent authority should  outrightly reject the 
application within 30 days from its receipt if the complete set of documents 
is not enclosed with the application. 
Audit noticed from scrutiny of 119 test checked lease files in all six selected 
districts that, in 30 cases, complete sets of manda tory documents (Detailed 
in Appendix-2.1 ) were not enclosed with the application form as sh own in 
Table-2.4. 
Table-2.4: Grant of lease based on incomplete sets of 
mandatory documents 
Sl. No. District Number of cases in which complete set of 
mandatory documents not enclosed 
1 Chaibasa 4 
2 Chatra 4 
3 Dhanbad 6 
4 Pakur 4 
5 Palamu 1 
6 Sahibganj 11 
Total 30 
Source: Information provided by DMOs. 
Thus, in the absence of the complete sets of docume nts, these applications 
should have been rejected by the competent authorit y (DMO concerned) 
within 30 days from their receipt. However, it was noticed that despite 
insufficient documentation leases were irregularly granted by the concerned 
DCs. 
As per Rule 9 (5) of JMMC Rules, 2004 applicants were required to submit 
a valid RCC for last year, but DMOs did not adhere to the provisions of 
JMMC Rules, 2004, and four leases were granted to a pplicants who had 
mining dues in same or in other districts at the ti me of application, as 
discussed in the following paragraphs:  
• At DMO, Dhanbad, Asit Kumar Mandal and Azad Ansari had jointly 
applied for three stone mining leases between Febru ary and March 2016. 
For these leases, three affidavits were submitted w ith the applications 
wherein in two affidavits it was noted that Mr. Aza d Ansari (co-applicant) 
had declared that he did not have any mining lease in the State, in case of 
the third affidavit, Mr. Ansari stated that he was holding one lease in 
Jamtara. As such, on the basis of the third applica tion, it may be seen that 
Mr. Ansari had made false declarations in his first two affidavits submitted 
with first two applications. In all the three cases the RCC was not submitted 
                                                 
14   RCC is a certificate issued by DMO which certifies that the applicant does not have any 
mining dues. 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
25  
by the applicants. Hence, the affidavits in respect  of two applications were 
incorrect and one affidavit was not supported by th e required RCC. Thus, 
all the three applications were liable to be rejected due to non-submission of 
these documents under the provisions of Rule 9(9) o f JMMC Rules, 2004. 
However, DMO, Dhanbad granted (August 2017) the thr ee leases to the 
applicants. Audit obtained information from DMO, Jamtara which revealed 
that dues amounting to ₹ 2.97 lakh were outstanding against Azad Ansari at 
the time of application.  
• In another case at DMO, Dhanbad, Rameshwar Mahto ha d applied 
(December 2020) for mining lease for Stone. The app licant was holding a 
mining lease in Bokaro district and submitted an RC C but, this was issued 
in June 2016 by DMO, Bokaro instead of being an RCC  for the year 
2019-20. The DMO Dhanbad granted (January 2022) the lease on the basis 
of old RCC, instead of seeking the latest RCC. Audi t obtained updated 
information from DMO, Bokaro which revealed that Rameshwar Mahto had 
outstanding dues amounting to 
₹ 0.76 lakh at the time of application. 
• At DMO, Pakur, M/s Black Diamond Stone Works had ap plied 
(June 2016) for mining lease for stone without enclosing RCC from Mahbul 
Sheikh, one of the partners in the firm. Audit noti ced from the scrutiny of 
Register IX 15  that Mr. Mahbul Sheikh was a defaulter in payment of dues of 
₹ 10.74 lakh in two certificate cases registered in the same district. Despite 
the fact that one of the partners of the applicant firm, M/s Black Diamond 
Stone Works was a defaulter in the same district, m ining lease was granted 
(September 2017) without submission of RCC as required under Rule 9 (5) 
of JMMC Rules, 2004. As the document was deficient in terms of 
submission of RCC by co-applicant, the application should have been 
outrightly rejected, but the DMO did not adhere to the provisions resulting 
in grant of lease to a defaulter. 
• In another case at DMO, Pakur, M/s Bajrang Stone Wo rks had 
applied (February 2016) for mining lease for stone 
. In the application Form 
submitted, Mr. Somraj Bhagat was declared as a part ner of M/s Bajrang 
Stone Works and affidavit in respect of only Mr. So mraj Bhagat was 
submitted. DMO, while processing the application, d id not enquire about 
other partners of the firm and granted (September 2 019) the mining lease. 
Audit noticed that surface rights of the land (over  which application was 
submitted for seeking mining lease)  were in the names of Mr. Somraj Bhagat 
and Mr. Dilip Kumar Bhagat (father of Somraj Bhagat). Further scrutiny of 
Register IX revealed that Dilip Kumar Bhagat had de faulted (as proprietor 
of the firm M/s Bajrang Stone Works) in payment of mining dues of 
                                                 
15   Register maintained at DMO to watch progress of C ertificate cases initiated for 
recovery of mining dues which contains details of d efaulters, amount to be recovered 
and nature of default etc . 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
26  
₹ 3.99 lakh in two certificate cases (registered in the same district). Thus, 
there were deficiencies in the scrutiny of applicat ions and visible facts by 
the DMO due to which mining lease was irregularly a warded despite  
deficient documents attached with the application. 
Audit noticed that though Rule 9 (5) of JMMC Rules,  2004 mandates 
submission of valid royalty clearance of all mining leases held by applicants 
in Jharkhand with every application, there was no s ystem in place for 
verification of leases held by applicants, unless the applicant himself offers 
a declaration regarding holding any lease either pr esently or previously. 
There was also no system in place to check for any omission of information 
by the applicant or, if he/she already held leases and had defaulted in 
payment of royalty.  
A centralised/defined system for issuance of royalt y clearance certificate 
either manually or electronically was absent in the State. Further, there were 
no cross checks or control measures in place while granting mining lease, 
due to which defaulters were able to obtain new lea ses despite having 
mining dues. 
2.2 Management of mining leases 
According to the provisions of the JMMC Rules, 2004 , as amended from 
time to time, extension of leases of minor minerals  (mentioned in 
Schedule-2) over government land and raiyati land above five Ha. could be 
extended up to 31 March 2022 and renewal over raiyati  land having area of 
up to three hectares is granted by the Deputy Commissioner (DC). 
2.2.1 Irregular renewal of mining lease 
Rule 9(1)( क) of the JMMC (Amendment) Rules, 2017 (date of notification, 
i.e. , effective from 2 March 2017), stipulates that min ing lease for minor 
minerals (stone, morrum  and soil) over an area of more than five Ha. 16  of 
raiyati  land would be granted by Director, Mines through e-auction.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that a stone mining le ase over an area of 
6.026 Ha. of raiyati  land under DMO, Sahibganj valid up to 9 October 2017, 
was renewed on the approval of DC, Sahibganj in October 2017 for a period 
of 10 years, despite the fact that the DC was not c ompetent to grant lease 
over raiyati land exceeding five Ha.  
Irregular renewal deprived the exchequer of chances of collection of higher 
revenue by grant of lease through auction process. Responsibility needs to 
be fixed for violation of extant provisions of Rule  9(1) of JMMC Rules by 
erring officials. 
                                                 
16   This limit was amended to three Ha. vide gazette notification no. 218 dated 14 March 
2019. 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
27  
2.2.2 Irregular cancellation of mining lease  
As per Rule 9(1 )(घ) of JMMC (Amendment) Rules, 2017 effective from  
02 March 2017 all applications for grant of mining lease over Government 
land or raiyati  land having area of five Ha. and above (later appliable to all 
cases irrespective of area applied through 2 nd  Amendment effective from  
12 December 2017) will be deemed ineligible as the amended Rules provide 
for settlement of such mines through e-auction only. Further, leases, having 
area of five Ha. and above, pending renewal, due to want of EC/MP shall be 
granted extension up to 31 March 2020 under the provisions of Rule 9(1)( च).  
In case of one stone mining lease at DMO, Sahibganj, the lessee had applied 
(September 2017) for renewal of his mining lease over an area of 2.023 Ha. 
of raiyati land. This lease was going to expire in December 20 17. The DC, 
Sahibganj granted renewal (on 01 December 2017) for  a further period of 
10 years but the renewal was later cancelled (Augus t 2018) in light of 
JMMC (2 nd  Amendment) Rules and extension was granted only up  to  
31 March 2020.  
Audit observed that provisions of Rule (extension of lease period) were not 
applicable in case of renewal of leases for an area  of less than five Ha. of 
raiyati  land. Furthermore, the renewal order (01 December 2017) in this 
case was passed before the issue of notification (1 2 December 2017) of 
JMMC (2 
nd  Amendment) Rules. Hence, the cancellation of renewal of lease 
was irregular and deprived the lessee of renewal of  lease for 10 years. The 
irregular action also caused potential revenue loss  to exchequer for the 
remaining period of seven years as the mine remaine d idle after expiry of 
extended period. 
2.2.3 Irregular extension of lease period 
Audit observed frequent changes in the JMMC Rules, 2004 in respect of 
renewal of lease and period of lease (or extension of lease period) of stone 
mines. Period-wise changes in Rules and their impac t on lease period in 
renewal cases is shown in Table-2.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
28  
In six sampled districts, Audit test checked 44 cas es out of 78 cases where 
extension of lease period was granted under the ame nded Rule 9(1)( च) and  
(छ) of JMMC Rules, 2004 during 2017-22 as shown in Table-2.6. 
Table-2.6: Number of mining leases extended during 2017-22 and test 
checked during audit  
District No. of mining leases where 
extension of lease period was 
granted during 2017-22 
No. of cases 
test checked 
No. of 
ineligible 
applicants 
Chaibasa 02 02 01 
Chatra 00 00 00 
Dhanbad 12  10 10 
Pakur 39 12 10 
Palamu 05 05 05 
Sahibganj 20 15 07 
Total 78 44 33 
Source: information available on records of DMOs.  
As detailed in Table-2.6, Audit noticed in 33 out of 44 stone mining leases 
in five test checked districts 17  (lease end period ranged between August 
2014 and December 2021) that lessees had submitted applications for 
renewal/extension between March 2018 and June 2021 i.e. , after the date of 
notification of the JMMC (First and Second Amendmen t) Rules, 2017. 
The extension of lease period (up to 31 March 2020 and further up to 
31 March 2022) was granted to all these 33 lessees. 
As per the provisions of Rule 9(1) of JMMC (2 nd  Amendment) Rules, 2017 
extension of lease period was allowable only to tho se lessees, whose 
renewal applications were made prior to the date of  notification of the 
                                                 
17   Chaibasa, Dhanbad, Pakur, Palamu and Sahibganj. 
Table-2.5: Amendments in Rule 9(1) (च) and (छ) of JMMC Rules, 2004 
and impact thereof  
Period Rule 9(1)( च) and ( छ) of JMMC Rules, 2004 
Applicable for determining period of those leases whose 
renewal application became time barred due to non-obtaining 
of EC/MP prior to the notification. 
0 to < 3 Ha.  
(raiyati land) 
≥ 3 and < 5 Ha. 
(raiyati land) 
Govt. land and raiyati 
land above 5 Ha. 
Ist  Amendment 
2017 
02 March 2017 to 
11 December 2017  
Up to original 
period of lease 
Up to original 
period of lease 
Up to original period of 
granted/ renewed lease 
or 31 st  March 2020 
which is later. 
2nd  Amendment 
2017 
12 December 2017 
to 29 September 
2020 
Up to original period of granted/renewed lease or 31 st  March 
2020 which is later.  
30 September 
2020 to 31 st  March 
2022 
Up to original period of granted/renewed lease or 31 st  March 
2022 which is later (in those cases only where exte nsion of 
lease period granted up to 31 st  March 2020) 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
29  
amendments but had become time barred due to non-submission of EC/MP. 
In these 33 cases, lessees had applied for renewal/extension after the date of 
notification of amendments, hence, grant of extensi on in all these cases 
was not allowable. The DMOs concerned, however, gra nted extension of 
lease period in these cases in violation of the pro visions of JMMC 
(Amendment) Rules, 2017; JMMC (Second Amendment) Ru les, 2017 and 
JMMC (Amendment) Rules, 2020 (Appendix-2.2 ).  
This resulted in irregular extension of lease period with the approval of DC, 
an action fraught with risk of connivance between the district administration 
and applicant to circumvent the provisions for grant of lease through auction 
process.  
2.3  Non-lapsing/cancellation of inoperative leases  
As per terms and conditions (No. 24) of Part-VII of  the Model Lease Deed 
annexed with JMMC Rules, if a lessee, without obtaining prior approval of 
competent officer or DC, does not carry out mining operation in his mine 
for a continuous period of one year, his lease may be cancelled. 
During the scrutiny of lease files with allied records of two mining leases of 
minor minerals (earlier major minerals) at DMO, Chaibasa and two mining 
leases of stone at DMO, Sahibganj, Audit noticed th at the lessees had 
discontinued mining operations for a continuous period of one to more than 
five years during the period 2017-23 as shown in Table-2.7. 
Table-2.7: Showing details of leases that required to be declared lapsed 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of 
lease 
Mineral Area 
(in 
acre) 
Lease 
period 
Period of 
discontinuance 
as of 31.3.2023  
1 
Chaibasa 
M/s Mangi 
Lal Rungta 
China 
clay 226.81 Up to 
15.07.2025 
Since 2017-18 
(six  years ) 
2 Sri Keyur 
Sinha Quartz 39.93 
24.07.2009 
to 
23.07.2039  
Since 2017-18 
(six years) 
3 
Sahibganj 
Sri Somnath 
Ghosh Stone 4.00 
06.02.2017 
to 
05.02.2027 
Since 2020-21 to 
date 
(three years) 
4 
M/s 
Mahakal 
Stone 
Stone 6.25 
10.01.2022 
to 
09.01.2032 
Since inception 
(one year) 
Total 276.99   
Source: Information available on records of DMOs. 
It was noticed during audit scrutiny that, DMOs/DCs, of both these districts 
did not declare the mining leases lapsed or take steps to cancel these leases. 
Thus, these leases over a mineralised area of 276.9 9 acre were lying idle 
resulting in blockage of State revenue and affectin g mineral development 
and employment generation. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
30  
2.4 Grant of mining leases through auction 
Government of Jharkhand has framed Jharkhand Minor Mineral (Auction) 
Rules, 2017 effective from 06 September 2017 for gr ant of mining leases 
through an e-auction process. These rules were to a pply to all minor 
minerals except soil, brick earth, morrum , reh soil, clay for making Raniganj 
tiles and stone (boulder, bajri , shingle, stone brick, stone dust) over an area 
of less than three Ha. of raiyati  land (amended through Rule 9(1) of JMMC 
(Amendment) Rules, 2019). 
The Director, Mines/DC would initiate an e-auction process for grant of a 
mining lease with respect to an area within the dis trict, if the mineral 
contents in such area have been established by Director, Geology under the 
provisions of Jharkhand Minor Minerals (Evidence of  Mineral Contents) 
Rules (JMMEMC Rules), 2018.  
Existence of mineral content is required to be esta blished in an area for the 
purpose of auction of Mineral Blocks by carrying ou t exploration as per 
suggested geological parameters and exploration nor ms. JMMEMC Rules, 
2018, provide for two stages of exploration i.e. , C2: General Exploration 
followed by C1: Detailed Exploration. 
Further, Rule 6 of JMMEMC Rules, 2018 provides that  an area shall be 
considered for granting a mining lease if, Detailed  Exploration (C1) has 
been completed to establish Indicated/Measured Mine ral Resource and a 
geological study report has been prepared in respect of such an area.  
During the course of Audit, it was observed that th e Department did not 
have any reliable data about the minor mineral rese rves in the State. In 
response to an audit enquiry, the Department stated  that previously minor 
minerals (which were major minerals prior to Februa ry 2015) reserve data 
was maintained by the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) but at present, neither 
IBM nor the State Government maintains minor minerals inventory.  
The Directorate of Geology prepared 
18  292 blocks of minor minerals after 
conducting General (C2) and Detailed (C1) explorati ons, during the period 
from 2018-19 to 2021-22, which were forwarded to the Director, Mines for 
auction process. 
2.4.1 Delay in auction process  
Out of 292 minor mineral blocks prepared, 278 were available for settlement 
during 2018-23, but auction process was initiated f or only 47 stone blocks 
(16 per cent ) and just 11 cases (3.77 per cent ) were completed during this 
period. The details are shown in Table-2.8. 
                                                 
18   Identified the location and area; kind and grade of minerals; estimated the volume of 
mineral reserve etc . 

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
31  
Table-2.8: Showing details of minor minerals blocks prepared during 2018-23 
Year Mineral Mineral blocks 
available for 
auction in 
beginning of 
year 
No. of 
mineral 
blocks 
prepared 
Total mineral 
block available 
for auction 
during the year  
No. of 
mineral 
blocks put on 
auction  
No. of blocks 
where auction 
process had 
been 
completed 
2018-19  
Stone 
00 
37 
42  
03 01 
Decorative stone  01 00 00 
Mica 02 00 00 
Quartz 01 00 00 
Mica & Quartz 01 00 00 
Total 42 03 01 
2019-20  
Stone 
39  
22 
64  
00 00 
Decorative stone  02 00 00 
Mica 01 00 00 
Total 25 00 00 
2020-21  
Stone 
64  
22 
90  
00 00 
Decorative stone  04 00 00 
Total 26 00 00 
2021-22  Stone 90  199 289  11 00 
Total 199 11 00 
2022-23  Stone 278  00 278  33 10 
Total 00 33 10 
Grand Total  292  47 11 
Source: Information provided by the Directorate of Geology.  
From Table-2.8, it is evident that though 42 mineral blocks were prepared 
during 2018-19 but auction process could be initiat ed in three cases only. 
Further, 90 mineral blocks were available for aucti on during 2019-21 but, 
the auction process could not be initiated even in a single case during these 
two years. Furthermore, auction process was initiat ed in only 44 cases out 
of the 289 mineral blocks available during 2021-23.  Thus, the department 
had initiated auction process only in 47 mineral bl ocks out of 292 blocks 
prepared for auction and only 11 blocks were settled during 2018-23 due to 
lackadaisical approach of the Department towards au ction of mineral 
blocks. Delayed auction of available minor mineral blocks put stress on 
available functional leases and ultimately led to u nscientific mining (as 
discussed in Chapter 4).   
Audit observed that delay in auction process and low percentage of initiation 
and finalisation of auction cases was due to lack o f monitoring by the 
Department and deficiencies in planning, which restricted effective conduct 
of auctions in a phased and time bound manner. This has not only adversely 
affected flow of revenue to the State but also impa cted potential 
employment generation and development.  
2.4.2 Incorrect estimation of mineral reserves and defective 
auction of mineral blocks 
Out of 47 cases, Audit examined 13 cases (10 cases where auction process 
had been completed and three cases where auction process was in progress). 
During the scrutiny of estimation of Geological Res erve (GR) of these 13 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
32  
cases, Audit noticed that in three cases there were  irregularities in 
determination of allowable depth (mining activities below ground water are 
not permissible as per JMMC Rules) and arithmetical  errors in reserve 
estimation, as detailed below:  
(i)  In two cases 19  Audit observed that allowable depths (21 meter and  
27 meters) of mining activities in the Mining Plans  exceeded the ground 
water table (11.63 meters and 5.40 meters), reported by the Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), by 9.37 meters and 21.60 meters respectively. Based 
on these faulty Plans, the Department estimated GRs  (February 2022), 
prepared mineral blocks and conducted auction for f urther settlement. As 
such, GR estimation, below the average depth of gro und water table was 
irregular. Allowing the auction of these blocks rai sed the risk of 
unsustainable mining.  
(ii) Arithmetical errors were noticed in estimation  of GR in two old 
mineralised blocks 
20 , where auction process had been completed as detailed 
below: 
• In one case, GR was wrongly computed (February 2022 ) by the 
Directorate of Geology as 7,280.77 m 3 instead of 72,808.14 m 3 which 
resulted in under estimation of mineral reserve by 65,527.37 m3. 
• In another case, total estimated reserve was 1,24,2 12.22 m 3 as per 
previous MP. However, there was depletion of reserv e of 1,21,742.13 
m3 due to previously excavated quantity and balance r eserve was only 
2,470.10 m 3 but in the GR, this was computed as 2,04,491.48 m 3 
resulting in over-estimation by 2,02,021.38 m3. 
Thus, these two GRs were defective in terms of reserve estimation. Further 
scrutiny revealed that auction had been conducted o n the basis of incorrect 
estimation of resources made in GR as shown in Table-2.9.  
Table-2.9: Showing financial impact of incorrect GR on key parameters  
(₹ in lakh)  
Particulars Mineral Block 
Sarmanda-A Pandiasai 
Correct quantity of reserve (m3) 72,808.14 2,470.10  
Incorrect quantity of reserve (m3) 7,280.77 2,04,491.48  
Difference (m3) 65,527.37 (-) 2,02,021.38  
Value of estimated reserve (VER) ( ₹ 448.09 per m3) (-) 293.62 (+) 905.24  
Bid security (0.25% of VER) (-) 0.73 (+) 2.26 
Upfront payment (0.5% of VER) (-) 1.47 (+) 4.53  
Performance Security (0.5% of VER) (-) 1.47 (+) 4.53  
Total financial impact; short (-) and excess (+)  (-) 3.67 (+) 11.32  
Source: GR and Comparative Statement of bid. 
                                                 
19   Bara Bhumari Stone Block and Pandiasai Stone Bloc k. 
20   Pandiasai Stone Block and Sarmanda-A Stone Block.  

Chapter 2: Allotment of mining leases  
 
33  
It is evident from the above that incorrect estimat ion of reserve in GR had 
affected threshold value of key parameters of biddi ng, rendering the entire 
bidding process questionable. This incorrect estima tion could lead to 
extraction of non-mineable resources in the second case where the actual 
mineable reserve was only 2,470.10 m 3. Furthermore, such incorrect 
estimation of reserves would also lead to grant of irregular EC which may 
impact the environment adversely. 
2.5  Recommendations 
The Government/Department may: 
• implement a system of online application of mining lease and put 
in place a procedure for issuing/obtaining centrali sed royalty 
clearance certificates through JIMMS.  The Department may also 
ensure integration of JIMMS with online land records; 
• take necessary steps to cancel leases granted on Jungle Jhar/forest 
land and restore legal status of such land;  
• cancel inoperative leases and expedite auctioning p rocess of 
mineral blocks for revenue augmentation and mineral  
development in the State; and  
• fix responsibility on erring officers who violated provisions of the 
relevant Acts and Rules by misreporting the nature of land to be 
leased for mining. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Chapter 3 
Revenue Realisation and 
Management of Sand Ghats  

 
Chapter  
  
Revenue Realisation and 
Management of Sand Ghats  
The Department of Mines and Geology is responsible for the levy and 
collection of mineral receipts based on the product ion and dispatch of 
minerals.  
Receipts from minor minerals mainly consist of royalty while other receipts 
include surface rent 
21 , dead rent 22 , application fee, licence fee, permit fee, 
interest on belated payment of dues, price of miner als extracted 
unauthorisedly etc ., and in case of auction of mineral blocks, upfron t 
payment, price offer/reserve price are levied in ad dition to royalty. In this 
chapter, deficiencies in assessment, levy and colle ction of royalty from the 
lessee along with the role of JSMDC in the manageme nt of sand ghats for 
commercial purposes in the light of new Sand Mining  Policy introduced in 
August 2017, have been discussed. 
3.1  Trend of Revenue 
The details of revenue receipts from minor minerals , total non-tax revenue 
receipts, total revenue receipts 23  and the percentage of contribution of minor 
mineral receipts towards non-tax revenue receipts a nd total revenue are 
given in Table-3.1 . 
Table-3.1: Trend of Revenue  
(₹ in crore)  
Year Total  
revenue   
receipts 24  
from minor 
minerals 
Total non-
tax 
revenue  
Total  
revenue  
of State 
Percentage 
contribution of minor 
minerals to total non-
tax revenue receipts 
(Col. 2 to Col. 3) 
Percentage 
contribution of minor 
minerals to total 
revenue receipts  
(Col. 2 to Col. 4) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2017-18  1,082.44  7,846.67  20,200.11  13.79 05.36 
2018-19  683.03  8,257.98  23,010.02  08.27 02.97 
2019-20  652.82  8,749.98  25,521.43  07.46 02.56 
2020-21  775.09  7,564.01  24,444.09  10.25 03.17 
2021-22  697.73  10,030.75  31,321.00  06.96 02.23 
Total  3,891.11  42,449.39  1,24,496.65  09.17 03.12 
Source: Finance Accounts, GoJ and mineral wise collection report furnished by Department. 
The above figures indicate a decline in revenue rec eipts from minor 
minerals, which dropped from ₹ 1,082.44 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 697.73 crore 
                                                 
21   Surface rent is payable by a lessee for the surfa ce area used by him for mining 
operations and it shall not exceed the land revenue. 
22   Every lessee of a mining lease has to pay dead re nt every year at prescribed rates or 
royalty in respect of the quantity of minerals removed, whichever is greater. 
23   Own tax revenue receipts plus non-tax revenue rec eipts. 
24   Includes ₹ 765 crore on account of surface rent, dead rent, application fee, licence fee, 
permit fee, certified/non-certified arrears of major as well as minor minerals.   
3 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
36  
in 2021-22. Further, the contribution of minor mine ral receipts to total 
revenue receipts of the State also witnessed a shar p decrease falling from 
5.36 per cent  in 2017-18 to 2.23 per cent  in 2021-22. Although no reasons 
for this fall in revenue from minor minerals were p rovided by the 
Department, Audit observed several instances of los s of revenue to the 
Government exchequer due to reasons such as short/n on-levy of royalty, 
dead rent, penalty etc . as discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
3.2  Assessment, levy and collection of royalty 
Under the provisions of JMMC Rules, the holder of a mining lease or permit 
for minor minerals shall furnish to the State Gover nment such returns and 
statements within such period as may be specified by it. These returns 25  are 
to be scrutinised by Assistant Mining Officer (AMO) /District Mining 
Officer (DMO) who shall assess the amount of dead r ent, surface rent and 
royalty payable by the lessees at the end of the pr escribed period. The 
AMOs/DMOs are enjoined to inspect, verify, and chec k the accounts of 
minerals. Lack of scrutiny of the prescribed return s resulted in non/short 
levy and evasion of revenues. 
3.2.1  Automation of process and records  
The Department implemented (May 2015) an IT based m ineral 
administration system through a software applicatio n called the 
Jharkhand Integrated Mines and Minerals Management System 
(JIMMS), introduced with the objective of simplifyi ng the complex 
mining process. Through the introduction of JIMMS, the Department 
would identify and remove duplicity of the requirem ent of monthly/ 
annual progress reports and returns filled by the l essees. It, further, 
facilitate online realisation of mining revenue, qu arterly assessment on 
real time basis  for increasing efficiency, monitor demand to preven t 
illegal mining, help to formulate policies to curb pilferages, issuance of 
Transit Permit and Pass under tight guidance to avo id human errors on 
data posting and interconnecting all the reports an d returns complying 
the laws laid. Sixty three leases pertaining to the  lease period between 
December 1999 and March 2030 were examined by Audit  to assess the 
extent of automation of records in JIMMS. The follo wing deficiencies 
were noticed: 
(i)  Lease Profile 
• Incomplete profiles : JIMMS had provisions for lessees for 
uploading their profile . The DMOs of concerned districts would 
ensure the completion of the process. In 63 cases, it was noticed 
                                                 
25   As per departmental instructions of June 1970, DM O/AMO is required to check 
monthly returns periodically and compare it with th e entries in Raising and Despatch 
(RD) register of minerals. 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
37  
that the lease profiles were incomplete, and missed  crucial 
information such as: MP in nine cases, Forest clear ance in 
14 cases, EC in six cases, Pollution clearance in s even, survey 
details in 45 cases, Grant order of lease in 38 cas es, Lease deed in 
27 cases and Surface right clearance in 28 cases. T hus, the 
objective of making a robust system that would enca psulate all 
crucial data/information was not fully achieved. 
• Deficient documents : Instead of mining plans, in 50 cases, 
mining plan approval letters, in two cases, lease d eed and in two 
cases, only cover pages, were uploaded. Up to date Pollution 
clearance was not found uploaded in the system in s even cases.  
• Lease maps : JIMMS has the provision to generate lease maps on  
Google Application using coordinates, which could a ssist the 
Department in monitoring the mining operation throu gh generated 
maps. However, in 47 cases, coordinates required we re not filled 
while in 15 cases, coordinates filled were insuffic ient, preventing 
the generation of satellite images and hindering mo nitoring of 
mining activities. 
(ii)  Monthly Returns and assessed figures 
• Inconsistent balances : JIMMS has a facility for lessees to upload 
the monthly return detailing the quantity of openin g balance, 
production and dispatch during the month and closin g balance of 
mineral. In 31 monthly returns of five leases for t he period 
between April 2017 and September 2020, closing bala nces of 
previous months did not match with opening balances  of 
subsequent months. 
• Report on Periodic assessment : Rule 41 of JMMC Rules, 2004 
provides for annual assessment of royalty payable b y lessees. 
However, there was non-availability of required too ls in JIMMS 
to carry out this yearly royalty assessment.  
• Module to map applicable rate : Rates of royalty on stone boulder/ 
gravel/shingle were prescribed on the basis of thei r uses. Modules 
on JIMMS were not equipped to identify the uses and  levy the 
applicable rate (refer to Paragraph 3.2.2 ).  
(iii)   Permanent Account Number (PAN)  
• Incorrect PAN : Lease profile did not have the facility to fill P AN, 
however, the number was to be filled in the "Mines- wise revenue 
collected" statement by lessee due to absence of fa cility to fetch 
the PAN from lease profile. 
• Changes in PAN : PAN is a unique number and could not be 
changed without changing the identity. In three cas es, PAN of 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
38  
lessees was changed two to three times during 2018- 19 to 
2020-21, which is unusual. 
(iv)  Generation of unauthentic transportation challans  
JIMMS was not foolproof with regard to generation o f authentic 
transportation challans as it allowed the lessee to  generate 
subsequent challans for a vehicle before the expiry  of the validity 
period of previous one (refer to Paragraph 4.3.1 ).  
These findings highlight the need for improved data  accuracy and 
completeness in JIMMS to ensure effective monitorin g and management 
of mining activities through this automated system.  Due to these 
constraints, JIMMS could not be comprehensively use d for assessment 
and collection of revenue by the Department. 
3.2.2  Short levy of royalty due to application of incorrect rate 
Schedule 2 of JMMC Rules, 2004 prescribed royalty o n stone boulder/ 
gravel/shingle to be levied at ₹ 132 per m3 (say ₹ 3.74 per cft) whereas royalty 
on those stone boulder/gravel/shingle which are use d for making chips, was 
to be levied at ₹ 250 per m3 (say ₹ 7.08 per cft). 
Audit noticed that the varied rates of royalty were  fixed on the basis of end 
use of the output of quarries but there were no rel ated checks in JIMMS to 
ensure application of correct rates as per end use. Due to this, the assessment 
of royalty was solely dependent upon the end use de clared by the lessee.  
Further, for the purpose of royalty assessment, JIMMS recognized stones that 
were as small as 5 mm as ‘stone boulders,’ which is not logical.  
Due to absence of checks in the JIMMS system on end  use, Audit noticed 
short realisation of royalty and other revenue 26  as discussed in following 
cases: 
• In three DMOs, Chatra, Chaibasa and Sahibganj, 25 l essees had 
dispatched 122.96 lakh cft of stone boulder to 15 c rusher units during 
the period from October 2019 to January 2022, by paying royalty at the 
rate of ₹ 3.74 per cft. Supply to stone crusher clearly indi cates that the 
boulders were to be used for making chips hence, as per applicable rates 
specified, royalty should have been ₹ 7.08 per cft. Payment of royalty 
at lower rate resulted in short levy of royalty and  District Mineral 
Foundation Trust (DMFT) 27   contribution of ₹ 5.35 crore. 
                                                 
26   Rule 6 of JDMFT Rules, 2016 provides for collecti on of contribution to DMF fund in 
the following manner: 30 per cent of the royalty for the existing leases which are no t 
granted through auction; and 10 per cent  of the royalty for leases which are granted 
through auction. 
27   MMDR Act, 1957 (Section 9B, 15(4) and 15A) provid es that the State Governments 
shall establish a non-profit trust to be called the  District Mineral Foundation Trust 
(DMFT) in districts affected by mining related oper ations. All mining lessees will 
contribute to the DMFT funds at certain rates. 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
39  
• In DMO, Pakur, an irregularity was detected by the Audit where five 
lessees exploited an ambiguity in the system due to  overlapping size 
ranges (0-150 mm) in the JIMMS dropdown menu for both stone chips 
and stone boulders. They dispatched 50.24 lakh cft of stone boulder 
with sizes between 40 mm and 60 mm and paid royalty at ₹ 132 per m3 
(i.e. , ₹ 3.74 per cft). However, as per Bureau of Indian St andards IS 
383:2016, stone of this size was categorised as sin gle size aggregate 
(chips). As such, the lessee was required to pay royalty at ₹ 250 per m3 
(₹ 7.08 per cft) instead of ₹ 3.74 per cft. This highlighted a potential 
revenue loss of ₹ 2.18 crore (under the head royalty and DMFT) due to 
incorrect classification. 
Thus, due to the systemic error in JIMMS, identifie d during Audit, 
the lessees gained from undue benefit of ₹ 7.53 crore ( ₹ 5.35 crore + 
₹ 2.18 crore).  
3.2.3  Non-realisation of dead rent 
Under the provisions of Rule 29 of  JMMC Rules, 2004, every lessee of a 
mining lease must pay dead rent every year at prescribed rates or royalty in 
respect of the quantity of minerals removed, whiche ver is greater. Further, 
Rule 29( अ)(2) provides that dead rent for the current financi al year was 
payable within a period of 15 days from execution o f lease deed and 
thereafter, annual dead rent was payable by 28 th  February in advance.  
Scrutiny of records of four DMOs 28  revealed that 15 minor mineral lessees 
had not paid dead rent of ₹ 2.23 crore for the period between March 2016 
and March 2022. Audit observed that the DMOs could not monitor the dues 
of dead rent from these lessees. Further, the DMOs neither initiated any 
action to get the outstanding dead rent deposited n or did they forfeit the 
security deposit. The JIMMS also did not have a provision to automatically 
generate demand for dead rent on due date. This resulted in non-realisation 
of dead rent of ₹ 2.23 crore.  
3.3 Production beyond limit of Mining Plan/Environm ental 
Clearance/Consent to Operate 
Rule 54(6) of JMMC (2 nd  Amendment) Rules, 2017 states that any person, 
agent, manager or contractor alleged as illegally m ining would be liable to 
pay as penalty, double (previously single rate applicable up to 11 December 
2017) the price of mineral so mined. Rule 34A(1) read with Rule 34E(1) of 
JMMC Rules, 2004, stipulates that mining operations will be carried out in 
accordance with the approved Mining Plan. Further Hon’ble Supreme Court 
in its decision (August 2017) in “Common Cause Case ” held that any 
person, agent, manager or contractor who extracts a ny mineral beyond the 
                                                 
28   Chaibasa, Dhanbad, Pakur and Sahibganj. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
40  
limit prescribed by the competent authority will also be held responsible for 
unlawful/unauthorized mining and such act would att ract a penalty for 
illegal mining as per prevailing Act/Rules. 
Scrutiny of Mining Plan/EC/CTO and Form-K submitted  by lessees, for 
production and dispatches revealed that in four dis tricts 
29 , 26 lessees of 
minor minerals had extracted minerals beyond permis sible limits between 
April 2014 and July 2023 as summarized in Table-3.2 . 
Table-3.2: Details of extraction of sand and stone beyond permissible 
limits 
Districts Mineral  No. of 
leases  
Quantity 
Extracted 
(in lakh m3) 
Permissible 
Limit*  
(in lakh m3) 
Excess 
Extraction 
(in lakh m3) 
Penalty 
Amount  
(₹ in crore)  
Sahibganj Stone  08 23.23  13.96  9.26  58.00  
Pakur Stone 12 43.38 20.23 23.15 144.91 
Dhanbad Sand 01 3.43  3.22  0.21  0.45  
Chatra Stone 05 0.59 0.0030  0.59 1.85 
Total 26 70.63 37.41 33.21 205.21 
*Limits permitted in MPs/ECs/CTO.  
Source: information available in records of DMOs. 
It is evident from the above table that against the  permissible quantity of 
minerals of 37.41 lakh m 3, 26 lessees extracted 70.63 lakh m 3 of sand and 
stone which resulted in excess extraction of 33.21 lakh m 3 of minor minerals 
beyond permissible limits and that should have been  reckoned as illegally 
mined minerals as per Hon’ble Supreme Court Orders of August 2017. 
Hence, these lessees were liable to pay penalty amounting to ₹ 205.21 crore 
for unlawful/unauthorized extraction of minerals. H owever, DMOs of 
respective districts did not impose and collect the penalty. 
3.4  Management of Sand Ghats  by JSMDC 
Sand mining policy in Jharkhand 
In compliance of Supreme Court’s ruling of Deepak K umar v/s State of 
Haryana (SLP No. 19629 of 2009) and subsequent MoEF CC’s guidelines, 
the State Government notified (August 2017) 
31  the Jharkhand State Sand 
Mining Policy, 2017 for effective guidance and management of sand mining 
in the State, in an environmentally sustainable and  socially responsible 
manner. The objective of the New Sand Mining Policy  was to fulfil the 
developmental needs of the State as well as to ensu re regular and adequate 
supply of sand at a reasonable price for common people.  
As per New Sand Mining Policy, the management of sa nd ghats  of 
Category-2 in the State was handed over by the Gove rnment to the 
                                                 
29   Chatra, Dhanbad, Pakur and Sahibganj. 
30   The lessees conducted mining activities without obt aining ‘Consent to Operate’, 
hence, the total production of minerals was illegitimate.  
31   Notification number 1905 dated 16 August 2017. 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
41  
Jharkhand State Mining Development Corporation (JSMDC) for a period of 
five years from 16 August 2017, which was later extended for another three 
years from August 2022 by a Cabinet decision (September 2022). 
The salient features of the New Sand Mining Policy were as follows: 
• District Survey Report (DSR) 32  for each district shall be prepared by a 
committee headed by the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Cha irperson, of 
the District Environment Impact Assessment Authorit y (DEIAA). The 
State Government shall issue necessary guidelines o r directives as and 
when required for an effective preparation of DSR. 
• Identification of the sand available in different w ater streams of rivers, 
such as 1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd  and onwards would be done by the District Survey 
Committee, based on its size and capacity. Based on  DSR, the Survey 
Committee shall categorize the sand in 1 st  order and 2 nd  order stream/ 
river as Category-1 and 3 rd  order and above as Category-2.  
The Policy also defined the management structure of  streams (henceforth 
sand ghats ) of different orders. Management details of the tw o Categories 
are given in Table-3.3 . 
Table -3.3:  Details of management of Category -1 and Category -2 
sand ghats  
Category Category-1 Category-2 
Management 
by  
Gram Panchayat /Local Self 
Government  
Allocated to JSMDC for a 
minimum period of five years or 
more as decided by the 
Government. 
Utilisation 
Purpose 
Non-commercial purpose 
(Sand would be free from 
taxes and royalty, only a 
nominal maintenance charge 
shall be levied by GP/LSG)  
For Commercial purpose (Sand 
sold by JSMDC on price decided by 
JSMDC in consultation of State 
Government) 
Statutory 
Clearance 
Exempted from EC, no 
mechanised lifting, no 
storage of sand. 
JSMDC to obtain EC, Mining Plan, 
or any other statutory requirement 
for sand mining, storage and sale.  
Monitoring DC to ensure no commercial/ 
illegal extraction of sand. 
 
Adoption of appropriate technology 
such as RFID/GPS tracking of 
vehicles, CCTV surveillance, 
central monitoring, cashless online 
sale etc . to prevent illegal mining 
and transportation of sand. 
                                                 
32    DSR for sand mining is prepared at an interval of every five years with an objective to 
identify the mineable area, non-mineable area and to calculate the annual rate and time 
of replenishment. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
42  
3.4.1  Identification of sand ghats  and stock yard 
The Directorate of Mines provided JSMDC with a list  of Category-2 sand 
ghats  (November 2017) numbering a total of 177 ghats  in 19 districts. This 
was later updated (March 2022) to 608 ghats  in 23 districts. Upon reviewing 
JSMDC's database for these 608 ghats, it was found that it contained only 
basic information like name, district and area to b e covered. There was no 
information about inclusion of the listed ghats  in the DSRs of concerned 
districts. JSMDC could not provide the DSRs of 21 d istricts (except 
Dhanbad, Pakur and Simdega) to Audit. These DSRs wo uld have included 
crucial details such as mineable quantity, replenis hment rate and time, 
compatibility with EC norms required for sand ghats etc . 
Further, Audit compared the updated list of 608 san d ghats  (having area of 
4,859.96 Ha.) with the initial list of 177 sand ghats  and observed that there 
was mention of 37 ghats  in initial list which were omitted in the updated 
list. Reasons for such omissions were neither found on record nor were these 
provided by the Department of Mines & Geology. Furt her, 389 sand ghats  
for which tenders were invited for empanelment of M DO by JSMDC 
(during the period December 2017 to October 2019) c onsisted of 95 sand 
ghats , which were not in the updated list of 608 ghats  as assigned by DMG 
to JSMDC. The inconsistencies in the information ab out the available 
number of sand ghats  to be managed highlight the casual approach of the  
Department as well as JSMDC in management of sand ghats. This also 
contributed to the low rate of operationalization o f sand ghats as indicated 
in Table-3.4 . 
• Timeline vis-à-vis achievement for operationalisation of sand 
ghats : JSMDC, that was now responsible for the management of sand ghats , 
was to select (i) agencies for preparation of MP/EC ; (ii) Mines Developer 
and Operators (MDO) for mining; and (iii) an IT sol ution developer for 
RFID/GPS tracking of vehicles used for transportati on of sand, CCTV 
surveillance, central monitoring and facilitating c ashless online sale. 
JSMDC decided to commence sand production from Category-2 sand ghats  
from 1 March 2018.  
During the course of Audit, it was noticed that JSM DC could not achieve 
the targets as per the timelines set for operationa lisation of sand ghats . 
Timelines set by JSMDC and corresponding achievemen t are outlined in 
Table-3.4 . 
 
 
 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
43  
Table-3.4: Timeline for operationalizing sand ghats  vis-à-vis  actual achievement  
(as of 31 October 2023) 
Task Action 
by 
Timeline Achievement by 
JSMDC against 
608 identified 
sand ghats 33  
Final date of 
achievement 
for sand ghats  
in Col. D 
Delay in 
achievement  
Percentage 
achievement  
A B C D E F G 
Identification 
of stockyard 
for sand ghats  
JSMDC  15 December 
2017 21 February  
2020 2Y 1.5M 3.45 
Preparation of 
MP and EC 
Selected 
agency 
15 December 
2017 22 July 2019 1Y 6.5M 3.62 
Approval of 
MP and EC 
Selected 
agency 
15 March 
2018 22 September 
2019 1Y 5.5M 3.62 
Award of work 
order to MDO 
for sand mining  
JSMDC  15 January 
2018 21 March 2020 2Y 1.5M 3.45 
Network 
installation of 
sand ghat  and 
user acceptance 
test/Go live 
Selected 
agency 31 May 2018  21 
Network installation, Cashless online sale 
achieved for 21 but CCTV surveillance and 
central monitoring not established 
Source: Compiled by Audit based on the records of JSMDC. 
The table indicates that JSMDC achieved the set tar gets in only a limited 
number of sand ghats , ranging from 3.45 to 3.62 per cent  of the total target. 
Even for these few sand ghats , there were delays ranging between 18 and 
26 months for various tasks such as selection of ag ency for preparation of 
MP/EC, selection of MDOs for operation of ghats  etc . Further no progress 
in any of these tasks was observed after March 2020 . In essence, JSMDC 
managed to operationalise only 21 out of the 608 ghats  of Category-2 
assigned to it by the Department of Mines and Geology (DMG).  
This lack of progress and non-achievement of target s could be further 
attributed to the following factors: 
• Preparation of MP and EC: In January 2018, JSMDC empanelled 
five agencies 
34  to prepare MPs and EC proposals 35  for sand ghats. During 
the period January 2018 to November 2019, JSMDC assigned 167 ghats to 
these agencies for preparation of MPs/EC proposals.  Out of these 
167 proposals, the agencies prepared and submitted the proposals for only 
36 cases and could obtain approval to MPs and ECs i n respect of only 
22 ghats . Thus, MP and EC were obtained only for 22 out  of 167 ghats (i.e. , 
13.17 per cent  of proposals)  assigned to these agencies. Reasons for 
assigning only 167 ghats to the agencies  for preparation of MPs and EC 
                                                 
33   Yearwise list of identified sand ghats  was not made available by JSMDC/Department. 
34   (i) Crystal Consultants, (ii) ENV Developmental A ssistance Systems Pvt. Ltd.,  
(iii) Enviro care Technocrats Pvt. Ltd, (iv) Kalyan i Laboratories Private Ltd. and  
(v) Overseas Min Tech Consultant & Sathi Planners Pvt. Ltd. 
35   The procedure for grant of ECs from the concerned  authorities is detailed in 
Paragraph 4.2  of the report. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
44  
proposals against the 608 ghats  assigned to JSMDC by DMG and 
preparation and submission of MPs and EC proposals in respect of only 
36 ghats  could not be ascertained in audit. JSMDC could als o not provide 
any justification for inaction in respect of the remaining 441 ghats . 
• Award of work order to MDOs for sand mining: The JSMDC 
floated tenders for 389 sand ghats  between December 2017 and 
October 2019 to select the MDOs responsible for managing the entire sand 
ghat  operation, including mining, transportation, stock ing, and loading of 
sand.  
Although preferred bidders were selected for 89 san d ghats , agreements 
were executed for only 26 sand ghats , indicating a low conversion rate of 
preferred bidders to MDOs. Notably, the reason for the low conversion rate 
was the availability of ECs for only 22 sand ghats .  However, only 21 sand 
ghats  could be made operational. 
In a bid to streamline operations, JSMDC consolidat ed responsibilities in 
September 2021, assigning both mining plan preparation and execution to a 
single agency, the MDO. Consequently, JSMDC empaneled 130 MDOs by 
July 2022. However, despite this effort, none of th e sand ghats  became 
operational beyond the existing 21.  
Thus, JSMDC could not ensure timely preparation of MPs to obtain ECs 
from SEIAA and proceeded with the process for selection of MDOs without 
valid MPs and ECs, rendering the entire process unproductive.  
On this being pointed out (December 2023), management of JSMDC replied 
(July 2024) that due to various legal issues, the number of operational sand 
ghats  decreased. At present all the sand ghats  (21 sand ghats ) are 
operational.  
3.4.2 Irrational  deployment of IT solution developer  
Consortium of M/s M-Junction Service Ltd. and M/s T elematics 4 U 
Services Pvt. Ltd. was selected (September 2018) for providing required IT 
solution in 200 sand ghats  for five years (at a cost of ₹ 59,535 per ghat 36  
per month for first three years and ₹ 54,610 per ghat  per month for next 
two years). The agreement also required the agency to deploy two persons 
(at ₹ 0.51 lakh per month- variable cost) at each sand ghat  for bill generation 
and eight persons ( ₹ 4.20 lakh per month- fixed cost) at the Ranchi 
headquarters for call center and technical support. 
The agency provided IT solutions for up to 16 ghats during 2018-22. 
Furthermore, the JSMDC operated a maximum of 16 san d ghats  in a year 
and garnered sale proceeds amounting to ₹ 12.09 crore (excluding royalty 
                                                 
36   Cost of Central monitoring system at State and di strict level was distributed among 200 
ghats . 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
45  
and other associated fees and cess paid to the Government) during 2018-22, 
while the IT service provider claimed bills amounting to ₹ 4.57 crore for the 
same period. As such, the expenditure incurred on IT solutions ranged from 
31.95 per cent  to a maximum of 59.87 per cent  of the proceeds from sand 
sales in a year, as detailed in Table-3.5 . 
Table-3.5: Year wise sale proceeds of sand and payment made to 
the agency 
(₹ in lakh)  
Period No. of sand 
ghats 
operational  
Receipt 
from Sand 
sale 
Bill claimed  Amount 
paid 
Percentage of 
claim   
(Col. 4 to Col. 3)  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2018-19 3 47.81 20.85 20.42 43.61 
2019-20 16 173.92 104.13 103.52 59.87 
2020-21 15 555.59 177.53 177.53 31.95 
2021-22 12 431.70 154.41 104.82 35.77 
Total  1,209.02 456.92 406.29  
Source: Statement provided by JSMDC. 
Audit observed that JSMDC had prepared MP and obtai ned EC for only 
22 sand ghats  and maximum 16 ghats  were operational in a year during 
2018-22, but JSMDC made arrangements for IT solutio ns for operation of 
200 ghats  and incurred enormously high expenditure on it.  J SMDC could 
have revised the timeline for network installation of sand ghat  and user 
acceptance test/Go live or implemented IT solutions on a smaller scale and 
deployed lesser number of IT personnel at Headquarter level. In the absence 
of this, expenditure incurred solely on IT solution s exceeded one-third of 
the proceeds from sale of sand. 
3.4.3  Potential loss of revenue due to non-operati onalisation of 
sand ghats   
As a deemed lessee for operational ghats , JSMDC was required to follow 
the procedures outlined in the JMMC Rules and pay d ead rent ₹30,000 per 
acre per year or royalty in respect of the quantity  of sand removed, 
whichever was greater.  
Out of 608 sand ghats , JSMDC attempted to operate 389 ghats  but 
successfully operationalized only 21 ghats . Thus, 368 sand ghats remained 
non-operational during 2017-22.  Due to 368 non-operative ghats , the State 
Government suffered potential losses of 
₹ 70.92 crore 37  for these ghats (with 
an area of 9,782.55 acres) during November 2019 to March 2022.  
 
                                                 
37   ₹ 70.92 crore = 9,782.55 acres x ₹ 2,500 ( ₹ 30,000/12) acre per month x 29 months 
(November 2019 to March 2022) i.e. , after last of month of tender notice for selectin g 
MDO (October 2019). 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
46  
3.4.4 Analysis of the income and expenditure in ope ration of 
sand ghats  
As per Department of Industries, Mines and Geology, GoJ notification dated 
5 October 2017, JSMDC was entitled to a 15 per cent  agency commission 
charge on the sale proceeds from the management of Category-2 sand ghats . 
After deducting all the expenditures related to ope ration and management 
of sand ghats , JSMDC was to pay back the remaining amount collected from 
sales to the Government exchequer. 
3.4.4.1 Trend of revenue from Sand Mining 
The chart below represents the royalty received by the Department on 
account of sand mining in the State, for the years 2016-22. It is evident from 
the chart below that the amount of royalty decrease d significantly, post the 
handover of sand mining leases to JSMDC. There was a sudden increase in 
royalty in the year 2020-21, the reasons for which were neither evident in 
the records nor intimated by the Department. 
 
Source: Royalty data provided by the Department. 
Data on mineral-wise royalty receipts of the State was gathered from the 
Mines and Geology Department for the period 2017-22. A comparison was 
made between the royalty received from sand by the Department and the 
royalty remitted by JSMDC against sale of sand duri ng the same period. 
Discrepancies observed are presented in Table-3.6 . 
Table-3.6: Royalty received from sand as per Department and royalty 
paid by the JSMDC  
(₹ in lakh)  
Period  As per 
Department 
(Royalty receipt 
from sand)  
As per JSMDC 
(Royalty 
remitted against 
sale of sand)  
Differences  
2017-18  226.87  0.00  No sand ghat  being operated 
by JSMDC during the period   
2018-19  140.47  9.64  130.83  
2019-20  175.67  38.81  136.86  
2020-21  901.46  140.89  760.57  
2021-22  192.02  109.47  82.55  
Source: Royalty data provided by the Department and JSMDC. 
8.29 
2.26 
1.40 1.75 
9.01 
1.92 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Chart 3.1: Royalty received from sand 
(₹ in crore) 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
47  
From October 2018, the sand ghats  (Category-2) of the State were being 
solely operated by JSMDC. Hence, royalty received from the sand as shown 
by the Department should have been the same as show n by the JSMDC. 
However, there were substantial discrepancies in th e figures of royalty 
during the period 2019-22, ranging between ₹ 82.55 lakh and ₹ 760.57 lakh.  
No justification/reasons for the same were provided to Audit. In the absence 
of required information, Audit could not analyse th e reasons for these 
variations. 
3.4.4.2  JSMDC sustained loss in operation of sand ghats  
Year wise proceeds obtained from the sale of sand by JSMDC and provision 
for payments made in the annual accounts of JSMDC d uring the period 
2018-22 are depicted in Table-3.7 . 
Table-3.7: Sale proceeds of sand and provision of payment/payment made 
(₹ in lakh)  
Period No. of 
operative  
sand 
ghats 
(Dispatch)  
Sale 
proceeds 
without 
GST 
Sales commission 
@15 per cent sale 
proceeds excluding 
royalty, DMFT, 
E. Cess & MGMT 
to JSMDC 
Provision of 
payment to agency 
selected for 
preparation of 
MP/EC, MDO and 
IT service provider  
Royalty, 
DMFT,  
E. Cess & 
MGMT 
Profit to be 
deposited in 
State 
exchequer 
2018-19  3 60.78  7.17 90.04 12.96 (-) 49.39 
2019-20  14 225.97  26.09 265.98 52.05 (-) 118.15 
2020-21  15 744.12  83.34 381.30 188.53 90.95 
2021-22  11 578.19  64.75 322.66 146.49 44.29 
Total  1,609.06  181.35 1,059.98 400.03 (-) 32.30 
Source: JSMDC Annual Accounts.  
It is evident from the table that, between 2018 and 2022, JSMDC dispatched 
sand from a maximum of 15 ghats  in a year, generating ₹ 16.09 crore in sale 
proceeds. After deducting 15 per cent  commission ( ₹ 1.81 crore) and 
statutory deductions ( ₹ 4.00 crore), JSMDC incurred direct expenses of 
₹ 10.60 crore. Despite generating revenue, JSMDC the refore sustained a 
loss of ₹ 32.30 lakh, indicating operational inefficiency.  
Audit estimated JSMDC's revenue potential with 60 per cent  of available 
reserve as production output (as envisaged in the S ustainable Sand Mining 
Management Guidelines 2016 i.e. , annual mineable reserve in ECs) between 
April 2020 and March 2022. Based on this, had JSMDC  efficiently 
operated all 21 sand ghats , it could have remitted profits of ₹ 11.51 crore to 
₹ 12.25 crore 38  annually to the State Government. However, JSMDC’s  
production output was only 28.53 to 31.50 per cent  of desired production 
                                                 
38   Profit = (Desired production per year x rate of s and per cft) – (liability on account of 
statuary deductions, payment to MDOs/IT solution provider, commission to JSMDC); 
Desired profit for 2020-21 = (407.82 lakh cft x ₹ 7.5 per cft) - ₹ 1,907.50 lakh = 
₹ 1,151.15 lakh; For 2021-22: (407.82 lakh cft x ₹ 7.5 per cft) - ₹ 1,833.94 = 
₹ 1,224.71 lakh. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
48  
during this period. Thus, this suboptimal performan ce resulted in lost 
revenue opportunities. The inefficient management a nd operation of sand 
ghats  by JSMDC led to financial losses of ₹ 32.30 lakh during 2018-22. 
3.4.5 Depleting reserve in non-operational ghats  
An analysis was carried out of the trend of sand ac cumulation due to 
sedimentation process in non-operational Category-2  sand ghats  for five 
years period. Audit compared the total reserve (as provided in DSRs  
2017-22 and DSRs 2022-27) of 14 sand ghats  of three districts as detailed 
in Table-3.8 . 
Table-3.8:  Trend of sedimentation process in non-operational sand ghats  
Sl. No.  District  Sand ghat  DSR 2017-22  DSR 2022-27  
Area  
(in Ha.)  
Annual 
Mineable 
reserve (MT)  
Area  
(in Ha.)  
Annual 
Mineable 
reserve (MT)  
1 Dhanbad Lohapatti 16.00 2,16,000 45.00 4,47,363 
2 Dhanbad Bhowra 12.00 1,62,000 12.79 54,079 
3 Dhanbad Chas-Nalla 7.20 97,200 30.63 62,357 
4 Dhanbad Jajalpur 3.00 40,500 9.81 77,107 
5 Pakur Babudha 10.49 7,18,794 9.21 1,91,824 
6 Pakur Rolagram 14.94 7,61,076 8.09 62,316 
7 Pakur Barasinghpur  20.01 10,57,050 11.60 1,28,134 
8 Pakur Ganpura 7.08 2,46,645 6.00 58,478 
9 Pakur Benakur 9.76 6,87,083 7.75 68,225 
10 Pakur Ghurani 10.96 3,85,823 3.60 56,240 
11 Simdega Gorra 4.43 1,79,314 5.80 48,139 
12 Simdega Konoriya 4.04 1,63,701 4.00 34,584 
13 Simdega Ramjal 4.84 1,96,182 5.92 21,323 
14 Simdega Latakel 4.71 1,90,958 12.00 1,01,477 
Total 129.46 51,02,326 172.20 14,11,646 
Source: Compiled by audit based on records of JSMDC. 
It is evident from the table that there were 14 san d ghats  having total area 
of 129.46 Ha. with total reserve 51.02 lakh MT per annum  as per DSR  
2017-22. In DSR 2022-27 though, the total area increased from 129.46 Ha. 
to 172.20 Ha., but the total reserve decreased from  51.02 lakh MT to 
14.12 lakh MT per annum . 
A huge decrease (72.33 per cent ) in annual reserve in non-operational sand 
ghats  could not be attributed to only a geographical phe nomenon (washing 
away/ redistribution of reserve), and possibility o f illegal mining in these 
non-operational ghats  during the period cannot be ruled out. Further 
scrutiny of updated DSR (2023) revealed that there were 442 potential sand 
ghats  of Category-2 in existence, which were not being operated. A similar 
study of sand reserves in these inoperative sand ghats  may reveal 
possibilities of illegal mining on a larger scale.  
 

Chapter 3: Revenue Realisation and Management of Sand Ghats  
 
49  
3.5  Recommendations 
The Government/Department may 
• assess reasons for decrease of sand reserves in ino perative sand 
ghats and take comprehensive measures to augment Go vernment 
revenue from minor minerals by operationalizing sand ghats;  
• fix responsibility on erring officials who did not verify rates of 
royalty applicable to boulders dispatched to crushe rs for making 
chips and adhere to provisions of the Act/Rules for  collection of 
correct royalty and penalty; and  
• make concerted efforts to rectify shortcomings of J IMMS 
including formulating a mechanism for submission of  Mining 
Plans through JIMMS for transparency and documentar y 
evidence.  

 
 
 
Chapter 4 
Sustainable and Scientific 
Mining 

 
Chapter  
  
Sustainable and Scientific Mining 
Minor minerals were brought under the Environment I mpact Assessment 
Notification in 2006, requiring environmental clearance for leases over five 
Ha. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate  Change (MoEFCC) 
constituted a group to develop guidelines for susta inable mining of minor 
minerals. The report recommended that the Union Min istry of Mines, 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), and state governments  adopt model 
guidelines and make necessary provisions under the Minor Mineral 
Concession Rules. The Indian Bureau of Mines finali zed (June 2011) the 
Minor Minerals Conservation and Development Rules ( Minor MCDR), 
2010. Consequently, Chapter 4A in February 2014, 4B in May 2014 and 4C 
in March 2019 on Mining Plan and Environment Conservation were inserted 
in JMMC Rules 2004, adopting IBM’s model guidelines format.  
As per JMMC Rules 2004, scientific mining means car rying out mining 
activities as per mining plan and schemes. As per p rovisions contained in 
Rules 5 and 6 of the JMMC Rules, 2004, clearances a nd approvals from 
various agencies are required to ensure that mining activities are sustainable 
and scientific in nature. Details of these approval s required, and role of 
various agencies therein, are as shown in Chart-4.1 . 
Chart-4.1: Roles of various agencies in ensuring sustainable and scientific mining 
 
• Category A mines from Central Government and Category B mines from 
SEIAA.
Environmental Clearance from Central Government/SEIAA 
•Consent to Establish and Consent to Operate.
Clearance from State Pollution Control Board 
• The mining operations should be restricted to above ground water table so t hat 
it does not intersect it. In case of working below the ground water table , prior 
approval of Ground Water Directorate, GoJ/Central Ground Water Board sha ll 
be obtained .
Clearance from Ground  Water Directorate, GoJ/ 
Central Ground Water Board 
• Distance of the lease from the nearest forest boundary should be at least 250 
meters. No mining shall be undertaken in forest area without obtaining prio r 
forest clearance from GoI .
Clearance from Divisional Forest Officer 
• There should be no human habitation within a distance of 500 meter from the 
applied mining lease area and clearance about type of land involved in mining
lease is required.
Clearance from Circle Officer of Land Revenue Department 
• As per instructions of DGMS, height of benches and slope should be maintained 
as per approved mining plan.
Safety measures to be adpoted in line with instructions  of 
DGMS 
4 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
52  
4.1 Mining Plan 
After receiving letter of intent from DMO, Applican t of a mining lease is 
required to submit a Mining Plan (MP).  The MP serves as the basis for 
scientific and sustainable mining practices. The annual projected volume of 
minerals approved in the MP also forms the basis fo r determining 
production quantities given in Environmental Cleara nce (EC), Consent to 
Establish (CTE), and Consent to Operate (CTO) 39 . Procedure for 
preparation and approval of MP for minor minerals in Jharkhand is given in 
Chart-4.2 . 
Chart-4.2: Procedure for preparation and approval of Mining Plan 
for Minor Minerals 
 
4.1.1 Shortcomings in process of preparation and ap proval of 
Mining Plan  
JMMC Rules adopted the Mining Plan format as provid ed in the model 
Minor MCDR, 2010 circulated by the IBM. Mining leas es for minor 
minerals are generally granted for a period of 10 y ears (with provision for 
subsequent renewals). The MP of  the entire lease period of 10 years was 
approved in two parts of five years each. The first  part (Mining Plan, 
henceforth 1 st  Plan) had chapters on geology and exploration, exp ected 
yearly production, mining, processing and environmental management plan. 
                                                 
39   CTE and CTO are given by Pollution Control Board un der Section 25/26 of the Water 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and u nder Section 21 of the Air  
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 for establishing and operating the project. 
Submission and Approval of Mining Plan 
1. Submission of MP by applicant to AMO/DMO of concerned district 
for approval, which has to be done within seven days of submission of MP.
2. In case of delay in approval by AMO/DMO, the Deputy Dirctor, 
Mines should ensure approval of MP .
Review and Updation of Mining Plan 
Holder of mining lease shall apply for review or updation of MP at least 
120 days before the expiry of the first five years period of the MP to 
AMO/DMO.
Submission of mine closure plan by holder of mining lease and its 
approval by AMO/DMOs 
1. Progressive mine closure plan had to be submitted along with the 
initial MP.
2. Final mine closure plan had to be submitted one year prior to the 
proposed closure and had to be approved within 90 days from date of 
receipt, by AMO/DMO.

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
53  
The second part (Scheme of Mining, henceforth calle d 2 nd  Plan) had a 
chapter on review of 1 st  five-year plan, in addition to further chapters on  
yearly production, exploration, environmental management etc ., on the lines 
of the 1 st  Plan.  Both parts of the MP were required to be ap proved 
separately. 
Audit test checked 74 stone mining leases, granted during February 2009 to 
March 2022 and their mining plans of six test checked districts and noticed 
the following shortcomings: 
i) As per Para 3.3 of IBM Manual on Appraisal of Mi ning Plan (2014), the 
MP for fresh lease cases shall be approved only aft er site inspection is 
carried out along with the Recognised Qualified Per son 
40  (RQP) and 
representative of the applicant. However, in case of 64 fresh lease cases 
with lease period between February 2009 and January 2032, no records 
in support of site inspection of the lease area with the applicant/RQP by 
the approving authorities were made available to Audit. Further, in none 
of the cases, dates of submission of MPs by applica nts to approving 
authorities were mentioned. Only approved MPs along with conditional 
approval letters were produced to Audit. The absenc e of a documented 
trail of these events raises concerns about the tho roughness and 
transparency of the review and approval process.  
ii) The borehole and sampling reports that were to be mandatorily included 
in support of detailed exploration of the proved re serve and 
measurement of bulk density, were not available in the MPs of all the 
74 test checked leases. In the absence of corrobora tory evidence, 
correctness of the estimation of proved reserve and  bulk density 
included in the MPs was questionable.  
iii) AutoCAD software is used to generate Development Plans and sections, 
incorporating three-dimensional images of the lease area and applicable 
tools for measuring sectional area/volume. It was, however, noticed that 
given the crucial role of this software, the Department had not equipped 
mining offices with AutoCAD or compatible software to facilitate 
comprehensive vetting of these MPs and sections therein. Lessees were 
submitting (as of March 2022) only two-dimensional printouts of maps 
in the MP, which could not ensure comprehensive vet ting of the Plan 
and effective monitoring of mining operations.  
iv) Rule 34E(1) of JMMC Rules, 2004 provides that I BM instructions in 
respect of preparation and approval of MPs should b e complied with. 
IBM (April 2010) instructed that boundary pillars o f each mining lease 
were to be fixed precisely. Each boundary pillar wa s to be surveyed 
                                                 
40   As per Rule 34C(1) of JMMC Rules, 2004, every MP sh all be prepared by persons 
having required qualification and experiences.  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
54  
using the D ifferential Global Positioning System  or, DGPS (for its 
ground position), by an agency recognised by the St ate Government. 
Further, JMMC Rules, 2004 provided that coordinates  on boundary 
pillars should also be recorded. In this context, A udit noted that 
available coordinates of boundary pillars in MPs we re not recorded 
precisely in 47 cases, as detailed in Paragraph-4.1.3.2.  
4.1.2 Irregular approval of Mining Plan 
In compliance of Rule 34D of JMMC Rules, 2004, the State Government 
instructed through notification (27 September 2014)  to submit MPs to 
AMOs/DMOs of concerned district who would approve i t within seven 
days. In case of any delays foreseen or accumulatio n of unapproved MPs, 
these MPs were to be submitted to the DDM who shall ensure their approval 
by himself, or by a designated officer of the Direc torate of Geology posted 
in the district. In this context, Audit noticed the following irregularities. 
Out of 138 Mining Plans 41  for 74 test checked stone leases, 120 plans 42  were 
produced before Audit. In violation of Departmental  instructions 
(August 2014), out of 120 plans, 65 plans (54 per cent ) were approved by 
non-designated authorities posted in Department/oth er districts, as these 
were other than designated authorities as specified  in State Government’s 
instructions of 2014. Further, as per Rule 34 E of the JMMC Rules, 2004, 
approval of the MP should be given after thorough investigation but, in nine 
cases these were either approved on the same day 43  or on the very next day 
of submission, which indicates lack of thorough investigation. 
To bypass the fulfilment of conditions required for  approval of Plans, the 
approving authorities granted conditional approvals to MPs based on certain 
criteria (like submission of DGPS within six months, submission of detailed 
study of ground water study at the time of complian ce of EC etc .). This 
practice was in contravention of Rule 34E of JMMC Rules, 2004 that states 
that approval should be granted only after thorough investigation.   
Thus, the Department did not fully implement its ow n instructions on 
approval of MP by authorized officers of the respec tive districts and also 
did not adhere to the statutory provisions.   
4.1.3  Irregularities in Mining Plan  
Audit also noticed cases of irregularities in the M Ps approved by DMG 
wherein information furnished in the MPs did not match the physical status 
                                                 
41   74 plans for 1 st  five-year and 64 plans for 2 nd  five-year (as in these cases 1 st  five-year 
period ended). 
42   65 plans for 1 st  five-year and 55 plans for 2nd  five-year.  
43   Counted from date of deposit of fee for approval of MP. 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
55  
of mines. Cases noticed during test-checks have bee n discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1.3.1 Unreliable information in Mining Plan 
The Surface Plan of a lease area outlines the initial surface conditions, safety 
barriers and boundary pillars at the start of a MP period. For the second 
five-year plan period, a survey is conducted and th e actual lease area 
position during the survey becomes the surface plan. Although surface plans 
of 2 nd  MP for stone mining in six districts exhibited bou ndary pillars, a 
7.5-meter safety barrier and benches (created during 1 st  MP), joint physical 
verification (JPV) with DMG officials revealed that  55 out of 63 test 
checked leases lacked these features, as discussed in Paragraph 4.1.4.1 , 
indicating non-compliance with plan requirements as  illustrated in 
Case Study-4.1 . 
Case Study-4.1 
New Three Star Mines (Lessee code - 0623160603), Pakur 
The District Mining Officer (DMO), Pakur granted a 10 year stone 
mining lease to a lessee over an area 44  covering 2.34 Ha. in 
October 2019. The lease was based on the 1 st five-year mining plan 
approved in December 2015 and a 2 nd  five-year plan approved in 
November 2020. As per lease agreement, the lease pe riod was from 
20 March 2020 to 19 March 2030. 
Audit findings were as follows: 
• Inaccurate Surface Plan : The surface plan of the 2 nd  five-year plan 
showed 0.29 Ha. as excavated land and 2.05 Ha. unbr oken land 
(Picture-4.1) . Scrutiny of records revealed that this was not a 
fresh lease as 1.975 out of 2.34 Ha. of lease area was previously 
allotted to an ex-lessee for lease tenure of 20 yea rs (2 April 1990 to 
1 April 2010). Information about mining activities performed by 
ex-lessee during his lease tenure of 20 years and satellite images prior 
to grant of this lease (9 March 2019) revealed that  42.73 per cent  of 
lease area was already excavated (Picture-4.3)  indicating lack of 
thorough examination by the RQP/approving authority. 
• Non-Compliance with MP : The annual development plan (fifth 
year) of the 2 nd  five-year plan specified that the total area to be broken 
up in the next five years would be 1.17 Ha. (by Mar ch 2025) 
(Picture-4.2)  and by March 2025, the maximum depth of the mining 
pit would be 15 meters with three benches (five meters each). 
                                                 
44   Plot no. 329 (P), 338 (P), 340, 341, 342, 343(P),  344(P) and 347(P) of Mauza  Kanupur, 
Pakur P.S, District Pakur. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
56  
  
Picture-4.1: Showing unexcavated 
land (87.61 per cent  of lease area) in 
Suface Plan of 2 nd  five year Mining 
Plan 
Picture-4.2: Showing proposed broken up 
area (1.17 Ha.) in development plan (fifth 
year) of 2 nd  five year Mining Plan 
During joint physical verification (JPV) in October 2023, the team found 
that excavation was carried out in the entire lease  area (2.34 Ha.) and 
depth of pit was ranging from 25.45 meters to 30.45  meters with steep 
slope (ranging from 85° to 90°) without formation o f benches 
(Picture-4.4 ) indicating non-adherence to the conditions of MP and lack 
of monitoring by the concerned DMO.  
  
Picture- 4.3: Google Image dated 9 
March 2019, showing 42.73 per cent  
of lease area was excavated prior to 
grant of lease (kml file) 
Picture- 4.4: Showing steep slope of 
boundary wall without any bench, safety 
barrier (0-0.5m width instead of proposed 
7.5 m), no plantation on safety barrier. 
Ishraq Zia (Lessee code- 0204599601), Dhanbad 
DMO Dhanbad granted 45  (March 2016) a stone mining lease (10 years) 
for an area covering 3.25 Ha. 46   based on 1 st  five-year MP which was 
approved by DDM Ranchi (undated). Subsequent to gra nt of lease, a 
revised MP was again approved by DDM Ranchi in July 2016. Scrutiny 
of surface plan of the revised approved MP revealed  that there was a 
deliberate misrepresentation of facts. While the surface of lease area was 
depicted as unbroken (Picture-4.5) in the Plan, which meant that mining 
activities had not been carried out before, the sat ellite images of 
21 March 2014 (Picture-4.6)  of lease area (prior to grant of lease) 
                                                 
45   Plot no. 11, 19, 20, 21, 1048(P) under the lease ar ea was previously allotted to  
M/s JKC Project Ltd. Application for reallotment of lease were invited through gazette 
notification.  
46   Plot no. 11, 19, 1048(P) of Mauza - Gorga, Circle-Nirsa, District- Dhanbad. 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
57  
showed excavated pit within the lease area. The rea son behind the 
existence of this excavated pit was allotment of th is lease previously to 
an ex-lessee.  
  
Picture-4.5: Showing unexcavated 
lease area in Surface plan  
Picture-4.6: Google Image dated 21 
March 2014 of lease area 
In both the cases covered under the case study, the surface plans’ depiction 
of unbroken land was inaccurate, indicating that the MPs were prepared and 
approved without conducting a proper survey of the lease area. This had 
significant implications on subsequent approval of EC, mining operations 
and monitoring of excess excavation. Incorrect plans led to deviations from 
scientific mining practices, including the absence of benches, safety 
barriers, gentle slopes, and plantations. Under Rul e 34(A)(2) it is the duty 
of the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district and DMOs to ensure 
implementation of the mining plan, but they could not ensure its correctness 
and implementation.  
4.1.3.2 Deficient recording of coordinates of lease  area 
Recording of coordinates of every turning/corner po int would ensure a 
proper shape and size of the leased area. Audit con ducted a comparison of 
the shape, area, and location of mining leases avai lable in the khasra  and 
surface plan maps with maps generated on Google Earth using co-ordinates 
of 61 out of 63 jointly physically verified 47  mining leases. A comparison of 
these maps revealed variations in shape, area, and locations of mining leases 
in 47 out of 61 leases. The discrepancies in lease area, shapes, and locations 
across different maps indicated lack of diligence w hile preparing the MP 
and subsequent lacunae in the process of vetting an d approval of mining 
leases/plans. A copy of the Khasra  map, Surface plan and satellite image of 
a leased area (M/s Suruchi Stones works, Chatra ) illustrating variations in 
the shape, size, and location of mining is shown in Picture-4.7 .  
 
                                                 
47   Two MPs not produced. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
58  
Picture-4.7: Showing variation in shape, size and place of mining 
   
Khasra map (0.684 Ha.)  Surface plan of 1 st  five-year 
MP (lease area 1.09 Ha.) 
approved on 25 June 2015 by 
AMO, Chatra 
Map generated using coordinates 
available in mining plan, Lease 
area-0.48 Ha. (kml file) 
M/s Suruchi Stones works, Misrol, Lessee code: 308337301, lease area-0.684 Ha.,  
granted on 14 November 2015, by DC, Chatra. 
The variations in mining lease maps were attributed  to several factors like 
(i) non-recording of coordinates of every turning p oint, (ii) non-recording 
of coordinates of every boundary pillar, and (iii) incorrect recording of 
coordinates.  Audit noticed in cases of three lease s in Chatra and Palamu 
districts that the maps generated on Google Earth b ased on recorded 
coordinates, have errors of aerial distances rangin g up to 2.90 km from 
actual locations of mines, indicating possible violation of the lease area (as 
discussed in subsequent paragraphs). 
4.1.3.3 Overlapping lease area with unregulated min ing related 
activities around these leases  
In three 48  out of the six test-checked districts, four instances were identified 
where the lease areas of two different leases overl apped. The extent of the 
overlapping portion varied, ranging from 0.30 to 1.14 Ha. Notably, the MPs 
for these two leases were either prepared/approved by the same 
RQP/authority (one set of leases in Palamu and one set in Chaibasa) or 
approved by the same authority but prepared by diff erent RQP (one set of 
leases in Chaibasa and one set in Sahibganj) illustrated in Case Studies-4.2 
and  4.3. 
 
 
                                                 
48   Chaibasa  (1) Trustline Dealer Pvt. Ltd., lessee code- 01013 35502 and CTS Industries 
Ltd., lessee code- 0101334704 overlapped portion- 0 .43 Ha., (2) CTS Industries Ltd., 
lessee code-0101334703 and Trustline Dealer Pvt. Lt d., lessee code-0101335501 
overlapped area-0.30 Ha.), Palamu  (1) Maa Stone Works, lessee code- 411172501 and 
Damdami Morrum and Stone Deposit, lessee code- 411722401 overlapped portion-1.14 
Ha.) and Sahibganj  (1) M/s Kwality Stone Products, lessee code- 62039 6401 and M/s 
Shree Guru, lessee code- 620420902 Plot 541 overlapped). 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
59  
Case Study-4.2 
The DMO Palamu granted two stone mining leases: (i) M/s Maa Stone Works, 
Damdami (June 2015) over 4.047 Ha. for 10 years, ba sed on a 1 st  five-year 
Mining Plan approved by the Deputy Director, Geolog y; (ii) M/s Damdami 
Morrum and Stone Deposit (December 2016) over 4.65 Ha., on the part of the 
same plot. Both leases had MPs prepared and approved by the same RQP and 
authority. Audit conducted JPV with DMO of these tw o leases in 
December 2022 and noticed that:  
• Overlapping Lease Areas :  Boundary pillars in the two abutting leases 
were absent, except for only one pillar in M/s Damdami Morrum and Stone 
Deposit. In absence of boundary pillars, Audit prep ared kml file from the 
coordinates in MPs of these leases on Google Earth software to demarcate 
their lease areas and found that 1.14 Ha. overlappe d between M/s Maa 
Stone Works and M/s Damdami Morrum and Stone Deposi t's lease areas.  
Due to this overlap, the possibility of disputes an d unnecessary litigations 
cannot be ruled out.  
•  Irregular operation of crushing units : As per MPs and CTOs, M/s Maa 
Stone Works was permitted to sell stone boulder and  not permitted to sell 
the stone chips but, scrutiny of historical images available on Google Earth 
pro revealed irregular operation of crushers in the  lease area in 
January 2018 and January 2019.  
• Excavation in Non-Mining Zone : Excavation of 2.19 Ha. outside the 
lease boundary of M/s Maa Stone works was found wit hin 250 meters of 
forest land, which showed that not only was this mi ned illegally, but also 
that provisions prohibiting mining activities near forest areas were not 
being adhered to. 
  
Picture-4.8: Showing lease area – M/s Maa 
Stone Works (lease boundary red line) 
overlapped (1.14 Ha.) with M/s Damdami 
Morrum and Stone Deposit (lease boundary in 
blue line); distance from forest pillar to 
excavated land (2.19 Ha., outside eastern 
boundary of M/s Maa Stone Works) was less 
than 250 meter image date 21 December 2022 
Picture-4.9: Google Image date 10 January 
2018 (crushers  within lease area marked in 
green line) 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
60  
Case Study-4.3 
A lease was transferred to M/s Kwality Stone Products in September 2008 for 
the entire plot number 541 (along with 12 plots), l ater renewed for another 
10 years (up to 14 October 2022). Despite the period of the existing lease not 
having expired, the DMO, Sahibganj irregularly granted a lease to M/s Shree 
Guru Stone Works in December 2018 on a part of the same plot (along with 
07 plots) for 10 years (lease period 25 January 2019 to 24 January 2029). Thus, 
during the period 25 January 2019 to 14 October 2022, the lease portion over 
part of plot number 541 overlapped between M/s Kwality Stone Products and 
M/s Shree Guru Stone Works. This may lead to future  disputes and legal 
issues. During JPV in September 2023, it was seen t hat excavation had been 
carried out in the entire plot, and boundaries between the two leases were not 
demarcated. 
  
Picture- 4.10: Showing two abutting leases 
on plot-wise map (Plot number 541 
allotted to two lease holders), ( Khasra  
map) Sahibganj 
Picture- 4.11: Showing excavation in lease 
of M/s Kwality Stone Products 
Audit observed that lack of diligence on the part o f authorities responsible 
for vetting and approving mining plans resulted in irregular approval of 
mining plans with overlapping areas which may lead to disputes, illegal and 
unsustainable mining outside the lease areas etc . 
4.1.3.4 Presumptive water table level in mining pla n 
As per Rule 6 (घ) of the JMMC Rules, 2004 (amended on February 22, 
2017), the maximum depth of mining should not excee d the permanent 
water level of that area. However, the Rules do not  define what the 
permanent water level is. According to standard EC conditions, prior 
approval from the Ground Water Directorate, GoJ or the Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), Ministry of Jal Shakti, GoI is required to work below 
the groundwater table.  


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
61  
Scrutiny of MPs of 61 test-checked leases revealed that the water level was 
proposed on a presumptive basis (like assessing the  level from the nearest 
wells, tube well, water bodies etc .) in MPs of these 61 leases without any 
consultation with CGWB to determine the Permanent w ater level. 
Moreover , in 13 cases lessees who had conducted mining activi ties below 
the ground water level failed to obtain necessary p ermission from CGWB 
before continuing mining activities. 
In absence of exact definition of Permanent water l evel, audit obtained the 
data available with CGWB and Drinking Water & Sanit ation Division 
(DWSD), GoJ. CGWB maintains data of two types of aquifers: (i) confined 
aquifer 
49  and (ii) unconfined aquifer 50 . A comparison was made between the 
recommended depth of mining pits in conceptual plan s 51 /the depth noticed 
during JPVs and the deepest water level/table 52  reported by CGWB/DWSD 
from 2017 to 2024. 
 
Picture-4.12: Showing RL of stone mining leases and  water level/table of nearest 
wells (confined and unconfined) 
 
  
                                                 
49    A confined aquifer is bounded above and below by aquiclude (impermeable geological 
unit).  
50   An unconfined aquifer, also known as water table aq uifer, is bounded below by 
aquiclude (impermeable geological unit) but not restricted by any confining layer above 
it. Its upper boundary is water table. 
51   Shows Plan and sections at the end of life of min e. This is part of the MP. 
52   Well nearest to the test checked mining leases. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
62  
The observations are discussed in Table-4.1 .  
Table- 4.1: Showing comparison of existing water table and depth of mining 
recommended in Mining Plan/found in JPV  
Name of 
District  
Number 
of 
mining 
lease/  
Number 
of 
blocks  
Maximum depth of 
pit (in meter)  
Maximum Water 
level reported by 
CGWB during 
2017-24 (in meter 
below ground level)  
Maximum 
Water 
table 
reported 
by DWSD 
during 
2017-24 
(mbgl)  
Excess depth in 
comparison to 
water level/ table 
(in meter)  
MPs 
(Conceptual 
Plans)  
JPV  Unconfined 
aquifer  
Confined 
aquifer  
Mining 
plan  
JPV  
Chatra  3/2 30 to 52 39.90 to 
70.10 3.3 to 11.2  6.9 to 
7.45 
18.15 to 
18.48 
11.52 to 
33.85 
21.42 to 
51.95 
Dhanbad  3/2 27 to 34 30 to 48  3.5 to 9 9.26 16.20 to 
16.80 
10.20 to 
17.80 
13.20 to 
31.80 
Palamu 5/1 24 to 60 41 to 94  6.6 to 12.4  14.85 21.25 2.75 to 
38.75 
19.75 to 
72.75 
Pakur 2/1  25 to 42 33 to 
40.23 
8.27 to 
10.95 
4.07 to 
6.12 21.50 3.50 to 
20.50 
11.5 to 
18.73 
Source: information from CGWB, DWSD, Mining plan, JPV report. 
It is evident from the above table that in 13 cases  out of 61 test-checked 
leases, depth recommended in the concerned MP and n oticed during JPV 
exceeded the water level/table 53  of the concerned block which is discussed 
in Case Study-4.4 .   
Case Study-4.4 
DMO, Palamu granted two adjoining stone mining leas es 54  in Chattarpur 
block of Palamu district to a person in December 2011. The person obtained 
ECs for both leases on 30 December 2015, based on M Ps prepared by the 
same RQP and approved by the same authority.  
According to the 1 st  and 2 nd  MPs, the ultimate mining pit depth in 
conceptual plans and pre-monsoon water table for bo th leases were 
specified as follows: 
Mining 
leases 
Plans Ultimate mining pit 
depth (Conceptual Plan) 
in meter 
Pre-monsoon water 
table (in meter) 
Kharwadih  1st  66 (RL 242-176) 75 (RL 167) 
2nd  42 (RL242- 200) 55-59 (RL 183-187) 
Bagaiya 1st  72 (RL 246-174) 75 (RL 171) 
2nd  60 (RL 246-186) 76 (RL170 ) 
                                                 
53   Maximum pit depth recommended in Conceptual Plan/ noticed in JPV had been 
compared with the deepest water table/level reported by CGWB/DWSD. 
54   M/s Kharwadih (lease area- 4.650 Ha., lease perio d- 07.01.2012 to 06.01.2022, mauza: 
Kharwadih, 1 st  five-year MP approved on 14.05.2015 and 2 nd  plan approved on 
05.08.2020), M/s Bagaiya (lease area- 4.046 Ha., le ase period 08.01.2012 to 
07.01.2022, mauza: Bagaiya, 1 st  five year MP approved on 14.05.2015, 2 nd  MP 
approved on 03 October 2020). 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
63  
The table reveals that mining activities were reduc ed by 24 meters (from 
66 to 42 meters) for Kharwadih and 12 meters (from 72 to 60 meters) for 
Bagaiya. The reduction in Kharwadih was done to avo id intersecting with 
groundwater. However, in the adjoining Bagaiya lease, mining was allowed 
up to 60 meters, despite the fact that this was an adjoining lease. Notably, 
DWSD reported a maximum water table depth of 21.25 meters below 
ground level (mbgl) in the Chattarpur block during 2017-2023. 
Thus, mining activities were allowed at different depths in adjoining leases 
based on presumptive assumptions in MPs without obtaining the necessary 
permission from CGWB. 
  
Picture-4.13: Bagaiya stone mine, partly 
filled with water, depth of water-30 meter, 
(JPV- November 2022) 
Picture-4.14: Kharwadih mines, filled 
with water (JPV- November 2022) 
During beneficiary survey, 55 per cent  (327 out of 597) residents stated that 
deterioration of the water table was one of the maj or negative impacts of 
mining activities. Thus, inability of the DMG in cross verifying the relevant 
data before approval of MP based on presumptive lev els of water table 
resulted not only in deterioration of water table o f the mines affected area 
but was also against the objective of environment m anagement plan for 
sustainable and scientific mining.  
4.1.3.5 Irregular accounting of mineable reserve in  Mining Plan 
The MPs for stone leases outlined mineable reserve and non-mineable 
resources. The lease area was categorised into (i) Mining Pit Area : which 
includes mineable reserve for excavation and non-mineable resources in the 
form of benches 55  (ii) Safety Barrier : 7.5 meter area surrounding the pit 
area, exclusively containing non-mineable resources which is not available 
for mining, as shown in Picture -4.15. 
  
                                                 
55   Equal height and width, dimension (6 m height and 6 m width, 5 m x 5 m etc .). 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
64  
Picture 4.15: Pictorial representation of a mine showing safety  
barrier and mining pit with benches  
 
An audit scrutiny of the MPs of 61 out of 63 physic ally verified leases 
revealed that within the mining pit area, mining activities were proposed to 
be performed at a 45° angle, considering the existe nce of benches.  It was 
also noticed that despite similar conditions for no n-mineable resources, in 
25 cases, ratio of mineable to non-mineable resourc es exhibited wide 
variation ranging from 88:12 to 51:49. Further, bas ed on the area of the 
safety barrier (as mentioned in the land use pattern), Audit calculated 56  that 
non-mineable resources of 83.87 lakh tonnes should have been blocked in 
safety barriers in 14 out of 25 cases. However, it was observed that the MPs 
included the total approved non-mineable resources of 53.21 lakh tonnes in 
these mines, indicating understatement of non-minea ble resources by 
30.66 lakh tonnes in the MPs.  
The overstatement of mineable reserve, valued at 
₹ 34.96 crore 57 , due to 
understatement of non-mineable resources, could result in: (i) Unwarranted 
allowance of mineable quantities in ECs (ii) Promot ion of unsustainable 
mining practices (iii) Negative impact on safety measures due to absence of 
safety barriers and benches and (iv) Adverse enviro nmental effects due to 
lack of space for plantation. 
The irregular accounting of mineable reserve agains t non-mineable 
resources within the mining pit area in one case ou t of the 14 cases 
commented upon above, has been scrutinised in detail in Case Study-4.5 .  
Case Study-4.5  
Lutful Haque (Lessee code-623955701), Pakur 
According to MP, the total mineable reserve of the mine was 30,07,368 
tonnes, with 24,74,928 tonnes (equivalent to 9,16,6 40 m 3) available for 
extraction during the 10 year lease period. The rem aining quantity was 
reserved for subsequent period of two years. Further, area of 4.02 Ha. out 
of the total 5.46 Ha. was designated for excavation , with a specified 
depth ranging between two to 20 meters, to maintain  a gentle side wall 
slope of 45°.  
                                                 
56   Calculated by multiplying area of safety barrier (mentioned in land use pattern) 
multiplied by depth of the resources (mentioned in geological plan). 
57   11.17 lakh m 3 (30.66 lakh tonnes/bulk density) x rate of stone ₹ 313 per m 3. 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
65  
The mining plan indicated 9,16,640 m 3 (as per the volume mentioned in 
MP) of mineable reserve for 10 year lease period.  Even if excavation is 
done at a 90 o slope with uniform depth of 20 meters, there was 
overstatement of mineable reserve as shown below:  
• Excavation area: 4.02 Ha. = 40,200 m 2 
• Uniform depth: 20 meters 
• Maximum possible mineable reserve without following the condition 
of maintaining the 45° slope: 40,200 m 2 x 20 m = 8,04,000 m 3 
Comparing this to the approved mineable reserve of 9,16,640 m 3, it is 
evident that there was an overstatement of mineable  reserve by at 
least 1,12,640 m 3 (9,16,640-8,04,000). This suggests that the estima tion 
process followed was unreliable.  
4.1.3.6 Recommendation for utilisation without samp ling and 
testing  
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 199 9 were introduced 
for conserving and developing granite resources. Ke y provisions include:  
(i) Rule 3(h): Defines granite as rocks recoverable  as dimensional stone, 
capable of taking polish, and commercially exploita ble (ii) Rule 22: 
Promotes utilisation of smaller blocks for manufact uring bricks, flooring, 
tiles etc ., and use of small pieces as stone aggregates and quarry backfill  
(iii) Rule 43: Requires quarry owners to maintain b orehole records and 
prohibits their destruction without approval. 
Among the 63 stone leases examined, MPs of 61 lease s reported that the 
lease areas consisted of rock mass of granite. However, in all cases, the MPs 
uniformly recommended the use of granite as chips/b oulders without 
conducting proper sampling and tests to ascertain w hether they were 
suitable for dimensional stone, capable of taking p olish, and commercially 
exploitable. Thus, the State Government ignored exp loring the possibility 
of commercial exploitation of high value products t hat could have fetched 
higher royalty.  
4.1.3.7 Non-incorporation of baseline data in Envir onmental 
Management Plan 
As per Mining plan format provided in the model Min or MCDR, 2010 
circulated by IBM, the chapter on Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
in MP should have baseline data (air, water and noi se pollution level) of 
lease area which would serve as reference point for  evaluating 
environmental deterioration due to mining operations in future.  
Scrutiny of Chapter on EMP in MPs of 61 test checked leases revealed that 
no data for air, water and noise pollution level through on-site measurements 
around lease area were recorded, except for documen ting pre-recorded 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
66  
water quality data measured by the CGWB at various locations in the 
respective district. This indicated that on-site me asurements for air, water 
and noise pollution were not taken. Had these data points been collected and 
recorded, these could have been used as baseline da ta for evaluating 
environmental deterioration due to mining operation. 
Thus, inclusion of EMP in mining plans without rele vant data, resulted in 
lack of the baseline to effectively assess the impa ct of mining operation on 
environment. 
4.1.4 Implementation of Progressive Mine Closure Pl an 
As per Rule 17 of minor MCDR, 2010,  every mine shall have a Mine 
Closure Plan which shall be of two types:  
• Progressive mine closure plan for the purpose of pr oviding 
protective, reclamation and rehabilitation measures in a mine or part thereof 
and  
• Final mine closure plan for the purpose of decommis sioning, 
reclamation and rehabilitation of a mine or part th ereof after cessation of 
mining and mineral processing operations. 
The progressive mine closure plan essentially entai ls the systematic 
implementation of the MP. The lease area should be properly demarcated 
through boundary pillars and fenced, excavation sho uld be limited within 
mining pit area, leaving benches with gentle slope and safety barriers around 
the mining pit area for plantation purposes. Audit observed that in 61 out of 
63 test checked stone leases (in two cases MP not p roduced), progressive 
mine closure plans were submitted along with the MP but were not complied 
with.  
Audit conducted JPV with DMG officials in 63 select ed stone leases 
58  and 
observed several deviations from the provisions outlined in the MP, both in 
working and closed stone mining leases, as discussed below. 
4.1.4.1 Mining  in excess of permissible limit  
Indian Bureau of Mines issued a circular (No. 02/20 10) in April 2010 
requiring submission of geo referenced cadastral ma ps and DGPS surveys 
for boundary pillars of mining lease by the lessee. The JIMMS has facilities 
in place to use this data and generate maps in Goog le Earth using 
geographical coordinates of the boundary pillars of  mining leases. Audit 
noted that in case of 61 out of 63 test-checked sto ne leases (in two leases 
MP not produced), the Mining Plans included mineabl e reserve, 
                                                 
58   54 fresh leases (where no mining activity performed  earlier) and nine renewed leases, 
out of 63 leases 51 working and 12 expired leases.  
 
Mine Closure  Plan  


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
67  
non-mineable resources, and proposed mining activit ies at a 45° angle, 
providing for equal size of benches.  
Additionally, the Department had instructed field o ffices (in July 1986) to 
conduct annual sectional measurements (of at least 20 per cent ) of leases to 
verify the actual quantity excavated against dispat ch of minerals. The 
DMOs were further required to verify 10 per cent  of these measurements 
for data accuracy. 
During the JPV, Audit observed that 55 out of 63 le ases 
59  had side walls 
with steep slopes of approximately 65° to 90°, devi ating from the 
recommended gentle slope of 45°. To verify the depth recommended in the 
mining plan, the team measured the depth by droppin g a rope with a stone 
load from ground level to the ultimate pit level. T he comparison of mining 
activities (prescribed in Mining plan) and JPV obse rvations for 55 stone 
leases is shown in Chart 4.3 . 
Chart-4.3 
  
Showing prescribed mining activities Showing actual mining activities 
performed by lessees 
The pictorial chart reveals two key issues: 
a.  Lessees excavated stone without creating required b enches and safety 
barriers, increasing the side wall angle from 45° t o 65-90° and 
horizontally infringing on non-mineable resources, violating mining 
plan terms. 
b.  Lessees also excavated beyond the allowable depth, vertically 
infringing on non-mineable resources, with pit dept hs exceeding 
permissible limits by 2.5 to 50 meters ( i.e. , 11 to 494 per  cent ).  
                                                 
59   55 cases: no benches, one case: no mining perform ed, five cases: one bench and two 
cases: 2 to 3 benches. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
68  
For comparing the excavation within and outside lea se area (horizontal 
infringement), geographical coordinates of every bo undary pillar of the 
lease were necessary. Audit noticed that despite IB M instructions and 
inbuilt feature of recording of coordinates in JIMMS, sufficient and correct 
geographical coordinates of boundary pillars were not recorded.  
Further, in order to obtain Environmental clearance  from SEIAA, the 
applicants were to submit kml files 60  to generate lease maps on Google 
Earth. However, these kml files submitted for EC we re not available on 
Parivesh Portal. 61  Had these files been made available to Audit, they  could 
have proved helpful for generating maps on Google Earth.  
The lessees in the test checked cases neither submitted geo-referenced maps 
of mining leases, nor did they ensure their superim position on 
Geo-referenced cadastral map. As a result, the requ ired superimposed 
outputs (soft copy of shape file and its hard copy)  was not available with 
DMOs in the 61 test checked stone leases. 
In the absence of shape files with DMOs, kml files in the Parivesh Portal, 
and coordinates for each boundary pillar pertaining to 63 stone leases in the 
JIMMS, Audit obtained coordinates from mining plans  of these leases. 
Audit then generated maps on Google Earth by preparing Comma Separated 
Value (CSV) files from the available coordinates of boundary pillars in the 
mining plan. These CSV files were imported into Goo gle Earth to produce 
maps in kml format. However, in 47 leases incorrect  coordinates were 
recorded in the MPs and MPs in respect of two lease s were not made 
available. On Audit’s request for corrections in co ordinates, DMOs 
provided accurate coordinates in respect of eight l eases only. Audit 
successfully generated matching maps for 22 leases of five districts (except 
Dhanbad) and noticed horizontal infringement (15.44  Ha. outside lease 
area) in 14 leases 
62 . Two of such Google Images are shown in Picture-4.16 
and  4.17. 
                                                 
60   kml files is a format used to display geographica l data in Earth browser such as Google 
Earth. 
61    MoEFCC, GoI launched (August 2018) Parivesh Portal, a single window portal for the 
EC. 
62   In Chatra- (i) Shri Ajay Kumar (lessee code-101333001, outside lease area 0.14 Ha.), 
In Palamu- (ii) Shri Anoop Kumar Singh (lessee code- 41151080 1, outside lease area 
0.55 Ha.), (iii) M/s Mahadev Construction Pvt. Ltd.  (lessee code-411510701, outside 
lease area 1.50 Ha.),  
In Sahibganj- (iv)  M/s Sri Ram Stone Product (lessee code- 620053304, outs ide lease 
area 1.64 Ha.), (v) M/s Kwality Stone Product (less ee code-620396401, outside lease 
area-0.21 Ha.) and nine leases mentioned in Table-4.2 . 
 
kml file 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
69  
  
M/s Mahadev Construction Pvt. Ltd., lessee code- 
411510701, Palamu 
Sri Ram Stone product, lessee code- 620053304, 
Sahibganj 
Picture-4.16: Google Image (13 December 
2022) showing lease area (kml area 4.65 Ha.) 
outlined in green, excavated area inside lease 
area shaded in Yellow (2.52 Ha.) and outside 
lease area in purple colour (1.50 Ha.) 
Picture-4.17: Google Image (06 June 2021) 
showing lease area (kml area 2.43 Ha.) outlined 
in green, excavated area inside lease area shaded 
in Yellow (0.80 Ha.) and outside lease area in 
purple colour (1.64 Ha.) 
Audit faced constraints 63  in estimating extraction volumes and accordingly 
selected 64  13 out of 63 stone mining leases using specific cr iteria 65 . Audit 
estimated extraction volumes by measuring excavated  areas in Google 
Earth and multiplying them with depths observed dur ing JPV, adjusting 
for trapped volumes in slopes (70-90° angles 66 ) and haul roads 
(Appendices-4.1, 4.2 and  4.3 ).  
Volumetric assessment of excess extraction with the  help of an 
expert  
Audit appointed Birsa Institute of Technology 67  (BIT), Sindri as consultant 
and issued work order (05 April 2024 and 14  August 2024) for obtaining 
technical opinion of BIT, Sindri for volume calcula tion of excavated 
                                                 
63   Non-availability of three-dimensional image of hill s and inaccessible terrain,  
non-availability of production data of previous lea ses in renewal cases, overlapping 
leases  etc .  
64   Nine stone leases where shape and size of kml fil es of mining leases matched with 
Khasra Maps and four stone leases where shape and size of kml files of mining leases 
did not match. 
65   Jointly physically verified leases (depth measure d), fresh (unbroken leases i.e. , where 
excavation started for the first time). In case of renewed leases, if renewal data is 
available since beginning, availability of historic al Google Image, no adjoining leases 
(in case of adjoining leases data of adjoining leases available). 
66   DMG officials estimated the volume of extraction in selected leases of Pakur through 
sectional measurement method by assuming the angle of extraction as 90 o. 
67   A Government Engineering College in Dhanbad (Esta blished in 1949) under 
Department of Higher and Technical Education, Government of Jharkhand. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
70  
minerals in stone quarries for these 13 mines, prov iding the requisite 
information (kml files, depth, angle, area of pit, mining plan etc .) available 
with Audit. BIT, Sindri used following techniques f or providing the 
technical opinion:  
• High resolution satellite images of each quarry site were obtained to 
provide a visual spatial reference for digitising the pit boundaries  
• Preparation/validation of kml files and digitizatio n of quarry pit 
boundaries 
• Import of Satellite image and kml files into AutoCA D Civil 3D 
software 
• Creation of 3D surface model 68  of each quarry pit 
• Volume calculation using cut and fill method 69   
This technique allows for differentiation between the material removed (cut) 
and the void created (fill), providing a precise of the total excavated volume 
for each quarry site.  
The consultant submitted (2 May 2024 and 7 October 2024) the study report 
on extracted minerals. 
Observations based on excess extraction estimated b y Audit and BIT, 
Sindri in these 13 leases are as under: 
A. Observations on nine leases where shape and size  matched with 
Khasra Map   
The estimated excess excavation in nine mining leas es, where kml file 
matched with Khasra  map, as calculated by Audit is shown 
 in  Table-4.2 .  
 
  
                                                 
68   Represents the current topography of the quarry, including elevation data, pit depth and 
surface contours.  
69   Cut Volume: Represents the volume of material that has been excavated from the quarry 
pit. Fill Volume: Represents any voids or depressio n created during the excavation 
process. 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
71  
It is evident from Table-4.2  that in nine leases, total excess excavation of 
75.08 lakh m 3 was estimated by Audit. While validating the audit 
observations, BIT Sindri estimated excess excavatio n of 76.54 lakh m 3. 
Thus, the overall difference (between Audit and BIT , Sindri) in estimated 
excess extraction was only 1.46 lakh m 3 (1.94 per cent ) in these leases of 
four districts. 
• Within the lease area  of nine leases:  Audit estimated stone excavation 
of 86.96 lakh m 3 while the lessees reported 52.67 lakh m 3 of Stone 
excavation for the period from January 2012 to Sept ember 2023. 
                                                 
70   Satellite images (February 2021 to November 2022)  considered for measuring area. 
71    Detailed in Appendix-4.1  and 4.2 . 
 Table 4.2: Estimated excess excavation in nine mining leases (where kml file  
matched with Khasra  map) calculated by Audit  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
lease/district/ lessee 
code/ lease period 
Lease 
area 
(in 
Ha.) 
 
Estimated 
excavated area 70  
(Ha.) 
Estimated 
excavated volume 
(in lakh m 3) 
Reported 
production 71   
(in lakh m 3) 
Estimated excess 
production (in 
lakh m 3)  
Total excess 
production 
(in lakh m 3)  
In Out Lease area Lease area Lease area Total area 
In Out In Out In Out (In+ Out) 
1 M/s Jaishankar 
Stone Works, 
Chatra, 308336601,  
14.7.14 to 13.7.24 
0.713  0.71  2.98  2.71  10.61  0.80  0.00  1.91  10.61  12.52  
2 M/s Chatania 
Mines, Chatra, 
308156501,  
24.10.19 to 23.10.29  
2.83  0.65  0.78  1.92  2.15  1.92  0.19  0.00  1.96  1.96  
3 M/s Jai Shiv 
Construction, 
Chatra, 308336901,  
12.2.15 to 11.2.25 
1.03  0.86  1.10  4.41  5.82  1.44  0.00  2.97  5.82  8.79  
4 M/s Trustline 
Mining and 
Minerals, Chaibasa, 
101597101,  
18.1.16 to 17.1.26 
18.93  4.22  1.09  18.15  4.10  14.30  0.00  3.85  4.10  7.95  
5 M/s Raj Kumar 
Khurana, Palamu, 
411354101,  
17.8.13 to 16.8.23 
4.05  2.23  0.95  13.42  5.80  13.42  0.02  0.00  5.78  5.78  
6 M/s Shyam Stone 
Mines, Palamu 
411355001,  
23.7.15 to 22.7.25 
4.856  3.51  
3.30  
14.27  
10.74  
6.72  
0.00  
7.55  
10.74  20.52  7 M/s Sona Stone 
Chips, Palamu, 
411354301 
12.12.13 to 11.12.23  
0.96  0.84  2.84  0.61  2.23  
8 M/s Bagaiya Stone 
Mine, Palamu, 
411353903,  
08.1.12 to 07.1.22 
4.046  3.61  0.33  25.88  0.30  11.94  0.00  13.94  0.30  14.24  
9 M/s New Three Star 
Mines, Pakur, 
623160603,  
20.3.20 to 19.3.30 
2.34  1.95  0.87   3.36  1.48  1.52  0.00  1.84  1.48   3.32  
 Total  39.755  18.58  11.40 86.96  41.00  52.67  0.21   34.29  40.79   75.08  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
72  
Therefore, there was underreporting of 34.29 lakh m 3 of stone 
extraction by the lessees, valued at ₹ 107.33 crore 72 .   
• Outside lease area of nine leases:  Audit estimated 41.00 lakh m 3 of 
stone excavation while the lessees reported 73  0.21 lakh m 3, leading to 
under reporting of 40.79 lakh m 3 of stone by the lessees for the period 
from January 2012 to September 2023, valued at ₹ 127.67 crore 74 . 
Five cases are illustrated in Case Study-4.6 . 
Case Study-4.6 
1.  M/s Jai Shankar Stone Works, Chatra   
M/s Jai Shankar Stone Works, Chatra was granted (June 2014) a lease over 
0.713 Ha. of land in Mauza Dalkoma, Block Huntergan j of Chatra district 
for a period of 10 years (14.07.2014 to 13.07.2024) . During the JPV (on 
23 May 2023), the team noticed that the lessee had exceeded permissible 
limits by vertically excavating up to 39.60 meters deep, exceeding the 
15 meters permissible limit, approved in the MP. Au dit generated kml file 
of lease area on Google Earth from available coordinates of boundary pillars 
in the MP and noticed an excavation of 0.71 Ha. within and 2.98 Ha. outside 
the lease area. Audit estimated the volume of extra ction (February 2022) 
after deducting volume trapped inside slope and haul road. 
Based on this, audit findings were as follows: 
• Total extraction: 13.32 lakh m 3 (2.71 lakh m 3 inside and 10.61 lakh m 3 
outside lease area). 
• Reported extraction: 0.80 lakh m 3 during the period. 
• Under reporting: 12.52 lakh m 3 (1.91 lakh m 3 inside and 10.61 lakh m 3 
outside).  
 
Picture- 4.18: Google Image (17 February 2022) showing lease area (kml area 0.713 Ha.) outlined 
in green, excavated area inside lease area shaded i n Yellow (0.71 Ha.) and outside lease area in 
purple colour (2.98 Ha.) 
                                                 
72   34.29 lakh m 3 x ₹ 313 per m 3= ₹ 107.33 crore. 
73   Audit figured out volume produced outside lease a rea after adjusting the produced 
volume reported by lessee with excavated volume wit hin lease area (calculated by 
Audit). 
74   40.79 lakh m 3 x ₹ 313 per m 3= ₹ 127.67 crore. 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
73  
Audit also noticed that for avoiding detection of excess excavation, the lessee 
started filling of excavated mines, as depicted in the following satellite 
images.  
  
Picture-4.19: Google Image 28.12.2018 
unfilled portion (shown in red outline) 
Picture-4.20: Google Image of 17.02.2022 
(excavated portion filled shown with in red 
outline) 
 
2.  M/s Chatania Mines, Chatra  
 
Picture-4.21: Google Image (17 February 2022) showi ng lease area (kml area 2.83 Ha.) outlined 
in green, excavated area inside lease area shaded i n Yellow (0.65 Ha.) and outside lease area in 
purple colour (0.78 Ha.), Depth measured in JPV (23 May 2023): (39.90 meter against permissible 
depth of 20 meter) 
 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
74  
3.  M/s Jai Shiv Construction, Chatra  
 
Picture-4.22: Google Image (30 November 2022) showi ng lease area (kml area 1.03 Ha.) outlined in 
green, excavated area inside lease area shaded in Yellow (0.86 Ha.) and outside lease area in purple 
colour (1.1 Ha.), Depth measured in JPV (11 May 202 3): (64 meter against permissible depth of 18 
meter) 
 
4.  M/s Shyam Stone Works, Palamu and M/s Sona, Palamu 
 
Picture-4.23: Google Image (07 December 2021) showing lease area (kml area 4.856 Ha. of M/s Shyam 
and 0.96 Ha. of M/s Sona) outlined in green, excavated area inside lease area shaded in Yellow (3.51 
Ha. of M/s Shyam and 0.84 Ha. of M/s Sona) and outside lease area in purple colour (3.30 Ha.), depth 
measured in JPV (02 December 2022): (35-45 meter against permissible depth of 12.5-24 meter) 
 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
75  
5.  M/s Raj Kumar Khurana, Palamu  
 
Picture- 4.24: Google Image (25 February 2021) show ing lease area (kml area 4.05 Ha.) 
outlined in green, excavated area inside lease area shaded in Yellow (2.23 Ha.) and outside 
lease area in purple colour (0.95 Ha.), Depth measu red in JPV (26 November 2022): (61 
meter against permissible depth of 18 meter) 
B. Observations on four leases where shape and size  did not match 
with Khasra map   
The estimated excess excavation in four mining leas es, where kml file did 
not match with Khasra map, as calculated by Audit is shown  in Table-4.3 . 
Table-4.3: Showing estimated excess excavation in four mining leases  
(where kml file not matched with Khasra map ) calculated by Audit  
Name of 
lease/district/ lessee 
code/ lease period  
Lease 
area 
(hectare) 
Estimated 
excavated 
area 75  
(hectare)  
Estimated 
excavated 
volume  
(in lakh m 3) 
Reported 
production 76  
(in lakh m 3) 
Excess 
production 
(in lakh m 3) 
M/s Ashutosh Stone 
Works, Chatra, 
308013401,  
26.06.14 to 25.06.24  
4.04  3.30  12.44  3.06  9.38  
M/s CTS Industries 
Ltd., Chaibasa, 
101334703, 
23.02.16 to 22.02.26  
3.64  1.74  4.15  1.40  2.75  
M/s Ramashish 
Singh, Palamu, 
411596801 
23.03.16 to 22.03.26  
4.85  6.00  13.33  9.98  3.35  
M/s Sky Stone 
Works, Sahibganj, 
620829301, 
06.11.17 to 05.11.27  
2.86  1.50  3.18  0.21  2.97  
Total  15.39  12.54  33.10 14.65  18.45  
                                                 
75   Satellite image (February 2022 to December 2022) considered for measuring area.  
76   Detailed in Appendix-4.3 . 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
76  
It is evident from the Table 4.3  that the overall excess extraction (as per 
Audit) was 18.45 lakh m 3 (valued at ₹ 57.75 crore @ ₹ 313 per m3) in four 
leases of four districts, while it was 18.97 lakh m3 as per calculations of BIT, 
Sindri. Thus, there was an overall difference (betw een Audit and BIT, 
Sindri) in estimated excess extraction of only 0.52  lakh m 3 (2.82 per cent ) 
which validated the audit observations. 
Due to mismatch of kml file with khasra  map, Audit faced limitations in 
analysing extraction outside/inside lease area. Aud it only compared 
excavated volume (estimated by audit) with reported production by lessee. 
Two cases are illustrated in Case Study-4.7 . 
Case Study-4.7  
1.  M/s Ashutosh Stone Works, Chatra 
M/s Ashutosh Stone Works, Chatra was granted a 10 y ear lease 
(26 June 2014-25 June 2024) for 4.04 Ha. of land in  Mauza 
Dalkoma, Hunterganj block of Chatra. Audit conducte d JPV with DMO 
on 23 May 2023. 
Audit findings: 
• There was a mismatch between kml file size (2.93 Ha.) and 
khasra map (4.04 Ha.). 
• Lease area was 1.95 km away from the kml file location. 
• Excavated area: 3.3 Ha. (measured using Google Earth Pro). 
• Excavated depth: 42 meters (exceeding the permissible 36 
meters in approved mining plan). 
Audit multiplied the depth with excavated area to calculate the volume of 
extraction after deducting volume trapped inside slope and haul road. The 
estimated extraction volume: (a) Total: 12.44 lakh m 3 (b) Reported: 
3.06 lakh m 3 (c) Under reporting: 9.38 lakh m 3. 
 
Picture- 4.25: Google Image (17 February 2022) showing incorrect lease area (kml 
area 2.93 Ha. instead of 4.04 Ha.) outlined in gree n, excavated area shaded in 
purple (3.3 Ha.) 
 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
77  
2.  M/s Ramashish Singh, Palamu  
 
Picture- 4.26: Google Image (13 December 2022) show ing incorrect lease area 
(kml area 5.83 Ha. instead of 4.85 Ha.) outlined in green, excavated area shaded in 
purple (6 Ha.), Depth measured in JPV (02 June 2023 ): Excavated depth 
(24.38 meter against permissible depth of 12 meter) 
Thus, lessees had underreported stone excavation by  93.53 lakh m 3 
(75.08 lakh m 3 as detailed in Table-4.2  for nine cases where kml matched 
+ 18.45 lakh m 3 as detailed in Table-4.3  for four cases where kml did not 
match) in 13 leases compared to Audit's estimates based on JPV and available 
tools on Google Earth. This underreporting, combine d with excavation 
beyond lease areas, poses environmental hazards and  depletes mineral 
reserves rapidly, undermining scientific and sustai nable mining objectives. 
Besides this, there is also significant revenue loss to the Government. Audit 
estimated the potential financial implication of su ch excess extraction of 
mineral extraction to be ₹ 292.75 crore {93.53 lakh m 3 (volume of excess 
extraction)  x ₹ 313.00 per m 3 (price of mineral)} for 13 stone leases. 
These observations are based on estimation to appri se the Department 
about the ground level situation. It calls for a fu rther detailed 
investigation by the Department to work out the exa ct amount of 
underreporting of mineral extraction.  
Apart from the above observations Audit noticed 
(i)  Absence of required boundary pillars and safety bar rier : In 46 
out of 63 cases either the boundary pillar was enti rely absent (30) or was 
only partially found (16). Furthermore, in 62 out of 63 leases across sampled 
districts, the safety barrier was reduced, ranging from 0 to 7 meters, instead 
of the required 7.5 meters shown in Picture-4.27 . This resulted in reducing 
the space for planation on safety barriers. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
78  
  
Picture-4.27: Showing no safety barrier and no plantation work 
M/s Sanjay Kumar Singh & Ashish 
Kumar Singh, lessee code-0308337101, 
Chatra 
M/s Arun Kumar Singh lessee 
code-0308081601, Chatra 
In nine adjoining leases across three districts 77  there were no boundary walls 
between two leases, indicating extraction of non-mineral resources blocked 
in safety barriers, as shown in Picture-4.28 . 
  
Picture-4.28: Showing no boundary wall between adjoining leases. 
M/s Trustline Dealers Pvt. Ltd., lessee 
code-0101335502, Chaibasa 
(Green polygon) 
M/s CTS Industries Ltd., lessee 
code-0101334704, Chaibasa 
(Yellow polygon) 
(ii)  Method adopted by lessees to conceal excess excavation:  Scrutiny 
of MP of three leases of three districts 78  revealed that after the end of lease 
period of current lessees, there were balance minea ble stone reserves 79  of 
6.55 lakh m 3. That means that the current lessee had extracted m aterial of 
his share as mandated in MP/EC/CTO. The remaining b alance after 
accounting the depletion of reserve (limited/fixed permissible extraction) 
                                                 
77    Chaibasa, Chatra and Pakur. 
78   Pakur, Palamu and Sahibganj. 
79   M/s Lutful Haque, Pakur, lessee code- 623955701, lease period 15 September 2017 to 
14 September 2027, Balance mineable reserve- 2,03,0 45.20 m 3, M/s  Bagaiya Stone 
Mines, Palamu, lessee code-411353903, lease period 08 January 2012 to 07 January 
2022, Balance mineable reserve- 60,235 m 3, M/s Krishna Sah, Sahibganj, lessee code-
620779003, lease period 02 April 2015 to 01 April 2 025, Balance mineable reserve- 
3,92,367.40 m 3. 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
79  
would be reallotted to the next lessees. Audit noti ced that in two leases of 
Pakur and Sahibganj, the lessees started filling/fi lled the pit using stone 
dust/earth brought from other places while in one l ease of Palamu, lessee 
converted the mine into a water reservoir. Action o f the lessees indicated 
that the lessees had extracted the material of more  than permissible limits 
from these mines.  
The filling up of excavated land was fraught with t he risk of fraudulent 
intention to conceal excess excavation to avoid mea surement of excavated 
area for fixation of demand by DMOs, shown in Pictures-4.29 and  4.30 . 
Kml file (outlined in Green) Krishna Sah, lessee code-0620779003, Sahibganj 
  
Picture-4.29: Area outlined in yellow 
excavated area (Google Image 
March 2020) 
Picture-4.30: Area outlined in yellow 
filled area (Google Image July 2022) 
(iii)  Non-conducting of required measurement: Audit observed that 
during the period 2017-22, the official of the DMG did not conduct any 
periodic inspections as instructed by the Departmen t. The DMG was 
supposed to conduct annual sectional measurement of at least 20 per cent  of 
leases to verify the actual quantity excavated. The  officials of the DMG 
conducted yearly sectional measurements of only 0.6 8 to 3.17 per cent  of 
the existing minor mineral leases in six test check ed districts.  Thus, these 
measures were not adequate to determine excavation beyond lease 
area/excess excavation and impose penal provisions provided for in the 
Act/Rules. There is a need to include the use of modern technology (such as 
drone surveys) in the JMMC Rules, 2004, in line wit h Rule 34A of the 
Mineral Conservation and Development Rules (MCDR), 2017, for detecting 
instances of excess excavation by lessees and impos ing penalties 
accordingly. 
(iv)  Discrepancies in Rules to curb unauthorised/ illegal excavation:  
In light of the ground situation, Audit further scr utinized, the collection 
report of royalty furnished by the Director, Mines to analyse the revenue 
collection from minor minerals consumable 
80  in the State during the period 
                                                 
80   As per Schedule of Rate published by Works Depart ment, GoJ; Stone, Sand, Morrum , 
Brick earth and Ordinary earth are the minor minera ls consumable in execution of 
construction/developmental works.  


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
80  
2017-22. It was observed that revenue of ₹ 1,554.81 crore was collected 
from lessees of four minor minerals ( i.e. , stone, brick earth, sand and 
morrum ) during 2017-22. During the same period, ₹ 1,550.34 crore was 
collected as royalty and penalty equal to royalty, from works contractors 
engaged by various Works Departments as depicted in Table-4.4 . 
Table-4.4: Showing comparison between contribution of royalty from mining leases and 
royalty and penalty equal to royalty from Works Department during 2017-22 
Name of Minor 
mineral 
Total collection in the State ( ₹ in lakh) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total 
A.   B.   C.   D.   E.   F.   G.   
Stone (Lease/permit)  22,781.66  26,127.46  26,983.26  36,021.61  38,179.96  1,50,093.95  
Brick earth 
(Lease/permit)  452.50  530.78  631.84  781.50  830.62  3227.24  
Sand (Lease/permit)  226.87  140.47  175.67  901.46  192.02  1636.49  
Morrum  385.84  3.35  6.67  120.42  7.48  523.76  
Ordinary earth  00.00  00.00  00.00  00.00  00.00  00.00  
Total from 
Leases/Permits 23,846.87  26,802.06  27,797.44  37,824.99  39,210.08  1,55,481.44  
Works Department 
(royalty and penalty 
equal to royalty received 
from works contractors)  
31,559.90  34,214.73  31,282.85  33,422.74  24,553.68  1,55,033.90  
Total collection from 
minor minerals 
consumable in 
construction works  
55,406.77  61,016.79  59,080.29  71,247.73  63,763.76  3,10,515.34  
Percentage of receipt 
from works contractors 
over total receipts from 
minor minerals 
consumable in works 
contract.  
56.96  56.07  52.95  46.91  38.51  49.93  
Source: Information received from Director, Mines. 
From the above, it is evident that more than 95 per cent  of minor minerals’ 
revenue (Leases and Permits) was collected from sto ne, whereas the other 
minor minerals together contributed less than five per cent .  Further, the 
Department had collected ₹ 1,550.34 crore from Works Departments during 
2017-22, which was almost 50 per cent of total revenue collected from 
minor minerals. As such, collection of double the rate of royalty from works 
contractors for the minerals procured from undisclosed sources was almost 
equal to the revenue collection from disclosed sour ces of these minor 
minerals. 
Audit noticed that there were discrepancies between Rules 54 and 55 of the 
JMMC Rules, 2004. Rule 54 provides that, if a perso n extracts/transports 
minor minerals without valid lease/permit he shall be considered as a party 
of illegal extraction. Further, the Rule prescribes  legal actions or/and 
recovery of penalty at double the price of minerals so extracted/transported 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
81  
illegally in addition to rent, royalty etc . However, Rule 55 of the Act ibid  
absolves contractors of the Works Departments from being a party to 
illegal/unauthorised extraction by enabling them to  use minerals from 
undisclosed sources by payment of penalty equal to royalty only, which 
contradicts the essence of provision in Rule 54, i.e. , as a deterrent to illegal 
mining. Therefore, there is a need for the State Go vernment to realign 
Rule 55 with Rule 54 of the JMMC Rules, 2004 to fulfill its objective. 
4.1.4.2 Implementation of Environmental Management Plan 
To mitigate the adverse impact of mining on the env ironment, plantations 
were to be placed on the safety barriers of mining leases.  Accordingly, 
lessees were required to plant the recommended quan tity of trees in grid 
pattern on safety barriers in the first year of the  1 st  Plan period and nurture 
them during the subsequent lease period. 
Audit found that in 61 out of 63 test-checked leases across sampled districts, 
only 2,225 plants were planted against the proposed 74,676 plants, resulting 
in a shortage of tree plantation ranging from 20 to  100 per cent  (illustrated 
in Case Study-4.8) .   
At the time of renewal of the CTOs, JSPCB verifies the compliance of 
conditions like plantation of trees, maintenance of  air quality standard etc . 
Audit enquired about copies of reports based on ins pections conducted by 
the Regional Office, O/o JSPCB, Dhanbad, for renewa l of CTO in case of 
10 test checked stone leases in Dhanbad district. T est check of 
10 Inspection Reports (of inspections conducted between 02 May 2020 and 
03 September 2022) revealed that the renewal of CTO s was done on the 
basis of assurance provided by lessee for complianc e with conditions of 
applicable Act/Rules for air, water and environment  protection and 
condition of ECs. The inspecting team reported some  plantation in all 
10 cases which was not quantified in the report. 
Noting the conditional renewal of CTO, Audit conduc ted JPV with the 
DMG officials. A case study on inspection conducted  by Regional Officer, 
Hazaribagh in Hunterganj, Chatra is illustrated in Case Study-4.8 . 
Case Study-4.8 
Regional Officer (O/o JSPCB, Regional Office, Hazar ibagh) conducted 
(27 July 2022) physical verification of two leases 81  at Circle-Hunterganj, 
Chatra for compliance with CTO conditions. JSPCB had issued CTOs for 
these two leases based on the Inspection Reports in  which the officer 
                                                 
81   (i) M/s Ashutosh Stone Works (Lessee code- 030801 3401), Chatra (lease period 
26 June 2014 to 25 June 2024, Lease area- 4.04 Ha.,  Green belt- 1.05 Ha.),  
(ii) M/s Jaishankar Stone Industries (Lessee code- 0308027801), Chatra, Lease period 
(24 November  2015 to 23 November 2025, lease area 3.645 Ha., Green belt- 
0.896 Ha.). 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
82  
reported that these two leases were fenced by six f eet high net and 
concrete pillars and plantation was done in the lease area.  
Audit conducted JPV 82  of these leases with official of DMG and noticed 
that the lease area was not fenced by a net with th e support of concrete 
pillars. Also, no air, water and noise monitoring stations were available in 
the lease area. The width of the green belt zone (for plantation) was 0.5-2 
meter and 01-7.5 meter  instead of 7.5 meter uniformly around the mining 
pit area. No plantation was available in the green zone.   
Audit had conducted JPV only 5-10 months after the physical inspection 
conducted by the Regional Officer, JSPCB and notice d these 
contradictory observations. Thus, Reports based on physical verification 
conducted by Regional Officer was unreliable & inco rrect, as is evident 
from the photograph shown below: 
 
Picture-4.31: Showing no fencing with support pilla rs and no plantation on green 
belt (image taken during JPV of M/s Ashutosh Stone Works) 
As discussed in Paragraph-4.1.3.7, for assessing the impact on 
environment, the lessees were required to establish air, water and noise 
monitoring stations with facilities of recording of real time data.  
Audit further noticed in 63 test checked leases (ex cept one lease in 
Sahibganj) that air, water, and noise monitoring st ations were not 
established within the lease area.  
In the MPs related to 40 out of 51 test checked working leases, construction 
of garland drains (connected to settling tanks) aro und the pit was proposed 
to prevent rainwater runoff from entering the mining pit. However, in 38 out 
of 40 leases, these drains were not constructed as proposed in the concerned 
MPs.  
Parapet walls around dump were to be constructed in  15 out of 51 test 
checked working leases to establish overburden in t he demarcated area. 
However, Audit noticed that these were not construc ted in 14 leases and 
                                                 
82   M/s Ashutosh Stone Works (Date of JPV- 23 May 202 3), M/s Jaishankar Stone 
Industries (Date of JPV- 08 December 2022). 


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
83  
dump was found lying at places other than the demar cated areas, as shown 
in Picture-4.32 . 
 
Picture-4.32: Dump lying outside lease area (other than demarcated place) in 
Palamu, Lessee code- 411596801 Date of JPV (2 June 2023) 
Thus, mining in excess of permissible area and improper implementation of 
EMP was in contravention of the progressive mine cl osure plan, which 
detailed various proposals with the objective of protecting the environment. 
Non-implementation of these, defeated the objective s of protective, 
reclamation and rehabilitation measures in mines. 
4.1.5 Implementation of final mine closure plan 
As per Rule 17E(3) of MMCD Rules, 2010 (prepared by  IBM for minor 
mineral), the lessee shall submit a financial assur ance (FA) to the officer 
authorised by the State Government before executing  the mining lease 
deeds. As per Rule 34G of JMMC Rules, 2004, if mining lease/permit holder 
fails to execute reclamation and restoration work, the cost of the same shall 
be recovered from the FA.  
Audit noticed the following shortcomings in the implementation of the Final 
Mine Closure Plan: 
• As per MMCD Rules, 2010, the rate of FA was 
₹ 15,000 per Ha. of 
the mining lease area that had been put to use for mining and allied activities, 
subject to a minimum of ₹ 50,000 for Category B mines. Thereafter, this 
was not revised by the State Government whereas, in  case of major 
minerals, rate of FA was revised twice by the Centr al Government during 
the period February 2017 to November 2021 and was i ncreased from 
₹ 15,000 (effective from April 2003) to ₹ 3.00 lakh per hectare (effective 
from November 2021) subject to minimum ₹ 5.00 lakh in case of Category 
B mines. Scrutiny of mining plans revealed that in 63 cases 83  of test checked 
districts, different rates (13 cases: ₹ 15,000, 40 cases: ₹ 25,000, two cases: 
₹ 2.00 lakh, six cases: not calculated in MP, two ca ses: MP not produced) 
                                                 
83   Chaibasa (seven working + three expired), Chatra (nine working + one expired), 
Dhanbad (nine working + one expired), Pakur (five w orking + three expired), Palamu 
(ten working + two expired), Sahibganj (11 working + two expired). 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
84  
per hectare for calculation of FA was proposed by R QP and approved by 
the authority. The reason for variation was adoptio n of rates of major 
mineral MCD Rules, prescribed for Category A in 40 cases ( ₹ 25,000) and 
for B mines in two cases (two case: ₹ 2.00 lakh) by different RQPs in MPs. 
This resulted in variation in rates of FA at inter/ intra district level within a 
particular time interval among different mining leases. 
• In 49 out of 63 leases of test checked districts, F A of ₹ 49.29 lakh 
was submitted to DMO by the lessees in the form of National Saving 
Certificates (25 cases), Bank Guarantees (23 cases), LIC policies (one case). 
Out of three means of submission of FA, LIC policy was not an acceptable 
form as spouse of the lessee was a nominee in this policy. In 21 out of 
23 working leases (till October 2023 i.e. date of a udit), BG of ₹ 23.56 lakh 
had lapsed.  In 14 cases of all six test checked districts 84 , FA of ₹ 7.55 lakh 
was not available with DMOs.  
• In 12 out of 63 stone leases where the lease period  had expired 
during May 2019 to July 2023, DMOs permitted lessee s to exit the lease 
area without submission of the final mine closure p lan or confiscation of 
their FA portion 
85  of ₹ 15.00 lakh.  This oversight hindered the enforcement 
of reclamation and rehabilitation redeeming activit ies as illustrated in 
Case Study 4.9 .  
Case study 4.9 
In case of M/s Mahadev Stone Product, lease over an area of 4.35 Ha. had 
expired on 18 September 2023, and the mining pit wa s required to be 
converted into a water reservoir  as per the conceptual plan. Audit prepared 
kml file on Google Image and noticed that instead of 3.72 Ha., total lease 
area (4.35 Ha.) was excavated. Due to the non-avail ability of boundary 
wall with adjoining leases , different leases were found merged with one 
another, creating a bigger excavated pit .   
During JPV (October 2023), the Audit Team noticed t hat there were no 
benches and plantations available. Also the require d safety barrier was 
only 0.5 meter, on one side of the boundary wall. T he overburden was 
found dumped inside the lease area and three out of  four boundary walls 
were not found.  
Audit further noticed that lessee failed to submit final mine closure plan 
and FA, though he was required to submit ₹ 2.00 lakh for the purpose.  
Thus, the provisions of the progressive mine closur e plan were not 
followed.  
                                                 
84   Chaibasa (three expired), Chatra (one expired), D hanbad (one working), Pakur (one 
working + two expired), Palamu (two working + one expired), Sahibganj (one working 
+ two expired).  
85   In 10 cases FA was submitted and two cases MP was  not produced. 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
85 
  
Picture-4.33: Showing lease of Mahadev 
Stone Product (Date of JPV 07 October 
2023) 
Picture-4.34: Showing kml file (Google 
Image date 16 January 2022), 4.40 Ha., 
lease area surrounded by other expired 
leases  
Audit observed that unscientific closure of mines made them unsafe (due to 
absence of boundary pillars, fencing, safety barrie r and benches), 
environmentally unfriendly (due to absence of plantation) and overexploited 
(due to excavation of non-mineable resources). 
4.1.6 Mining operation without Mining Plan 
Rule 34 (A) (2) of JMMC Rules, 2004 states that min ing activities shall be 
done as per the approved MP and the DC/competent authority shall suspend 
mining activity if the lessee does not perform mini ng activity according to 
approved MP.   
In five out of 63 test checked mining leases of thr ee districts, the lessee 
excavated and produced stone without an approved MP . The details are in 
Table-4.5 . 
Table-4.5: Showing lease period, expiry date of 1 
st  five year plan and status of 
2nd  five year plan  
Name of lessee Lessee code  Lease 
period 
Expiry 
date of 1 st  
MP 
Date of 
submission of 2 nd  
MP and present 
status (July 2023)  
Production (m 3) 
during the period 
(no approved MP)  
M/s Rana Uday 
Pratap Singh, 
Dhanbad  
0204300705  30.04.2016 
to 
29.04.2026  
29.04.2021  Not submitted  
 
68,118 (May 2021 
to January 2023) 
M/s Umesh Kumar 
and Suresh Mahto, 
Dhanbad  
0204596101  11.04.2016 
to 
10.04.2026  
10.04.2021  Not submitted  
 
22,653 (May 2021 
to February 2023) 
M/s Azhar Islam, 
Pakur  
0623230302  25.02.2016 
to 
24.02.2026  
24.02.2021  Submitted and 
approved on 
27.09.2022 
1,48,839 
(March 2021 to 
August 2022) 
M/s Mahadev Stone 
Product, Pakur  
0623325710  19.09.2013 
to 
18.09.2023  
28.11.2019  Submitted on 
12.09.2022 and 
approved on 
14.09.2022 
1,88,334 (December 
2019 to August 
2022) 
M/s Mumtaj Ahmad 
Khan, Palamu 
0411140101  14.11.2017 
to 
13.11.2027  
13.11.2022  16.12.2022 but 
not approved 
Excavation noticed 
during JPV (no 
production reported)  
Source:  1st  Mining Plan, application fee deposited through JIMMS for 2 nd  Mining Plan and 
lease deed. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
86  
It is evident from Table-4.5  that, in five leases, the 2 nd  five-year plan 86  was 
either not submitted or submitted after the expiry of one to 33 months of the 
1st  five-year plan but was not approved.  
Even after the expiry of the 1 st  five-year plan and non-submission or 
approval of the 2 nd  five-year plan, lessees were engaged in unauthoriz ed 
excavation and stone production of 4.28 lakh m 3. This was confirmed during 
JPV, where ongoing mining operations were observed,  as shown in  
Picture-4.35 .  
  
Picture-4.35: Showing excavation in lease area on t he date of physical verification 
(26 November 2022) by Lessees Code: 0411140101 (Nam e of Lessees- M/s Mumtaj 
Ahmad Khan) despite lapse of 1 st  five-year plan on 13/11/2022 and non-submission 
2nd  five-year plan. 
Excavation without approved MP was unauthorized, la cked scientific 
oversight, and was non-compliant with environmental  norms. Audit 
observed that DC/competent authority did not suspend the mining activities 
in these cases. 
 4.2  Environmental Clearance 
The MoEFCC oversees India's environmental and fores try policies. The 
Environment Impact Assessment notification, 2006 is sued by MoEFCC, 
mandates Central Government to issue Environmental Clearance (EC) for 
projects of Category ‘A’ (area ≥ 50 Ha.) and SEIAA 87  to approve projects 
of Category ‘B’ (area < 50 Ha.). The established procedures (effective from 
14 August 2018) for grant of EC for sand and other minor minerals including 
cluster situation 88  for mines were as explained in Table-4.6 . 
                                                 
86   In case of M/s Mahadev Stone Product, Pakur perio d of 1 st  MP was 29.11.2014 to 
28.11.2019. 2 nd  MP was approved on 14.09.2022. So excavation durin g 29.11.2019 to 
13.09.2022 was without approved MP.  
87   A three membered committee (Chairman, Expert memb er and Member Secretary), duly 
constituted by the Central Government under Sub-sec tion 3 of Section 3 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, in accordance with the procedures specified in this 
notification.  
88   A cluster shall be formed when distance between t he peripheries of one lease is less 
than 500 meters from the periphery of other lease in homogeneous mineral area.  


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
87  
Table-4.6: Showing category of mines, area and condition of approval 
of EC  
Area of Lease 
(hectare) 
Category 
of 
Project  
Requirements  Requirement 
of Public 
hearing  
Authority 
to Grant 
EC  
0 to 5 Ha. individual 
mine lease  
B2 Form 1M, DSR, 
Prefeasibility Report 
(PFR) and approved mine 
plan 
No DEIAA 89  Clustered area of mine 
leases up to 5 Ha. 
 > 5 Ha. and < 25 Ha. 
(Individual mine lease)  
B2 Form 1, DSR, PFR and 
approved mine plan 
No 
SEIAA 90  
Clustered area of mine 
leases  
> 5 Ha. and < 25 Ha. 
with no individual 
lease > 5 Ha. 
Form 1, DSR, PFR and 
approved mine plan and 
one EMP for all lease in 
the cluster 
DEIAA 
≥ 25 Ha. and < 100 Ha. B1 Form 1, DSR, PFR and 
approved mine plan, 
EIA/EMP 
Yes SEIAA Cluster of mine leases 
of area ≥ 25 Ha. with 
individual lease size 
< 100 Ha. 
Form 1, DSR, PFR and 
approved mine plan and 
one EMP for all lease in 
the cluster 
≥ 50 Ha. A Form 1, DSR, PFR and 
approved mine plan, 
EIA/EMP Yes  MoEFCC Cluster of any size with 
any individual lease ≥ 
50 Ha. 
The Project Proponent 91  (PP) would need to apply for EC in prescribed form 
through Parivesh Portal 92 , along with requisite documents as specified in 
Table-4.6 . After grant of EC, the PP shall submit six monthl y reports on 
compliance with the stipulated EC conditions includ ing results of 
monitoring data to the SEIAA/JSPCB and to its Regional Offices.  
Audit noticed irregularities in granting of ECs whi ch are elaborated in 
following paragraphs. 
4.2.1 Issuance of EC based on fake contiguous certi ficate 
In compliance with the judgment (dated 13 September 2018) of the National 
Green Tribunal (NGT), the MoEFCC issued an order (1 2 December 2018) 
                                                 
89     For minor minerals of Category B2, District Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
(DEIAA) was established on 15 January 2016. The aff airs of the DEIAA was assigned 
to SEIAA by the MoEFCC on 12 December 2018 (as per direction of NGT dated 
13 September 2018).  
90    State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) was established by MoEFCC 
under EIA Notification 2006 to act as the regulatory authority for EC at the State level. 
91   “Project Proponent” means an individual or public o r private entity that has ultimate 
control over the affairs of the project. An application seeking prior EC in all cases shall 
be made by the project proponent.  
92    MoEFCC, GoI launched (August 2018) Parivesh Portal, a single window portal for the 
EC. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
88  
that mine lease areas between five and 25 Ha. (incl uding cluster situation) 
falling under Category B2 were to be treated at par  with Category B1 by 
SEIAA. Thus, from 12 December 2018, submission of EIA, EMP by the PP 
and thereafter Public Consultation by the competent  authority became 
compulsory conditions for prior issuance of EC for mine leases between five 
and 25 Ha.  
Contiguous certificates for cluster situations were  issued to the applicants 
by the DMO. Such certificates provide information a bout the total area of 
the stone mine leases within 500 meters of the applied lease. The applicants 
had to attach these certificates with applications (Form 1) to get prior ECs 
from SEIAA. The applications along with cluster certificates were available 
in ‘Parivesh Portal’.  
 Test check of records of DMO Pakur revealed that in  eight 
cases, DMO issued contiguous certificates (between August 2020 and 
August 2021) in which areas of mine leases within c luster ranged between 
5.00 and 7.06 Ha. However, Audit noted that in the Parivesh Portal, the 
applicants had submitted manipulated certificates o f the same number 
wherein the areas were reduced i.e. , between 2.73 and 4.94 Ha. for 
qualifying them under B2 Category, as detailed in Table-4.7 . 
Table-4.7: Showing contiguous certificate issued by DMO and 
manipulated by the applicants  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of Applicant  Number of mine lease and area 
of Cluster (including applied 
lease) (Area in hectare)  
EC number and 
date (under B2 
Category)  
Original (by 
DMO)  
Fake (by 
Applicant)  
1 Shri Avinash Kumar 
Bhagat 4 6.41 4 4.65 2322/2021/33 
(14.07.2021) 
2 M/s CB Stone Works 2 5.27 1 2.73 2446/2021/188 
(30.10.2021) 
3 Md. Najimuddin 3 5.54 3 4.32 2407/2021/149 
(23.09.2021) 
4 M/s Four Star Stone 
Works 2 5.00 2 4.67 2414/2021/136 
(23.09.2021) 
5 M/s Manoj Stone Works  2 5.36 2 4.94 2323/2021/45 
(13.07.2021) 
6 M/s Rajiv Ranjan 
Pandey 3 6.75 2 4.02 2447/2021/187 
(30.10.2021) 
7 M/s Shriguru Stone 
Works 4 7.06 2 3.29 2452/2021/197 
(30.10.2021) 
8 M/s Jishan Stone Works 3 5.40 2 2.75 2433/2021/132 
(23.09.2021) 
 
  

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
89  
Picture-4.36: Showing original and fake contiguous certificate issued to Shri 
Avinash Kumar Bhagat 
  
Original Certificate of area 6.41 Ha. Fake Certificate of area 4.65 Ha. 
Source: lease file maintained by DMO, 
Pakur. 
Source: Parivesh Portal. 
Based on such fake certificates, SEIAA issued prior ECs to eight applicants 
under B2 category (0 to 5 Ha.) (as detailed in Table-4.7 ) and DMO, Pakur 
granted the mining lease. After obtaining leases on  these fake certificates, 
lessees had excavated 6.35 lakh m 3 of stone (as of March 2024) valuing 
₹ 19.88 crore (6.35 lakh m 3 x ₹ 313 per/m 3) unauthorisedly between 2022-23 
and 2023-24.  
Audit observed that the Department has not develope d any system to 
cross-verify the documents submitted by the applica nt on Parivesh Portal 
which resulted in issuance of EC by SEIAA on the ba sis of manipulated 
documents. The Department may consider filing FIRs against erring 
applicants for detailed investigation of the matter and put in place a system 
of cross verification between the DMO and SEIAA.  
 DMO Sahibganj, issued a Contiguous Certificate to M /s Pahariya 
Stone Works 93  on 23 November 2017 for issuance of EC by SEIAA un der 
B2 Category (0 to 5 Ha.). The contiguous certificat e stated that area of 
applied lease was 2.22 Ha. and there was a mining l ease (1.11 Ha.) of M/s 
Parwati Stone Works within a periphery of 500 m. Based on this certificate, 
SEIAA issued EC to applicant on 4 November 2019 under B2 Category (0 to 
5 Ha). Audit scrutiny of contiguous certificate and  working leases in 
Sahibganj revealed that in addition to M/s Parwati Stone Works another 
                                                 
93   Plot no. 83,175,193 and 194.  


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
90  
mine lease of M/s S.S. Black Stone 94  of 3.64 Ha. had been working within 
the periphery of 500 meters since 30 March 2016. These two leases (Applied 
lease: M/s Pahariya Stone Work and working lease: M /s S.S. Black Stone) 
were situated on a common plot (plot number 194) an d were adjacent to 
each other. Thus, area of cluster in contiguous cer tificate should have been 
6.97 Ha. instead of 3.33 (1.11+ 2.22) Ha. and SEIAA  should have issued 
EC under B2 (5 to 25 Ha.) instead of B2 (0 to 5 Ha. ) category.  Audit 
observed that contiguous certificates were issued without proper verification 
of working leases within the periphery of 500 meter s resulting in issuance 
of inaccurate certificates.  
4.2.2 Mining vehicles damaging approach road 
To avoid any adverse impact of mining operations on village and habitations 
surrounding the leases, MoEFCC directed (October 20 14) that no road 
movement shall be allowed on existing village road network without 
appropriately increasing the carrying capacity of s uch roads by the Project 
Proponents.  The EIA conditions require conduct of transportation study as 
per Indian Road Congress (IRC) Guidelines for asses sing the impact (like 
projected increase in truck traffic, capability of road network in handling 
incremental load) of mining projects on local transport infrastructure.  
During JPV with Engineers of Rural Works Divisions,  Audit noticed that 
approach roads to the mines were originally village roads, constructed under 
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) or other schemes. As per 
IRC, the PMGSY roads were designed considering a low volume of traffic, 
hence, commercial vehicles (mining vehicles) with l aden weights of up to 
40 tonnes were not fit for these roads.  
During JPV of village roads in four blocks 
95  (where mines and crushers were 
concentrated) of Chatra and Palamu districts, 12 PMGSY roads which were 
constructed during December 2017 to July 2022 with an expenditure of  
₹ 39.74 crore 96  were found completely/partly damaged after one to five 
years from date of construction due to operation of  heavy mining vehicles. 
During JPVs in other four test checked districts 97  also, Audit noticed 
damaged approach roads in the periphery of five to 10 km of mines and 
crushers.  
                                                 
94   Lessee code- 0620549801, Khata no. 3, Plot no. 79(P ), Khata no. 18, Plot no. 194(P), 
Khata no. 11, Plot no. 198(P), Mauza- Belbhadri, Ci rcle- Mandro, lease period 
30.03.2016 to 29.03.2026. 
95   Tandwa and Hunterganj blocks of Chatra (six PMGSY  roads of ₹ 9.64 crore, Satbarwa 
and Chattarpur blocks of Palamu (six PMGSY roads of ₹ 30.10 crore). 
96   As per the records of Rural Works Department. 
97   Chaibasa, Dhanbad, Pakur and Sahibganj. 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
91  
Picture-4.37: Showing completely damaged PMGSY road in mining area 
(due to plying of heavy mining vehicles) in Chatra and Palamu districts 
  
(Link road to NH 75 to Sehra), Length-
2.9 km, Satbarwa Palamu (JPV date 19 
May 2023) 
(Link road from Tulsipur to 
Bishunpur connecting NH 99) Length-
6.10 km, Hunterganj, Chatra (JPV 
date 17 June 2023 
4.2.3  Beneficiaries response on impact of mining a ctivities 
During the beneficiary survey conducted between Nov ember 2022 and 
October 2023, Audit enquired about the impact of mi ning activities, and 
responses obtained from beneficiaries (597) are summarized as under; 
• Eighteen per  cent  (106) stated that mining activities were being 
performed within a distance ranging from 100 to 200  meter from their 
community/private assets (like school, temple, houses etc .). 
• Thirty-three per cent (194) stated that their community assets (like road, 
ponds, playground etc .) were damaged due to mining activities and 
complained that no project had been taken up for re construction of 
destroyed assets.  
• While 29 per cent  (171) stated that mining activities provided them 
employment, 68 per cent  (407) complained that quality of life had 
deteriorated due to damage to environment, destruct ion of agricultural 
field, lowering of water table, damaged roads and t he absence of any 
restoration works.  
4.3  Transportation of minerals 
As per Rule 5 (ii) of Jharkhand (Prevention of Ille gal Mining, 
Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2017 (notified o n 27 January 2018), 
dealers/ lessee (as deemed dealer 98 ) were required to register their mineral 
carrying vehicles (MCV) in JIMMS portal with their RFID/GPS or any 
other vehicle tracking details within 60 days of ge tting dealer registration. 
                                                 
98   If a person is holding a valid mining lease granted under the Mineral Concession Rules, 
1960, 2016 or JMMC Rules, 2004 & amended from time to time framed under the 
MMDR Act shall be exempted to register as a dealer for the same lease and minerals. 
However, he will be treated as deemed dealer for the purpose of these rules.  


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
92  
Further, as per the Rules, the transportation of mi neral/ore was to be done 
in the following manner. 
 
Source:  Rules 9 and 10 of Jharkhand (Prevention of  Illegal Mining, Transportation and 
Storage) Rules, 2017. 
4.3.1 Non-provision of RFIDs/GPS in MCVs  
As per the vehicle status report in DMG website, 72 ,449 vehicles were 
registered as of 28 March 2023, but none of these v ehicles was equipped 
with RFID/GPS or any other vehicle tracking system even after lapse of five 
years. 
During test-check, Audit observed cases where MCVs registered with 
DMGs were not equipped with RFID/GPS or any other v ehicle tracking 
system, transporting challans were not captured in JIMMS, multiple 
challans were generated with unrealistic details etc . These cases which 
indicate absence of a robust system for transportation of minerals, have been 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Carrier is required to comply with the information with regard to the locaction 
and time limits specified in the transport challan.
After approval of transit permit (a unique number) in (C2) for a particular s tack, 
the Lessee/Dealer was to fill requisite information to generate T ransport challan 
in Form D (a unique number) through JIMMS for transportation of minerals/ore 
(number of challans against a transit permit depends upon the total quantit y 
approved in transit permit for a particular stack to be dispatched).
Rule 10(v)(a) -Transport of mineral/ore was to normally pass through check 
gate/weighbridge to verify the quantity moved. Wherever there was no fac ility 
of weighment, verification was to be done through volumetric measurement.
Rule 9(iii) and 10(ii)(b)- DMO shall approve/reject Transit Permit (C2) to 
Lessee/Dealer duly generated through JIMMS after getting verifica tion of 
stack/grade of mineral applied for within 15 days from the receipt of the 
application.
Rule 9(i and ii) and 10(ii)(a)- Lessee/Dealer shall apply for transit permit for 
transportation of mineral/ore from a particular stack to various consi gnees in 
Form C/C1 through JIMMS along with payment of royalty in advance.

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
93  
4.3.1.1 Unregulated transportation of minerals  
Rule 10(v)(a) of Jharkhand Minerals (Prevention of Illegal Mining, 
Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2017 provides th at all transport of 
Minerals/ores will normally pass through check-gate /weighbridge of the 
Department and /or approved by the Department.  The quantity moved will 
be verified through designated check gate/weighbridge. 
• Audit conducted JPV of premises of 29 dealers 99  along with DMG 
officials in all six test checked districts. It was  noted that in 20 out of 29 
dealer premises, 100  weighbridges were installed however, only seven 
dealers provided the weighbridge report 101  for the period August 2022 to 
July 2023. In the absence of these Reports, Audit c ould not compare 
transporting challans with the weighbridge reports in the remaining 
13 cases to ascertain illegal transportation of minerals.  
• Audit compared information available in weighbridge  reports (like 
vehicle number, date of weighment, weighment of mineral) with date wise 
challans available in JIMMS for respective vehicles  in case of seven 
dealers of two districts (Palamu and Sahibganj). Comparison of these two 
information is detailed in Table-4.8 . 
Table-4.8: Comparison between weighment of vehicle as per weighbridge 
reports and transporting challans available at JIMMS 
Weighbridge report v/s JIMMS Challans Type of 
vehicles 
Total 
number of 
vehicles 
Total 
number 
of trips 
Total 
weight of 
mineral 
transported  
(in MT) 
Vehicle number matched with JIMMS 
(transporting challans available) (1) Truck, 
Hyva, 
Dumper 
280 720 18,318.85 
Vehicle number not matched with JIMMS 
(transporting challans not available) (2) 234 1,614 22,442.04 
Vehicle number not mentioned in 
weighbridge reports (transporting challans 
not available) (3) 
Tractor N/A 2,615 11,524.42 
Total (2+3)   4,229 33,966.46 
Grand Total (1+2+3)  514 4,949 52,285.31 
Source:  Data of seven dealers of two districts (Pa lamu: period August 2022 and December 2022 
and Sahibganj: July 2023). 
                                                 
99    According to the Jharkhand Minerals (Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation 
and Storage) Rules, 2017, a dealer is defined as an y person engaged in purchasing, 
storing, selling, transporting or processing minera ls for commercial gain within the 
State.  
100   District (Dealer/weighbridge installed) Chaibasa:  4/2, Chatra: 5/1, Dhanbad: 5/5, 
Palamu: 8/6, Pakur: 2/1 and Sahibganj: 5/5. 
101   Report containing the weighment results of vehicl es, carrying minerals for a specified 
period. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
94  
The above table indicates that out of a total of 4, 949 trips made by 
vehicles carrying 52,285.31 MT of stone-chips/bould ers, only 720 trips 
(14.55 per cent ) with a load of 18,318.85  MT (35 per cent ) had 
corresponding transporting challans issued through JIMMS for 
280 registered vehicles. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that for 4,229 trips out of  4,949 trips where 
JIMMS challans were unavailable, the vehicles carri ed 33,966.46 MT of 
stone chips/boulders/dust out of which 11,524.42 MT  was transported on 
other vehicles, for which registration number was n ot mentioned in 
weighbridge reports (like tractors as shown in Picture-4.38 ), indicating 
utilisation of unauthorised vehicles in transportation of minerals.  
 
Picture-4.38: Tractor with no registration number p arked outside Lessee/Dealer 
(lessee code- 0411722401) at Damdami, Palamu 
Transportation of minerals without valid challans a nd use of unregistered 
vehicles for transporting minerals occurred because  all trips made by 
vehicles were not weighed at the weighbridge and no t recorded in JIMMS. 
Consequently, this raised the risk that dealers wer e unlawfully dispatching 
stone chips and stone dust without proper challans, and evading payment of 
royalty on these minerals. 
 During JPV with DMG officials, the team observed 28 trucks loaded 
with stone within the lease/dealership areas across  four districts. Audit 
verified the transporting challan records for these  vehicles on JIMMS and 
noticed that challans for 17 out of 28 vehicles (61  per cent ) were not 
available in JIMMS. The unauthorised movement of mi nerals by vehicles 
without valid challans indicated illegal transporta tion and highlighted loss 
of revenue to the government exchequer.  


Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
95  
Picture-4.39: Loaded trucks (with boulder) inside lease area without challans 
  
Loaded truck (JH09S3915) within lease 
area of M/s Shree Guru Stone Works, 
Sahibganj 
Loaded truck (JH03T1494) within lease 
area of MCC Mahadeo Construction 
Pvt. Ltd, Palamu 
 Transportation challans generated through JIMMS con tain 
important information like address of seller and purchaser of minerals, type 
and quantity of mineral transported, place of deliv ery, vehicle number and 
its route, distance of delivery, period of validity  of challans etc . However, 
there was no system in JIMMS to ascertain the compl etion of delivery of 
minerals at designated place within the validity period of the challans.  
An examination of randomly selected 102 transportation challans available 
on JIMMS, issued between September 2021 and March 2023, involving four 
test-checked districts 102 , revealed that: 
• In case of 28 vehicles, 35 initial challans were followed by 50 additional 
challans that were issued before the expiry of the previous challans. 
These subsequent challans were issued with a time gap ranging from 11 
minutes 34 seconds for making delivery at a distance of 20 km to 1 hour 
41 minutes 41 seconds for distances of 250 kms for the same vehicles 
which appears unrealistic. 
• In five cases, it was observed that these vehicles were in operation on 
two or three different routes on the same date, wit h time differences 
ranging from 19 minutes 27 seconds to 2 hours 6 min utes 50 seconds. 
Despite the distances between the places of dispatc h for the first and 
succeeding routes ranging between 105 km to 299 km,  these vehicles 
were recorded as being in operation.  
In both cases, there were chances of misutilisation  of challans. These 
irregularities indicate that JIMMS lacked the necessary security measures to 
generate valid challans. Moreover, inadequate monit oring mechanism to 
distinguish vehicular movements with or without valid challans rendered the 
transportation system through challans generated from JIMMS ineffective. 
                                                 
102   Chatra, Dhanbad, Pakur and Palamu. 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
96  
Audit observed that merely registering vehicles wit h DMG and issuing 
transporting challans through JIMMS were insufficie nt to detect illegal 
transportation.  A more robust system integrating v ehicle tracking system, 
check gates equipped with CCTV cameras, installatio n of weighbridges 
(with CCTV cameras) within lease/dealer areas, and generation of real-time 
challans through JIMMS during weighment was required.  
4.3.1.2 Illegal transportation of minerals  
Audit noticed instances of (i) misutilization of tr ansporting challans for 
transportation of stone extracted illegally from an  area other than the area 
under lease, and (ii) transportation of closing sto ck of stone lying at quarry 
site of the expired leases, without transit permit/ challan. Such transportation 
attracted penal action like recovery of value at double the price of minerals, 
under Rule 54(6) of JMMC Rules, 2004. 
• As per JIMMS data, a lessee in Dhanbad, obtained tr ansporting 
challans for dispatch of 1,98,950 cft. of stone bou lder during 2016-18 and 
after that continuously maintained a closing balance of 1,63,625 cft. without 
any further production/dispatch of stone.  Audit conducted JPV (June 2023) 
and noticed that land was unbroken and no mining ac tivities had ever been 
carried out over the leased area. Thus, the lessee mis-utilised transporting 
challans for transportation of 1,98,950 cft. (5,633  m
3) of stone boulder 
illegally extracted from somewhere else. Thus, less ee was liable to pay 
penalty amounting to ₹ 35.26 lakh 103  for illegal transportation of 5,633 m 3 
of stone boulder under the provisions of Rule 54 of JMMC Rules, 2004.  
• Further, in Pakur district two leases had expired o n 
31 December 2019 and 31 March 2020 having closing b alance of stock of 
32,57,500 cft. (one case: stone metal: 11,46,580 cf t. and stone boulder: 
13,76,770 cft. and another case: stone boulder: 7,3 4,150 cft.). The 
possession of leasehold had not been taken over by the DMO in the first 
case while in the second case, it was surrendered b y the lessee to DMO. 
Audit observed (during JPV conducted on 13 October 2023) that only 
2,11,890 cft., of stone metal and 2,00,000 cft. of stone boulder were lying 
within the lease area in the first case, whereas, i n the second case, no stone 
metal/boulder (during JPV conducted on 07 October 2023) was lying at the 
quarry site. As the lessee in the first case, illegally transported 21,11,460 cft/ 
59,789 m3 (9,34,690 cft. of stone metal and 11,76,770 cft. of stone boulder) 
from leasehold area, he was liable to pay penalty o f ₹ 3.74 crore under the 
provisions of Rule 54 of Rules ibid  but the same was not imposed by the 
DMO. Besides, DMO also could not prevent removal of  7,34,150 cft. or 
20,789 m 3 of stone boulder worth of ₹ 65.07 lakh from the surrendered 
quarry site in the second case. 
                                                 
103   At the rate of ₹ 626 per m3. 

Chapter 4: Sustainable and Scientific mining   
 
97  
4.4  Recommendations  
The Government may: 
• formulate a manual for appraisal of Mining Plans on  minor 
minerals in line with the Indian Bureau of Mines (I BM) Manual 
on appraisal of Mining Plan (2014), to establish a standardized 
procedure for processing, examination and scrutiny of Mining 
Plans; 
• ensure submission of kml files of lease area create d through 
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) surve y alogwith 
the Mining Plans, ensure submission of these files to SEIAA, 
update repository of kml files thereon for monitori ng through 
satellite imagery and enforce the progressive mine closure plan as 
proposed in the MPs. Also ensure that a final mine closure plan is 
submitted by lessees, and approved by the District Mining Officers 
(DMOs) for its implementation; 
• conduct detailed investigation to work out the exac t volume of 
under-reported minerals extracted and make provisions in JMMC 
Rules, 2004 in line with Rule 34A of Mineral Conser vation and 
Development Rules (MCDR), 2017 for carrying out dro ne survey 
of minor mineral leases throughout the State for checking instance 
of excess excavation by lessees and imposing penalt ies 
accordingly; 
• establish inter-departmental coordination among DMG , Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, State En vironment 
Impact Assessment Authority, Central Ground Water B oard and 
Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board for complia nce of 
conditions of MPs and ECs;  
• implement system for periodic survey for identifica tion and 
reconstruction/restoration of damaged assets due to  mining 
activities;  
• implement a comprehensive system by integrating all  aspects of 
transportation of minerals (weighing, tracking, monitoring etc.) to 
effectively monitor and plug illegal transportation  of minerals; 
and 
• ensure installation of weighbridges in dealer/lease  areas 
with facilities for authentically fetching weighmen t data for 
transporting challans on a real-time basis.  
 
 

 
 
 
Chapter 5 
Conclusion  

 
Chapter  
  
Conclusion 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether appropriate 
systems were being adopted to facilitate scientific  mineral exploration and 
estimation of mineral resources; mining leases/lice nses were granted, 
renewed, surrendered or cancelled in accordance wit h the applicable 
provisions; management of mines and minerals in the  State was adequate 
and effective etc.  As part of the Performance Audit, six district min ing 
offices were selected for detailed examination, bes ides audit of the 
Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Limited (JSMDC).  
After the conclusion of the Audit, an Exit Conferen ce was held on 
22 July 2024 with the Secretary, Department of Mine s and Geology, 
Government of Jharkhand, where audit observations w ere discussed to 
obtain the Government’s point of view. The Departme nt intimated that the 
data pertaining to observations/suggestions were un der verification and 
detailed replies would be furnished after examinati on. However, no replies 
have been received, despite several reminders (July 2025). 
The Department amended the provisions for grant/ren ewal/extension of 
mining leases frequently, with short interval perio ds (in March 2017, 
February 2018, March 2019 and September 2020) creating ambiguity in the 
interpretation of amended provisions. The Department could not institute a 
check and balance mechanism to ensure that the Depu ty Commissioners 
(DCs) do not grant leases beyond their competency. The Department had no 
system in place to identify defaulters during grant of new leases and to detect 
nature of land use, resulting in grant of mining le ases on forest land. These 
cases eventually resulted in irregular grant/renewa l/extension of mining 
leases in the State.  
Progress of auction of mineral blocks was very slow with only 3.77 per cent 
(11 out of 292 blocks) auction completed during 201 8-23. Minor mineral 
blocks with potential resources were lying idle, re sulting in blockage of 
revenue. 
An IT based mineral administration system, the Jharkhand Integrated Mines 
and Minerals Management System (JIMMS), was introdu ced with the 
objective of simplifying the complex mining process. However, automation 
of records was found to be incomplete due to unavai lability of crucial 
records/information/data.  
There was leakage of revenue due to short levy of royalty, including DMFT 
contribution of 
₹ 7.53 crore, non/short realisation of dead rent of ₹ 2.23 crore 
etc.  Further, penalty of ₹ 205.21 crore was not recovered from the lessees 
due to non-adherence to the provisions of the Act, Rules and Departmental 
instructions. 
Management of Sand  ghats  
Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation had  a mandate to 
operate 608 commercial sand ghats  within the State during 2017-22. 
5 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
100  
JSMDC initiated the process to operationalise 389 s and ghats  but it could 
operate only 21 ghats  ( i.e. , 3.45 per cent  of ghats ). The reasons for this 
included not ensuring timely preparation of Mining Plans (MP), and delay 
in submission of proposals to the State Environment  Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA) for grant of Environmental Clearance (EC). Due to 368 
non-operative ghats , the State Government suffered potential losses of  
₹ 70.92 crore from these ghats  (that had an area of 9,782.55 acres).  JSMDC 
had financial losses of ₹ 32.30 lakh during 2018-22 due to reduced 
operational efficiency of only 28.53 to 31.50 per cent  of desired production.  
Approval and implementation of Mining Plans 
The approved Mining Plans contained unreliable info rmation viz , incorrect 
surface plans, incorrect coordinates of boundary pi llars, overlapping lease 
areas, incorrect estimation of mineable and non-mineable reserves, incorrect 
estimation of ground water table. Fifty-four per cent  of MPs were approved 
by authorities posted in other districts who were n ot designated authorities 
while nine MPs were approved on the same day or the  very next day of 
submission, indicating lack of due diligence.  
Audit noticed that mining in non-mineable area of the lease was a common 
and widespread practice. There was estimated excess  excavation vis-à-vis  
permissible limit on which estimated 93.53 lakh m 
3 of stone in 13 stone 
leases was excavated which was not reported. The po tential financial 
implication of excess extraction of mineral was est imated to be 
₹ 292.75 crore (93.53 lakh m 3) in these 13 leases.   
There were cases of deviations from activities prop osed in the MPs, 
non-existence of benches and mines with steep side walls, reduced safety 
barriers with less plantation and extraction of non-mineable reserves.  
The DMG could conduct sectional measurements of onl y 0.68 to 
3.17 per cent  of existing minor mineral leases in test checked districts during 
2017-22 and they lacked modern tools like UAVs to m onitor excavation to 
ensure implementation of progressive mines closure plans. The final mine 
closure plans were not submitted in test checked cases. 
Air, water, noise monitoring stations were not found established within lease 
areas to monitor the level of pollution. Financial Assurance (FA) for 
reclamation and restoration submitted by lessees, w as not sufficient due to 
non-revision of rate of FA, non-submission of FA, lapse of Bank Guarantees 
and non-confiscation of FA.  
Environmental Clearance 
State Environment Impact Assessment Authority, Jharkhand predominantly 
relied on mining plans for issuance of EC. SEIAA was unable to enforce the 
conditions of EC and did not conduct monitoring thr ough methods like 
satellite imagery and JPV.  
Lack of coordination between the Departments enable d the applicants to 
obtain ECs on fake contiguous certificates in eight cases.  
Community assets (like roads, ponds, playgrounds etc. ) were damaged due 
to mining activities and reconstruction/restoration  of destroyed assets had 

Chapter 5: Conclusion  
101
not been undertaken. In the absence of analysis of impact of mining 
activities on road networks, 12 PMGSY roads of ₹ 39.74 crore were 
completely/partly damaged due to operation of heavy mining vehicles. 
Transportation of minerals 
The DMG registered 72,449 vehicles as of 28 March 2023, but none of these 
vehicles were equipped with Radio Frequency Identification/Global 
Positioning System (RFID/GPS) or any other vehicle tracking system 
even after a lapse of five years. The Department relied on permits and 
challan system in the absence of comprehensive systems to detect 
unauthorised movements of vehicles, overloading, transportation on 
unregistered vehicles etc.  
The overall system for transportation of minerals could not provide 
assurance for preventing illegal transportation of minerals. Audit test 
checked weighbridge report of seven dealers of stone chips and found that 
in 85 per cent of cases, JIMMS challans were unavailable.  In case of 28 
vehicles, 35 initial challans were followed by 50 additional challans that 
were issued before the expiry of the previous challans. There was no 
mechanism in place to monitor/detect illegal transportation of closing stock 
lying within the expired lease area. 
Ranchi 
The 27 September 2025  
(INDU AGRAWAL) 
Pr. Accountant General (Audit), Jharkhand 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 08 October 2025 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

 
 
  
Appendices 

Appendices  
 
103  
Appendix-2.1  
(Referred to in Paragraph 2.1.3) 
Lease was granted on insufficient documents 
 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of 
applicant 
Date of last 
application 
Mauza/Area Document 
attached 
Deficiency in enclosed documents 
1 
Chaibasa 
M/s CTS 
Industries 26.09.2015 Purtidighia/11.75 
acre 
Two 
affidavits and 
up to date 
RCC Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6 & 7). 
2 26.09.2015 Padapahar/5.00 
acre 
3 26.09.2015 Padapahar/10.00 
acre 
4 M/s Ezhar 
Karim 11.06.2015 Padapahar/2.50 
acre 
One affidavit 
only 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( 
ज)(7) only. RCC not 
attached. 
5 
Chatra 
M/s Chatania 
Mines 17.05.2019 
Chatania/ 7.00 
acre 
One affidavit 
only 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( 
ज)(7) only. RCC not 
attached. PAN or Income Tax declaration regarding partnership 
firm was not enclosed. 
6 M/s Jai 
Shankar Stone 
Works 
22.04.2014 Dalkoma/1.76 
acre 
One affidavit 
and RCC  Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. 
7 01.06.2015 Akta/9.00 acre 
8 
M/s Ashutosh 
Stone Works 05.04.2014 
Dalkoma/10.00 
acre 
One affidavit 
only 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( 
ज)(7) only. RCC not 
attached. Applicant was director of Pvt. Ltd. Co. but neither PAN 
nor declaration regarding Income Tax payment of the company 
was furnished. 
9 
Dhanbad 
Rameshwar 
Mahto  19.12.2020 
Dudhia /7.00 
acre 
Single 
affidavit 
attached  
Declared he holds lease in Bokaro but could not attached RCC for 
current year 2019-20, instead RCC of 2016 issued by DMO, 
Bokaro was attached. 
10 
Manmohan 
Grover & 
Ankush Grover 
 17.03.2021 
Salpatra/7.32 
acre 
Single 
affidavit of 
each partner 
was attached 
Ankush Grover already holds mining lease over an area of 9.00 
acre but in this application, he concealed this fact and also left the 
column in his affidavit blank. As such his affidavit was incorrect. 
11  
 02.03.2016 Garga/3.90 acre Single 
affidavit of 
Azad Ansari declared in his affidavit dated 02.03.2016 that he 
holds mining lease in Jamtara but did not attach RCC. 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
104  
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of 
applicant 
Date of last 
application 
Mauza/Area Document 
attached 
Deficiency in enclosed documents 
12  
 
 
Dhanbad 
 
 
Asit Kr 
Mandal & 
Azad Ansari  
20.02.2016 Garga//7.00 acre each partner 
was attached 
Azad Ansari declared that he does not have mining lease and no 
due pending but, in the application, dated 02.03.2016 (lease at Sl. 
No. 11) he had declared that he holds mining lease in Jamtara. In 
JIMMS database a mining lease was in his name in Jamtara. 
Affidavit was incorrect.  
13 26.02.2016 
Garga/7.85 acre 
14 
M/s. Maa 
Ambe Stone 29.03.2016 
Dolabar/1.05 
acre 
Single 
affidavit 
attached  
Affidavit had partial content of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. Declared no 
mining lease but not submitted RCC. 
15 
Pakur 
M/s Bajrang 
Stone Works 05.02.2016 
Suraidih/6.43 
acre 
One affidavit 
of one partner 
only 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. Surface 
right over the applied land was jointly in the name of Dilip Kumar 
Bhagat and Somraj Bhagat but affidavit of other partner not 
attached. No RCC attached. Credentials of firm not attached. 
16 
M/s Black 
Diamond 
Stone  
29.12.2016 
Belpahari/10.36 
acre  
Affidavit of 
firm/company 
not attached 
Affidavits had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. 
Credentials of firm not attached. 
17 
M/s Cygnet 
stone works  21.09.2016 
Jiyajori/05.83 
acre 
One affidavit 
of one partner 
only 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. Affidavit 
of other partner not attached. No RCC attached. Credentials of 
firm not attached. 
18 M/s Sahil 
Stone works 07.01.2020 Baliapatra/4.63 
acre 
Individual 
PAN attached PAN of firm not attached 
19 Palamu M/s Maa Stone 
Works 31.01.2020 Damdami/12.00 
acre 
Single 
affidavit 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. RCC not 
attached. 
20  
 
Sahibganj 
 
 
 
M/s O.P.Stone 
Works 09.09.2017 Sudare/7.00 acre Single 
affidavit 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(7) only. RCC not 
attached. 
21 
M/s Maa 
Rakshi Stone 
Works 
03.01.2020 
Bhutaha/3.15 
acre 
Single 
affidavit and 
RCC Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6) only. 
22 M/s S.B. Stone 
Works 16.07.2018 Piparjori/12.10 
acre 

Appendices  
 
105  
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of 
applicant 
Date of last 
application 
Mauza/Area Document 
attached 
Deficiency in enclosed documents 
23  
 
 
 
Sahibganj 
 
  
  
M/s Minakshi 
Stone Works 26.07.2017 Demba/10.00 
acre 
Single 
affidavit Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6) only. RCC not 
attached. 
24 M/s Maharani 
Stone Works 28.08.2017 Demba/08.10 
acre 
25 
M/s Mira 
Pahar Stone 
Mines 
31.12.2016 
Mirapahar/9.00 
acre 
Single 
affidavit and 
RCC 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6) only. 
26 M/s Abhi 
Stone Works 31.08.2017 Rohre/12.00 acre Single 
affidavit 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6) only. RCC not 
attached. 
27 M/s Mahakal 
Stone Works 04.01.2021 Gilmari/6.25 
acre 
28 M/s R. B. 
Stone Works 28.08.2017 Mayurkola/11.25 
acre 
29 
M/s Kashi 
Builders & 
Service Pvt. 
Ltd. 
02.03.2019 
Jokmari/7.00 
acre 
30 
M/s Sri Guru 
Stone Works 16.06.2017 
Dhatapara/10.57 
acre 
Single 
affidavit and 
RCC 
Affidavit had partial contents of Rule 9 (1)( ज)(6) only. 
 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
106  
Appendix-2.2  
(Referred to in Paragraph 2.2.3) 
Irregular grant of extension of lease period 
 
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
1 Chaibasa 
Shri Ajay Kumar 
Mauza- Gundijora, 
Area- 4.00 acre 
Govt. land 20.12.2009 
to 
19.12.2019 
12.10.2019 and 
04.11.2020 
26.12.2019 
and 
18.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
2 
Dhanbad 
Tej Narayan Singh, 
Mauza- Keshka, Khata 
No. 42, Plot No. 21(P), 
Area- 3.00 acre 
Govt. land 22.03.2009 
to 
21.03.2019 
12.12.2018 (1 
st  
extension) and 
21.10.2020 (2 
nd  
extension) 
23.01.2019 
and 
08.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
3 
Tej Narayan Singh,  
Mauza- Keshka, Khata 
No. 42, Plot No. 21(P), 
Area- 2.80 acre. 
Govt. land 17.09.2010 
to 
16.09.2020 
31.08.2020 
(Renewal) 
08.04.2021 
 31.03.2022  
4 
Gayasuddin Ansari 
Mauza- Marro, Khata 
No. 20, Plot No. 386(P), 
Area- 3.5 acre. 
Govt. land 06.11.2008 
to 
05.11.2018 
25.06.2018 
(Renewal) and 
23.12.2020 
17.11.2018 
and 
28.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
5 
M/s Mahalakshmi 
Industries 
Mauza- Marro, Khata 
No. 20, Plot No. 386(P), 
Area- 5.00 acre. 
Govt. land 13.06.2010 
to 
12.06.2020 
11.02.2021 
(Extension) 
08.04.2021 
 31.03.2022  
6 
M/s Mahalakshmi 
Industries 
Mauza- Marro, Khata 
No, 20, Plot No. 386(P), 
Area- 3.00 acre. 
Govt. land 12.12.2008 
to 
11.12.2018 
11.08.2018 
(Renewal) and 
22.10.2020 
(Extension) 
20.11.2018 
and 
26.11.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 

Appendices  
 
107  
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
7 
Dhanbad 
Amit Kumar Mandal. 
Mauza- Marro, Khata 
No, 20, Plot No. 386(P), 
Area- 6.00 acre. 
Govt. land 03.01.2009 
to 
02.01.2019 
08.10.2018 
(Renewal) and 
20.10.2020 
(Extension) 
06.12.2018 
and 
04.11.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
8 
M/s Shivay Enterprises 
Mauza- Salpatra, Khata 
No. 78, Plot No. 423, 
425(P), Area- 2.44 acre,  
Govt. land 05.12.2011 
to 
04.12.2021 
29.06.2021 12.01.2022 
 31.03.2022  
9 
Kamlakar Mandal and 
Tara Pad Mandal, 
Mauza- Nipniya, Khata 
No, 54, Plot No. 01(P), 
Area- 2.00 acre, 
Govt. land 27.10.2008 
to 
26.10.2018 
04.06.2018 
Renewal) and 
05.01.2021 
(Extension) 
16.10.2018 
and 
27.01.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
10 
Pradeep Kumar Singh, 
Mauza- Keshka, Khata 
No. 42, Plot No. 21(P), 
Area- 3.50 acre, 
Govt. land 28.12.2008 
to 
27.12.2018 
11.07.2018 
(Renewal) and 
21.10.2020 
(Extension) 
04.01.2019 
and 
08.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
11 
Asit Kumar Mandal and 
Jagdish Singh. 
Mauza- Marro, Khata 
No, 20, Plot No. 386(P), 
Area- 3.50 acre, 
Govt. land 05.11.2008 
to 
04.11.2018 
29.06.2018 
(Renewal) and 
20.10.2020 
(Extension) 
17.11.2018 
and 
04.11.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
12 
 
 
Pakur 
Arti Madhyan,  
Mauza- Khaprajola, 
Area- 3.14 Ha.  
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
24.05.2010 
to 
23.05.2020 
30.12.2020 29.01.2021 
 31.03.2022  
13 
 
 
 
 
 
Arti Madhyan,  
Mauza- Pipaljori, Area- 
3.215 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
19.02.2011 
to 
18.02.2021 
30.12.2020 08.03.2021 
 31.03.2022  Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
 

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
108  
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
14 
 
 
 
 
Pakur 
M/s Jial Das & Co. 
Mauza- Malpahari, 
Area- 1.06 Ha.  
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
25.08.2004 
to 
24.08.2014 
11.01.2021 07.11.2017 
and 
16.09.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application has 
already been deemed rejected 
on 24.11.2014 under the 
provision of rule 23(2)( च). 
Hence, renewal application 
in this case was not pending 
on 02.03.2017. Hence, 
extension was not allowable. 
15 
M/s Lakhmani Stone 
Products 
Mauza- Pipaljori, Area- 
4.767 Ha.  
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
20.08.2010 
to 
19.08.2020 
07.10.2020 02.12.2020 
 31.03.2022  
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
16 
M/s Rohit Rajdeo & 
others. 
Mauza- Bahirgram, 
Area- 0.437 Ha, 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
12.06.2011 
to 
11.06.2021 
11.05.2021 14.06.2021 
 31.03.2022  
17 
M/s. Maa Tara Stone 
Works, 
Mauza- Suraidih, Area- 
1.133 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
07.06.2010 
to 
06.06.2020 
09.11.2020 09.12.2020 
 31.03.2022  
18 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M/s. S.K. Dutta & Co, 
Mauza- Malpahari, 
Area- 0.809 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
01.03.2001 
to 
28.02.2011 
11.11.2020 26.09.2018 
and 
27.11.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application has 
already been deemed rejected 
on 28.05.2011 under the 
provision of rule 23(2)( च). 
Hence, renewal application 
in this case was not pending 
on 02.03.2017. Hence, 
extension was not allowable. 

Appendices  
 
109  
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
19 
 
 
Pakur 
M/s. Saura 
Constructions, 
Mauza- Bishanpur, 
Area- 1.299 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
01.04.2010 
to 
31.03.2020 
11.11.2020 02.12.2020 
 31.03.2022  
 20 
Hira Lal Bhakat,  
Mauza- Kanhupur, Area- 
2.764 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
31.08.2010 
to 
30.08.2020 
10.11.2020 12.01.2021 
 31.03.2022  
21 
M/s. Chhabariya 
Engineering Co., 
Mauza- Pipaljori, Area- 
2.29 Ha. 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
01.07.2010 
to 
30.06.2020 
06.02.2021 10.03.2021 
 31.03.2022  
22 
 
 
 
 
 
Palamu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amit Kr. Sinha,  
Mauza- Bohita, Khata 
No. 237, Plot No. 
317(P), Area- 9.00 acre 
Govt. land 25.02.2009 
to 
24.02.2019 
29.10.2018 
(Renewal) and 
03.11.2020, 
23.11.2020 and 
10.12.2020 
(Extension) 
07.03.2019 
and 
04.01.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
23 
Fazle Kareem 
Mauza- Bakoria, Khata 
No. 555, Plot No. 4348 
and 4381(P), Area- 2.10 
acre 
Govt. land 17.07.2009 
to 
16.07.2019 
25.03.2021 14.05.2021 
 31.03.2022  
24 
M/s Jai Maa Kali 
Enterprises 
Mauza- Bohita, Khata 
No. 237, Plot No. 
317(P), Area- 3.78 acre 
Govt. land 24.07.2011 
to 
23.07.2021 
24.05.2021 26.06.2021 
 31.03.2022  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
110  
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
25 
 
 
Palamu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uday Kr. Singh 
Mauza- Chhaparwar, 
Khata No. 91, Plot No. 
128(P), Area- 6.00 acre 
Govt. land 14.07.2011 
to 
13.07.2021 
12.04.2021 07.06.2021 
 31.03.2022  
26 
M/s Broadway Links 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Mauza- Chhaparwar, 
Khata No. 91, Plot No. 
128(P), Area- 5.00 acre 
Govt. land 10.08.2011 
to 
09.08.2021 
17.05.2021 07.06.2021 
 31.03.2022  
27 
Sahibganj  
M/s Ghosh Stone 
Works,  
Mauza- Gangopara 
Bedo, Khasra No. 25(P) 
& 44(P), Area- 9.30 acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
11.10.2015 
to 
10.10.2020 
13.07.2020 25.11.2020 
 31.03.2022  
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
28 
Tarkeshwar Jaiswal,  
Mauza- Damra 
Daminbhitha, Khasra 
No. 9(P), 10(P), 15(P) 
and 37(P), Area- 9.60 
acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
04.01.2012 
to 
03.01.2019 
25.09.2018 (1 
st  
Renewal) and 
02.12.2020 (2 
nd  
Renewal) 
03.01.2019 
and 
13.03.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
29 
Mrs. Najnin Bibi 
Mauza- Margaro, Khasra 
No. 106(P), Area- 5.00 
acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
21.08.2008 
to 
20.08.2018 
24.05.2018 (1 
st  
Renewal) and 
18.11.2020.(2 
nd  
Renewal) 
25.02.2019 
and 
27.01.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
30 
Md. Farsad 
Mauza- Desh Paharia, 
Khasra No. 73(P), 77(P), 
79(P), 83(P) & 100, 
Area- 3.34 acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
08.07.2011 
to 
07.07.2018 
05.03.2018 (1 
st  
Renewal) and 
06.01.2020 (2 
nd  
Renewal) 
21.09.2018 
and 
29.07.2021 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 

Appendices  
 
111  
Sl. 
No.  District 
Details of lease Type of land Original 
lease 
period 
Date of 
application 
for extension 
Date of 
grant of 
extension 
Extended 
up to  
Brief of observation 
31 
M/s Hiralal Ajay & Co. 
Mauza- Gudaitungi, 
Khasra No. 89. 90, 91 & 
92, Area- 5.48 acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
23.06.2015 
to 
22.06.2020 
09.11.2020 28.11.2020 
 31.03.2022  
32 
Sahibganj  
M/s Jai Mata Di Stone 
Works 
Mauza- Banchapa, 
Khasra No. 299(P), 
300(P), 301(P), 302 & 
303(P), Area- 5.64 acre, 
 
Renewal Applied on 
Khasra No. 299(P) & 
300(P), Area- 0.55 acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
21.12.2011 
to 
20.12.2018 
16.07.2018 (1 
st  
Renewal) and 
12.11.2020 (2 
nd  
Renewal) 
29.12.2018 
and 
08.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
Renewal application was not 
pending prior to 02 March 
2017 or 19 February 2018 
hence, extension was not 
allowable. 
33 
M/s Maa Kalika Stone 
Works. 
Mauza- Ambade, Khasra 
No. 17(P), 18(P), 22, 
31(P), 32(P) and 35(P), 
Area- 11 acre 
Private/ Raiyati  
land 
04.01.2012 
to 
03.01.2019 
10.09.2018 (1 
st  
Renewal) and 
03.01.2020 (2 
nd  
Renewal) 
25.02.2019 
and 
24.12.2020 
 
31.03.2020 
and 
31.03.2022 
 
 
  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
112  
Appendix-4.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.1.4.1) 
Excess extraction of stone excavated by lessee (within lease area: kml matched with lease area) 
 
Details of 
lessee 
Area as per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Date on extraction calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
Jaishankar 
Stone 
Works, 
Chatra, 
Lessee code-
308336601, 
Period of 
lease-
14.07.2014 to 
13.07.2024 
Lease area- 
0.713 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
0.71 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
39.60 m 
Google 
image- 
 17.02.2022 
Total Mineral 
resources-276886 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 0.44 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.71 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-
23.05.2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road - 
6240 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.22 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
393 m 
Height-  
39 m 
Base-  
6.87 m 
Period of 
production- 
July 2014-
May 2023 
Volume extracted-
270646 m 
3 
Production reported-
79650 m 
3 
Excess extraction 
190997 m 
3 
Mining Pit (17.02.2022) Unexcavated surface (21.01. 2011) 
Chatania 
Mines, 
Chatra, 
Lessee code-
308156501, 
Period of 
lease-
24.10.2019 to 
23.10.2029 
Lease area- 
2.83 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
2.83 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
39.90 m 
Google 
image- 
 17.02.2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -243709 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area-  
1.8 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.65 
Ha. 
Slope- 70 
o  JPV-23-05-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road- 
52052 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.93 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
168.30 m 
Height- 
37.49 m 
Base-  
13.65 m 
Period of 
production- 
October 2019-
May 2023 
Volume extracted-
191657 m 
3 
Production reported 
191657 m 
3 
Excess extraction- 
0 m 
3 
Mining Pit (17.02.2022) Unexcavated surface (28.12. 2018) 
 


Appendices  
 
113  
Details of 
lessee 
Area as per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Date on extraction calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Jai Shiv 
Construction, 
Chatra, 
Lessee code- 
308336901,  
Period of 
lease- 
12.02.2015 to 
11.02.2025 
Lease area- 
1.03 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
1.03 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
64 m 
Google 
image- 
 30.11.2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -542034 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 0.64 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.86 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-
11.05.2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
101328 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.35 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
275 m 
Height- 
63.03 m 
Base-  
11.11 m 
Period of 
production- 
February 
2015- May 
2023 
Volume extracted-
440706 m 
3 
Production reported-
144132 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
296574 m 
3 
Mining pit (30.11.2022) unexcavated surface (16.04. 2013)  
M/s 
Trustline 
Mining and 
Minerals, 
Chaibasa, 
Lessee code- 
101597101, 
Period of 
lease- 
18.01.2016 to 
17.01.2026 
Lease area- 
18.93 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
19.00 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
50 m 
Google 
image- 
 29.05.2022 
Total Mineral 
resources -2038049 
m
3 
  
Mining pit 
area- 16.52 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 4.22 
Ha. 
Slope- 75 
o  JPV-
18.08.2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
222993 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-2.33 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
590 m 
Height- 
48.30 m 
Base-  
12.94 m 
Period of 
production- 
January 2016- 
August 2023 
Volume extracted-
1815057 m 
3 
Production reported-
1429890 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
385166 m 
3 
Mining Pit (29.05.2022) 
 
Unexcavated surface (26.04.2014) 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
114  
Details of 
lessee 
Area as per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Date on extraction calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Raj 
Kumar 
Khurana, 
Palamu, 
Lessee code- 
411354101,  
Period of 
lease- 
17.08.2013 to 
16.08.2023 
Lease area- 
4.05 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
4.05 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
61 m 
Google 
image- 
 25.02.2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -1360300 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 3.10 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 2.23 
Ha. 
Slope- 90 
o  JPV-
26.11.2022 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road -
18300 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.91 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit-   
586.74 m 
Height- 61 m 
 
Base- 0 m 
Period of 
production- 
August 2013-
November 
2022 
Volume extracted-
1342000 m 
3 
Production reported-
1342000 m 
3 
Excess extraction-0 m3 Mining Pit (25.02.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.04. 2013) 
M/s 
Bagaiya 
Stone 
Mine, 
Palamu, 
 
Lessee code- 
411353903, 
Period of 
lease- 
08.01.2012 to 
07.01.2022  
Lease area- 
4.046 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
4.046 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
94.00 m 
Google 
image- 
 07.12.2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -3277685 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 3.22 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 3.61 
Ha. 
Slope- 75 
o  JPV-
10.11.2022 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
689906 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.60 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
526.04 m 
Height- 
90.79 m 
Base-24.33 m 
 
Period of 
production- 
January  
2012- January 
2022 
Volume extracted-
2587778 m 
3 
Production reported-
1194282 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
1393496 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.12.2021) Available image (second yea r of lease 
dated 16.11.2013) 


Appendices  
 
115  
Details of 
lessee 
Area as per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Date on extraction calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Shyam 
Stone 
Works, 
Palamu 
Lessee code-
411355001, 
Period of 
lease 
23.07.2015 to 
22.07.2025 
Lease area- 
4.856 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
4.856 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
45.00 m 
Google 
image- 
 07.12.2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -1555492 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 2.86 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 3.51 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-
02.12.2022 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
128222 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-2.27 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
637.16 m 
Height- 
44.32 m 
Base-  
7.81 m 
Period of 
production- 
July 2015- 
November 
2022 
Volume extracted-
1427270 m 
3 
Production reported-
671478 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
755792 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.12.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.11. 2013) 
M/s  Sona 
Stone Chips,
 
Palamu 
Lessee code- 
411354301, 
Period of 
lease- 
12.12.2013 to 
11.12.2023 
Lease area- 
0.96 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
0.96 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
35 m 
Google 
image- 
07.12.2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -294000 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 0.64 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.84 
Ha. 
Slope- 90 
o  JPV-
02.12.2022 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
9415 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.28 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
95.80 m 
Height- 35 
m 
Base- 0 m 
Period of 
production- 
December 
2013- 
November 
2022 
Volume extracted-
284585 m 
3 
Production reported 
61212 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
223373 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.12.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.11. 2013) 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
116  
Details of 
lessee 
Area as per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Date on extraction calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s New 
Three Star 
Mines, 
Pakur,  
Lessee code- 
623160603, 
Period of 
lease- 
20.03.2020 to 
19.03.2030 
Lease area- 
2.34 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
2.34 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
17.65 m 
Google 
image- 
 16.01.2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -342864 m
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 0.90 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 1.95 
Ha. 
Slope- 85 
o  JPV-
07.10.2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
6553 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-0.82 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
354.6 m 
Height- 
17.58 m 
Base-1.54 m 
Period of 
production- 
May 1990- 
September 
2023 
(including 
extraction 
during 
previous lease 
period) 
Volume extracted-
336310 m 
3 
Production reported 
152116 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
184194 m 
3 
Mining Pit (16.01.2022) Available image (09.03.2019 ) before start 
of lease 
Note 1 – (Area as per mining plan)- available in Mining plan 
Note 2- (Details of dimension as per Google image) -lease area, mining pit area, perimeter were calculated by available measurement tool in Google earth application  
Note 3- (Details of JPV) -1. Depth along hypotenuse - measured by rope tied with stone for load purpose 2. Slope- eye estimation by JPV team 3. Height and base- sin and cos value 
of angle * depth along hypotenuse 
Note 4- (Dates), 1. Google image- date of Google image mentioned in image 2. Date of JPV 3. Period of production- production figure available in file and JIMMS (from start of 
lease period to date of JPV) 
Note 5- (Details of volume) 1. Total mineral reserve- mining pit area in Ha. (Google image) *10000*Height 2. Reserve trapped in slope- ½* Height * base* Perimeter (along 
boundary wall) 3. Volume extracted- Total mineral reserve- reserve trapped in slope 4. Production reported- Production reported during period of production 5. Excess 
extraction -   Volume extracted – Production reported. 
Note 6- Google image based on which calculation of volume done by the Audit, Area in Green line-lease boundary (KML file), Area in Yellow line- excavated area 
Note 7- Google image showing flat surface (means no extraction) before start of lease 
 
  


Appendices  
 
117  
Appendix-4.2 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.1.4.1)  
Excess extraction of stone (Outside lease area: kml matched with lease area) 
 
Details of lessee Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
Jaishankar Stone 
Works, Chatra, 
Lessee code-
308336601, Period 
of lease-14.07.2014 
to 13.07.2024 
Lease 
area- 
0.713 
Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
0.71 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
39.60 m 
Google 
image- 
 17-02-2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -
1162143 m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
0.44 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 2.98 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-23-05-
2023 
Reserve trapped 
in slope-  
101608 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.22 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
758 m 
Height-  
39 m 
Base-  
6.87 m 
Period of 
production- 
July 2014-
May 2023 
Volume 
extracted-
1060535 m 
3 
Production 
reported 0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
1060535 m 
3 
Mining Pit (17.02.2022) Unexcavated surface (21.01. 2011) 
Chatania Mines, 
Chatra, Lessee 
code-308156501, 
Period of lease-
24.10.2019 to 
23.10.2029 
Lease 
area- 
2.83 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
2.83 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
39.90 m 
Google 
image- 
 17-02-2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -292450 
m
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
1.8 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.78 
Ha. 
Slope- 70 
o  JPV-23-05-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope- 77179 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.93 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
301.70 m 
Height- 
37.49 m 
Base-  
13.65 m 
Period of 
production- 
October 2019-
May 2023 
Volume 
extracted-215271 
m
3 
Production 
reported - 
19728.58 m 
3 
Excess extraction- 
195542.27 m
3 
Mining Pit (17.02.2022) Unexcavated surface (28.12. 2018) 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
118  
Details of lessee Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Jai Shiv 
Construction, 
Chatra, Lessee 
code- 308336901,  
Period of lease- 
12.02.2015 to 
11.02.2025 
Lease 
area- 
1.03 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
1.03 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
64 m 
Google 
image- 
 30-11-2022 
Total Mineral 
resource - 
693299 m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
0.64 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 1.10 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-11-05-
2023 
Reserve trapped 
in slope and haul 
road-111692 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.35 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
319 m 
Height- 
63.03 m 
Base-  
11.11 m 
Period of 
production- 
February 
2015- May 
2023 
Volume 
extracted-581608 
m
3 
Production 
reported-0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
581608 m 
3 
Mining pit (30.11.2022)  unexcavated surface (16.04.2013)  
M/s Trustline 
Mining and 
Minerals, 
Chaibasa, Lessee 
code- 101597101, 
Period of lease- 
18.01.2016 to 
17.01.2026 
Lease 
area- 
18.93 
Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
19.00 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
50 m 
Google 
image- 
 29-05-2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -
526415.50 m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
16.52 
Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 1.09 
Ha. 
Slope- 75 
o  JPV-
18.08.2023 
Reserve trapped 
in slope-
116238.34 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
2.33 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
372 m 
Height- 
48.30 m 
Base-  
12.94 m 
Period of 
production- 
January 2016- 
August 2023 
Volume 
extracted-
410177.16 m 
3 
Production 
reported-0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
410177.16 m 
3 
Mining Pit (29.05.2022) Unexcavated surface (26.04. 2014) 


Appendices  
 
119  
Details of lessee Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Raj Kumar 
Khurana, Palamu, 
Lessee code- 
411354101,  
Period of lease- 
17.08.2013 to 
16.08.2023 
Lease 
area- 
4.05 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
4.05 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
61 m 
Google 
image- 
25-02-2021 
Total Mineral 
resource - 
579500 m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
3.10 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.95 
Ha. 
Slope- 90 
o  JPV-26-11-
2022 
Reserve trapped 
in slope-0 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.91 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit-   
222.26 m 
Height- 61 m
 
Base- 0 m 
Period of 
production- 
August 2013-
November 
2022 
Volume 
extracted- 
579500 m 
3 
Production 
reported-2238 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
577263 m 
3 
Mining Pit (25.02.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.04. 2013) 
M/s Shyam Stone 
Works, Palamu 
Lessee code-
411355001, Period 
of lease 23.07.2015 
to 22.07.2025, M/s 
Sona Stone Chips, 
Lessee code- 
Palamu Lessee 
code- 411354301, 
Period of lease- 
12.12.2013 to 
11.12.2023 
Lease 
area- 
4.856 
Ha., 
0.96 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
4.856 Ha., 
0.96 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
35 m 
Google 
image- 
 07-12-2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -
1137444 m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
2.86 Ha., 
0.64 Ha., 
 
Mining pit 
area- 3.30 
Ha. 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-02-12-
2022 
Reserve trapped 
in slope- 
63897.40 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
2.27 
Ha.,0.28 
 
Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
610.21 m 
Height- 
34.47 m 
Base-6.08 m 
Period of 
production- 
December 
2013- 
November 
2022 
Volume 
extracted-
1073546.60 m 
3 
Production 
reported 0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
1073546.60 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.12.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.11. 2013) 


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
120  
Details of lessee Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s Bagaiya 
Stone Mine, 
Palamu, 
 Lessee 
code- 411353903, 
Period of lease- 
08.01.2012 to 
07.01.2022 
Lease 
area- 
4.046 
Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
4.046 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
94.00 m 
Google 
image- 
 07-12-2021 
Total Mineral 
resource -
299622.18  m 
3 
 
  
Mining 
pit area- 
3.22 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.33 
Ha. 
Slope- 75 
o  JPV-10-11-
2022 
Reserve trapped 
in slope-
269426.79 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.60 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
243.96 m 
Height- 
90.79 m 
Base-24.33 m 
 
Period of 
production- 
January 2012- 
January 2022 
Volume 
extracted-
30195.39 m 
3 
Production 
reported-0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
30195.39 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.12.2021) Unexcavated surface (16.11. 2013) 
M/s New Three 
Star Mines, Pakur, 
Lessee code- 
623160603, Period 
of lease- 20.03.2020 
to 19.03.2030  
Lease 
area- 
2.34 Ha. 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
2.34 Ha. 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
17.65 m 
Google 
image- 
 16-01-2022 
Total Mineral 
resource -152970 
m
3 
 
 
 
 
Mining 
pit area- 
0.90 Ha. 
Mining pit 
area- 0.87 
Ha. 
Slope- 85 
o  JPV-07-10-
2023 
Reserve trapped 
in slope-4969 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.82 Ha. 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
367.40 m 
Height- 
17.58 m 
Base-1.54 m 
Period of 
production- 
March 2020- 
September 
2023 
Volume 
extracted-148001 
m
3 
Production 
reported 0 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
148001 m 
3 
Mining Pit (16.01.2022) Available image (09.03.2019 ) before start 
of lease 
  


Appendices  
 
121  
Notes pertaining to Appendix-4.2 
Note 1– (Area as per mining plan)- available in Mining plan  
Note 2- (Details of dimension as per Google image) -lease area, mining pit area, perimeter were calculated by available measurement tool in Google earth application 
Note 3- (Details of JPV) -1. Depth along hypotenuse- measured by rope tied with stone for load purpose 2. Slope- eye estimation by JPV team 3. Height and base- sin and cos value 
of angle * depth along hypotenuse 
Note 4- (Dates), 1. Google image- date of Google image mentioned in image 2. Date of JPV 3. Period of production- production figure available in file and JIMMS (from start of 
lease period to date of JPV) 
Note 5- (Details of volume) 1. Total mineral reserve- mining pit area in Ha. (Google image) *10000*Height 2. Reserve trapped in slope- ½* Height * base* Perimeter (along 
boundary wall) 3. Volume extracted- Total mineral reserve- reserve trapped in slope 4. Production reported- Production reported during period of production 5. Excess 
extraction-   Volume extracted – Production reported. 
Note 6- Google image based on which calculation of volume done by the Audit, Area in Green line-lease boundary (KML file), Area in Yellow line- excavated area 
Note 7- Google image showing flat surface (means no extraction) before start of lease 
 
  

Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
122  
Appendix-4.3 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.1.4.1)  
Excess extraction of stone excavated by lessee (kml not matched with lease area) 
 
Details of 
lessee 
Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s 
Ashutosh 
Stone Works, 
Chatra, 
Lessee code- 
308013401, 
Period of 
lease- 
26.06.2014 to 
25.06.2024 
Lease 
area- 4.04 
hectare 
Lease area 
(KML file)-
2.93 hectare 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
42 m 
Google 
image- 
 17-02-2022 
Total Mineral resource -
1364933 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 2.99 
hectare 
Mining pit 
area- 3.3 
hectare 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-23-05-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
120760 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
1.05 
hectare 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
746 m 
Height- 
41.36 m 
Base-7.29 m 
Period of 
production- 
June 2014- 
May 2023 
Volume extracted-
1244173 m 
3 
Production reported-
305748 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
938425 m 
3 
Mining Pit (17.02.2022) 
 
Unexcavated surface (16.04.2013) 
M/s CTS 
Industries 
Ltd.,  
Chaibasa 
Lessee code- 
101334703, 
Period of 
lease- 
23.02.2016 to 
22.02.2026 
Lease 
area- 3.64 
hectare 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
6.7 hectare 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
26.52 m 
Google 
image- 
 29-05-2022 
Total Mineral resource -
454434 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 3.10 
hectare 
Mining pit 
area- 1.74 
hectare 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-18-08-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road-
39551  m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.54 
hectare 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
571 m 
Height- 
26.12 m 
Base-4.60 m 
Period of 
production- 
February 
2016- 
August 
2023 
Volume extracted-
414882 m 
3 
Production reported-
140537 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
274346 m 
3 
Mining Pit (29.05.2022) Flat surface (26.04.2014) 


Appendices  
 
123  
Details of 
lessee 
Area as 
per 
mining 
plan 
(Note 1) 
Details of 
dimension 
per Google 
Image 
(Note 2) 
Details JPV 
(Note 3) 
Dates 
(Note 4) 
Details of volume 
(Note 5) 
Google Image of mining pit area 
(Image date on which extraction 
calculated) 
(Note 6) 
Google Image of mining pit area (image 
date before grant of lease) 
(Note 7) 
M/s 
Ramashish 
Singh,  
Palamu,  
Lessee code-
411596801, 
Period of 
lease-
23.03.2016 to 
22.03.2026 
Lease 
area- 4.85 
hectare 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
5.83 
hectare 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
24.38 m 
Google 
image- 
 13-12-2022 
Total Mineral resource -
1440565 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 4.19 
hectare 
Mining pit 
area- 6.0 
hectare 
Slope- 80 
o  JPV-02-06-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road -
107872 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier-
0.66 
hectare 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
989 m 
Height- 
24.01 m 
Base-4.23 m 
Period of 
production- 
March 
2016- June 
2023 
Volume extracted-
1332693 m 
3 
Production reported- 
998297 m 
3 
Excess extraction- 
334396 m 
3 
Mining Pit (image date 13.12.2022) Flat surface (im age date 02.06.2013) 
M/s Sky 
Stone Works, 
Sahibganj, 
Lessee code- 
620829301, 
Period of 
lease- 
06.11.2017 to 
05.11.2027 
Lease 
area- 2.86 
hectare 
Lease area 
(KML file)- 
3.54 hectare 
Depth along 
hypotenuse- 
24.38 m 
Google 
image- 
07-03-2022 
  
Total Mineral resource -
360141 m 
3 
 
  
Mining pit 
area- 1.66 
hectare 
Mining pit 
area- 1.5 
hectare 
Slope- 80 
o JPV-21-09-
2023 
Reserve trapped in 
slope and haul road -
41296 m 
3 
Safety 
barrier -
0.53 
hectare 
Perimeter of 
mining pit- 
482 m 
Height- 
24.01 m 
Base-4.23 m 
Period of 
production- 
November 
2017- 
September 
2023 
Volume extracted-
318845 m 
3 
Production reported-
20813 m 
3 
Excess extraction-
298032 m 
3 
Mining Pit (07.03.2022) Flat surface (23.02.2016) 
  


Report on Performance Audit of Management of Minor Minerals in Jharkhand 
124  
Notes pertaining to Appendix-4.3 
Note 1– (Area as per mining plan)- available in Mining plan  
Note 2- (Details of dimension as per Google image) -lease area, mining pit area, perimeter were calculated by available measurement tool in Google earth application 
Note 3- (Details of JPV) -1. Depth along hypotenuse- measured by rope tied with stone for load purpose 2. Slope- eye estimation by JPV team 3. Height and base- sin and cos value 
of angle * depth along hypotenuse 
Note 4- (Dates), 1. Google image- date of Google image mentioned in image 2. Date of JPV 3. Period of production- production figure available in file and JIMMS (from start of 
lease period to date of JPV) 
Note 5- (Details of volume) 1. Total mineral reserve- mining pit area in hectare (Google image) *10000*Height 2. Reserve trapped in slope- ½* Height * base* Perimeter (along 
boundary wall) 3. Volume extracted- Total mineral reserve- reserve trapped in slope 4. Production reported- Production reported during period of production 5. Excess 
extraction -   Volume extracted – Production reported. 
Note 6- Google image based on which calculation of volume done by the Audit, Area in Green line-mining pit area 
Note 7- Google image showing flat surface (means no extraction) before start of lease 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/jharkhand/en 
 
