 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Himachal Pradesh 
Report No. 3 of 2025 
(Composite Audit Report-II) 

 

i 
Table of Contents  
Description 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page(s) 
No. 
Preface iii 
Overview v 
CHAPTER I: GENERAL 
Introduction 1.1 1 
About the State of Himachal Pradesh 1.2 1 
State Government Profile 1.3 3 
Authority for Audit 1.4 5 
Response of State Government to Audit 1.5 5 
Acknowledgement 1.6 8 
CHAPTER II: PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON WELFARE OF BUILDING 
AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS 
Department of Labour and Employment 
(Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare 
Board) 
Introduction and Audit Framework 2.1 9 
Notification and Framing of Rules 2.2 16 
Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 2.3 18 
Assessment, Collection and Transfer of Cess 2.4 33 
Health and Safety Norms 2.5 44 
Departmental Inspections 2.6 49 
Administration and Utilisation of the Fund 2.7 52 
Internal Control Mechanism and Beneficiary Survey 2.8 92 
Conclusion 2.9 97 
Recommendations 2.10 99 
CHAPTER III: QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN PROCUREMENT, 
STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD ITEMS 
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
Introduction 3.1 101 
Organisational set-up 3.2 102 
Audit objectives 3.3 103 
Audit Criteria 3.4 103 
Audit Scope and Methodology 3.5 103 
Financial Management  3.6 104 
Results of Audit 3.7 105 
Deficiencies in quality management at the time of 
procurement, storage and distribution of the food items 3.8 105 
Deficiencies in Monitoring and Supervision 3.9 115 
Deficiencies in consumer awareness activities 3.10 118 
Findings from the Joint Physical Inspection of 
godowns and Fair Price Shops 3.11 120 
Findings from the Beneficiaries Survey 3.12 123 
Findings from the independent qualitative analysis of the 
food items 3.13 123 

ii 
Description 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page(s) 
No. 
Conclusion 3.14 126 
Recommendations 3.15 127 
CHAPTER IV: ROLE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH KAUSHAL VIKAS 
NIGAM (HPKVN) IN SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
Technical Education, Vocational and Industrial Training Department 
Introduction 4.1 129 
Planning and Implementation 4.2 134 
Fund Management 4.3 140 
Infrastructure for skill trainings 4.4 146 
Training 4.5 150 
Capacity Building and Adequacy of Trainers 4.6 162 
Monitoring and Internal Control mechanism 4.7 164 
Conclusion 4.8 171 
Recommendations 4.9 171 
CHAPTER V: INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF THEME BASED 
TOURIST CIRCUIT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH THROUGH SWADESH 
DARSHAN SCHEME 
Tourism and Civil Aviation Department 
Introduction 5.1 173 
Planning for design, identification and selection of tourist 
circuits/ projects/ sites/ components 5.2 177 
Funds Management 5.3 183 
Execution of the Scheme 5.4 185 
Conclusion 5.5 191 
Recommendations 5.6 192 
CHAPTER VI: INDIVIDUAL AUDIT OBSERVATIONS (DEPARTMENTS) 
Department of Agriculture 
Excess payment of subsidy to farmers on purchase of 
tractors under Sub -Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanisation 
6.1 193 
Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department 
Unfruitful and avoidable expenditure on construction of 
a bridge 6.2 194 
Undue financial benefits/ favour to contractor and 
unfruitful expenditure on construction of road 6.3 200 
CHAPTER VII: INDIVIDUAL AUDIT OBSERVATION ON STATE 
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (SPSUs) 
Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL)  
Unfruitful expenditure on the construction of 
Transmission Lines 7.1 205 
APPENDICES  213 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 202 2 on Performance and 
Compliance A udit of Departments of Social, General  and 
Economic Sectors except Departments of Planning, Finance 
and Economics and Statistics has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Himachal Pradesh 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of Performance and 
Compliance Audit of  Receipts and Expenditure of the 
Government of Himachal Pradesh, conducted in terms of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India's (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Services) Act, 1971.  
The instances mentioned in this Report for Compliance Audit 
are those which came to notice in the course of test audit 
done for the year 20 21-22 as well as those which came to 
notice for earlier years but could not be reported in the 
previous Audit Reports. Period covered in the Performance 
Audit is 2017 -22. Instances relating to the period 
subsequent to year 2021-22 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
This Report covers matters arising out of the Compliance Audit and Performance Audit 
of the Departments of Labour and Employment, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Affairs (FCSCA), Technical Education, Vocational and Industrial Training  (TEVIT), 
Tourism and Civil Aviation  (TCA), Agriculture, Public Works and one State Public 
Sector Undertaking i.e. Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL). 
The Report contains one Performance Audit, three Subject Specific Compliance Audits 
(SSCAs) and four individual Compliance Audit observations. The Report has been 
organised into seven chapters as under:  
Chapter I - General 
This Chapter contains description of the State Government of Himachal Pradesh, brief 
profile of the State  for the year 2021 -22, the authority for audit and response of the 
State Government to Inspection Reports and Audit Observations. 
Performance Audit 
 
Department of Labour and Employment 
(Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board) 
 
Chapter II - Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
Building and other construction workers in India are among the most vulnerable 
segments of the unorganised labour force facing inherent risks to life and limb of the 
workers, casual nature of employment, uncertain working hours and inadequate welfare 
facilities. To address these issues, the Government of India enacted the Building and 
Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and established a cess on construction costs to fund social security and 
welfare schemes through the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess 
Act, 1996. In line with this, Himachal Pradesh implemented the Himachal Pradesh 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions 
of Service) Rules, 2008 a nd created the Himachal Pradesh Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Board in 2009, leading to the establishment of the 
Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund. 
The Audit covered a period  of five years from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22. However, where 
inconsistency in rules was observed and updated data beyond audit period was 
available, the same has been added in the Report, wherever required. 
The rule formulated on financial assistance for marriage lacked clarity as it failed to 
specify how many members can apply and who from the family is eligible to claim the 
assistance. This led to situations where the same marriage received assistance more than 
once. Furthermore, the health check -up framework was deficient in supervision and 
Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
vi 
 
record-keeping by the Board. Additionally, the minimum registration period of 10 
years, recommended under the Model Welfare Scheme formulated by the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, Government of India , was not adopted by the Board . It 
adopted minimum registration period of three years  without assessing long -term 
liability of pension.   
The State Government has not developed any mechanism to monitor construction 
activities in the State. The process of registration of establishments had issues of not 
obtaining commencement/completion notice from the employers, delay in registration 
and non-registration of eligible establishments. The process of registration of workers 
was flawed as monthly returns from the employers were not being obtained, issues of 
non-registration of eligible workers, duplicate/triplicate registrations, bogus 
registrations and registration without obtaining documents of workers were noticed.   
Also, there was a shortfall in organisation of camps and registration of workers and it 
was not ensured that details of work done are entered in the identity cards of the workers 
by the employers to ensure validity of work period. The mismatch in figures o f the 
Board and LOs/LI of registered workers and camps organised, points towards the 
ineffective reporting mechanism. 
The Assessing Officers -cum-LOs failed to obtain Form -I from all employers as 
required by the Cess Rules and only issued six assessment orders amounting to 
₹ 12.91 lakh while cess amounting to ₹ 407.61 crore was deposited without any 
assessment during 2017-22. The Board did not coordinate with Local Bodies to share 
information on approved building plans and construction projects. Additionally, 
establishment-wise data of cess collected was not maintained and non-reconciliation of 
cess led to difference of ₹ 226.52 crore in cess figures of the Board and the LOs . The 
Board or the Department did not provide a uniform format for transferring cess to the 
fund, resulting in cess of ₹  112.39 crore being kept in the suspense account, 
₹ 13.24 crore deposited in the fund without information about the jurisdiction of LO 
and collection charges not remitted to the Government Treasury. Furthermore, 
instances of short realisation of cess of ₹  4.20 crore due to dishonoured cheques/bank 
drafts not being corrected or revalidated  in time and non -remittance of cess of 
₹ 8.26 lakh was noticed.     
The test checked LOs/LI did not inspect sites where accidents had occurred before or 
after the accidents and did not conduct investigation/inquiry after the accidents. A Joint 
Physical Inspection also found that construction sites lacked essential safety measures, 
including first -aid kits, safety equipment, on -site fire safety equipment, and basic 
amenities like water, toilets, and shelter. 
The State Government had not revised the inspection targets after September 2011 
indicating a lack of analysis of ongoing construction activities with respect to available 
manpower. Significant shortfall in inspections ranging from 62 to 76 per cent  was 
noticed during 2017 -22. LOs/LIs did not maintain Inspection Notes or Registers to 
monitor compliance with safety deficiencies noted in previous inspections. The 

Overview 
vii 
 
inspection mechanism lacked risk-based assessments according to size of construction 
sites and inspect large construction projects approved by the Local Authorities.  
Administrative irregularities included shortfall of 77 per cent  in holding the Board 
meetings and delay in constitution of State Advisory Committee and not holding any 
of its meetings. Annual accounts were submitted for audit after taking upto 19 months, 
Annual Report was approved with delay of upto 33 months and subm itted to the State 
Government with delay of upto 31 months. Annual Budget was approved with delay 
ranging from three to 15 months.  
Staff shortage of 35 per cent observed, key posts being held on additional charge and 
filling of 75 per cent posts on outsourced basis hindered the implementation of welfare 
Acts.  
Financially, ₹ 703.15 crore were accumulated in the fund, administrative expenditure 
limit of five per cent was breached twice in 2017 -18 and 2018-19, and ₹ 15.89 crore 
was spent irregularly on donations, construction and advertising. The Board had 
accrued income tax liability of ₹ 191.01 crore due to erroneous registration unde r 
Income Tax Act.  
Implementation of welfare schemes faced inconsistent rules, non -coverage of 
beneficiaries, non-distribution of material and improper payments. Inaction by LOs/LIs 
on rectifying rejected claims and delays in disbursement of welfare benefits was also 
observed. The Board did not establish an effective system for social audits of benefits. 
The internal control and monitoring mechanism was nearly non -existent, as the Board 
and LOs/LIs did not maintain control registers or records. Of 243 workers surveyed, 
only seven (three per cent) were actually engaged in construction work, raising doubts 
about whether welfare benefits were being provided to the intended construction 
workers. Unregistered workers were unaware of the welfare benefits, indicating 
ineffective publicity by the Board. 
The State Government may  
• Specify in the application form related to financial assistance for marriage that 
assistance has not been applied/obtained by different family members including 
self for the marriage of same person. Rule should also bring clarity to avoid 
instances of marriage assistance more than once. 
• Ensure compliance with the recommendations of Model Welfare Scheme. 
Deviation, if any, should be properly assessed before adoption. 
• The Department should operationalise use of GIS mapping and conduct proper 
inspections for monitoring construction activities in the State.  
• The registration of all eligible workers in the State must be ensured through 
proactive approach on behalf of the Board and the Department by way of camps, 
targeted publicity campaigns, special drives etc. instead of leaving it on the 
initiative of the workers.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
viii 
 
• The LOs should ensure that the employers/contractors submit monthly returns in 
Form-XXX so that information about construction workers eligible for 
registration at the construction site would be available with the LOs. 
• Also, lacunae in the registration process resulting in duplicate registration, bogus 
registration on the basis of fraudulent certificates etc. must be removed through 
development of appropriate software with the necessary controls.   
• The Department and the Board must ensure that comprehensive database on 
account of cess is prepared at LOs and the Board level.  
• Process of obtaining Form-I and assessment of cess thereafter must be followed 
diligently to avoid any loss of revenue.  
• The Department should coordinate with other concerned Departments to collect 
cess from all eligible establishments in the State. There could be added a 
provision of “cess deposition” in the application for Building Plan approval from 
Local Bodies.  
• Cess collection should be reconciled regularly by the Board as well as the Cess 
Collector.  
• The Government or the Board should provide a uniform format to be submitted 
by all the cess deductors with details of individual establishments/construction 
works, amount, period of cess deducted, mode of cess transfer in Board’s bank 
account, details of pending cess (if any), amount of cess paid in advance (if any), 
jurisdiction of Labour Office etc. 
• The LOs and LIs, being the field agents of the Department and the Board, must 
inspect the construction sites regularly and maintain inspection notes and 
registers to ensure compliance to the issues raised or shortcomings noticed 
during previous inspections regarding the safety and health of the construction 
workers.  
• The Department should revise inspection targets regularly after analyzing 
ongoing construction activities and also available staff strength and formulate a 
comprehensive inspection policy specifying periodical visits and risk -based 
assessment of construction sites in the State.  
• The Department and the Board should develop software for registration of 
workers and establishments through which the applications for welfare benefits 
may also be submitted, scrutinised and sanctioned for speedy disbursal of benefits 
to worker.  
• The Board and SAC meetings should be held at regular intervals and preparation 
and approval of Annual Accounts and Annual Reports must be ensured within 
prescribed time frame.  
• The Board should coordinate with Social Audit Unit of the State and take steps to 
conduct Social Audit in all the Blocks of the State periodically. 

Overview 
ix 
 
• The Board may ensure implementation of schemes to provide maximum benefits 
to all eligible workers in the State, thereby avoiding accumulation of funds. Also, 
expenditure from the fund should be in accordance with provisions of the 
Act/rules. 
• It is recommended that avoidable expenditure towards income tax liability is 
addressed. 
• A database on account of welfare benefits should be prepared to remove 
irregularities regarding double sanctions, instances of unjustified and irregular 
payments and it also warrants proper scrutiny of applications and documents 
attached by the field officers as well as the Board while sanctioning the claims.  
Compliance Audit 
 
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs  
Chapter III -  Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of 
Food Items 
The State Government has entrusted the Department and the Himachal Pradesh State 
Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (Corporation) with the responsibility of procuring 
and distributing various food items under TPDS, its monitoring and quality control at 
various levels with the help of field functionaries.  
Audit observed that the Department did not revise the inspection tar gets in line with 
TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 and hence fell short in fixing the same. Further, even the 
targets fixed for inspections by the Department were not met. S hortfall in sample 
collection for testing the quality of food items was observed. Due to delays in 
disseminating the test report to the field units, substandard food items were distributed 
in the State. Lackadaisical approach in upgradation and modernisation of Departmental 
FTL resulted in lapse of allocated Budget, non-accreditation and non -upgradation of 
the laboratory. Thus, the  Departmental action for ensuring the quality of food items 
through Joint P hysical Inspection and lab testing as required under the applicable 
Act/order was found insufficient by Audit. 
The Department was found lacking in ensuring proper monitoring and supervision at 
all levels. The Vigilance Committees required to be formed at every Block and FPS 
level had not been constituted in many of the Blocks and FPSs. Further, non-holding of 
periodical meetings of the Vigilance Committees up to the prescribed extent 
undermined the transparency and accountability of TPDS system in the State. The 
Department was lagging behind in utili sing the allotted Budget for consumer 
sensitisation activities, which limited the beneficiary’s capacity to be a participant in 
the quality control process. 
During physical verification of the wholesale godowns, various quality related 
shortcomings were noticed. Beneficiaries have also reported below average quality of 
food items during Beneficiary Survey. Further, most of the beneficiaries did not have 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
x 
 
the knowledge of  the Department’s toll -free number and were not aware of the 
complaint mechanism. Thus, Audit concludes that monitoring systems and consumer 
awareness measures undertaken by the Department were inadequate and leaves scope 
for improvement. 
Independent qualitative analysis of food items conducted by Audit revealed that none 
of the samples of fortified rice and fortified wheat flour conformed to the prescribed 
level of micronutrients. In addition, some fortified salt samples also did not conform to 
the prescribed level of micronutrients. 
The Government may consider the following: 
• Fixing the inspection targets of various field functionaries in line with the TPDS 
(Control) Order, 2015 and ensure that the targets are duly achieved. 
• Take measures to ensure that there is no shortfall in collection of samples of 
various food items by the field functionaries from the FPSs, mills and godowns. 
• Expedite the process of upgradation and modernisation of its FTL and ensure its 
accreditation with the standardised agency. 
• Ensure that no food item is distributed before its testing and the results should be 
conveyed to the field units expeditiously. 
• Ensure formation of Vigilance Committees at all levels and their regular 
meetings. 
• Emphasise upon community participation as a key component of improving 
accountability and transparency in the State. 
• Proactive monitoring of the fortification programme in the State. 
Technical Education, Vocational and Industrial Training Department 
 
Chapter IV -  Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill 
Development 
Skills and knowledge  are the driving forces of economic growth and social 
development for any country. The HPKVN is responsible for skilling of youth of the 
State through short term courses for self-employment and employment in private sector. 
Programme implementation has not been given due attention by two State/ 
Departmental Level Monitoring Committees. There was absence of effective planning 
in the HPKVN as Annual Plans of HPKVN were not prepared. Efforts to converge skill 
development programmes implemented by various Departments under one umbrella 
were not effective. Trainings in Agriculture and Horticulture Sectors were not adequate. 
Utilisation of funds was low during 2017 -22 due to delay in empanelment of TSPs, 
delay in start of trainings, low progress on civil works , etc. Performance Security was 
not obtained from the TSPs. Exemption from GST Council towards payment of GST 
on training conducted by the TSPs has not been obtained. There was shortfall in 
providing wage employment to both female and PwD candidate s. Records relating to 

Overview 
xi 
 
adherence to the various provisions of the PMKVY guidelines such as biometric 
attendance, insurance of candidates, organising Kaushal Melas, training linked to 
captive placements, etc., have either not been maintained or the provisions have not 
been complied with Monitoring, inspection and internal control mechanism was also 
not effective. The performance of consulting firms engaged for implementation of 
HPSDP was also not satisfactory. Surveyed candidates expressed dissatisfact ion 
towards non- conduct of job fairs and non-providing of placements by the TSPs after 
their certification. 
In view of the audit findings, the State Government may consider 
• Skilling in sectors matching with aspiration of candidates so that they undergo 
trainings, take placements, and do associated jobs with objective of long -term 
employment. 
• Providing adequate infrastructure for training of candidates by timely completion 
of infrastructure. 
• Providing trainings in sectors with local job opportunities and skilling in local 
arts and crafts with provision for finance, market, display -sale centres to 
publicise the same and linking of trainings to captive placement. 
• Ensuring monitoring of implementation of programmes at apex level and 
adequate inspections of training by various Departmental functionaries.  
• Ensuring monitoring the performance of firms and TSPs in compliance to the 
contractual agreement. 
Tourism and Civil Aviation Department 
Chapter V -  Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in 
Himachal Pradesh through Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
The objectives outlined in the DPR of Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit 
(Circuit) relating to boosting local economy through employment to local youth, 
enhancing income by tourism activity were not achieved.  
Circuit under the scheme was not clearly defined as projects were identified and 
proposed at isolated places without identifying entry/ exit points in the DPR. Hence, 
the tourist circuit proposed was unable to motivate the tourists to visit most or next 
destinations of the circuit.  
Consultants for preparation of DPRs of individual components were engaged without 
following the tender process. Considerable time was taken in preparation and 
finalisation of Detailed Project Report of Circuit as a whole. The consultants had not 
prepared DPRs of the individual components within the stipulated time.  
Due to non -availability of land and necessary clearance/ no objection certificates of 
different Departments/agencies, two components were dropped midway, and others 
remained unexecuted for long and resulted in unfruitful/wasteful expenditure.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
xii 
 
No expenditure was incurred for IEC activities. Liquidated damages were not imposed 
in two cases despite inordinate delay in completion of the components. 
The diversion of the IDSD funds observed in the SDS component Convention Center 
at Kiarighat was against the SDS guidelines.  
The Department had handed over operation and maintenance of one completed 
component without signing a memorandum of understanding with the concerned 
Agency and another completed component was not handed over to the operation and 
maintenance Agency. 
On Joint Physical Inspection by Audit, it was observed that some of the sub -
components of the sanctioned components were either not constructed or constructed 
in variance of the approval, making the expenditure incurred unfruitful. 
Performance Security of ₹  1.57 crore from the successful bidder was not obtained 
resulting in extension of undue favour to the contractor. 
The State Government may consider the following: 
• Preparation of DPRs of the projects as per standards/guidelines so as to avoid 
delays/dropping of the components. 
• Ensuring compliance with all checklists regarding availability of land/forest 
clearances/no objection certificates from all the Departments concerned and 
completion of all codal formalities before awarding works for execution so as to 
ensure their execution, within the stipulated period. 
• Expediting utilisation of funds and creation of infrastructure facilities under the 
projects so as to derive intended benefits of the scheme in time. 
• Ensuring strict compliance with the stipulated clauses of the contract agreement 
including recovery of liquidated damages from the contractor. 
Chapter VI - Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
 
Department of Agriculture 
 
Excess payment of subsidy to farmers on purchase of tractors under Sub-Mission 
on Agricultural Mechanisation 
Non-adherence to the pattern of assistance under Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Sub -
Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation (SMAM)” resulted in excess payment of 
financial assistance of ₹ 4.61 crore to 1,005 beneficiaries in the test-checked Districts. 
(Paragraph 6.1) 

Overview 
xiii 
 
Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department 
 
Unfruitful and avoidable expenditure on construction of bridge 
Construction of a bridge with improper design coupled with inaction against the 
defaulters/ contractor and lack of investigation as well as lackadaisical attitude of the 
Department towards execution of rehabilitation work of the damaged bridge resulted in 
unfruitful expenditure of ₹  10.60 crore. Further, it also involved an avoidable 
expenditure of ₹ 4.15 crore on rehabilitation and strengthening of the damaged bridge 
(₹ 2.15 crore) and construction of alternate multi -span B ailey bridge (₹  two crore), 
resultantly defeating the objective of providing relief to the commuters. 
(Paragraph 6.2) 
Undue financial benefits/ favour to contractor and unfruitful expenditure on 
construction of road 
Failure of the Department to expedite the execution of the work within stipulated period 
resulted in extension of undue financial benefits/ favour of ₹  1.69 crore to the 
contractor, besides rendering the expenditure of ₹ 4.86 crore on the work unfruitful due 
to the work not completed on time. 
(Paragraph 6.3) 
Chapter VII -  Individual Audit Observation on State Public Sector Undertakings 
(SPSUs) 
 
Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL) 
 
Unfruitful expenditure on the construction of Transmission Lines 
Poor/faulty planning for construction of (i) 400 KV Single Circuit transmission line 
without the provision of equivalent voltage sub-station and (ii) two 33 KV lines without 
required bays resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹  76.26 crore. Further, this also 
resulted in non-achievement of the related objectives of these works. 
(Paragraph 7.1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 | P a g e  
 
Chapter I: General  
1.1 Introduction  
This Report covers matters arising out of the Performance Audit and Compliance Audit 
of the Departments and State Public Sector Enterprises of the State Government. The 
primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of the Legislature the important 
results of audit. Findings of audit are expected to enable the Executive to take corrective 
action as also to frame policies and directives that will lead to improved financial 
management of the organisations contributing to better governance. 
The Report has been organised in seven chapters as under: 
Chapter-I contains description of the State Government  of Himachal Pradesh, brief  
profile of the State  for the year 2021-22, the authority for audit,  response of the State 
Government to various audit products namely Inspection Reports, individual 
observations/paragraphs and follow-up action on Audit Reports. 
Chapter-II contains Performance Audit Report on ‘ Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers’. 
Chapter-III contains Subject Specific Compliance Audit on ‘Quality Management in 
Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items’. 
Chapter-IV contains Subject Specific Compliance Audit Report on ‘Himachal Pradesh 
Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN)’.  
Chapter-V contains Subject Specific Compliance Audit Report on ‘Integrated 
Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh  Through Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme’.  
Chapter-VI contains individual  observations relating to Compliance Audit of 
Departments. 
Chapter-VII contains individual  observation relating to Compliance Audit of State 
Public Sector Undertakings. 
1.2 About the State of Himachal Pradesh 
Himachal Pradesh is situated in the western Himalaya s. The State has a geographical 
area of 55,673 sq. km, which constitutes 1.69  per cent of the geographical area of the 
country. Recorded Forest Area (RFA) in the State is 66.52 per cent of the State’s area. 
The State is predominantly mountainous with altitudes ranging from 350 metres to 
6,975 metres above the mean sea level. About one third of the area of the State is 
permanently under snow, glaciers and cold desert. The Average Annual Rainfall is 
about 1,800 mm. The temperature of the State varies from sub-zero to 35°C. The Satluj, 
Beas, Ravi, Chenab and Yamuna are the major rivers of the State. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
Himachal Pradesh became a State on 25 January 1971. 
It is a Special Category State. The State is bordered by 
Punjab, Haryana , Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Uttarakhand, and Uttar Pradesh . The State shares an 
international border with China. 
The State has 12 Districts of which most are hill 
Districts and three are Tribal Districts. As per the 2011 
census, Himachal Pradesh has a population of 68.6 lakh 
accounting for 0.57 per cent of India’s population. The 
rural and urban population constitutes 89.97  per cent 
and 10.03  per cent respectively. Tribal population is 
5.71 per cent of the State's population. Agriculture is 
the main occupation of the people of Himachal Pradesh 
as it provides direct employment to about 69 per cent of the main working population. 
Manufacturing, Horticulture and Tourism are other important sectors of the State. 
1.2.1 State Economy 
Gross State Domestic Product 1 (GSDP) of Himachal Pradesh is estimated to be 
₹ 1,24,400 crore at constant prices 2 (2011-12) at the end of the Financial Year 
2021-22, registering growth of 8.35 per cent over the previous year . G SDP of 
Himachal Pradesh (at constant prices) was 0.84  per cent of national GDP  
(₹ 147.36 lakh crore). GSDP and per capita income (both at current and constant 
prices) for 2021-22 in comparison with 2020-21 are depicted in Chart 1.1. 
 
Source: Information supplied by Economic and Sta tistics Department of H imachal Pradesh. 
 
 
 
1  Total value of goods and services produced during a Financial Year within the State. It is the most 
commonly used indicator to measure the size of an economy of a State. 
2  GSDP at constant prices excludes the impact of inflation, while GSDP at current prices includes the 
impact of inflation. 
1,56,675
1,83,333 
1,14,814 1,33,079 
1,75,173 2,01,854 
1,24,400 1,41,830 
GSDP at current prices Per capita income (at
current prices)
GSDP at constant
(2011-12) prices
Per capita income (at
constant prices)
GSDP (₹ crore), Per Capita Income (₹)
2020-21 2021-22
Chart 1.1: GSDP and Per Capita Income


Chapter I: Introduction 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
1.3 State Government Profile  
 
1.3.1 Structure of Government 
The Government of Himachal Pradesh is organi sed into 48 Departments and 
29 State Public Sector Undertakings ( PSUs). In addition to the above , there are 
53 Autonomous Bodies in the State. 
The State has  61 Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs) which include five Municipal 
Corporations (Shimla, Dharamshala, Solan, Mandi and Palampur ), 29 Municipal 
Councils and 27 Nagar Panchayats . Further, t here are 3, 708 Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs)  which include  12 Zila Parishads, 81 Panchayat Samiti s and 
3,615 Gram Panchayats as on 31 March 2022. 
1.3.2 Receipts of the State Government 
The trend in  total receipts of the State Government during the period 2017-18 to 
2021-22 and components thereof is depicted in Chart 1.2. 
Source: State Finances Audit Report for the year ended 31  March 2022  Government of Himachal 
Pradesh. 
The t rend in components of Revenue Receipts during the period 201 7-18 to  
2021-22 has been depicted in Chart 1.3. 
27,367
30,950 30,742 33,438
37,309
5,675 6,458
10,870
16,775
9,383
1,637 1,628 2,458 788 1,064
34,679
39,036
44,070
51,001 47,756
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Revenue Receipts Capital Receipts
Net Public Account Receipts Total Receipts
Chart 1.2: Trends in Resources of State (₹ in crore)

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
 
Source: State Finances Audit Report for the year ended 31  March 2022, Government of Himachal 
Pradesh. 
1.3.3 Expenditure Profile of State Government 
Total expenditure of the State G overnment during the last five yea rs and its 
composition is depicted in Chart 1.4. 
 
Source: State Finances Audit Report for the year ended 31  March 2022, Government of Himachal 
Pradesh. 
Further details on Budget, Receipts, Expenditure, and other dimensions of State 
Finances are discussed in the CAG’s State Finances Audit Report (SFAR) for Himachal 
Pradesh. 
 
 
7,108 7,573 7,624 8,083 9,715 
2,364 2,830 2,501 2,188 
2,612 4,801 5,430 4,678 4,754 
7,349 
13,094 
15,117 15,939 
18,413 
17,633 
27,367 
30,950 30,742 33,438 
37,309 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
 -
 10,000
 20,000
 30,000
 40,000
Own tax revenue Non tax revenue
State's Share in Union taxes and duties Grants-in-aid from GoI
Revenue Receipts
Chart 1.3: Components of Revenue Receipts (₹ in crore)
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
27,053.16
29,442.11
30,730.43
33,534.93
36,194.54
3,755.67
4,583.41
5,173.91
5,309.21
6,029.38
502.53
467.98
458.21
320.12
377.97
Chart 1.4: Total Expenditure of State Government (₹ in crore)
Revenue Expenditure (RE) Capital Expenditure (CE) Loans and Advances disbursed

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
5 | P a g e  
 
1.4 Authority for Audit 
Authority for audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)  
is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution of India and the CAG’s 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (DPC Act). The CAG 
conducts audit of expenditure of State Government Departments under Section 133 
of the CAG’s DPC Act. In addition, CAG also conducts audit of other Autonomous 
Bodies which are substantially financed by the Government under Section 14 4 of 
DPC Act. Section 16 of the CAG’s DPC Act authorises CAG to audit all receipts 
(both revenue and capital) of the Government of India and of Government of each 
State and of each Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly and to satisfy 
himself that the rules and procedures are designed to secure an effective check on 
the assessment, collection and proper allocation of revenue and are being duly 
observed. Principles and methodologies for various audits are  prescribed in the 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts (Amendments), 2020 and Auditing Standards 
issued by the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. 
1.5 Response of State Government to Audit 
 
1.5.1 Response to Inspection Reports 
Inspection Report (IR) refers to an Audit Report issued by the Audit Office [viz., PAG 
(Audit), HP] after completion of audit of an auditable entity 5. IR contains individual 
audit observations/findings (referred to as Audit Paragraphs) and may contain audit 
findings on a specific theme. 
The heads of the auditable entities, through their next higher authorities, are required to 
report compliance with respect to the findings contained in the IRs to the PAG (Audit) 
within four weeks of receipt of IRs. Based on the action taken, an Audit Paragraph is 
either settled or the auditable entity is requested to take further corrective action. When 
all the Audit Paragraphs in an IR are settled, the IR is treated as settled. Ad -hoc 
Committee meetings are scheduled by the Finance Department on an annual basis where 
Audit Paragraphs of IRs are discussed for settlement. Status of IRs and Audit 
Paragraphs therein pertaining to Social, General (excluding three Departments6) and 
Economic Sectors as of 31 March 2022 is shown in Table 1.1. 
 
3  Audit of (i) all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of State; (ii) all transactions relating to 
Contingency Fund and Public Accounts; and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, profit and loss 
accounts, balance-sheets and other subsidiary accounts. 
4  Several non -Commercial Autonomous/Semi -Autonomous Bodies, established to implement 
Schemes for employment generation, poverty alleviation, spread of literacy, health for all and 
prevention of diseases, environment, etc., and substantially financed by the G overnment, are 
audited under Section 14. 
5  Auditable entity refers to any entity of the State Government including any Office, Authority, Body, 
Company, Corporation, Fund, Local Body, or any other entity subject to audit by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
6  Planning, Economics and Statistics and Finance Departments. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
6 | P a g e  
 
Table 1.1: Status of settlement of Inspection Reports and Audit Paragraphs  
Sr. No. Particulars Inspection Reports Audit Paragraphs 
1. Pendency as of 31 March 2021 11,254 50,912 
2. Issued during the year 2021-22 617 8,414 
3. Settlement during 2021-22 328 4,557 
4. Pendency as of 31 March 2022 11,543 54,769 
1.5.2 Response of State Government to Audit Observations contained in previous 
CAG Audit Reports 
CAG’s Audit Reports that are tabled in the Legislature stand referred to the 
PAC/COPU. According to the Rules and Procedures of the PAC/COPU (as per 
recommendations of Shakdher Committee), all State Government A dministrative 
Departments/Public Sector Undertakings are required to initiate suo motu action on all 
Audit Paragraphs featuring in these Audit Reports. They are required to furnish, within 
three months of the presentation of the Audit Reports to the State Legislature, detailed 
notes to PAC/COPU indicati ng the remedial action taken or proposed to be taken by 
them with respect to the Audit Paragraphs contained in the Audit Reports. 
The status of suo motu replies to audit observations contained in previous years’ CAG 
Audit Reports on Social, General and Economic Sectors and CAG Audit Reports on 
PSUs, as of 31 March 2022 is given in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Status of suo-motu replies for audit observations contained  
in previous Audit Reports 
Name of the 
Report 
Year of 
the 
Report 
Total Audit Observations 
included in the Report Suo-motu replies received Suo-motu replies not 
received 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
CAG Audit 
Report on 
Social, 
General and 
Economic  
(Non-PSUs) 
Sectors 
2012-13 
to 
2018-19 
24 138 21 111 3 27 
CAG Audit 
Report on 
PSUs 
2016-17 
to 
2018-19 
2 34 2 23 0 11 
Year-wise detail of suo-motu replies not received as shown in Table 1.2 is given in 
Appendix 1.1. 
1.5.3 Discussion of CAG Audit Reports in PAC/COPU 
CAG Audit Reports referred to Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and Committee on 
Public Undertakings (COPU) are taken up for discussion and oral examination by the 
Committee concerned. State Government officials (usually the Administrative 
Secretaries of State Government Department concerned/heads of State PSUs) are called 
for oral examination by PAC/COPU.  During the year 20 21-22, the status of a udit 
observations discussed by PAC/COPU  and status of audit observations pending for 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
7 | P a g e  
 
discussion in the PAC/COPU as of 31 March 2022 is given in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3: Discussion of Audit Observations during the year 2021-22 and Audit 
observations pending for discussion as of 31 March 2022 in PAC/COPU 
During the year 2021 -22, the status of audit observations discussed by PAC/COPU is 
given in Appendix 1.2 and t he year -wise details of audit observations pending for 
discussion in PAC/COPU is given in Appendix 1.3. 
1.5.4 Response of the State Government to recommendations of PAC/COPU 
PAC/COPU prepares reports summari sing the Committee's hearings, action taken by 
the State Government/PSUs and recommendations of the Committee. These reports are 
submitted to the State Legislature. Administrative Departments and PSUs are required 
to submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on recommendations of PAC/COPU within three 
months from the date of receipt of recommendations. The status of ATNs on the 
recommendations of PAC/COPU, as of 31 March 2022, is shown in Table 1.4. 
Table 1.4: Status of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the recommendations of PAC/COPU 
Name of the Report 
Concerned 
Legislative 
Committee 
PAC/COPU 
recommendations 
pertaining to 
Legislative 
Assembly Tenures 
Number of 
Departments/ 
PSUs 
Number of total 
pending ATNs on 
recommendations of 
PAC/COPU 
CAG Audit Report 
on Social, General 
and Economic  
(Non-PSUs) Sectors 
Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC) 
Vidhan Sabha VI, 
VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, 
XII, XIII 
20 95 
CAG Audit Report 
on PSUs 
Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
(COPU) 
Vidhan Sabha XII 
and XIII 11 26 
Department-wise and Vidhan Sabha tenure -wise detail of Table 1.4 is given in 
Appendix 1.4. 
 
Concerned 
Legislative 
Committee 
-Name of 
the Report 
Year of 
the 
Report 
Total Audit Observations 
included in Reports 
Audit Observations 
discussed in PAC/COPU up 
to March 2021 
Audit Observations 
discussed in PAC/COPU 
during 2021-22 
Audit Observations pending 
for discussion in 
PAC/COPU as of  
31 March 2022 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
PAC- 
CAG 
Audit 
Report on 
Social, 
General 
and 
Economic  
(Non-
PSUs) 
Sectors 
2008-09 to 
2018-19 43 322 28 240 5 23 10 59 
COPU- 
CAG 
Audit 
Report on 
PSUs 
2015-16 
to 
2019-20 
3 50 1 3 0 12 2 35 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
8 | P a g e  
 
1.6 Acknowledgement 
The Office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Himachal Pradesh 
acknowledges the cooperation extended by the State Government Departments, Public 
Sector Undertakings and other auditable entities  during the course of audit . We 
acknowledge the cooperation extended by the Himachal Pradesh Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Board and the Department of Labour and 
Employment of Himachal Pradesh during the conduct of the Performance Audit. 
We also acknowledge the cooperation extended by the Departments of Food, Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs; Technical Education; and Tourism and Civil Aviation 
during the conduct of Subject Specific Compliance Audits. We hope that our audit 
findings will  help highlight areas for improvement and suggest corrective actions 
based on the observations contained in this Audit Report. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Performance Audit on Welfare of 
Building and Other Construction 
Workers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 | P a g e  
 
Chapter II: Performance Audit on Welfare of Building and Other 
Construction Workers 
 
Department of Labour and Employment 
(Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board) 
2.1  Introduction and Audit Framework 
2.1.1  Introduction 
Building and other construction  workers are one of the most vulnerable segments of the 
unorganised labour in India. Building and other construction works are characterised by 
their inherent risk to the life and limb of the workers. The work is also characterised by its 
casual nature, temporary relationship between employer and employee, uncertain working 
hours, lack of basic amenities and inadequacy of welfare facilities.  
It was considered necessary to constitute Welfare Boards in every State to provide and 
monitor social security schemes and welfare measures for the benefit of building and other 
construction workers. For the said purpose, the Government of India brought out a 
comprehensive legislation , namely, the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 ( hereinafter referred to 
as “the Act”). It was also considered necessary to levy a cess on the cost of construction 
incurred by the employers on the building and other construction works for ensuring 
sufficient funds for the Welfare Boards to undertake the social security schemes and 
welfare measures. The cess was provided for in the Building and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “the Cess Act”). 
Himachal Pradesh Government notified Himachal Pradesh Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2008 
(hereinafter referred to as “HPBOCW Rules”). It constituted Himachal Pradesh Building 
and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board (hereinafter referred to as “the Board”)  
in March 2009 and thereafter Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ 
Welfare Fund (hereinafter referred to as “the Fund”) was created.   
The Board consists of  a Chairperson appointed by the State Government, a member 
nominated by the Central Government, not more than five persons representing the 
building and other construction workers appointed by the State Government, not more than 
five persons from among the employers of construction and building workers appointed by 
the Government, not more than five members representing the State Government of whom 
one shall be the Chief Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction of the State, 
one each shall be a representative of Finance Department, Law Department, Labour 
Department and Welfare Department. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
10 | P a g e  
 
The functions of the Board are carried out by the Secretary-cum-Chief Executive Officer 
(CEO), who is further assisted by Assistant Controller for  looking into  accounts and 
financial work, Executive Officer for administrative matters, Section Officers to examine 
welfare scheme applications and other staff for assisting in day to day work . At field level, 
12 Labour Officers1 (LOs) and 33 Labour Inspectors2 (LIs) of the Department of Labour 
and Employment are posted throughout the State for effective discharge of the functions 
of the Board  and the Department . Further, in March 2023, 12 Labour Welfare Officers  
(LWOs)3 were appointed, who work as the field functionaries of the Board. 
The Department of Labour and Employment, Government of Himachal Pradesh 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Department”) aims to promote growth of industrial and 
commercial activities by ensuring harmonious relationship between the employer and 
workmen through preventive steps, conciliatory effort, adjudicatory and punitive action 
and promoting welfare activities for workmen. This is done through the implementation of 
27 Central Acts and two State Acts  in the State.  These Acts are listed in Appendix 2.1. 
The Act and the Cess Act , which form the core of this Performance Audit Report , are 
among these 27 Central Acts. 
Labour Commissioner-cum-Director of the Department is Chief Inspector and Appellate 
Authority under the Act and the Cess Act respectively . The 12 Labour Offices  are each 
headed by a Labour Officer of the Department who are appointed as Cess Collectors cum 
Assessing Officers, Authorised Officers and Inspectors. In addition, the office of the LI 
Hamirpur is also authorised for registration of workers and submission of welfare claims 
of the beneficiaries in his jurisdiction. 
 
1  Labour Officers ( LOs) are Assessing Officers -cum-Cess Collectors for assessment and collection of 
cess under the Cess Act, Registering Officers for registration of establishments, Inspectors for 
inspection within their respective jurisdiction and Authorised Officers for re gistration of building and 
other construction workers (registration of workers is being carried out by LWOs from March 2023 
onwards) under the Act.  
2  Labour Inspectors (LIs) are Inspectors for inspection within their respective jurisdictions under the Act. 
LI Hamirpur has been given additional responsibility of registration of eligible workers, distribution of 
benefits to the beneficiaries and organising the awareness camps. 
3  Labour Welfare Officers (LWOs) work as the field functionaries of the Board for registration of 
beneficiaries, disbursement of benefits to beneficiaries and organising the awareness camps.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
11 | P a g e  
 
2.1.2  Organisational Setup  
Organogram of the Department and the Board is given below: 
 
The Board had registered 3,73,513  building and other construction workers and 
2,267 establishments/construction works as of March 2022. Active registrations of workers 
was 2,90,929 as of March 2022. During 2017 -22, the Board had registered 2,62,988 
beneficiaries and cess amounting to ₹  407.74 crore was deposited in the F und, wh ile 
welfare benefits amounting to ₹ 315.42 crore were distributed to the beneficiaries. 
LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
DEPARTMENT 
LABOUR INSPECTOR 
SECRETARY (LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT DEPARTMENT) 
LABOUR COMMISSIONER-CUM-
DIRECTOR OF EMPLOYMENT 
JOINT LABOUR COMMISSIONER 
DEPUTY LABOUR COMMISSIONER 
THE BOARD 
THE CHAIRPERSON 
THE BOARD MEMBERS 
SECRETARY-CUM-CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
LABOUR OFFICER  
 ASSISTANT 
CONTROLLER 
EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
LABOUR 
WELFARE 
OFFICER 
SECTION 
OFFICER 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
12 | P a g e  
 
2.1.3 Audit Framework 
2.1.3.1 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with objectives to assess whether: 
1. The rules notified by the State Government under the Act are consistent with the 
spirit of the Act and the Cess Act. 
2. There was an effective system for registration of establishments and beneficiaries. 
3. Cess assessment, collection, and transfer of collected cess to the Fund was 
efficient. 
4. Government prescribed appropriate health and safety norms and could ensure 
compliance to those norms by the employers. 
5. Government implemented transparent and effective system of inspections to check 
evasion of labour cess and to ensure compliance to health and safety norms by 
employers. 
6. Administration and utilisation of funds on implementation of Welfare Schemes by 
the Board was efficient and effective and as per Act and rules framed by the State 
Government and Central Government. 
2.1.3.2 Audit Criteria 
Criteria against which the audit findings are benchmarked are derived from the following 
sources:  
(i) Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996  
(ii) Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2008 
(iii) Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996 and Cess 
Rules, 1998 
(iv) Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009 
(v) Resolutions passed by the Board 
(vi) National Building Code of India, 2016 titled ‘Construction Management, 
Practices and Safety’ 
(vii) Indian Standard Safety Code for Scaffolds and Ladders Part I & II (IS: 3696) 
(viii) Inspection Policy notified by the State Government  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
13 | P a g e  
 
2.1.3.3 Audit scope and methodology  
The Audit covered a period  of five years from the year 2017-18 to 2021 -22. However, 
where inconsistency in rules was observed and updated data beyond audit period was 
available, the same has been included in the Report, wherever required. Audit test-checked 
the records of the offices of the Board, Labour Commissioner -cum-Director of 
Employment, two Labour Officers(LO) and one Labour Inspector (LI). Selection of field 
units, Welfare Schemes , beneficiaries for survey and establishments for Joint Physical 
Inspection are discussed in the Paragraphs 2.1.3.4 to 2.1.3.7. 
2.1.3.4 Selection of units  
The sample test-checked in Audit included two Labour Officers’ zones, four Local Bodies 
and four Executive Agencies (two each in the test-checked LO Zones ). In addition, 10 
Welfare Schemes were also test-checked to evaluate eligibility conditions of beneficiaries 
and timely disbursal of benefits. A total of 243 beneficiary applications were scrutinised 
for conducting a survey. Joint Physical Inspection of 2 6 establishments/sites was also 
conducted. 
2.1.3.4 (A) Selection of Labour Office Zones 
The Department has divided the whole State into 12 Labour Office rs’ zones and 
distribution of the benefits of the Welfare Schemes and collection of cess is through the 
LOs of these zones. As per the approved sampling methodology, two Labour Office zones 
namely, LO Bilaspur (including Labour Inspector Hamirpur which is under the jurisdiction 
of LO Bilaspur) and LO Kullu were selected based on the maximum amount of benefits 
distributed and the maximum cess contribution to the Fund during 2017-22, respectively. 
2.1.3.4 (B) Selection of Works Executing Agencies and Local Bodies in the selected 
two Labour Office zones 
• Records of four Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department (PWD) Divisions 
namely, PWD Ghumarwin, PWD Barsar, PWD Kullu, and PWD Banjar (shown in 
the map), being the top four Divisions incurring expenditure on construction works 
during 2017-22, were test-checked to verify whether the establishments were being 
registered as per the rules  and applicable labour cess was being deducted from 
payments made and was deposited timely into the Board’s account  as per the 
provisions of the Cess Act.  
• Records of four Local Bodies/Town and Country Planning (TCP) office s namely, 
Municipal Council (MC) Bilaspur, MC Hamirpur, MC Kullu, and TCP Manali, 
(shown in the map) were selected through random sampling for assessing whether 
applicable labour cess was collected while approving the Building Plan and 
deposited with the Board.  
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
14 | P a g e  
 
Details of the test-checked units are shown in Map 2.1. 
Map 2.1: Details of test-checked units  
 
2.1.3.5 Selection of Welfare Schemes 
Ten Welfare Schemes  were selected based on stratified data of amount of  assistance 
disbursed during 2017-22 as given in Chart 2.1.   
 
 
 
 
 
1. Labour Office having maximum amount 
of benefits under Welfare Schemes :  
LO Bilaspur (along with LI Hamirpur) 
2. Labour Office havin g maximum 
contribution to Cess Fund: LO Kullu 
 
SELECTION OF UNITS 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
15 | P a g e  
 
Chart 2.1: Details of selected ten Welfare Schemes  
 
2.1.3.6 Selection of beneficiaries for survey 
A total of 243 applications4 of the registered beneficiaries in the test-checked LOs/LI were 
selected for checking eligibility conditions and timely disbursal of benefits. Survey of these 
beneficiaries was conducted to evaluate  the performance of the Board in respect of 
identification and registration of beneficiaries, scrutiny of their applications, and  
addressing the grievances of the beneficiaries, if any.  
Additionally, Beneficiary Survey of 82 workers5 at worksites selected for Joint Physical 
Inspection in the test -checked LOs/LI zones was also conducted. Findings of the 
Beneficiary Survey are discussed in Paragraph 2.8. 
2.1.3.7 Selection of establishments/worksites 
In the test-checked LOs/LI, Audit conducted Joint Physical Inspection of 26 6 
establishments/ construction sites. Nine registered construction sites were selected 
randomly from the data base of LOs. 14 unregistered construction sites were selected on 
 
4  LO Bilaspur: 65, LO Kullu: 112, LI Hamirpur: 66 
5  LO Bilaspur: 09, LO Kullu: 20, LI Hamirpur: 53 
6  LO Bilaspur: 06, LO Kullu: 11, LI Hamirpur: 09 
Five schemes with maximum 
amount of financial assistance 
Death and Funeral 
Financial Assistance  
₹ 14.86 crore 
 
Schemes with no expenditure 
a. Advance for purchase or 
construction of house  
b. Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin, and 
Steel Dinner Set for beneficiary 
 
Induction Cooker  
₹ 7.92 crore 
Washing Machine  
₹ 8.04 crore 
 
Solar Lantern  
₹ 10.24 crore 
Maternity/Paternity 
Financial Assistance  
₹ 11.87 crore 
Marriage Assistance  
₹ 64.48 crore 
Education Assistance  
₹ 72.15 crore  
COVID-19 Financial 
Assistance ₹ 78.59 crore
Ten selected 
Welfare 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
16 | P a g e  
 
the basis of high construction cost from the database of Local Bodies and works executing 
units. Three construction sites where accident had occurred were also selected. Findings of 
the Joint Physical Inspection are discussed in Paragraph 2.3.3 and Paragraph 2.5.2. 
2.1.3.8 Entry Conference and Exit Conference 
An Entry Conference with the Secretary, Labour and Employment to the Government of 
Himachal Pradesh was held on 6 December 2022 wherein the objectives, scope, criteria 
and methodology of audit were discussed. On conclusion of Audit, Exit Conference was 
held with the Secretary, Labour and Employment on 20 October 2023 and the comments 
of the Secretary have been suitably incorporated in the Report.  
Audit Findings 
 
2.2 Notification and Framing of Rules 
Section 62 (1) of the Act provides that the appropriate Government may, after consultation 
with the Expert Committee7, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of 
this Act. Subsequently, the State of Himachal Pradesh with the recommendations of Expert 
Committee (constituted by Government of Himachal Pradesh in September 2003) notified 
HPBOCW Rules, 2008 to carry out provisions of the Act.   
2.2.1 Absence of clarity in rule for financial assistance for marriage  
As per Rule 282  of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 regarding financial a ssistance8 for marriage, 
the beneficiary after completion of two months of the membership shall be eligible to get 
financial assistance for his marriage  and for the marriage of two children only. The 
beneficiary shall submit the application for such assistance to the Secretary or the 
Authorised Officer in Form No.-XLIV along with requisite documents like Certificate of 
Marriage, copy of Parivar Register etc.  
Audit observed that: 
I. The Rule is not clear about who will be eligible  in case more than one family 
member i.e., father, mother and son/daughter himself/herself, make the application 
for financial assistance for the same marriage.   
II. Also, the Rule is not clear about any restriction/limitation on how many members 
of the same family (father, mother, son himself/daughter herself) can get financial 
 
7  Section 5 of the Act  provides that the appropriate Government may constitute one or more expert 
committees consisting of persons specially qualified in building and other construction work for 
advising the Government for making rules under this Act. 
8  Rates of marriage assistance : ₹ 5,100/ - w.e.f. December 2008, ₹ 11,000/ - w.e.f. November 2011, 
₹ 21,000/- w.e.f. May 2013, ₹ 25,000/- w.e.f. August 2014, ₹ 35,000/- w.e.f. January 2018, ₹ 51,000/ - 
w.e.f. September 2020. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
17 | P a g e  
 
assistance for the marriage of one 9 family member in case more than one family 
member is registered with the Board.  
The Board stated (April 2023)  that the above issues shall be brought to notice during the 
Board of Directors’ meeting.  
Due to absence of clarity of the Rule, Audit noticed 12 cases where two members of the 
family got marriage assistance for the marriage of one person of the family, as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.7.10.4 (A). 
2.2.2 Non-compliance with the Central Advisory Committee recommendations  
Section 3 of the Act provides that the Central Government shall constitute a committee to 
be called the Central Building and Other Construction Workers’ Advisory Committee 
(CAC) to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration 
of this Act as may be referred to it. Recommendations of CAC are then communicated to 
the States. Issues related to CAC recommendations are discussed in the succeeding 
Paragraphs. 
2.2.2.1 Frequency of health check-up of beneficiaries 
The CAC 10 in its 16 th meeting (September  2014) recommended that the annual health 
check-up of every registered construction worker must be got done by the concerned State 
Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards. 
The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) in January 2020 notified  Rule 280(3) of 
HPBOCW Rules, 2008 stipulating that the Board may conduct health check -up of the 
registered workers/beneficiaries and their dependents and expenditure shall be borne by 
the Board.  
Audit observed that: 
I. The Rule was framed after a delay of more than five years after the recommendation 
(September 2014) of CAC. Further, the Rule does not specify the frequency of 
health check-up which was stipulated by CAC to be conducted annually. 
 
9  Cases where all members of the family (both parents and child) are registered with the Board and all of 
them applied for marriage assistance for marriage of child or self as the case may be.  
10  The CAC advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of the Act 
and shall consist  of a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government, three Members of 
Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and one by the Council of States, 
the Director-General as ex officio member, such number of other members, not exceeding thirteen but 
not less than nine, as the Central Government may nominate to represent the employers, building 
workers, associations of architects, engineers, accident insurance institutions and any other interests 
which, in the opinion of the Cent ral Government, ought to be represented on the Central Advisory 
Committee. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
18 | P a g e  
 
II. In the meantime, although the Board had directed (August  2019) the LOs/LI to 
conduct health check-ups as per targets fixed by them, n o record of health check -
up conducted and workers covered against the target was maintained by the Board. 
2.2.3 Non-adoption of criteria for pension as per Model Welfare Scheme 
Pursuant to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 4 July 2018, Model Scheme 
for Building and Other Construction Workers and Action Plan for Strengthening 
Implementation Machinery was formulated by Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
Government of India (GoI) and all the State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations were requested to comply with the scheme. As per Model Welfare 
Scheme, pension should be admissible to only those registered building and other 
construction (BOC) workers who have remained registered for a minimum of 10 years. In 
this regard, the St ate Welfare Board should issue a certificate to the effect that a BOC 
worker has remained registered for a period of 10 years.  
Rule 272 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 states that if a person had been a beneficiary for at least 
three years continuously immediately before attaining the age of 60 years he shall be 
eligible to get a pension11 and pension will become payable from the first day of succeeding 
month in which he completes 60 years of age. 
Audit observed that the Board did not adopt the 10 -year registration criterion for pension 
as prescribed in the Model Welfare Scheme, and continued to grant pensions in accordance 
with Rule 272 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008. 
During 2017 -22, the Board disbursed pension to 454 beneficiaries amounting to 
₹ 0.98 crore in the State on the criteria of three years of membership of the Board.  
The Board stated (December 2022) that the matter of pension eligibility was discussed in 
its 35 th meeting of the Board and it was decided to keep the criteria of three years of 
continuous service for the pension.  
Audit is of the view that non-adoption of the 10-year criterion may lead to a higher financial 
liability for the Board. Given that pension constitutes a long -term obligation, the Board 
should analyse its impact on future financial sustainability and capacity to provide other 
welfare benefits to workers. 
2.3 Registration of Establishments and Beneficiaries 
The Act is applicable to “every establishment which employs or had employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months, ten or more building workers in any building or other 
construction work”. Section 7 of the Act provides that every employer shall in relation to 
an establishment to which this Act applies on its commencement, within a period of 60 
days from such commencement make an application to the Registering Officer for the 
 
11  Rate of Pension (per month): ₹ 200/ - w.e.f. December 2008, ₹ 500/ - w.e.f. November 2011, ₹ 1,000/ - 
w.e.f. January 2020.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
19 | P a g e  
 
registration of such establishment. After the receipt of an application, the Registering 
Officer shall register the establishment and issue a certificate of registration to the employer 
thereof.  
As per Government notification (April 200912), the Labour Officers of the State have been 
appointed as Registering Officers to register building and other construction works. The 
Board had registered 2,267 establishments/construction works as of March 2022. 
Registration of Establishments 
 
2.3.1  Non-development of mechanism for regular monitoring of construction 
activities in the State 
Pursuant to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court (4 July 2018),  Model Welfare 
Scheme was formulated by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India. 
One of the measures suggested to strengthen the machinery for registration of 
establishments was that the State Governments should develop a mechanism for r egular 
monitoring of construction activities going on in the State and make use of Geographic 
Information System (GIS) technology/mapping etc. for the purpose. Specific care should 
be taken that the private sector is also covered. 
Audit noticed that neither the Board nor the Department had devised suitable mechanism 
for regular checking/detection of ongoing construction activities in the State as of January 
2023. Neither have they used any GIS technology or mapping to register each construction 
work as ‘establishment’ under the Act. 
The Board stated (December 2022)  that nothing has been received from the Government 
as action is required to be taken at the Government level.  
The reply confirms the fact of absence of a monitoring mechanism with the Board and the 
Department to check the construction activities in the State. This is also to be viewed 
against the fact that Audit has observed that major portion of cess amount was being 
deposited by the Government employers as compared to the private employers as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (E). The Department is depending on suo motu action on part of the 
employers to register their establishments/works while it should be taking proactive action 
and initiative to develop a mechanism for the registration of all employers including private 
construction sites in collaboration with the St ate Government. Such a mechanism will 
further enable verification regarding the registration of workers as well as payment of cess 
and thus will ensure compliance with the Act/Rules. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary stated (October 2023) that creation of GIS wing 
within Information Technology Department of Government of Himachal Pradesh has been 
approved and feature for mapping of the construction sites will be included in the ambit of 
the newly created wing. 
 
12  Notification No.: Shram (A)4-6/2007-BOCW-Pt.-II, Dated 30 April 2009. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
20 | P a g e  
 
2.3.2  Non-compliance with the registration conditions 
Rules 26 and 27 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provide for certain conditions to be fulfilled for 
registration and penalties to be levied for late registration of establishment. Audit noticed 
that the Registering Officers had not ensured that these rules were being complied with by 
the employers. Audit observations relating to registration have been discussed in the 
succeeding Sub-paragraphs.  
2.3.2.1 Non-obtaining work commencement/completion notice from the employers 
As per Rule 26 (3) of HPBOCW Rules , 2008, the employer shall, before 30 days of the 
commencement and completion of any building or other construction work, submit a 
written notice to the Inspector, intimating the actual date of commencement or, as the case 
may be, completion of such building or other construction work in Form- IV13. 
Audit observed that in the test-checked LOs, 35 establishments14 were registered under the 
Act during 2017 -22. However, notice regarding commencement or completion of any 
building or other construction work was not submitted by the employers/contractors to the 
LO concerned.  
LO Bilaspur and LO Kullu stated (January 2023) that due to rush of work and vacant post 
of Labour Inspector, notice could not be served to establishments for non -submission of 
completion report.  
Submission of information about the commencement/completion of construction work 
provides the opportunity to the LO/LI to inspect the construction site and in case of 
completion of work, it allows LO/LI to ensure that the complete cess  amount has been 
deposited by the employer. Absence of any mechanism for obtaining information regarding 
commencement/completion of construction work shows weak controls of the Board with 
regard to the ongoing construction activities in the State. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the LOs to register all the 
establishments/sites and demand for required certificates. 
2.3.2.2  Non-registration of establishments within time and non -levy of late fee for 
delay  
Section 10 of the Act  provides that no employer of an establishment to which this Act 
applies shall employ building workers in the establishment after the expiry of sixty days’ 
period for registration of establishment as given under Section 7 of the Act, or after the 
 
13  Form-IV contains information about name and address of establishment and employer, name and 
situation of place where work is to be carried on, number and date of certificate of registration, name 
and address of person in -charge, nature of work involved, da te of commencement or completion of 
work.  
14  LO Bilaspur: 14 and LO Kullu: 21 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
21 | P a g e  
 
revocation of registration under Section 8 or after the expiry of the period for preferring an 
appeal under Section 9 or after the dismissal of the appeal, as the case may be. 
Rule 27 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008  provides that if the application for registration is not 
submitted within the time limit i.e., within 60 days from the commencement of work, late 
fee @ 25 per cent of the rates of fee 15 shall be levied where the delay is up to one month, 
@ 50 per cent where the delay is beyond one month and up to six months and 100 per cent 
where the delay is beyond six months. 
Audit noticed that  in test-checked LOs, out of 35 establishments 16 registered during the 
period 2017-22, applications of 16 establishments17 were submitted after the expiry of sixty 
days’ time specified and with delay ranging from 15 days to 1,570 days. These 
establishments continued engaging workers and carried on the construction work without 
registration. They were registered by the concerned LOs as and when the applications were 
received from the employers without stopping the construction work or levying the late fee 
as applicable, in violation of the Act/Rule ibid.  
LO Bilaspur stated (March 2023)  that notice will be issued to the establishments in due 
course of time. LO Kullu stated (May 2023) that registration is being done through online 
portal and less fees deposited by the mentioned employers will be recovered. 
The reply is not acceptable as the LOs/LIs should ensure that the construction works do 
not carry on without registration and should have collected late fees from the employers at 
the time of registration.   
2.3.3  Unregistered establishments noticed during Joint Physical Inspection 
Section 7 of the Act provides for registration of establishments with the Registering Officer 
within a period of sixty days from commencement of work. Section 10 provides for the 
effect of non-registration and states that no employer of an establishment to which this Act 
applies shall employ building workers in the establishment after the expiry of sixty days’ 
period for registration of establishment from commencement of work. 
In the two test -checked LOs, during Joint Physical Inspection conducted by Audit along 
with the staff of PWD and Labour Offices, 14 unregistered18 construction works  were 
noticed. Out of which, 13 construction works were required 19 to be registered under 
Section 7 ibid. Out of 206 workers engaged in these 14 establishments , 82 workers were 
surveyed and only 11 workers were found registered with the Board.  
 
15  Fees to be paid for grant of certificate of registration is based on number of workers proposed to be 
employed and is ₹ 100/ - for 10 to 50 workers, ₹ 500 for 51 to 100 workers, ₹ 1,000/ - for 101 to 250 
workers, ₹ 2,500/- for 251 to 500 workers and ₹ 5,000/- for more than 500 workers.  
16  LO Bilaspur: 14, LO Kullu: 21. 
17  LO Bilaspur: seven, LO Kullu: nine. 
18  11 sites selected from the data of PWDs and three sites from the data of MCs/TCP. 
19  Establishments had employed on any day during construction period, ten or more building workers.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
22 | P a g e  
 
Out of 14 unregistered construction works, cess of 11 establishments was being deposited 
by their Principal Employers 20 whereas three private employers eligible for deposition of 
cess, had not paid the same  during the period covered under audit (2017 -22), which was 
against the provisions of the Cess Act.  
Thus, non -registration of establishments under the Act was indicative of the fact that 
registration process was ineffective and concerned LOs had not conducted inspections  as 
a result of which eligible establishments were not identified and provision of Section 10 
‘Effect of non-registration’ could not be applied. 
Pictures o f some unregistered sites visited during Joint Physical Inspection are shown 
below: 
 
20  The Contract Labour (Registration and Abolition) Act, 1970 defines Principal Employer as “in relation 
to any office or Department of the Government or a local authority, the head of that office or Department 
or such other officer as the Government or the l ocal authority, as the case may be, may specify in this 
behalf”. Test-checked Principal Employers include PWD Kullu, PWD Banjar, PWD Barsar and PWD 
Ghumarwin. 
Picture 2.3 
50 Bedded Integrated Ayush Sowa-Rigpa 
Hospital, Bajoura, Kullu  
Picture 2.2 
Construction of bridge over Sukkar Khad on 
Bara Khlaut Nandal Suddar Batlahu 
Joreghat Road, Hamirpur 
Picture 2.1 
Government Degree College, Gadagusaini, 
Kullu 
Picture 2.4 
Shopping Complex near Shiv Mandir Main 
Bazar, Hamirpur  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
23 | P a g e  
 
Registration of Workers 
Section 12 of the Act provides that every building worker in the age group of 18 to 60 years 
and who has been engaged in any building or other construction work for not less than 
ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be eligible for registration as a 
beneficiary under this Act.  
Rule 266 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 states that every building worker eligible to become 
a beneficiary to the Fund shall submit an application to the Secretary or to an officer 
authorised by him in this behalf. Where the Secretary of the Board or an officer authorised 
by him is satisfied th at the applicant fulfils the conditions, such building worker shall be 
registered as a member.  
As per Government Notification (March 2010 21), the Labour Officers of the State have 
been appointed Authorised Officers to register building and other construction workers.  
The Flow chart of the process of registration of building and other construction workers as 
beneficiary is as follows: 
2.3.4 Progress with regard to registration of workers 
The Board had registered 3,73,513 beneficiaries/workers as of March 2022. The following 
chart shows the progress in respect of registration of workers with the Board. 
Chart 2.2: Progress in respect of registration of workers with the Board 
 
 
21  Notification No.: BOCWB/Estt./Registration/SML/2010, Dated 6 March 2010 . 
137045
172326
213184
303848
373513
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
No. of registered workers
No. of registered 
workers
31-Mar-18 31-Mar-19 31-Mar-20 31-Mar-21 31-Mar-22
1. APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION  
2. REGISTRATION FEE 
 LABOUR 
OFFICER 
WORKER 
1. REGISTRATION NUMBER    
2. IDENTITY CARD 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
24 | P a g e  
 
Audit observations made with respect to registration of workers are discussed in the 
succeeding Paragraphs.  
2.3.4.1 Non-obtaining monthly returns from the employers 
As per Rule 268 (2) of HPBOCW Rules , 2008, every employer shall send a return on 
monthly basis to the Secretary, or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, a return 
in Form-XXX showing the details of the workers entitled to be registered as well as those 
who left the work during the preceding month. 
Audit noticed  that in the test -checked LOs , none of the employers of 35 registered 
establishments22 had submitted monthly returns to the concerned LO during 2017 -22. 
Resultantly, information about workers entitled to be registered was not received by the 
office and eligible workers might not have been registered due to which they would have 
been deprived of benefits of Welfare Schemes provided by the Board.  
LO Kullu confirmed the facts and stated (February 2023) that it is the duty of the employer 
to submit the Form -XXX to the Registering Officer as per the mandate of the Act. LO 
Bilaspur stated (March 2023) that notice will be issued to the establishments in due course 
of time.  
LOs should take proactive action to obtain monthly returns from the employers and register 
the eligible workers.  
2.3.4.2 Unregistered workers noticed during Beneficiary Survey 
In the test-checked LOs/LI, out of 82 workers surveyed by Audit at the construction sites/ 
establishments, 71 unregistered workers were noticed. Out of these 71 unregistered 
workers, 53 workers were unaware about the Board and its Welfare Schemes  and 
48 workers were eligible for registration based on the criteria of 90 days’ work in 
construction activities in the preceding 12 months. The non -registration of these workers 
deprived them of welfare benefits being provided by the Board. 
Also, out of 82 workers surveyed, majority i.e., 64 workers (78 per cent) were migrant 
workers. Out of which, 43 migrant workers were eligible for registration but only 11 were 
registered. However, as per information furnished by LI Hamirpur, only 424 migrant 
workers (one per cent) out of 77,695 registered workers were registered as of December 
2022. As per information furnished by LO Bilaspur only 640 migrant  workers 
(two per cent) out of 42,559 registered workers  and as per information furnished by LO 
Kullu only 688 migrant workers  (three per cent) out of 25,388 registered workers  were 
registered as of March 2022.  
 
22  LO Bilaspur: 14 and LO Kullu: 21. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
25 | P a g e  
 
The registration of only one to three per cent  migrant workers as intimated by the 
Department is in sharp contrast with the findings of the Beneficiary Survey, which raises 
the question whether all the eligible migratory workers were indeed being registered.  
The Board should provide ample publicity to its schemes and should focus on modern 
means of advertisement through social media along with the usual means of advertisement 
through newspaper, radio etc. and facilitate direct contact with workers through 
organisation of camps at the construction sites. The Registering Officers i.e., LOs of the 
Department also have a crucial role in generating awareness among the construction 
workers, including the migrant workers about the need for registration, thereby enabli ng 
access to the Welfare Schemes of the Board. 
2.3.4.3 Shortfall in registration of workers 
The Board had fixed (May 2013, May 2018, May 2019 and July 2021) target of registration 
of workers for every Labour Zone (Appendix 2.2). The post of Motivator-cum-Computer 
Operator was created to  assist the LOs/LI to  increase the number of beneficiaries of the 
Board. The Board also directed every Motivator -cum-Computer Operator to register 
maximum construction workers (March 2018). 
Audit noticed that  the Board had fixed targets without any survey or assessment of the 
number of building and other construction workers engaged in the State. Audit further 
observed that there was shortfall in registration of workers as beneficiaries of the Board 
under each LO/LI in the State against these targets ranging from seven to 94 per cent during 
2017-22 as shown in Appendix 2.2. This is indicative of the fact that either the targets 
were not fixed on a realistic basis or the officials did not take necessary action to achieve 
the set targets. 
In test-checked LOs/LI, LO Bilaspur had  a shortfall in registration ranging from 2,849 to 
10,345 (41 to 63  per cent), LO Kullu from 1,747 to 16,578 (52 to 92  per cent) and LI 
Hamirpur from 1,581 to 9,547 (11 to 53 per cent) during 2017-22. 
The Board stated (May 2023) that the post of Motivator-cum-Computer Operator had been 
created to achieve the targets and sufficient camps to increase registration of beneficiaries 
were organised to motivate the workers but still workers did not register and as such targets 
could not be achieved. 
The reply is not acceptable as there was a shortfall in organi sation of awareness camps, 
meetings etc. as discussed in the succeeding Paragraph.  
2.3.4.4 Shortfall in organisation of camps 
The Secretary -cum-CEO of the Board directed (September 2018 ) all the motivators/  
Registration Assistant/Computer Operators to organi se at least 3 -5 camps23 in a week to 
 
23  52 weeks x 3 camps = at least 156 camps in a year. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
26 | P a g e  
 
gear up the registration number so as to maximise the beneficiary enrolment as per the 
targets fixed. Motivators were also to attend the Gram Sabha meeting of Panchayat 
concerned, Panchayat Samiti meeting and other such meetings which are conducted in the 
Block Development Office to cover the M ahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and other BOC workers. 
Audit observed that - 
(I) Despite the Board being formed in 2009, the targets for conducting camps to 
maximise the registrations were fixed only in September 2018.  
(II) As against the requirement of a minimum of 46824 camps to be organised by each 
LO in the State and LI Hamirpur during the period April 2019 to March 2022, there 
was a shortfall ranging between 50 per cent (232 camps) to as much as 95  per cent 
(443 camps) in organisation of camps as detailed in Chart 2.3.  
Chart 2.3: Details of camps organised by Labour Offices during 2019-22 
Source: Information provided by the Board.  
Due to non -organisation of required camps, the workers remained unaware of Welfare 
Schemes provided by the Board as was observed during the Beneficiary Survey of 
82 workers in which 57 (70 per cent) were unaware about Welfare Schemes of the Board 
and 55 (67 per cent) said that camps were not organised by LOs/LI and as a result eligible 
construction workers did not get registered with the Board, rendering the process of 
creating awareness about welfare benefits incomplete and ineffective.  
Besides, LO Bilaspur and LO Kullu  had not maintained any camp register. Thus, Audit 
could not verify the number of camps actually organised by the LOs and in the absence of 
 
24  156 camps x 3 years = 468 camps. 
90
25 43
100
236
51
120 131
97
69
185
124 112
378
443 425
368
232
417
348 337
371
399
283
344 356
Minimum camps to be organised (468)
No. of camps
Achievement Shortfall Minimum camps to be organised (468)

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
27 | P a g e  
 
the register how these numbers were being reported in Monthly Progress Reports. While 
the LI Hamirpur had maintained Camp Register w.e.f. November 2021 only, which was 
however neither signed by the motivator nor verified by the LI. 
The Board stated (December 2022)  that due to Vidhan Sabha Session, Model Code of 
Conduct and COVID -19 pandemic, required camps could not be organi sed. The test -
checked LOs and LI confirmed the facts and stated (December 2022, February 2023) that 
due to rush of work and shortage of staff and COVID-19 pandemic, required camps could 
not be organised.   
The fact, however, remains that the year 2019-20 was not fully impacted by COVID-19; 
but still there was shortfall in the year. Shortfall of up to 4 43 camps (95 per cent) against 
468 required camps is not justified on the basis of Vidhan Sabha Sessions which are known 
in advance and were for the duration of 159 days during 2017 -22 and Model Code of 
Conduct comes into effect only for a small duration. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary agreed (October 2023) to the audit findings and 
assured to take appropriate action. 
2.3.4.5 Mismatch in figures of registered workers and camps organised 
As per data provided by the Board based on the compiled data from Monthly Progress 
Reports submitted by the LOs/LIs, a total of 1,04,065 workers  were registered during 
2017-22 with the Board through LO Bilaspur, LO Kullu and LI Hamirpur. However, as per 
the information supplied by these LOs/LI, 98,802 workers were registered during the same 
period. Thus, there was a mismatch of 5,263 number of workers in figures supplied by the 
Board and by the test-checked LOs on account of registration of workers. 
Similarly, as per information supplied by the Board, 467 camps were organised by the test-
checked LOs/LI during 2017-22. However, as per information supplied by these LOs/LI, 
632 camps were organised by them during the same period. Thus, there was a mismatch of 
165 number of camps.  
2.3.5  Discrepancies in registration of workers 
Section 12 of the Act provides that every building worker in the age group of 18 to 60 years 
and who has been engaged in any building or other construction work for not less than 
ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be eligible for registration as a 
beneficiary under this Act. Discrepancies noticed by Audit in the maintained records of 
registered workers with the Board are discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs.  
 
 
 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
28 | P a g e  
 
2.3.5.1  Multiple registration of workers 
Scrutiny of test -check of the records of 2,94,329 registered workers 25  revealed that 
922 beneficiaries were registered twice and six beneficiaries were registered thrice with 
the same Aadhar number and other details such as name, address, bank account details etc. 
against different registration numbers under the same LO/LI as shown in Table 2.1: 
Table 2.1: Detail of workers registered multiple times with the Board in the State 
Name of LO/LI No. of workers registered twice No. of workers registered thrice 
Baddi 4 0 
Bilaspur  14 0 
Chamba 1 0 
Hamirpur 425 2 
Kangra 129 1 
Kinnaur 9 0 
Kullu 11 0 
Mandi 119 0 
Nahan 40 0 
Rampur 25 0 
Shimla 19 0 
Solan 111 3 
Una 15 0 
Total 922 6 
The Table 2.1 indicates that process of registration lacked controls and was ineffective in 
finding out double/triple registrations, due to manual maintenance of records and improper 
verification of documents at the time of registration. Even bogus registrations in the test-
checked LOs/LI were noticed during audit as pointed out in the succeeding Paragraph. 
LWOs26 concerned stated (April –June 2024) that registration of workers is completely 
manual and there is no such mechanism to find out the double registrations and further 
stated that registrations observed as double registrations have been cancelled after being  
pointed out by the Audit. 
The Department or the Board may complete the ongoing development of software at the 
earliest so that necessary internal controls are built into the system to ensure that 
shortcomings such as multiple registration of workers, double disbursal of welfare benefits 
(Paragraph 2.3.5.1  and 2.7.10.2 (C)), disbursal of welfare benefits to deceased 
beneficiaries (Paragraph 2.7.10.2  (D)) etc. noticed during Audit, may be addressed as 
manual detection of such shortcomings is difficult.  
2.3.5.2 Registration of ineligible/bogus workers as beneficiaries  
Rule 266 (3) of HPBOCW Rule, 2008  provides that the application for registration shall 
be accompanied with a certificate or wage slips from the employer or contractor or copy 
 
25  Out of 3,73,513 registered workers up to March 2022, data was provided for only 2,94,329 registered 
workers to audit for test-check. 
26  LWO: Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kullu, Mandi, Kangra, Solan, Sirmour, Kinnaur, Chamba and Rampur . 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
29 | P a g e  
 
of Muster Roll or Attendance Register to the effect that the applicant is a construction 
worker. If such certificate is not available, a certificate issued either by the registered 
Construction Workers Union or Executive Officer of the concerned Local Urban Bodies or 
Secretary of Gram Panchayat to the effect that the applicant has worked for at least 90 days 
in the preceding twelve months may be considered. 
In the test-checked LOs/LI, it was noticed that out of total 1,19,665 live registered workers 
(as of March 2022), 86,344 live registered  workers (72 per cent) were registered on the 
basis of certificate of 90 days’ work in the previous one year provided by the Unions. The 
details of workers as of March 2022 are shown in Chart 2.4. 
Chart 2.4: Details of workers as of March 2022 
Source: Information provided by the test-checked LOs/LI. 
*Percentage of live workers registered based on certificate of the Union to total live registered workers as 
of March 2022. 
It can be seen from Chart 2.4 that in test-checked LOs/LI, 60 to 88 per cent live workers 
were registered based on employment certificate by the Unions.  
The Rule states that only in the absence or non-availability of wage slip from the employer/ 
contractor, copy of muster roll or attendance register, a certificate issued by the Unions 
may be considered. However, scrutiny of service continuity certificate revealed that all the 
employers signed the certificate issued by the Unions instead of issuing the same 
themselves. Even the LOs had not questioned the same and registered the workers without 
checking the authenticity of the certificates.  
Also, on scrutiny of the certificates issued by these Unions, it was observed that these were 
certified by the Unions, but the Unions did not maintain any record of genuine workers and 
no documentary proof was provided by the Unions alongwith the certifica te as the Rules 
did not provide for attaching supporting documents for the certification. The certificates 
67360
25388
40913
64969
17832
36864
43369
10622
32353
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000 80000
LI Hamirpur (67)
LO Kullu (60)
LO Bilaspur (88)
No. of workers
Name of Unit (per cent*)
Live workers registered based on certificate of the Unions Total live registered workers Total registered workers

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
30 | P a g e  
 
contained the information supplied27 by the employers for whom the worker has done the 
work, verification of which was not possible in the absence of any record. It was also seen 
that certificates for ineligible works other than building and other construction work viz., 
farm work, grass cutting work were issued by the Unions. Also, test -checked LOs/LI did 
not verify or make enquiries to find out whether the signatures of these employers were 
genuine or these employers had even got the work done at all. Further, LOs did not enquire, 
inspect, register and collect cess from the eligible establishments based on these 
certificates, making it susceptible to submit false information in the certificates.  
Furthermore, possibly to avoid the scrutiny by LOs, it was observed in 166 test -checked 
service continuity certificates  issued by various unions to workers that 808 construction 
works were mentioned, none of which were registered with the Labour Office.  
The above observations point towards weak controls in registering construction workers.  
Assistant Controller (F inance & Account) of the Board conducted inspection  
(August 2021) of the LI Hamirpur and noticed irregularities in work certificates issued by 
Unions, such as work certificate issued for farm work, grass cutting work, two work 
certificates issued for a worker of overlapping period by two different Unions mentioning 
different private works etc. He concluded that these irregularities demonstrate issuance of 
fraudulent certificates without any record and authenticity on the part of the Unions.  
To confirm the above findings, Audit conducted Inspection -cum-Beneficiary Survey in 
test-checked LOs/LI of 71 registered beneficiaries  (LO Bilaspur: 30, LO Kullu: 16, LI 
Hamirpur: 25) selected randomly from the records, who were registered on the basis of 90 
days’ work certificate provided by the Unions. Findings are discussed below: 
(I) 47 beneficiaries (66 per cent) admitted that they were not engaged in any building 
and other construction work and were employed such as under the State Government, 
having private businesses, working as private school teacher etc. One beneficiary 
was working as truck driver in neighboring State for the last 20 years and one 
beneficiary denied to ever having applied for the registration.  
(II) Out of the above 47 beneficiaries, 14 beneficiaries (30  per cent ) had applied for 
welfare benefits under various Welfare Schemes  implemented by the Board. Of 
which, nine beneficiaries had received welfare benefits as of April 2023.  
(III) Out of 71 beneficiaries surveyed, 24 beneficiaries (34  per cent) stated that they did 
not receive Identity Cards from the LOs/LI Office. However, as per record of LOs/LI, 
Identity Cards had been issued to all the registered beneficiaries and Identity Cards 
of workers registered through Unions were given to Unions. 
These observations point towards the fact that the rule for registration of workers was being 
misused and the registrations based on employment certificates provided by Unions could 
 
27  Information of work done, address, cost of work and period of work done along with signature or thumb 
impressions of employers. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
31 | P a g e  
 
not be considered genuine and registration of bogus/ineligible beneficiaries could not be 
ruled out in Audit. Ineligible beneficiaries were being registered and they were also 
disbursed benefits, which points to lack of internal control as ineffective checks were 
exercised by the Board/LOs both at the time of registration as well as at the time of release 
of benefits. 
LO Bilaspur and LI Hamirpur confirmed the facts and stated (February 2023) that due to 
shortage of staff and heavy workload, it is not possible to check employer details. They 
further added that there is also no provision in HPBOCW Rules, 2008 to verify the records 
of the Unions.  
The reply was not acceptable as being the Authori sed Officer, they are responsible for 
scrutiny and analysis of the details provided in the applications for registration so as to 
avoid registration of ineligible workers. 
In the Exit Conference, the Board officials stated (October 2023) that registration through 
the Unions has been dispensed with.  
2.3.5.3  Registration of beneficiaries without obtaining any documents 
Rule 266 (1) to (3) of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 states that every building worker who has 
completed 18 years of age but has not completed 60 years of age and who is not a member 
in any other welfare fund established under any law for the time being in force and who 
has completed 90 days of service as a  building worker in the year immediately preceding 
shall be eligible for the membership in the F und. A certificate to prove age shall also be 
submitted along with the application.  Certificate or wage slip or appointment letter from 
the employer or contractor that the applicant is a construction worker shall be produced 
along with the application for registration. 
Audit observed that an inquiry against the LI Theog for registration of workers without 
documents had been started by the Labour Commissioner, Himachal Pradesh, Shimla. The 
Board had released (through RTGS) COVID -19 financial assistance 28 of ₹ 12.06 lakh to 
201 number of workers, out of which an amount of ₹ 11.44 lakh was disbursed to workers, 
who were registered in the month of April 2020 by the LO Shimla on information provided 
by LI Theog, Shimla. These workers were registered without requisite valid documents 
(job certificate from registered employer, Birth Certificate, etc.). The Board had also failed 
to obtain the requisite documents from LO concerned at a later stage. Thus, the payment 
released to the concerned beneficiaries was fraught with the risk of payments to ineligible 
beneficiaries.  
The Board stated (March 2023)  that there was no mechanism or software through which 
these errors could be detected. Also, the focus was on providing maximum assistance for 
survival during outbreak. Thus, it was not possible to check the errors at that particular 
 
28  Three instalments of ₹ 2,000/- in April, May and July 2020 to each registered beneficiary of the Board.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
32 | P a g e  
 
time. However, the LO Shimla informed that the matter involves financial embezzlement 
and the Board (February 2023) had taken up the matter with Labour Commissioner for 
conducting Preliminary Inquiry in the matter, which is still awaited. The Department stated 
(May 2023) that Joint Labour Commissioner had submitted the Inquiry Report before the 
Labour Commissioner and the Report is under consideration.  
The registration and disbursement of welfare assistance without even obtaining the 
documents as stipulated under the Rules shows failure of the concerned Authorised Officer 
to perform their duties and responsibilities. Had the LO Shimla been vigilant at the time of 
disbursement of the first instalment, the subsequent disbursal of instalments could have 
been prevented. This also gives scope for misuse of the schemes that are intended for the 
entitled beneficiaries by diverting benefits to ineligible/fraudulent claimants. 
2.3.5.4  Non-obtaining the work / service continuity certificate or undertaking on 
yearly basis 
Section 14 of the Act  provides that the building worker who has been registered as a 
beneficiary under this Act shall cease to be as such when he attains the age of 60 years or 
when he is not engaged in building or other construction work for not less than 90 days in 
a year. 
Rule 267 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 originally stated that (1) a beneficiary of the Fund 
shall contribute to the F und ₹ 20/ - per mensem. This contribution shall be remitted in 
advance once in three months in any of the banks specified by the Board in the District in 
which the member resides. (2) If a beneficiary commits default in the payment of 
contribution continuously for a period of one year, he shall cease to be a beneficiary of the 
Fund. 
However, the State Government modified Rule 267 (May 2013 ) and st ated that a 
beneficiary of the F und shall contribute ₹ nine to the F und only for three years. Thus, 
beneficiary’s membership is for three years and additional one year if he defaults on 
payment of contribution, which was against the Act ibid as the workers did not have the 
impetus or the wherewithal to submit certificate annually.  
In the test-checked LOs/LI29, Audit noticed that work/service continuity certificate was not 
obtained from the beneficiary/registered workers on yearly basis but practice of obtaining 
the same from the beneficiary when they applied for any type of welfare assistance was 
observed, which is indicative of the fact that the process is not fol lowed regularly by the 
office as obtaining service continuity certificate is a continuous process.  
2.3.6  Non-entering the details of construction work in Identity Cards 
Section 13 of the Act states  that (1) the Board shall give to every beneficiary an identity 
card with his photograph duly affixed thereon and with enough space for entering the 
 
29  LO Bilaspur, LO Kullu and LI Hamirpur. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
33 | P a g e  
 
details of the building or other construction work done by him. (2) Every employer shall 
enter in the identity card the details of the building or other construction work done by the 
beneficiary and authenticate the same and return it to the beneficiary.  
Rule 266 (8) of the HPBOCW Rules , 2008 stipulates that the Secretary of the Board or 
other officer authorised by him in this behalf shall issue to every beneficiary an identity 
card with a photo of the beneficiary affixed in Form- XXXII and maintain a register of 
identity cards so issued in Form- XXXIII.  
The Board prescribed the Identity Card that contains Part I to IV. These parts include: 
Part I Complete detail of registered beneficiary  
Part II Subscription and renewal of the registration 
Part III Detail of building or other construction work done by the beneficiary  
Part IV Detail of welfare assistance/schemes disbursed to registered beneficiaries 
In the test -checked LOs/LI, Audit noticed that  the details of the building and other 
construction work done by the beneficiary were not being entered in Part-III of the Identity 
Card by the employers.  
Details mentioned in the service continuity certificate submitted by the beneficiaries to the 
LOs/LI were not based on the employment record entered in the Identity Card. The LOs/LI 
neither pointed out the shortcomings in the Identity Cards nor verified the details of 
continuity certificates.  
While confirming the facts LO Kullu stated (December 2022)  that matter pertains to 
employer and beneficiary. LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that due to shortage of staff 
and rush of work it could not be ensured that the details of work were being entered in the 
Identity Card. 
Replies were not acceptable as it was the responsibility of the LOs/LI or Authori sed 
Officers to ensure that the details of construction work are being entered in Identity Card 
by the employers so that renewal of membership and genuineness of workers for availing 
welfare benefits could be ensured.  
2.4 Assessment, Collection and Transfer of Cess 
The Cess Act, 1996 is enacted with a view to augment the resources of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards constituted under Section 18(1) of the Act.  
The Cess Act is applicable  to the employer (Government, Public and Private Sector) 
engaged in building or other construction works. In exercise of powers conferred by Sub 
Section 1 of Section 14 of the Cess Act , the Central Government has framed the Building 
and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 (hereinafter referred as “the 
Cess Rules”).  
The Government of Himachal Pradesh vide Notification (April 2009) appointed Labour 
Officers as Cess Collector-cum-Assessing Officers and Labour Commissioner as Appellate 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
34 | P a g e  
 
Authority for the purpose of the Cess Act. The State Government vide Direction30 issued 
on 12 August 2009, instructed that an employer is required to deposit one per cent cess31 
of the cost of construction occurred by him on the construction work or construction project 
with the cess collector of the area.  
As per Rule 6 of the Cess Rules, 1998, every employer, within 30 days of commencement 
of his work o r payment of cess, as the case may be, furnish to the Assessing Officer 
information in Form-I 32. Rule 7 states that the Assessing Officer, on receipt of information 
in Form-I shall make an order of assessment within a period not exceeding six months from 
the date of receipt of such information, indicating the amount of cess payable by the 
employer. Rules 4 and 5  provide that Employer should deposit the cess amount with the 
Board with intimation to concerned LO and the Board and collection charges, as per Rule 
5(2), not exceeding one per cent of cess amount shall be deducted by the Employer.  
Flow Chart of the information of assessment, collection and transfer of cess between 
employer/contractor, LO and the Board is as follows: 
 
2.4.1 Mechanism for assessment of cess  
Section 5(1) of the Cess Act, 1996 and Rule 7 of the Cess Rules, 1998  provides that the 
Assessing Officer, on receipt of information in Form-I from an employer shall make a 
scrutiny of such information furnished and, if he is satisfied about the correctness of the 
particulars so furnished, he shall make an order of assessment within a period not exceeding 
six months from the date of receipt of s uch information in Form I, indicating the amount 
of cess payable by the employer. 
Audit findings are discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
 
30  Letter no. L&E 6-12/2008-(Lab)vol-V dated 12.08.2009.  
31  Out of the applicable cess amount, 99 per cent of the cess amount is to be deposited in the Fund and 
rest one per cent of the cess amount is to be deposited in the Treasury within seven days from its receipt 
by the Cess Collector.  
32  Form-I contains information regarding establishment such as name of establishment, address, name of 
work, no. of workers employed, date of commencement of work, estimated period and cost of work, 
stages of work, details of payment of cess, deduction at source. 
THE BOARD 
1. FORM I                                               
2. INTIMATION OF CESS DEPOSITED 
3. COLLECTION CHARGES 
 LABOUR 
OFFICER 
ASSESSMENT ORDER 
EMPLOYER/ 
CONTRACTOR 
1. COPY OF 
ASSESSMENT ORDER 
2. INFORMATION 
OF CESS COLLECTED  
1. TRANSFER OF CESS AMOUNT                                     
2. INTIMATION OF CESS DEPOSITED 


Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
35 | P a g e  
 
2.4.1.1 Non-obtaining of Form-I on account of cess 
Section 4 of the Cess Act, 1996 states that (1) every employer shall furnish such return to 
such officer or authority, in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed. (2) If any 
person carrying on the building or other construction work, liable to pay the cess, fails to 
furnish any return, the officer or the authority shall give a notice requiring such person to 
furnish such return before such date as may be specified in the notice. 
As per Rule 6 of the Cess Rules,  1998, every employer, within thirty days of 
commencement of his work or payment of cess, as the case may be, furnish to the Assessing 
Officer, information in Form-I. 
 Rule 7(5) states that if the employer fails to furnish information in Form  I, the Assessing 
Officer shall proceed to make the assessment on the basis of available records, and other 
information incidental thereto. 
Audit observed that in the two test -checked LOs, out of 35 number of establishments 33 
registered under the Act during 2017-22, none of the establishments had submitted Form-
I to the LO concerned. The LOs neither issued notice as per Section 4 ibid to these 
employers nor took any action for obtaining the same and in absence of Form -I, the LOs 
did not proceed to make assessment as per Rule 7(5) ibid, which provides for assessment 
on the basis of available records and other information and it was left to the employers to 
remit the cess to the Board.  
LO Bilaspur confirmed the facts and stated (February 2023) that due to scarcity of the staff 
and heavy rush of work, Form -I could not be obtained while LO Kullu stated 
(February 2023) that employers do submit Form-I for registration of establishment.  
The reply  of LO Kullu  is not acceptable as Form -I under HPBOCW Rules, 2008 for 
registration of construction works was being submitted by the employers whereas 
abovementioned Form -I under the Cess Rules , 1998  containing information about 
estimated cost of construction and cess amount deposited to the Board was not being 
submitted by these employers.  
2.4.1.2 Absence of mechanism for ensuring timely assessment of cess 
Section 4(1) of the Cess Act, 1996  states that every employer shall furnish such return to 
such officer or authority, in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed. 
Section 5(1) states that the officer or authority to whom or to which the return has been 
furnished shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit and 
after satisfying himself or itself that the particulars stated in the return are correct, by order, 
assess the amount of cess payable by the employer. 
 
33  LO Bilaspur: 14 and LO Kullu: 21. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
36 | P a g e  
 
As per Rule 7 (1) of Cess Rules, 1998, the Assessing Officer, on receipt of information in 
Form-I from the employer shall make an order of assessment within a period not exceeding 
six months from the date of receipt of such information in Form-I.  
Audit observed that during the period 2017-22, an amount of ₹ 407.74 crore was received 
by the Board on account of cess from establishments/employers as depicted in Chart 2.5. 
Chart 2.5: Cess deposited with the Board during 2017-22 
 
 Source: Figures supplied by the Board.  
Audit further observed that only six Assessment Orders34 amounting to ₹ 12.91 lakh were 
issued by the Assessing Officers in the State. These Assessment Orders were for private 
construction sites and raised an additional demand for the amount of ₹  11.91 lakh 35. 
However, the Board did not have any information  whether the assessed amount of cess 
vide these Assessment Orders had been deposited by the employers in the Fund or not. 
Thus, the cess amount of ₹  407.6136 crore was deposited without any Assessment Orders 
and remitted by the employers at their own initiative and based on their calculation. 
In the two test-checked LOs, the employers/contractors had remitted cess of ₹ 40.9637 crore 
during 2017-22 without issuing any Assessment Orders during the same period as depicted 
in the Chart 2.6. 
 
34  Solan: three (one Assessment Order with zero amount), ₹ 9.84 lakh, Una: one, ₹ 1.84 lakh, Chamba: 
one, ₹ 0.42 lakh, Shimla: one, ₹ 0.81 lakh. 
35  Cess amounting to ₹ 1.00 Lakh had already been deposited by one establishment under LO Solan 
jurisdiction.  
36  Total cess amount (₹ 407.74 crore) – Assessed Amount (₹ 0.13 crore) = Cess amount deposited without 
assessment (₹ 407.61 crore). 
37  LO Bilaspur: ₹ 8.12 crore, LO Kullu: ₹ 32.84 crore. 
68.85 67.67
82.11 85.25
103.86
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Amount in crore
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
37 | P a g e  
 
Chart 2.6: Details of cess collected/remitted in test-checked units during 2017-22 
 
Source: Figures supplied by LO Kullu and figures obtained from Register of Cess of LO Bilaspur.  
LO Bilaspur stated (February 2023) that it is the duty of employer to deposit the cess within 
thirty days of completion of construction. LO Kullu stated (February 2023) that they had 
shortage of staff and no technical assistance was extended by the Board as well as the 
Department to facilitate the process of assessment of cess. The Board stated (April 2023) 
that due to shortage of staff and having no control over the LOs of the Department, the 
matter has not been scrutinised. Further, the Board had planned for the creation of Cess 
Collection Portal in which all the functions may be developed. The Department stated  
(March 2023) that the matter regarding collection of cess without assessment pertains to 
LO concerned.  
Absence of mechanism for ensuring submission of returns by employer compounded by 
non-issue of assessment orders is a reflection of the tardy implementation of the Act/Rules 
by the State Government. This puts onus of depositing and correctness of cess amount only 
on the employer, with no independent verification of the same by the Departmental 
Authorities. In absence of assessment of cess, actual amount of cess reali sable could not 
be ascertained in Audit. Resul tantly, loss of revenue to the F und and Government 
exchequer could not be ruled out. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) to call for explanation on 
non-issuing of Assessment Orders from the LO Kullu and LO Bilaspur.  
2.4.1.3 Absence of mechanism for assessment of cess recoverable from Local Bodies 
Rule 4(4) of the Cess Rules,1998 provides that where the approval of a construction work 
by a local authority is required, every application for such approval shall be accompanied 
by a crossed demand draft in favour of the Board and payable at the station at which the 
Board is located for an amount of cess payable at the notified rates on the estimated cost 
of construction. 
Audit noticed that 1271 number of Building Plans38 were approved by the test -checked 
Local Bodies i.e., MC Kullu, MC Bilaspur, MC Hamirpur and TCP Manali during 2017-22. 
 
38  MC Bilaspur: 116, MC Hamirpur: 379, MC Kullu: 254, TCP Manali: 522.  
3.6
1.37 0.60
2.28
0.27
8.42
4.36
8.58
6.55
4.92
0
2
4
6
8
10
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Amount in crore
Bilaspur Kullu

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
38 | P a g e  
 
Neither the estimated cost of construction nor the cess details were mentioned/attached in 
the Building Plans submitted for approval. While approving the Building Plans, these Local 
Bodies neither collected any cess from the applicant nor shared the details of number of 
approved Building Plans with the concerned LOs.  
Executive Officers, MC Bilaspur, MC Hamirpur and MC Kullu and Town Country Planner 
Manali stated (December 2022, January, February 2023) that there is no provision for 
collection of cess in the Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning (HPTCP) Act and 
Rules.  
Replies point towards the failure of the State Government to incorporate the provisions of 
the Cess Act and Rules in the HPTCP Act and Rules, since the Cess Act and Rules have 
provisions for the Local Bodies to collect the cess while this is absent in the HPTCP Act 
and Rules. Further, the State Government should have issued instructions to the Local 
Bodies to share information of Building Plans approved by the Local Bodies with the 
concerned LOs.  
2.4.2  Issues relating to maintenance of data 
2.4.2.1 Absence of establishment/employer wise database on account of cess 
Rule 24 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides that the Registering Officer shall maintain 
a register in Form-III39 showing the particulars of the establishments in relation to which 
certificate of registration have been issued by him. 
A total of 2,267 establishments 40 were registered with all 12 LOs concerned as of March 
2022. Audit observed that the Board had not maintained establishment wise/employer wise 
records with details of name of establishment, management of establishment, address, date 
of registration, registration no. under HPBOCW Rules, 2008 and project cost, date of start 
of construction work, period of work completion, advance cess deposited, cess deposited 
with date, cess assessed/ pending, etc. 
In the test-checked LOs41, it was observed that Register of Establishments in the Form-III 
had been prepared and Register of Cess Collection was maintained, but they had not 
consolidated establishment -wise data of cess collected which would help in 
reconciliation/final assessment of cess.  
The Board stated (March 2023) that they had maintained the record of number of registered 
establishments as per information given by the concerned LOs in their reporting format 
 
39  Form-III contains information to be entered in register regarding registration no. and date, name, address 
of the construction site, name of employer and his address, nature of work, name and permanent address 
of the establishments, probable date of commen cement of work, maximum no. of workers to be 
employed on any day, probable duration and date of completion of work. 
40  LO Baddi: 185, LO Bilaspur: 172, LO Chamba: 159, LO Kangra: 193, LO Kinnaur: 115, LO Kullu: 77, 
LO Mandi: 278, LO Sirmour at Nahan: 137, LO Rampur: 92, LO Shimla: 169, LO Solan: 334, LO Una: 
273 and LI Hamirpur: 83. 
41  LO Bilaspur and LO Kullu. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
39 | P a g e  
 
every month. LO Kullu and LO Bilaspur stated (February, March 2023) that due to extreme 
workload and lack of staff, it was difficult to maintain such data. In future, best efforts will 
be made in this regard.  
The reply is not acceptable since had the above cited database been maintained by the 
Board/LO concerned, it would have helped in assessment and reconciliation of cess and 
determining date of completion of project and due date of depositing cess accordingly as 
difference of ₹ 226.52 crore was noticed due to non -reconciliation of cess as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.4.3.2.  
2.4.2.2 Absence of uniform format for submitting cess details by the cess deductors 
Section 3(2) of Cess Act, 1996  provides that cess shall be collected from every employer 
including deduction at source in relation to a building or other construction work of a 
Government or of a public sector undertaking or advance collection through a local 
authority where an approva l of such building or other construction work by such local 
authority is required, as may be prescribed. Rule 261(1)(b) of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008  
states that the Board shall be responsible for laying down policies for the  deposits of the 
amount of the Fund.  
Audit noticed absence of any uniform format for submitting cess details by the cess 
deductors such as PWD, HIMUDA 42 etc., who had deducted cess at source or collected 
cess in relation to a building or other construction work and were depositing the cess with 
the Board from time to time and sending the information to Labour Office as well as the 
Board. However, in the absenc e of a uniform format, the information supplied by the 
deductors was not uniform and contained only the amount of cess deposited and, in a few 
cases, the mode of transfer, name of contractor, period of cess deducted.  
The Board in respect of uniform format for intimation by cess deductors stated  (February 
2023) that such format is to be devised by the Labour and Employment Department. 
The r eply is not acceptable as the Board was facing issues such as non -reconciliation, 
incomplete information about jurisdiction of establishments etc. in the absence of such 
format as discussed in Paragraph 2.4.3.4. It is the responsibility of the Board as per Rule 
261(1)(b) of HPBOCW Rules, 2008, which provides the power to the Board for laying 
down policies for the deposit of the amount of the Fund.  
2.4.3 Collection and transfer of collected cess 
Rule 4 of the Cess Rules, 1998  states that the cess levied shall be paid by an employer, 
within thirty days of completion of the construction project or within thirty days of the date 
on which assessment of cess payable is finalised, whichever is earlier, to the cess collector. 
 
42  Himachal Pradesh Housing and Urban Development Authority (HIMUDA) . 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
40 | P a g e  
 
Rule 5(1)  provides that the proceeds of the cess collected shall be transferred by such 
Government office, Public Sector Undertakings, local authority, or cess collector, to the 
Board along with the form of challan prescribed (and in the head of account of the Board) 
under the accounting procedures of the State, by whatever name they are known. 
Audit findings with regard to collection and reconciliation of cess by the Board are 
discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
2.4.3.1 Loss of income due to non-revalidation of cheques and demand drafts 
Scrutiny of Balance Sheet of the Board  for the year 2021 -22 
revealed that an amount of ₹  4.20 crore was shown as 
recoverable from LOs. The amount was not realised from 
Cheques and Demand Drafts remitted by the 
LOs/establishments to the Board on account of cess during the 
period 2014-19, as these were dishonored by the Banks due to 
difference in titles, insufficient funds , outdated/stale instruments,  alterations in cheque 
requiring full signature etc. Accordingly, the Board had returned these Cheques to the 
LOs/sender concerned for correction/ revalidation, but these Cheques were not received 
back from the LOs as of November 2022. The Board had directed the LOs for 
revalidation/correction of the Cheques and to send new Cheques in place of the dishonored 
Cheques by the concerned establishments. But fresh Cheques/DDs amounting to 
₹ 4.20 crore were not obtained by the LOs. Thus, cess of ₹ 4.20 crore remained unrealised 
as of March 2022.  
The Board stated  (December 2022) that Cheques and Demand Drafts were not received 
from the establishments by the Board. These were routed through Labour Offices as LOs 
are appointed by the Government as Authorised Officers for the Board, who are not under 
direct control of the Board. The Board had requested LOs concerned from time to time for 
reconciliation of these Cheques.  
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that although the LOs are not under the 
control of the Board, they should have taken up the matter with the Labour and 
Employment Department to revalidate or receive fresh Cheques/DDs. Further, the LOs, 
being appointed as the Cess Collectors by the Government, it is their responsibility to 
ensure proper collection and transfer of the cess amount to the Board.  
2.4.3.2 Non-reconciliation of cess  
The Secretary of the Board issued (August 2018)  instructions to all the Departments, 
Corporations, Private Firms/Agencies/Contractors, etc. to transfer the cess collected by 
them to the Board electronically through RTGS/NEFT 43 in the Board’s Bank account. 
 
43  Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) . 
CHEQUES / DEMAND 
DRAFTS OF ₹ 4.20 CRORE ON 
ACCOUNT OF CESS WERE 
PENDING FOR REVALIDATION.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
41 | P a g e  
 
While transferring the funds through RTGS/NEFT, information was to be sent to the Board 
as well as the LO concerned for reconciliation of accounts. 
Audit noticed that  the above process of intimation to LOs as well as the Board was not 
followed and hence, there was huge difference in data provided by the Board of cess 
collected/deposited in the Board’s bank account and cess collection details provided by the 
LOs during the period 2017-22 as depicted in the Chart 2.7. 
Chart 2.7: Cess collection details provided by the Board and LOs 
 
Source: Information provided by LOs and the Board 
It can be seen from the Chart 2.7 that there was difference of ₹ 226.52 crore in cess figures 
of the period 2017-22. The difference was because the information about deposition of cess 
in the Board’s account was not provided to the LO concerned. The cess was accounted for 
in the Board’s accounts but not in the LOs’ accounts and sho ws that the accounts of the 
Board were not reconciled with the accounts of LOs. The Board has not taken any action 
for making Labour Officer-wise database for the above period.  
The Board stated (December 2022) that no mechanism has been developed to reconcile the 
cess collected at the Board or at Labour and Employment Department.  
The non-development of cess reconciliation process demonstrates the failure of the Board 
and the Department to formulate an integrated system of cess collection and reconciliation. 
In the absence of information about cess deposited by the employer, the con cerned Cess 
Collector-cum-Labour Officer could not verify whether the due amount of cess was 
deposited by the employer/ establishment or not. 
2.4.3.3 Cess deducted but not deposited in the Fund 
Rule 5 of the Cess Rules , 1998 provides that the proceeds of the cess collected shall be 
transferred by cess collecting authorities to the Board within 30 days of its collection under 
the accounting procedures of the State. 
68.85 67.67
82.11 85.25
103.86
44.75
30.76 36.57
28.7
40.44
24.10
36.91
45.54
56.55 63.42
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Cess amount in crore
Details provided by Board Details provided by Labour Offices Difference

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
42 | P a g e  
 
Audit noticed during test -check of records of MCs, that MC Manali,  District Kullu had 
incurred expenditure of ₹ 8.26 crore for the purpose of construction and repair/maintenance 
of various development works during 2017-22. The office had deducted one per cent cess 
from each bill of contractor amounting to ₹  8.26 lakh during 2017-22 but the amount was 
kept in the bank account  of the MC Office and not deposited with the Board and 
Government Treasury as of March 2023. Also, the office has maintained Cess Register 
only from April 2020 onwards.   
The MC Manali stated that the amount of cess had not been deposited with the Board and 
due to shortage of manpower record could not be maintained (December 2022). LO Kullu 
stated (May 2023) that notice will be served to the Executive Officer, MC Manali in this 
regard.  
2.4.3.4 Shortcomings noticed in transfer of cess by the cess deductors 
Section 3(2) of Cess Act, 1996  provides that cess shall be collected from every employer 
including deduction at source for construction work of Government/PSUs or advance 
collection through a local authority.  
Audit noticed that the cess deductors were depositing the cess with the Board from time to 
time. However, the information provided by the cess deductors lacks the complete details 
of individual construction works/establishments and the Board office could n ot reconcile 
the amount of cess deposited and as a result following shortcomings were noticed. 
Table 2.2: Details of cess deposited without complete information during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Shortcomings 
Amount of 
cess/ no. of 
establishments 
Reply of the Board 
Jurisdiction of LO concerned 
not known 13.24 / 28 
The Board stated  (December 2022) that it had 
contacted the Bank Authorities for providing 
details but only name of establishment and bank 
branch was provided and not the complete details 
of depositors. 
Cess kept in Suspense Head due 
to lack of information about 
establishments / employers 
112.39/NA* 
The Board stated  (November 2022) that the 
information pertains to LOs but the reply from 
LOs is awaited. 
Lack of  information about 
establishment/construction 
work in the intimation letters 
received from the Works 
Executing Agencies 
2.37/NA* 
The Board stated  (January 2023) that Section 22 
of the Act, which defines the function of the 
Board, is not related to the Cess Collection or 
assessment etc. Further, matter is related with 
Labour Officer -cum-Cess Collector -cum-
Assessment officer who are not working under the 
control of the Board. And from bank statement it 
is not possible to find out the exact required 
information regarding cess. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
43 | P a g e  
 
Shortcomings 
Amount of 
cess/ no. of 
establishments 
Reply of the Board 
Cess deposited  in the Board’s 
account with Collection 
Charges44 
1.39 (Cess: 
₹ 1.38 crore, 
Collection 
Charges: ₹ 0.01 
crore) / 41 
The Board stated  (February 2023) that 
responsibility of collection of cess and deduction 
of collection charges lies with the LOs of Labour 
and Employment Department and matter pertains 
to Labour and Employment Department. 
* Detail of the number of establishments is not available.  
The replies are not acceptable as the Board has not made any efforts to clear the huge 
amount kept in Suspense Head and even directions were not issued to cess deductors to 
provide complete information of the establishments. Also, the Board was not transferring 
the collection charges to the Government Treasury during 2017 -22. Collection Charges 
amounting to ₹ one lakh were noticed during test-check of records of the Board which were 
not deposited in the Government Treasury. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the Board that proper 
information be collected regarding units and place from where cess is being deposited and 
Suspense Head may be cleared. 
2.4.3.5 Delay in deposition of cess by the Government Works Executing Agencies 
with the Board 
Rule 5 of the Cess Rules,1998 provides that the cess collected shall be transferred by cess 
collecting authorities to the Board within 30 days of its collection. 
Rule 12 stipulates that an Assessing Officer, if it appears to him that an employer has not 
paid the cess within the date as specified in the assessment order or has paid less cess, 
including the cess deducted at source or paid in advance, shall issue a notice to such 
employer that it shall be deemed to be in arrears and such Assessing Officer may, after 
such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on such employer, a penalty not exceeding such amount 
of cess. 
Audit observed that  the Government Works Executing Agencies (PWD, HIMUDA etc.) 
are deducting cess from the bills of contractors at the time of payment of bill and are 
depositing the accumulated cess amount by a single transfer through RTGS, Cheque or 
Bank Demand Draft in the Board’s bank accounts along with the intimation to the Boa rd. 
In the test -checked Works Executing Agencies45, it was noticed that cess amounting to 
₹ 5.14 crore46 was deposited with a delay ranging from one to 420 days during 2017-22.  
Also, the Board/LOs had neither taken any action nor issued any instructions to the Works 
Executing Agencies to deposit the cess within the prescribed time limit.  
 
44  Collection Charges are to be collected at the rate of one per cent of the cess  collected and are to be 
deposited in the Government Treasury.  
45  PWD Kullu, PWD Banjar, PWD Ghumarwin, PWD Barsar. 
46  LO Bilaspur: ₹ 3.22 crore, LO Kullu: ₹ 1.92 crore. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
44 | P a g e  
 
Further, as no Assessment Orders for these construction works were issued by the 
Assessing Officers and so the last date for deposition of cess was not specified and penalties 
for delays in deposit of the cess demanded could not be ascertained by Audit.  
The Board stated (February 2023) that such matter pertains to Labour Commissioner of the 
Department as Labour Officers -cum-Cess Collector-cum-Assessing Officer are working 
under the control of the Labour Commissioner.  
The reply is not acceptable as the amount was to be deposited in the Board’s bank account, 
so it was the duty of the Board to coordinate with the Department for timely deposit of 
cess. 
2.5 Health and Safety Norms  
Chapter VII of the Act provides for safety and health measures to be adopted by the 
employers and stipulates power of appropriate Government to make rules for the safety 
and health of building and other construction workers. Rule 296 of the HPBOCW  Rules, 
2008 stipulates the powers of inspectors to inspect construction sites for safety, health and 
welfare of building workers.  
2.5.1 Inspection of Accident Sites  
Section 39 of the Act provides that (1) where in any establishment an accident occurs which 
causes death or which causes any bodily injury by reason of which the person injured is 
prevented from working for a period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following 
the accident, or which is of such a nature as may be prescribed, the employer shall give 
notice thereof to such authority, in such form and within such time as may be prescribed. 
(2) On receipt of a notice the authority may make such an investigation or inquiry as i t 
considers necessary.  
Section 47 provides that whoever contravenes the provisions of any rules for safety and 
health of building workers shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or w ith 
both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention continues 
after conviction for the first such contravention. 
Audit noticed that in the test-checked LOs, intimation regarding 10 accidental deaths47 due 
to accidental fall from bridge, electrocution, boulder falling on worker etc. at six 
construction sites was received by the concerned LOs from the employers. It was noticed 
that in three construction sites, neither the concerned LOs nor the concerned LI had 
conducted inspections prior to or even after the accidents. The LOs/LI had not conducted 
any investigation or inquiry after the accidents to find out cause of accidents. As a result, 
there would be no scope for pointing out lack of safety measures at these construction sites 
 
47  LO Kullu: eight deaths at five construction sites, LO Bilaspur: two deaths at one construction site.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
45 | P a g e  
 
or correcting them and initiating appropriate action/prosecution of employer under Section 
47 of the Act ibid.  
LO Kullu did not state in his/her reply (May 2023) whether inspections of these sites were 
conducted or not and Audit also did not find any inspection reports for these construction 
sites. LO Bilaspur failed to provide any Inspection Reports after stating (April 2023) that 
the inspections were conducted.  
Inspections of these construction sites, prior to accident, regarding safety and health of 
building workers would have helped in raising safety standards at these construction sites 
and could have prevented such accidents in future. Further, during Joint P hysical 
Inspection of 26 sites, it was noticed that eight construction sites  had not provided any 
safety equipment to workers as discussed in the succeeding Paragraph. 
2.5.2 Lack of facilities observed during Joint Physical Inspection 
Audit conducted Joint Physical Inspection of 26 numbers of construction 
sites/establishments during December 2022 to February 2023. Out of which, nine 
establishments were registered, 14 construction sites  were found to be unregistered 
whereas three sites were those where accident had occurred.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
46 | P a g e  
 
Figure 2.1: Details of shortcomings noticed by the Audit during Joint Physical Inspection  
 
It can be seen from the above figure that:  
(I) 69 per cent sites did not have fire safety equipment at sites while 31 per cent sites 
did not provide safety equipment to workers.  
(II) 54 per cent sites had not conducted health check-ups of the workers and 31 per cent 
sites did not have first-aid kit available at the sites.  
(III) Basic amenities such as toilet facilities, shelter facilities and drinking water facility 
were not provided by 23 per cent, eight per cent and four per cent sites respectively.  
During Joint Physical Inspection of construction sites, unhygienic shelters, toilet facilities 
and lack of safety equipment were also noticed as shown in pictures below: 
UNREGISTERED 
SITES 
14 SITES (54%) 
FIRST-AID KIT NOT 
AVAILABLE 
EIGHT SITES (31%) 
REGISTERED 
SITES 
NINE SITES 
(35%) 
HEALTH CHECK-
UPS NOT 
CONDUCTED 
14 SITES (54%) 
SAFETY EQUIPMENT 
NOT PROVIDED  
EIGHT SITES (31%) 
WATER FACILITY 
NOT AVAILABLE 
ONE SITE (4%) 
TOILET 
FACILITY NOT 
PROVIDED 
SIX SITES 
(23%) 
SHELTER 
FACILITY NOT 
PROVIDED 
TWO SITES (8%) 
 NO. OF CONSTRUCTION 
SITES/ 
ESTABLISHMENTS 
INSPECTED  
 
26 SITES 
FIRE SAFETY EQUIPMENT 
NOT AVAILABLE 
18 SITES (69%) 


Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
47 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 2.7: Unhygienic toilet at construction site of 
Badminton Hall, Kullu 
Picture 2.8: Unhygienic toilet at construction site of 
CHC Banjar 
Picture 2.5: Uncovered washroom at construction site 
of overbridge on Sukkar Khad, Hamirpur 
Picture 2.6: Uncovered toilets at construction site of 50 
bedded hospital, Bajoura, Kullu 
Unhygienic toilets at the construction sites 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
48 | P a g e  
 
  
Picture 2.11: Unventilated living quarters with 
bathroom inside the quarters at construction site of 
CHC Banjar 
Picture 2.12: Unventilated living quarters for workers at 
construction site of Government Degree College, 
Gadagushaini, Kullu 
Picture 2.13: Unventilated living quarters at construction site of 50 bedded Ayush Sowa-Rigpa 
Hospital, Bajoura, Kullu 
Picture 2.10: Workers working without safety 
helmets, safety vests, hand gloves at construction 
site of GDC Kullu. 
Picture 2.9: Workers working without helmets, 
safety vests, hand gloves at construction site of Mini 
Secretariat, Ghumarwin, Hamirpur 
Safety equipment not provided to workers 
Unhygienic living quarters of workers at construction site 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
49 | P a g e  
 
In the Exit Conference (October 2023), the Secretary agreed to the audit findings on health 
and safety norms and noted the unhygienic conditions of the construction sites. He agreed 
to take corrective action on the audit findings after discussion with the concerned officials. 
2.6 Departmental Inspections  
Section 42(2) and (3) of the Act  states that the State Government may, by notification, 
appoint a Gazetted Officer of that Government to be the Chief Inspector of Inspection of 
Building and Construction who shall be responsible for effectively carrying out the 
provisions of this Act in the State and shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector under 
this Act throughout the State in relation to establishments for which the State Government 
is the appropriate Government. The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint 
such number of its officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and 
may assign to them such local limits as it may think fit.  
Accordingly, the State Government notified (April 2009 48 ) and appointed Labour 
Commissioner, Himachal Pradesh as “Chief Inspector”,  Joint Labour Commissioner and 
Deputy Labour Commissioner as “Inspector”  for the whole State and appointed Labour 
Officers and Labour Inspectors as “Inspector” within their respective jurisdiction, for the 
purposes of the Act. 
2.6.1  Position of staff for inspections in the State 
Staff strength of the LOs/LIs in the State  who are appointed as Inspector under the Act is 
given in Table 2.3: 
Table 2.3: Staff strength of Inspectors in the State as of March 2022 
Sr. No. Name of the Post Sanctioned Strength Person-in-position Vacancy 
(percentage) 
1 Labour Officer 12 12 0 
2 Labour Inspector 33 25 8 (24) 
Total 45 37 8 
Source: Information supplied by the Department. 
It can be seen that, out of 33 sanctioned posts of the Labour Inspectors in the State, eight 
posts (24 per cent) were vacant under the Department as of March 2022. Shortage of staff 
leads to non-achievement of targets of inspections, non-registration of establishments and 
workers and lack of compliance with health and safety norms as was seen during Joint 
Physical Inspection and Beneficiary Survey and puts extra burden on the existing staff.  
 
 
 
 
48  Notification No. Shram (A)4-6/2007-BOCW-Pt.-II, Dated 30 April 2009. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
50 | P a g e  
 
2.6.2  Inspection of construction sites 
As per Rule 296 of HPBOCW Rules , 2008, an Inspector (LO/LI) may examine the 
construction site or place, or premises used for building or other construction work 
regarding safety, health or welfare of construction workers provided under the Act/Rules.  
The Department has prescribed Inspection Proforma under the Act and the Rules made 
thereunder and has also fixed target of inspections for LOs and LIs. The details of 
inspections conducted by the LOs and LIs are submitted to the Department.  
2.6.2.1  Non-revision of Target  
The targets for inspection were set by the Labour Commissioner of the Department during 
September 2011 after analysing the staff at that time to strengthen the inspection machinery 
by creating new Zones/Circles, since then target of inspection was not revised till date  
(March 2023) whereas construction activities have increased in the State during the period 
as can be seen from increased cess remittance to the Board.  
The Department stated (January 2023) that targets under the Act were to be revised as per 
recommendation/proposal of the Inspecting Authorities/Cess Collectors i.e., LOs and LIs. 
After receiving their proposal, the Department will revise the target. 
The reply is not acceptable as inspections are key aspects of ensuring compliance with the 
Act/Rules as well as Cess Act/Rules to see that all construction works/workers are 
registered and cess is collected. However, no action in this regard was taken by t he 
Department to receive proposals/recommendations from the LOs/LIs. 
2.6.2.2  Shortfall in achievement of target of inspections 
Detail of target for inspection of establishments/construction sites fixed under the Act and 
achievement there against by the LOs/LIs during 2017-22 in the State is as under: 
Table 2.4: Details of inspections conducted by LO/LI in the State 
Year Target of inspections No. of inspections conducted Shortfall (per cent) 
2017-18 1,860 712 1,148 (62) 
2018-19 1,860 705 1,155 (62) 
2019-20 1,860 620 1,240 (67) 
2020-21 1,860 484 1,376 (74) 
2021-22 1,860 448 1,412 (76) 
Total 9,300 2,969 6,331 (68) 
Source: Information provided by the Department.  
Against the total target of 9,300 inspections for the LOs/LIs in the State during 2017 -22, 
only 2,969 inspections (32 per cent) were conducted by the officials and shortfall ranging 
from 62 to 76 per cent was noticed against the Annual Targets.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
51 | P a g e  
 
In selected LOs/LI, shortfall in inspections conducted by LOs and LI was also noticed as 
detailed in the Table 2.5: 
Table 2.5: Details of inspections conducted by LOs and LI in selected LOs/LI during 2017-22 
Name of Unit Target of 
inspections 
No. of inspections 
conducted 
Shortfall  
(per cent) 
Labour Officer Bilaspur 480 56 424 (88) 
Labour Officer Kullu 540 175 365 (68) 
Labour Inspector 
Hamirpur 
240 47 193 (80) 
Total 1,260 278 982 (78) 
Source: Information provided by selected Labour Offices. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.5 that there was a shortfall from 68 to 88  per cent in 
inspections conducted during the period 2017-22 in selected LOs/LI.  
The Department stated (November 2022) that the shortfall of inspections was due to target 
set on higher side. LO Kullu stated (December 2022)  that there are limited number of 
ongoing construction sites in the area and these sites cannot be visited again and again due 
to extreme work pressure and also the post of LI is vacant since 2018. LO Bilaspur stated 
(January 2023) that best efforts are being made to achieve the target. LI Hamirpur stated 
(February 2023) that due to excessive work in the office target of inspection could not be 
achieved.   
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the officers to do the required 
inspections in time and submit the inspection report of each site to the Board for onward 
compilation of the database. 
2.6.2.3  Absence of Inspection Notes/Registers 
Audit noticed that necessary notes in format prescribed by the Department and registers in 
respect of inspections conducted by the Inspecting Authorities in the selected LOs/LI 
offices were not on record and Audit could not ensure whether the inspections were carried 
out or not and progress on the shortcomings pointed out by Inspectors, if any, could not be 
tracked and there is a risk that the entire exercise may be unproductive.  
LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that due to excess (sic) work, the Inspection Register 
could not be maintained. LO Bilaspur  stated (February 2023) that Register/Inspection 
Notes will be maintained in future.  
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary instructed (October 2023) to maintain the Inspection 
Notes by the Inspectors. 
 
 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
52 | P a g e  
 
2.6.2.4  Ineffective system of inspections 
Audit observed following shortcomings in the system of inspections:  
(I) The Department had not made any risk -based assessment according to size of 
construction sites. 
(II) The Department had also not devised  any system to inspect and register large 
construction projects approved by the Local Authorities such as Municipal 
Corporations, Town and Country Planning etc. In fact, the Department did not 
have any mechanism of obtaining/sharing information from other Authorities 
like Local Bodies regarding the projects for which the bodies had given 
approvals, as discussed in Paragraph 2.4.1.3 . 14 unregistered sites were 
noticed during Joint Physic al Inspection conducted by A udit as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.3.3.  
(III) In selected LOs, cases of accidental deaths at worksite were noticed but no 
inspections of these establishments were carried out by the Inspectors as 
discussed in Paragraph 2.5.1. 
2.7 Administration and utilisation of the Fund 
Section 18 of the Act and Rule 251 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides for the constitution 
of the Board to provide welfare measures and facilities to the building and construction 
workers. As per Rule 251(2) of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 the term of office of the 
Chairperson and the members of the Board other than the official members shall be thre e 
years from the date of their appointment, provided that the members may continue in office 
till their successors are appointed.  
The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) first constituted the Board in March 2009  
and subsequently reconstituted it in 2012, 201649, 2018 and 2022.  
Further, Rule 265 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides for constitution of a Fund by the 
name “The Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund” 
which shall be administered by the Board. Section 22 of the Act  provides that the Fund 
shall be utilised for Welfare Schemes  and Section 24 provides for the administrative 
expenditure of the Board.  
The audit observations on the functioning of the Board are given in the succeeding 
Paragraphs.  
2.7.1  Shortfall in holding of the Board meetings 
Rule 253 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides that the Board shall ordinarily meet once 
in two months provided that the Chairperson shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of a 
 
49 Only the Chairman and Employee Representatives were appointed. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
53 | P a g e  
 
requisition in writing from not less than one third of the members of t he Board, call a 
meeting thereof. 
Rule 257 provides that every question considered at a meeting of the Board shall be decided 
by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the event of any equal 
votes, the Chairperson shall have and exercise a casting vote. 
Audit observed that the Board Meetings were not held regularly during 2017-22 as shown 
in Chart 2.8. 
Chart 2.8: Board Meetings held during 2017-22 
 
Source: Information supplied by the Board. 
It can be seen from the Chart 2.8 that out of 30 meetings required to be held during the 
period 2017-22 of the Board, only seven meetings (23 per cent) were held and shortfall of 
23 meetings (77 per cent) was observed. In these meetings, matters regarding approval of 
the budget and expenditure, annual accounts, service matters of the Board, amendment in 
welfare scheme rules, ex -post facto sanction to  expenditure etc. were discussed by the 
Board. However, in the absence of regular meetings, responsibilities envisaged in 
Rule 26150 were not fulfilled as delay in approval of the budget, annual report and annual 
accounts and their submission to the Government was noticed as discussed in the 
succeeding Paragraphs. 
The Board stated (December 2022) that it made all possible efforts to adhere to the schedule 
of their meetings. However, the Board has delegated power to the Secretary and other 
Officers of the Board to discharge statutory functions so that the work of the Board may 
not suffer for want of the Board’s meeting s and the Government has also constituted 
Service Committee to examine the proposals concerning staff strength, pay scales, allied 
matters, etc.  
The reply is not acceptable as all the matters are to be decided under Rule 257 of HPBOCW 
Rules, 2008 by voting of members in the Board meetings, which cannot be circumvented 
 
50  The Board shall be responsible for all matters concerned with the administration of the Fund, laying 
down policies for the deposits of the amount of the Fund, submission of Annual Budget and Annual 
Report on the activities of the Board to Government, proper maintenance of accounts, collection of 
contribution to the Fund, speedy settlement of claims and sanction of advances and other benefits etc.  
0
2
4
6
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
6 6 6 6 6
2
1 1
0
3
4
5 5
6
3
No. of meetings
Meetings required to be held Meetings held Shortfall
30
7
23
Total
meetings
required to
be held
Total
meetings
held
Shortfall

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
54 | P a g e  
 
by delegating the powers to a single official. Further, duties of the Board such as approval 
of annual budget, annual accounts, annual reports etc. fall within its mandate and cannot 
be delegated. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) to convene the Board 
meeting within a fortnight. 
2.7.2 Staff position of the Board 
For smooth functioning of the Board adequate manpower is required and the Board has 
created different categories of posts from time to time, with the permission of Government, 
for execution of the functions of the Board.  
Also, as per Government notification 51  (April 2009) , 12 Labour Officers of the 
Department, were appointed as Registering Officer , Cess Collector , Assessing Officer , 
Inspector and Authorised Officer (August 2010) for the purpose of the Act and Cess Act 
in the State. For Hamirpur District, Labour Inspector is appointed as “Authorised Officer” 
and “Inspector” for the purpose of the Act. The LOs/LIs are performing these duties of 
registration of works and workers, cess assessment and collection and inspection under the 
Act in addition to the regular duties assigned to them by the Department.  
2.7.2.1 Inadequate Human Resource – Vacant posts 
Audit noticed that the Board had a Sanctioned Strength of 196 posts, out of which only 127 
posts were filled, which shows that the Board was not provided with necessary staff. 
Details of Sanctioned Strength and Persons-in-Position of the Board as of March 2022 are 
given in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Details of manpower of the Board as on 31 March 2022 
Sr. 
No. Name of the Post Sanctioned 
Strength Person-in-Position Vacancy 
(percentage) 
1 Secretary-cum-CEO  1 1 0 
2 Assistant Controller (F&A) 1 1 0 
3 Executive Officer 1 1 0 
4 Section Officer (SAS) 1 1 0 
5 Labour Welfare Officer52 12 0 12 (100) 
6 Junior Office Assistant (IT) 23 10 13 (65) 
7 Motivator-cum-Registration 
Assistants 30 28 2 (7) 
8 Ministerial/Other Staff53 127 85 42 (33) 
Total 196 127 69 (35) 
Source: Information supplied by the Board. 
 
51  Notification No.: Shram (A)4-6/2007-BOCW-Pt-II, Dated 30 April 2009. 
52  Posts of LWOs were filled in March 2023. 
53  Personal Assistant, Senior Assistant, Office Assistant, Accountant, Computer Operator, Benefit 
Delivery Assistant/ Data Entry Operators, Clerks, Steno, Drivers, Peons, Chowkidar -cum-Peons, 
Cooks, Mali and Sweeper (Part Time). 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
55 | P a g e  
 
It can be seen from Table 2.6 that out of 196 posts, 69 posts (35 per cent) were lying vacant 
as of March 2022 and posts of LWO and Junior Office Assistant had 100 per cent (as of 
March 2022) and 65 per cent vacancies respectively.  
2.7.2.2 Vacancies in posts of Labour Welfare Officers for long periods 
Twelve posts of LWOs were lying vacant (as shown in Table 2.6) since the date of sanction 
i.e., July 2012. These posts were filled in March 2023 after a lapse of more than 10 years 
by the State Government which adversely affected the registration process of beneficiaries 
and implementation of Welfare Schemes as observed for the period of Audit, because these 
duties were being carried out by the LOs/LIs in addition to their designated duties.  
Shortage of staff had  put an extra burden on the existing staff of the Board and the 
Department.  
2.7.2.3 Key posts held on additional charge  
The Secretary-cum-CEO exercises administrative and financial powers as delegated by the 
Board from time to time, Assistant Controller is responsible for maintenance of finance 
and accounts system of the Board and Section Officer is responsible for scrutiny of welfare 
scheme applications. These key posts were held as additional charge  for 18 months, nine 
months and 22 months respectively during 2017 -22. Also, the post of Section Officer 
remained vacant for 15 months during the same period. Holding these key posts on an 
additional charge basis would have impacted the following processes  of the Board, i.e., 
approval of the Budget, Annual Report and its submission to the State Government and 
sanction of welfare benefits to beneficiaries. Delays in all the above were noticed as 
discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
2.7.2.4 Filling of posts on outsourced basis 
Most of the posts in the Board are filled on outsourced basis as detailed in Table 2.7.  
Table 2.7: Details of mode of appointment of staff of the Board as of March 2022 
Mode of appointment Sanctioned 
Strength Persons-in-Position Vacancy 
(per cent) 
Regular/additional/secondment basis 45 16 29 (64) 
Outsourced basis 147 110 37 (25) 
NIC outsourced 4 1 3 (75) 
Total 196 127 69 (35) 
Source: Information supplied by the Board. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.7 that against the Sanctioned Strength of 196 posts, as 
many as 147 posts (75 per cent) were sanctioned to be filled on outsourced basis and even 
out of these, 37 posts (25 per cent) were lying vacant. The majority of the work at the 
Board and in the field, offices is managed by the outsourced staff. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
56 | P a g e  
 
The Board stated (January 2023)  that the requisition for filling up the post of LWOs was 
sent to Himachal Pradesh Public Service Commission (HPPSC) vide letter dated 
September 2020 and the matter was sub -judice. But t hese posts were finally filled in  
March 2023. 
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the Board started the process of filling 
up the post of LWO only in 2020 after a delay of almost eight years from the date of 
sanction and the work of the Board has suffered due to shortage of staff as disc ussed in 
succeeding Paragraphs and Paragraph 2.3.  
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) that a review be done of the 
outsourced employees before renewal.  
2.7.3 State Advisory Committee  
Section 4 of the Act provides that the State Government shall constitute a committee to be 
called the State Building and Other Construction Workers Advisory Committee (SAC) to 
advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act 
as may be referred to it.  
Accordingly, Rule 10 of the HPBOCW Rules , 2008  provides for constitution of State 
Advisory Committee consisting of a Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government, 
two members of the Legislative Assembly, a member to be nominated by the Central 
Government, the Chief Inspector of Inspections of B uilding and Construction, the Chief 
Inspector of Factories, three members representing employers, three members representing 
the building and other construction workers to be nominated by the State Government, 
three members of Secretary level (Secretary (Labour)/Secr etary (PWD)/Secretary (MPP 
and Power)), two members to be nominated by the State Government, one each 
representing State Level Associations of Architects or Engineers and Accident Insurance 
Institutions.  
Rule 20 states that the State Advisory Committee shall meet at such places and such times 
as may be decided by the Chairperson of such Committee and it shall meet at least once in 
six months. Also, the State Advisory Committee shall be reconstituted after every three 
years.  
2.7.3.1 Delay in constitution of SAC 
Audit noticed that the SAC was first constituted in May 2011 after a lapse of more than 14 
years from the enactment of the Act and was subsequently reconstituted in April 2015, 
May 2018 and February 2022 with a delay ranging from one month to 11 months as detailed 
in the Table 2.8: 
 
 
 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
57 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.8: Details of constitution of all State Advisory Committees  
Committee Date of constitution of 
SAC (Month and year) 
Due date of  
re-constitution as per rule Delay in months 
First Committee May 2011 After 14 years from enactment of the Act 
Second Committee April 2015 May 2014 11 
Third Committee May 2018 April 2018 1 
Fourth Committee February 2022 May 2021 9 
Source: Records of the Board.  
The Board stated (May 2023)  that SAC is formed by the State Government and the 
constitution of SAC is not in purview of the Board. The Department did not provide any 
reason for the delay in the formation of SAC. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary agreed (October 2023) with the audit findings and 
assured to take appropriate action.  
2.7.3.2 Non-conducting of SAC meetings 
SAC was required to meet  at least once in six months. However, against the required 
10 meetings of the SAC, no meetings were held during the period 2017-22. As a result, the 
constitution of the SAC was reduced to a mere formality and the Government did not utilise 
the Committee for its advice on issues of workers’ welfare during the above period. 
The Board stated (December 2022)  that convening the meeting of SAC is in the purview 
of the Government. The Department stated (January 2023) that the meetings could not be 
held due to administrative reasons and COVID-19 outbreak.  
The reply is not acceptable as the mere constitution of SAC without convening its meetings 
is a violation of the Rules and does not enable the SAC to fulfill its mandate of advising 
the Board on welfare matters. The Board and the Department should coordinate with each 
other to conduct regular meetings of the SAC. 
2.7.4 Submission of Annual Accounts  
Section 27(3) of the Act  states that the accounts of the Board shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India annually and any expenditure incurred 
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
Section 27(4) states that the Board shall furnish to the State Government before such date, 
as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with the Auditor's Report. 
Further, Rule 291 of the HPBOCW Rules , 2008 provides that a report on the functioning 
of the Board during every Financial Year shall be approved by the Board before the 15 th 
day of June next year and be submitted to the Government before the 31 st day of July of 
that year. Audit observed that the Audited Annual Accounts are included in the Annual 
Report. Thus, the Annual Accounts should have been prepared before 15th June. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
58 | P a g e  
 
However, Audit noticed the Annual Accounts of the period 2017-22 of the Board were 
submitted to the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Himachal Pradesh after taking a 
time of eight to 19 months after close of the Financial Year as given in the Table 2.9: 
Table 2.9: Details of Annual Accounts submitted to Pr. Accountant General, HP 
Financial Year Date of Submission of Annual 
Accounts to the Pr. AG, HP 
Time taken in submission of Accounts 
after completion of Financial Year 
2017-18 December 2018 8 months 
2018-19 August 2020 16 months 
2019-20 November 2021 19 months 
2020-21 July 2022 15 months 
2021-22 May 2023 13 months 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the Board officials to adhere 
to the timeline for submission of Annual Accounts. 
2.7.5 Delay in approval and submission of Annual Report 
Section 26 of the Act provides that the Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time 
each Financial Year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its 
activities during the previous Financial Year , and submit a copy thereof to the State 
Government and the Central Government. Section 27(5) provides  that the State 
Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be 
after they are received, before the State Legislature. 
Rule 291 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides that report on the functioning of the Board 
during every Financial Year shall be approved by the Board before the 15 th day of June 
next year and be submitted to the Government before the 31st day of July of that year. 
Audit noticed that  there were delays, both in the approval by the Board of the Annual 
Report on the functioning of the Board as well as in the submission thereof by the Board 
to the Government as detailed given in Table 2.10.  
Table 2.10: Delays in approval and submission of Annual Report by the Board during 2017-22 
Financial 
Year 
Due date for 
approval of 
the Report 
Report 
approved by 
the Board in 
Delay 
(in 
months) 
Due date of 
submission of 
Report to the 
State/ 
Central 
Government 
Date of 
submission to 
the State 
Government 
Delay 
(in 
months) 
2017-18 15 June 2018 December 2019 17 31 July 2018 March 2020 19 
2018-19 15 June 2019 June 2021 24 31 July 2019 January 2022 29 
2019-20 15 June 2020 April 2023 33 31 July 2020 March 2023 31 
2020-21 15 June 2021 April 2023 21 31 July 2021 March 2023 19 
2021-22 15 June 2022 Not approved*  31 July 2022 Not 
submitted*  
*As of April 2023.  
As seen from the Table 2.10, the Annual Report was approved by the Board with delays 
ranging from 17 to 33 months and submitted to the Government also with delays ranging 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
59 | P a g e  
 
from 19 to 31 months. The Annual Report for Financial Year  2021-22 had not been 
approved at the level of the Board itself as of April 2023. It is also evident that the Annual 
Reports for both the years 2019 -20 and 2020-21 were submitted to the State Government 
(March 2023) prior to their approval by the Board (April 2023), which is in contravention 
of the Rules. 
Also, Annual Reports have never been submitted to the Central Government by the Board 
ever since the constitution of the Board, which is against the provisions of the Act ibid.  
The Board stated (April 2023) that all efforts are being made to ensure timely approval of 
the Annual Report from Board of Directors. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the Board to send the Annual 
Report to Central Government without delay. The Secretary also said that the Report for 
2021-22 be submitted within a fortnight. 
2.7.6 Budget preparation 
As per Section 25 of the Act, the Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each 
Financial Year, as may be prescribed, its Budget for the next Financial Year, showing the 
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the State 
Government and the Central Government.  
2.7.6.1 Delay in approval of Annual Budget of the Board 
Audit noticed that the meetings for approval of the Budget, showing estimated receipts and 
expenditure for the next Financial Year , were held after the commencement of the 
Financial Year for which the Budget was to be approved, whereas it should have been held 
and the Budget should have been approved before commencement of the Financial Year 
i.e., before 31 March of preceding Financial Year. Details of the Board meetings held for 
approval of the Budget are given in Table 2.11. 
Table 2.11: Details of the Board meetings held for approval of Annual Budget 
Financial Year Meeting required to be held by Budget approved in Delay (in months) 
2017-18 March 2017 February 2017 No delay 
2018-19 March 2018 December 2018 9 months 
2019-20 March 2019 December 2019 9 months 
2020-21 March 2020 June 2021 15 months 
2021-22 March 2021 June 2021 3 months 
It can be seen from the Table 2.11 that during 2018 -22, the Budget was approved with 
delays ranging from three months to 15 months and the Budget for Financial Year   
2020-21 was approved after lapse of the Financial Year, making the exercise of approval 
of estimates futile. 
The Board stated (March 2023)  that it made all possible efforts to adhere to the schedule 
of meetings.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
60 | P a g e  
 
The reply reflects that the Board had not followed the provisions of the Act regarding 
holding of regular meetings for such important functions like Budget approval. The entire 
process of approving the Budget estimates with delays/after lapse of the year shows weak 
or absence of controls in the budgetary process. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) the Board officials to adhere 
to the timeline for the Budget preparation.  
2.7.7 Database of building and other construction workers in the state 
Section 12 of the Act and Rule 266 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 provides that every worker, 
aged between 18 and 60 years, engaged in construction work for not less than 90 days 
during the preceding 12 months should apply for registration to the concerned registering 
officer. Construction workers will be eligible for welfare scheme benefits provided by the 
Board after registration as a beneficiary. Audit findings with respect to database of BOC 
Workers are in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
2.7.7.1 Non-maintenance of individual beneficiary-wise database by the Board 
Audit observed that 3,73,513 workers were registered with the Board as of March 2022. 
However, the Board as well as test-checked LOs/LI had not maintained details of welfare 
benefits for each worker such as details of date on which application for benefits received, 
quantum of benefits disbursed under each scheme, date of disbursement etc. Thus, they 
failed to have a comprehensive database of beneficiaries at any level for cross-checking of 
payment of benefits, which would have served as useful inputs for policy making and 
performance analysis.  
Maintenance of such a type of database at the Board level would facilitate distribution of 
welfare assistance to those beneficiaries, who have migrated to different LO jurisdictions 
other than the one they had registered with. This will facilitate submissi on of 
claims/applications to any LO in the State and  mitigate the difficulty and inconvenience 
for the beneficiaries to submit claims/applications through the LO under which they were 
registered. 
The Board and test-checked LOs/LI stated (December 2022, January and February 2023) 
that such data could not be maintained due to shortage of staff and manifold increase in 
registration process. The data will be maintained once the process is started online on the 
Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board Portal. 
Due to absence of comprehensive database/records, Audit noticed instances of multiple 
registration of workers ( Paragraph 2.3.5.1), double payment of benefits ( Paragraph 
2.7.10.2 (C)), delay in payment of welfare scheme benefits (Paragraph 2.7.12.3) etc.  
 
 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
61 | P a g e  
 
2.7.7.2 Introduction of Universal Access Number  
The Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoL&E), Government of India 
informed (September 2015) the Hon’ble Supreme Court that Government of India (GoI) 
contemplated introduction of Universal Access Number (UAN) to every registered worker 
so that if he or she migrates from one State to another, the benefit of registration does not 
get lost, nor does that construction worker need to get registered in another State. 
Audit observed that no process of introduction of Universal Access Number was started by 
the Board by coordinating with the MoL&E and only LO/LI-wise registration numbers 
were provided to the registered workers in the format/code prescribed by the Board.  
The Board stated (May 2023)  that Identity Cards are being issued to registered workers 
with separate Registration Number and Online Portal of the Board is under trial phase, 
wherein provision has been made to provide UAN to each registered worker.  
The State Government should coordinate with the Government of India to introduce UAN 
to every registered worker, as was contemplated by the Government of India (MoL&E)  
during the year 2015 for the facility of migrant workers from one State to another. 
2.7.8 Issues relating to Financial Management by the Board 
The Himachal Pradesh Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund 54 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Fund”) is to be administered by the Board. The Fund consists 
of contributions made by the beneficiaries, amount of cess @one per cent55 of construction 
cost received by the Board from establishments through Labour Officers/Cess Collectors 
and cess deductors/depositors in the Board’s bank account, accumulated interest on funds 
in bank accounts and grant of loans or advances if any, made by  any authority. As per 
Section 24 (2) of the Act, the Fund was to be utilised for meeting expenses of the Board in 
discharge of its functions. Section 22 states that the Board may provide various welfare 
benefits to the construction workers.  
2.7.8.1 Financial position of the Board 
Details of receipts, expenditure and balance of funds of the Board during 2017-22 are given 
in the Table 2.12: 
 
 
 
 
 
54  Constituted under Rule 265 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008.  
55  Notified by the Department of Labour and Employment vide letter of August 2009.   

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
62 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.12: Details of Receipts and Expenditure of the Board during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Receipts 
Total 
Funds 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance Registration 
and Renewal Cess$ 
Interest 
and 
Others$ 
Total 
Receipts Welfare* Administrative# Total* 
2017-18 458.59 0.02 68.85 
(72) 
26.79 
(28) 95.66 554.25 36.44 (7) 2.05 (5.3) 38.49 
(7) 515.76 
2018-19 515.76 0.06 67.67 
(65) 
36.37 
(35) 104.10 619.86 24.68 (4) 2.35 (8.7) 27.03 
(4) 592.83 
2019-20 592.83 0.07 82.11 
(66) 
42.58 
(34) 124.76 717.59 50.89 (7) 2.46 (4.6) 53.35 
(7) 664.24 
2020-21 664.24 0.13 85.25 
(73) 
30.98 
(27) 116.36 780.60 106.28 (14) 2.50 (2.3) 108.78 
(14) 671.82 
2021-22 671.82 0.15 103.86 
(79) 
28.14 
(21) 132.15 803.97 97.14 (12) 3.68 (3.6) 100.82 
(13) 703.15 
Total  0.43 407.74 
(71) 
164.86 
(29) 573.03  315.42 13.04 328.46  
Source: Information supplied by the Board 
$ Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage of receipt to total receipt. # Figures in parenthesis indicate 
percentage of expenditure to total expenditure.  *Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage of expenditure 
to the total funds.  
Findings on audit analysis of the above data have been discussed in succeeding Paragraphs. 
2.7.8.1 (A) Over accumulation of funds 
It can be seen from Table 2.12 that the Board had funds ranging between ₹  515.76 crore 
(Closing Balance 2017-18) and ₹ 703.15 crore (Closing Balance 2021-22). The Fund was 
to be used for welfare of building and other construction workers and administrative 
expenses. However, it is observed that the proportion of the welfare expenditure and total 
expenditure with respect to the total available funds ranged from a marginal four per cent 
(2018-19) to 14 per cent (2020-21) during 2017-22.  
Against the total available funds of ₹  1,031.62 crore ( Opening Balance of 2017 -18 
₹ 458.59 crore + ₹ 573.03 crore which is total receipts of 2017 -22) during 2017 -22, the 
Board had utilised only ₹  328.46 crore (32 per cent ) during the same period. Further, 
during the period 2017 -20, ratio of Expenditure with respect to Receipts during the year 
remained low ranging from 26 to 43 per cent which led to over accumulation of funds in 
the bank accounts of the Board over time as shown in Chart 2.9. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
63 | P a g e  
 
Chart 2.9: Details of Receipts and Expenditure of the Board for the period 2017-22 
During 2020-21, expenditure increased due to COVID-19 Financial Assistance disbursed 
as per the directions of the State Government ( March, May, and August 2020) at the rate 
of ₹ 2 ,000/- per instalment to the registered beneficiaries (total three instalments) 
amounting to ₹ 68.59 crore. 
Underutilisation of the Fund also resulted in liability of income tax up to ₹ 191.01 crore as 
condition of 85 per cent of receipts to be expended on Welfare Schemes was not fulfilled 
by the Board as discussed in Paragraph 2.7.8.2 (B). 
The Board stated (January 2023) that the expenditure is purely based on the claims received 
from the registered beneficiaries and if they do not present their legitimate claims, the 
Board has no power to enforce them.  
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the Board did not plan ahead to utilise 
the huge funds lying with it by formulating long and short -term targets. The Board could 
have either introduced new Welfare Schemes or enhanced the amount of benefits of the 
existing Welfare Schemes  with a change from demand -based disbursement of welfare 
benefits to maximum coverage of beneficiaries for schemes for which all the beneficiaries 
are eligible. Also, it could coordinate with other Local Departments and sanction grants -
in-aid to them for providing welfare benefits which could be provided directly at 
construction sites. The plea of the Board that the low expenditure is linked to the claims 
received from the beneficiaries should also be seen in the light of the fact that there is lack 
of awareness among the beneficiaries about the Board and the Welfare Schemes available, 
as was observed by Audit during the Beneficiary Survey as indicated in 
Paragraph 2.8.2.1 (B). 
2.7.8.1 (B) Administrative Expenditure incurred beyond prescribed limit 
Section 24(3) of the Act stipulates that in any Financial Year, no Board shall incur expenses 
towards salaries, allowances and other remuneration to its members, officers and other 
employees and for meeting the other Administrative Expenses exceeding five per cent of 
its total expenses during the Financial Year. 
From the Table 2.1 2, it can be seen that the Board’s expenditure on Administrative 
Expenses was more than five per cent  of total expenditure during the Financial Year s  
95.66 104.1
124.76 116.36 132.15
38.49
(40)
27.03
(26)
53.35
(43)
108.78
(93)
100.82
(76)
0
50
100
150
2017 -18 2018 -19 2019 -20 2020 -21 2021 -22
AMOUNT IN CRORE Receipt Expenditure (percentage)

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
64 | P a g e  
 
2017-18 (5.3 per cent) and 2018-19 (8.7 per cent), which was in contravention of provision 
of the Act ibid while during the period 2019-22, it was within the limit. 
The Board stated (December 2022)  that the expenditure was not irregular as without 
administrative expenditure, it is not possible to run the organi sation. However, the Board 
had also taken up the matter with the Government of India through the State Government 
to relax the limit as it is not possible to adhere to the limit at the initial stage. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Board  should take austerity measures while incurring 
expenditure from the Fund and the Board should focus on disbursal of maximum welfare 
benefits to all the eligible BOC workers in the State, as stipulated under the Act. 
2.7.8.1 (C) Mismatch in figures of welfare expenditure 
Audit noticed  that there was mismatch of 
₹ 23.68 crore in figures of individual scheme wise 
welfare expenditure and in the figures of overall 
welfare expenditure provided from the Annual 
Accounts for the period 2017-22. Both the figures 
were supplied by the Board. As per the individual 
scheme-wise expenditure, the total expenditure on 
the Welfare Schemes was ₹ 291.75 crore while as 
per overall welfare expenditure provided from the 
Annual Accounts, the total expenditure on the Welfare Schemes was ₹ 315.42 crore. The 
details of mismatch in figures are given in Appendix 2.3. 
The Board stated (May 2023) that booking of expenditure in the books of accounts is being 
done as per accounting concepts and accounting conventions, however the difference is 
due to the reason that data of individual scheme -wise expenditure was supplied by the 
concerned Dealing Assistant directly.  
The reply is not acceptable as it is evident that the Board is not reconciling its accounts 
since different figures were given for the same expenditure. It should have ensured that the 
data maintained by the Dealing Assistants is reconciled with the Accounts from time to 
time. This showed weak internal controls and improper maintenance of records.  
2.7.8.1 (D) Cess collected and welfare expenditure by the selected LOs/LI  
Details of cess collected and welfare expenditure by the selected LOs/LI during 2017 -22 
are given in Table 2.13. 
 
 
 
 


Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
65 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.13: Details of Cess Collected and Welfare Expenditure by the selected LOs/LI 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
LO Bilaspur LI Hamirpur Total 
Welfare 
Expendit
ure 
Total workers 
registered 
(No. of 
establishments
) 
LO Kullu 
Cess 
Collected* 
Welfare 
Expendit
ure 
Welfare 
Expenditure 
Cess 
Collected 
Welfare 
expenditure 
Workers 
registered 
 (No. of 
establishments) 
2017-18 3.60 3.21 3.66 6.87 5,616 (6) 8.42 0.78 616 (6) 
2018-19 1.37 2.90 3.70 6.60 16,108 (4) 4.36 0.77 1422 (6) 
2019-20 0.60 6.38 11.90 18.28 11,045 (0) 8.58 2.04 1585 (5) 
2020-21 2.28 14.72 25.20 39.92 30,631 (4) 6.55 3.83 4300 (4) 
2021-22 0.27 9.11 10.83 19.94 23,883 (0) 4.92 4.45 8859 (0) 
Total 8.12 36.32 55.29 91.61 87,283 (14) 32.83 11.87 16782 (21) 
Source: Information supplied by the Board and the selected LOs 
*LI Hamirpur is under the jurisdiction of LO Bilaspur for collection of cess.   
It can be seen from the Table 2.13 that in the jurisdiction of LO Bilaspur, which includes 
LI Hamirpur, cess amounting to ₹ 8.12 crore  was collected and expenditure of 
₹ 91.61 crore was incurred on Welfare Schemes. In the jurisdiction of LO Kullu cess of 
₹ 32.83 crore  was collected and welfare expenditure of ₹  11.87 crore was incurred on 
Welfare Schemes.  
In LO Kullu, low welfare expenditure against cess collected may be due to non-registration 
of the workers engaged in these establishments, as a result of which they would have been 
deprived of the admissible welfare benefits. In LO Bilaspur, high welfare s cheme 
expenditure in comparison to cess collected showed that either cess was not being collected 
from all the establishments or bogus registration of workers is being carried out as 
discussed in Paragraph 2.3.5.2.  
2.7.8.1 (E) Collection of cess from Government and Private Employers 
Audit observed that in the test-checked LOs, Register of Cess received from the employers 
was being maintained. During scrutiny of these Registers for the period 2017 -22, it was 
observed that cess amounting to ₹ 40.95 crore was deposited by 152 employers 
(Government and Private) as indicated in Table 2.14.  
Table 2.14: Details of cess received by selected LOs during 2017-22  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
Labour 
Office 
Total Government 
Employers* Private Employers* 
No. of 
Employers 
Amount 
of Cess 
No. of 
employers 
Amount 
of Cess 
No. of 
Employers 
Amount of 
Cess 
LO Bilaspur 103 8.12 90 (87) 6.51 (80) 13 (13) 1.61 (20) 
LO Kullu 49 32.83 34 (69) 32.19 (98) 15 (31) 0.65 (2) 
Total 152 40.95 124 38.70 28 2.26 
Source: Information prepared from Register of Cess maintained by the LOs 
* Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage with respect to total.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
66 | P a g e  
 
It can be seen from the Table 2.14 that: 
(i) In LO Bilaspur, out of the total 103 employers who deposited cess, 90 (87 per cent) 
were Government Employers and 13 (13 per cent) were Private Employers. While 
the proportion of cess deposited by the Government Employers (₹ 6.51 crore) was 
80 per cent of the total cess deposited.  
(ii) In LO Kullu,  out of 49 employers who deposited cess, 34 (69 per cent ) were 
Government Employers and 15 (31 per cent) were Private Employers. While the 
proportion of cess deposited by the Government employers (₹ 32.19 crore) was 
98 per cent of the total cess deposited. 
It was also observed that during 2021 -22, 340 employers transferred cess in the Board’s 
bank accounts, out of which 294 (86 per cent ) were Government Employers and  
46 (14 per cent) were Private Employers while bifurcation of amount of cess deposited was 
not available. 
Thus, the major portion of cess amount was being deposited by the Government Employers 
as compared to the Private Employers.  
2.7.8.2 Financial Irregularities in the utilisation of the Fund 
Financial irregularities noticed in utilisation of the F und are discussed in the succeeding 
Paragraphs. 
2.7.8.2 (A) Irregular/inadmissible expenditure from the Fund 
Rule 289 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008  states that the  Fund shall not, without the previous 
approval of Government, be expended for any purpose other than those mentioned in the 
Act and the Rules. 
As per Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India order56 (June 2016), all 
the State Governments and UT Administrations are not to spend the Fund for construction 
of buildings for schools, hospitals, training centers, labour shed-cum-night shelter, waiting 
hall, hostels etc. or for any purpose other than for welfare of BOC workers and their family 
exclusively. In case of any such violation, immediate corrective steps should be taken and 
the funds so spent should be recouped in the Building and Other Construction Workers’ 
Welfare Cess Fund with immediate effect under intimation to the Central Government.  
Audit noticed that the Board had incurred irregular/inadmissible expenditure of 
₹ 15.89 crore from the Fund. The details of which are given in Table 2.15.  
 
 
 
 
56  Notification no.: Z-20011/08/2014-BL dated 7 June 2016. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
67 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.15: Details of irregular/inadmissible expenditure from the Fund 
Purpose of 
expenditure 
Irregular 
expenditure 
amount 
(in crore) 
Reply of the Board Audit Remarks 
Donation of funds 
to Chief Minister 
Relief Fund 
2.00 
The Board replied (March 2023 ) that 
the Government has decided to transfer 
the funds for poorest of poor workers in 
the time of crisis during COVID -19 
period. 
The F und is to be 
utilised only for the 
welfare of BOC 
workers and their 
families. 
Construction of 
Skill Development 
Training Institute 
at Palkwah Khas, 
Tehsil Haroli, 
District Una, HP 
13.5557 
The Board stated (May 2024)  that the 
Board constructed Skill Development 
Institute to fulfil the purpose of Rule 
283(D) of HPBOCW Rules amended in 
2014. 
Capital Expenditure 
from the F und is not 
permissible and is 
against the Government 
of India orders (June 
2016) ibid. 
Publicity of 
Pradhan Mantri 
Shram Yogi 
Maandhan Yojana 
(PM-SYM) 
0.23 
The Board stated (March 2023)  that 
Government of HP conveyed approval 
for expenditure related to wide 
publicity of the scheme material. The 
Deputy Labour Commissioner stated 
(March 2023) that Labour 
Commissioner decided that the 
expenditure be incurred at the State 
level as well as th e District level shall 
be borne by the Board and verbal 
approval from Additional Chief 
Secretary (Labour and Employment) to 
the GoHP had been obtained in this 
regard. 
The Scheme was not 
implemented by the 
Board and expenditure 
was to be borne by the 
Department. The 
expenditure incu rred 
should be recouped in 
the F und by the 
Government of 
Himachal Pradesh as 
per directions of 
Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. 
Purchase of bags 
from 
“Advertisement 
and Publicity” 
head of account 
0.11 
The Board stated (March 2023)  that to 
increase the registration of workers and 
to provide them benefits of various 
Welfare Schemes run by the Board, the 
Board of Directors approved purchase 
of bags. 
The purchase and its 
distribution to the Board 
officials does not justify 
the advertisement or 
publicity aspe ct and 
shows misutilisation of 
the Fund. 
Total 15.89   
2.7.8.2 (B)  Income Tax Liability due to erroneous registration under IT Act 
The Himachal Pradesh Government constituted the Board (March 2009) to implement 
Welfare Schemes  for construction workers and levied Labour Cess at the rate of 
one per cent in accordance with the requirement of the Cess Act. The cess so collected was 
required to be spent on various schemes for welfare of building and other construction 
workers.  
 
57  The Board paid ₹ 18.41 crore for the entire construction. Out of which, the objected amount is 
₹ 13.55 crore which was paid after June 2016. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
68 | P a g e  
 
Section 10 (46) of the Income Tax (IT) Act , 1961  
provides that in computing the total income of a 
previous year of a body or authority or Board or Trust 
or Commission, any income falling within any of the 
following clauses shall not be included : (i) it has been 
established or constituted by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or constituted by 
the Central Government or a State Government, with the object of regulating or 
administering any activity for the benefit of the general public; (ii) it is not engaged in any 
commercial activity; and (iii) it is notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette for the purposes of this clause. 
The Board was registered as Charitable Trust under Section 12AA(1)(B) of the IT Act, 
1961 on 01.04.2011. Under Section 11 (1) of the IT Act, 15 per cent income of a Trust was 
exempted from Income Tax and remaining 85 per cent income was required to be utilised 
for charitable or religious purposes in India for getting exemption from Income Tax.  
The Board initially did not register itself under Section 10 (46) and was registered under 
the Section 12AA(1)(B) of the IT Act and subsequently could not fulfil the condition for 
exemption under section 11(1), which resulted in tax liability of ₹ 191.01 crore up to March 
2022.  
The Board, after lapse of more than seven years, through letter dated 18.12.2018, had 
applied to the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax for seeking exemption U/s 10(46) of the 
IT Act, 1961. But no exemption had been granted by the Income Tax Authorities as of 
October 2023 and tax liability of ₹ 148.30 crore was to be paid as of March 2022. 
In the Exit Conference, the Secretary directed (October 2023) to do necessary follow -up 
with the Income Tax Department. 
2.7.8.2 (C) Tax liability due to less annual expenditure  
As the condition of expenditure to the extent of 85 per cent of annual income towards its 
objectives were not fulfilled during above period, except during the Financial Year 2020-
21, so ₹  191.01 crore was to be paid by the Board as Income Tax. Out of which, 
₹ 42.71 crore has already been deposited or deducted as TDS with the Income Tax 
Department and income tax liability of ₹ 148.30 crore was still outstanding as on 31 March 
2022. Details of income, expenditure and tax demanded and deposited by the Board are 
given in Table 2.16: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TAX LIABILITY: ₹ 191.01 CRORE                            
TAX PAID: ₹ 42.71 CRORE 
       PENDING LIABILITY: ₹ 148.30 CRORE 
INCOME TAX LIABILITY 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
69 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.16: Details of Income, Expenditure and Income Tax of the Board during 2009-22 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Total 
Income 
Total 
Expenditure 
Percentage of 
Expenditure to 
Income 
Income Tax 
demand 
amount 
Income Tax 
deposited 
/deducted 
2009-10 24.39 0.07 0.29 - 0.02 
2010-11 46.49 0.41 0.88 - 0.19 
2011-12 49.49 0.42 0.85 - 0.82 
2012-13 62.33 2.12 3.04 - 1.07 
2013-14 71.28 4.62 6.48 8.26 7.97 
2014-15 79.83 6.23 7.80 36.78 20.67 
2015-16 81.29 19.81 24.37 - 1.46 
2016-17 90.68 30.87 34.04 - 1.15 
2017-18 95.66 38.39 40.13 47.97 1.76 
2018-19 104.10 27.03 25.96 32.52 2.31 
2019-20 124.76 53.35 42.76 65.48 1.82 
2020-21 116.35 108.78 93.49 - 1.34 
2021-22 132.16 100.82 76.29 - 2.13 
Total 1,078.81 392.92 36.42 191.01 42.71 
Source: Income and Expenditure are from Balance Sheets (2009 -16) and data provided by the Board  
(2017-22). Income Tax details provided by the Board.  
The Board stated (February 2023)  that the Board could not utilise 85  per cent of the 
receipts towards charitable activity of various Welfare Schemes  because all claims are 
demand based, and disbursement remained less than 85 per cent of the receipts. The Board 
further stated that time to time letter was sent to CBDT and CIT 58 for seeking exemption 
U/s 10(46) which is under process.  
The reply should be seen against the fact that had the Board been registered U/s 10(46) 
initially, it would have been exempted from paying Income Tax and the huge amount 
deposited as Income Tax could have been used on welfare of building and other 
construction workers. 
2.7.8.2 (D)  Software for database of workers not developed  
The Board had started (February 2017) the process 
of developing Online Software for registration/ 
renewal, contribution/fee, processing claims, 
worker/scheme wise benefits delivered to 
registered workers and also benefits yet to be 
delivered, work continuity certificates of 
beneficiaries, checking of duplicity/error in 
registration, cess collection, grievance redressal 
mechanism etc. through National Information 
Centre (NIC), Shimla.  
 
58  Central Board of Direct Taxation and Commissioner of Income Tax . 
EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON 
SOFTWARE 
 
 ₹ 27.61 LAKH HAD BEEN 
EXPENDED BY THE BOARD ON 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
WHICH IS STILL NOT 
FUNCTIONAL EVEN AFTER 
LAPSE OF SIX YEARS.  
 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
70 | P a g e  
 
Audit noticed that  no timeline was fixed by the Board for completion of software 
development and software had not been developed by the NIC, Shimla even after a lapse 
of almost six years and expenditure of ₹ 27.61 lakh had been incurred (February 2023) on 
development of software.  
The Board stated (February 2023)  that the delay in development of software was due to 
technical issues and that HPBOCWWB Portal is being used for online registration process 
of workers and was in final stage of implementation of online claim process. 
The reply is confirmation of the fact that the Board failed to achieve its intended objective 
of having comprehensive software for providing better services to construction workers, 
hassle-free registration and renewal, status of their welfare benefit application and 
grievance redressal mechanism, despite considerable lapse of time.  
2.7.9 Formulation of Welfare Schemes 
Section 22 of the Act provides for various Welfare Schemes that may be implemented by 
the Board. Accordingly, Rules 271 to 283  and 298 to 302 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008  
stipulate various Welfare Schemes59 for building and other construction workers. 
The expenditure incurred on various Welfare Schemes during 2017-22 is depicted in the 
Chart 2.10 given below.  
Chart 2.10: Welfare Expenditure from the Fund during 2017-22 
 
Source: Information provided by the Board. 
 
59  Financial Assistance for Marriage, Maternity/Paternity Benefit, Financial Assistance for Education, 
Medical Assistance to Beneficiaries and Dependents, Old Age Pension, Disability Pension, Death and 
Funeral Assistance, Assistance for purchase of Bicycle an d Washing Machine for Women, Induction 
Heater and Solar Lamp. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
36.44
24.68
50.89
106.28
97.14
Amount in crore
Financial Year

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
71 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.17: Welfare Expenditure sanctioned on Welfare Schemes during 2017-22 
(₹ in crore)  
Sr. 
No. Name of Scheme@ No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount  
(per cent*) 
1 Advance for Purchase or Construction of House 0 0 
2 Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin, and Steel Dinner Set for 
beneficiary 
0 0 
3 Disability Pension  11 0.01 
4 Expenses on Creches at Worksite 0 0.11 
5 PMJJBY and PMSBY 19,959 0.35 
6 General Welfare Activity 0 0.36 
7 Old Age Pension  740$ 0.63  
8 Medical Assistance  2,724 3.12 (1) 
9 Financial Assistance for Induction Cooker  47,509 7.92 (3) 
10 Financial Assistance for Washing Machines 11,894 8.04 (3) 
11 Financial Assistance for Bicycle  32,815 8.60 (3) 
12 Financial Assistance for Solar Lamp 39,896 10.24 (4) 
13 Maternity/Paternity Financial Assistance 2,754 11.87 (4) 
14 Death and Funeral Financial Assistance 958 14.86 (5) 
15 Financial Assistance for Marriage 17,504 64.48 (23) 
16 Financial Assistance for Education 74,849 72.15 (26) 
17 COVID-19 Financial Assistance 3,92,955# 78.59 (28) 
Total 281.33 
Source: Information provided by the Board. 
*Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage of Expenditure to Total Expenditure.  
# Figures are sum of no. of workers covered in three instalments under the scheme.  
$ Figures are cumulative no. of workers paid pension in five years and not individual beneficiaries wise.  
@ Expenditures amounting to ₹ 10.41 crore (Depreciation: ₹ 4.91 crore, Advertisement and Publicity: 
₹ 3.03 crore, CM Relief Fund: ₹ two crore, Rent of Stores: ₹ 0.32 crore, Freight Charges: ₹ 0.10 crore and 
Workers’ Transit Hostel: ₹ 0.05 crore) are excluded.  
2.7.9.1 Formulation of schemes without any survey or Inspection Report 
Section 5 of the Act provides that the appropriate Government may constitute one or more 
expert committees consisting of persons specially qualified in building and other 
construction work for advising that Government for making rules under this Act.  
Section 22(1) provides that the function of the Board is to provide various welfare measures 
to the beneficiaries. The Board has implemented various Welfare Schemes as per Rules 
271 to 283 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008.  
Audit noticed that the State Government framed scheme rules after consultation with the 
Expert Committee for carrying out provisions of the Act. But Welfare Schemes notified by 
the State Government and implemented by the Board were not based on any kind of survey 
throughout the State or any Inspection Reports submitted by the inspecting officials of the 
Department or the Board. 
The Board stated (December 2022)  that the schemes implemented have been notified by 
Government in HPBOCW Rules, 2008 and afterwards the same have been expanded and 
      > 10 per cent 
     1 to 10 per cent 
      < 1 per cent 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
72 | P a g e  
 
new schemes have been included through amendment in said Rules by Himachal Pradesh 
Government.  
Adopting a bottom -up approach for formulation and implementation of schemes after 
conducting surveys and taking input from beneficiaries would increase chances of their 
successful execution. Also, the reply is to be seen against the fact that various Welfare 
Schemes were notified/added in the Rules but remained unsuccessful at the implementation 
stage as discussed in Paragraph 2.7.10.1. 
2.7.9.2 Irrational formulation of schemes without any preliminary study 
The State Government , on recommendation of the Expert Committee , amended 
(August 2014) the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 and added Rule 283 (B) and (F)  60 which states 
that the Board may provide one washing machine and one bicycle to female beneficiary as 
a onetime incentive. This benefit will be provided only once per family.   
Audit observed that the distribution of washing machines and bicycles to the building and 
other construction workers is not supported by any survey as these workers migrate in 
search of work and live in temporary housings/shelters which are not provided with running 
water facili ty and are not even provided with uninterrupted power supply. Also, the 
uniform applicability of the scheme of distribution of bicycles was not examined with 
regards to its feasibility by the Board or Expert Committee as the scheme would be useful 
in plain regions of the State but not in hilly regions with high altitude in Kinnaur and Lahaul 
& Spiti Districts.  
The feasibility of schemes should be examined in the initial stage and supported by 
adequate surveys as implementation without usefulness would lead to wasteful expenditure 
from the F und without raising the living standards of BOC workers. The top -down 
approach adopted by the State Government in the formulation of schemes should be re -
examined. Also, the audit observation is buttressed by the fact that 60 washing machines 
and 436 bicycles were lying undistributed in the stores as of March 2022 as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.7.10.6 (C). 
2.7.10 Implementation of Welfare Schemes 
Ten Welfare Schemes were selected for test check in audit on the basis of expenditure 
sanctioned during 2017-22 as detailed in Table 2.18.  
Table 2.18: Details of ten Welfare Schemes selected for test check in audit 
Sr. 
No. Name of Scheme Financial Assistance 
(in crore) 
1 COVID-19 Financial Assistance 78.59 
2 Education Assistance 72.15 
3 Marriage Assistance 64.48 
4 Death and Funeral Financial Assistance 14.86 
 
60  Date of notification: 14 August 2014. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
73 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. Name of Scheme Financial Assistance 
(in crore) 
5 Maternity/Paternity Financial Assistance 11.87 
6 Solar Lantern 10.24 
7 Washing Machine 8.04 
8 Induction Cooker 7.92 
9 Advance for purchase or construction of house No Expenditure 
10 Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin and Steel Dinner Set for beneficiary No Expenditure 
Source: Information provided by the Board. 
The audit observations on implementation of Welfare Schemes  are discussed in the 
succeeding Paragraphs.  
2.7.10.1 Non-implementation of notified Welfare Schemes 
Audit noticed that various Welfare Schemes were notified in the HPBOCW Rules, 2008 
by the State Government but the following Welfare Schemes were not implemented by the 
Board as discussed below.  
2.7.10.1 (A)   Advance for purchase or construction of house and loan for the 
purchase of tools 
Welfare Schemes such as Advance for purchase or construction of house (Rule 274) and 
loan for the purchase of tools (Rule 276) were notified under the HPBOCW Rules, 2008.  
Audit noticed that  no application was received by the Board for availing benefits under 
these Welfare Schemes till December 2022 even after the lapse of almost 13 years since 
the constitution of the Board (March 2009). 
The Board stated (February 2023)  that it is providing assistance to registered workers for 
construction of houses if the beneficiary is getting the benefit of the same under 
PMAY/MMAY61.  
The r eply is not satisfactory as condition of eligibility under PMAY/MMAY is not 
mandated in the Rules ibid and separate scheme in Rule 302 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 was 
added as MMAY. Not receiving even a single application shows lack of publicity of the 
scheme on behalf of the Board and leading to lack of awareness of the workers.  
2.7.10.1 (B)  Non-coverage under Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
As per Model Welfare Scheme (October 2018), State Welfare Boards should coordinate 
with their respective States Governments to ensure that the newly launched Scheme 
‘Ayushman Bharat’ is able to cover maximum BOC workers. 
Audit noticed that  the Board had not taken any steps to coordinate with the State 
Government for covering the registered workers under Ayushman Bharat scheme.  
 
61  Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana and Mukhya Mantri Awas Yojana. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
74 | P a g e  
 
The Board stated (December 2022) that it is providing medical assistance to its registered 
beneficiaries as per their medical expenses’ claims.  
The reply is not satisfactory, since the Board covered all its registered BOC workers under 
the Ayushman Bharat scheme, the beneficiaries could have utilised the cashless benefits 
offered through e-card. The Board can provide medical assistance if BOC workers fail to 
get medical assistance under the Ayushman Bharat scheme.  
2.7.10.1 (C)   Scheme for providing Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin and Steel Dinner Set 
for female beneficiary 
As per notification dated 06 January 2020 issued by the Department, welfare scheme 
namely Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin and Steel Dinner Set for female beneficiary (Rule 
283(F)) was inserted.   
Audit observed that the Board received 10,110 applications on account of blanket, hot case, 
tiffin and Steel Dinner Set between the period February 2020 and July 2021 from LOs for 
sanction. But the Board had not sanctioned any claims or signed any rate contract for 
purchase of blankets with any firm till March 2021, when Government of India advised 
States to discontinue in-kind schemes or benefits. 
The Board stated (February 2023) that distribution of in-kind benefits stopped as per letter 
of the Government of India (March 2021) and accordingly the Board had not implemented 
the scheme namely Blankets, Hot Case, Tiffin and Steel Dinner Set for female 
beneficiaries. 
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the scheme was notified in January 
2020 and Board started receiving applications from March 2020 onwards but it had not 
sanctioned even a single application until the stoppage of scheme by Government of India 
order (March 2021).  The delay of almost one year in processing the cases of a weaker 
section of society deprived them of their benefits, especially such a scheme which was 
intended for the female workers. 
2.7.10.1 (D)  Mobile crèches for the use of children 
Section 35 of the Act provides that in every place wherein, more than fifty female building 
workers are ordinarily employed, there shall be provided and maintained a suitable room 
or rooms for the use of children under the age of six years of such female workers. 
The Government notified (January 2020) that the Board may provide Mobile Toilets and 
Mobile Crèches to the registered Building and Other Construction Workers in such places 
wherever required. All the expenditure, including its maintenance etc., may be borne by 
the Board.  
Audit noticed that the Board in convergence with Department of Women and Child 
Development (WCD) decided (November 2018) to establish crèches at identified 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
75 | P a g e  
 
construction sites 62  and transferred ₹  10.85 lakh to Director, WCD. Out of which 
₹ 7.05 lakh was utilised, and ₹ 3.80 lakh remained unutilised (January 2023). The scheme 
was stopped and creches were closed due to the COVID-19 outbreak but neither the scheme 
was made operational thereafter nor the balance amount was returned to the Board by th e 
WCD.  
2.7.10.1 (E)  Other Welfare Schemes 
As per notification (September 2021) of the State Government, various rules were added 
in the HPBOCW Rules, 2008. Through these rules, five new schemes namely (i) Female 
Birth Gift Scheme (Rule 298), (ii) Mentally Retarded Children Benefit Scheme (Rule 299), 
(iii) Widow Pension (Rule 300), (iv) Hostel Facility Scheme (Rule 301) and (v) 
Mukhyamantri Awas Yojana (Rule 302) were added.  
Audit noticed that no application was received by the Board for availing benefits under any 
of the abovementioned schemes till March 2022, as a result of which, no benefits could be 
granted by the Board to workers. 
The Board stated (February 2023)  that the Board is organi sing awareness camps and 
providing publicity by social media, AIR, FM radio etc. to publicise various Welfare 
Schemes.  
Evidently, wide publicity was not provided as already discussed in Paragraph 2.3.4.4 to 
these schemes and workers were unaware of these Welfare Schemes. This is also validated 
by the audit observation on Joint Physical Inspection as well as a Beneficiary Survey where 
many workers were not having any awareness about the Board or its schemes. 
2.7.10.2  COVID-19 financial assistance  
In order to contain the spread of Corona Virus (COVID-19) to the extent possible by taking 
preventive, precautionary and pre-emptive measures, the State Government issued orders 
(March, May, and August 2020) for the disbursement of ₹ 2,000/- per registered worker 
per instalment (total three instalments) of the Board as financial assistance for purchase of 
necessary ration items, medicines, etc. During 2020 -21, an amount of ₹ 78.59 crore  was 
sanctioned in three instalments under this scheme.  
Audit noticed the following shortcomings:  
2.7.10.2 (A)  Coverage of beneficiaries  
Details of live registered workers covered under COVID-19 pandemic financial assistance 
by the Board in the State are given in Table 2.19. 
 
 
 
 
62  In the Districts of Mandi, Shimla, Sirmour and Solan. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
76 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.19: Live registered workers covered under COVID-19 Financial Assistance 
(₹ in crore) 
Instalment 
No. Month 
Total Live 
Registered 
Workers 
No. of 
payments 
sanctioned 
Registered workers 
not covered (per cent) 
Amount 
sanctioned 
1 2 3 4 5 (Column 3-4) 6 
First April 2020 1,36,211 1,24,094 12,117 (9) 24.82 
Second May 2020 1,50,342 1,32,267 18,075 (12) 26.45 
Third July 2020 1,67,140 1,36,609 30,531 (18) 27.32 
Total 78.59 
Source: Information supplied by the Board. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.19 that nine to 18 per cent of registered workers were not 
covered in three instalments sanctioned under COVID-19 financial assistance.  
The Board stated (March 2023)  that benefit of COVID -19 financial assistance was 
transferred to beneficiaries as per the recommendation and verification by the LO 
concerned and in the absence of required mandatory information i.e., Aadhar No., Bank 
Account, IFSC Code etc. benefits coul d not be sanctioned to remaining beneficiaries. 
LWOs stated (May 2024) that information of bank account and IFSC code of some of 
beneficiaries registered prior to 2018 was not available as process of DBT started later on.  
The reply is not satisfactory as steps should have been taken by the Board to obtain such 
information from the LOs and beneficiaries and the increasing number of uncovered 
workers under the scheme shows that required details of workers registered after sanction 
of the first instalments were not obtained by the LOs/LI, thereby depriving the beneficiaries 
of intended benefits.  
2.7.10.2 (B) Rejected claims pending for disbursal 
It was noticed that the Board had sanctioned payment of COVID-19 financial assistance in 
three instalments to 124094, 132267 and 136609 registered workers respectively. But 
30,968 claims were rejected due to reasons such as incorrect account number or IFSC codes 
etc. Out of which, 76 claims  were subsequently approved after receiving rectification 
through concerned LOs but 30,892 claims were still pending for approval/sanction as of 
December 2022.  
The Board stated (March 2023) that workers were informed about rejections through LOs 
concerned so as to get the correct account credentials from the beneficiaries. But corrected 
list had not been received from LOs and as such benefits were not transferred.  
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the workers should have been informed 
immediately as it was noticed that some workers, whose phone numbers were not available, 
were intimated by the LO/LWO in December 2023 after lapse of three years; and corrected 
information be obtained from them as soon as possible, as the pandemic forced all 
construction works to be stopped and there was no alternative source of income for these 
construction workers and they faced hardships in their day -to-day life. The negligence on 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
77 | P a g e  
 
part of the Board as well as Labour Offices was seen as claims of 30,892 workers are still 
pending for approval even after lapse of almost three years.   
2.7.10.2(C) Double disbursement of assistance due to duplicate registration of 
beneficiaries 
Audit noticed that  158 beneficiaries were sanctioned and disbursed COVID -19 financial 
assistance at least twice as they were having two different registration numbers but same 
Aadhar number and other details like name, address, account numbers etc., resultantly an 
amount of ₹ 3.16 lakh (total amount paid ₹  6.32 lakh) was disbursed in excess to them 
during the year 2020-21 as detailed in the Table 2.20.  
Table 2.20: Double disbursement of COVID-19 financial assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of unit (LO/LI) No. of beneficiaries sanctioned / 
disbursed double assistance 
Excess amount paid @ ₹ 2,000/- 
per beneficiary 
Bilaspur 2 0.04 
Hamirpur 66 1.32 
Kangra at Dharmshala 9 0.18 
Mandi 20 0.40 
Rampur 1 0.02 
Solan 54 1.08 
Shimla 6 0.12 
Total 158 3.16 
The Board stated (April 2023)  that it had directed all LWOs to recover the amount from 
the beneficiaries in case of release of double payment to them. LO Bilaspur stated 
(April 2023) that no mechanism is available through which duplicate registration of 
workers can be prevented. LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that no such 
mechanism/software is available with the office through which multiple applications for 
registration from a single beneficiary can be detected. Also, applications from the Unions 
are received in bulk, which make it difficult to detect duplicate registration forms. 
2.7.10.2 (D) Disbursement of assistance to deceased beneficiaries 
During the scrutiny of records in test checked LOs , it was noticed  that the Board had 
sanctioned and disbursed COVID -19 Financial Assistance through NEFT/RTGS to 
25 deceased beneficiaries during the year 2020 -21, which is indicative of the fact that no 
checks were being enforced by the Board or their Authori sed Officer prior to sanctioning 
of financial assistance and the data of live registered workers maintained by the LOs/LI 
could not be considered reliable because payments were made to the deceased workers. 
These 25 beneficiaries63 died between October 2017 to February 2020. Still, an amount of 
₹ 1.00 lakh was disbursed to these beneficiaries under COVID -19 Financial Assistance 
scheme.  
 
63  LO Bilaspur: six, LI Hamirpur: 14, LO Kullu: one, LO Nahan: two, LO Shimla: two. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
78 | P a g e  
 
LWO Bilaspur accepted the facts without providing any reason (May 2023). LWO Kullu 
stated (April 2023) that assistance was released to the beneficiary on the direction of 
Government whereas information of death of beneficiary was received later in July 2020. 
LWO Hamirpur stated  (May 2023) that there was no direction to verify at that point of 
time, the status of registered workers and there was no mechanism to find out live status of 
workers.   
The Board should ensure implementation/operationali sation of Management Information 
System (MIS) so that as and when date of death is entered, no more benefits may be 
provided to the worker other than death benefits.  
2.7.10.3 Financial Assistance for Education  
As per rule 281 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 – Financial Assistance for Education- up to two 
children of the members shall be eligible for such financial assistance as may be determined 
by the Board for such courses of study as may be specified by the Board from time to time. 
Details of financial as sistance for education have been given in Appendix 2.4. An 
application in Form- XLIII shall be submitted with such documents and within such time 
as may be specified by the Board. Financial assistance shall be granted subject to the 
following conditions namely:  
1. The son(s)/daughter(s) of the registered beneficiaries shall be entitled for the benefit 
under this scheme. 
2. They shall be regular student(s) in the recognised Institutions.  
3. This benefit shall not be allowed for more than two children of the beneficiary; and  
4. The beneficiary shall produce a certificate from the head of the respective 
institution where his/her son(s) or daughter(s) is studying.  
During 2017 -22, financial assistance for education amounting to ₹ 72.15 crore  was 
sanctioned to 74,849 beneficiaries. However, as per balance sheets the expenditure 
incurred during 2017-22 was ₹ 86.48 crore and mismatch in figures is already pointed out 
in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C). Audit noticed the following irregularities in sanction of 
assistance: 
(i) Financial assistance  amounting to ₹ 0.21 lakh  was disbursed twice  to two 
beneficiaries for their wards for same class/course year. 
(ii) Financial assistance of ₹ 0.56 lakh was sanctioned to two beneficiaries for more 
than two children which was irregular. 
(iii) Beneficiary with duplicate registration  was disbursed ₹ 0.19 lakh  financial 
assistance for education for his same ward against both registration numbers.  
The Board stated (April, May 2023) that field functionaries had been requested to initiate 
steps to recover the excess amount paid to beneficiaries.  
The Board should be more vigilant while processing claims and records should be 
maintained in such a manner so as to trace the record of previous welfare scheme payments.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
79 | P a g e  
 
2.7.10.4 Financial Assistance for Marriage  
As per Rule 282 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 , Financial Assistance for Marriage 64- the 
beneficiary after completion of two months of the membership shall be eligible to get 
financial assistance for his marriage and for the marriage of two children only. The 
beneficiary shall submit the application for such assistance to the Secretary o r the 
Authorised Officer in Form No. -XLIV along with requisite documents like certificate of 
marriage, copy of Parivar Register etc. During 2017-22, financial assistance for marriage 
amounting to ₹ 64.48 crore was sanctioned to 17,504 beneficiaries . However, as per 
balance sheets the expenditure incurred during 2017 -22 was ₹ 71.23 crore and mismatch 
in figures is already pointed out in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C). 
2.7.10.4 (A) Irregular sanction of marriage assistance  
Audit noticed that 38 number of beneficiaries, who received financial assistance of 
₹ 17.44 lakh for marriage during the period 2017-22, did not fulfill the essential criteria of 
the rule ibid as detailed below: 
(i) In five marriage assistance cases, assistance of ₹ 1.75 lakh was sanctioned twice to 
a beneficiary for the marriage of same child.  
(ii) Four number of beneficiaries  got registered with the Board after the date of their 
marriage or their children’s marriage resulting in irregular payment of ₹ 1.20 lakh.  
(iii)In case of 17 number of applicants/beneficiaries  the date of marriage was within 
the period of two months from the registration date with the Board which is contrary 
to rule ibid and irregular payment of ₹ 5.77 lakh was made to them.  
(iv) In 12 marriage assistance cases , total marriage assistance of ₹ 8.72 lakh was 
sanctioned to two members of the same family {Parent member and son/daughter 
(self) also registered as member} for a marriage.  
The Board stated (April 2023)  that for double payments and registration of beneficiaries 
after date of marriage, recovery process has been initiated. And the non-completion of two 
months’ membership condition, the Board has stated that the payments are made as per 
Rule 285(B). For pay ment made to two members of the same family for a marriage, the 
Board stated (April 2023) that the rule says that benefit under this rule is to be granted to 
the registered beneficiary and matter shall be brought to the notice of BOD in next meeting.  
The reply is not satisfactory as the Board has considered two months’ membership period 
from date of registration to date of sanction of the claim. The Board should have a 
calculated period of two months’ membership from date of registration to date of event i.e., 
date of marriage, for checking eligibility as envisaged in rule ibid.  
 
 
64  Rates of marriage assistance: ₹ 5 ,100/- (December 2008), ₹ 11 ,000/- (November 2011), ₹ 21 ,000/-  
(May 2013), ₹ 25,000/- (August 2014), ₹ 35,000/- (January 2018), ₹ 51,000/- (September 2020). 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
80 | P a g e  
 
2.7.10.4 (B) Less and excess payment of marriage assistance 
Audit noticed that  the Board had made excess or less payment on account of financial 
assistance for marriage as detailed in Table 2.21. 
Table 2.21: Details of less/excess payment of Marriage Assistance 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. 
Benefit 
disbursement year 
(Year of marriage/ 
claim) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
admissible as 
per rates 
Amount paid Less (-)/ 
excess(+) 
1 2018-19 (2013-14) 1 21,000 11,000 -10,000 
2 2018-22 (2017-18) 2 25,000 35,000 +20,000 
3 2020-21 (2020-21) 1 51,000 35,000 -16,000 
It can be seen from the Table 2.21 that two beneficiaries were paid less amount of 
₹ 0.26 lakh while two beneficiaries were paid excess amount of ₹ 0.20 lakh than the 
admissible rate of financial assistance.  
The Board confirmed the facts and stated (April 2023)  that the remaining amount will be 
given to the beneficiaries in further proceedings and LO concerned has been requested to 
recover the excess amount.  
The above findings are indicative of the fact that the ineffective system of vetting and 
verification of applications at field offices as well as the Board resulted in irregular 
payment to beneficiaries.  
2.7.10.5  Maternity Financial Assistance  
Rule 271 of the Act provides that  the women employees who are beneficiary of the F und 
shall be given ₹ 25,000/- (amended65 time to time by Govt. of HP) each as maternity benefit 
during the period of maternity. An application made by  a woman employee  in Form- 
XXXIV with such other documents as may be specified shall be submitted for this benefit 
provided that this benefit shall not be allowed for more than twice. 
Rule 285 of HPBOCW Rules, 2008  (amended May 2013) provides that all financial 
benefits under these rules, other than death benefits and medical assistance and where 
service condition is not specified in these rules, shall become payable only after the 
completion of two months of m embership of the F und. During 2017 -22, Maternity 
Financial Assistance claims amounting to ₹  11.87 crore were sanctioned to 2,754 cases.  
However, as per balance sheets the expenditure incurred during 2017-22 was ₹ 8.13 crore 
and mismatch in figures is already pointed out in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C). 
 
65  Maternity Financial Assistance: ₹ 1,000/ - w.e.f. March 2009, ₹ 10,000/ - w.e.f. November 2011,  
₹ 25,000/- w.e.f. January 2018. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
81 | P a g e  
 
Audit noticed that the Board had sanctioned irregular Maternity Financial Assistance 
amounting to ₹  1.30 lakh to seven beneficiaries during 2017 -22 as detailed in the 
Table 2.22: 
Table 2.22: Details of irregular Maternity Financial Assistance during 2017-22 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount of 
financial 
assistance paid 
Irregular 
amount paid Irregularities noticed 
1 5 80,00066 80,000 Assistance paid even though two months’ 
membership condition was not fulfilled.  
2 2 1,00,00067 50,000 
Payment made twice to the beneficiaries 
for the birth of twins which was 
unjustified as the rule does not provide for 
sanction of benefit on the basis of number 
of children born. So, amount of 
₹ 50,000/- was paid in excess.  
Total 7 1,80,000 1,30,000  
The Table 2.22 shows that provisions of HPBOCW Rules, 2008 were not followed by the 
Board which resulted in irregular/overpayment of financial assistance to the beneficiaries.  
The Board (April 2023) confirmed the facts and assured that the excess amount paid will 
be recovered and further added that in the abovementioned five cases of non -completion 
of membership, amount was paid according to the rule.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Board had misinterpreted the rule and eligibility period 
of two months was considered from date of registration to date of sanction instead of from 
date of registration to date of event.  
2.7.10.6 In-kind welfare assistance 
As per Rule 283 68 of HPBOCW Rule, 2008  –the Board may provide Washing Machine 
and Bicycle to female beneficiary and Induction Heater, Solar Lantern to all registered 
beneficiaries. The application for this assistance shall be submitted by the beneficiary to 
Authorised Officer of the Board in form no. XLVIII along with requisite documents. On 
receipt of application for the assistance from the beneficiaries (through LOs), the Secretary 
of the Board shall issue supply order to the rate contracted firms for supply of the material 
on Freight-on-Road basis at the Labour Office.  
During 2017-22, the Board sanctioned in-kind benefits to 1,32,114 beneficiaries amounting 
to ₹ 34.80 crore. However, as per balance sheets the expenditure incurred during 2017 -22 
was ₹ 38.53 crore and mismatch in figures is already pointed out in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C). 
 
66  3 cases at the rate of ₹ 10,000/- and 2 cases @ ₹ 25,000/-. 
67  At the rate of ₹ 50,000/- per beneficiary for birth of twins. 
68  Date of notification: 14 August 2014. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
82 | P a g e  
 
The Government of India in March 2021  restricted the disbursement of in -kind material 
except in extraordinary circumstances. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies: 
2.7.10.6 (A)  Absence of mechanism to ensure uniform coverage 
The Board had not devised a comprehensive mechanism for distribution of in-kind material 
so as to ensure distribution of benefits within a definite timeframe and as a result eligible 
beneficiaries were deprived of benefits of the schemes and material remained undistributed 
with the LOs as discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
The benefits were not distributed universally to all the registered workers but were 
sanctioned based on the applications received from the beneficiaries and due to lack of 
awareness workers might have been deprived of the benefits of the scheme. Also, the 
shortfall in the organi sation of camps reflects poor publicity on behalf of the Board as 
already discussed in Paragraph 2.3.4.4.  
2.7.10.6 (B)   Low coverage of registered beneficiaries under in-kind Welfare 
Schemes 
Audit observed that  the Board had introduced in -kind welfare scheme in the month of 
August 2014. The details of beneficiaries covered, sanctioned, supply received, and 
material distributed are given in Table 2.23:  
Table 2.23: Details of in-kind benefits sanctioned, supply received,  
distributed upto March 2022* 
Type of 
in-kind 
material 
Workers 
registered 
during 
2015-21 
No. of items 
sanctioned 
Supply 
received 
No. of items 
sanctioned 
but supply 
order not 
placed 
(per cent@) 
No. of items 
distributed to 
beneficiaries 
(per cent#) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
who didn’t 
receive in-
kind material 
(per cent#) 
Bicycle 2,47,858 45,233 24,314 20,919 (46) 23,878 (10) 2,23,980 (90) 
Induction 
Heater 2,47,858 68,148 64,249 3,899(6) 55,017 (22) 1,92,841 (78) 
Solar 
Lantern 2,47,858 60,512 38,070 22,442 (37) 35,647 (14) 2,12,211 (86) 
Washing 
Machine 2,47,858 20,292 19,846 446 (2) 19,786 (8) 2,28,072 (92) 
Total  1,94,185 1,46,479 47,706 (25) 1,34,328(54)  
Source: Information provided by the Board for the period 2015-21. 
*In-kind schemes closed as on 31 March 2021. @ Percentage of supply order not placed to no. of items 
sanctioned. # Percentage of beneficiaries to total registered beneficiaries. 
(i) It can be seen from  the Table 2.2 3 that against overall 2,47,858 registered 
beneficiaries with the Board during 2015 -21, only 23,878 (10 per cent) workers 
received Bicycle, 55,017 (22 per cent) workers received Induction Heater, 35,647 
(14 per cent) received Solar Lantern and 19,786 (eight  per cent) workers received 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
83 | P a g e  
 
Washing Machine. Beneficiaries ranging from 78 to 92 per cent were not covered 
under the in-kind benefit scheme.  
(ii) In 25 per cent of the items sanctioned (1,94,18 5), supply orders were not placed 
even after having sufficient funds and as a result not distributed to the beneficiaries, 
depriving them of intended benefits.  
The Board stated (December 2022) that beneficiaries had to apply for in -kind benefits on 
prescribed forms. Without applying for the same, the in-kind benefit cannot be distributed 
to all the registered workers. Also, supply order was not  issued as the rate contract with 
Controller of Store had expired with the firm. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Board had sufficient funds to disburse the in-kind benefits 
to the higher number of registered beneficiaries by wide publicity of the schemes , 
particularly in those places where BOC workers gather. Further, channels like Local 
Bodies, Unions etc. could have been involved to make BOC workers aware of these 
schemes. This would have helped in achieving its objective of betterment of living 
standards of maximum number of BOC workers.  
Also, during survey conducted by the Audit, it was noticed that out of 82 workers surveyed, 
57 workers (70 per cent ) were not aware about the Board and Welfare Schemes being 
implemented by the Board as discussed in Paragraph 2.8.2.1 (B).  
2.7.10.6 (C)  Non-distribution of in-kind material  
The Board has from time to time issued supply orders after receipt of application from the 
beneficiaries. In spite of this, large quantity of material worth ₹ 2.53 crore  was not 
distributed as of March 2022 as per details given in the Table 2.24. 
Table 2.24: Details of undistributed in-kind material as of March 2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of material 
Period 
of 
scheme 
Material 
received 
Material 
Distributed Balance (undistributed) 
Quantity Quantity Quantity Averaged value69 
Induction heater 2015-21 64,249 55,017 9,232 1.71 
Solar lantern 2015-20 38,070 35,647 2,423 0.63 
Bicycle 2015-21 24,314 23,878 436 0.14 
Washing 
machine 
2016-19 19,846 19,786 60 0.05 
Total  1,46,479 1,34,328 12,151 2.53 
Source: Information supplied by the Board. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.24 that 9,232 Induction Heaters, 2423 Solar Lantern, 
436 Bicycles and 60 Washing Machines remained undistributed as of March 2022 and 
 
69  Total cost of items procured divided by total items procured from date of implementation of scheme to 
March 2022.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
84 | P a g e  
 
warranty of these products would have expired and further deterioration of material could 
not be ruled out.  
In selected LOs/LI, it was noticed that in-kind items were lying in the stores as detailed in 
the Table 2.25: 
Table 2.25: Details of undistributed in-kind material in selected LOs/LI as of March 2022 
Type of material  LO Bilaspur LO Kullu LI Hamirpur Total 
Induction heater 1,570 8 4,611 6,189 
Solar lantern 904 0 467 1,371 
Bicycle 9 0 110 119 
Washing machine 2 0 1 3 
Source: Information supplied by the selected LOs/LI. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.25 that 6,189 Induction Heaters, 1371 Solar Lanterns, 119 
Bicycles and three Washing Machines remained undistributed in the selected LOs/LI as of 
March 2022.  
The Board stated (December 2022) that  there are some migrant registered workers who 
shifted to another State and material issued to them are also lying pending in the store and 
concerned District LOs/LIs are trying to contact these migrant labourers to receive their 
material from time to time. LO Bilaspur stated (January 2023) that distribution of 
remaining in-kind items was under process. LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that due 
to COVID-19 and shortage of staff, material could not be distributed.  
The reply must be seen in the light of the fact that the material remained undistributed even 
after lapse of two years from the date of closure of the schemes. Audit conducted Joint 
Physical Inspection of the stores maintained by the test-checked LOs/LI, wherein it noticed 
that undistributed in-kind items were kept in store. 
Pictures of material lying in the stores are given below: 
Picture 2.15: Washing Machines and Bicycles lying in the store of LO Bilaspur 
Picture 2.14: Induction Cookers, Solar Lanterns and various in-kind material lying in store of LI Hamirpur 


Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
85 | P a g e  
 
2.7.10.6 (D)  Expenditure on rent paid for storage of material  
The Board had incurred expenditure of ₹  0.40 crore on account of rent for storage of the 
material in different labour offices as of March 2022. The Government of India 
(22 March 2021) restricted the disbursement of in -kind material except in extraordinary 
circumstances. As material amounting to ₹ 2.53 cro re was still undistributed as of March 
2022, future expenditure in lieu of rent cannot be ruled out. 
Had the Board taken timely action for disbursal of in -kind items lying in the store, future 
expenditure on part of rent for storage could have been avoided.  
2.7.10.7  Medical Financial Assistance  
Rule 280 of the HPBOCW Rules, 2008  provides that the Board may sanction financial 
assistance70 to the beneficiaries who are hospitalised for five or more days due to accident 
or any disease. Financial assistance shall be given at the rates fixed from time to time by 
the Government of Himachal Pradesh through notification. During 2017 -22, the Board 
sanctioned Medical Assistance amounting to ₹ 3.12 crore to 2,724 beneficiaries. However, 
as per balance sheets the expenditure incurred during 2017 -22 was ₹ 3.69 crore and 
mismatch in figures has already been pointed out in Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C). 
Audit noticed that  comprehensive guidelines for medical assistance were not formulated 
and there were the following ambiguities in sanction of financial assistance: 
(i) Medical assistance amounting to ₹ 0.19 lakh was sanctioned to three beneficiaries 
for medical claims pertaining to period prior to registration as a beneficiary with 
the Board.  
(ii) No timeline had been fixed for the submission of medical claims in the rules. Audit 
observed that medical assistance was sanctioned for 61 medical claims amounting 
to ₹ 5.46 lakh that were claimed as late as 37 months from completion of treatment 
during 2017-22.  
(iii) The Board is granting medical assistance to the dependents (parents, spouse, 
children etc.) of beneficiaries but definition of dependents was not defined in the 
rule.  
The Board confirmed the facts and stated  (April 2023) that matters of claims sanctioned 
for prior period were being taken up with the LOs and comprehensive guidelines shall be 
formulated in accordance with the recommendation of the Expert Committee. 
 
 
70  Maximum rate of Medical Assistance: ₹ 1,000/ - (normal) and ₹ 5,000/ - (accidental) as of December 
2008, ₹ 5,000/ - as of May 2013, ₹ 10,000/ - (outdoor) and ₹ 30,000/ - (indoor) as of August 2014, 
₹ 50,000/- (outdoor) and 1,00,000/- (indoor) as of January 2020. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
86 | P a g e  
 
2.7.10.8  Health check-up – abysmal coverage of beneficiaries under annual health 
check up 
CAC in its 16th meeting (September 2014) recommended that Annual Health Check-up of 
every registered construction worker must be done by the concerned State Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Boards. 
Rule 280(3) of HPBOCW Rules, 2008  (added in January 2020) stipulates that the Board 
may conduct health check-up of the registered workers/beneficiaries, and their dependents 
and expenditure shall be borne by the Board.   
During 2017-22, the Board had directed (August 2019) the LOs/LI to conduct health check-
ups in September and October 2019 and 2,195 workers were targeted to be covered out of 
2,90,929 registered live workers under different LOs  as of March 2022 . The details of 
workers targeted for health check-ups are as shown in the Table 2.26. 
Table 2.26: Workers covered under health check-up camp during 2017-22 
Name of Labour 
Officer 
Total live workers as on 
03/2022 
Workers to be covered 
during camp in year 
2019-20 
Workers covered 
under health  
check-up 
Bilaspur 35,675 550 0 
Baddi 3,769 60 45 
Hamirpur 64,969 270 212 
Chamba 21,140 00* 0 
Kangra 34,919 00* 46 
Mandi 58,665 00* 179 
Kullu 17,832 290 290 
Kinnaur 7,605 600 00 
Shimla 6,467 00* 00 
Rampur 10,948 180 45 
Nahan 6,886 55 106 
Solan 7,198 00* 150 
Una 14,856 190 56 
Total 2,90,929 2,195 1,129 
Source: Record of the Board and information provided by the LI Hamirpur.  
*No target was set by the Board for health check-ups. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.26 that while targets for coverage of workers were not set 
in five LOs and less than one per cent of live registered workers were covered in the health 
check-up camps organised by the Board. 
In the test-checked LOs/LI, LI Hamirpur covered 212 beneficiaries and LO Kullu covered 
290 beneficiaries under health check-up camps.  
LO Bilaspur stated (May 2023) that  no health check -up camp was organi sed by them, 
however, LO Bilaspur office cooperates with the Health Department whenever required. 
LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that the office will conduct health check-up camps as 
per the direction of the Board. LO Kullu stated ( February 2023 ) that due to extreme 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
87 | P a g e  
 
workload, shortage of staff and COVID-19 pandemic, it was difficult to cover live workers 
under the health check-ups.  
It is evident from the above that the coverage of beneficiaries was abysmally low and the 
Board has failed in ensuring that the health check -ups of all the workers were conducted. 
Besides, during Beneficiary Survey and Joint Physical Inspection, 48 workers stated that 
no health check-up was conducted as discussed in Paragraph 2.8.2.1 (B).  
2.7.10.9 Training for Skill Development    
As per the Model Welfare Scheme (July 2018),  it was mandated to provide financial 
assistance in the form of Stipend and Training expenses to BOC workers and such training 
may be limited to once in three years. Skill Development may also be provided to the 
dependents of BOC workers but that may be without any stipend. The expenses to be 
incurred under this head in a Financial Year should not exceed 10 per cent of the cess 
collected in the previous year.  
2.7.10.9 (A) Non-utilisation of available funds for the scheme 
Audit noticed that the Board had incurred minimal expenditure on account of Stipend and 
Training of the registered workers and their dependents under Skill Development during 
2018-22. The details of cess collected and amount available for expenditure on skill 
development during 2018-22 in the State is given in Table 2.27. 
Table 2.27: Cess collected and available funds for the scheme during the period 2017-21 
(₹ in crore) 
Cess 
collection 
Year 
Amount of Cess 
Collected 
Training 
year 
Amount permissible 
for expenditure on 
training* 
Funds utilised 
(per cent) 
2017-18 68.85 2018-19 6.88 - 
2018-19 67.67 2019-20 6.77 - 
2019-20 82.11 2020-21# 8.21 - 
2020-21 85.2 2021-22 8.52 0.4 (5)  
Total 303.83  30.38 0.4 (1) 
*@10 per cent of Cess collected in previous year.  
# During 2020-21, due to the COVID-19 pandemic the training could not be conducted. 
It can be seen from the Table 2.27 that an amount of ₹ 30.38 crore was permissible to the 
Board for expenditure on skill development training scheme during 2018 -22 but only 
₹ 0.4 crore (one per cent) was utilised for the same in one year only viz., 2021-22.  
The Board stated (February, May 2023) that  it had implemented the Recognition of Prior 
Learning71 scheme since 2015. 
 
71  RPL is also training scheme for BOC workers implemented by the Board prior to notification of Model 
Welfare Scheme in 2018.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
88 | P a g e  
 
The reply is not acceptable as training was only held in the years 2015 -16 and 2021 -22 
after a gap of five years and permissible amount as per Model Welfare Scheme guidelines 
was not utilised by the Board.  
2.7.10.9 (B) Non-achievement of targets 
Audit noticed that Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) were signed in May 2020 and 
May 2021  with three training providers to impart training to construction workers 
registered with the Board under Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) scheme. During 
2021-22, the three training providers organi sed training camps in their respective allotted 
regions to provide masonry training to the construction workers. The details of target, 
achievement and shortfall are given in Table 2.28.  
Table 2.28: Details of training provided under Skill Development Training Scheme during 
2021-22 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Training 
Providers 
District/Region 
allotted Target Achievement Shortfall 
(per cent) 
1 M/s Labour Net Services 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
Bilaspur, Baddi, 
Hamirpur and Kinnaur 10,000 6,459 3,541 (35) 
2 M/s G&G Skills 
Developers (P) Ltd. 
Mandi, Kangra, Kullu 
and Una 10,000 7,973 2,027 (20) 
3 M/s Maa Saraswati 
Educational Trust 
Chamba, Rampur, 
Shimla and Solan 10,000 4,863 5,137 (51) 
Total 30,000 19,295 10,705 (36) 
It can be seen from the Table 2. 28 that there was a shortfall of 20 to 51 per cent in 
achievement of targets of workers to be covered under the training scheme.  
Also, against total 2,22,158 live registered workers as of March 2021, only 30,000 
(14 per cent) were targeted by the Board and 19,295 (nine per cent) were provided with 
skill training.  
Thus, non-implementation of the scheme during 2018-20 and non-achievement of targets, 
stymied the intended benefit of the scheme.  
2.7.11 Non-conducting of periodic Social Audit 
As per the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court  (March 2018), the Auditing standards 
of Social Audit as developed by the CAG for MGNREGA scheme have been adopted 
mutatis mutandis for carrying out social audits in respect of the implementation of the Act. 
As per the scope of audit, Social Audit was to be conducted in every Block (rural areas) 
and ward (urban areas) such that all Wards and/or Blocks of a State are covered within a 
given period of two years. 
Audit noticed that Social Audit was conducted  on a pilot basis only in three Blocks 72 
(three per cent) out of total 88 Blocks in the State, by the Social Audit Unit of Himachal 
Pradesh during 2018 -19 for the period 2017 -18. The Social Audit Unit submitted their 
 
72  Bijhri (Hamirpur), Amb (Una) and Kangra. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
89 | P a g e  
 
report to the Board with observations noticed in the disbursement of in-kind material to the 
beneficiaries and gave their suggestion for bringing more transparency in the process of 
registration and disbursement of in-kind material.  
Despite the shortcomings73 pointed out in the Social Audit Report, the Board had not made 
any sincere efforts to conduct social audit for the period 2017 -22 in all 
Districts/Blocks/Wards in the State.  
The Board stated (December 2022) that  Social Audit is conducted by Social Audit 
Department and the Board has written to the Social Audit Unit for conducting Social Audit.  
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the Social Audit could have pointed 
out the deficiencies in the process of distribution of welfare benefits and recommendations 
would have helped in setting up a more robust system of distribution of welfare benefits.  
2.7.12  Issues relating to processing of claims  
 
2.7.12.1  No timeline to accept and reject applications for Welfare Schemes 
As per Section 22(1) of the Act , the Board has implemented various Welfare Schemes 
detailed in Rule 271 to 283 in the HPBOCW Rules, 2008.  
Audit observed that the Board had not fixed any timeline for acceptance, rejection, sanction 
and delivery of welfare benefits to beneficiary to avoid delays with reference to timeline 
prescribed in  the Model Welfare Scheme 74 as discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
However, the Board had only fixed eligibility condition of two months’ membership since 
registration for availing benefits under Welfare Schemes , except death and medical 
assistance. No timeline has been prescribed for disbursing other benefits. Also, there is no 
mechanism to inform the applicant about the status of application viz. sanction, rejection, 
pendency etc. 
The Board stated (December 2022) that  membership or two -month membership is the 
timeline for accepting of application regarding claim forms of various schemes.  
The reply is not acceptable as membership, or two -month membership, are eligibility 
conditions for availing benefits and not the timeline for processing of the claims. The Board 
should formulate detailed timelines for all Welfare Schemes . Also, no action taken on 
rejected claims sent back to LO for rectification and delay in approval of claims as per 
timeline fixed by Model Welfare Scheme were noticed by Audit as discussed in the 
succeeding Paragraph. 
 
73  Seven workers who were disbursed in -kind benefits as per LO record, denied having received in -kind 
benefits and one worker reported about inferior quality of the in-kind material.  
74  Pursuant to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 4 July 2018, the MoL&E formulated the 
Model Welfare Scheme for Building and Other Construction Workers and the Action Plan for 
strengthening the implementation machinery. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
90 | P a g e  
 
2.7.12.2  No action taken under process claims by LOs/LIs 
Audit noticed that, in test-checked LO/LI75, 70 claims76 for medical assistance, 52 claims 
for financial assistance for education and two claims for financial assistance for marriage 
were reverted by the Board to the respective LOs for various reasons such as treatment 
taken from private hospital, dependent certificate of member not attached, m edical bills 
not verified by medical officer etc. and these claims were sent back to the concerned LO/LI. 
However, no action was taken by LO/LI to address the objections raised by the Board by 
informing the beneficiaries and the same were lying with their office as of February 2023. 
Resultantly, beneficiaries were deprived of the intended benefits of the schemes.  
Also, it was noticed that the LO/LI concerned had not maintained any register of claims. 
The concerned LWO/LI stated (February and May 2023) that action could not be taken due 
to rush of work, however rectification process is under process.  
2.7.12.3 Delays in sanction of claims  
In order to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of the Act, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court directed (January 2010) that benefits under the Act should be extended to 
the registered workers within a stipulated time frame, preferably within six months. 
As per Model Welfare Scheme , Ministry of Labour and Employment (July 2018), 
compensation should be disbursed in a definite time frame not exceeding 60 days from the 
date of death of the beneficiary.  
Audit noticed that financial assistance under various Welfare Schemes were sanctioned 
during 2017-22 with delays as detailed below:  
(i) It was noticed that 124 applications for financial/in -kind assistance for education, 
maternity/paternity benefit, marriage and bicycle were sanctioned with a delay 
ranging from two to 49 months, after the expiry of the stipulated six-month time 
frame, from date of application to sanction of claims.  
(ii) LO Bilaspur sent 9,235 applications of beneficiaries received through the Unions 
for financial assistance for education to the Board, out of which 9,141 of 
applications were sanctioned with a delay ranging from one to 24 months, after the 
expiry of the stipulated six-month time period, from date of application to sanction. 
There was also a delay from three to 28 months in forwarding the applications to 
the Board by the Labour Office. 
(iii) In LI Hamirpur, it was noticed that 317  nominees of beneficiaries were provided 
death benefit from August 2018 to March 2022. Out of which 63 claims of 
applicants were disbursed after delays of more than 60 days (delay ranging from 19 
 
75  LO Bilaspur and LI Hamirpur. 
76  LO Bilaspur: 60, LI Hamirpur: 10. 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
91 | P a g e  
 
to 39 days after lapse of 60 days) even from the date of dispatch77 from the LI which 
is in violation of provisions of Model Welfare Scheme 
The Board stated (April 2023) that the Board has many Welfare Schemes for workers and 
claim forms are submitted to LOs/LI and after scrutiny the claim forms are sent to the 
Board. Claims are scrutinised in Board headquarters, which is a time -consuming process 
and if any error is found, this causes unnecessary delay in clearing the benefit as the claim 
is sent back to LOs/LI for rectification. 
The delay in processing and disbursal of claims adds to the anguish of the family members 
who are in the lowest strata of financial structure of society and either have no or have 
limited alternate source of income. 
2.7.13  Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
The State Government has prepared Drishti Himachal Pradesh -2030 to achieve all the 
SDGs by 2030. The contribution of the Board to achieving the SDGs through Welfare 
Schemes is as detailed below: 
I. Good Health and Well-being (SDG-3):  
The Board had implemented five Welfare Schemes78 for upliftment of 
health standards of the workers and sanctioned ₹ 14.99 crore in respect 
of 5,478 workers  during 2017 -22. Shortcomings noticed in 
implementation of these schemes are discussed in Paragraph 2.7.10. 
II. Quality Education (SDG-4):  
The Board had implemented scheme of financial assistance for 
education to provide educational and learning opportunities to the 
wards of the workers in the State and sanctioned ₹ 72.15 crore to 
74,849 workers  during 2017 -22. Shortcomings noticed in 
implementation of the scheme are discussed in Paragraph 2.7.10.3. 
III. Protect Labour  Rights and Promote Safe Working 
Environments (SDG 8.8):  
The State Government has formulated two targets viz. strive to 
achieve wellbeing of workers engaged in the unorganised sector, 
particularly women migrants and create a data base on building and 
maintenance workers engaged in unorganised sector, especially of 
those engaged in unsafe employment.  
The Board has not formulated any Action Plan to achieve this  
SDG 8.8 and has not maintained data base of workers engaged in 
 
77  As the date of receipt of applications was not available with the LI Hamirpur office the delay has been 
calculated from the date of dispatch of applications to the Board.  
78  Medical Assistance, Maternity Benefit, Female Birth Gift Scheme, Mentally Retarded Children Benefit 
Scheme, Health Check-up of Beneficiaries. 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
92 | P a g e  
 
the unorganised sector. However, inspections are being conducted to check the 
working conditions under various Acts and 2,969 number of inspections  were 
conducted by Inspectors during 2017 -22. Shortcomings noticed in conducting 
inspections are discussed in Paragraph 2.6.2. 
2.8 Internal Control Mechanism and Beneficiary Survey  
 
2.8.1  Internal Control and Monitoring 
Internal Audit and Internal Control System are the important mechanisms to ensure the 
smooth functioning of an organisation. Effective internal control helps in exercising checks 
on various activities of the organisation whereas internal audit system acts as an effective 
tool in exercising various checks on expenditure. 
2.8.1.1  Lack of Internal Control and Monitoring Mechanism  
Audit noticed the following deficiencies: 
(I) No database of workers engaged  in construction activities throughout the State 
had been prepared. 
(II) There was a delay in deposit of registration fee collected and non -maintenance 
of Register of Receipts.  
(III) The Register of Identity Cards  did not provide space/column for signature of 
beneficiary, to whom the Identity Card was issued. In the absence of column for 
signature of beneficiary the receipt of the Identity Card by the beneficiary cannot 
be confirmed.   
(IV) Mismatch in records  maintained by the Labour Offices and the Board was 
noticed with regard to number of workers registered and camps organised during 
2017-22. 
(V) Cess was being deposited in the bank accounts of the Board, but reconciliation 
of cess was not being done and as a result an amount of ₹ 112.39 crore was lying 
in suspense head of account since 2019.  
(VI) One of the methods adopted by the Board for monitoring progress was 
submission of Monthly Progress Reports (MPR) by LOs to the Board on the 15th 
of every month. The MPR by the Labour Officers was submitted with delays to 
the Board and does not cover the progress with regard to benefits received (other 
than in kind) by the beneficiaries. 
(VII) There was l ack of comprehensive guidelines  for the Welfare Schemes  
implemented by the Board.  
(VIII) Lack of proper scrutiny of applications while sanctioning welfare scheme 
benefits to the beneficiaries, le d to double payment of assistance, less payment 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
93 | P a g e  
 
of assistance , payment of assistance for period prior to registration with the 
Board, without proper documents  along with application and also delays in 
processing of claims etc. as already discussed in Paragraph 2.7.  
(IX) There was absence of internal audit wing in the Board. 
Due to lack of internal control/ monitoring mechanism, risks related to improper 
maintenance of records, erroneous payment of welfare benefits and irregularities in 
processing of claims could not be ruled out.  
The Board confirmed the facts and stated (April 2023) that full time HPFAS79 Officers are 
not being posted by Himachal Pradesh Government in the Board and accordingly internal 
control is not being implemented in its full spirit. Matter has been taken up with the 
Himachal Pradesh Government from time to time. The Board also stated (December 2022) 
that as pointed out by Audit the modified MPRs have been demanded from the LOs/LI and 
shall be compiled on regular basis.  
2.8.1.2  Physical verification of store items 
Rule 140 of Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules (HPFR), 2009 provides that (1) The officer-
in-charge of the stores shall cause to maintain the inventory for fixed assets, consumable 
goods and dead stock or unserviceable items. 
(2) Head of the Department shall conduct the physical verification of fixed assets, 
consumable goods and dead stock or unserviceable items or cause it to be conducted 
through his subordinate officer(s) or through a committee constituted either by him or by  
the State Government, at least once in a year.  
Audit noticed that in selected LOs/LI, physical verification of store items/in-kind material80 
had not been conducted since 2015-16. 
As per the Joint Physical Inspection of the store (November 2021) of LI Hamirpur, shortage 
of 290 bicycles was noticed in previous Audit. LI Hamirpur acted at the behest of Audit 
and made recovery of amount of 190 bicycles (not delivered) from the vendor and 100 
undisbursed bicycles were recovered from the sites/villages where the distribution of 
bicycles was carried out. No shortcoming was found during Joint Physical Inspection of 
the same store by Audit in February 2023. But still no physical verification of stock was 
being done by the LI Hamirpur.  
LO Bilaspur stated (February 2023)  that no direction/instruction was given by the Board 
for conducting physical verification. LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023) that due to heavy 
workload stock registers could not be verified.  
 
79  Himachal Pradesh Finance and Accounts Services (HPFAS). 
80  Bicycle, Washing Machine, Induction Heater and Solar Lantern. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
94 | P a g e  
 
The reply is not acceptable as State Financial Rules regarding Annual Physical Verification 
of store items were to be followed by the LOs which could also help in detecting the 
mistakes during procurement of goods.  
2.8.1.3  Maintenance of Register of Receipts  
Rule 3(7) of the HPFR, 2009 provides that  (a) Detailed procedure regarding assessment, 
collection, allocation, remission and abandonment of revenue and other receipts shall be 
laid down in the guidelines of the Department responsible for the same, in consultation 
with the Finance Department.  
(b) In the Departments in which officers are required to receive money on behalf of the 
Government and issue receipts thereof, the Departmental regulations shall provide for the 
maintenance of a proper account thereof. 
Audit noticed that  the selected LOs/LI had not maintained Register of Receipts for the 
amount received by them on account of registration/renewal contribution from registered 
workers and its remittance to the Board during 2017-22. In the absence of the Register, the 
authenticity of actual receipt in lieu of registration/renewal contribution collected during 
above period from registered workers and remitted to the Board could not be verified in 
audit. 
LI Hamirpur stated (February 2023)  that the Board had not issued any direction for 
maintenance of Receipt Register. LO Bilaspur stated (February 2023) that due to rush of 
work and shortage of staff register could not be maintained. LO Kullu stated 
(December 2022) that register has been maintained but due to rush of work and shortage 
of staff registers were not complete.  
The reply is not acceptable as financial rules were to be followed by the LOs/LI.  
2.8.1.4  Absence of comprehensive format of Identity Card register  
Rule 266(8) of HPBOCW Rules state s that the Secretary of the Board or other officer 
authorised by him in this behalf shall issue to every beneficiary, an identity card with a 
photo of the beneficiary affixed in form- XXXII and maintain a register of identity cards 
so issued in form- XXXIII. The identity card contains Part I to IV as shown in Table 2.29.  
Table 2.29.: Details contained in the Identity Card  
Part I Complete detail of registered beneficiary  
Part II Subscription and renewal of the registration 
Part III Detail of building or other construction work done by the beneficiary  
Part IV Detail of welfare assistance/schemes disbursed to registered beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
95 | P a g e  
 
Table 2.30: Format of Register of Identity Card  
Name of District-------- 
Sr. 
No.  
Number of 
Identity Card 
Date of 
Issue  
Name and 
address of the 
worker  
Signature of 
Executive Officer  
Remarks 
      
      
From the Table 2.30, it can be seen that prescribed format of Register does not include 
application date, benefit granted/rejected with reason, complete detail of 
family/nomination, work continuity certificate etc. which are prescribed in the Identity 
Card. Consequently, such details of beneficiaries were not entered in the Register of 
Identity Cards with the LOs/LI and shortcomings such as double registration of 
beneficiaries, double payment of benefit, non-renewal of registration etc. could have been 
avoided if the registers were maintained in similar format as of Identity Card.  
The Board confirmed the facts and stated (April 2023)  that discrepancy pointed out by 
Audit shall be eliminated through software/portal being developed through NIC. 
2.8.2  Beneficiary Survey   
Beneficiary Survey of 325 beneficiaries /construction workers was conducted 
(December 2022 to February 2023) as per criteria below:  
(I) 243 beneficiaries, who had received welfare benefits under eight selected Welfare 
Schemes 81 , were selected randomly from the records of the Board to check 
eligibility conditions and timely disbursal of benefits.  
(II) Audit conducted Joint Physical Inspection of 26 construction sites82 along with the 
staff of concerned labour offices and works executing agencies and 82 building and 
other construction workers (71 unregistered workers  and 11 registered workers ) 
were surveyed at these construction sites to assess the extent of registration, reasons 
for non -registration, awareness among construction workers about Welfare 
Schemes implemented by the Board and facilities provided to workers at the 
construction sites by the employers. 
2.8.2.1   Findings of the Beneficiary Survey 
 
2.8.2.1 (A) Beneficiary Survey of workers selected under ten Welfare Schemes  
Findings of Beneficiary Survey of 243 registered workers who had received welfare 
benefits are depicted in Figure 2.2: 
 
81  COVID-19 Financial Assistance, Education Assistance, Marriage Assistance, Death and Funeral 
Financial Assistance, Maternity/Paternity Financial Assistance, Induction Cooker, Washing Machines, 
Solar Lamp. 
82  LO Bilaspur: six, LO Kullu: 11, LI Hamirpur: nine. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
96 | P a g e  
 
Figure 2.2: Findings of Beneficiary Survey  
The above figure shows that most of the benefits (82  per cent ) were distributed to 
MGNREGS workers and only three  per cent of beneficiaries surveyed  were engaged in 
any kind of construction work during the survey period. Welfare benefits were distributed 
to 42 per cent surveyed beneficiaries, who were ineligible due to non-fulfillment of various 
conditions which shows that the proper scrutiny of welfare applications was not being done 
by the LOs/LI or the Board. Claims of nine  per cent workers were disbursed with a delay 
ranging from 57 to 730 days, after the lapse of stipulated six months from the date of 
receiving of claim.  
2.8.2.1 (B)  Beneficiary Survey of workers during Joint Physical Inspection 
Findings of Beneficiary Survey conducted of 82 construction workers  while conducting 
Joint Physical Inspection of the construction sites/establishments is depicted in the 
Figure 2.3.  
 
TOTAL NO. OF WORKERS SURVEYED 
243 
23 
NO. OF CLAIMS DISBURSED WITH DELAY 
NO. OF MGNREGS WORKERS  
199 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES WERE 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS 
44 
WORKERS WERE FOUND ENGAGED IN 
CONSTRUCTION WORK DURING SURVEY PERIOD 
7 
57 TO 730 DAYS’ DELAY IN DISBURSAL OF CLAIMS 
(82%) 
(18%) 
(3%) 
(9%) 
102 
(42%) 
 WORKERS DID NOT FULFIL ELIGIBILITY 
CRITERIA 
WORK CONTINUITY CERTIFICATE NOT 
ON RECORD 
78 
10 
 3 
 9 
2 
90 DAYS’ CERTIFICATE NOT 
PROVIDED WHILE REGISTRATION 
AS PER WORK CERTIFICATE, LESS THAN 90 
DAYS’ WORK DONE IN PREVIOUS 12 MONTHS 
AUTHENTICITY OF APPLICATION NOT VERIFIED 
BY THE REGISTERING OFFICER (LO/LI) 
REGISTRATION FORM WITHOUT INFORMATION 
OF PERIOD OF WORK DONE IN PREVIOUS YEAR 

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
97 | P a g e  
 
Figure 2.3: Findings of Beneficiary Survey conducted of 82 construction workers 
Note: The area of the bubble is not proportional to the number of workers.  
The Beneficiary Survey revealed that out of the 82 workers surveyed, 64 (78 per cent) were 
migrant construction workers. Among these surveyed workers, health and safety measures 
such as fire safety equipment, health check -ups, safety equipment, and first -aid kits were 
not available/provided by the employers. Basic labour rights such as a weekly day off and 
minimum wages were also not given to the surveyed workers. Basic amenities such as 
shelter facilities were similarly not provided.  
2.9 Conclusion 
The State Government’s rule for marriage assistance, as established under the Act, fails to 
specify who from the family is eligible to claim the assistance. This led to situations where 
the same marriage received  assistance more than once. Furthermore, the health check -up 
framework was deficient in supervision and record-keeping by the Board. Additionally, the 
minimum registration period of three years, instead of the 10 years recommended by the 
Model Welfare Scheme, was adopted  for disbursing pension  without a thorough 
assessment of the long-term liabilities consequent to this decision. 
Process of registration of establishments and workers remained ineffective as instances of 
non-registration of establishments and workers, lack of coordination with Local Bodies to 
SAFETY EQUIPMENT 
NOT PROVIDED  
34 (41%) 
 
TOTAL NO. OF 
WORKERS 
SURVEYED  
82 
FIRE SAFETY 
EQUIPMENT 
NOT 
AVAILABLE AT 
THE SITE  
59 (72%) 
 
SHELTER NOT 
PROVIDED 6 (7%) 
A DAY OFF NOT GIVEN IN A WEEK  
51 (62%) 
   
UNREGISTERE
D WORKERS 
71 (87%) 
UNAWARENESS 
ABOUT WELFARE 
SCHEMES  
57 (70%)  
MIGRANT 
WORKERS 
64 (78%) 
FIRST-AID KIT NOT 
AVAILABLE 
38 (46%) 
 
  
  
  
HEALTH CHECK-UP NOT 
CONDUCTED  48 (59%) 
 
MINIMUM WAGES NOT 
PAID 
5 (6%) 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
98 | P a g e  
 
register and collect cess  from employer/contractor, duplicate and bogus registration of 
workers, etc. were noticed. Also, there was a shortfall in organization of camps and 
registration of workers and it was not ensured that details of work done are entered in the 
Identity Cards of the workers. The mismatch in figures of the Board and LOs/LI of 
registered workers and camps organi sed, points towards an ineffective reporting 
mechanism. 
The Assessing Officers -cum-LOs had not made efforts to obtain Form -I from all the 
employers as per provision of Cess Rules and the LOs were not issuing assessing orders. 
The Board had not coordinated with the Local Bodies and Executing Agencies for sharing 
information of Building Plans and construction projects approved.   
The Board or LOs had not maintained establishment -wise data of cess collected which 
resulted in non -reconciliation of cess amounting to ₹  226.52 crore. The Board or the 
Department had not prescribed a uniform format to transfer cess amount in the fund.  
Besides, there were instances of short realization/non -remittance of cess to the Board due 
to dishonored cheques/bank drafts not corrected/revalidated in time. 
The test-checked LOs/LIs did not conduct regular inspections as per the provisions of the 
Acts and Rules so as to check the facilities of health, safety and welfare of the construction 
workers. Deaths due to accidents at the sites could have been avoided, which showed lack 
of proactive actions on the part of the officials towards the safety of the construction 
workers.  
The Joint Physical Inspection also revealed that construction sites lacked safety and 
security measures such as first -aid kit, safety equipment for workers, on site fire safety 
equipment and basic amenities of water, toilet and shelter.  
The State Government had not provided adequate staff to achieve targets of inspections. 
The targets were not revised after 2011, showing that the Department did not analyse the 
position of ongoing construction activities in the State vis -a-vis required and  available 
manpower. Even the prescribed targets were not achieved. The responsibility of 
maintenance of any inspection notes or registers was not fulfilled by the LOs/LIs and 
compliance to lack of safety measures noticed, if any, during previous inspectio ns could 
not be ensured. The overall mechanism of inspections remained ineffective as there was no 
risk-based assessment, periodical visits or inspections of construction sites where 
accidental deaths were reported. 
The Department and the Board had not prepared any Annual Action Plan nor had fixed 
long/short term targets. They had not conducted any survey of workers across the State to 
build a database for aiding in decision making and formulation of schemes. The Board had 
not maintained comprehensive individual worker/beneficiary -wise database of registered 
workers.  

Chapter II: PA on Welfare of Building and Other Construction Workers 
 
99 | P a g e  
 
Administrative irregularities continued to be present in functioning of the Board relating 
to the Board and State Advisory Committee meetings, ineptness in the Budget formulation, 
delays in approval of Annual Budget and Annual Report and submission of annual accounts 
for audit.  
Shortage of staff with the Board had also adversely affected the implementation of the Acts 
relating to welfare of construction workers. Effective institutional system for social audit 
of benefits provided to the construction workers was not devised.  
As regards financial management, huge accumulation of fund which rose to ₹ 703.15 crore 
in 2021-22 was noticed.  
Implementation of Welfare Schemes faced problems of inconsistency in rules, delay in 
disbursal of welfare benefits, non -coverage of beneficiaries, non -implementation of 
notified Welfare Schemes, less/excess payments, unfruitful expenditure, non -distribution 
of in-kind material kept in the store. Also, inaction on part of LOs/LIs for rectification of 
rejected claims was noticed by Audit.  
2.10  Recommendations 
The State Government may  
• Specify in the application form related to financial assistance for marriage that 
assistance has not been applied/obtained by different family members including self 
for the marriage of same person. Rule should also bring clarity to avoid instances of 
marriage assistance more than once. 
• Ensure compliance with the recommendations of Model Welfare Scheme. Deviation, 
if any, should be properly assessed before adoption 
• The Department should operationalise use of GIS mapping and conduct proper 
inspections for monitoring construction activities in the State.  
• The registration of all eligible workers in the State must be ensured through 
proactive approach on behalf of the Board and the Department by way of camps, 
targeted publicity campaigns, special drives etc. instead of leaving it on the initiative 
of the workers.  
• The LOs should ensure that the employers/contractors submit monthly returns in 
Form-XXX so that information about construction workers eligible for registration 
at the construction site would be available with the LOs. 
• Also, lacunae in the registration process resulting in duplicate registration, bogus 
registration on the basis of fraudulent certificates etc. must be removed through 
development of appropriate software with the necessary controls.   
• The Department and the Board must ensure that comprehensive database on account 
of cess is prepared at LOs and the Board level.  
• Process of obtaining Form -I and assessment of cess thereafter must be followed 
diligently to avoid any loss of revenue.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
100 | P a g e  
 
• The Department should coordinate with other concerned Departments to collect cess 
from all eligible establishments in the State. There could be added a provision of 
“cess deposition” in the application for Building Plan approval from Local Bodies.  
• Cess collection should be reconciled regularly by the Board as well as the Cess 
Collector.  
• The Government or the Board should provide a uniform format to be submitted by 
all the cess deductors with details of individual establishments/construction works, 
amount, period of cess deducted, mode of cess transfer in Board’s bank account, 
details of pending cess (if any), amount of cess paid in advance (if any), jurisdiction 
of Labour Office etc. 
• The LOs and LIs, being the field agents of the Department and the Board, must 
inspect the construction sites regularly and maintain inspection notes and registers 
to ensure compliance to the issues raised or shortcomings noticed during previous 
inspections regarding the safety and health of the construction workers.  
• The Department should revise inspection targets regularly after analyzing ongoing 
construction activities and also available staff strength and formulate a 
comprehensive inspection policy specifying periodical visits and risk -based 
assessment of construction sites in the State.  
• The Department and the Board should develop software for registration of workers 
and establishments through which the applications for welfare benefits may also be 
submitted, scrutinised and sanctioned for speedy disbursal of benefits to worker.  
• The Board and SAC meetings should be held at regular intervals  and preparation 
and approval of Annual Accounts and Annual Reports must be ensured within 
prescribed time frame.  
• The Board should coordinate with Social Audit Unit of the State and take steps to 
conduct Social Audit in all the Blocks of the State periodically. 
• The Board may ensure implementation of schemes to provide maximum benefits to 
all eligible workers in the State, thereby avoiding accumulation of funds. Also, 
expenditure from the fund should be in accordance with provisions of the Act/rules 
• It is recommended that avoidable expenditure towards income tax liability is 
addressed. 
• A database on account of welfare benefits should be prepared to remove 
irregularities regarding double sanctions, instances of unjustified and irregular 
payments and it also warrants proper scrutiny of applications and documents 
attached by the field officers as well as the Board while sanctioning the claims.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Quality Management in Procurement, 
Storage and Distribution of Food Items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 | P a g e  
 
Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and 
Distribution of Food Items 
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs  
 
3.1 Introduction 
The Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs (Department) 
(formerly part of Cooperative Department) came into existence as a separate unit in 
the State in the year 1966. The Department deals with the demand and supply of 
various essential commodities in the open market as well as the Public Distribution 
System (PDS). The work of the Department is supplemented by the Himachal Pradesh 
State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (Corporation).  
In Himachal Pradesh, seven food items (wheat, wheat flour, rice, pulses, sugar, edible 
oil and salt) are being distributed through Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
to the beneficiaries through a network of 120 wholesale godowns of the Corporation 
and 5,068 Fair Price Shops (FPSs) . Allocation of wheat and rice is made by the 
Government of India under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 20131 whereas the 
allocation of pulses, edible oil, salt and sugar 2 is made by the State Government under 
Himachal Pradesh State Specially Subsidised Scheme 3 . The Department further 
allocates the same to the Districts on the basis of total ration card holders available in 
the Districts. 
The Corporation lifts wheat and rice from 20 godowns of the Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) as per the allocation made by the Government of India. Further, the Corporation 
procures the remaining food items under State subsidy by inviting tenders and signing 
MoUs with the suppliers. Finally, the  food items are lifted by 5,068 FPS owners from 
120 wholesale godowns of the Corporation for distribution to the cardholders. 
To maintain the quality of the food items, samples of various commodities distributed 
to the beneficiaries under TPDS and Himachal Pradesh State Specially Subsidi sed 
Scheme are drawn by the field staff of the Department regularly on a targeted basis and 
are sent to the Departmental Food Testing Laboratory (FTL) at the Directorate office, 
Shimla for analysis. In addition, the Corporation also sends the samples to empanelled 
laboratories operated by the private agencies. 
A Performance Audit (PA) on Public Distribution System was conducted and included 
in the CAG’s Audit Report for the year ended March 2011, followed by a follow-up on 
audit findings in the CAG’s Audit Report for the year ended March 2018, highlighting 
 
1  Covers 7.43 lakh card holders belonging to Priority Households (PHH) and Antodaya Anna Yojna 
(AAY). 
2  Subsidised by Government of India for AAY beneficiaries. Other than AAY are subsidised by the 
State Government.  
3  Covers all 19.48 lakh card holders. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
102 | P a g e  
 
deficiencies4 in quality management in the State . The Report was discussed in the 
Public Accounts Committee  (PAC) of Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly in 
February 2015 and August 2016 and was  finally settled in March  2020. The 
recommendations of the PAC  have also been referred in this report where persistent 
deficiencies continued to exist (Paragraphs 3.8.5 and 3.9.1). 
3.2 Organisational set-up 
At the Government level, the Additional Chief/Principal Secretary (Food, Civil Supplies 
and Consumer Affairs) is the head of the Department. He /She is assisted by Director, 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Department (Director, FCSCA) and 
Managing Director, Himachal Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation (HPSCSC) 
Limited. At the District level, the schemes related to food security are implemented by 
the respective District Controllers (DCs), FCSCA5, with the assistance of seven Area 
Managers6  concerned of HPSCSC Limited through a network of 5,068 FPSs.  The 
organisational structure for implementation of various food security schemes in the State 
is depicted in the Chart below: 
 
4  The deficiencies were: shortfall in inspection of FPSs, short collection and testing of samples of 
food items, distribution of food items without getting the test analysis report, inadequate staff and 
equipment in the Departmental laboratory, inadequate fo rmation and functioning of Vigilance 
Committee, findings on the Beneficiary Survey highlighting supply of poor-quality food items. 
5  Twelve DCs are posted in field units and one DC is posted at the Directorate Office.  
6  Located at Chamba, Dharamshala, Hamirpur, Mandi, Nahan, Shimla, and Solan.  
District Controller (Food, Civil Supplies 
and Consumer Affairs) (13 Nos.) 
Principal Secretary 
 (Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs) 
Director (Food, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs) assisted by 
Additional Director and Joint Director 
Managing Director (Himachal 
Pradesh State Civil Supplies 
Corporation Limited) assisted by 
Executive Director and Joint Director 
Divisional Managers (2 Nos.) 
Food and Supply Officers and 
Inspectors at Block Level 
 Area Managers (7 Nos.) 
Fair Price Shops 
 Godowns 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
103 | P a g e  
 
3.3 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the SSCA were to ascertain whether: 
• Quality of  food items was ensured by the D epartment at the time of 
procurement, storage and distribution through Joint Physical Inspection and lab 
testing as required under the Act/ TPDS (Control) Order, 2015. 
• Monitoring systems existing in the D epartment were a dequate and compliant 
with the rules and notifications. 
• Consumer awareness ac tivities were organised in the State under Public 
Distribution System (PDS) as per approved proposal from the Government of 
India. 
• Complaints and grievance re dressal system existing in the S tate was adequate 
and compliant with the NFS Act/ TPDS (Control) Order, 2015. 
3.4 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria used for conducting the audit were derived from the following 
sources: 
• Food Safety and Standards Act , 2006 ; 
• The Consumer  Protection Act, 2019 ; 
• Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2015 ; 
• Food Safety and Standards Rules, 2011 ; 
• Guidance document on Food Safety Management System, 2018 issued by the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI); 
• Food Safety and Standards (Fortification  of Foods) Regulations, 2018; 
• National Food Security Act, 2013; 
• Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules (HPFR), 2009; 
• Government instructions/notifications regarding the quality of food items, such 
as on inspections and sample collection. 
3.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Subject S pecific Compliance Audit (SSCA)  covering the period 2019 -20 to 
2021-22 was undertaken from September 2022 to December 2022. 
The SSCA covered the offices of:  
➢ Director, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs; 
➢ Managing Director, Himachal Pradesh State Civ il Supplies Corporation 
Limited; 
➢ Three District Controllers, Kinnaur, Mandi and Solan of the Department (out of 
12); 
➢ Both the  Divisional Managers , Dharamshala and Solan  and three Area 
Managers, Kinnaur (at Shimla), Mandi and Solan  (out of seven) of the 
Corporation.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
104 | P a g e  
 
In addition, 15 godowns (out of 
28) and 60 FPSs (out of 1 ,188) 
from the 11 Blocks7 (out of 19) 
relating to the three test-checked 
Districts were also selected for 
Joint Physical Inspection. 
Beneficiaries (307 in number) 
linked to the test-checked FPSs 
were also surveyed during the 
audit. Samples of various food 
items 8  distributed in the State 
were also lifted from the 
godowns and FPSs from the test-
checked Blocks and were sent to 
a Food Testing Laboratory, 
namely Punjab Biotechnology Incubator (Department of Science, Technology and 
Environment, Government of Punjab), Mohali by Audit to ascertain the quality. 
Audit findings were discussed with the Principal Secretary (FCSCA)  in the Exit 
Conference held in July 2023 and views of the Government have been incorporated in 
this Report, wherever appropriate. 
3.6 Financial Management  
The status of outlay and expenditure of the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs under the heads subsidy, salary and other expenses9 during the years 
2019-22 is depicted in Chart 3.1. 
Chart 3.1: Details of Budget and Expenditure during 2019-22 
Source: e-Kosh website, Himachal Pradesh. 
 
7  Kinnaur: two; Mandi: six and Solan: three. 
8 Edible oil, pulses, rice, salt, sugar, and wheat flour. 
9 Other Expenses include medical reimbursement, motor vehicle, major and minor works, material 
supply, machinery and equipment, wages, travel expenses, rent rate and taxes, publication, 
advertisement and publicity, maintenance, transfer expenses, honorarium,  remuneration to 
outsourced employees, training, hospitality and entertainment expenses, office expenses.  
 
Map 3.1: Test-checked Districts Kinnaur, Mandi and Solan 
and their corresponding test-checked Blocks 


Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
105 | P a g e  
 
Further, under the Head ‘Other expenses’ budget allocation and utilisation thereagainst 
under ‘major works ’ and ‘machinery & equipme nt’, during 2019 -20 to 2021 -22 is 
depicted in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Fund allocation under ‘major works’ and ‘machinery & equipment’ 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Major works Machinery and equipment 
Budget Expenditure Budget Expenditure 
2019-20 300.00 300.00 6.09 6.09 
2020-21 1.00 1.00 13.97 13.85 
2021-22 3.00 1.00 157.00 7.00 
Source: e-Kosh. 
Against the Budget of ₹ 300.00 lakh in 2019-20, funds amounting to ₹ 273.00 lakh had 
been transferred to the executi ng agency (HPSIDC10) for the construction of four 
godowns. However, work had not started (July 2024) due to delays in obtaining NOCs 
from Forest Department/Panchayats and non -transferring of land to the executive 
agency. Balance fund of ₹  27.00 lakh was transferred to the Sub -Divisional Officer 
(Civil) cum District Controller, Pangi for construction/repair of two godowns.  
Further, funds allocated under machinery and equipment during the year 2021 -22 for 
the upgradation of the laboratory and its subsequent lapse has been commented upon in 
Paragraph 3.8.8. 
3.7 Results of Audit 
The deficiencies noticed in audit have been classified under the following heads: 
• Deficiencies in quality management at the time of procurement, storage, and 
distribution of food items 
• Deficiencies in monitoring and supervision 
• Deficiencies in consumer awareness activities 
• Findings from the Joint Physical Inspection of godowns and Fair Price Shops 
• Findings from the Beneficiary Survey 
• Findings from the independent qualitative analysis of the food items 
Significant findings have been detailed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
3.8 Deficiencies in quality management at the time of procurement, storage 
and distribution of the food items 
 
3.8.1 Quality management at the time of procurement of food items from FCI 
Clause 7(6) of the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 stipulates that before delivery of food 
grains from the FCI, an officer of the State Government not below the rank of Food and 
Civil Supplies Inspector and an officer of the FCI shall jointly inspect the stocks of the 
food grains intended to be issued so as to ensure that it conforms with the prescribed 
quality specifications. Further, Clause 7(7) stipulates that after Joint Physical 
 
10  Himachal Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
106 | P a g e  
 
Inspection, the FCI shall issue to the State Government, before dispatch of the food 
grains from godowns, one stack-wise sealed sample jointly drawn for display at the FPS 
and a duplicate sealed sample drawn shall be kept with the FCI for future reference. 
Audit found that the above rule was not complied with as the FCI neither conducted 
any Joint Physical Inspection of its godowns with the officer of the Department nor was 
any joint sampling done for displaying samples in FPS during the period from 2019-20 
to 2021-22. 
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) accepted the audit 
findings and stated (July 2023) that instructions are being issued to the officials to 
comply with the TPDS orders and inspectors will be deputed in each of the godowns to 
jointly inspect the consignment during delivery. 
3.8.2 Short fixation of targets for inspection of FPSs in the State 
As per Para 6 of the Annexure to the TPDS (Control) Order, 2001 the State Government 
had to ensure regular inspection of FPS not less than once in six months. Thereafter, 
the Department had notified (2007) targets for inspection for various field functionaries 
to inspect the FPSs in their respective jurisdictions.  
Further, in supersession of the earlier Order of 2001, TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 was 
introduced, Rule 11(1) of which specifies that the State Government should ensure 
regular inspection of FPSs by the designated authority not less than once in three 
months. The State Government shall issue the order specifying the inspection schedule, 
list of check points and authority responsible for this purpose.  
Audit observed that the targets for FPS inspection fixed  by the Department in 2007 
were not revised in line with the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015, as a result of which the 
targets remained short fixed, as depicted in Chart 3.2. 
 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
As evident from the above, the Directorate had fixed short targets to the extent ranging 
between 47 and 48 per cent during 2019-22. This short fixation of inspection targets 
given to the field units by the Directorate, reduced the likelihood of timely detection of 
irregularities in delivery of food supplies to the intended beneficiaries. 
19,936 20,084 20,272
10,560 10,420 10,4799,376 (47) 9,664 (48) 9,793 (48)
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Chart 3.2:Target for inspections of FPSs in the State during 2019-22
Target for inspection
required to be fixed
Target for inspection actually
fixed
Target for inspection short 
fixed

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
107 | P a g e  
 
The Director, while accepting the facts, stated (December 2022) that lower targets were 
fixed due to vacant posts of field functionaries and the spread of C OVID-19. He said 
that there were low chances of theft, diversion etc. of stock of food grains as the system 
was fully computerised. The Director, FCSCA issued instructions (December 2021) to 
all the District Controllers to ensure inspection of all FPSs so that no FPS is left 
unchecked after three months and no leakages or diversion of food grains should happen 
in the area under their jurisdiction. 
The reply is not satisfactory as shortfall in inspection of FPSs at various levels have 
been noticed as commented in the succeeding Paragraph. 
3.8.3 Non-achievement of targets fixed by the Department for conducting 
inspections of godowns, mills and FPSs in the State 
The Department fixed  monthly targets of inspection of godowns, mills and FPSs of 
various field functionaries11 in the State in the year 2007. Further, Rule 11 (2) of TPDS 
(Control) Order 2015 specifies that the State Government shall ensure that stock of 
foodgrains under TPDS system, as issued from FCI godowns , are not replaced or 
tampered with during storage, transit or any other stage till the delivery to ration card 
holders.   
Scrutiny of records revealed that inspection target fixed by the Department for 
godowns, mills and FPSs in the State  could not be achieved, and the shortfall was 
ranging between 15 and 27  per cent during the period from 2019 -20 to 2021 -22 as 
depicted in Chart 3.3.  
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
Further, even in the test-checked Districts, shortfall in condu cting inspections of 
godowns, mills and FPSs at various levels was noticed as detailed in Table 3.2. 
  
 
11  District Controller: 11 (eight for FPS and three for mills/godowns), Food and Supply Officer: 13 
(10 for FPS and three for mills/godowns), Inspector: 12 (10 for FPS and two for mills/godowns).  
 
12,908 12,660 12,757
10,951
9,291 10,183
1,957 (15) 3,369 (27) 2,574 (20)
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Chart 3.3 : Details of inspections of Godowns, Mills and FPSs 
conducted in the State during 2019-22
Target fixed
Achievement
Shortfall of
achievement

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
108 | P a g e  
 
Table 3.2: Details of inspections of godowns, mills and FPSs in the test-checked  
Districts during 2019-22 
Year 
Kinnaur Mandi Solan 
Target Achievement 
Excess 
(+)/ 
shortfall 
(-) 
Target Achievement 
Excess 
(+)/ 
shortfall 
(-) 
Target Achievement 
Excess 
(+)/ 
shortfall 
(-) 
Inspections conducted by District Controller 
2019-20 63 16 -47 (75) 120 10 -110 (92) 120 44 -76 (63) 
2020-21 108 40 -68 (63) 120 59 -61 (51) 120 47 -73 (61) 
2021-22 108 51 -57 (53) 120 36 -84 (70) 120 115 -5 (4) 
Inspections conducted by FSO 
2019-20 66 20 -46 (70) 352 244 -108 (31) 144 0 -144 (100) 
2020-21 0 0 0 32 0 -32 (100) 144 0 -144 
(100) 
2021-22 0 0 0 48 26 -22 (46) 144 0 -144 
(100) 
Inspections conducted by Inspector 
2019-20 264 51 -213 (81) 1764 1455 -309 (18) 720 634 -86 (12) 
2020-21 396 104 -292 (74) 1778 1245 -533 (30) 720 545 -175 (24) 
2021-22 319 176 -143 (45) 1820 1221 -599 (33) 720 514 -206 (29) 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage . 
From Table 3.2, it is evident that shortfall in conducting inspection of godowns, mills 
and FPSs was found to be as below: 
• Up to 92 per cent at the level of District Controller; 
• Up to 100 per cent at the level of Food and Supply Officer (FSO);  
• Up to 81 per cent at the level of Inspector. 
Further, no targets were fixed for inspections by FSO in District Kinnaur during the 
period 2020-22 due to the post lying vacant since November 2019. Though the target 
for inspections by FSO were fixed in District Solan during 2019-22, the same could not 
be achieved due to the post lying vacant since November 2017. 
The District  Controllers of the test-checked Districts stated that targets were not 
achieved due to COVID-19, vacant posts of FSO/ Inspector and work overload. 
The Director, while accepting the facts, stated (March 2023) that targets could not be 
achieved due to vacant posts of field functionaries and spread of COVID-19. 
Shortfall in inspection is associated with the risk of supply of food items of substandard 
quality to the card holders. 
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) while agreeing with the 
audit findings, directed (July 2023) the Departmental officers to make sure that targets 
are set and duly adhered to in accordance with the TPDS order. In the test -checked 
Districts like Kinnaur and Solan, the Department attributed the shortfall to some of the 
vacant posts. 
The Department should take up the matter with the State Government for filling up the 
vacant posts so that regular inspections of godowns, mills and FPSs are conducted and 
supply of quality food items is ensured. 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
109 | P a g e  
 
3.8.4 Shortfall in the collection of samples of food items 
The Department had fixed (August 2016, February 2020  and February 2021 ) monthly 
targets for the Departmental officials12 for the collection of samples from godowns, mills 
and FPSs to be sent to the Departmental food testing laboratory for analysis to monitor 
the quality of food items.   
Audit noticed that the total samples collected by the officials concerned viz., DCs, FSOs 
and Inspectors in the State during 2019-22 were 6,070 against the target of 9,372 which 
resulted in shortfall of 3,302 (35 per cent) samples during the said period as depicted in 
Chart 3.4.  
 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
Further, the above shortfall at the level of various  field functionaries in the State for the 
period 2019-22 is depicted in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Details of sample collection by various field functionaries in the  
State during 2019-22 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
T: Target, A: Achievement, S- Shortfall, E- Excess. 
As seen from Table 3.3, shortfall in sample collection at various level of functionaries 
was ranging from zero to 100 per cent. 
In the test-checked Districts, collection of samples from godowns, mills and FPSs of 
food items at the level of various field functionaries is shown in Table 3.4. 
 
12  Monthly target of sample collection for various field functionaries for the period 2019 -22: District 
Controller – one (2019 -21), three (2021 -22); Food and Supply Officer - one (2019 -21), five  
(2021-22); Inspector – three (2019-20), two (2020 -22), Deputy Director – No target (2019 -21), 
three (2021-22), Joint Director – No target (2019-21), two (2021-22). 
3,348
2,372
3,652
2,049 1,757
2,264
1,299 (39)
615 (26)
1,388 (38)
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Chart 3.4: Sample collection in the State during 2019-22 
 Target fixed
 Achievement
Shortfall
Year 
DC FSO Inspector Joint Director Deputy Director 
T A S(-)/ 
E(+) T A S T A S T A S T A S 
2019-20 156 167 11 204 130 -74 
(36) 2,988 1,752 -1,236 
(41) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 156 191 35 204 124 -80 
(39) 1,992 1,442 -550 
(28) 8 0 -8 
(100) 12 0 -12 
(100) 
2021-22 520 301 -219 
(42) 1,020 177 -843 
(83) 1,992 1,766 -226 
(11) 48 7 -41 
(85) 72 13 -59 
(82) 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
110 | P a g e  
 
Table 3.4: Details of samples collection in the test-checked Districts during 2019-22 
Year 
Kinnaur Mandi Solan 
Target Achievement 
 Excess 
(+) 
shortfall 
(-) 
Target Achievement 
 Excess 
(+) 
shortfall 
(-) 
Target Achievement 
 Excess 
(+) 
shortfall 
(-) 
Collection of samples by District Controller 
2019-20 12 26 14 12 5 -7 (58) 12 17 5 
2020-21 12 25 13 12 3 -9 (75) 12 33 21 
2021-22 36 29 -7 (19)  36 16 -20 (56) 36 29 -7 (19) 
Collection of samples by Food and Supply Officer 
2019-20 12 0 -12 (100) 24 37 13 12 0 -12 (100) 
2020-21 12 0 -12 (100) 24 0 -24 (100) 12 0 -12 (100) 
2021-22 60 0 -60 (100) 120 0 -120 (100) 60 0 -60 (100) 
Collection of samples by Inspector 
2019-20 108 13 -95 (88) 396 264 -132 (33) 180 194 14 
2020-21 72 56 -16 (22) 264 190 -74 (28) 120 137 17 
2021-22 72 58 -14 (19) 264 218 -46 (17) 120 100 -20 (17)  
Source: Departmental figures. Figure in parenthesis indicate percentage.  
As seen from Table 3.4, there was shortfall ranging between 5 6 and 75 per cent for 
sample collection by DC in Mandi District during 2019-20 to 2021-22. At level of FSO, 
shortfall was 100 per cent in Kinnaur and Solan during 2019-22 and in Mandi District, 
100 per cent shortfall was during 2020-22. At level of inspector, there was shortfall 
ranging between 17 per cent and 88 per cent in the test-checked Districts in 2019-22. 
The District Controllers of the test-checked Districts stated that targets were not 
achieved due to COVID-19, vacant posts of FSO/Inspector and work overload.  
The Director stated (August 2022) that targets were not achieved by the 
officers/officials concerned due to COVID-19 and they were engaged in the 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign of Pradhan Mantri Garib 
Kalyan Anna Yojana, a flagship programme launched by the Government of India.  
The reply is not satisfactory as the issue of shortfall in sample collection in the State 
was also highlighted in the previous Audit Reports of the CAG for the year ended 
March 2011 (46-78 per cent) and for the year ended March 2018 (16-45 per cent). This 
indicates that the Department has been neglecting the issue of regular inspection/ 
sample collection for several years, which has also been continuing during the period 
of the current audit. Thus, the Department failed to improve the situation, and this is 
associated with risk of supplying substandard food items to the FPS card holders as 
seen in the succeeding Paragraphs.  
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) while agreeing with the 
audit findings stated (July 2023) that it will be corrected by taking appropriate 
measures. 
3.8.5 Distribution of food items below prescribed quality specifications 
The TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 requires that the State Government should ensure that 
the stocks of food grains intended to be issued to the consumers conforms to the 
prescribed quality specifications. 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
111 | P a g e  
 
To ensure the quality of food items, the samples of various commodities distributed to 
the beneficiaries under the TPDS and Himachal Pradesh State Specially Subsidi sed 
Scheme are drawn by the field staff of the Department regularly on a target basis and 
sent to the Departmental laboratory for analysis.  
Section 46(3) of FSS Act, 2006 stipulates that the Food Analyst shall analyse samples 
within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of sample. 
Audit noticed that out of 10,396 samples analysed in the laboratories13 during 2019-22, 
237 samples representing 16,706.69 qtl. of food items14 and 8,48,186 litres of edible oil 
were found to be below the prescribed specifications. O ut of these sub-standard food 
items, HPSCSC replaced only 288.84 qtl (1.7 per cent) and 32,405 litres (3.8 per cent) 
sub-standard food items respectively and the balance quantity of food items were 
supplied to the beneficiaries without replacement through the PDS network in the State 
as detailed in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Details of distribution of substandard food items during 2019-22 in the State 
Year 
Number of 
samples analysed 
Number of 
samples 
found below 
specification 
Quantity of samples 
found below 
specification  
Quantity 
replaced by 
HPSCSC 
Quantity of sub -
standard food items 
distributed  
Dept. Corp. Dept. Corp. Food 
items (qtl)  
Edible oil 
(ltr) 
Food 
items 
(qtl) 
Edible 
oil 
(ltr) 
Food 
items 
(qtl) 
Edible oil 
(ltr) 
2019-20 2,049 1,413 49 33 6,975.14 1,84,895 Nil Nil 6,975.14 1,84,895 
2020-21 1,757 1,082 33 24 4,392.13 2,52,000 Nil Nil 4,392.13 2,52000 
2021-22 2,260 1,835 59 39 5,339.42 4,11,291 288.84 32,405 5,050.58 3,78,886 
Total 6,066 4,330 141 96 16,706.69 8,48,186.00 288.84 32,405 16,417.85 8,15,781.00 
Source: Departmental figures. Note: Dept. = Department, Corp.=Corporation . 
Audit further noticed that the analysis report of 80 (out of 141) failed samples was 
issued by the Department to its field units with delays ranging between one and 39 days 
(except in three cases). In these three cases, delay reported was 75, 75 and 112 days. In 
case of the Corporation, time taken in reporting the test results of failed samples to its 
field units was ranging between 15 and 182 days (except in two  cases). In these two 
cases, delay was 1,077 and 1,250 days. Consequently, substandard food items could not 
be replaced before their distribution. 
Distribution of food items below specification was previously pointed out in the Report 
of CAG for the year ended 31 March 2011. Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of 
Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly , in its recommendation, had also directed 
(August 2016) the Department that food grains should be analy sed in accredited labs 
before distribution. Again, on being pointed out during follow-up audit findings for the 
CAG’s Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2018, the Government had stated 
 
13  Departmental laboratory as well as empanelled laboratories of HPSCSC Limited. There were 
11 private labs empaneled by the HPSCSC in the year 2019-20 till May 2021. During June 2021 to 
April 2022, there were nine private empaneled labs. 
14  Pulses, rice, salt, sugar, wheat and wheat flour. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
112 | P a g e  
 
(January 2019) that in future, the problem of delay in issue of test/ analysis report would 
be reduced. 
Despite the issue of distribution of substandard food items being highlighted repeatedly, 
action on the part of the Government remained unsatisfactory. The Department and the 
Corporation had failed to issue the analysis reports in time and the situation had only 
worsened. Thus, the quality of food items distributed to the beneficiaries was not 
ensured. 
The Director stated (February 2023) that the samples of different commodities have not 
been analysed within specific time period due to shortage of staff involved in analysis 
work.  
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) while agreeing with the 
audit findings stated (July 2023) that the procedural issues would be  rectified. The 
Managing Director (HPSCSC) also stated that due to limited holding capacity of the 
godowns, it is not possible to wait for the test results. The Principal Secretary directed 
the Department to come up with a concrete methodology so that the problem of delays 
in submission of analysis reports can be resolved and asked them to come up with the 
Action Taken Report (ATR) in this regard.  
3.8.6 Shortcomings in the fortification of food items  
To address the large-scale prevalence of malnutrition and deficiency diseases (anaemia, 
stunting etc.) among different sections of the population (children, pregnant and 
lactating mothers), the State Government of Himachal Pradesh accorded permission 
(July 2019 and November 2019) to fortify food items (edible oil, salt, wheat flour and 
rice15) under TPDS and State Specially Subsidised Schemes. 
Further, Chief Secretary to the Government of Himachal Pradesh in a review meeting 
(September 2021) directed a scientific third -party evaluation to check the level of 
fortification/micronutrients16 in PDS items.  
Accordingly, all the District Controllers, FCSCA were directed (October 2021) to draw 
one sample of fortified wheat atta, edible oil and double fortified salt from flour 
mills/wholesale godowns and send the same to the Karnataka Health Promotional Trust 
(KHPT)17 Bengaluru for analysis. 
Scrutiny revealed that the 10 District Controllers 18 sent 15 samples of fortified wheat 
flour (November/December 2021) collected from the flour mills to KHPT, Bengaluru 
for testing the level of micronutrients. The test analysis reports (January 2022) of 
13 samples19 did not conform to the level of micronutrients in fortified wheat flour as 
 
15 Government of India gave directions (February 2022) to distribute fortified rice in District Chamba 
from April 2022 and rest of the Districts in Himachal Pradesh from April 2023. 
16   Folic Acid, Iron, Vitamin B12 in wheat flour, Vitamins (A and D) in edible oils and Iron (Fe) in 
double fortified salt. 
17  Associated with the Government of Himachal Pradesh as Technical Support Agency for improving 
the quality of fortified items. 
18  Bilaspur, Chamba, Hamirpur, Kangra, Kullu, Mandi, Shimla, Sirmaur, Solan and Una.  
19  Test report of remaining two samples were awaited (December 2022). 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
113 | P a g e  
 
specified in Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of Foods) Regulation, 2018. The 
Department issued instructions (February 2022) to the millers concerned to follow the 
FSSAI norms regarding the fortification of wheat flour. 
In addition, the Department also decided (February 2022) to lift the samples of fortified 
flour from these mills again to validate the level of fortificants in the flour. However, 
no sample of fortified food item was sent for quantitative analysis of micronutrients to 
KHPT or any other NABL-accredited laboratory (December 2022).  
Thus, the Department’s monitoring of the effective implementation of the enrichment 
programme was limited, as there was no follow -up on the results of testing. This 
reduced the effectiveness of the initiative in achieving its intended purpose of 
addressing micronutrient deficiency in the State.  
3.8.7 Non-deposit of penalty in G overnment account amounting to  
₹ 322.71 lakh   
As per Rule 3 (1) of H imachal Pradesh Financial Rules (HPFR) 2009, all monies 
received by or on behalf of the Government either as dues of the Government or 
otherwise for deposit, remittance and withdrawal therefrom, shall be brought into 
Government Account immediately. 
Further, as per the provisions of Himachal Pradesh Specified Essential Commodities 
(Regulation and distribution) Order, 2019 and the terms and conditions mentioned in 
the MOUs between the Corporation and the suppliers, t o maintain the quality of food 
items, the samples of various commodities distributed to the beneficiaries under the 
TPDS and Himachal Pradesh State Specially Subsidised Scheme should be tested and 
in case of failure of samples, a penalty shall be imposed on the defaulters20.  
Audit noticed that out of 237 failed samples (Department: 141, Corporation: 96) during 
the period 2019 -20 to 2021 -22, actions/penalties/explanations were taken/imposed/ 
given in respect of 227 samples (Department: 131 21, Corporation: 96) and recoveries 
amounting to  ₹ 234.71 lakh (Department: ₹  8.46 lakh, Corporation: ₹  226.25 lakh) 
were made and in case of remaining 10 samples penalty was not imposed by the 
Department. Scrutiny further revealed that  the Corporation, instead of depositing the 
penalty amount of ₹  226.25 lakh in to Government account, ha d kept it in its bank 
account as of April 2023. 
A similar issue was previously observed by the Audit with respect to the Department 
as pointed out in follow-up audit findings in the Audit Report of the CAG for the year 
ended March 2018. Consequently, the Department had deposited ₹ 203.04 lakh (out of 
₹ 299.51 lakh) into Government account in June 2019. However, the balance amount 
of ₹ 96.46 lakh has not been deposited (February 2023).  
 
20  Suppliers, Godown Incharge and FPS Incharge. 
21  Penalty imposed: 103, warning issued: four, sample taken from premises of consumer: two, food 
items damaged due to heavy rain: 10, food items not lifted from godowns: two, penalty not imposed 
due to delay in analysis: two, penalty not required on black gram: eight.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
114 | P a g e  
 
Thus, an amount of ₹ 322.71 lakh (₹  226.25 lakh + ₹  96.46 lakh) has not yet been 
deposited in the Government account, which was irregular. 
During the Exit Conference, the Department stated (July 2023) that most of the cases 
were under arbitration, hence, penalty amount could not be deposited into Government 
account. The reply is not acceptable as keeping Government money outside 
Government account was in violation of the HPFR, as ibid. 
3.8.8 Non-accreditation of Departmental Food Testing Laboratory  
Section 3(p) of Food Safety and Standard ( FSS) Act, 2006 envisages that food 
laboratory means food laboratory or institute established by the Central or a State 
Government or any other agency and accredited by National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) or an equivalent  accreditation agency 
and recognised by the Food Authority under Section 43.  
Audit noticed that the Departmental Food Testing Laboratory (FTL) was set up in 1973 
for physical analysis (visual analysis) of food grains (wheat and rice) at the time of 
procurement from the source. Since 2014, chemical analysis of the samples of food 
items22 began in the FTL which was done manually. Manual analysis is time consuming 
process and involves human intervention. Moreover, the laboratory was neither 
accredited nor was any application for accreditation made with any Government 
agency. 
To modernise the laboratory, the Director, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs, 
Shimla constituted a Committee (August 2017) comprising the Departmental officers23 
to furnish a report on automation and upgradation of the existing food grain testing 
laboratory. The Committee inter alia recommended (September 2017) moderni sation 
and accreditation of the existing lab. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Directorate, Shimla submitted  a proposal to the 
Secretary/Addl. Chief Secretary (FCSCA) in July 2020 for upgradation of the existing 
FTL seeking budget amounting to ₹  1.50 crore. Accordingly, the Government of 
Himachal Pradesh allocated (April 2021) funds of ₹ 1.50 crore to the Department. 
Government of Himachal Pradesh constituted (January 2022) a State Level Purchase 
Committee (SLPC) to give its opinion on moderni sation of existing Departmental 
laboratory as well as purchase of sophisticated equipment for the laboratory. The SLPC 
finalised (February 2022) the list of equipment required for the moderni sation of FTL 
and tender document. The Department published the tender (March 2022) but due to 
receipt of only one tender, the tender was cancelled and the allocated Budget lapsed at 
the end of the Financial Year. 
 
22  Wheat, Rice, Sugar, Pulses, Edible Oil and Salt. 
23  Joint Director as Chairman, Dy. Director, District Controllers (Una, Solan, Shimla) and Junior 
Analyst, Shimla as members. 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
115 | P a g e  
 
Thus, non-finalisation of the tender document within one year after Budget allotment, 
resulted in the lapse of Budget of ₹ 1.50 crore at the end of the Financial Year 2021-22, 
consequently impacting the modernisation of the laboratory.  
The Director, FCSCA admitted (June 2022) that the laboratory was neither accredited 
nor was any application for accreditation made with any Government agency. The 
Department was in the process of upgrading the laboratory and only after that the matter 
regarding accreditation will be taken up with the Authorities concerned. He further 
stated (January 2023) that tender for procurement of sophisticated equipment had been 
finalised but supply order had not been issued as the Budget was not available and the 
State Government was requested to allocate Budget of ₹ 3.57 crore for procurement of 
equipment (May 2023).  
The fact therefore remains that in the absence of accreditation of the laboratory, 
authenticity of test results and scientific checks, as prescribed in the FSSAI Act, applied 
by the FTL in analysis of quality specification of food items could not be ascertained. 
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) stated (July 2023) that 
the process of upgradation of the Departmental FTL would be expedited. 
3.9 Deficiencies in Monitoring and Supervision 
Section 29(1) of the National Food Security Act, 2013 provides that for ensuring 
transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System and 
accountability of the functionaries in such system, every State Government shall set up 
Vigilance Committees (VCs) at the State, District, Block and FPS levels24. Further, the 
TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 provides clear guidelines to the State Government for 
establishing VCs at State, District, Block and FPS levels. Functions of VCs at various 
levels are as under: 
• At State level, VC has to supervise the implementation of all schemes under 
NFSA, 2013 and recommend to the Government of India any improvement for 
furtherance of the objectives of the Act. 
• At District, Block and FPS levels, VCs have to supervise implementation of all 
schemes under NFSA, 2013 and inform the District Grievance Redressal officer 
of any malpractice or misappropriation of funds found or of pilferage of 
subsidised ration which comes to notice. 
 
24  The composition of VCs at various levels is as follows: (i) At State level, Minister, FCSCA is the 
Chairman with eight official members and non -official members (not more than 17) nominated by 
the State Government. (ii) At District level, Minister nominated by the Chief Minister is the 
Chairman with 11 official members and three non-official members nominated by the State 
Government. (iii) At Block level, the Sub Divisional Officer of the Block is the chairman with five 
official members and not more than five non-official members nominated by the State Government. 
(iv) At FPS in rural, the Pradhan of Gram Panchayat is the chairman with six official members and 
three members nominated by Gram Panchayat. (v) At FPS in urban, Mayor/ President of Local 
Urban Bodies is the chairman with three official members and five members nominated by the State 
Government. 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
116 | P a g e
Audit found several deficiencies in the establishment and functioning of VCs which are 
discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
3.9.1 Formation and Functioning of Vigilance Committees 
As per clause 11(5) of TPDS (Control) Order, 2015, VCs at all levels were required to 
hold meetings at least once in every quarter to ensure the effective implementation of 
TPDS in the State. Audit noticed that the functioning of VCs, wherever formed, was 
ineffective, as meetings at all levels were not held to the prescribed extent during 
2019-22 as depicted in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Details of formation and meetings of Vigilance Committees in the State 
during 2019-22 at District, Block and FPS Levels 
Year 
District Level Block Level FPS level 
No. of 
Districts 
VCs 
formed/ 
Existing 
Meetings 
required 
Meetings 
held 
Short 
fall 
No. of 
Blocks 
VCs 
formed/ 
Existing 
Meetings 
required 
Meetings 
held 
Short 
fall 
No. 
of 
FPS 
VCs 
formed/ 
Existing 
Meetings 
required 
Meetings 
held 
Short 
fall 
2019-20 12 12 48 18 30 (63) 78 67 268 7 261 
(97) 4,984 4,596 18,384 3,080 15,304 
(83) 
2020-21 12 12 48 14 34 (71) 78 70 280 4 276 
(99) 5,021 4,659 18,636 1,324 17312 
(93) 
2021-22 12 12 48 13 35 (73) 78 70 280 9 271 
(97) 5,068 4,669 18,676 2,935 15,741 
(84) 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
As evident from Table 3.6, VCs at District level were formed in all the 12 Districts of 
the State. However, in eight out of 78 Blocks and in 399 out of 5,068 FPSs in the State, 
these committees were not constituted as of March 2022. 
Further, shortfall in holding of meetings in the State during 2019 -22 ranged between 
63 and 73  per cent at District level, between 97 and 99  per cent at Block level and 
between 83 and 93 per cent at FPS level. 
The District Controllers, FCSCA concerned, however, furnished no explanation for 
non-formation of VCs/ non conducting of meetings. 
In the test-checked Districts details of VCs formed at various levels are depicted in 
Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: Details of meetings of Vigilance Committees during 2019-22 at various levels 
in the test-checked Districts 
Name 
of 
District 
Year 
District Level Block Level FPS level 
VCs 
requir
ed to 
be 
forme
d 
VCs 
form
ed 
Meeti
ngs 
requir
ed 
Meeti
ngs 
held 
Shor
t-fall 
VCs 
requ
i-red 
to be 
for-
med 
VCs 
for-
med 
Mee-
tings 
requ
i-red 
Mee-
tings 
held 
Shortfal
l 
VCs 
requi
-red 
to be 
form
ed 
VCs 
form
ed 
Meeti
ngs 
requir
ed 
Meeti
ngs 
held 
Shor
tfall 
Kinnaur 2019
-22 3 3 12 1 11 
(92) 9 9 36 0 36(100) 196 188 752 0 752 
(100) 
Mandi 2019
-22 3 3 12 7 5(42) 30 30 120 0 120(100) 2,382 2,340 9,360 272 9,088 
(97) 
Solan 2019
-22 3 3 12 4 8 
(67) 15 15 60 5 55 (92) 954 954 3,816 870 2,946 
(77) 
Source: Departmental figures. Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
Table 3.7 shows that during 2019-22, 50 VCs at FPS level were not constituted in two 
Districts (Kinnaur and Mandi). Further, shortfall in meetings of VCs ranged between 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
117 | P a g e  
 
42 and 92  per cent at District level, between 92 and 100  per cent at Block level and 
between 77 to 100 per cent at FPS level during 2019-22 in the three Districts. 
The District Controller of Mandi attributed the occurrence of COVID-19 to shortfall in 
meeting of VCs. District Controllers of Kinnaur and Solan did not furnish any reasons 
in this regard. 
It is pertinent to mention here that the issue of non-formation of VCs and its functioning 
was commented upon in the previous Audit Report of CAG for the year ended 
March 2011. P ublic Accounts Committee of the Himachal Pradesh Legislative 
Assembly had also recommended (August 2016) to constitute the Block level and FPS 
level VCs to check the supply of substandard food items . The issue was again 
highlighted in the follow-up audit findings in the Audit Report for the year ended March 
2018. Yet committees in eight out of 78 Blocks and in 399 out of 5,068 FPSs in the 
State were not constituted as of March 2022. There was also consistent shortfall in the 
frequency of VC meetings held in the State. 
During the Exit Conference (July 2023), the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) while 
accepting the audit findings, directed the Department to make sure that the committees 
are constituted in  the remaining Blocks/godowns/FPSs and regular meetings are 
conducted at all levels. 
3.9.2 Non-conducting of Social Audit in the State 
As per Clause 12(2) and 12(3) of the Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2015, every local authority, or any other authority or body, as may be authorised 
by the State Government, shall conduct or cause to be conducted, periodic social audits 
on the functioning of Targeted Public Distribution System, and cause to publici se its 
findings and take necessary action, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. The Central Government may, if it considers necessary, conduct or cause 
to be  conducted social audit through independent agencies having experience in 
conduct of such audits.  
Audit noticed that the State Government had notified (November 2021) and authorised 
all the Sub Divisional Magistrates in the State to engage all field functionaries under 
his disposal or any independent body to perform the work of facilitation in the conduct 
of periodical social audits as prescribed in the functioning of FPS.  The Director, 
FCSCA requested all the Deputy Commissioners in the State (June 2022) to direct all 
the Sub Divisional Magistrates under their jurisdiction to get the social audit done and 
also directed the District Controllers to coordinate with the SDM concerned and submit 
the report to the Directorate within twenty days. 
As is evident from the above, the State Government took six years from the date of 
issue of TPDS Order, 2015 to notify (November 2021) the order for conducting social 
audit and the Department further took seven months to notify the same for conducting 
periodical social audits of FPSs. Consequently, social audit could not be conducted in 
the State during the period 2019-22.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
118 | P a g e  
 
The Department accepted (January 2023) that no social audit had been conducted till 
March 2022. However, it was informed that all the Districts had been directed 
(June 2022) to get the social audit done. 
Thus, due to non -conducting of social audit, the common people were deprived of 
collective monitoring and evaluation of the planning and implementation of TPDS 
(Control) Order 2015, thereby, compromising the transparency and accountability 
measures in TPDS. 
3.9.3 Vacancies in the posts of key functionaries  
As against 389 sanctioned posts of 30 different categories of staff as of March 2022, 
the Department had 277 (71  per cent) persons -in-position. Sanctioned strength and 
vacancies in the post of several functionaries who are directly involved in quality 
management are depicted in Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Sanctioned strength and vacancies of various posts 
Sr. 
No. Designation Sanctioned 
strength 
Vacancy (per cent) 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Joint Director 2 1 (50) 1 (50) 1 (50) 
2 Deputy Director  2 2 (100) 1 (50) 1 (50) 
3 District Controller (DC) 13 2 (15) 1 (8) 2 (15) 
4 Food and Supply Officer 
(FSO) 17 10 (59) 13 (76) 13 (76) 
5 Inspector 83 7 (8) 7 (8) 9 (11) 
6 Technical Assistant/Head 
Analyst/Junior Analyst 5 2 (40) 2 (40) 2 (40) 
Source: Departmental figures, figures in bracket shows per cent. 
As evident from Table 3.8, vacancy position of the functionaries mentioned was 
ranging between eight and 100 per cent. Further, the vacancy in the cadre of FSO, who 
are responsible for ensuring the overall quality of foodgrains along with conducting 
inspections of godowns/mills/FPSs were on the higher side, ranging between 59 and 
76 per cent during the period 2019 -2022. The vacancies of the abovementioned 
categories resulted in non-achievement in targets for conducting inspections of FPSs, 
godowns and mills, shortfall in collection of samples of various food items and delay 
in analysing samples of food items, as already pointed out in Paragraphs 3.8.3, 3.8.4 
and 3.8.5. 
3.10 Deficiencies in consumer awareness activities  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Government of India  
provides grants -in-aid to the S tates for undertaking nine consumer awareness 
activities25. 
 
25  (i) Observation of world consumer day; (ii) promotion of less use of single use plastic; (iii) display 
and dissemination of relevant publicity material during local festival; (iv) identification of village 
signboards, wall paintings, hoardings etc. in local lan guage; (v) organising nukkad natak, street 
shows, puppetry shows etc.; (vi) development of folk song audio cassettes; (vii) organising 
exhibitions/camps in schools on specific issues; (viii) publishing and distribution of hand hills/ 
pamphlets in local language; (ix) insertion of ads/ spots. 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
119 | P a g e  
 
Audit noticed that the Government of India  sanctioned and released ₹  20.00 lakh 
(February 2020) to the State Government for undertaking consum er awareness 
activities in the State. Out of the total available funds of ₹ 20.00 lakh, ₹ 19.63 lakh was 
utilised during 2019-22. The final Utilisation Certificate was yet to be submitted to the 
Government of India  as the Department was still not able to utili se ₹ 0.37 lakh as of 
March 2022 . In addition, the Department had no information on detailed activities 
undertaken by the field units. 
In the test-checked Districts during 2019 -22, the number of consumer awareness 
programmes undertaken were as follows: 
• Solan: only six26 out of nine activities were undertaken; 
• Kinnaur: only one27 out of nine activities were undertaken; 
• Mandi: only three28 out of nine activities were undertaken. 
As stated subsequently in Paragraph 3.12, the Beneficiary Survey conducted by Audit 
revealed that 6 1 per cent of the beneficiaries were not aware of the complaint 
mechanism against sub -standard food items. Further , 92 per cent of the people 
surveyed denied any participation in consumer awareness camps organi sed by the 
Department. Had the Department given due importance to consumer awareness 
activities, the beneficiary feedback would have acted as an additional layer of check on 
the quality of food grains distributed through TPDS. In addition, inability of the 
Department to utili se the funds hampered the prospect of getting additional 
grants-in-aid from Government of India for undertaking consumer awareness activities. 
The District Controllers of the test-checked Districts stated (October -November 
2022) that the allotted funds had been utili sed for creating consumer awareness 
activities, but no feedback has been obtained from the consumers. 
The Director stated (June 2022) that balance funds could not be utili sed due to 
COVID-19. 
The reply was not satisfactory in view of the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic spread 
in 2020 -21 and thereafter the Department could have undertaken all the assigned 
activities during 2021-22 when the impact of COVID-19 had subsided. 
During the Exit Conference (July 2023) , the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) stated that  
the total number o f (pending) grievances under NFSA in the S tate is zero . The Joint 
Director also stated that awareness programme was firmed up in the S tate which 
resulted into doubling the consumption of fortified salt, as consumers were earlier 
sceptical of using this product because of its appearance. A similar measure was also 
 
26  Observation of world consumer right day; promotion of less use of single use plastic, identification 
of village signboards, wall paintings, hoardings etc.; publishing and distribution of pamphlets in 
local languages; insertion of ads/ spots; organising nukkad natak, street shows, puppetry shows etc.  
27  World consumer day/ National consumer day. 
28  Consumer awareness seminar; display and dissemination of relevant publicity material during local 
festival; organising nukkad natak, street shows, puppetry shows etc. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
120 | P a g e  
 
taken to instil faith in the minds of consumers about the quality of fortified rice supplied 
in the State.  
3.11 Findings from the Joint Physical Inspection of godowns and Fair Price 
Shops  
 
Section 31(1) of the Food  Safety and Standards Act, 2006, stipulates that no person 
shall commence or carry on any food business except under a license and shall make 
an application for grant of license. Further, as per the guidance documents/notes issued 
by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India based on Part -II Schedule 4 of 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation 
2011, basic equipment/facilities like firefighting equipment, proper cleanliness, proper 
ventilation, rodent capt uring mechanism etc, should be available at each godown for 
proper storage management . Further, stack numbering scheme (layout) should be 
displayed in each warehouse/godown clearly labelling the location and number of each 
stack. Unloading of grain should be done in individual stacks, with at least one meter 
gap with the next immediate stack or the wall to facilitate people’s movement, 
cleaning/housekeeping as well as for proper sealing of the stack for any future 
fumigation. In addition, stack card for each stack should be displayed prominently , 
always accessible and data should be updated immediately after completion of stacking 
or issuance or any treatment/disinfestations.  
In addition, TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 lays down the duties and responsibilities of 
FPS owners which, inter alia, include display of sample of food grains supplied, display 
of toll-free help line number, mechanism for redressal of grievances with respect to the 
quantity and quality of foodgrains, etc. 
3.11.1 Deficiencies in the inspected godowns 
During Joint Physical Inspection of 15 godowns (out of 120) conducted with the 
representatives of the Department and the Corporation of the sampled Blocks of three 
test-checked Districts, several shortcomings were noticed as indicated in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Details of facilities in the godowns 
Name of 
District 
Total 
Number 
of 
godowns 
Number of godowns lacking in the facilities 
Firefighting 
equipment 
Proper 
Cleanliness Fumigation 
Measures 
adopted 
to 
prevent 
floor 
moisture 
Surrounding 
area free 
from debris 
and 
pollution 
Proper 
ventila-
tion 
Base 
racks 
for 
storage 
of food 
items 
Stack 
off 
the 
wall 
Rodent 
capturing 
mechanism 
Kinnaur 3 3 1 3 2 1 2 2 2 3 
Mandi 9 6 5 7 6 6 5 9 8 7 
Solan 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 
Total 15 12 9 13 11 10 9 14 13 13 
  
In addition, following shortcomings were also noticed: 
➢ No godown with stack plan and stack cards with entries, was found. 
➢ In godowns at Arki and Dharampur, it was observed that food grains were stored 
in a very unsystematic and unhygienic condition. Due to seepage in the wall, the 

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
121 | P a g e  
 
water had got accumulated and had created large amount of moss and moisture 
on the floor everywhere as can be seen in the following photographs.  
  
Picture 3. 1: Water accumulating on the  
 floor (Dharampur) because of seepage in the wall 
Picture 3.2: Large amount of moss on the sides of 
the floor (Arki) 
Further, Audit observed that during the period 2019-20 to 2021-22, the inspections of 
godowns at Dhar ampur (June 2020)  and Arki (October 2020 and March 2022)  were 
also conducted by the Department . Shortcomings29 noticed during the i nspection of 
godown at Dharampur were issued by the Department to the concerned Area Manager 
with the direction to rectify the same. In the case of godown Arki, shortcomings30 were 
noticed, however no direction to rectify the same was issued to the concerned Area 
Manager. The persistent irregularities  show the lackadaisical approach of the 
Department towards managing proper storage of food items. 
3.11.2  Deficiencies in the inspected Fair Price Shops 
In the sampled Districts, 60 FPSs connected with the sampled godowns were physically 
verified and surveyed by the Audit. The results of physical verification are indicated in 
Table 3.10. 
Table 3.10: Details of facilities in FPSs 
Name of 
District 
Total 
Number 
of FPSs 
Number of FPSs lacking in the facilities 
Display of 
sample of 
food items 
Proper 
ventilation 
Proper 
cleanliness 
Rodent 
capturing 
mechanism 
Base 
racks 
for 
storage 
of food 
items 
Stack 
off 
the 
wall 
FSSAI 
license 
Kinnaur 4 4 2 0 4 2 3 1 
Mandi 40 40 19 13 33 38 36 27 
Solan 16 16 2 8 12 14 15 12 
Total 60 60 23 21 49 54 54 40 
 
 
 
29  No space around the stacks, godown was not found safe from rodents and preservative was not 
made available etc. 
30  Shortcomings noticed were improper cleanliness, godown was not found safe from rodents and 
preservative was not made available etc. 
 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
122 | P a g e  
 
 In addition, following shortcomings were also noticed: 
➢ In 41 out 60 FPSs, required periodical inspections were not conducted. Further, 
not even a single inspection was conducted in 10 FPS (out of 41 FPSs) during 
2019-22.  
➢ In 25 out of 60 FPSs, toll-free help line number was not displayed. 
➢ In FPS Piplughat and Dumehar , foodgrains were stored in very unhygienic 
conditions due to seepage in the wall. Large amount of moisture on the floor 
and wall were observed as shown in the following photographs.  
 
Picture 3.3: Dampness and moisture on the walls 
and floor (Piplughat) 
Picture 3.4: Dampness and moisture on the walls 
and floor (Dumehar) 
 
  
Picture 3.5: Dampness and moisture on the walls and floor (Dumehar) 
Further, Audit observed that during the period 2019-20 to 2021-22 the inspections of 
FPSs at Piplughat ( six times) and Dumehar (four times) were also conducted by the 
Department. The Department, however, did not notice any irregularity vis-a-vis storage 
of food items.  Whereas the above photographs show that the Departmental officials 
were not conducting the inspection in a proper manner.  
During the Exit Conference, the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) directed (July 2023) the 
Departmental officials to initiate corrective measures, especially on the issue of 
cleanliness of godowns/FPSs. 
 


Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
123 | P a g e  
 
3.12 Findings from the Beneficiary Survey 
In the test-checked Districts, 307 beneficiaries, selected randomly, connected with the 
test-checked FPSs were surveyed in the presence of the Departmental officers by the 
Audit. As per their responses the satisfaction level of certain parameters was low as 
depicted in Table 3.11. 
Table 3.11: Details of responses of Beneficiary Survey 
Sr. 
No. Parameters Response  
Yes (per cent) No (per cent) 
1.  Food items received in time 288 (93) 19 (7) 
2.  Ever participated in the consumer awareness 
camp organised by the Department 25 (8) 282 (92) 
3.  Knowledge of Toll-Free No. of the Department 
to complain regarding issue of sub -standard 
food items  
87 (28) 220 (72) 
4.  Awareness about complaint mechanism 
against supply of sub-standard food item 119 (39) 188 (61) 
 Quality of food items Very 
Good Good Average Poor Very 
Poor 
5.  Quality of wheat (BPL, AAY, PHH)  3 89 35 45 15 
6.  Quality of rice 2 163 88 47 7 
7.  Quality of flour 2 125 86 71 23 
8.  Quality of pulses 0 121 55 113 18 
9.  Quality of sugar 1 185 90 29 2 
10.  Quality of edible oil 0 172 60 58 17 
11.  Quality of salt 0 111 21 101 74 
12.  Quality of Black Grams (BPL) 0 116 8 30 60 
Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
Table 3.11 revealed the following: 
➢ 92 per cent beneficiaries did not participate in any consumer awareness camps. 
➢ 72 per cent beneficiaries did not have knowledge of the Department’s toll-free 
number. 
➢ 61 per cent beneficiaries were not aware of the complaint mechanism.   
➢ 10 to 57  per cent beneficiaries reported that the quality of food items 31 was 
below average32. 
The results of the survey, thus, confirm the fact that the quality of food items distributed 
to the beneficiaries was not ensured (Paragraph 3.8.5) and awareness of consumer 
activities was not properly disseminated (Paragraph 3.10). 
3.13 Findings from the independent qualitative analysis of the food items 
Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of Foods) Regulation, 2018 states that any 
manufacturer who fortifies any food shall ensure that the level of added micronutrients 
on the label of such fortified food shall fall within the prescribed range. The Department 
conducts the testing of food items at its own Food Testing Laboratory (FTL). The lab, 
however, is neither accredited through any authorised agency nor does it conduct the 
 
31  Black gram, edible oil, pulses, rice, salt, sugar, wheat and wheat flour. 
32  Below average includes poor and very poor. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
124 | P a g e  
 
testing of fortified food items. This is primarily because necessary equipment to 
accurately assess the levels of micronutrients present in various food items distributed 
within the State through the Public Distribution System (PDS) was not available. With 
a view to validate the effectiveness of th e fortification program in the S tate, an 
independent qualitative analysis of the food items was  done by Audit  through an 
NABL-accredited and FSSAI empanelled  food testing laboratory  viz., Punjab 
Biotechnology Incubator, Mohali, Government of Punjab.  
Audit collected 66 samples33 of various food items34 from godowns and their attached 
FPSs with the assistance of the Departmental officials in two batches 35 from the three 
test-checked Districts, on the basis of inputs gathered during the survey of FPSs and 
godowns. These samples were then sent to the food testing laboratory for analysis. 
Results of qualitative analysis of the fortified samples are depicted in Chart 3.5. 
 
From Chart 3.5, it is evident that 100  per cent samples of fortified wheat flour and 
fortified rice and 67  per cent samples of double fortified salt d id not conform to the 
prescribed levels of micronutrients as per the Food Safety and Standards (Fortification 
of Foods) Regulations, 2018. Only in one fortified food item  namely, fortified edible 
oil, the level of micronutrients (both vitamin A and D) was found within the prescribed 
range in all the samples. 
Detailed scrutiny of the reports pertaining to fortified wheat flour is indicated in the 
Chart 3.6. 
 
33  Kinnaur (12), Mandi (32) and Solan (22). 
34  Fortified rice (12), fortified wheat flour (12), fortified edible oil (12), fortified salt (six), sugar (12) 
and dal (12). 
35  Samples from Mandi and Solan Districts were collected (April 2023) and sent to the lab in the 
first batch (April 2023) and the samples from Kinnaur District were collected (May 2023) and sent 
to the lab in second batch (May 2023). 
6
12 12 12
4
12 12
0
2
0 0
12
Fortified salt Fortified rice Fortified wheat flour Fortified edible oil
Chart 3.5: Results of fortified samples collected and tested by Audit
No of samples
Samples which did not conform to the prescribed level of fortificants
Samples which conform to the prescribed level of fortificants

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
125 | P a g e  
 
 
From Chart 3.6, it is evident that Iron 36 in three samples  was above the prescribed 
limit. Vitamin B937 in seven samples was not within the range of the prescribed limit 
and Vitamin B1238 in all the 12 samples was below the prescribed limit. 
Similarly, detailed analysis of the fortified rice is indicated in Chart 3.7.  
 
From Chart 3.7, it is evident that Iron in eight samples was below the prescribed limit, 
Vitamin B9 in seven samples was below the prescribed limit and Vitamin B12 in ten 
samples was not within the range of the prescribed limit. It was also noticed that in 
three samples of fortified rice, fortificants39 were found below the quantification limit40 
of the laboratory. 
  
 
36  Iron promotes increased energy and healthy pregnancy in women. 
37  Vitamin B9 or Folic acid also works closely with vitamin B12 to help make red blood cells and 
help iron work properly in the body. 
38  Vitamin B12 keeps blood and nerve cells healthy, helps in DNA formation and prevents 
megaloblastic anaemia. 
39  In one sample, all three fortificants (Vitamin B9, B12 and Iron) and in two samples, two fortificants 
(Vitamin B9 and B12). 
40  This indicates that the level of the fortificants in the sample was even below the detection limit of 
the laboratory. 
12 12 12
9
5
00
6
12
3
1 0
Iron Vitamin B9 Vitamin B12
Chart 3.6: Analysis of fortified wheat flour
Total number of samples
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was within the the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was below the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was above the prescribed limit
12 12 12
4 5
2
8 7 7
0 0
3
Iron Vitamin B9 Vitamin B12
Chart 3.7: Analysis of fortified rice
Total number of samples
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was within the the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was below the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was above the prescribed limit

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
126 | P a g e  
 
Analysis of fortified salt samples are depicted below in Chart 3.8. 
 
 
Chart 3.8 indicates that in two samples (out of six) of fortified salt, Iodine41 was found 
to be above the prescribed limit and in two samples Iron was found below the prescribed 
limit. 
However, it was observed that parameters 42 other than fortificants  in the samples of 
pulses (urad dal, chana dal, dal malka), sugar and rice were found to be within the 
prescribed limits of the Food Safety and Standards Regulations, 2018. 
These findings highlight the inability of the Department to effectively implement the 
fortification program me in the State, as a result of which the beneficiaries may be 
deprived of the intended benefits of fortification of food items. Remedial measures are 
necessary to rectify these shortcomings so that the food items being supplied are 
fortified as per the stipulated parameters. 
During the Exit Conference (July 2023) , the Principal Secretary (FCSCA) stated that 
the Department presently did not have any mechanism to test the fortified food items 
and assured that it would send samples to a n FSSAI approved laboratory for testing 
before distribution. 
3.14 Conclusion 
The State G overnment has entrusted the Department and the Corporation with the 
responsibility of procuring  and distributing various food items under TPDS, its 
monitoring and quality control at various levels with the help of field functionaries.  
Audit observed that the Department did not revise the inspection targets in line with 
TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 and hence fell short in fixing the same. Further, even the 
targets fixed for inspections by the Department were not met.  Shortfall in sample 
collection for testing the quality of food items w as observed. Due to delays in 
disseminating the test reports to the field units, substandard food items were distributed 
 
41  Iodine ensures central nervous system development and proper cognitive functions in children, as 
well as prevent goitre and hypothyroidism in people of all ages. 
42  Moisture, extraneous matter, other edible grains, damaged grains, weevilled grains, Uric acid and 
Aflatoxin 
6 6
4 4
0
22
0
Iodine Iron
Chart 3.8: Analysis of fortified salt (In numbers)
Total number of samples
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was within the the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was below the prescribed limit
Samples in which fortificant (s)
was above the prescribed limit

Chapter III: Quality Management in Procurement, Storage and Distribution of Food Items  
127 | P a g e  
 
in the State . Lackadaisical approach in  upgradation and modernisation of  the 
Departmental FTL resulted in lapse of allocated Budget, non-accreditation and non-
upgradation of the laboratory. Thus, the Departmental action for ensuring the quality of 
food items through Joint P hysical Inspection and lab testing as required under the 
applicable Act/order was found insufficient. 
The Department was found lacking in ensuring proper monitoring and supervision at 
all levels. Vigilance Committees required to be formed at every Block and FPS level 
had not been constituted in many of the Blocks and FPSs. Further, non -holding of 
periodical meetings of the Vigilance Committees up to the prescribed extent 
undermined the transparency and accountability of TPDS system in the State. The 
Department was lagging behind in utili sing the allotted Budget for consumer 
sensitisation activities, which limited the beneficiary’s capacity to be a participant in 
the quality control process.  
During physical verification of the wholesale godowns , various  quality related 
shortcomings were noticed. Beneficiaries have also reported below average quality of 
food items during Beneficiary Survey. Further, most of the beneficiaries did not have 
the knowledge of the Department’s toll-free number and were not aware of the 
complaint mechanism. Thus, monitoring systems and consumer awareness measures 
undertaken by the Department were inadequate and leaves scope for improvement. 
Independent qualitative analysis of food items conducted by Audit revealed that none 
of the samples of fortified rice and fortified wheat flour conform ed to the prescribed 
level of micronutrients. In addition, some fortified salt samples also did not conform to 
the prescribed level of micronutrients.  
3.15 Recommendations 
The Government may consider the following: 
• Fixing the inspection targets of various field functionaries in line with the TPDS 
(Control) Order, 2015 and ensure that the targets are duly achieved. 
• Take measures to ensure that there is no shortfall in collection of samples of 
various food items by the field functionaries from the FPSs, mills and godowns. 
• Expedite the process of upgradation and modernisation of its FTL and ensure its 
accreditation with the standardised agency. 
• Ensure that no food item is distributed before its testing and the results should be 
conveyed to the field units expeditiously. 
• Ensure f ormation of V igilance Committees at all levels and their regular 
meetings. 
• Emphasise upon c ommunity participation as a key component of improving 
accountability and transparency in the State. 
• Proactive monitoring of the fortification programme in the State. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal 
Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill 
Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

129 | P a g e  
 
Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam 
(HPKVN) in Skill Development 
Technical Education, Vocational and Industrial Training Department 
 
4.1 Introduction 
Skills and knowledge  are the driving forces of economic growth and social 
development for any country. Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) was 
incorporated in September 2015 under the Companies Act, 2013 by Himachal Pradesh 
Government as a specialised skill development company under the Department of 
Planning. The objective  of formation of HPKVN inter alia  is to consolidate the 
fragmented Technical, Vocational and Educational Training (TVET) programmes of 
Himachal Pradesh , align all TVET programmes with India ’s National Skills 
Qualification Framework (NSQF), facilitate Private Sector participation in design and 
delivery of TVET and development of skill infrastructure in the State. In May 2018, the 
State Government notified that the Administrative Department of HPKVN will be 
Technical Education Department instead of Planning Department. 
4.1.1  Key objectives of HPKVN 
Key objectives of HPKVN are as follows: 
i. To improve employability of the youth of the State through quality skill training  
ii. To consolidate Technical , Vocational and Educational Trainings (TVET) 
framework in the State  
iii. To develop quality skill infrastructure in the State  
iv. To impart demand driven skill training for youth of Himachal Pradesh  
v. To facilitate private sector participation in design, delivery and u pgradation of 
equipment in technical training institutes to National Council of Vocational 
Training (NCVT) level  
vi. To pay special focus on skilling needs of Persons with Disabilities  (PwDs) and 
Women  
vii. To provide a platform for placement of trained candidates. 
4.1.2 Skill Training programmes implemented by HPKVN  
The HPKVN is implementing following programmes/ projects: 
• Himachal Pradesh Skill Development Project (HPSDP) - It is an Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) sponsored project with project cost of $100 million. 
It aims to strengthen skill activities and skill infrastructure in the State. Project 
period was from May 2018 to June 2023. The project consists of four major 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
130 | P a g e  
 
components viz (i) civil works (ii) consultancy services and capacity building 
(iii) trainings1 and (iv) procurement of equipment and furniture.  
Funding under the scheme is in the ratio of 80:20 between ADB and the State. 
• Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna 2 (PMKVY)- PMKVY-I was launched 
in 2015 with 100 per cent Government of India funding to encourage and promote 
skill development in the country by providing free short duration skill training 
through Training Service Providers (TSPs) and incentivising youth by providing 
monetary rewards for skill certification . However, State was covered under 
PMKVY-II with p roject period 201 6-20 and approved cost of project was 
₹ 63.51 crore. PMKVY-II was rolled over to PMKVY-III in the year 2020-21.  
• SANKALP3- Launched in January 2018 with a focus on District-level skilling 
ecosystem through convergence and coordination  among various stakeholders 4. 
Approved cost of the p roject for the State  was ₹ 2.11 crore and period of 
implementation was 2018-23. Funding under the scheme was in the ratio 90:10 
between Centre and State. 
The sub -components of the programmes implemented  by HPKVN are  shown in 
Chart 4.1. 
  
 
1  Includes: (i) Short -Term Training (STT) program (ii) Bachelor of Vocation (B.Voc) Program 
(iii) Graduate Job Training Program (iv) Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) programme 
(v) Specialised training through MoU in Government institutes (IIT, NIFT, ABVIMAS etc.)  
2  Includes components of Short -Term Training, Recognition of Prior Learning and special projects 
(PMKVY-III). 
3  Skills Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood Promotion (SANKALP).  
4  Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam and Himachal Pradesh State Handicrafts and Handlooms 
Corporation Limited. 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
131 | P a g e  
 
Chart 4.1: Sub-components of the programmes implemented by HPKVN 
 
Full form of abbreviations: See footnote5. 
Trainings under above schemes are provided under public private partnerships by TSPs 
and public private partnerships by ITIs, Indian Institute of Technology ( IIT) Mandi, 
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), 
Sonipat (Haryana), etc. Bachelor of Vocational Education ( B.Voc.) programme, a 
three-year course, is implemented by the Higher Education Department in Government 
colleges through TSPs under HPSDP. The HPKVN has identified 33 sectors 
(Appendix 4.1), out of which training is imparted to candidates in 30 sectors under the 
above three programmes as of October 2022. 
Project Administration Manual (PAM) was framed by the Planning Department 
describing the essential administrative and management requirements to implement 
HPSDP in accordance with the policies and procedures of the State Government and 
Asian Development Bank (ADB). The PAM includes references to all available 
templates and instructions either through linkages to relevant Uniform Resource 
Locators (URLs) or incorporated in the PAM. 
 
5  RLC: Rural Livelihood Centre; CLC: City Livelihood Centre; MCC: Model Career Centre; ITI: 
Industrial Training Institute; COE: Centre of Excellence; B.Voc: Bachelor of Vocational Education; 
MoU: Memorandum of Understanding; DoRD -Director of Rural Department ; DoUD-Director of 
Urban Department; DoLE- Director of Labour and Employment; DoTE - Department of Technical 
Education; HPSHHCL: Himachal Pradesh State Handicrafts and Handloom Corporation Limited; 
ABVIMAS: Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Mountaineering and Allied Sports. 
HPKVN Programmes
HPSDP 
Budget - $ 100 million 
(₹ 640 crore)
Skill Trainings 
Approx. 
₹ 241 crore
1. Short term 
trainings (in ITIs and 
by private TSPs)
2. Graduate Add on 
(private TSPs)
3. RPL (private 
TSPs)
4. B. Voc (State 
component)- Higher 
Education by private 
TSPs
5. MoUs for 
specialised trainings 
through reputed 
institutes (IIT, 
ABVIMAS, etc.)
Civil Works 
Approx. (PWD)
₹ 242 crore
RLCs (7)- for 
DoRD
CLCs (5)- for 
DoUD
MCCs (11)- for 
DoLE
Women 
Polytechnic (1)-
for DoTE
Centre of 
Excellence (1)-
HPKVN
ITI Chhatri (1)-
for DoTE
Procurement of 
Equipment and Furniture. 
Approx. ₹ 118 crore
1. Upgrading 
equipments for 22 
trades in selected 50 
exisiting ITIs
2. Purchase of 
Equipment for RLC, 
CLC, MCC, Women 
Polytechnic and ITI  
Chhatri
3. Capacity 
Development of 
Faculty/Staff of ITIs, 
etc.
Consultancy and 
Capacity Building  
Approx. 
₹ 38.01 crore
(three firms 
selected) 
1. PriceWater 
HouseCoopers
2. IPE Global
3. Rodic 
PMKVY (Budget –
₹ 63.51 crore)
Short Term 
Trainings (3-4 
months) by private 
TSPs
Recongnition of 
Prior  Learnings 
(12-80 hours) by 
private TSPs
SANKALP (Budget –
₹ 2.11 crore)
1.Resources hiring 
2. Workshops
3. Trainings- MoU 
with HPSHHCL
4. Training of 
Teachers (ToT)
5. Awareness drive 
6. Artisan Cluster 
Development 
7. Industry meets

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
132 | P a g e  
 
4.1.3 Organogram of HPKVN  
Organogram for HPKVN is depicted in Chart 4.2. 
Chart 4.2: Organogram of HPKVN 
 
 
Note-  District Coordinator works as field functionary for monitoring and reporting of schemes of 
HPKVN. 
4.1.4 Audit Objectives 
The audit of HPKVN was conducted to ascertain whether: 
• Policies and plans required for skill development have been formulated and are 
adhered to for implementation of various programmes. 
• Availability of funds and their utilisation were as per norms. 
• Necessary physical infrastructure and human resources is available and utilised 
to fulfil the objectives of enhancing skills and employment opportunities. 
• Implementation of training programmes of skill development were as per targets 
fixed. 
• Internal controls and monitoring systems were in place as per the norms. 
4.1.5 Audit Criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria sourced from the following: 
• Himachal Pradesh Skill Development Policy (Him Kaushal), 2016 
• Project Administration Manual (PAM) - Himachal Pradesh Skills Development 
Project 
• Guidelines of Skill Development Programmes including Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), and Skill Acquisition and Knowledge 
Awareness for Livelihood Promotion (SANKALP). 
              
          
              
                                                    
                                                     
                                                      
                              
                           
                                     
                           
                
                     
          
                               
                      
                           
                                     
                      
         
                
                       
                
                           
                 
                  
           
                     
                  
                  
          
                  
        
                  
                 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
133 | P a g e  
 
• Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009 
• University Grants Commission Guidelines for implementation of B.Voc 
programme 
• Other rules and guidelines/regulation/instructions issued by the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), Central and the State Governments. 
4.1.6  Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The Audit covered the period since inception of HPKVN i.e., from 2015-16 to 2021-22 
with the objective to cover the skill development related activities  of HPKVN (which 
commenced from 2016 onwards) and conducted test-check of the records of (i) HPKVN 
(ii) Directorate of Higher Education, Shimla and (iii) Directorate of Technical 
Education, Vocational and Industrial Training,  Sundernagar. Three Districts (Kullu, 
Mandi and Una)  out of 12 in the S tate and 44 projects6 (Appendix 4.2) out of 8 3 
projects allotted to 51 TSPs were selected for detailed record scrutiny using IDEA 7 
software and Stratified Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR). 
Audit findings and recommendations included in the report were discussed with the 
Managing Director, HPKVN on 10 August  2023. Replies of the management of  
HPKVN have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
The details of selected Districts (Kullu, Mandi and Una) and records of  TSPs test -
checked are as depicted in Map 4.1. 
Map 4.1: Completed and ongoing selected projects in three test-checked Districts 
 
Audit methodology  included scrutiny of records, issue of questionnaire/audit 
memoranda, analysis of data/information of the selected units/TSPs, examination of the 
responses of various functionaries and surveys of candidates and TSPs. Joint Physical 
 
6  Completed projects: 24 (implemented by 16 TSPs) out of 50 and ongoing: 20 (implemented by 
17 TSPs) out of 33 projects in three test-checked Districts. 
7  Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis. 
        
        
     
       
   
      
      
      
                
       
     
                  
             
           
                  
             
           
                  
             
           

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
134 | P a g e  
 
Inspection of selected infrastructure facilities created under HPSDP and analysis of 
Management Information System  (MIS) data relating to trainings conducted by  
HPKVN. 
Audit Findings 
 
4.2  Planning and Implementation 
 
4.2.1  Non-implementation of Policy Framework 
Himachal Pradesh Skill Development Policy (Him-Kaushal Policy-2016) was framed 
detailing institutional arrangements and operational strategies for creating employment 
opportunities (self-employment and employment in private sector)  and address issues 
relating to problem of unemployment . The Him -Kaushal Policy 2016 stipulates 
HPKVN to deliver the mandate of the H imachal Pradesh Skill Development Mission 
by bringing convergence across the TVET programmes being run by different 
Departments, and aligning all trainings with the competency levels specified in India’s 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) and other national quality assurance 
and certification norms.   
In the policy , the State Government projected requirement of skilled manpower of 
5.76 lakh during XII Plan (2012 -17) and 6.38 lakh  during XIII Plan (2017 -22). The 
policy underscores additional requirement of skilled manpower across 24 high priority 
sectors by 2022 based on a study conducted by the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship.  
Audit observed that:  
• As per Economic Survey of the State Government, t he unemployment rate 8 of 
persons in the age group of 15-59 years in the State decreased from 5.8 per cent 
(2018-19) to 3.8 per cent (2020-21) and increased to 4.6 (2021 -22) despite the 
implementation of policy ibid.  
• In Him Kaushal policy, the State Government selected six focus areas/sectors of 
skill development out of 24 areas identified (August 2013)  in the District level 
skill gap study of the State conducted by KPMG Advisory Services Pvt. Ltd. 
engaged by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). However, the 
number of trainings in focus areas was not adequate as discussed in 
Paragraph 4.2.6. 
• It was reco mmended in the A spirational Survey (covering 6,455 youth) 
conducted by Economics and Statistics Department that the preferred sectors for 
jobs were traditional sectors . However, skilling in local arts and crafts  (under 
HPSDP and PMKVY) and set ting up of market, display -sales centers with 
provision for finance to publicise the locally developed art and craft as mandated 
in para 4.12 of Him Kaushal Policy  (Appendix 4.3) were not conducted during 
2018-22. 
 
8  Unemployment rate is percentage of persons unemployed among persons in the labour force.  

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
135 | P a g e  
 
• The HPKVN had conducted Industrial Survey (December 2020) cover ing 311 
units in industrial clusters of Baddi, Barotiwala, Nalagarh, Parwanoo, Solan, Kala 
Amb, Paonta Sahib, Una and Mandi. In terms of employment, the top 10 sectors 
identified were pharmaceutical, textile, electrical and electronics, automobile, 
plastic, chemical, fast moving consumer goods, metal products, food processing 
and engineering . HPKVN had conduced training  in the above  sectors 
(Appendix 4.4) except pharmaceuticals, chemicals, chemicals-based products 
and food processing as of September 2022. 
HPKVN stated (August 2023) that overall targets for HPKVN is approximately 65,000 
and the figure 6.38 lakh is the projected target of manpower to be trained under all 
programmes including different Departments across the State. The aim of HPKVN is 
strictly restricted towards ADB funded project and target achievement of 65 ,000 
certified candidates has been exceeded. The fact, however, remains that as per Him 
Kaushal Policy, HPKVN has been made nodal agency (overarching body) for 
implementation of the policy and specific progress in creation of skilled manpower in 
each of the sectors was to be overseen by the HPKVN. 
4.2.2 Institutional Mechanism  
To oversee the implementation of programme and guide the HPKVN, two high-level 
Committees were constituted by the State Government in April 2016 (Appendix 4.5).  
(i) Project Steering Committee (PSC) : The PSC comprising Chief Secretary and 
Secretaries of the seven-line Departments9, Advisor Planning and Managing Director 
of HPKVN as member s was to provide overall direction and guidance to the HPSDP 
and to meet every quarter, or as required. Audit observed that no meeting of PSC was 
convened since its inception.  
(ii) Project Management and Implementation Committee (PMIC): It comprises of 
Managing Dire ctor, General Managers of HPKVN and  Directors of the line 
Departments. It is mandated to meet every quarter, or as required to carry out functions 
of planning and implementation of projects.  
Audit observed that against required 20 meetings, only five meetings were held during 
2017-22. Decisions taken in these meetings  inter alia included due emphasis by all 
stakeholders on achievement of targets of trainings, connect and placement support to 
trainees through Industries Department, early completion of  infrastructural and 
procurement works, operationalisation of buildings at the completion stage, etc.   
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that no PSC meeting was convened and would be 
planned soon. It was assured that regular meetings of PMIC will be held in future.  
 
9  Economic and Statistics, Higher Education, Industries, Labour and Employment, Public Works, 
Rural Development and Urban Development. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
136 | P a g e  
 
4.2.2.1 Non-Preparation of Annual Action/ Five Year Plans of HPKVN 
The office manual of the State Government  requires preparation of an Annual Action 
Plan (AAP) for all the Departmental programmes/ schemes in advance in January or 
February every year with month-wise and quarter-wise breakup of targets in respect of 
each activity to be achieved during ensuing Financial Year. The office manual also 
provides for preparation of five-year plan of programme  and activities of the 
Department. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that during 2015-22, HPKVN had neither prepared AAPs/ five 
year plans with month-wise and quarter -wise breakup of targets and implementation 
strategy for various schemes/ programmes nor had the Technical Education Department 
insisted upon preparation of the same. Planning by the HPKVN is critical to 
implementation of various Skill Development activities. The efforts of the State 
Government for strengthening the skill development activities were deficient which can 
be attributed to inadequate planning, which is brought out in succeeding Paragraphs. 
The HPKVN admitted (August 2023) that annual action plans were not prepared. It was 
further stated that appropriate action would be taken in this regard in future. 
4.2.3  Irregular Expenditure on IEC Activities 
The Department of Information and Public Relations (DIPR) had reiterated in a 
notification issued in October 2018 that it is the nodal agency  for release of 
advertisements to newspaper and other media through Online Advertisement 
Management Software (OAMS) for all the Departments/ boards/ corporations . IPR 
Online Advertisement Management Software is a fully automated web portal which 
enables all the offices of all the departments/boards & corporations of Himachal 
Pradesh, to upload their advertisement proposals for publication in newspapers. 
Through thi s OAMS, the departmental proposals (requests for publication of 
tenders/notices, display advertisements etc.) are further released online to the 
newspapers for publication by the IPR department.   
Scrutiny of records showed that HPKVN had incurred: 
• An amount of ₹ 69.38 lakh on advertisement and publicity of programmes of 
HPKVN in newspapers, institutional magazines, etc. during the period between 
August 2018 and March  2022 without uploading the proposals on OAMS and 
approval of the State Government through DIPR.  
• Out of the above amount, ₹ 24.97 lakh was incurred on publicity of programmes 
in journals, souvenirs, periodical s, etc. , of multiple organisations without 
verifying their status of wide circulation. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that all the proposals of advertisement will be made 
through the Department of Information and Public Relations in future. 
  

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
137 | P a g e  
 
4.2.4  Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
Paras 85 to 87 of the PAM  provide for stakeholder communication strategy by 
conducting sensiti sation workshops with potential trainees and their parents, senior 
faculty of colleges, polytechnics, and ITIs, and officers of the executing agency and 
implementing agencies. Similar workshops were required to be conducted for TSPs, 
assessment agencies10, Industries Associations and Chamber of Commerce, placement 
agencies and sector skills councils11 in partnership with HPKVN officials. The purpose 
of stakeholder communication strategy is to provide information on int ended benefits 
of HPSDP to all stakeholders. 
Audit observed that no targets of sensitisation workshops were fixed  for trainees, 
parents, faculty etc., during 2018 -22. In absence of targets, adequacy of sensiti sation 
workshops conducted could not be ascertained in audit. The details of various 
categories of trainees who attended the sensitisation workshops is given in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Details of sensitisation workshops conducted during 2018-22.  
Year 
Potential 
trainees Parents 
Faculty of 
colleges, 
polytechni
cs and 
ITIs 
Officers 
of 
executing 
agency 
and 
implemen
ting 
agencies 
TSPs 
Assessme
nt 
agencies 
Sector 
skill 
councils 
Industries 
Associations 
and 
Chamber of 
Commerce 
Placement 
agencies 
W T W T W T W T W T W T W T W T W T 
2018-19 3 91 1 2 3 25 5 80 5 40 2 5 1 16 5 81 2 6 
2019-20 65 4,077 4 61 1 54 10 27 1 25 0 0 0 0 2 75 2 10 
2020-21 14 582 1 2 0 0 1 4 1 4 0 0 0 0 1 12 0 0 
2021-22 129 6,379 7 324 0 0 2 9 1 10 1 2 0 0 1 60 2 4 
Total 211 11,129 13 389 4 79 18 120 8 79 3 7 1 16 9 228 6 20 
Note: W= Workshop organised; T = Trainees attended. 
As can be seen from Table 4.1, sensitisation workshops were not organised for faculty 
of various concerned institutions  during 2020-22, Assessment Agencies during 2019-
21, Sector Skill councils during 2019-22 and for Placement agencies during 2020-21.   
The HPKVN assured (August 2023) to conduct adequate number of sensiti sation 
workshops for each category of stakeholders in future. 
4.2.5  Mobilisation, Candidate Screening and Counselling 
Para 4.10 of the Him Kaushal Policy  2016 stipulates that  training partners are 
responsible for mobili sing interested and eligible youth  for skilling. The mobilised 
trainees are to be put through an assessment process or basic  screening tests to assess 
the need and aptitude fundamental to the  trades. Counselling is to be provided to both 
the candidate and his/  her parents to make  informed choices to match aptitude and 
 
10  Assessment agencies are responsible for assessing the skills of candidates who have undergone 
training in different sectors, ensuring that they meet requirement of industry Sectors.  
11  Sector Skill Councils are industry-led bodies responsible for addressing the skill development needs 
in specific sectors or industries. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
138 | P a g e  
 
aspiration and a Parent Consent Form is to be obtained from parents/guardians of every 
trainee prior to the commencement of the training program. 
Test-check of the records of the selected  TSPs revealed that pre-assessment/tests had 
not been conducted  for candidates  to assess their need , aptitude and to match their 
aspirations with their educational qualification . Also, TSPs had  not obtained Parent 
Consent Form . This led to non -assessment of candidates’ need and aptitude 
fundamental to trades of their choice . This was one of the reasons for shortfall in 
placements of the trainees after completion of trainings as discussed in 
Paragraphs 4.5.1.1 and 4.5.2.1. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that mobilisation, candidate screening and 
counselling of candidates were conducted by TSPs but record thereof was not 
maintained. It assured that instructions will be issued to all TSPs to maintain such 
records in future. 
4.2.6 Focus Sectors of Him Kaushal Policy 
Para 4.8 of the Him Kaushal  Policy 2016 stipulates that HPKVN has been tasked to 
address the needs and requirement of manpower in the following priority-wise six focus 
sectors to draw upon the strengths of the local workforce: (i) Agriculture 
(ii) Horticulture (iii) Tourism and Hospitality (iv) Construction (v) IT Enabled services 
(vi) Banking and Financial services. 
HPKVN identified 33 sectors and is providing trainings in 30 Sectors (Appendix 4.4). 
The number of youths trained, certified and placed in six focus Sectors vis-a-vis 24 
other sectors during 2016-22 (up to October 2022) is given in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Trainings in six focus Sectors vis-a-vis 24 other sectors 
Sr. 
No. Focus Sectors 
Total 
Trained 
in 30 
Sectors 
Trained 
Nos. 
(per cent) 
Total 
certified 
in 30 
sectors 
Certified 
Nos 
(per cent) 
Total 
placed 
in 30 
sectors 
Placed 
Nos 
(per cent) 
1. Agriculture  
 
 
 
 
 
55,754 
815 (01)  
 
 
 
 
 
36,033 
414 (01)  
 
 
 
 
 
5,527 
01 (0.02) 
2. Horticulture 648 (01) 612 (02) 03 (0.05) 
3. Tourism and 
Hospitality 
7,650 
(14) 
5,137 (14) 492 (09) 
4. Construction 1,766 
(03) 
1,030 (03) 253 (05) 
5. IT/ITES 11,508 
(21) 
5,548 (15) 759 (14) 
6. Banking and 
Financial 
295 (01) 90 (0.24) 0 
Total 22,682 
(41) 
12,831 (36) 1,508 (27) 
Other 24 Sectors 33,072 
(59) 
23,202 (64) 4,019 (73) 
 Note: Figures is the parenthesis denotes percentage of trained/ certified/ placed candidates against total 
candidates in respective category.  
Source: Figures supplied by HPKVN /MIS data. 
 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
139 | P a g e  
 
Audit noticed that: 
• Six sectors were prioritised as focus sectors.  Number of trained candidates  in 
these sectors  was 41 per cent  of the total number of candidates  trained in all 
sectors. 
• Agriculture and Horticulture were two focus areas where trainings were only 
three per cent of the total trained candidates. 
• Candidates certified in the focus sectors is 36 per cent of total certified candidates.   
• Training in construction ( three per cent ) and Banking and Financial Sectors 
(0.53 per cent) was also low. 
• 75 per cent of trainings (Appendix 4.4) were provided in eight sectors 12 while 
trainings in remaining 22 sectors was 25 per cent. Further, in 10 out of 22 sectors, 
number of trainings was less than one per cent of the total trainings. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that efforts will be made to conduct more trainings 
under above focus sectors in future. 
4.2.7  Convergence of skill program mes and aligning training to national 
standards 
India’s National Policy on Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (2015) encourages 
States to develop umbrella skills development mission  across Government 
Departments, corporate sector, community based organi sations, dedicated individuals 
who have been working in the skilling and entrepreneurship space, industry and trade 
organisations. Para 4.5 of Him Kaushal Policy 2016 mandates the HPKVN to  bring 
about convergence across the skills programmes run by different Departments to reduce 
duplication and align all training s to national standards.  Further, in review meeting 
(February 2022), details of the schemes being implemented by various Departments of 
the State were called for by the Chief Secretary , Government of Himachal Pradesh to 
bring about convergence among different stakeholders.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that though numerous13 skill development programmes 
were being run in the State by various Departments, no plan/details for such 
convergence had been prepared and no concrete effort was made by the HPKVN during 
2016-22 to converge skill development programmes under one umbrella.  
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that convergence under various skill development 
programmes is a policy matter, and a request has been made to 15 Departments to share 
the requisite data/ details of the training programs implemented by them.  The fact, 
however, remains that convergence of skill programmes in the State and aligning 
 
12  IT/ITES: 21 per cent; Tourism and Hospitality: 14 per cent; Healthcare (10 per cent); Apparel and 
Made ups: (10 per cent ); Electronics (six per cent) Beauty and Wellness (five per cent ); Auto 
(five per cent) and Insurance (four per cent). 
13  Skill Development programmes in School/ Colleges by Higher and Elementary Education 
Departments, Two/ three years courses in ITIs/ Polytechnics, Skill Development programme by 
various other Departments such as Agriculture, Horticulture, Labour and Employment, Urban 
Development, Rural Development, Health and Medical Education, Tourism and Industries 
Department, HP Handicrafts and Handloom Corporation Limited, HP SC and ST Development 
Corporation, District Rural Development Agencies, Rural Self Employment Training Institutes, etc. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
140 | P a g e  
 
training to national standards could not be made in  spite of lapse of more than seven 
years since establishment of HPKVN, as of August 2023. 
4.3  Fund Management 
 
4.3.1  Receipt and Utilisation of funds 
Details of availability of funds and expenditure incurred there against under HPSDP , 
PMKVY and SANKALP projects during 2015-22 are given in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Details of availability of funds and expenditure incurred during 2015-2022. 
  ₹           
Year Opening 
balance 
Amount received 
Total 
funds 
available 
Utilisation 
Total 
utilisation 
( per cent) 
Closing 
balance 
Centre 
State 
(HPSDP) 
Misc. 
receipt/ 
Int. 
PMK
VY-2 
SAN 
KALP 
HPSD
P 
Misc. 
Exp. 
  
PM
KVY
-2 
SAN 
KALP 
2015-16 0.00 -- -- 1.00 -- 1.00 0 -- 0.33 -- 0.33 (33) 0.67 
2016-17 0.67 -- -- 2.64 -- 3.31 0 -- 2.97 -- 2.97 (90) 0.34 
2017-18 0.34 21.56 -- 7.44 0.41 29.75 0 -- 2.84 0.03 2.87 (10) 26.88 
2018-19 26.88 -- -- 71.35 0 98.23 3.57 -- 6.65 0.25 10.47 (11) 87.77 
2019-20 87.77 -- -- 89.25 7.38 184.40 8.04 -- 54.41 0.06 62.51 (34) 121.89 
2020-21 121.89 -- 1.58 15.00 2.66 141.13 3.01 -- 54.15 0.04 57.20 (41) 83.93 
2021-22 83.93 -- -- 58.79 1.48 144.20 3.73 -- 96.02 0.02 99.77 (69) 44.43 
Total 21.56 1.58 245.47 11.93  18.35  217.37 0.40 236.12  
Source: Annual Accounts. Figures of 2020-21 and 2021-22 are unaudited. 
Chart 4.3: Component wise expenditure as of March 2022 (₹ in crore) 
From the Chart 4.3, it can be seen that substantial amount has been incurred  on civil 
works. Audit scrutiny revealed several shortcomings in completion of works 
(Paragraph 4.4.1). Also, most of deliverables were not achieved by the consultants as 
detailed in Paragraph 4.7.6. 
It can be seen from Table 4.3 that percentage of utilisation of funds during 2015 -22 
ranged between 10 and 90. The utilisation of the funds was low during 2017-18 to 2020-
21 due to delay in empanelment of TSPs, non-start of training programmes in time, low 
progress of civil works (Paragraph 4.4.1), etc. The Government of India did not release 
grant under PMKVY after 2017 -18 (however, in 2020 -21 ₹ 1.58 crore was released 
under Government of India  sponsored scheme SANKALP) on account of less 
utilisation of amount released due to delay in identification of training centres by private 
55.16, 
23%
41.82, 
18%88.64, 
38%
50.49, 
21%
Expenditure
Training
Equipment & Furniture
Civil Works
Admin, Consultancy & Capacity
Building  Expenses

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
141 | P a g e  
 
TSPs, equipping labs, mobilisation/ identification of candidates, etc., which indicated 
that the projects were not implemented as required. 
The HPKVN attributed (August 2023) low utili sation of funds during 2020 -21 and 
2021-22 to COVID -19 related restrictions resulting in suspension of training 
programmes, slowdown of construction works, delay in procurements, etc. The reply is 
not acceptable as expenditure was low even during the pre-Covid period. 
4.3.2 Non-obtaining of Performance Guarantee/ Security from TSPs 
Clause 35 of Project Administration Manual states that all expenditure will be carried 
out in accordance with Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009 (HPFR). Rule 107 of 
Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009 provides for obtaining Performance Guarantee 
(PG) from successful contractor on award of the contract for an amount of five to 
10 per cent of the value of the contract with an objective to giving an assurance to the 
Government in the event of inadequate or delayed performance or a violation of 
guidelines and protocols by TSPs.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that the HPKVN had neither inserted Performance Guarantee/ 
security clause in agreement/ MoU with TSPs nor obtained any Performance Guarantee 
from TSPs during the period covered under audit.  The HPKVN allotted eight projects 
to seven TSPs under HPSDP and PMKVY-2 between June 2018 and September 2021 
with project cost  ₹ 33.20 crore and released ₹ 9.14 crore  to the TSPs . However, 
Performance Guarantee s aggregating to  ₹1.66 crore (calculated at the rate of 
five per cent) required under the rule had not been obtained (Appendix 4.6).  
In addition to the above, nine projects under Pilot Project and PMKVY were allotted to 
seven TSPs between September 2016 and February 2019 on the basis of common cost 
norms (per hour/ days/ candidate basis) and an amount aggregating to ₹ 2.33 crore was 
released to the TSPs without obtaining PG. 
HPKVN stated (August 2023) that HPKVN abides by the standard bidding guidelines 
issued by ADB which do not include any provision for a Performance Guarantee. The 
reply is not tenable as its  provision contained in  Project Administration Manual of 
HPSDP provides that procurement of goods and services is to be carried out in 
accordance with regulations contained in HPFR, which inter alia provides for obtaining 
of Performance Guarantee.  
4.3.3  Non-achievement of Targets under PMKVY 
The Government of India approved PMKVY-2 with implementation period of 2016-20 
in the State to be conducted by HPKVN. A total of 49,499 trainees were targeted to be 
trained with ₹  14,805 per trainee average cost plus four per cent  of total funds as 
administrative cost. Further, the State was to submit Utilisation Certificate subject to 
spending 80 per cent of the total funds sanctioned for 2017 -18 and achievement of 
50 per cent of physical targets for the year 2017-18 to receive further instalments under 
the programme. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
142 | P a g e  
 
The Government of India revised (June 2019) the physical targets to 40,012 with project 
cost at ₹  63.51 crore. Trainings of c andidates enrolled under PMKVY -2 during the 
period 2016-20 were to be completed physically and financially (extended due to Covid 
pandemic) by July 2022. 
The performance of State under PMKVY-2 during 2017-22 is given in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Performance under PMKVY-2 during 2017-22 
                b       ₹           
Sr. 
No. Parameter 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Extended 
period of 
project 
(due to 
Covid) 
Total 
Revised 
target 
(June 
2019) 
Targets 
1. Total trainees to 
be trained 
14,000 16,500 18,999 -- 49,499 40,012 
2. Training funds 
required @ avg. 
cost ₹ 14,805 per 
trainee 
20.72 24.43 28.13 -- 73.28 59.14 
(@ avg. 
cost 
₹14,781 
per 
trainee) 
3. Administrative 
expense @ four 
per cent of total 
funds 
0.83  0.98 1.12 -- 2.93 2.54  
 
4. Mobilisation and 
awareness @ 
three per cent of 
training fund, 
excluding 
administrative 
cost 
Not 
applicable 
Not 
applicable 
Not 
applicable 
-- -- 1.83 
5. Total funds 
allocated (2+3+4) 
21.55 25.41 29.25 -- 76.21 63.51 
Physical and Financial Achievements under PMKVY during 2017-22 
6. Trainees trained 240 (02) 5,494 (33) 8,993 
(47) 
28 14,755 14,755 
(37) 
7. Trainees certified -- (0) 3,416 (62) 5,995 
(67) 
2,765 12,176  12,176 
(83) 
8. Trainees placed -- (0) 948 (28) 1,601 
(27) 
359 2,908 2,908 
(24) 
9. Amount received 21.56 -- -- -- -- 21.56 
(34) 
10. Total expenditure 
incurred 
-- (0) 3.57 (14) 8.13 (28) 6.67 18.37 18.37 
(29) 
Source: Figures supplied by the HPKVN. 
From the above details, Audit noticed that:  
• Against total funds allotted for the period 2017 -22, expenditure incurred was 
only 29 per cent. 
• Due to non-utilisation of funds allocated for the year 2017-18, the Government 
of India  did not release further instalments amounting to ₹ 41.95 crore and 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
143 | P a g e  
 
expenditure on entire project (PMKVY- 2 and PMKVY-3) was met out of  the 
first instalment released for the year 2017-18.  
• The total number of trainees trained (14,755) was only 37 per cent of the target 
up to  October 2022. Thus, State could not receive the remaining funds of 
₹ 41.95 crore due to non-conduct of targeted number of trainings. 
• Guidelines of PMKVY 3.0 issued (December 2020) by  Government of India  
provided to utilise balance funds received as the first instalment under PMKVY-
2 for trainings under PMKVY -3 and no separate funds were released under 
PMKVY-3. 
The HPKVN attributed (January 2023) low enrolments to high aspiration of Himachali 
youth, multiple skilling programmes, lack of infrastructure facilities and limited scope 
of mobilisation. The reply should be seen in light of fact that HPKVN failed to conduct 
the targeted number of trainings and resultantly could not  avail the committed 
Government of India funding under the scheme. 
4.3.4 Performance of State under SANKALP 
To strengthen institutional mechanisms  for skill development and increase access to 
quality and market -relevant training for youth across the country, SANKALP was 
launched on 19 January 2018 with six-year implementation period till March 2023. The 
programme has four key result areas (i) institutional strengthening at Central, State and 
District level; (ii) quality assurance of skill development programmes; (iii) inclusion of 
marginalised population in skill development programmes; a nd (iv) expanding skills 
through PPPs. Funding under the scheme is in ratio 90:10 between Centre and State. 
The Government of India  sanctioned (up to October 2020) ₹ 2.11 crore and released 
(March 2021) ₹ 1.58 crore under two components (i) Institutional Strengthening at the 
National and State Levels for Planning, Delivering and Monitoring High -quality 
Market Relevant Training , and (ii) Improved Quality and Market Relevance of Skill 
Development Programmes. The State Government released 10 per cent  share of 
₹ 15.75 lakh in August 2022 after a delay of 17 months from release of Government of 
India share.  
Audit noticed that: 
• Though the State Government was eligible for ₹ 3.18 crore  as part of State 
Component under SANKALP (Central share: ₹ 2.86 crore and State Share: 
₹ 0.32 crore), only ₹ 2.11 crore  (Central share: ₹ 1.90 crore and State Share: 
₹ 0.21 crore) was approved by Government of India due to non-receipt of proposal 
of State under the component viz Improved Access and Completion of Skill 
Training for Female Trainees and Other Disadvantaged Groups. In this regard, the 
HPKVN stated (November 2022) that the said intervention will be covered  under 
HPSDP.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
144 | P a g e  
 
• Against availability of ₹ 1.74 crore14 under the programme, the utilisation of funds 
was ₹ 0.46 crore  only (26 per cent), leaving ₹ 1.28 crore as unutilised as of 
October 2022. The detail of utilisation of funds against approved amount is 
tabulated in Appendix 4.7. 
As can be seen from Appendix 4.7, physical and financial progress under the scheme 
is unsatisfactory and targeted beneficiaries had remained largely deprived of the 
benefits of the scheme in spite of more than 2 1 months of receipt of Government of 
India share under the scheme.  
While admitting the facts, the HPKVN stated (November 2022) that funds were not 
utilised as resources could not be hired  due to delays in getting appropriate approvals 
from Administrative and Finance Department, resulting in slow down of the 
programme. 
4.3.5  Non-recovery of Amount for Non-commencement of Project 
The HPKVN and M/s MMC Computers had signed undertaking-cum-Indemnity bond 
in December 2018 under PMKVY -2.0 for providing training to candidates in IT and 
ITES and Electronic and Hardware Sectors at a total project cost of ₹ 7.32 lakh15. The 
first installment  of ₹  2.20 lakh was released to M/s MMC Computers  in April -May 
2019.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that M/s MMC Computers did not complete  the project 
(candidates were provided training but were not certified) and the HPKVN terminated 
the contract in July 2022 without recovering ₹  2.20 lakh as of October 2022.  HPKVN 
had neither obtained the Performance Guarantee of ₹ 0.37 lakh ( five per cent of the 
value of contract) nor recovered interest (₹  0.62 lakh) which would have accrued on 
₹ 2.20 lakh for 40 months16. The HPKVN failed to effect recovery of the amount paid 
and interest accrued as of October 2022. 
The HPKVN stated (October 2022) that Performance Security was not obtained due to 
absence of provision in guidelines / common cost norms and action is being taken to 
recover the amount. The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that recovery of the first tranche 
paid to the M/s MMC Computers has been initiated. The reply is not acceptable as the 
Performance Guarantee to safeguard interest of the Government was not obtained. 
4.3.6  Non-collection of Refundable Security Deposits 
Para 5.8 of the Common Cost Norms17 (August 2015) for Skill Development stipulates 
levy of security deposits from the candidates to ensure that candidates selected for the 
training programmes are undergoing the training with seriousness, and to reduc e the 
 
14  Government of India: ₹ 1.58 crore and State: ₹ 0.16 crore. 
15  IT and ITES: ₹ 3.59 lakh and Electronic and Hardware: ₹ 3.73 lakh. 
16  Calculated on average rate of outstanding public debt for the period May 2019 to October 2022 at 
the rate of 7.97 per cent  (2019-20), 7.59 per cent  (2020-21), and 7.51 per cent  (2021-22 and 
2022-23) per annum. 
17  Cost Common norm is an established standard or average approved by Government of India  in 
order to bring about uniformity and standardisation in the implementation of various Skill 
Development Schemes by various Departments/ Ministries. 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
145 | P a g e  
 
drop-out rates. Training p roviders shall charge a refundable security deposit of 
₹ 1,000/- per candidate for NSQF18 level 5 and above, ₹  500 for NSQF levels 3 and 4 
and ₹ 250 for NSQF Levels 1 and 2 at the commencement of the training. The amount 
would be refunded to every candidate who is certified.  
Audit noticed that: 
• Details regarding security deposit obtained from candidates enrolled under 
HPSDP and PMKVY programmes during 2016-22 had not been maintained by 
HPKVN.  
• Records in 13 test-checked units19 revealed that security deposit of ₹ 21.49 lakh 
was not obtained from 3,956 candidates out of 3,970 candidates enrolled by 
these TSPs under NSQF level 1 to 5 courses.  
The HPKVN informed (August 2023) that  directions will be issued to all the TSPs to 
adhere to the instructions contained in ‘Common Cost Norms’ guidelines regarding 
collection of refundable security from the trainees. 
4.3.7  Avoidable expenditure on Payment of Goods and Service Tax 
Clauses 2 and 4 of Government of India Notification (January 2019) 20 stipulate that 
services provided by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) are exempted from all 
taxation. Clauses 69 and 72 of Government of India Notification (June 2017) provide 
that services rendered by Sector Skill Councils (SSCs), assessment agencies, and 
training partners approved by SSCs under recognized skill development programs shall 
be exempt from payment of central taxes. 
Scrutiny of bills made available to Audit revealed that Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas 
Nigam (HPKVN) paid ₹  1.43 crore as GST on training services amounting to 
₹ 10.28 crore delivered by 14 Training Service Providers (TSPs) during 2018–22. The 
TSPs or HPKVN had not availed tax exemption, nor was the matter taken up with the 
GST authorities for exemption. In contrast, TSPs engaged by the Higher Education 
Department for B. Voc. courses had obtained such exemptions. The GST paid could 
have been utilized for skilling more candidates. 
In response (November 2022), HPKVN stated that it had not pursued the matter with 
the GST Council as it was implementing an ADB -sponsored program and hence not 
exempt. The reply is not tenable in light of the June 2017 notification, which provides 
for exemption to TSPs approved under SSCs or other recognized bodies, irrespective 
of the source of funding. The matter warranted appropriate follow -up with the GST 
 
18  National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF)  is a nationally integrated education and 
competency-based framework that enables persons to acquire desired competency levels. NSQF 
organises qualifications according to a series of levels of knowledge, skills and aptitude. These 
levels, graded from one to ten, are defined in terms of learning outcomes. 
19  M/s Wazir Advisors, eight selected ITIs (Bagsaid, Bangana, Dalash, Mandi (W), Nirmand, Padhar, 
Paplog and Shamshi) and four (Graduate add on - ongoing) selected Degree Colleges 
(Jogindernagar, Karsog, Kullu and Una). 
20  Ministry of Finance, Government of India circular no. 83/02/2019 -GST dated 1st January 2019 on 
Applicability of GST on Asian Development Bank (ADB).  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
146 | P a g e  
 
authorities to explore applicability of exemption as GST l aw recognises right to 
education including vocational training and provides exemption from the levy of GST. 
4.4  Infrastructure for skill trainings 
 
4.4.1  Status of Infrastructure of Training Centres 
Under ABD sponsored HPSDP , funds of ₹ 119.58 crore were released between 
July 2016 and July 2022  to Public Works Department for execution/ upgradation of 
26 projects (11 Model Career Centres (MCC), seven Rural Livelihood Centres (RLC), 
five City Livelihood Centres (CLC), one ITI, one Centre of Excellence (CoE) and one 
Women Polytechnic College) between July 2016 and July 2022.  
Audit observations on civil works/infrastructure is given in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Audit Observations on Civil Works 
Name of Work(s) Status Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
Exp.  
(As of 
Dec. 
2022) 
Physical 
Progress 
in 
per cent 
Delay  
(Months)  
Audit Remarks 
Development of 
11 Model Career 
Centres (MCC) 
 
Purpose: To 
create awareness 
among youth 
about Technical 
and Vocational 
Education 
Training 
Work not 
Started: one 
(Kaza) 
₹ 5.81 crore 
(July 2022)  
-- -- -- -- Construction of MCC 
Kaza not commenced 
due to late finalisation of 
site. After finalisation of 
site, tender was awarded 
in December 2022.  
Completed/ 
Partially 
Completed 
works: six21 
₹ 17.08 
crore (July 
2019- 
March 
2021)  
Completion 
date: 
(March 
2020 and 
May 2022) 
₹ 17.23 
crore 
₹ 12.23 
crore 
42 to 
100 
per cent  
7-33  Delay in completion/ 
handing over completed 
buildings of six MCCs 
was due to delay in 
approval of variations  
and additional works 
such as fire protection 
works, residential area 
restrictions, etc. 
Ongoing 
work: Two 
(Dadasiba and 
Solan) 
₹ 8.25 crore 
(Dadasiba: 
November 
2020 and 
Solan: 
January 
2021) 
₹ 1.50 
crore 
₹ 0.71 
crore 
16 and 
one 
per cent 
-- Two MCC s (Dadasiba-
slow work progress  and 
Solan- delayed due to 
change in structural 
design) are in progress  
for completion  by June 
2023 and September 
2023 respectively. 
Not awarded: 
2 (Nahan and 
Udaipur) 
-- -- -- -- -- Two MCCs (Nahan and 
Udaipur) not awarded 
due to delay in 
identification of suitable 
land. 
 
21  Baddi, Bilaspur, Chamba, Dharamshala, Hamirpur and Mandi  

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
147 | P a g e  
 
Name of Work(s) Status Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
Exp.  
(As of 
Dec. 
2022) 
Physical 
Progress 
in 
per cent 
Delay  
(Months)  
Audit Remarks 
Establishment of 
five CLCs and 
seven RLCs 
 
Purpose: To 
provide 
vocational 
training and 
business 
development 
support to 
improve 
livelihood of 
youth of urban 
and rural areas of 
the State 
Partially 
Completed: 
four CLCs22 
Ongoing:  
one-CLC 
(Bilaspur) 
₹ 18.94 
crore 
₹ 37.70 
crore 
₹ 15.84 
crore 
33 to 
100 
per cent  
nine to 41  
 
The completed works - 
CLCs (Nahan,  Sidhbari 
and Sundernagar ) in 
which progress has been 
shown as 100  per cent  
have not been handed 
over to the line 
Department due to 
additional work  
(installation of 
transformer, etc.) and for 
want of approval of 
variations. 
- Delay in completion of 
CLC Bilaspur was due 
to delay in obtaining 
forest clearance, slow 
progress of work.  
CLC, Shamshi 
Partially completed 
building has been 
handed over  
(March 2022) to 
Industries Department. 
 
Picture 4.1 (November 2022) of 
under-construction/ partially 
completed CLC Shamshi- in 
which weaver service centre is 
operational 
Ongoing23: 
six-RLCs 
₹ 38.14 
crore 
₹ 22.79 
crore 
46 to 
100 
10 to 41   Ongoing five RLCs 
(Bangana, Chopal, 
Nagrota, Pragatinagar 
and Seraj) works were 
delayed due to land 
issues, change in designs 
and additional scope of 
work. 
RLC, Sadhayna where 
physical progress has 
been shown as 100 
per cent is yet to be 
completed for want of 
additional work. 
Not awarded: 
01 (RLC, 
Nalagarh) 
₹ 12.15 
crore 
(December 
2022) 
-- -- -- -- Work of RLC Nalagarh 
has not  been awarded 
due to delay in 
finalisation of design. 
Construction of 
Women 
Ongoing ₹ 42.61 
crore 
₹ 33.50 
crore 
₹ 29.69 
crore 
93 
per cent  
41  Delay due to change in 
scope of work (rising of 
the plinth level, addition 
 
22  CLCs: Nahan, Shamshi, Sidhbari and Sundernagar  
23  RLCs: Bangana, Chopal, Nagrota, Pragatinagar, Sadhyana and Seraj. 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
148 | P a g e  
 
Name of Work(s) Status Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
Exp.  
(As of 
Dec. 
2022) 
Physical 
Progress 
in 
per cent 
Delay  
(Months)  
Audit Remarks 
Polytechnic 
college at Rehan  
 
Purpose: To 
improve access 
for girls to TVET 
(Intake 720 and 
hostel facilities 
for 120) 
(August 
2017) 
Scheduled 
Completion 
date: July 
2019 
 
 
Picture 4.2 (December 2022) of Women 
Polytechnic College Rehan- Delay of 41 
months in completion 
of guide bund and 
source of power supply ) 
and non -finalisation of 
Sewage Treatment Plan 
and its execution. 
The building has been 
partially 
taken over along with 
administrative block and 
courses started from 
academic session 2021 -
22. However, other 
facilities like hostel and 
staff residence are yet to 
be completed. 
Due to delay of more 
than three years in 
completion of the 
college and hostel 
buildings, the objective 
of establishing of 
polytechnic college 
exclusively for women 
under HPSDP remained 
largely unachieved. 
Construction of 
Centre of 
Excellence 
(CoE), 
Waknaghat- (IT 
and Tourism and 
Hospitality 
sectors) 
Purpose: For 
hosting industry 
driven skilling 
training in the 
State 
Ongoing  ₹ 84.26 
crore (June 
2020) 
Scheduled 
Completion 
date: 
January 
2022 
₹ 20.00 
crore 
₹ 18.42 
crore 
16 
per cent  
11   Delay in handing over 
site, finalisation of plan, 
land demarcation and 
design change issues. 
 
 
Picture 4.3 Under construction (February 
2023) main building of CoE, Waknaghat 
Construction of 
ITI Chhatri  
Ongoing 
 
 
 
₹ 18.84 
crore 
(September 
2020) 
Schedule 
Completion 
date: June 
2022 
₹ 9.65 
crore 
₹ 5.46 
crore 
41 
per cent  
6 months Delay in issuing of 
drawings by HPPWD, 
land issue, 
approachability to site, 
labour shortages, etc. 
 
 


Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
149 | P a g e  
 
As seen from Table 4.5, of the total 26 projects envisaged to create infrastructure to 
build awareness and to provide training as well as to improve access to youth in rural 
and urban areas, 10 were partially completed, 12 were ongoing and four were not started 
as of December 2022. Of the ongoing works, there were delays ranging between six to 
41 months, thus, leading to non-achievement of their objectives of the works.  
Non-completion or non-utilisation of buildings in time resulted  in non-availability of 
the requisite infrastructure facilities. Also, the consultant (M/s Rodic) hired for quality 
assurance and monitoring of civil works failed to get the works completed within the 
stipulated time (Paragraph 4.7.6). 
Thus, HPKVN’s inability to ensure timely setting up of advanced training institutes and 
model career centres led to non-accrual of envisaged benefits of expansion of skilling 
and career facilities in the concerned areas/ Districts.  
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that major reasons for delay in completion of civil 
projects can be attributed to delay in land identification, transfer of land, delay in 
finalisation of structural design, COVID -19 restrictions, geographical and climatic 
issues. It assured that now regular monitoring was being done for early completion of 
these projects and handing over of completed assets to line Departments for training 
related activities. 
4.4.2  Upgrading the training machinery and equipment in 50 ITIs 
As per output 3 of PAM, the HPSDP envisaged upgrading training machinery and 
equipment for 22 trades in 50 ITIs  under the Department of Technical Education, 
Vocational and Industrial Training (TEVIT).  
4.4.2.1 Delay in Supply of Machinery and Equipment 
Seven orders  for procurement  of various machinery and equipment (like supply of 
material such as automobile parts, electrical and electronics related equipment, IT tool 
and components, etc.) were awarded to four firms24 between December 2019 and 
July 2021 at a tendered value of ₹ 8.90 crore by the Director, Department of TEVIT for 
supply and installation within 365 days from the date of award of orders. In case of 
delay in supply of machinery and equipment, liquidated damages shall be applicable at 
the rate of 0.1 per cent per day subject to the maximum of 10 per cent of contract value. 
Audit observed that orders valuing ₹ 2.95 crore were partially supplied by two firms25 
while no material was supplied in remaining orders by two firms, though stipulated 
period for the completion of these jobs had expired as of October 2022. However, the 
process to levy liquidated damages of ₹ 59.56 lakh against these firms was not initiated 
as of October 2022.  
The TEVIT stated (October 2022) that the firms did not supply machinery/ equipment 
due to non-availability of items in the market and space issues  in respective ITIs. The 
 
24  Asha Enterprises, Mandi; Mars Edpal Instruments Pvt. Ltd., Ambala Cantt; Puri Scientific Works, 
Ambala Cantt and Chawala Digital Systems, Panchkula.  
25  Asha Enterprises, Mandi and Mars Edpal Instruments Pvt. Ltd., Ambala Cantt.  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
150 | P a g e  
 
reply is not tenable as the Department failed to plan receipt and installation of 
machinery and equipment before placing the supply orders. Also, the fact remains that 
delay was on part of concerned firms. In the absence of upgradation of machinery and 
equipment in the ITIs, the quality of training would be adversely impacted. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that necessary action will be initiated to levy 
liquidated damages against the defaulting firms. 
4.4.3  Adequacy of Equipment in Colleges/ Training Centres 
Para 10 of the UGC guidelines for Bachelor of Vocation (B. Voc) provides that colleges 
need to have adequate laboratory/workshop facilities for face-to-face delivery of skills 
and hands-on practice either owned or arranged. Further, job role wise (NSQF level 3 
to 7) requirement  of infrastructure has been defined by Skill Management and 
Accreditation of Training Centres (SMART26) for the respective Sector Skill Councils 
(SSCs). One of the services offered on SMART is standardisation of training 
infrastructure and equipment for all NSQF Job roles across all SSCs. 
Audit observed that  three test-checked colleges 27 did not have 123 out of 20328 
specified machinery/ equipment/ articles (such as desktop/laptops, telephones, display/ 
boards/ standees, dummy products, etc.) either completely or had been provided 
partially as specified by the SMART for respective Sector Skill Councils of the Retail 
Management (Retailers Association’s Sector Skill Council of India) and Hospitality 
and Tourism ( Tourism and Hospitality Skill Council ) sectors. This affected the 
learning/ practical skills of the trainees enrolled in B achelor of Vocation courses in 
above test-checked colleges as evident from Paragraph 4.5.1.1. 
HPKVN stated (August 2023) that action has been taken by the Directorate of Higher 
Education to purchase specified tools and equipment for running courses under B.Voc 
programmes. 
4.5  Training 
Key training programmes implemented during 2016-22 by HPKVN are (i) Short Term 
Trainings (STTs) through private TSPs and in ITIs : 3-5 months (ii) Graduate Add-on 
for upskilling of final year graduating students : 200-400 hours  (iii) Bachelor of 
Vocation Course in Government colleges : 3-year degree course (iv) Recognition of 
Prior Learning (RPL) by private TSPs : 12 to 80 hours (v) Trainings under HPSDP by 
executing Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with ITIs and 13 reputed Institutes 
(IIT Mandi, ABVIMAS, NIFT, NIELIT, etc. ): three weeks to 15 months . HPKVN 
maintains data regarding the above training on a separate Management Information 
System (MIS). 
 
26  Skill Ecosystem intends to address the important issues like evaluation of skill providers in an 
objective manner, fostering excellence in Training Centres, enabling trainees to make informed 
choices with regard to Training Centres, etc. 
27  Government Degree Colleges at Kullu, Sarkaghat and Una. 
28  Total items to be used in all college. 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
151 | P a g e  
 
District-wise number of trainees trained and certified during the period 2016-22 (as of 
October 2022) is shown in Map 4.2. 
Map 4.2: District-wise number of trainees trained and certified during 2016-22 
 
T= trained, C= Certified 
4.5.1  Trainings under HPSDP 
 
4.5.1.1 Non-achievement of Targets under HPSDP 
As per design and monitoring framework contained in Appendix -7 of PAM, at least 
80 per cent of trainees who complete the training courses under the project should be 
successfully certified. Of the successfully certified, at least 50 per cent should get wage 
employment within six months of completion of training, with 40 per cent  of the 
remaining being gainfully self-employed (i.e., combined placements under both wage 
employment and self-employed should at least be 70 per cent). 
Pilot/Short Term Training (STT) Project for skill development was taken up during 
2016-18 and trainings under HPSDP commenced from May 2018 . The status of 
trainings under HPSDP during 2016-22 was as depicted in Table 4.6.  
Table 4.6: Details of trainings in the State under HPSDP during 2016-22 
Training 
type Period Target Enrolled 
Trained 
(percentage 
against 
target) 
Assessed 
Certified 
(percentage 
against 
trained) 
Placed 
(percentage 
against 
certified) 
Pilot Project for Skill Development 
Pilot-STT 2016-18 1,080 1,224 936 (87) 911 636 (67) 563 (89) 
Training under HPSDP 
STT (ITIs) 2019-22 37,191 10,190 5,807 (16) 5,255 3,775 (65) 546 (14) 
B. Voc 2017-22 5,280 4,547 1,994 (38) 1,894 1,840 (92) 742 (40) 
Graduate 
Add on 2018-22 7,500 6,262 5,936 (79) 5,601 5,193 (87) 417 (8) 
MoUs (for 
Advanced 
Level 
courses) 
2019-22 
(up to Oct 
2022) 
14,930 8,498 4,765 (32) 4,485 4,436 (99) 117 (3) 
        
      
      
        
      
      
     
      
      
       
      
      
     
      
      
    
      
      
      
      
      
      
        
      
      
      
      
               
       
     
       
   
   
     
      
      
                      
                        
     
                            

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
152 | P a g e  
 
Training 
type Period Target Enrolled 
Trained 
(percentage 
against 
target) 
Assessed 
Certified 
(percentage 
against 
trained) 
Placed 
(percentage 
against 
certified) 
under 
HPSDP 
Flagship- 
STT under 
HPSDP 
2018-22 
(up to Oct 
2022) 
9,300 4,078 3,106 (33) 3,088 2,742 (88) 999 (36) 
RPL 2021-22 8,000 6,462 6,445 (81) 6,441 5,278 (82) N.A. 
Total 
(except Pilot-STT) 82,201 40,037 28,053 (34) 26,764 23,264 (84) 2,821 (16)* 
Source: Figures supplied by HPKVN. 
Note: NA = Not applicable ; STT: Short Term Training ; RPL: Recognition of Prior Learning ; B.Voc: 
Bachelor of Vocation 
* Figure excludes RPL (Scheme is for recognition of skill of workers with informal experimental 
learning) 
The audit noticed that:  
• Candidates trained against the targets ranged between 16 and 87 per cent under 
various training programmes of HPSDP during 201 8-22 (up to October 2022) 
indicating that the targets were not achieved to that extent.  
• Candidates certified against those who were trained under Pilot STT scheme 
(67 per cent) and short-term training in ITIs (65 per cent) were below the target 
of 80 per cent. In other cases, certification ratio was above 80 per cent. 
• The ratio of placement of the certified candidates (other than pilot STT and RPL 
schemes) ranged between three and 40 per cent, which was far below the 
required level of 70  per cent, indicating that training failed in achieving the 
intended outcomes. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that the main reasons for trained candidates not 
taking up the jobs is their preference of higher education and preparation for 
competitive exams. It was further stated that TSPs are also not making adequate efforts 
at their end for placement of the certified candidates. The reply is not acceptable as the 
HPKVN did not  establish a comprehensive framework including all stakeholders 
(candidates, parents, TSPs, Placement agencies, Industry partners, etc.) to counsel and 
facilitate employment opportunities to trained candidates. 
4.5.1.2  Non-achievement of Targets of Completed Projects 
Of 11 test-checked completed projects under HPSDP, audit findings on four projects29 
involving two TSPs are discussed in the subsequent Paragraphs. 
Skill Development project s30 were allotted to M/s LabourNet Services India Private 
Limited (M/s LabourNet) in September 2016 on pilot basis and again under HPSDP in 
June 2018. Similarly, Indian Institute of Skill Development (IISD) was allotted project 
for Graduate Add-on course under HPSDP in June 2018. Period of above projects was 
 
29  Pilot- Short Term Training (STT) Project and HPSDP No. I to III.  
30  M/s LabourNet: Pilot project and HPSDP- II and III projects; M/s IISD: HPSDP-I project. 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
153 | P a g e  
 
15 to 24 months. These TSPs were required to facilitate placement to at least 70 per cent 
of the certified trainees to be eligible for payment of the last tranche of 30 per cent.  
Scrutiny of records of these TSPs revealed that both these TSPs have not fulfilled their 
contractual obligations as indicated in Table 4.7.  
Table 4.7: Details of trainings assigned to two test-checked TSPs 
TSP Period Project Sectors Targets 
assigned 
Trained 
(percentage 
against 
target) 
Assessed 
Certified 
(percentage 
against 
trained) 
Placed 
(percentage 
Against 
certified) 
M/s 
LabourNet 
2017-
18 
Pilot Furniture and 
Automotive 390 390 (100) 346 218 (56) 192 (88) 
M/s 
LabourNet 
2019-
20 
HPSDP 
Project 
No.-II 
Automobile, 
Construction, 
plumbing, 
Power 
2,000 584 (29) 584 493 (84) 139 (28) 
M/s 
LabourNet 
2019-
20 
HPSDP 
Project 
No. III 
IT-ITES, 
Electronics, 
BFSI 
3,000 866 (29) 866 709 (82) 225 (32) 
IISD 2018-
20 
HPSDP 
Project 
No. I 
IT- ITES, 
Banking, 
Finance, 
Securities 
and 
Insurance, 
Apparel 
Home 
furnishings 
2,000 2,032 (102) 1,924 1,851 (91) 175 (9) 
The audit noticed that: 
• Achievement of certification of candidates against candidates trained was between 
56 and 84 per cent in case of M/s LabourNet and was 91 per cent in case of IISD 
while achievement of placement against certified was between nine and 32 per cent 
under both the projects (except M/s LabourNet project for the year 2017-18 when 
placement was 88 per cent ), which was far below the required minimum of 
70 per cent.  
• Time period of contracts of M/s LabourNet and IISD expired between December 
2019 and June 2020, the same were not renewed by the HPKVN due to failure of 
TSPs to achieve the targets of certification and placements of candidates . 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
154 | P a g e  
 
Irregularities observed with respect to  M/s LabourNet are indicated from (i) to 
(iv) below.  
• The last tranche of 30 per cent in respect of certified candidates was, however, not 
claimed by the se TSPs, as these TSPs failed to place 70 per cent of trained 
candidates. 
From scrutiny of records of the above projects, the following further irregularities were 
noticed: 
(i) There was no provision of franchising/ outsourcing of training program by the 
TSP in t he contract agreement. However, M/s LabourNet outsourced training 
program to local level private institutes M/s Shree Vidya Group and KBS which 
was in contravention of the contract provision.  
(ii) As per contractual agreement, every trainer engaged by the TSP shall be 
Training of Trainers (ToT) certified. However, it was noticed that all 11 trainers 
deployed by LabourNet at Baijnath-II, Chauntra, Loharin, Nalagarh, Pandoh-II 
and Una were not ToT certified. 
(iii) Labs of M/s LabourNet were not in conformity with Skill Sector C ouncil’s 
norms as necessary equipment31 required for trainings were not available.  
(iv) There was provision of Performance Guarantee  (PG) for an amount of 
25 per cent of the value of the contract  in Pilot- Short Term Training  scheme 
(allotted to  M/s LabourNet) in event of inadequate or delayed performance 
whereas no such provision was made under HPSDP which should have been at 
least five per cent. Non-obtaining of  Performance Guarantee (₹ 93.39 lakh) on 
project cost of ₹ 18.68 crore32 allotted to LabourNet and IISD was in violation 
of financial rules. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that t he HPKVN has cancelled services of M/s 
LabourNet Services India Private Limited due to non -adherence of proper procedures 
and guidelines. The fact, however, remains that inclusion of provision of Performance 
Guarantee and penalty in the contract agreement could have been one of the deterrents 
for non-achievement of targets of training. 
  
 
31  Baijnath-II: IT-ITES Sector-Telephone voice recorder, IVR and software / document format for 
recording call/ interactions (15), supporting software/ applications for projecting audio, video 
recording system; Assessment and test tools for day to day online test and assessments;  
Chauntra: Automotive Sector - Accessories like Seat cover, floor mats, infotainment, GPS 
graphics/ stickers, roof rail, rain water shield, fog lamps, crash guards, foot rests, courtesy lamps 
and show beeding; Pandoh-2: IT-ITES sector- Sun glasses (12), Overall Apron (14) Multi meter 
(not working); Flip Charts with marker, Microphone/ voice system for lectures and class activities, 
handy camera; Automotive sector- Cotton Gloves (14), Hard Toed boots (14), sun glasses (13) and 
overall apron (14). 
32  Total payment- M/s LabourNet: ₹ 2.57 crore (Project cost: ₹ 12.99 crore) and Indian Institute of 
Skill Development : ₹ 2.33 crore (Project cost : ₹ 5.69 crore). 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
155 | P a g e  
 
4.5.1.3 Shortfall in Trainings by ITIs 
Memorandum of Understandings  (MoUs) were signed ( July 2019 -October 2021 ) 
between test-checked eight ITIs33 and HPKVN for imparting training to 6 ,222 
candidates in various sectors such as Construction, Plumbing, Apparel and Make Ups 
and Beauty and Wellness in the ITIs within 18 to 36 months from signing of MoUs at 
combined cost of ₹ 11.40 crore. HPKVN was to release the amount in three instalments 
depending upon achievement of targets.  
Audit noticed that the first instalment of ₹ 3.42 crore was received ( November 2019-
December 2021) by the ITIs against which expenditure of ₹  1.41 crore (41 per cent) 
was incurred as of December  2022. Remaining amount  of ₹  2.20 crore was lying 
unutilised (HPSDP funds: ₹ 2.01 crore and interest: ₹ 0.19 crore) with these ITIs in the 
savings bank accounts and Fixed Deposit Receipts. Further, against the targets of 
training of 6,222 candidates, only  1,248 (20 per cent) were trained , of which 1,048 
candidates were certified as of December 2022. Of certified students, only 291 students 
(28 per cent) were placed, though stipulated period of MoUs had expired in April 2023.   
The Principals of the respective ITIs attributed  (October 2022) the shortfall in 
expenditure to non -purchase of tool and machinery  (Paragraph 4.4.2.1), lack of 
admission in short term courses and COVID -19 pandemic. The Principal, ITI (W), 
Mandi, further stated that matter regarding reduction in training targets  from 1,920 to 
720 was taken up (August 2022) with the HPKVN but no response was received. 
Non-conducting of the required training is one of the reasons that led to a blockade of 
funds in the bank accounts and non-release of subsequent installments. 
4.5.1.4 Gender and Social Dimensions 
Para 65 to 70 of Project Administration Manual stipulates separate targets for women 
and Persons with Disability (PwD)  as HPSDP has been categorised a gender equity 
theme. The achievements of enrolment and certification/ placement against indicators/ 
targets for women and PwD are given in Tables 4.8 and 4.9. 
Table 4.8: Status of enrolment of women and PwDs during 2018-22 (upto June 2022) 
Indicators Target to be 
achieved by 2022 
Total 
enrolment in 
NSQF aligned 
courses 
Required 
enrolment 
(35 per 
cent) 
Actual 
Enrolment 
Shortfall 
(in 
per cent) 
Participation of 
female candidates in 
NSQF aligned and 
market- oriented 
short-term training 
At least 14,000 of 
the targeted 40,000 
youth or 
35 per cent 
30,673 
10,735 14,297 -- 
Participation of 
Persons with 
Disability in above 
courses 
400 or one per cent 
of the targeted 
40,000 youths are 
Persons with 
Disability 
307 155 50 
Source: Project Administration Manual and information supplied by the HPKVN  
 
33  Bagsaid; Bangana; Dalash; Mandi (Women); Nirmand; Padhar; Paplog and Shamsh i. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
156 | P a g e  
 
Table 4.9: Status of certification and placement of women and PwDs  
during 2018-22 (upto June 2022) 
Indicators Target Certification Percentage 
achievement 
Percentage 
Shortfall 
Certification of 
female candidates 
70 per cent of 
women enrolled or 
9,800 
Required: 9,800 
Certified: 8,435 86 14 
Wage employment- 
Female 
At least 2,940 or 
30 per cent should 
get wage 
employment within 
six months of 
completing training 
Required: 2,940 
Achieved: 521 
18 
 
82 
 
Certification of 
PwDs 
At least 280 or 70 
per cent of PwDs 
Required: 280 
Certified: 99 35 65 
 
Wage employment- 
PwDs 
At least 84 or 30 
per cent of 
successfully 
certified 
Required: 84 
Certified: Nil Nil 100 
Source: Project Administration Manual and information supplied by the HPKVN . 
As can be seen from Tables 4.8 and 4.9, while enrolment during 2018-22 (upto June 
2022) of female candidates in NSQF aligned and market-oriented short-term training is 
substantial, there is significant shortfall in wage employment of certified female  
candidates. Enrolment of PwD candidates is low while wage employment shortfall is 
100 per cent during 2018-22 (upto June 2022). Shortfall in providing wage employment 
may be attributed to non-conduct of adequate sensitisation workshops for trainees with 
Industries Associations and Chamber of Commerce and placement agencies during the 
above period as indicated in Paragraph 4.2.4. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that availability of jobs in the local areas is 
influencing the participation of women in wage employment. The fact however remains 
that there was significant gap in wage employment of PwD and female candidates.  
4.5.2  Training under PMKVY 
 
4.5.2.1 Non-achievement of Targets under PMKVY 
Paras 1.4.10 and 4.6 of PMKVY  guidelines stipulate that the training partners have to 
successfully place at least 50 per cent of the batch of trainees.  
The status of training under PMKVY during 2017-22 in the State is given in Table 4.10. 
Table 4.10: Status of trainings in State under PMKVY during 2017-22 
Training 
type 
Period Allocation Target Enrolled Trained 
(per cent 
against 
target) 
Assessed Certified 
(per cent 
against 
trained) 
Placed 
(per cent 
against 
certified) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT 
2017-22 40,012 35,080 16,484 13,733 
(39) 
12,652 11,300 
(82) 
2,908 
(26) 
PMKVY-
2.0 RPL 
2019-20 4,500 4,500 1,568 1,022 (23) 876 876 (86) NA 
PMKVY-
3.0 STT 
2020-22 
(upto 
10/22) 
-- 540 501 501 (93) 387 365 (73) 22 (06) 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
157 | P a g e  
 
Training 
type 
Period Allocation Target Enrolled Trained 
(per cent 
against 
target) 
Assessed Certified 
(per cent 
against 
trained) 
Placed 
(per cent 
against 
certified) 
PMKVY-
3.0 RPL 
2020-21 -- 2,400 1,640 1,640 (68) 1,355 1,200 (73) NA 
PMKVY 
3.0 Covid 
Crash 
course 
2021-22 -- 120 80 78 (65) 75 68 (87) 4 (06) 
Total (Except RPL) 40,012 35,740 17,065 14,312 
(40) 
13,114 11,733 
(82) 
2,934 
(25) 
Source: Figures supplied by HPKVN. Note: NA=Not applicable; figure in parenthesis is in per cent 
The audit noticed that: 
• Percentage of trained candidates against the target was only 40 per cent. 
• The percentage of certified candidates against trained ranged between 73 and 87 
under PMKVY. 
• The percentage of candidates placed against certified candidates (except RPL) 
ranged between six and 26, which is far below the required level of 50 per cent. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that targets under PMKVY were not achieved 
because of restrictions imposed due to spread of COVID-19. It further stated that there 
were operational/ implementation related issues in placing certified candidates.  The 
reply is not acceptable as the achievement of targets was low even during pre -Covid 
period.  
4.5.2.2 Other irregularities in the implementation of PMKVY 2.0 and 3.0 
Audit scrutini sed records of  13 completed projects 34 involving 11 TSPs under 
PMKVY-2 (seven TSPs35 allotted STTs), RPL (One TSP- IL and FS) and PMKVY-3 
(three TSPs36) in HPKVN and following audit observations were noticed as depicted in 
Table 4.11. 
Table 4.11: Other irregularities noticed in the implementation of PMKVY 2.0 and 3.0 
Sr. 
No. Provision Audit 
observation 
Conclusion and the reply 
furnished by HPKVN (January 
2023) 
PMKVY-2.0 (STT) 
i. Para No.1.3.7 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - Bio-metric 
device for capturing students ’ and 
trainers’ attendance (Aadhaar 
enabled) was mandatory at the 
PMKVY centres. 
Relevant 
records had not 
been furnished  
by HPKVN  for 
scrutiny in 
respect of all 
The HPKVN stated  that bio -metric 
devices were used for capturing 
attendance. However, in absence of 
records the same could not be 
verified.  
 
34  Since PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0 have been closed, no training programme was underway at the 
time of audit. 
35  Short Term Trainings: Golden Institute of Technology; Orion edutech; Mentor Skill India; Lord 
Ganesha Institute of Management and Technology; CSC E -governance Service India limited; 
Institute of Hotel Management Education Society Rampur Bushahr and Sri Radha Krishna Infotech 
Private limited. 
36  Short Term Trainings: Govt. ITI Sandhole; RPL: Deunique and Special Project: IL and FS. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
158 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. Provision Audit 
observation 
Conclusion and the reply 
furnished by HPKVN (January 
2023) 
seven test-
checked TSPs. 
ii. Para No. 1.4.5 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - Kaushal Melas  
were required to be conducted in 
coordination with State/ Local 
Representatives by TSPs at least 
once every six months.  
The objective of Kaushal Melas is 
to mobilise school dropouts and 
undergraduate college dropouts 
towards STT. 
Relevant record 
in this regard 
was not 
available for 
five37 TSPs at  
HPKVN while 
two TSPs (Lord 
Ganesha and 
SCS E -
governance) 
had not 
conducted 
Kaushal mela. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that Kaushal Mela was the mandate 
of the TSPs, hence no records were 
available at HPKVN.  
 
In absence of records, effectiveness 
of Kaushal Mela,  if any conducted 
by five TSPs, could not be 
ascertained in audit.  
Further, non -conduct of Kaushal 
Melas by two TSPs may have 
contributed to a shortfall in 
achieving targets. 
iii. Para No.  1.4.5 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - TSPs are 
required to ensure that mobilisation 
efforts are visible on print, outdoor 
and digital media. 
Records were 
not available at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN stated that data in 
respect of f ive out of seven test-
checked TSPs is available on  Skill 
Development Management System 
(SDMS) portal (now defunct - not 
accessible anymore) and in respect 
of two TSPs  (M/s IHM and M/s 
Radhe Krishna) , relevant 
information is available at TSP 
level. However, access of records on 
SDMS Portal was not made 
available to Audit. 
Thus, extent of mobili sation could 
not be test-checked in audit. 
iv. Para No. 1.4.6 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - SSCs are 
mandated to conduct Training of 
Trainers (ToT) for certification of 
trainers. 
Records were 
not available  at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that ToT certification details were 
uploaded on Skill Development 
Management System (SDMS) portal 
which is non-functional now. 
Evidently, in absence of records , 
ToTs conducted for trainers could 
not be established in audit. 
v. Para No. 1.4.7 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - Every certified 
candidate will be mapped  to 
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY). Candidates will 
have the insurance clause 
mentioned on their respective 
PMKVY certificates. TSPs would 
be responsible for paying the 
insurance fee for every enrolled 
candidate in their respective batch. 
Certified 
candidates 
were not 
mapped to 
PMKVY.  
The HPKVN stated that no mapping 
of certified candidates has been 
made to PMSBY  as no appropriate 
agency could be identified  for 
linking of certified candidates with 
PMSBY. 
Thus, trainees were deprived of the 
intended benefits of PMSBY. 
vi. Para No. 1.4.10 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - TSPs are 
required to have mentorship -cum-
placement cells. 
Records were 
not available  at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that data was uploaded on SDMS  
portal which is now defunct and not 
accessible anymore  and admitted 
that having a placement cell is 
 
37  Golden Institute of Technology; Orion edutech; Mentor Skill India; Institute of Hotel Management 
Education Society Rampur Bushahr and Sri Radha Krishna Infotech Private limited.  

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
159 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. Provision Audit 
observation 
Conclusion and the reply 
furnished by HPKVN (January 
2023) 
necessity for SMART accreditation 
process. 
Shortfall in achievement of targets 
under PMKVY may be attributed , 
inter-alia to lack of set up of 
mentorship-cum-placement cells. 
vii. Para No. 1.4.4 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines- The trainee under 
the programme should either be a 
school/ college dropout(s) or 
unemployed. 
Relevant record 
was not 
available at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN stated that record is not 
available. Evidently, eligibility 
status of trainees could not be 
assessed in audit. Chances of 
ineligible persons provided training 
cannot be ruled out. 
viii. Para No. 1.4.4 of PMKVY -2.0 
(STT) guidelines - Targets shall be 
allocated to TSPs based on overall 
minimum 70  per cent placement 
performance of the TSP. The targets 
are subject to performance review 
every six months. 
No 
performance 
review every 
six months of 
targets allotted 
vis-a-vis 
placement 
performance 
was carried out 
in respect of 
seven test-
checked TSPs. 
The HPKVN stated that  the same 
has not been adhered  to. It was 
further stated that the training 
partners were allocated small targets 
in order to ensure uniform 
distribution of targets.  
TSPs failed to achieve minimum 
level of placements ( Paragraph 
4.5.1.1), and no performance review 
of targets was carried out. 
PMKVY-3.0 
ix. Para No. 6 of PMKVY -3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- High standard of 
monitoring of Training Centres was 
to be ascertained. For this purpose, 
quarterly progress report, Geo-
tagging, audit, etc. was to be carried 
out. Those TSPs were to be 
onboarded which show 
commitment towards skill 
development movement, for a long 
haul, through evidence of 
ownership / long lease of  
infrastructure created for providing 
training. 
Relevant record 
of monitoring  
of Training 
Centre (Govt. 
ITI Sandhol) 
was not 
available at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN replied that no records 
were available at Headquarters. 
Evidently, the availability of 
infrastructure at TSP level as per 
requirement of training programme 
could not be ascertained in absence 
of said record. 
 
x. Para No. 6 of PMKVY -3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- During accreditation 
and affiliation of Training Centres, 
feedback from industry/ placement 
partners regarding job readiness 
(technical and soft skills) of placed 
candidates is to be sought. 
Relevant record 
required for 
accreditation 
and 
affiliation of 
Training Centre 
(Govt. ITI 
Sandhol) was 
not available at 
HPKVN level. 
The HPKVN replied that no record  
is available. 
Evidently, job readiness for trainees 
in sync hronisation with industry / 
placement partners could not be 
ascertained in absence of said 
record. 
xi. Para No. 7 of PMKVY -3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Registrations, 
enrolment and selection of the  
candidate will be done through 
common digital platform. 
This platform shall be integrated 
with Skill India Portal so that post 
MIS data of 
trainees was 
not integrated 
with Skill India 
Portal by 
HPKVN. 
The HPKVN stated that it tried to 
integrate MIS data with Skill India 
Portal data but due to technical 
glitches at MSDE/ NSDC , the same 
could not be integrated. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that it has not been provided access 
to Skill India Portal so far. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
160 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. Provision Audit 
observation 
Conclusion and the reply 
furnished by HPKVN (January 
2023) 
registration lifecycle of the 
candidate is mapped coherently. 
Due to n on-mapping of data with 
Skill India Portal, database of the 
certified candidates under PMKVY-
3.0 in the State was not available at 
national level. 
xii. Para No. 10 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Additional support  to 
improve the outcome of the scheme 
shall be provided to the candidates, 
including special groups in the form 
of: 
• Conveyance cost 
• Post Placement Stipend 
• Additional support to PwD 
candidates 
• Accidental insurance 
• Yearly incentive to Training 
Provider 
• One-time placement travel cost 
• Special Incentive for foreign 
placements 
• Post Placement Tracking 
Allowance 
Provision for 
additional 
support to 
improve the 
outcome of the 
scheme has not 
been complied  
with. 
The HPKVN stated that no such 
request was received from any of the 
TSPs. However, the reply is not 
acceptable as 13 PwD candidates 
were provided training  in the 
completed projects  who were not 
provided additional support as 
required. 
 
This impacted the output of the 
scheme, as the placement of 
certified PWD candidates was not  
carried out. 
 
xiii. Para No. 13 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- The schedule  of 
activities related to placements shall 
be circulated to District Skill 
Councils (DSCs) for wider 
publicity. 
Schedule of 
activities 
related to 
placements had 
not been 
circulated as 
required. 
The HPKVN stated that DSCs were 
constituted in 2020 -21 and by that 
time PMKVY was approaching 
closure.  
Non-circulation of the schedule  had 
an adverse effect on placement of 
certified candidates. 
xiv. Para No. 13 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Training linked to 
captive placements  (training and 
placement within the same 
industry) will be promoted. 
Same has not 
been complied  
with. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that trainings linked to captive 
placements will be promoted in 
future. 
Non-conduct of trainings linked to 
placement within industry is one of 
the reasons for low placement of 
candidates. 
xv. Para 1 3 of PMKVY -3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Provides that Rozgar 
Melas are to be organised on regular 
intervals at District and regional 
level by TSP/  DSCs/ State Skill 
Development Mission (SSDM) / 
SSCs for placement and 
apprenticeship. 
No Rozgar 
mela was 
organised. 
The HPKVN stated no Rozgar 
melas could be organised due to 
prevailing Covid norms. 
The reply should be seen in light of 
fact that placement of certified 
candidates was not to the required 
level (70 per cent). 
xvi. Para No. 13 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- A three-month 
placement/ self -employment 
monitoring shall be done by TSPs, 
DSCs, SSDMs. 
No such 
monitoring was 
done. 
The HPKVN stated that placement 
record is available on the HPKVN’s 
MIS portal. 
No record of monitoring of certified 
candidates whether they  continued 
in the job placed or left midway , is 
however available on MIS. 
xvii. Para No. 13 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Provides that all 
certified candidates shall be on -
boarded onto Aatmanirbhar Skilled 
Relevant record 
or login id of 
the ASEEM 
portal is not 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) 
that this was the mandate of the TSP 
however onboarding could not be 
facilitated since HPKVN did not 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
161 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. Provision Audit 
observation 
Conclusion and the reply 
furnished by HPKVN (January 
2023) 
Employee Employer Mapping  
(ASEEM) portal (acts as a directory 
of skilled workforce) seamlessly to 
make them available to potential 
employers at click of a mouse. 
available at 
HPKVN level. 
receive the login credentials from 
Government of India.  
Failure to onboard candidates 
deprived them of the benefits of 
registering on the portal developed 
to seek details of certified trainees 
by potential employers.  
xviii. Para No. 13 of PMKVY-3.0 (STT) 
guidelines- Post placement 
verification shall be done by  State 
Skill Development Mission  
(SSDM) i.e. HPKVN and District 
Skill Council at District level. 
Relevant record 
was not 
available at 
HPKVN level. 
 
In absence of post placement  
verification record, actual placement 
of candidates could not be verified 
in audit. 
xix. Para No. 6 of PMKVY -3.0 (RPL) 
guidelines- Potential candidate s 
must be counselled by the trainer  
about benefits of RPL certification , 
Career Progression, Employment  
opportunity with learned skill , 
identifying knowledge gaps, etc. 
Relevant record 
of Pre -
screening and 
Counselling of 
candidates 
under PMKVY 
(RPL) was not 
available. 
The HPKVN stated that the said 
activities are undertaken at field 
level. 
In absence of relevant record, the 
veracity of Pre -screening and 
Counselling done under PMKVY - 
RPL could not be ensured in audit. 
xx. Para No. 6 PMKVY-3.0 (RPL) 
guidelines- All RPL certified 
candidates shall receive accident 
insurance of three years . A unique 
policy number of the accident 
insurance be mentioned on the 
certificate to be awarded to 
respective certified candidates. 
Unique policy 
number of the 
accident 
insurance was 
not found 
mentioned on 
certificates 
issued to RPL 
certified 
candidates. 
The HPKVN stated  (August 2023) 
that no appropriate agency could be 
identified for insurance of certified 
candidates. 
In absence of the same, 1200 
certified trainees were deprived of 
the intended benefits of the 
insurance programme.   
4.5.3  Trainings under SANKALP 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed  between HPKVN and Himachal 
Pradesh State Handicrafts and Handloom Corporation Limited (HPSHHCL) in 
October 2021 for skill upgradation, design intervention and marketing of State specific 
Arts and Crafts  under Skills Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood 
Promotion (SANKALP). As per MoU , the HPSHHCL was to provide training to 
200 candidates pursuing skill upgradation, design intervention and marketing of State 
specific Arts and Crafts 38 at rate of per candidate expenditure of ₹  22,400/- with total 
project cost of ₹  44.80 lakh. Duration of training was six months and 200 candidates 
(preferably women, SC/ST, PwDs) were to be trained within a period of one year from 
the date of signing (12th October 2021) of MoU. 
Components of training  under MoU included: (i) Conduct of capacity building, 
orientation and sensitisation workshops for all the stakeholders (ii) Conduct of Training 
of Trainers (ToTs).  
 
38  Bamboo craft, Hand Knitting, Pine Needle craft, Kangra Miniature Painting, Chamba Rural 
Embroidery craft and Pottery trades/ job roles. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
162 | P a g e  
 
The HPKVN was to release 10 per cent as mobilisation advance to HPSHHCL and 
balance amount was to be provided after training of candidates. 
Audit observed that: 
• The HPKVN released ₹  41.23 lakh  as advance against required amount of 
₹ 4.48 lakh to HPSHHCL between October  2021 and August 2022 . However, 
details of expenditure incurred had not been obtained as of December 2022. 
• As per MIS data (February 2023) the details of training provided to candidates 
under SANKALP is given in Table 4.12. 
Table 4.12: Details of training provided to candidates under SANKALP 
Scheme Enrolled Undergoing 
training 
Trained Assessed Certified 
SANKALP 176 126 50 50 0 
From Table 4.12 it can be seen that: 
(i) The training was  to be provided within one year from the date of signing  
(October 2021) of MoU. However, no candidate has been certified even after a 
lapse of five months from the expiry of MoU as of March 2023.  
(ii) The trainings were preferably for women, SC/ST, PwDs candidates, however, no 
information about category of trainees is available with the HPKVN, either on 
MIS or manually.  
(iii) The number of enrolled candidates for training under SANKALP is 176 against 
the target of 200.  
(iv) Further, no ToT was conducted for the trainers as shown in Appendix 4.7. 
From the above, it is evident that the implementation of the MoU on part of HPKVN 
was not monitored and the training was not completed within the prescribed period as 
per the MoU.  
4.6  Capacity Building and Adequacy of Trainers 
Capacity building enables continuous upgrading of skills and knowledge management 
and is essential for increasing the capability of the organisation to achieve its goals. 
4.6.1  Training of Master Trainers 
As per Output 4 (iv) of Project Administration Manual of HPSDP , 50 master trainers 
in key trades were to be provided requisite training to further train trainers engaged by 
the TSPs. HPKVN identified 33 sectors for training out of which trainings in 30 sectors 
are being provided.   
Audit observed that: 
• Without identifying key trades in these 30 sectors, MoU was signed (June 2022) 
between Director, TEVIT and Central Tool Room and Training Centre, Kolkata 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
163 | P a g e  
 
for master training in only six39 trades across three sectors40 to 62 participants of 
the Department of TEVIT at a cost of ₹ 21.40 lakh.  
• Trades of only three (having 17 per cent certified candidates only) out of above 
30 sectors were covered and remaining trades under 27 sectors in which 
83 per cent (Appendix 4.4) of candidates had been certified as of September 
2022 were not considered for the purpose of training of master trainers. This is 
bound to affect quality delivery of skilling to candidates in absence of master 
training of trainer s engaged by various TSPs in respect of remaining identified 
sectors. 
• Of above, 59 trainers attended  master training programme at a cost of 
₹ 19.78 lakh in three sectors as against 50 master trainers across 30 sectors  that 
were required to be trained. 
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that more training programmes covering other trades 
would be undertaken soon.  The reply should be seen considering the fact that master 
trainers have been provided training only in three sectors , while training is being 
conducted in 30 sectors as identified by HPKVN. 
4.6.2 Training of Trainers (ToT) and Training of Assessors (ToA)  
Trainers and assessors, working in short -term skill development programmes, are to 
undertake training, based on Government of India approved framework41, consisting of 
orientation on domain ( sector and job role -specific subject) and platform (training 
delivery/ assessment) skills, followed by assessment and certification. The Training of 
Trainers (ToT) and Training of Assessors (ToA) are of two categories (i) basic (training 
of seven to10 days), followed by, (ii) advanced (maximum of 15 weeks duration). The 
basic certification is valid for two years whereas advanced certification has lifelong 
validity. The certification of trainers  ensures that trainers remain updated as per 
advancements in respective industries and certified assessor ensures evaluation of 
students, as per industry standards. 
Audit, however, noticed that data relating to number of trainers/ assessors engaged by 
the TSPs, trainers/ assessors due for training and trainers/ assessors trained with basic 
and advanced certification is not available with the HPKVN in any of the projects. As 
a result , the certification status of trainers/ assessors engaged by the TSPs as per 
advancements and standards in respective industries could not be verified in Audit.  
While confirming the facts, the HPKVN stated (January 2023) that related data has not 
been maintained. In the absence of such data, maintenance of standard quality training 
by the TSPs cannot be assured. 
 
39  Basic architecture kit, advance civil software design, mechanical design, welding technology, CNC 
machinist and computer operator and hardware assistant. 
40  Architecture, Plumbing and Information Technology. 
41  Conducted by the respective Skill Sector Council. The trainers and Assessors are themselves to 
enroll for trainings on the Skill India portal.   

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
164 | P a g e  
 
4.6.3  Deployment of Unqualified Trainers 
Para 6.5.2 of the agreement executed between the Department of Higher Education and 
various TSPs provides that TSPs should deploy trainers trained and certified by 
concerned sector skill council as per N ational Skill Development Council (NSDC)  
norms. 
Audit observed that out of the 13 trainers deployed by the three TSPs42 for Bachelor of 
Vocation programme in three test -checked Government Colleges for imparting 
trainings, validity of certificates  of two trainers having basic certification (having 
validity period of two years) had expired in February  2020 and January  2021 while 
certificates of remaining 11 trainers were not available with the TSPs. Deployment of 
unqualified trainers was against the provision of agreement ibid and is bound to have 
adverse effect on quality of training, certification, and subsequent placement of 
trainees.  
The HPKVN stated (August 2023) that it will ensure that all trainers and assessors are 
ToT and ToA certified in future. 
4.7  Monitoring and Internal Control mechanism 
 
4.7.1  Management Information System (MIS) 
Para 54 of PAM requires HPKVN to design a comprehensive Management Information 
System ( MIS) to capture information on key activities and trainings across all the 
implementing agencies and enable real-time reporting and analysis of relevant project 
information. It will also facilitate easier linkage with the National Career Services 
Portal operat ed by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India . 
Accounting systems were also to be integrated with the MIS for financial reporting as 
per PAM Manual. 
Audit observed that Management Information System was developed (October 2016) 
by HPKVN to record data relating to only training of candidates. No financial reporting 
is being recorded in the MIS. 
Analysis of MIS data of training generated in October 2022 was also carried out with a 
view to assess the correctness and reliability of details/ information of the trainees. 
Analysis revealed duplicate/triplicate trainings by same candidates, unrealistic entry of 
age of trainees, email column left bank, entry of wrong contact details, column of 
assessment date left blank, erroneous entries of number of attempts of assessment, date 
of certification field left blank, non-entry of dates of job offer to the candidates, etc. as 
per details given in Appendix 4.8.  
This is indicative of irregularity and/or incorrect data entry in the MIS system. Due to 
lack of validation checks/ automatic check s, the MIS data used by the HPKVN as 
database and for reporting to the State Government/ Government of India/ ADB may 
 
42  M/s LabourNet in Kullu, M/s Centum Learning Limited in Kullu and M/s Orion Edutech in Una.  

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
165 | P a g e  
 
not be reliable and the objective envisaged in PAM for a comprehensive MIS system 
has not been achieved. 
4.7.2  Use of Aadhar for Identification of Candidates  
As per Government of India guidelines (September 2016), the State Governments can 
mandate use of Aadhar authentication for the beneficiaries under section 7 of the 
Aadhar Act 2016. In order to do so, the State Governments are required to notify such 
schemes under Section 7 of the Aadhar Act before seeking permission from the Unique 
Identification Authority of India. Further, as per Section 8(2) of the Aadhar Act, 2016, 
consent of an individual before collecting his identity information for the purpose of 
authentication must be ensured. 
Audit noticed  that Aadhar number is being used for identification of candidates in  
enrolment/ training and direct benefit transfer (on job training - RPL) without notifying 
skill development programmes under Section 7 of the Aadh ar Act. One-time consent 
for use of their Aadhar from candidates enrolled under above p rogrammes was not 
obtained. 
The HPKVN admitted (December 2022) that Aad har is used as unique Id for 
identification of c andidates enrolled under skill d evelopment schemes, however, the 
same has not been notified under Section 7 of the Aadhar Act.   
4.7.3  Grievances Redressal Mechanism 
Para 4.22 of Him Kaushal  Policy, 2016  stipulates that a ll trainees , TSPs and  other 
stakeholders shall make representation of grievances to Designated Authority within 
HPKVN. Further, Para 3 of the Himachal Pradesh Public Services Guarantee Act  
(HPPSG), 2011 stipulates notification of services, designated officers, first appellate 
Authority, second appellate Authority and stipulated time limits for the services 
provided by the Department/ HPKVN.   
Audit noticed that HPKVN had established internal grievances redressal mechanism43 
under HPSDP in March 2022, after more than three  years since start of project . 
However, no such mechanism has been developed/ established for PMKVY and 
SANKALP projects as of October 2022.  
Also, HPKVN had not notified the services , designated officers, first appellate 
Authority, second appellate Authority and stipulated time limits under HPPSG Act as 
of October 2022. 
The HPKVN stated (October 2022) that grievances redressal mechanism under 
PMKVY, SANKALP and HPPSG Act, 2011 was yet to be set up. 
 
43  Managing Director (HPKVN) at State level, Project Manager, PWD at Zone level and Grievance 
Redressal Officer (District coordinator) at District level. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
166 | P a g e  
 
4.7.4  Unjustified Expenditure on Pay and Allowances 
The PAM, loan agreement with ADB, guidelines/ instructions/ rules of Government of 
India / State schemes implemented by HPKVN do not provide for appointment of a 
State Coordinator in HPKVN. 
Audit noticed that the State Government appointed State Coordinator in HPKVN in 
January 2019 who reports  to State Industries Minister. Without defining roles and 
responsibilities of State Coordinator in HPKVN, pay and allowances of ₹  38.72 lakh 
(plus Government accommodation) were paid out of ADB sponsored HPSDP by 
HPKVN during January 2019 to March 2022.  
The HPKVN admitted (October 2022) that no role and responsibility of State 
Coordinator was prescribed.  
4.7.5  Monitoring and Inspection of skill Training Programmes 
For review of quality assurance process of trainings conducted by TSPs, every batch of 
training should be visited by District coordinator44, consultant of monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) firm and HQ officials of HPKVN.  
Details of inspections of skill training programme is given in Table 4.13. 
Table 4.13: Details of inspections of skilling programmes 
Year Batches Inspections 
required 
Inspections 
by District 
Coordinator 
Inspections 
by M&E 
firm 
Inspections 
by HQ 
officials of 
HPKVN 
Total 
Inspections 
conducted 
Shortfall 
(percentage) 
2016-17 5 15 9 0 -- 9 6 (40) 
2017-18 8 24 -- 0 -- 0 24 (100) 
2018-19 175 525 79 249 -- 328 197 (38) 
2019-20 668 2,004 314 489 -- 803 1,201 (60) 
2020-21 34 102 24 501 -- 525   423 (-) 
2021-22 468 1,404 115 443 -- 558 846 (60) 
Total 1,358 4,074 541 1,682 -- 2,223 1,851 (45) 
Source:  Figures supplied by HPKVN. Note: Data also includes inspections of batches spill over to more 
than one Financial Year. 
From Table 4.13, it can be seen that overall shortfall in inspections by various 
functionaries was 45 per cent during 2016-22. 
4.7.6  Performance of Consultancy firms under HPKVN 
Project Administration Manual envisages engagement of t hree consulting firms under 
the HPSDP to assist the HPKVN for implementation of programmes. These include the 
 
44  District Coordinators are officials of HPKVN at District level. 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
167 | P a g e  
 
Project Management Consulting (PMC) firm 45, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
firm46, and a civil works quality assurance firm47.  
Contract agreements were signed between HPKVN and three consultancy firms48 to 
provide experts and sub-consultants for implementation of HPSDP. 
Audit observed that the performance of consultancy firms was not satisfactory as given 
in Table 4.14. 
Table 4.14: Status of outcome of major deliverables of consultancy firms 
Work and 
Firm 
Contract 
value 
(₹ in crore) 
Amount 
paid (up to 
March 
2022) 
 ₹           
Major Deliverables Status 
Project 
Management 
Consultant-
(M/s PwC) 
23.57 
 
16.06 
 
Preparation of annual 
work plans 
Annual Plans not prepared  
during 2018-22. 
Development of MIS Partially developed - Not 
capable of recording  financial 
transactions and not integrated 
with National carrier service 
portal. (Paragraph 4.7.1) 
Collection of project 
baseline data  and 
updation of design and 
monitoring 
framework 
Activity assigned to M&E firm 
(IPE Global) without any 
change in person -months of 
consulting services 
Updating the HP Skill 
Development Policy 
Not updated yet 
Planning and 
executing livelihood 
development 
programmes 
No headway due to non -
completion of RLCs/ CLCs 
Preparation of 
Institutional 
development plans  
across selected ITIs 
Prepared for only five  ITIs out 
of 56 ITIs with whom 
agreement has been signed for 
providing STTs. 
Operationalisation of 
MCCs 
Only three out of 11  MCCs 
operationalised as of October 
2022.  
Convergence of 
various skill  
development 
programmes 
No progress  made as of 
October 2022 
 
45  Assist in project management including monitoring, documentation, reporting, financial 
management, accounts, contract management, procurement and tendering, tracking the TSP/ 
assessors/ career counsellors work and identifying opportunities for apprenticesh ips and 
placements, outreach, communication, counselling and updating the MIS. 
46  Assist in preparing an M&E framework, collecting baseline data, conducting periodic tracer 
surveys, skill -gap analysis, project monitoring and capacity building, tracking and assessing the 
outcomes of project.  
47  Assist PWD and HPKVN in ensuring that the civil contractors adhere to the required quality, 
technical, and safety specifications, capacity building of contractors, the site -specific environment 
management plans, and improving construction quality and durability. 
48  PricewaterhouseCoopers Pvt. Limited, India (PwC): January 2018; Rodic Consultants Pvt. Limited 
in association with GC Sharma and Sons (Rodic): February 2018 and IPE Global (IPE Global): 
March 2018. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
168 | P a g e  
 
Work and 
Firm 
Contract 
value 
(₹ in crore) 
Amount 
paid (up to 
March 
2022) 
 ₹           
Major Deliverables Status 
Preparing SOP for key 
activities to be 
undertaken by various 
line Departments.  
Prepared only for Higher 
Education Department, under 
preparation for TEVIT 
Department and not prepared 
for Labour and Employment 
Department 
Quality 
Assurance- 
(M/s Rodic) 
5.14 7.35 Assisting HPPWD  in 
obtaining various 
clearances and 
monitoring execution 
of infrastructural 
works by HPPWD 
Delays in preparatory items of 
works (Paragraph 4.4.1) being 
executed under HPSDP 
resulting in delayed/ non-
completion of projects  and 
time overrun. 
 
Monitoring 
and 
Evaluation- 
(M/s IPE 
Global) 
9.30  5.36 Livelihood 
development  
No headway  due to non -
completion of RLCs/ CLCs 
Conduct surveys and 
estimate the baseline 
Conducted for only 400  
trainees across nine training 
centres, though 58,733 
candidates were enrolled as of 
October 2022. 
Track the placement  
of trained candidates 
for period of six 
months 
Comparative analysis is yet to 
be done. 
Skill-gap analysis/ 
demand surveys 
Prepared for only one out of 12 
Districts in the State 
Project monitoring  
and Capacity 
Building.  
There was shortfall in  
inspection of batches 
(Paragraph 4.7.5). 
Capacity building (Training to 
master trainer, ToT, etc.) under 
the project is deficient  
(Paragraph 4.6.1 and 4.6.2).  
Total 38.01 28.77   
The expenditure on consultancy (₹ 28.77 crore) was about half  of that incurred on 
skilling (₹ 55.16 crore) under programmes (HPSDP, PMKVY and SANKALP) during 
2018-22. However, the performance of consultancy firm s could not be described as 
satisfactory. 
4.7.7  Joint Physical Inspection of Training Centres 
Joint Physical Inspection of ongoing training programmes was carried out during 
November-December 2022 by Audit  with officers/officials of the govt/HPKVN . 
Findings of the inspection are given in Table 4.15. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
169 | P a g e  
 
Table 4.15: Findings of Joint Physical Inspection of training centres 
TSPs visited Audit Criteria Audit Observations/ Remarks 
(i) Indian Institute 
of Technology 
(IIT), Mandi 
Para 4 (i) of MoU  signed 
between HPKVN and IIT 
Mandi in April 2022 under 
HPSDP stipulates that 
Himachali youth  with 
qualification B.E./ B.Tech., 
M.E./ M.Tech., Polytechnic 
and ITI  who are willing for 
wage/ self -employment on 
completion of training shall 
only be enrolled. 
Out of 49 candidates enrolled  in training 
programme ‘Finite Element Modelling for 
Engineers’, 18 candidates (37 per cent) were 
non-Himachalis. 
Similarly, out of 91 trainees  of completed 
course ‘Hands-on training of Computational 
Fluid Dynamics’, 15 trainees  (17 per cent ) 
were non-Himachalis. 
The GM, HPKVN stated (January 2022) that 
due to non -availability of adequate and 
eligible candidates, the students studying at 
IIT, Mandi were given the opportunity of 
skilling. The reply is not acceptable as only 
Himachali youth s were to be provided 
training under the programme as per the 
MOU. 
(ii) Atal Bihari 
Vajpayee Institute 
of Mountaineering 
and Allied Sports 
(ABVIMAS), 
Manali 
Para 7 (a) of the MoU executed 
in March 2022  between 
HPKVN and Director, 
ABVIMAS provides skilling 
of youth in basic/ elementary 
level of courses (Skiing, river 
rafting, search and rescue, etc.) 
of duration seven to 14 days 
only.   
During survey, four candidates  who have 
completed the basic training in either of the 
courses offered stated that in order to become 
eligible for wage employment candidates 
have to be certified in basic, intermediate and 
advance level training programmes.  
However, only basic training is provided 
under HPSDP MoU with ABVIMAS which 
is inadequate for placements.  
The Director, A BVIMAS admitted that 
advance course certification  is necessary for 
placement of candidates. 
From the above, it is evident that trainings 
offered in A BVIMAS are not job oriented 
and can be  one of the reasons for lack of 
placements of trained candidates.  
4.7.8  Survey of the Candidates 
Survey of the candidates  enrolled in ongoing/completed tr aining programmes offered 
by 20  TSPs under HPKVN schemes was conducted be tween October 2022 and 
December 2022 by Audit to assess whether training was being imparted to candidates 
as envisaged in the programmes. Overall, 408 out of 5,459 beneficiaries were covered 
in the survey. The details of beneficiaries surveyed, and their satisfaction level are given 
in Table 4.16. 
Table 4.16: Details of Beneficiary Survey and satisfaction level of candidates surveyed 
Particulars 
Satisfaction level response 
Yes  
(per cent) 
No  
(per cent) 
No response 
(per cent) 
Biometric devices used for attendance  31 (8) 377 (92) 0 (-) 
Understandability of training lecturers 324 (80) 84 (20)  0 (-) 
Improvement required, if any, in (material/ trainers) 65 (16) 248 (61) 95 (23) 
Mobilised about requirement of trades keeping in 
view the local opportunities and interest/ choice 301(74) 93 (23) 14 (3) 
Got job after completion of training 51(12) 351 (86) 6 (2) 
Whether placement provided by the TSP 53(13) 348 (85) 7 (2) 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
170 | P a g e  
 
Particulars 
Satisfaction level response 
Yes  
(per cent) 
No  
(per cent) 
No response 
(per cent) 
Was course designed keeping in view of industrial 
needs  148(36) 242 (59) 18 (5) 
Training needed in any other area to enhance skill 8(2) 400 (98) 0 (-) 
Training material provided by TSP 223(55) 18 (4) 167 (41) 
Was transport facility available 31(8) 374 (91) 3 (1) 
Counselled prior to training  369(90) 23 (6) 16 (4) 
Machinery and equipment required for training 
made available by TSP 386(95) 16 (4) 6 (2) 
Feedback on training and or job taken 246(60) 116 (28) 46 (12) 
Job fairs/mela/interviews arranged by TSP/ 
HPKVN 117(29) 280 (69) 11 (2) 
Any other suggestion/ recommendation offered 
The course should be product oriented, 
assignments may be given to students, invite 
industrial professionals, latest equipment may 
be provided, vocational trainers may be 
appointed timely. 
It can be seen from Table 4.16 that satisfaction level of candidates was not upto mark, 
especially towards non-use of biometric device for attendance, non -design of training 
programme keeping in view of the industrial needs, non -organising of job fair/ mela/ 
interviews by TSPs and providing placements. 
4.7.9  Survey of the TSPs 
Survey of 18 TSPs was also conducted between October 2022 and December 2022 
regarding training programmes being conducted by them. Responses of these 18 TSPs 
have been consolidated in Table 4.17. 
Table 4.17: Responses of TSPs in survey on crucial issues  
Particulars Responses 
Yes No 
Performance Security deposited for courses as required 6 12 
Biometric attendance taken during trainings 0 18 
Training programme inspected by HPKVN or other designated agency  10 8 
Women and PwD enrolled 12 6 
Reporting framework exists with HPKVN 6 12 
Post placement tracking carried out  5 13 
Job fairs/Kaushal and Rozgar mela/Placement arranged  8 10 
Any placement assistance provided to candidates  9 9 
Mentorship-cum-placement cell established  9 9 
Third party agency monitoring held  3 15 
Placements of candidates tracked every month for the period of one year 3 15 
Whether 50  per cent  or more certified candidates employed within three 
months of certification 2 16 
It can be seen from Table 4.17 that responses of  TSPs with regard to obtaining 
Performance Security, use of biometric for attendance, third party monitoring, 
placements and tracking of candidates indicated that implementation of the programme 
was not as envisaged. 
 
 

Chapter IV: Role of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) in Skill Development  
171 | P a g e  
 
4.8  Conclusion 
The HPKVN is responsible for skilling of youth of the State through short term courses 
for self -employment and employment in private sector. However, p rogramme 
implementation has not been given due attention  by two State/ Departmental level 
monitoring Committees. Efforts to cover skill development programmes implemented 
by various Departments under one umbrella were not effective. Trainings in Agriculture 
and Horticulture Sectors were not adequate.  
Utilisation of funds was low during 2017 -22 due to delay in empanelment of TSPs, 
delay in start of trainings, low progress on civil works, etc.  
The Performance S ecurity was not obtained from the TSPs.  Exemption from GST 
council towards payment of GST on training conducted by the TSPs has not been 
obtained. There was shortfall in providing wage employment to both female and PwD 
candidate. Records relating to adherence to the v arious provisions of the PMKVY 
guidelines such as biometric attendance, insurance of candidates, organising Kaushal 
Melas, training linked to captive placements, etc., have either not been maintained or 
the provisions have not been complied with.  
Monitoring, inspection and internal control mechanism was also not effective. The 
performance of consulting firms engaged for implementation of HPSDP was also not 
satisfactory.  
Surveyed candidates expressed dissatisfaction towards non- conduct of jobs fairs and 
non-providing of placements by the TSPs after their certification.  
4.9  Recommendations 
In view of the audit findings, the State Government may consider 
• Skilling in s ectors matching with aspiration of candidates so that they undergo 
trainings, take placements, and do associated jobs with objective of long-term 
employment. 
• Providing adequate infrastructure for training of candidates by timely completion 
of infrastructure. 
• Providing trainings in sectors with local job opportunities and skilling in local 
arts and c rafts with provision for finance, market, display -sale centres to 
publicise the same and linking of trainings to captive placement. 
• Ensuring monitoring of implementation of programmes at apex level and 
adequate inspections of training by various Departmental functionaries.  
• Ensuring monitoring the performance of firms and TSPs in compliance to the 
contractual agreement. 
The audit findings were referred to the State Government in April 2023. The reply has 
not been received. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-V 
Integrated Development of Theme 
Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal 
Pradesh through Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

173 | P a g e  
 
Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist  
Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through Swadesh Darshan Scheme  
 
Tourism and Civil Aviation Department 
 
5.1 Introduction 
Ministry of Tourism (MoT), Government of India (GoI) launched Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme – Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuits in the 
Country (SDS) for development of tourism infrastructure in January 2015 pursuant to 
the Union Government Budget announcements for the year 2014-15.  
Under the scheme, 15 circuits: Eco-tourism, Wildlife, Buddhist, Desert, Spiritual, 
Ramayana, Krishna, Coastal, Northeast, Rural, Himalayan, Tribal, Heritage, 
Tirthankara and Sufi were identified for development all over India by MoT. Out of the 
above 15 circuits, Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit  (the Scheme) was 
sanctioned for the State of Himachal Pradesh to be implemented by the Department of 
Tourism and Civil Aviation (DoT), Government of Himachal Pradesh. The project in 
the State was executed by three executing agencies as given in Chart 5.1. 
Chart 5.1: Executing agencies for SDS  
 
Projects sanctioned under SDS, which were to be completed by June 2020 , were 
extended till September 2022 by MoT (September 2022). 
Himachal Pradesh is popular for its topographical diversity and pristine natural beauty. 
Therefore, it is an attractive destination for tourists. Details of tourist inflow in  
Himachal Pradesh is given in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Tourist inflow in Himachal Pradesh 
(in lakh) 
Sr. No. Calendar 
Year Indian Tourists Foreign Tourists Total Percentage 
growth 
1. 2011 146.05 4.85 150.90 - 
2. 2012 156.46 5.00 161.46 +7.00 
3. 2013 147.16 4.14 151.30 -6.29 
4. 2014 159.25 3.90 163.15 +7.83 
5. 2015 171.25 4.06 175.31 +7.45 
6. 2016 179.98 4.53 184.51 +5.25 
7. 2017 191.31 4.71 196.02 +6.24 
8. 2018 160.94 3.57 164.51 -16.07 
Himachal Pradesh Tourism 
Development Board 
(HPTDB), Shimla
Himachal Pradesh Tourism 
Development Corporation 
(HPTDC), Shimla
Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
Institute of Mountaineering 
and Allied Sports 
(ABVIMAS), Manali

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
174 | P a g e  
 
Sr. No. Calendar 
Year Indian Tourists Foreign Tourists Total Percentage 
growth 
9. 2019 168.30 3.83 172.13 +4.63 
10. 2020 31.71 0.43 32.14 -81.33 
11. 2021 56.32 0.05 56.37 +75.39 
12. 2022 150.71 0.29 151.00 +167.87 
Source: Information furnished by DoT, HP. 
5.1.1 Scheme objectives 
The guidelines of the SDS were issued in 2015. The scheme guidelines were 
subsequently revised in October 2017 based on third -party impact evaluation of the 
scheme conducted by National Productivity Council (NPC) 1 . A s per the revised 
guidelines, the objectives of SDS were: 
• To position tourism as a major engine of economic growth and job creation by 
planned development of tourism circuits having potential of attracting tourists. 
• Enhancing the tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner by developing 
world class infrastructure/facilitation center in the circuit/ destinations. 
• Follow community-based development and pro-poor tourism approach through 
creating awareness and employment for the local community. 
Additional guidelines were also issued in August 2020 applicable to the projects 
sanctioned before October 2017. 
5.1.2 Budget and Expenditure  
The Scheme is 100  per cent centrally funded and efforts were to be made to achieve 
convergence with other schemes of Central and State Governments and also to leverage 
the voluntary funding available for Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) initiatives 
of Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) and Corporate Sector. 
MoT had sanctioned ( March 2017) the project covering 14 components for 
₹ 99.76 crore under SDS-Himalayan Circuit  for implementation in the State of 
Himachal Pradesh. The M oT accorded ( September 2020 ) revised sanction of 
₹ 80.69 crore for 10 components. It dropped six components where no work was started 
due to land acquisition issues, proceedings in the National Green Tribunal, etc., out of 
the 14 components sanctioned earlier and added two new components, details of which 
are given in Appendix 5.1. The details of amounts sanctioned, expenditure and status 
of work in respect of the 10 sanctioned components of the scheme are given in 
Table 5.1 and details of funds released by MoT are given in Table 5.1(a).   
  
 
1  The National Productivity Council (NPC) is as an autonomous organisation under  the Department 
for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of 
India. 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
175 | P a g e  
 
Table 5.1: Details of components sanctioned under SDS 
Sr. 
No. Name of the component Executing 
Agency 
Amount 
sanctioned 
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure2 
(September 
2022) 
(₹ in crore) 
Status of work 
(September 2022) 
1.  Convention Centre at Kiarighat HPTDB 25.00 37.60 Completed 
2.  Heliport at Shimla HPTDB 12.13 12.34 Completed 
3.  Village Haat at Kangra HPTDB 4.00 3.58 Completed 
4.  
International Standard Free 
Standing Artificial Climbing 
Wall, Manali 
ABVIMAS 3.00 1.59 Completed 
5.  Paragliding Centre and 
Equipment at Bir HPTDB 8.00 8.00 Completed 
6.  Construction of Art and Craft 
Centre at Bhalei Mata HPTDC 4.00 4.65 Completed 
7.  Development of Maa 
Hateshwari temple, Hatkoti HPTDC 3.04 3.04 Completed 
8.  Signages Gantries3, CCTV and 
WiFi for the entire circuit HPTDC 5.01 4.32 Completed 
9.  Development and Beautification 
of Dal Lake, Dharamshala HPTDB 4.00 0.90 Incomplete/dropped 
10.  Light and Sound show, Shimla HPTDB 8.66 0.30 Incomplete/dropped 
 
Consultancy charges  
two per cent  1.54 1.51  
Contingency charges 
three per cent  2.31 2.27  
Total 80.69 80.10  
Source: Information supplied by the Department of Tourism, Himachal Pradesh. 
Table 5.1 (a): Details of funds released by MoT  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Funds released by MoT 
2016-17 19.95 
2017-18 - 
2018-19 - 
2019-20 19.93 
2020-21 19.97 
2021-22 4.70 
Total 64.55 
Against sanctioned funds of ₹ 80.69 crore, MoT released ₹ 64.55 crore. However, DoT 
had incurred expenditure of ₹ 80.10 crore i.e., ₹ 15.55 crore in excess  of the released 
amount. 
5.1.3 Audit objectives 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was conducted with the objective to 
assess whether: 
1. The tourist circuit was identified, prioriti sed, and planned as per the scheme 
design and objectives, to increase tourist potential at the sites.  
 
2  As per Review meeting held between MoT and states concerned in September 2022, SDS in the 
State was foreclosed based on progress reported till 31 August 2022 and remaining work was to be 
completed out of State funds. Hence, expenditure on the scheme was taken up to September 2022.  
3  A gantry is a high metal structure that supports a set of road signs. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
176 | P a g e  
 
2. The identified projects were executed as per prescribed guidelines so as to  
achieve integrated development of quality (world class) infrastructure. 
3. There was proper management of the funds and timely utilisation of the same as 
per the norms of the scheme.  
5.1.4 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit on Integrated Development of Theme Based 
Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through Swadesh Darshan Scheme  covering the 
period from January 2015 to March 2022 was conducted during October  2021 to 
February 2022 by test-check of records relating to all the sanctioned components under 
Himalayan Circuit, in the offices of the Director, Tourism and Civil Aviation, Himachal 
Pradesh, Shimla and the three executing agencies (Executive Engineer, HPTDB; 
Managing Director, HPTDC and Director, ABVIMAS). Information collected from the 
records and replies furnished by the above units to audit memoranda were analy sed to 
arrive at audit conclusions. Joint Physical Inspection of nine (out of 10) components’ 
sites and physical verification of 16 (out of 62 ) signages/gantries (tenth component) 
was also conducted. 
SDS has been allocated significant financial outlays and its impact is expected across 
the State. Further, H imachal Pradesh being a State with great tourism potential  and 
10 important components being identified under the scheme, achievement or otherwise 
of the objectives of the schemes assumes high importance.  
The audit objectives, criteri a and scope were discussed in an  Entry Conference held 
with the Principal Secretary (Tourism and Civil Aviation), Go vernment of Himachal 
Pradesh in November  2021. The audit findings were discussed with the Principal 
Secretary (Tourism and Civil Aviation), Government of Himachal Pradesh  in an Exit 
Conference held in June  2022 a nd the views of the Government/D epartment are 
included in the SSCA.  
5.1.5 Audit Criteria 
The main sources of audit criteria for the SSCA were: 
➢ Scheme guidelines/instructions/circulars issued by MoT. 
➢ Instructions/circulars issued by the State/Implementing Agency. 
➢ Minutes of National Steering Committee, Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee and Mission Directorate4 meetings. 
➢ Conditions of the sanctions accorded with the project. 
➢ Detailed Project Reports (DPR).  
➢ General Financial Rules,2017 and Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009. 
➢ Third party impact assessment report by National Productivity Council. 
 
4  Mission Directorate in the MoT (headed by an Officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary) was 
responsible for laying down the standard operating procedures in line with the guidelines of the 
scheme and coordinating with the States/UTs and Implementing A gencies etc. for effective imple-
mentation of the scheme.  

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
177 | P a g e  
 
➢ CPWD/PWD Works Manual. 
 
5.2 Planning for design,  identification and selection of tourist circuits / 
projects/ sites/ components 
 
5.2.1 Issues related to DPRs for SDS and its components 
The DPR for the entire SDS scheme (Himalayan Circuit) was prepared by HPTDC, 
through hiring of a consultant M/s Sharma & Associates, Sanjauli, Shimla  
(February 2017). There was one DPR for the entire scheme, which was sent by DoT to 
MoT. Component wise separate DPRs were prepared by executing agencies viz 
HPTDB, HPTDC and ABVIMAS through various firms and sent to MoT for approval. 
Details of DPRs are provided in Appendix 5.2. 
5.2.1.1  Non-achievement of objectives outlined in the DPR 
The DPR for SDS provided for the following objectives: 
• Enhancing income and employment opportunities by integration of tourism 
activity in overall development process of the area;   
• Ensuring maximum employment to the locals by formulating an appropriate  
human resources development plan for imparting training in key skills to the local 
population. 
• Boosting the economy of local people and increasing their income and paying 
capacity by providing basic tourism infrastructure in the proposed locations; and 
• Constructing field hostels  at two places to initiate the process of tourism 
promotion in the area so that the private hotels and paying guest houses ultimately 
take over the boarding and lodging activities.  
The audit noticed that: 
• Documents evidencing the method by which income and employment 
opportunities would be enhanced were not found on the records of DoT/HPTDC.  
• No mechanism had been devised for imparting training to the local population to 
ensure maximum employment to the locals.  
• No details for creation of jobs/employment after development of infrastructure in 
each project component were found. 
• Further, no field hostels  to initiate the process of tourism promotion were 
constructed by DoT as of April 2023. 
The Director, DoT and Executive Engineer, HPTDC stated ( March 2022 ) that no 
human resource plan was formulated before preparing the DPR to impart training on 
key skills to the local population  of all implement ed projects. Thus, the fact remains 
that DoT could not achieve the objectives outlined in the DPR.  
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
178 | P a g e  
 
5.2.1.2 Lack of community participation in the preparation of DPR for SDS 
SDS guidelines provided for organi sation of a workshop of stakeholders to discuss 
various aspects of projects including sustainability, environmental impact, etc., and 
incorporation of its recommendations in the DPR. In the DPR prepared by the DoT, it 
was mentioned that community participation is the key to any sustainable development; 
and the proposed development plan under submission had to be prepared in consultation 
with the local community. Besides, meetings were to be held with all the stakeholders 
like representatives of the local self -Government, local development offices and local 
opinion leaders.   
Audit noticed that it was stated in the DPR that consultation was done with the local 
community and meetings were held with all the stakeholders like representatives of 
local Governments, local development officers and local leaders for preparation of the 
DPR. However, no records/minutes of meetings held with the above were provided by 
the DoT. This indicated that the DoT had not maintained documents of consultation 
with the local community evidencing their participation for preparation of the DPR.  
Executive Engineer, HPTDC stated (March 2022) that information for preparation of 
DPR was gathered by the team of architects appointed for the purpose by consulting 
local people with regard to advantage of area etc., verbally. The reply is not acceptable 
because HPTDC should have maintained proper records of consultation with all 
stakeholders for preparation of the DPR, as stipulated in the guidelines.  Lack of 
community participation was also evident in the component - Development and 
Beautification of Dal Lake, Dharamshala, as observed in subsequent Paragraph 5.3.1, 
which was also one of the reasons for the failure of the component.  
5.2.1.3 Deviation in DPR from definition of tourist circuit 
As per SDS guidelines, a Tourist Circuit is defined as a route on which at least three 
major tourist destinations are located such that none of these are in the same town, 
village or city. At the same time, it should be ensured that they are not separated by a 
long distance. It should have well defined ent ry and exit points. A tourist who enters 
should get motivated to visit all the places identified on the circuit. 
It was observed that:  
• Entry and exit points were not identified in the DPR prepared by HPTDC to 
ensure that tourists get motivated to visit most of the places identified in the 
circuit. The process of identifying entry and exit points was neither proposed by 
PMC5 (national level consultant appointed by MoT ) during finalisation of sites 
nor pointed out by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC)6 
while sanctioning of project. 
 
5  Ernst and Young Pvt. Ltd. PMC is responsible for detailed perspective plans and vetting of DPRs.  
6  CSMC (in MoT) is responsible for sanctioning of the projects submitted by the Mission Directorate, 
which is headed by the Member Secretary, National Steering Committee as Nodal Officer.  

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
179 | P a g e  
 
• Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit had nine destination sites 
(excluding signages and gantries across the State). From the State capital Shimla, 
the map of the circuit depicts the destination sites scattered to the west 
(Kiarighat), east (Hatkoti), north-east (Manali) and north-west (Kangra, 
Dharamshala, Bir and Bhalei) spread across 781  kms. However, this did not 
constitute a circuit as it did not have definite interlinkages between the sites, as is 
evident from the map below . While PMC had done analysis of individual sites, 
there is no mention of these sites forming a circuit or any strength and weakness 
analysis having been conducted of the circuit as a whole. 
 
As there is an absence of clearly demarcated entry and exit points linking the circuits 
and as these standalone sites are geographically far apart, the probability of tourists 
planning their journey to cover these destinations as a circuit does not seem probable, 
thereby defeating the concept of circuit creation. In  fact, as these destinations do not 
contribute to circuit development, being standalone, referring to the project as circuit 
creation and development thereof is a misnomer. Thus, the sites for th e circuit under 
the scheme in the State were planned/ formulated as isolated places and cannot be 
linked as a clearly defined circuit, defeating the basic objective of creation of tourist 
circuit under the scheme.  
The Director, DoT stated (April 2022) that DPR was prepared by HPTDC after site 
inspection conducted by the PMC appointed by MoT. The project was approved by the 
MoT as per meetings of the Mission Directorate and the CSMC. The matter of 
identifying entry and exit points were not objected by PMC/ CSMC/ MoT. The reply 
does not explain the reasons for non -identification of entry and exit points of tourist 
circuit in the DPR as per the provisions of SDS guidelines and why sites were not 
proposed to form a circuit as per guidelines. 
Picture 5.1: Google map showing sites in the Himalayan tourist circuit in Himachal Pradesh 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
180 | P a g e  
 
5.2.1.4  Selection of consultant for preparation of DPR of the SDS components 
Para 4.6 of SDS guidelines provides that the Implementing Agency shall observe all 
codal formalities while awarding contracts for works/material/equipment procurement 
and ensure complete transparency in its transactions. Rule 124 of Himachal Pra desh 
Financial Rules 2009 (HPFR ) provides that advertised tender be invited for hiring of 
consultants’ services for the projects costing ₹ 10.00 lakh and above.  
Audit observed that HPTDB had allotted the work of preparation of DPR with detailed 
drawings (working and structural cost estimates, bill of quantity) of six 7 components/ 
destinations under SDS to a consultant 8 for ₹ 1.11 crore (at the rate of two per cent of 
projected cost) without inviting advertised tender, on the plea that the consultant had 
been working for Asian Development Bank project (executed by DoT) for preparation 
of DPR since February 2006 and made payment of ₹ 1.01 crore accordingly. Contrary 
to the provision of HPFR and SDS guidelines ibid, the expenditure of ₹ 1.01 crore on 
consultancy services was irregular. On the other hand, HPTDC, which was also another 
Executing Agency for three components, called for tenders for two components9 of 
SDS and got bids finali sed for consultancy charges at the rate of 1.4 and 1.5 per cent 
for these two components10.  
The Director, DoT stated ( December 2021)  that quotation from two firms (already 
working on ADB project) were invited and after negotiation, the consultant agreed to 
work at the rate of two per cent. DoT also stated that work i.e., drawings, estimates and 
DPR awarded by HPTDC at lower rate was due to situation and Terms of Reference 
(TOR) which might be different in both the cases (HPTDB and HPTDC). In the Exit 
Conference, the Government confirmed (June 2022) the facts and stated that necessary 
action would be taken. However, the fact remains that DoT had not followed the open 
tendering process as stipulated in the HPFR. 
5.2.1.5  Delay in preparation of DPR for the SDS 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) in respect of Integrated Development of Himalayan 
Circuit-Scheme (Scheme) was prepared (September 2015) by HPTDC by engaging the 
services of a consultant 11  for an amount of ₹  4.50 lakh. The DPR was sent 
(October 2015) to MoT for approval but the same was returned ( March 2016) after 
raising certain observations 12 to DoT for making amendment in DPR and drawings 
 
7  (i) Convention Center at Kiarighat, (ii) Ice Skating Rink at Shimla, (iii) Heliport at Shimla,  
(iv) Village Haat at Kangra, (v) Dal lake at Dharmshala and (vi) Paragliding Center at Bir Billing.  
8  M/s Shah Technical consultant.  
9  (i) Construction of Art and Craft Centre at Bhalei Mata, (ii) Development of Maa Hateshwari  
temple, Hatkoti, (iii) Signages Gantries, CCTV and WiFi for the entire circuit - consultation was 
done by the HPTDC itself. 
10  Tenth component ‘International Standard Free -Standing Artificial Climbing Wall, Manali’,  
consultancy was undertaken by the construction firm itself. 
11  M/s Sharma & Associates, Sanjauli, Shimla. 
12  Circuit map with location and distances marked were not provided; details like architectural  
drawings with plinth areas, estimates, analysis of rates based on quotations from market were not 
provided; land ownership details were not furnished and execution and O&M were not clearly  
defined, etc. 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
181 | P a g e  
 
accordingly. The amended DPR was sent (March 2017) by DoT to MoT for releasing 
funds under the scheme. Based on DPR, MoT sanctioned (March 2017) ₹ 99.76 crore 
and simultaneously released ₹  19.95 crore to HPTDB. This indicated that DoT had 
taken time of two years (since the launch of SDS in March 2015) for finalising DPR.  
5.2.1.6  Time taken in preparation of DPRs for components of the Scheme 
DoT had assigned the work of preparation of DPRs to the Executing Agencies and the 
Executing Agency had further  allotted the said work to consultants. However, the 
consultants had submitted the DPRs with delay as depicted in Appendix 5.3.  
It can be observed from Appendix 5.3 that: 
➢ DoT had not prescribed any timeline to the executing agencies 
(HPTDC/HPTDB/ABVIMAS) for allotment of consultancy work to the 
consultant. 
➢ As per allotment orders/TOR  issued by the executing agencies , DPRs were to 
be prepared by consultants within 30 days from the allotment of the work. 
However, the DPRs of four (out of 10) components were completed by the 
consultants with delays ranging between 131 and 361 days. 
➢ No penalty was imposed for the delay in the submission of DPRs as there was 
no clause in the agreement in this regard. 
The Director, DoT stated (December 2021) that the work was awarded to the consultant 
for the preparation of DPRs and payment was made on output basis. However, the fact 
remains that considerable time was taken for preparation of DPRs by the consultants.  
5.2.2 Role and responsibilities of the State Government before sending project 
proposal to MoT 
The State Government before sending project proposal to MoT was responsible for: 
i. Identification of the projects 
ii. Preparation of project proposal/DPR in line with the scheme guidelines and 
toolkit for preparation of DPR 
iii. Feasibility study/survey of the projects 
iv. Preparation/maintenance of data related to tourist footfall, employment 
generation, etc. 
Audit observed deficiencies in the above as indicated in the following Paragraphs. 
5.2.2.1 Issues relating to acquisition of land and obtaining other clearances/ NOC  
Paras 4.1 and 4.6  of SDS guidelines provide that site evaluation will be carried out 
before preparation of conceptual detailed project report and land to be used for the 
projects must be free from all encumbrances. The guidelines further provide that the 
funds were to be released to the State only after submission of all the necessary 
clearances and work orders. As per DPR, the State Government was required to obtain 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
182 | P a g e  
 
the necessary clearances/ no objection certificates (NOC ) from various Departments/ 
Local Bodies before execution of the project. 
In two components as indicated below, DoT did not obtain necessary clearance of land 
from the Forest Department/ Irrigation Department before preparation of conceptual 
DPR. Further, the Executive Agency (HPTDB) had awarded the works pertaining to 
these two components to contractors without ensuring the necessary clearances. As a 
result, there was a delay of 409 and 257 days respectively in handing over of sites to 
the contractors and commencement of work as shown in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Delay in handing over of site to contractors for want of land clearance  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
component 
Date of 
award 
letter 
Date of handing 
over of 
encumbrance 
free land/site 
Delay in 
handing 
over of 
site 
(days) 
Reason for delay 
Status 
(April 
2023) 
1. 
Paragliding 
Center at 
Bir 
5 
February 
2019 
20 March 2020 409 
Non-obtaining 
clearance from  the 
Forest D epartment 
for cutting of 42 
Nashpati trees 
Completed 
but yet  to 
be handed 
over 
2. Heliport at 
Shimla 
31 
August 
2018 
15 May 2019 257 
Water supply line 
was not shifted  and 
water tank which was 
at the site was not 
dismantled 
Completed 
but yet to 
be handed 
over 
The Director, DoT stated (January 2022) that the sites were not completely handed over 
due to some administrative reasons and local issues. DoT has confirmed (April  2023) 
that these components ha ve been completed. However, t he fact remains that both the 
works were delayed due to non -handing over of encumbrance free sites to the 
contractors.  
5.2.2.2  Non-obtaining of NOCs resulting in unfruitful expenditure 
For execution of a component  (Ice-Skating Rink at Shimla) that was sanctioned in 
March 2017, DoT had to obtain necessary NOCs from different Departments13, the area 
being a sliding/sinking zone. However, no NOCs were obtained for as long as 
34 months14 after sanction. This resulted in non -start of construction work at the site 
and subsequently MoT dropped ( January 2020)  the component, thus rendering the 
expenditure of ₹ 0.26 crore (advertisement expenses: ₹ 0.03 crore; and cost of DPR 
preparation: ₹ 0.23 crore) incurred by DoT for preparation of DPR/ work estimates and 
advertisements as unfruitful. In addition, the objective of development of Ice-Skating 
Rink to be used by tourists was not achieved. 
The Director, DoT stated (April 2022) that the delay in finalisation of DPR of proposed 
Ice Skating Rink was due to the reasons that, the proposed work was a specialised job, 
 
13  HPPWD, Forest Department, Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited, Shimla Municipal 
Corporation, National Green Tribunal, Himachal Road Transport Corporation, Geological wing 
under Department of Industries, Fire Services Department. 
14    From March 2017 to January 2020. 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
183 | P a g e  
 
which consisted of civil and refrigeration parts and the same had been proposed for the 
first time in Himachal Pradesh. For the preparation of concept, drawing, design and for 
finalisation of its specification s of International Standards and its DPRs etc. , a lot of 
exercise involving consultations with national and international experts had been done 
by various levels/authorities, which took four to five months for its finali sation. The 
proposal of the Ice-Skating Rink had been developed/ planned as per International  
Standards and cost of project had been worked out to  be ₹ 21.00 crore (₹ 12.00 crore 
for civil part and rupees nine crore for refrigeration part). Funds to the tune of rupees 
eight crore only were sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism which were not sufficient 
to execute the work. As such, to get the additional funds of ₹ 13.00 crore the case 
remained under process with the Gov ernment. But during the seventh Board of 
Directors meeting held on 31 /10/2019, it was decided that the project w ould be taken 
up for its implementation under  Shimla Smart City Limited (SSCL). Due to non-
availability of NOCs from various agenc ies, the case could not be taken up by SSCL. 
Thereafter, during the review meeting for the North Region held on 18/01/2020 at New 
Delhi for SDS, it was decided to drop the project. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government stated (June 2022) that necessary action would 
be taken in this regard. The fact, however, remains that the DoT had not obtained all 
the required NOCs from the Departments concerned, which resulted in a dropping of 
the component. 
5.3 Funds Management 
 
5.3.1  Wasteful expenditure of ₹ 0.90 crore due to seepage of water resulting in   
dropping of the Dal lake component 
In case of component -Development and Beautification of Dal Lake, the District 
Tourism Development Officer (DTDO), Dharamshala intimated (November 2018) 
DoT that there was continuous seepage of water of the Dal lake resulting in less water 
availability in the water body. In order to prevent seepage and restore the water level 
of Dal lake, advice from geologists, engineers, and wetland experts was required to 
resolve the issues. The DTDO, Dharamshala further intimated (January 2020) that the 
protection of Dal lake from seepage may be included in the scheme as a separate 
component, because without addressing the issue of seepage, the beautification of Dal 
lake would have no meaning. However, the DoT did not consider the request, citing the 
reason that there was no provision for seepage treatment in the scope of work under the 
Scheme. Subsequently, geologists and wetland experts were not consulted to resolve 
the issue of seepage of Dal lake and the lake got dried up as shown in Picture 5.2. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
184 | P a g e  
 
Picture 5.2: Dal lake, Dharamshala 
In the meantime, DoT had incurred expenditure of ₹  0.90 crore for the development 
and beautification of Dal lake up to September 2022 without taking up the matter with 
the State Government and MoT regarding inclusion of the component of leakage 
treatment of Dal lake in the scope of work as envisaged in SDS guidelines issued 
(August 2020) by MoT, wherein there was a provision for change/addition in scope of 
component in the public interest. 
The contractor had requested/intimated on 8 November 2019 and 30 July 2020 that the 
execution work of component was delayed due to pending design/layout plan which 
resulted in delay for more than one and half years. It was noticed that the execution of 
the said component was held up because the local community had wanted the inclusion 
of the protection of Dal Lake from seepage, as a component in the Scheme, before 
construction of other works of the component.  
A review meeting held on 22 July 2021 under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary 
(Tourism), decided that the work of Development and Beautification of Dal lake be 
stopped. 
Thus, non -inclusion of the aspect of protection from seepage of water in DPR 
(July 2018), not taking up matter with MoT even after the issue was pointed out by 
DTDO and non-enhancement of scope as provided in the revised guidelines resulted in 
dropping of the component and wasteful expenditure of ₹ 0.90 crore. 
The Director, DoT stated (December 2021) that the expenditure incurred at site was not 
a wasteful expenditure because the work was started with the intention to complete the 
entire work but due to some unavoidable circumstances and hindrance by local people, 
the work could not be completed. The reply is not acceptable as DoT should have 
addressed the issue of seepage from the lake  during August  2020 when scheme 
guidelines were revised. Further by ensuring community participation to address the 
concerns of the local community as stipulated in the guidelines, development of the 
component could have been achieved.  


Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
185 | P a g e  
 
5.3.2 Fund utili sation/ expenditure against I nformation Education 
Communication 
Para 8.2.5 of the guidelines provides that 10  per cent of the project cost shall be 
earmarked for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) programme for 
capacity development like workshops, seminars, publications, stakeholders outreach, 
skill development and professional and administrative services. 
Audit noticed that n either funds for IEC were earmarked nor any expenditure was 
incurred for IEC activity and skill development.  
The Director, DoT stated (March 2022) that no funds were earmarked for IEC 
components and the same would be done in future fr om the State Budget. In the E xit 
Conference, the Government stated (June  2022) that necessary action would be taken 
in this regard. However, the fact remains that IEC activities were to be conducted right 
from the initial stage which were not done. 
5.4 Execution of the Scheme 
 
5.4.1 Inordinate delay in completion of Scheme components and non -levy of 
liquidated damages 
Details of delay in execution of works of two  (out of 10) components (status of work 
indicated in Table 5.1) by the contractors within the stipulated period of completion 
and non-levy of liquidated damages are given in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Delay in execution of works/ projects 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Compo-
nent 
Criteria 
Award 
date 
and 
amount 
Stipulated 
date of 
completion 
Status of work 
as on date of 
audit (October 
to December 
2021) 
Delay 
(days)/ 
(Reasons) 
Liquidated 
damages 
not levied 
(₹ in lakh) 
1. 
Light 
and 
Sound 
Show, 
Shimla 
Component was 
to be completed 
on or before 120 
days from the 
date of issuance 
of work order, 
failing which 
liquidated 
damages of 
₹ 0.25 lakh per 
week subject to 
overall maximum 
of 10 per cent of 
contract amount 
to be imposed 
30-07-
2020,  
₹ 7.47 
crore 
06-12-2020 Incomplete 
329 
(Eight Film 
scripts 
provided 
late without 
voice over 
and music) 
11.7515 
2. 
Artificial 
Climbing 
Wall, 
Manali 
18 per cent 
penalty per 
annum will be 
levied on the last 
instalment by the 
institute for the 
17-07-
2019, 
₹ 1.47 
crore 
16-05-2020 Incomplete 
586 / 
(Timely 
certification 
of IFSC 
standard 
not 
14.1217 
 
15  47 weeks multiplied by 25,000 (December 2020 to November 2021). 
17  ₹ 48.87 lakh (last installment) multiplied by 18 per cent for 586 days (stipulated date of completion 
i.e., 16/05/2020 to 23/12/2021). 
 
 
 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
186 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Compo-
nent 
Criteria 
Award 
date 
and 
amount 
Stipulated 
date of 
completion 
Status of work 
as on date of 
audit (October 
to December 
2021) 
Delay 
(days)/ 
(Reasons) 
Liquidated 
damages 
not levied 
(₹ in lakh) 
number of days 
for the project 
delayed16 
(16.05.2020 to 
16.12.2021) from 
the date of award 
letter. 
obtained by 
contractor.) 
Total 25.87 
It can be seen from Table 5.4 that the contractors had not completed the works within 
the stipulated period and the executing agencies had not levied the liquidated damages 
of ₹ 25.87 lakh for delays of 329 and 586 days. 
For the work at S r. No. 1, the Director, DoT stated ( January 2022) that initially the 
proposal/concept for light and sound show having WOW effect at Town Square, Shimla 
including Operation and Maintenance for five years was approved by the State 
Government and the notice to proceed with the work was issued to contractor 
on 30/07/2020. Thereafter, the contractor prepared the initial concept and submitted the 
same to the Department vide email dated 17/02/2021. Further, as per the guidelines of 
MoT, no objection certificate was required before the start  of the work from the 
concerned Agency i.e ., Municipal Corporation, Shimla which was received on 
28/06/2021 and thereafter, DoT intimated the contractor to start the work at site. In 
addition to the above, the representative of contractor further clarified vide email that 
he submitted eight numbers of scripts and eight numbers of films (without voice over 
and music) to the Departmental Authority. The fact however remains that the Executive 
Agency had failed to act against the contractor as per the agreement. The DoT did not 
furnish replies for the work at Sr. No. 2. In the Exit Conference, the Government stated 
(June 2022) that necessary action would be taken. The Department confirmed 
(April 2023) that the work  at Sr. No. 1 had been dropped and work at S r. No. 2  had 
since been completed. However, the fact remains that project completion was delayed 
significantly, and no penalties were levied o n the contractors, thus extending undue 
favour to them. 
5.4.2 Irregular diversion of funds 
Para 4.4 (9) of SDS guidelines provides that the DPR shall be prepared as per toolkit of 
MoT with focus on no duplication/ overlap of works with other schemes of GoI. 
 
 
16  The contractor had to certify the construction from M/s Climb Korea that the speed climbing wall 
so erected conforms to International Federation of Sports Climbing (IFSC) standards and after col-
lecting the said certificate, the contractor had to submit th is to ABVIMAS which was not done. 
Thus, the component got delayed. 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
187 | P a g e  
 
5.4.2.1 Diversion of funds from Integrated Development of Solan District Scheme 
for project -Convention Centre at Kiarighat and submission of false 
Utilisation Certificates 
Under the scheme “Integrated Development of Solan District (IDSD) 18 ”, MoT 
sanctioned (August 2008) ₹  1.60 crore for development of wayside amenities, 
construction of Tourist Reception Centre and Construction of Multi storied parking at 
Kiarighat. Para 9 of the sanction letter under the IDSD provides that the State 
Government/ HPTDC will not keep the amount unutilised for more than six months. In 
case the funds cannot be utili sed by such a time, the same will have to be surrendered 
to MoT or their formal approval should be taken to transfer/adjust the amount against 
other central financially assisted projects. 
Audit observed that MoT released funds of ₹ 1.28 crore to DoT and DoT had submitted 
(January 2013) Utilisation Certificate (UC) of ₹  1.28 crore to MoT . Audit further 
observed that the aforesaid work sanctioned under IDSD could not be started due to 
non-availability of land and water . Funds of ₹  1.28 crore released ( September 2018: 
₹ 0.48 crore and May  2020: ₹ 0.80 crore) were lying unutilised from August 2008 to 
September 2018 with HPTDC and were not surrendered. In September 2018, DoT had 
transferred the amount sanctioned for IDSD to SDS for ‘Construction of Convention 
Centre at Kiarighat ’. Thus, DoT had issued false UCs to MoT (January  2013) and 
transferred funds sanctioned for IDSD project to SDS project without approval of MoT. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government confirmed (June 2022) the facts and stated that 
necessary action would be taken in this regard. Providing wrong information to MoT in 
the form of UCs without actual utilisation points to serious lapses in the monitoring 
mechanism. 
5.4.3 Status of infrastructure created 
 
5.4.3.1 Handing over of completed components for operation and maintenance  
MoT issued (June 2021) instructions that after physical completion of the project, the 
respective state/central implementing agencies , in consultation with the State 
Government, hand over the assets to the selected Agency with clear role s and 
responsibilities for operation and maintenance of components viz., Tourist Facilitation 
Center (TFC), cafeteria and toilets. Once the operation and maintenance Agency was 
selected, the Implementing Agency would inform the MoT to release five  per cent of 
the sanctioned cost or final project cost after successful operation and maintenance of 
components for one year as certified by an independent agency. The Implementing 
Agency had to submit the detail s in respect of completed projects so that verification 
of these components could be got done by MoT from India Tourism Development 
Corporation Ltd. (ITDC), an independent agency.  
The following deficiencies were noticed in the audit:  
 
18  Central Government Scheme under which the State Government received funds in 2008. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
188 | P a g e  
 
(i) Handing over components without MoU and non -submission of physical 
completion certificate 
HPTDC had completed the component  - Art and Craft Centre at Bhalei  in 
September 2021 with an expenditure of ₹ 4.65 crore. However, it was noticed that: 
• On approval of the State Government for transferring the said component to the 
Department of Language, Art and Culture, HPTDC handed over the assets along 
with detail s of civil and electrical items of inventories of the component to 
District Language Officer, Chamba on 16 November 2021 for its operation and 
maintenance without entering into an MoU. 
• DoT had not submitted the physical completion certificate of the component to 
MoT as of December  2021; as a result, verification of components viz., toilet, 
TFC, cafeteria facilities was not got  done by an independent agency required 
under the Scheme. 
The Director, DoT did not furnish reasons for the deficiencies. 
(ii) Completed component not handed over  
Construction of component- Village Haat at Kangra was completed on 
30 September 2020 at a cost of ₹  3.58 crore. DoT had not submitted completion 
certificate to MoT for verification of constructed components and release of the 
remaining five per cent of the sanctioned cost as of December 2021.  
Further, DoT had not handed over the completed component for operation and 
maintenance to the appropriate Agency by signing M oU as of October  2021. As a 
result, beneficiaries were deprived of the intended benefits of the project. 
The Director, DoT stated (December 2021) that the Department had requested Director, 
Language, Art and Culture D epartment repeatedly to take over the possession of the 
building and the same would be transferred to them soon. 
As of September  2022, none of the completed components was handed over to the 
appropriate agency. 
5.4.4  Observations as a result of Joint Physical Inspection of the site of the 
projects  
Deviations found during Joint Physical Inspection of the sites of the projects are given 
in Table 5.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
189 | P a g e  
 
Table 5.5: Details of deviations found during Joint Physical Inspection 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Project/ 
component Deviation/deficiencies found 
1. Heliport at Shimla                                                                    Picture 5.3 
• A pantry of 3.75 m2 was 
constructed against the 
approved size of cafeteria 
of 45.59 m2.   
• Baggage/ Luggage room 
was not constructed 
against the provision of 
23.40 m2. 
• The retaining wall was not 
constructed at the rear side 
of the Heliport , as a result 
it might affect the 
durability of the Heliport.  
 
 
 
2. Construction of 
Convention Center 
at Kiarighat 
• A convention hall was 
constructed with capacity 
of 350 persons against the 
approved provision of 
1,000 person capacity. 
• Parking for 90 vehicles 
was constructed against 
the approved provision of 
200 vehicles capacity. 
                                                                             Picture 5.5  
3. Development of Art 
and Craft Center at 
Bhalei 
• Parking area of 144.30 m 2 
was constructed against 
the approved area of  
500 m2.  
• Museum and Village 
Bazaar was not 
constructed for which 
there was a provision of 
₹ 2.50 crore in DPR. 
                                                                             Picture 5.6 
4. Development of 
Maa Hateshwari 
Temple, Hatkoti 
• A provision of ₹  0.08 crore was made for r ain shelter . However, 
during Joint Physical Inspection, it was found that rain shelter was 
yet to be completed.  
5. Village Haat at 
Kangra, project 
• Open-Air-Theatre for which provision of ₹  0.60 crore was made, 
was not constructed. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government confirmed the facts and stated (June 2022) that 
necessary action would be taken in this regard. However, the fact remains that approved 
components intended to facilitate tourism were not fully implemented as envisaged. 
 
 
 
Picture 5.4 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
190 | P a g e  
 
5.4.5 Issues related to Performance Security 
Rule 11(i)  and (ii) of General Conditions of Contract  of H imachal Pradesh Public 
Works Department provide for obtaining Performance Security from the successful 
bidders at the rate of five to 10 per cent of the value of the contract. Para 2.2.7.2 (ii) of 
Master Circular- Guarantees and Co-acceptances of RBI provides that the beneficiary 
of the Bank Guarantee (BG) should also be advised to invariably obtain the 
confirmation of the banks concerned about the genuineness of the guarantee issued by 
them as a measure of safety.  
Deficiencies relating to Performance Security were noticed in four  out of 10 
components, details of which are given in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Status of Performance Security 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of work 
(project) 
Date of 
award 
(contract 
value - 
₹ in crore) 
Performance 
Security to be 
obtained 
/obtained 
(₹ in lakh) 
Performance 
Security 
furnished 
valid up to 
Issue 
1. Heliport of 
Shimla 
July 2018 
(8.70) 
 
87.02 July 2019 
Non-confirmation 
of BG furnished as 
Performance 
Security by the 
contractor, from the 
concerned bank  and 
non-extension of the 
same after its due 
date 
2. 
Development of 
Maa Hateshwari 
Temple, Hatkoti 
November 
2020 (2.11) 21.07 -- 
Non-obtaining 
Performance 
Security 
3. 
Art and Craft 
Center Bhalei, 
Chamba 
September 
2019 (3.43) 34.28 -- 
Non-obtaining 
Performance 
Security 
4. 
Artificial 
Climbing Wall, 
Manali 
July 2019 
(1.47) 14.66 -- 
Non-obtaining 
Performance 
Security 
Total 157.03   
Source: Information supplied by executing agencies. 
As can be seen from Table 5.6, Performance Security of ₹ 70.01 lakh was not obtained 
in three contracts (Sr. Nos. 2 to 4). In respect of Performance Security of ₹ 87.02 lakh 
in one contract (Sr. No. 1), the BG submitted as Performance Security of ₹ 87.02 lakh 
was neither confirmed from the bank concerned nor extended beyond the validity date. 
Thus, total Performance Security of ₹ 157.03 lakh was not obtained/confirmed from the 
contractors. This had resulted in the extension of undue favour to the contractors.  
In respect of Heliport at Shimla, DoT stated (January 2022) that the letter for 
confirmation of BG furnished as Performance Security was written to the bank but no 
confirmation was received. As regards the extension  of BG, the c ontractor was 
requested time and again to extend the bank guarantee, but he refused to extend the 
bank guarantee. 

Chapter V: Integrated Development of Theme Based Tourist Circuit in Himachal Pradesh through 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
191 | P a g e  
 
In respect of Hatkoti and Bhalei project, HPTDC stated (February 2022) that tenders 
had been called for as per Financial Manual of HPTDC wherein no such guidelines of 
Performance Security  were there in bidding documents. Hence, no Performance 
Security was taken from the bidder. 
However, this reply is not satisfactory, as Departments, Corporations etc. are required 
to comply with the Himachal Pradesh Financial Rules, 2009, which are applicable to 
the Departments, Corporations, etc., within the State. As per Chapter 6 of these Rules, 
Performance Security must be obtained from the successful contractor and should 
remain valid for a period of sixty days beyond the date of completion of the contract. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government stated (June 2022) that necessary action would 
be taken in this regard. 
5.5  Conclusion 
The objectives outlined in the DPR of Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit 
(Circuit) relating to boosting the local economy through employment to local youth, 
enhancing income by tourism activity were not achieved.  
Circuit under the scheme was not clearly defined as projects were identified and 
proposed at isolated places without identifying entry/ exit points in the DPR. Hence, 
the tourist circuit proposed was unable to motivate the tourists to visit most or the next 
destinations of the circuit.  
Consultants for preparation of DPRs of individual components were engaged without 
following the tender process. Considerable time was taken in preparation and 
finalisation of detailed project report of Circuit as a whole. The consultants had not 
prepared DPRs of the individual components within the stipulated time.  
Due to non -availability of land and necessary clearance/ no objection certificates of 
different Departments/agencies, two components were dropped midway, and others 
remained unexecuted for long and resulted in unfruitful/wasteful expenditure.  
No expenditure was incurred for IEC activities. Liquidated damages were not imposed 
in two cases despite inordinate delay in completion of the components. 
The diversion of the IDSD funds observed in the SDS component Convention Center 
at Kiarighat was against the SDS guidelines.  
The Department had handed over operation  and maintenance  of one completed 
component without signing a memorandum of understanding  with the concerned 
agency and another completed component was not handed over to the operation and 
maintenance agency. 
On Joint Physical Inspection by Audit, it was observed that some of the sub -
components of the sanctioned components were either not constructed or constructed 
in variance of approval, making the expenditure unfruitful. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
192 | P a g e  
 
Performance Security  of ₹  1.57 crore from the successful bidder was not obtained 
resulting in extension of undue favour to the contractor. 
5.6 Recommendations  
The State Government may consider the following: 
• Preparation of DPRs of the projects as per standards/guidelines so as to avoid 
delays/dropping of the components. 
• Ensuring compliance with all checklists regarding availability of land/forest 
clearances/no objection certificates  from all the Departments concerned and 
completion of all codal formalities before awarding works for execution so as to 
ensure their execution, within the stipulated period. 
• Expediting utilisation of funds and creation of infrastructure facilities under the 
projects so as to derive intended benefits of the scheme in time. 
• Ensuring strict compliance with the stipulated clauses of the contract agreement 
including recovery of liquidated damages from the contractor. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VI 
Individual Audit Observations 
(Departments) 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

193 | P a g e  
 
Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
Department of Agriculture 
 
6.1 Excess payment of subsidy to farmers on purchase of tractors under  
Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation 
 
Non-adherence to the pattern of assistance under Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
“Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation (SMAM)” resulted in excess 
payment of financial assistance of ₹  4.61 crore to 1,005  beneficiaries in the  
test-checked Districts.  
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme,  Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechani sation 
(SMAM)1, is implemented by the Directorate of Agriculture with the objective to 
increase the reach of farm mechani sation to small and marginal farmers by providing 
financial assistance on agricultural machinery (tractors). For the purpose of providing 
financial assistance, farmers were categorised into two groups : (i) SC, ST, Small and 
Marginal farmers, Women and NE States beneficiaries; and (ii)  other beneficiaries. 
Financial assistance was to be provided for two types of tractors – two-Wheel Drive 
(2WD) and four-Wheel Drive (4WD). Financial assistance was restricted in terms of 
specific percentage of the cost of tractor subject to the maximum limit for each category 
of beneficiary and type of tractor. Till 2017 -18, no differentiation was made between 
2WD and 4WD Tractor ; and flat norms of financial assistance 2 were prevailing. 
However, w.e.f. 2018-19, differentiation between 2WD and 4WD Tractor was made 
and different norms of financial assistance for the same were prescribed as depicted in 
Table 6.1.  
Table 6.1: Financial Assistance for procurement of Agriculture Machinery 
Type of Tractor 
For SC, ST, Small and Marginal 
farmers, Women and NE States 
beneficiary 
For other beneficiaries 
Pattern of 
assistance 
(per cent of 
cost) 
Maximum 
permissible subsidy 
for equipment per 
beneficiary 
Pattern of 
assistance 
(per cent of 
cost) 
Maximum 
permissible subsidy 
for equipment per 
beneficiary 
(i) Tractor 
2WD3  50 ₹ 2.50 lakh 40 ₹ 2.00 lakh 
(ii) Tractor 
4WD4  50 ₹ 3.00 lakh 40 ₹ 2.40 lakh 
The Directorate of Agriculture, while issuing the cost norms w.e.f. 2018 -19, did not 
differentiate between Tractor 2WD and 4WD as directed in the guidelines of the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Sub -Mission of Agricultural Mechanisation” and flat 
 
1  A centrally sponsored scheme with 90 per cent share of Centre and 10 per cent State share. 
2  ₹ 1.25 lakh or 35 per cent of the cost of Tractor (Above 20-40 PTO HP) whichever was less. 
3  2WD (Two-wheel drive) vehicles are powered by only two wheels, either in the front or in the back. 
4  4WD (Four-wheel drive) vehicles are powered by all the four wheels. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
194 | P a g e  
 
rate of financial assistance of 50  per cent of the cost of Tractor or ₹  three lakh, 
whichever was lower, was issued to the Districts. 
Audit scrutiny (2021 -22) of four 5 test checked Districts revealed non -cognisance of 
norms mentioned ibid. Against, the due financial assistance of ₹  25.10 crore to 
1,005 beneficiaries of 2WD tractors, an amount of ₹  29.71 crore was disbursed 
resulting in excess payment of financial assistance of ₹ 4.61 crore to these beneficiaries. 
The excess financial assistance ranged from ₹ 6,000 to ₹ 50,000 per beneficiary. Details 
of distribution of 2WD and 4WD tractors are given in Appendix 6.1. 
The Director of Agriculture accepted (May 2022) the lapse in following the guidelines 
of the scheme. The reply of the Government was still awaited (July 2024). 
Recommendation: The State Government may strengthen the internal control 
mechanism to implement the scheme according to operational guidelines and take 
suitable action for recovery of excess financial assistance made to farmers including 
fixing of accountability for non-adherence to the stipulated norms. 
Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department 
 
6.2 Unfruitful and avoidable expenditure on construction of a bridge 
Construction of a bridge with improper design coupled with inaction against the 
defaulters/ Contractor and lack of investigation as well as lackadaisical attitude 
of the Department towards execution of rehabilitation work of the damaged 
bridge resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 10.60 crore. Further, it also involved 
an avoidable expenditure of ₹  4.15 crore on rehabilitation and strengthening of 
the damaged bridge (₹ 2.15 crore) and construction of alternate multi-span Bailey 
bridge (₹ Two crore), resultantly defeating the objective of providing relief to the 
commuters. 
To alleviate the constant traffic jam in the route from Manali to Mandi, the State 
Government accorded (July 2007) administrative approval and expenditure sanction of 
₹ 5.51 crore for construction of 101.00  meters span balanced cantilever prestressed 
concrete (PSC) Box girder double-lane bridge over river Beas at Bhoothnath (including 
both side approaches to connect Bus -stand Kullu and National Highway to Manali). 
However, the span was reduced to 90 metres (July 2007) due to some technical reasons 
and site conditions. 
 
5  Deputy Director of Agriculture, Palampur, Kangra District; Deputy Director of Agriculture, Nahan, 
Sirmour District; Deputy Director of Agriculture, Una District and Deputy Director of Agriculture, 
Chamba District. 

Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
195 | P a g e  
 
Scrutiny of records 
(February 2021) of the 
office of the Executive 
Engineer, Kullu revealed 
that the construction work of 
the bridge was awarded in 
May 2008 to a Contractor6 
for a tender amount of 
₹ 6.65 crore and stipulated 
to be completed by 
June 2010. After carrying 
out the geotechnical 
investigations of the bridge 
site, the Contractor had 
submitted his own design 
which was duly approved 
(August 2010) by the Chief 
Engineer, Mandi. As per the approved design, the span of the bridge was increased 
from 90 metres to 96  metres. In the meantime, the work was also approved 
(November 2009) under NABARD (RIDF -XVI)7 and the State Government 
accorded (December  2009) revised administrative approval and expenditure 
sanction of ₹ 8.58 crore. The bridge was completed in October  2013 at a cost of 
₹ 10.60 crore8. The excess expenditure of ₹  2.02 crore was incurred without 
ensuring revised administrative sanction of the State Government, and therefore, 
was irregular. 
Main components9 of a bridge are as shown in the picture: 
 
6  M/s Jagdish Chand Gupta Engineers & Contractor. 
7  NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development; RIDF - Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund. 
8  Value of original work: ₹  6.65 crore, extra amount due to increase in span: ₹  0.06 crore, cost 
escalation: ₹ 1.16 crore and cost on approaches of ₹ 2.74 crore. 
9  Expansion joints are designed to adjust its length accommodating movement or deformation by 
external loads, shrinkage, or temperature variations, and allow for continuous traffic between bridge 
structures and interconnecting structures (another bridge or abutment).  Abutment is a retaining 
wall supporting the ends of a bridge, and, in general, retaining or supporting the approach 
embankment. Bearing is a component of a bridge which typically provides a resting surface 
between bridge piers and the bridge deck. The purpose of a bearing is to allow controlled movement 
and thereby reduce the stresses involved.  Girder have cast-in-place, reinforced concrete beams 
with integral deck sections to either side of the tops of the beams.  
  
Picture 6.1: Map of Bhoothnath Bridge, Kullu 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
196 | P a g e  
 
 
(i) Defects in the damaged bridge 
The bridge was opened for vehicular traffic in October 2013. However, the bridge got 
damaged within a period of five years and was closed for traffic in January  2019. 
During inspection of the bridge carried out by the Executive Engineer, Kullu Division 
No. II along with the Assistant Engineer, Sub-Division No. III, Kullu in October 2018 
and Chief Engineer, Mandi in November 2018, the following deformation/ distress was 
pointed out: 
Picture 6.3: Defects in Bhoothnath Bridge, Kullu  
1. Vertical Cracks in the Abutment 
2. Damage to bearings10 
3. Cracks in the Bracket11 Supporting Span 
4. Uplift of Cantilever Arm12 of Kullu Side 
 
10  Fixed and free bearings. 
11  Brackets are reinforced structural projections used to transfer vertical and horizontal forces from 
beams to walls or columns. 
12  Cantilever arms are a rigid structural device anchored to a wall or surface which supports 
overhanging structures without external bracing. 
Picture 6.2: Diagram of Bridge 
 


Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
197 | P a g e  
 
5. Cracks in the Girders of Simply Supported Span13 
6. Closing of the Expansion Gap at this location 
The damaged bridge having these faults is as shown in the pictures below: 
   
Picture 6.4: Picture 
showing Damaged Bridge 
Picture 6.5: Damage to the 
Fixed Bearing 
Picture 6.6: Damage to the Free 
Bearing 
A Committee of five members (January 2019) was formed under the chairmanship of 
Additional District Magistrate, Kullu to investigate and submit a full rep ort on the 
damaged bridge. The C ommittee in its report (May 2019) recommend ed for 
constitution of another C ommittee of experts as the bridge design involved complex 
civil engineering and hence needed some experts for detai led investigation. However, 
no Committee of experts was constituted. 
On further scrutiny of the documents, Audit observed that the Executive Engineer, 
Kullu awarded (November  2019) the work of rehabilitation and strengthening of the 
bridge to M/s Freyssinet Menard India Pvt. Ltd (Agency) at a tendered cost of 
₹ 2.69 crore with the stipulation to complete it by March  2021. The Agency 
investigated the defects of the damaged bridge (February 2020) and reported that: 
• Abutment side  - Kharal End: The 22m suspended span is supported by fixed 
bearings on the abutment side and by free bearings towards the cantilever side 
(Articulation joint). A large PCC lump was found at the expansion joint location 
which closed the expansion joint and prevented movement of the suspended span 
during temperature change. As a result, the suspended span exerted a push 
towards the fixed bearings on abutment. This further pushed the abutment and 
created cracks as well as damaged the fixed bearings/pedestal. 
• Articulation Joint14: The cracks at the articulation joint location are suspected to 
be caused by a detailing deficiency. The minimum anchoring length of any rebar15 
 
13  Simply supported beams consist of one span with one support at each end, one is a pinned support 
and the other is a roller support.  
14  Articulation joint in a bridge is a mechanical joint that allows for movement and flexibility in the 
bridge structure, typically at the point where two bridge segments (suspended span and supported 
span) meet. 
15  Simply Supported Span (rebar) is a steel bar used as a tension device in reinforced concrete and 
reinforced masonry structures to strengthen and aid the concrete under tension.  


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
198 | P a g e  
 
is supposed to be 50 times the diameter but here the anchoring for a 20 mm 
diameter reinforcement is only 300 mm instead of one metre. 
The report of the above firm also supported the fact of improper design and construction 
by the Contractor. 
Further, the Chief Engineer, Mandi zone had also pointed out (January  2021) that the 
Contractor had not performed the task of construction of the bridge as per the contract 
requirements and directed (January  2021) the Superintending Engineer, Kullu and 
Executive Engineer, Kullu to initiate action against the Contractor. However, the fact 
remained that the issues of defective construction by the Contractor or the improper 
design were not pointed during the approval or construction stage and were noticed 
only after expiry of the defect liability period of the Contractor which is indicative of 
serious lapses of the Department. As of March 2023, no action has been initiated against 
the officials concerned. 
(ii)  Non-completion of rehabilitation and strengthening work of the bridge and 
construction of alternate bridge 
The rehabilitation work was st arted in 
December 2019 and the D ivision had 
incurred an expenditure of ₹  2.15 crore 
(February 2023) on it. However, the 
work had not been completed as shown 
in the picture, and therefore, the bridge 
could not be opened to the public.  
Picture 6.7: Bridge under rehabilitation 
However, to ease the traffic congestion 
in the area, another sem i-permanent 
multi-span one -way B ailey bridge 
(costing ₹ Two crore) was constructed 
as shown in the picture as an alternative 
arrangement. 
Picture 6.8: Alternate Bailey Bridge in Kullu 
(iii)  Inspections of the bridge during construction 
As per Paragraph 5.2 of CPWD Works Manual adopted by the Himachal Pradesh Public 
Works Department, the Executive Engineer of the Division was to carry out minimum 
of one inspection for every two bills o f a work being executed at his D ivisional 
Headquarters (HQ) and one inspection for every three bills outside HQ. Similarly, the 
Superintending Engineer was to carry out at least one inspection for every three bills of 
a work at his HQ and for four bills for works outside HQ. For this purpose, the officers 
were to ensure issue of inspection notes/ instructions after their inspection. 
  


Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
199 | P a g e  
 
During scrutiny, it was noticed by Audit that no records/ inspection notes were available 
with the Department regarding the inspections by the Authorities concerned to ensure 
quality of work during execution by the Contractor. Consequently, it cannot be 
ascertained what kind of quality check was ensured by the Departmental Officials 
during the construction of the bridge. 
Thus, construction of the bridge on the basis of improper design, poor execution, issues 
related to periodical inspection, lack of investigations and actions against the 
defaulter(s), and delay in execution of rehabilitation work of the damaged bridge 
resulted in unfruitful expenditure of  ₹ 10.60 crore besides avoidable expenditure 
of ₹ 4.15 crore on construc tion of alternative multi -span B ailey bridge and 
rehabilitation/ strengthening of the damaged bridge.  
The Executive Engineer stated (February 2021 and December 2022) that though the 
inspection of bridge was conducted by  the Higher Authority from time to time, 
however, inspection notes were not issued by them. The bridge would be opened for 
vehicular traffic after completion of rehabilitation work. The reply is not acceptable as 
the approved design of the bridge was not technically co rrect as confirmed in Chief 
Engineer’s report (January 2021). Besides, the Department had neither ensured 
investigation of the  damaged bridge by experts nor taken any action against the 
defaulters as of March 2023. Records of inspection of the work done by  the Higher 
Authorities were not maintained by the Department to provide an assurance of their 
monitoring of the works. The Division also did not expedite the execution of the bridge 
rehabilitation and strengthening work, which had been pending for the last three years. 
Moreover, the main objective of the bridge to provide desirable transportation facilities 
to the inhabitants of Kullu, ease the growing tourist traffic to and from Manali and make 
the transportation of the agriculture and horticulture produce to the other parts of the 
country more convenient remained impeded.  
Audit findings were referred to the Government in April 2023, their reply had not been 
received (October 2024).  
The Government may consider: 
• Conducting thorough investigation of the causes of the damages in the bridge 
so as to take appropriate action against the defaulters. 
• Expediting the execution of the rehabilitation and strengthening of the bridge 
so as to ensure its use for the intended purpose effectively.  
• Ensuring that the  design of a work is approved following due technical 
processes. 
• Ensure periodical physical inspections of the works and maintain record of the 
inspections, instructions issued on site, issues noticed and remedial action 
taken on discrepancies noticed.  
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
200 | P a g e  
 
6.3 Undue financial benefits/ favour to Contractor and unfruitful expenditure 
on construction of road 
Failure of the Department to expedite the execution of the work within 
stipulated period resulted in extension of undue financial benefits/ favour of 
₹ 1.69 crore to the Contractor, besides rendering the expenditure of ₹ 4.86 crore 
on the work unfruitful due to the work not completed on time.  
The road from Pujarli to Koti to Saraidhar via Jagterli in Rohru Tehsil of Shimla District 
was planned by the State Government to cater to the present-day volume of traffic and 
provide desirable transportation fa cilities to the inhabitants of T ehsil Rohru, D istrict 
Shimla as well as for improving economic activities of the area. The State Government 
accorded (August 2015) administrative approval and expenditure sanction of 
₹ 5.73 crore for up -gradation of Pujarli Koti Saraidhar Road via Jagterli having total 
length of 10.700 Km in Shimla District under NABARD 16 (RIDF17-XXI). The road 
plan covering above villages is as shown in the map. 
The Chief Engineer (CE) (South Zone) accorded 
(September 2015) technical sanction of ₹ 5.14 crore 
for this work18.  
Scrutiny of records (March 2022) of the office of the 
Executive Engineer, Public Works Division, Rohru 
revealed that the aforesaid work was awarded 
(June 2016) to a Contractor for ₹ 5.25 crore with the 
stipulation to be completed by July  2018. The 
Contractor had started the work in August  2016. 
However, the Contractor had not completed the 
work (January  2023) as pe r details shown in 
Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Details of work completed and pending work 
Sr. No. Name of item of work Work completed Pending work 
1. Work of removal of formation deficiencies 10.700 Km NIL 
2. Providing of cross drainage  10.700 Km NIL 
3. Laying of kharanja stone soling 10.700 Km NIL 
4. Sub-base G-I 9.400 Km 1.300 Km 
5. Sub-base G-II  4.000 Km 6.700 Km 
6. Tarring 2.500 Km 8.200 Km 
7. Construction of retaining and breast wall. V: 
kms 10.700 10.700 Km NIL 
8. V-shape drain and parapets NIL 10.700 Km 
Overall work done up to March 2023 70 per cent 
 
16  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. 
17  Rural Infrastructure Development Fund. 
18  Removal of formation deficiencies, retaining wall, breast walls, cross drainage work, metaling and 
tarring works, roadside V-shape drain and essential parapets (5.3 km to 16.0 km) 
Picture 6.9: Map of planned road in 
Rohru 


Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
201 | P a g e  
 
Total expenditure of ₹ 4.86 crore had been incurred on the work (January  2023). The 
following observations are made regarding deviations from the contractual provisions 
resulting in grant of undue benefits/favour to the Contractor. 
(i) Short levy/ non-recovery of compensation for delay 
As per Clause 2 of the contract, for non -completion of the work within the stipulated 
period, compensation of 1.5  per cent of tendered amount per month of delay to be 
computed on per day basis which shall not exceed 10 per cent of the tendered value of 
work was to be levied. Thus, the Department was to levy ₹  52.48 lakh (10 per cent of 
awarded amount) as compensation for delay. However , the Department had levied 
compensation of ₹ 36.73 lakh19 (seven per cent of awarded amount) only, resulting in 
short levy of compensation of ₹  15.75 lakh. However as against this, an amount of 
₹ 10.50 lakh only was withheld (August  2021) from the eighth Running bill but no 
amount had been recovered from the Contractor as of December 2022. Even knowing 
the fact that the Contractor was showing slow progress in the work despite repeated 
requests (May  2017 to September  2021) from the Department, the Contractor was 
extended undue financial benefits in the form of short -levy and non -recovery of 
compensation for delay in violation of the provision of the contract. 
(ii)  Inadmissible payment of price escalation to Contractor  
As per Clause 10cc of the agreement “If the prices of materials and/or wages of labour 
required for execution of the work increase, the Contractor shall be compensated for 
such increase subject to the condition that such compensation for escalation in price 
shall be available only for the work done during the stipulated period of the contract 
including such period for which the contract validity is extended under Clause 5 of the 
contract without any action under Clause 2 of the contract”.  
The Superintending Engineer (SE) Rohru had accorded (November 2020) extension of 
time up to June 2021 under Clause 5 of the Contract Agreement without prejudice to 
the right of the Department to take action under various clauses of the Contract 
Agreement. However, in contradiction to its own above orders, the SE approved 
(April 2021) price escalation payment of ₹ 31.28 lakh in violation of the Clause of the 
contract ibid, which was paid to the Contractor through Running Account (RA) Bills/ 
Hand Receipts (HR) (between November  2018 and December  2020) for different 
quarters from September 2018 to December 2020 as shown in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Details of payment of price escalation under Clause 10cc of the contract 
(Amount in ₹) 
Period RA/Date of 
bill 
Amount of claim Total Material Labour 
September 2018 to November 2018 5th 26-11-2018 1,25,361 1,41,626 2,66,987 
May 2019 to July 2019 HR 2-07-2019 1,03,162 1,81,822 2,84,984 
January 2020 to March 2020 HR 1-03-2020 1,07,211 1,81,822 2,89,033 
September 2020 to November 2020 6th 06-11-2020 5,01,742 15,06,739 20,08,481 
October 2020 to December 2020 7th 24-12-2020 93,891 1,85,045 2,78,936 
Total 9,31,367 21,97,054 31,28,421 
 
19  June 2019: ₹ 26.24 lakh and September 2021: ₹ 10.50 lakh. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
202 | P a g e  
 
As the price escalation pertained to the period beyond the stipulated date of completion 
and the Contractor was levied compensation for delay under C lause 2 of the contract 
hence, price escalation given to the Contractor under 10cc was inadmissible. 
Inadmissible payment of price escalation resulted in undue financial benefits of 
₹ 31.28 lakh to the Contractor. 
(iii)  Short recovery of material ₹ 24.72 lakh 
As per measureme nt books and indents of Tikker S ub-Division and Rohru store, 
9,535 bags of cement at the rate of ₹  282/- per bag and 312 drums of bitumen of 
50.872 MT valuing ₹ 23.07 lakh were issued to the Contractor between July 2016 and 
November 2020 to execute the road work. The details of recovery effected up to eighth 
Running Account bills of the Contractor is as shown in Table 6.4.  
Table 6.4: Details of short recovery of material from the Contractor 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of 
material  
Quantity issued to 
Contractor 
Quantity 
consumed 
Balance 
quantity Value of 
material 
issued 
Recovery 
made 
from the 
Running 
bills 
Recovery 
yet to be 
effected Bags/Drum No. of 
bags/MT 
No. of 
bags/MT 
No. of 
bags/MT 
Cement  9,535 9535 4,600 4,935 26,88,870 12,97,200 13,91,670 
Bitumen 
VG-10  262 40.872 18.08 22.792 19,00,548 8,40,720 10,59,828 
RSS-120 15 3.000 9.507 0.493 4,06,750 3,86,697 20,053 SS-1 35 7.000 
Total     49,96,168 25,24,617 24,71,551 
As evident from Table 6.4, the Department had recovered ₹ 25.24 lakh only instead of 
₹ 49.96 lakh in lieu of material issued to the Contractor, resulting in short recovery of 
₹ 24.72 lakh. 
(iv) Non-obtaining of Performance Guarantee  
With a view to safeguard public interest against losses, Himachal Pradesh Financial 
Rules, 2009 provide for obtaining of Performance G uarantee (PG) from successful 
bidder (Contractor) on award of the contract for an amount between five to 10 per cent 
of the value of the contract. Further as per Section 21.1 of Central Public Works Manual 
2014, the Contractor shall deposit an amount equal to five per cent of the tendered and 
accepted value of the work (without limit) as Performance Guarantee in Fixed Deposit 
Receipt (FDR) of a Scheduled Bank, an irrevocable bank guarantee bond of any 
scheduled bank, etc.  
Contrary to the provisions ibid, the Department had not obtained the minimum amount 
of Performance Guarantee of ₹  26.24 lakh (five  per cent of contract value of 
₹ 5,24,76,897/-), from the Contractor when the work was awarded. Non -obtaining of 
PG (being an instrument of deterrence) from the Contractor had put the public interest 
 
20  VG-10, RSS-1 and SS-1 are types of bitumen. 

Chapter VI: Individual Audit Observations (Departments) 
203 | P a g e  
 
at risk and led to the failure of the Department to enforce compliance with the terms 
and conditions of the contract.  
(v) Short deduction of Security Deposit 
As per Clause 1 of the Contract Agreement, Security Deposit at the rate of five per cent 
was to be deducted from the Running Account bills of the Contractor. However, it was 
noticed that against the Security Deposit of ₹ 20.85 lakh to be deducted on the amount 
of work done of ₹ 4.17 crore, the amount deducted as Security D eposit up to the 
eighth Running Account bill was ₹  14.21 lakh only resulting in sho rt deduction of 
₹ 6.64 lakh as Security D eposit, in violation of the Clause ibid. Due to slow pace of 
progress of work by the Contractor and no further payment, recovery of balance amount 
of Security Deposit by the Department could not be ensured. 
(vi) Non-production of M form/certificates of stone royalty  
As per C lause 37 of Contract Agreement, royalty charges for material (stone, sand, 
stone aggregate) should be deducted from each R unning bill of the Contractors as per 
rates approved by the Industries Department. A certificate issued by the Mining Officer 
of Industries Department as proof of royalty paid on the material to be used on the work 
by the Contractor is to be obtained. Otherwise, royalty at prevalent rate shall be 
deducted from Contractor bill (s) on the material consumed in the work. 
As per the eighth Running Account bill (December 2020), the Division had worked out 
royalty of ₹  22.84 lakh for consumption of 18,636.35 cubic meter stone at the rate 
₹ 135 per cubic meter, 68.7 metric ton sand at the rate of ₹  96 per metric ton and 
1,245.69 metric ton aggregates at the rate of ₹  112 per metric ton. The D ivision had 
deducted royalty of ₹  4.10 lakh from the Contractor (first Running A ccount bill: 
₹ 1.59 lakh and second Running bill: ₹ 2.50 lakh). However, no royalty was deducted 
from the third to eighth Running Account bills. As per remarks in the bills, M forms/ 
necessary certificates of the Mining Department were stated to have been produced by 
the Contractor. However, no such forms/ certificates were found on record. As a result, 
the authenticity of exemption of royalty deduction could not be v erified in Audit. 
Besides, the Measurement Book in respect of deductions from the first and the second 
Running A ccount bills were not produced to audit in the absence of which the 
authenticity of deductions made could not be verified. The potential risk  of short 
deduction of royalty of ₹ 18.74 lakh21 and extension of undue financial benefits to the 
Contractor could also not be ruled out.  
Thus, the work was still incomplete (January  2023) and the Contractor had not 
accelerated the work since December 2020. The failure of the Department to expedite 
the execution of the work within the stipulated period resulted in extension of undue 
financial benefits/ favour to Contractor for ₹ 1.69 crore:  
• non-recovery of compensation for delay: ₹ 0.52 crore;  
 
21  Total royalty worked out: ₹ 22.84 lakh less already deducted from the first and the second Running 
Account bills: ₹ 4.10 lakh. 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
204 | P a g e  
 
• inadmissible payment of cost escalation: ₹ 0.31 crore; 
• short recovery of material: ₹ 0.25 crore;  
• non-obtaining of Performance Security; 
• short recovery of Security Deposit: ₹ 0.07 crore. 
Besides, expenditure of ₹  4.86 crore on the road not completed in time was rendered 
largely unfruitful as the public of the area was deprived of the intended benefits.  
The Executive Engineer stated (March and January  2023) that recovery of 
compensation in lieu of liquidated damage charges would be realised from the 
Contractor’s Running B ills and deviation case s were  sent to the higher office for 
obtaining necessary approval. Recovery on account of cement, bitumen and of royalty 
of stone w ould be deducted from the next Running B ills. Besides, no reasons were 
furnished for inadmissible payment of cost escalation and non -obtaining of 
Performance Guarantee. The f act, however, remains that the D ivision had failed to 
enforce the contractual provisions. 
Further, since the road was planned to provide transport facility to residents, 
transportation of horticulture and agriculture produce and acceleration of economic 
activities in the rural area, the non-completion of the road deprived the residents of the 
intended benefits and defeated the purpose of constructing the road, especially in a state 
like Himachal Pradesh, where road connectivity is an essential lifeline for the residents. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VII 
Individual Audit Observation on 
State Public Sector Undertakings 
(SPSUs) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
205 | P a g e  
Chapter VII: Individual Audit Observation on SPSUs 
 
Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL) 
 
7.1 Unfruitful expenditure on the construction of Transmission Lines 
Poor/faulty planning for construction of (i) 400 KV Single Circuit transmission 
line without the provision of equivalent voltage sub -station and (ii) two 33 KV 
lines without required bays resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹  76.26 crore. 
Further, this also resulted in non -achievement of the related objectives of these 
works. 
The Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (Company) had awarded three 
works to lay transmission lines in Solan District which are:  (i) from Nalagarh to 
Kunihar (June 2011), (ii) Gaura to Kather (April  2012) and (iii) Radyana to Kather 
(December 2016) with the purpose to have a better power arrangement in  Solan city. 
Audit observed that all these three transmission lines were non -functional (July 2024) 
despite lapses of seven to 13  years from the date of award as explaine d in the 
subsequent Paragraphs. 
Picture 7.1: Idle transmission lines from sub-station Nalagarh to proposed  
sub-station Kunihar 
 
As per Regulation 9(2) of Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(Terms and Conditions for Determination of Wheeling Tariff and Retail Supply 
Tariff) Regulations 2011 , distribution licensee (in the instant case , Company) is 
required to take scheme wise approval for capital investment for creation of new 
assets at 33 KV and above. 
The Company submitted a proposal (October 2009) to the Himachal Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (HPERC) for the construction of 400 KV, Single 


Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
206 | P a g e  
Circuit (S/C) transmission line on Double Circuit (D/C) towers 1 from Power Grid 
Corporation India Limited (PGCIL) 400/220 KV sub -station Nalagarh to proposed 
400/220/132 KV sub-station to be constructed at Kunihar (Picture 7.1).  
The project was planned (October 2009) with the objectives: 
• to overcome the problem of low voltage;  
• to overcome insufficient infrastructure for drawing out power in winters from 
Haryana (Panchkula) to Himachal Pradesh; and  
• for increasing the capacity of electrical infrastructure in view of the expected 
load growth @ 12 per cent per annum in the State, which would be 2,000 MW 
in 2014-15. 
The initial proposal of the same project was earlier (June 2005) rejected by HPERC 
in tariff order 2005-2006 on the grounds that 25 per cent share of power from Nathpa 
Jakhari project ( a major hydel power project of 1 ,500 MW on the Sutlej river in 
Shimla District) with some proportion of free power 2 from other projects shall be 
exported out of the S tate and does not belong to the Company. As such , this 
transmission line was not justified. The Company is entitled to regional share of 
2.47 per cent of power only. Besides, there is already a 400 KV sub-station of PGCIL 
at Nalagarh which could be used for meeting the additional load on the existing  
220 KV sub-station at Kunihar in future.  
Audit noticed (August  2019) that notwithstanding the rejection of the proposal by 
HPERC, the proposal for the construction of the a bove-mentioned 400 KV line was 
still approved by the Company in its 54th Extra High Voltage (EHV) Transmission 
Committee meeting during June 2010. A scheme amounting to ₹  14,465.46 lakh3 was 
proposed for funding the project. The Company decided to go ahead to lay the 
440 KV transmission lines on the proposed 220  KV transmission lines to cater to  the 
power demand and to ensure the economic dispatch of power. The Company awarded 
(June 2011) work for 400  KV S/C transmission line on D/C tower s from PGCIL 
400/220 KV sub -station to proposed 400/220 KV sub -station at Kunihar on turnkey 
basis to a Contractor4 with scheduled date of completion as March  2013 (15 months 
from the date of signing agreement) for an overall amount of ₹  53.74 crore5. In the 
meantime, citing the other 220  KV power sub-station works envisioned for Nalagarh 
and Baddi areas, HPERC once again deferred and disapproved (November  2011) the 
 
1  Single circuit transmission line takes only one set of power lines (three cables) from one 
destination to other. Double Circuit Transmission Lines has two sets of power lines (three cables 
each). This ensures more reliable power as well as better maintenance opportunities.  
2  25 per cent equity power and 12  per cent free power belongs to  the State Government and not to 
the Company (HPSEBL). 
3  Loan amount disbursed by Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) ₹  57.65 crore out of total loan 
₹ 130.19 crore sanctioned by REC. Besides this, HPSEBL share was ₹ 14.47 crore. 
4  M/s Unitech Power Transmission. 
5  Only for construction of Transmission line. 

Chapter VII: Individual Audit Observation on SPSUs 
207 | P a g e  
earlier rejected (200 5-06) provision of the proposed 400/220  KV sub -station at 
Kunihar in the CAPEX Plan of the Company for the control period FY 2012 -14. 
Despite the rejection on two occasions of the proposed sub -station at Kunihar, the 
Company entered (December 2011) in agreement with the Contractor and the 
transmission line was ultimately completed in July 2019 with a delay of more than six 
years by incurring an expenditure of ₹ 89.84 crore (including ₹ 19.96 crore as interest6 
during construction) till March 2020. However, the transmission line was constructed 
without any sub -station for its termination. Total expenditure of ₹  99.66 crore 
(including ₹ 27.31 crore as accrued interest during construction) had been incurred on 
the project till August 2022.  
Picture 7.2: Proposed/ existing system 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
As the Company was not having its 400 KV sub -station at Kunihar or any other 
alternate arrangement to link and to put to use the constructed 400 KV transmission 
line, the Company, in its 74 th Extra High Voltage (EHV) Committee meeting 
(22 May 2018) decided for interlinking of this line at the existing 220  KV Up arla 
Nangal (Nalagarh) sub-station at one end and termination of the same at 220  KV sub-
station at Kunihar on the other end by charging the same on 220 KV  (Picture 7.2). 
For interlinking the transmission line, construction of two number of 220  KV bays 
with three Km 220 KV D/C transmission line upto Uparla Nangal sub-station and one 
number of 220 KV bay with 0.800  Km 220 KV S/C transmission line to terminate at 
existing 220  KV sub -station at Kunihar would be required 7 involving an extra 
 
6  Interest accrued by the Company on the loan amount during construction which is capitalised.  
7  Nine towers required (two at Kunihar end and seven at Nalagarh end) . 
220 KV 
Substation at 
Uparla Nangal, 
Nalagarh 
400 KV Sub-
station of PGCIL, 
Nalagarh 
 
220 KV Sub-
station at Kunihar 
 
 
 
Proposed 400 KV 
Sub-station at 
Kunihar 
7 towers required for 
proposed 220 KV TL 
Constructed 400 KV TL  
2 towers required for 
proposed 220 KV TL 
Existing 220 KV line 
Towers to tap TL 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
208 | P a g e  
estimated expenditure of ₹  16.28 crore (August 2018). It could be seen from the 
above that even if the line was connected with 220  KV sub -station, it w ould have 
remained underutilised. 
The Company was still in the process of acquiring/ getting the lease of the land for 
the additional proposed line (July 2024).   
Thus, even after the rejection of the proposal of 400 KV Sub -station at Kunihar by 
HPERC, the 400 KV transmission line had been constructed without any sub -station 
to terminate upon. This is indicative of faulty/ poor planning of the Company, as a 
consequence of which, they failed to achieve the planned objectives of the project 
even after a period of 11 years from the date of award of the project. This resulted in 
unfruitful expenditure to the tune of ₹ 72.35 crore (till August 2022).   
Thus, the Company not only failed to generate revenue due to the incomplete project 
but also had to sustain interest liability on the borrowed funds. 
Picture 7.3: Idle transmission lines from sub-station Gaura to Kather and  
Radyana to Kather 
 
According to Rule 3(1) (a) of the Works of Licensees Rules, 2006 notified by the 
Government of India (GoI) under Sub-section (2) of the Section 67 of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, a licensee was required to obtain prior consent of the landowner or 
occupier of any building or land to carry out the works relating to laying down or 
placing any electric supply line. The rule further provides that in case where the 
owner of the land raises objections in respect of works to be carried out under the 
rule, the licensee shall obtain permission in writing from the District Magistrate or the 
Commissioner of Police or any other officer authori sed by the State Government in 
this behalf.   
Audit noticed (November 2021) that for providing emergency alternate supply to  
Solan town, in case of failure of supply from 132 KV sub -station Solan, work for the 


Chapter VII: Individual Audit Observation on SPSUs 
209 | P a g e  
construction of 33  KV HT line (30 Km ) from 132/33 KV sub -station Gaura to 
33/11 KV sub-station Kather (Picture 7.3) was awarded (April 2012) to a Contractor8 
for ₹  Three crore (Supply ₹  2.41 crore and e rection ₹  0.59 crore). The work was 
awarded without provision of bay at Kather end. After survey by the Contractor, the 
line length was reduced to 15.270 km out of which 14.5 km was completed 
(March 2018) with a total expenditure of ₹  2.52 crore. The remaining portion could 
not be completed due to ‘Right of Way’9 issues in some areas resulting in non -
completion of transmission line . Sr. Executive Engineer, HPSEBL Solan, also 
observed (June  2020) in his report that the erect ion of transmission line was 
unsatisfactory, and the condition of the line deteriorated with the passage of time. To 
make the line functional, the already constructed transmission line had to be brought 
in good condition  and to terminate the transmission line on both the ends at the 
substations (Kather and Gaura), bay at Kather end was to be laid, as the bay at Gaura 
end was already (September  2014) available . This may involve an  estimated 
expenditure of ₹ 1.84 crore (May 2021).  
Picture 7.4: Showing the constructed transmission lines and required bays for 
connection with sub-stations 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the meantime, another work (Picture 7.3) for the construction of  20.3 Km 33 KV 
link line from Radyana to Kather was awarded (December 2016) to a Contractor10 for 
₹ 1.71 crore (Supply ₹ 0.75  crore and e rection ₹  0.96 crore). This work was also 
awarded without the provision of bays at both ends. It was observed that 17.03 km 
line was completed in March  2018 after incurring an expenditure of ₹  1.39 crore 
(including cost of material i.e. , conductor, supplied by the Company). The remaining 
portion could not be completed due to ‘Right of Way’ issues resulting in  
 
8  M/s Ubitech (P) Ltd. 
9  The legal right of someone to pass over another’s land, acquired by grant or by long usage. 
10  M/s UTRI HR Services (P) Ltd. 
132 KV sub 
station Gaura 
33 KV Sub 
station 
Radyana 
33 KV 
sub 
station 
Kather 
33 KV line 
33 KV line 
Incomplete 
transmission lines 
Bays to be 
constructed 
Existing Bays 
 
Bays to be 
constructed 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
210 | P a g e  
non-completion of the transmission line.  Sr. Executive Engineer, HPSEBL Solan, 
also observed (June  2020) in his /her report that the condition of the line deteriorated 
with the passage of time. To make the line functional, bays were to be constructed at 
an extra expenditure of ₹ 0.83 crore (May 2021).  
The remaining portion of both the lines could not be completed due to the issue regarding 
‘Right of Way’. Thus, both the 33 KV lines could not be put to use as the provision for 
bays to ensure connectivity of transmission lines with sub -stations was not kept at the 
time of planning, as seen in Pictures 7.4 and 7.5. Besides, the intended purpose of the 
transmission lines as an alternative source of power to Solan city was also defeated. 
Thus, the expenditure of ₹  3.91 crore (₹  1.39 crore + ₹  2.52 crore ) incurred on 
construction of these two lines proved unfruitful. 
Picture 7.5: Constructed Transmission Line lying idle 
In the reply, the unit stated (December 2021) that the lines are lying unutili sed as the 
provision of bay was not taken in the scheme to utili se the same. It was further stated 
that the scheme for completion of the balance works had been submitted (May  2021) 
to the Superintending Engineer (Distribution System Planning). However, the 
position remained the same, as the scheme submitted by the Division Office has not 
been sanctioned till July 2024 and the lines are lying unutilised and idle. 
Non-utilisation of the above three lines had resulted in an unfruitful expenditure to 
the tune of ₹  76.26 crore (₹ 72.35 crore + ₹ 3.91 crore). An additional expenditure of 
₹ 18.95 crore (₹  16.28 crore + ₹  1.84 crore + ₹  0.83 crore) was required to put the 
partially constructed transmission lines in use. The interest liability will increase 
further till the actual utilisation of the transmission line. 


Chapter VII: Individual Audit Observation on SPSUs 
211 | P a g e
The poor/  faulty planning by the Company resulted in incomplete works and 
consequent non -utilisation of the constructed infrastructure, in addition to  non-
achievement of the stated objectives as well as unfruitful expenditure. 
The Company should plan a complete project keeping in view all its components 
and avoid the construction of lines without the provision of connecting facilities at 
sub-station. The Company should also ensure the Right of Way before awarding 
the work to avoid delays in completion of work.  
   (Purushottam Tiwary)          
Shimla     Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
Dated: 14 October 2025        Himachal Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi      (K. Sanjay Murthy)       
Dated: 10 November 2025 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Appendices 
213 | P a g e  
 
Appendices 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.2) 
Details of suo motu replies of Audit observations included in the CAG Audit Reports on Social, 
General and Economic Sectors and CAG Audit Reports on PSUs (as of 31 March 2022) 
Name of 
the Report 
Year of 
the 
Report 
Date of 
presentation 
of Audit 
Report in the 
State 
Legislature 
Due date 
for receipt 
of Suo-
moto 
Replies 
Departments/ State PSUs 
Suo-motu replies not 
received as of 31st March 
2022 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
CAG 
Audit 
Report on 
Social, 
General 
and 
Economic 
(Non-
PSUs) 
Sectors 
2012-13 21.02.2014 20.05.2014 Tribal Development 0 1 
2013-14 10.04.2015 09.07.2015 
Health and Family Welfare 0 1 
Tribal Development 0 1 
Medical Education and 
Research 0 1 
2014-15 07.04.2016 06.07.2016 SC, OBC and Minority 
Affairs 0 1 
2015-16 31.03.2017 30.06.2017 
Home 0 2 
IPH 0 3 
Fisheries 0 1 
2016-17 05.04.2018 04.07.2018 
Information Technology 1 0 
Horticulture 0 1 
Home 0 1 
2017-18 14.12.2019 13.03.2020 Revenue 0 2 
2018-19 13.08.2021 13.11.2021 
Horticulture 1 1 
Urban Development 1 0 
Education 0 3 
GAD 0 1 
Industries 0 1 
Labour and Employment 0 1 
Planning 0 2 
PWD 0 1 
Revenue 0 1 
Technical Education 0 1 
Total 3 27 
CAG 
Audit 
Report on 
PSUs 
2016-17 05.04.2018 04.07.2018 
Himachal Pradesh Road 
and Other Infrastructure 
Development Corporation 
0 1 
2017-18 14.12.2019 13.03.2020 
Himachal Pradesh Financial 
Corporation 0 1 
H.P. State Industrial 
Development Corporation 0 1 
H.P. Road and Other 
Infrastructure Development 
Corporation 
0 1 
2018-19 13.08.2021 12.11.2021 
H.P. State Electricity Board 
Limited 0 1 
H.P. Beverages Limited 0 1 
H.P. State Forest 
Development Corporation 0 1 
H.P. Himachal Pradesh 
General Industries 
Corporation Ltd 
0 1 
H.P. Road and other 
Infrastructure Corporation 
Ltd 
0 1 
Himachal Road Transport 
Corporation 0 2 
Total 0 11 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
214 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.3) 
Detail of Audit observations discussed in PAC/COPU during 2021-22 
  
Committee: Name 
of Report 
Name of Department/ 
PSUs 
Year of 
Report 
Audit Observations discussed during 
2021-22 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance Audit 
Paragraphs 
PAC: 
CAG Audit Report 
on Social, General 
and Economic (Non-
PSUs) Sectors 
 
Animal Husbandry 
2013-14 0 1 
2014-15 0 2 
2015-16 1 0 
2016-17 0 1 
2017-18 0 1 
Agriculture  
2009-10 0 3 
2014-15 1 0 
2016-17 0 3 
Jal Shakti Vibhag 2012-13 0 1 
2013-14 1 1 
2014-15 0 1 
2015-16 0 3 
2016-17 1 2 
2017-18 0 2 
Industries 2013-14 1 0 
2017-18 0 2 
Total 5 23 
COPU: 
CAG Audit Report 
on PSUs 
Himachal Pradesh State 
Electricity Board Ltd. 2015-16 0 7 
Himachal Pradesh 
General Industries 
Corporation Ltd. and HP 
State Handicraft and 
Handloom Corporation 
2017-18 (both) 0 1+1 
Himachal Pradesh State 
Civil Supplies 
Corporation Ltd. 
2013-14 0 2 
Himachal Pradesh State 
Forest Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
2010-11 0 1 
Total 0 12 

Appendices 
215 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-1.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.3) 
Year-wise detail of Audit observations pending for discussion in PAC/COPU  
as of 31 March 2022 
 
Committee: 
Name of Report 
Year of 
Report 
Total Audit Observations 
included in Report 
Audit Observations pending for 
discussion in PAC/COPU as of  
31st March 2022 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
Performance 
Audits 
Compliance 
Audit 
Paragraphs 
PAC: 
CAG Audit 
Report on Social, 
General and 
Economic (Non-
PSUs) Sectors 
 
Upto 
2008-09 14 114 0 1 
2009-10 2 26 0 5 
2010-11 2 20 0 1 
2011-12 1 19 0 5 
2012-13 3 13 1 5 
2013-14 4 23 1 5 
2014-15 4 28 1 6 
2015-16 5 13 2 4 
2016-17 4 26 2 8 
2017-18 2 21 1 8 
2018-19 2 14 2 11 
2019-20* 0 5 0 * 
Total 43 322 10 59 
COPU: CAG 
Audit Report on 
PSUs 
2015-16 1 11 0 7 
2016-17 1 13 1 8 
2017-18 1 11 1 10 
2018-19 0 10 0 10 
2019-20* 0 5 0 * 
Total 3 50 2 35 
* CAG Audit Report on Compliance Audit for the year 2019 -20 includes both PSUs/Non -PSUs Sectors, 
however same has been bifurcated in the above table as per their discussion in the committee.  
Note: CAG report for the year  2019-20 was laid in assembly on 15/03/2022, therefore discussion/ Suo -moto 
replies were due on 14/06/2022. Hence, it has not been included for the status for the year 2021-22. 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
216 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-1.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.4) 
Department-wise and Vidhan Sabha tenure wise detail of pendency of Action Taken Notes on 
recommendations of PAC (as of 31 March 2022) 
Name of 
Department 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
VI 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
VII 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
VIII 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
IX 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
X 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
XI 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
XII 
Vidhan 
Sabha 
XIII 
Total 
Pending 
Response 
PWD -- -- 1 -- 1 08 2 -- 12 
Urban Development -- -- -- 2 -- -- -- -- 2 
Health and Family 
Welfare -- -- -- -- -- 4 1 -- 5 
Higher Education -- -- -- -- -- 1 -- 1 2 
Primary Education -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 1 
Technical Education -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 -- 1 
Horticulture -- -- -- -- -- 2 1 1 4 
Rural Development -- -- -- -- 1 -- -- 2 3 
AYUSH -- -- -- --  -- -- 2 2 
Fisheries -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 1 
Finance -- -- -- -- -- 2 -- -- 2 
Revenue -- -- -- 4 2 6 1 1 14 
Jal Shakti -- -- -- -- 1 -- 1 -- 2 
Industries -- -- 2 1 1 1 3 2 10 
Animal Husbandry -- -- -- -- -- -- 2 -- 2 
Excise and Taxation -- -- -- -- -- 3 -- -- 3 
Home -- -- -- -- -- 2 -- -- 2 
Forest 1 1 -- 1 -- 7 4 10 24 
Agriculture -- -- -- -- -- 1 -- -- 1 
Panchayati Raj -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 2 2 
Total 1 1 3 8 6 37 16 23 95 
 
PSU-wise and Vidhan Sabha tenure wise detail of pendency of Action Taken Notes on 
recommendations of COPU (as of 31st March 2022) 
Sr. 
No. Name of State PSUs Pending Action 
Taken Notes (ATNs) 
Vidhan Sabha 
Tenure 
1 Himachal Pradesh State Forest Development Corporation 2 XIIth Vidhan 
Sabha 2 Himachal Pradesh Agro Industries Corporation Limited 1 
Total 3 
1 Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited 9 
XIIIth Vidhan 
Sabha 
2 Himachal Pradesh State Forest Development Corporation 1 
3 Himachal Pradesh Agro Industries Corporation Limited 1 
4 Himachal Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 1 
5 Himachal Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation  1 
6 Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation Limited 4 
7 Beas Valley Power Corporation 1 
8 Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Produce Marketing and Processing 
Corporation Limited  1 
9 Himachal Pradesh Road Transport Corporation 2 
10 Himachal Pradesh Minorities Finance and Development Corporation  1 
11 Himachal Pradesh Power Transmission Corporation Limited 1 
Total 23 
Note: ‘ -- ’ means no ATN(s) is pending for the particular Department/PSU.  

Appendices 
217 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.1) 
Labour laws implemented by Labour and Employment Department, Himachal Pradesh 
Central Acts 
1.  Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976  
2.  Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970  
3.  Child Labour (Regulation and Prohibition) Act, 1986  
4.  The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996 
5.  Cine Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981  
6.  The Building and Other Construction Workers Cess Act, 1996  
7.  Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  
8.  Employees State Insurance Act, 1948  
9.  Equal Remuneration Act, 1976  
10.  Factories Act, 1948  
11.  Industrial Dispute Act, 1947  
12.  Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946  
13.  Interstate Migrant Workman (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979  
14.  The Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by certain 
Establishments) Act, 1988  
15.  Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  
16.  Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
17.  Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961  
18.  Payment of Bonus Act, 1965  
19.  Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972  
20.  Payment of Wages Act 1936  
21.  Plantation Labour Act, 1951  
22.  Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976  
23.  Trade Unions Act, 1926  
24.  Working Journalists and other Newspapers Employees (Condition of Service and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1955 
25.  Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923  
26.  Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959  
27.  Persons with Disabilities (Full Participation, Equal Opportunities and Protection of Rights) Act, 
1995 
State Acts  
1.  Himachal Pradesh Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1969  
2.  H.P. Industrial Establishments (National and Festivals Holidays, Casual and Sick Leave) Act, 
1969 
 
 
 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
218 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.4.3) 
Details of target, achievement and shortfall in registration of workers during 2017-22 
Labour Officer/ 
Labour Inspector Year Target Achievements Shortfall 
(per cent) 
Bilaspur 
2017-18 6,000 2,206 3,794 (63) 
2018-19 18,000 7,655 10,345(57) 
2019-20 6,907 4,058 2,849(41) 
2020-21 5,900 9,531 0 
2021-22 9,965 10,433 0 
Baddi 
2017-18 6,000 530 5,470(91) 
2018-19 18,000 1,150 16,850(94) 
2019-20 3,057 499 2,558(84) 
2020-21 1,700 899 801(47) 
2021-22 8,566 1,120 7,446(87) 
Hamirpur 
2017-18 6,000 3,410 2,590(43) 
2018-19 18,000 8,453 9,547(53) 
2019-20 6,174 6,987 0 
2020-21 5,100 21,100 0 
2021-22 15,031 13,450 1,581(11) 
Chamba 
2017-18 6,000 758 5,242(87) 
2018-19 18,000 3,118 14,882(83) 
2019-20 4,524 4,212 312(7) 
2020-21 3,300 7,702 0 
2021-22 9,100 2,483 6,617(73) 
Kangra 
2017-18 6,000 2,149 3,851(64) 
2018-19 18,000 5,124 12,876(72) 
2019-20 6,082 4,769 1,313(22) 
2020-21 5,000 13,481 0 
2021-22 17,664 6,616 11,048(63) 
Mandi 
2017-18 6,000 3,779 2,221(37) 
2018-19 18,000 7,413 10,587(59) 
2019-20 7,824 9,446 0 
2020-21 6,900 17,278 0 
2021-22 18,300 15,094 3,206(18) 
Kullu 
2017-18 6,000 616 5,384(90) 
2018-19 18,000 1,422 16,578(92) 
2019-20 3,332 1,585 1,747(52) 
2020-21 2,000 4,300 0 
2021-22 8,665 8,859 0 
Kinnaur 
2017-18 6,000 865 5,135(86) 
2018-19 18,000 990 17,010(95) 
2019-20 2,782 1,382 1,400(50) 
2020-21 1,400 2,160 0 
2021-22 7,132 1,680 5,452(76) 

Appendices 
219 | P a g e  
 
Labour Officer/ 
Labour Inspector Year Target Achievements Shortfall 
(per cent) 
Shimla 
2017-18 6,000 516 5,484(91) 
2018-19 18,000 1,414 16,586(92) 
2019-20 3,975 1,041 2,934(74) 
2020-21 2,700 2,465 235(9) 
2021-22 14,232 804 13,428(94) 
Rampur 
2017-18 6,000 502 5,498(92) 
2018-19 18,000 1,578 16,422(91) 
2019-20 3,332 2,300 1,032(31) 
2020-21 2,000 3,051 0 
2021-22 8,665 3,186 5,479(63) 
Sirmour at Nahan 
2017-18 6,000 669 5,331(89) 
2018-19 18,000 1,106 16,894(94) 
2019-20 4,707 898 3,809(81) 
2020-21 3,500 2,689 811(23) 
2021-22 9,165 896 8,269(90) 
Solan 
2017-18 6,000 345 5,655(94) 
2018-19 18,000 1,561 16,439(91) 
2019-20 3,516 1,611 1,905(54) 
2020-21 2,200 1,734 466(21) 
2021-22 8,732 1,284 7,448(85) 
Una 
2017-18 6,000 1,928 4,072(68) 
2018-19 18,000 3,009 14,991(83) 
2019-20 4,249 2,146 2,103(49) 
2020-21 3,000 4,257 0 
2021-22 13,000 3,236 9,764(75) 
Note: Target fixed by the Board in May 2013, March 2018, May 2019 and July 2021  
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
220 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7.8.1 (C)) 
Details of mismatch in figures of welfare scheme expenditure provided by the Board for 2017-22 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. Head 
Total expenditure 
on scheme as per 
Balance sheet 
Total expenditure 
as per supplied by 
the Board 
Difference 
1 Advertisement and Publicity 3,01,65,961 3,02,81,325 1,15,364 
2 Disability Pension 1,03,000 95,000 8,000 
3 Death and Funeral Benefits 16,08,32,707.8 14,86,01,856 1,22,30,851 .8 
4 CM Relief Fund 2,00,00,000 2,00,00,000 0 
5 Facilitation charges 65,759 0 65,759 
6 Expenses Creches on work 10,85,000 10,85,000 0 
7 Financial assistance for Bicycle  6,92,13,310.00  8,59,81,750 1,67,68,440 
8 Financial assistance for Education 86,48,05,105 72,15,49,834 14,32,55,271 
9 Freight Charges 13,12,537 9,85,121 3,27,416 
10 Induction Heaters 9,23,72,162 7,92,39,643 1,31,32,519 
11 Covid-19 relief 72,25,12,000 78,59,10,000 6,33,98,000 
12 Marriage Assistance 71,23,07,045 64,47,62,000 6,75,45,045 
13 Maternity/ Paternity Benefit 8,12,73,450 11,87,50,557 3,74,77,107 
14 Medical Assistance 3,68,84,835 3,11,80,562 57,04,273 
15 Old age pension benefits 97,67,500 63,17,000 34,50,500 
16 Rent of Store taken for 
Beneficiaries items 39,58,152 31,52,604 8,05,548 
17 Rashtriya Swasthya Bima 
Yojna 6,14,856.75 40,420 5,74,436.75 
18 Seminars and Workshops 7,070 0 7,070 
19 Solar Lantern 9,65,79,256 10,24,13,474 58,34,218 
20 RPL 1,29,41,120 0 1,29,41,120 
21 Workers Transit Hostel 6,10,809 5,39,208 71,601 
22 Depreciation 4,32,85,907 4,90,92,044 58,06,137 
23 General and Welfare Activities 41,26,125 36,38,576 4,87,549 
24 Income from previous year 5,86,00,399.42 0 5,86,00,399.42 
25 Washing Machine 12,71,51,131 8,03,71,060 4,67,80,071 
26 Expenses on welfare activities 72,836 0 72,836 
27 Pension 1,000 0 1,000 
28 PMJJY and PMSBY 34,65,828 34,65,828 0 
29 Gram Rozgar Sevak 
Honorarium 88,000 0 88,000 
Total 3,15,42,02,862 2,91,74,52,862 23,67,50,000 
 
  

Appendices 
221 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7.10.3) 
Amounts of Financial Assistance for Education for the period 2017-22 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. Course 
Notification Date 
17th 
November 
2011 
9th 
May 
2013 
19th 
January 
2018 
6th 
January 
2020 
16th 
September 
2020 
(Girls) 
16th 
September 
2020 
(Boys) 
24th 
September 
2021 
1 1st to 5th standard 500 1,000 3,000 7,000 8,000 5,000 8,400 
2 6th to 8th standard 800 1,200 3,000 7,000 8,000 5,000 8,400 
3 9th to 10th 
standard 1,000 1,500 6,000 10,000 11,000 8,000 12,000 
4 10+1 and 10+2 
standard 1,500 2,000 6,000 10,000 11,000 8,000 12,000 
5 Bachelor of Arts 2000 2500 10000 15,000 16,000 12,000 36,000 
6 BSc/B.Com/BBA 
or equivalent 2,500 3,000 10,000 15,000 16,000 12,000 36,000 
7 
Postgraduate 
(Arts and 
Commerce) 
3,000 3,500 15,000 20,000 21,000 17,000 60,000 
8 Postgraduate 
(Science) 3,500 4,000 15,000 20,000 21,000 17,000 60,000 
9 Diploma courses 
(one year) 2,000 2,500 15,000 20,000 21,000 17,000 48,000 
10 Diploma courses 
(two years) 2,500 3,000 15,000 20,000 21,000 17,000 48,000 
11 Diploma courses 
(three years) 3,500 4,000 15,000 20,000 21,000 17,000 48,000 
12 Professional 
courses 8,000 10,000 25,000 35,000 36,000 27,000 60,000 
13 PhD, Research 
courses 10,000 15,000 25,000 35,000 36,000 27,000 1,20,000 
 
 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
222 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.2) 
Identified sectors by HPKVN 
Sr. No. Name of Sector 
1. Agriculture 
2. Horticulture 
3. Tourism and Hospitality 
4. Construction 
5. Information Technology /IT Enabled Services 
6. Banking and Financial 
7. Apparel and Made ups 
8. Healthcare 
9. Electronics 
10. Beauty and Wellness 
11. Auto 
12. Banking, Financial Service and Insurance 
13. Power 
14. Media and Entertainment 
15. Plumbing 
16. Retail 
17. Life Science 
18. Capital Goods 
19. Logistics 
20. Telecom 
21. Management and Entrepreneurship Professional 
22. Plastic and Rubber 
23. Green Job 
24. Handicraft 
25. Textile 
26. Furniture 
27. Engineering/Architecture 
28. Service and Documentation 
29. Food Processing 
30. Iron and Steel 
31. Aerospace/ Aviation* 
32. Disaster Management * 
33. Infrastructure Equipment* 
*Training in these sectors have not been conducted (up to September 2022) 
  

Appendices 
223 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.6) 
1.  Details of selection of completed projects in the test-checked districts 
Sr. 
No. District Scheme TSP Enrolled 
candidates 
1. 
Kullu 
MoUs with reputed 
Institutes 
The National Institute for Entrepreneurship and 
Small Business Development (NIESBUD) 25 
2. Pilot IL&FS (Learnet Skills Ltd.) 222 
3. PMKVY-2.0 Golden Institute of Technology 120 
4. RPL Quess Corporation Limited 693 
5. PMKVY- 2.0 RPL IL&FS (Learnet Skills Ltd.) 408 
6. 
Mandi 
Flagship scheme- 
Graduate Add on 
Focal Skills Development Pvt. Ltd. 316 
7. Indian Institute of Skill Development 86 
8. MoUs with reputed 
Institutes 
The National Institute for Entrepreneurship and 
Small Business Development (NIESBUD) 180 
9. Pilot LabourNet 151 
10. PMKVY 3.0 Government ITI Sandhol 52 
11. PMKVY 3.0 RPL De Unique Education Society 200 
12. PMKVY 3.0 Special 
Project 
IL&FS (Learnet Skills Ltd.) 40 
13. 
PMKVY Version 2 
CSC-e-Governance Service Ltd. 62 
14. Institute of Hotel Management Education 
Society Rampur Bushahr 150 
15. Lord Ganesha Institute of Management and 
Technology 60 
16. Sri Radha Krishna Infotech Private Limited 184 
17. RPL Vocman India Private Limited 517 
18. PMKVY-RPL IL&FS (Learnet Skills Ltd.) 227 
19. 
Una 
Flagship scheme LabourNet 300 
20. Flagship scheme- 
Graduate Add on 
Indian Institute of Skill Development 239 
21. Pilot LabourNet 1 
22. PMKVY 3.0 RPL De Unique Education Society 200 
23. PMKVY-2.0 Mentor Skills India 120 
24. Orion Edutech 8 
Total 4,561 
 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
224 | P a g e  
 
2. Details of selection of ongoing projects in the test-checked districts 
Sr. No. District Scheme TSP Enrolled candidates 
1. 
Kullu 
Graduate Add-on Focal Skills Development Pvt. Ltd. 90 
2. 
ITIs (HPSDP STT) 
Government ITI Dalash 86 
3. Government ITI Nirmand 25 
4. Government ITI Shamshi 661 
5. MoUs 
Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of 
Mountaineering and Allied Sports 430 
6. HP Branch of NIRC of ICAI 18 
7. B.Voc Government Degree College, Kullu 
(LabourNet) 252 
8. 
Mandi 
Flagship Scheme Wazir Advisors Pvt Ltd 780 
9. Graduate Add-on Focal Skills Development Pvt. Ltd. 234 
10. 
ITIs (HPSDP STT) 
Government ITI Bagsaid 364 
11. Government ITI Paplog 203 
12. Government ITI Women Mandi 119 
13. Government ITI Padhar 97 
14. MoUs IIT Mandi 110 
15. NIELIT 527 
16. B.Voc Government Degree College, 
Sarkaghat (Centum learning ltd.) 35 
17. 
Una 
Graduate Add-on Focal Skills Development Pvt. Ltd. 446 
18. ITIs (HPSDP_STT) Government ITI Bangana 435 
19.   NIELIT 236 
20. B.Voc Government Degree College, Una 
(Orion Edutech) 311 
Total 5,459 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
225 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.1) 
         Local Arts and Crafts 
(a) Himachali Paintings: Chamba, Kangra and Gompa styles, traditional Thangka paintings from 
Tabo and Manali  
(b) Metalcraft: Traditional art of sculpting idols of Gods and goddesses, making ornaments, 
decorative figurines, carvings etc.  
(c) Shawls: Kinnauri shawls, Kullu shawls, Kinnauri Dohru etc.  
(d) Carpets: including carpets, namdhas and rugs, colourful Indo-Himalayan carpets, and Gudmas 
used as ornate wall hangings  
(e) Woodcraft carvings and turnings  
(f) Embroidery: an integral part of Pahari culture like Chamba Rumal, Sunni embroidery, framed 
embroidery in addition to caps, hand fans, wall hangings, etc.  
(g) Footwear: Chamba Chappal, Grass pullan from Mandi, Kapul from Kinnaur, shoes with 
woollen border from Manali  
(h) Leathercraft: leather bags, garments, pouches, travel accessories, shoes, sandals, belts and 
chappals  
(i) Blankets and Rugs: Pangwali Blanket (from Chamba), Kinnauri Pattoo, local wool blankets  
(j) Woollen caps, mufflers and Knitware : Kullu caps and mufflers, Lahauli gloves, Lahauli 
socks, Kullu jacket etc. 
Source: Para 4.12 of Himachal Pradesh Skill Development Policy (Him Kaushal - 2016). 
 

Appendices  
226 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.4 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.2.1, 4.2.6 and 4.6.1) 
 Details of Enrolment, Training and placement in the Focus and other Sectors 
(In Numbers) 
Sr. No. Sectors Enrolled Trained Certified Placed Drop out 
Focus Sectors 
1 Agriculture 815 815 (1.46)  414 (1.15)  1 (0.02)  0 
2 Horticulture 648 648 (1.16)  612 (1.70)  3 (0.05)  0 
3 Tourism and 
Hospitality 8,040 7,650 (13.72)  5,137 (14.25)  492 (8.90)  390 
4 Construction 1,830 1,766 (3.17)  1,030 (2.86)  253 (4.58) 64 
5 IT/ITES 12,061 11,508 (20.64) 5,548 (15.40)  759 (13.73) 553 
6 Banking and Financial 295 295 (0.53)  90 (0.25)  0 (-)  0 
Total (A) 23,689 22,682 (40.68) 12,831 (35.61)  1,508 (27.28) 1,007 
Other Sectors 
7 Apparel and Made ups 5,794 5,601 (10.05) 3,300 (9.16)  740 (13.39) 193 
8 Healthcare 5,532 5,388 (9.66)  4,879 (13.54)  504 (9.12) 144 
9 Electronics 3,707 3,422 (6.13) 2,349 (6.52) 391 (7.07) 285 
10 Beauty and Wellness 2,903 2,666 (4.78) 2,049 (6.51) 704 (12.74)  237 
11 Auto 2,715 2,552 (4.58) 1,635 (4.54) 418 (7.56) 163 
12 Insurance 2,654 2,437 (4.37) 2,193 (6.09) 122 (2.21) 217 
13 Power 1,866 1,812 (3.25) 879 (2.44) 45 (0.81) 54 
14 Media and 
Entertainment 1,634 1,562 (2.80) 1,343 (3.73) 63 (1.14) 72 
15 Plumbing 1,444 1,397 (2.51) 676 (1.88) 108 (1.95) 47 
16 Retail 1,127 1,012 (1.82) 697 (1.93) 221 (4.00) 115 
17 Life Science 1,118 1,094 (1.96) 733 (2.03) 260 (4.70) 24 
18 Capital Goods 998 967 (1.73)  400 (1.11) 53 (0.96) 31 
19 Logistics 880 772 (1.38)  415 (1.16) 8 (0.14)  108 
20 Telecom 782 703 (1.26)  456 (1.27) 29 (0.52) 79 
21 
Management and 
Entrepreneurship 
Professional 
488 488 (0.88)  366 (1.02)  13 (0.24)   0 
22 Plastic and Rubber 430 352 (0.63)  232 (0.64) 163 (2.95) 78 
23 Green Job 324 318 (0.57)  261 (0.72) 1 (0.02)  6 
24 Handicraft 180 180 (0.32)  124 (0.34)   0 (-) 0  
25 Textile 164 71 (0.13)  70 (0.19)  92 (1.66) 93 
26 Furniture 150 125 (0.22)  99 ()  84 (1.52) 25 
27 Engineering/ 
Architecture 71  71 (0.13) 0 (0) 0 0 
28 Service and 
Documentation 31 30 (0.05)  21 (0.06)  0 1 
29 Food Processing 27  27 (0.05) 0 (0) 0 0 
30 Iron and Steel 25 25 (0.04)  25 (0.07)  0 0 
Total (B) 35,044 33,072 (59.32) 23,202 (64.39) 4,019 (72.72)  1,972 
Grand Total (A+B) 58,733 55,754 36,033 5,527  2,979 
 
  

Appendices 
227 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.2) 
 Committees for direction and monitoring of projects 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
Constitution Functions 
Chief Secretary, 
Additional Chief 
Secretary (ACS) of 
Planning and 
Finance; ACS/ 
Principal 
Secretaries/ 
Secretaries of 
Technical 
Education, Higher 
Education, Labour 
and Employment, 
Rural 
Development, 
Urban Department 
and Industries 
Department, 
Advisor- Planning 
and Managing 
Director of 
HPKVN 
• Provide overall direction and guidance to the HPSDP in terms of design and 
implementation  
• Approve annual work plans and budget for the physical and financial targets and 
activities of each implementing agency  
• Undertake quarterly performance reviews across different components and suggest 
ways of expediting project implementation  
• Ensure that the executing agency, implementing agencies, and the support departments 
coordinate seamlessly to ensure timely execution of project activities.  
• Review any financial irregularity and audit notes, and issue corrective actions as 
required  
• Review the findings of monitoring and evaluation surveys to assess effectiveness in 
terms of achieving project outcomes. Suggest ways of incorporating lessons and 
improving future implementation  
• Track the progress made in terms of achieving the project outputs and outcomes as 
laid down in the project’s design and monitoring framework  
• Correspond with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for any major changes that may 
be required in the project 
Project Management and Implementation Committee (PMIC) 
Constitution Functions 
Managing Director, 
General Managers 
of HPKVN, 
Directors of the 
Technical 
Education, Higher 
Educations, 
Industries, Labour 
and Employment, 
Rural 
Development, 
Urban 
Development 
Department and 
Chief Engineer 
(PWD) 
•Prepare annual work plans and budgets for each implementing agency based on the 
planned activities for the HPSDP 
 • Review overall project implementation quarterly or as required  
• Coordinate with the executing agency and implementing agencies in terms of 
procurement, financial management, safeguards, and other project activities  
• Coordinate with the supporting departments —(i) Department of Economics and 
Statistics, (ii) Department of Industries, (iii) Department of Labor and Employment, (iv) 
Department of Urban Development, (v) Department of Rural Development, and (vi) 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment — to ensure that activities falling under 
their purview are executed effectively  
• Address bottlenecks to ensure smooth implementation  
• Work towards achieving the outcomes and outputs laid out in the project’s design and 
monitoring framework 
 • Review utilization certificates submitted by the implementing agencies, and examine 
action taken reports for audit objections and other financial management requirements  
• Engage with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, National Skill 
Development Corporation, National Skill Development Agency, sector skills councils, 
and industry associations as required, to ensure alignment with relevant national quality 
standards 
 
 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
228 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.2) 
 Statement showing detail of TSPs from whom Performance Guarantee not obtained 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No. PIA Programme Project 
cost Sector Date of 
agreement 
Amount 
released 
to TSP 
PG not 
obtained* 
Project cost provided 
1. 
Lord Ganesha 
Institute of 
Management 
and 
Technology 
PMKVY-2 
STT 4.38 Customer Care 
Executive 9.7.19 3.51 0.22 
2. 
Quess 
Corporation 
Limited 
HPSDP-
RPL 548.88 
Agriculture 
Handicrafts, 
Tourism, Green 
Jobs  
28.12.19 54.89 27.44 
3. 
Vocman India 
Private 
Limited 
HPSDP-
RPL 98.08 
Healthcare, 
Construction, 
Power 
26.7.19 70.00 4.90 
4. 
LabourNet 
India Private 
Limited- 02 
HPSDP- 
STT 568.96 
Auto, 
Construction, 
Power 
26.6.18 92.91 28.45 
5. 
LabourNet 
India Private 
Limited- 03 
HPSDP- 
STT 729.97 
IT-ITes, 
Electronics, 
Hardware 
19.6.18 144.75 36.50 
6. 
Indian 
Institute of 
Skill 
Development 
HPSDP- 
Graduate 
Add on 
568.85 
BFSI, Electronics, 
IT-ITes, Beauty 
and Wellness, 
Apparel, Makeup 
25.6.18 233.13 28.44 
7. 
Focal Skills 
Development 
Private 
Limited 
HPSDP- 
Graduate 
Add on 
794.50 
Media and 
Entertainment, IT-
ITes, BFSI 
27.12.19 307.79 39.73 
8. 
De-unique 
Education 
Society 
PMKVY-
3.0 RPL 6.75 Field Technician 18.9.21 6.75 0.34 
Total 3,320.37   913.73 166.02 
Project cost not provided** 
9. 
IL&FS 
(Learnet Skill 
Limited) 
Pilot 
Common 
Cost 
norms 
Hospitality- Food 
and Beverages 22.9.16 8.09 Not 
obtained 
10. 
LabourNet 
India Services 
Private 
Limited 
Pilot -do- 
Furniture Fitting- 
Carpenter 
Fitter 
Automotive- 
Electrician 
22.9.16 19.74 Not 
obtained 
11. 
Golden 
Institute of 
Technology 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- 
Field Technician 
and Home 
Appliance, CCTV 
Installation 
7.12.18 60.17 Not 
obtained 
12. 
CSC-e-
Governance 
Services 
Limited 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- Handset Repair 
Engineer 7.12.18 6.12 Not 
obtained 

Appendices 
229 | P a g e  
 
Sr. 
No. PIA Programme Project 
cost Sector Date of 
agreement 
Amount 
released 
to TSP 
PG not 
obtained* 
13. 
Institute of 
Hotel 
Management 
Education 
Society, 
Rampur 
Bushahr 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- 
Front Office 
Associates, Food 
and Beverages, 
House Keeping 
Attendant 
18.2.19 45.27 Not 
obtained 
14. 
Sri Radha 
Krishna 
Infotech 
Private 
Limited 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- 
Field Technician 
and Computing, 
Documentation, 
Assessment and 
Retailer, Trainee 
Associates and 
Customer Care 
Executive 
18.2.19 34.21 Not 
obtained 
15. Mentor Skills 
India 
PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- 
Taxi Driver, 
Chauffeur, 
Showroom hostess 
20.3.18 48.96 Not 
obtained 
16. Orion Edutech PMKVY-
2.0 STT -do- 
Self Employed 
Tailor, Hair 
Stylist, Meet and 
Greet Officer 
21.3.18 7.29 Not 
obtained 
17. 
IL&FS 
(Learnet Skill 
Limited) 
PMKVY-
2.0 RPL -do- 
House Keeping, 
Street Food 
Vendor 
 3.45 Not 
obtained 
Total    233.3  
Grand Total 1,147.03 166.02 
*  Five per cent of project cost.  
**  Project cost in respect of nine projects was not calculated by the HPKVN and therefore amount of PG could 
not be calculated as in PMKVY payments were made to the TSP on the basis of Common cost norms (per 
hour/ day/ candidate basis). 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
230 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.7 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.3.4 and 4.5.3) 
 Details of physical and financial progress under SANKALP scheme 
Sr. 
No. Component Sub- 
component Physical Progress 
Financial progress 
Approved Amt.  
(₹ in lakh) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
1. 
Institutional 
Strengthening at 
the National and 
State Levels for 
Planning, 
Delivering and 
Monitoring High-
quality Market 
Relevant Training 
Institutional 
Strengthening- 
hiring of 
Resources at 
District and HQ 
level 
Resources yet to be hired.  86.40 0 
2. -do- 
Skill Orientation 
Programme/ 
Workshops 
Work assigned to HPKVN’s 
district teams. Two Skill 
Orientation workshops 
attended by 43 participants in 
Shimla district only.  
38.00 0.81 
3. 
Improved Quality 
and Market 
Relevance of Skill 
Development 
Programmes 
Endeavours 
pertaining to Skill 
Upgradation, 
Design 
Intervention and 
Marketing of State 
Specific Arts and 
Crafts 
MoU signed with Handicrafts 
and Handloom Corporation 
Limited on 12th October 2021 
for capacity enhancement 
initiatives of craftsmen and 
artisans in Chamba Rumal, 
Wood Craft, Kullu Caps etc., 
job roles. 
44.80 
41.23 (Amount 
transferred as 
advance to 
Handicrafts and 
Handloom 
Corporation 
Limited) 
UC received; 
details of 
expenditure 
incurred not 
provided. 
4. -do- Conduct of TOTs 
ToTs to upgrade the skills of 
artisans, weavers and other 
stakeholders not conducted  
3.00 0 
5. -do- 
Conduct of 
Mobilisation, 
Drives, Awareness 
Creation through 
Mobile Skill Vans 
Mobile skill van has been 
deployed and has covered 
eight districts out of 12 
districts in the State. Second 
round not taken up as of 
October 2022 
10.80 1.72 
6. -do- Artisan Cluster 
Development 
Not developed as of October 
2022 15.00 0 
7. -do- 
Industry meets, 
exposures, 
Exhibitions and 
Marketing 
interventions 
along with 
handholding 
support for 
Entrepreneurship 
Development 
Only industry meets and 
exposure visits undertaken for 
HPKVN staff.  
Entrepreneurship 
Development Activities/ 
endeavours in Financial 
Literacy, Institutional 
Strengthening, Business Plan 
Preparation, etc. for trained/ 
certified candidates from 
HPKVN sponsored trainings 
programme had not been 
explored as of October 2022. 
12.60 
2.08 
 
Assam exposure 
visit (1.47) 
 
Mumbai 
exposure (0.61) 
Total 210.6 45.84 

Appendices 
231 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-4.8 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.7.1) 
 Details of irregularities/incorrect data entries noticed during analysis of MIS data 
Particulars Criteria Total candidates 
captured 
Irregular 
entries Details of irregularities 
Duplicate/ 
Triplicate 
training and 
other 
irregularities 
Candidates may 
avail training 
only once under 
HPSDP and 
should have at 
least six months 
gap between two 
trainings under 
PMKVY 
62,179 
HPSDP: 
41,532 
2,307 
(double 
trainings 
etc.) 
- Same course and same registration 
date captured: 115 
- Same course and different 
registration date captured: 262 
- More than one registration in 
different course captured: 1,930 
PMKVY
: 20,495 
535 
(more than 
one training 
programmes 
attended 
shown etc.) 
- Same course and same registration 
date captured: 152 
- Same registration date and 
different course captured: 6 
- More than one registration in 
different courses within six months 
captured: 78 
- More than one registration in same 
course within six months captured: 
98 
Age 
Candidates 
should be in age 
group of 18-45 
years. However, 
in MoU/ flexi 
MoU/ RPL 
courses no upper 
age limit is 
provided by the 
HPKVN  
62,179 10 Age shown in minus (i.e., - 2013, - 
96, - 90 etc. 
-do- 132 Age of candidates is between 0 and 
14 years 
-do- 73 Captured age of candidates was 
above 65 years 
Contact 
details 
Provision of 
entry of mobile is 
provided in the 
MIS 
-do- 
230 Mobile number entered is of less 
than 10 numbers 
216 Mobile number entered is of more 
than 10 numbers 
4 E-mail/ address entered 
Course start 
date There is 
provision of 
entry of course 
start and 
completion date 
-do- 
3,462 Field left blank, thus duplicate cases 
under PMKVY/HPSDP cannot be 
ascertained. Course 
completion 
date 
16,812 
4 
Incorrect entry of course completion 
captured i.e., Aug 1900, Nov 1021 
and Aug 1922 
Assessment 
date 
There is 
provision of 
entry of 
assessment date 
-do- 
17,449 Field left blank 
4 Erroneous entries of assessment date 
captured i.e., 2062, 1900, 1922. 
Number of 
attempts of 
assessment 
There is 
provision of 
entry of number 
of attempts of 
assessment by 
candidates 
-do- 33 Erroneous entries found recorded 
i.e., 144.98, 148.17, etc. 
Date of 
certification  
Date of 
certification 30,212 7,872 Field left blank 
Job offered 
date 
Date on which 
job was offered 5,566 
695 Field left blank 
5 Erroneous entries found recorded 
i.e., 7,000; 1,920; 1,899 

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
232 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2) 
Detail of project sanctioned in March 2017 and September 2020 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No. 
Project sanctioned vide sanction 
March, 2017 
Project sanctioned vide sanction 
September 2020 
Final 
Status Expenditure 
incurred on 
dropped project Name of Project Amount 
sanctioned Name of project Amount 
sanctioned 
Dropped/ 
Retained 
1. Convention centre at 
Kiarighat 2,500.00 Convention centre at 
Kiarighat 2,500.00 Retained NA 
2. Ice Skating Rink at 
Shimla 800.00 NA NA Dropped 
26.00  
(3 lakh on 
advertisement 
and 23 lakhs on 
preparation of 
DPR) 
3. Heliport at Shimla 700.00 Heliport at Shimla 1,213.25 Retained NA 
4. Water Sports Centre and 
equipment at Sunni Area 600.00 NA NA Dropped Nil 
5. Wayside Amenities at 
Tipra 500.00 NA NA Dropped Nil 
6. 
Multi-Level Parking with 
cafeteria and TRC at 
Manali 
1,000.00 NA NA Dropped Nil 
7. 
International standard free 
standing Artificial 
climbing wall 
300.00 
International 
standard free 
standing Artificial 
climbing wall 
300.00 Retained NA 
8. Development and 
Beautification of Dal Lake  400.00 
Development and 
Beautification of Dal 
Lake 
400.00 Retained NA 
9. Paragliding Centre and 
equipment at Bir 800.00 Paragliding Centre 
and equipment at Bir 800.00 Retained NA 
10. Wayside amenities cum 
Rafting centre at Nadaun 300.00 NA NA Dropped Nil 
11. Saurav Kalia Van Vihar 300.00 NA NA Dropped 
18.00 
(construction 
work) 
12. Village Haat at Kangra 400.00 Village Haat at 
Kangra 400.00 Retained NA 
13. Art and Craft centre at 
Bhalei Mata 400.00 Art and Craft centre 
at Bhalei Mata 400.00 Retained NA 
14. 
Signage, Gantries CCTV 
and WiFi for the entire 
circuit 
501.00 
Signage, Gantries 
CCTV and WiFi for 
the entire circuit 
501.00 Retained NA 
15.   Light and sound 
show at Shimla 866.26 Added NA 
16.   
Development of Maa 
Hateshwari Temple 
at Hatkoti 
303.96 Added NA 
TOTAL 9,501.00  7,684.47   
Architect Fee @ two per cent 190.02  153.69   
Contingency charges @ three per 
cent 285.03  230.53   
Grand Total 9,976.05  8,068.69   
Note:  Total 14 projects were sanctioned in March 2017 and were revised during September2020 vide which 10 
projects (14 initial – 6 dropped + 2 added= 10) were finally sanctioned. 
  

Appendices 
233 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.1) 
Details of consultants of the DPRs prepared under Himalayan Circuit 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
component 
Executing 
agency Consultant How were the consultants 
selected 
Date of 
appointment 
of consultant 
Date of 
submission of 
DPR by the 
Consultant 
1.  
Entire 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
HPTDC 
M/s Sharma & 
Associates, 
Sanjauli 
The firm was empanelled in 
the approved list of HPTDC 
from January 2006. Work 
allotted for ₹ 4.50 lakh. 
16.09.2015 27.02.2017 
2.  
Convention 
Centre at 
Kiarighat 
HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant HPTDB allotted the work of 
preparation of DPR with 
detailed drawings (working 
structure drawings, cost 
estimates, bill of quantity) of 
these components under 
SDS to a consultant i.e. M/s 
Shah Technical Consultant 
without inviting advertised 
tender and got bids finalized 
on the plea that the 
consultant had been working 
for Asian Development 
Bank Project (executed by 
DoT) for preparation of DPR 
since February 2006. 
01.07.2017 04.01.2018 
3.  Heliport at 
Shimla HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant 
01.07.2017 13.01.2018 
4.  
Development 
and 
Beautification 
of Dal Lake, 
Dharamshala 
HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant 
07.07.2018 28.07.2018 
5.  Village Haat at 
Kangra HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant 
01.07.2017 28.07.2018 
6.  
Paragliding 
Centre and 
Equipment at 
Bir 
HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant 
07.07.2018 06.08.2018 
7.  Ice skating rink 
Shimla HPTDB 
M/s Shah 
Technical 
Consultant 
07.07.2018 19.03.2019 
8.  
Development of 
Maa Hateshwari 
temple, Hatkoti 
HPTDC 
Sh. Sushil Sharma 
& Associates, 
Shimla 
Work allotted at the rate of 
1.5 per cent of project cost. 
The firm was empanelled in 
the approved list of HPTDC 
from January 2006 
04.09.2019 23.12.2019 
9.  
Construction of 
Art and Craft 
Centre at Bhalei 
Mata 
HPTDC 
M/s Grassroot 
research and 
consultancy 
By inviting advertised 
tender. 02.01.2019 12.06.2019 
10.  
Signages 
Gantries, CCTV 
and WiFi for the 
entire circuit 
HPTDC HPTDC 
No tender had been invited 
as the work of consultation 
of the components was done 
by the HPTDC itself. 
NA 10.10.2018 
11.  
International 
Standard Free-
Standing 
Artificial 
Climbing Wall, 
Manali 
ABVIMAS 
M/s Paramount 
Consultant, 
Dehradun 
By inviting advertised 
tender. Consultancy and 
construction was to be done 
by the same firm. 
11.07.2019 
During the 
submission of 
the bids the 
bidder had to 
submit the 
designs along 
with the bids. 
 
  

Composite Audit Report-II of the CAG for the period ended March 2022 
 
234 | P a g e  
 
Appendix-5.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.1.6) 
Details of delay in allotment of DPR work to Firm/Consultant and delay in receipt of DPR from 
consultant 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
work and 
Name of 
Executing  
Agencies 
Date of work 
assigned by 
DoT 
Date when 
work of DPR 
allotted by 
Executing 
Agencies to 
consultant 
Date when 
DPR received 
from Firm/ 
Consultant 
Due date of 
receipt of 
DPR from 
Firm/ 
Consultant 
(30 days) 
Delay in 
receipt of 
DPR after 
given 30 
days 
period 
(Days) 
1. 
Art and Craft 
Centre at 
Bhalei Mata 
Distt. 
Chamba. 
(HPTDC) 
17.05.2018 02.01.2019 12.06.2019 01.02.2019 131 
2. 
Construction 
of convention 
centre at 
Kiarighat 
Distt. Solan 
(HPTDB) 
31.12.2016 01.07.2017 04.01.2018 31.07.2017 156 
3. 
Construction 
of Heliport at 
Shimla Distt. 
Shimla 
(HPTDB) 
31.12.2016 01.07.2017 13.01.2018 31.07.2017 165 
4. 
Construction 
of proposed 
village Haat at 
Kangra 
(HPTDB) 
31.12.2016 01.07.2017 28.07.2018 31.07.2017 361 
 
  

Appendices 
235 | P a g e  
 
Appendix – 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1) 
District-wise details of subsidy given on purchase of 2WD tractors under SMAM during 2018-21 
(Amount in ₹) 
District Year Number 
of cases Total cost Subsidy due Subsidy given 
Subsidy given 
in excess of 
the norms 
Palampur 
2018-19 37 2,15,51,000 92,50,000 1,07,75,500 15,25,500 
2019-20 190 12,85,83,400 4,75,00,000 5,61,96,700 86,96,700 
2020-21 202 12,31,60,429 5,05,00,000 5,98,57,000 93,57,000 
Total 429 27,32,94,829 10,72,50,000 12,68,29,200 1,95,79,200 
Sirmour 
2018-19 63 3,73,38,000 1,57,50,000 1,84,47,500 26,97,500 
2019-20 128 7,73,61,000 3,20,00,000 3,77,89,500 57,89,500 
2020-21 48 2,97,25,500 1,20,00,000 1,42,84,750 22,84,750 
Total 239 14,44,24,500 5,97,50,000 7,05,21,750 1,07,71,750 
Una 
2018-19 109 7,49,81,541 2,72,50,000 3,24,82,000 52,32,000 
2019-20 147 9,31,68,865 3,67,50,000 4,38,83,928 71,33,928 
2020-21 65 3,87,03,406 1,62,50,000 1,89,77,066 27,27,066 
Total 321 20,68,53,812 8,02,50,000 9,53,42,994 1,50,92,994 
Chamba 
2019-20 15 84,12,000 35,00,000 40,76,000 5,76,000 
2020-21 1 6,25,000 2,50,000 3,00,000 50,000 
Total 16 90,37,000 37,50,000 43,76,000 6,26,000 
Grand Total 1,005 63,36,10,141 25,10,00,000 29,70,69,944 4,60,69,944 
 
District-wise details of the 4WD tractors given under the SMAM during 2018-21 
PTO, 
HP@ Name of the tractor 
Palampur Sirmour Una Chamba 
Total 2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 2018-19 2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 2018-19 2019-
20 2020-21 
Below 20 
Sonalika DI-22 0 0 2 2 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 8 
VST Shakti MT 180D 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
Kubota B2741S 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 
Sonalika International 
GT-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 
 Total 0 0 2 3 1 0 4 2 0 0 0 0 12 
Between 
20 
to 40 
Mahindra JIVO 245DI 1 2 3 1 1 0 7 0 0 0 1 0 16 
Sonalika DI-30 
Bhagban 0 2 2 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 8 
VST Shakti MT 270 
VIRAAT 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 
VST isubish I Shakti 
VT-224-ID 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
John Deere 5105d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 4 0 0 0 12 
Total 1 4 5 7 1 0 10 8 4 0 1 0 41 
Grand Total 1 4 7 10 2 0 14 10 4 0 1 0 53 
@ PTO (Power-take-off) Horsepower indicates the power that an engine produces. 