 
SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTION OF INDIA 
लोकहितार्थ सत्यनिष्ठा 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2023 
Government of Chhattisgarh 
Report No. 06 of 2025 
(Performance and Compliance Audit-Civil) 
 


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Performance and Compliance Audit 
for the period ended 31 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Chhattisgarh 
Report No. 06 of 2025 

i 
 
 
  
Subject 
Reference to 
Paragraph(s) Page(s) 
Preface  v 
Overview  vii 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Expenditure Profile of the Departments 1.2 1 
Office of the Accountant General (Audit) 1.3 1 
Audit Mandate 1.4 1 
Planning and Conduct of audit 1.5 2 
Response of Departments to audit findings 1.6 4 
Acknowledgement 1.7 5 
CHAPTER II – PERFORMANCE AUDIT  
Urban Administration and Development Department 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana-Urban (PMAY-U) in Chhattisgarh 2.1 7 
CHAPTER III – COMPLIANCE AUDIT  
Labour Department 
Implementation of Welfare Schemes by the 
Labour Department 
3.1 59 
Energy Department 
Installation of Solar Pumps by Chhattisgarh 
Renewable Energy Development Agency 
3.2 72 
Public Works Department   
Undue benefit to Contractor  3.3 80 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Contents 

ii 
Appendices 
Appendix 
No. Subject 
Reference to 
Para no. Page 
1.1 Expenditure incurred by various 
departments in the State 
1.2 85 
1.2 Department-wise break -up of 
outstanding Inspection Reports and 
Paragraphs (General, Social and 
Economic Sector) 
1.6.1 87 
1.3 Detail of Units with instances of Record 
not produced 
1.6.5 88 
2.1.1 Statement showing the details of 
Division wise districts and tier wise 
selected ULBs 
2.1.5 90 
2.1.2 Statement showing the details of 
beneficiaries having income more than  
` three lakh benefitted under PMAY-U 
2.1.6.3 91 
2.1.3 Statement showing the details of 
beneficiaries benefitted under PMAY-U 
and PMAY-G 
2.1.6.6 93 
2.1.4 Statement showing details of 
beneficiaries benefitted under IHSDP 
 and PMAY-U 
2.1.6.7 100 
2.1.5 Statement showing the details of 
blockage of fund due to non –
completion of DUs under AHP as of 
August 2024 
2.1.8.2 101 
2.1.6 Statement showing the details of 
beneficiaries who did not commence the 
work 
2.1.8.9 102 
2.1.7 Statement showing the details of 
duplicity in benefits provided under 
PMAY-U 
2.1.8.14 108 
2.1.8 Statement showing the details of BLC 
houses geo tagged as complete but 
found incomplete during joint physical 
verification 
2.1.9.1 110 
3.1.1 Organisational set -up of Labour 
Department 
3.1.2 112 

iii 
 
3.1.2 Schemes implemented by CGAKM and 
CGSKM and schemes selected for 
Compliance Audit (CA) 
3.1.3 113 
3.1.3 Scheme wise number of beneficiaries 
and expenditure incurred under 
CGAKM and CGSKM during 2018 -19 
to 2022-23 
3.1.7 115 
3.1.4 Scheme wise expenditure per 
beneficiary in CGAKM and CGSKM 
during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
3.1.7 120 

v 
PREFACE  
 
This Report of Government of Chhattisgarh for the period ended 31 March 
2023 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Chhattisgarh for 
being laid before the State Legislature under Article 151 of the Constitution of 
India. This Report contains three chapters. 
This Report deals with the results of audit of expenditure of the departments of 
Government of Chhattisgarh under General, Social and Economic Sectors. It 
contains significant results of Performance Audit of Urban Administration and 
Development Department and Compliance Audits of La bour Department, 
Energy Department, Public Works Department of the Government of 
Chhattisgarh. 
The instances mentioned in this report are those which came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the period 2023-24, as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports. 
Instances relating to the period subsequent to 2022 -23 have also been 
included, wherever necessary.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity  with Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 

vii 
 
 
This Report comprises three chapters containing results of one Performance 
Audit pertaining to Urban Administration and Development Department,  one 
Compliance Audit pertaining to Labour Department and one Long Paragraph 
pertaining to Energy Department under General, Social, Economic Sectors. In 
addition, the Report contains one audit paragraph pertaining to Public Works 
Department. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India . Audit samples have been drawn 
based on Multistage Stratified Sampling, Simple Random Sampling without 
Replacement methods. The specific audit methodology adopted has been 
mentioned in the Performance/Compliance Audits. The audit conclusions have 
been drawn and recommendations have been made taking into consideration the 
views of the State Government.  
Chapter I 
This chapter presents the planning and extent of audit and a brief analysis on 
the expenditure of departments along with responses of Government to the 
Audit Inspection Reports/Audit Reports pertaining to General, Social and 
Economic Sectors. 
Chapter II 
This chapter de als with the findings of Performance Audit (PA) on 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban in Chhattisgarh . 
Significant results of audit that featured in this chapter are summarized below: 
 
PA on Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana -Urban in 
Chhattisgarh 
PMAY-U is a flagship Mission of Government of India (GoI) implemented by 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA). Mission was launched in 
June 2015 with the objective to address the housing requirement of the slum 
dwellers and other people belonging to Economically Weaker Sections (EWS), 
Low Income Group (LIG) and Middle Income Group (MIG) categories in the 
urban areas through four verticals: 
 Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) – EWS houses are built 
with Central assistance of ` 1.50 lakh, State support of ` 2.50 lakh and 
` 0.75 lakh from beneficiaries involving public or private sector. 
 Beneficiary Led individual house Construction (BLC) – 
Beneficiaries get ` 1.50 lakh from the Center, ` 0.85 lakh from the State, 
and contribute ` 0.86 lakh to construct new house or enhancement. 
 In Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) – Slum housing is redeveloped 
using land as a resource, with Central assistance of ` 1 lakh, beneficiary 
contribution of ` 0.75 lakh and Public Private Partnership (PPP) share 
of ` 3.75 lakh per house. 
Overview 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
viii 
 Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) – Home loan interest subsidy 
of 6.5, 4 and 3 per cent on loan amount of ` 6, 9 and 12 lakh for  
EWS, LIG and MIG -I & II beneficiaries  respectively. CLSS 
implemented as a Central Sector Scheme. 
The Performance Audit on Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana -
Urban in Chhattisgarh was conducted to assess the adequacy of planning and 
execution of projects, and the robustness of beneficiary id entification system 
under each vertical, prudence in Fund management for the scheme, along with 
built-in monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in the scheme to successfully 
achieve its intended goals. 
Housing for All Plan of Actions (HFAPOAs) for 36 and 132 ULBs were 
prepared and approved (April 2018 and February 2022) by State Level 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) and Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee (CSMC)  in August 2020 and February 2022 
respectively. A total demand for five lakh Dwelling Units (DUs) under four 
verticals of scheme (AHP - 1.70 lakh, BLC – 2.57 lakh, ISSR – 0.27 lakh and 
CLSS – 0.46 lakh) was projected by the State Government in the approved 
Housing for All Plan of Action (HFAPOAs). However, 2.49 lakh DU s  
(50 per cent of demand) were taken up for construction under AHP (0.38 lakh) 
and BLC (2.11 lakh), out of which 2.07 lakh DUs (0.23 lakh – AHP and  
1.84 lakh – BLC) were completed as of April 2025. Subsidy claims of 0.37 lakh 
were also approved under CLSS. 
Identification and Selection of Beneficiaries 
There was delay in preparation and approval of HFAPOAs by SLSMC due to  
which projects for 1.48 lakh DUs under PMAY -U were sanctioned without  
preparing Plan of Action and finalization of beneficiaries list. Audit observed 
that DPRs of projects were submitted for approval of CSMC either without  
attaching the list of beneficiaries or attaching the probable list of beneficiaries  
without verification/validation of beneficiary data. 
Initial demand survey database of identified beneficiaries attached with 
HFAPOAs and entered in the Management Information System (MIS) were not 
available due to continuous updation (addition/deletion) in the original 
database. Due to which grant of scheme benefit to originally identifi ed 
beneficiaries could not be ensured in Audit. 
Vacant housing stocks available with ULBs under previous schemes could not  
be utilised as the same were not considered during preparation of HFAPOA.  
Due to non -linkage of PMAY -U and PMAY -G MIS, 99 beneficiaries have  
availed benefi ts in both schemes. Thirty -five beneficiaries who had already  
benefitted under Integrated Housing and Slum Development Program again  
availed the benefits under BLC vertical of scheme. 
Audit observed in four ULBs (Municipal Corporation Bilaspur, Raipur, Korba 
and Municipal Panchayat Premnagar) that 71 beneficiaries whose income was  
more than ` 3.00 lakh were selected and were allotted houses/DUs under  
BLC/AHP. ULBs paid assistance of ` 4.05 crore to 250 beneficiaries under BLC 
without ensuring the ownership of land in the name of beneficiaries. 
 

Overview 
ix 
Fund Release 
Against the GoI  contribution of ` 3291.60 crore, the State Government has  
contributed funds of ` 594.85 crore through budget and ` 1554.57 crore of  
matching State share were sourced by State Urban Development Agency from  
loan taken against the State Government Guarantee. An expenditure of  
` 5,175.09 crore had been incurred under the scheme during 2016 -17 to  
2023-24.  
Central assistance was transferred to the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) with delay 
(14 days to 251 days), leading to delays in fund disbursement to ULBs. 
Project implementation under various verticals of scheme 
Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) 
During the period of 2015 -16 to 2023-24, out of total sanctioned 75, 164 DUs 
under AHP vertical, 37,067 DUs have been curtailed/surrendered. Out of  
remaining 38,097 DUs, only 23,242 DUs were completed as of April 2025. 
Out of the completed DUs under AHP vertical, 6,888 DUs were allotted to slum 
dwellers while 10,903 DUs meant for slum dwellers were allotted under  
‘Mor Makan Mor Aas’ to non-slum dwellers by revising the eligibility criteria 
without the approval of CSMC. Further, share of State contribution (` 2.50 lakh) 
was also recovered from the  beneficiaries in addition to their contribution of  
` 0.75 lakh per DU under the Mor Makan Mor Aas scheme.  
Audit noticed that against the DUs allotted to slum dwellers, ULB could only  
recover ` 22.13 crore and remaining amount of ` 17.23 crore could not be 
recovered (March 2025). The main reason for non -recovery was absence of  
written consent of beneficiary contribution and non -attachment of eligible  
beneficiaries at the stage of DPR preparation. 
Audit noticed delay in completion of DUs by ULBs under AHP projects and 
consequent blocking of scheme funds of ` 230.05 crore. Delay in completion of 
DUs were mainly due to lack of funds, Covid pandemic and slow progress of  
work. Undue favour extended to contractors due to irregular disbursement and  
non-recovery of mobilisation advance as per the terms of contract. 
Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC) 
Out of total sanctioned 2.77 lakh houses in Beneficiary Led Construction  
(BLC), 66,383 houses were surrendered/curtailed, and out of remaining  
2.11 lakh houses, 1.84 lakh houses were completed as of April 2025. 
Under BLC vertical, there were  some instances of selection of ineligible 
beneficiaries, construction of houses beyond the prescribed lay out, construction 
of shops along with house, sanction of house without own ership of land and 
selling of houses/DU to a third person after construction by beneficiaries. Audit 
noticed that in some cases instalments for various stages of construction were 
released without completion of construction and geo-tagging of respective stage 
while in other cases there was delay in release of final instalment after 
completion of houses. 
 
 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
x 
In Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) 
All the projects under ISSR vertical comprising 5,946 DUs could not be  
implemented and surrendered/curtailed due to lack of private partnership. Thus, 
beneficiaries of slum areas were deprived of scheme benefit due to curtailment 
of projects. 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 
Under CLSS, against the total of 2.49 lakh subsi dy claims submitted by the  
beneficiaries, only 37,374 claims were approved, for which an amount of   
` 820.93 crore was released as subsidy during 2016 -17 to 2022 -23.  
29 beneficiaries availed the double benefits under the CLSS as well as 
BLC/AHP verticals under the scheme. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Audit noticed lapses in the monitoring mechanism of Department regarding 
construction of BLC houses i.e. mismatched and photographs of other 
beneficiaries’ houses used for  geo-tagging of different construction st ages, 
irregular geo-tagging for completion stage of houses found incomplete during 
site inspection etc., delay in appointment of Independent Facilitate Agency 
resulted in delay in conducting social audit. 
Audit noticed that despite the scheme's strong emphasis on empowering women 
through property ownership, a significant number of female members did not 
get the intended benefits as only 50 per cent of houses were sanctioned in the 
name of female beneficiaries during the period 2016-17 to 2023-24, which falls 
short of the scheme’s goals. 
The State Government may 
 Speed up the construction of remaining houses and set a firm deadline 
to complete them so that all intended beneficiaries receive their houses 
without further delay. 
 Ensure timeliness in release of Central and State share and transfer 
of funds to executing agencies/ULBs and beneficiaries for 
construction of houses. 
 Ensure that eligible slum dwellers identified originally get benefitted 
under the scheme by facilitating allotment of house to them on priority 
in ongoing projects. 
 Strengthen the monitoring/control mechanisms to prevent double 
benefits to single beneficiary under two housing schemes or  
two verticals of a scheme. 
 Enforce geo-tagging compliance to ensure proper tracking of housing 
units before releasing funds to intended eligible beneficiaries. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring officials for wrong release of 
assistance before geo-tagging and other irregularities in geo -tagging 
of BLC houses as included under Paragraph no. 2.1.6.4, 2.1.7.4, 
2.1.8.9, 2.1.8.12 and 2.1.9.1. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring official for irregular release and non-
recovery of mobilization advance from the contractor. 

Overview 
xi 
 Increase the numbers of female beneficiaries by 
allocating/sanctioning house in the name of female me mber to meet 
the scheme objective of women empowerment. 
 (Chapter-II) 
Chapter III 
This chapter deals with the findings of Compliance Audit (CA) on  
Implementation of Welfare Schemes by the Labour Department, one Long 
Paragraph on Installation of Solar Pumps by CREDA and one Compliance 
Audit Paragraph pertaining to Public Works Department . Significant results of 
audit that featured in this chapter are summarised below: 
(i) Compliance Audit on Implementation of Welfare Schemes by 
the Labour Department   
The Labour Department of the Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG) is the nodal 
department to ensure protection of workers from the organised as well as 
unorganised sectors, and their economic, physical and social interests through 
enforcement of Labour Acts/Laws made by the Central and State Governments, 
and implementation of worker welfare schemes. Under the Unorganised 
Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008 (UWSSA) of Government of India, 
Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG) constituted (January 2011) the 
“Asangathit Karmkaar Rajya Samajik Suraksha Mandal” (CGAKM) under the 
Labour Department to provide social security to the unorganised workers. The 
CGAKM is implementing welfare schemes to provide social security to workers 
of the unorganised sector.  
On the other hand workers engaged in the various establishments, having 10 or 
more workers, were categorised as organised sector workers. Chhattisgarh  
Shram Kalyan Mandal  (CGSKM) was constituted (February 2001) under the 
provision of the Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam, 1982 to protect 
the interest of the workers, and implement various welfare schemes for the 
sector.  
The Compliance Audit on Implementation of welfare schemes by the Labour 
Department was conducted by examining 10 welfare schemes (seven from 
unorganised sector and three from organised sector) in 10 selected districts 
covering the period from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23. Beneficiary survey of  
506 workers had also been conducted to evaluate the implementation of the 
selected schemes. 
Implementation of welfare schemes for unorganised & organised sector: 
Audit observed that out of allotment of ` 329.41 crore to CGAKM for 
unorganised sector workers, ` 210.75 crore (64 per cent) was spent whereas out 
of available fund of ` 44.86 crore, only ` 21.27 crore was spent by CGSKM.  
In the u norganised Sector, 76.33 lakh workers of Chhattisgarh state were 
registered under e-Shram portal of Government of India (GoI), against which 
only 16.62 lakh (22 per cent) workers were found registered under Chhattisgarh 
labour portal while in the Organised Sector only 2.05 lakh (26 per cent) workers 
against target of 8 lakh had been registered during the period of Audit.  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
xii 
This indicates that Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities 
which are important to create awareness about schemes were not implemented  
effectively. 
It was noticed that expenditure was not incurred consistently under various 
schemes such as marriage assistance, distribution of cycle, sewing machines, 
tools, equipment etc., while in 10 (Assistance for Smart Vending Cart, E-Thela 
Sahayta Yojna, OPD treatment to Safai Karmkar,  OPD treatment to  Contract 
Labour and Hamal Workers, Mukhya Mantri Cycle  Rickshaw, Free 
Baishakhi/Calipers/Hearing Aid distribution, Free Cycle Distribution, Health 
and Eye Test Camp and Free Spectacles Distribution, Accidental Death 
Assistance to  Workers and Sports Competitions for workers) out of total 50 
schemes for  unorganised and organised sector,  no expenditure was incurred 
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23. Further, in 17 schemes, only 12.42 lakh 
workers were benefitted during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, indicating shortfall in 
coverage of registered workers under various schemes. Irregularities in 
the purchase of cycles for cycle distribution scheme was observed as 695 
number of cycles remained undistributed to workers for six years in Raipur 
district. Deficiencies such as delay in release of financial assistance for the 
purchase of e-Rickshaw, non-distribution of cycle purchased for cycle 
distribution schemes, non -providing of necessary equipment and protective 
gears to Safai Karmakar every year, and non -distribution of food regularly at 
various centers in Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojana were 
noticed. 
The Government may ensure: 
 Better utilisation of the funds allotted for the benefit of workers.  
 Fixing the responsibility on erring officials who failed in distribution 
of purchased cycle and other equipment/protective gears/materials etc. 
 Specific measures to register remaining and eligible workers  on IT 
labour portal and to effectively conduct IEC activities to educate and 
create awareness among workers about various government welfare 
schemes and procedure to take advantages of these schemes. 
 A robust IT sub-module in existing labour portal may be made for user 
friendly registration and disbursal of benefits for better 
implementation, transparency and monitoring.  
 (Paragraph 3.1) 
(ii) Long Paragraph on Installation of Solar Pumps through 
Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(CREDA)  
Audit of installation of solar pumps through CREDA was conducted with 
objective to assess whether the installation of solar pumps was done in an  
economical, efficient and timely manner for minor irrigation purpose and supply 
of drinking water in remote, scattered and unelectrified area of the State in 
accordance with the scheme guidelines. The CREDA allowed installation of 
costlier DC solar pumps instead of AC pumps contrary to scheme guidelines 
resulted in extra cost on works pertaining to installation of solar pumps under 
Saur Sujala Yojana (SSY). As per scheme guideline and scope of rate contract, 

Overview 
xiii 
before installation of solar pumps in tube wells , yield testing was to be carried 
out to determine capacity of solar pumps. During 2016 -23, the System 
Integrators (SIs) installed 90,130 solar submersible pumps in tube wells without 
conducting yield test. Moreover, installation of costlier submersible so lar 
pumps in well instead of surface pumps without considering the depth of water 
table in the wells resulted in avoidable extra cost of ` 9.70 crore. During the 
period 2016-21, CREDA did not deduct labour cess towards building and other 
construction workers’ welfare from the bills of SIs. 
 It is recommended that CREDA should frame clear guidelines 
specifying the suitable type and category of solar pumps to be installed 
for respective source of water, and enforce strict adherence to scheme 
guidelines 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
(iii) Audit Paragraph on undue benefit to contractor 
Loss of ` 2.02 crore to the Government due to misclassification of hard rock as 
ordinary rock and excess payment of  ` 1.19 crore to the contractor for 
embankment work. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 

 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

 
1 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) contains 
matters arising from Audit of various Departments of the Government of 
Chhattisgarh conducted with a view to assess whether a given subject matter 
(an activity, financial or non-financial transaction, information in respect of an 
entity or a group of entities) complies in all material respects with applicable 
laws, rules, regulations, established codes etc., and the general principles 
governing sound public financial management.  
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature, significant results of Audit and to enable the Executive to take 
suitable corrective actions, for improved financial management of organisations 
and better governance. 
This chapter explains the planning and coverage of audit, response of 
Departments and Government to audit findings, process of preparation of audit 
reports and follow-up action on previous Audit Reports. 
1.2 Expenditure Profile of the Departments 
A summary of the expenditure incurred against the budget estimate by the major 
departments of Government of Chhattisgarh during the year 2022-23 is given in 
Appendix 1.1 . The t otal Budget Estimates of the departments were  
` 1,13,262.75 crore and Actual Expenditure was ` 1,10,683.20 crore. In Annual 
Audit Plan (AAP) 2023 -24, out of the 40 departments (as mentioned in the 
Appendix 1.1), comprising audit universe of 4987 units, 392 units pertaining to 
39 departments were planned for audit during 2023-24. This report covers result 
of 230 units (including 100 Implementing units for which IRs were issued), 
which were test checked from 12 Apex entities where an expenditure of  
` 6435.81 crore was incurred (5.81 per cent of total expenditure incurred by the 
State). 
1.3 Office of the Accountant General (Audit) 
Under the directions of the CAG, Office of the Accountant General (Audit), 
Chhattisgarh is responsible for conducting audit of 40 Apex departments 1 and 
Local Bodies/ Public Sector Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies thereunder in 
the State of Chhattisgarh. Out of these, 35 departments are covered under 
General, Social and Economic Sectors Audit. 
1.4 Audit Mandate 
The CAG’s authority for audit is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the 
Constitution of India, and CAG's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971 (DPC Act). The CAG audits the departments in General, Social and 
                                                 
1  Including Law and Legislative Department 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
2 
Economic Sectors (GS&ES) of the Government as per the following provisions 
of the CAG’s DPC Act: 
 Audit of expenditure of various Departments is carried out under Section 
13 of the DPC Act; 
 Audit of autonomous bodies is conducted under sections 19(2) 2, 19(3)3 
and 20(1)4 of the DPC Act; 
 In addition, CAG also conducts audit of other autonomous bodies, which 
are substantially funded by the Government under Section 145 of the 
DPC Act. 
Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in the Auditing 
Standards and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, as well as other 
guidelines, manuals and instructions issued by or on behalf of the CAG. 
1.5 Planning and Conduct of audit 
The following flowchart depicts the process of planning, conduct of audit and 
preparation of Audit Reports: 
 
 
  
                                                 
2  Audit of the accounts of Corporations (not being Companies) established by or under law 
made by the Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations.  
3  Audit of accounts of Corporations established by or under la w made by the S tate 
Legislature. 
4  Audit of accounts of any Body or authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the CAG and the Government .  
5  Audit of all (i) receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants 
or loans from Consolidated Fund of State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any  body 
or authority where grants or loans to such body or authority from Consolidated Fund of 
State in a financial year is not less than ` one crore.  

Chapter I: Introduction 
3 
Chart 1.1: Planning, conduct of audit and preparation of Audit Reports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After completion of audit of each unit, an Inspection Report (IR) containing 
audit findings is issued to the Head of the unit with a request to furnish replies 
within four weeks of receipt of the IR. Significant audit observations pointed 
out in these IRs, which require attention at the highest level in Government, are 
issued as draft paragraphs to the Government for their responses, before 
possible inclusion after due consideration of the responses, in the Audit Reports. 
In addition, Compliance Audits on specific themes or topics are also issued to 
the Government for their responses, before possible inclusion in the Audit 
Reports. These Audit Reports are submitted to the Governor of Chhattisgarh 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for causing them to be laid on the 
Table of the State Legislature. 
Assessment of Risk - Planning for audit of entities/schemes/ 
units is based on risk assessment involving certain criteria like; 
 expenditure incurred 
 when last audited  
 criticality/complexity of activities  
 priority accorded for the activity by Government 
 level of delegated financial powers  
 assessment of internal controls 
 concerns of stakeholders 
 
Planning of Audit includes determining  
 Extent and type of Audit - Financial, Compliance and 
Performance Audits  
 Audit objectives, scope and methodology  
 Sample of audit entities and transactions for detailed 
audit 
Inspection Reports are issued based on 
 Scrutiny of records/ data analysis 
 Examination of audit evidence 
 Replies/ Information furnished to Audit enquiries 
 Discussion with the Head of unit/local management 
Audit Report is prepared  
 From the significant audit observations which 
featured in Inspection Reports/ draft Performance 
Audit Reports/Compliance Audit Reports, 
 Considering the response of the Department/  
Government to the audit findings, and  
 Submitted to Governor for causing it to be tabled in 
the State Legislature 
 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
4 
1.5.1 Significant audit observations and response to audit: 
During the year 2023 -24, 230 units were audited and 29 significant au dit 
observations were reported as Part -IIA para through Inspection Reports, 
however, response from Government were not received in any case. Out of these 
29 significant audit findings, 11 significant deficiencies were reported to 
Departments as Factual Sta tements for which responses were received in  
six cases. One Audit paragraph and one Long Paragraph is included in this 
Report.  
One Performance Audit on ‘PA on Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana-Urban in Chhattisgarh’ and one Compliance Audit on ‘Implementation 
of welfare schemes by the Labour Department’ was conducted and included in 
this Report. During the year 2023 -24, 18 Certification Audits were also 
conducted.  
1.6 Response of Departments to audit findings  
1.6.1 Response to previous Inspection Reports 
Heads of Offices are required to respond to the observations contained in IRs 
and take appropriate corrective action. Audit observations communicated in IRs 
are also discussed at periodical intervals in meetings at District/State levels by 
officers of the Accountant General’s office with officers of the concerned 
departments. As of 30 June 2024, 6 ,575 IRs related to General, Social and 
Economic sectors containing 34 ,434 paragraphs pertaining to previous years 
were pending for settlement as detailed in Table 1.1. Of these, first replies have 
not been received in respect of 3,424 IRs (21,071 paragraphs). Department-wise 
details are given in Appendix 1.2. 
Table 1.1: Position of Outstanding Paragraphs (GS&ES) 
Year Number of IRs/Paragraphs 
pending for settlement 
 (as of 30 June 2024) 
IRs/Paragraphs where even first 
replies have not been received  
(as of 30 June 2024) 
IRs Paragraphs IRs Paragraphs 
2018-19& 
earlier years 4690 20528 1868 9654 
2019-20 512 3361 413 2786 
2020-21 238 1790 196 1520 
2021-22 381 2655 322 2260 
2022-23 754 6100 625 4851 
Total 6575 34434 3424 21071 
Lack of action on IRs and audit paragraphs is fraught with the risk of 
perpetuating serious financial irregularities pointed out in these reports. It may 
also result in dilution of internal controls in the governance process, inefficient 
and ineffective delivery of public goods/ services, fraud, corruption and loss to 
public exchequer. The State Government, therefore, needs to institute an 
appropriate mechanism to revi ew and take expeditious action to address the 
concerns flagged in these IRs and audit paragraphs. 
 
  

Chapter I: Introduction 
5 
1.6.2 Response of Government to audit observations 
All departments are required to send their responses to draft Compliance Audit 
paragraphs proposed for inclusion in CAG’s Report within six weeks of their 
receipt. One draft Compliance Audit Report and one draft paragraph included 
in this Report were forwarded to the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of the Departments concerned, drawing their attention to 
the audit findings and requesting them to send their response within six weeks. 
It was brought to their personal attention that these draft Compliance Audit 
Report and draft paragraph were likely to be included in the Audit Report of the 
CAG of India, which would be placed before the State legislature, and it would 
be desirable to include their comments/responses to the audit findings. The 
responses of the Government, wherever received, have been appropriately 
incorporated in the Report. 
1.6.3 Response of Government to audit paragraphs that 
featured in earlier Audit Reports 
Administrative Departments are required to submit Explanatory Notes on Audit 
paragraphs included in Audit Reports, within a period of three months after their 
presentation to State Legislature, duly indicating the action taken or proposed 
to be taken. Explanatory Notes were yet to be received (as of 31 July 2024) from  
40 departments in respect of 324 Paragraphs that featured in the Audit Reports 
for the year up to 2022. 
1.6.4 Response of Government to recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee 
Administrative Departments are required to submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
on recommendations of Public Accounts Committee (PAC) within six months 
from the date of receipt of recommendations. As of 30 June 2024, 122 ATNs in 
respect of 40 departments were yet to be received.  
1.6.5 Records not produced to Audit for scrutiny 
The programme of local audit of different offices was drawn up sufficiently in 
advance and intimations were issued to the departments to enable them to keep 
the relevant records ready for audit scrutiny. 
For the period 2022-23, in 30 auditee units pertaining to Eight Departments, the 
auditee did not provide files, return s, documents, registers and other records 
pertaining to implementation of various schemes as detailed in Appendix 1.3. 
This issue was highlighted in the Inspection Reports and intimated to the 
Secretaries/HODs of the concerned departments. Non -furnishing of records to 
Audit raises red flags as these transactions could not be vouchsafed in audit and 
possibilities of fraud and misappropriation of public money could not be ruled 
out. 
1.7  Acknowledgement  
The Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Chhattisga rh wishes to 
acknowledge the cooperation and assistance extended by the officials of the 
State Government and various other departments during the course of audit. 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 

 
7 
CHAPTER II 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
Urban Administration and Development Department 
 
2.1 Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana -Urban (PMAY -U) in 
Chhattisgarh’ 
 
Executive Summary 
Why this audit? 
Government of India (GoI) launched the scheme, Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana-Housing for All-Urban (PMAY-U) in June 2015. The scheme addresses 
urban housing shortage among the Economic Weaker Section (EWS)/Low 
Income Group (LIG) and Middle-Income Group (MIG) categories including the 
slum dwellers by ensuring a pucca house to all eligible urban households by the 
year 2022. Union cabinet has approved continuation of PMAY -U up to  
31 December 2025 with all the verticals except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme 
(CLSS) vertical. 
A total demand for 5 lakh Dwelling Units (DUs) was projected by  the State 
Government in the approved Housing for All Plan of Action (HFAPOAs) 
prepared for 168 ULBs against which 2.49 lakh DUs (50 per cent of demand) 
were taken up for construction and 2.07 lakh DUs were completed as of  
April 2025.  An expenditure of  ` 5175.09 crore had been incurred under the 
scheme during 2016-17 to 2023-24. 
We conducted this audit with the objective to assess the adequacy of planning 
and execution of projects, and the robustness of beneficiary identification 
system under each vertica l, prudence in Fund management for the scheme, 
along with built -in monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in the scheme to 
successfully achieve its intended goals. 
What we found? 
We noticed that Housing for All Plan of Actions (HFAPOAs) were prepared 
and approved (April 2018 for 36 ULBs and February 2022 for 132 ULBs) by 
State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) with delay of 
three to six years of implementation of t he scheme. Meanwhile, projects under 
AHP/BLC/ISSR verticals were sanctioned by the SLSMC and Central 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) for construction of 1.48 lakh 
DUs without preparation of HFAPOAs, Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) and 
finalisation of beneficiaries list indicating deficient planning. Approval of 
projects without identification and validation of beneficiaries led to curtailment 
of projects later on. During the period of 2015 -16 to 2023 -24, out of total 
sanctioned 75,164 D Us in Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) vertical,  
37,067 DUs (49 per cent) have been curtailed/surrendered. Out of remaining 
38,097 DUs, only 23,242 DUs (61 per cent) were completed as of April 2025. 
Similarly, out of total sanctioned 2.77 lakh hous es in BLC vertical,  
66,383 houses (24 per cent) were surrendered/curtailed, and out of remaining 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
8 
2.11 lakh houses, 1.84 lakh houses (87 per cent ) were completed. All the 
projects under In Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) vertical with 5,946 DUs 
could not be  implemented and surrendered/curtailed due to lack of private 
partnership. Vacant housing stocks available with ULBs under previous 
schemes could not be utilised as the same were not considered during 
preparation of HFAPOA.  
Initial demand survey database of identified beneficiaries attached with 
HFAPOAs and entered in the MIS were not available due to continuous 
updation (addition/deletion) in the original database. Due to which grant of 
scheme benefit to originally identified beneficiaries could not be en sured in 
Audit. 
Due to non -linkage of PMAY -U and PMAY -G MIS, 99 beneficiaries have 
availed benefits in both schemes. Thirty -five beneficiaries who had already 
benefitted under Integrated Housing and Slum Development Program (IHSDP) 
again availed the benefits under BLC vertical of scheme. Central assistance was 
transferred to the SNA with delay, leading to delays in fund disbursement to 
ULB and to beneficiaries and payment to contractors. Audit noticed delay in 
completion of DUs by ULBs under AHP projects an d consequent blocking of 
scheme funds of ` 230.05 crore. Delay in completion of DUs was mainly due 
to lack of funds, covid pandemic and slow progress of work. Undue favour 
extended to contractors due to irregular disbursement and non -recovery of 
mobilisation advance as per the terms of contract.  
Out of the completed DUs under AHP vertical, 6,888 DUs were allotted to slum 
dwellers while 10,903 DUs meant for slum dwellers were allotted under  
‘Mor Makan Mor Aas’ to non-slum dwellers by revising the eligibili ty criteria 
without the approval of CSMC. Further, share of State contribution (` 2.50 lakh) 
was also recovered from the beneficiaries in addition to their contribution of 
` 0.75 lakh per DU under the Mor Makan Mor Aas scheme. All ISSR projects 
comprising 5946 DUs for slum redevelopment were also curtailed. Thus, 
beneficiaries of slum areas under AHP/ISSR vertical were deprived of scheme 
benefit due to curtailment of projects and allotment of house to non -slum 
dwellers. 
Under BLC vertical, there were instances of selection of ineligible beneficiaries, 
construction of houses beyond the prescribed lay out, construction of shops 
along with house, sanction of house without ownership of land and selling of 
houses/DU to a thir d person after construction by beneficiaries. Audit noticed 
that in some cases installments for various stages of construction were released 
without completion of construction and geo -tagging of respective stage while 
in other cases there was delay in release of final instalment after completion of 
houses. Audit noticed lapses in the monitoring of construction of BLC houses 
i.e. mismatched and photographs of other beneficiaries’ houses used for  
geo-tagging of different construction stages, irregular geo -tagging for 
completion stage of houses found incomplete during site inspection, etc. Delay 
in appointment of Independent Facilitate Agency resulted in delay in conducting 
social audit. 
Audit noticed that despite the scheme's strong emphasis on empowering women 
through property ownership, a significant number of female members did not 
get the intended benefits as only 50 per cent of houses were sanctioned in the 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
9 
name of female beneficiaries during the period 2016-17 to 2023-24, which falls 
short of the scheme’s goals. 
What we recommend? 
The State Government may: 
 Speed up the construction of remaining houses and set a firm deadline 
to complete them so that all intended beneficiaries receive their houses 
without further delay. 
 Ensure timeliness in release of Central and State share and transfer 
of funds to executing agencies/ULBs and beneficiaries for 
construction of houses. 
 Ensure that eligible slum dwellers identified originally get benefitted 
under the scheme by facilitating allotment of house to them on priority 
in ongoing projects. 
 Strengthen the monitoring/control mechanisms to prevent double 
benefits to single beneficiary under two housing schemes or two 
verticals of a scheme. 
 Enforce geo-tagging compliance to ensure proper tracking of housing 
units before releasing funds to intended eligible beneficiaries. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring officials for wrong release of 
assistance before geo-tagging and other irregularities in geo -tagging 
of BLC houses as included under Paragraph no. 2.1.6.4, 2.1.7.4, 
2.1.8.9, 2.1.8.12 and 2.1.9.1. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring official for irregular release and non-
recovery of mobilisation advance from the contractor. 
 Increase the numbers of female beneficiaries by 
allocating/sanctioning house in the name of female member to meet 
the scheme objective of women empowerment. 
 
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
10 
 
2.1.1 Introduction 
PMAY-U is a flagship Mission of Government of India (GoI) implemented by 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), was launched on  
25 June 2015. The Mission addresses urban housing shortage among the 
Economic Weaker Section (EWS)/Low Income Group (LIG) and Middle -
Income Group (MIG) categories including the slum dwellers by ensuring a 
pucca house to all eligible urban households by the  year 2022. Union cabinet 
has approved continuation of PMAY -U up to 31  December 2025 with all the 
verticals except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) vertical. 
PMAY-U adopts a demand driven approach wherein the Housing shortage is 
decided based on demand assessment by States/Union Territories. State Level 
Nodal Agencies (SLNAs), Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/Implementing 
Agencies, Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) and Primary Lending Institutions 
are main stakeholders who play an important role in implementation and success 
of PMAY-U. 
The Mission promotes women empowerment by providing the ownership of 
houses in name of female member or joint name. Preference is also given to 
differently abled persons, senior citizens, Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes, 
Other Backwa rd Classes, Minority, single women, transgender and other 
weaker & vulnerable sections of society. PMAY -U house ensures dignified 
living along with sense of security and pride of ownership to the beneficiaries. 
The Mission seeks to address the affordable housing requirement in urban areas 
through following programme verticals as given below:  
 Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) – EWS houses are built with 
Central assistance of ` 1.50 lakh, State support of ` 2.50 lakh and 
` 0.75 lakh from beneficiaries, involving public or private sector. 
 Beneficiary Led individual house Construction (BLC) – Beneficiaries 
get ` 1.50 lakh from the Center, ` 0.85 lakh from the State, and 
contribute ` 0.86 lakh to construct new house or enhancement. 
 In Situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) – Slum housing is redeveloped 
using land as a resource, with Central assistance of ` 1 lakh, beneficiary 
contribution of ` 0.75 lakh and Public Private Partnership (PPP) share 
of ` 3.75 lakh per house. 
 Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) – Home loan interest subsidy of 
6.5, four and three per cent on loan amount of ` 6, 9 and 12 lakh for 
EWS, LIG and MIG-I&II beneficiaries. 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
11 
The Performance Audit of PMAY-U in Chhattisgarh was undertaken to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the scheme in addressing the state's acute housing shortage, 
which was estimated at 4.23 lakh houses as per Census 2011. 
2.1.2  Administration and Implementation Structure 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, MoHUA  is the Apex decision making body of the 
scheme at GoI level. At State level, the Urban Administration and Development 
Department (UADD) is designated for financial and administrative control of 
ULBs. Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG) constituted State Lev el 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) and State Level Appraisal 
Committee (SLAC) under PMAY -U and appointed State Urban Development 
Agency (SUDA) as the State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) for implementation 
of the AHP, BLC and ISSR verticals under t he scheme in which Urban 
Administration and Development Directorate and SUDA monitor the funding 
to the ULBs and other implementing agencies {Chhattisgarh Housing Board 
(CGHB) & Raipur Development Authority (RDA)} and utilisation thereof. At 
Directorate level, Chief Engineer (CE) is assisted by Superintending Engineer 
(SE), Executive Engineer (EE), Assistant Engineer (AE), Sub -Engineer and 
they technically assist ULBs for implementation of projects. At ULB level, the 
Commissioner/Chief Municipal Officer is assisted by SE, EE, AE, Sub -
Engineer, and other staff to discharge their duties for smooth functioning of the 
scheme. The role of various agencies involved in implementation of the scheme 
is illustrated in Chart 2.1 below: 
Chart 2.1: Implementation structure of PMAY-U scheme 
 
 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
12 
2.1.3 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of this Performance Audit are to assess whether, 
 The ‘Housing for All’ projects were meticulously planned and executed 
with due diligence to ensure comprehensive implementation. 
 The beneficiary identification system under each vertical was robust, 
effective, and guarantees the inclusion of all eligible individuals while 
preventing the inclusion of non-eligible beneficiaries. 
 Fund management for the scheme followed established guidelines and 
policies, ensuring optimal efficiency and effectiveness. 
 The scheme incorporates necessary administrative and regulatory 
measures, along with built-in monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, to 
successfully achieve its intended goals. 
2.1.4 Audit Criteria 
The Per formance Audit findings were benchmarked against the following 
criteria: 
 PMAY-U Scheme guidelines issued by MoHUA, GoI 
 Advisory on geo-tagging of BLC issued by MoHUA 
 PMAY Management Information System (MIS) User Manual, 2016 
 Social Audit Guidelines 2017 issued by MoHUA 
 Best practices and orders, notifications, circulars, and instructions issued 
by the State Government and MoHUA from time to time. 
2.1.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covered implementation of  PMAY-U scheme in  
Chhattisgarh during 2015-24. It involved examination of records in Secretariat, 
UADD, SUDA, 26 ULBs (six 1 Municipal Corporations, nine 2 Municipal 
Councils and 11 3 Municipal Panchayats) sampled by  adopting multistage 
stratified sampling by taking the number of houses sanctioned and expenditure 
incurred under PMAY-U along with other implementing agencies i.e. RDA and 
CGHB as detailed Appendix 2.1.1. Further, out of total 38 AHP and 388 BLC 
projects approved in selected 26 ULBs, 17 AHP and 128 BLC projects  
{30 per cent  projects of AHP (minimum two) & BLC verticals selected by 
Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR)}  have been 
selected respectively of which five beneficiaries from each selected project were 
selected on random basis during field visit for detailed scrutiny and joint 
physical verification/interaction with beneficiary. 
The methodology of this Performance Audit included analysis of procedures, 
use of  existing data, quantitative analysis at directorate and ULB level and 
                                                                 
1 Ambikapur, Bhilai, Bilaspur, Jagdalpur, Korba and Raipur  
2 Arang, Bijapur, Gariyaband, Jamul, Katghora, Khairagarh, Saragarh, Surajpur and 
Takhatpur 
3 Abhanpur, Bastar, Bhatgaon, Chhurikala, Dhamdha, Fingeshwar, Gandai, Geedam, Kota, 
Premnagar and Sitapur 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
13 
beneficiary interaction/survey -cum-joint physical verification at ULB and 
implementing agencies level. 
We conducted an Entry Conference on 14  August 2023 with the Special 
Secretary, UADD in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and 
criteria were shared. Draft Performance Audit Report was forwarded to the 
State Government (08 November 2024) and an Exit conference with the 
Secretary, GoCG, UADD was held on 07 May 2025. The replies of the State 
Government had been suitably incorporated in the Report.  
Audit findings  
 
2.1.6 Identification and Selection of Beneficiaries 
As per para 8.3 of PMAY -U guidelines, States/Cities must conduct demand 
surveys to assess housing needs, excluding temporary migrants from the 
beneficiary list. The Housing for All Plan of Action (HFAPOA) should outline 
the housing demand of eligible benef iciaries and selected interventions. 
Additionally, existing affordable housing stock in the city must be considered 
while preparing HFAPOAs.  
Para 8.5 of PMAY-U guidelines stipulates that based on HFAPOA, States/Cities 
will subsequently prepare the Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) dividing the 
task up to 2022 in view of the availability of resources and priority. 
Further, as per para 8.8 to 8.10 the HFAPOA and AIPs should be submitted to 
the Ministry after approval of SLSMC, HFAPOA should be reviewed on a  
yearly basis to make changes in view of implementation of AIP in the preceding 
years and based on HFAPOA and availability of resources, each city will 
prepare Detailed Project Report (DPRs) under each vertical of the Mission 
(except CLSS) duly approved by SLSMC.  
The various implementation stages of PMAY -U scheme are illustrated in the 
Chart 2.2 and Chart 2.3 given below: 
 
 
 
 
 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
14 
Chart 2.3: Process flow chart for selection of beneficiaries under PMAY-U 
 
2.1.6.1 Demand Survey for identification of beneficiaries and 
preparation of Housing for All-Plan of Action (HFAPOA) 
CSMC in its 8th meeting directed (April 2016) all State/UT to complete demand 
survey and preparation of HFAPOA by June 2016. 
2.1.6.1(a) Delay in issue of RFP and preparation of HFAPOA 
During scrutiny of records in test checked ULBs and SUDA,  Audit noticed 
delay in issue of Request for Proposal (RFP)  by SUDA for award of work of 
preparation of HFAPOA after conducting demand assessment survey. 
Further, during 2016 -17, three RFPs for prep aration of HFAPOA after 
conducting demand assessment survey were issued in February 2016, May 2016 
and September 2016 and work orders were issued to selected three agencies in 
August 2016, November 2016  and March 2017 for 17 ULBs, 11 ULBs and  
eight ULBs respectively. None of the agencies completed the assigned work 
within the prescribed time of four months . For remaining 132 ULBs, RFP was 
issued in March 2018 after a gap of 18 months and the work order was issued 
by SUDA in January 2019 for 132 ULBs.  
Agencies submitted the HFAPOA & AIP for 36 and 132 ULBs in March 2018 
and March 2021 which were approved by SLSMC in April 2018 and February 
2022 and CSMC in August 2020 and February 2022  respectively. However, 
1,259 projects were approved before preparation of HFAPOAs and finalization 
of list of beneficiaries as shown in Table 2.1.1 below: 
 
 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
15 
Table 2.1.1: Details of approval of projects without preparation of HFAPOA  
Name of 
component 
No. of ULBs  Number 
of 
projects 
Numbers 
of DUs 
Date of 
approval of  
projects by 
CSMC 
work of survey 
and HFAPOA 
awarded 
(completed) 
Date of 
approval of 
HFAPOA 
by CSMC  
AHP 13 58 43543 27-10-2015 
to 27-02-
2018 
August 2016 to 
March 2017 
(March 2018) 
August 2020 
BLC 161 1193 98017 20-12-2016 
to 07-08-
2020 
August 2016 to 
January 2019 
(March 2021) 
August 2020 
and February 
2022 
ISSR 05 08 5946 20-12-2016 
to 27-09-
2017 
August 2016 to 
March 2017 
(March 2018) 
August 2020 
Total  1259 147506    
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records of SUDA) 
Thus, it can be seen that there was delay in issue of RFP and finalisation of 
proposals by SUDA as well as delay in preparation and approval of HFAPOAs 
under the PMAY -U. Due to which implementation of 1,259 projects for 
1,47,506 DUs under PMAY-U was carried out without preparing Plan of Action 
as prescribed in the guidelines. During test check of records, Audit observed 
that DPRs of above projects were submitted for approval of CSMC either 
without attaching the list of beneficiaries or attaching the probabl e list of 
beneficiaries without verification/validation of beneficiary data. 
Implementation of projects, without Plan of Acton and identification of 
beneficiaries resulted in gaps in linking/selection of beneficiaries and 
curtailment of projects as discussed in succeeding paras. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that during the period when the 
HFAPOAs were being prepared and submitted to the GoI, the Central 
Government has already started sanctioning of AHP/BLC houses by instructing 
the states to prepare proposals from the MIS Demand Base readily available in 
the MIS. In parallel to the operations above, during the preparation of HFAPOA 
the DPRs were sanctioned by GoI for which entries of probable beneficiaries in 
survey data/attachment/curtailment and all such activities were being carried 
out in PMAY-U MIS portal. The GoI didn’t approve the HFAPOAs priority else 
would have stopped the sanctions, neither any sanctions were discussed in the 
CSMCs against the HFAPOA date of the State. The second lot of HFAPOA of 
the State were approved by CSMC in February 2022. The State has acted on the 
directives issued by the GoI. 
The reply confirms that DPRs were prepared and submitted for approval without 
identifying the eligible beneficiaries as well as bef ore completion of demand 
survey and preparation of HFAPOA. Reply of the Government regarding 
approval of DPR is not acceptable as according to the PMAY -U guidelines, 
based on HFAPOA and availability of resources, DPRs were to be prepared by 
the State Government. 
 
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
16 
2.1.6.1(b) Deficiency in demand survey and mismatch with database 
in PMAY-U MIS portal 
According to PMAY-U guidelines, States and cities were required to conduct 
demand surveys to assess housing needs. Based on these surveys, they were to 
prepare HFAPOA, which contains the demand for housing by eligible 
beneficiaries and proposed interventions.  It further states that allotment of 
houses to identified eligible beneficiaries in AHP projects should be made 
following a transparent procedure as approve d by SLSMC and beneficiaries 
selected should be part of HFAPOA. 
Audit observed inconsistencies between surveyed beneficiary data included in 
the approved HFAPOAs and the entries of surveyed beneficiaries made in the 
MIS database of ULBs in the PMAY -U porta l. HFAPOAs recorded a total 
demand of 5,00,075 i.e. 3,48,640 and 1,51,435 in 36 ULBs and 132 ULBs 
respectively. However, as per MIS database as on December 2024, entries for 
5,67,066 beneficiaries were made under surveyed  list. Thus, additional entries 
for 66,991 beneficiaries were made in MIS  that were not part of list of 
beneficiaries identified during demand survey and included in HFAPOAs.  
Audit further noticed that removal of beneficiaries as well as the addition of 
new applicants based on proposals of curtailment/new projects submitted to the 
CSMC, led to continuous modifications in the original survey database on the 
MIS portal. As a resu lt, the original list of surveyed beneficiaries initially 
entered in the MIS portal could not be traced, making it difficult for Audit to 
verify whether benefits were provided to originally identified beneficiaries. This 
indicates deficiencies in identific ation and selection of beneficiaries. Further 
scrutiny revealed that out of additional entries made in the MIS portal after 
approval of HFAPOAs (February 2022) benefits have been provided to 38,345 
beneficiaries (AHP-3,588 and BLC-34,757) in contravention to the provision of 
scheme guideline as the benefits were to be provided to only surveyed 
beneficiaries included in approved HFAPOAs.   
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the GoI  approved the HFAPOA 
for any particular city/ULB based on the real time survey database of the 
PMAY-U MIS portal as on the date of CSMC. Therefore, the survey data of the 
HFAPOA report once approved was uploaded on the PMAY -U MIS Portal on 
a real time basis. In parallel to the operations above, during the preparation of 
HFAPOA the DPRs were sanctioned by GoI for which entries of probable 
beneficiaries in survey data / attachment/curtailment and all such activities were 
being carried out in PMAY-U MIS portal. Therefore, if looked upon today, the 
data cannot be traced retrospectively, since a lot of transformation has been 
carried out during the original mission period. Further, all the valid beneficiaries 
entered in the MIS Portal, interested in availing benefits of PMAY-U and whose 
proposals were duly forwarded by the ULBs have been provided with the 
benefits of PMAY -U, which includes the beneficiaries from the Demand 
Assessment Survey.  
Reply is not acceptable as addition in the list of beneficiaries in MIS beyond the 
beneficiaries identified after conducting demand survey included in HFAPOA 
highlights a critical gap in survey data, selection of beneficiaries and tracking 
of benefits to originally identified beneficiaries during survey under PMAY-U. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
17 
2.1.6.1(c) Curtailment of projects sanctioned under PMAY-U 
Audit noticed that total demand of 5 lakh DUs for beneficiaries was projected 
in approved HFAPOAs of Chhattisgarh on the basis of demand survey 
conducted in 168 ULBs. Against the total demand, 3.58 lakh DUs , were 
originally sanctioned of which 1.09 lakh DUs were curtailed and 2.49 lakh DUs 
i.e. 50 per cent of total projected demand were taken up for construction by the 
Chhattisgarh Government under PMAY-U resulting in unsaturated demand. 
(i) Curtailment of AHP projects 
During scrutiny of record of proposals submitted by the State Government for 
approval of AHP projects in CSMC and minutes of meetings, Audit noticed that 
out of 97 sanctioned projects for construction of 58,038 houses to be executed 
by 16 ULBs during the period 2016-19, 38 not started projects of 26,982 houses 
had been curtailed till April 2025. Of these eight projects of 12,817 houses were 
sanctioned before the preparation of HFAPOA. The curtailment was done due 
to non-availability of land, beneficiaries availed the benefits under CLSS and 
beneficiaries not interested to move/shift at the locations of these projects and 
allotment of land patta by the State Government to slum dwellers. 
Similarly, out of 14 sanctioned projects for construction of 13,017 to be 
executed by CGHB during the period 2015 -17, 10,085 houses of six projects 
had been curtailed  in 38th and 54th CSMC due to insufficient registration and 
demand as well as absence of valid beneficiaries for the allot ment. Further, all 
14 projects of 13,017 houses were sanctioned before preparation of HFAPOA.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that  the State after the directives of 
CSMC, thoroughly reviewed the non-started houses in the AHP vertical across 
various cities. The cities submitted proposals to the State for curtailment of not-
started houses, since identification of the beneficiaries for houses being 
constructed was already a challenging task. In such scenario again constructing 
new houses might create v acant housing stocks. The beneficiaries identified 
during the Demand Assessment survey under the identified slum areas had 
started withdrawing their consent to relocate from slum to the AHP sites. 
Therefore, the State Government has proposed curtailment of  AHP houses to 
avoid the creation of vacant house stock. 
The reply is not acceptable as approval of projects without finalisation of list of 
beneficiaries and availability of resources resulted in cancellation of AHP 
projects. 
(ii)  Curtailment of BLC projects 
Audit noticed that out of total sanction of 1,960 projects for construction of  
2.77 lakh BLC houses during the period 2016 -24, 66,383 houses have been 
curtailed till April 2025 for beneficiaries have sold their land, already benefitted 
in earlier GoI schemes, unwillingness due to financial burden, migrated, annual 
family income more than ` 3.00 lakh, land dispute, land located under high 
tension line, death of beneficiaries etc. 
Thus, curtailment/surrender of projects indicates deficient planning in taking up 
housing projects under AHP and BLC and selection of ineligible beneficiaries 
and their entries in MIS portal. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
18 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the curtailment of houses in BLC 
were basically due to non-submission of land documents by the beneficiaries or 
their dissent to start the construction even after 2 to 7 years of sanction from 
GoI. Therefore, the State Government has proposed curtailment of non -started 
houses under the directives of CSMC and cleaned up the sanction of invalid 
beneficiaries. 
The reply is not acceptable as the cancellation of BLC houses highlights poor 
beneficiary validation and planning before sanctioning of projects. 
(iii)  Curtailment of ISSR projects 
In-situ slum rehabilitation using land as a resource with private participation for 
providing houses to eligible slum dwellers is an important component of the 
“Pradhan Mantri Awas Y ojana–Housing for All (Urban)” mission. This 
approach aims to leverage the locked potential of land under slums to provide 
houses to the eligible slum dwellers bringing them into the formal urban 
settlement. 
Central assistance of ` one lakh per house is admissible for all houses built for 
eligible slum dwellers under the component of In -Situ Slum Redevelopment 
(ISSR). After redevelopment, de-notification of slums by State/UT Government 
is to be recommended under the guidelines. Flexibility is given to States/Cities 
to deploy this Central assistance for other slums being redeveloped.  
Ten ISSR projects for construction of 6,671 DUs were sanctioned by CSMC for 
five Municipal Corporations during the year 2016 -17 and 2017-18 as detailed 
in Table 2.1.2. 
Table 2.1.2: Details of sanction and release of Central assistance under PMAY-U for 
ISSR projects 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Project name  No. of 
units 
approved 
Sanctioned 
Central 
assistance at 
the rate of  
` one lakh 
per house 
Central 
assistance 
released   
(A) Projects approved in 17th CSMC meeting (December 2016) 
1 Bilaspur Mittitila Vishnu Nagar 232 232.00 0.00  
2 Bilaspur Minimata Talapara 493 493.00 0.00  
(B) Projects approved in 21st CSMC meeting (April 2017) 
3 Raipur Tikrapara and Amapara 484 484.00 187.00  
4 Raipur Daganiya 592 592.00 50.00  
5 Korba Kuwanbhatta 161 161.00 64.00  
6 Rajnandgaon Dabripara 300 300.00 120.00  
(C) Projects approved in 26th CSMC meeting (September 2017) 
7 Bhilai Ghasidas Nagar 1680 1680.00 0.00  
8 Bhilai Ruvabandha 1176 1176.00 0.00  
9 Bhilai Indranagar Model town 616 616.00 0.00  
10 Korba Sitamani Basti 937 937.00 0.00  
  Total   6,671 6,671.00 421.00  
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records)  
(*Included two projects with 725 DUs in Bilaspur which were converted under AHP vertical in 
April 2018) 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
19 
CSMC in its 17 th meeting (December 2016) while sanctioning the projects, 
directed the State Government to prepare a backup plan for ISSR projects in 
case private developers are not willing/ava ilable. Audit noticed that State 
Government has submitted the proposal of surrender of 59464 houses in 10 ISSR 
projects which was approved by CSMC in its 51 st and 72 nd meeting held in 
August 2020 and April 2025 respectively. 
While approving the proposal, the CSMC noted that verification of data was not 
done before preparation of DPRs for these projects. CSMC directed the State 
Government to ensure that no eligible beneficiary is deprived of benefit under 
the scheme due to dropping of these beneficiaries. ISSR projects were to provide 
dignified living conditions to slum -dwellers after development of slums, 
therefore projects under ISSR vertical should not be cancelled. 
The State Government while submitting proposal for curtailment proposed to 
provide patta to  eligible slum dwellers and providing houses under AHP for 
slum dwellers. Audit noticed that, out of the total eligible beneficiaries in  
eight ISSR projects, only 696 beneficiaries from Minimata in Bilaspur were 
given land pattas, leaving 5975 (6671 -696) eligible beneficiaries without any 
benefits. Thus, intended purpose of development of slum could not be achieved. 
Audit noticed that for preparation of DPRs for the eight surrendered ISSR fee 
of ` 1.44 crore was payable to various agencies against which payment of  
` 1.25 crore was made by SUDA during 2017-18. Due to surrender/cancellation 
of ISSR projects, expenditure incurred on preparation of DPRs remained 
unfruitful. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that ULBs who issued tender did not 
receive bid. The Government notification (September 2019) regarding issue of 
land patta in slum area demotivated the entire process of relocation and in turn 
increase the tendency of interest toward BLC vertical. The State proposed the 
conversion of 725 DUs in 02 ISS R projects of Bilaspur into AHP projects 
primarily due to non -availability of bidders, which may be considered as a 
backup plan of the State. The State had a due diligence of all the back -up plan 
available at that instant and keeping in mind the available AHP houses and BLC 
houses, it was proposed not to increase the EWS housing stocks and proceed for 
curtailment of ISSR projects. Hence the curtailment of eight ISSR projects was 
done after thorough analysis and due diligence with all the available analytics. 
The reply confirms that ISSR projects were initiated without proper planning 
after consulting the stakeholders, identification and validation of beneficiaries 
which resulted in curtailment of these projects. 
2.1.6.2 Non-inclusion of existing vacant affordable housing stock in 
HFAPOA 
As per the guidelines , while preparing HFAPOA, State/UT and Implementing 
Agencies should also consider the affordable housing stock already available in 
the city as Census data suggests that large number of houses built under earlier 
schemes are vacant. 
                                                                 
4  In 51st CSMC-5946 DUs (6671-725) 725 DUs were converted under AHP and curtailed in 
71st CSMC meeting in April 2025. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
20 
During the review of the HFAPOA that was prepared and approved by SLSMC 
and CSMC, along with the information provided to the audit by the Municipal 
Corporation of Bhilai and Bilaspur regarding the availability of housing stocks 
in these two ULBs, it was noticed that vacant housing stocks present under 
earlier scheme such as IHSDP, BOMBAY Awas and Atal Awas etc. in these 
ULBs (Bilaspur-1000, Bhilai-1828) at the time of preparation of the HFAPOA. 
However, the availability of existing vacant housing stock was not considered 
while preparing HFAPOA. 
As a result, the available vacant housing stocks with ULBs were not taken into 
account while assessing the requirement of housing stock in HFAPOA and 
therefore, could not be utilised under the AHP vertical of PMAY-U. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that  the affordable housing stock 
already available with ULBs sanctioned through State parastatal housing 
agencies or houses sanctioned under previous housing schemes have been 
included in the HFAPOA report. Further, Demand Assessment for the city has 
been done keeping in view, the decadal urban population growth, demand-based 
needs for affordable housing and the Mission period of the PMAY -U, till  
December 2022. Although if existing housing stocks were to be accounted for, 
the ULBs still submitted their demands optimistically to cater the futuristic 
demands of affordable housing in the city. It is through this anticipation that the 
Houses being constructed across the cities are readily  available to the 
beneficiaries, even in the year 2024-25. 
The reply is not acceptable as neither the vacant housing stock considered in 
HFAPOA nor the details of allotment against the vacant housing stock had been 
provided in support of reply. 
2.1.6.3 Selection of ineligible beneficiaries having income more 
than ` 3.00 lakh 
As per Paragraph 3 of PMAY-U guidelines, beneficiaries having annual income 
less than ` 3.00 lakh of EWS categories only, can avail benefits under AHP and 
BLC verticals. 
Audit observed in four ULBs (Municipal Corporation Bilaspur, Raipur, Korba 
and Municipal Panchayat, Premnagar) that 71 beneficiaries whose income was 
more than ` 3.00 lakh were selected and were allotted houses/DUs under 
BLC/AHP verticals as detailed in Appendix 2.1.2. 
Further analysis revealed that 575 out of these 71 beneficiaries were serving staff 
officials in ULBs /Government departments having annual income more than 
` 3 lakh availed the benefits of the scheme under EWS by submitting false 
declarations of annual gross income of their households. It is pertinent to be 
noted that even being aware of this fact, the ULBs ignored the same and 
extended undue benefits to ineligible beneficiaries. 
The State Government sated (May 2025) that  the benefits have not  been 
provided to the beneficiaries of Municipal Corporation, Korba and proposed 
beneficiaries shall be removed from the MIS through Beneficiary Modification 
Request duly approved by the State Government in the upcoming SLSMC. In 
Municipal Corporation Bila spur, the beneficiary has been allotted the house 
                                                                 
5  ULB staff/officials-56 and in one case wife of ULB staff 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
21 
under the PMAY -U Scheme, based on the income certificate issued by 
Tehsildar, Bilaspur Tehsil, which declared the annual income of the beneficiary 
to be ` 2.80 lakh per annum. In Municipal Corporation Raipu r, beneficiaries 
resided in the Sweeper colony, Tikrapara, Raipur, which was constructed 
around 70 years before. The condition of the housing infrastructure was severely 
deteriorated and to prevent loss of any life/property, the Corporation decided to 
relocate these beneficiaries of LIG category along -with other beneficiaries of 
EWS category before the Start of Monsoon Rains. As they did not have any 
housing stock reserved/vacant for LIG/Transit category for these beneficiaries, 
the decision was taken based  on the circumstances created in relocating the 
beneficiaries of sweeper colony and the inclusive nature of the project. Further, 
in Municipal Panchayat  Premnagar three beneficiaries availed the benefit by 
submitting false affidavits for which notices had been issued and recovery is 
being done. 
The reply confirms that beneficiaries not fulfilling the income criteria had been 
benefitted under AHP/BLC vertical in contravention of the scheme guidelines. 
2.1.6.4 Selection of beneficiary already having pucca house 
 
In Municipal Council, Takhatpur, a BLC house was sanctioned in favour of a 
beneficiary (ID -0322801973609953938) and after completion, financial 
assistance of ` 2.26 lakh was paid. 
On joint physical verification (February 2024) of BLC houses along with the 
officials of Municipal Council, PMC and CLTC, it was found that beneficiary 
already had a Pucca house with commercial shops adjoining to new PMAY -U 
house. Further, the house under BLC was constructed in three floors beyond 
the approved layout as shown below. 
  
(Photos taken during JPV of Beneficiary ID-0322801973609953938) 
Further, geo-tag of actual work site was not uploaded in PMAY -U BHUVAN 
portal, and a photograph of another house was uploaded which was approved. 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
22 
 
(Geo-tagged Photos of Beneficiary ID-0322801973609953938) 
Similarly, in Municipal Corporation, Raipur it was observed that a BLC house 
was sanctioned in favour of beneficiary (ID -228020340667800959) and after 
completion (May 2020), financial assistance of ` 2.26 lakh was paid. 
Audit noticed that house under BLC was sanctioned to the beneficiary in 
February 2019 and building permission for the same was issued in  
September 2019. The beneficiary has sub mitted the self -declaration in  
June 2019 that she has no Pucca house anywhere in India. Further scrutiny of 
records revealed that on 5 th October 2019, the beneficiary submitted an 
affidavit stating that beneficiary has a Pucca house constructed on  
1470 Square feet of  land and Kachcha house in 630 square feet land in her 
name at Ward -28, Maharshi Valmiki Ward, Raipur and she has given her 
Pucca house (constructed in 1470 Sqft.) to her three sons through a family 
settlement agreement (5 October 2019) to ava il benefit under BLC on the 
remaining land of 630 Sqft in her name. Scrutiny also revealed that beneficiary 
has not submitted any evidence of transfer other than notarised family 
settlement agreement of h ouse/property in the name of her  three sons and the 
Ration Card of beneficiary attached with application included the name of all 
three sons as her family members.  
Thus, proper verification of application/documents was not done for exclusion 
of ineligible beneficiaries having pucca house at the time of sanc tion and 
attachment of house under BLC vertical.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the Architect is solely 
responsible for the mistake in Municipal Council Takhatpur. The ULB has also 
admitted that the Architect has uploaded fake geo-tagged images in the Bhuvan 
Portal. Further, in Municipal Corporation Raipur, the beneficiary and her three 
sons were residing the Aabadi Land, namely Rakba 630 sqft. and Rakba  
1470 sqft. The beneficiary has submitted internal mutual bantwaranama deed, 
which st ates that the Aabadi Land of 630 sqft. has been allotted to the 
beneficiary Smt. Parvati Narang. The ULB has stated that since beneficiary was 
residing in the Kuchha house over the Aabadi Land before the cut -off-date, 
hence the sanction of BLC houses accorded. 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
23 
The reply is not acceptable as ULB on the basis of self -declaration without 
validating the beneficiary data sanctioned house to beneficiary already having 
pucca house.  
2.1.6.5 Irregular sanction of House to beneficiary without 
obtaining the document for ownership of plot/land in the 
name of beneficiaries 
As per UADD guidelines issued in September 2016, people who own private 
or permanently leased land, or have built houses (Kutcha/Semi-Pucca) on such 
land and were living in the municipal area before 31st August 2015, can apply 
for this scheme. Additionally, according to State Government instructions  
(29 May 2017), upon submission of a notarized family partition letter as per the 
Rules by all heirs of the same family residing jointly, the benefits of the scheme 
will be provided to each eligible member of the family for separate house. 
However, before commencing construction, it will be mandatory for the 
beneficiaries to complete the process of transferring the plot into their name and 
submit the necessary documentation. 
During scrutiny of records in test checked ULBs, audit observed that the 
construction work was started by 250 beneficiaries without submitting the 
documents of transfer of plot in their name. Further, scrutiny revealed that  
ULBs paid assistance of ` 4.05 crore to 250 beneficiaries without ensuring the 
transfer of land in the name of beneficiaries.  
It is evident from the facts that building permission to start the work was issued 
to beneficiaries without obtaining required document in contravention to the 
Government instruction issued in this regard. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that notices were issued for 
submission of documents of transfer of land in the name of beneficiaries. 
Further, in some cases, letters have also been sent to the Tehsildar for the 
transfer of land ownership to the ben eficiaries, which is still pending. 
Consequently, the payment of final assistance could not be disbursed. 
Reply indicates that eligibility conditions prescribed in the guidelines were not 
complied while sanctioning house to beneficiaries. 
2.1.6.6 Duplication of beneficiaries under PMAY -U and  
PMAY-G schemes under BLC vertical  
Para 2.1 of PMAY -U Guidelines stipulate that the MIS linkage between 
Department of Panchayat and Rural Development (P&RD) for PMAY -G and 
MoHUA for PMAY-U would be done to avoid duplication of beneficiaries. 
During analysis and scrutiny of online PMAY -U MIS database of all ULBs,  
99 cases were noticed in 42 ULBs where beneficiaries have availed the benefits 
under BLC vertical of both the schemes i.e. PMAY-U and PMAY-G due to non-
linkage of MIS database between PMAY -U and PMAY -G and absence of 
mechanism in the Department of Panchayat & Rural Development and Urban 
Administration and Development for sharing of database to avoid duplication 
of beneficiaries. Of these, 52 beneficiarie s had completed their houses under 
both PMAY-U and PMAY-G scheme, and in remaining 47 cases, the work was 
completed in one scheme and progress in another scheme as detailed in 
Appendix 2.1.3. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
24 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the MIS Portal of PMAY-U under 
report section has a segment named “Gramin Report” for which GoI dumps data 
of duplication between PMAY-G and PMAY-U periodically, but not regularly 
and no such separate identified notification for such dumping of data is received 
in the portal. This signifies that duplicate data is to be checked retrospectively 
after the data is dumped by GoI in the Gramin Report. Further, the PMAY -U 
MIS portal has no real time provision to avail the data regarding intimation of 
duplicity between PMAY-G and PMAY-U. The retrospective dumped data by 
GoI provides limited information regarding duplicity in sanction of houses 
between PMAY-G and PMAY -U and has no consideration regarding waiting 
list of PMAY -G. A letter has been sent to Panchayat and Rural Development  
Department for confirmation. The subordinate official was instructed that once 
duplicity under both schemes is confirmed, the beneficiary must be given the 
choice to avail benefits under only one scheme, as claiming under both is not 
permitted. 
The reply is not acceptable as no efforts had been made by the Department for 
sharing of database/ list of beneficiaries for verification to avoid duplication of 
beneficiary which resulted in double benefits to beneficiaries under PMAY -U 
and PMAY-G. 
2.1.6.7 Irregular attachment of beneficiaries in BLC vertical 
after making allotment of houses of IHSDP 
As per para 1.3 of guidelines, a beneficiary family will comprise husband, wife, 
unmarried sons and/or unmarried daughters. The beneficiary family should not 
own a pucca house (an all -weather dwelling unit) either in his/ her name or in 
the name of any member of his/her family in any part of India. 
During scrutiny of the records in Municipal Council, Khairagarh, it was 
observed that 492 houses under IHSDP were constr ucted (2016) to shift the 
identified beneficiaries of six different wards. Allotment of all 492 houses has 
been done by ULB till April 2019. 
Further, on scrutiny of records of houses sanctioned under BLC vertical and 
cross verification from MIS database an d allotment made to the beneficiaries 
under IHSDP, Audit found that the benefits under BLC vertical were provided 
to 35 beneficiaries to whom houses have already been allotted under IHSDP as 
detailed in Appendix 2.1.4. Financial assistance of ` 72.14 lakh was provided 
to these beneficiaries under PMAY-U. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the relevant beneficiaries, who 
were allotted houses under IHSDP had previously submitted written application 
in the ULB for cancellation of the houses sanctioned under IHSDP scheme due 
to various personal reasons. It was further stated that the beneficiaries were 
sanctioned houses under BLC component only after their application for 
cancellation of IHSDP houses allotted to them previously. It was also stated that 
the IHSDP houses were not occupied by these beneficiaries. 
The reply is not acceptable as house sanctioned under IHSDP were not 
cancelled and undue benefit was extended to the beneficiaries under PMAY-U 
even though a Pucca house was allotted under IHSDP. 
  

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
25 
2.1.7 Fund released under the scheme 
The GoI, under the PMAY-U, distributes funds to States and UTs based on an 
assessment of factors such as population, existing slums, and other criteria 
outlined by the MoHUA . The disbursement occurs in three installments:  
40 per cent, followed by another 40 per cent, and then 20 per cent. The second 
installment is to be released once 70 per cent of the first installment has been 
utilized. Similarly, the final 20 per cent depends on the utilization of 70 per cent 
of the previously allocated funds as well as the completion of housing and 
infrastructure projects. 
The fund sharing of the cost of each dwelling unit under different verticals of 
the scheme is shown in Table 2.1.3. 
Table 2.1.3: Details of fund sharing of the cost of each dwelling unit under 
PMAY-U 
(` In Lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Verticals GoI 
Share 
GoCG 
Share 
Beneficiary 
Share 
PPP 
Share 
Cost of each 
Dwelling Unit 
(excluding cost 
of land) 
1 In-Situ Slum 
Redevelopment (ISSR) 
1.00 0.00 0.75 3.75 5.50 
2 Affordable Housing in 
Partnership (AHP) 
1.50 2.50 0.75 NA 4.75 
3 Beneficiary Led 
Construction (BLC (N/E)) 
1.50 0.85 0.86 NA 3.21 
(Source: Information taken from details submitted by SUDA to CSMC)  
Credit Link Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) is the fourth vertical of PMAY-U and this 
is to be implemented by Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs). Funding pattern 
for CLSS vertical is as given in Table 2.1.4. 
Table 2.1.4: Details of funding pattern of CLSS Scheme  
Particulars EWS LIG MIG-I MIG-II 
Scheme Duration  17/06/15 to 31/03/22 01/01/17 to 31/03/21 
Household Income ( ` per 
annum)  
Upto 
3,00,000/- 
3,00,001/- to 
6,00,000/- 
6,00,001/- to 
12,00,000/- 
12,00,001/- to 
18,00,000/- 
Interest Subsidy ( per cent/ 
annum)  
6.50 4.00 3.00 
Maximum loan tenure (in years)  20 Years 
Eligible Housing Loan Amount 
for Interest Subsidy (`)  
6,00,000/- 9,00,000/- 12,00,000/- 
Dwelling Unit Carpet Area  Upto 30# Sq.m Upto 60# Sq.m Upto 160 sq.m Upto 200 sq.m 
Discount Rate for Net Present 
Value calculation of interest 
subsidy (per cent)  
9 
(Source: Information compiled from scheme guidelines) 
# The beneficiary, at his/her discretion, can build a house of larger area but interest subvention 
would be limited to first ` 6.00 lakh only. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
26 
Apart from sharing the cost of dwelling units, the GoI also shares the  
100 per cent expenses towards Capacity building, Social audit, Geo -tagging, 
Information Education & Communication and Administration and office 
expenses. Further, GoI shares 75 per cent expenses for preparation of House for 
All-Plan of Action, appointment of Third -party quality monitoring agency and 
experts at State and District level technical cell. 
Year-wise receipt and expenditure incurred thereon are as detailed in  
Table 2.1.5. 
Table 2.1.5: Details of year-wise receipt and expenditure incurred under  
PMAY-U 
(` in crore) 
Year Release of fund 
from  
Loan 
obtained 
by SUDA 
Total 
availability 
of funds 
Expenditure by SUDA 
GoI  State GoI State Total 
1 2 3 4 5 (2+3+4) 6 7 8 (6+7) 
2015-16 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2016-17 133.36 108.23 0.00 241.59 21.68 0.53 22.21 
2017-18 479.96  83.74 0.00 563.70 105.60 100.27 205.87 
2018-19 354.33  79.40 0.00 433.73 461.57 358.96 820.53 
2019-20 617.75 25.50 500.00 1143.25 675.26 502.90 1178.16 
2020-21 231.68 4.51 325.00 561.19 304.58 286.77 591.35 
2021-22 436.60 86.21 0.00 522.81 359.19 194.39 553.58 
2022-23 548.22 203.21 464.68 1216.11 505.12 357.62 862.74 
2023-24 489.70 4.05 264.89 758.64 578.13 362.52 940.65 
Total 3291.60 594.85 1554.57 5441.02 3011.13 2163.96 5175.09 
(Source: Information furnished by SUDA and compiled by Audit) 
It may be seen from the above table that against the GoI contribution of  
` 3291.60 crore, State Government has contributed funds of ` 594.85 crore 
through budget. During 2022 -23, ` 200.00 crore was diverted (September 
2022) from additional State fund of AMRUT Mission ( ` 100.00 crore) and 
Swachh Bharat Mission ( ` 100.00 crore) . Out of total available funds of 
` 5441.02 crore, ` 1554.576 crore were sourced by SUDA from loan taken 
against the State Government Guarantee (for matching State share).  
2.1.7.1 Delay in transfer of GoI share to SNA  
According to para 14.2.1 of PMAY-U scheme guidelines, the Central assistance 
along with the committed State share should be transferred to the State Level 
Nodal Agency (SLNA) within 15 days of receiving the Central funds, for further 
release to implementing agencies, who shall transfer the funds to eligible 
beneficiaries within another 15 days, w herever applicable. Further as per GoI 
instruction (March 2021), State Government has to notify a Single Nodal 
Agency (SNA) for implementation of scheme and transfer the Central share 
received in the RBI to concerned SNA account within a period of 21 days of its 
                                                                 
6  State Bank of India-` 825 crore and Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited 
(HUDCO)- ` 729.57 crore. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
27 
receipt. Corresponding State share should be released as early as possible and 
not later than 40 days of release of Central share. 
During scrutiny of records of CEO, SUDA audit noticed that in compliance of 
GoI instruction, SNA account was opened in September 2021 and after that , 
` 486.35 crore from central assistance were deposited in the SNA account after 
a delay of 14 to 67 days. During the period 2015-2021, prior to introduction of 
SNA, there was delay ranging between 32 days to 251 days in release of central 
share by State Government. This resulted in delay in transfer of funds to ULBs 
and in payments to beneficiaries and contractors. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the main reason for delay in 
withdrawal was due to non -provisioning of funds in the budget of the related 
years.  
Reply is not acceptable as due to non -provisioning of budget, funds under the 
scheme were withdrawn with a delay which resulted in delayed transfer of funds 
to ULBs for implementation of projects. 
2.1.7.2 Extra Budgetary resources used for funding of State share 
in PMAY-U  
During scrutiny of records of SUDA it was observed that for requirement of 
funds of ` 3357.007 crore for implementation of the scheme during the period 
2017-18 to 2021 -22, SUDA submitted a proposal to the Finance department 
through UADD for obtaining loan from financial institutions. The proposal was 
approved in Cabinet Decision (January 2018) and Government accorded 
Administrative Approval (AA) for providing guarantee (February 2018) for 
obtaining loan of ` 3357.00 crore from financial institutions till scheme period 
(March 2022) which was extended till December 2024. As per the AA, principal 
and interest on loan obtained was to be repaid in next 15 to 20 years up to the 
period 2038-39 through budgetary provision by the State Government. 
Accordingly, after inviting Expression of Interest for Term loan of  
` 3357.00 crore (August 2018), SUDA obtained  loan  of ` 825.008 crore (with 
an interest of ` 674.00 crore for 19 years at 8.54 per cent rate of interest) from 
State Bank of India after executing an agreement (June 2019) and obtain 
approval from Finance Department (June 2019). Further, agreement was  
executed (December 2022) with Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited (HUDCO) for loan amount of ` 2385.00 crore and ` 879.779 crore (for 
19 years at 8.5 per cent interest rate) was withdrawn as matching State share 
against the release of Central share (` 1164.00 crore) between December 2022 
and October 2024.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the Department has procured 
loans from the Financial Institutions for the fulfilment of commensurate State 
Share under PMAY-U. The decision has been backed by the policy approval of 
                                                                 
7  2017-18: ` 736.00 crore, 2018 -19: ` 1373.00 crore, 2019 -20: ` 802.00 crore, 2020 -21: 
` 298.00 crore and 2021-22: ` 148.00 crore 
8  July 2019-` 200.00 crore, September 2019-` 100.00 crore, November 2019-` 100.00 crore, 
December 2019-` 100.00 crore, May 2020-` 125.00 crore, August 2020-` 100.00 crore and 
October 2020-` 100.00 crore 
9  December 2022-` 700.00 crore, March 2024-` 93.00 crore, September 2024-` 19.69 crore 
and October 2024-` 67.08 crore. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
28 
the State Cabinet. The rate of interest for both the institutions was approved by 
the Department of Finance. 
Funding of State share through extra budgetary resources not only understated 
expenditure and deficit of  the State Government to the extent of expenditure 
incurred under the scheme met outside the budgeted resources in that year but 
also raise question on transparency and intergenerational equity. 
2.1.7.3 Delayed transfer of interest of ` 36.15 crore receive d on 
SNA account under PMAY-U 
As per GoI instruction (March 2021) State has to notify a Single Nodal Agency 
(SNA) for implementing the PMAY -U scheme and interest earned from the 
funds released was to be apportioned in SNA account between the Central and 
State for deposit in the respective Consolidated Funds.  
During the scrutiny of records, it was observed that in compliance with GoI 
order an SNA account was opened by SUDA in HDFC Bank on 28th September 
2021 and the State share along with the Central share was deposited in SNA 
account. However, the interest amount received on the central and State share 
released under the scheme was not transferred to the respective Consolidated 
Funds. Further, GoI issued another instruction in June 2021 and February 2022 
with reference to earlier order (March 2021) regarding depositing of interest. 
Thereafter interest amount of ` 22.64 crore pertaining to Central share for the 
period from 2015-16 to 2021-22 was transferred (July 2022) to GoI after a delay 
of more than one year. Further, out of the total Central share interest of  
` 14.98 crore earned during 2022 -24, an amount of ` 2.71 crore earned on  
1st July 2023 was transferred to GoI (October 2024) by SUDA after a delay of 
more than one year. 
Similarly, interest received on State share was to be transferred to State 
Government but the interest amount of ` 9.40 crore for the period from  
2015-16 to 2021 -22 was transferred to the consolidated fund of State  
(April 2024) with a delay of more than three years from the date of issuing 
instruction by GoI. Further, out of the total State share interest of ` 7.72 crore 
earned during 2022-24, an amount of ` 1.40 crore earned on 1 st July 2023 was 
transferred to the State Government (October 2024) after a delay of more than 
one year. 
Thus, due to non -compliance of GoI instruction, the interest received on the 
central and State share released under the scheme had not only remained outside 
the Government Account but also  could not be utilised by GoI and State 
Government. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the Mission Directorate is 
regularly depositing the interest accumulated in the respective consolidated 
bank account under the Directives of Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure, GoI and Department of Finance of GoCG. 
The reply is not acceptable as the interest earned under PMAY-U was deposited 
in respective Consolidated fund after a delay of more than one to three years. 
 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
29 
2.1.7.4 Release of financial assistance before/without geo -
tagging for construction of later stages  
As per the operational guidelines for geo-tagging, the States/UTs should ensure 
that whatever construction stage is completed (Not Started, foundation, lintel, 
roof or completed) w.e.f. 25 August 2018 must be geotagged within five days 
from date of completion of that construction stage. The disbursement is based 
on the progress of construction and verified through geo -tagged photos 
uploaded on the PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal. 
An analysis of the online PMAY-U MIS database (as of December 2024) for all 
ULBs revealed that, in 84 ULBs, final installment payments amounting to 
` 13.18 crore were disbursed to 328 beneficiaries between 13 to 79 months 
before geo-tagging of completion stage. These payments were also made 
without uploading the geo -tagged photographs on the PMAY -U BHUVAN 
Portal. Of these, 94 cases test checked in 12 selected ULBs, and noticed that 
payment of ` 38.80 lakh was made without geo-tagging. 
Thus, the payments were made to beneficiaries before completion of the house 
and geo-tagging for the completion stage. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that beneficiaries had duly completed 
their houses before the payment of final assist ance made to them and the geo -
tag was not being done due to technical error. However, the payment has been 
made to the beneficiaries based on the actual photograph of the completed 
house. The geo -tags of the houses were done after the eradication of the 
technical error. 
Reply is not acceptable as neither any log was maintained at ULB level nor 
correspondence with higher authorities regarding technical error were found in 
this regard during audit. 
  
2.1.8  Implementation of Projects under various verticals of 
scheme 
2.1.8.1 Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) 
As per para 6.1 and 6.4 of scheme guidelines the Central assistance of 
` 1.50 lakh per EWS house is provided by the GoI  under Affordable Housing 
in Partnership (AHP) vertical and AHP can be a mix of houses for different 
categories, but it will be eligible for Central assistance, if at least 35 per cent of 
the houses in the project are for EWS category. The States can decid e on an 
upper ceiling on the sale price of EWS houses with an objective to make them 
affordable and accessible to the intended beneficiaries. State and cities also 
extend other concessions such as their state share, land at affordable cost, stamp 
duty exemption etc.  
The year wise receipt of funds and expenditure incurred on AHP vertical are 
detailed in Table 2.1.6 below: 
 
 
 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
30 
Table 2.1.6: Details of year wise receipt and expenditure of fund by SUDA under 
AHP vertical 
(` in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Receipt Total 
fund 
available 
Expenditure 
(percentage 
against 
available fund) 
Closing 
Balance Central 
share 
State 
share10 
Total 
2016-17 0.00 79.82 84.66 164.48 164.48 20.80(13)  143.68 
2017-18 143.68 136.37 62.79 199.16 342.84 106.65(31) 236.19 
2018-19 236.19 96.91 23.15 120.06 356.25 247.00(69) 109.25 
2019-20 109.25 0.00 250.00 250.00 359.25 276.40(77) 82.85 
2020-21 82.85 0.00 160.00 160.00 242.85 240.77(99) 2.08 
2021-22 2.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.08 0.50(24) 1.58 
2022-23 1.58 75.62 210.93 286.55 288.13 147.06(51) 141.07 
2023-24 141.07 0.00 3.18 3.18 144.25 66.95(46) 77.30 
Total   388.72 794.71 1183.43  1106.13   
(Source: Information furnished by SUDA) 
It can be seen that during 2016 -17 to 2023-24, ` 1106.13 crore were spent by 
SUDA against the available funds of ` 1183.43 crore. Expenditure against 
available funds ranged from 13 per cent to 77 per cent except in 2020 -21 in 
which 99 per cent funds were spent for implementation of AHP verticals. 
The physical status of the AHP projects taken under the PMAY-U is detailed in 
Table 2.1.7 below. 
Table 2.1.7: Details of year wise physical status of AHP houses under PMAY-U 
as of April 2025 
Year No. of 
houses 
sanctioned 
No. of revised houses 
sanctioned after 
curtailment/surrender 
No. of 
houses 
completed 
No. of 
houses 
under 
progress 
No. of 
houses not 
started 
2015-16 12670 2874 2394 480 0 
2016-17 13416 12865 8922 3682 261 
2017-18 17457 13164 8294 4216 654 
2018-19 29752 7325 3073 4150 102 
2019-20 0 0 0  0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0  0 0 
2021-22 1869 1869 559 1310 0 
Total 75,164 38,097 23,242 13,838 1,017 
(Source: Information provided by SUDA and compiled by Audit) 
It may be seen from the above that out of total 75,164 DUs sanctioned during 
2015-16 to 2018 -19 and 2021 -22, 37,067 DUs (49 per cent ) had been 
curtailed/surrendered till April 2025. Out of remaining 38,097 DUs,  
23,242 DUs (61 per cent) were completed and 13,838 DUs (36 per cent) could 
                                                                 
10  State figure included funds financing through Extra Budgetary resources. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
31 
not be completed even after lapse of more than three to seven years from the 
date of approval of projects by CSMC. In four ULBs (Dhamtari, Dantewada, 
Risali and Ambikapur) not a single DU had been completed  under sanctioned 
AHP projects. Moreover, construction of 1,017 DUs sanctioned during 2016-19 
were not commenced till April 2025.  The delay in construction of sanctioned 
houses was due to various factors viz. delay in award of work after sanctioning 
of project, delay in handing over of site, change in site, delay in payment of RA 
bills to contractor and slow/no progress by contractors etc. 
2.1.8.2 Blockage of fund due to non -completion of DUs under 
AHP  
Scrutiny of the records in six 11 test checked ULBs revealed that out of total 
sanctioned 10 projects for construction of 12,802 DUs during the period  
2016-2020, work orders were issued to contractors at contract sum of  
` 576.67 crore for completion of work within stipulated period of 1 2 to  
36 months between August 2017 and January 2020. Out of 12,802 DUs,  
580 DUs were completed as of August 2024. Audit noticed that in Municipal 
Corporation, Bilaspur one of the work awarded to contractor for 5785 DUs, 
1,914 DUs were curtailed due to no n-providing of work site to contractor. Out 
of the remaining 3,871 DUs,  after completion of 522 DUs (14 per cent) with 
expenditure of ` 48.42 crore, contractor left the work incomplete in May 2023. 
Remaining, 2,406 DUs in which construction was not started  were further 
curtailed in CSMC meeting dated April 2025. Similarly, in another project in 
Bilaspur, the work of 493 DUs was left incomplete by contractor after 
completion of 58 DUs and incurring expenditure of ` 9.20 crore. Municipal 
Corporation Bilaspur re-tendered the work in June 2023 which is yet to be 
approved by SUDA as of May 2025. In other seven project of five Municipal 
Corporations, contractors could not complete a single DU (out of 6,524 
sanctioned DUs) even after a lapse of 29 to 72 months from the stipulated period 
of completion after incurring expenditure of ` 172.43 crore till August 2024 as 
detailed in Appendix 2.1.5. Thus, non-completion of DUs, resulted in blocking 
of fund ` 230.05 crore incurred under the projects in six ULBs. The photographs 
taken during joint physical verification of AHP projects are shown below:  
 
 
(Photos taken during JPV of AHP projects of 392 DUs and 667 DUs at Raipur)  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the completion of AHP Dwelling 
units faced significant delays due to multiple factors such as COVID -19 
pandemic, legal and procedural hurdle s, slow progress of work, delay  in site 
                                                                 
11  Ambikapur, Bhilai, Bilaspur, Jagdalpur, Korba and Raipur  


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
32 
handover, delay in payment of RA bills to contractors, and non -availability of 
funds. The State is continuously monitoring the progress and shall ensure 
completion by the Mission period. 
Reply of the Government is not acceptable as works could not be completed till 
date (May 2025) even after the end of pandemic and the  ULBs did not take 
action against the contractor for slow progress of work as per the terms of 
contract. This indicates inadequate monitoring of construction under AHP 
projects. 
Similarly, in works executed by RDA and CGHB it was noticed total 4,109 and 
2,932 DUs were sanctioned by the CSMC during the period 2015 -19 and  
2021-22. Above EWS DUs have been sanctioned under self-financing scheme12 
at a cost of ` 5.23 lakh to ` 8.60 lakh. Of these 2,415 and 2,452 DUs have been 
completed respectively and remaining  2,174 DUs could not be completed till 
March 2025 even after lapse of three to nine years from the date of sanction of 
projects. The photographs taken during joint physical verification  
(10 June 2024) of AHP projects are shown below: 
 
(Photos taken during JPV of AHP projects of 257 DUs and 258 DUs of RDA) 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the delays were primarily due to 
Covid-19 pandemic and the financial stress it caused on allottees in this self -
financing scheme. As beneficiaries default ed on payments, RDA faced 
constraints in disbursing running bills to contractors, affecting the construction 
cycle. With the improvement in instalment collections and re -award of 
incomplete packages, construction has regained momentum. The remaining 
units are under active progress and targeted for completion by October 2025.  
The reply is not acceptable as the cost of DUs allotted by RDA and CGHB was 
very high for EWS beneficiaries and approval of DPR without identification of 
beneficiaries affected the project execution. 
2.1.8.3 Irregularities in payment and recovery of mobilisation 
advance to contractors 
As per clause 3.20.1 (i) of the agreement executed between contractor and 
Commissioner, the mobilisation advance up to five per cent of the contract value 
shall be given if requested by the contractor within one month of the date of 
order of commencement of the work.  The five per cent advance shall be given 
in two stages: 
                                                                 
12  After making total payment of AHP DUs by beneficiaries, central assistance of  
` 1.50 lakh was paid to the beneficiaries. 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
33 
Stage 1: Two per cent  of the contract value payable after signi ng of the 
agreement 
Stage 2: Three per cent of the contract value on the receipt of the certificate 
from the contractor that he has established complete central and field -testing 
laboratories and has engaged, the workers/technicians and has brought requisite 
plants and machineries at work site and also the work is physically started. 
As per clause 3.20.1 (ii) of the agreement, the recovery of this advance shall be 
done in equal monthly instal lments on pro-rata basis (after 15 per cent  of 
contract work is executed) from each of the further running bills. However, all 
the advances shall be fully recovered when 80 per cent  contract sum is 
completed or when 75 per cent of stipulated validity period is over whichever 
event is earlier. 
Audit found the  following irregularities in payment and recovery of 
Mobilisation advances to the contractors: 
2.1.8.3(a) Irregular grant and non-recovery of mobilisation advance  
Scrutiny of records of Municipal Corporation Bilaspur revealed that 
construction of 5785 DUs at the rate of ` 4.53 lakh per DU (in 37 different sites) 
was awarded at a contract value of ` 262.12 crore in March 2019. The stage -I 
mobilisation advance of ` 5.24 crore at the rate of 2 per cent of contract value 
was provided to the contractor in March 2019. Further, out of the remaining 
stage-II mobilisation advance of ` 7.86 crore, first instalment of ` 4.09 crore 
was given to contractor on 14 May 2019 without starting of work physically at 
site in violation of contract conditions. Second instalment of stage -II advance 
of ` 3.77 crore was paid to contractor in July 2019 after commencement of work 
in only two sites at Madhuban and Mopka for construction of 493 DUs out of 
the total 37 sites involv ing construction of 5,785 DUs. Further, 13 sites were 
handed over to contractor between October 2019 and January 2021 after release 
of mobilisation advance. Thus, release of mobilisation advance of ` 4.09 crore 
without starting of work was irregular and in  violation of contract conditions. 
Further, release of mobilisation advance of ` 7.1913 crore to the contractor 
before handing over the remaining work sites and before commencement of 
work resulted in undue favour to contractor.  
It further noticed that pro gress of above work remained slow and only  
18 per cent value of work was completed and work was stopped by contractor 
as per the status of work provided to Audit as of August 2024. The time 
extension was granted to contractor up to December 2024. Audit no ticed that 
recovery of mobilisation advance was not initiated from the contractor though 
75 per cent of the stipulated/validity extended period completed in July 2023.  
Thus, undue favour to contractor by granting mobilisation advance without start 
of work  at sites against the contract conditions resulted in non -recovery of 
mobilisation advance of ` 13.10 crore. As the matter was pending in court, bank 
guarantee could not be forfeited by the Municipal Corporation Bilaspur. 
Similarly, in Municipal Corporation Raipur, work of construction of 667 DUs 
was awarded to a contractor (August 2019) with contract sum of ` 32.01 crore 
and stipulated completion period of 24 months. A mobilisation advance of 
                                                                 
13  ` 7.86 crore- (three per cent of (493 DUs at the rate of ` 4.53 lakh = ` 0.67 crore) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
34 
` 1.60 crore was granted to contractor against the ban k guarantee (BG) of 
` 64.00 lakh and ` 96.00 lakh valid up to August 2020 and October 2020 
respectively. Audit scrutiny further revealed that the above BGs were expired 
and were not renewed as of April 2024. Audit noticed that the above work was 
to be completed in August 2021 which was extended till March 2022. However, 
after completion of 24 per cent of work till August 2021 contractor stopped the 
work from September 2021. 
As per the terms of contract, entire mobilisation advance was to be recovered 
till A ugust 2021 (i.e 75 per cent  of stipulated/extended period of contract) 
however, only ` 73.00 lakh out of 1.60 crore had been recovered from the 
contractor. Thus, non -recovery of mobilisation advance under the stipulated 
time and non-renewal of BG resulted in non-safeguard of financial interest of 
ULB. 
The State Government stated (May 2 025) that Municipal Corporation  Raipur 
has followed the contractual provisions for mobilisation advance as per clause 
3.20.1 (i) of the agreement. However, due to Covid -19 and other unfortunate 
incidents the project was delayed, and the project could not achieve the 
milestone required for recovery of mobilisation advance. The mobilisation 
advance recovery is under progress. Municipal Corporation  Bilaspur has also 
followed the co ntractual provisions for mobilis ation advance as per Clause 
3.20.1(i) of the agreement. However, several unfortunate reasons prevented the 
project from reaching the required stage for mobilisation advance recovery. 
Further, the agreement values were revised, leading to adjustments in RA bills. 
As per the revised calculations, mobilisation advance recovery has already 
commenced, ensuring compliance with the contractual terms. Further, assured 
that due process is being followed, and c orrective actions have been taken to 
regularise the recovery process as per the financial and contractual obligations.  
The reply is not acceptable as the stage two mobilisation advance was provided 
to the contractor without handing over the work sites and  commencement of 
work in Bilaspur and in case of Raipur the delay in recovering the mobilisation 
advance and the lapse in renewing bank guarantees indicated lack of internal 
controls in financial matters. 
2.1.8.4 Non-recovery of ` 0.70 crore from the defau lting 
contractor and cost overrun of ` 0.90 crore due to the 
work left incomplete 
In Municipal Corporation Bilaspur the work of 493 DUs (174 at Chingrajpara 
and 319 at Chantidih) was sanctioned by CSMC (December 2016) and after 
inviting the tender, work orders were issued (August 2017) to contractor for 
completion of 174 DUs with stipulated period of 12 months and 319 DUs with 
stipulated period of 18 months. The project remains incomplete and expenditure 
of ` 9.20 crore was incurred on the project till August 2024. Scrutiny of records 
revealed that after issue of work order (August 2017) of 174 DUs, the site for 
construction of six blocks (29 DUs per block) was provided to contrac tor 
between January and July 2018. Thereafter, two -time extensions without 
penalty have been granted till December 2019 but contractor failed to complete 
the work within the extended period. Thereafter four more-time extensions were 
granted with penalty at  the rate of two per cent  till April 2022 and regular 
notices were issued (between July 2019 and July 2022) for speedy progress & 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
35 
timely completion of work but contractor could not complete the work. 
Therefore, notice under clause 1.15 was issued (December 2022) and finally the 
contract was terminated (July 2023) under clause 1.15 by the Municipal 
Commissioner and contractor was prohibited to participate in the tender for that 
work. As per the final measurement recorded, contractor has executed work of 
` 5.15 crore against the total work of ` 7.97 crore. As per the final order, after 
forfeiture of EMD and Security deposit (SD) of ` 17.23 lakh and levying penalty 
of ` 28.24 lakh, an amount of ` 70.08 lakh was computed as recoverable from 
the defaulting contractor which shall be recovered as arrear of land revenue. 
Similarly, for construction of 319 DUs in 11 blocks till March 2019, the land 
was provided to contractor for construction of 145 DUs (five blocks) in two 
phases between October 2017 and March 2018 an d due to stay of Court for 
removal of slum, the land for remaining 174 DUs was provided in July 2021. 
Therefore, four -time extensions up to February 2022 (for 36 months) were 
granted without penalty but contractor failed to complete the work of 145 DUs 
and the work of 174 remaining DUs did not commence till the end of extended 
period. In the meantime, regular notices were issued (between June 2018 and 
July 2022) regarding slow progress and non -commencement of works. 
Thereafter, as contractor could not execu te the work, notice for stoppage of 
work and cancellation of contract under clause 1.15 was issued  
(December 2022) and finally the contract was cancelled (April 2023). The 
contractor has executed work of ` 3.09 crore against the total work of  
` 14.35 cro re till April 2023. Further, the incomplete work was finalised  
(June 2023) after inspection of site and valuation of work left incomplete. As 
per the final incomplete bill after forfeiting of EMD and SD of ` 10.07 lakh, an 
amount of ` 1.02 crore was recov erable from the defaulting contractor, which 
was not yet recovered.  
The photographs of work left incomplete taken during joint physical verification 
of AHP sites are shown below: 
 
(Photos taken during JPV of AHP projects of 174 DUs and 319 DUs) 
Further, the tender for balance work of above 493 DUs was invited (June 2023) 
and letter for approval of lowest rates (` 3.45 crore against the balance work of 
` 2.82 crore for 174 DUs at Chingrajpara and ` 13.24 crore against the balance 
work of ` 11.25 crore for 319 DUs at Chantidih) was forwarded to CEO, SUDA 
(August 2023) approval of which is awaited (October 2024). 
Thus, non-completion of work even after lapse of seven years after award of 
work not only resulted in blocking of expenditure of ` 9.20 crore incurred on 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
36 
the work and cost overrun of ` 0.9014 crore on the project but also in non -
recovery of ` 1.72 crore from the contractor. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the original contracts for both 
Chingrajpara (174 DUs) and Chantidih (319 DUs) were terminated due to the 
contractor's inability to complete the work within the stipulated period, despite 
multiple extensions. Regular notices were issued to ensure timely completion, 
but due to slow progress and non-performance, the contracts were cancelled in 
2023 after following due process. Following the contract termination, a re -
tendering process was initiated, and the lowest rates for balance work were 
approved. The tender for balance work, amounting to ` 22.82 crore for 
Chingrajpara and ` 13.61 crore for Chantidih, was finalized in June 2023. 
Further, the Earnest Money Deposit and Security Deposit of ` 1.02 crore from 
the defaulting contractor have been forfeited and the process for recovering the 
remaining amount from the contractor is underway, as per contract conditions. 
The Municipal Corporation is actively ensuring the completion of the balance 
work and recovering dues as per legal and contractual provisions. 
The reply is not acceptable as despite finalisation of tender for balance work in 
June 2023, the work is yet to be awarded which caused further delay in 
completion of project. 
2.1.8.5 Non-recovery of beneficiary share of ` 17.23 crore  
As per PMAY-U scheme guideline, EWS households are defined as households 
having an annual income up to ` 3.00 lakh and paragraph 6 provides benefits to 
EWS beneficiaries under AHP component by giving central assistance of  
` 1.50 lakh, state assistance of ` 2.50 lakh and beneficiary has to contribute only 
` 0.75 lakh for each unit. Further, according to the decision taken by CSMC in 
its 11th meeting (August 2016), written consent from the beneficiaries regarding 
beneficiary contribution must be obtained befor e preparation of DPR. As per 
instruction of SUDA (May 2017), the beneficiary contribution would be 
collected from eligible beneficiaries in monthly installments (First installment 
of ` 5000, 23 installments of ` 3000 and last installment of ` 1000) by ULBs. 
Scrutiny of the records in seven test checked ULBs revealed that out of total 
sanctioned 23,246 DUs under AHP for slum dwellers, 14,316 DUs had been 
completed of which 5,247 DUs were allotted to the slum dwellers till March 
2025. Audit noticed that again st the DUs allotted to beneficiaries, ULB could 
only recover ` 22.13 crore and remaining amount of ` 17.23 crore could not be 
recovered (March 2025). The main reason for non -recovery was absence of 
written consent of beneficiary contribution and non -attachment of eligible 
beneficiaries at the stage of DPR preparation. This is one of the reasons for slow 
progress and non -completion of projects even after the  expiry of stipulated 
period as detailed in Table 2.1.8 below: 
 
 
 
                                                                 
14  In 174 DUs  (` 3.45 crore -` 2.82 crore) =  ` 0.63 crore and in 319 DUs ( ` 13.24 crore - 
` 11.25 crore) = ` 1.99 crore; total ` 2.62 crore - ` 1.72 crore = ` 0.90 crore. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
37 
Table 2.1.8: Details of outstanding beneficiary share from slum dwellers under 
AHP as of March 2025 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
No. of DUs 
Sanctioned  
Completed 
DUs 
DUs 
allotted 
Required 
beneficiary 
share  
Beneficiary 
share 
received 
Outstanding 
beneficiary 
share 
1 Bilaspur 3446 2097 2037 15.28 12.85 2.43 
2 Bhilai 3709 1421 556 4.17 3.68 0.49 
3 Raipur 11581 9536 2060 15.45 3.72 11.73 
4 Ambikapur 493 0 0 0.00 0.05 -0.05 
5 Jagdalpur 462 346 40 0.3 0.07 0.23 
6 Korba 3265 800 544 4.08 1.59 2.49 
7 Arang 290 116 10 0.08 0.17 -0.09 
  Total 23246 14316 5247 39.36 22.13 17.23 
(Source: Information provided by Suda and compiled by Audit) 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the category of beneficiaries 
selected for the scheme are basically EWS beneficiaries, who are either residing 
in slums or reside in rental complexes. These beneficiaries belong to a very 
scarce income group. The ULBs are facing great difficulty in collecting 
beneficiary share from these categorically economically weak beneficiaries, 
while it is very difficult for these beneficiaries also to spare amount for paying 
against the beneficiary collection. This viscous cycle of beneficiaries not able 
to pay due to their poor economic condition and ULBs not able to collect from 
these beneficiaries has resulted in low beneficiary collection. As far as written 
consent obtaining from beneficiaries before preparation of DPR it is kindly 
submitted that even after providing consent to relocate to the AHP site, several 
beneficiaries or major groups of beneficiaries have r egistered their discontent 
towards relocation to the AHP houses. The ULB therefore again keeps on 
surveying to identify and select the beneficiaries for the project. The ULBs have 
undertaken that the balance beneficiary collection shall be collected within  the 
timeframe. 
The State Government should find out ways such as facilitating/ educating the 
beneficiaries about the various available options of easy credit facilities and 
allowing smaller amount of monthly instalment for smooth recovery of 
beneficiary share.  
2.1.8.6 Extra financial burden on beneficiaries for allotment of 
DUs under ‘Mor Makan Mor Aas’   
As per PMAY-U scheme guideline, EWS households are defined as households 
having an annual income up to ` 3.00 lakh and paragraph 6 provides benefits to 
EWS beneficiaries under AHP component by giving central assistance of  
` 1.50 lakh, State assistance of ` 2.50 lakh and beneficiary has to contribute only 
` 0.75 lakh for each DU. 
To address the issue of unallocated DUs, the Urban Admi nistration & 
Development Department introduced a sub -scheme called "Mor Makan Mor 
Aas" in February 2022 under PMAY-U. This scheme aimed to provide housing 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
38 
to eligible beneficiaries living in rented accommodations in municipal areas, 
whether in slum or non-slum locations. 
Further scrutiny of the "Mor Makan Mor Aas" guidelines revealed that instead 
of the standard ` 75,000 beneficiary contribution as per PMAY-U, beneficiaries 
were required to pay ` 3.25 lakh per DU (including ` 2.50 lakh of State share). 
However, the cost of DU ranged between 2.98 lakh to ` 3.87 lakh. Additionally, 
the scheme guidelines were not submitted for approval to the SLSMC, nor was 
approval obtained from the CSMC as detailed in Table 2.1.9. 
Table 2.1.9: Details of allotment made under Mor Makan Mor Aas as of  
March 2025 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB No. of DUs 
Sanctioned  
Completed 
DUs 
No. of 
DUs 
allotted 
under 
‘Mor 
Makan 
Mor 
Aas’ 
Beneficiary 
share as 
per 
PMAY-U 
at the rate 
of ` 0.75 
lakh  
Beneficiary 
share 
recovered 
by ULBs 
under 
‘Mor 
Makan 
Mor Aas” 
Additional 
burden on 
beneficiaries 
1 Bilaspur 3446 2097 76 0.57 1.36 0.79 
2 Bhilai 3709 1421 1464 10.98 21.00 10.02 
3 Raipur 11581 9536 7727 57.95 220.83 162.88 
4 Risali 493 0 121 0.91 0.49 -0.42 
5 Rajnandgaon 1930 1282 165 1.24 2.94 1.70 
6 Raigarh 1031 622 231 1.73 5.63 3.90 
7 Jagdalpur 462 346 206 1.55 0.59 -0.95 
8 Durg 1502 536 279 2.09 5.41 3.31 
9 Birgaon 696 696 138 1.04 2.52 1.49 
10 Korba 3265 800 435 3.26 7.67 4.41 
11 Bhilai-Charouda 1027 795 61 0.46 1.09 0.63 
  Total 29142 18131 10903 81.78 269.53 187.76 
(Source: Information provided by SUDA and compiled by audit) 
It may be seen from the above that out of 29,142 DUs sanctioned under AHP 
vertical of PMAY -U, 18,131 DUs were completed of which 10,903 DUs 
allotted under Mor Makan Mor Aas scheme by the ULBs as of March 2025. For 
DUs allotted under the scheme, the contribution of beneficiaries was 68 per cent 
(` 3.25 lakh) instead 16 per cent (` 0.75 lakh) in PMAY-U. Thus, higher share 
of contribution was recovered from the beneficiaries and burden of State share 
of contribution was also transferred on the beneficiaries. I n 11 test checked 
ULBs, additional contribution of ` 187.76 crore was recovered against the 
allotment of DUs to 10,903 beneficiaries till March 2025. Audit noticed that the 
allotment of DUs sanctioned under AHP for slum dwellers were allotted under 
“Mor Makan Mor Aas” by revising the basic eligibility criteria for extending 
benefits to non-slum dwellers. Thus, the core objective/purpose of the scheme 
to relocate the slum dwellers defeated as 59 per cent of DUs sanctioned under 
AHP for slum dwellers were diverted/allocated to non-slum dwellers. Also, the 
benefit of Central subsidy provided under the PMAY -U did not reach to 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
39 
intended beneficiaries as AHP was initially planned by the State Government 
only for slum dwellers. 
The State Government stated (May 2025)  that the houses left vacant after 
occupancy of beneficiaries from slum were taken up under revised guidelines 
of Mor Makan Mor Aas as per the Cabinet decision  and allotted to non -slum 
residents who were eligible under AHP guidelines. Further, the benefici ary 
share of ` 3.25 lakh per unit cost was provided to beneficiaries for AHP houses 
built in prominent and significant urban areas, where the cost of land and 
infrastructure is very high. But the State Government has not provisioned for 
recovery of cost of land and is indirectly subsidising the cost of land under Mor 
Makan Mor Aas.  After 100 per cent allotment of DUs, modified project cost 
will be submitted to SLSMC and CSMC for approval. 
Reply is not acceptable as the intended purpose of providing affordable housing 
to slum dwellers under AHP vertical could not be fully achieved due to 
allotment of DUs to non-slum dwellers at higher cost/beneficiary share.  
2.1.8.7 Beneficiary Led Individual House Construction 
The fourth component of the Mission i.e. beneficiary Led Construction or 
Enhancement (BLC) is assistance to individual eligible families of EWS 
categories to either construct new house or enhance existing houses on their 
own to cover the beneficiaries who are not able to undertake the benefit of other 
components of the mission.  Central Assistance up to ` 1.50 lakh per EWS house 
is provided to eligible families belonging to EWS categories for individual 
house construction/enhancement under BLC. The ULBs val idate the 
information and building plan submitted by the beneficiary so that ownership 
of land and other details like economic status and eligibility can be ascertained. 
Central Assistance, along with State/UT/ULB share up to ` 0.85 lakh was 
released to the bank accounts of beneficiaries through DBT by the  State in 3-4 
installments according to the progress of work and geo-tagging of photographs 
of houses at different levels in BHUVAN Portal taken by the Surveyors of 
Architects/Project Management Consultant s prepared the DPRs approved by 
CSMC. 
The year wise receipt of funds and expenditure incurred under BLC vertical by 
SUDA are detailed in Table 2.1.10. 
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
40 
Table 2.1.10: Details of year wise receipt and expenditure by SUDA under BLC 
vertical 
(` in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Receipt Total 
available 
fund 
Expenditure 
(percentage 
against 
available 
fund) 
Closing 
Balance Central State15 Total 
2016-17 0.00 3.07 6.5 9.57 9.57 0 (0) 9.57 
2017-18 9.57 335.68 18.63 354.31 363.88 92.08 (25) 271.80 
2018-19 271.80 259.27 59.15 318.42 590.22 541.33(92) 48.89 
2019-20 48.89 610.88 239.54 850.42 899.31 877.17(98) 22.14 
2020-21 22.14 270.68 145.2 415.88 438.02 326.75(73) 111.27 
2021-22 111.27 428.71 76.44 505.15 616.42 584.27(69) 32.15 
2022-23 32.15 465.47 453.76 919.23 951.38 678.48(49) 272.90 
2023-24 272.90 483.13 264.89 748.02 1020.92 844.99(83) 175.93 
Total   2856.89 1264.11 4121.00   3945.07   
(Source: Information provided by SUDA and compiled by Audit) 
It can be seen that utilisation  against available funds was less in first two year 
and increased up to 98 per cent during 2019-20 and declined up to 49 per cent 
during 2022-23.   
The physical status of the BLC projects taken under the scheme is detailed in 
Table 2.1.11. 
Table 2.1.11: Details of year wise sanction and physical status of BLC houses 
under PMAY-U 
Year Original 
sanctioned 
Revised 
sanction 
Physical progress as on April 2025 
Completed Foundation Lintel Roof Not 
started 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2016-17 2157 1222 1211 2 6 3 0 
2017-18 64647 45576 43260 953 683 506 172 
2018-19 65835 44286 41894 1023 750 447 172 
2019-20 29777 24617 23039 606 488 332 152 
2020-21 25497 20375 18126 867 737 452 193 
2021-22 46368 38537 31132 3024 2065 1587 731 
2022-23 38453 32505 22561 3502 2388 2339 1715 
2023-24 4718 3951 2611 373 260 416 291 
Total 277452 211069 183834 10350 7377 6082 3426 
(Source: Information provided by SUDA and compiled by Audit) 
It may be seen from the above that out of the total sanctioned 2.77 lakh BLC 
houses during the period 2015-16 to 2023-24, 24 per cent (66,383 houses) were 
                                                                 
15  State figure included funds financed through loan outside the budgetary resources.  

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
41 
surrendered due to reasons such as beneficiaries already possessing a pucca 
house, having an income e xceeding ` 3.00 lakh or lacking proper land 
documents. Out of 2.11 lakh, 1.84 lakh houses (87 per cent) were completed. 
However, 23,809 houses remain unfinished despite a lapse of more than one to 
seven years since the date of sanction. 
The State Governmen t stated (May 2025) that ULBs actively encouraged 
beneficiaries and issued notices to Architect and beneficiaries for completion of 
houses. However, due to financial constraints and rising material costs, many 
beneficiaries were unable to contribute their share towards the completion of 
their houses. 
Reply is not acceptable as non -completion of houses is due to delay in 
attachment of beneficiaries and release of installments by the ULBs as discussed 
in next paras. 
2.1.8.8 Non/delay release of assistance even after completion of 
BLC house by the beneficiaries 
As per PMAY (U) manual for District level functionaries, funds should be 
transferred directly to beneficiaries account through DBT mode based on geo -
tagging of house at various stages of construction.  UAD Department and 
SUDA issued instruction (May 2018 and January 2019) to issue building 
permission and release various installments within three days after approval by 
competent authority. 
During analysis of the online PMAY -U MIS database of all ULBs (as of 
December 2024), it was observed that in 136 ULBs, even after construction and 
geo-tagging of completion stage of BLC houses during the year 2019 -20 to 
2023-2024, final instalment of assis tance of ` 62.55 crore was not released to 
15,675 beneficiaries as of December 2024. Further, in 82 ULBs the instalment 
of final assistance amounting to ` 6.01 crore was released to 1,620 beneficiaries 
with a delay ranging from 25 to 71 months from the mon th of geo-tagging of 
completion stage uploaded in PMAY-U Bhuvan Portal.  
Out of the entries in MIS database, audit has examined 449 cases from the 
records of 16 test checked ULBs and noticed the reasons for delay/non -release 
of installments were non -availability of funds, non -submission of documents 
for processing payment, non -completion of houses in all respect and non -
availability of land ownership documents. 
Thus, above cases of non -release/ delays in release of financial assistance not 
only caused finan cial hardship to the beneficiaries but also indicate deficient 
monitoring mechanism for sanctioning and geo -tagging of houses at ULBs 
level.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the final payment of assistance 
was pending due to non-submission of land transfer documents; non-completion 
of internal finishing works and non-payment of building permission charges for 
extra construction by the beneficiaries. Further, due to weak financial 
capabilities of the EWS beneficiaries, the internal finishing work s are often 
stalled due to non-availability of last trench of the beneficiary contribution. The 
beneficiary, however, completes the incomplete work as per their financial 
convenience. As far as the geo -tagging of the completion stage is concerned, 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
42 
the external completion of the house and occupancy of the beneficiary in the 
proposed house provides merit to the ULB for geo -tagging and showing it as 
complete. However, the final payment is made only after the houses are 
completed in all respects. 
Reply is not a cceptable as geo -tagging of houses at completed stage without 
actual completion of house is incorrect and against the scheme guidelines. Due 
to geo-tagging of incomplete house as completed, misstated physical progress 
of construction on Bhuvan Portal.  
2.1.8.9 Non-commencement of BLC houses by the beneficiaries 
As per the advisory issued by GoI for all States/UTs on geo-tagging under BLC 
component of the Mission, the release of subsequent instal lments of central 
assistance to the beneficiaries through DB T is linked to the geo -tagging of 
various stages. It is also stated that physical progress reported in the Utilisation 
Certificate must be reconciled with the geo -tagged houses before releasing 
subsequent installments for BLC Projects to States. 
Audit noti ced from analysis of the online PMAY -U MIS database (as of 
December 2024), that in 133 ULBs, after geo-tagging of foundation/lintel stage 
of 11,181 BLC houses and release of first installment, beneficiaries had not 
executed the work at later stages even af ter lapse of 13 to 81 months resulting 
in non-completion of sanctioned house.  
Audit verified the records in test checked ULBs and found that first instalment 
for foundation/plinth level was released to 177 beneficiaries (out of 201) after 
digging of small pit in the land and geo-tagging the same without achieving the 
prescribed foundation level as detailed in Appendix 2.1.6. This indicates that 
first instalment was sanctioned and released without actual completion of work 
and proper verification by the CLT C and Commissioner/CMOs as  shown in 
PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal are below: 
 
(Geo-tagged photos of beneficiary ID-22801949068800002 and 228019750723500003) 
Thus, release of first instalment only after digging of small pit without carrying 
out actual foundation level work indicates serious lapses on the part of geo -


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
43 
tagging personnel and officer who approved payment. This also indicates non -
serious intent of beneficiary as many beneficiaries did not continue construction 
of their BLC houses. Moreover, there was no  monitoring by architects, PMCs, 
CLTCs, Commissioner/CMOs or higher levels to identify and address such 
issues. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that ULBs have issued several notices 
to start the work, however, the 201 beneficiaries could not start the work after 
foundation/plinth. Therefore, final notices have been issued to them to start the 
work failing which the ULB shall initiate the process  for recovery of first 
instalment provided to these beneficiaries. 
2.1.8.10 Poor quality construction of BLC houses in PMAY by 
Architect’s Surveyor 
During scrutiny of records of Municipal Panchayat, Kota, and verification of 
the status of geo-tagging in PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal, Audit noticed that in 
12 cases, the construction of BLC houses at Ward -1 ‘Fakir Mohalla’ had 
commenced in February 2022 and rema ined incomplete even after more than 
two years (March 2024). An inspection of ward-01 was conducted in May 2023 
by the CMO, accompanied by the Sub -engineer and CLTC, during which 
substandard quality of construction was found and concerned Architect was 
instructed to complete all under construction houses with quality within  
15 days. 
A joint physical verification on 04 March 2024 of the above BLC houses was 
conducted and from the discussions with beneficiaries, it came to light that 
these houses were being constructed by a contractor (an employee of the 
Architect). Complaints regarding poor quality construction and non -
rectification by the contractor were also submitted (June 2023) to the Municipal 
Panchayat office, but no action was taken to address these i ssues or complete 
the houses. The photographs of the houses taken during the joint physical 
verification are as follows: 
 
Photos taken during JPV of Beneficiary ID-0322801968631813047 and 0322801968627822675 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the concerned surveyor, who had 
started the work as a contractor for the construction of BLC houses has been 
removed and the Notice has been served to the Consultant in -charge of the 
project for completion of houses. 
 
 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
44 
2.1.8.11 Construction of commercial shops in deviation to the  
approved lay out by the beneficiaries  
During scrutiny of records and on joint physical verification of BLC houses in 
test checked ULBs Audit noticed that 17 beneficiaries had not constructed the 
houses as per lay-out and along with BLC house shops for commercial purposes 
have been found constructed as shown in the photographs below: 
 
Photos taken during JPV of Beneficiary ID-228019266858400016 and 0322801989633384266 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that after completion of their houses 
under PMAY -U, some beneficiaries have constructed shops to support their 
livelihood. In other cases, notices have been issued to the beneficiaries for 
construction of commercial shops. 
The reply is not acceptable because as  per geo-tagged photo uploaded in the 
PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal it is clearly visible that commercial shops were 
constructed by beneficiaries which were ignored by the competent authorities 
at the time of geo-tagging and release of payment as shown below. 
 
Geo-tagged photos of Beneficiary ID-228019266858400016 and 228019266858400005 
2.1.8.12 Construction of houses beyond approved layout/ carpet 
area 
PMAY-U supports construction of houses up to 30 square meter carpet area. 
During scrutiny of records and on joint physical verification of BLC house in 
test check ULBs, Audit found that 107 beneficiaries constructed the houses with 
higher carpet area/multistorey beyond the approved 30 sqm layout for BLC 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
45 
houses for which notices have been issued by ULBs to the beneficiaries. 
Further, in Bilaspur and Bhilai beneficia ries later applied for regularis ation of 
these unauthorized constructions under 'Chhattisgarh Regularis ation of 
Unauthorized Development (Amendment) Act and Rules, 2022 '. The officials 
responsible for monitoring the construction failed to ensure compliance to the 
guidelines, allowing unauthorized expansions. This led to irregular financial 
assistance of ` 2.19 crore being provided to 107 beneficiaries.  
 
(Geo tagged photo)  (Beneficiary ID-228019737902000071) (Photo taken during JPV) 
 
 
(Geo tagged photo)  (Beneficiary ID-228019270707800082) (Photo taken during JPV) 
 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that notices have been issued to the 
Architect and concerned beneficiaries for extra construction of houses and some 
beneficiaries have applied for regularis ation of unauthorized construction. 
However, the payment of assistance was provided according to the provision of 
scheme guidelines and no payment was made for extra construction of houses. 
The reply is not acceptable as regularisation of extra construction beyond 
approved lay out is not only in contravention of the scheme guidelines but also 
against the spirit of scheme objectives. 
 
 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
46 
Case Study 
Irregular approval of building permission for same land and payment of 
assistance by geo-tag of photographs of other house  
In Municipal Corporation Korba a building plan for construction of BLC house 
up to 35 square meter in ground floor in Khasara no.-818 under Ward no-1, was 
approved (February 2020) in favor of Beneficiary code-228019490685500046. 
Accordingly, after geo-tagging of foundation (01 August 2021), the work was 
shown as completed on 27 September 2021.  
During joint physical verification (September 2023), a double storey building 
was found constructed in place of 35 sqm. sanctioned lay out under the scheme. 
Municipal Corporation, Korba has also issued another building permission for 
carpet area of 224.06 sqm. Moreover, during Joint Physical Verificat ion 
following actual house instead of house shown in geo-tagged photo was found. 
 
            (Geo tagged photo)   (Photo taken during JPV) 
Further, payment of financial assistance was provided without physical 
verification of work site by the officials of Architect, PMC, CLTC and 
Municipal Corporation. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the beneficiary has availed the 
benefit of the Scheme by submitting incorrect affidavits regarding income and 
has constructed houses more than the permissible ar ea. Hence, ULB has 
initiated recovering the instal lments paid under the Scheme and taking 
necessary legal action against the beneficiary and notice has been served 
(January 2025) to the beneficiary. 
2.1.8.13 Selling of houses by beneficiaries after receiving benefits 
under PMAY-U 
According to first SLSMC (October 2015), sale of houses allotted to the 
Beneficiaries under the mission will be restricted for 10 years. Further a s per 
the provisional allotment letter, the house is allo tted to the beneficiary for his 
residential use only. They will not have rights and are not allowed to sell or 
give on lease or rent or donate or transfer this house in any other manner. 
Scrutiny of records revealed the followings: 
 In Municipal Council  Takhatpur, during joint physical verification it 
was found that one beneficiary (ID -228019737147900111) sold half 
portion of the house to third party at a cost of ` 8.03 lakh in June 2023 
after receiving financial assistance of ` 2.26 lakh. 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
47 
 In Municipal Panchayat, Bhatgaon a BLC house was sanctioned 
(September 2017) in favour of beneficiary (ID -228020277427000009) 
on the basis of NOC from father without any document for ownership/ 
partition of land as the land (Khasra No. 1295/8) registered in the name 
of his father. On joint physical verification it was found that after 
completion of house and receipt of assistance, the land on which house 
was constructed belongs to beneficiary’s father, which was sold 
(February 2023) to third party at a cost of ` 42.60 lakh and the purchaser 
had renovated the house. 
 In Municipal Corporation, Raipur after completion of the work of 
construction of 232 DUs at Amlidih for allotment (May  2022) of DUs 
under Mor Makan Mor Aas , provisional allotment letter for 30 yea rs 
lease was issued (January  2023). During joint physical verification of 
232 DUs constructed at Amlidih (22 May 2024) and interaction with 
beneficiaries, it was noticed that the beneficiary to whom allotment was 
done after making a  payment of ` 3.03 lakh through bank finance sold 
the house to a  third person (July  2023) at a cost of ` 6.00 lakh in 
violation of the conditions of allotment. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that action will be taken against the 
beneficiaries who have sold thei r houses after availing of benefits under 
PMAY-U. As per the scheme guidelines, beneficiaries are prohibited from 
selling their houses within a period of 10 years. Further, in the case of Raipur 
notice was issued to the beneficiary for submission of justif ication regarding 
selling of DU but due to non -submission of justification, the house has been 
de-occupied from the beneficiary and taken under the control of the 
Corporation. This house will be further allotted to another valid beneficiary. 
2.1.8.14 Extension of multiple benefits under different verticals 
Para 5.12 of PMAY-U scheme guidelines state that beneficiaries can only receive 
one benefit under the scheme's verticals. While three verticals are managed by 
State/UT governments through Urban Local Bodi es (ULBs), the Credit Linked 
Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) is implemented by Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs). 
PLIs must use the CLSS Awas Portal (CLAP) to check for duplication and allow 
beneficiaries to track their application status. Housing Urban Developmen t 
Corporation (HUDCO), National Housing Bank (NHB) and State Bank of India 
(SBI) are selected by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), 
Government of India as Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) for implementation of 
the scheme and to distribute these subsidies. 
In Chhattisgarh against the total of 2.49 lakh subsidy claims submitted by the 
beneficiaries, only 37,374 claims were approved, for which an amount of 
` 820.93 crore was released as subsidy during the period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23 
The reasons for non -approval of remaining cases or pending at different stages 
were asked from all three 16 CNAs and are still awaited. Scrutiny of records 
revealed the following. 
During scrutiny of online MIS database of test checked ULBs and the 
information provided by Chhattisgarh Housing Board (CGHB), it was observed  
                                                                 
16  HUDCO, SBI and National Housing Bank 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
48 
that 133 17 beneficiaries in Municipal Corporation, Korba and Bilaspur and 
CGHB, availed benefits under the CLSS vertical. Of these, audit verified the 
cases of 29 beneficiaries availed the dual benefits under the scheme. This 
occurred despite their attachments under the AHP/BLC verticals, leading to an 
undue benefit of ` 57.61 lakh in contravention to scheme guideline, as det ailed 
in Appendix 2.1.7. 
The above findings highlight attachment of beneficiaries under the various 
verticals resulting in duplicity of benefits to beneficiary under PMAY -U. Such 
cases are in clear violation of the provisions outlined in the PMAY-U guidelines. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that  the dual benefit was attained by 
the beneficiary by being attached in the same MIS portal twice for different 
verticals. Further, the beneficiary already attached in AHP vertical could apply 
for CLSS in the same portal and the CLSS vertical is handled /monitored by PLIs 
/CNAs hence are well beyond the reach of checks /monitoring of ULBs. 
The explanations given by the State Government do not resolve the violation of 
PMAY-U guidelines. Allowing beneficiaries to receive benefits under the CLSS 
vertical, despite being attached to AHP and BLC verticals, clearly shows 
duplication and lack of proper verification.  
2.1.8.15 Under-representation of Female Beneficiaries   
The PMAY -U emphasizes women's ownership a nd co -ownership of houses, 
contributing to their socio-economic empowerment. As per paragraph 2.5 of the 
scheme guidelines, houses constructed or acquired with Central Assistance under 
the PMAY-U Mission should be in the name of the female head of the household, 
or the joint name of the male head of the household and his wife. Only in cases 
where there is no adult female member in the family, the house can be in the 
name of a male member of the household. 
During scrutiny and analysis of PMAY-U MIS database (as of December 2024) 
across 170 ULBs and information provided to audit by SUDA regarding benefits 
provided to female beneficiaries under the scheme, it was found that despite the 
scheme's focus on empowering women through property ownership, a significant 
number of female members did not receive the intended benefits. The year-wise 
details of benefits provided to female beneficiaries under the scheme during the 
period from 2015-16 to 2023-24 are given in Table 2.1.12. 
  
                                                                 
17  Bilaspur-08, Korba-01 and CGHB-124 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
49 
Table 2.1.12: Details of year-wise benefits provided to female beneficiaries under 
PMAY-U 
(Source: Compiled from MIS database of all ULBs) 
It is evident from the above that only 47 per cent of the total 2.09 lakh BLC 
beneficiaries and 77 per cent of the total 0.30 lakh AHP beneficiaries, overall, 
50 per cent from 2016 -17 to 2023 -24 were female, which falls short of the 
scheme’s goals. This shortfall highlights the challenges in registering t angible 
assets in the name of the female head of the household or joint ownership. 
Consequently, the initiative's potential to advance women’s empowerment and 
socio-economic independence could not be fully achieved. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the sanction letter has been issued 
to the beneficiaries based on the ownership of land. The sanction has been 
preferably accorded to the beneficiaries who have the ownership of the land. 
Additionally, the subordinate officials were instructed to determine the number 
of houses sanctioned either in the name of the female head or jointly with the 
male head. 
The reply is not acceptable as the scheme aims to empower women by 
sanctioning house in their name however, sanctioning houses in the name of 
male members on the basis of land ownership does not meet the scheme’s 
objective. 
 
Year Vertical Total 
beneficiaries 
Gender 
Male (per cent) Female (per cent) Third Gender 
2016-17 AHP 2278 456 (20) 1821 (80) 1 
BLC (NC) 2754 654 (24) 2100 (76) 0 
2017-18 AHP 9536 1965 (21) 7561 (79) 10 
BLC (NC) 47313 21691 (46) 25620 (54) 2 
2018-19 AHP 8641 1185 (14) 7456 (86) 0 
BLC (NC) 39316 22065 (56) 17251 (44) 0 
2019-20 AHP 2170 755 (35) 1414 (65) 1 
BLC (NC) 48557 27688 (57) 20869 (43) 0 
2020-21 AHP 1787 455 (25) 1330 (74) 2 
BLC (NC) 26185 14180 (54) 12005 (46) 0 
2021-22 AHP 2076 1009 (49) 1066 (51) 1 
BLC (NC) 18086 10691 (59) 7394 (41) 1 
2022-23 AHP 2391 771 (32) 1615 (68) 5 
BLC (NC) 18937 10535 (56) 8402 (44) 0 
2023-24 AHP 901 304 (34) 597 (66) 0 
BLC (NC) 8256 3991 (48) 4265 (52) 0 
Total AHP 29780 6900 (23) 22880 (77) 22 
Total BLC (NC) 209404 111495 (53) 97906 (47) 03 
Grand Total 239184 118395 (50) 120706 (50) 25 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
50 
2.1.8.16 Other irregularities 
 In the Municipal Corporation  Bhilai, Audit noticed that a BLC house 
(beneficiary ID 228020080660600435) was found completed within 
five days, from t he foundation stage (10 th February 2023) to the 
completion stage (15th February 2023). 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that there has been error in the 
geo-tagging and subsequent notices have been issued to the relevant 
consultant, but no financial misappropriation has been done since 
payment has been made to the beneficiary based on actual site visit of 
the ULB officials. 
 In Municipal Corporation Raipur, Audit noticed that two BLC houses of 
Beneficiary ID -0322802034632575297 and 0322802034632573544 
were sanctioned  (2021-22) and first instalment of ` 50,000 against 
foundation stage was made to each beneficiary (May 2023) without 
granting building permission (March 2024) and obtaining necessary 
documents such as self -declaration affidavits (May 2024) f or income 
etc. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that keeping in view the 
importance of the Scheme and delivery of scheme benefit to the 
beneficiary; the work was started by the beneficiary and the payment of 
installments were made based on the actual geo-tagging. 
The reply is not acceptable as the payment was provided without 
obtaining required affidavits in contravention of the scheme guidelines. 
 During joint physical verification of BLC projects in test checked ULBs, 
audit noticed that in 49 houses,  PMAY-U Logo showing the details of 
beneficiaries such as name, ID, project details, year of construction etc., 
were not found.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that logo was present during 
the final payment, but the beneficiaries removed the logo after 
completion of their houses. After instructions, the beneficiaries have 
reinstated the logo in their houses, and notices have been issued 
regarding non-removal of the logo. 
                                 
 
2.1.9 Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring of the implementation of the scheme was done through manual 
monitoring, PMAY MIS, Third Party Quality Monitoring Agency (TPQMA), 
social audit, geo-tagging, SLTC/CLTCs etc.  
2.1.9.1  Irregularities in geo-tagging of BLC houses 
Geo-tagging in PMAY-U is used to monitor the construction progress of houses 
through geo -tagged photos. The Management Information System (MIS) 
integrates with BHUVAN Portal, BHARAT MAP, and UMANG Mobile App  
to track different construction stages. To ensure accuracy, pho tos must be 
tagged within 10 meters of the house, capture all five stages from a consistent 
location, and include the beneficiary. Audit observed the following deficiencies 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
51 
in geo -tagging of construction of houses under the scheme in test checked 
ULBs: 
 In 38 cases, the geo-tagging of completion stage were uploaded in the 
PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal Appendix 2.1.8. However, on joint physical 
verification it was found that the construction of those houses was at 
foundation/plinth stage or lintel/roof stage as shown below: 
 
(Photo taken during JPV)  (Beneficiary ID-228020706777400010) (Geo tagged photo) 
 
(Photo taken during JPV)  (Beneficiary ID-228020365837500065) (Geo tagged photo) 
Thus, due to lack of monitoring at various levels, the photographs of other 
completed houses were uploaded in the PMAY -BHUVAN Portal and false 
progress was submitted to State and GoI. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the surveyor of the consultant 
had error-fully geo-tagged the stages of the houses. All the beneficiaries were 
not paid the final instalment. Later, beneficiaries have informed them regarding 
completion of their houses, based on the physical verification, final installments 
were paid to them. 
The reply is not acceptable as incorrect geo -tagging led to false reporting on 
construction progress to GoI. 
 In Municipal Council  Sarangarh and Municipal Panchayat  Abhanpur 
and Kota, Audit noticed that two to four BLC houses were sanctioned to the 
beneficiaries of same families on the same land however, instead of construction 
of multiple BLC houses, single house was constructed by the beneficiaries and 
geo-tagging of sa me house was done from different sides of the house was 
uploaded in PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal. 


Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
52 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that in Kota, notice has been issued 
to the Architect regarding furnishing of explanation for irregular attachment of 
beneficiaries and sanction of two BLC houses on the same land purchased after 
the cut-off date irregular payment of financial assistance against single house. 
In Abhanpur, four houses were sanctioned for family members. However, 
instead of constructing separate hou ses, they have constructed a single house 
on 1200 m² through mutual understanding. However, in the case of Sarangarh 
two separate houses have been sanctioned. 
The reply is not acceptable because only single house was found constructed at 
the site instead of separate houses and uploading photos from different angles 
to show false progress indicates monitoring failure. 
 In 42 cases, Audit noticed that completed house of one BLC beneficiary 
was used for geo-tagging purpose of multiple beneficiaries by simply changing 
the name and ID of beneficiaries. However, CLTC and competent authorities 
gave their approval, and finally mismatched ph otographs were geo -tagged in 
PMAY-U BHUVAN Portal. As a result, false progress submitted to State and 
GoI which shows the lack of monitoring at various level as shown below: 
 
(Geo-tagged Photo) (Beneficiary ID-228019490685700042) (Photo taken during JPV) 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the  wrong photographs were 
geo-tagged by the surveyors of Architect/PMC which has been later on 
corrected/revised, and notices have been issued to the Architects/PMC in this 
regard. However, the physical verification of the houses is ensured before the 
payment of installments. 
 Audit noticed that the geo -tagged photographs from Lintel to 
Completion stage of 136 beneficiary  was uploaded either on the same date or 
within two to five days from last geo-tagging. However, as per advisory for geo-
tagging, the construction of each stage will take at least a minimum of  
10-15 days. Thus, the provisions of advisory were not strictly  followed which 
shows the lack of monitoring at each level. 
While accepting the audit observation, the State Government stated (May 2025) 
that the beneficiaries often start the works before intimating the U LBs, in such 
cases to proceed in the portal which doesn’t allows to skip the stages, same 
photographs are being uploaded for previous/skipped stages.  Further, 
photographs are often taken from different angles, hence the houses seem to be 
different at various stages.  The notices have been issued  to the res pective 


Chapter II: Performance Audit 
53 
Architect/PMCs. However, the physical verification of the houses is ensured 
before the payment of installments. 
2.1.9.2 Delay in appointment of Independent Facilitate Agency 
(IFA)  
Para 12.5 of scheme guidelines provided for undertaking social audit of the 
projects being implemented under the scheme. Further, MoHUA issued 
instruction (September 2017) and reminders (November -December 2018 and 
April 2019) for appointment of Independent  Facilitate Agency (IFA) for 
conducting social audit.  
SUDA initiated (January 2018) the process for selection of IFA for conducting 
social audit by inviting Request for proposal (February 2018) however, the same 
was cancelled (April 2018) due to receipt o f single proposal. Thereafter next 
tender was re-invited in October 2019 and July 2020. The contract was signed 
(June 2021), and work order was issued to selected Agency on 19 August 2021 
for conducting of social audit of nine 18 ULBs for the period of 2016 -17,  
2017-18 and 2018-19 (three ULBs for each year) for completion of work within 
one year. The Agency started the Audit in April 2022 after a delay of seven 
months against the prescribed time of starting the work within three months. 
Audit noticed that ad ditional work was awarded to the same agency for 
conducting social audit for the period from 2019-20 to 2021-22 (three ULBs for 
each year) was issued (08 August 2022) at agreed cost of ` 8.21 lakh to the same 
IFA for completion of social audit and submissi on of report within one year. 
The IFA had submitted the social audit reports in November 2023 with delay of 
three months. Thereafter no records regarding conducting of social audit were 
found.  
Further, scrutiny revealed that, despite Raipur and Bilaspur being audited twice, 
significant irregularities such as non/delayed payment of assistance, incomplete 
houses, geo-tagging with other beneficiary ID, selling BLC houses, construction 
beyond approved layouts, and commercial shop constructions etc. were not 
highlighted in the social audit reports. 
Thus, due to delay in selection of Agency for conducting social audit, the social 
audit for the period from 2016 -17 to 2019 -20 was conducted in 2021 -22 i.e. 
after a delay of two to four years. There was further delay on the part of Agency 
in conducting the social Audit.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that in the initial phase of the scheme, 
the department regularly coordinated with the GoI and other States for the social 
audit process. Along with this, the department also coordinated with the senior 
officials of the Panchayat and Rural Development Department (P&RD) of the 
State for conducting social audit. After coordination with the GoI and other 
States, the department started the process of preparing RFP for social audit 
work. Since only one tender was received in the first tender, the second tender 
was considered. During this time, coordination was again done with the P&RD, 
but due to not receiving proper response, second tender was issued and after 
negotiation, proposal was sent to the Government for approval of ` 8.20 lakh. 
                                                                 
18  Bhilai, Bilaspur, Dongargarh, Durg, Jagdalpur, Lakhanpur, Raigarh, Raipur and 
Rajnandgaon  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
54 
After approval of rates by the Government (June and August 2021), work order 
was issued (06 August 2021) to the firm. During this time, the second wave of 
Covid-19 epidemic was prevailing in the country. 
The reply is not acceptable as there were critical delays in the social audit and 
an unjustifiable gap between the cancellation of the first tender in 2018 and 
issuance of the second in 2019, followed by further delays in issuing the work 
order in 2021. These delays in social audit impacted the timely identification 
and resolution of irregularities in PMAY-U projects. 
2.1.9.3 Functioning of Third -Party Quality Monitoring Agency 
(TPQMA) 
Paragraph 12.9 of PMAY-U guidelines require a system to check the quality of 
housing projects through Third Party Quality Monitoring (TPQM). All projects 
under the Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) component are to be 
monitored, while a sample of houses under Beneficiary -Led Construction 
(BLC) is to be r eviewed fairly. Two 19 TPQM agencies were appointed for 
monitoring the quality of houses under the scheme. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that for TPQM in ULBs of five different 
clusters, work orders were issued (March, September and October 2018) to two 
selected agencies in which TPQM was to be done at three levels (Foundation, 
lintel and completion) according to the guidelines issued by the GoI. Further 
scrutiny revealed that out of 70 sanctioned AHP projects first, second and third 
visit was carried out in 37, 28 and five (Bilaspur cluster) AHP projects 
respectively between September 2018 and October 2021 whereas no visit was 
carried out in Ambikapur cluster as ascertained from the bills for field visit 
submitted by the selected agencies.  
Similarly, in c ase of BLC projects only first visit in Bilaspur cluster of 240 
projects (October 2018 and July 2019) and third visit in Raipur and Durg cluster 
of 363 projects was carried out between September 2018 and April 2022 (Durg 
cluster). However, visit was not ca rried out after October 2018 and October 
2019 in Ambikapur and Jagdalpur cluster. Thereafter, no visit was carried out 
by TPQMA in any clusters till the date of audit (June 2024). 
Thus, due to inadequate monitoring of ongoing and completed projects, the 
objective of review and monitoring of quality of all PMAY -U projects had 
remained unachieved.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that TPQMA conducted visits in  
73 AHP projects (1 st Visit: 59 Projects, 2 nd Visit: 45 Projects and 3 rd Visit:  
10 Projects). Further, TPQMA conducted visits in 1958 BLC projects (1st Visit: 
1861 Projects, 2 nd Visit: 1440 Projects and 3 rd Visit: 1121 Projects). Hence, 
TPQMA conducted visits periodically in all the AHP and BLC projects to 
ensure quality and sound construction of the houses. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per document attached with reply, 2 nd 
and 3 rd visits were not conducted by TPQMA in Durg, Jagdalpur and 
Ambikapur cluster which defeated the objective of ensuring housing quality.  
                                                                 
19  Engineering Staff College of India, Hyderabad for Durg and Raipur cluster and SGS India 
Pvt. Ltd., Nagpur for Ambikapur, Jagdalpur and Bilaspur cluster 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
55 
2.1.9.4  Non-updating of MIS payment in PMAY-U portal 
As per PMAY -U guidelines, State Level Technical Cell (5 -10 professionals) 
and City Level Technical Cell (2 -4 professionals) were to be established to 
enhance capacity in planning, engineering, and monitoring. CLTCs were 
responsible for managing data entry and file uploads, preparing formats for MIS 
applications, setting up systems to mon itor and report project progress, and 
submitting quarterly progress reports to the SLNA via ULBs.  
During scrutiny of records and analysis of online MIS database (as of December 
2024), Audit noticed significant gaps in MIS database updates for BLC projects. 
Payments were released based on progress and geo -tagging, but the payment 
status in the MIS database was not updated as a result out of a total of 2.11 lakh 
beneficiaries benefitted under BLC vertical, online MIS payment entries of only 
1.25 lakh were fo und. Additionally, there was no integration between PFMS 
and MIS databases, leading to discrepancies.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the MIS did not have the original 
feature of continuous up-dation of beneficiary payment. The provision for u p-
dation of beneficiary payments stagewise was introduced in the year 2022 -23 
for the retrospective entry of payments made from 2016-17 to 2022-23, so that 
the linkage with PFMS may be initiated. But significantly the follow-up for the 
up-dation of the pay ment details was not taken -up by the GoI and the linkage 
work was also left out. Hence, the up -dation of beneficiary payment in MIS 
portal may not be significantly used for signifying non -performance of the 
CLTC professionals. Every ULB with the help of CL TCs and PMC/Architects 
have maintained a detailed offline database of the beneficiary payments made 
till date. The CLTCs and PMC/ Architects have helped a lot in the performance 
of the project, else the ULB officials could not have been able to achieve 
progress as seen today. 
The reply is not acceptable as CLTCs are responsible for MIS entries and in 
absence of MIS entries, the payment made to a particular beneficiary could not 
be verified from PMAY-U portal.  
 
2.1.10 Conclusion 
The Housing for All Plan of Actions (HFAPOAs) were prepared with delay of 
three to six years and AHP/BLC/ISSR projects with 1.48 lakh Dwelling Units 
(DUs) were sanctioned without identification/selection of beneficiaries based 
on demand assessment survey i ndicating deficient planning. Vacant housing 
stock available with ULBs under previous schemes could not be considered 
during preparation of HFAPOA. Due to approval of projects without 
identification of eligible beneficiaries, 1.09 lakh sanctioned houses ha d been 
curtailed till April 2025.  
The initial demand survey database entered in the MIS at the time of preparation 
of HFAPOAs were not available due to continuous updation (addition/deletion) 
in the original database. As a result, grant of scheme benefits  to originally 
surveyed beneficiaries could not be ensured in Audit. 
The absence of linkage between PMAY-U and PMAY-G databases resulted in 
99 beneficiaries availing benefits under both schemes, while 35 beneficiaries 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
56 
who had earlier received housing benefits under the Integrated Housing and 
Slum Development Program were allotted houses again under PMAY-U. 
Central share was not transferred to the SNA within the prescribed timeliness, 
leading to delay in fund disbursement to ULB and payment to beneficiaries and 
contractors.  
Under AHP vertical of PMAY -U scheme, fund amounting to ` 230.05 crore 
was blocked due to delay in completion of DUs by ULBs and the delay in 
completion of DUs was mainly due to lack of funds, Covid pandemic and slow 
progress of work.  Undue favour was extended to contractors due to non -
compliance to the terms and conditions of contract for payment and recovery of 
mobilisation advance and levying penalty. 
Out of 18,375 DUs completed under AHP vertical, 10,903 DUs (59 per cent) 
meant for slum dwellers were allotted under ‘Mor Makan Mor Aas’ to non-slum 
dwellers by revising the eligibility criteria without the approval of Central 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee. Further, share of State contribution 
(` 2.50 lakh) was also recovered fro m the beneficiaries in addition to their 
contribution of ` 0.75 lakh per DU. All the In -Situ Slum Redevelopment 
projects for slum development could not be implemented and curtailed due to 
lack of private partnership. Expenditure of ` 1.25 crore was incurre d on 
preparation of DPRs of these curtailed projects also rendered unfruitful. Thus, 
initially identified beneficiaries of slum areas under AHP vertical were deprived 
of scheme benefit due to curtailment of projects and allotment of house as per 
the revised criteria. 
Under BLC vertical, there were instances of selection of ineligible beneficiaries 
having gross annual income more than ` 3.00 lakh and pucca houses, non -
commencement of houses by beneficiaries after getting financial assistance for 
foundation/plinth, construction of houses beyond the prescribed lay out, 
construction of shops along with house, sanction of house without ownership of 
land and selling of houses/DU to a third person after construction by 
beneficiaries. In some cases, instal lments for  various stages of construction 
were released without completion of construction and geo-tagging of respective 
stage while in other cases there was delay in release of final instalment after 
completion of houses. 
There were lapses in the monitoring of cons truction of BLC houses i.e. 
mismatched and photographs of other beneficiaries’ houses used for geo -
tagging of different construction stages, irregular geo -tagging for completion 
stage of houses found incomplete during site inspection, release of final 
instalment of assistance before geo -tagging of completion stage. Delay in 
appointment of Independent Facilitate Agency resulted in conduct of social 
audit for the period 2016-20 with a delay of two to four years. 
The scheme’s objective of socio -economic empowerment of women through 
ownerships or co -ownership of house could not be fully achieved as only  
50 per cent of houses were sanctioned to female members under PMAY -U 
which falls short of the scheme’s goals. 
 
 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
57 
2.1.11 Recommendations 
The State Government may 
 Speed up the construction of remaining houses and set a firm deadline 
to complete them so that all intended beneficiaries receive their houses 
without further delay. 
 Ensure timeliness in release of Central and  State share and transfer 
of funds to executing agencies/ULBs and beneficiaries for 
construction of houses. 
 Ensure that eligible slum dwellers identified originally get benefitted 
under the scheme by facilitating allotment of house to them on priority 
in ongoing projects. 
 Strengthen the monitoring/control mechanisms to prevent double 
benefits to single beneficiary under two housing schemes or  
two verticals of a scheme. 
 Enforce geo-tagging compliance to ensure proper tracking of housing 
units before releasing funds to intended eligible beneficiaries. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring officials for wrong release of 
assistance before geo-tagging and other irregularities in geo -tagging 
of BLC houses as included under Paragraph no. 2.1.6.4, 2.1.7.4, 
2.1.8.9, 2.1.8.12 and 2.1.9.1. 
 Fix responsibility on the erring official for irregular release and non-
recovery of mobilisation advance from the contractor. 
 Increase the numbers of female beneficiaries by 
allocating/sanctioning house in the name of female member to  meet 
the scheme objective of women empowerment. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 

59 
CHAPTER III 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT  
Labour Department 
3.1 Compliance A udit on  Implementation of Welfare 
Schemes by the Labour Department  
 
3.1.1 Introduction 
The Labour Department of the Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG) is the nodal 
department to ensure protection of workers from the organised as well as 
unorganised1 sectors, and their economic, physical and social interests through 
enforcement of Labour Acts/Laws made by the Central and State Governments, 
and implementation of worker welfare schemes. 
Under the Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008 (UWSSA) of 
Government of India, GoCG constituted (January 2011)  the “ Asangathit 
Karmkar Rajya Samajik Suraksha Mand al” (CGAKM) under the Labour 
Department to provide social security to the unorganised workers. In 
Chhattisgarh, 56 categories of unorganised workers have been notified. The 
CGAKM is implementing welfare schemes to provide social security to workers 
of the unorganised sector. 
Workers engaged in the various establishments, having 10 or more workers, 
were categorised as organised sector workers. Chhattisgarh  Shram Kalyan 
Mandal (CGSKM) was constituted (February 2001) under the provision of the 
Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam, 1982 to protect the interest of the 
workers, and implement various welfare schemes for the sector. 
3.1.2 Organisational Setup 
The Labour Department, GoCG is headed by the Secretary to GoCG and 
assisted by the Labour  Commissioner, CGAKM and CGSKM. The CGAKM 
consists of a Chairman appointed by the State Government, Secretary of the 
Labour Department as ex-officio member and 28 nominated members including 
representative of unorganised workers, employers, State Legislative Assembly, 
reputed persons of civil society and related department. The CGSKM consists 
of Chairman, Vice -Chairman, Welfare Commissioner and 19 nominated 
members including representative of employers, employees and independent 
members. Detail flow chart of organisational set-up of the Labour Department 
is given in Appendix 3.1.1. 
3.1.3 Audit Objective, Scope and Methodology 
Audit was conducted covering the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23 to assess the 
compliance with ACTs/Rules and procedure in implementation of schemes for 
workers welfare, for achieving the intended benefits. 
                                                           
1  An enterprise owned by self-employed workers engaged i n the production/ sale of goods / 
providing service of any kind, and any enterprise which employs less than ten workers.  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
60 
Test check of records was carried out in three apex units i.e. Labour 
Commissioner Office, CGAKM and CGSKM and in 10 district-level units2. Out 
of 10 districts, six districts where both labour offices and welfare centers existed 
were selected. In addition, four districts were selected based on statistical 
sampling. 10 3 out of 50 4 welfare schemes implemented by CGAKM and 
CGSKM were selected f or scrutiny (Appendix 3.1.2). There were 4.94 lakh 
beneficiaries who availed the benefit of welfare schemes in the selected districts 
during 2018-19 to 2022-23. A beneficiary survey of 506 workers was conducted 
to evaluate the implementation of the selected schemes. 
3.1.4 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
 The Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam, 1982, UWSSA, and 
Labour Acts of the Government of India and the GoCG. 
 Government Notifications and Instructions issued from time to time for 
implementation of Acts and laws by the Central and State Government. 
 Welfare scheme guidelines/orders issued by the Labour Department, 
GoCG during 2011-18. 
3.1.5 Financial Management under CGAKM and CGSKM.  
Allotment of funds a nd expenditure for the welfare schemes in CGAKM and 
CGSKM revealed that the Labour Department made total budget 
provision/allotment of ` 329.41 crore during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 under the 
Scheme Heads (SH) 7435, 8977, 8989 and 4270. Funds under the scheme head 
4270-Shram kalyan Nidhi were provided to CGSKM while remaining scheme 
heads operated for CGAKM. Out of allotted funds, only ` 210.75 crore (64 per 
cent) was spent on all the 50 welfare schemes including administrative 
expenditure (` 88.56 crore in 10 selected welfare schemes) and ` 118.66 crore 
(36 per cent) remained unspent during 2018-23 as mentioned in Table 3.1.1. 
Table 3.1.1: Year wise detail of allotment, expenditure and savings under the 
budget head for welfare schemes in CGAKM and CGSKM during 2018-23 
 (` in crore) 
(Source: Information provided by Labour Commissioner Office and CGSKM )  
                                                           
2  Assistant Labour Commissioner (ALC)/Labour Officer (LO) Bilaspur, Durg,  
Janjgir-Champa, Kanker, Kondagaon, Korba, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Surguja  
3  seven from unorganised sector and three from organised sector 
4  14 under organised sector and 36 under unorganised sector 
Year Allotment Expenditure  
 
Savings (per cent) 
2018-19 71.15 36.00 35.15 (49) 
2019-20 67.82 33.53 34.29 (51) 
2020-21 63.42 40.80 22.62 (36) 
2021-22 61.50 42.08 19.42 (32) 
2022-23 65.52 58.34 7.18 (11) 
Total 329.41 210.75 118.66 (36) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
61 
It can be seen from the above table that allotment of fund declined while, 
expenditure against allotted funds consistently increased from 2019 -20 
onwards. Out of the total expenditure of ` 210.75 crore, ` 11.96 crore was 
incurred under the scheme head 4270  for CGSKM and remaining expenditure 
of ` 198.79 crore was incurred under CGAKM. Besides, budget allocation 
CGSKM received funds through contribution from registered workers and 
establishment and interest income etc. 
Audit noticed that in CGSKM, out of available fund of ` 44.86 crore,  
` 21.27 crore (47 per cent ) was spent during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 Details of 
receipts/available fund and expenditure is given in Table 3.1.2. 
Table 3.1.2: Receipt, Expenditure and Saving of Shram Kalyan Nidhi during 
2018-19 to 2022-23 
 (` in crore) 
Year Opening 
balance 
Receipts during 
the year 
Total 
available fund 
Expenditure Closing 
balance 
2018-19 3.01 5.60 8.61 4.02 4.59 
2019-20 4.59 9.32 13.91 5.27 8.64 
2020-21 8.64 8.28 16.92 3.46 13.46 
2021-22 13.46 7.00 20.46 2.88 17.58   
2022-23 17.58 11.65 29.23 5.64 23.59 
Total  41.85  21.27  
(Source: Information provided by CGSKM) 
Section 9 of the Chhattisgarh  Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam,  1982 provides 
that registered establishments have to contribute to welfare fund so that the fund 
would be utilised for the welfare of workers of the  organised sector. Audit 
noticed that out of 8,777 registered establishments, 1,627 had not made 
contribution of at least ` 2.93 crore 5 to welfare fund during January 2017 to 
March 2023. The CGSKM had not taken any action for the  recovery of these 
pending contributions. 
Out of the total expenditure of ` 21.27 crore, only ` 9.05 crore (43 per cent) was 
incurred on va rious welfare schemes and remaining expenditure was incurred 
on administration and establishment. During 2018 -19 to 2022-23, ` 3.74 crore 
was incurred by CGSKM for advertisement out of which ` 76.04 lakh was 
incurred on advertisement to raise awareness in public for prevention of covid. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that in case of CGAKM saving occurred 
due to Covid -19 during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 while in case of CGSKM there 
was provision of ` 50 crore for construction of Shram Bhawan, Dormitory, other 
buildings and implementation of new schemes. However, due to non -
availability of land, constructions of these buildings could not started. 
Reply of the Government indicates that focus of expenditure was more towards 
administrative and establishment activities than on welfare schemes. 
 
                                                           
5  1627 (establishments) x ` 1500 x 2 (twice in a year) x 6 (years) = ` 2.93 crore 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
62 
3.1.6 Registration of workers  
(i)  Unorganised sector: 
Section 10 of  UWSSA provides that every worker of unorganised sector who 
has completed 14 years of age shall be eligible for registration in CGAKM. The 
unorganised workers and establishment/workers of organised sector can apply 
for registration online via shramevjayate.cg.gov.in and obtain registration card 
to avail the benefit of various welfare schemes. Year-wise details of registration 
of workers in the CGAKM is given in Table 3.1.3. 
Table 3.1.3: Status of unorganised Workers’ registration in CGAKM 
(Source: Information provided by CGAKM) 
Audit observed that: 
 As per the e-Shram National portal, 76.33 lakh workers (excluding  
6.44 lakh construction workers) were registered in various occupational 
sectors in Chhattisgarh State as of March 2023. However, number o f 
workers registered under CGAKM as of March 2023 was only  
16.62 lakh, and balance 59.71 lakh 6 unorganised sector workers 
remained out of the targeted beneficiary number for the CGAKM. 
 Out of 16.62 lakh unorganised worker registrations, only 9.25 lakh  
(56 per cent ) were linked with Aadhaar numbers whereas 8.97 lakh  
(54 per cent ) registrations were linked with mobile numbers. The 
Department identified 3.40 lakh cases (May 2024) having multiple 
registrations with same Aadhaar number, but only 5,013 cases  were 
rectified and remaining 3.35 lakh cases were pending for rectification. 
(ii)  Organised sector: 
Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam , 2015 (amended) inter alia  
provides that every establishment 7 shall submit the names of the workers 
working under it for registration to the CGSKM. Year -wise details of 
registration of workers in the CGSKM is given in Table 3.1.4. 
                                                           
6  76.33-16.62 = 59.71 
7  As per Section 2 (5) (i) (ii) of the Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam , 1982, a 
factory or any establishment which carries on any business or trade or any work in 
connection with or ancillary thereto, which empl oys or has employed 10 or more workers 
in any working day during the preceding months 
Year Number of 
registered 
workers  
Application 
for 
registration 
received 
during the 
year 
Registration 
during the 
year 
Number of 
applications 
rejected 
Approved 
from  pending 
application  
Cancellation 
of 
registration 
due to death 
and any 
other reason 
Closing 
(2) +(4) 
+(6) - (7) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
2018-19 7,38,542 7,74,040 5,46,530 2,27,510 1,253 221 12,86,104 
2019-20 12,86,104 79,420 48,162 31,258 6 304 13,33,968 
2020-21 13,33,968 1,75,803 96,499 79,304 10 1,102 14,29,375 
2021-22 14,29,375 98,970 69,319 29,651 49 2,311 14,96,432 
2022-23 14,96,432 2,44,840 1,66,539 78,301 204 1,099 16,62,076 
Total  - 13,73,073 9,27,049 4,46,024 1522 5037 - 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
63 
Table 3.1.4: Status of registration of Establishments and organised workers in 
CGSKM 
(Source: Information provided by CGSKM) 
Audit observed that target of 2.50 lakh and 5.50 lakh was fixed for registration 
of workers for the years 2019-20 and 2021-22 respectively. Accordingly, funds 
were sanctioned and expenditure of ` 3.74 crore was incurred on 
publicity/advertisement. However, only 2.05 lakh (26 per cent) workers were 
registered till March 2023. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that in case of CGAKM, against 85.81 lakh 
registered workers under e-shram portal of Government of India, registration of 
26.62 lakh workers have been done and efforts are being made to register 
remaining 59.19 lakh (May 2025) workers. In case of CGSKM, efforts are being 
made to increase the registration of number of establishments and workers o f 
the Organised Sector. 
3.1.7 Implementation of the Welfare Schemes 
For CGAKM, applications were sought from unorganised workers to avail the 
benefit of the schemes. The workers were required to submit application forms 
(online through the  Labour portal) along with uploading of required 
documents as per the scheme requirements (e.g. for Maternity Assistance 
schemes, birth certificate and bank account details). A committee consisting 
of District Collector, ALC/LO of the concerned districts and Chie f Executive 
Officer (CEO) of Nagar Nigam/Nagar Palika was the sanctioning authority for 
financial assistance on e -Rickshaw and Mukhyamantri Cycle Assistance 
Scheme for entitlement of workers. For other schemes ALC/LO/any other 
officer (authorised by the Collector) of the district was authorised to sanction 
applications of workers. Similarly, for CGSKM, applications were sought by 
employer of establishment through online portal. Welfare Commissioner was 
the competent authority to scrutinise the applications and sanction for benefit 
of the welfare schemes.     
During the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23, 36 schemes for unorganised sector 
workers and 14 schemes for organised  sector workers were implemented by 
CGAKM and CGSKM respectively for their benefit. Total number of 
beneficiaries and expenditure under these schemes are given in Table 3.1.5. 
  
Year Opening balance of 
registered establishments 
and workers 
Registration during the 
year 
Closing balance  of 
registration  
Establishments Workers Establishments Workers Establishments Workers 
2018-19 2,393 1,05,863 1,439 23,719 3,832 1,29,582 
2019-20 3,832 1,29,582 1,077 17,760 4,909  1,47,342 
2020-21 4,909 1,47,342 1,206 23,257 6,115  1,70,599 
2021-22 6,115 1,70,599 1,737 23,838 7,852  1,94,437 
2022-23 7,852 1,94,437 925 10,292 8,777 2,04,729  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
64 
Table 3.1.5: Status of number of beneficiaries benefited and expenditure 
incurred under various Labour welfare schemes during the  
period 2018-19 to 2022-23 
Year CGAKM CGSKM 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
2018-19 4,46,113 32.67 78,684 2.45 
2019-20 2,91,761 7.48 1,26,861 2.25 
2020-21 12,557 21.04 93,015 1.13 
2021-22 17,362 37.12 1,28,775 0.90 
2022-23 20,480 42.75 26,780 2.32 
Total 7,88,273 141.06 4,54,115 9.05 
(Source: Information provided by CGAKM and CGSKM) 
Audit observed that  
a) Number of beneficiaries reduced sharply after 2020, however, scheme 
expenditure has gone up for the unorganised sector. In comparison, 
scheme expenditure for the organised sector has remained insignificant, 
even though the number of registered beneficiarie s is higher for the 
sector from 2020 onwards. 
b) In 10 out of the 50 schemes (Appendix 3.1.3) for CGAKM and CGSKM 
put together, no expenditure was incurred during the period 2018 -19 to 
2022-23 despite budget provision as detailed below: 
CGAKM– (i) Assistance for Smart Vending Cart (Readymade Kitchen) 
(ii) E-Thela Sahayta Yojna (iii) OPD treatment to Safai Karmkar (iv) 
OPD treatment to Contract Labourer and Hamal worker (v) Mukhya 
Mantri Cycle Rickshaw; 
CGSKM – (i) Free Baishakhi/Calipers/Hearing Aid distribution (ii) Free 
Cycle Distribution (iii) Health and Eye Test Camp and Free Spectacles 
Distribution (iv) Accidental Death Assistance to Workers (v) Sports 
Competitions for workers.  
Thus, the workers of both organised and unorga nised sectors were 
deprived of the benefit of the above welfare schemes even after 
availability of funds.  
c) In 17 schemes, average financial benefit to each worker was less than 
` 1,000 (Appendix 3.1.4) . Audit further noticed that expenditure on 
welfare schemes such as marriage assistance, distribution of sewing 
machine, cycles, tools and equipment etc. was not incurred consistently 
throughout the audit period and benefits were granted in specific years. 
In overall, CGAKM and CGSKM incurred expenditure of  
` 150.11 crore and only 12.42 lakh workers were benefitted during 
2018-19 to 2022 -23, indicating shortfall in coverage of registered 
workers under various welfare schemes and under -utilisation of 
available funds there by CGAKM and CGSKM for the welfare of 
workers. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
65 
d) For two schemes i.e. financial assistance to e-Rickshaw and CM Cycle 
Assistance Scheme, provision of constituting a committee is laid down 
in the scheme guideline for scrutiny of applications and extends benefit 
to workers. However, the said mechanism was not prescribed in other 
schemes. This reflects that there was no uniform mechanism for 
selecting beneficiaries and lacks consistent approach.  
The Government stated (May 2025) that out of 10 welfare schemes, five welfare 
schemes have been closed due to non -receipt of applications/insufficient 
applications during 2018-19 to 2022-23. In remaining welfare schemes, efforts 
are being made to increase the number of beneficiaries. 
Reply is not acceptable as 6,773 applications were received in five schemes (101 
applications in four schemes under CGAKM and 6,672 in one scheme under 
CGSKM) but no benefit was provided to the workers. 
3.1.7.1 CM Cycle Assistance and Newspaper Distributor 
(Hawker) Cycle Schemes by CGAKM 
During 2018-19 to 2022-23 six schemes8 relating to free cycle assistance were 
implemented by CGAKM for registered workers. Audit test checked two cycle 
schemes of CGAKM i.e. CM Cycle Assistance and Newspaper Distributor 
(Hawker) Cycle S cheme. Under these schemes, a  cycle would be provided to 
women workers (age 18 -40 years) and Hawkers registered in CGAKM. Audit 
noticed the following irregularities: 
(i) Less coverage of beneficiaries 
There were 6.51 lakh women workers and 1,624 Hawkers regist ered under 
CGAKM. During 2018-19 to 2022-23 against 1.50 lakh applications received, 
0.35 lakh (23  per cent) workers were benefitted while 0.76 lakh (51  per cent) 
applications were pending for processing by the District Labour  Offices and 
0.39 lakh applications were rejected. All the cycles were distributed during the 
year 2018 -19 and no cycles were distributed to workers during 2019 -20 to  
2022-23.  
 Scrutiny of records in District Labour Office, Raipur revealed that 
18,200 cycles (4,200 for CGAKM and 14,000 for BOCW) supplied to 
the Raipur district for distribution to workers who had applied for cycle 
schemes. CGAKM made payment of ` 1.55 crore (March 2020) to the 
firm for 4,200 cycles (100 male + 4,100 female) and balance paym ent 
for 14,000 cycles were made by BOCW Board (February 2020). Out of 
18,200 cycles received, 17,505 cycles were distributed to the 
beneficiaries and the  remaining 695 cycles were not distributed to the 
beneficiaries and were lying idle for the last six ye ars at Government 
Higher Secondary School, Kolar, Block -Abhanpur, Krishi Upaj Mandi 
Samiti, Block -Abhanpur, ITI College Mana, Gobra -Navapara and 
Arang. Photograph of damaged cycles were taken during the joint 
physical verification of the site is given below: 
                                                           
8  (i) CM Cycle Assistance Scheme (ii) Hawker Cycle Assistance Scheme (iii) Cycle and 
Torch Assistance for Kotwar (iv) Cycle Scheme for Raut Charwaha, Milkmen  (v) Cycle 
Assistance for son/daughter of Safai Karmkar (vi) Cycle Chhatri, Chappal/Juta Scheme 
for Gharelu Kamgaar. 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
66 
 
Damaged cycles kept at Government Higher Secondary, Kolar (Block - Abhanpur), 
Date: 26.06.2024 
It was also noticed that the Labour  Inspector, office of the ALC, Raipur had 
reported (May 2022) that cycles were not in condition to use i.e. rusted and 
damaged. Due to non-distribution of cycles in time, not only there was wasteful 
expenditure of ` 25.76 lakh (` 3,707 x 695) but also the workers were deprived 
of the benefit of the schemes. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
Government of India issued instructions to BOCW board that materials shall 
not be issued to the workers. However, due to some conf usion, distribution of 
cycles to the workers of unorganised sector was held up. As regards wasteful 
expenditure of ` 25.76 lakh, Government further stated that necessary steps will 
be taken after physical evaluation of remaining cycles. 
Reply confirms that  Department did not distribute cycles to the workers 
registered under CGAKM. Further, due to non -distribution and consequent 
damage in 695 cycles expenditure of ` 25.76 lakh incurred on purchase of cycle 
rendered wasteful. 
3.1.7.2 Deficiencies in implementation of other schemes 
Audit observations on other schemes of CGAKM such as e-Rickshaw 
Assistance Scheme, provision for necessary equipment i.e. Gloves, Mask, 
Gumboot etc. to Safai Karmakar, Skill Development to Safai Karmakar and 
under CGSKM, Edu cational Scholarship Scheme, Administrative expenditure 
on Operation of Welfare Centre and Free Tailoring Training Scheme and 
Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna are given below:- 
 e-Rickshaw Assistance Scheme (For unorganised worker): - As per 
the e-Rickshaw Scheme, financial assistance of ` 50,000 was to be 
provided by CGAKM to the applicant/worker aged 18 -50 years on his 
application after his contribution of ` 10,000 and sanctioning of 
the remaining amount of loan from bank. It was observed that 1, 053 
workers were provided financial assistance for the  purchase of e-
Rickshaw in the State during 2018 -19 to 2022-23 and in Durg district, 
financial assistance for the  purchase of e-Rickshaw had not been given 
to any beneficiaries during 2020 -21 to 2022 -23 even though 39 
applications were received. Further, nine beneficiaries of four districts 9 
                                                           
9 Rajnandgaon (1), Korba (4), Surguja (2) and Raigarh (2) 


Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
67 
had got financial assistance for e-Rickshaw after the lapse of one year 
from their applications submitted to the Labour Department whereas  
13 beneficiaries in eight  districts10 had got financial assistance in  
six months to 12 months of submission of their applications. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that out of 39 applications received 
during 2020-21, financial assistance for e-Rickshaw have been given to 
11 beneficiaries whereas in 06 cases duplicate applications were 
received and in 22 cases applications were rejected due to improper 
documentation. 
The Government did not address the issue of delay in providing financial 
assistance to 1 1 beneficiaries in Durg district and 22 beneficiaries in 
other selected districts.  
 Grant of Necessary Equipment for Safai Karmkar (for unorganised 
worker): -Assistance of ` 1,000 for purchase of Gumb oot, Gloves, 
Masks and Apron was to be given every year to Safai Karmkars aged 
18-60 years registered under the CGAKM. It was observed that 11,042 
applications were received, out of which 6,327 workers were provided 
benefits of the scheme after incurring expenditure of ` 34.35 lakh during 
2018-19 to 2022 -23. Ou t of 11,042 applications received, 3,230 
applications (29 per cent ) were pending.  Beneficiary survey of 56 
workers revealed that workers were provided the  benefit of the scheme 
for only one year instead of every year as provided in the guidelines of 
the scheme.  Further, in three districts, i.e. Kondagaon, Janjgir-Champa 
and Raigarh beneficiary survey revealed that 11 workers were included 
in the list of beneficiaries but none of them had got necessary equipment 
as provided in the guidelines. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that notification would be issued as 
per the new guidelines and equipment will be issued every year on the 
basis of initial application and verifying the availability of respective 
Safai Karmkars every year.  
 Skill Development to Safai Karmkar :-Scheme provides that training 
on some selected small business would be imparted to registered 
workers/family members (husband, wife, son and daughter) of workers 
(above 18 years age) from time to time with the help of Chhattisgarh 
State Skill Development Authority. There were 32,623 Safai Karmkar 
registered under CGAKM (during 2018 -23). It was observed that 741 
applications were received in the state , out of which 440 workers were 
given skill development training during 2018 -19 to 202 2-23 but no 
records on their subsequent employment in any organisation were 
maintained by CGAKM. Further, it was observed that in test -checked 
districts no workers were selected for training even after receiving 188 
applications under the scheme during last five years.  
The Government stated (May 2025) that instruction for maintenance of 
records of such employment would be issued in case of Skill 
development to Safai Karmkar.  
                                                           
10 Rajnandgaon (1), Durg (1), Korba (1), Kondagaon (1), Kanker (2), Janjgir -Champa (4), 
Raigarh (1) and Bilaspur (2) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
68 
 Educational Scholarship Scheme (for organised worker): -The 
scheme provides that S on/Daughter (up to two sons/daughters) of 
registered workers of establishment registered under  CGSKM were 
eligible to get the benefit of ` 1,500 to ` 10,000 as scholarship (from 
class one to post -graduation). It was observed that out of 11,254 
applications received, only 8,779 (78 per cent) workers were benefitted 
under the scheme after incurring expenditure of ` 3.12 crore during 
2018-19 to 2022 -23. Out of the remaining 2,497 applications, 2,475 
were rejected and 22 were pending. In three test -checked districts 
(Surguja, Kondagaon and Kanker) although there were 4,859 workers in 
168 number of establishments, no a pplication was received from the 
workers. This indicates lack of awareness for the welfare scheme of 
educational scholarship in these districts. 
The Govern ment stated (May 2025) that in E ducational Scholarship 
Scheme, efforts would be made through posters,  display boards etc., in 
establishments for publicity of this scheme so that workers will be aware 
to avail the benefit of the schemes. 
Reply is not acceptable as CGSKM incurred expenditure of ` 3.74 crore 
on advertisement during the same period indicating  ineffectiveness in 
reaching out the workers through traditional mode of advertisement such 
as hoarding, posters etc. The CGSKM should take initiative to raise 
awareness among the workers for welfare schemes in innovative way. 
 Administrative expenditure on  Operation of Welfare Centres and 
Free Tailoring Training Scheme (for organised worker): -Family 
members (wife and daughter) of worker of the establishment registered 
under CGSKM are entitled to get the benefit of free tailoring training at 
Welfare Centres,  and after qualifying the required examination of 
tailoring/embroidery conducted by CGSKM, sewing machine would be 
provided to them. Scrutiny revealed that 2,572 beneficiaries were given 
sewing training during 2018-23. Out of these 2,572 beneficiaries, 1,702 
beneficiaries were entitled to availing sewing machines. These eligible 
beneficiaries were to be provided sewing machine during 2018 -23 but 
they were provided benefit through DBT during the year 2023-24. Thus, 
there was delay in providing benefit of the scheme ranging from one to 
five years. 
The Government remained silent for delay in providing benefit of the 
scheme to the beneficiaries. 
 Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna (for organised 
worker):-Workers of registered establishments were eligible  for 
nutritional food (Rice, Dal, Sabji and Achar) at a price of ` 5 per meal 
at specified centres. Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna  
was implemented in only five districts (Bilaspur, Raipur, Rajnandgaon, 
Durg and Raigarh) through distribution of food at Seven to eight centres 
in 2018-19. During 2019 -20 to 2022 -23, this scheme was operated in 
four districts (Raipur, Rajnandgaon, Durg and Raigarh). Food was not 
distributed during entire year in two centres i.e. Magneto Mall (Raipur) 
and Brihaspati Bazar (Bilaspur) and for six months in one centre of 
Chhavni (Durg) during 2018 -19. Further, food was not distributed in 
Nava Raipur for 11 months during 2021-22.   

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
69 
The Government stated (May 2025) that in case of Shaheed Veer 
Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna  in Brihaspati Bazar (Bilaspur) and 
Chhavni (Durg), workers from unorganised sector have benefitted 
whereas in Magneto Mall (Raipur), unregistered persons had availed the 
benefit, hence it was closed for some time. At present, in Nava Raipur, 
food centre is not operated by the engaged contractor/vendor. 
Reply indicates inadequate monitoring of distribution of food in the 
centres i.e. Brihaspati Bazar (Bilaspur) and Chhavni (Durg) and in 
Magneto Mall (Raipur) . Further, as per the ag reement, 
contractor/vendor had to operate all food centres. 
3.1.8 Non-adherence to Lok Seva Guarantee Act, 2011  
Under Lok Seva Guarantee Act, 2011 in three schemes i.e. Maternity Assistance 
related to women Theka/Hamal/Gharelu Kamgaar shramik, Safai Karmkar and 
other unorganised workers time limit for disposal of cases (30 working days 
after the date of application received) was provided. Audit scrutinised current 
records in selected districts offices related to scheme benefits under CGAKM 
which comes under the Lok Seva Guarantee Act, 2011  and noticed that 2,837 
applications of above three maternity schemes were pending beyond the time 
limit of 30 days from the date of application. The details are given in  
Table 3.1.6. 
Table 3.1.6: Details of Schemes in which Lok Seva Guarantee Act, 2011 was not 
followed 
Name of the 
Scheme 
District Delay Status obtained up 
to (Considering 20 
working days in a 
month) 
Delay 
ranges 
from date 
of 
application 
No. of Applications 
were pending 
(delay beyond 30 
days) 
Theka Shramik 
Gharelu Mahila 
Kamgaar and 
Hamal Sh ramik 
Prasuti Sahayta 
Yojna 
Kondagaon 31 December 2023 50 days to 
55 days 
02 
(20 days to 25 days) 
Kanker 31 December 2023 40 days to 
75 days 
12 
(10 days to 45 days) 
Raipur 31 May 2024 40 days to 
246 days 
123 
(10 days to 216 
days) 
Asangathit 
Karmkar Prasuti 
Sahayta Yojna 
Kondagaon 31 December 2023 40 days to 
95 days 
45 
(10 days to 65 days) 
Kanker 31 December 2023 40 days to 
84 days 
25 
(10 days to 54 days) 
Raipur 31 May 2024 40 days to 
242 days 
90 
(10 days to 212 
days) 
Janjgir-
Champa 
31 December 2023 Up to 60 
and beyond 
60 days 
2535 
(more than 60 days) 
Safai Karmkar 
Prasuti Sahayta 
Yojna 
Raipur 31 May 2024 40 days to 
98 days 
05 
(10 days to 68 days) 
Total    2837 cases 
(Source: Information provided by selected district offices) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
70 
From the above , it is evident that the delay ranged from 10 days to 216 days 
after the time limit of 30 working days. Thus, the Lok Seva Guarantee Act was 
not adhered to properly by the Department in these schemes. 
On this being pointed out, ALCs/LOs of concerned districts replied that delay 
in the disposal of applications was due to the  Vidhan Sabha election and staffs 
were involved in election duty. 
Reply indicates that provision of Lok Seva Guarantee Act was not adhered to. 
3.1.9 Insufficient number of meetings conducted by CGAKM 
and CGSKM 
Records of CGAKM and CGSKM revealed that, during 2018 -23, the meeting 
of CGAKM was conducted only once (February 2023) against the required 15 
meetings and the meeting of CGSKM was conducted seven times against the 
required 20 meetings provided in the Unorganised Workers Social Security 
Rules, 2010 and the Chhattisgarh Shram Kalyan Nidhi Niyam , 1984 
respectively.  
Further, the decisions taken in meetings of CGSKM for organising free health/ 
eye examination camp, expansion of free sewing and embroidery training 
centres etc. were not implemented. Due to which, workers were deprived of the 
benefit of the welfare programs. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that desired numbers of meetings were not 
conducted due to non-availability of nomination of members since 2018 -19 to 
November 2022. However, nomination was made in December 2022 but due to 
incomplete quorum meetings were not held. 
Reply confirms that meetings were not conducted due to delayed nomination of 
member and incomplete quorum indicating inadequate governance by CGAKM 
and CGSKM. 
3.1.10 Shortage of Manpower in State  
For the smooth implementation of various schemes and Acts under the Labour  
Department, the state Government has sanctioned the posts of officers and 
employees in Labour Offices. Details of sanctioned, working and vacant posts 
of staff in the Labour Department are given in the Table 3.1.7. 
Table 3.1.7: Details of sanctioned, working and vacant posts (as of March 2023) 
Category State 
Sanctioned 
posts 
Men in 
position  
Vacant posts  
(per cent) 
Assistant Labour Commissioner/Labour 
Officer/Assistant Labour Officer 
53 34 19 (36) 
Labour Inspector/Labour Sub Inspector 150 113 37 (25) 
Assistant Grade-3 103 21 82 (80) 
Data Entry Operator 27 15 12 (44) 
Peon and Choukidar including 
outsourced. 
110 28 82(75) 
(Source: Information provided by Labour Commissioner office) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
71 
It was observed that 80 per cent  of post in case of Assistant Grade -3,  
44 per cent  in case of Data Entry Operator, 36 per cent  of ALC/LO and  
25 per cent  of post in case of Labour Inspector/Labour  Sub Inspector were 
vacant, which resulted in shortcomings in implementation of schemes, delay in 
pursuing pending cases in Labour Court, improper maintenance of records and 
non-adherence to the Lok Seva  Guarantee Act, 2011 etc . as mentioned in 
previous paragraphs.  
The Government stated (May 2025) that Steps are being taken for new 
appointment and promotion of staff in due time. 
3.1.11  Conclusion 
The Labour Department is the nodal department of GoCG to protect the 
workers’ economic, physical and social in terests through enforcement of 
Labour Acts and Laws made by the Central and State Governments, and 
implementation of welfare schemes for them. 
We noted that the GoCG did not ensure expenditure on schemes commensurate 
with the allotments, and number of registered workers. Registration of workers 
of the unorganized sector was far below the number of registration under the  
e-Shram portal of GoI, while in the Organised Sector registration was only  
26 per cent.  Monitoring/evaluation of welfare schemes by CGAK M/CGSKM 
was insufficient due to lack regular and periodic meetings of the monitoring 
agencies. 
3.1.12 Recommendations 
The Government may ensure: 
 Better utilisation of the funds allotted for the benefit of workers.  
 Fixing the responsibility on erring officials who failed in distribution 
of purchased cycle and other equipment/protective gears/materials etc. 
 Specific measures to register remaining and eligible workers on IT 
labour portal and to effectively conduct IEC activities to educate and 
create awareness among workers about various government welfare 
schemes and procedure to take advantages of these schemes. 
 A robust IT sub-module in existing labour portal may be made for user 
friendly registration and disbursal of benefits for better 
implementation, transparency and monitoring.  
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
72 
Energy Department 
 
3.2  Long Paragraph on Installation of Solar Pumps by 
Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy Development 
Agency 
 
3.2.1 Introduction 
The Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy Development Agency (CREDA) has been 
constituted (May 2001) under Society Act, 1973 by the Government of 
Chhattisgarh (GoCG) as a nodal agency for development and promotion of 
renewable energy in the State. The main objective of the CREDA is to promote 
the utilization of renewable energy reso urces like solar, wind, hydro, biomass,  
biogas and geothermal which are either limitless or abundantly available in 
nature to produce energy for domestic and industrial purposes and at the sam e 
time reduce the dependence on  the limited conventional sources of energy like 
coal, fossil fuels, petroleum etc. CREDA functions as an agency for installing 
solar pumps based on Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) devices in different sources of 
water such as tubewells, wells, rivers, ponds etc. to provide 
individual/community minor irrigation under Saur Sujla Yojna  (SSY) and 
supply drinking water from spot source under Solar Dual Pumps  (SDPs) and 
through pipeline under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM). Under the SDP/JJM scheme, 
the CREDA installs solar pump sets and elevated storage tanks as deposit works. 
During the period 2017 -23, CREDA had installed 1,26,908 solar pumps with 
expenditure of ` 4,495.24 crore for providing minor irrigation and supply of 
drinking water under the three schemes. The details of number of solar pumps 
installed by CREDA under different schemes along with expenditure incurred 
during 2017-23 is shown in the following Table 3.2.1. 
Table 3.2.1: Details of solar pumps installed by CREDA under different schemes 
during 2017-23 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. Name of Schemes No. of solar pump 
installed 
Expenditure  
1 Minor Irrigation- 
(i) Individual Saur Sujla Yojna (SSY)  
 
1,12,392 
 
3,404.09 
(ii) Solar Community Irrigation (SCI) 171 60.61 
2 Supply of Drinking Water- 
(iii) Solar Dual Pumps (SDPs) 
 
9,594 
 
482.54 
(iv) Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 4,751 548.00 
 Total 1,26,908 4,495.24 
(Source: Physical/financial progress intimated by the CREDA for year 2017-23). 
Audit test checked (between April 2021 and September 2023) records 
maintained by the CREDA, its Regional Offices and offices functioning at 
district level covering the period from 2017-18 to 2022-23 with the objective to 
assess whether the installation of solar pumps was done in an economical, 
efficient and timely manner. Audit also conducted field survey of beneficiaries 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
73 
(farmers) who has received solar pumps under the SSY. Out of 28 districts in 
the State, eight districts11 and from each of the selected district, two Blocks (or 
25 per cent) and in each selected block, 15 solar pumps  were selected for field 
survey through Stratified Random Sampling Without Replacement method.  
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria sourced from the Scheme 
guidelines, circulars, and instructions issued by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India (GoI),  GoCG, Energy 
Department/Finance Department and Works Manual of the CREDA. 
Being a registered society, CREDA executes work from the deposits made 
available by various Departments/Authorities/Bodies.  
During 2017-23, CREDA had received funds of ` 5,147.66 crore under SSY/ 
SCI from Energy Department and, SDPs/ JJM from Public Health Engineering 
Department and other districts authorities. Out of the available funds of  
` 5,195.63 crore (including opening balance of ` 47.97 crore for year  
2017-18), fun d totaling ` 4,495.24 crore (86.52 per cent ) was utilised for 
installation of solar pumps under various schemes and ` 700.40 crore was lying 
as closing balance at the end of March 2023, as enumerated in Table 3.2.2. 
Table 3.2.2: Status of fund flow for installation of solar pumps during 2017-23 
(` in crore) 
Year Opening Balance Receipts Total Expenditure  
(per cent) 
Closing Balance 
(per cent) 
2017-18 47.97 901.5 949.47 891.69 (93.91) 57.78 (6.09) 
2018-19 57.78 677.05 734.83 621.25 (84.54) 113.59 (15.46) 
2019-20 113.59 496.19 609.78 559.70 (91.79) 50.08 (8.21) 
2020-21 50.08 988.64 1038.72 651.10 (62.68) 387.62 (37.32) 
2021-22 387.62 790.90 1178.52 941.11 (79.86) 237.41 (20.14) 
2022-23 237.41 1293.38 1530.79 830.39 (54.25) 700.40 (45.75) 
Total  5147.66 6042.11 4495.24 (86.52)  
(Source: Financial progress intimated by the CREDA for year 2017-23) 
The closing balance increased from ` 50.08 crore at the end of year 2019-20 to 
` 700.40 crore at the end of year 2022 -23 and the percentage of expenditure 
from available fund shows fluctuating trend from 93.91 per cent  to  
54.25 per cent during 2017-23 indicating under utilisation of available funds. 
The District Water and Sanitation Committees (DWSCs) had deposited funds 
for installa tion of solar pumps under Jal Jee van Mission at the fag end of 
financial year 2022 -23 and unspent fund of these deposits reflected as more 
closing balance. 
  
                                                           
11  Balodabazar, Balrampur, Gariyaband, Jashpur, Kanker, Kondagaon Narayanpur and 
Rajnandgaon 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
74 
3.2.2 Audit findings 
3.2.2.1  Preference to costlier DC solar pump over AC pumps for 
installation under SSY scheme 
The SSY scheme aims to provide minor irrigation facility particularly in 
unapproachable areas devoid of electricity through installation of solar pumps. 
As per the scheme guidelines for the year 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19, only 
AC solar pumps were to be installed under the category of three to five HP 
capacity while option of DC solar pumps was available for the category of one 
to two HP capacity. However, in revised guidelines for the  year 2019-20 the 
option of AC and DC solar pumps was extended to all category i.e. two to five 
HP of pumps. 
During the period 2016-23, CREDA invited open tenders for supply and 
installation of two to  five HP AC and DC  submersible and surface  solar 
pumps. The lowest accepted rates of submersible and surface solar pumps  
ranged between ` 1,38,585 and ` 4,50,000 per pump set for AC pump sets while 
for DC solar pump sets these rates ranged between ` 1,86,219 and ` 4,90,500. 
Thus, the accepted rates of DC solar pumps were ` 40,500 to ` 47,634 more 
than the accepted rates of AC solar pumps.  
Audit observed (between April 2021 and September 2023) that under SSY 
CREDA had installed 1,24,472 solar pump  sets comprising 88,806 DC  
(71.35 per cent) and 35,666 AC (28.65 per cent) pump sets during the period 
2016-23. Out of which, during 2016-17 to 2018-19, 24,427 DC solar pumps of 
three to five HP were installed instead of AC pumps in contravention to the 
scheme guidelines. As a result an extra cost of ` 49.39 crore incurred on the 
scheme due to preference to DC pumps over AC pumps shown in Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3: Details of DC solar pumps installed with different capacity from 
2016-19 
(` in lakh) 
(Source: - Financial progress intimated by the CREDA for year 2016-23) 
  
Sl. 
No 
Type and 
Capacity of 
the solar 
pumps 
Phase-I (2016-17) Phase-II (2017-18) Phase-III (2018-19) 
No. of 
DC 
pumps 
Rates 
(DC/AC) 
Difference No. of 
DC 
Pumps 
Rates 
(DC/AC) 
Difference No. of 
DC 
Pumps 
Rates 
(DC/AC) 
Difference 
1 
3 HP 
Surface  
631 3.60/3.36 0.24 3011 2.99/2.82 0.17 573 2.09/2.10 0.00 
2 
3 HP 
Submersible  
2107 3.72/3.48 0.24 5945 3.18/3.02 0.16 6910 2.48/2.25 0.23 
3 
5 HP 
Submersible  
728 4.91/4.50 0.41 1929 4.19/3.94 0.25 1820 3.15/2.89 0.26 
4 
5 HP 
Surface  
0 0 0 229 4.33/3.98 0.35 544 3.33/3.11 0.22 
 Total 3466 Extra cost ` 955.60 11114 Extra cost ` 1927.41 9847 Extra cost ` 2056.02 
Total no. of solar pumps installed in year 2016-19 24427 Gross extra cost  ` 4939.03  lakh 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
75 
It is evident from the above table that costlier DC pumps of three to five HP 
were installed while the guidelines prescribed for installation of AC pumps 
during the period from 2016 -17 to 2018-19. This resulted in extra expenditure 
of ` 49.39 crore. 
On bei ng pointed out, the Government replied (January 2024) that as per 
Indicative Technical Specification of the MNRE water discharge capacity of the 
DC solar pumps  is more in comparison of AC solar pump. There is no other 
use of DC solar pumps hence the possibility of theft cases is low.  
Reply is not in consonance with the scheme guidelines prescribed for 
installation of AC Pumps under three to five HP category.  
3.2.2.2  Payment to SIs  for installation of solar pumps without 
conducting yield test of tube well under SSY  
As per the scope of contract, the work of installation of solar pumps shall also 
include survey of sites, estimation of yield of bore well/water source, right 
selection of size and type of pumps, submission of site clearance certificate and 
yield report where the Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) pumps are to be installed. The 
sanction order, work order and letter of intent issued by the CREDA for 
installation of solar pumps unde r SSY stipulate the responsibility of System 
Integrators (SIs)12 to check the yield of bore well before the installation of solar 
pumps. Further, it was directed that the work orders will be cancelled with 
immediate effect in case the water is not found suf ficient with respect to the 
sanctioned capacity of pump. Moreover, as per orders (June 2019) of CREDA 
minimum five geo -tagged photographs were to be submitted with the Joint 
Completion Certificate of every project executed by CREDA. This included 
photographs before and after completion of work, photographs of different 
components and one photograph of the established plant with beneficiary.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed (between April 2021 and September 2023) that 
during the period 2016 -23, CREDA had in stalled 1,24,472 solar pumps  
(90,130 submersible pumps in tube wells and 34,342 pumps on  surface water 
sources like river, ponds etc.) under SSY scheme. However, the necessary 
yield tests were not carried out before installing solar submersible pumps as no 
reports of yield test or other record of execution of yield test was found and 
provided to Audit. During field survey (April 2022 to December 2022) in eight 
selected districts, 236 solar pumps  (3HP-188 and 5HP-48) were physically 
inspected, and interaction was made with the beneficiaries. Out of these, 15 
solar pumps (six per cent) were found yielding low water and 13 solar pumps 
were not working/collapsed. 
The beneficiaries had also confirmed that the SIs did not perform the yield 
tests before  installation of solar pumps. CREDA however, released entire 
payment to SIs as per the rate contract. In the absence of break-up of component 
wise cost in rate contract, audit has adopted the rate of yield test component 
prescribed in Schedule of Rates (SoR ) effective from February 2015 and June 
2020 in the Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)  to calculate 
payment of ` 4.66 crore13 made to the SIs for yield test.  This resulted in 
                                                           
12  System Integrator is a Contractor/Agency registered with CREDA/MNRE to execute 
installation of solar pumps along with allied work. 
13  56301 nos x ` 415 per hour + 34083 nos x ` 688 per hour = ` 2.32 crore + ` 2.34 crore 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
76 
extension o f undue benefit to contractors of ` 4.66 crore as payment was 
made without ensuring execution of an item of work by CREDA. 
On being pointed out, the Government stated (January 2024) that due to remote 
and un-electrified region all the SIs/Vendor examine water source by general 
method of static level and total depth of water before installation of solar pump 
and the same information was provided in Form - 2 of the application based on 
which work orders were issued by Regional office s. It was further stated that 
instructions will be issued for mandatory execution of yield test and geo-tagged 
photograph before installation of solar pump. It was further stated that in 
compliance to audit observations, provisions for conducting yield test and geo-
tagged photographs has been adopted in tender documents. 
Reply is self-explanatory that yield test was not conducted before installation 
of solar submersible pump and capacity (3HP/5HP) of solar pump was 
determined on the basis of static level and tot al depth of tube well instead of 
testing of water yield in tube wells.   
3.2.2.3 Avoidable extra cost due to installation of submersible 
solar pumps in well instead of surface pumps 
Under the SSY scheme guidelines (May 2017), farmers with less than one-
hectare land are eligible for solar pumps on the basis of availability of water in 
their shallow tube well or own other source.  SSY guidelines envisage that as 
per availability of water in sources like Tube Well/Well/Tank/River/Anicut, 
submersible/surface solar pump of 2HP to 5HP shall be installed.  
Scrutiny of records revealed (between April 2021 and September 2023) that 
during 2016 -23 CREDA  had installed 1,24,472 solar pumps (Submersible-
90,130 and surface- 34,342) under SSY. Out of which 5 ,297 submersible solar 
pumps (4865 -3 HP and 432 -5 HP) were installed in wells as given in  
Table 3.2.4. 
Table 3.2.4: Regional Office wise installation of solar pumps in wells 
Name of Regional 
Offices 
Three HP solar pumps Five HP solar pumps 
Submersible Surface Submersible Surface 
Bilaspur14 99  346 25 11 
Durg 409 466 66 137 
Jagdalpur 386 1096 9 125 
Dantewara 624 95 14 35 
Raigarh 81 327 14 65 
Raipur 524 495 88 69 
Surguja 2742 2306 216 152 
Total 4865 5131 432 594 
 
  
                                                           
14  Data relating to district Gourella-Pendra-Marwahi, Mungeli, Korba 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
77 
Generally submersible pumps are used for deep wells while surface pumps are 
for shallow water sources. It can be seen from the above table that submersible 
were installed across the regions irrespective of depth of water table. Audit 
noticed that the gener al water level depth ranged between 0 -2 mete r below 
ground level (mbgl) in 13 per cent of wells, 2 -5 mbgl in 46  per cent of wells 
and up to 10 mbgl in 37  per cent of wells in Chhattisgarh as per the ground 
water Report 2021-22 of Chhattisgarh. Deeper water level ranging between 20 
to 40 mbgl occur only in parts of Bilaspur and Kabirdham. However, it can be 
seen from above table that in Bilaspur region which has deeper well than rest of 
Chhattisgarh more surface pumps had been installed th an submersible pump s 
while in Surguja and Raipur more submersible pumps had been installed. This 
indicates that surface pumps that are more economical in cost could have been 
installed instead of submersible pumps under the scheme. Audit further noticed 
that as per the lowes t rates accepted by CREDA during 2016 -23 there was an 
average rate difference of ` 28,697 and ` 95,551 between submersible and 
surface solar pumps of 3HP and 5HP respectively, as detailed in Table 3.2.5. 
Table 3.2.5: Rate difference between surface and submersible solar pump 
(Amount in `) 
Year of average 
Rate of solar 
Pumps in Rate  
Contract 
3 HP solar pumps 5 HP solar pumps 
Average 
rate of 
Submersible 
pumps 
Average  rate of 
surface pumps 
Difference 
in average      
rate 
Average 
rate of 
Submersible 
pumps 
Average     
rate of 
Surface 
pumps 
Difference 
in average      
rate 
2016-17 to  
2022-23 
2,88,337 2,59,640 28,697 4,38,805 3,43,254 95,551 
(Source:-During 2016 -17 to 2022 -23 lowest rates accepted for installation of solar pumps 
under SSY by the    CREDA). 
Thus, installation of 2 ,746 (2,474 nos. of three HP and 272 nos. of five HP)   
solar submersible pumps instead of surface pumps in 14 15 districts resulted in 
extra avoidable cost of ` 9.70 crore16. 
On being pointed out the Government replied (January 2024) that suction head 
of surface pump is low and submersible pumps were installed in few wells 
where depth was more. It was further stated that in compliance to audit 
observation, installation of submersible solar pumps are not being done now. 
Reply is not acceptable because as per MNRE specification surface pump 
available with suction head capacity of 20 to 30 meter and as per the Ground 
water report of GoI the maximum depth of well was within 25 mbgl.  
3.2.2.4 Undue benefit to SIs due to non -deduction of labour cess 
of ` 12.47 crore 
The GoI notified “The Building and Other Construction Worker’s Welfare Cess 
Act, 1996” with a view to augment the resources for the welfare of the workers 
engaged in building and other construction works. As per Section 3(1)  of the 
                                                           
15  Bastar, Dhamtari, Durg, Jangir -Champa, Jashpur, Kabirdham, Kanker, Korba, Koriya, 
Mahasamund, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Surguja available in ground water report 
of 2021-22. 
16  ` 7.10 crore (2,474 nos of three HP at the rate ` 28,697) + ` 2.60 crore (272 nos of five HP 
at the rate ` 95,551) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
78 
Act, cess is to be levied and collected at the rate of one per cent on the cost of 
construction as “deduction  at source” in relation to construction works of 
Government or public sector undertakings. CREDA is the nodal agency for the 
implementation of various State schemes viz. SSY for individual minor 
irrigation, Solar Community Irrigation (SCI), Solar Dual Pump (SDP) and JJM 
for supply of drinking water  in Chhattisgarh. CREDA followed rate contracts 
with the SIs for installation  of solar pumps under SSY/SCI/SDP/JJM schemes 
during 2016-17 to 2022-23 which contains supply, installation and civil works. 
The condition of rate contracts also contains conditions for deduction of labour 
cess on civil works from the bills of the SIs during release of payments. 
During 2016-17 to 2022-23, CREDA had installed 1,39,643 solar pumps 
under SSY/SCI for minor irrigation and SDP/JJM for supply of drinking water 
and payment aggregating to ` 5,006.57 crore made to SIs as per accepted costs. 
Thus, during this period labour cess (one per cent of cost) was to be affected to 
the extent of ` 50.06 crore. 
Scrutiny of records revealed (between April 2021 and September 2023) that 
during 2016-21, CREDA had not deducted labour cess from the payment of  
` 3,235.07 crore released to SIs for installation of solar pumps which was 
violation of codal provisions. However, CREDA had started deduction of labour 
cess on installation of solar pumps since year 2021 -22. It was further noticed 
that during 2021-23, CREDA had deducted labour cess on 30 per cent cost i.e. 
installation of solar pumps. 
However, CREDA had not deducted the labour cess from the payment made to 
SIs during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21. This had resulted in undue benefit to 
the SIs by non-deduction of labour cess to the extent of ` 12.47 crore17 which 
was not recovered from the responsible SIs and not deposited with Building and 
other Construction Worker’s Welfare Board till December 2024. 
On being pointed out, the Government replied ( January 2024) that at present, 
one per cent labour cess is being deducted on civil work of installation cost. It 
was further stated that in compliance to audit observation, provision for 
deduction of labour cess on total cost of a pump has been adopted  in the tender 
document of 2024-25. 
3.2.3  Conclusion 
The objective of promoting renewable source of energy by implementation of 
projects for installation of solar pumps by CREDA suffered due to deficient 
utilization of funds and deviation from scheme guidelines. This led to 
installation of pumps without asce rtaining suitability with the water sources, 
release of contract payment without testing the yield of tube wells, and opting 
for costlier pumps. All of these affected the performance of the schemes, and 
caused avoidable expenditure. CREDA also defaulted in  statutory compliance 
by not recovering royalty and labour cess, where it was due. 
 
                                                           
17  One per cent of (30 per cent of ` 5,006.57 crore) = ` 15.02 crore – ` 2.55 crore (labour 
cess recovered and deposited for the period 2021-22 to 2022-23 to respective final head of 
accounts) = ` 12.47 crore  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
79 
3.2.4 Recommendations 
 It is recommended that CREDA should frame clear guidelines 
specifying the suitable type and category of solar pumps to be installed 
for respective source of water, and enforce strict adherence to scheme 
guidelines.  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
80 
Audit Paragraphs 
Audit observed significant deficiencies in critical areas, which impact the 
effectiveness of the State Government. Some important findings arising out of 
Compliance Audit ar e featured in this Chapter. The observations relate to 
non/absence of compliance with rules and regulations and deficiency in 
oversight/administrative control. These are mentioned below:  
Public Works Department 
 
3.3 Undue benefit to contractor 
Misclassification of hard rock as ordinary rock and excess payment of  
` 1.19 crore to the contractor for embankment work in excess of actual 
quantity executed, resulted in loss to the Government and undue benefit 
to contractor. 
As per clause 4.023(v) of Works Department Manual regarding the use of 
measurement books, “Interpolations/erasures/overwriting of figures are strictly 
prohibited. If corrections are necessary, they must be made by drawing a line 
over the wrong entry and writing the correct figure above it. The correction must 
be initialled and dated by the party making it. When corrections are necessary 
in group of figures the whole group should be rewritten, initialled and dated. 
Initials must contain first letters of person’s name and surname. If any 
measurement is cancelled, the reasons for the cancellation must be recorded on 
the same page and dated signature made there under”. Further, as per provision 
of Schedule of Rates (SoR) for Road Works, 2013 issued by the Public Works 
Department (PWD), G overnment of Chhattisgarh (GoCG), the hard rock 
obtained during excavation shall be issued to the contractor at the rate of  
` 200.00 per cum.  
GoCG, PWD issued a work order (October 2014) to a contractor for contract 
amount of ` 6.46 crore  (13.80 per cent  below SoR)  for Ghat cutting and 
construction of cement concrete (CC) road on Masanki - Bedmi Road (length 
4.36 km),  PWD, Surguja circle , with stipulated period of completion as  
15 month including rainy season i.e. 19.01.2016. 
The original scope of work was revised due to change in alignment of road and 
additional work including new item of Bituminous Macadam (BM) and Semi -
Dense Bituminous Concrete (SDBC), and GoCG approved (April 2018) 
supplementary schedule for the work with the instruction to ensure that the net 
excess cost should not exceed ` 4.71 crore of the contracted amount. The work 
was completed in March 2018, and payment of ` 11.51 crore 18 was released 
(March 2022) to the contractor. An amount of ` 33.92 lakh was paid in excess 
to the amount of ` 11.17 crore19 approved by GoCG in supplementary schedule. 
Scrutiny of records showed the following: 
                                                           
18  Vide Vr. No. 13 DL dated 11.03.2022 including cost escalation of ` 12.82 lakh 
19  ` 6.46 crore (contracted amount) +  ` 4.71 crore (additional net cost in supplementary 
schedule) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
81 
(A) Loss of ` 2.02 crore to Government due to misclassification of hard 
rock as ordinary rock 
Audit scrutiny showed that the original estimates of the work inclu ded item of 
excavation in ordinary rock with quantity as 44,528.16 cum and excavation in 
hard rock with quantity as 66,792.24 cum while in the revised estimate  
(June 2016), the quantity of items of excavation in ordinary rock and hard rock 
was revised as 3,72,566.90 cum and nil respectively.  
Audit further noticed that time extension for the period April 2017 to March 
2018 was granted (December 2017) to the contractor by the Superintending 
Engineer for reasons such as ghat cutting in hard rock and delay in permission 
from forest department. 
Audit noted from the supplementary schedule submitted (February 2018) to 
GoCG, PWD for approval of variation in quantities and cost of items, actual 
quantities executed under the item of  excavation in ordinary rock and in hard 
rock were shown as 2,41,064.28 cum (60 per cent) and 1,60,709.52 cum (40 
per cent) respectively. The quantities included here were in agreement with the 
initial recordings (26 February 2018) made in the Measurement Books (MBs), 
for the 8th and final bill20. 
Audit however noticed that the above initial recordings were struck off in the 
MBs and overwritten, showing the entire quantity i.e. 4,01,773.80 cum 
(2,41,064.28 cum plus 1,60,709.52 cum) as cutting in ordinary roc k without 
recording any justification/reasons for the overwriting. Accordingly, payment 
was made to contractor considering cutting in ordinary rock for 4 ,01,773.80 
cum at the rate of ` 129 per cum in 8th running bill.  
The above facts indicates that hard rock was excavated and as per provision of 
SoR of the Department, the hard rock obtained during excavation was required 
to be issued to the contractor. Thus, non-issue of 1,60,709.52 cum of hard rock 
to the contractor and misclassification of hard rock as ordinary rock resulted in 
net loss of revenue of ` 2.02 crore21 to the Government.  
On this being pointed out, Secretary, GoCG, PWD replied (August 2024) that 
there was mix material (hard rock, ordinary rock and soil) in ghat portion and 
it was difficult to differentiate the material into hard rock, ordinary rock during 
the excavation and stacking & transport of the material was also difficult due to 
deep trench on both side of the road. Thus, payment of cutting material was 
done after classifying the material at lesser rate item i.e. ordinary rock. Besides 
this, 40 per cent of material had fallen in the trench during ghat cutting due to 
steep slope at one side of the road and remaining 60 per cent  was used in 
construction of em bankment. It was further stated that no clarification for 
overwriting in the MB and bill MB was received from the then Sub -Engineer 
and the then Sub -division Officer. Further, it was also informed that 
classification of rock was done by the then Executive Engineer and no 
permission letter for classification was as such available in the record. 
Reply is not acceptable due to the following reasons: 
                                                           
20  Later on 9th final bill for escalation was submitted. 
21  1,60,709.52 X [200-(215-129) less 13.80 per cent] 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
82 
 No record/documentary evidence for excavation of mixed material and 
correspondence by contractor for difficultie s in differentiation and 
stacking of excavated material was provided in support of reply.  In the 
absence of stacking quantification of material fallen in trench as  
40 per cent is also questionable;  
 Classification of excavated material was done without obtaining 
permission letter; and 
 Excavation of hard rock was cited as a factor by the contractor and 
considered by the GoCG at the time of granting extension for the work. 
Striking out the initial entries of hard rock in MB and overwriting as ordinary 
rock just prior to final payment without any justification confirms that cutting 
material was misclassified as ordinary rock to avoid recovery from the 
contractor in lieu of hard rock excavated and issued to him.  
(B) Payment of ` 1.19 crore to the contractor for embankment work in 
excess of actual quantity executed 
The above work also included construction of embankment with material 
deposited from roadway cutting and material obtained from borrow pits with 
quantity as 50,721.60 cum at the rate of ` 74.00 per cum and 53,176.91 cum at 
the rate of ` 145 per cum respectively, as approved (April 2018) in 
supplementary schedule by GoCG. 
It was seen that for 8 th and final bill, Sub -Engineer recorded (February 2018) 
measurement of total filling volume of 1,01,837.26 cum in the MB (at Page 57 
of MB No. 919), which included total fill quantity obtained from roadway 
cutting (50,721.60 cum) and borrow pit (51,115.66 cum). However, the quantity 
of item obtained from roadway cutting was increased to 2,37,492.11 cum by 
overwriting and striking out the initial measurement of 50,721.60 cum in the 
MB. Additional quantity of 1,86,770.51 22 cum of the item of construction of 
embankment with material of roadway cutting was paid (October 2018) to the 
contractor vide 8 th final bill without recording any detailed measurements for 
increased quantity. This resulted in excess payment of ` 1.19 crore 23 to the 
contractor for quantity of work that was  apparently not executed. 
Later, a show cause notice for overwriting in the MBs was issued  
(February 2024) to the the then Sub-Engineer and Sub-divisional Officer by the 
EE but no clarification was received (August 2024) from them. 
Secretary, GoCG, PWD replied (August 2024) that out of the total cutting of 
4,01,773.80 cum on the ghat side of road 60 per cent  of material i.e.  
2,37,492.11 cum was used in construction of embankment and payment was 
made on the basis of LxBxD measurement till 7 th running bill and the final 
payment was done after the final levelling of road. It was further stated that no 
clarification for overwriting in the MB and bill MB was received from the then 
Sub-Engineer and the then Sub-Division Officer.  
Reply is not accep table as only 1,01,837.26 cum quantity was required for 
filling as per the final calculation of quantity of earthwork recorded in MBs. 
Quantity of 50,721.60 cum of the material obtained from roadway cutting was 
changed as 2,37,492.11 cum by overwriting/str iking out in MB and 50,721.60 
                                                           
22  2,37,492.11 cum – 50,721.60 cum 
23  1,86,770.51 X ` 74 less 13.80 per cent 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit  
83 
cum was the actual executed quantity which was also approved in the 
supplementary schedule (April 2018) by GoCG. The additional quantity of 
1,86,770.51 cum was paid to contractor without recording any detailed 
measurement for work done.  
Thus, the government made excess payment to the contractor due to non -
maintenance of the sanctity of measurement books by allowing  
striking out/overwriting of entries, as a result, the exchequer suffered a loss of   
` 3.21 crore24. 
It is recommended that responsibility may be fixed and action taken against 
the defaulting officers and strict adherence to norms for maintenance of 
measurement book may be ensured to prevent alterations in records critical 
for assuring correctness of payment against work executed. 
  
 
 
 
 
Raipur 
The: 11 NOV 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
(MOHD. FAIZAN NAYYAR) 
                      Accountant General (Audit) 
                      Chhattisgarh 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The: 19 NOV 2025 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
24  (` 2.02 crore + ` 1.19 crore) 

 
 
APPENDICES 

85 
Appendix 1.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph 1.2) 
Expenditure incurred by various departments in the State 
( incrore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Department BE* AE* 
1 General Administration Department 815.30 723.80 
2 Home Department 5,758.92 4,971.13 
3 Jail Department 236.17 177.67 
4 Finance Department 20,750.77 23,699.59 
5 State Tax Department (GST) 392.16 323.58 
6 Revenue Department 2,675.43 1,769.49 
7 Transport Department 107.49 74.05 
8 Sports and Youth Welfare Department 147.88 90.04 
9 Forest Department 2,248.89 2,366.48 
10 Commerce and Industry Department 417.23 308.34 
11 Mineral Resources Department 1,070.29 810.77 
12 Energy Department 5,206.49 6,669.21 
13 Agriculture Department 9,271.77 9,346.64 
14 Co-operation Department 457.01 426.63 
15 Labour Department 156.04 125.46 
16 Public Health and Family Welfare Department 4,738.60 4,878.86 
17 Urban Administration & Development Department 3,848.28 4,263.97 
18 Public Works Department 6,638.18 4,734.12 
19 School Education Department 16,650.23 15,913.51 
20 Panchayat and Rural Development Department 8,830.11 8,148.38 
21 Planning Economics and Statistics Department 422.58 392.55 
22 Public Relation Department 324.87 399.43 
23 Tribal, Scheduled Caste & Backward Class 
Department 2,347.71 1,739.01 
24 Social Welfare Department 1,071.10 1,023.27 
25 Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection 
Department 5,158.51 5,917.70 
26 Culture Department 187.75 176.44 
27 Water Resources Department 3,323.14 1,664.24 
28 Housing and Environment Department 579.16 607.37 
29 Public Health Engineering Department 1,551.16 2,575.58 
30 Animal Husbandry Department 581.30 388.59 
31 Fisheries Department 181.94 109.52 
32 Higher Education Department 1,138.02 1,004.73 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
86 
33 Women and Child Welfare Department 2,289.47 1,583.99 
34 Capacity Building, Technical Education & 
Employment Department 670.59 497.46 
35 Electronics and Information Technology 
Department 246.80 146.69 
36 Aviation Department 61.49 124.01 
37 State Legislature Department 70.32 54.10 
38 Medical Education Department 1,707.54 1,718.63 
39 Sericulture Department 165.55 143.91 
40 Law and Legislative Department 766.51 594.26 
Total 1,13,262.75 1,10,683.20 
(Source: Budget Book of Government of Chhattisgarh for the respective year)  
*BE- Budget Estimate; AE- Actual Expenditure 
  

Appendices  
87 
Appendix 1.2 
(Referred to in para 1.6.1)  
Department-wise break-up of outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs 
(General, Social and Economic Sector)  
Name of Department 
Number of IRs/Paragraphs 
pending as of 30 June 2024 
IRs Paragraphs 
Higher Education Department 138 489 
Technical Education Department 34 117 
School Education Department 799 3995 
Labour Department  33 177 
General Administration Department 62 144 
Public Relation Department 15 37 
State Legislature Department 10 26 
Revenue and Disaster Management Department 649 2020 
Skill development, Technical Education and Employment 
Department 101 370 
Sports & Youth Welfare Department 14 75 
Panchayat and Rural Development Department 1022 6601 
Jail Department 51 156 
Home (Police) Department 99 367 
Law and Legislative Department  66 181 
Urban Administration & Development Department  244 2383 
Housing & Environment Department 22 118 
Culture and Archaeology Department  128 660 
Electronics and Information Technology Department  3 41 
Tourism Department 7 81 
Public Works Department 281 1509 
Public Health Engineering Department  159 849 
Water Resources Department 601 3023 
Agriculture Department 236 1070 
Horticulture Department 60 316 
Veterinary Department 119 671 
Sericulture Department 77 267 
Fisheries Department 58 198 
Cooperative Department 37 134 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department  184 939 
Medical Education Department 59 524 
Public Health & Family Welfare Department 488 3292 
Rehabilitation Department 9 31 
Social Welfare Department 127 700 
Tribal, Schedule Caste and Backward Class Department  165 915 
Women and Child Development Department  418 1958 
Total 6575 34434 
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
88 
Appendix 1.3 
(Referred to in para 1.6.5)  
Detail of Units with instances of Record not produced  
Department Auditee Unit IR No. Para No. Details of records not 
produced to Audit 
Urban 
Administration 
& Development  
Municipal 
Council, Saraipali 
59 OBS-481943 Vouchers of 28.32 lakh  
for the month of June 2022. 
Nagar Panchayat, 
Rajpur 
60 OBS-517600 Tender Files relating to 
auction of shops for rent, 
Building permission etc. 
Nagar Panchayat, 
Thanakhamariya 
67 OBS-505122 Purchase files of e-rikshaw, 
tractor trolly, vacuum 
emptier, weighing machine, 
dustbin etc. 
Municipal 
Council, Janjgir 
Naila 
72 OBS-433768 Records relating to water 
augmentation scheme, 
Measurement Book of 
beautification of Bhima 
Talab and BDM garden.  
School 
Education 
BEO, Durgkondal 38 9 Records relating to Mid-day 
Meal, Saraswati Cycle 
Scheme. 
BEO, Marwahi 25 9 Stock Register and Issue 
Register. 
BEO, Bilaigarh 40 6 Cash Book, Stock Register. 
BEO, Antagarh 39 8 Records relating to 
Saraswati Cycle Scheme, 
uniform (dress) distribution, 
text book distribution and 
construction of kitchen 
sheds. 
BEO, Baikunthpur 43 2 Purchase vouchers of gas 
chulha for Mid-day Meal 
Scheme. 
BEO, 
Rajnandgaon 
120 10 Cash Book, procurement 
files, progress reports, 
funding details of Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan. 
BEO, Chhura 71 3 Vouchers of 5575 
regarding supply of material. 
BEO, 
Chhuikhadan 
88 10 Information relating  to 
private schools under BEO. 
BEO, 
Wadrafnagar 
126 3 Purchase Files and Vouchers 
of 23.55 lakh for the 
selected month. 
BEO, Khairagarh 92 9 Information relating to 
private schools under BEO. 
BEO, Bhaiyathan 94 6 Cheque diary, Bill Transit 
Register, Bank Statement, 
Administrative orders. 
BEO, Sonhat 127 9 Information relating to 
private schools under BEO. 
BEO, Mainpat 111 15 All the records since 
commencement of office to 
2014-15. 
Agriculture 
Dy. Director, 
Agriculture, 
Dantewada 
117 7 
OBS-351415 
Records relating to National 
Food Security Mission. 
DAO, Dantewada 72 11 Cash Book, Stock Register, 
Issue Register, Passbook of 

Appendices  
89 
 
 
Medical 
Education 
Government Ayurved 
Dispensary, Talnar. 
BMO, Khadgawa 45 6 Bill, Voucher and CA Audit 
Report for the year 2016-17 
to 2018-19 of National 
Health Mission. 
Bill and Voucher for the year 
2016-17 to 2017-18 of 
Jeevan Deep Samiti account, 
Chirmiri. 
Bill, Voucher and CA Audit 
Report of PHC, Ratanpur. 
CS, Dhamtari 100 7 Cash Book of Jeevan Deep 
Samiti. 
CMHO, Bijapur 117 20 Files relating to Recruitment 
of staff, files relating to 
purchase and fabrication of 
pathology lab, purchase of 
hat bazar clinic ambulance 
and mobile bike ambulance, 
purchase files relating to 
DMF, Cashbook. 
CMHO, 
Kondagaon 
123 15 Cashbook, Bank Account 
details, purchase and tender 
files, stock register, bills and 
vouchers, files relating to 
recruitment of staff. 
Women & 
Child 
Development  
PO, ICDS, 
Bagbahara, 
Pathalgaon  
73 4 Vouchers of 1.26 lakh  for 
the month of March 2022. 
PO, ICDS, Darima  96 7 Vouchers of 2.15 lakh  for 
the month of March 2015. 
DPO, Ambikapur 87 6 Files, Cashbook and 
Vouchers related to various 
schemes. 
Social Welfare 
Adhikshak 
Drishtri evam 
Shrawan 
badhitarth 
Vidyalaya, 
Mathpuraina, 
Raipur 
21 5 Bills and Vouchers of  
6.86 crore for procurement 
of goods and services, Funds 
issued under National Social 
Assistance Programme,  files  
relating to tender/quotation.  
Superintendent, 
Orthopedically 
Handicapped 
Children Home, 
Mana Camp, 
Raipur 
5 9 Bills and Vouchers of   
12.49 crore for 
procurement of goods and 
services. 
Food, Civil 
Supplies and 
Consumer 
Protection 
Asst. Controller 
Weight and 
Measurement, 
Raigarh 
29 48 Quarterly Progress Report 
for the month November 
2018. 
Horticulture 
Asst. Director, 
Horticulture, 
Gariyaband 
71 7 Cashbook and vouchers for 
the selected month. 
Total 30 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
90 
Appendix-2.1.1 
(Referred to in para 2.1.5) 
Statement showing the details of Division wise districts and tier wise selected 
ULBs 
Division District Municipal 
Corporation 
Municipal 
Council 
Municipal 
Panchayat 
Bastar Bastar Jagdalpur - Bastar 
Bijapur - Bijapur Geedam 
Bilaspur Bilaspur Bilaspur Takhatpur Kota 
Korba Korba Katghora Chhurikala 
Sarangarh-
Bilaigarh 
- Sarangarh Bhatgaon 
Durg Durg Bhilai Jamul Dhamdha 
Khairagarh- 
Chhuikhadan-
Gandai 
- Khairagarh Gandai 
Raipur Gariyaband - Gariyaband Fingeshwar 
Raipur Raipur Arang Abhanpur 
Surguja Surguja Ambikapur - Sitapur 
Surajpur - Surajpur Prem Nagar 
Note:- Sampling in IDEA was done for selected districts having more than one Municipal 
Corporation/ Municipal Council/ Municipal Panchayat. 
  

Appendices  
91 
Appendix-2.1.2 
(Referred to in para 2.1.6.3) 
Statement showing the details of beneficiaries having income more than three 
lakh benefitted under PMAY-U 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB Beneficiary ID Monthly 
Income 
Annual 
Income 
1 
Municipal Corporation, 
Korba 
228019490689500029 60000 720000 
2 228019490686800578 50000 600000 
3 228019490686800541 30000 360000 
4 228019490686800553 30000 360000 
5 228019490686800498 28000 336000 
6 222801949391560854 28000 336000 
7 228019490686800544 27000 324000 
8 228019490686800569 27000 324000 
9 228019490689400129 26000 312000 
10 228019490686800449 26000 312000 
11 228019490686800598 26000 312000 
12 228019490686800607 26000 312000 
13 228019490686800198 26000 312000 
14 Municipal Corporation, 
Bilaspur 
228019759434600021 26911 322932 
15 
Municipal Corporation, 
Raipur 
228020340731200464 45000 540000 
16 228020340667500264 45000 540000 
17 228020340665600146 40800 489600 
18 228020340666200004 36000 432000 
19 0222802034536198378 30000 360000 
20 228020340731200029 29000 348000 
21 228020340731200472 28000 336000 
22 228020340731200338 27000 324000 
23 228020340667700245 27000 324000 
24 228020340671400173 39028 468336 
25 228020340671400272 39849 478188 
26 228020340671400178 38697 464364 
27 228020340671400100 61960 743520 
28 0222802034629157552 29100 349200 
29 228020340671400054 58395 700740 
30 228020340671400029 42473 509676 
31 228020340671400151 45129 541548 
32 0222802034631501752 45065 540780 
33 228020340671400180 53745 644940 
34 Survey Code -5793359 40985 491820 
35 228020340671400055 40415 484980 
36 0222802034579310432 46707 560484 
37 228020340671400244 58387 700644 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
92 
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 
  
 
1  Municipal Corporation Raipur, provided the details of 54 regular employees to whom 
benefits under AHP vertical have been provided even though their gross annual income 
was more than  3.00 lakh. However, the gross monthly income of two beneficiaries 
was not provided. 
38 Survey Code -5793273 33458 401496 
39 228020340671400211 48167 578004 
40 Survey Code -5793217 56636 679632 
41 0222802034629354161 52109 625308 
42 0222802034629338364 51364 616368 
43 0222802034629309796 48167 578004 
44 228020340671400269 56635 679620 
45 228020340671400149 47037 564444 
46 Survey Code -5793346 39261 471132 
47 228020340671400217 50167 602004 
48 Survey Code -5793253 30209 362508 
49 0222802034629363591 35920 431040 
50 0222802034629383442 49627 595524 
51 228020340671400042 55029 660348 
52 228020340671400089 45460 545520 
53 228020340671400040 Beneficiary passed away 
54 228020340671400276 50165 601980 
55 228020340671400168 56635 679620 
56 Survey Code-5793054 33390 400680 
57 228020340671400238 39261 471132 
58 0222802034629381816 30600 367200 
59 0222802034629373131 41655 499860 
60 0222802034629382091 41655 499860 
61 Survey Code -5793306 38093 457116 
62 228020340671400171 39371 472452 
63 228020340671400243 32135 385620 
64 0222802034629370646 Income not available1 
65 228020340671400088 55250 663000 
66 228020340671400156 33340 400080 
67 Survey Code -6268919 40415 484980 
68 228020340671400251 Income not available 
69 Municipal Panchayat, 
Premnagar 
0322801926627632753 27880 334480 
70 0322801926627552150 27600 354127 
71 0322801926632386816 Wife of an Accountant 

Appendices  
93 
Appendix-2.1.3 
(Referred to in para 2.1.6.6) 
Statement showing the details of beneficiaries benefitted under PMAY-U  
and PMAY-G 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Beneficiary Code Project Details Status of 
House 
Under 
PMAY-U 
Status of 
House 
Under 
PMAY-G 
1 Wadrafnagar 228019196945400024 BLC Wadrafnagar 
Balrampur 29-28 rev 
Aug 2020 Valid 
(7C22801919042882) 
Completed Completed 
2 Wadrafnagar 228019196945400025 BLC Wadrafnagar 
Balrampur 29-28 rev 
Aug 2020 Valid 
(7C22801919042882) 
Completed Completed 
3 Wadrafnagar 228019196946000014 BLC Wadrafnagar 
95-90 revised DUs 
March 2020 Valid 
(7C22801919042884) 
Completed Completed 
4 Wadrafnagar 228019196946300063 BLC Wadrafnagar 
Balrampur 29-28 rev 
Aug 2020 Valid 
(7C22801919042882) 
Completed Completed 
5 Wadrafnagar 228019196946300064 BLC Wadrafnagar 
Balrampur 29-28 rev 
Aug 2020 Valid 
(7C22801919042882) 
Completed Completed 
6 Wadrafnagar 228019196946300066 BLC Wadrafnagar 
64-61 revised DUs 
Oct 2019 Valid 
(7C22801919042880) 
Completed Completed 
7 Ambikapur 228019270706000063 BLC FOR 389-320-
293 Re Rev EWS 
houses 
(7C22801927038317) 
Completed Completed 
8 Ambikapur 228019270706900010 BLC Rev 182-148 in 
Ambikapur 
(7C22801927053177) 
Completed Completed 
9 Ambikapur 228019270707100010 New construction 
579-467-436 re rev 
BLC 
(7C22801927038342) 
Completed Completed 
10 Ambikapur 228019270709900071 New construction 
579-467-436 re rev 
BLC 
(7C22801927038342) 
Completed Completed 
11 Bodla 228019837204700051 Pradhan mantri 
awash yojna HFA 
311 DUs 
(7C22801983047644) 
Completed Completed 
12 Rajnandgaon 228019912956000041 Construction of 549-
807 BLC New 
Construction Valid 
Completed Completed 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
94 
Houses 
(7C22801991047507) 
13 Bhilai 
Charoda 
228020070658500286 BLC new 
construction 84 valid 
patta DU 
(7C22802007052985) 
Completed Completed 
14 Bhilai Nagar 228020080658600159 BLC 230 DUs –188-
136DUs - 106 DUs 
(7C22802008048297) 
Completed Completed 
15 Bhilai Nagar 228020080661700048 PMAY- HFA project 
for BLC 302 DU - 
248 DU -- 210 -- 190 
DUs 
(7C22802008053229) 
Completed Completed 
16 Bhilai Nagar 228020080662600039 New construction 
under BLC in 1632- 
1245 -- 1039 --1005 
DU at Bhilai 
(7C22802008047757) 
Completed Completed 
17 Balod 228020152536100084 BLC balod 114 DUs 
valid FEB 2023 
(7C22802015049097) 
Completed Completed 
18 Raipur 228020340665400023 BLC Raipur 282 - 
281 Revised Valid 
Feb 2023 
(7C22802034050817) 
Completed Completed 
19 Kondagaon 228020621148000046 BLC Kondagaon 25 
revised4 aabadi sept 
2018-19 
(7C22802062053232) 
Completed Completed 
20 Mandir 
Hasaud 
322444587634823825 BLC New 
Construction of 287 
DU of Mandir 
Hasaud 
(7C22444587045306) 
Completed Completed 
21 Mandir 
Hasaud 
322444587634826555 BLC New 
Construction of 287 
DU of Mandir 
Hasaud 
(7C22444587045306) 
Completed Completed 
22 Pratappur 322801920624708771 BLC Pratappur-315 
DUs Valid June2021 
(7C22801920026395) 
Completed Completed 
23 Kusmi 322801922634845181 BLC Kusmi 81 DUs 
April 2022 
(7C22801922043421) 
Completed Completed 
24 Lakhanpur 322801928626263637 BLC Lakanpur-375-
359 revised DUs 
Valid June 2021 
(7C22801928047501) 
Completed Completed 
25 Pathalgaon 322801933629973832 BLC Pathalgaon-185 
DUs Valid June 2021 
(7C22801933026372) 
Completed Completed 
26 Naila-Janjgir 322801950547675589 Janjgir Chama 
(7C22801950026424) 
Completed Completed 

Appendices  
95 
27 Adbhar 322801963615963718 Janjgir Champa 
Adbhar 248 DUs 
June 2021 
(7C22801963026415) 
Completed Completed 
28 Jaijepur 322801964630017388 Janjgir Champa 
Jaijepur 443 DUs 
June 2021 
(7C22801964026419) 
Completed Completed 
29 Pendra 322801966628944850 Bilaspur Pendra 166 
DUs June 2021 
(7C22801966026404) 
Completed Completed 
30 Bilaspur 322801975625499980 Revised New 540 
DUs Under Bilaspur 
of Valid Patta June 
2021 
(7C22801966026404) 
Completed Completed 
31 Bilaspur 322801975626278625 Revised New 
Construction Of 636 
DUs Under BLC at 
Municipal 
Corporation Bilaspur 
of Valid Patta June 
2021 
(7C22801975044676) 
Completed Completed 
32 Bilaspur 322801975631636447 Revised New 
Construction of 643 
DUs under BLC at 
BMC of valid patta 
july 2020 
(7C22801975047606) 
Completed Completed 
33 Bilha 322801980628819772 Revised bilha 
bilaspur 155 dus 
(7C22801980048603) 
Completed Completed 
34 Kawardha 322801981556644681 Kawardha 48 valid 
March 2020 
(7C22801981052922) 
Completed Completed 
35 Kawardha 322801981625004070 Kawardha 60 Valid 
June 2021 
(7C22801981044754) 
Completed Completed 
36 Sahaspur-
Lohara 
322801984600851296 Pradhan mantri 
awash yojna HFA 26 
(7C22801984050208) 
Completed Completed 
37 Sahaspur-
Lohara 
322801984607807112 Pradhan mantri 
awash yojna HFA 26 
(7C22801984050208) 
Completed Completed 
38 Sahaspur-
Lohara 
322801984607844916 Pradhan mantri 
awash yojna HFA 26 
(7C22801984050208) 
Completed Completed 
39 Nawagarh-D 322801995606196613 BLC Nawagarh 459 
DUS JUNE 2021 
(7C22801995026382) 
Completed Completed 
40 Nawagarh-D 322801995626385982 BLC Nawagarh 459 
DUS JUNE 2021 
(7C22801995026382) 
Completed Completed 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
96 
41 Bhilai Nagar 322802008622392591 BHILAI BLC 539 
DPR NC 26 JUNE 
2023 
(7C22802008050355) 
Completed Completed 
42 Bhilai Nagar 322802008622658929 BLC NC BHILAI 
DURG 762 --- 470 
JUNE 2021 
(7C22802008048510) 
Completed Completed 
43 Bhilai Nagar 322802008629984552 New construction 
under BLC in 1632- 
1245 -- 1039 --1005 
DU at Bhilai 
(7C22802008047757) 
Completed Completed 
44 Gobra 
Nawapara 
322802031631511095 Revised BLC 
325/352 VALID 
JUNE 2021 
(7C22802031053226) 
Completed Completed 
45 Gobra 
Nawapara 
322802031631511095 Revised BLC  
325/352 VALID 
JUNE 2021 
(7C22802031053226) 
Completed Completed 
46 Birgaon 322802033138003235 PMAY-HFA, BLC 
NEW 
CONSTRUCTION 
107 DUs Valid 
(7C22802033047746) 
Completed Completed 
47 Raipur 322802034627448495 BLC Raipur 2660 - 
3786 Nov 2022 
(7C22802034049277) 
Completed Completed 
48 Raipur 322802034629052732 BLC Raipur 2660 - 
3786 Nov 2022 
(7C22802034049277) 
Completed Completed 
49 Raipur 322802034630176841 Raipur BLC Revised 
427 - 417 Valid Feb 
2023 
(7C22802034049296) 
Completed Completed 
50 Kurud 322802049615770663 BLC JUNE 2021 184 
DUS KURUD 
(7C22802049026548) 
Completed Completed 
51 Dhamtari 322802052533066397 BLC Revised VALID 
974 DPR July 2023 
(7C22802052053263) 
Completed Completed 
52 Dhamtari 322802052533066397 BLC Revised VALID 
974 DPR July 2023 
(7C22802052053263) 
Completed Completed 
53 Raipur 322802034637026955 New BLC 1075 DU 
for RMC under 
PMAY 
(7C22802034050598) 
Completed Existing 
site (Old 
House) 
54 Takhatpur 322801973625076446 Bilaspur Takhatpur 
(7C22801973026368) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
55 Bilaspur 228019750725700009 New Construction Of 
755 Dus Under BLC 
at Municipal 
Corporation Bilaspur 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 

Appendices  
97 
of Valid Patta Feb 
2022 
(7C22801975033151) 
56 Bhilai Nagar 322802008441254898 PMAY- HFA Project 
FOR BLC 302 DU - 
248 DU -- 210 -- 190 
DU 
(7C22802008053229) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
57 Mahasamund 228020452693200010 BLC Valid 48 DUs 
Feb 2023 
(7C22802045048861) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
58 Ambikapur 322801927630561293 New BLC Valid 1570 
-1461 
(7C22801927053266) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
59 Baloda 
Bazar 
322802022629665674 BLC FOR 18 EWS  
2020-21 revised 20-
18 
(7C22802022052904) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
60 Premnagar 322801926627354987 BLC Premnagar 369-
354 DUs revised 
Valid June2021 
(7C22801926052681) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
61 Raipur 228020340667800653 BLC Raipur 449 - 
451 - 514 Valid 
Revised June 2023 
(7C22802034053056) 
Completed House 
Sanctioned 
62 Bilaspur 322801975611714473 Revised New 
Construction Of 807 
DUs under BLC 
Valid-Sep 2019 
(7C22801975047582) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
63 Bilaspur 322801975634762687 New Construction Of 
405 DUs under BLC 
Valid-Nov 2022 
(7C22801975043440) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
64 Bhilai Nagar 228020080668600036 BLC  1258 DU -- 841 
DU -- 809 DUs 
(7C22802008047762) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
65 Bhilai Nagar 228020080659600004 BLC 140 DU -- 120 
DU---- 99 DUs 
(7C22802008048311) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
66 Arang 228020296862000056 233 BLC ABADI 
DPR 
(7C22802029047658) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
67 Raipur 322802034630815093 Raipur BLC Revised 
427 - 417 Valid Feb 
2023 
(7C22802034049296) 
Completed Proposed 
Site 
68 Rajnandgaon 322801991544689725 Construction of 340-
397 BLC 
(7C22801991047549) 
Completed Roof Cast 
69 Wadrafnagar 228019196946200046 BLC Wadragnagar 
64-61 revised DUs 
Oct 2019 Valid 
(7C22801919042880) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
98 
70 Wadrafnagar 228019196946200046 BLC Wadragnagar 
64-61 revised DUs 
Oct 2019 Valid 
(7C22801919042880) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
71 Takhatpur 322801973615754046 Bilaspur Takhatpur 
(7C22801973026368) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
72 Surajpur 322801923633396425 BLC Surajpur 218 
DUs Feb 2023 
(7C22801923045635) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
73 Saragaon 322801956614321834 BLC 539 DPR NC 26 
June 2023 
(7C22802008050355) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
74 Bilaspur 322801975616722962 New Construction of 
405 DUs under BLC 
Valid-Nov 2022 
(7C22801975043440) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
75 Bhilai Nagar 228020080661700005 PMAY- HFA Project 
For BLC 302 DU - 
248 DU -210 - 190-
187 DU 
(7C22802008047692) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
76 Bhilai Nagar 322802008622666035 BLC 539 DPR NC 26 
June 2023 
(7C22802008050355) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
77 Bhilai Nagar 322802008609625479 BLC 1258 DU - 841 
DU - 809 DUs 
(7C22802008047762) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
78 Bhilai Nagar 322802008630131376 BLC 419 DU - 333 
DU -305 DUs 
(7C22802008047690) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
79 Maro 322801996625055477 BLC 122 DUS June 
2021 
(7C22801996026383) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
80 Malhar 322801978628906198 Bilaspur Malhar 282 
DUs June 2021 
(7C22801978026401) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
81 Ambikapur 322801927629133015 New BLC Valid 1570 
-1461 
(7C22801927053266) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
82 Ambikapur 228019270705400040 New BLC Valid 1570 
-1461 
(7C22801927053266) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
83 Ambikapur 322801927634761920 BLC 459 Nov 2022 
Ambikapur 
(7C22801927043649) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
84 Chirmiri 322801916629755442 BLC-118-85 DUs 
revised valid June 
2021 
(7C22801916052978) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
85 Gharghoda 228019378426200038 Revised 44 BLC 
(7C22801937047436) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
86 Chirmiri 322801916629755442 BLC -118-85 DUs 
revised Valid June 
2021 
(7C22801916052978) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 

Appendices  
99 
87 Gharghoda 228019378426200038 Revised 44 BLC 
(7C22801937047436) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
88 Raipur 322802034630279767 Raipur BLC DPR 
Revised 1090 -1062-
1052 
(7C22802034064519) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
89 Rajnandgaon 228019912950400022 Construction of 340-
397 BLC Valid 
Houses 
(7C22801991047549) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
90 Sahaspur-
Lohara 
228019845830900023 BLC 230 DUs 
September 2018-19 
ABADI 
(7C22801984047463) 
Foundation 
or Plinth 
Completed 
91 Champa 322801955622224927 Janjgir Champa valid 
102DUs 
(7C22801955053234) 
Lintel Completed 
92 Raigarh 322801939629833819 BLC Raigarh Valid 
291 DUs Revised 
(7C22801939047322) 
Lintel Completed 
93 Rajnandgaon 322801991628718786 Construction of 698-
787 BLC New 
Construction Valid 
Houses 
(7C22801991052995) 
Lintel Completed 
94 Takhatpur 322801973625077386 Bilaspur Takhatpur 
(7C22801973026368) 
Not 
Started 
Completed 
95 Sakti 322801957626327348 Janjgir Champa Sakti 
valid 14 DUs 
(7C22801957043453) 
Not 
Started 
Completed 
96 Bhilai Nagar 322802008626155666 BLC NC RISALI 
639-581-521-455 DU 
(7C22802008063374) 
Not 
Started 
Completed 
97 Raipur 322802034625668078 BLC Raipur 2660-
3786 - 2457 – 2344 
(7C22802034064516) 
Not 
Started 
Completed 
98 Raipur 322802034630930623 Raipur BLC DPR 
Revised 1090 -1062-
1052 
(7C22802034064519) 
Not 
Started 
Completed 
99 Sitapur 322801930630000454 BLC Sitapur-605 
DUs Valid June 2021 
(7C22801930026400) 
Roof Completed 
(Source: Analysis of online PMAY-U MIS database) 
  

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
100 
Appendix-2.1.4 
(Referred to in para 2.1.6.7) 
Statement showing details of beneficiaries benefitted under IHSDP 
 and PMAY-U 
Sl. 
No. 
Beneficiary ID Ward no /Name of the 
ward 
No. of 
house 
allotted 
under 
IHSDP 
Status of 
BLC house 
Assistance 
paid ( in) 
1 228019896977400004 Ward No.18 Ambedakar A-09 Completed 135600 
2 228019896977400023 Ward No.18 Ambedakar A-11 Completed 226000 
3 0322801989630500796 Ward No.16 Dauchoura A-61 Completed 135600 
4 228019896975100088 Ward No.14 Sonesarar A-82 Completed 221000 
5 0322801989628894959 Ward No.14 Sonesarar A-85 Completed 226000 
6 0322801989607542839 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para  A-107 Completed 226000 
7 228019896977100009 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para A-108 Completed 215500 
8 0322801989633779415 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para A-113 Completed 226000 
9 228019896977100056 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para A-114 Completed 226000 
10 228019896976400013 Ward No. 05 Thakur Para, B-10 Completed 137400 
11 228019896976400022 Ward No. 05 Thakur Para, B-12 Completed 225400 
12 228019896976100131 Ward No.2 Durga Munch  B-82 Completed 226000 
13 0322801989631508156 Ward No.4 Radha Krishan  B-93 Completed 225400 
14 0322801989623878855 Ward No.6 Baredh para  B-104 Completed 226000 
15 228019896975700047 Ward-20 Naya Khamhriya B-176 Completed 229000 
16 228019896975700028 Ward-20 Naya Khamhriya B-177 Completed 226000 
17 228019896975700053 Ward-20 Naya Khamhriya B-178 Completed 226000 
18 228019896975700007 Ward-20 Naya Khamhriya B-180 Completed 225400 
19 228019896976200056 Ward No.3 Ganjipara C-05 Completed 226000 
20 228019896977200055 Ward No.10 Shitla Mandir C-43 Completed 226000 
21 0322801989631518348 Ward No.11 Killa Para  C-47 Completed 187800 
22 0322801989630546580 Ward No.13 Dhaneli C-58 Completed 187800 
23 0322801989625632939 Ward-16 Dauchoura C-67 Completed 225400 
24 228019896977000007 Ward No.16 Dauchoura C 69-70 Completed 226000 
25 228019896977300047 Ward No.17 Dauchoura C-71 Completed 226000 
26 0322801989605901896 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para  C-90 Completed 226000 
27 228019896977100080 Ward No.1 Pipariya Para  C-92 Completed 188550 
28 228019896976100044 Ward No.2 Durga Munch  C-94 Completed 221300 
29 228019896976400015 Ward No.5 Thakurpada C-99 Completed 56500 
30 228019896977200156 Ward No.10 Shitla Mandir  C-111 Completed 225400 
31 228019896976900040 Ward No.13 Dhaneli C-117 Completed 223000 
32 0322801989631504869 Ward-20 Naya Khamhriya C-128 Completed 187800 
33 228019896976800012 Ward No.12 Amlipara C-154 Roof 188400 
34 228019896975100013 Ward No.14 Sonesarar C-155 Completed 220000 
35 0322801989632189627 Ward No.14 Sonesarar C-157 Completed 187800 
 Total    72,14,050 
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 
 
 

Appendices  
101 
Appendix-2.1.5 
(Referred to in para 2.1.8.2) 
Statement showing the details of blockage of fund due to non–completion of DUs under AHP as of August 2024 
(  in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Sanctioned 
DUs 
Administrative 
Approval date 
(amount) 
Technical 
Sanction 
date 
(amount) 
Name of contractor Contract 
sum 
Date of 
work 
order 
Stipulated 
period of 
completion 
(delay in 
month) 
Completion 
of DUs 
Current status of work 
Financial Physical 
Status/percentage 
1 Ambikapur 493 27/04/2018 
(22.40) 
19/07/2018 
(22.04) 
M/s. Vinod Kumar 
Jain 
22.40 24/01/2020 24 (29) 0 13.80 Finishing stage 
2 Bhilai 1120 20/12/2016 
(54.76) 
11/01/2017 
(53.84) 
M/s. Chandra Nirman 
Pvt. Ltd. 
50.13 05/05/2018 18 (58) 0 32.74 Foundation Stage - 
720, Slab Stage - 
22, Finishing Stage 
- 1127 3 Bhilai 894 20/12/2016 
(35.83) 
11/01/2017 
(34.65) 
M/s. Chandra Nirman 
Pvt. Ltd. 
40.14 05/05/2018 18 (58) 0 20.47 
4 Bilaspur 174 20/12/2016 
(25.46) 
11/01/2017 
(24.26) 
M/s. Shankara 
Enterprises 
7.98 18/08/2017 12 (72) 58 9.20 Contract terminated 
and approval of 
balance work tender 
rates awaited 5 Bilaspur 319 14.35 18/08/2017 18 (66) 0 
6 Bilaspur 5785 27/02/2018 & 
27/04/2018 
(274.77) 
7/19/2018, 
25/07/2018 
(274.77) 
M/s. BSBK Pvt. Ltd. 262.12 07/03/2019 36 (29) 522 48.42 Work stopped at site 
7 Jagdalpur 174 27/02/2018 
(8.26) 
18/07/2018 
(8.12) 
M/s. OM Builders 8.26 22/12/2018 24 (44) 0 2.40 37 
8 Korba 986 27/02/2018 
(132.18) 
18/04/2018 
(130.16) 
M/s. Back Bone Pvt. 
Ltd. 
42.22 11/06/2019 24 (37) 0 30.75 75 
754 33.56 08/03/2019 24 (48) 0 27.96 75 
1044 45.38 09/07/2019 24 (44) 0 31.53 75 
9 Raipur 667 27/02/2018 
(31.68) 
18/07/2017 
(31.16) 
M/s. BSBK Pvt. Ltd. 32.01 29/08/2019 24 (36) 0 7.81 Work stopped by 
contractor-24 
10 Raipur 392 25/06/2018 
(18.62) 
01/09/2018 
(18.31) 
M/s. Raipur 
Construction Pvt. Ltd. 
18.12 23/08/2019 24 (36) 0 4.97 25 
 Total 12802 601.96 597.31  576.67   580 230.05  
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
102 
Appendix-2.1.6 
(Referred to in para 2.1.8.9) 
Statement showing the details of beneficiaries who did not commence the work 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Beneficiary ID First instalment Foundation or 
only Pit  Amount Date of 
payment/plinth 
geo-tag 
1 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Korba 
228019490688000022 56063 21/07/2020 Only Pit 
2 228019490691100009 57188 06/07/2020 Only Pit 
3 228019490691100014 57188 03/12/2020 Only Pit 
4 
Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 
228019750694200474 57187 25/06/2019 Only Pit 
5 228019750724900165 57187 09/03/2020 Foundation 
6 228019750724600204 57187 30/01/2020 Only Pit 
7 228019750723500003 57187 08/11/2019 Only Pit 
8 
Municipal 
Corporation, 
Ambikapur 
228019270710400057 56500 11/08/2021 Only Pit 
9 228019270710300071 56500 28/05/2019 Only Pit 
10 228019270710000062 56500 23/04/2018 Foundation 
11 228019270710300089 56500 15/09/2019 Only Pit 
12 228019270710300105 56500 07/02/2020 Only Pit 
13 228019270710300122 56500 04/09/2021 Only Pit 
14 228019270710400085 56500 22/09/2021 Only Pit 
15 228019270710300127 56500 28/07/2021 Foundation 
16 228019270710400080 56500 11/08/2021 Only Pit 
17 228019270710400088 56500 09/09/2020 Foundation 
18 228019270710300123 56000 04/09/2021 Only Pit 
19 228019270710300125 56500 22/09/2021 Foundation 
20 
Municipal 
Corporation, 
Jagdalpur 
228020640644900066 56062 19/08/2021 Only Pit 
21 228020640644900068 57187 12/11/2021 Only Pit 
22 228020640650400045 56062 17/02/2023 Only Pit 
23 228020640645400175 56062 29/09/2021 Only Pit 
24 228020640646400027 56531 27/05/2022 Only Pit 
25 228020640650400006 57187 06/09/2022 Only Pit 
26 228020640645400042 56531 21/12/2021 Only Pit 
27 228020640645400077 56531 12/02/2020 Only Pit 
28 228020640645400086 56500 23/02/2019 Only Pit 
29 228020640645700050 54781 26/06/2019 Only Pit 

Appendices  
103 
30 228020640647100015 56500 18/03/2019 Only Pit 
31 228020640646800016 56859 11/02/2022 Only Pit 
32 228020640649800031 56531 25/02/2020 Only Pit 
33 228020640649000056 56531 02/07/2019 Only Pit 
34 228020640646200019 56500 18/03/2019 Only Pit 
35 228020640648800014 56531 21/12/2021 Only Pit 
36 228020640644900027 56500 09/03/2018 Only Pit 
37 032280206418444713 55156 11/05/2022 Only Pit 
38 228020640642900160 51187 14/12/2022 Only Pit 
39 228020640649300022 56531 19/08/2021 Only Pit 
40 228020640648000029 55250 26/10/2018 Only Pit 
41 0322802064557563560 55156 23/02/2023 Only Pit 
42 
Municipal 
Corporation, 
Raipur 
228020340667800957 50000 10/01/2022 Only Pit 
43 228020340670300060 50000 11/10/2022 Only Pit 
44 03228020344630283860 50000 30/09/2022 Foundation 
45 228020340674000345 50000 16/11/2022 Only Pit 
46 
Municipal 
Council, 
Katghora 
228019458404700062 56531 04/03/2020 Only Pit 
47 228019456771500068 56531 19/11/2019 Only Pit 
48 0322801945630363055 56531 23/02/2023 Only Pit 
49 228019456783600030 56531 09/11/2021 Only Pit 
50 Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Gandai 
228019875848600019 56000 16/05/2019 Only Pit 
51 228019875848600069 56500 22/01/2020 Only Pit 
52 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Chhurikala 
228019466714500009 56531 04/07/2022 Only Pit 
53 228019466714800037 56531 11/07/2019 Only Pit 
54 228019466714500005 56531 21/02/2022 Only Pit 
55 228019466713900011 56531 22/08/2019 Only Pit 
56 0322801946615881116 56531 22/05/2023 Only Pit 
57 228019466714100030 56531 09/03/2020 Only Pit 
58 228019466714500036 56531 14/12/2021 Only Pit 
59 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Kota 
228019686715300089 57187 12/10/2022 Only Pit 
60 228019686715300088 57187 08/08/2022 Only Pit 
61 228019686716300116 56531 07/04/2022 Only Pit 
62 228019686716300120 55406 27/05/2020 Only Pit 
63 0322801968626271497 57187 07/03/2023 Only Pit 
64 228019306997900023 56500 30/10/2019 Only Pit 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
104 
65 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Sitapur 
228019306997700015 56500 16/12/2019 Only Pit 
66 228019306913700036 56500 30/10/2019 Only Pit 
67 228019306997900011 56500 08/02/2019 Only Pit 
68 0322801930629901672 56500 03/08/2022 Only Pit 
69 
Municipal 
Council, 
Surajpur 
228019236859300062 54750 04/06/2022 Only Pit 
70 228019236851900074 54750 15/11/2019 Only Pit 
71 228019236859500052 54750 21/01/2020 Only Pit 
72 228019236858700012 54750 13/11/2019 Only Pit 
73 228019236859500053 54750 15/06/2020 Only Pit 
74 228019236859500063 54750 04/08/2022 Only Pit 
75 228019236859100077 54750 08/09/2021 Only Pit 
76 228019236850800105 54750 28/07/2021 Only Pit 
77 228019236859200028 54750 22/07/2021 Only Pit 
78 228019236853400013 54750 04/08/2020 Only Pit 
79 228019236852200020 54750 25/11/2019 Foundation 
80 228019236851900009 54750 17/10/2019 Only Pit 
81 Municipal 
Council, 
Bijapur 
228020761040300004 56500 20/09/2018 Only Pit 
82 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Geedam 
228020706777900083 56500 21/09/2021 Only Pit 
83 228020706777800057 56500 21/09/2021 Only Pit 
84 228020706777800055 56500 21/09/2021 Foundation 
85 228020706777900061 56500 03/06/2020 Only Pit 
86 228020706777800002 56500 26/08/2021 Only Pit 
87 228020706777300021 56500 21/09/2021 Foundation 
88 
Municipal 
Council, 
Sarangarh 
228019426716700024 57250 29/05/2018 Only Pit 
89 228019426716900047 57250 21/11/2019 Only Pit 
90 228019426717000170 57100 18/04/2022 Only Pit 
91 228019426717000168 57100 18/05/2022 Foundation 
92 228019426717800189 56500 28/02/2022 Only Pit 
93 228019426717300052 57250 10/12/2021 Foundation 
94 228019426716600175 57250 15/03/2023 Only Pit 
95 228019426717700078 57250 15/03/2023 Only Pit 
96 228019426716900085 57250 26/09/2022 Only Pit 
97 228019426717400082 57250 10/12/2022 Only Pit 
98 228019737901900004 56500 07/07/2022 Only Pit 

Appendices  
105 
99 
Municipal 
Council, 
Takhatpur 
228019737902100004 56000 13/02/2019 Only Pit 
100 228019737901900030 56500 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
101 228019737902300075 56000 20/06/2022 Only Pit 
102 228019737902700088 56500 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
103 228019737902700101 57187 07/06/2022 Only Pit 
104 228019737902300016 56500 10/02/2020 Only Pit 
105 228019737902400110 57187 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
106 228019737901900049 55500 10/02/2020 Only Pit 
107 228019737902700246 56500 10/02/2020 Only Pit 
108 228019737901900020 56000 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
109 228019737902700180 56000 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
110 228019737902700202 57187 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
111 228019737902700268 56500 09/11/2020 Only Pit 
112 228019737147800087 57250 24/02/2022 Only Pit 
113 228019737901900070 57187 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
114 228019737901800009 57187 30/03/2021 Only Pit 
115 228019737147700119 57000 05/10/2019 Only Pit 
116 228019737902700358 57187 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
117 228019737902400165 55500 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
118 228019737902300160 56500 20/06/2022 Only Pit 
119 228019737147700153 57187 28/11/2022 Only Pit 
120 228019737147700148 57187 28/11/2022 Only Pit 
121 228019737902100102 57187 28/11/2022 Only Pit 
122 228019737147700121 56250 10/02/2020 Only Pit 
123 228019737147700105 56500 10/02/2020 Only Pit 
124 228019737147700131 56500 30/03/2020 Only Pit 
125 228019737147800103 56500 14/07/2021 Only Pit 
126 228019737147900141 56500 30/11/2019 Foundation 
127 228019737902000069 56000 30/03/2020 Only Pit 
128 228019737902700371 56500 04/05/2022 Only Pit 
129 228019737902700307 56500 14/07/2020 Only Pit 
130 228019737902400020 55500 07/06/2022 Only Pit 
131 228019737902700018 57187 14/07/2020 Only Pit 
132 228019737902600031 57250 24/05/2019 Only Pit 
133 228019737901800005 56500 17/01/2020 Only Pit 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
106 
134 Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Fingeshwar 
0322802036630407569 56550 17/05/2023 Foundation 
135 0322802036628720637 56550 15/05/2023 Only Pit 
136 Municipal 
Council, 
Gariyaband 
228020408395100095 55400 23/01/2020 Only Pit 
137 228020408865700016 52350 07/07/2022 Foundation 
138 228020408395100142 56550 23/01/2020 Only Pit 
139 
Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bhilai 
228020080662100031 53593 01/08/2019 Foundation 
140 0322802008629530090 51812 18/08/2023 Foundation 
141 228020080664500082 56531 22/01/2019 Foundation 
142 228020080661600281 53593 15/05/2022 Only Pit 
143 228020080661900173 52343 01/07/2019 Only Pit 
144 228020080660000227 57187 31/07/2021 Foundation 
145 0322802008610890118 55156 06/08/2021 Only Pit 
146 0322802008625048423 55406 24/05/2022 Only Pit 
147 228020080661800120 55687 13/08/2021 Only Pit 
148 228020080660400147 54750 25/09/2019 Foundation 
149 0322802008402775563 56062 13/09/2021 Only Pit 
150 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Bastar 
228020656774000007 56500 26/09/2019 Only Pit 
151 228020656774000008 56500 06/06/2019 Only Pit 
152 228020656773900016 56500 12/05/2020 Only Pit 
153 228020656774500024 57188 21/01/2020 Only Pit 
154 228020656773800013 56500 11/11/2019 Only Pit 
155 228020656773800017 56500 18/11/2019 Only Pit 
156 228020656774900035 56500 22/06/2019 Only Pit 
157 228020656774300042 57188 06/08/2021 Only Pit 
158 228020656774700039 57188 23/09/2021 Only Pit 
159 0322802065622250443 57188 18/05/2022 Only Pit 
160 228020656774500006 56500 21/06/2018 Only Pit 
161 228020656773900016 56500 22/05/2023 Only Pit 
162 228020656773700055 56500 25/05/2022 Only Pit 
163 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Premnagar 
228019266854700008 57250 23/02/2019 Only Pit 
164 228019266854700007 56500 15/12/2022 Only Pit 
165 228019266855400009 54750 18/10/2018 Only Pit 
166 228019266849500011 56500 08/12/2021 Only Pit 
167 228019266855400012 57250 05/03/2020 Only Pit 
168 228019266858000013 56500 24/12/2019 Only Pit 

Appendices  
107 
169 228019266855400017 56500 22/12/2021 Only Pit 
170 228019266859000007 56500 08/11/2021 Only Pit 
171 2280192668549500013 56500 15/12/2022 Only Pit 
172 0322801926629003371 56500 15/06/2022 Only Pit 
173 0322801926627774293 56500 12/07/2022 Only Pit 
174  228019266858400029 56500 12/07/2022 Only Pit 
175 0322801926629006054 56500 12/07/2022 Only Pit 
176 228019266855400010 56500 01/08/2022 Only Pit 
177 0322801926629519285 56500 16/08/2022 Foundation 
178 0322801926627574648 56500 30/09/2022 Foundation 
179 0322801926628990551 56500 30/09/2022 Only Pit 
180 0322801926628984349 56500 30/09/2022 Only Pit 
181 0322801926628988277 56500 30/09/2022 Only Pit 
182  0322801926627555697 56500 27/10/2022 Foundation 
183 0322801926627735161 56500 27/10/2022 Only Pit 
184 0322801926628972747 56500 27/10/2022 Only Pit 
185 228019266854700012 56500 27/10/2022 Only Pit 
186 
Municipal 
Council, 
Arang 
228020297226000055 56500 02/08/2022 Only Pit 
187 228020296861800046 54750 02/03/2022 Only Pit 
188 228020296862400128 54750 17/12/2021 Only Pit 
189 228020296861800062 55500 24/05/2022 Foundation 
190 
Municipal 
Panchayat, 
Abhanpur 
228020306894600152 57188 21/02/2023 Only Pit 
191 0322802030630983326 56531 10/08/2023 Only Pit 
192 228020306894800043  56063 21/07/2023 Only Pit 
193 228020306894800100 57188 29/11/2022 Only Pit 
194 228020306894800054 57188 22/07/2022 Only Pit 
195 228020307200000152 57188 21/07/2023 Only Pit 
196 0322802030631023570 56531 10/08/2023 Only Pit 
197 228020306894600147 57188 24/05/2023 Only Pit 
198 228020306894800071 57188 24/05/2023 Only Pit 
199 228020306894800033 57188 13/06/2023 Foundation 
200 228020306894800093 57188 24/05/2023 Only Pit 
201 228020307200000159 57188 24/05/2023 Only Pit 
Total 11292101  177 Pits Only 
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
108 
Appendix-2.1.7 
(Referred to in para 2.1.8.14) 
Statement showing the details of duplicity in benefits provided under PMAY-U 
(  in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB Beneficiary Code Aadhaar 
Number/ Survey 
code 
Mission 
Vertical 
Date of 
attachment 
of 
beneficiaries 
CLSS 
Subsidy 
1 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Korba 
228019490686800398 ******598268 AHP 12/07/2018 0.53 
CLS1088801949000008 
Loan A/c 37474292998 
******598268 CLSS 15/02/2019 2 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 228019750724900138 ******445998 BLC 04/03/2020 2.34 CLS1083801975000036 ******445998 CLSS 08/02/2019 
3 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 228019750692600025 ******159874 BLC 10/01/2018 2.15 CLS1077801975000010 ******159874 CLSS 26/09/2019 
4 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 238021752611700028 ******054640 BLC 15/01/2018 2.67 CLS1184801975000025 ******054640 CLSS 03/07/2019 
5 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 228019750725400544 ******910079 AHP 10/07/2018 2.20 CLS1088801975000148 ******910079 CLSS 12/04/2019 
6 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 228019750725100011 ******462211 BLC 28/09/2017 2.67 CLS1184801975000022 ******462211 CLSS 03/07/2019 
7 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 0322801975636693266 ******058522 BLC 19/06/2023 2.67 CLS1223801975900006 ******058522 CLSS 02/12/2022 
8 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur CLS1088801975000058 ******957094 CLSS 29/03/2019 1.82 228019759434600014  AHP  
9 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Bilaspur 228019750724900431 ******725666 AHP 31/10/2020 2.67 CLS1074801975900002 ******725666 CLSS 07/09/2020 
10 Chhattisgarh 
Housing 
Board 
3201240 289914 AHP 20/12/2019 2.67 
C0000953081  CLSS 2019-20 
11 3201608 428018 AHP 06/06/2018 2.67 
C0002020072  CLSS 2021-22 
12 3205791 403541 AHP 30/12/2019 2.35 
C0001120729  CLSS 2020-21 
13 3205342 3903893 AHP 04/06/2018 2.67 
C0002734791  CLSS 2021-22 
14 3206818 5904986 AHP 16/01/2018 1.25 
C0000349441  CLSS 2021-22 
15 3205859 267751 AHP 29/11/2018 1.11 

Appendices  
109 
 
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 
  
C0001120237  CLSS 2019-20 
16 3203948 270862 AHP 16/08/2017 2.35 
C0001183651  CLSS 2019-20 
17 3202797 427905 AHP 23/05/2016 2.20 
C0002675394  CLSS 2022-23 
18 3205418 292659 AHP 31/05/2018 2.67 
C0001956484  CLSS 2021-22 
19 3201629 295837 AHP 31/12/2019 2.35 
C0001159626  CLSS 2020-21 
20 3206879 5905136 AHP 16/01/2018 2.67 
C0001781209  CLSS 2021-22 
21 3203607 425351 AHP 23/05/2016 1.89 
C0001863661  CLSS 2020-21 
22 3204724 437957 AHP 19/12/2019 1.10 
C0002079322  CLSS 2021-22 
23 3201495 403324 AHP 20/12/2019 1.08 
C0000360979  CLSS 2019-20 
24 3204723 5900037 AHP 20/12/2019 0.82 
C0000404340  CLSS 2021-22 
25 3203328 238947 AHP 14/05/2016 2.18 
C0000378444  CLSS 2019-20 
26 3204429 5904973 AHP 19/12/2019 1.21 
C0000348947  CLSS 2019-20 
27 3206447 5903928 AHP 16/12/2019 2.67 
C0002685014  CLSS 2022-23 
28 3207479 5958848 AHP 05/04/2018 1.42 
C0000252333  CLSS 2018-19 
29 3201451 5906115 AHP 24/12/2019 0.56 
C0001538249  CLSS 2022-23 
 Total     57.61 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
110 
Appendix-2.1.8 
(Referred to in para 2.1.9.1) 
Statement showing the details of BLC houses geo tagged as complete but found 
incomplete during joint physical verification 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB Beneficiary Code Date of last 
payment 
Total 
payment 
Date of 
completion as 
per geo-tag 
1 Municipal Council, Takhatpur 228019737902000072 28/02/2022 137249 19/06/2023 
2 Municipal Corporation, Korba 228019490685700048 11/03/2022 56531 01/09/2023 
3 228019490685700056 25/02/2022 132975 21/09/2021 
4 Municipal Corporation, 
Bilaspur 
0322801975636314518 17/08/2023 186824 24/08/2023 
5 Municipal Council, Katghora 228019458404700033 01/08/2022 188511 25/09/2021 
6 228019458404700037 15/12/2023 188511 25/09/2021 
7 Municipal Panchayat, 
Dhamdha 
0322802003634086368 03/05/2024 182200 30/03/2024 
8 Municipal Panchayat, 
Bhatgaon 
228020276892300025 30/01/2021 228749 25/01/2021 
9 0322802027629824559 26/07/2023 137350 06/09/2023 
10 0322802027629823649 21/03/2023 114500 05/09/2023 
11 Municipal Panchayat, 
Chhurikala 
0322801946631018750 03/07/2023 188513 23/06/2023 
12 Municipal Panchayat, 
Premnagar 
228019266856600014 17/09/2020 226000 21/07/2020 
13 228019266856600003 03/02/2021 229000 07/07/2020 
14 0322801926634368913 26/12/2023 188400 11/01/2024 
15 0322801926629065766 16/09/2023 226000 15/07/2023 
16 228019266858500001 17/01/2020 228950 21/11/2019 
17 0322801926634366495 26/12/2023 188400 11/01/2024 
18 0322801926627335027 02/07/2023 188400 28/10/2023 
19 228019266858500007 24/12/2019 226000 12/10/2019 
20 0322801926631770211 16/09/2023 188400 10/10/2023 
21 0322801926627616583 01/03/2024 188400 11/01/2024 
22 0322801926627357428 18/01/2023 188400 15/10/2023 
23 0322801926629067556 10/11/2023 188400 04/01/2024 
24 228019266856600005 12/05/2020 229000 16/01/2020 
25 228019266856600008 12/05/2020 226000 06/02/2020 
26 228019266856600011 16/07/2020 226000 09/07/2020 
27 228019266856600013 12/05/2020 229000 06/02/2020 
28 228019270710200307 10/11/2021 56500 15/09/2021 

Appendices  
111 
(Source: Information compiled by audit from records) 
  
29 Municipal Corporation, 
Ambikapur 
228019270710200061 20/04/2018 56200 31/08/2021 
30 228019270710100124 03/10/2023 113000 24/09/2021 
31 Municipal Council, Surajpur 228019236859600009 12/03/2021 229000 25/01/2021 
32 228019236859300003 22/06/2020 219000 11/06/2020 
33 228019236850800010 02/03/2021 226000 18/01/2021 
34 Municipal Panchayat, 
Fingeshwar 
228020365837500065 05/03/2020 188496 24/12/2019 
35 Municipal Panchayat, 
Abhanpur 
0322802030630958026 05/03/2024 226126 20/02/2024 
36 228020306894200083 24/05/2024 190938 30/04/2024 
37 0322802030630957687 15/03/2024 226123 21/02/2024 
38 Municipal Corporation, 
Raipur 
228020340668900086 22/04/2020 181000 20/02/2024 
Total 7019046   

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
112 
Appendix 3.1.1 
(Referred to in Para 3.1.2) 
Organisational Setup of the Labour Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BOCW Welfare 
Board Industrial 
Court 
Director 
Employees’ 
State Insurance 
Services 
Labour 
Commissioner 
Additional Labour 
Commissioner  
Dy. Labour 
Commissioners 
Assistant Labour 
Commissioner/Labour 
Officer 
Chhattisgarh 
Asangathit Karmkar 
Rajya Samajik 
Suraksha Mandal 
 Chairman 
Secretary 
Dy. Labour Commissioner 
Labour Inspector Assistant Labour Commissioner/Labour Officer 
 Chairman 
Chhattisgarh 
Shram Kalyan 
Mandal 
Vice Chairman 
Welfare 
Commissioner 
Labour Minister, Government of 
Chhattisgarh 
Secretary, Labour 
Department 

Appendices  
113 
Appendix 3.1.2 
(Referred to in Para 3.1.3) 
Schemes implemented by CGAKM and CGSKM and schemes selected for 
Compliance Audit (CA) 
Name of the schemes implemented in Organised and 
Unorganised Sectors 
Name of the schemes 
selected for CA 
Organised Sector 
(i) Educational Scholarship Scheme 
(ii) Operation of Welfare Centre and administrative 
expenditure on Free Tailoring Training Scheme  
(iii) Assistance for Kanya Vivah 
(iv) Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna 
(v) Assistance to  Medhavi Shiksha 
(vi) Khel Kood protsahan Scheme  
(vii) Accidental Death Assistance to workers  
(viii) Free Cycle Distribution   
(ix) Health and Eye Test Camp and Free Spectacles 
distribution 
(x) Free Baisakhi/Callipers/Hearing Aids distribution  
(xi) Sports competitions for workers 
(xii) Free Sewing Machines Distribution 
(xiii) Financial Assistance and Rehabilitation to 
Labourers affected by Silicosis Disease  
(xiv) Administrative expenditure under the Chief 
Minister’s Skill Development Scheme  
(i) Educational 
Scholarship Scheme  
(ii) Operation of Welfare 
Centre and 
administrative 
expenditure on Free 
Tailoring Training 
Scheme  
(iii) Shaheed Veer Narayan 
Singh Shram Anna 
Yojna 
Unorganised Sector 
(i) Maternity Assistance to Women (Asangathit) 
(ii) Assistance for Death and Disability   
(iii) Maternity Assistance to Women (Theka 
Shramik/Domestic Worker/Hamal Shramik)  
(iv) CM Cycle Assistance Scheme (Asangathit) 
(v) e-Rickshaw Assistance Scheme  
(vi) Cycle, Umbrella, Slipper/Shoes Assistance to 
Domestic Workers. 
(vii) Prime Minister Jeevan Jyoti Insurance Scheme  
(viii) Marriage Scheme for Contract, Domestic and Hamal 
Women Workers  
(ix) Scholarship Scheme for Children of Unorganised 
Workers  
(x) Chief Minister Sewing Machine Assistance to 
Unorganised Workers  
(xi) Scholarship for Children of Contract, Domestic and 
Hamal Women Workers  
(xii) Scholarship for Children of Safai Karmkar  
(xiii) OPD Treatment to Safai Karmkar 
(xiv) Skill Development for Domestic Women Worker 
and Family Empowerment Scheme for Contract and 
Hamal Workers  
(xv) OPD Treatment to Contract Labourer and Hamal 
Workers  
(xvi) Skill Development Scheme for Safai Karmkar 
(xvii) Assistance for Smart Vending Cart (Readymade 
Kitchen)  
(xviii) Special Coaching Scheme for Children of Safai 
Karmkar 
(i)  e-Rickshaw Assistance 
Scheme 
(ii) CM Cycle Assistance 
Scheme (Asangathit)  
(iii) Necessary Equipment 
Assistance to Safai 
Karmkar 
(iv)  Newspaper Distributor 
(Hawker) Cycle 
Scheme  
(v) Skill Development 
Scheme for Safai 
Karmakar 
(vi) Maternity Assistance 
to women 
(Asangathit) 
(vii) Maternity Assistance 
to Women (Theka 
Shramik/Domestic 
Worker/Hamal 
Shramik). 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
114 
(xix) e-Thela Sahayta Yojna 
(xx) Maternity Assistance to Women (Safai Karmkar)  
(xxi) Marriage Assistance Scheme for Unorganised 
Workers 
(xxii) Mukhyamantri Cycle Assistance to Raut Charvaha 
and Milkman 
(xxiii) Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Shram Anna Yojna 
(xxiv) Marriage Scheme for Safai Karmkar 
(xxv) Necessary Equipment Assistance to Safai Karmkar 
(xxvi) Newspaper Distributer (Hawker) Cycle Scheme 
(xxvii) Cremation Assistance for Unorganised Workers  
(xxviii) Cycle Assistance to the Children of Safai Karmkar 
(xxix) Safety Equipment Assistance for Garbage Pickers 
(xxx) Shoe, Hook Assistance for Hamal and Supa, Tokri 
Assistance for Women Hamal 
(xxxi) CM Cycle and Torch Assistance for Kotwar  
(xxxii) Financial and Rehabilitation Assistance for Workers 
Suffering from Silicosis Disease   
(xxxiii) Taraju, Weight and Tokri Assistance for Retail Seller 
of Vegitable, Fruit and Flower   
(xxxiv) CM Medical Assistance to Unorganised Workers for 
Critical Disease  
(xxxv) Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Beema Yojna 
(xxxvi) Mukhyamantri Cycle Rickshaw   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
115 
Appendix 3.1.3  
(Referred to in Para 3.1.7) 
Scheme wise number of beneficiaries and expenditure incurred under CGAKM and CGSKM during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
( in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme 
Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total Exp. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
CGAKM (36 schemes) 
1 Maternity Assistance to 
Asangathit Karmkar 380 38.05 2,333 233.30 6,331 633.10 7,641 954.80 13,958 2,791.60 30,643 4,650.85 
2 Assistance for death 
and disability for 
Asangathit Karmkar 
0 0.00 7 7.00 1,192 1,192.00 2,402 2,402.00 484 484.00 4,085 4,085.00 
3 Maternity Assistance to 
Women (Theka/Hamal 
Shramik and 
Housekeeping) 
1,274 105.55 737 73.61 2,091 209.10 2,449 290.80 4,686 937.20 11,237 1,616.26 
4 Mukhyamantri 
Asangathit Karmkar 
Cycle Sahayata 
33,435 1,239.44 744 27.58 19 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 34,198 1,267.02 
5 E-Rickshaw Assistance 629 314.50 324 162.00 73 36.50 10 5.00 15 7.50 1,051 525.50 
6 Assistance to 
Housekeeping 
Labourer Cycle, 
Umbrella, Shoes, 
Slipper 
5,851 246.15 140 5.89 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5,991 252.04 
7 Prime Minister Jeevan 
Jyoti Insurance 
(Converged) 
1,45,832 249.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1,45,832 249.37 
8 Assistance for marriage 
of Housekeeping and 
Hamal Women 
Labourers 
1,494 224.10 101 15.15 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1,595 239.25 
9 Scholarship Scheme for 
Asangathit Karmkar's 
Children 
14,131 131.35 5,506 49.86 1,230 11.46 2,247 20.87 295 2.72 23,409 216.25 
10 CM Sewing Machine 
Assistance  for 
Asangathit Karmkar 
3,815 160.23 471 19.78 23 0.00 51 0.00 0 0.00 4,360 180.01 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
116 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme 
Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total Exp. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
11 Scholarship to the 
Housekeeping and 
Hamal Labourer’s 
Children 
8,358 72.54 3,935 34.94 1,035 9.79 1,902 17.63 143 1.27 15,373 136.16 
12 Scholarship to Safai 
Karmakar's Children 4,163 85.70 1,036 20.80 209 4.57 485 10.99 104 2.06 5,997 124.10 
13 Maternity Assistance to 
Safai Karmkar 345 26.95 94 6.65 151 7.55 131 9.70 241 48.20 962 99.05 
14 Marriage Assistance to 
Asangathit Karmkar 470 70.50 140 21.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 610 91.50 
15 CM Cycle Assistance 
to Raut Charvaha, 
Milkman 
2,023 71.80 237 8.41 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2,260 80.21 
16 Shaheed Veer Narayan 
Singh Shram Anna 2,11,298 36.29 2,73,927 39.10 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 4,85,225 75.39 
17 Marriage Assistance to 
Safai Karmkaar 341 51.15 9 1.35 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 350 52.50 
18 Necessary Equipment 
Assistance to Safai 
Karmkaar 
5,338 30.75 609 3.51 105 0.00 43 0.00 222 0.00 6,317 34.25 
19 CM Cycle assistance to 
Asangathit Karmkar 
Newspaper 
Distributors (Hawkers) 
917 32.54 2 0.07 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 919 32.62 
20 Cremation Assistance 
to Asangathit Karmkar 319 15.95 235 11.75 2 0.10 0 0.00 0 0.00 556 27.80 
21 Cycle Assistance to 
Son/Daughter of Safai 
Karmkar 
670 24.84 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 670 24.84 
22 Safety Equipment 
Assistance to Rag 
Picker 
2,104 13.07 314 1.95 64 0.00 0 0.00 332 0.00 2,814 15.02 
23 Shoe, Hook for Hamal 
and Supa, Tokri for 
Women Hamal 
Sahayata 
1,906 9.53 70 0.35 32 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2,008 9.88 
24 CM Kotwar Cycle, 
Torch Sahayata 194 8.34 4 0.17 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 198 8.51 

Appendices  
117 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme 
Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total Exp. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
25 Financial and 
Rehabilitation 
Assistance for Silicosis 
Disease sufferer 
Workers 
1 3.00 1 3.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 6.00 
26 Taraju, Weight and 
Tokri Sahayata Yojna 
for Phutkar, Sabji,Fal 
and Phul Vikreta 
548 3.84 7 0.05 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 555 3.89 
27 CM Medical 
Assistance to 
Asangathit Karmkar 
for severe disease 
3 1.50 1 0.50 0 0.00 1 0.50 0 0.00 5 2.50 
28 OPD treatment to Safai 
Karmkar 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
29 Skill Development for 
Housekeeping Women 
and Family 
empowerment for 
Theka Shramik Hamal 
Kamgar 
131 0.00 409 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 540 0.00 
30 OPD treatment 
Assistance for Theka 
Shramik and Hamal 
Labourers 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
31 Skill Development 
Safai Karmkaar 73 0.00 367 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 440 0.00 
32 Smart Vending Card 
Assistance 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
33 CM Asagathit Karmkar 
Cycle Ricksha 
Assistance 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
34 E-thela Assistance 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
35 Pradhan Mantri 
Suraksha Beema 70 0.01 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 70 0.01 
36 Special coaching for 
Safai Karmkar's  
Son/Daughter  
0 0.00 1 0.73 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 0.73 

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
118 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme 
Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total Exp. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Total CGAKM 788,273 14106.51 
CGSKM (14 Schemes) 
37 Educational 
Scholarship 3,852 91.53 6,628 147.54 3,027 67.59 1,682 42.34 3,677 192.14 18,866 541.12 
38 Kanya Vivah Sahayata 345 51.75 175 26.25 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 520 78.00 
39 Expenditure of salary 
and other on Operation 
Labour Welfare 
Centre/Free Sewing 
Embroidery training   
879 47.50 706 25.59 0 22.82 471 22.40 1,164 23.62 3,220 141.93 
40 Accidental Death 
Assistance 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
41 Free Cycle Distribution 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
42 Free Sewing Machine 775 32.15 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 775 32.15 
43 Health, Eye Test, Camp 
and free distribution of 
Spectacles 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
44 Free 
Vaisakhi/Callipers/Tri 
cycle/ Hearing Aids 
Distribution 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
45 Financial assistance 
and Rehabilitation 
Assistance to 
Labourers affected by 
Silicosis (disease)  
1 3.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 3.00 2 6.00 
46 Sports competition for 
Labourers 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
47 Chief Minister Skill 
development and 
family empowerment 
(Administrative and 
Salary Expenditure) 
0 11.42 0 14.27 0 13.27 0 10.35 0 9.98 0 59.30 
48 Shaheed Veer Narayan 
Singh Shram Anna 72,832 7.30 1,19,352 11.72 89,988 9.28 1,26,622 15.16 21,934 2.69 4,30,728 46.16 
49 Medhavi Shiksha 
Protsahan 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3 0.25 3 0.25 

Appendices  
119 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme 
Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Number 
of Ben. Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total Exp. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
50 Khel Kood Protsahan 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 0.25 1 0.25 
Total CGSKM 4,54,115 905.16 
Grand Total 1,242,388 15,011.66 
(Exp.- Expenditure and Ben.- Beneficiaries)

Audit Report on Performance and Compliance Audit for the period ended 31 March 2023 
120 
Appendix 3.1.4 
(Referred to in para 3.1.7) 
Scheme wise expenditure per beneficiary in CGAKM and CGSKM during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(Amount in ) 
CGAKM (13 schemes) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Scheme Number 
of Ben. 
Exp. Number 
of Ben. 
Exp. Number 
of Ben. 
Exp. Number 
of Ben. 
Exp. Number 
of Ben. 
Exp. Total 
Number 
of Ben. 
Total 
Exp. 
Exp. per 
Ben. 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1 Prime Minister Jeevan Jyoti 
Insurance Scheme 
145832 24937272 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 145832 24937272 171 
2 Scholarship Scheme for 
Children of Unorganised 
Workers 
14131 13135000 5506 4985950 1230 1146000 2247 2086500 295 272000 23409 21625450 924 
3 Scholarship for Children of 
Contract, Domestic and 
Hamal Women Workers 
8358 7254000 3935 3493500 1035 979250 1902 1762750 143 126500 15373 13616000 886 
4 Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh 
Shram Anna Yojna 
211298 3628728 273927 3910187 0 0 0 0 0 0 485225 7538915 16 
5 Necessary Equipment 
Assistance to Safai Karmkar 
5338 3074688 609 350784 105 0 43 0 222 0 6317 3425472 542 
6 Safety Equipment Assistance 
for Garbage Pickers 
2104 1306584 314 194994 64 0 0 0 332 0 2814 1501578 534 
7 Shoe, Hook Assistance for 
Hamal and Supa, Tokri 
Assistance for Women 
Hamal 
1906 953000 70 35000 32 0 0 0 0 0 2008 988000 492 
8 Taraju, Weight and Tokri 
Assistance for Retail Seller 
of Vegitable, Fruit and 
Flower 
548 383600 7 4900 0 0 0 0 0 0 555 388500 700 
9 OPD Treatment to Safai 
Karmkar 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 OPD Treatment to Contract 
Labourer and Hamal 
Workers 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 Assistance for Smart 
Vending Cart (Readymade 
Kitchen) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Appendices  
121 
(Exp.- Expenditure and Ben.- Beneficiaries) 
12 Mukhyamantri Cycle 
Ricksha 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 e-Thela Sahayta Yojna 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
CGSKM (4 Schemes) 
14 Accidental Death Assistance 
to workers 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 Free Cycle Distribution 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
16 Free 
Baisakhi/Callipers/Hearing 
Aids distribution 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
17 Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh 
Shram Anna Yojna 
72832 730300 119352 1172280 89988 928439 126622 1516298 21934 269052 430728 4616369 11 

 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
www.cag.gov.in 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/chhattisgarh/en 
