© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in
lR;eso t;rs
State Finances Audit Report 
of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March 2023
Government of Sikkim
Report No. 1 of 2024
2024
https://cag.gov.in/ag/sikkim/en
Report No. 1 of 2024 – Government of Sikkim
© COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Government of Sikkim — Report No. 2 of 2025  
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank 
of Sikkim for the year ended March 2023
GOVERNMENT OF SIKKIM
Report No. 2 of 2025
(State 
Finance
s Audit 
Report)
https:https://cag.gov.in/ag/sikkim/en


Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank 
of Sikkim for the year ended March 2023
Government of Sikkim
Report No. 2 of 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraph Particulars Page No.
Preface iii
Executive Summary v
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION AND AUDIT FRAMEWORK
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 Organisational Set-up 1
1.3 Audit Objectives 2
1.4 Audit Criteria 2
1.5 Scope of Audit and Methodology 3
1.6 Disclaimer and Acknowledgement 3
CHAPTER II: GOVERNANCE
2.1 Regulatory framework 5
2.2 Corporate Governance 7
2.3 Compliance 8
2.4 Conclusion 11
2.5 Recommendations 11
CHAPTER III: BANKER OF THE GOVERNMENT
3.1 Excess claim of Agency Commission from the State 
Government - ₹ 32.81 crore
13
3.2 Loans to Government Departments/ PSUs/ ABs 15
3.3 Irregularities in collection of Government Revenue by Rangpo 
Extension Counter
16
3.4 Conclusion 17
3.5 Recommendations 17
CHAPTER IV: COMMERCIAL BANKING
4.1 Banking operations 19
4.2 Customer Services 23
4.3 Non-compliance to Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 
2002
25
4.4 Credit Functions 26
4.5 Functioning of Branches 39
4.6 Information Technology Systems 42
4.7 Human Resource Management 45
4.8 Conclusion 47
4.9 Recommendations 48
CHAPTER V: FRAUD RISK MANAGEMENT
5.1 Inadequate Fraud Risk Controls 49
5.2 Instances of illicit transactions/ frauds/ misappropriation cases 
noticed in audit
49
5.3 Ineffective punitive action against the cases of Fraud/ 
Misappropriation
56
5.4 Non-existence of Internal Audit Wing 59
5.5 Non appointment of Chief Risk Officer 59
5.6 Non-existence of Mandatory Leave and Rotation Policy 60
5.7 Conclusion 60
5.8 Recommendations 60
Appendices 63
Glossary 85

PREFACE
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing the results of 
Performance Audit on the functioning of the State Bank of Sikkim for the period from 
2017-18 to 2022-23 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Sikkim under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India.
The State Bank of Sikkim (SBS) was established under the State Bank of Sikkim 
Proclamation, 1968 by the then Chogyal of Sikkim to carry on the business of banking; 
borrow or raise money; to lend money by making loans and advances; to buy, sell, 
collect and deal in bills of exchange, hundies, promissory notes, drafts, bills of lading, 
debentures and other instruments.  The SBS also acts as an agent of the Government of 
Sikkim.  It is not regulated by the Reserve Bank of India.  The focus of the audit is to 
assess the role of the SBS in providing the envisaged banking services to its customers 
in an efficient way.
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

About the Report:
The Report is about the results of a Performance Audit on the Functioning of the State 
Bank of Sikkim (SBS). We covered the period from 2017-18 to 2022-23.  The audit 
examination includes analysing the data in the Core Banking Solution System, test 
check of records at Head Office and 18 selected branches and three extension counters.
What has been covered in this audit? 
In this Performance Audit, we have focussed on the overall functioning of the SBS 
and the regulatory framework under which it operates.  We have assessed the banking 
operations parameters, processes of credit appraisal, sanction, recovery, etc.  We have 
reviewed the Non- Performing Asset (NPA) cases along with schemes such as One 
Time Settlement Scheme and COVID rehabilitation scheme.  Adequacies of Fraud Risk 
Management system, IT systems and Human Resource Management were also reviewed. 
What have we found? 
We found significant areas for improvement in the functioning of the SBS as highlighted 
below: -
Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Framework
State Bank of Sikkim (SBS/ Bank) was constituted (September 1968) under the State 
Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968 (Proclamation) by the then Chogyal (King) of 
Sikkim, for providing banking facilities in Sikkim. Section 19 (1) (a) of the Proclamation 
further empowered the Government of Sikkim to appoint SBS to act as an Agent of 
Government of Sikkim (GoS), to accept moneys on behalf of GoS and make payments 
up to the amount standing to the credit of GoS and carry out GoS remittances, besides 
other banking operations.
A Performance Audit (PA) on the functioning of SBS was taken up in view of the existing 
high level of Gross Non-Performing Assets (GNPA) aggregating ₹1,682.04 crore  
(52.23 per cent) of its total advance as on 31 March 2023.
(Paragraph 1.1)
Chapter II: Governance
Regulatory framework
Audit noticed certain limitations in the Proclamation and the State Government has not 
made any efforts to ensure that the proclamation is aligned with generally accepted best 
practices of commercial banking in India. 
(Paragraph 2.1)
Absence of Lender of Last Resort
Since the SBS is not a bank licensed under the Banking Regulation (BR) Act, 1949 it 
does not have a lender of last resort.  Also, as per Section 4 (3) of the Proclamation, the 
liability of the shareholders shall be limited to the amount, if any unpaid on the shares 
held by them.  Hence, considering the alarming rate of non-performing assets (currently 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
vi
52.23 per cent), in the untoward event of a “Bank Run” occurring, there is no lender of 
the last resort to bail out the SBS from insolvency.
(Paragraph 2.1.1)
Impact of RBI’s absence
Audit observed that without RBI’s regulatory framework, the Bank may be more 
vulnerable to financial crises due to lack of supervisory oversight, as they might not 
adhere to strict standards for capital adequacy or liquidity, and they are more prone 
to risky lending practices and inadequate monitoring of loan recovery, resulting in 
accumulation of bad loans.
(Paragraph 2.1.3)
Non-formulation of Critical Policies
Audit noticed that SBS had not framed critical policies viz., Compliance Policy, Anti-
Fraud policy, Whistle Blower policy, Credit policy, Investment policy, IT Policy, Legal 
Audit policy, Rotation and mandatory leave policy for establishing the organisational 
culture, robust ‘control and oversight system’. Thus lack of these policies led to credit 
lending without proper credit appraisal, regular follow-ups and credit/ legal audit, etc., 
resulting in accumulation of NPAs and series of irregularities and fraudulent activities 
prevalent in the Bank.
(Paragraph 2.2.1)
Non-Compliance of the provisions of the Proclamation
Audit noticed that the SBS did not comply with  important provisions of State Bank of 
Sikkim Proclamation, 1968 such as non-submission of returns/reports to GoS, declaring 
dividends without first providing adequate provisions for bad and doubtful debts, etc.
SBS has not set up any oversight committees such as Audit Committee, Fraud Monitoring 
Committee. In absence of such oversight committees, audit noticed several irregularities 
with respect to the financial reporting practices of the Bank especially regarding the 
classification of NPAs and misreporting of NPAs.
(Paragraph 2.3.1)
Non-Compliance of Board of Directors’ directives
The SBS had not complied with several directives of the Board such as formulation of 
necessary policies/ guidelines as recommended by the C&AG, setting up internal audit 
wing, etc.
(Paragraph 2.3.2)
Lack of oversight by the State Government
The State Government had a supervisory role for monitoring the activities of SBS and 
to provide necessary guidance on issues of significance to develop and establish a robust 
‘control and oversight system’. However, audit observed that the same was not carried 
out by the Finance Department, GoS.
(Paragraph 2.3.4)

Executive Summary
vii
Recommendations
	The State Government may establish robust control and oversight system for 
monitoring the activities of SBS.
	The State Government may put in place an effective regulatory oversight to 
ensure better financial discipline, reduce NP As, and safeguard the stability of 
the banking system.
	SBS may formulate and implement critical policies such as Compliance 
policy, Anti-Fraud policy, Whistle Blower policy, Credit policy, Investment 
policy, etc. 
	SBS may establish governance committees like Audit Committee and Fraud 
Monitoring Committee to oversee key areas for transparent functioning of the 
Bank.
	SBS may strictly comply with the provisions of the SBS Proclamation, 1968 and 
the directions of the Board of Directors.
Chapter III: Banker to the Government
Excess claim of Agency Commission from the State Government
Examination of the records (May 2023) relating to claims of agency commission raised 
on the Finance Department revealed that although rates notified by the RBI were on 
per transaction basis with different rates for physical mode and e-mode transactions, 
the SBS, stuck to the lumpsum rate of 0.118 per cent without giving cognisance to the 
rates notified by the RBI from time to time as was stipulated in the agreement. Further, 
claim was inflated by not excluding the Receipts from GoI and Loans raised by GoS. 
This resulted in excess claim of agency commission amounting to ₹ 32.81 crore from 
Government of Sikkim.
(Paragraph 3.1)
Loans to Government Departments/ PSUs/ ABs
The SBS had sanctioned 34 term loans amounting to ₹ 913.37 crore to six departments, 
three PSUs and one Autonomous Body between March 2013 to March 2023.  While 
availing the loans, the Finance Department had assured that the departmental loans 
would be repaid through budgetary allocation to the concerned departments However,  
due to non-repayment of loan instalments 25 out of 34 accounts have turned into NPA 
with total outstanding balance of ₹ 555.93 crore as on 31 March 2023. This indicates that 
there is lack of financial discipline by the State Government in repaying the debts and 
there seems to be an overall lack of segregation of roles between the State Government 
and the SBS due to which substantial amount has been left unpaid.
(Paragraph 3.2)
Recommendations
	SBS may claim agency commission as per the agreement with the State 
Government and the state Government may on its part check the veracity of the 
claims raised by SBS, before accepting the claim.;

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
viii
	SBS may establish a robust mechanism to ensure that there are no revenue 
leakages on collection of government revenue by the employees of SBS.
Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
Capital Adequacy Requirement
During 2017-23, the entire paid-up capital of ₹ 0.53 crore was held by the GoS.  The 
GoS had not framed any regulatory Capital Adequacy Norms for the Bank.  The SBS, 
however, had voluntarily disclosed the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) as per Basel-I 
Capital Accord for the last five financial years.  The SBS had not maintained adequate 
CAR (nine per cent) and the same ranged between 4.35 to 6.72 per cent. 
(Paragraph 4.1.6)
Lack of adequate banking facilities
Audit noticed that in absence of a license from the RBI, the SBS is unable to provide 
Electronic Fund Transfer facilities on its own.  However, as an alternative measure, it 
had tied up with the YES bank to provide the same to its customers.  Apart from this, 
the SBS did not offer important services/ features such as net banking facilities, mobile 
banking services, credit card facilities, etc. to its customers even though these services 
have become an intrinsic component in the modern-day banking business.
(Paragraph 4.2.1)
Lack of Complaint Redressal Mechanism
An effective grievance redressal mechanism is essential to create a more harmonious 
and productive environment for all stakeholders of an entity. However, there was no 
robust complaint redressal mechanism to which SBS had assured to formulate a General 
Rule and Code of Ethics (GRACE) for the benefit of its customers. 
Audit highlighted in the C&AG’ s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Sikkim 
that there was no robust complaint redressal mechanism to which SBS had assured to 
formulate a General Rule and Code of Ethics (GRACE) for the benefit of its customers.  
Despite the assurance, no action was initiated by SBS as of March 2023. Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism assumes significance in view of the fact that SBS customers also 
do not have options like Ombudsman. 
 (Paragraph 4.2.3)
Non-compliance to Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
Audit noticed that the SBS did not have any written down KYC norms, nor did it have 
any Customer Acceptance Policy. 
In absence of proper KYC norms due to which the customer’s accounts/ transactions 
are not being critically monitored, the SBS is unable to put in place a system to ascertain 
and/ or prevent the bank from being used, intentionally or unintentionally for money 
laundering activities.
(Paragraph 4.3)

Executive Summary
ix
Credit Appraisal, Recovery of Loans & Non-Performing Assets
The credit appraisal process at SBS was found to be inadequate, as it did not 
adopt essential risk mitigation mechanisms such as gathering market intelligence, 
verifying legal matters, checking wilful defaulters’ details with the RBI, or utilizing 
credit scoring agencies like CIBIL. Due diligence on loan applications was minimal, 
leading to poor credit decisions. Additionally, an audit scrutiny of 224 NPA cases in 
May 2023 revealed that the Loan Recovery Policy was not effectively implemented, 
and loan recovery was conducted arbitrarily. Weak recovery efforts stemmed from 
sanctioning loans to uncredit worthy accounts, inadequate security cover, not 
initiating legal action against defaulters, undue favoritism, and non-compliance 
with both pre- and post-disbursement conditions, including monitoring the end use 
of funds. The absence of inspections, irregular monitoring, and lack of follow-ups 
further worsened the situation. As a result of these lapses in credit functions, the 
quality of advances at SBS deteriorated significantly, with gross NPAs reaching an 
alarming 52.23 per cent (₹ 1,682.04 crore) vis-à-vis its total advance in the corresponding 
period (₹ 3,220.67 crore) as on 31 March 2023.
(Paragraph 4.4.1, 4.4.4 & 4.4.6)
Under-Provisioning against Non-Performing Assets
Audit observed that SBS has neither carried out any age-wise analysis of its loan assets 
to classify them as per its Asset Classifications and Provisioning Guideline’s nor it has 
made adequate provisions for NPAs. 
Instead of making provisions based on the classification of assets into different categories 
as per its own guidelines, it had made a general provision over the years.  This has 
resulted in under provisioning of the NPA accounts amounting to ₹ 225.28 crore as on 
31 March 2023. Even if SBS had made minimum provisions at 15 per cent as per its own 
guidelines, the profit earned during each year would have turned into losses during the 
last five years ended 31 March 2023.
(Paragraph 4.4.6.3)
Selection of NPAs for One Time Settlement (OTS)
One Time Settlement (OTS) scheme is a negotiated agreement between the bank and 
the borrower to settle a loan or debt for an amount that is less than the total outstanding 
balance. 
SBS had formulated ‘Loan Recovery Policy, 2014’ which stipulated with respect to 
NPAs, that the compromise should be a negotiated settlement which would ensure 
recovery of dues to the maximum extent possible at minimum expenses and within 
shortest possible time frame.
Audit noticed that the SBS neither outlined the method of selecting the NPAs for OTS, 
nor did it approach the defaulters for settling the outstanding dues under NPA. Further, 
the SBS did not create any awareness about the scheme to all its borrowers unlike the 
SCBs which follows the practice to publicise its OTS schemes through its web portal to 
disseminate the information widely.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
x
Thus, in absence of any predetermined and widely publicised eligibility criteria, the 
selection of loanees was not transparent and the possibility of preferential treatment to 
certain account holders could not be ruled out.
(Paragraph 4.4.6.4 (a))
Non-reconciliation of Inter Branch transactions and other bank accounts
The reconciliation of bank accounts is a fundamental financial practice that contributes 
to accuracy, transparency and control over an entity’s financial affairs.  It is an essential 
tool for error detection, fraud prevention, financial planning, etc. Regular reconciliation 
promotes financial stability and informed decision making.
However, audit noticed  that an unreconciled balance of ₹ 9.44 crore for the period 
prior to 2017 has been lying as Branch Adjustment under other assets in the books of 
accounts as on 31 March 2023. It was also observed that nine out of 38 accounts were 
not reconciled for period ranging from two months to eight years due to which there is 
an unreconciled figure of ₹ 33.48  crore as on 31 March 2023. Further, in 10 out of the 
29 reconciled accounts, it was noticed that the reconciliation had been done by posting 
a bulk amount/ figure as a cut off difference which was yet to be reconciled. These 
accounts had an unreconciled balance of ₹ 23.72 crore, 
(Paragraph 4.5 (a))
Insecure CBS infrastructure
Audit noticed that the SBS had not adopted proper security measures in the operation 
of its Core Banking Solutions System as the system was not restricted to be operated 
within its own network through VPN and as such it could be operated through any 
network inside or outside the bank, through mobile hotspots, etc.  No boundaries were 
set up for the operations of the IT infrastructure of the bank.  As such, the CBS can be 
operated outside the Bank’s premises creating a possibility of security breach.
(Paragraph 4.6.1)
Sharing of user IDs and passwords
Audit observed that the Branch / Section heads and the staff were not adhering to the 
Standard Operating Procedures as in 13 out of 21 (test checked) branches, user IDs 
of the Managers/ officers/ staff were utilised to carry out the transactions during such 
periods when they were either on leave or were out of station.  There is no record of 
who had accessed their credentials in their absence indicating absence of critical internal 
controls.  The user ids and passwords were saved in the devices used by the employees 
and anyone getting hold of the computer systems were able to log in through the saved 
ids and carry out transactions in CBS.  Audit also noticed that in one case, a private 
individual had access to the Core Banking Solution System (CBS) of an employee and 
issued bank statement without the consent of the staff.
(Paragraph 4.6.2)
Compromised Data Integrity: a risky oversight
Data integrity, is crucial for the smooth functioning of any financial institution. When 
data integrity is compromised, it can lead to a range of negative consequences such 

Executive Summary
xi
as inconsistent records, data entry errors, fragmented systems, compliance risks and 
operational inefficiencies.
Audit observed several inconsistencies in the CBS software such as reporting of closed/ 
null accounts as NPAs, mismatch in the reported figures of NPAs in terms of both 
number and amount, positive balances (excess recoveries) were marked as NPAs, closed 
accounts were reflecting outstanding balances and there was divergence in reporting of 
NPAs as the gross NPAs reported by SBS was ₹ 1,682.04 crore whereas the gross NPAs 
as worked out by audit was ₹ 1,798.62 crore. 
 (Paragraph 4.6.3)
Recommendations
The Bank may
	 endeavour to maintain its Capital Adequacy Ratio as per the industry standards;
	 make KYC norms mandatory to prevent the risk of money laundering and ensure 
proper verification of customers before processing transactions.
	  ensure proper provisioning against non-performing assets as per its own guidelines 
to accurately reflect asset quality and mitigate financial risks. 
	 implement a transparent and well-defined policy for the One Time Settlement 
(OTS) scheme;
	 provide adequate banking facilities to its customers and put in place a Complaint 
Redressal Mechanism;
Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
Non framing of Fraud Risk Management framework/policy
Audit noticed that the SBS had neither framed any Fraud Risk Management framework/ 
policy nor had a sound Fraud Risk Management system in vogue. 
(Paragraph 5.1)
Illicit transactions from borrowers to accounts of bank employees
Audit noticed that substantial funds amounting to ₹ 3.65 crore had been deposited into 
the Bank’s employees personal accounts from 166 loanees accounts (loan account, 
savings accounts, current account, etc.) out of which, in 64 instances amounting to  
₹ 1.29 crore, the date of deposit in employee’s personal accounts corresponded directly 
to the date of disbursement of loan to the loanees.
These transactions seem to be cases of suspected fraudulent transactions.
(Paragraph 5.2.1)
Irregularities in recruitment of Assistant Mangers (AMs)
Audit noticed that candidates scoring lesser marks in written examination were selected 
for the post of AM while other candidates falling under same categories had scored 
higher marks but were not selected for appointment.
Further, candidates scoring as low as 26 to 42 marks were called for interview and 
ultimately got selected, whereas candidates scoring in between 55 to 69 were not even 
called for the interview. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
xii
Thus, the selection process adopted by SBS was irregular and the possibility of fraud 
and favouritism in selecting the candidates, could not be ruled out. 
(Paragraph 5.2.4)
Non-existence of Internal Audit Wing
The introduction of Risk-Based Internal Audit system was mandated for all Scheduled 
Commercial Banks.  As part of effective risk management, the SBS should have 
established its own Internal Audit Wing and developed a well-defined policy on Risk 
Based Internal Audit.
The SBS had neither formulated a Risk Based Internal Audit policy nor had established 
its own Internal Audit Wing.  It is pertinent to mention that this issue was already 
highlighted in the C&AG’s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018 for Government of Sikkim. 
(Paragraph 5.4)
Non-existence of Mandatory Leave and Rotation Policy
Mandatory leave for staff was introduced after the RBI saw a sharp increase in frauds 
in banks following forensic studies. Audit noticed that SBS neither framed the Rotation 
Policy nor policy on Mandatory Leave as is being done by SCBs.  Thus, SBS was unable 
to facilitate early detection of frauds/ financial irregularities carried out by the bank 
officials. 
 (Paragraph 5.6)
Recommendations
	 SBS may investigate the irregularities regarding illicit transactions from 
borrowers to accounts of bank employees, non monitoring of high value deposits, 
temporary misappropriation of cash at Namchi Branch and irregularities in 
recruitment of Assistant Managers and take appropriate action against the 
concerned employees.
	 SBS may formulate and enforce a robust Fraud Risk Management policy including 
a Code of Ethics and establish a Compliance and monitoring mechanism;
	 SBS may formulate a Risk-Based Internal Audit policy and establish an Internal 
Audit Wing to provide assurance to its Board of Directors and senior management 
regarding the quality and effectiveness of its internal control, risk management 
and governance framework;
	 SBS may frame Mandatory Leave and Rotation Policy, so as to ensure rotation of 
employees and mandatory leaves especially in critical posts.
The cases pointed out are based on test checks conducted by Audit.  The Bank may 
initiate to comprehensively examine similar cases and take necessary corrective 
action.  The overall functioning of the Bank may also be critically analysed, and 
loopholes/ deficiencies may be addressed as per the industry best practices.

CHAPTER I: 
INTRODUCTION AND 
AUDIT FRAMEWORK

Chapter I- INTRODUCTION AND AUDIT FRAMEWORK
1.1 Introduction
State Bank of Sikkim (SBS/ Bank) was constituted (September 1968) under the State 
Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968 by the then Chogyal (King) of Sikkim, for providing 
banking facilities in Sikkim. The Charter includes accepting of deposits for the purpose 
of lending or investment, repayable on demand or otherwise and withdrawal by cheques, 
draft, order or otherwise and to mobilise capital for economic development and to 
stimulate trade and industry and various other public      purposes. 
Section 19 (1) (a) of the Proclamation further empowered the Government of Sikkim 
to appoint SBS to act as an Agent of Government of Sikkim (GoS), to accept moneys 
on behalf of GoS and make payments up to the amount standing to the credit of GoS 
and carry out GoS remittances, besides other banking operations. As per the notification 
issued (September 1968) by GoS, SBS was to act as Banker and Agent of GoS with 
effect from 09 September 1968. According to Section 3(2) of the Proclamation, SBS 
shall be a body corporate by the name of State Bank of Sikkim having perpetual 
succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
By the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, Sikkim became a State of the 
Union of India with effect from 26 April 1975. A new article, 371F was inserted in the 
Constitution stipulating special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.  As per 
Article 371F(k) of the Constitution of India, all laws in force immediately before the 
appointed day ( viz., 26 April 1975) in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim 
or any part thereof shall continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority. The State Bank of Sikkim 
Proclamation, 1968, being a law in force prior to the appointed day, was still operational 
as of March 2023. Thus, SBS is neither a Company1 nor a   Co-operative Bank2 as defined 
in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (BR Act, 1949) and is not governed by the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI).
As of March 2023, the entire paid-up share capital (₹ 0.53 crore 3) of SBS was held by 
GoS.
A Performance Audit (PA) on the functioning of SBS was taken up in view of the 
existing high level of Gross Non-Performing Assets (GNPA) aggregating ₹1,682.04 
crore (52.23 per cent) of its total advance as on 31 March 2023.
1.2 Organisational set-up
As per Section 8(1) of the Proclamation, the general superintendence and direction 
of the affairs and business of SBS was vested in the Board of Directors (Board). The 
1 ‘Company’ means any company as defined in Section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 and includes a 
foreign company.
2 ‘Co-operative bank’ means a state co-operative bank, a central co-operative bank and a primary co- 
operative bank.
3 Excluding the paid up value (₹ 0.05 crore) of 10,000 shares (partly paid @ ₹ 50 per share) held by 
United Commercial Bank Limited (UCO bank), which were surrendered by UCO bank and amount 
refunded (June 2006) by SBS. The paid up share capital of SBS was, accordingly, reduced (2014-15) 
by SBS to that extent.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
2
composition of the Board as on 31 March 2023 was as shown in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Composition of Board of Directors
Designation Position in the Board
Former MLA Chairman
Secretary to the Chief Minister, GoS Director
Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training Director
Controller of Accounts-cum-Secretary, Finance Department Director
Managing Director, SIDICO4 Director
Managing Director, State Bank of Sikkim Managing Director
Source: Government Notification
The entire oversight of SBS operations rested with the Board and the Managing Director 
(MD) was responsible for the general management of the business of SBS. As on  
31 March 2023, apart from the Head Office, SBS had 55 branches and eight extension 
counters5 across the State. 
1.3 Audit Objectives
The audit objectives were to get a reasonable assurance that;
	 SBS was compliant of the provisions of State Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968. 
	 the targets and growth of deposits and advances were achieved efficiently, 
effectively and economically;
	 the role of SBS as a Banker to the Government was efficiently fulfilled;
	 the objectives for borrowing, raising, lending/ advancing and investment of funds 
were achieved;
	 the Risk Management procedures and methodologies including implementation of 
Non-Performing Assets (NPA) Recovery Policy are adequate and in accordance 
with RBI standards;
	 the IT systems management was efficient and effective; and
	 the Human Resource Management policies and procedures were effective.
1.4 Audit Criteria
The audit criteria that were applied for assessing the achievement of the audit objectives 
are;
	 Provisions of the State Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968.
	 The Sikkim Public Demand Recovery Act, 2006. 
	 The State Bank of Sikkim Recovery Policy, 2014.
	 The State Bank of Sikkim (Classification, Recruitment and Promotion) Regulations, 
2011 and the State Bank of Sikkim Service Regulations, 2011.
	 Policies/procedures prescribed by the Board and senior Management of SBS for 
regulating its banking operations.
4 Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited.
5 Extension counters are those counters which are specifically opened for collection of Government 
revenue such MV tax, Power and water bills, etc. These counters do not accept public deposits or lend 
advances.

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Framework
3
	 Generally accepted National and International Good Practices in the Banking 
Sector and Corporate sector.
1.5 Audit Scope and Methodology
Audit reviewed the banking operations of SBS for a period of six years from 2017-18 
to 2022-23. An entry conference was held (20 September 2022) with the Managing 
Director wherein the scope, audit objectives, audit criteria and the methodology were 
explained.  The methodology included examination of data/ records at the Head Office 
and visiting the selected branch offices.
For this purpose, audit selected 18 branches and three extension counters (out of 
55 branches and eight extension counters) for detailed examination using ‘random 
sampling without replacement’ sampling technique based on the quantum of deposits 
and volume of transactions for the branches and the extension counters respectively. 
Further, out of 3,664 cases of NPA involving ₹ 1,682.04 crore, 224 cases amounting 
to ₹ 572.70 crore (34.05 per cent) pertaining to major sectors 6 including cases settled 
through One Time settlement (OTS) were selected for detailed scrutiny. 
An exit meeting was held (29 January 2024) with the Chief Secretary, Government of 
Sikkim, the Managing Director of State Bank of Sikkim and other officers from the 
Finance Department and State Bank of Sikkim. The views expressed in the meeting 
have been suitably incorporated in the Report.
1.6 Disclaimer and Acknowledgement
This Performance Audit Report has been prepared based on information/ records 
furnished and made available by the SBS. The responsibility of the correctness of the 
information/ data vests with the Bank. 
Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim wishes to acknowledge the co-operation extended 
by the Management of State Bank of Sikkim and Government of Sikkim at each stage 
of the audit process.
6 Cash Credit, Construction, Business loans & Start-up scheme and OTS (all 30 files furnished by SBS).

CHAPTER II:
GOVERNANCE

Chapter II- GOVERNANCE
Governance refers to the way an organisation is managed and controlled. It sets the 
framework for how power and authority are exercised and how decisions are made and 
implemented in the organisation. 
A sound governance mechanism is critical for any bank as it ensures prudent decision-
making, identifies and manages risks effectively and most importantly protects the 
interests of its customers. The RBI Act, 1934 and the BR Act, 1949 are the major 
legislations governing commercial banking in India. The RBI Act constituted Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI), which acts as regulator of the banking sector of India. The BR Act 
enables RBI to issue rules and regulations for the sound governance and management of 
commercial banks in India. SBS, however, does not come under the regulatory purview 
of RBI and is still regulated by the provisions of the SBS Proclamation of 1968. 
2.1 Regulatory framework
Audit studied the regulatory framework under which the SBS operates, and the governance 
structure adopted by the Bank. SBS was established under and governed by the State 
Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968. Audit noticed (July 2023) certain limitations in 
the Proclamation and the State Government has not made any efforts to ensure that the 
Proclamation, drawn in 1968, is aligned with the best practices of commercial banking 
in India such as the Banking Regulations Act, 1949, which significantly reduced the 
efficiency of operations of SBS, as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.
2.1.1 Absence of Lender of Last Resort
In India, the BR Act, 1949 empowers the RBI to inspect and supervise the commercial 
banks through on-site inspection and off-site surveillance.  As a Banker to the banks, 
RBI also acts as the “lender of the last resort” as it bails out the banks in distress from 
possible temporary liquidity crisis and the banking system from a possible breakdown. 
Since SBS is not a bank licensed under the BR Act, it does not have a lender of the last 
resort.  Also, as per Section 4 (3) of the Proclamation, the liability of the shareholders 
shall be limited to the amount, if any unpaid on the shares held by them. Audit opines 
that, in the context of an alarming rate of non-performing assets in SBS (currently 52.23 
per cent), in the untoward event of a “Bank Run7” occurring, there is no lender of the last 
resort to bail out SBS from insolvency as Government of Sikkim has a limited liability 
to the extent of its shareholdings which stood at ₹ 53 lakh. 
SBS did not provide a relevant reply.
2.1.2 Deposit insurance
Deposit insurance helps in ensuring financial stability and enhances customer confidence 
in banks. The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (DICGC), 
a subsidiary of the RBI insures all deposits offered by the banks up to a maximum of  
₹ five lakh for both principal and interest amount. In case of a bank failure or a Bank Run, 
7 A bank run is when the customers of a bank or other financial institutions withdraw their deposits 
at the same time over fears about the bank’ s solvency.  As more people withdraw their funds, the 
probability of default increases, which in turn, can cause more people to withdraw their deposits.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
6
the DICGC Act, 1961 guarantees the reimbursement of up to the maximum amount per 
depositor, regardless of the number and type of deposits held in such a bank. Since SBS 
is not covered under the DICGC Act, the depositors of SBS cannot avail the facilities 
offered by the DICGC in case of a bank failure. 
Audit observed (July 2023) that since SBS is not governed by BR Act, 1949, it is outside 
the ambit of DICGC Act, 1961. Audit is of the opinion that the State Government needs 
to take necessary steps to bring SBS under RBI’s regulatory mechanism and get the 
status of SBS changed to ‘Insured Bank’ in order to safeguard the investor’s interests.
The SBS accepted the audit contention. 
2.1.3 Impact of RBI’s absence
RBI’s regulations and supervision play a crucial role in ensuring that banks maintain 
healthy asset quality and minimise the risk of financial instability. Entities that are not 
directly supervised by RBI face several limitations. One major constraint is the lack of 
oversight in terms of financial stability and risk management. Without RBI’s regulatory 
framework, these entities may be more vulnerable to financial crises, as they might 
not adhere to strict standards for capital adequacy or liquidity. Audit observed certain 
limitations in the functioning of SBS as follows:
	 Lack of regulatory oversight: The RBI monitors banks’ financial health, including 
their NPA levels. If a bank’s NPAs are deemed excessive, RBI can take corrective 
actions, such as imposing restrictions or even appointing administrators. In extreme 
cases, RBI may initiate the liquidation of the bank, protecting depositors and other 
stakeholders through the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation 
(DICGC). Thus, in absence of RBI’s supervision, NPAs were allowed to grow 
unchecked (52.23 per cent as on March 2023), leading to a significant deterioration 
in the financial health of SBS. Without stringent regulatory oversight, SBS was 
more prone to risky lending practices and inadequate monitoring of loan recovery, 
resulting in accumulation of bad loans. 
	 Unsecured loans: The RBI, for economic or legal reasons relating to the borrower’s 
financial difficulty, permits the banks to restructure the loans of the customers, 
grants concessions to the borrower that the bank would not otherwise consider. 
Restructuring would normally involve modification of terms of the advances/ 
securities, which would generally include alteration of repayment period/ repayable 
amount/ the amount of instalment/ rate of interest. RBI normally does not allow the 
banks to grant loans to an already NPA account. Audit observed that as SBS was 
not under the supervisory purview of RBI, SBS at its discretion sanctioned loans 
to NPA accounts and these too turned bad subsequently (as discussed in paragraph 
4.4.1). Thus, SBS was not guided by any financial prudence.
	 Provisioning Coverage Ratio (PCR): This is essentially the ratio of provisioning 
to gross non-performing assets and indicates the extent of funds a bank has kept 
aside to cover loan losses.  RBI had advised SCBs under its regulatory purview to 
maintain the PCR at 70 per cent by September 2010. Audit, however, observed that 
the PCR of SBS was a meagre 1.61 per cent vis-à-vis that of SCBs, the majority of 
whom had achieved the target of 70 per cent within the stipulated target date. Thus, 

Chapter II: Governance
7
a meagre provisioning coverage ratio, especially in the context of having no lender 
of the last resort, is a significant risk for the stability of the Bank.
	 Operations outside Sikkim: Since SBS does not have a license issued by RBI, it is 
not permitted to open a branch outside state. As a result, growth of business of the 
Bank outside Sikkim is not possible. Further, the services of SBS are not available 
to its customers outside the State and the customers have to rely on other banks for 
their travel and business needs outside the State. It also restricts its customers from 
inter banking operations within Sikkim.
In the exit meeting, the MD, SBS stated (January 2024) that GoS and GoI were actively 
considering bringing SBS under the ambit of RBI and once this is achieved, all related 
matters would be duly addressed.
2.2 Corporate Governance
The Management of SBS is vested in a Board of Directors (BoD). As on 31 March 
2023, the BoD comprised of six Directors including the Chairman and the MD. As on 
31 March 2023, SBS had Head Office at Gangtok controlling 63 branches (including 
eight extension counters) across Sikkim. The organisational structure of SBS is as 
shown in the chart below:
Chart-2.1: Organisational structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairman 
Managing Director 
Board of Directors
General Managers (4) 
Chief General Manager (1)
Advisor 
Assistant Managers 
Asstt. General Managers 
Sr. Managers/ Managers 
Subordinate staffs 
2.2.1 Board of Directors: Composition and its functioning
The Board of Directors of a corporate entity plays critical and multifaceted role in ensuring 
governance, management, and overall success of the institution.  The Board is expected 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
8
to play a pivotal role in ensuring that the Bank operates ethically, responsibly, and in 
the best interests of its stakeholders, including shareholders, employees, customers, and 
the community at large. Their duties encompass a wide range of responsibilities such as 
strategic oversight, risk management, financial oversight, corporate governance, ethical 
responsibility, and crisis management.
According to Section 9 of the Proclamation, the maximum number of members (including 
the Chairman and the MD) on the Board are fixed at seven. The power of nominating 
the Chairman is vested with GoS. As on 31 March 2023, six directors (including the 
Chairman and MD) were on the Board, and all were nominated by GoS. 
Audit studied the functioning of the Board of SBS. Observations in this regard is 
discussed below:
	 Non-formulation of Critical Policies
Considering the growing complexities in functioning of the banking sector and as 
per the best practices adopted by the other banks in the country, it was important 
for SBS to formulate various board-approved polices such as Compliance Policy, 
Anti-Fraud policy, Whistle Blower policy, Credit policy, Investment policy, IT 
Policy, Legal Audit policy, Rotation and mandatory leave policy for establishing the 
organisational culture, robust ‘control and oversight system’ and also for effective 
decision making. 
Audit noticed (October 2023) that SBS had not framed any such policies.  Non-
formulation of such policies has led to: 
	 credit lending without proper credit appraisal, regular follow-ups and credit/ legal 
audit, etc., resulting in accumulation of NPAs (discussed in detail in paragraph 
4.4.1 & 4.4.4),
	 a series of irregularities and fraudulent activities and no effective actions were 
initiated. (discussed in detail in paragraph 5.3),
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation. The MD, SBS, in the exit meeting, 
further stated (January 2024) that all policies will be reviewed comprehensively and 
policies will be framed by hiring professional experts within six months.
2.3 Compliance 
Compliance is a fundamental aspect of responsible and sustainable business and 
governance. Organisations that prioritise compliance are better positioned to navigate 
the challenges of a rapidly changing world, protect their stakeholders’ interests, and 
contribute positively to the society.
Lapses in compliances noticed in Audit are discussed below:
2.3.1 Non-Compliance of the provisions of the Proclamation
Examination of the records (October 2023) showed that the Bank did not comply with 
important provisions of the Proclamation as detailed in Table 2.1:

Chapter II: Governance
9
Table 2.1: Non-compliances to the provisions of the Proclamation
Section Non-compliances
17 Section 17 of the Proclamation allows the Board to constitute committees 
as it deems fit. However, despite its business as well as the banking sector 
in the country undergoing significant transformation over the years in terms 
of complexity as well as size, SBS has not set up any oversight committees 
such as Audit Committee, Fraud Monitoring Committee. In absence of such 
oversight committees, audit noticed several irregularities with respect to the 
financial reporting practices of the Bank especially regarding the classification 
of NPAs and misreporting of NPAs as discussed in paragraphs 4.4.6.2, 4.4.6.3 
and 4.6.3. Audit also noticed several instances of suspected fraudulent acts 
in areas such as cash management and recruitment as discussed in paragraph 
5.2.
27A (2) and 
28 (1)
No quarterly returns on the position of the assets and liabilities of the SBS 
were submitted by SBS to GoS/designated authority as per the requirements.
Section 34 (1) The Bank was to declare dividends only after creating provisions for bad 
and doubtful debts and other provisions. However, it was noticed that SBS 
had declared dividends of ₹ 8.01 crore during 2017-18 to 2022-23 without 
first providing adequate provisions for bad and doubtful debts as per its own 
guidelines.
Section 35 Contrary to the provisions which stipulated that an Annual General Meeting 
(AGM) shall be held annually within six months from the date on which the 
annual accounts are closed or such extended time on a request from SBS, no 
AGM was held between 2017-18 and 2021-22.
Source: Management reply and Annual Report
SBS while accepting the audit observation, stated (January 2024) that the compliances 
of un-complied provisions of the Proclamation will be ensured in future. It was further 
stated that at the instance of audit, the Bank is conducting AGM since 2023.
2.3.2 Non-Compliance of Board of Directors’ directives
Compliance with the directives of the Board is vital for effective governance, risk 
management and overall success of an organisation. The Senior Management is 
responsible for carrying out the bank’s activities in a manner consistent with the business 
strategy under the guidance of the Board. 
Audit observed (July 2023) that SBS Management did not comply with several directives 
of the Board, as discussed below:
i) Formulation of necessary policy/guidelines: In its 169 th meeting (28 November 
2017), the Board directed the management to formulate all necessary policy/
guidelines pointed out in the C&AG Audit Report No. 1 of 2018 on top priority. 
However, no policy/guidelines were formulated in the last six years despite 
confirming the decisions taken in this meeting, in the succeeding meetings. 
 SBS while accepting the audit observation, stated (January 2024) that the policies 
would be formulated by engaging professionals of the banking industry.
ii) Meeting of the Board:   As per the  best practices followed by SCBs in India, a 
minimum of four meetings of the Board is usually held in a year. Further, the 
Chairman of the Board in 173 rd meeting (01 October 2020) had also directed the 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
10
MD to hold meetings of the Board at frequent intervals. Audit observed that a total 
of 10 meetings of the Board were held during the period from 2017-18 to 2022-
23.  Moreover, despite the Chairman’s directions referred above, the Management 
could manage to hold only five meeting during October 2020 to 31 March 2023. 
Audit opines that, the frequency of the meeting was not commensurate with the 
role the Board has to play in the overall functioning of the Bank.
 SBS attributed (January 2024) the delay in holding meetings to unavailability of 
the Government appointed Directors, who remains busy most of the time. 
iii) Setting up of Internal Audit: In 174th meeting (19 March 2021), the Board expressed 
serious concern over the sudden spurt of frauds in SBS and advised to set up its 
own Internal Audit team. However, no such Internal Audit Team has been set up so 
far.
 SBS informed (January 2024) that the Bank had initiated the effort to establish 
Internal Audit Wing and has approached Finance Department, GoS to extend the 
service of its internal audit wing for the purpose.
iv) Reduction of Interest rate:  The Board has sanctioned loans at the rate of 12 per 
cent to four borrowers. Subsequently, the management, without the approval of the 
Board, had reduced the interest rates during the years from 2019-20 to 2022-23 and 
consequently forgone interest of ₹ 1.61 crore8.
 The Bank stated (January 2024) that the matter is duly appraised to the BoD and 
post facto approvals are obtained. The Chief Secretary, in the exit meeting, while 
agreeing to the audit observation stated (January 2024) that reducing the interest 
rates by bypassing the Board was highly irregular. The reply reaffirms the audit 
contention that the decision to reduce the interest rates by bypassing the competent 
authority (BoD) was irregular.
2.3.3	Non-fulfilment	of	the	assurances	on	C&AG’s	Audit	Report
SBS did not comply with its various assurances given to the C&AG while replying to 
the Performance Audit Report on “Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim” featured in the 
C&AG’ s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Sikkim.  The major assurances that 
were not complied with are detailed below:
	 Formulation of necessary policies as referred to in Paragraph 2.2.
	 Asset Classification and Provisioning Guidelines of SBS.
	 Complete the reconciliation processes in a reasonable time and to formulate 
Accounting and Operational Manual.
SBS stated (January 2024) that all such recommendations will be complied within six 
months.
2.3.4  Lack of oversight by the State Government
As per Section 31 A of Proclamation, the State Government had a supervisory role 
for monitoring the activities of SBS and to provide necessary guidance on issues of 
8 Mungipa Trades: ₹ 19,46,688, Sunil K Agarwal: ₹ 31,89,311, Skipping Stone: ₹ 38,47,890, Teesta 
Rangit Pvt Ltd: ₹ 71,13,929.

Chapter II: Governance
11
significance to develop and establish a robust ‘control and oversight system’.  However, 
audit observed that the same was not carried out by the Finance Department, GoS.
Audit further noticed that as per the Section 31 (1) of Proclamation, the GoS may 
request RBI to cause an inspection to be made, by one or more of its officers, of SBS 
and its books and accounts. However, since 1968, GoS has not made any such request. 
Thus, the State Government not only was unable in monitoring the activities of SBS but 
did not provide necessary guidance for establishment of a robust control and oversight 
system also.
In the exit meeting, the Chief Secretary stated (January 2024) that SBS does not fall 
under any administrative department and Finance Department would be proposed as an 
administrative department for which “Allocation of Business” rule needs amendment. 
The reply however confirms the audit contention that the State Government did not 
fullfill the role assigned to it under the Proclamation.
2.4 Conclusion
Audit observed that the governance structures within SBS have left much to be desired.  
The role of the Board of Directors in the overall governance of the Bank assumes great 
significance as SBS neither has a lender of last resort nor any regulators to regulate 
its activities. The Bank has not been able to keep pace with the transformations in the 
banking sector within the country and globally.  The absence of supervision by the 
Reserve Bank of India played a crucial role in the unchecked rise of Non-Performing 
Assets, ultimately leading to a severe deterioration in the financial health of the bank. 
Further, non-formulation of critical policies, not setting up important committees, 
non-compliances to the provisions of the Proclamation, non-adherence to the Board’s 
directives, indicate weak governance structures. In the absence of a lender of the last 
resort or an external regulator coupled with lack of oversight from the State Government, 
these issues pose grave concerns for the financial stability of the Bank as well as the 
customer confidence.
2.5 Recommendations
	 The State Government may establish robust control and oversight mechanism for 
monitoring the activities of SBS;
	 The State Government may put in place an effective regulatory oversight to ensure 
better financial discipline, reduce NP As and safeguard the stability of the banking 
system; 
	  SBS may formulate and implement Critical policies such as compliance policy, 
Anti-Fraud policy, Whistle Blower policy, Credit policy, Investment policy, etc.;
	  SBS may establish governance committees like Audit Committee and Fraud 
Monitoring Committee  to oversee key areas for transparent functioning of the 
Bank;
	  SBS may strictly comply with the provisions of the State Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 
1968 and the directions of the Board of Directors;

CHAPTER III: 
BANKER OF THE 
GOVERNMENT

Chapter III: Banker of the Government
Typically, the Government transactions of a State are carried out by the RBI being the 
Central Bank, in terms of the agreement entered into with the State Governments under 
section 21A of the RBI Act, 1934. As of now, such agreements exist between RBI and 
all the State Governments except Government of Sikkim. 
In the absence of role of RBI as a banker to Government of Sikkim, SBS, with the powers 
conferred to it by the Proclamation, acts as the Banker of the State Government.  Thus, 
SBS is vested with the responsibility of receiving money on its behalf and making all 
payments and keeping custody of the balances in current accounts (Major Head 8999) 
as well as investment of cash balances.
GoS maintains only one current account at SBS, i.e., Government Account, wherein all 
government receipts are deposited, and payments are made there from.  Further, SBS 
on the instruction of the State Government either invest such amount with itself by 
withdrawing from the Government Account or transfers funds from the Government 
Account to other banks/financial institutions. Subsequently, SBS forwards the monthly 
compilation of transactions (receipts and payment) to the Central Pay and Accounting 
Office (CPAO)/ Treasury based on which CPAO/Treasury works out its Cash Balance. 
Monthly transactions (receipts and payment) of the State Government are also forwarded 
to the office of the Senior Deputy Accountant General (Sr. DAG) (A&E), Sikkim for 
compilation of accounts. 
Audit scrutinised the activities of SBS as a banker to the government and the observations 
in this regard are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
3.1	 Excess	 claim	of	Agency	Commission	from	the	State	Government	-	₹	32.81	crore
SBS entered (October 2001) into an agreement with the State Government for carrying 
out the general banking business of the State Government on payment of agency 
commission by the State Government at such rates as were made applicable from time 
to time by the RBI for nationalised banks with effect from 01 April 2000, after excluding 
receipts from Government of India and other financial Institutions/Banks. 
The RBI, from time to time, have revised the rates and methodology of claiming 
commission. During the audit period, the rates for claiming agency commission were 
based on the number of transactions as given in table below:
Table 3.1: Rate of Commission
Sl. 
No.
Types of Transaction Unit 1 July 2017 to 
30 July 2019
1 August 2019 
onwards
1 Receipts- Physical Mode Per Transaction ₹ 50/- ₹ 40/-
2 Receipts- e-mode Per Transaction ₹ 12/- ₹ 9/-
3 Pension payment Per Transaction ₹ 65/- ₹ 75/-
4 Payment other than pension Per ₹ 100 turnover 5.5 paise 6.5 paise
Source: the RBI circulars
Scrutiny of records (May 2023) showed that during the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22, 
SBS raised agency commission claim of ₹ 72.77 crore which was accepted by the 
Finance Department, GoS and payment was made accordingly. In this connection, Audit 
observed the following:

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
14
	 The claim of agency commission by SBS was based on the lumpsum rate of 
0.118 per cent without taking into cognisance of the rates notified by the RBI from 
time to time as was stipulated in the agreement (October 2001);
	 The claim of SBS based on Receipts accepted and Payment made on behalf of 
GoS, was inflated by not excluding the Receipts from GoI and Loans raised by 
GoS, leading to excess claim of agency commission amounting to ₹ 12.26 crore, as 
detailed in the table below:
Table 3.2: Excess commission claimed
(₹	in	crore)
Year Claims made by SBS Claims as calculated by Audit 
based on Finance Accounts
Excess agency 
commission 
claimed by SBSReceipts Payment Commission Receipts Payment Commission
2017-18 5,167.61 5,889.53 15.39 1,592.27 5,675.58 10.12 5.27
2018-19 5,657.23 6,923.13 17.52 1,605.72 6,564.46 11.38 6.14
2019-20 2,181.82 7,416.84 13.37 1,663.81 6,922.75 11.96 1.41
2020-21 1,662.00 7,259.93 12.42 1,628.99 7,882.53 13.24 -0.82
2021-22 2,015.25 8,264.83 14.07 1,935.05 7,985.47 13.81 0.26
Total 16,683.91 35,754.26 72.77 8,425.84 35,030.79 60.51 12.26
Source: Management’ s records
	While processing the claims for agency commission, the Finance Department 
accepted the statement of claims submitted by the SBS without verifying the 
calculations.
Audit further observed that although rates notified by the RBI were on per transaction 
basis with different rates for physical mode and e-mode transactions, SBS raised claims 
on lumpsum rate of 0.118 per cent.  As per the terms of the agreement ( i.e., applicable 
rates of RBI), SBS was eligible for agency commission of ₹ 39.96 crore for the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22 calculated on per transaction basis. However, SBS did not honour 
the rates as revised by RBI and claimed agency commission of ₹ 72.77 crore by adopting 
the RBI rates that was prevalent in 2001. Thus, SBS claimed excess agency commission 
of ₹ 32.81 crore from Government of Sikkim.
Further, audit noticed that the claims were not vetted by the State Government before 
release of agency commission to SBS. This would have helped avoid excess claims 
made on government exchequer.
Thus, the Bank had claimed excess agency commission of ₹ 32.81 crore which were 
released by the State Government without due diligence, resulting in extra financial 
burden to the State Exchequer.
SBS stated (January 2024) that the commission is claimed as per the agreement and 
that the Government and the Bank were working to revise the rates of commission. 
The State Government stated (January 2024) that considering the outreach of SBS in 
remote locations where there is no access to other Nationalised Banks, the cost per 
transactions is obviously high. SBS is still issuing Bank Receipts for cash transactions 
and information furnished to audit also pertained to transactions done in physical mode. 
Thus, the functioning of SBS will be reviewed with respect to the rate of commission 
published by RBI vis-à-vis the ease of doing business, reliability of e-mode transaction 

Chapter III: Banker of the Government
15
and other enabling environments. Accordingly, the Finance Department will suitably 
revise the rate of agency commission payable to SBS. 
The justification provided by SBS and the State Government is not acceptable as the 
terms of agreement stipulated that the rates for agency commission were to be levied at 
such rates as were made applicable from time to time by the RBI for nationalised banks. 
SBS did not adhere to the modified rates and methodology of charging commission 
issued by RBI, in violation of the agreement. Further, SBS had erroneously claimed 
agency commission on the Central Government receipts also. 
3.2 Loans to Government Departments/PSUs/ABs
Audit noticed that SBS had sanctioned 34 term loans amounting to ₹ 913.37 crore 9 to 
six departments10, three PSUs 11 and one Autonomous Body 12 between March 2013 to 
March 2023. All these loans were taken on behalf of the Government and subsequently, 
due to non-repayment of loan instalments 25 out of 34 accounts have turned into Non-
Performing Assets (NPA) with total outstanding balance of ₹ 555.93 crore ( Appendix 
1) as on 31  March 2023. While availing the above loans, the Finance Department 
had assured that the above loans would be repaid through budgetary allocation to the 
concerned departments.
From the records made available to audit, it was noticed in one instance that the SBS 
had sanctioned term loans amounting to ₹ 209.27 crore to Sikkim Power Investment 
Corporation Limited (SPICL) to enable the company to meet up its other financial 
commitments, for which SPICL was in default.  The term loans were secured by (i) 1 st 
charge on the receivables of the Corporation from sources other than the Teesta III HEP, 
(ii) 2nd charge of the receivables on account of 12 per cent free power from Teesta III 
HEP, (iii) Corporate Guarantee to be executed by the corporation in favour of the SBS, 
and (iv) Charge on the share of SPICL in Teesta Urja Limited. The total outstanding 
dues as on 31 December 2022 stood at ₹ 338.50 crore.
Audit observed (October 2023) that the major source of revenue of SPICL was the 
revenue from free power received/ receivable from Teesta III HEP and Chuzachen 
project and these revenues were already pledged (February 2012) with the Power Finance 
Corporation (PFC) and the REC in its entirety for repayment of loan taken by SPICL on 
behalf of the GoS.  No other source of revenue was available with SPICL. However, the 
SBS had subsequently sanctioned 13 and released the loans to SPICL without verifying 
the repayment capacity of SPICL. 
Audit also noticed that the loan sanctioned by the SBS was for servicing interest liability 
with the PFC as SPICL was unable to meet its commitments to PFC from the revenue 
generated from free power of the above two HEPs. This implies that SPICL’s only 
source of revenue was insufficient to service the PFC loans itself.  Hence, the decision 
9 (₹ 88.64 crore prior to April 2017; during 2017-23: ₹ 824.73 crore).
10 Power Department, Roads and Bridges, Buildings, Urban Development Department, Rural 
Development and Tourism.
11 Sikkim Power Investment Corporation Limited (SPICL), Sikkim Power Development Corporation and 
Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation (SIDICO).
12 State Institute of Capacity Building.
13 First loan sanctioned in October 2013.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
16
of sanctioning loan on the second charge of revenues was taken without due diligence 
and was highly irregular. 
Moreover, as the entire loan was taken on behalf of the Government of Sikkim for 
implementation of the above two HEPs, the SBS should have incorporated a provision 
for the GoS to provide budgetary provision to secure its financial interests. However, 
neither the SBS incorporated the same nor did the GoS provide any budgetary support 
for the said loans.
This indicates that there is lack of financial discipline by the State Government in 
repaying the debts and there seems to be an overall lack of segregation of roles between 
the State Government and the SBS due to which substantial amount has been left unpaid. 
The SBS stated (January 2024) that the State Government had repaid an amount of 
₹ 200 crore during the year 2022-23 and matter is regularly apprised to the government 
for repayment of loan. The State Government while accepting (January 2024) the 
audit observation stated that the adjustment of loan taken from SBS is top priority of 
Government and settlement will be considered in phased manner through necessary 
budgetary support.
3.3 Irregularities in collection of Government Revenue by Rangpo Extension 
Counter
Extension counters are opened exclusively for collecting and remitting Government 
revenue such as motor vehicle tax, power and water bills, etc. These counters do 
not accept public deposits or lend advances. The revenue collected at these counters 
is immediately credited into the Government accounts. Monitoring these extension 
counters is of vital importance as there is a possibility of leakage of government revenue 
from these extension counters. 
In one instance, Sikkim Nationalised Transport (SNT), GoS filed a complaint (December 
2019) to the SBS that the bank receipts (BRs) issued by SBS’s extension counter at 
Rangpo check post were subsequently deleted by them. SNT stated that once the Bank 
Receipts (BR) are issued by the bank to the customers on payment of supervision charges, 
SNT issues a supervision receipt and the same is accounted for as revenue in the books 
of accounts of SNT. Thus, if these BRs are subsequently deleted after handing over the 
same to the driver/staff of vehicle, there is a loss to the state exchequer. As such, SNT 
submitted the details of deleted transactions to SBS for recovering the amount from the 
concerned staffs and crediting to the Government Account. Subsequently, the Finance 
Department constituted (24 December 2019) a special audit team supervised by the Joint 
Director, Internal Audit/Local Fund Audit. The internal audit team reported (October 
2020) that an amount of ₹ 16.72 lakh had been misappropriated by cancelling on an 
average 73 BRs/ Challans per month w.e.f. April 2018 to December 2019 and deleting 
on an average 43 BRs per month during the same period.  As such, these amounts have 
not been actually received into the government revenue account of SNT.  This was 
possible as CBS system had a provision for cancellation of the BRs/ challans.  Further, 
reconciliation of the amount collected and deposited into the government account was 
also not carried out between SBS and SNT.  Consequently, SBS issued show cause 
notice against the suspected employees and initiated a preliminary inquiry against the 

Chapter III: Banker of the Government
17
suspected employees. However, no progress was achieved.  Rather, SBS stated that 
SNT has initiated inquiry at their end. This action is not justified as the cancellation/
deletion of the BRs were not possible without the involvement of the bank employees. 
During the verification of records of the extension counter at Rangpo check post, audit 
observed (April 2023) that only one employee was manning the extension counter at a 
given point of time.  It was noticed that the employee had issued a Bank Receipt (BR) 
towards supervision charges of SNT amounting ₹ 1,335. However, the Bank employee 
had wrongly credited the major head (MH0041) pertaining to Motor Vehicle Department 
(MVD) instead of crediting the same to SNT (MH 1055).  Since, the issued BR could 
not be cancelled in the CBS system, to rectify the mistake, a new BR was issued and 
credited in the correct major head of SNT.  However, instead of rectifying the wrong 
entry under MH 0041 by following up with the MVD,  five permits were issued to five 
different individuals without issuing any BRs but by writing the amount over a piece 
of paper until entire amount of ₹ 1,335 got adjusted. These unusual practices followed 
by the SBS also had the acceptance of the personnel of MVD posted in the check post. 
It was further observed that there is no checking/inspection being carried out by the 
nearest branch head or by the officials of Head office. Discrepancy in cash balance 
of ₹ 337 was also noticed on the day of audit. This practice is fraught with the risk of 
misappropriation/ embezzlement.
SBS stated (January 2024) that the case is being investigated by Internal Audit cell of 
GoS. The State Government replied (January 2024) that any misappropriation/ fraud 
leading to leakage of Government revenue is viewed seriously. As such, an Internal 
Audit wing has been engaged to carry out an exhaustive audit and submit the findings 
within a stipulated time frame. Further, in the exit meeting, the Chief Secretary also 
stated (January 2024) that there is a possibility of defalcation or misuse of money in 
such circumstances. Thus, the CS directed SBS to open a 24x7 counter in the controlling 
branches to enable the extension counters to deposit the cash without delay.
3.4 Conclusion
The above observations highlight the inadequacies in functioning of SBS as a Banker of 
the Government.  SBS claimed excess agency commission from the State Government, 
resulting in financial burden to the State Exchequer. SBS could not ensure collection, 
deposit and accounting of government receipts in its extension counters. SBS also did 
not exercise due diligence while sanctioning loans to the State Government departments 
and State PSUs/Autonomous bodies.
3.5 Recommendations
	SBS may claim agency commission as per the agreement with the State Government 
and the State Government may on its part check the veracity of the claims raised by 
SBS, before accepting the claim;
	SBS may establish a robust mechanism to ensure that there are no revenue leakages 
on collection of government revenue by the employees of SBS.

CHAPTER IV: 
COMMERCIAL BANKING

Chapter IV: COMMERCIAL BANKING
One of the important operations of SBS is to accept deposits from and extend advances 
to the public.  SBS accepts deposits from customers through various forms viz., savings 
bank deposits, term deposits, current account deposits, etc.  Interest payments are made 
to the customers for their deposits.  Advances granted by the Bank take various forms 
such as term loans, cash credit, etc.  Interest in Advances is one of the major sources of 
revenue for the Bank.
4.1 Banking operations
4.1.1 Balance sheet
The summarised details of the financial position of SBS for the years 2017-18 to 2022-23 
are given in Table: 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Financial Position
(₹ in crore)
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-2314
A. Liabilities
Capital 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53
Reserve & Surplus 55.34 77.25 93.09 108.24 133.08 144.45
Deposits 2512.52 2963.05 2934.75 3164.63 4508.72 4401.34
Borrowings 214.60 67.61 136.75 185.34 45.65 210.76
Other Liabilities & Provisions 91.69 109.05 100.79 98.71 104.53 46.75
Total 2874.68 3217.49 3265.91 3557.45 4792.51 4803.83
B. Assets
Cash in hand 13.99 18.54 13.44 13.16 20.52 17.75
Balance with RBI 0.62 0.32 0.32 0.32 0.27 0.27
Balances with Other Banks and 
Money at Call and Short Notices
1299.17 1288.88 1015.65 1062.42 1876.89 1452.45
Investments 374.11 426.92 109.45 114.95 157.05 168.05
Advances 1037.26 1410.33 2054.05 2297.53 2657.86 3085.25
Fixed Assets 25.24 24.25 27.71 28.20 29.17 31.64
Other Assets 124.29 48.25 45.29 40.88 50.75 48.42
Total 2874.68 3217.49 3265.91 3557.46 4792.51 4803.83
Source: Financial Statements of SBS
The summarised details of deposits, advances and investments during the period of 
audit are as follows:
Table 4.2: Deposits, Advances and Investments
(₹ in crore)
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Deposits 2,512.52 2,963.05 2,934.75 3,164.63 4,508.72 4,401.34
Advances 1,037.26 1,410.33 2,054.05 2,297.53 2,657.86 3,085.25
Investments 1,536.22 1,435.08 994.77 1,005.63 1,908.65 1,454.00
Source: Management’ s records Investment includes FD held with other Banks
14 Draft Separate Audit Report for the year 2022-23 is under finalization.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
20
Over a period of six years, the deposits and advances have grown by ₹ 1,888.82 crore15 
and ₹ 2,047.99 crore 16 respectively. At the same time, investments have decreased by 
₹ 82.22 crore from ₹ 1,536.22 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 1,454.00 crore in 2022-23.  
4.1.2 Deposits
As on 31 March 2023, there were 1,78,420 bank accounts 17 being operationalised with 
SBS. It was seen that as compared to SCBs, SBS recorded a higher year-on-year growth 
rate in its deposits18 as depicted in the chart below:
Chart 4.1: Growth rate of deposits
 
13.99
33.54
14.31
16.6
28.25
10.53
8.78
12.33
10.14 10.2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Per cent
Financial Year
SBS SCBs
Source: Annual Report of SBS and RBI websites
4.1.3 Advances
The year-on-year growth of advance of SBS during the year 2017-18 to 2022-23 is 
depicted in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Growth in Advances
Year Advance (₹ in crore) Year over Year growth (per cent)
2017-18 1037.2619 166.05 (19.06)
2018-19 1410.33 373.07 (35.97)
2019-20 2054.05 643.72 (45.64)
2020-21 2297.53 243.48 (11.85)
2021-22 2657.86 360.33 (15.68)
2022-23 3085.25 427.39 (16.08)
Source: Management’ s records 
SBS has recorded an increase of ₹ 2047.98 crore (197.44 per cent) from ₹ 1037.27 crore 
in 2017-18 to ₹ 3085.25 crore in 2022-23 under Advances. It was further noticed that as 
compared to SCBs, the growth rate of Advances to the public was higher in all the years 
as depicted in Chart 4.2.
15 (from ₹ 2,512.52 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 4,401.34 crore in 2022-23).
16 From ₹ 1,037.26 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 3085.25 crore in 2022-23.
17 Source: CBS software; Saving accounts: 1,35,648, Current accounts: 4,029, Cumulative Deposit: 
20,905 Recurring deposits: 4,134 and Fixed deposits: 13,704.
18 While making comparison of SBS vis-à-vis SCBs, government deposits have not been considered.
19 Advance 2016-17=₹ 871.21 crore.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
21
Chart 4.2: Growth of Advances of SBS vis-à-vis other banks (per cent)
 
35.96
45.64
11.85
15.68
16.08
12.90
6.28 5.32
10.66 15.82
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
35.00
40.00
45.00
50.00
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
SBS SCBs
Source: Annual Report of SBS and RBI as available in their websites
It can be seen from the chart  above that the growth rate ( per cent ) of Advances of 
SBS had always remained higher in comparison to SCBs. This must be viewed along 
with the fact that SBS does not have a robust Credit Appraisal, Lending and Recovery 
Mechanism. Audit has observed that due to arbitrary sanction and weak recovery of 
loans, a significant portion of its advances20 (37.55 per cent) has turned into NPA as on 
31 March 2022 as discussed in paragraph 4.4.6.1.
SBS stated that higher than national average growth in advance is due to huge demand 
of credit from SBS due to credit not being provided by other banks in view of difficult 
land laws prevalent in the State. Further, NP A of SBS is on the higher side due to poor 
economic scenario of the State. 
The reply is not acceptable by Audit as the SCBs are providing credit in Sikkim year 
on year.  Moreover, controlling its NPA by having proper credit appraisal mechanism, 
monitoring mechanism, etc. is in the best interest of SBS to protect its financial interest 
and stability.
4.1.4 Investment
Lack of diversification of Investment Portfolio
Diversification is a risk management strategy that creates a mix of various investments 
within a portfolio. A diversified portfolio contains a mix of distinct asset types and 
investment vehicles such as fixed deposits, government securities, government bonds, 
etc. in an attempt to limit exposure to any single asset or risk. A well-designed portfolio 
is expected to yield higher long-term returns and lower the risk of any individual 
holding or security.
Audit noticed that the investment portfolio of SBS was not diverse as it comprised only 
Fixed Deposit with SCBs and investment in Mutual Funds (MFs). SBS had invested 
substantially in fixed deposits 21 with SCBs and in MFs 22. The position of investments 
during 2017-18 to 2022-23 is tabulated in Chart 4.3. 
20 Excluding NP As under Government Loans.
21 70-92 per cent of total investment.
22 8-30 per cent of total investment.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
22
Chart 4.3: Investment
 
1,162.11
1,008.16
885.32
890.68
1,751.60
1,285.95
374.10
426.92
109.45
114.95
157.05
168.05
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
₹ in crore
Financial Year
Fixed Deposit Mutual Fund
Source: Management’ s records
In the exit meeting, the MD, SBS stated (January 2024) that investment in direct stocks 
was riskier and the Bank had invested majority of funds in Fixed Deposits and partially 
in Mutual Funds as they preferred liquidity.
4.1.5	Profitability	
The summarised details of the ‘net profits’ earned by SBS during the six years from 
2017-18 to 2022-23 have been presented in Table 4.4:
Table	4.4:	Profitability	of	SBS	during	2017-23
(₹ in crore)
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Total Income (a) 177.76 212.72 220.12 220.65 247.81 264.93
Total Expenditure (b) 158.84 180.76 195.06 203.52 203.25 245.97
Net Profit (a-b) 18.92 31.96 25.06 17.13 44.56 18.96
Source: Management’ s records 
It can be seen that during 2017-18 to 2022-23, the Bank has clocked a net profit 
ranging from ₹ 17.13 crore to ₹ 44.56 crore. Examination of records, however, showed 
that the profit had been arrived at without creating mandatory provisions. Audit 
observed that after taking into consideration the mandatory provisions, the reported 
profits during the period under review would turn into losses, as discussed in detail in  
paragraph 4.4.6.3.
4.1.6 Capital Adequacy Requirement 
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) indicates the strength and potential of a bank to absorb 
the probable losses which may occur in its day-to-day functioning.  The CAR is 
expressed as the ratio of ‘Regulatory Capital Funds’ to ‘Risk-Weighted Assets’ (RWA), 
which internationally active banks would be required to maintain.  The regulatory 
framework for the CAR for banks is globally framed by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS).  Till date, three sets of Basel norms have been issued.  
Global standards on the regulatory capital requirements for banks were issued (1988) by 
BCBS, which was known as Basel-I Accord. 
The Basel-I Accord was imposed on the banking sector globally through a minimum 
CAR.  The RBI norms, however, had been more stringent than the Basel norms.  As 

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
23
against the Basel norms of minimum CAR of eight per cent, the RBI prescribed (July 
2015) a CAR of nine per cent for Indian banks. 
During 2017-23, the entire paid-up capital of the SBS, ₹ 0.53 crore, was held by the 
GoS.  The GoS had not framed any regulatory Capital Adequacy Norms for the Bank 
so far (November 2023). The SBS, however, had voluntarily disclosed the CAR as per 
Basel-I Capital Accord for the last six financial years as depicted in the table below:
Table 4.5: Capital Adequacy Ratio of SBS
Financial Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Capital Adequacy Ratio – (Basel-I) 
disclosed by SBS.
5.33 6.29 5.77 6.72 4.35 4.86
Source: Management’ s records
It was evident from the above table that the present CAR was less than the rates prescribed 
under Basel-I (eight per cent) and by the RBI (nine per cent). Moreover, the SBS, unlike 
the scheduled/ nationalised banks, does not have a banker of the last resort to bail them 
out in case it ever faces a “Bank Run”23.
The SBS stated (July 2023) that it is not bound to follow Basel Accord. However, in 
order to bring in best practice, the SBS is computing its CAR under Basel-I Accord on 
its own.  Since there is no infusion of the capital by the Government, it has not been 
able to meet the minimum requirement. In the exit meeting, the MD, SBS further stated 
(January 2024) that the infusion of capital to increase the CAR is under consideration 
by the State Government. 
4.2 Customer Services
Customer service helps retain and attract customers and also contributes to the bank’s 
reputation, profitability and long-term sustainability.  
Modern day banking offers a wide range of facilities and services (like online banking, 
mobile banking, ATMs, Debit and Credit cards, Electronic Fund Transfers (EFT), etc.) 
that have transformed the way individuals, businesses and institutions manage their 
finances. These facilities are of paramount importance as they provide convenience, 
accessibility and efficiency, enhancing financial inclusion and economic growth. The 
status of services provided by SBS to its customers is as under.
4.2.1 Lack of adequate banking facilities
Audit noticed (July 2023) that in absence of a license from RBI, SBS is unable to 
provide EFT facilities on its own. However, as an alternative measure, it had tied up 
with YES bank to provide the same to its customers. Apart from this, SBS  could not 
offer important services/features such as net banking facilities, mobile banking services, 
credit card facilities, etc. to its customers even though these services have become an 
intrinsic component in the modern-day banking business.
Further, audit, with respect to provision of ATM facilities, noticed that although SBS 
had 55 branches across the State, it had provided only 14 ATMs, as detailed below. 
23 A bank run or run on the bank occurs when many clients withdraw their money from a bank, because 
they believe the bank may fail in the near future.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
24
Table 4.6:  Allocation of ATM vis-à-vis ATM cards issued
District No. of 
ATMs
No. of 
Branches with 
ATM installed
No. of 
Branches 
without ATM
No. of ATM 
cards issued by 
branches without 
ATM
Distance from the 
branches without ATMs to 
the nearest branch having 
ATM (km)
East 8 7 19 2,322 1 to 29 km
West 2 2 11 796 1 to 41 km
North 1 1 6 153 21 to 59 km
South 3 2 7 642 11 to 34 km
12 43 3,913
Source: Management’ s records 
As can be seen from the above table, that in 43 branches where ATMs were not 
installed, 3913 account holders were issued an ATM card.  In absence of sufficient 
ATMs installed across the State, these ATM card holders have to travel between 1 24 
and 5925 kms to withdraw money from SBS ATMs. Since these ATM cards cannot be 
used outside the SBS’s ATM network, issue of ATM cards to these customers becomes 
ineffective. 
SBS while accepting (January 2024) that payment gateway is essential to enhance the 
provision of quality banking services to the customers, stated that due to non-availability 
of payment gateway from RBI, the Bank has not been able to provide many facilities to 
the customers. In the exit meeting, the MD, SBS further stated (January 2024) that GoS 
and GoI were actively considering bringing SBS under the ambit of RBI and once this is 
achieved, all related matters would be duly addressed.
4.2.2	Lack	of	product	diversification
Product diversification is a vital strategy for banks to remain competitive, manage risks 
and cater to the diverse needs of their customers. By offering a wide range of financial 
products and services, banks can build stronger relationships with customers, achieve 
stable revenue streams and position themselves for sustainable growth.
The summarised details of products/services provided by SBS vis-à-vis other banks are 
as shown in the table below: 
Table	4.7:	Number	of	products	offered	by	banks
Bank Types	of	products	offered	by	the	bank
Savings Term Deposits Current
State Bank of Sikkim 3 6 2
State Bank of India 15 21 13
Central Bank of India 10 18 5
Jammu & Kashmir Bank 10 13 6
Source: official website of respective banks https://bank.sbi/https://www.jkbank.com/
It can be seen from the above table  that in comparison to the other banks, SBS offered 
very few products under its portfolio. For instance, the services provided by other banks 
such as (i) Auto-sweep (MOD) accounts, (ii) special packages under savings accounts 
scheme to defence/railway/police personnel such as zero balance accounts, offering 
attractive rates for loans, locker facilities, etc. (iii) annuity deposit scheme, (iv) public 
provident fund scheme, (v) Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme, etc. were not provided by SBS. 
24 Sichey.
25 Lachen.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
25
As such, audit observed that SBS has not diversified its portfolios as per the needs of 
customer and to keep up with its competitors.
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated that it was unable to develop several 
products as is done by other banks as SBS operates outside the purview of the BR Act, 
1949 and does not have access to a payment gateway. SBS assured that the Bank is 
endeavouring to acquire payment gateway from RBI for offering such facilities to its 
customers. 
4.2.3 Lack of Complaint Redressal Mechanism
An effective grievance redressal mechanism is essential to create a more harmonious 
and productive environment for all stakeholders of an entity. 
Audit highlighted in the C&AG’ s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Sikkim 
that there was no robust complaint redressal mechanism to which SBS had assured to 
formulate a General Rule and Code of Ethics (GRACE) for the benefit of its customers.  
Despite the assurance, no action was initiated by SBS as of March 2023. Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism assumes significance in view of the fact that SBS customers also 
do not have options like Ombudsman. 
4.3 Non-compliance to Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 and the Prevention of Money-Laundering 
(Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, form the legal framework on Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) and Countering Financing of Terrorism (CFT). In terms of the 
provisions of the PML Act, 2002 and the PML Rules, 2005, Regulated Entities (REs) 
are required to follow certain customer identification procedures such as framing 
Customer Acceptance Policy, categorising the customers under low, medium and 
high-risk category and monitoring their transactions, etc. Accordingly, the RBI issued  
(25 February 2016) a master direction on Know Your Customer (KYC).  
4.3.1  Absence of written down KYC norms
KYC is essential for the Bank to ensure compliance with regulations, manage risks 
effectively, protect their reputation, and prevent financial crime.  By verifying the identity 
of customers, monitoring their transactions, and assessing associated risks, Bank can 
uphold regulatory standards, safeguard their reputation, and mitigate potential financial 
threats. It also fosters trust and confidence among customers and stakeholders, thereby 
ensuring the integrity and stability of the financial system.
Audit noticed that the SBS does not have any written down KYC norms, nor does it 
have any Customer Acceptance Policy. Bank also had not categorised its customers for 
monitoring their transactions. It was seen that address/identity proof, PAN, Aadhaar, 
etc. are usually obtained and maintained by the SBS while opening accounts.  However, 
where PAN/Aadhaar details were obtained, the Bank did not have a mechanism to verify 
the same with the issuing authority, thus rendering the process ineffective. 
It was noted from the records of SBS that out of 1,78,420 accounts, in 1,39,357 accounts 
KYC26 has been done.  Even in these accounts, the following issues were noticed:
26 Non collection of documents and/or non updation of documents.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
26
(a) Non-uploading of signatures and Photos
Audit observed that in 3,969 KYC accounts, customers’ signatures were not uploaded 
and in 3,638 KYC accounts photographs were not uploaded. Thus, instant identification 
of customers through CBS system was not possible in respect of these accounts which 
may result in customer inconvenience especially RTI/LTI/senior citizen customers.
(b) Non-linking of PANs
Audit observed that out of 1,39,357 KYC accounts, PAN details were not available in 
case of 52,572 accounts (37.72 per cent). Moreover, out of 86,785 KYC accounts 
having PAN details, false PAN details were fed in the CBS system for 239 accounts 
as there was no mechanism to ensure authentication of PAN. 
(c) Non-seeding of Aadhaar
Aadhaar seeding is a process of linking Aadhaar number with primary bank account 
number which helps the bank to authenticate its customers and act as an important 
tool for authorities to monitor the financial transactions individuals engage in. Further, 
this would also enable customers to operate their accounts through Aadhaar Enabled 
Payment System (AEPS) and to receive various DBT subsidies. 
To be able to seed the Aadhaar numbers of the customers, the Bank must possess a 
valid agreement from Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) for availing 
the authentication service as Authentication User Agencies (AUA), sub-AUA or 
Authentication Service Agency (ASA).
Audit observed (September 2023) that the SBS did not have an existing arrangement 
with UIDAI and no efforts were taken in this regard.
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and stated that the matter would be 
addressed in new software.
As KYC norms have not been made mandatory, SBS was unable to put in place a 
system to ascertain and/ or prevent the bank from the risk of being used, intentionally or 
unintentionally, for money laundering activities.
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted for addressing the issues 
in new software.
4.4 Credit Functions
The credit function involves the process of extending loans, granting credit lines, etc. 
to the borrowers based on their creditworthiness.  Interest charges and fees associated 
with credit products contribute to the profitability of financial institutions, enabling 
them to sustain their operations and continue providing financial services to the 
community. 
SBS provided various credit facilities, such as Cash Credits/Overdrafts (CC/OD), 
Employees Personal Loan, Construction Loan and various other loans to its customers.  
The category wise details of ‘Loans and Advances’ disbursed during the years from 
2017-18 to 2022-23 have been depicted in the table below:

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
27
Table	4.8:	Disbursement	of	Loans	&	Advances	during	2017-23
(₹ in crore)
Sl. 
No.
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total
1 Term Loan 
Government 
and PSUs 
No 1 5 6 4 4 6 26
Amount 0.10 139.04 151.24 145.00 127.00 262.35 824.73
2 Cash Credit No 32 81 47 40 67 41 308
Amount 39.98 78.03 123.93 77.30 107.19 33.65 460.08
3 Construction 
Loan 
No 109 165 71 29 75 71 520
Amount 36.86 108.41 136.19 11.91 28.59 31.82 353.78
4 SBS Home 
Loan 
No 152 161 227 120 239 259 1158
Amount 37.43 45.57 64.23 32.16 65.15 71.08 315.62
5 Business 
Loan 
No 81 122 76 48 64 51 442
Amount 9.02 30.47 84.75 43.15 64.34 48.10 279.83
6 Others27 No 1180 1139 936 635 1298 2524 7712
Amount 87.09 73.60 61.70 40.58 106.87 169.92 539.76
Source: Management’ s records
The credit function within financial institutions involves several key activities like the 
following:
	 Credit appraisal 
	 Valuation of securities.
	 Disbursement and Loan Documentation
	 Safe keeping/ custody of loan documents.
	 Post sanction follow-up and Recovery
	 NPA management
Audit studied these processes and the observations in this regard are discussed below:
4.4.1 Credit appraisal
Credit risk is the uncertainty of default by the borrowers on repayment of the loan amount.  
Banks generally adopt an effective credit appraisal mechanism before sanctioning the 
loans. This involved assessing the creditworthiness of potential borrowers, evaluating 
their financial history, income levels, existing debts, and other relevant factors, to 
evaluate the risk associated with lending money to the borrower. 
Typically, SCBs employ various methods such as gathering market intelligence from 
public domain, information from other lenders, legal matters, wilful defaulters’ details 
with the RBI, etc.  Apart from these, credit scoring agencies like CIBIL help banks 
decide on the credit worthiness of the applicant and thereby mitigate risk. 
Audit observed that SBS adopted none of the above mechanisms and the due diligence 
on the loan applications was minimal.  
As shown in Table	4.8, SBS had sanctioned 10,166 loans amounting to ₹ 2,773.80 crore 
to various categories of borrowers during 2017-23. As on May 2023, out of 10,166 loans 
(₹ 2,773.80 crore) sanctioned during 2017-18 to 2022-23, 890 loans worth ₹ 863.73 
crore had turned into NPA. 
27 Personal Loan, employee construction loan, Home Loan, Sikkim Youth Start up Scheme, etc.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
28
While in 17 cases highlighted in Appendix 2, these loans became NPAs, resulting in an 
outstanding amount of ₹109.69 crore against a total sanctioned amount of ₹ 88.37 crore 
as of September 2022 and the duration for which these accounts remained classified as 
NPAs  ranged from seven to 73 months. 
Audit noted that there were 3,664 NPA accounts in SBS as of March 2023, audit scrutiny 
(July 2023) of 224 random NPA accounts showed that the sanction of credit was not based 
on any laid down criteria like obtaining credit ratings of the borrowers, ascertaining the 
repayment capacity, etc. 
It was observed that 10 out of 224 NPA accounts which had become NPA with outstanding 
balance of ₹ 17.56 crore were given fresh loans/enhancements under Construction loan, 
Cash Credit, business loan, etc.  These fresh loans/enhancements also (except one28) had 
subsequently turned NPAs with an outstanding balance of ₹ 25.52 crore.  This indicates 
that, SBS did not verify data available with themselves regarding loan applicants.  In 
two cases29, loans amounting to ₹ 4.65 crore were sanctioned as take-over loans from 
Central Bank of India (₹ 3.65 crore) and SISCO (₹ one crore). However, these loans 
were already NPAs with these banks.  These loans taken over by SBS subsequently 
turned into NPAs with SBS also.  Thus, SBS did not safeguard its financial interest by 
taking over these NPA accounts from other banks.
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated (August 2023) that a new system of loan 
appraisal has been implemented with scope for credit rating of borrower for processing 
of loan.  However, no documentary evidence was submitted in support of its reply. 
In the exit meeting, the MD, SBS further stated (January 2024) that the Bank had 
sanctioned fresh loans to these 10 NP A accounts to complete/revive the projects with 
a view to recover the dues once the projects were successfully completed.  SBS further 
stated that the practice of infusing fresh loans to an already NP A account was not 
followed by SCBs. Thus, the State Government directed the Bank to discontinue such 
practices.
The reply vindicates the audit contention that the credit appraisal of SBS was weak and 
the 10 loans sanctioned to NPAs were highly irregular.
4.4.2 Collateral securities
SBS sanctions Cash Credit loans to the contractors based on the works orders of various 
government departments.  For securing the loan, the bank obtains two types of securities 
viz., (i) primary securities i.e., the bills receivable from the government departments, 
and (ii) collateral securities i.e., land and other immovable properties.  
Audit noticed that government departments are also not made a party to the loan 
agreement to ensure that SBS has a first charge on the payments due to the contractors 
and that payments are released to SBS. As such, the agreements lacked enforceability. 
Moreover, limits on Cash Credit were not being reduced proportionately after 
payments were released by the government departments concerned, resulting in under 
securing its loan. Further, SBS could not manage the risks effectively and exposed 
28 Mr. Chabilal Gurung.
29 RM Rasaily (₹ 3.65 crore), Champa Darjee (₹ one crore).

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
29
itself to unnecessary financial losses and weaken its legal standing as SBS did not 
invoke guarantees submitted by the third parties at the time of sanction of loans. As 
guarantees are designed to protect the bank, failing to act on them has resulted in 
missed opportunities for recovery. 
Audit further noticed lapses in valuation of collateral securities as detailed below:
	 As per the policy guidelines of SBS on Asset Classification and Provisioning, 
SBS must empanel valuers with it who will carry out the valuation of collateral 
securities and periodically revalue the collateral securities once in three years for 
provisioning purpose. However, audit noticed that empanelment of valuers was not 
done by SBS.
	 In two cases, management while sanctioning the loans had noticed and remarked 
that the collateral securities were valued on a higher side.  However, the same 
was not revalued by the management, and the loans were sanctioned on higher 
valuations.
	 In one case, the valuer had given two different valuations on the same day for 
the same property. However, SBS had sanctioned the increase in CC limit from  
₹ 0.10 crore to ₹ 1.10 crore without going for independent revaluation to protect 
its financial interest.
	 In one case, the bank had enhanced (February 2009) the OD limit from ₹ 1.50 crore 
to ₹ 2.50 crore against the mortgage of additional property worth ₹ 1.73 crore.  
Despite the fact that the loan was not serviced regularly, and the Bank having 
issued (March 2011) legal notice to the loanee, the limit was again enhanced 
(February 2014) to ₹ three crore wherein the additional property mortgaged in 
2009 was revalued at ₹  6.15 crore.  Since the valuation of properties had seen a 
sharp rise in 2014 vis-à-vis valuation in 2009, the Loan Section of SBS should have 
reconfirmed the valuation from the Revenue Officer concerned before sanctioning 
the additional loan.  However, the same was not ensured.  Moreover, the properties 
originally mortgaged were also released on the loanee’s request as the revaluation 
of the additional property was sufficient to cover the OD limit.  Subsequently, the 
loan had turned into NPA with outstanding amount of ₹ 3.38 crore as of March 
2017.  The same property was again valued at ₹ 2.70 crore in October 2019 when 
the loanee had request for further enhancement. This corroborates that the valuation 
done in 2014 was not proper and the possibility of over valuation of property to 
avail more loan could not be ruled out either. Thus, due to the enhancement of 
the OD limit and release of other collateral securities, the collateral securities 
available (₹ 2.70 crore) with the Bank was not sufficient to cover the loan amount 
(₹ 3.38 crore). 
This indicates that SBS did not have a proper system for valuation of properties 
mortgaged, which results in considerable risk to the bank.  Unlike other banks, who 
employ independent valuers for the purpose, General Manager (Credit) did not take any 
initiative to have empanelled valuers as mandated by its own rules.  
The above instances indicate that the valuation processes adopted by SBS were arbitrary 
thereby substantially increasing the credit risk for SBS. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
30
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the variation in 
value as depicted is the result of change in valuation accepting system of the Bank. 
In order to ensure practical valuation, the bank has started rejecting unreasonable 
valuation. As such, values of earlier valued properties got revised considerably. Thus, it 
has enabled the bank to hold more realistic securities.
The Chief Secretary, in the exit meeting, advised (January 2024) SBS that in the Bank’ s 
own interest, it should have its own empanelled valuers. 
The justification provided by SBS is not acceptable in view of the fact that Policy 
Guidelines on Asset Classification and Provisioning already provided for revaluation of 
collateral securities once every three years, which SBS did not comply with.
4.4.3 Safe custody of the Documents
After completion of the process of sanction and documentation, proper safekeeping of 
the original documents is very important to safeguard the Bank’s interest. However, the 
Loan section was maintaining a single file for all loan files and was not storing the files 
(containing all original documents) securely as these were stored in sectional almirahs 
and the same were left unlocked at times. As such, a few loan files were missing and 
no steps could be taken to recover the same.  To overcome this issue, the Managing 
Director issued a circular (SBS/GTK (HO)/52/2021/349 dated 25 January 2021) with 
the following directions to the Loan section;
	 to securely store all the legal documents (original) under proper lock and key and 
only a file containing sanction letters and correspondence must be kept for day-to-
day use;
	 original files could be used during review of accounts in exceptional circumstances 
only;
	 All storage facilities must be of double lock system and keys to be held by two 
officers as joint custodians.
The joint custodians responsible for safe keeping of original documents were designated 
as shown in the table below:
Table 4.9: Joint Custodian details
Sl. 
No
Category of loans Joint	Custodian	officers
1 All loans of ₹ one crore 
and above
General Manger (Credit) and AGM/Sr. Manager (Credit) or as may be 
decided by GM (Credit).
2 All loans between ₹ 10 
lakh to ₹ one crore
Assistant General Manger (Credit)/Sr. Manager (Credit) and Manager 
(Credit)/ Asst. Manager (Credit) or as may be decided by GM (Credit).
3 All loans below ₹ 10 lakh Concerned section in charge together with any other officer as decided 
by GM (Credit).
Source: Management’ s records
The General Manager (Credit) was vested with the overall responsibility to adhere 
and take necessary steps to comply with the circular.  Audit, however, noticed that the 
instructions were not adhered to by General Manager (Credit) and all the loan files 
(maintained as single file with all original documents) were kept in the respective 
sections.  Further, the loan files sanctioned prior to the issuance of circular were also not 
reviewed and maintained in multiple sets as outlined in the circular.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
31
The Loan section (Cash Credit) was unable to furnish one loan file to audit for scrutiny as 
the Bank said that the file was untraceable indicating the risks with the present approach.  
This has consequently led to non-safeguarding the interest of the SBS and has also 
limited the auditing process.
This issue assumes more significance as during the 168 th Board meeting (30 March 
2017), SBS had written off 435 old NPA/loss loan amounting to ₹ 8.01 crore citing that 
the chances of recovery from these accounts were very slim due to non-availability of 
securities/ documents.
SBS while accepting the audit observation (January 2024) stated that the circulars 
issued for safe keeping of documents shall be strictly implemented and any lapses would 
be looked into.
4.4.4 Recovery of Loans
The Loan Recovery Policy, 2014 of SBS was framed with an objective to provide 
framework to recover the entire book dues along with accrued interest from the borrowers, 
to reduce the NPA level of the bank by resorting to various recovery measures including 
compromise settlement of NPA and Bad debts accounts with minimum sacrifice wherever 
it is deemed necessary.
Audit scrutiny (May 2023) of 224 NPA cases showed that the Loan Recovery Policy, 
2014 was not followed in spirit and the recovery of loans was done in an arbitrary 
manner.  The recovery was very weak due to sanctioning of loans to credit unworthy 
accounts, inadequate security cover, not initiating legal action against the defrauders, 
undue favour to the defaulters, non-enforcement of internal control procedures, non-
compliance of pre or post-disbursement conditions of the sanctions such as verifying 
end use of the fund, diversion of loans, etc. lack of inspection and irregular monitoring, 
lack of post inspection follow up, etc. 
4.4.4.1 Post Sanction follow-up activities
Bank, as per its Recovery Policy, 2014 must undertake review of its advance portfolio 
on regular basis as a part of internal control for timely detection of warning signals and 
taking preventive measures for avoiding possible slippage into NPAs. 
Audit, however, noticed that SBS did not have any established procedure for post sanction 
monitoring of credit facilities. The follow-up of loans and advances was arbitrary.  The 
following important deficiencies were noticed in the monitoring and follow-up action 
of SBS; 
	 There was no written down policy/Standard Operating Procedure to subject the 
borrower accounts having high exposure to internal credit audit annually. Thus, 
SBS did not carry out credit audit during the audit period;
	 Based on the test check of records, it was noticed that contrary to its Recovery 
Policy,  
(i) regular inspection of assets mortgaged with SBS as security was not carried 
out;
(ii) monitoring of guarantors and value of collateral security was not done; and

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
32
(iii) regular inspections were not carried out to ensure that the borrowed funds 
were utilised for the intended purposes. 
	 the progress reports (physical or financial) on the activities/progress of works of the 
borrowers pertaining to Cash Credit for carrying out government contract works, 
Construction and Business loans were not obtained and reviewed;
	 statements showing the operational results/balance sheets of the borrowers were 
not scrutinised on a periodic basis;
	 the periodical stock/assets statements were not obtained.  There was no system of 
periodical audit of stock/assets of the borrowers to ensure correctness and adequacy 
of securities against the loan amount; and
	 follow-up and persuasion with the defaulters at initial stage of default in 
repayment of loan instalments was also done on ad hoc basis. Regular follow-up 
and negotiation with the defaulters to secure the financial interests of the Bank 
was missing.
	 SBS does not have any legal audit policy/stipulated procedures/ practice to 
conduct legal audit of its borrower accounts to avoid slippage of the account 
into NPA.  Loan Section and the Legal Cell remained effectively inactive as a 
meagre number of reminders (456)/legal notices (94) were served by them during 
the six year period ending March 2023.
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated (January 2024) that credit/recovery 
policies will be framed in due course and the recommendation are acknowledged for 
future guidance.
4.4.5 Status of recovery of loan under SPDR, Act
The purpose of debt recovery Acts is to create a fair and orderly process for resolving 
debt-related disputes while protecting the rights of both creditors and debtors.  These 
acts play a crucial role in maintaining the functioning of credit markets and supporting 
economic stability. 
In Sikkim, the debt related disputes are resolved through the Sikkim Public Debt 
Recovery (SPDR) Act, 2022 (as amended).  The SPDR Act provides the Certificate 
Officer (the District Collector) with same powers as conferred on the Civil Court under 
the Code of Civil Procedures, 1908 for the purpose of any enquiry into any dispute 
relating to issue of certificate for money and the enquiry by the Certificate Officer would 
be deemed as a judicial proceeding.  The Act was legislated for resolving debt related 
disputes in Sikkim.  As such, the ‘Certificate Debtor”30 is bound by the outcome of the 
proceedings of the case under this Act. 
As on March 2023, 41 cases were pending for recovery under the SPDR Act, 2006. 
Out of which, proclamation of sale orders were issued in two cases 31 involving ₹ 1.73 
crore, decrees in favour of SBS were executed in 11 cases involving ₹ 11.40 crore while 
10 cases involving ₹ 26.94 crore filed more than three years back, were still pending.  
30 The person named as a debtor in the Certificate filed under the Act.
31 Rameswar Tamang, C.c. Shangderpa & Tenzing Zigdel Khangserpa.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
33
Audit noticed that in the two cases wherein proclamation of sale orders were issued, 
the properties in question could not be auctioned due to lack of interest shown by the 
prospective buyers.  The SBS was in the process of re-auctioning the properties.  Audit 
further noticed that no action has been taken for the remaining 3,623 32 NPA cases.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that SBS has obtained 
about 30 certificates for execution.  All pending cases in the court are vigorously followed 
by the Bank.
4.4.6 Non-Performing Assets
Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) in banks are loans that have become non-performing 
due to borrower’s inability to meet repayment obligations for an extended period. 
Managing and reducing NPAs is a critical aspect of a bank’s risk management and 
financial stability efforts. As per the Bank’s policy, an account becomes an NPA if no 
payments are received for 90 days.
As SBS did not carry out its due diligence in various key activities under credit functions, 
the quality of advances was deteriorating and the gross NPAs as on 31 March 2023 stood 
at an alarming rate of 52.23 per cent (₹ 1,682.04 crore) vis-à-vis its total advance in the 
corresponding period (₹ 3,220.67 crore33). 
4.4.6.1 Gross NPA ratio
The Gross NPA ratio of SBS in respect of non-Government/PSUs advances was 
extremely high vis-à-vis that of Scheduled Commercial Banks in the country as 
depicted in the chart below:
Chart 4.4: Comparison of Gross NPA ratio of the SBS with the Industry
 
11.18 9.08 8.21 7.33
5.82
36.65 33.34 37.17 35.83 37.55
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
NPA percentage
SCBs SBS
Source: Annual reports of the SBS and the RBI website; (figures for 2022-23 in respect of SCBs not 
available)
Analysis of category-wise NPA vis-à-vis total NPA of SBS showed that the category-
wise percentage was highest in the three categories viz., Government and PSUs, Cash 
Credit and Construction Loans.  As on 31 March 2023, NPAs under these categories 
32 Total NP A 3664 minus 41 cases.
33 The figure is furnished by the Bank from its database and the same differs from the Financial Statements 
as these are subject to adjustments.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
34
were 34.87 per cent, 30.36 per cent and 22.30 per cent respectively as depicted in 
Table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Category-wise NPA vis-à-vis total NPA 
(in per cent)
Category 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Cash Credit 45.22 38.11 44.06 37.31 31.5 30.36
Construction Loan 25.9 36.34 27.77 23.17 21.55 22.3
Government & PSUs 21.57 17.56 21.38 32.65 38.79 34.87
Others 7.31 7.99 6.79 6.87 8.16 12.47
Total 100 100 100 100 100 100
Source: Management’ s records 
It could be seen from the table above that the NPA percentage under Government and 
PSUs, Cash Credit and Construction Loans was alarmingly high as compared to total 
NPA per Year over the period 2017-23. Despite the increase in risk exposure in these 
categories of loans, viz., Government and PSU, Cash Credit and Construction, SBS did 
not carry out any credit concentration risk analysis of its credit portfolio to assess its limit 
position and devising further lending strategies. It was observed that during the last two 
years, SBS had disbursed ₹ 389.35 crore, ₹ 140.84 crore and ₹ 60.41 crore in these three 
categories respectively. As the NPAs under the three categories are very high, immediate 
remedial measures are required to be put in place to effect recovery of these NPAs. 
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
4.4.6.2 Asset Classification
SBS had adopted the ‘Asset Classification and Provisioning Guidelines’ (Guidelines) 
and Loan Recovery Policy 2014, according to which, if interest or instalment of principal 
remained overdue for more than 90 days, loans were to be classified as Non-Performing 
Assets (NPAs) i.e. into Substandard, Doubtful and Loss Assets.  Audit, however, noticed 
that the Credit department had categorised the loan assets into two broad head namely 
Standard and Sub-standard assets which was in contravention of its own guidelines.
The table below depicts the summarised details of classification of the loan assets by 
SBS as on 31 March during last six financial years (2017-18 to 2022-23): 
Table	4.11:	Asset	Classification
(₹ in crore)
Particulars As on 31 March
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Standard 
Assets
No of accounts 15,615 19,895 12,275 12,578 13,111 14,429
Amount (per cent) 634.64 
(58.84)
1,010.71 
(65.11)
1,315.97 
(60.42)
1,403.26 
(57.75)
1,432.44 
(51.14)
1,538.67 
(47.77)
Sub Standard 
Assets
No of accounts 2,347 2,758 2,775 2,899 3,013 3,664
Amount (per cent) 443.90 
(41.16)
541.57 
(34.89)
862.21 
(39.58)
1,026.47 
(42.25)
1,368.79 
(48.86)
1,682.04 
(52.23)
Total Assets 34 Amount 1078.54 1552.28 2178.18 2429.73 2801.23 3320.71
Source: Management’ s records 
34 These figures differ from figures reflected in table 4.1 (source: Financial Statements) because the 
amount of advances reflected in the Financial Statements is after adjustments made for Bad Debts and 
interest suspense.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
35
4.4.6.3 Under-Provisioning against Non-Performing Assets
Audit observed that SBS has neither carried out any age-wise analysis of its loan assets 
to classify them into the above class of assets nor it has made adequate provisions for 
NPAs. 
SBS must make provisions based on the classification of assets into different categories 
as per its own guidelines. However, it had made a general provision over the years.  This 
has resulted in under provisioning of the NPA accounts amounting to ₹ 225.28 crore as 
on 31 March 2023. Even if SBS had made minimum provisions at 15 per cent as per 
its own guidelines, the profit earned during each year would have turned into losses as 
detailed in the table below:
Table 4.12: Short provisioning
(₹ in crore)
Year As on 31 March
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Substandard Assets 443.90 541.57 862.21 1,026.47 1,368.79 1,682.04
Provision to be created @ 15 per cent 66.59 81.23 129.33 153.97 205.32 252.31
Actual provision created 3.00 10.00 17.00 22.00 22.03 27.03
Short Provisioning 63.59 71.23 112.33 131.97 183.29 225.28
Profit/ (Loss) for the year as per the 
financial statements
18.92 31.96 25.06 17.13 44.56 18.96
Actual Profit/ (Loss) (44.67) (39.27) (87.28) (114.84) (138.73) (206.32)
Source: Financial Statements and Management’ s records
As a matter of fact, even with minimum prescribed provision, the Bank would have been 
running into losses which will increase year after year.  The accumulated losses would 
have eroded the capital.
The high level of Gross NPAs had correspondingly reduced the availability of funds for 
carrying out the credit and lending activities of SBS to that extent.  Furthermore, such a 
high level of NPAs also has the potential to create a negative reputational consequence 
as borrowers would not be inclined to repay their loans.  This possesses significant threat 
to the business continuity of any bank.
‘The major lapses of the Bank on executing the credit functions are highlighted as 
case studies in Appendix 2 of this Report These include sanctioning of loans without 
due diligence as to the valuation of securities, allowing the loanees to draw over and 
above the sanction limits, improver valuation of securities mortgaged, enhancement 
of loan after account turning NPA, granting loans on sublet works without ensuring 
recoverability capacity of the borrowers, improper recovery follow ups, inability to 
verify the end use of the funds, etc. 
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated that although it does not come under 
the purview of RBI, as a responsible Banking institution, it has adopted the policy of 
Income Recognition and Assets Classification of RBI but despite its best efforts, the 
Bank was unable to implement the policy totally.
4.4.6.4 One Time Settlement
One Time Settlement (OTS) scheme is a negotiated agreement between the bank and 
the borrower to settle a loan or debt for an amount that is less than the total outstanding 
balance. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
36
SBS had formulated ‘Loan Recovery Policy, 2014’ which stipulated with respect to 
NPAs, that the compromise should be a negotiated settlement which would ensure 
recovery of dues to the maximum extent possible at minimum expenses and within 
shortest possible time frame.
(a) Selection of NPAs for OTS
Audit observed (September 2023) that SBS neither outlined the method of selecting the 
NPAs for OTS, nor did it approach the defaulters for settling the outstanding dues under 
NPA. Further, SBS did not create any awareness about the scheme to all its borrowers 
unlike SCBs, which follow the practice to publicise its OTS schemes with predetermined 
eligibility criteria through its web portal to disseminate the information widely.
Thus, in absence of any predetermined and widely publicised eligibility criteria, the 
selection of loanees was not transparent and the possibility of preferential treatment to 
certain account holders could not be ruled out.
SBS stated (January 2024) that the recovery through OTS is as practiced by the other 
banks. The Bank issues notices to the defaulters and they approach the Bank for 
settlement.
(b) Grading of loan account
As per the guidelines, the loans selected to be settled under OTS were to be graded 
based on various parameters to derive at the settlement amount and higher the 
grading, recovery would be more. The minimum settlement amount can vary from 
100 per cent of the principal amount of NPA to any amount that may be possible 
to recover. However, SBS would be well within its jurisdiction to exclude a particular 
class of borrowers from the scheme in the interests of its financial health.
Following discrepancies were noticed on grading of loans for OTS:
Table 4.13: Grading of loans
Sl. 
No.
Parameters 
for grading
Audit Observation
1 Realisable 
value of 
securities
In ten out of 30 cases scrutinised in audit, SBS had graded the securities as ‘easily 
marketable’ and the balance were graded as ‘not easily marketable or very difficult 
to market.’ However, no documentary evidence was available to substantiate the 
rational of such assessment of the marketability of such properties, by SBS.
2 Aggregate 
means of 
borrowers/ 
guarantors
In four cases, aggregate means of borrowers were graded the highest, in 25 cases, 
it was graded as moderate and in one case, it was graded as lowest ( i.e., no means 
for recovery).  However, no documentary evidence was available to substantiate or 
justify such grading. 
3 Business 
Activity of 
the borrower
The loan accounts were graded under this parameter without any verification as to 
end use of the loan, any other successful venture of the loanee, etc. and without any 
documentary evidence.
Source: Management’ s records
(c) Irregular settlement of loans under OTS
As per the records made available to audit, SBS had stated to have settled 91 NPA 
accounts during the period under review involving ₹ 51.14 crore under OTS wherein 
it had recovered ₹ 37.55 crore and sacrificed ₹ 13.59 crore.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
37
The SBS furnished 33 OTS files for scrutiny, out of which three files were not amongst 
the 91 OTS cases settled by SBS during the audit period. This is indicative of the fact 
that the Loan Section neither had a comprehensive list of cases taken up for OTS nor was 
it aware of the financial implications of these cases. Audit scrutinised 30 NPA accounts35 
with total outstanding dues of ₹ 28.35 crore which were settled at ₹ 19.02 crore resulting 
in a sacrifice of ₹ 9.33 crore (principal sacrifice: ₹ 0.31 crore; interest sacrifice: ₹ 9.02 
crore).  The following was observed: 
	 As per the guidelines, when an account is classified as an NPA, the interest charged 
but not recovered must be reversed back. However, this reversal of interest is to be 
added back along with a notional interest @ nine per cent (simple interest) to arrive 
at the total outstanding dues for the purpose of OTS. Moreover, the notional interest 
was to be charged on the total outstanding dues after adding back the reversal of 
interest.
 It was however observed that in 13 cases, the notional interest was charged on the 
ledger balance without adding back the reversal of interest. Thus, SBS has under 
reported the sacrifice amount by ₹ 1.91 crore and as such, the Board was misled in 
terms of the sacrifice SBS was actually making.; 
	 As per RBI norms, wilful defaulter is an account who has defaulted on the 
repayment even when it has the capacity to repay the same, diverted the funds 
for other purposes, has siphoned off the funds, etc.  The Loan Recovery Policy 
of SBS stipulates that the OTS in the case of wilful defaulters should be avoided 
to the possible extent and basic principle shall be to allow law to take its own 
course.  However, audit observed that One Time Settlement has been awarded to 
13 loanees36 whom SBS themselves have categorised as wilful defaulters which 
was against its own policy and sacrificed ₹2.84 crore;
	 The management had opted for OTS in seven cases 37 due to insufficient 
documentation resulting in sacrifice of ₹ 2.67 crore which could have been avoided 
with proper documentation and better record keeping; 
	 In one case 38, SBS had sanctioned (19 June 2018) another loan amounting to 
₹ 1.20 crore to the loanee whose earlier loan had turned into an NPA. Subsequently, 
the NPA loan was processed (07 August 2018) through OTS for settlement against 
which the payment was routed through the new loan account. Subsequently, the 
entire fresh loan also turned into NPA as on March 2019.  
The above observations indicate that, SBS implemented the OTS scheme in an arbitrary 
manner resulting in substantial loss to the bank. 
The major lapses of the Bank on OTS are highlighted as case studies in Appendix 3 of 
this Report
35 Three files were incomplete.
36 Kharka Kumar Gurung, Nar Bahadur Rai, Krishna Bahadur Chettri, Krishna Kumari Dahal, Phurden 
Lama, Tashi Palaki Bhutia, Tamanna Rai, Ugen Dorjee Bhutia, Chandra Bahadur Gurung, Karna 
Prasad Sharma, Suresh Kumar Chettri, Sushil Tamang, Ram Kumar Chettri.
37 Sushila Chamling, Kishan K Agrawal, Karma T Namgyal, Melodin Rai, Nar Bahadur Rai, Imtiyaz 
Ahmed, Sonam Wangchuk Bhutia.
38 Sushila Chamling.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
38
The MD, SBS, in the exit meeting, accepted the audit observation and assured (January 
2024) to review the OTS policy. The State Government also instructed the Bank to bring 
in necessary reforms in OTS.  The State Government further stated that filing of FIRs 
and intervention of the Enforcement Directorate was instrumental in effecting recoveries 
in many cases.
4.4.7 Issuance of Bank Guarantees
SBS offers the facility of Bank Guarantee (BG) to various contractors as required by them 
to fulfil the conditions of their work agreements with the implementing departments/ 
agencies.  These Bank Guarantees are issued in accordance with SBS’s policy guidelines 
over ‘Issuance of Inland letter of Guarantee’. The rates of commission and processing 
fees were clubbed with the GST and revised rates are implemented w.e.f. 01 November 
2017. Again, rates of commission charges were revised in 2019 and 2020. The rates of 
minimum cash margin and commission charges w.e.f. 01 November 2017 are as shown 
in Table 4.14.
Table 4.14: Rate of BG commission
Particulars Up to 
₹	1.00	
cr.
₹	1.00	
cr.	to	₹	
5.00 cr.
Above 
₹	5.00	
cr.
Up to 
₹	1.00	
cr.
₹	1.00	
cr.	to	₹	
5.00 cr.
Above 
₹	5.00	
cr.
Up to 
₹	1.00	
cr.
₹	1.00	
cr.	to	₹	
5.00 cr.
Above 
₹	5.00	
cr.
w.e.f. 01 November 2017 w.e.f. 01 January 2019 w.e.f.	28	May	2020
Minimum cash 
Margin 25% 20% 15% 25% 20% 15% 25% 20% 15%
Commission for 
BG with cash 
margin up to 99%
2.48% 
p.a.
1.89% 
p.a.
1.53% 
p.a.
2.48% 
p.a.
2.10 % 
p.a.
1.80 % 
p.a.
2.48% 
p.a.
2.10% 
p.a.
1.80% 
p.a.
Commission for 
BG with cash 
margin of 100%
25% of commission as 
applicable above ₹ 5000/- ₹ 59/- per lakh of BG 
Amount
Processing Fee 1,180 2,950 11,800 1,180 2,950 11,800 1,180 2,950 11,800
Renewal of BG Not prescribed. Renewed 
as per rates shown above
(a) 50% of Normal rate (effective from date of expiry)
(b) 75% of Normal rate (effective from a subsequent date)
Source: Management’ s records 
The cash margin enables SBS to limit its exposure and risk in such transactions.  The 
BG was to be issued for a minimum of six months and commission on BG was to be 
charged on quarterly basis39 for BGs exceeding six months period.  The power to revise 
the commission rates and cash margin was vested with the Board of Directors alone. 
As per Policy guidelines on ‘Issuance of inland letter of Guarantee’, it must ensure the 
following;
•	 At the time of issuing guarantees, SBS must exercise due caution and have 
sufficient experience with the customer to satisfy themselves that the customer has 
the necessary experience, capacity and means to perform the obligations under the 
contract and is not likely to commit any default; and
•	 Minimum cash margin from third party can also be accepted with lien in favour of 
SBS backed by personal surety of the deposit holder.
The Bank Guarantees issued during the audit period were scrutinised and the observations 
thereon are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:
39 Portion of a quarter to be treated as full quarter.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
39
4.4.7.1 Loss of ₹ 1.35 crore towards commission due to clubbing of Bank Guarantees
As per paragraph 4(i) of the BG policy of the Bank, the minimum cash margin prescribed 
was only an indicator and while sanctioning BG, effort should be made to increase the 
cash margin to maximum possible. Only Board shall have the power to lower cash 
margin from the prescribed minimum level as above.
It was further noticed that out of 935 BGs issued (fresh issue-493 BGs and 
renewed-442 BGs) during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23, amount of 407 BGs were 
clubbed together for the purpose of charging commission which resulted in loss of ₹ 1.35 
crore to SBS and extension of undue benefit to contractors.  Similarly, due to clubbing 
of the amount of BGs, SBS also collected Cash Margin at a lesser rate thereby exposing 
itself to an unsecured risk of ₹ 13.86 crore during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23. 
SBS accepted the issue of short collection of Cash Margin and stated that SBS has already 
asked the customers to create a margin money FD for the deficit amount.  However, SBS 
did not offer any comment on the loss of ₹ 1.35 crore.
4.4.7.2 Issue of Bank Guarantee to a NPA account
As per Section 11 (d) of the BG policy, the Bank should exercise due caution and have 
sufficient experience with the customer to satisfy themselves that the customer has the 
necessary experience, capacity and means to perform the obligations under the contract 
and is not likely to commit any default.  SBS has granted (24 Jul 2009) Cash Credit 
facility amounting to ₹ one crore to a contractor.  Due to non-payment of dues, the 
account became NPA and ₹ 1,58,36,575 remained outstanding as on 07 September 
2017. However, SBS issued three Bank Guarantees amounting to ₹ 4.07 crore to the 
same contractor between July 2017 to September 2017 despite knowing the fact that 
the account was already a NPA with the bank which was in contravention to the policy 
guidelines. Moreover, SBS had obtained a fixed deposit amounting to ₹ 40 lakh from 
a third party as Margin Money.  However, no certificate of lien in favour of SBS was 
insisted upon from the deposit holder.  
Thus, in violation of its own policy guidelines and against principles of prudent financial 
management, SBS provided bank guarantees to a defaulter.
SBS stated that the Bank issued BG to the borrower as the borrower was awarded a 
government contract work in the year 2017 and SBS sensed the fair opportunity to 
recover its dues and settle the accounts from the payment received against the execution 
of the contract work.
The justification provided by SBS is not acceptable as BG was issued in violation of 
its own BG Policy and SBS could not recover its dues or settle the NP A account as  
on 31 March 2023, as claimed by the Bank.  
4.5 Functioning of Branches
State Bank of Sikkim has 55 branches across the State.  Audit scrutinised a sample of 
18 branches40 to assess their functioning, and the observations are discussed below: 
40 Excluding three extension counters at Rangpo, Melli and SNT.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
40
(a) Non-reconciliation of Inter Branch transactions and other bank accounts
The reconciliation of bank accounts is a fundamental financial practice that contributes 
to accuracy, transparency and control over an entity’s financial affairs.  It is an essential 
tool for error detection, fraud prevention, financial planning, etc. Regular reconciliation 
promotes financial stability and informed decision making.
Audit observed (September 2023) the following:
Non-reconciliation of Inter-branch transactions
With the implementation of Core Banking Solution System (CBS) in SBS in April 2017, 
the accounts are automatically reconciled at the end of the day. However, prior to April 
2017, reconciliation of inter-branch transactions was done manually due to lack of inter-
connectivity in the previous application software between the branches and Head Office 
(HO) and between branches themselves. Accordingly, the inter-branch accounts were 
reconciled at HO and unreconciled entries were sent to branches for their response.  
Examination of the records revealed that an unreconciled balance of ₹ 9.44 crore for the 
period prior to 2017 is lying as Branch Adjustment under other assets in the books of 
accounts as on 31 March 2023. 
SBS stated (January 2024) that the reconciliation process is underway and is a continuous 
process. The reply is is not acceptable as no reduction in the Branch Adjustment Amount 
was noticed even after seven years. 
Non-reconciliation of accounts maintained with other banks
SBS (HO and 18 branches) has maintained 38 accounts with various commercial banks 
to facilitate smooth banking operations. It was observed that nine out of 38 accounts 
were not reconciled for period ranging from two months to eight years due to which 
there is an unreconciled figure of ₹ 33.48 crore as on 31 March 2023. Further, in 10 
out of the 29  reconciled accounts, it was noticed that the reconciliation had been done 
by posting a bulk amount/figure as a cut off difference which was yet to be reconciled. 
These accounts had an unreconciled balance of ₹ 23.72 crore, thus leaving an amount 
of ₹ 57.20 crore unreconciled as on 31 March 2023. Due to non-reconciliation of these 
accounts, the reasons for the differences were not known to the management.  
Both these unreconciled amounts could be an outcome of an error. At the same time, the 
possibility of frauds/misappropriation in these unreconciled transactions could not be 
ruled out either.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the reconciliation 
process is underway and is a continuous process and in the exit meeting, the MD, SBS 
stated (January 2024) that considering the gravity of the matter, the same would be 
expedited by engaging external agencies.
(b) Delayed deposit of collections by Rangpo & Melli Check Post extension counters
SBS, through its branches including 24x7 revenue counters, collects various government 
revenues on behalf of the State Government and credits the same into the Government 
account immediately. The 24x7 counters are operational on a 24x7 basis and as such 

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
41
these counters deposit the cash in lieu of the revenue collected on the next working day 
to their respective branches who are responsible for its supervision.
Audit noticed (April 2023) that there was substantial delay in remittance of government 
revenue by extension counters under two check posts as detailed in the table below:-
Table 4.15: Delayed remittance
Branch Collection 
Period
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
No. of instance 
(delayed 
remittance)
Delayed 
remittance 
(₹	in	crore)
Remarks
Rangpo CP May 2019 to 
March 2022
61.19 74 4.34 ₹ 0.01 lakh to ₹ 21.20 
lakh was deposited with 
a delay 41 ranging from 
one to nine days
Melli CP June 2019 to 
March 2022
15.43 78 1.12
Source: Management’ s records
SBS stated (January 2024) that the collection amount is credited on the same day and 
delay in transfer of cash collected is on account of holidays. The reply is factually 
incorrect as the cases of delayed deposits pointed out in audit all occurred during 
working days and the money lies outside the bank account of SBS for the period of delay.
In the exit meeting, the Chief Secretary also stated (January 2024) that there is 
a possibility of defalcation or misuse of money in such circumstances. Thus, the CS 
directed SBS to open a 24x7 counter in the controlling branches to enable the extension 
counters to deposit the cash without delay as the practice followed by these extension 
counters is fraught with the risk of temporary misappropriation of public money.
(c) Mismatch of signature/thumb impression with specimen signature
On test check of vouchers in respect of sample branches, it was observed that the 
signature in the withdrawal form/cheque was not tallying with the specimen signature 
in the system in 151 cases under 12 Branches 42. Further, under six branches 43, audit 
noticed that third parties had withdrawn money through withdrawal slip and self-bearing 
cheques, indicating major violation of internal controls.
In all the above cases, the concept of Maker44 & Checker45 though available in the banking 
system was not followed in letter and spirit by the branch personnel as transactions were 
authorised despite mismatch/non availability of specimen signatures.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the circular has 
been issued to ensure strict checking of signature and thumb impression.
(d) Non submission of document for cash deposit
As per section 114 B of the Income Tax Act, 1961, every person shall quote his permanent 
account number (PAN) in all documents pertaining to Deposit (exceeding ₹ 50,000 at a 
time) with any bank or financial institution including post offices.
41 The delay in days of deposit has been worked out considering the official holidays based on the State 
Government’ s official calendar.
42 Namthang, Secretariat, Sang, Pakyong, Soreng, Rakdong-Tintek, Mangalbaria, Singtam,Mangan, 
Namchi, Rhenock & Ravangla.
43 Secretariat, Sang, Pakyong, Soreng, Rakdong Tintek & Namchi.
44 Maker is the employee who makes the vouchers while making payment/ receiving money.
45 Checker is the higher officer who authorises the voucher/ entries.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
42
However, it was noticed that in several cases the branches did not insist upon submission 
of PAN details wherein the deposits exceeded ₹ 50,000 at a time. 
(e) Non verification of vouchers
As per the general practice, banks must have a system of V oucher Verification at the end 
of the day.  It is one of the comprehensive risk control systems introduced by the Bank 
to prevent frauds, and safeguard and protect the interest of the Bank.  
However, it was noticed that SBS had not adopted any system of voucher verification at 
the end of the day closing.
SBS has accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
4.6 Information Technology Systems
4.6.1 Insecure CBS infrastructure
Use of Information Technology by banks and their constituents has grown rapidly and is 
now an integral part of the operational strategies of banks. Thus, it is important for the 
Bank to identify the inherent risks and the controls in place to adopt appropriate cyber-
security framework. Depending on the level of inherent risks, the banks are required to 
identify their riskiness as low, moderate, high and very high or adopt any other similar 
categorisation. The IT architecture should be designed in such a manner that it takes 
care of facilitating the security measures to be always in place. The same needs to be 
reviewed and upgraded, if required, as per their risk assessment in a phased manner. 
Banks are also responsible for keeping customer data safe and protecting it from cyber-
attacks or unauthorised access.
Thus, banks employ various safe practices such as blocking access to social websites, 
personal emails, and USB ports for its employees, access controls using VPN, etc. to 
ensure that the systems remain safe from unwarranted access. 
Audit noticed (April 2023) that SBS had not adopted proper security measures in the 
operation of its Core Banking Solutions System as detailed below: 
	The system was not restricted to be operated within its own network through VPN. 
The CBS system could be operated through any network inside or outside the bank, 
through mobile hotspots, etc.  No boundaries were set up for the operations of the 
IT infrastructure of the bank. As such, the CBS can be operated outside the Bank’s 
premises creating a possibility of security breach;
	Access to other websites, personal emails were also not restricted.
	Moreover, USB ports were not blocked.
Thus, audit observed that basic security practices required for a banking IT system were 
not in place. This poses a serious risk to the data security of SBS system and the bank’s 
financial resources and operations are not safe from unauthorised access and cyber-
crimes.

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
43
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated (January 2024) that the bank is now 
migrating to new application which incorporates all security measures and is a proper 
banking software capable to addressing all banking issues.
4.6.2 Sharing of user IDs and passwords: Control failure
SBS implemented Core Banking Solution System in April 2017. To carry out the banking 
operations, each employee has been provided with a unique user ID and password.  The 
management of SBS circulated (01 February 2020) the Standard Operation Procedure 
for safe keeping, updating and maintaining of user passwords. As per this SOP, user 
IDs and passwords are confidential and must not be shared with anyone to prevent any 
unauthorised access as it invites the risk of fraudulent activities exposing SBS as well 
as the public transacting with SBS to great risk. Audit observed that the Branch/Section 
heads and the staffs were not adhering to these as discussed below.
	 In 13 branches46, the staffs including the Branch Managers (in some branches) had 
shared their user IDs and passwords amongst themselves.  In all these 13 branches, 
user IDs of the Managers/ officers/ staff were utilised to carry out the transactions 
during such periods when they were either on leave or were out of station.  There is 
no record of who had accessed their credentials in their absence indicating absence 
of critical internal controls.
	 In one branch (Namchi), a private insurance agent was also given access to the CBS 
systems and user IDs/ passwords and had accessed the CBS account of the staff and 
issued bank statement without the consent of the staff.
	 The Bank employees were not sufficiently made aware of the importance of 
safe practices. In nine branches 47, the user IDs and passwords were saved in the 
computer systems itself and were available to anyone operating it. Thus, anyone 
getting a hold of the computer systems can log in through the saved ids and carry 
out transactions in the CBS.
The instances pointed out by audit indicate gross violation of SOP of SBS itself.  
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated (January 2024) that the circulars had 
been issued to discontinue the practice of sharing User IDs and passwords, warning ID 
owners of the consequences they would face . It was further stated that the matter relating 
to engagement of private person getting access to CBS system is being investigated. The 
Chief Secretary, in the exit meeting instructed (January 2024) SBS to issue show cause 
notice to the branch head for giving access to a private individual.
4.6.3 Compromised Data Integrity: a risky oversight
Data integrity, or the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of data, is crucial for the 
smooth functioning of any financial institution. When data integrity is compromised, 
it can lead to a range of negative consequences such as inconsistent records, data entry 
errors, fragmented systems, compliance risks and operational inefficiencies.
Audit observed several inconsistencies in the CBS software such as:
46 Deorali, Namthang, Rangpo, Singtam, Soreng, Pakyong, Sang, Mangalbaria, Secretariat, Phodong, 
Mangan, Namchi, KSC.
47 Soreng, Singtam, Rangpo, Mangan, Sang, Pakyong, Secretariat, Deorali & KCS.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
44
	The NPA as of March 2023 stood at ₹ 1682.04 crore pertaining to 3664 accounts. 
However, as per the report generated from the CBS software depicted the NPA at 
₹ 1681.97 crore pertaining to 3651 accounts.
	The CBS report had reflected nine accounts as NPA although the current status of 
these accounts was closed/Null. 
	Eight accounts where overpayment (₹2.73 lakh) i.e. positive balance was apparent 
were marked as NPA.
	In two cases, although the sanction amount was Nil, the outstanding balance of 
₹ 11.10 lakh was being reflected under the standard accounts.
	In 16 cases, although the accounts were closed, the database was reflecting an 
outstanding of ₹ 7.28 lakh.
	In 983 accounts, although the repayment was not received beyond 90 days, 
these accounts were reflected as standard assets. Thus, there was divergence of 
₹ 116.58 crore in the reporting of gross NPAs as on March 2023. The gross NPAs 
reported by SBS was ₹ 1,682.04 crore whereas the gross NPAs as worked out by 
audit was ₹ 1,798.62 crore.
SBS while accepting the audit observation stated (January 2024) that the bank is now 
migrating to new application which incorporates all security measures and is a proper 
banking software capable to addressing all banking issues.
However, the above inconsistencies present significant risks, ranging from operational 
inefficiencies to regulatory non-compliance and customer dissatisfaction. This 
undermines SBS’s ability to maintain accurate, reliable information, which is essential 
for both day-to-day operations and long-term strategic decisions. 
4.6.4	Other	deficiencies	in	CBS	 System
Other deficiencies observed in the CBS system are as under;
	The CBS system was not configured to enable various features such as:
(i) automated categorisation of the loan accounts as Standard/NPA which was 
being done manually;
(ii) provision to add/update the details of primary/collateral securities in the CBS 
system  and were instead maintained physically in the respective files
(iii) provision for issuance of a Bank Guarantee and the same is being done manually  
(iv) system to check CIBIL score while sanctioning the loan; 
(v) renewal of term deposits of customers attaining the age of 60 year at the 
applicable interest rates is done on manual basis; 
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted for addressing the issues 
in new software.
4.6.5 Absence of Management Information System
An MIS, or Management Information System, in banking terms is a system that provides 
managers with the information they need to make informed decisions about the bank’s 
operations. This information is typically presented periodically in the form of reports, 

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
45
dashboards, and other visualisations that help managers understand the bank’s financial 
performance, customer behaviour, and other key metrics at a glance.  The goal of an 
MIS in banking is to improve decision-making, increase efficiency, and enhance overall 
performance. Overall, MIS plays a vital role in the banking sector by enabling banks to 
manage their resources efficiently, make informed decisions, mitigate risks, and provide 
better customer service.
It was, however, noticed that the Management of SBS did not implement an effective 
MIS system to monitor the overall performance of SBS. In the absence of an effective 
MIS system in place, there would be considerable delays in furnishing information to 
the top- level management and outside agencies as and when they are required. It is 
pertinent to mention here that during audit many such information requisitioned by audit 
were furnished either with incomplete/ wrong details (for instance details of NPAs and its 
provisioning, etc.) or with considerable delays (for instance employee data, fortnightly 
deposits data, etc.). As such, it is recommended that SBS may devise its own MIS system 
laying down the reporting structure to the top-level management on a periodical basis.
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
4.7 Human Resource Management
The management of people in the organisation along with handling the financial and 
economic risks at the wider level is the most potent challenge in front of the banking 
industry in any given time frame. Efficient and skilled manpower in the sector can only 
manage the financial risks that the banks need to take on regular basis. 
The details of SBS’s business and manpower for the last six years ending 31 March 2023 
are given in the table below:
Table 4.16: SBS business and manpower
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Number of employees (Permanent 
and Temporary)
444 473 598 623 701 784
Total Business (₹ in crore) 3549.78 4373.38 4988.80 5462.16 7166.58 7624.30
Business per employee (₹ in crore) 8.00 9.25 8.34 8.77 10.22 9.72
Number of branches48 49 52 60 61 63 64
Employee per branch 9.25 9.10 9.97 10.21 11.13 12.25
Employee cost (₹ in crore) 34.43 37.87 39.73 32.08 30.69 37.86
Cost per employee (₹ in crore) 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.05
Source: Data furnished by the Bank & Financial Statements
It can be seen from the above table that the number of employees has increased from 444 
in 2017-18 to 784 in 2022-23. Business per employee had also increased from ₹ eight 
crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 9.72 crore in 2022-23. Cost per employee had seen a decrease from 
₹ 0.08 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 0.05 crore in 2022-23. 
However, this is to be viewed with the fact that there has been substantial recruitment 
of temporary staff in the corresponding period. These employees are drawing a monthly 
48 Including Head Office and Extension Counters.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
46
salary of ₹ 9,000 to ₹ 10,500. Further, the average employee per branch has also seen 
an increase from 9.25 employees per branch in 2017-18 to 12.25 employees per branch 
in 2022-23. 
Audit studied the HR policies of the bank and the observations in this regard are 
discussed below.
4.7.1 Lack of manpower analysis
SBS neither has any system to analyse its manpower requirement for deployment 
of resources within its network of branches nor it has ever analysed the manpower 
requirement. Audit analysed the adequacy of manpower posted in the branches by 
correlating the number of officials posted at the branches vis-à-vis the number of 
vouchers prepared by each branch during the year 2022-23. 
It was seen that 25 branches were preparing less than 20 vouchers per employee in a day 
and only 12 branches were preparing more than 40 vouchers per employee in a day.  On 
an average, a branch per employee is preparing 28 vouchers per day.  Although average 
transaction handled by each employee varied between 2.64 to 103, the deployment of 
manpower was not based on any rational.  
Audit observed that the volume of transaction was less when compared with the number 
of people posted in these branches.  For example, in Singtam branch 11 employees 
were performing an average 71 transactions whereas in  Rangpo branch 19 employees 
were performing an average only 17 transactions. Similarly, in 16 other branches where 
the average transaction per employee (between 13 to 66) was much less than Singtam 
branch (71), more employees per branch was posted ranging between 12 to 25 employees 
vis-à-vis 11 employees in Singtam. 
The chart below details deployment of manpower vis-à-vis average number of transactions.
Chart 4.5: Deployment of manpower
 
71
17
37 35 37 36
11
19 19
4 99
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Singtam Rangpo Ranipool Makha Namthang Rabdentse
Avg. transaction per employee per day No of employees
Source: Management’ s records 
The above chart clearly shows that for similar number of average transactions, there was 
no uniformity in deployment of manpower.  Hence, it can be concluded that there is no 
rationale for employee deployment in the branches. 
Audit noticed that despite having very less transaction in majority of the branches, SBS 
had appointed another 360 employees during the last six years in violation of its own 
recruitment policy as highlighted in paragraph 4.7.2.  Moreover, as SBS has appointed 

Chapter IV: Commercial Banking
47
manpower without any analysis, optimum utilisation of the services of its employees 
will not be possible.
The MD, SBS, in the exit meeting, while accepting the audit observation stated  
(January 2024) that the manpower analysis would be carried out relating to deployment 
of manpower
4.7.2	Irregular	recruitment	of	lower	cadre	officials
State Bank of Sikkim had increased its branches from 48 branches during 2017-18 to 63 
branches during 2022-23. During the same period, the bank had recruited 360 employees 
(126 Peons/ Office Attendants/ drivers and 234 Junior Accounts Assistants). As per the 
Recruitment Policy, 2011, the post of Peon and Jr. AAs were to be recruited through 
100 per cent direct recruitment with a minimum eligibility criterion being Class-VIII 
passed and Class-X passed respectively.  In this regard, audit observed (June 2023) that 
out of 360 appointments made during the last six years, none of them were recruited as 
per its existing Recruitment Policy 2011, viz., by way of conducting a written test and 
interview which was in violation of the laid down recruitment policy of SBS. During the 
period from 2017-18 to 2022-23, 52 employees working as peon on temporary post were 
absorbed in substantive post. Similarly, 40 employees working as Jr. Accounts Assistant 
respectively on temporary basis were also absorbed in substantive post. SBS had resorted 
to recruitment on temporary basis without conducting any formal exam/interview and 
then regularising their services. Thus, SBS had violated its own recruitment policy and 
the possibility of nepotism and fraud in selecting the candidates, cannot be ruled out. 
4.8	 Conclusion
Audit observed that the Bank’s financial reporting was highly inflated due to maintaining 
a meagre provisioning coverage ratio and its Capital Adequacy Ratio was below the 
norms of nine per cent followed by the SCBs in the country. The customer services 
offered by SBS was a bare minimum as audit observed lack of adequate banking facilities 
and lack of effective complaint redressal mechanism. 
SBS did not have a properly formulated KYC policy as mandated by the PML Act. 
The completeness and reliability of the customer data is also doubtful as important 
information such as signatures and photographs of customers were not uploaded in CBS 
system, Aadhaar was not seeded and PAN was not linked with the concerned authorities. 
Credit facilities were extended to credit unworthy accounts due to ineffective credit 
appraisal mechanism as the Bank did not obtain credit ratings of the borrowers, ascertain 
the repaying facilities, etc. The Bank did not follow its own recovery policy properly 
and the recovery of loan was done in an arbitrary manner. The Bank did not adhere to 
the post sanction conditions of sanction, the end use of the funds was not verified by the 
Bank. 
The Bank did not classify its loan assets as per its own guidelines and also did not 
make adequate provisions against the NPAs. The NPAs of the Bank was abnormally 
high as compared to the SCBs in the country. The OTS scheme was executed in an 
arbitrary manner and BGs were issued by flouting its own BG policy and even the 
Board’s directives were not adhered to by the Bank. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
48
The branches were not effectively functioning as considerable accounts were left 
unreconciled, signatures were not verified before releasing payments to the customers, 
and there were delays in deposit of collection. The sanctity of the CBS was severely 
compromised by poor security practices relating to access to the CBS system which 
might not only jeopardise their own viability but also undermines the trust and stability 
of the banking ecosystem. 
The Management of Human Resources needs marked improvement and recruitment 
must be based on proper manpower analysis and considering all eligible criteria.
4.9 Recommendations
The State Bank of Sikkim may:
	endeavour to maintain its Capital Adequacy Ratio as per the industry standards;
	make KYC norms mandatory to prevent the risk of money laundering and ensure 
proper verification of customers before processing transactions.
	ensure proper provisioning against non-performing assets as per its guidelines to 
accurately reflect asset quality and mitigate financial risks. 
	implement a transparent and well-defined policy for the One Time Settlement 
scheme.
	provide adequate banking facilities to its customers and put in place a Complaint 
Redressal Mechanism;
	take necessary steps to bring down its NP A ratio, in line with accepted industry 
standards. The Bank may conduct thorough due diligence check on potential 
borrowers and regularly review the financial health of the existing customers to 
prevent credit assets turning into NP As.
	initiate enquiries on the individual cases highlighted under credit functions 
(Appendix 2) and fix the responsibilities against erring officials, if any.
	implement data quality standards and data governance, provide training and 
awareness to its employees to minimise entry errors and mishandling and carry out 
periodic reviews/ data audit to ensure more reliable reporting and decision-making 
in the future.
	conduct a proper manpower analysis to assess staffing needs and ensure all 
recruitments follow the bank’ s approved policy and guidelines to maintain fairness 
and transparency..

CHAPTER V: 
FRAUD RISK MANAGEMENT

Chapter V: FRAUD RISK MANAGEMENT
Fraud risk management is of paramount importance for banks to ensure financial 
stability as well as customer trust. Board and Management of the Bank must focus on 
the “Fraud Prevention and Management Function” to enable, among others, effective 
investigation of fraud cases and prompt as well as accurate reporting to appropriate 
regulatory and law enforcement authorities. 
Audit studied the fraud risk management practices of SBS and found lacunae with same 
as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.
5.1 Inadequate Fraud Risk Controls
	 Non -framing of Fraud Risk Management framework
SBS had neither framed any Fraud Risk Management framework/ policy nor established 
sound Fraud Risk Management systems in place.  
It is pertinent to mention that SBS in its reply to Paragraph 3.2.8.10 “Fraud and 
Misappropriation” of the C&AG’ s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Sikkim 
stated that SBS has recognised the importance of bringing in a proper control system in 
place and would also be coming out with an Anti-Fraud Policy of its own to minimise 
the instances of frauds. However, no such system was put in place as on date (September 
2023) due to which there were no adequate deterrent controls in SBS as a result further 
cases of frauds were noticed.
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
5.2 Instances of illicit transactions, presumptive frauds/ misappropriation cases 
noticed in audit
5.2.1 Suspicious transactions linked to loan facilitation indicating possible 
misconduct
Audit scrutinised the accounts of all Key Managerial Personnel (up to General 
Manager level) and employees (up to the level of Jr. AA) posted in the Credit/Loan 
section at Head Office (including legal wing and BG cell) and officials of the 21 
branches test checked in audit for the period April 2017 to March 2023 and observed 
that: 
	 Substantial funds totalling to ₹ 3.65 crore had been deposited into the Bank’s 
employees personal accounts from 166 loanees’ accounts (loan account, savings 
account, current account, etc.) as detailed in Table 5.1.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
50
Table 5.1: Details of funds deposited into Bank employees’ personal accounts from loanees
Sl. No. Name of the Employees Designation Total	amount	received		(in	₹)
1 KB Chamling Ex-Chairman 5,00,000
2 SR Karki CGM 26,58,000
3 K T Lepcha GM 1,95,000
4 Reena Basnett Rai
AGM
28,20,000
5 Ratna Bdr Gurung 1,14,000
6 Durga Chettri
Sr. Manager
5,70,000
7 Sunil Kr Tamang 20,42,000
8 Rabden Tshering Bhutia 4,00,000
9 Susan Sharma 1,43,62,700
10 Krishna K Pradhan
Manager
25,12,000
11 Laden Bhutia 2,50,000
12 Lekhraj Dhakal 25,000
13 Pawang Tamang
Manager (IT)
14,94,500
14 Sangay C Bhutia 14,73,000
15 Aarti Sherstha
Asst. Manager
7,67,500
16 Uma Pradhan 20,000
17 Sova Gurng 2,54,000
18 Lalita Karki 3,00,000
19 Areena Chettri
Sr. Accounts 
Assistant
5,35,000
20 Jigmic W Bhutia 2,50,000
21 Karma Thupden Bhutia 45,000
22 Ram kr Tewari 20,000
23 Tshering Thendup Bhutia 10,31,000
24 Suresh Rai 2,00,000
25 Bal Bdr Chettri 3,73,000
26 Sanchaman Subba 73,000
27 Jigmee W Bhutia 4,50,000
28 Bal Bdr Dahal 1,50,000
29 Pintso Doma Bhutia 69,400
30 Urmila rai
Account Assistant
10,62,000
31 Keshab Khatiwara 62,000
32 Youmanti Rai 1,90,000
33 KT Choppel Bhutia
Junior Accounts 
Assistant
6,89,000
34 Renuka Rai 4,87,000
35 Ritu Chamling 12,000
Total 3,64,56,100
Source: Management’ s records 

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
51
	Out of the above, in 64 instances (₹ 1.29 crore), the date of deposit in employee’s 
personal accounts corresponds directly to the date of disbursement of loan to the 
loanees (Appendix 4). Further, 29 loan accounts (17 per cent) pertaining to the above 
transactions have turned into NPA as on date.
The above transactions are suggestive of suspected fraudulent activities related to the 
facilitation of the loans.
The above highlighted cases are illustrative and not exhaustive and cover a period from 
2017-18 to 2022-23 only.  
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the matter has 
been taken up seriously by the Bank and show cause notice were issued to all involved 
employees. The matter is being investigated.
In the exit meeting, the Chief Secretary also stated (January 2024) that the matter has 
been taken seriously and exemplary action would be taken against the erring officials to 
set as a future deterrence and the outcome would be intimated to audit.
5.2.2 Non-monitoring of high value deposits
As per the industry best practice, all transactions in cash deposits over a certain 
limit (as set out by the management) in any bank official’s accounts would either 
automatically be flagged by the CBS system or are monitored microscopically by a 
designated officer and such bank officials are to compulsorily disclose the source of 
such deposits. 
It was noticed (July 2023) that SBS had neither set a limit on deposits by its own 
employees, nor did it establish such controls in its system to monitor such high deposits 
to verify the source. In absence of any control mechanism, it was noticed that in 17 staff 
accounts, ₹ 3.95 crore had been deposited over a five-year period 2017-18 to 2022-23. 
However, in absence of any mechanism to monitor cash deposits in the employees’ 
accounts which would keep the employees away from indulging in any suspicious 
activities, the SBS was unable to verify the source of cash deposit in the bank accounts 
of these officials.
In addition, audit noticed that there were high value transactions (₹ one lakh and above) 
which have been credited/ routed in the saving account of SBS officials from the saving/
current account of third parties which amounted to ₹ 4.19 crore which merits detailed 
verification.
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
reference.
5.2.3	Temporary	misappropriation	of	cash	at	Namchi	Branch	₹	0.12	crore
Audit observed (March 2023) that the branch had kept huge amount of cash49 in the form 
of coins ranging from ₹ 1,76,259 (01 February 2023) to ₹ 5,31,880 (25 September 2019).  
49 For the period from 08 February 2018 to 01 February 2023. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
52
As such, a joint physical verification of cash balance was conducted 02 February 2023 
by the branch officials in presence of audit, wherein it was observed that the Branch had 
kept the coin under a separate vault but in a haphazard manner which implied that the 
coins were not verified for a long time.
On physical counting of coins by the officials in presence of audit team, it was seen 
that against the book balance (coins) of ₹ 1,76,259 on 01 February 2023, ₹ 91,430 only 
was physically available resulting in shortfall of ₹ 84,829. Considering the shortage, 
explanation was called for from the officials of the branch and it was stated that after 
the day closing, those staff in need of immediate cash would withdraw money from the 
vault without debiting their account and returned the amount as and when they were able 
to repay the same. 
However, to conceal the discrepancies and reconcile the cash summary register, the coin 
amounts were manipulated by recording them as deposits at the time of physical cash 
withdrawal and as withdrawals when returning the cash. This entire deposit/withdrawal 
process occurred off the books.
Based on the shortage of cash and the system of withdrawal, which is entirely off  
the books, these transactions are cases of temporary misappropriation. As such, 
detailed scrutiny of cash summary book from 08 February 2018 to 08 April 2022 
was carried out wherein it was observed that several transactions were made coins 
both as deposits and withdrawals. For instance, there was a deposit of coin of ₹ 
1,50,000 (23 September 2019) and withdrawal of ₹ 1,00,000 (28 September 2019). 
However, neither any vouchers were prepared, nor were any entries made in the 
CBS system.  Audit noted total temporary misappropriation of ₹ 0.12 crore based 
on the test check of records. This issue assumes more significance as the Preventive 
Check team, though visited the branch several times (12 February 2018, 03 March 
2020 & 08 April 2022) and verified the cash balance, did not highlight and flag this 
issue. 
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the matter has been 
taken up seriously by the Bank, show cause notice has been issued and departmental 
enquiry has been proposed.
5.2.4 Irregularities in recruitment of Assistant Mangers 
As per the 169 th Board Meeting dated 28 November 2017, the Board approved 
recruitment of 20 Assistant Managers (AMs) through direct recruitment. Subsequently, 
the Board approved 50 to recruit 26 AMs. Considering the 100-point Roster Model 
being the norms of the State Government, reservations for various categories were 
made by SBS on its own as shown in Table 5.2.
50 Vide 173rd board meeting dated 01 October 2020 and 174th Board meeting dated 19 March 2021. 

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
53
Table 5.2: category-wise reservation of AMs post
UR BL BL 
(W51)
BL
(BPL52)
OBC 
(CL53)
OBC 
(CL) 
women
OBC 
(CL) 
BPL
OBC 
(SL54)
OBC 
(SL) 
women
OBC 
(SL) 
BPL
ST ST
(W)
SC SC 
(W)
PT Total55
5 2* 2 1 3 1 1 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 26
Source: Management’ s records 
Note: Out of 26 posts, one post under BL category shall be reserved for State Government certified SP AE 
(Sport Persons and Artisans of Excellence)
Subsequently, SBS had floated an advertisement (25 May 2021) calling for 
applications of eligible candidates for the post of AM. The advertisement stipulated 
that the candidates had to qualify in written test by securing a passing mark as 
decided by SBS. 
In response to the same, 3,513 applicants submitted the forms out of which 2,270 
applicants had appeared for the written examination held on 21 November 2021.  
The examination process consisted of Objective Test of 200 marks on Optical Marks 
Recognition (OMR) system consisting of five sections wherein the candidate had to 
qualify the test by securing passing marks to be decided by SBS. The adequate number of 
candidates in each category as may be decided by SBS (approx. 3-4 times the number of 
vacancies) were to be shortlisted for the interview which carried 25 marks. Accordingly, 
on the basis of the results of written examination (November 2021), 69 candidates were 
called for the interview (December 2021) and 26 candidates (Appendix 5) were selected 
for the post of AMs (February 2022). 
To ascertain the fairness in the selection process, audit had called for following 
information:
	 Name of Agency/Committee who had prepared Questionnaires,
	 Evaluation Sheet (written exams & interview),
	 Name of Agency/Committee scrutinised the Evaluation sheet,
	 Members of Interview panel,
	 Authority constituting the Interview Panel and committee, 
	 Cut off mark for written exam i.e. ST/SC and General, and 
	 Attendance sheet for Interview.
However, SBS had did not furnish the above information to audit and furnished only 
few records viz., one set of question paper and the answer keys, list of applicants that 
had applied for the examination, the final list of candidates who appeared for the said 
examination and their answer sheets.  Accordingly, based on availability of basic records 
such as answer sheet and answer key, audit re-evaluated the answer sheets of all the 
69 candidates (Appendix 6) who had been called for the interview.
Audit observed (July 2023) that:
51 Women.
52 Below poverty line.
53 Central list.
54 State list.
55 UR-Unreserved, BL-Bhutia Lepcha, OBC-Other Backward Classes, ST-Scheduled Tribes,  
SC-Scheduled Caste, PT-Primitive Tribe.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
54
	 Candidates scoring lesser marks in the written examination were selected over 
those candidates who had scored higher marks falling under the same categories 
(i.e. SC/ ST/OBC/General/ Primitive Tribe) as detailed in the table below: 
Table 5.3: Selection of candidates scoring lesser marks
Category Selected Candidates Candidates not selected
Name Score Name Score
BL Yada Bhutia 92 Ugen Tenzing Bhutia 128
PT Pema Dorjee Lepcha 42 Tashi Tshering Lepcha 99
OBC Khagen Chettri 35 Suraj Basnett 98
OBC Sujan Rai 28 Praney Rai 102
OBC Manu Gautam 26 Shreya Gautam 100
Source: Management’ s records
Audit considered only those cases where the difference in marks between the two groups 
was more than 25 which implies that had the selected candidates scored full marks in the 
interview also, it would be substantially less than the marks obtained by the candidates 
(who were not selected) in the written exam alone.
SBS replied that there were no other BPL candidates in the given category scoring 
higher marks than the three candidates who were selected.  One candidate is selected 
under Primitive Tribe (PT) category.  Other candidates who scored higher under PT 
category were disqualified based on the past record/non-production of a certificate. 
Further, one candidate being in OBC-SL was selected under SP AE category as the 
management has interchanged SP AE category with OBC-SL in absence of candidate 
from SP AE category.
The reply is not acceptable as SBS had neither furnished the tabulation/evaluation sheet 
for written exam nor a copy of BPL/OBC-SL certificate of all four candidates who were 
selected to justify their selection.  Further, the reason for non-selection of its own staff  
based on the past records lacks justification as he was already acquitted from the case he 
was allegedly involved in and was also allowed to appear for the written exam.  Hence, 
disqualifying him lacked justification.
	 Candidates scoring as low as 26 to 42 marks were called for interview and ultimately 
got selected, whereas on a test check basis it was noticed that candidates scoring in 
between 55 to 69 were not even called for the interview. 
 SBS replied that due to reservation system in some category, the candidates scoring 
lower marks had to be selected. The reply is not acceptable as it is unreasonable 
to select applicants based on him/ her scoring the highest amongst the candidates, 
without considering the minimum qualifying marks to ensure that even with 
reservation benefits, candidates meet a basic competency level.  Moreover, SBS 
did not furnish evaluation sheet for written exam to justify that there were no other 
candidates under the reserved category who had scored more than the selected 
candidates.

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
55
	 In respect of one selected candidate 56, it was noticed that the answer sheet neither 
bear the signature of candidate nor the invigilator. Thus, his candidature must have 
been forfeited.
 SBS has accepted the audit observation and stated that it was a case of oversight 
on SBS’ s part.  However, the fact remains that the candidature of the applicant was 
not cancelled and rather he was selected for appointment.  Hence, the possibility 
of suspected fraud cannot be ruled out in audit.
	 The advertisement stipulated that the candidates had to qualify in written test by 
securing a passing mark as decided by the bank.  However, it was not mandatory 
for the candidates to qualify in each section of the written exams unlike in other 
banking examinations conducted across the country wherein the candidates have 
to qualify securing qualifying marks in each section in order to be eligible for 
interview call. Eight57 candidates out of 26 candidates had either scored very less 
marks in a particular section specially under “Data Analysis & Interpretation” or 
had not attempted the section at all.  This issue assumes significance, as the written 
examination is conducted to ascertain the general aptitude of the candidates.  
However, they were also selected for the post of AMs although the candidates 
lacked general aptitude in the particular field.
 SBS has accepted the audit observation and stated that since minimum passing 
marks for individual sections were not stipulated, there was no scope for 
disqualifying the candidates based on not attempting certain section of the 
examination.
 The reply is not acceptable as setting a minimum qualifying mark for each 
section of the exam would have ensured that candidates achieved a basic level of 
competency.
	 As per the advertisement, adequate number of candidates in each category as 
may be decided by SBS (approx. 3-4 times the number of vacancies) would be 
shortlisted for the interview. This works out to 78-104 candidates. However, only 
69 candidates were shortlisted for the interview.
 SBS stated that inviting candidates with lower marks had no scope of making 
it to the merit list even after awarding full marks in the interview.  As such, 
very low scoring candidates were left out to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to 
them.  The reply is not acceptable as SBS had invited candidates scoring lesser 
marks while ignoring/ not-inviting candidates who scored higher marks for the 
interview.
	 Although the advertisement was published duly depicting the category wise 
vacancies and post to be filled up, category-wise results were not published.
56 Sudhershan Chettri.
57 Sumiran Pradhan, Jeten Subba, Kesang Doma Sherpa, Anjana Chettri, Manu Gautam, Khagen 
Chettri, Pema Dorjee Lepcha & Sarju Sunwar.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
56
 SBS replied that selection is made category and sub-category wise merit list under 
the reservation system in terms of the Government notification.  Final selection is 
based on total score from written and interview.  The reply is not acceptable as the 
category-wise results were not published and no records were provided to prove 
that such category wise selection was done.
	 The vacancies were not filled according to the roster system as instances were 
noticed wherein under five categories 58 the suitable candidates (five) were not 
available for selection.  However, instead of keeping it vacant and carrying 
forward the vacancy for next recruitment process, these vacancies were filled 
by inducting more candidates 59 (five) under other categories 60 thereby exceeding 
their limits. 
 SBS replied that vacancies were filled in terms of Government Notification.  The 
reply is not acceptable as SBS did not furnish the government notification. 
 Thus, the selection process adopted by SBS was irregular and the possibility of 
fraud and favouritism in selecting the candidates, could not be ruled out. 
 The MD, SBS, in the exit meeting, stated (January 2024) that the matter will be 
forwarded to Department of Personnel & Training, GoS for detailed investigation.  
The State Government also noted the issue for necessary action.
5.3	 Ineffective	punitive	action	against	the	cases	of	Fraud/	Misappropriation
During 2020-21, four cases of fraud were noticed by the Bank based on the complaints 
and inspection by the PCM61 team as detailed below; 
	 Rangpo extension counter : In 2019, based on the complaint from the Sikkim 
Nationalised Transport (SNT) Department, GoS, a fraud was unearthed wherein 
the Bank Receipts (BR) issued to the customers on account of various Government 
revenue deposits were subsequently deleted from the CBS system by the Bank 
employee which resulted in misappropriation of ₹ 16.72 lakh (discussed in detail in 
paragraph 3.3). Consequently, the facility of deleting bank receipts were disabled 
in its CBS system. 
	 Mangalbaria: The Bank deputed (September 2020) a team consisting of General 
Manager (Operations) and General Manager (AM/R) for immediate investigation 
of the branch. During the surprise check, it was noticed that the payments made 
by the branch were not entered into the CBS system and a cash shortage of ₹ 3.73 
lakh was detected from the cash vault. The team filed a general diary with the 
nearest police station.  On further investigation, it was noticed that ₹ 27.54 lakh was 
misappropriated by the Junior Accounts Assistant in connivance with the Branch 
Manager by withdrawing from the customer’s account without their authorisation. 
58 BL (W), BL (BPL), OBC (CL) BPL, OBC (SL) BPL & SC (W).
59 OBC (SL)-3, ST-1 & SC-1.
60 This was arrived at by audit duly considering the top five candidates under “unreserved” category 
irrespective of their actual categories.
61 PCM is an alternative to an Internal Audit Wing wherein the task of conducting PCM of one branch is 
assigned to an officer/ branch head of the other branches on rotation basis.

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
57
Both employees were suspended and the matter was under investigation by the 
Disciplinary committee of SBS.  
 In an earlier instance (2010), while being posted at M.G. Marg branch, the said 
Branch Manager was also accused of misuse of Temporary Deposit Receipt (TDR) 
forms (August 2010) and was detained by Sikkim Vigilance police. However, 
due to lack of inquiry on the part of SBS, the then enquiry committee could not 
decide the gravity of the loss and recommended for revocation of suspension.  
Thereafter, the said Branch Manager was reinstated and posted (October 2018) to 
Mangalbaria branch.  Though the said Branch Manager was reinstated, the case 
relating to misuse of TDR is still under investigation under Sikkim Vigilance 
police. 
	Phodong: During PCM (October 2020), a cash shortage of ₹ 10.41 lakh was 
detected which was fraudulently withdrawn by Branch Manager in-charge by 
writing withdrawal slip in his account without making entry in the system and 
debiting the bank. In view of the above, the Management suspended the Branch 
Manager and initiated disciplinary action against him.  It was also seen that the 
Management had issued an order (22 June 2021) relieving the Branch Manager in 
charge from the services of SBS. However, it was seen that the Board of Directors 
in its 175 th board meeting had decided that since the money was refunded by the 
Branch Manager and considering his misconduct to be the first time, the suspension 
was revoked and as a penalty, downgraded him to the post of a Junior System 
Analyst. 
	Namthang : Based on the complaint received, the Bank inspected (October 
2020) the branch wherein initially a cash shortage of ₹ two lakh was unearthed.  
During questioning, the cashier in charge stated that the then Branch Manager 
threatened him and asked him to make payments in the name of a customer 
who was yet to come to the branch. He then took the money forcefully with 
the assurance to replenish the same. However, before replenishing the cash, the 
then branch manager passed away. On further investigation, the Bank noticed 
that the Cashier along with the Assistant Manager had also withdrawn money 
from the customer’s account without their authorisation. Thus, the late Branch 
Manager together with other employees had misappropriated in total ₹ 13.80 lakh  
from the customers’ accounts without their authorisation.  In this regard, a 
show cause notice was issued to all employees involved and the enquiry is 
being conducted by SBS. The outcome of the said enquiry is still awaited  
(November 2023). 
 Status of fraud cases noticed by SBS is as under:

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
58
Table 5.4: Status of Cases of fraud
Branch Name of the 
officer/official	
involved
Amount 
involved 
(₹)
Period Details of 
disciplinary 
action taken 
against the 
officials
Remarks
Phodong Mr. Bhupen 
Suji Sr. System 
Assistant
10,40,590 2019-20 Downgrade 
to the post of 
System Assistant 
in Level-9 of the 
pay matrix from 
the existing post 
of Sr. System 
Assistant in 
Level-11.
Whole amount was 
recovered
Namthang i) Late Bal 
Kumar Rai 
(then Branch 
Incharge)
ii) Smt. Uma 
Pradhan 
(Branch Staff)
iii) Shri. Bal 
Bahadur 
Chettri
13,80,000 2018-19 Inquiry 
completed.
Order yet to be 
passed.
Out of ₹ 13.80 lakh, 
₹ two lakh have 
been recovered from 
the CPF account 
of Late Bal Kumar 
Rai and ₹ 1.50 lakh 
has been recovered 
during enquiry from 
other staffs of the 
branch and remaining 
amount is yet to be 
recovered.
Mangalbaria i) Shri Pema 
Wangyal 
Bhutia/ 
Branch in 
Charge
ii) Shri Pradeep 
Rengang 
(Darjee)
27,54,333 2020-21 Inquiry 
completed. 
Shri Pradeep 
Rengang 
(Darjee) is under 
suspension. Shri 
Pema Wangyal 
Bhutia retired 
from service.
Order yet to be 
passed
Not yet recovered.  
Retirement benefits 
of the branch manager 
withheld.
Head Office 
(24x7 
Extension 
counter)
Mr. Bhanu Chettri 4,68,908 2022-23 Not Applicable Whole amount was 
recovered. 
Involved employee 
was terminated by the 
management
Extension 
counter at 
Rangpo 
Check Post 
- 16,72,000 April 
2018 to 
December 
2019
No action taken 
against the 
employees of the 
branch
Departmental enquiry 
at SBS’s end has been 
stopped. It was stated 
by SBS that the same 
has been initiated by 
the SNT Department 
and the enquiry is still 
under process.
Source: Management’ s records 
It can be seen from the above table that out of five cases of misappropriation detected 
by the management, only in two cases the management was able to complete the 
enquiry and initiated action against the fraudsters. However, in two cases the 

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
59
management was still unable to complete the enquiries even after a lapse of three to 
five years.
The above paragraphs indicate not only that the controls in place to prevent the 
irregularities were ineffective, but also that SBS could not take timely punitive action.  
This effectively means that there were no deterrent controls either.
Thus, the SBS did not take effective actions against the employees engaged in fraudulent 
acts thus setting a wrong precedence.
SBS replied (January 2024) that in all the cases, action has been taken to investigate 
the incident and appropriate punitive actions were taken. The reply is not acceptable 
as the actions taken by the Bank such as downgrading of post by the Board (after 
initially terminating the employee), reinstating the employee due to lack of effective 
enquiry by the Bank and due to pressure from various quarters to reinstate him and 
not concluding its investigation in time were not commensurate with the scale of 
misconducts.
5.4 Non-existence of Internal Audit Wing
An independent and effective internal audit function in a financial entity provides 
vital assurance to the Board and its senior management regarding the quality and 
effectiveness of the entity’s internal control, risk management and governance 
framework. 
The introduction of Risk-Based Internal Audit system was mandated for all Scheduled 
Commercial Banks.  As part of effective risk management, SBS must have established 
its own Internal Audit Wing and developed a well-defined policy on Risk Based Internal 
Audit.
SBS had neither formulated a Risk Based Internal Audit policy nor had established its 
own Internal Audit Wing. It is pertinent to mention that this issue was already highlighted 
in the C&AG’ s Audit Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Sikkim. 
However, as an alternative, SBS had devised a system of Preventive Check Measures 
(PCM) wherein the task of conducting PCM of one branch is assigned to an officer/ 
branch head of the other branches on rotation basis. However, it was seen that the 
bank had not devised any policy for PCM.  In absence of it, all its branches were not 
subjected to periodical review and even the basis for selection of branches was not 
documented. 
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and stated that it had initiated the 
effort to establish internal audit wing. It was proposing to approach Finance Department 
to extend its service of the internal audit wing for the purpose. 
5.5	 Non	appointment	of	Chief	Risk	Officer
The role of Chief Risk Officer (CRO) in a bank is to facilitate the analysis of risks 
and interrelationships of risks across market, credit and operational risks, to review the 
risk profile and to prioritise action to mitigate the potential risks.  As such, all SCB’s of 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
60
the country were advised by the RBI to appoint a CRO.  SBS however, has not appointed 
a Chief Risk Officer. 
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
5.6 Non-existence of Mandatory Leave and Rotation Policy
Mandatory leave for staff was introduced after the RBI saw a sharp increase in 
frauds in banks following forensic studies. The SCBs were advised to immediately 
put in place a ‘staff rotation policy’ and policy for mandatory leave for staffs. As a 
prudent operational risk management measure, it is imperative that employees posted 
in sensitive positions or areas of operations are covered under a ‘Mandatory Leave’ 
policy wherein such employees are required to compulsorily avail of leave for a few 
days (say 10 working days) in a single spell every year, during their posting in such 
areas. The bank must also identify such highly sensitive positions where the bank 
will, without any prior intimation , advise the employee to be away from his desk for 
a specified number of working days each year.
Audit noticed that SBS neither framed the Rotation Policy nor policy on Mandatory 
Leave as is being done by SCBs.  Thus, SBS was unable to facilitate early detection of 
frauds/ financial irregularities carried out by the bank officials. 
As per the leave details furnished by SBS, it was noticed that during 2017-18 to 2021-22 
(five-year period), 81 employees had not availed a single leave (Privilege Leave & 
Medical Leave). 
SBS accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and noted the same for future 
compliance.
5.7 Conclusion
 SBS was not able to detect and prevent irregularities in the organisation due to inadequate 
fraud risk controls and lack of internal control mechanism. This situation highlights the 
need for a comprehensive review and improvement of the management practices and 
processes.  SBS could not enforce timely and commensurate punitive action against the 
erring employees. This has resulted in a breakdown of ethical culture from the top to 
bottom of the organisation, necessitating a complete overhaul of the management and 
its processes.
5.8	 Recommendations
	 SBS may investigate the irregularities regarding illicit transactions from 
borrowers to accounts of bank employees, non  monitoring of high value deposits, 
temporary misappropriation of cash at Namchi Branch, irregularities in 
recruitment of Assistant Managers (refer paragraphs 5.2.1 to 5.2.4) and take 
appropriate action against the concerned employees.
	 SBS may formulate and inforce a robust Fraud Risk Management policy 
including a Code of Ethics and establish a compliance and monitoring 
mechanism;

Chapter V: Fraud Risk Management
61
	 SBS may formulate a Risk-Based Internal Audit policy and establish an Internal 
Audit Wing to provide assurance to its Board of Directors and senior management 
regarding the quality and effectiveness of its internal control, risk management and 
governance framework;
	 SBS may frame Mandatory Leave and Rotation Policy, so as to ensure rotation of 
employees and mandatory leaves especially in critical posts.
  (NARMADHA R.)
Gangtok  Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim
The  01 July 2025  
Countersigned
  (K. SANJAY MURTHY)
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India
The 11 July 2025


APPENDICES

Appendix 1
Statement showing the loan sanctioned to Government Department/SPSUs/ABs
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2)
Sl. 
No.
Account No. Name Type of 
Loan
Principal 
amount 
(in	₹)
Sanction 
date
Outstanding as 
on 31.03.2023 
(in	₹)
NPA Date Purpose
1 xxxx800001 SIDICO Ltd Term Loan 150000000 28.01.2013 144999708 31 Mar 2017
Development infrastructure including 
acquisition and development of land 
around the upcoming airport in Pakyong, 
East Sikkim
2 xxxx800002 SIDICO Ltd Term Loan 350000000 27.07.2013 369947422 31 Mar 2017 For repayment of loan installments3 xxxx800003 SPICL Ltd 170000000 11.10.2013 202587055 31 Mar 2017
4 xxxx800004 State Institute of capacity Building Term Loan 30000000 10.02.2014 1862015 31 Mar 2017 For meeting its committed liabilities
5 xxxx800005 SPICL Term Loan 45000000 31.03.2014 50706271 31 Mar 2017 For repayment of loan installments6 xxxx800006 SPICL 46500000 14.10.2014 49143023 31 Mar 2017
7 xxxx800007 SPICL
Term Loan
47400000 12.01.2015 48641623 31 Mar 2017
For repayment of loan installments8 xxxx800008 SPICL 47500000 30.03.2015 53036272 31 Mar 2017
9 xxxx800011 Secretary RMDD 400000000 11.10.2018 243773764 30 Sept 2020
10 xxxx800010 SPICL
Term Loan
400000000 12.07.2018 421930448 22 Jan 2020
For repayment of loan installments11 xxxx800012 SPCIL 220000000 13.03.2019 242310362 21 Apr 2020
12 xxxx800014 Power Department   166400000 30.03.2019 209530079 22 Jan 2020
13 xxxx800015 Principal CE cum Secretary Roads  Term Loan 552447786 04.10.2019 340265 30 Sept 2020 For repayment of loan installments14 xxxx800016 Buildings & Housing Department 10000000 04.10.2019 367353652 30 Sept 2020
15 xxxx800019 Tourism & Civil Aviation Dept
Term Loan
300000000 25.02.2020 309162333 30 Sept 2020 For repayment of loan installments
16 xxxx800018 SPICL 250000000 12.02.2020 279749573 10 Dec 2021 For repayment of loan installments17 xxxx800020 SPICL 250000000 12.03.2020 251369863 30 Sept 2020
18 xxxx800017 Power Department Term Loan 150000000 19.12.2019 154318554 30 Sept 2020 For repayment of loan installments19 xxxx800022 Secretary, Road 350000000 23.10.2020 365620269 10 Dec 2021
20 xxxx800024 Tourism & Civil aviation Dept Term Loan 300000000 05.03.2021 302367123 10 Dec 2021 For repayment of loan installments21 xxxx800023 Power Department 600000000 05.03.2021 240605781 31 Mar 2022
22 xxxx800021 SPICL  Term Loan 200000000 09.04.2020 200000000 30 Sept 2020 For repayment of loan installments23 xxxx800026 Tourism & Civil aviation Dept 500000000 22.09.2021 500000000 31 Mar 2022
24 xxxx800027 Power Department Term Loan 300000000 26.11.2021 300000000 31 Mar 2022 For repayment of loan installments25 xxxx800029 Power Department 249900000 29.09.2022 249900000 31 Mar 2023
6085147786 5559255455
Source: Management’ s records 

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
64
Appendix 2 
Case Studies: Non-Performing Assets
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.6.3)
Cash Credit
SBS sanctions Cash Credit facilities to individuals, entrepreneurs, government contractors, 
business	firms,	etc. mostly based on the work orders of the government departments. The loans 
are secured by way of mortgage of land and other properties, hypothecation of bills receivables.
Case 
No.
Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
1 2.50 - 2.50 0 3.86 March 2017
•	 SBS had sanctioned (September 2010) ₹ 2.50 crore to Mr. Ugen Dorjee Bhutia  as a clean 
overdraft for “Civil works of Paradise Pvt. Limited Company (Paradise Breweries) at 
Kamling, Rinchenpong, West Sikkim”.  As a collateral security, he had mortgaged land 
bearing Khatyan No 210, plot no 23, 25, 26, 57, 157, 24/604 at Panchgharey block, South 
Sikkim valuing ₹ five crore.
•	 The GoS stated (August 2022) that the Commerce & Industries Department was in process 
of acquiring the land at ₹ 14.49 crore to implement its own projects.  However, while 
initiating the registration process, the Department found that the land was mortgaged with 
SBS. 
•	 The loanee had defrauded the Department by selling the already mortgaged land with SBS to 
the Department and also accepted ₹ 13.00 crore as part compensation from the Department.
•	 However, he had not repaid his outstanding dues to SBS. Thus, he seems to be a wilful 
defaulter. 
SBS stated (January 2024) that the Bank was not aware of proprieties being acquired by the 
Government and money released to him.  As the property document is still under mortgage with 
SBS and transfer of title before settlement of loan is out of question.  The Bank has made it clear 
that the loan needs to be cleared before the document is released.  The reply is not acceptable 
as even after the issue was brought to the notice of the Bank and being defrauded by the loanee 
by selling the already mortgaged land to the Department, the Bank did not take any criminal 
action against the defaulter.
2 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
0.15 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.38 March 2017
•	 SBS had sanctioned (May 2008) ₹ 0.15 crore to Mr. Buddha Singh Tamang as a clean 
overdraft for execution of contractual works.  As a collateral security, he had mortgaged 
his properties valuing ₹ 0.42 crore.  Subsequently, his limit was enhanced over the period 
with final enhancement of CC limit to ₹ three crore being carried out during February 2014 
against additional mortgage of properties and work orders from the department.
•	 The borrower was permitted to withdraw over and above the CC limit several times
•	 The loanee’s own properties mortgaged was valued at ₹ 30/ sq. ft in the year 2009.  While 
requesting for enhancement of CC limit to ₹ three crore, the same property was revalued 
at ₹ 114/sq.ft. in 2014.  However, while requesting for further enhancement of CC Limit 
to ₹ seven crore the same properties was again revalued at ₹ 50/sq. ft.  The valuation of 
properties had seen a sharp rise in 2014 vis-à-vis valuation in 2009.  Thus, the loan section 
must have reconfirmed the valuation report from the Revenue Officer concerned before 
sanctioning the additional loan.  This is corroborated by the fact that the same property was 
again revalued at ₹ 50/ sq. ft in 2019.

Appendices
65
•	 The account had turned into NPA and SBS had given several time extensions for closing 
the loan account.  However, instead of repaying the loan, the loanee requested for further 
enhancement of limit to ₹ three crore. 
•	 In spite of the account being turned into NPA, SBS had considered the request of loanee for 
enhancement of CC limit.  The proposal (May 2013) to take legal action for defaulting in 
repayment of loan amount was set aside.  Rather, the request for enhancement of CC limit to 
₹ three crore was granted (December 2013) to the loanee and again withdrawals were made 
by the loanee from his CC account.
•	 Thus, though the outstanding loan is not being paid up SBS knowingly had further enhanced 
the credit limit and given unfair advantage to the loanee.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the recovery suit has been 
filed for recovery.
3 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
2.00 4.00 4.00 1.20 4.49 April 2020
•	 SBS had sanctioned (March 2015) ₹ two crore to Mr. Binod Kumar Subba as a clean 
overdraft against the mortgage of landed properties valued at ₹ 2.06 crore.  Subsequently, 
the CC limit was enhanced (September 2018) by ₹ one crore and the loanee submitted a 
work order dated 03 February 2018 for “construction of approach road to Hee Bazaar- 
₹ 5.04 crore”.  The department had already released part payment and the balance work 
amounting to ₹ 3.08 crore remained unexecuted/ unpaid.  
•	 The valuer (Building Space and Designs) had valued the mortgaged land as under:
Amount of CC 
limit	(₹	in	crore)
Area of 
land (sq.ft)
Valuation of land 
per	sq.	ft.	(in	₹)
Total value of 
land	(in	₹)
Date of 
valuation
2.00 32,493.14 350 1,13,72,599 12.03.2015
3.00 32,493.14 154 50,03,943 22.02.2019
As can be seen from above table, the value of the land had decreased from ₹ 350/ sq. ft. in 
2015 to ₹ 154/ sq. ft. in 2019 contrary to the characteristics of the land which appreciates 
over a period of time.  It was apparent that the initial valuation was extremely exaggerated 
in order to comply with the terms and conditions for sanction.
•	 Enhancements were also extended (September 2018, March 2019 & March 2021) to the 
loanee on his request even though he had time and again defaulted on his payments. In one 
occasion (March 2019), the CC limit was enhanced in-spite of the fact that CC limit had 
exceeded the previous limit.  This indicates a weak internal control system.
•	  While floating the proposal for enhancement of loan to ₹ three crore, the asset coverage ratio 
was misreported as 1.50 instead of 0.67.  Thus, even though the securities were not sufficient 
to cover the loan amount, the enhancement was made anyhow.  Thus, SBS had not obtain 
adequate security cover.
•	 Although the balance work amounted to ₹ 3.08 crore, second enhancement of ₹ one crore 
was extended to the loanee thereby increasing the total limit to ₹ four crore.  Thus, the 
recoverability of the same was doubtful to that extent at the initial stage itself.
Though the loan committee had agreed for increase in CC limit to ₹ four crore subject to 
mortgaging additional properties of the loanee, no such mortgages was done.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the recovery suit has been 
filed for recovery.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
66
4 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
2.40 00 2.40 0.03 2.67 April 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned (June 2020) ₹ 2.40 crore to Mr. Sukhang Limboo for executing the 
sublet work (25 per cent of original work) “ Road and Junction improvement at Gangtok” 
project under Smart City awarded to Mr . K B Gurung.  The loan was covered by mortgage 
of loanee’s landed property valued at ₹ 0.97 lakh and third-party mortgage of ₹ 2.41 crore. 
•	 Though the work order was issued in March 2019 and the loan was sanctioned in June 2020, 
SBS did not ensure the status of work from the Gangtok Smart City Development Limited.
•	 The loanee was a grade IV contractor and was ineligible to participate in the original bid 
exceeding ₹ one crore and above.  As such the loanee did not have the required capacity to 
execute the works.  Since the repayment was based on the completion of the works, SBS 
should have factored in on this issue before sanctioning the loans.  However, the same was 
not done.
•	 The then MD had suggested that SBS must discourage granting loans on sublet works and 
third-party mortgage.  However, SBS allowed the loanees to avail loans on sublet works and 
against third party mortgages. 
•	 Though SBS had secured the loan through primary security of hypothecation of bills 
receivable, this security is as good as having no security.  Because the Department is obliged 
to release the bills to the primary contractors only and the repayment by the loanee was 
subject to release of funds by the primary contractor to loanee.  Thus, securing the loan with 
hypothecation of loanee’s bills was a futile exercise and timely repayment was not ensured.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the recovery suit has been 
filed for recovery.
5 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
1.50 6.50 6.50 0.21 7.83 April 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned (August 2018) ₹ 1.50 crore to Mr. Som Bahadur Subba for executing the 
balance work (sublet) against the mortgage of properties valued at ₹ 2.29 crore.  Subsequently, 
the SBS had increased the CC limit to ₹ 6.50 crore by sanctioning an additional amount of ₹ 
five crore for executing the other sublet works. 
•	 The loanee was a grade IV contractor and was ineligible to participate in the original bid 
exceeding ₹ one crore and above. As such, the loanee did not have the required capacity to 
execute the works.  Since the repayment was based on the completion of the works, SBS 
must have factored in this issue before sanctioning the loans.  However, the same was not 
done.
•	 Though SBS had secured the loan through primary security of hypothecation of bills 
receivable, this security is as good as having no security.  Because the Department is obliged 
to release the bills to the primary contractors only and the repayment by the loanee was 
subject to release of funds by the primary contractor to loanee.  Thus, securing the loan with 
hypothecation of loanee’s bills was a futile exercise and timely repayment was not ensured.
•	 SBS had not ensured whether the concurrence of the Department was obtained for subletting 
the works.
•	 Considering that the valuer has done the valuation of mortgaged land for ₹ 2.29 crore, the 
then CGM had remarked that the valuation was on a higher side and for all practical purpose, 
the valuation was ₹ 1.20 crore.  Thus, SBS did not obtain adequate security cover.

Appendices
67
•	 The limit of the CC was increased from ₹ 1.50 crore to ₹ 6.50 crore, although the loanee 
had already defaulted in repayment of its dues and the total outstanding at the time of 
enhancement stood at ₹ 1.68 crore.  Thus, the Loan Appraisal Committee did not consider 
the performance of the borrower before enhancing the limit of CC.
SBS stated (January 2024) that the MD as CEO is vested with powers to sanction loan. The 
sanctions are reported to BoD and are subsequently ratified.  The reply is incorrect as the power 
of sanctioning loans was delegated to the MD only in 2019 whereas the loan was sanctioned in 
August 2018 when the power to sanction loans above ₹ 10 lakh was vested with the BoD.
6 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
1.00 1.70 1.70 0.00 1.77 April 2020
•	 Mr. Indra Bahadur Rai had an existing loan of ₹ one crore for construction of hotel which 
was diverted for other uses and the account had turned into NPA.  However, SBS extended 
the loan by ₹ 0.30 crore and agreed to convert the loan as fresh CC for executing various 
works that were sublet to him and adjusted the previous NPA account.  Further enhancement 
of ₹ 0.40 crore was also extended to the loanee on his request even though he once again 
defaulted on his payments and had exceeded his CC limit. 
•	 Though SBS had secured the loan through primary security of hypothecation of bills 
receivable, this security is as good as having no security.  Because the Department is 
obliged to release the bills to the primary contractors only and the repayment by the loanee 
was subject to release of funds by the primary contractor to loanee. Thus, securing the loan 
with hypothecation of loanee’s bills was a futile exercise and timely repayment was not 
ensured.
•	 The CC was sanctioned based on the work orders issued to Co-operative societies and one 
sublet work.  However, SBS had not ensured whether the concurrence of the Department was 
obtained for subletting the works.  Moreover, since the first two works were awarded to the 
co-operative societies, sanction of loans on the strength of those two work orders was highly 
irregular.
•	 Follow-up with the Departments/ Organisations were not done to ensure that the payments 
were not released without first adjusting the same towards loan repayment.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the recovery suit has been 
filed for recovery.
Business Loan
State Bank of Sikkim (SBS) provides loans to individuals, entrepreneurs, and business firms for setting 
up of new business ventures and expansion of existing business. These loans are provided to the public 
based on mortgage of land/buildings/hypothecation of goods.
Case 
No.
Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
7 0.70 - 0.70 0.01 0.79 April 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned ₹ 0.70 crore to Mr Gopal Prasad Timsina  for purchase of excavator 
and tripper (truck) against the hypothecation of assets created out of loan along with the 
collateral securities of properties of borrower valued at ₹ 0.98 crore. 
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 24 lakh, the loanee had repaid amount of ₹ one lakh only as on 
August 2023.
•	  Against the proforma invoice submitted by the Loanee amounting to ₹ 0.80 crore (Bansal 
Earthmover private limited) and ₹ 0.22 crore (Nim DAO Motors), SBS had released ₹ 0.60 
crore and ₹ 0.09 crore to the vendors respectively.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
68
•	 SBS had neither insisted on submission of copies of original invoices/vehicle registration 
documents nor was any physical verification carried out to find out whether the loan amount 
has been utilised for purchasing the above vehicles. 
•	 On the instance of audit, SBS obtained registration certificates and photographs of vehicles 
purchased from the loanee.  However, on verifying the credentials of the owner of the 
vehicle62 in e-parivahan portal, the vehicle was not found registered in loanee’s name.  As 
such, the borrower had defrauded SBS by falsifying the documents.  
•	 On pointing out the same, the Management insisted the loanee to furnish written letter 
(November 22) certifying the utilisation of funds.  Subsequently, the loanee stated that he 
had purchased the excavator only and diverted the remaining funds for other purposes.  
Thus, in absence of the follow up exercise by SBS, the loanee did not purchase the vehicle 
although the money was released directly to vendors. 
•	 The fact that the loanee had furnished wrong details relating to existence of the vehicle 
proves that the loanee has defrauded the bank by producing false documents. 
•	 However, SBS neither initiated criminal lawsuit against the loanee nor any action was taken 
against the vendor.
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the matter is being 
investigated and criminal suit is being proposed. The fact remains that the Bank had not verified 
the end use of the loan fund.  As such, the Bank must fix responsibility/ accountability to the 
erring officials. 
8 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
6.00 - 5.85 0.26 5.96 April 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned (December 2019) a loan of ₹ six crore63 to Mr Dhu Tshering Sherpa and 
Shanti Kr Basnett for setting up of stone crusher unit at Yangang, South Sikkim with a total 
project cost of ₹ eight crore. 
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 2.52 crore, the loanee had repaid amount of ₹ 26 lakh only as on 
August 2023.
•	 The loan was secured by way of mortgage of landed property valuing ₹ 5.09 crore  
(18 November 2019) of the co-borrower and hypothecation of plant and machineries and 
other assets in the unit. 
•	 SBS had obtained land valuing ₹ 5.09 crore against the loan sanction of ₹ six crore. Thus, 
the bank did not secure its loan fully. 
•	 SBS had not insisted on submission of trade license to execute such projects by the loanees.
•	 SBS did not verify the end use of the fund, as out of sanctioned amount, ₹ two crore had only 
been released to the vendor, whereas the remaining balance had been paid directly to loanee.  
Thus, SBS did not verify whether the plant & machinery were purchased or not.  Further, 
SBS had not listed the items that were hypothecated under Plant & Machinery.  Moreover, 
stock audit was never carried out by the bank.
•	 The Co-borrower had stated (Jan 2022) that the stone crusher plant had not been set up as 
proposed.  He further questioned SBS as to how such a huge amount of money was released 
without any spot verification.  Despite receiving such complaint, no action has been taken 
against the primary borrower. 
•	 SBS did not carry out any post sanction inspection/ follow up.  During the physical 
verification (24 Jan 2023) carried out by audit party along with officials of SBS, it was seen 
that the project was yet to be constructed/ started.
62 Only the credentials of truck was verified from the portal since the JCBs are not being registered in  
Sikkim.
63 As on date amount of ₹ 5.68 has been r eleased as on date (₹ 1.50 crore in 28 Jan 2020, ₹ 2.00 crore 
on 23 March 2020 and ₹ 2.18 crore in 19 Oct 2020).

Appendices
69
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that the matter is being 
investigated and criminal suit is being proposed.  The fact remains that the Bank had not verified 
the end use of the loan fund. As such, the Bank must fix responsibility/ accountability to the 
erring officials.
9 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
2.50 5.00 5.00 0 5.28 April 2018
•	 The SBS had sanctioned (28 January 2015) ₹ 2.50 crore to Mr. Padam Bahadur Chettri .  
This was further increased to ₹ five crore with sanction of an additional amount of ₹ 2.50 
crore (April 2016) against the mortgage of landed properties (extension of existing mortgage 
and fresh mortgage) valued at ₹ 5.7864 crore.
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 6.16 crore, the loanee did not repay a single EMI as on August 
2023.
•	 Although initially the proposal was to construct a tourist lodge, there were frequent changes 
in plan from setting up of petrol pump and construction of commercial flat at National 
Highway to the final proposal for construction of four storied building along with one 
banquet hall, children park and swimming pool at the original site.  Thus, SBS without 
verifying the feasibility of the projects agreed to the request of the loanee for change in plans 
multiple times.
•	 The loanee had land valued ₹ 45 lakh mortgaged (January 2015) against the loan of ₹ 2.50 
crore thereby under securing the loan.  Subsequently, the loanee had mortgaged (May 2015) 
additional land (valued at ₹ 2.82 crore) in favour of SBS.  
•	 The loanee had not repaid even a single instalment (August 2023).
•	 Though the loan amount had been released in a phase manner, SBS did not verify the end use 
of loan before release of the subsequent instalment. 
•	 Since the end use of the fund was not verified, a joint physical verification exercise was 
carried out on 7 January 2023 by the audit with the Bank officials.  It was observed that the 
borrower did not set up any of the projects as proposed, as only barren land was found under 
his possession.  As such, releasing the entire loan amount without post sanction inspection/ 
follow up by SBS is highly irregular. 
•	 As the loanee did not repay the loan amount, SBS had filed an FIR on May 2020 against the 
loanee for misuse of loan amount.  However, it did not fix any accountability for such lapse 
against its erring officials.
SBS stated (January 2024) that the matter is under investigation with the ED.  However, the fact 
remains that the Bank had not verified the end use of the loan fund. As such, the Bank must fix 
responsibility/ accountability to the erring officials.
10 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
2.00 - 2.00 0.20 1,82 June 2020
•	 SBS had sanctioned (07 April 2015) ₹ two crore to Mr. Manoj Kumar Rai for setting up of a 
Stone Crusher plant at 13th Mile, Gangtok Nathula Road and subsequently, SBS considering 
the request of loanee (30 November 2015) agreed to change plant location to Karek, South 
Sikkim.
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 2.89 crore, the loanee had repaid ₹ 20.00 lakh only as on August 
2023.
64 Tika Ram Sharma ₹ 45 lakh, Padam Bahadur Chettri ₹ 2.51 crore and Shanti Sharma ₹ 2.82 crore.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
70
•	 SBS, considering the delay in implementation of project decided 8 July 2016) to reschedule 
the loan account with tenure of seven years six months and additional moratorium period of 
21 months. 
•	 The loanee had mortgaged land valuing ₹ 1.50 crore against the loan sanction of ₹ two crore 
thereby not securing the loan for the full amount.
•	 Apart from money receipt of ₹ 1.13 crore for purchase of plant and machineries, no other 
records were available. 
•	 The loanee did not have a valid license for stone crusher plant. 
•	 Since the end use of the fund was not verified, joint physical verification (30 January 2023) 
was carried out by audit with the Bank officials wherein it was noticed that the project did 
not exist.  Thus, the SBS did not verify the license for the plant, progress of the project, and 
in general the end use of the funds.
11 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
2.50 - 2.50 0.04 2.73 April 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned (March 2021) ₹ 2.50 crore to Mr. Bishal Chettri for establishment of 
dairy farm and fodder nursery cum fodder processing plant against the hypothecation of 
livestock, plant and machinery along with mortgage of landed properties registered in the 
name of borrower and third parties having a value of ₹ 0.68 crore and ₹ 1.46 crore thereby 
under securing the loan.
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 1.14 crore, the loanee had repaid ₹ 4.25 lakh only as on August 
2023.
•	 As per the DPR, a total of 80 cows were proposed to be purchased.  However, during the 
joint physical verification carried out by the audit with the Bank officials, only 17 cows and 
nine calves were found on the spot.  Further, the loanee did not set up the project completely.
•	 Even though the fund were released in instalment basis, the Bank did not verify the utilisation 
of previous instalment before releasing the subsequent instalment.  The fund was required to 
be released on an instalment basis subject to proper utilisation of previous releases.  However, 
SBS had released the entire loan amount without post sanction inspection/ follow up. 
SBS while accepting (January 2024) the audit observation stated that FIR has been filed with 
the Police and bank filed recovery suit and decree has been obtained.  The fact remains that the 
Bank had not verified the end use of the loan fund. As such, the Bank must fix responsibility/ 
accountability to the erring officials.
Construction Loan
State	 Bank	 of	 Sikkim	 (bank)	 offers	construction	 loans	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 self-construction	 of	
residential house property or for commercial buildings. These loans are provided to the public 
based on mortgage of land/buildings and potential projected revenue.
Case 
No.
Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
12 40.00 - 40.00 0.74 52.23 Oct 2022
•	 SBS had sanctioned (26 August 2019) a term loan of ₹ 40 crore to M/s Teesta Rangit (p) Ltd 
/M/s Hotel Royal Plaza located at Syari, Gangtok for takeover of existing loan from SBI 
and PNB amounting to ₹ 16.34 crore and ₹ 23.66 crore for expansion and refurbishing of 
hotel. 
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 11.50 crore, the loanee had repaid amount of ₹ 74.00 lakh only as 
on August 2023.

Appendices
71
•	 The loan was secured by mortgage of lease (landed) properties on which the hotel is located 
for a period of 99 years.  Further, during February 2021, SBS has sanctioned an additional 
loan amount of ₹ 50 lakh under Covid Rehabilitation Scheme.
•	 Although the loan sanctioning authority is the Board of Directors, the loan was sanctioned/ 
released by the MD before its approval by the Board.  The same was ratified by Board 
during the meeting held on 18 September 2019.
•	 While issuing the sanction letter the interest rate was depicted as 11 per cent whereas, the 
loan was approved by SBS and ratified by the Board at the rate of 12 per cent interest.  
Further, as per the loan statement interest was charged at the rate of 12 per cent.  However, 
the management revised the interest rate to 11 per cent though the same was approved by 
board at the rate of 12 per cent.  This has resulted in the loss of interest of ₹ 81.00 lakh as 
on date of NPA (30 September 2022).
•	 The loanee had neither serviced the interest portion during the moratorium period nor 
repaid the EMI after expiry of extended moratorium period).  Moreover, EMI for takeover 
loan was not specified.
•	 The financial position of the Company (loanee) was not sound as the company had a total 
accumulated loss of ₹ 37.51 crore.  However, SBS did not recognise the same before 
sanctioning the loan.
•	 The entire loan amount was sanctioned without any post sanction inspection/ follow up by 
SBS.
SBS replied that in order to make the rates competitive with other banks, the loan was actually 
sanctioned at 11 per cent.  However, it was wrongly mapped at 12 per cent in the system, which 
was later rectified.  As such, there is no interest loss.  The reply is not acceptable as the loan 
was put up for approval of the Board at 12 per cent rate of interest only and so approved by the 
Board.  Thus, by arbitrarily reducing the rate, the Bank did not follow the Board’ s directives.  
Further, SBS does not have a system of credit rating of its borrowers.
SBS further replied that the fund had been used for the development of the project and the bank 
has ensured proper utilisation. The reply is not acceptable as no records were available in the 
files produced to audit to justify the proper utilisation of the fund.
13 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
1.50 3.70 3.70 0.07 3.77 -
•	 SBS had sanctioned (October 2017) construction loan of ₹ 1.50 crore to Mr. Chabilall 
Gurung for construction of hotel at Yangang, South Sikkim 
•	 The loan amount was mortgage against the project land and building value at ₹ 1.40 crore and 
another property valued at ₹ 1.38 crore. 
•	 Against the sanctioned of ₹ 1.50 crore, the loanee had utilised ₹ 23 lakh for closing the NPA 
account of ₹ 10 lakh taken during the year 2006. 
•	 This loan had also turned into NPA.  However, SBS had further sanctioned a business loan 
of ₹ 3.70 crore for settlement of NPA account (₹ 1.50 crore).  Thus, SBS did not verify the 
credibility of the loanee, as despite the accounts being NPA65, the bank had agreed to finance 
the borrower multiple times. 
•	 The land valuing ₹ 2.78 crore was mortgaged against the loan sanction of ₹ 1.50 crore.  
However, on the enhancement of loan, the SBS had obtained security amounting to ₹ 3.13 
crore against the total loan sanction of ₹ 3.70 crore.  Thus, the SBS did not obtain adequate 
security cover.
•	 It was observed that the post sanction verification was not done after 2019 in case of 
construction loan and post verification was never carried out after sanction of business loan.
65 Loan released in May 2006 and October 2017.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
72
SBS replied that while financing such projects, the Bank’ s fund when utilised in the project 
enhances its value.  Property if valued now will be more than the loan value.  As such 
loan is adequately covered.  The reply is not acceptable as the security obtained during 
enhancement of loan was inadequate to cover the loan amount.  Further, the contention 
that the value of the securities would increase over time is hypothetical and is against the 
financial interest of SBS. 
SBS further replied that the end use of the fund has been ensured.  The reply is not acceptable as 
no documented follow up exercises carried out by SBS was available on record.
14 Amount 
Sanctioned
(₹	in	crore)
Enhanced 
Amount
(₹	in	crore)
Total 
Amount 
Released
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
paid
(₹	in	crore)
Amount 
outstanding
(₹	in	crore)
Outstanding Since
5.00 10.00 10.00 0.00 12.55 April 2019
•	 SBS had sanctioned (November 2015) ₹ five crore to Mr Sonamla Ethenpa, Namchi  for 
setting up of a hotel, which was later increased to ₹ 10.00 crore by sanctioning ₹ three core 
(July 2017) and ₹ two crore (July 2018). 
•	 Against the EMI due of ₹ 9.98 crore, the loanee did not repay a single EMI as on August 
2023.
•	 The loan was sanctioned against mortgage of land and under construction building valued at 
property valued at ₹ 14.61 crore (land valuation ₹ 2.38 crore along with personal guarantee 
of Mrs. Ongmu Bhutia one of the promoters of company.
•	 Post sanction follow up inspections were not carried out by SBS except for one inspection 
in 2016.  As the fund was required to be released in phased manner, releasing the entire loan 
amount without post sanction inspection/ follow up by SBS was not a prudent practice.  The 
loanee had not paid even a single instalment in eight years. 
•	 SBS did not verify the end use of the loan amount.
•	 Thus, the defaulter had defrauded SBS and diverted huge amounts without a single 
repayment.  However, no concrete action was taken against the defaulter.
SBS replied that the project could not be completed by the promoter and no income generation 
has taken place.  Post disbursement follow-up is regularly done and release of funds was in 
phased manner.
The reply is not acceptable as no documented follow up exercises carried out by the SBS was 
available on record.
Sikkim Youth Startup Scheme: 
The Government of Sikkim had introduced (August 2020) Skilled Youth Startup Schemes (SYSS) with 
a vision to reduce unemployment and create adequate self-employment opportunities.  The eligibility 
criteria is as detailed below
•	 The applicant should possess Certificate of Identification (COI) /Residential Certificate (for 
urban areas) of self/ father;
•	 The applicant should be unemployed possessing minimum educational qualification of Class-V .  
For technical projects/ manufacturing and service sector, the applicants should possess certificate 
from Technical Institute;
•	 Only one member of a family shall be eligible to avail the benefits under the Scheme;
•	 The family income shall not exceed eight lakhs per annum;
•	 In case of Government servant, ‘C’ and ‘D’ employee’s children can only avail this benefit;
•	 The beneficiary should not be a defaulter in SBS/ other banks; and
•	 A person who has already availed subsidy under CMSS/ PMEGP shall not be eligible under the 
scheme.

Appendices
73
Case 
No.
15 to 
17
•	 The bank sanctioned multiple loans under the scheme, including ₹ 14.25 lakh each to Mr . 
Jit Bahadur Limboo (21 December 2021) & Mr. Budhi Raj Limboo (11 January 2022) for 
starting up Homestay at Sribadam, West Sikkim, ₹ 14.25 lakhs to Miss Winona Lepcha (20 
April 2021) for a homestay at Lingthem, Dzongu, North Sikkim, and ₹14.25 lakh to Mr. 
Gom Tshering Lepcha (20 August 2021) for a homestay at Gerethang, West Sikkim.
•	 However, against the EMI dues of ₹ 17.08 lakh, only ₹ 3.30 lakh had been repaid as on 
August 2023.
•	 The bank sanctioned loans without adhering to the prescribed eligibility criteria, proper due 
diligence, and post-sanction monitoring, leading to potential misuse and default. 
•	 Loans were granted to ineligible applicants who either lacked the required educational 
qualifications, exceeded the prescribed income limits, or were already engaged in similar 
businesses, thereby defeating the scheme’s objective.
•	 Mandatory documentation, such as EDP training certificates, was not obtained before loan 
disbursal.
•	 In the case of Mr. Jit Bahadur Limboo & Mr. Budhi Raj Limboo, there were indications of 
possible collusion and fraud, as identical photographs were submitted for fund utilization 
verification.
•	 The bank did not conduct post-sanction physical inspections and follow-ups, resulting in a 
lack of oversight on loan utilization.
•	 The lack of due diligence, weak monitoring mechanisms, and non-adherence to scheme 
guidelines have led to financial mismanagement and potential misuse of funds, ultimately 
increasing the risk of NPAs for the bank.
	 SBS stated (January 2024) that the screening of candidates and projects were done by the 
Commerce and Industries Department and the projects were forwarded to the Bank after 
verification by the concerned department.  Releasing of loan before EDP training was at 
the request of the department.  The reply is not acceptable as considerable fund of the Bank 
has been released to the beneficiaries as loans, recovery of which is the responsibility of 
the Bank. Thus, as per financial prudence, the Bank should have carried out a minimum 
due diligence while sanctioning the loans.  Moreover, the beneficiary has falsified the 
documents to avail the subsidy. Hence, the issue may be investigated to ascertain whether 
the beneficiary is eligible for subsidy or not. Further, the fact remains that the beneficiaries 
were ineligible for the subsidy.  

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
74
Appendix 3
Case studies under OTS
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.6.4)
Case 
No.
Brief Observations
01 •	 This case has been discussed at Annexure 1 case no. 1. 
•	 Although the SBS was fully aware that Mr. Ugen Dorjee Bhutia had received ₹ 13 crore 
from the Department towards advance payment for sale of land which was still mortgaged 
with the SBS, the loan with the total outstanding of ₹ 9.82 crore was processed (1 
March2023) through OTS at ₹ five crore sacrificing ₹ 4.82 crore. Since the defaulter had 
received ₹ 13 crore, he was in a position to repay the loan in full. Hence, the action of the 
SBS to settle the loan under OTS by sacrificing ₹ 4.82 crore was not justified and highly 
irregular.
•	 Moreover, as the Department was already in the process of purchasing the mortgaged land 
and a substantial amount had also been paid to the defaulter, there was no marketability issue 
of the land. However, while processing the loan for OTS, the SBS had categorised it under 
“Very difficult to market.”
The SBS stated (January 2024) that the SBS was not aware of the transaction of mortgaged land 
with the government, and it was only after agreeing to settle the loan, the bank was aware of the 
same.  As far as marketability of the land is concerned, acquisition of land by the government 
is on rare occasion only which does not signify good marketability. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Commerce and Industries Department had already notified 
the Bank (August 2022) regarding the acquisition process with the defaulter before the Bank 
entered into OTS settlement (March 2023).  In this instant case, the land was highly marketable 
as before the loan was proposed for OTS, a substantial amount of ₹ 13 crore had been already 
paid to the defrauder.  However, the bank instead of initiating a criminal action against the 
defrauder had extended undue favour to him by settling the loan at lower amount.
02 •	 The SBS had sanctioned a construction loan to Mr. Sushil Tamang amounting to ₹ 1.50 
crore on 10 October 2015.  Due to non-payment of instalment, the loan was declared NPA 
on 31 March 2017.
•	 On 26 May 2022 and 31 May 2022, the borrower had requested to settle the loan through 
One Time Settlement (OTS) as an investigation was initiated against him by Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) in connection with the loan.
•	 The SBS management had negotiated with the defaulter and arrived at the settlement 
amount of ₹ 200 lakhs and sacrifice amount of ₹ 24.53 lakh.
•	 While computing the running ledger balance, in contravention to its own policy, the SBS 
did not add back the reversal of interest w.e.f. April 2017 to February 2018 amounting to 
₹ 18.65 lakh. 
•	 The SBS has disbursed ₹ 1.45 crore to the borrower out of sanctioned amount ₹ 1.50 crore.  
However, ₹ 5.00 lakh was also paid to the borrower which was directly adjusted towards 
payment of instalment on the borrower’s request.  Thus, the SBS has disbursed ₹ 1.50 crore 
to the borrower.
•	 The outstanding balance of the borrower’s loan account as on 31 May 2022 would work 
out to ₹ 2.82 crore (taking interest up to date).  The defaulter was under investigation by the 
ED for money laundering and as such he had no other option but to settle the loan.  Thus, 
the SBS should have recovered its outstanding dues to the maximum.  However, the bank 
settled for ₹ 2.00 crore against ₹ 2.82 crore.
•	 Thus, the SBS has extended undue benefit of ₹ 82.40 lakh to the borrower through OTS. 
SBS stated (January 2024) that recovery of loan was possible only after the bank had 
filed an FIR. Thus, there is no undue favour.  The reply is not acceptable as the bank 
while considering the repayment of the borrower had inordinately considered ₹ 13 lakh as 
payments made post OTS agreement.  Moreover, since the defaulter was being investigated 
by ED for money laundering, he had no other option but to settle the loan.  However, the 
bank went ahead with OTS instead of recovering the entire dues which has resulted in 
undue favour to the defaulter .

Appendices
75
Case 
No.
Brief Observations
03 •	 SBS had sanctioned (8 December 2008) a construction loan of ₹ 40 lakh to Mr. C.B. Gurung.  
Due to non-payment of dues, the loan account was declared NPA on 31 March 2014.
•	 On 3 June 2022, the borrower had requested to settle the loan through One Time Settlement 
(OTS) as an investigation was initiated against him by Enforcement Directorate (ED) in 
connection with the loan.
•	 The last date of payment in this account was done on 1 June 2010, however, the account was 
marked as NPA only on 31 March 2014. 
•	 The outstanding dues under this account amounted to ₹ 86.79 lakh which was settled at ₹ 71 
lakh and balance amount of ₹ 15.79 lakh was sacrificed.
•	 While arriving at the outstanding balance, SBS did not compound the interest amount 
although the last payment was made in June 2010.  As such, the actual sacrifice amount if 
OTS was done as per the policy would work out to ₹ 30 lakh.
•	 The outstanding balance of the borrower’s loan account as on 31 May 2022 would work out 
to ₹ 1.55 crore (taking interest up to date).  The defaulter was under investigation by the ED 
for money laundering and as such he had no other option but to settle the loan.  Thus, SBS 
should have recovered its outstanding dues to the maximum. However, the SBS settled for 
₹ 71 lakh against ₹ 1.55 crore.  Thus, the SBS has extended undue benefit of ₹ 83.98 lakh to 
the borrower through OTS.
SBS stated (January 2024) that there is no undue favour as for the bank, NP As are recovered 
through its efforts.  The reply is not acceptable as the defaulter was being investigated by ED 
for money laundering and he had no other option but to settle the loan.  However, the bank went 
ahead with OTS instead of recovering the entire dues which has resulted in undue favour to the 
defaulter.
04 •	 The SBS had sanctioned (22 July 2009) a Cash Credit amounting ₹ three crore to Mr. 
Karma T Namgyal.  However, the same is not linked with any saving/current account in 
SBS. 
•	 The loan was declared NPA on 31.03.2016 (w.e.f. 31 March 2015) and the outstanding 
balance of ₹ 2.95 crore was shown as NPA in the books of account.  However, it was noticed 
that the last date of payment was April 2015.  As such, the account would have become NPA 
only on 31 July 2015 with an outstanding balance of ₹ 3.07 crore.
•	 The customer had approached SBS on 20 March 2018 and 29 Dec 2019 to settle his loan 
account through One Time Settlement (OTS) and assured to settle the account on receipt of 
pending bill of ₹ 2.94 crore from the department. 
•	 The North Eastern Development Financial Corporation Ltd and Forest Department had 
requested SBS for credit worthiness report of Mr. Karma T Namgyal on March 2018 and 
December 2018 respectively. However, SBS had prepared (March 2018 & December 
2018) the credit worthiness report depicting the account as standard account although it 
had already become an NPA (March 2016). This wrong reporting of credit worthiness is 
misleading.  This kind of misreporting of the borrower’s credit worthiness could have a 
negative impact on the goodwill of the SBS. 
•	 Although the borrower stated to have had a receivable of ₹ 2.94 crore from the department, 
the loan was settled at a lower value i.e., ₹ 2.80 crore.  As such, against the total outstanding 
of ₹ 422 lakh including interest as on 31 March 2018, the SBS had sacrificed ₹ 1.42 crore to 
the borrower through OTS.
The SBS stated (January 2024) that the credit worthiness reporting shall be looked into. The 
account stands close as on date.  However, the fact remains that the Bank had misreported the 
defaulter as standard account.

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
76
Case 
No.
Brief Observations
05 •	 The SBS had sanctioned (21.04.2005) a Cash Credit of ₹ two crore to Mr. Kishan Kumar 
Agarwal. 
•	 The repayment of loan was irregular, however, the account was never declared as NPA. No 
payment was made after August 2012 and the limit had already exceeded several times.   
Further, the SBS stopped charging interest from 30 November 2014 thereby leaving an 
outstanding balance of ₹ 2.17 crore.
•	 On the request of the defaulter, the SBS had settled the loan under OTS at a compromise 
settlement of ₹ 72 lakh and sacrificing ₹ 2.17 crore including principal write off of ₹ 30 lakh.
•	 The SBS had ascertained that the borrower was doing well in his other businesses. As such, 
the borrower was a wilful defaulter.
•	 While processing the loan under OTS, the property has been categorised under ‘not easily 
marketable’.  However, no analysis was made by the SBS to verify the marketability of the 
properties. 
	 The SBS stated (January 2024) that recovery of NP A stands in advantage to the bank.  As on 
date, the account stands closed.  The reply is not acceptable as the Bank did not carry out 
minimum due diligence and also sacrificed principal beyond permissible limit which is in 
contrary to its own scheme guidelines. 
Source: Management’ s records 

Appendices
77
Appendix 4
Statement	showing	suspected	transaction	in	the	account	of	bank	officials
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.1)
Name of the 
Official
Date of credit Mode of transaction Amount credited 
into account of 
the	bank	officials
Details of Transferee Disbursement of loan/ installment to 
loanee during the same period
SR Karki 07 July  2018 By Transfer SB Cheque No 
628336
15,000.00 Gawari Maya Chettri loan account ₹ 15 lakh released on 7 July 2018
 12 November 2020 Cheque No 282383 550,000.00  Sudesh Subba loan account ₹ 35 lakh released on 12 November 2020
 23 May 2018 by amount transferred from 
SB Cheque No 133353
200,000.00 Mani Kumar Sherpa loan account ₹ seven lakh disbursed on 23 May 2018
Krishna Kala 
Pradhan
23 March 2021 By Transfer from Khem Raj 
Nepal
5,000.00 Khem Raj Nepal loan account ₹ five lakh EPL disbursed on 23 May 
2021
 20 January 2022 By amount transferred from 
Tarachand Lagun
300,000.00 Tarachand Lagun CC account 20 January 2022, ₹ three lakh transferred 
from CC account and ₹ 26 lakh withdrawn 
on same day 
 27 January 2022 By transfer Om Kumari Chettri 225,000.00 Om Kumari Chettri loan account ₹ 2.25 lakh transferred on same day
 04 April 2022 By Cheque No 584412 dated 
04 April 2022
150,000.00 Yam Kumar Pradhan loan account ₹ 1.50 lakh transferred on same day
 06 April 2022 By loan amount. transferred 
vide telephonic conversation 
with Yam Kumar Pradhan
300,000.00 Yam Kumar Pradhan loan account ₹ three lakh transferred on same day
 11 August 2022 By SB Cheque No 952581 
dated 11.08.2022
15,000.00 Kidiara Bhutia loan account ₹ two lakh transferred on same day
 17 September 2022 By amount transferred from 
Manoj Kr Thapa
12,000.00 loan account ₹ two lakh released on same day
 28 September 2022 By amount. transferred 200,000.00 Ashok Pradhan loan account ₹ 10 lakh released on same day
 19 January 2023 By amount transfer SB ac 
2811100140224284
200,000.00 Manoj Kr rai loan account ₹ 10 lakh released on same day
 21 January 2023 By Cash Manoj Kr Rai 200,000.00 Manoj Kr rai loan account ₹ 4.55 lakh released on same day
 04 February 2023 By amount transferred 30,000.00 Pema Doma Bhutia loan ₹ 5.50 lakh released on same day
KT Choppel Bhutia 12 April 2022 By amount transferred from 
Mingma Tshering
5,000.00 loan account ₹ two lakh released on same day
Reena Basnett Rai 24 August 2020 By amount of transferred 
from SB Ac
20,000.00 Transferred from Sonam Sherpa 
Business Loan
₹ 18 lakh was released on same day

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
78
Name of the 
Official
Date of credit Mode of transaction Amount credited 
into account of 
the	bank	officials
Details of Transferee Disbursement of loan/ installment to 
loanee during the same period
 08 October 2020 By amount transferred from 
SB Cheque No. 450380 
dt.08.10.20.
100,000.00 Dupden Bhutia Construction loan ₹ three lakh disbursed on same day
 31 August 2021 By Transfer Loan Sanction 1,000,000 Noel Sharma Loan account ₹ 10 Lakh released on same day
 08 September 2021 By amount transferred of 
loan disbursed
150,000 Abikeshar Dahal & Dhan Bdr 
Dahal Loan account
₹ 18 lakh was released on same day 
 08 November 2021 By SBS Cheque No.744285 10000 Jangu Tamang ₹ 16 lakh was released on same day 
Renuka Rai 13 September 2022 By amount transferred. from 
2811100140218248
100,000.00 Shyam Kr Rai loan account ₹ three lakh pension loan was disbursed 
on same day
Urmila rai 17 March 2022 By amount transferred from 
Anita Rai
137,000 Anita Rai Start up loan Directly transferred from loan account, 
as the whole installment released was 
transferred to staff account 21 April 2022 By amount transferred from 
2811100140224468
145,000 Anita Rai Start up loan
KB Chamling 16 October 2017 By Cheque No. 939884 500000 Garjamang Gurung Loan account Transferred from saving ₹ 40 lakh 
withdrawn from CC account on same day
Susan Sharma 19 September 2018 By Transfer from P T Sherpa 82,000.00  Passang Tempa Sherpa EPL of ₹ six lakh 
released on same day
 11 January 2019 By Transfer from N Gurung 63,000.00  EPL of ₹ 9.20 lakh on same day N 
Gurung
 27 February 2019 By Transfer from R. Balmaki 110,000.00  EPL of ₹ 9.80 lakh released on 27 
February 2019
 28 February 2019 By Transfer from D C Bhutia 400,000.00  EPL of ₹ 10 lakh released on same day 
D C Bhutia
 16 April 2019 By Transfer from M K 
Gurung and K T Bhutia 
245,000.00  ₹ 10 lakh released on same day to Account 
no xxxx500593 and ₹ 1.20 lakh released 
on same day to account no xxxx500592 
 17 April 2019 By Transfer Cheque No. 
735813
592,500.00  ₹ six lakh EPL released on same day 
Tulshi Chettri
 26 April 2019 By Transfer from Bharati 
Gurung
196,000.00  ₹ 3.50 lakh EPL loan released on same 
day Bharati Gurung
 29 July 2019 By Kearsing Poudyal 7,000.00  EPL ₹ nine lakh released on same day 
Kearsing Poudyul
 18 November 2019 By transfer Tempo Tshering 
Bhutia
505,000.00  ₹ 6.50 lakh EPL loan released on same 
day Tempo Tshering Bhutia

Appendices
79
Name of the 
Official
Date of credit Mode of transaction Amount credited 
into account of 
the	bank	officials
Details of Transferee Disbursement of loan/ installment to 
loanee during the same period
 10 December 2019 By Transfer Yadram Balmiki 483,000.00  ₹ 9.50 lakh released on same day EPL 
loan Yadram Balmiki
 11 December 2020 By Transfer Cheque No. 
451702
650,000.00  Karma Tenzing Bhutia EPL ₹ 10 lakh 
released on same day
 23 February 2021 By G Tamang Cheque No. 
455301
546,000.00  EPL of ₹ 10 lakh released on same day 
Gagan Tamang
 24 August 2021 By Transfer Cheque No. 
456613
195,000.00  Topgay Bhutia ₹ 9.50 lakh EPL released 
on same day
 17 January 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
457832 R Gurung
220,000.00  Roshan Gurung EPL of ₹ 2.50 lakh 
released on same day
 20 January 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
298105
220,000.00  Pumpha Rai EPL of ₹ five lakh transferred 
on same day
 25 January 2022 By Transfer from Thendup 
Bhutia
140,000.00  EPL ₹ three lakh released on same day
 01 February 2022 By Transfer from 202635 60,000.00  EPL ₹ four lakh released on same day 
Rinzing Sherpa
 2 March 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
337142
215,000.00  EPL ₹ 10 lakh released on same day 
Leela Maya Gurung
 5 April 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
945201
175,000.00  EPL ₹ nine lakh released on same day 
Nischal Gurung
 7 April 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
945273
100,000.00  EPL ₹ nine lakh released on same day 
Raj Hang Thebey
 1 November 2022 By Transfer from 203667 50,000.00  ₹ one lakh EPL disbursed on same day 
Binod Tamang
 1 November 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
196809
200,000.00  ₹ six lakh EPL disbursed on same day 
Birendra Subba
 14 November 2022 By Transfer Cheque No. 
964344
295,000.00  ₹ three lakh Pension loan disbursed on 
same day Bhaichung Lepcha
 14 November 2022 By Transfer amount from 
Cheque No. 203678
220,000.00  ₹ nine lakh EPL disbursed on same day 
Passang Tempa Sherpa
 6 December 2022 By Mahendra Kumar Limboo 
Cheque No. 107533
55,000.00  ₹ 20 lakh under Business loan disbursed 
on same day Mahendra Kumar Limboo
 17 February 2023 By Palman Chettri 30,000.00  EPL ₹ three lakh released on same day 
Pahal Man Chettri

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
80
Name of the 
Official
Date of credit Mode of transaction Amount credited 
into account of 
the	bank	officials
Details of Transferee Disbursement of loan/ installment to 
loanee during the same period
 14 March 2023 By Transfer Cheque No. 
945300
200,000.00  EPL ₹ two lakh released on same day 
Mamta Gurung
 21 March 2023 By Cheque No. 317210 55,000.00  EPL ₹ five lakh released on same day 
Kamal Chettri
Pawan Tamang 18 March 2020 By Transfer Cheque No. 
575254
200,000.00  EPL ₹ nine lakh released on same day 
Tashi Dadul Bhutia
 24 December 2020 By Transfer Cheque No. 
563456
200,000.00  EPL ₹ 4.5 lakh released on same day 
Samir Kumar Tamang
 4 February 2021 By Transfer Cheque No. 
488885
100,000.00  EPL ₹ 10 lakh released on same day Som 
Bahadur Limboo
 20 September 2018 By Transfer 7,500.00  Transferred from three EPL account 
disbursed on same day
 7 December 2018 By Transfer from Som 
Bahadur Limbu
377,000.00  ₹ eight Lakh EPL disbursed on same day
 15 February 2019 By Transfer 190,000.00  ₹ 6.5 Lakh EPL disbursed on same day
Tshering Thendup 
Bhutia
09 January 2018 By Transfer 200,000.00  Wangyal N Bhutia EPL ₹ four lakh 
released on same day
Suresh Rai 22 November 2019 By Transfer 200,000.00  Transfer from Suva Lachhi Rai SBS home 
loan ₹ two lakh released on same day
Jigme Wangchuk 
Bhutia
16 August 2021 By transferred from account 
no. xxxx203835
450,000.00  Shepo Bhutia Demand loan sanctioned 
on 16 August 2021
Sangay C Bhutia
 
 
5 January 2019 Received on EPL No. 
35500367
10,000.00  EPL ₹ 10 lakh disbursed on same day 
Pranita Chettri
11 March 2019 By transfer 10,000.00  EPL ₹ 10 lakh disbursed on same day 
Subash Bagdas
19 March 2019 By Cheque No. 436376 dated 
19 March 2019
100,000.00  ₹ two lakh EPL disbursed on same day 
Mahesh Rai
Total  12,923,000.00  
Source: Management’ s records

Appendices
81
Appendix 5
Statement showing the details of candidates selected for the post of Assistant Manager
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4)
Sl. No Roll No Name of Candidates
1 20210168 Sujan Rai
2 20210325 Anjana Chettri
3 20210566 Pravesh Tamang
4 20210669 Rinzing Ongmu Bhutia
5 20210865 Khagen Chettri
6 20210956 Nitesh Dahal
7 20211061 Pema Dorjee Lepcha
8 20211149 Lochan Gajmer
9 20211193 Sumiran Pradhan
10 20211397 Manu Gautam
11 20211406 Yada Bhutia
12 20211474 Sagar Sharma
13 20211616 Sarju Sunar
14 20211665 Abhisekh Rai
15 20211716 Ashish Gurung
16 20211776 Jeten Subba
17 20211788 Prasan Gurung
18 20211879 Dibya Rekha Gurung
19 20212316 Chewang Tamang
20 20212478 Yankey Tamang
21 20213073 Ugen Gyamtso Bhutia
22 20213261 Dechen Gurung
23 20213261 Kesang Doma Sherpa
24 20213318 Lukchyo Lepcha
25 20213392 Sudharshan Chettri
26 20213465 Vijay Sharma
Source: Management’ s records

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
82
Appendix 6
Statement showing the details of evaluation sheet re-assessed by the Audit for all the 
candidates called for interview for the post of Assistant Manager
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.4)
Sl. 
No
Roll No Name of the Candidate Written 
Exam mark
Interview 
mark
Total Remarks
1 20211474 Sagar Sharma 136 Not furnished 136 Selected
2 20210879 Ugen Tenzing Bhutia 128 Not furnished 128 Not Selected
3 20213261 Kesang Doma Sherpa 125 Not furnished 125 Selected
4 20213073 Ugen Gyamtso Bhutia 125 Not furnished 125 Selected
5 20211665 Abhisekh Rai 124 Not furnished 124 Selected
6 20211716 Ashish Gurung 122 Not furnished 122 Selected
7 20210956 Nitesh Dahal 120 Not furnished 120 Selected
8 20212316 Chewang Tamang 117 Not furnished 117 Selected
9 20213261 Dechen Gurung 116 Not furnished 116 Selected
10 20210325 Anjana Chettri 116 Not furnished 116 Selected
11 20210669 Rinzing Ongmu Bhutia 115 Not furnished 115 Selected
12 20213392 Sudharshan Chettri 115 Not furnished 115 Selected
13 20211776 Jeten Subba 115 Not furnished 115 Selected
14 20213465 Vijay Sharma 114 Not furnished 114 Selected
15 20210566 Pravesh Tamang 114 Not furnished 114 Selected
16 20211788 Prasan Gurung 112 Not furnished 112 Selected
17 20211879 Dibya Rekha Gurung 112 Not furnished 112 Selected
18 20211193 Sumiran Pradhan 112 Not furnished 112 Selected
19 20213318 Lukchyo Lepcha 106 Not furnished 106 Selected
20 20210307 Sandhya Pradhan 106 Not furnished 106 Not Selected
21 20210513 Landup Dorjee Sherpa 104 Not furnished 104 Not Selected
22 20212738 Praney Rai 102 Not furnished 102 Not Selected
23 20211027 Tashi Rabden Bhutia 100 Not furnished 100 Not Selected
24 20210204 Sanjhna Shree Pradhan 100 Not furnished 100 Not Selected
25 20210732 Shreya Gautam 100 Not furnished 100 Not Selected
26 20211038 Tashi Tshering Lepcha 99 Not furnished 99 Not Selected
27 20210952 Kesang Doma Bhutia 99 Not furnished 99 Not Selected
28 20212028 Suraj Basnett 98 Not furnished 98 Not Selected
29 20210319 Laden Bhutia 98 Not furnished 98 Not Selected
30 20212436 Nima Gyalpo Thapa 98 Not furnished 98 Not Selected
31 20212561 Sanjiv Tamang 95 Not furnished 95 Not Selected
32 20213419 Paden Bhutia 95 Not furnished 95 Not Selected
33 20212286 Abinnandan Lamsal Sharma 93 Not furnished 93 Not Selected
34 20210544 Rigzen Wangchuk Bhutia 93 Not furnished 93 Not Selected
35 20211968 Krishan Kumar Manger 92 Not furnished 92 Not Selected
36 20211406 Yada Bhutia 92 Not furnished 92 Selected
37 20211915 Cheten Gurung 91 Not furnished 91 Not Selected
38 20213208 Abinash Ghimirey 91 Not furnished 91 Not Selected
39 20212079 Suresh Sharma 89 Not furnished 91 Not Selected
40 20212075 Pratiksha Sharma 93 Not furnished 91 Not Selected
41 20212940 Pema Lhamu Bhutia 90 Not furnished 90 Not Selected
42 20210768 Diken Sharma 89 Not furnished 89 Not Selected
43 20211235 Mangil Rai 88 Not furnished 88 Not Selected
44 20212098 Nischal Sharma 88 Not furnished 88 Not Selected
45 20210053 Ram Singh Rai 87 Not furnished 87 Not Selected
46 20212364 Kalzang C Athupo Bhutia 87 Not furnished 87 Not Selected
47 20210841 Thinlay Dorjee Bhutia 87 Not furnished 87 Not Selected
48 20211426 Rinchen Lama 87 Not furnished 87 Not Selected
49 20210374 Rajiv Rai 85 Not furnished 85 Not Selected

Appendices
83
Sl. 
No
Roll No Name of the Candidate Written 
Exam mark
Interview 
mark
Total Remarks
50 20211149 Lochan Gajmer 85 Not furnished 85 Selected
51 20212314 Nikhil Rai 84 Not furnished 84 Not Selected
52 20211083 Nihal Rai 83 Not furnished 83 Not Selected
53 20212398 Srijana Tamang 82 Not furnished 82 Not Selected
54 20211403 Monika Rai 81 Not furnished 81 Not Selected
55 20213482 Mooee Subba 78 Not furnished 78 Not Selected
56 20212478 Yankey Tamang 74 Not furnished 74 Selected
57 20211616 Sarju Sunar 74 Not furnished 74 Selected
58 20211188 Phurmit Lepcha 73 Not furnished 73 Not Selected
59 20211618 Satyam Suji 73 Not furnished 73 Not Selected
60 20213434 William Songrowla 68 Not furnished 68 Not Selected
61 20212327 Santosh Ghimeray 68 Not furnished 68 Not Selected
62 20211194 Pancha Bahadur Rasaily 64 Not furnished 64 Not Selected
63 20213015 Anugra Rasaily 62 Not furnished 62 Not Selected
64 20211358 Bikash Biswakarma 61 Not furnished 61 Not Selected
65 20211061 Pema Dorjee Lepcha 42 Not furnished 42 Selected
66 20210673 Bilano Tamang 36 Not furnished 39 Not Selected
67 20210865 Khagen Chettri 35 Not furnished 35 Selected
68 20210168 Sujan Rai 28 Not furnished 28 Selected
69 20211397 Manu Gautam 26 Not furnished 26 Selected
Source: Management’ s records

GLOSSARY

GLOSSARY
Abbreviations Full Forms
A&E Accounts & Entitlement
AB Autonomous Body
AEPS Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
AGM Annual General Meeting
AGM (IT) Assistant General Manager (Information Technology)
AML Anti-Money Laundering
AMs Assistant Managers
ASA Authentication Service Agency
ATM Automatic Teller Machine
AUA Authentication User Agencies
BCBS Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BG Bank Guarantee
BL Bhutia/Lepcha
BoD Board of Directors
BPL Below Poverty Line
BR Bank Receipts
BR Act Banking Regulation Act
C& AG Comptroller and Auditor General
CAR Capital Adequacy Ratio
CBS Core Banking Solution 
CC Cash Credit
CCBS Cooperative Core Banking Solutions
CD Ratio Credit Deposit Ratio
CFO Chief Financial Officer
CFT Countering Financing of Terrorism
CGM Chief General Manager
CIBIL Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited
CIDs Customer Identification Numbers
CL Central List
CMSS Chief Minister’s Startup Scheme
COI Certificate of Identification
CP Check Post
CPAO Chief Pay and Accounts Officer
CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises
CRO Chief Risk Officer
CTO Chief Technical Officer
CVO Chief Vigilance Officer
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer
DICGC Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation of India
DOPART Department of Personnel Administrative Reforms, Training and Public Grievances
DPR Detailed Project Report
DRATs Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunals
DRTs Debts Recovery Tribunals

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank of Sikkim
86
Abbreviations Full Forms
EAs External Auditors
ED Enforcement Directorate
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme
EFT Electronic Fund Transfers
EMI Equated Monthly Instalment 
EPL Employee Personal Loan
FD Fixed Deposit
FIR First Information Report
GNPA Gross Non-Performing Assets
GoS Government of Sikkim
GRACE General Rule and Code of Ethics
GST Goods & Service Tax
HEP Hydro Electric Project
HO Head Office
HR Human Resource
IDs Identities
IRAC Income Recognition and Asset Classification
Jr. AA Junior Accounts Assistant
KYC Know Your Customer
LAC Loan Appraisal Committee
LTI Left Thumb Impression
MD Managing Director
MF Mutual Fund
MH Major Head
MIS Management Information System
NEDs Non-Executive Directors 
NPA Non-Performing Assets
OBC Other Backward Class
OD Overdrafts
OMR Optical Marks Recognition
OTS One Time Settlement
PA Performance Audit
PAN Permanent Account Number
PCM Preventive Check Measures
PCR Provisioning Coverage Ratio
PFC Power Finance Corporation
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme
PMLA Prevention of Money-Laundering Act
PNB Punjab Nationalised Bank
PSBs Public Sector Banks
PSUs Public Sector Undertakings
PT Primitive Tribe
RBI Reserve Bank of India
RC Registration Certificate
REC Rural Electrification Corporation

87
Glossary
Abbreviations Full Forms
REs Regulated Entities
RTI Right Thumb Impression
RWA Risk-Weighted Assets
SARFAESI Act Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securi-
ties Interest Act
SBI State Bank of India
SBS State Bank of Sikkim
SC Scheduled Caste
SCBs Scheduled Commercial Banks
SEBI Security and Exchange Board of India
SIDICO Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation
SL State List
SMS Short Message Service
SNT Sikkim Nationalised Transport
SOP Standard Operation Procedure
SPAE Sport Persons and Artisans of Excellence
SPD Sikkim Public Debt Recovery 
SPICL Sikkim Power Investment Corporation Limited
Sr. AA Senior Accounts Assistant
Sr. DAG Senior Deputy Accountant General 
ST Scheduled Tribe
SYSS Skilled Youth Startup Schemes
TDR Temporary Deposit Receipt
TDS Tax Deducted at Source
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India
UR Unreserved
USB Universal Serial Bus
VPN Virtual Private Network

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in
lR;eso t;rs
State Finances Audit Report 
of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March 2023
Government of Sikkim
Report No. 1 of 2024
2024
https://cag.gov.in/ag/sikkim/en
Report No. 1 of 2024 – Government of Sikkim
© COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Government of Sikkim — Report No. 2 of 2025  
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit on Functioning of State Bank 
of Sikkim for the year ended March 2023
GOVERNMENT OF SIKKIM
Report No. 2 of 2025
(State 
Finance
s Audit 
Report)
https:https://cag.gov.in/ag/sikkim/en
