 
  
Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India 
on 
Disaster Management  
in Karnataka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No. 08 of 2025 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 

 

 
i 
Table of Contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii 
Chapter I Disaster management and Audit framework  
1.1 Disaster Management 1 
1.2 Disaster Risk Reduction: Strategies and 
Framework 
2 
 1.3 Disaster profile of the State 2 
1.4 Organisation set up 4 
1.5 Why did we select this subject?  5 
1.6 Audit objectives 5 
1.7 Audit criteria 5 
1.8 Scope and Methodology of Audit 5 
1.9 Acknowledgement 7 
1.10 Structure of the report 7 
Chapter II Institutional framework and Capacity 
building 
 
2.1 Institutional arrangements and Disaster 
Management Plans in the State 
9 
2.2 Capacity Building 20 
2.3 Incident Response System 28 
Chapter III Financial resources and Utilisation  
3.1 Finance management 29 
Chapter IV Drought  
4.1 Introduction 41 
4.2 Drought Profile of the State 41 
4.3 Drought Management 44 
4.4 Preparedness against Drought 47 
Chapter V Flood and rain hazard  
5.1 Karnataka State Flood Profile 57 
5.2 Flood Risk Management 59 
5.3 Preparedness towards Flood Risk Reduction 60 

 
ii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
5.4 Mitigation Measures against Flood Hazard 66 
5.5 Relief towards Flood/Rain Damage 71 
5.6 Rehabilitation 77 
5.7 Reconstruction of Infrastructure Damaged by 
Flood Hazard 
78 
Chapter VI Landslides  
6.1 Karnataka State Landslide Hazard Profile 81 
6.2 Landslide Impacts 83 
6.3 Preparedness towards Landslides 84 
6.4 Mitigation Measures 86 
6.5 Landslides in Kodagu – A Case Study  88 
6.6 Relief and Rehabilitation/Reconstruction 96 
Chapter VII Other disasters affecting the State  
7.1 Cyclone 99 
7.2 Lightning 102 
 
  

 
iii 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Details Page 
Number 
2.1 Deficiencies in achieving the objectives of SDMP 109 
3.1 Discrepancies in accounts between Revenue 
Department and Accountant General (A and E)  
grants 
112 
3.2 Instances of non/improper maintenance of cash 
books 
113 
3.3 Statement showing the taluk wise number of bank 
accounts operated by Tahsildars in test -checked 
districts 
114 
3.4 Statement showing the discrepancy in release of 
funds between books of accounts of the district and 
taluks for the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 
115 
3.5 Illustrative instances of execution of works in 
violation of the guidelines and  monetary limits 
under SDRF grants 
116 
4.1 Data on taluks affected by Drought during 2001 -
2022 
118 
5.1 Estimated loss of infrastructure and crops in the 
State districts due to flood between the years 2018-
2022 
119 
5.2 Discrepancies in house damages 120 
5.3 Illustrative cases of irregular payment of 
compensation towards crop loss under Parihara 
portal 
126 
6.1 District-wise landslide susceptibility maps 128 
7.1 Nowcast lightning warnings issued by IMD 129 
 Abbreviations 130 

 
v 
Preface 
 
❖ This Report for the year ended March 2023 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Karnataka under Article 151 (2) of the 
Constitution of India. 
❖ This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of “Performance Audit on Disaster Management in Karnataka” 
covering the financial period 2017-23. 
❖ The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice 
during test audit for the period 2017 -23 but could not be reported in the 
previous Audit Reports; matters relating to the period after 2017-23 have 
also been included, wherever necessary. 
❖ The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
❖ Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Revenue 
Department (Disaster Management) and other stakeholding departments 
at each stage of this Audit process. 
  

 
vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Why did CAG do this Audit? 
The State of Karnataka, due to its unique geo -climatic and socio -economic 
conditions, is vulnerable to  various natural disasters and has been confronting 
frequent droughts, floods, landslides, etc.  Disaster risks in the State are further 
compounded by changes in demography, unplanned urbanization and development 
within high-risk zones, environmental degradation, climate change and geological 
hazards. These factors contribute to a situation where disasters seriously threaten 
the State’s economy, its population and sustainable development. 
The increase in natural disasters over the past decade and the extent of damage 
caused to both public infrastructure and private properties  was creating a 
substantial financial burden on the State Exchequer , which has necessitated 
understanding the reasons for such increase and the steps taken to forecast, prevent, 
mitigate and reduce the impact of the disasters. Disaster Management also calls for 
effective coordination between the different departments in the State. It is against 
this backdrop that the Performance Audit (PA) on Disaster Management has been 
carried out to assess the readiness of the State in its transformation from a 
response/relief-based approach to reducing disaster risk. 
Though the PA was conducted covering the period from 2017 -18 to 2022 -23, it 
attempted to even analyse prior disastrous incidences vis-à-vis endeavours of the 
State Government not only in managing the  calamity but also measures taken 
towards disaster risk reduction.   The PA involved test-check of records of offices 
of the Principal Secretary, Revenue Department (Disaster Management) at the apex 
level and selected nine offices of Deputy Commissioners at district level  besides 
Karnataka State Natural Disaster Management Centre  (KSNDMC), Bengaluru.   
Belagavi, Chikkaballapura, Dakshina Kannada, Davanagere, Haveri, Kalaburagi, 
Kodagu, Ramanagara and Shivamogga districts were selected for audit as all of 
them had been subjected to floods and drought during the past decade.  Moreover, 
the districts of Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and Shivamogga had also encountered 
landslides while Dakshina Kannada often faced cyclones. 
The State witnessed major disasters during the years 2018 to 2023 with floods 
occurring every year from 2018 to 2022 , which caused damage to crops, 
infrastructure, losses to human lives and cattle. In 2023, all the 31 districts were 
declared drought affected causing an estimated crop loss of ₹ 65,594 crore.   
 
Major Audit Findings 
 
Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA) was constituted in the 
year 2008.   However, the State Government published the State Disaster 
Management Policy only during the year 2020 i.e., 12 years after constitution of 
KSDMA. KSDMA constituted the Advisory Committee consisting of experts in 
the field of disaster management , in December 2019.  The State Disaster 
Management Plan for each year was being approved during/after September of the 
year to which the SDMP pertained. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
viii 
Sixteen departments (dealing with functions vulnerable to disasters and as decided 
by SEC) prepared their DMPs only during 2020-21 but had not reviewed and 
updated them. None of the hospitals (except a few private hospitals under 
Bengaluru Urban district) and educational institutions in the State as well as test -
checked districts had prepared the required disaster management plan.  The State 
Emergency Operation Centre (SEOC) was under -equipped in terms of human 
resources and infrastructure, which affected its functioning. As regards the forecast 
mechanism for different disasters, Audit noticed that the data collection, 
forecasting and dissemination mechanism in place in the State was flawed with 
defunct/faulty equipment, deficient data, improper contract man agement, non -
creation of disaster models, non-installation of sensors, etc. The Disaster Response 
Force units had huge vacancies (mainly in the cadres of police and fire service 
personnel) ranging from 67 to 96 per cent of the sanctioned strength whereby the 
units faced difficulties in managing shift -wise duties and rescue operations. As 
regards the National Disaster Management Information System (NDMIS) , a 
comprehensive online application, developed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the 
database was not being updated on a regular basis either at the State level or district 
level, failing which information regarding damages/losses on account of disasters 
could not be accurately captured. 
Funds released (as per  orders issued from the State level) were not ‘calami ty 
specific/component specific’, making it difficult to monitor the actual utilisation of 
NDRF/SDRF grants. Multiple bank accounts were opened and operated at Taluks 
without the approval of the Government/competent authority , which violated the 
instructions (January 2017) of the Government  itself. The Fire and Emergency 
Department had utilised ₹23.68 crore and ₹7.69 crore (released towards the 
components of search and rescue, capacity building and training) remained un -
utilised and was lying in the bank account as at the end of March 2023.  There was 
misappropriation of funds of ₹18.59 lakh during 2017 -18, at Chintamani taluk of 
Chikkaballapura district. Further, ₹1.81 crore was paid by taluks of Haveri district 
out of SDRF fund, for reasons not related to natural calamities/disasters.  
The State Government was yet to  bring out region -specific guidelines for 
management of drought. KSNDMC installed Telemetric Rain Gauges (TRGs) and 
TWSs in a phased manner (2009 -2015), however  as of December 2023, the 
percentage of defective instruments was 43  per cent and 52 per cent respectively, 
with the reason attributable being non-revision of the AMC since March 2022. The 
State Government/KSDMA/SEC had not formulated the Crisis Management Plan 
up to 2022-23. The Crop Weather Watch Group (CWWG) set up in the State to 
monitor the drought situation in the State, did not meet as envisaged during the 
years 2017 to 2022. As of 2022-23, the envisaged mission/task force for drought 
mitigation had not been set up in the State.  
Karnataka Groundwater Authority could not control illegal and inordinate 
extraction of groundwater for commercial purposes through private water tankers 
and did not possess either time-series data on the number of borewells in the State 
or data on the total number of borewells drilled  in the water distressed notified 
taluks. 
 

Executive Summary  
ix 
Despite being a drought -prone state , Karnataka also faced severe floods and 
landslides during the past decade.  The State Action Plan for  Flood Risk 
Management was brought out only during 2021  and in contrast to NDMA 
guidelines, did not provide for preparation of Flood Management Plans by schools, 
hospitals, industries, entertainment houses etc. In the absence of basic data, the 
State Government/KSNDMC could not create the envisaged hydrological models 
for flood forecasting in the State/region, rendering th e investment of ₹2.45 crore 
on the sensors and stream gauge monitors largely unfruitful.  The purpose of 
installing equipment at grassroots level for alerting endangered population from 
flood early warning through a wireless broadcasting system was not achieved.  25 
Telemetric Water Stations (TWSs) and 04 ultrasonic water level sensors to be 
installed under the work ‘Preparation of urban flood model for Bengaluru’ funded 
by the Department of Science and Technology, GoI, were installed and the project 
remained unimp lemented. As of December 2023, 49 out of 100 W ater Level 
Sensors (WLS) installed on storm water drains in Bengaluru were non -functional 
and no information/data was available in respect of five WLS installed at flood 
vulnerable streets.  Further, 69 out of t he 184 equipment s viz., Telemetric Rain 
Gauge, Telemetric Weather Stations, Telemetric Water Level sensors installed 
under smart cities of Mangaluru, Belagavi and Hubballi -Dharwad remained non-
functional (December 2023). 
Despite mentioning the requirement of legal framework in its Flood Action Plan, 
the State did not establish a legal framework for obtaining mandatory clearances 
by agencies for construction of public infrastructure in flood -prone areas , as a 
result of which the re were instances of  National/State highways, Railways and 
other roads getting flooded/inundated.  
Lacuna was noticed in the provision  of relief assistance particularly in 
compensation of house damages and crop loss.  Verification of a few individual 
payment files showed that photographs which neither had GPS coordinates nor the 
signs of rain/wetness on the damaged portion/collapsed buildings formed the basis 
for payment.  The absence of clear guidelines on the classification of damage and 
the huge difference in payment of compensation between categories allowed for 
arbitrary classification by the authorities, leading to contrasting compensation for 
the same percentage range of damage .  As against 1,10,407 approved cases of 
house damage for reconstruction during 2019-23, construction had not commenced 
in 22,496 cases (20 per cent) for which a total of ₹213.94 crore was already paid, 
raising questions on the assessments made. A sample analysis of Parihara portal 
(based on individual Aadhar number) disclosed omissions in payment of 
compensation for crop loss. Random verification of the data (through input of data 
like individual Aadhaar number, year, season, calamity, etc.) in the Parihara portal 
showed instances of compensation having been paid in violation of the guidelines. 
A joint physical inspection  (October 2022) of three bridges and two roads (State 
highway) damaged due to flood during the year 2022 -23 in Ramanagara district 
revealed that bridges/roads had not been restored and result antly, the public were 
forced to take alternate longer routes. 
Under landslide management, the State's response ha d been inadequate, with a 
delayed State Action Plan. Critical gaps include inaccurate landslide hazard 
zonation maps, lack of a landslid e inventory and lack of early warning systems.  
The State Government had rolled back the ban imposed on land conversions from 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
x 
agriculture to non-agricultural purposes in Kodagu district. The DC office (District 
Disaster Management Authority ) building at Kodagu  was built on a landslip 
vulnerable site and remained insecure despite an expenditure of ₹6.25 crore.  
 
The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project faced delays in implementation with 
EWDS equipment yet to be tested and shelter level equipment not being supplied 
to any MPCS. There were  discrepancies between statistics pertaining to the loss 
of human lives by lightning furnished by the district authorities and district level 
data shown in the Thunderstorm and Lightning Action Plan - 2022 published by 
the Revenue Department (Disaster Management). Deaths due to lightning had not 
shown any decreasing trend over the years 2018-23, evidencing the need of a robust 
mechanism at grass root level for community awareness for taking precautions 
from lightning strikes, in conjunction with advanced technological methods. As of 
August 2024, action had  not yet been initiated on the suggested actionable 
strategies to counter damage caused by Thunderstorms and Lightning. 
 
Recommendations: 
➢ The State Government should ensure effective functioning of institutions 
like SDMA, SEC, DDMAs etc., duly complying with provisions of the DM 
Act and ensure preparation of integrated disaster management plans at all 
envisaged levels. 
➢ The State Government should revamp the Emergency Operation Centres at 
all levels while ensuring availability of key infrastructure and form sector 
specific teams to deal with different disasters. 
➢ The State Government should ensure adequate capacity building by 
training officials at all levels for effective management of disasters at 
ground level and also strengthen the State Disaster Response Force. 
➢ The State Government should prioritise IEC activities at all levels to create 
awareness and better educate communities on disaster management. 
➢ The State Government should ensure strict adherence to financial record -
keeping and reconciliation procedures to enhance accountability and 
transparency in financial transactions. 
➢ The State Government should formulate guidelines for mitigating drought 
considering geo -spatial climate variations and ensure effective 
coordination among all the sectors in enhancing drought mitigation efforts. 
➢ The State Government should emphasise measures for water conservation 
and water harvesting as well as enforce  regulations on unchecked 
groundwater extraction. 
➢ The State Government should take immediate measures to prepare 
floodplain zoning of all vulnerable locations and should enact regulations 
thereon. It also should contemplate shifting villages persistently affected by 
floods to safer elevations to avoid recurrent damage as well as expenditure 
towards compensation. 
➢ The State Government should streamline the procedure for payment of 
compensation towards damages preventing ineligible payments and fixing 
accountability on concerned officials for any irregularities. 

Executive Summary  
xi 
➢ The State Government should put in place a proper institutional framework 
integrating geo -referenced landslide inventory -cum-susceptibility maps, 
regulate landslide risk areas and develop a Comprehensive Landslide 
Prevention and Mitigation Plan to avoid ge ological disaster. Government 
should also ensure thorough assessments of land conversions and enforce 
zoning regulations.  
➢ The State Government should ensure  proper commissioning and effective 
functioning of disaster risk reduction projects, such as NCRMP , while 
enhancing capacity-building measures in respect of hazards like cyclones 
and lightning to minimize infrastructural damage and human loss. 
  

Chapter 
-
 
I
 
Disaster 
m
anagement
 
and
 
Audit 
f
ramework
 


1 
CHAPTER I 
 
Disaster management and Audit framework 
Disaster is defined 1 as a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in 
any area, arising from natural or man-made causes, or by accident or negligence 
which results in substantial loss of life or human suffering or damage to, and 
destruction of property, or damage to/ or degradation of environment and is of 
such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the 
community of the affected area. While natural disasters result from geographical 
phenomena and include floods due to heavy rainfall, drought, earthquake etc., 
the human -made disasters result from human errors which include fires, 
industrial explosions, structural failures, etc. While landslides can be both 
natural and human induced , floods can also be attributable to human 
interventions like unauthorized land use conversions, encroachments to water 
bodies, clogging of stormwater drains, etc. 
Disaster risk arises when hazards interact with physical, social, economic and 
environmental vulnerabilities. Despite the growing understanding and 
acceptance of the importance of disaster risk reduction and increased disaster 
response capacities, disasters continue to pose a global challenge. 
1.1 Disaster Management 
Disaster Management  (DM) means a continuous and integrated process of 
planning, organising, coordinating and implementing measures which are 
necessary or expedient for: 
 preparedness to deal with any disaster and capacity-building thereon. 
 mitigation or reduction of risk of any disaster or its severity or 
consequences. 
 prompt response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster and 
assessing the severity or magnitude of effects of any disaster. 
 evacuation, rescue and relief followed by rehabilitation and 
reconstruction. 
 
The Disaster Management cycle is depicted in the Chart 1.1 below. 
Chart 1.1: Disaster Management cycle 
 
  Source: Karnataka State Disaster Management Plan 2021-22 
 
1 The Disaster Management Act, 2005. 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
2 
 An effective disaster risk management contributes to sustainable development. 
1.2 Disaster Risk Reduction - Strategies and Frameworks 
Disaster risk is increasingly of global concern and its impact and actions in one 
region can have an impact on risks in another, and vice versa.   
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a universal call for action to 
end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace and 
prosperity.  Based on NITI Aayog’s mapping framework, the Government of 
Karnataka had aligned its policies and programmes with SDGs and targets.  The 
SDGs related to disaster management primarily fall under SDG 11: "Sustainable 
Cities and Communities" and SDG 13: "Climate Action".  While disaster 
management is not a standalone SDG, it is closely interconnected with these 
goals and several others, as disasters can have significant social, economic, and 
environmental impacts.  There are 25 targets related to Disaster Risk 
Reduction (DRR) in 10 of the 17 SDGs, firmly establishing the role of DRR as 
a core development strategy.   
As part of the National Framework, t he High-Power Committee on Disaster 
Management, constituted by the Government of India (GoI) in 1999 had notified 
31 various disasters categorised into five major groups viz., Water and Climate 
related, Geological related, Biological related disasters, Chemical/Industrial/  
Nuclear related and accident-related disasters. 
The GoI enacted (December 2005) the Disaster Management Act, 2005  (DM 
Act) which provided for establishment of National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA) and State Disaster Management Authorities. This was 
expected to usher in a paradigm shift in disaster management from an earlier 
relief-centric approach to a proactive regime that lays greater emphasis on 
preparedness, prevention and mitigation. 
The NDMA brought out (2009) the National Policy on Disaster Management  
with a vision to build a safe and disaster resilient India by developing a holistic, 
proactive, multi -disaster and technology -driven strategy through a culture of 
prevention, mitigation, preparedness and response.  
Accordingly, the Government of Karnataka published (2020) the State Policy 
on Disaster Management. 
1.3 Disaster profile of the State 
The State of Karnataka is one of the disaster -prone States in India owing to its 
geo-environmental diversity and vulnerability.  It is situated on a plateau where 
the western and eastern ghat ranges converge in the western part of the Deccan 
peninsular region of India. While the State is highly prone to hazards such as 
drought, flood, landslides, etc., it is also affected by other hazards such as 
cyclones, lightning, and earthquakes.  
 

Chapter I: Disaster management and Audit framework  
3 
The major disaster profile of the State in the past decade is shown in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Major disaster profile of the State 
Disaster Affected 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
(in numbers)   
Drought Districts 28 28 9 27 30 - 30 18 - - - 31 
Taluks  157 125 34 136 164 - 164 49 - - - 223 
Flood/Rainfall Districts - 8 8 - 6 - 7 22 25 28 30 - 
Taluks  - 35 42 - 24 - 25 103 180 182 * - 
Landslide Districts 2 2 3 2 3 4 7 5 5 5 - - 
Taluks  2 2 3 2 4 6 12 7 9 10 - - 
Earthquake Districts 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 6 - - 
Taluks  2 1  1 1 2 1 1 1 10 - - 
Source: State Disaster Management Plan 2022-23 and Memoranda  
*In 2022, number of taluks affected by floods was not notified 
As at the end of March 2023, there were 31 districts with 223 taluks. The major 
disastrous incidents that happened in the State during the Audit period of 2017-
18 to 2022-23 and their impacts are listed in Table 1.2 and Table 1.3 below. 
Table 1.2: Major disaster events which happened in Karnataka during 
calendar years 2018-23 
 
Calendar 
Year Disaster Impact 
2018 
Severe drought affecting 30 
districts 
Total estimated loss – ₹28,046.95 crore 
Rabi season: Crop loss - ₹11,384.47 crore  
Kharif season: Crop loss - ₹16,662.48 crore  
Heavy rainfall leading to 
floods in seven districts 
coupled with devastating 
landslides 
Total estimated loss – ₹3,705.87 crore 
Crop loss– ₹1,670.84 crore  
Compensation and relief items – ₹227.51 crore 
Damage to infrastructure – ₹1,811.54 crore 
67 human and 240 cattle deaths  
2019 
Floods in 22 districts 
Total estimated loss - ₹35,160.81 crore 
Crop loss of ₹15230.60 crore  
Damage to infrastructure – ₹9,642.67 crore 
Compensation and relief items – ₹ 10,287.44 crore 
91 human and 3,400 cattle deaths  
49 taluks declared drought 
affected --- 
2020 Floods in 25 districts 
Total estimated loss - ₹23,481.63 crore 
Crop loss of ₹17,700.76 crore  
Damage to infrastructure – ₹10,984.71 crore 
Compensation and relief items – ₹458.58 crore 
85 human and 1,867 cattle deaths  
2021 
Coastal districts affected by 
cyclone Tauktae 
Total estimated loss - ₹209.60 crore 
Crop loss of ₹4.48 crore  
Damage to infrastructure – ₹196.93 crore 
Compensation and relief items – ₹8.19 crore 
6 human and 2 cattle deaths  
Floods in 28 districts 
Total estimated loss - ₹5,690.51 crore 
Crop loss of ₹1,702.65 crore  
Damage to infrastructure – ₹3,619.21 crore 
Compensation and relief items – ₹368.65 crore 
16 human and 358 cattle deaths  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
4 
Calendar 
Year Disaster Impact 
2022 Floods in 30 districts 
Total estimated loss - ₹7,647.13 crore 
Crop loss of ₹3,596.26 crore  
Damage to infrastructure – ₹3,673.30 crore 
Compensation and relief items – ₹404.57 crore 
82 human and 462 cattle deaths reported 
2023 All 31 districts of the State 
declared drought affected Total loss estimated - ₹65,594.92 crore (crop loss) 
Source: Memoranda submitted by State Government to GoI 
Table 1.3: Estimated Loss due to Calamities 
Calamity (Calendar year) Total estimated loss 
(₹ in crore) 
Loss of lives 
Human Livestock 
Drought (2018, 2019 and 2023) 93,641.87 - - 
Flood and landslide (2018, 2019, 
2020, 2021 and 2022) 
75,685.95 341 6,327 
Cyclone (2021) 209.60 6 2 
Total 1,69,537.42 347 6,329 
Source: Memoranda submitted by State Government to GoI  
Though the State Government did not notify any specific disaster during the 
year 2022, expenditure was, however, found to have been incurred towards 
compensation for rain damage. 
As could be seen from the tables above, the State was affected severely by one 
or the other hazards with substantial damage to agriculture/horticulture crops, 
public infrastructure and individual houses besides, loss of human lives and 
livestock. There were instances of both drought and flood distressing the State 
in the same year. 
1.4 Organisation set up 
The Revenue Department (Disaster Management) headed by a Principal 
Secretary to the Government is the noda l department for monitoring disaster 
management in the State. The organisational setup in respect of disaster 
management at State level is given in Chart 1.2. 
Chart 1.2: Organisational Setup at State level for Disaster Management  
Source: Karnataka State Disaster Management Plan 2017-18 


Chapter I: Disaster management and Audit framework  
5 
The institutional arrangements for disaster management in the State and their 
functioning are detailed in Chapter 2 of this report. 
1.5 Why did we select this subject? 
The State has suffered recurrent hazards of different types causing substantial 
damage to both public infrastructure and private properties. Disaster 
Management also calls for effective coordination between the different 
departments in the State.  It is against this backdrop that the Performance Audit 
(PA) on Disaster Management has been carried out to assess the readiness of 
the State in its transformation from a response/relief centric approach to disaster 
risk reduction. 
 
1.6 Audit Objectives 
The PA was undertaken to assess whether:  
❖ Institutional mechanism is in place as per the DM Act and functioning 
effectively in implementing disaster management policies and plans. 
❖ Adequate financial resources are provided for disaster management and 
efficiently utilised. 
❖ Forecasting mechanism and preparedness for disasters are timely and 
effective. 
❖ The State has taken appropriate preventive and mitigation measures in 
addition to the response-relief approach and rehabilitation activities. 
 
1.7 Audit criteria 
Audit observations are benchmarked against the criteria derived from: 
❖ Disaster Management Act 2005; 
❖ NDMA Guidelines on respective disasters; 
❖ Disaster Management Policies and Plans; and 
❖ Government instructions, orders, circulars, etc. 
1.8 Scope and methodology of Audit 
In the absence of comprehensive details of incident/disaster -wise expenditure, 
Audit selected the districts adopting random sampling method through IDEA.  
The PA covering the period 2017-18 to 2022-23 was conducted from November 
2022 to July 2023 through scrutiny of records at the Office of the Principal 
Secretary to the Government, Revenue Department (Disaster Management) and 
Offices of the Deputy Commissioner of selected nine2 districts (Chart 1.3).  
 
 
 
 
 
2 Belagavi, Chikkaballapur, Dakshina Kannada, Davanagere, Haveri, Kalaburagi, Kodagu,  
Ramanagara and Shivamogga. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
6 
Chart 1.3: Districts selected for Performance Audit 
 
 
Joint physical verification of disaster -affected locations was also conducted, 
wherever necessary and possible. 
All o f the test -checked districts  have been subjected to floods and droughts 
during the past decade. While the districts of Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and 
Shivamogga had also encountered landslides , the coastal district of Dakshina 
Kannada often faced cyclones.  Besides, there were instances of loss of human 
lives and livestock due to lightning in these districts. 
An entry conference was held on 9 January 2023  with the Principal Secretary, 
Revenue Department (Disaster Management) wherein Audit objectives, scope 
and methodology of Audit were discussed.  The findings of the Performance 
Audit were discussed in the exit conference held on 22 January 2024  with the 
Principal Secretary, Revenue Department (Disaster Management). The State 
Government furnished replies to the draft report during August 2024  which 
have been incorporated appropriately in the Report. In cases where replies were 
not furnished, the minutes of the exit conference have been considered. 
 


Chapter I: Disaster management and Audit framework  
7 
1.9 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Principal Secretary and 
staff at Revenue Department (Disaster Management) and the staff at the Offices 
of the Deputy Commissioner at test-checked districts during the conduct of this 
Performance Audit. 
1.10 Structure of the report 
The Disaster Management Act and the National Policy on Disaster Management 
spell out the institutional arrangements to be in place for management of all 
disasters, both at the Centre and the States.  The Karnataka State Disaster 
Management Policy stipulated an institutional framework and  responsibilities 
thereon together with the need for capacity building measures including forecast 
mechanism for disaster management in the State. Chapter II of the Report deals 
with the institutional framework  present. Addit ionally, the mechanism for 
forecasting and capacity building measures have been looked into. 
The management of disasters and implementation of policies/action plans 
require sufficient funding.  Chapter III deals with financial resources and their 
utilisation.   
The National Disaster Management Authority has brought out separate 
guidelines for management of various disasters such as floods, cyclones, 
landslides, drought, lightning etc., beginning from the year 2007 onwards.  The 
State, though belatedly, has brought out its action plans for management of each 
disaster other than drought. Chapters IV, V, VI and VII deal with management 
of drought, flood, landslide and other disasters resp ectively with a focus on 
compliance with the stipulated provisions. 
The major components of disaster management cycle include response, rescue, 
relief and rehabilitation activities. Disaster management in the State has been 
more response and relief-centric rather than making the State disaster resilient. 
These aspects were discussed appropriately in the respective disaster -wise 
chapters. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
II
 
Institutional 
 f
ramework 
and
 
Capacity 
b
uilding
 


9 
CHAPTER II 
 
Institutional framework and Capacity building 
 
[ 
This chapter deals with the deficiencies in the systemic establishments and 
functions that were to be  implemented by the State. E ffective implementation 
of measures for disaster risk reduction as laid down in the DM Act was marked 
by delays, infrequent meetings and inadequate emphasis on prevention and 
mitigation activities. This impacted the State's ability to transit from being 
reactive relief-centric to being proactive in its disaster risk reduction approach.  
The delays in approving the State disaster management plans, non -integration 
of departmental disaster management plans, non-compliance by institutions like 
hospitals and educational institutions with respect to preparation of plans  and 
the absence of plans by various other agencies raise concerns about the overall 
state of disaster preparedness in Karnataka.  The State's disaster response force 
and emergency operation centres were found to be ill -equipped and 
underfunded, understaffed, thus severely hampering their effectiveness. 
The expenditure towards capacity building and preparednes s was inadequate. 
The State Government did not  achieve objectives of the Aapdamitra scheme 
and had not taken up  effective IEC initiatives. Deficiencies in the weather 
forecast mechanism affected the efficacy of  the early warning system in the 
State. The State Government is yet to activate the Incidence Response System 
(IRS). 
 
2.1 Institutional Arrangements and Disaster Management Plans 
in the State  
Prior to implementation of the DM Act, the institutional mechanism in 
Karnataka for disaster risk reduction was of the nature of providing response 
and relief centric measures.  The institutional structure for DM is hierarchical 
and functions at different levels viz., Centre, State, District and Local.  Further, 
it is a multi-stakeholder setup, i.e., the structure draws involvement of various 
ministries, Government departments, administrative bodies and institutions.  
In accordance with the DM Act, GoI established (December 2005) the National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) headed by the Prime Minister and the 
National Executive Committee (NEC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary to 
the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative control of disaster management. 
The DM Act also stipulated establishment of Disaster Management Authority 
and the Executive Committee in every State, as well as subordinate local 
authorities. 
2.1.1 Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA) 
In accordance with Section 14 of the DM Act, the Government of Karnataka 
established (May 2008) the Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority  
(KSDMA) headed by the Chief Mi nister of the State and consisting of nine 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
10 
Ministers3 and the Chief Secretary of the State as the Chief Executive Officer .  
The Secretary, Revenue Department (DM) will be the Member Secretary.    
KSDMA was “to make Karnataka safer and disaster resilient through proactive 
disaster risk governance, adopting a people-centric approach to disaster risk 
reduction, climate change adaption and working towards sustainable 
developmental goals by harnessing appropriate technology and strategy 
involving all stakeholders,  to improve the capability to mitigate, prepare, 
respond, and recover from all natural and manmade disasters”. 
The powers and functions of KSDMA  included: (a) laying down the State 
Disaster Management Policy; (b) approving the State Disaster Management 
Plan4 (SDMP); (c) approving the disaster management plans (DMPs) of  the 
departments and their review; (d) laying down guidelines to be followed by the 
departments for integration of measures for prevention of disasters and 
mitigation in their development plans and pro jects and provide necessary 
technical assistance therefor; (e) coordinating the implementation of the State 
Plan; (f) recommending provision of funds for mitigation and preparedness 
measures etc.  
Audit observed that KSDMA was constituted in the State after a delay of more 
than two years since implementation of the DM Act, and even as of March 2023, 
it was not provided with any required infrastructure like office space, human 
resources, furniture/stationery, etc., for its activities. 
Further, as per Section 15 of the DM Act, KSDMA was to meet as and when 
necessary and at such time and place as the Chairperson of the State Authority 
may think fit.  However, though the State was experiencing disaster each year, 
KSDMA met only thrice, in November 2019, September 2020 and September 
2021 and no meetings were held during the years 2017 -18, 2018-19, 2021-22 
and 2022-23. A review of proceedings of the KSDMA meetings showed that, 
apart from approval to SDMP, the issues discussed were on constitution of 
Advisory Committee and preparation of DMPs by departments. It was observed 
that the issues relating to prevention and mitigation of disasters were not 
discussed in any of the meetings along with coordination /monitoring of 
implementation of disaster plans.  
Also, KSDMA did not effectively carry out the responsibilities prescribed in the 
DM Act towards laying down guidelines for formulation of development plans 
and provision of technical assistance therefor and thus, the functioning of the 
KSDMA was not constructive. 
The Government replied  (August 2024) that action ha d been initiated to 
strengthen the KSDMA with adequate staff and ensure proper functioning and 
conduct of all statutory body meetings regularly. However, audit observed that 
neither infrastructure nor required human resources were provided to KSDMA 
even as of September 2024. The reply vindicates the Audit finding that 
 
3Revenue, Home, Agriculture, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development & Panchayat Raj,   
Public Works, Animal Husbandry, Housing and Energy. 
4The Disaster Management Plan (DMP) is a policy document which needs to spell out the 
standard operating procedures to make the State disaster resilient, achieve disaster risk 
reduction through minimising loss of life/livelihoods/assets and maximizing the ability to cope 
with disasters at all levels of administration as well as among communities. 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
11 
necessary staff and periodical meetings were not held, thus rendering KSDMA 
ineffective. 
2.1.1.1 Delay in preparation of the State Disaster Management Policy 
As per Section 18 (1) of the DM Act, the State Authority shall have the 
responsibility for laying down policies and plans for DM in the State.  Section 
18(2)(a) of the DM Act stipulated the State Authority to lay down the State 
Disaster Management Policy. 
The State Government published the State Disaster Management Policy  only 
during the year 2020 i.e.,11 years after GoI published (2009) the National 
Policy.  Consequently, the DM plans prepared earlier and the DM activities 
handled in the State till the year 2020 were without the backing of a policy 
document.   
The State Government did not furnish records relating to preparation of SDM 
Policy or explain the reasons for the delay but  only replied (August 2024) that 
the SDM Policy was drafted in alignment with National Disaster Management 
Policy.  It was further replied that periodic updation of the Policy is being 
undertaken.  However, details of the updations incorporated and action taken 
thereon were not furnished to Audit. 
2.1.2 Cabinet Sub-Committee on Disaster Management  
The State Government constituted the Cabinet Sub -Committee (CSC) on 
Disaster Management once every five years5 starting from June 2013, consisting 
of selected Ministers with Revenue Minister being the Chairman. The CSC was 
to review the situation arising due to hazards like drought, floods and other 
natural disasters, formulate/decide policies and issue instructions for efficient 
management.  
Audit observed from the records made available that the CSC had met only 
thrice6  during the Audit period {2017-18 (1) and 2018-19 (2)}. The details of 
the meeting s conducted during other years were not forthcoming from the 
available records. As such, it could not be ascertained whether issues pertaining 
to multiple disasters and causes thereof were adequately addressed in the 
meetings. 
Verification of proceeding s of the meetings made available  showed that t he 
CSC had discussed issues like  drought/flood situation in parts of the State, 
maintenance of fodder banks, payment of crop loss compensation, provision of 
drinking water, employment opportunities under MGNREGS to avoid 
migration, etc. Test-check of records at district level showed that relief measures 
like drinking water supply, provision of fodder etc., have been taken besides, 
payment of compensation. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the CSC had met eight times during 
2023-24 and all possible measures were taken to ensure effective management 
of all the notified disasters through respective departments and authorities. The 
reply clearly indicates that the nodal body like CSC did not meet adequately till 
 
5 June 2013, June 2018 and June 2023. 
6 May 2017, November and December 2018. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
12 
2023-24, the period during which the State had encountered disasters 
repetitively. 
2.1.3 Advisory Committee 
The KSDMA constituted the Advisory Committee consisting of experts in the 
field of disaster management, as required under Section 17 of the DM Act, only 
in December 2019 after a delay of 11 years since its constitution .  As per the 
details furnished by the department, the Advisory Committee ha d met only 
twice (21-01-2020 and 22-05-2020) since its formation.   
A review of the proceedings of these meetings revealed that issues discussed 
generally involved preparation of State policy, preparation of departmental 
disaster management plans, strengthening forecast system, issue of safety and 
traffic congestion at airports as vulnerability, supply of safe drinking water 
during disasters, providing training in telemedicine, etc., however were without 
specific reference to any disaster the State was confronting. 
The Government replied  (August 2024) that action ha d been initiated to 
reconstitute the Advisory Committee in the State.  The purpose of an advisory 
committee involving experts is to assist the State Government and the failure to 
convene regular meetings would deprive the Government of consistently 
availing specialised technical guidance. 
2.1.4 State Executive Committee  
In accordance with Section 20 (1) of the DM Act, the State Government 
constituted ( March 2008) the State Executive Committee (SEC) u nder the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to the State Government.  The SEC was to 
assist the KSDMA in the performance of its functions following the guidelines 
laid down by the KSDMA and to coordinate and monitor the implementation of 
the National policy, the National plan and State plan for management of 
disasters in the State. 
2.1.4.1 State Disaster Risk Reduction Road Map 
Karnataka has faced various types of disasters successively impacting normal 
life and community property as well as public infrastructure and hence, there 
was a need to prepare a DRR road map containing broad areas for intervention 
that will be taken up by  various departments along with time -bound 
implementable action plans.   
Audit observed that the SEC mooted the proposal for preparation of DRR road 
map and assigned the task to UNICEF, Hyderabad  only during 2021 -22 and 
even as of January 2024, the State Government had not published its DRR Road 
Map with committed timelines to ensure a disaster resilient Karnataka. 
From records made available, Audit noticed absence of road map with defined 
responsibilities and committed timelines, whereby the line departments did not 
initiate adequate  preparatory/mitigative measures which affected the State’s 
preparedness to confront one or the other or multiple disasters each year (as 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
13 
tabulated in Chapter I causing damage to lives 7/infrastructure besides 
substantial financial burden towards compensation/restoration. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that DRR road map had been prepared 
delineating department -wise responsibilities and goals and has been placed 
before the SEC for review. 
2.1.4.2 State Disaster Management Plans 
A Disaster Management Plan needs to be dynamic, actionable and 
updated/revised periodically in keeping with the situation on the ground.  In the 
State, the SEC was responsible (Section 23 of DM Act) for preparing the SDMP. 
The SDMP was to include among other things the vulnerability of different parts 
of the State to different forms of disasters, measures to be adopted for 
prevention and mitigation of disasters, roles and responsibilities of each 
department etc. The components of SDMP are shown in Chart 2.1 below: 
Chart 2.1: Flow chart showing the components of SDMP 
 
Source: KSDMP 2017-18. 
➢ Preparation of State Disaster Management Plans  
The NDMA published the updated and revised National Disaster Management 
Plan (NDMP) during November 2019. Accordingly, the State Government 
adopted the format for preparation of SDMP.   
During the Audit period (2017-2023), the SEC had not prepared the SDMP for 
the years 2017-18 and 2018-19 and no reasons for the same were forthcoming 
from the records made available to audit.   
The SDMP was to be prepared after consultation with local authorities, district 
authorities and the people's representatives. However, records of the 
SEC/Revenue Department (DM) made available did not contain the details of 
the SEC consultation with  the local authorities, district authorities and the 
people's representatives prior to preparation of SDMP.   
 
7 Both Human and Livestock. 
Understanding multi-hazard risk vulnerability
Inter-agency coordination
Investing in DRR – Structural measures
Investing in DRR – Non-structural measures
Capacity development

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
14 
State Government replied (August 2024) that the SDMPs have been formulated 
in consultation with all the line departments for efficient management of natural 
disasters and details of consultative meetings would be documented in future. 
The deficiencies in implementation of SDMP in the State are discussed in 
respective disaster-wise chapters. 
➢ Absence of Standard Operating Procedures/Action plan 
Verification of SDMPs disclosed that plans had been prepared stipulating only 
the responsibility framework for the line department s with respect to different 
disasters.  However, the required Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) to be 
followed by the authorities either prior to or post disasters had not been included 
in the SDMPs.  Besides, none of the SDMPs included specific action plans for 
any disaster which the State had encountered in the past.  
Though the list of disasters during the past years ha d been mentioned in the 
SDMPs, the details of lessons learnt and actionable points thereon to prevent 
such mishaps in future were not brought out. 
➢ Delay in approval of State Disaster Management Plans 
Section 23(7) stipulates that the copies of the SDMP, approved by the SDMA, 
shall be made available to all the departments of the Government to enable them 
to draw up their own annual plans in accordance with the State Plan.  It was, 
therefore, judicious to prepare the SDMP for the ensuing year well in advance.  
Audit observed that there were delays in approval of the SDMP, by the SDMA 
every year. The SDMP for each year was being approved during/after 
September of the year to which the SDMP pertained. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that action was being initiated to update 
and e-publish the SDMPs, but did not clarify the reasons for delay in approval 
of plans every year. 
➢ Objectives of State Disaster Management Plans not achieved 
The SEC prepared the SDMPs with defined objectives which inter alia included 
stimulating prevention and preparedness measures, putting in place a forecast 
mechanism, ensuring an institutional techno -legal framework, etc. It was 
observed that there were certain deficiencies in achieving the objectives of SDM 
Plans as shown in Appendix 2.1. The lacunae in achieving the objectives of 
SDM Plans are discussed in detail in corresponding disaster -wise Chapters in 
the Report. 
2.1.4.3 Non-evaluation of preparedness 
As per the DM Act ( Section 22(2)(f) ), t he SEC among other functions was 
required to evaluate the preparedness at all governmental or non-governmental 
levels to respond to any threatening disaster situation or disaster and give 
directions, where necessary, for enhancing such preparedness).  Audit observed 
that SEC had not taken up any such evaluation  which resulted in departments 
not initiating necessary preventive/mitigative measures , affecting the  State’s 
preparedness to encounter  disasters year on year, particularly  floods and 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
15 
landslides which were  severely damaging infrastructure and 
vegetative/agricultural crops. 
The Government  replied (March 2023) that evaluation was not taken up as 
SDMP is prepared every year to guide the departments to take up preparedness 
activities.  The reply is not acceptable as apart from guiding the departments, as 
per the DM Act, the SEC was also required to evaluate the preparedness of 
various levels of government to handle disasters. The SDMP enables the line 
departments only to chalk out the disaster plan and it cannot supplement the 
functions of SEC. 
2.1.5 District Disaster Management Authority 
Every State Government shall, as soon as may be after constitution of the 
SDMA, establish a District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) for every 
district (Section 25(1) of the DM Act) by notification in the Official Gazette.  
The DDMA was to act as the planning, coordinating and implementing body 
for disaster management at district level and take all necessary measures in 
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the NDMA and KSDMA.  It will, 
inter alia, prepare the District Disaster Management Plan (DDMP) including 
district response plan. 
The State Government established the DDMA  for every district in the State 
headed by the Deputy Commissioner of the respective district, with the elected 
representative of the local authority as the Co -Chairperson in 2009.  Audit, 
however, observed that the constitution of DDMAs was notified only during 
February 2021. 
2.1.5.1 Meetings of the District authorities 
Section 27 of the DM Act stipulates that the District Authority shall meet as and 
when necessary and at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit. 
The details of meetings held by DDMAs of the sampled districts during the 
period from 2017-18 to 2022-23 are shown in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Number of meetings held by DDMAs of sampled districts 
District Number of meetings held during 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Belagavi 1 0 5 1 1 4 
Chikkaballapura 0 1 1 1 1 1 
Dakshina Kannada 4 1 3 6 8 6 
Davanagere 0 0 3 0 0 0 
Haveri 0 0 2 8 2 0 
Kalaburagi Not furnished 
Kodagu  0 0 0 1 2 2 
Ramanagara 1 1 2 2 3 3 
Shivamogga 0 0 3 2 1 5 
Source: Information furnished by the districts. 
Dakshina Kannada and Ramanagara were the only districts which had 
conducted the DDMA meetings consistently during all the years. DDMA, 
Belagavi had not met even once during 2018-19 and had met only once during 
2017-18, 2020-21 and 2021-22 despite the fact that the district was subjected to 
various disasters year on year.  Further, the Kod agu district is vulnerable to 
flood/landslides and hence, DDMP has a critical role to play in preparedness 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
16 
and mitigation.  However, the DDMA, Kodagu had not met even once during 
2018-19, the year in which the district was subjected to severe flood and 
landslide. 
Audit further observed that the DDMAs of sampled districts did not constitute 
any advisory committees, though required under Section 28(1) except Dakshina 
Kannada which had committees for oil spill and quick response. 
State Government replied (August 2024) that although the meetings of DDMA 
are conducted at the districts regularly, the s ame had not been documented 
suitably.   
2.1.5.2 District Disaster Management Plans 
Section 31  of the DM Act stipulates that there shall be a plan for disaster 
management for every district of the State to be prepared by the District 
Authority and approved by the State Authority.  The district plans shall be 
reviewed and updated annually.  
Audit observed that the DDMAs of the selected districts had prepared  the 
district plans during the years 2017 -18 to 2022 -23.  Though the district plans 
were forwarded to the State Authority, the SDMA had not reviewed and 
approved the plans in respect of the test -checked districts.  Further , as per 
Section 31(5) of the DM Act, copies of the district plan shall be made available 
to the departments of the Government in the district to enable them to prepare 
their respective DM plans. However, the stipulation had not been complied with 
by any of the test-checked districts. 
The Government replied (May 2023) that the departments in the districts have 
not prepared the DM plans, but the district plans were prepared in consultation 
with the departments concerned.  However, there was no evidence on record to 
justify that the district plans were prepared in consultation with the departments 
concerned.   
2.1.6 Other Disaster Management Plans  
2.1.6.1 Government Departments  
As per Section 40 of the DM Act , every department of the State Government, 
in conformity with the guidelines laid down by the State Authority, shall prepare 
a disaster management plan and annually review and update them.  Further, 
every department of the State Government shall furnish an implementation 
status report to the SEC regarding the implementation of the disaster 
management plan. 
Audit observed that  16 departments  (dealing with functions vulnerable to 
disasters and as decided by SEC) prepared their DMPs only during 2020-21 and 
thereafter had not reviewed and updated  them.  However, none of the 
departments had furnished the status report to SEC on implementation of 
planned activities of their departments in managing disasters and thus, SEC did 
not effectively monitor the preparation and implementation of the DMPs by the 
departments in the State  and integrate various disaster management activities  

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
17 
across the line departments.  This affected coordination among the departments 
in implementing activities in convergence. 
The Government replied (November 2022) that the departments did not furnish 
status reports and hence, the SEC had decided (September 2022) to constitute 
Disaster Management Cell in 16 departments at the State level to monitor the 
activities and the process is in progress  and further replied (August 2024) that 
the completion, periodic updation and implementation of DMPs will be ensured 
through capacity building. 
Recommendation 1: The State Government should ensure effective 
functioning of  institutions like SDMA, SEC , DDMAs etc.,  duly complying 
with provisions of the DM Act and ensure preparation of integrated disaster 
management plans at all envisaged levels. 
2.1.6.2 Local Authorities  
As per Section 3.2.7 of the State Policy, all the local authorities8 were to prepare 
DMPs in consonance with guidelines of NDMA, SDMAs and DDMAs.  Audit 
observed that none of the local authorities in the test -checked districts had 
prepared the required DM plans indicating absence of effective monitoring by 
the SDMA and DDMAs of preparatory activities for  disaster management at 
grassroots level.  
Though the Revenue Department (DM)  replied (May 2023) that 2,250 out of 
6,300 Gram Panchayats  (GP) have prepared the DM plans , none of the plans 
were available in physical records at the test -checked district and taluk level 
offices, produced to Audit for verification. 
2.1.6.3  Hospital/Educational Institutions 
The SDMP  of 2018 -19 stipulates that every hospital shall have a Disaster 
Management Plan (DMP) for disaster management  incorporating measures 
towards preparedness, mitigation, medical relief and rehabilitation etc.  
Similarly, the SDMP had made it mandatory for every school/college in the 
State to have a DM plan.   
However, scrutiny of records made available showed that none of the hospitals 
(except a few private hospitals under Bengaluru Urban district) and educational 
institutions in the State as well as test -checked districts had prepared the 
required disaster management plan. The Commissioner, Health and Family 
Welfare Services stated (October 2023) that nodal officers are being trained 
during 2023-24 regarding preparation of DMPs. 
It is mentioned in SDMP 2019-20 that training has been imparted to about 400 
Medical Officers in the last 3 years, whose expertise can be used for prepari ng 
hospital DM plan. However, effective action had  not been taken by the 
Government/departments to utilise their expertise in preparing hospital DM 
plans. 
 
 
8 Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Municipalities and Town Planning Authorities which 
control and manage civic services. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
18 
2.1.6.4  Other agencies 
The SDMP (2019-20) stipulated preparation of disaster management plans by 
many other essential sources/agencies.  Audit observed that while the Onsite 
and Off-site DM plan was prepared for major accident hazard prone industrial 
units, the other envisaged plans like Dams - Emergency Action Plan, Railway 
Disaster Management Plan, Railway Disaster Response Plan, Heritage  Area 
Disaster Management Plan,  DM plan for Large Congregations and Crowds, 
Cyber Crime Management Plan, Animal Care Management Plan during 
disasters, etc., were not prepared , by the  State Government/KSDMA in 
coordination with the  agencies concerned, even as of March 2023.  
The Government replied (February 2024) that suitable instructions would be 
issued in this regard to ensure preparation of DMPs by all the authorities, as 
required. However, the Government did not furnish either details of the 
instructions issued or compliance thereon by authorities/agencies in preparation 
of their DMPs (August 2024). 
2.1.7 Non-availability of Disaster Management Plans /publications in 
regional language 
The disaster  management plan is a policy document which needs to be 
disseminated up to the last mile community being the first responders to any 
disastrous event. Further, the State Government had brought out certain 
publications9 relating to management of different disasters.  
Audit observed that except for SDM Plan 2019-20 and SDM Policy 2020, none 
of the action plans/publications  were available in the local language  to enable 
ground level officials/volunteers to understand and act appropriately.   Though 
a decision was taken by the SEC during 2019 -20 to bring out the SDMPs in 
regional language, the same was not implemented and thus, the Disaster 
Management Plans were not available in regional language at the State, District 
or GP level. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that action would be initiated to e -
publish important plans/action plans/policies related to disaster management in 
the regional language. 
2.1.8 Crisis Management Committee and Plan 
As stipulated in the Government of India’s ( GoI’s) Crisis Management Plan  
(July 2007), the State Crisis Management Committee (SCMC) comprising high-
level officials of the State Government headed by the Chief Secretary shall deal 
with major cris es which have serious ramifications. The SCMC was to be 
activated in the event of crisis and it shall be assisted by the SEC as may be 
necessary.   
Though the Crisis Management Committee/Group was constituted in the State 
(2010 and 2017) both at the State level and district level, no details were 
forthcoming from the records of the nodal department regarding the activation 
of the Committee/Group during any of the disasters the State had encount ered 
during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23. Further, the specified Crisis Management 
 
9 State Disaster Management Policy, Action Plan for Flood Risk Management, Action Plan for 
Landslide Management, Thunder and Lightning Action Plan, etc. 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
19 
Plan (vide Government Order dated 19 July 2017) was not prepared in the State 
by any of the authorities. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the contingencies arising in future 
due to notified calamities will be dealt by SEC and DDMA through SDMP and 
DDMP respectively.  
2.1.9 Emergency Operation Centres 
The State Government had put in place (201 3) the State Emergency Operation 
Centre (SEOC) at the State level and District Emergency Operation Centres 
(DEOC) at the district level which shall be the nerve centres for coordination 
and management of disasters.  In accordance with the State Plan, the SEOC was 
responsible for operationalisation of Disaster Management Action Plan of all 
the districts, operationalisation of Standard Operating Procedures by/for various 
departments, monitor preparedness measures undertaken at district levels, 
prepare action taken report for Chief Secretary etc.   
Audit conducted (September 2023) a joint physical verification  of the SEOC 
along with the staff of nodal Department and observed that the SEOC was 
under-equipped (in terms of human resources and infrastructure) and remained 
ineffective for the following reasons: 
 
➢ The space meant to accommodate SEOC and refurbished at an expenditure 
of ₹61.84 lakh (out of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) grants during 
2020-21) was being used for other official purposes and thus, there was no 
place of functioning for SEOC. 
➢ The posts of Director, Consultant and the Liaison officer were not filled. 
➢ As provided in the SDMPs, the SEOC was the nerve centre for 
coordination in management of disasters  which was to be  equipped 
adequately with state-of-the-art technology equipment like video 
walls/large display TV sets, computers, laptops, fax machine, landline and 
mobile phones, satellite phones, VSAT connectivity, data wall with feeds 
from IMD, NRSC, INCOIS, CWC and all major media networks.  
However, the SEOC had only four desktops and one laptop, two landline 
phones and one printer. 
➢ Both television sets provided to SEOC were not working and were seen 
placed in a corner at the time of JPV .  Consequently, the SEOC did not 
have access to live telecasts of news relating to disasters. 
➢ Call logs which are prominent in the functioning of SEOC for disaster 
specific complaints were not maintained and hence, Audit could not ensure 
functioning of the system as envisaged. 
➢ Parts of the State were severely affected by floods/rainfall during the years 
2019 and 2022 and Kodagu district experienced devastating landslides 
during the years 2018 and 2020.  However, there was n o evidence on 
record to show that SEOC was activated and coordinated rescue and relief 
operations. 
 
Thus, the existence of SEOC at the State level complied with the provisions of 
the DM Act, however it’s functioning was affected , due to lack of functional 
resources.   

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
20 
Similarly, the DEOCs were to function as Control Room at the district level 
with Command, Control and Communication for effective response in an 
emergency through which management would be able to minimize the 
hardships of the community and improve the quality of the process of recovery. 
This control room was to provide timely support and well -thought-out 
interventions to the grassroots staff as well as volunteers. However, the DEOCs 
in the test -checked districts were also either non -existent or under -equipped, 
except for Dakshina Kannada district , which was equipped with display units 
and other essentials. 
State Government replied (August 2024) that SEOC is being integrated with 
Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) and the Common Alerting 
Protocol (CAP).   SEOC is being equipped with state-of-the-art communication 
equipment, infrastructure and will be shifted to KSNDMC premises to 
strengthen further.   
The State Government needs to  expeditiously address the stren gthening of 
EOCs which are local centres for managing response activities when a disaster 
strikes. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government should revamp  the Emergency 
Operation Centres  at all levels  while ensuring availability of key 
infrastructure and form sector specific teams to deal with different disasters. 
2.2 Capacity Building 
Section (2)(b)  of the DM Act defines capacity -building to include : 
(i) identification of existing resources and resources to be acquired or created; 
(ii) acquiring or creating resources identified; and (iii) organisation and training 
of personnel and coordination of such training for effective management of 
disasters. Audit observed that the expenditure of the Government towards 
capacity building and preparedness during the Audit period was grossly 
inadequate. 
2.2.1 Weather forecast mechanism  
Forecast mechanism plays a crucial role in disaster management by providing 
early warnings and predictions to help management and communities prepare 
for and mitigate the impact of potential disasters.  
In Karnataka, the State Government established (1988) the Drought Monitoring 
Cell (DMC)  as an institutional mechanism which was subsequently (2007) 
renamed as Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre  (KSNDMC) 
broadening the activities to include monitoring of other natural disasters like 
flood, thunderstorm-lightning, earthquakes, etc.  The KSNDMC was to provide 
necessary weather forecasts, early warnings and analysis for the State to make 
appropriate decisions.  State Government provided funds for the activities of 
KSNDMC under the capacity building component of State Disaster Respons e 
Fund.  

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
21 
Exhibit 2.1: Photograph showing the TRG and TWS 
 
Source: KSNDMC 
As of December 2023, the KSNDMC had established a network of forecasting 
mechanisms as detailed in Table 2.2 below. 
Table 2.2: Details of KSNDMC Network for Early Warning System 
Type of Early Warning System Number Disaster 
GPRS enabled and solar-powered Telemetric Rain 
Gauges (TRGs) at the Grama Panchayaths level 
6,358 Flood and Drought 
Telemetric Weather Stations (TWSs) at Hobli level 834 Flood and Drought 
Seismic observation centres 15 Earthquake 
Lightning detectors  11 Lightening 
Reservoir level sensors 6 Flood 
RADAR Stream gauges in Krishna River basin 9 - 
 Source: Information furnished by the KSNDMC. 
Through these networks and in alliance with IMD and Space Application 
Centre, Ahmedabad , the KSNDMC was generating/disseminating weather 
forecast alerts/advisories relating to rainfall and its intensity, temperature, 
humidity, wind speed, wind direction, seismic activities, lightning activities, 
etc., to the stakeholders and general public in near real -time through media 
platforms. 
Scrutiny of records at KSNDMC relating to forecast mechanism for different 
disasters disclosed that the data collection, forecasting and dissemination 
mechanism in place in the State was flawed with defunct/faulty equipment, 
deficient data, improper contract management, non-creation of disaster models, 
non-installation of sensors, etc., which are discussed in disaster-wise chapters. 
2.2.2 State Disaster Response Force 
Section 44  of the DM Act  provided for constitution of National Disaster 
Response Force for specialised response to natural and man-made disaster and 
Section 3.4.5 of National Policy on Disaster Management 2009, stipulated that 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
22 
the State Government was required to put in place their own State Disaster 
Response Force (DRF) for quickly responding to disasters. 
The State Government constituted four DRF units  at Bengaluru, Mangaluru, 
Belagavi and Kalaburagi in June 2013 and the fifth unit at Davanagere in June 
2022. The DRFs were functioning under the administrative control of Fire and 
Emergency department. Each unit had a sanctioned strength of 127  personnel 
comprising mainly of the police and fire service personnel. Review of records 
showed the following: 
➢ The units had huge vacancies ranging from 67 to 96 per cent  of the 
sanctioned strength because of which the units faced difficulties in 
managing shift-wise duties and rescue operations. The vacancies were 
mainly in the cadres of police inspectors and constables.  The 
department stated that ex-army personnel were being recruited through 
outsourcing. 
➢ All the DRF units were functioning from the buildings of other offices 
and did not have their  own infrastructure.  Audit observed that though 
adequate land has been sanctioned by the Government, same had not 
been made use of by the DRF. 
➢ None of the posts of fire personnel was filled up in Mangaluru unit and 
only one fireman was available against the total sanctioned strength of 
30 fire personnel in Davanagere unit.  One post of Medical Officer 
sanctioned for each unit remained vacant in all the units. 
➢ The DRF units were provided only a control room landline telephone 
connectivity and thus, were functioning without any advanced 
communication network.  DGP (DRF) replied (July 2023) that the units 
are in need of exclusive communication equipment like wireless sets, 
closed user group mobiles, etc. 
➢ Though the State was affected by floods recurrently, the units were not 
provided with trained divers. 
➢ No funds were released to the Fire and Emergency department for 
training activities during the Audit period.   
 
 
Thus, the SDRF units  were ill-equipped with respect to equipment and 
personnel to be of any effective use. 
Further, Government allocates funds for Fire and Emergency Services 
Department through its annual budget for its ‘general ’ functions and activities 
towards fire forces and also towards salary and other components of SDR Force 
companies/personnel (like building and infrastructure, medical expenses, 
transportation, telephone charges, etc). The Revenue Department (DM) releases 
funds, under capacity development component, which is to be expended only 
towards training activities and procurement of rescue equipme nt required for 
disaster management activities.  
The details of funds released by Revenue Department (DM) to SDR Force 
(2013-14) are as detailed in Table 2.3. 
 
 
 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
23 
Table 2.3: Details of funds released by Revenue Department (DM) 
    (₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance Receipts Expenditure Lapsed Closing 
Balance 
2013-14 0.00 7.63 2.89 0.00 4.74 
2014-15 4.74 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.74 
2015-16 4.74 1.00 0.05 0.00 5.69 
2016-17 5.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.69 
2017-18 5.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.69 
2018-19 5.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.69 
2019-20 5.69 20.09 18.09 0.00 7.69 
2020-21 7.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.69 
2021-22 7.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.69 
2022-23 7.69 14.65 2.65 12.00 7.69 
Total  43.37 23.68 12.00  
Source: Information furnished by Deputy Director, SDR Force. 
With respect to capacity building, out of ₹1.33 crore released towards training 
activities during 2013-15 (prior to audit period) only a sum of ₹38.54 lakh was 
utilised by the department. No funds were released for training activities during 
the audit period of 2017-23. It has also been observed that as at the end of March 
2023, a total sum of ₹7.69 crore was lying in the bank account of SDR Force, 
with lapse of ₹12.00 crore of allocated funds during 2022-23 
The State Government replied (August 2024) that detailed information on 
functioning of SDRF will be obtained from the concerned department and will 
be suitably addressed. Further, it is added that adequate funds were provided to 
the Fire and Emergency services. However, the DRF units continued to be in 
need of personnel and equipment. 
Recommendation 3: The State Government should ensure adequate capacity 
building by training officials at all levels for effective management of disasters 
at ground level and also strengthen the State Disaster Response Force. 
2.2.3 Centre for Disaster Management 
The State Government  established (2000 -01) the Centre for Disaster 
Management at Administrative Training Institute , Mysuru (CDM-ATI) for 
capacity building activities. The CDM-ATI was involved in training, research, 
documentation and development of  state-level information based on disasters 
and management.  
A review of the records/information furnished by CDM showed the following: 
➢ CDM was preparing the State DMPs  and imparting training to 
district/departmental authorities for preparation of respective DMPs. 
➢ The centre was functioning with five trainers handling training 
programmes for all sorts of hazards. 
➢ A total of 10,358 personnel of different cadres were provided training at 
CDM.   
➢ The centre had provided training on disaster management  to 4,900 
elected representatives and 496 personnel of Non -Government 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
24 
Organisations/civil societies (only in Mysuru city limits).  Hence, the 
efforts at capacity building of the communities and community -based 
organisations in the State to handle emergencies were inadequate. 
➢ As a capacity building measure, the SDMPs prescribed table -top 
exercises, simulations, and mock drills to improve operational readiness. 
Simulation techniques would be the best way of imparting practical 
training and demonstrations. However, simulation facilities for different 
types of disasters are not available at CDM. 
 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the present initiatives of capacity 
building where government employees being trained in the CDM, Mysore in a 
phased manner was not effective and sufficient.  Hence action is being taken to 
shift the capacity building activities to KSNDMC and setting up of the 
Karnataka State Institute of Disaster Management.  
2.2.4 National Disaster Management Information System 
The National Disaster Management Information System (NDMIS)  is a 
comprehensive online application, developed by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to capture disaster damages and losses effectively and also to monitor funds 
disbursal to the States for relief activities in case of disasters. The online System 
was to track the impacts of hazards for the entire country up to the district level. 
The State authorities and their respective districts were responsible for entering 
the data of their local disasters 10 on a daily basis.  The State Government was 
also to provide online data on expenditure incurred from SDRF (including 
additional central assistance from NDRF) in line with the GoI-approved norms, 
on a real-time basis. 
Audit observed that the database is not being updated on a daily basis  either at 
the State level or district level.   Thus, both the SEC as well as the department 
did not effectively monitor the utilisation of funds for DM activities indicating 
absence of an effective internal c ontrol mechanism. The non-maintenance of 
prescribed financial records and incorrect reporting is a matter of serious 
concern and the possibility of misutilisation/  misappropriation of SDRF funds 
cannot be ruled out. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that instructions have been issued to 
districts and concerned departments to update requisite information on a regular 
basis in NDMIS portal. 
2.2.5 Aapdamitra scheme 
The NDMA approved (2016 -17) a Centrally Sponsored Scheme called 
“Aapdamitra” with the objective of (a) training community volunteers with 
skills needed to respond to their community’s immediate needs in the aftermath 
of a disaster, thereby, enabling them to undertake basic relief and rescue tasks 
during emergencies such as floods, flash floods, and urban flooding, when 
emergency services are not readily available and (b) to create a Community 
 
10 Such as death, injury, affected population by categories, economic losses in sectors such as 
education, health, housing, agriculture, industries, critical infrastructure such as roads, bridges 
and buildings, cultural heritages etc. 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
25 
Emergency Stockpile/Reserve at the district/block level containing essential 
search and rescue equipment, medical first aid kits. 
Scrutiny of records showed that training was imparted during June to August 
2022 under this project to 3,400 volunteers in 11 districts at a cost of ₹4.14 
crore. Audit, however, observed that the Emergency Responder Kits were not 
procured and distributed to any of the trainees.  No records were also available 
in any of the test -checked districts indicating that the services of these trained 
volunteers were utilised for rescue operations during hazards.  Hence, it could 
not be ascertained as to whether the trained volunteers were utilised during the 
rescue operations, and even if they were engaged, rescue operations would have 
been ineffective without the kits. 
As a result, the State could not achieve the objective of the scheme as the trained 
volunteers cannot effectively perform their rescue operations  during hazards 
without these kits.    
The Government replied  (August 2024) that Fire and Emergency department 
was instructed (March 2024) to procure Emergency Respon der Kits for the 
volunteers trained under the scheme. 
2.2.6 Capacity building activities at District level 
As per Section 30(2) of the Disaster Management Act, the powers and functions 
of DDMA, inter alia, included review of capacity building plans and providing 
community training.  Further, the local bodies were also required to ensure 
capacity building of their officers and employees for managing disasters, 
carrying out relief, rehabilitation and reconst ruction activities in the affected 
areas. Audit observed that no funds were provided to DDMAs towards capacity 
building and training till the year 2020-21. The State Government commenced 
release of funds only after the recommendations of the XV Finance 
Commission. 
The Revenue Department endorsed (August 2023) the replies of the CDM-ATI 
which stated that a total of 9,844 personnel were trained at district/taluk/Grama 
Panchayat levels. Scrutiny of the reply revealed that the training was provided 
only to the government officials and elected representatives.  The fact, however, 
remained that capacity building activities were not provided to the first 
responders11 at the community level. 
Details of community level training provided were not available with any of the 
test-checked districts, except in Dakshina Kannada which reported two training 
schedules.  Similarly, none of the test -checked districts conducted mock drills 
for any type of natural hazards, except for Dakshi na Kannada which reported 
mock drills at major accident hazard industrial/chemical installations. 
Thus, as community level training was not provided in all districts, the training 
provided in the State under capacity building was inadequate to handle disasters. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that capacity building measures will be 
taken up to empower local population against vulnerable disasters through task 
force committees both in urban and rural local bodies. 
 
 
11 Local residents, voluntary rescue workers, etc. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
26 
2.2.7 Insufficient IEC activities towards disaster management 
A crucial pathway to reduce disaster risk is to generate awareness among the 
people about disastrous events and educate them to deal with such situations.  
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) activities play a crucial role 
in disaster management by facilitating the dissemination of information to the 
public, promoting awareness, and educating communities on preparedness, 
response, and recovery measures, thereby enhanci ng overall resilience and 
reducing the impact of disasters.   
In this connection, Audit observed the following: 
➢ None of the authorities like KSDMA, SEC or Revenue  Department 
(Disaster Management) had taken up effective IEC activities at the macro 
level towards disaster management  like mass communication through 
radio/television on do's and do n’ts of various natural and man -made 
disasters, preparedness and response activities , reacting to emergency 
situations, etc. 
➢ It was decided in the SEC meeting (September 2022) to release a sum of 
₹7.44 crore to the districts for awareness and IEC initiatives.  SEC further 
resolved (February 2023) to release the funds towards awareness and IEC 
activities only after transforming the material, prepared by the National 
Institute for Disaster Management (NIDM), ATI and UNICEF, to the 
State’s applicability.   However, no action has been taken either by 
SEC/nodal department for customisation of these materials. Consequently, 
funds were not disbursed to districts by the nodal department even as of 
October 2023. 
➢ NIDM, a premier institute for training and capacity building, aimed to 
create interest and raise the level of knowledge, skill and awareness on 
disaster management by offering free -of-cost self -study courses for the 
public, government officials and other stakeholders.  This facility could be 
accessed by anyone from anywhere in the country a t his/her convenience 
in flexi time.  However, the nodal department neither provided any 
publicity among the public/NGOs/CSOs regarding availability of such an 
opportunity nor encouraged government officials to get enrolled for free -
of-the-cost courses. 
Thus, the State Government had not taken any effective action towards reaching 
out to the people exposed to disaster risks at the grassroot level through the vital 
aspect of community awareness and IEC activities.  This gap may lead to 
delayed or inadequate responses, increased vulnerability and disturbances 
during disasters which could hinder recovery efforts.   
The Government replied  (August 2024) that digital IEC materials have been 
created for various disasters during 2023 -24 which have been disseminated to 
all the districts  and on social media platforms.  It is further stated that an 
Executive IEC Consultant is being hired to oversee  the preparation of creative 
IEC visuals. 
The reply cannot be accepted as State Government could have utilised/ 
customised the IEC material already prepared by  NIDM and UNICEF  and 
available free of cost  instead of a ppointing another Executive Consultant for 

Chapter II: Institutional framework and Capacity building  
27 
IEC, which would additionally burden the SDRF grants.  Further, neither were 
copies of the disseminated digital IEC materials nor social media links furnished 
to audit.   
Recommendation 4: The State Government should prioritise IEC activities at 
all levels to create awareness and better educate communities  on disaster 
management.  
2.2.8 Strengthening of State/District Authorities 
Sections 16 and 29 of the DM Act stipulate that the State Government shall 
provide the State and District Authorities with such officers, consultants and 
other employees as it considers necessary for carrying out the functions. 
While KSDMA was grossly understaffed, t he State Government had not 
assessed the number of staff required for the functioning of the District 
Authorities. Audit observed that a total of 32 DM Professionals were appointed 
(31 professionals at district level and one at the State level) on an annual 
contract basis under the centrally sponsored scheme ‘Strengthening of State 
Disaster Management Authorities and District Disaster Management 
Authorities12’, to manage all the activities pertaining to DM. 
To discharge the expected duties and responsibilities13, the District Professional 
was to be trained onsite as well as off -site for acquiring knowledge base and 
management of all sorts of disasters, which also helps in preparation of DDMP 
comprehensively.  This requires the professional to extensively move around 
the district to understand the terrain and local ground realities and explore ways 
of handling disasters.  The status of the fundamental facilities/requirements 
provided to the district DM professionals was as detailed in Table 2.4 below: 
Table 2.4: Fundamental facilities/requirements provided to the district 
DM professionals 
Facility/Requirement Factual status 
Comprehensive training at NIDM and other high -level institutions for 
all sorts of disasters 
Training was not provided to any of 
the Professionals, except for the 
person in Dakshina Kannada who 
was given theoretical training twice 
for 3 and 5 days respectively 
Exclusive communication network (satellite phone/hot line/wireless 
set/mobile phone etc.) to be in contact with district administration and 
DDMA in handling disasters effectively 
A wireless walkie talkie provided 
only for the Professional at Kodagu 
district 
Simulation training to understand the ways for planning prevention as 
well as response activities to various disasters Not provided to any of the 
Professionals Specialised training for dealing with special emergency situations  
Training in conducting mock drills in different types of disasters (both 
pre and post disaster activities) 
 
12 The NDMA formulated (2015) the scheme with the objective of improving the effectiveness 
of all SDMAs and DDMAs and making them functionally operational  by providing 
dedicated DM professionals for taking up prevention, mitigation, preparedness and capacity 
building measures to deal with the threatening disaster situation or disasters. 
13 Which included carrying out hazard risk vulnerability assessments, updating the DDMP, 
implementing DRR activities/programmes, facilitating community training and awareness 
programmes, organising mock drill and Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
activities for district specific disasters etc. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
28 
Facility/Requirement Factual status 
A designated vehicle for exploring the vulnerable terrains during the 
disaster as also travelling for arranging awareness/IEC to the last mile 
community 
Appropriate lifesaving equipment (terrain specific shoes, raincoat, 
helmet, lifeguard, mask, etc.) 
Social security measures (life insurance, medical allowance/facilities 
Travelling/daily allowance towards extensive travelling to different 
parts of the district 
Source: Data obtained by district disaster professionals in the form of a google spreadsheet 
issued through Revenue Department. 
Thus, the district DMPs were expected to function without basic social security 
benefits to their own life and suitable simulative training.  To expect a person 
without wide range of training to be prepared against all possible hazards and 
draft comprehensive disaster management plan  as well as  impart community 
training for capacity building, etc., was not prudent. 
It is imperative to mention here that the professionals were not being used for 
the envisaged core functions and in the absence of required facilities the 
productivity/ outcome of these professionals was doubtful.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that action has already been initiated to 
provide required staff for KSDMA for effective functioning and will further be 
strengthened through World Bank Programmes.  However, the Government’s 
reply was silent on absence of fundamental facilities/  requirements for the 
district DM professionals at the grassroot level. 
2.3 Incident Response System 
Disaster response is a multi-agency function.  The nodal department (Revenue 
Department (Disaster Management)) was responsible for managing and 
coordinating the response while other departments/agencies were to support and 
aid in managing the incidents.  T he SDMP details the response activities to be 
carried out in cases of disasters.   
The SDMPs envisaged an Incident Response System (IRS) in the State 
involving different authorities and functionaries.  Accordingly, the State 
Government had to activate the Incidence Response Teams (IRTs) at the State, 
district or taluk level and ensure coordination with SEOC. The details of IRTs 
established and put to action during any of the disasters w ere not documented 
at any level. 
The Revenue Department replied (May 2023)  that inputs from all the 
stakeholder departments are being sought and the IRS would be formulated and 
notified. However, the Government did not offer any comments (August 2024). 

Chapter 
-
 
III
 
Financial 
 r
esources
 
and Utilisation
  


29 
CHAPTER III 
 
Financial resources and utilisation 
 
This chapter reveals gaps in financial resources and their utilisation. The State’s 
minimal allocation of funds for capacity building, preparedness, and mitigation 
activities hindered its transition from response -oriented approach to disaster risk 
reduction strategy.  
Financial management in the State was deficient  due to non-maintenance/ 
incomplete records and lack of reconciliation.  Instances of lapsing of grants, 
parking of funds with banks/implementing agencies, non-submission of utilisation 
certificates, ineligible expenditures , violation of SDRF norms and unexplained 
expenditure out of donations from citizens /corporate bodies towards disaster 
management were noticed. 
The funds released by the Centre were poorly documented. The irregular operation 
of multiple bank accounts at the taluk level further complicated fund tracking and 
raised concerns about potential misappropriation. Omissions such as the absence 
of disaster -wise expenditure  data, improper maintenance of cashbooks by the 
district and taluk authorities , mismatch between districts and taluks  financial 
records hindered accurate assessment of fund utilisation by audit. 
Management of response activities to notified disasters in the State is funded 
through the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) constituted under Section 48 (1) 
(a) of the DM Act. The Government of India (GoI) contributes 75 per cent of SDRF 
allocation and the State contributes the balance 25 per cent.   
The National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) constituted under Section 46 of the 
DM Act supplements the SDRF of the State during disasters of severe nature when 
adequate funds are not available in SDRF.  As per recommendations of the XV 
Finance Commission and accepted by the GoI, the central financial grant-in-aid to 
the State was renamed as the State Disaster Risk Management Fund (SDRMF) and 
involves two components i.e., State Disaster Response Fund and State Disaster 
Mitigation Fund (SDMF).  The allocation between the two is in the ratio of 80:20 
respectively. 
In the State, the Revenue Department (DM) manages the finances for receipt/ 
expenditure towards DM and maintenance of accounts thereon.  The SDRF funds 
are operated through the Treasury at the State and district level and through bank 
accounts at the taluk level 14. The SEC is responsible for ensuring that the money 
drawn from SDRF is utilised for the purpose for which the SDRF was set up, 
expenditure is incurred on stipulated items as per norms and not diverted for 
inadmissible expenditure etc.  
3.1 Finance management  
 
3.1.1 Improper maintenance of financial records 
The Karnataka Financial Code, 1958 (Articles 327 to 345) explains the procedure 
for handling cash and maintenance of its account.  Audit, however, observed that 
besides improper maintenance of cashbook, concurrent records like comprehensive 
 
14 Government instructed the taluks to operate funds through treasury since 2022 -23 onwards. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
30 
set of receipt/release orders, reconciliation statements, annual balance 
confirmation certificates, etc., were also not maintained in the nodal Revenue 
Department. Non-maintenance of prescribed financial records with periodical 
reconciliation, despite carrying out financial transactions of high value was, thus, 
a gross violation of the codal provisions and canons of financial propriety.   
In the absence of prescribed financial records, Audit could not ensure the 
correctness of the receipts and expenditures incurred/exhibited in the financial 
statements made available to Audit.  
The Government replied  (August 2024) that  directions have been issued to  the 
concerned to maintain records properly and to conduct periodical reconciliation.   
3.1.2 Receipts and Expenditure 
In the absence of necessary financial records at State level, the statement of receipts 
and expenditure of the State towards disaster management (as furnished by the 
nodal Revenue Department) for the period 2017-18 to 2022-23 is depicted in Table 
3.1 below. 
Table 3.1: Receipts and Expenditure for disaster management 
                  (₹ in crore) 
Year OB NDRF 
SDRF SDMF  
Additional 
grants 
from State 
Total 
releases Expenditure 
GoI  State  GoI  State  
2017-18 1235.52 913.04 228.75 76.25 - - 37.19 2490.75 2,411.61 (97) 
2018-19 - 959.84 288.00 32.00 - - 400.00 1679.84 1,207.22 (72) 
2019-20 434.62 2744.26 204.00 132.00 - - 1500.00 5014.88 4,899.52 (98) 
2020-21 - 577.84 632.40 210.80 158.20 52.60 608.13 2239.97 2,238.37 (100) 
2021-22 - 1734.3 632.40 210.80 158.20 52.60 2426.27 5214.57 5,003.75 (96) 
2022-23 - 939.83 664.00 221.33 - - 1179.61 3004.77 2,939.41 (95) 
Total  7869.11 2649.55 883.18 316.40 105.20 6151.20 19644.78 18,699.88 (95) 
Source: Information furnished by the Revenue Department (Disaster Management) 
Figures in parentheses indicate percentage. 
The expenditure reported ranged between 72 and 100 per cent  of the receipts 
received during each year, as releases made to the districts and other agencies were 
booked as expenditure. 
Under SDMF, Audit observed that while the State Government released (2020-21) 
a sum of ₹184.50 crore (out of available ₹210.80 crore) to the districts offices with 
an instruction not to utilise the grants till receipt of guidelines from Government of 
India, the entire funds of ₹210.80 crore pertaining to 2021-22 were retained by the 
State Government, without releasing the funds to implementing agencies. Further, 
during the year 2022-23, as per the XV Finance Commission recommendations, an 
aggregate amount ₹221.40 crore (GoI - ₹166.05 crore and State - ₹55.35 crore) was 
to be provided under SDMF.However, due to no n-receipt of earmarked amount 
from GoI, State Government also did not release its matching share.   This resulted 
in non -execution of mitigative activities in the State with respect to 
hazards/different disasters, despite availability of funds aggregating to  ₹421.60 
crore. 
The above observation was also mentioned in the CAG’s Report No.1 – 
Government of Karnataka for the year 2024.  

Chapter III: Financial Resources and Utilisation  
31 
3.1.3 Discrepancies in account statements 
Since the transactions were operated through the treasury, Audit verified financial 
transactions with the records of the Office of the Accountant General (Accounts & 
Entitlements), Karnataka, Bengaluru and noticed discrepancies in exhibition of 
opening balances, receipts under different categories as well as expenditure figures 
as detailed in Appendix 3.1. 
Further analysis showed that as against the actual transfer of ₹4.19 crore to CDM-
ATI during 2019 -20, the department had reported only ₹4.06 crore resulting in 
short accountal of ₹0.13 crore.  Similarly, during the year 2021 -22, though an 
amount of ₹3 crore was shown as having been released to CDM -ATI, the funds 
were not actually transferred .  Evidently, the department did not  reconcile the 
financial figures periodically. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the expenditure is recorded at the State 
level based on release orders and reconciled through 62-B15 issued by the treasury.  
Any discrepancy with the AG (A&E) figures is likely due to non-drawal or lapsing 
of released grants by districts or agencies. It is further replied that action is being 
taken to ensure maintenance and updation of cash books.  
3.1.4 Component-wise expenditure 
The component wise break -up of expenditure  on disaster management , as 
furnished by the nodal Revenue Department (Disaster Management), is shown in 
Table 3.2.  
Table 3.2: Component-wise releases under disaster management 
(₹ in crore)                                                                                                                                              
Year 
Preparedness 
and capacity 
building 
Rescue 
and relief 
Reconstruction 
and 
Rehabilitation  
Mitigation COVID-
19 Total 
2017-18 0.52 483.68 1,927.41 0 0 2,411.61 
2018-19 0 482.00 725.22 0 0 1,207.22 
2019-20 4.86 1,061.42 3,792.88 0 40.36 4,899.52 
2020-21 31.60 760.08 577.84 184.50 684.35 2,238.37 
2021-22 34.57 663.73 3,143.07 0 1,162.38 5,003.75 
2022-23 36.29 631.25 2,177.87 0 94.00 2,939.41 
Total 107.84 4,082.16 12,344.29 184.50 1,981.09 18,699.88 
Source: Information furnished by the Revenue Department (Disaster Management. 
While the State had released funds mainly for reconstruction and rehabilitation 
activities followed by rescue and relief, the releases for preparedness and capacity 
building were very meagre (< one per cent ). The funds released for mitigation 
remained unspent for want of guidelines from the GoI. 
State Government stated (December 2023) that component -wise breakup of 
expenditure was maintained only from 2021 -22 on the recommendations of XV 
Finance Commission and expenditure towards input subsidy was shown under the 
head Reconstruction and Rehabilitation. 
 
 
 
15 Treasury schedule depicting head of account-wise expenditure. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
32 
3.1.4.1  Expenditure on disaster management activities 
The fund-flow mechanism in respect of disaster management is shown in Chart 
3.1 below. 
Chart 3.1: Fund flow chart for disaster management 
 
The Revenue Department (Disaster Management), being the nodal department, 
releases funds meant for disaster management to districts, capacity building 
departments/agencies and towards input subsidy for crop loss, etc., through 
treasury.  The Central grants under SDRF are released 16 annually by the State 
Government to all the districts , however without indicating Head of account, at 
times, even without specifying any particular calamity. Thus, the funds released to 
the districts are pooled in the Personal Deposit (PD) Account of the D eputy 
Commissioners (DCs) maintained at respective district treasuries.    
❖ Improper accounting of funds 
On scrutiny of fund release orders from State level, Audit observed that the releases 
were not ‘calamity specific/component specific’, and many a time included 
activities relating to multiple disasters (for e.g. flood-drought, rain -flood-
landslides, etc.) under single Object Head of Account.  Audit also observed 
instances of releasing of funds to DCs, though not affected by disasters, quoting 
‘insufficient balance - less than ₹5.00 crore’ in PD accounts.  Further releases from 
districts to taluks were not with reference either to disasters/component or Head of 
Account. Hence, the cashbook was maintained as a matter of routine in all the test-
checked districts without any distinct account of disaster-wise receipt/expenditure 
(including expenditure towards COVID-19). 
The DCs subsequently released funds to taluks and other implementing agencies 
(like divisions of PWD, PRED, RWS, etc.,) through treasury cheques, based on the 
local need/demand.  The taluks and implementing agencies operate the DM funds 
 
16 Under heads of account 2245 -80-102-0-01-139 (Major Works) , 2245-80-102-0-01-059 (Other 
Expenditure) and 2245-80-102-0-01-051 (Capacity building). 


Chapter III: Financial Resources and Utilisation  
33 
in their bank accounts.  While the taluks utilise funds for DM activities like 
payment of compensations, operation of relief centres, temporary restoration 
works, etc., the implementing agencies execute works entrusted to them by district 
and taluk authorities. Similar to districts, disaster -wise/component-wise details 
have not been maintained in any of the test-checked taluks.  
❖ Irregularities in maintenance of cashbook  
Audit also observed that while many taluks have not maintained/updated cashbook 
relating to disaster management, the entries in the maintained cashbooks were 
improper inasmuch as they depicted non-recording of narrations of the payments, 
payment to a group of people in a single entry, payments not attested, non -
accounting of cheques returned without payment, etc. Illustrative photographs of 
improper maintenance of cashbook are depicted in Exhibit 3.1 below. 
Exhibit 3.1: Photographs showing improper cashbooks 
 
 
Cashbook of Tahsildar, Mangaluru taluk 
 
 
Cashbook of Tahsildar, Shivamogga taluk 
Source: Joint Physical Verification. 
The photographs above clearly evidenced that the cashbooks have been written 
based on the entries in the bank account pass -sheet, but not as and when the 
cheques were drawn for payment. In the light of these omissions, fraudulent 
payments, if any, to ghost  beneficiaries could not be trace d in Audit.  The matter 
needs to be investigated in detail. 
Instances of non/improper maintenance of cashbook and other financial records by 
the district/taluk level offices in the test -checked districts as shown in  
Appendix 3.2.  
❖ Irregularities in maintenance of bank accounts 
Further, the taluks were operating multiple bank accounts (two to six) especially 
in private banks such as HDFC, Axis Bank, YES Bank, ICICI etc. Taluk-wise 
details of multiple bank accounts are shown in Appendix 3.3. 
Audit noticed that multiple bank accounts opened were without the approval of the 
Government/competent authority and violated the instructions of the Government 
issued vide notification of January 2017. Further, the State Government vide order 
dated 23 May 2022  directed that all Tahsildars should carry out the transactions 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
34 
relating to Disaster Management  only through the Personal Deposit accounts at 
treasury.  However, none of the test checked taluks have switched over fully to PD 
account operation by transferring the balances to PD accounts. Audit noticed that 
taluks of Chikkaballapura are yet to open PD  accounts and continue to operate 
SDRF grants through bank accounts (August 2024) only. 
❖ Discrepancies between accounts of districts and taluks 
On verification of cashbooks of test -checked districts and taluks, wherever 
maintained, Audit observed variations between the releases as per district office 
records and the receipts shown by the taluk offices. Illustratively, the discrepancies 
observed in Shivamogga and Chikkaballapura districts are indicated below: 
a) DC, Shivamogga released an amount of ₹1.37 crore to Sagara taluk during 
the year 2017-18.  But the same was not traceable in the cashbook as well 
as in the bank account of the taluk, furnished to Audit.  Upon query by 
Audit, the Tahsildar produced a new bank account statement where the 
amount was shown to have been released to  Rural Drinking Water and 
Sanitation Department , Shivamogga.  However, further details such as 
copies of release orders/OMs were not made available to Audit. 
b) ₹50.00 lakh released by DC, Shivamogga to the Shivamogga taluk vide 
order dated 28.01.20 was not accounted in the cash book which resulted in 
understatement of actual receipts and closing balance of grant available 
with the tahsildar. 
c) Chintamani taluk of Chikkaballapura district, despite having a precedence 
of instances of misappropriation of funds, did not maintain cashbook and 
did not  provide copies of OMs/vouchers in support of fund utili sation 
either, making it difficult for Audit to vouch for fund utilisation.  A special 
investigation needs to be conducted to derive an assurance about the SDRF 
expenditure made by Chintamani taluk. 
d) In Chikkaballapura taluk, ₹1.03 crore was not accounted in cashbook and 
the entire amount was debited from bank account by bank authorities on 
20.12.21.  Upon Audit query, Tahsildar, Chikkaballapura ha d written a 
letter (21.08.24) to Bank, wherein it was noticed that a cheque was drawn 
for the whole amount and kept in suspense for the past three years.   
e) Discrepancy noticed in Belagavi district is detailed in Appendix 3.4. 
Due to the operation of multiple bank accounts and inter -transfer of funds from 
one account to another , coupled with improper maintenance of cashbooks and 
absence of proper UCs, it was difficult for Audit to vouch for the transactions of 
taluks. 
Non-maintenance of records and absence of transparency in accounting of funds 
coupled with non -reconciliation is fraught with the risk of misappropriation/ 
embezzlement, if any, going unnoticed. 
The Government replied  (August 2024) that directions have been issued to 
concerned officials to properly maintain required records and to reconcile the same 
periodically.  Action has been initiated to get the services of State Accounts 
Department staff on deputation basis to supervise financial transactions pertaining 
to SDRMF and also engage the services of statutory auditors for audit compliances.  

Chapter III: Financial Resources and Utilisation  
35 
Recommendation 5: The State Government should ensure strict adherence to 
financial record -keeping and reconciliation procedures  to enhance 
accountability and transparency in financial transactions. 
❖ Substantial unspent balances with districts and taluks and absence of UCs 
Audit also noticed that the district/taluk authorities had significant unspent 
balances at the end of March 2023 as shown in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Unspent balances with district/taluk authorities of test-checked 
districts as at the end of March 2023 
(₹ in crore) 
District 
Unspent balance 
available in the PD 
Account of DCs 
Unspent 
balances in 
taluks17 
Number of taluks 
Total Information 
furnished 
Belagavi 51.08 22.18 14 14 
Chikkaballapura 19.87 2.50 06 06 
Dakshina Kannada 13.21 2.85 09 09 
Davanagere 9.04 3.12 06 06 
Haveri 27.58 -- 08 00 
Kalaburagi 44.35 2.60 11 03 
Kodagu 57.04 -- 05 00 
Ramanagara 19.26 0.87 04 01 
Shivamogga 21.07 6.36 07 07 
Total 262.50 40.53 70 46 
Source: Information furnished by district and taluk offices. 
The huge unspent balances indicate that the actual expenditure on DM in the State 
was overstated as the releases to the districts and other departments/agencies were 
booked as expenditure.  This not only resulted in incorrect reporting of expenditure 
by the State to the GoI/NDMA but also showed the absence of reconciliation and 
monitoring mechanisms by the department. Though the  department could not  
obtain Utilisation Certificates periodically for the funds released, subsequent funds 
were released as a matter of routine, without reference to progress of expenditure.    
Thus, the absence of details of disaster -wise receipts/expenditure, improper 
maintenance of cashbooks without due recordings, irregular maintenance of 
multiple bank accounts, mismatch between districts and taluks  financial records, 
etc., had prevented audit from assessing the  correctness of accounts of disaster 
management, from records made available to audit.  
3.1.4.2 Expenditure on capacity building 
Analysis of the financial statements furnished by the Department showed that out 
of ₹107.84 crore, an aggregated amount of ₹47.26 crore (44 per cent) was released 
to KSNDMC and ₹35.73 crore (33 per cent) to Fire and Emergency department for 
capacity building and procurement of essential equipment.  Funds released for 
capacity building activities to the districts and CDM-ATI were 12 and 11 per cent 
respectively of the total releases towards capacity building. 
 
 
17  The information to the extent provided by the taluk authorities has been compiled and 
consolidated.  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
36 
❖ Utilisation of funds by KSNDMC 
Though the N odal department had stated that ₹46.99 crore  was released to 
KSNDMC during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23, KSNDMC was reported to have 
received ₹47.89 crore indicating the absence of a reconciliation mechanism.  Audit 
observed that neither had KSNDMC furnished any Utilisation Certificate (UC) for 
the releases made to it nor did the department insist on the same. The absence of 
UCs and reconciliation between the department and the agency resulted in 
discrepancies. 
During 2017-23, the KSNDMC spent ₹21.77 crore and as at the end of March 2023 
held a balance of ₹27.04 crore18 in its bank account (savings and deposits) which 
constituted more than 50 per cent  of the releases.  However, the expenditure 
incurred by KSNDMC on the below -mentioned items  was inadmissible under 
SDRF grants of the State, due to the reasons mentioned there against in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Ineligible expenditure incurred by KSNDMC 
Name of the work 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Audit remarks 
Supply, Installation, Commissioning and 
maintenance of Telemetric Rain Gauge, 
Telemetric Weather Stations and 
Telemetric Water Level sensors in 
Mangaluru, Belagavi and Hubballi -
Dharwad SMART cities 
281.53 
These were the activities to be 
taken care of by the respective 
municipal bodies and the 
expenditure was to be charged 
under SMART City Mission 
programme. 
Hire charges of chartered flight for 
viewing the flood -affected places in the 
State during the visit of Inter-Ministerial 
Central Team 
11.22 
These administrative expenditures  
were not admissible under SDRF  
and were to be  borne by the State 
Government. 
  Salary to staff 12.91 
Total 305.66  
Source: Information furnished by KSNDMC. 
Besides, audit observed that KSNDMC had incurred an expenditure of ₹1.03 crore 
on the work of ‘Strengthening of SEOC at KSNDMC’ as a control room with 
communication equipment during the year 2021 -22 utilising the funds available 
under SDRF grants.  Concurrently, audit also observed that KSNDMC had incurred 
an expenditure of ₹61.84 lakh on the work ‘Supply, installation of equipment to 
strengthen SEOC and refurbishment of KSDMA office at MS Building, Bengaluru’ 
with components like video wall, communication/ conferencing equipment, well -
designed conference room, etc.  However, the refurbished room was utilised by the 
Revenue Department for other official purposes, instead of by the intended SEOC.   
As commented in Paragraph 2.1.9 previously, while there was no physical 
establishment of KSDMA, the SEOC was grossly non -functional at MS Building 
premises. Thus, the expenditure ₹61.84 lakh incurred towards interior decoration 
works out of SDRF grants (meant for capacity building and preparedness activities) 
was clearly ineligible. 
 
 
 
18  Includes interest amount of ₹91 lakh. 

Chapter III: Financial Resources and Utilisation  
37 
❖ Utilisation of funds by Fire and Emergency Department 
The Revenue Department had released ₹43.37 crore to the Fire and Emergency 
Department during the period 2013 -2022 towards training, capacity building and 
procurement of equipment for DRF units.  The Fire and Emergency Department 
had utilised ₹23.68 crore and ₹7.69 crore (released towards the components of 
search and rescue, capacity building and training) remained unutilised and was 
lying in the bank account as at the end of March 2023.  The Fire and Emergency 
Department did not furnish either the reasons for non-utilisation or action plans for 
utilisation. Further, an amount of ₹12 crore lapsed during 2022 -23 as the 
department could not utilise the funds timely.   This resulted in parking of S DRF 
grants outside the Government account.  It also indicates that the Fire and 
Emergency department had no plans for the purchase of equipment and capacity 
building. 
❖ Utilisation of funds by Centre for Disaster Management 
As against ₹9.29 crore actually released to CDM-ATI during the period 2017-2023 
for conducting training activities on DM, the Institute had spent ₹4.18 crore and 
the balance ₹5.11 crore remained in the bank account of CDM and outside the 
Government account.  Audit observed that the average annual expenditure of CDM 
during the period 2017 -18 to 2022 -23 was only ₹70 lakh and th e percentage of 
savings ranged between 29 and 89 per cent during these years.  Hence, release of 
funds more than the actual utilisation was unwarranted and there was nothing on 
record to justify the excess releases. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that replies in this regard will be 
furnished after getting details of the expenditure from KSNDMC, Fire and 
Emergency Department and CDM-ATI, Mysore. 
3.1.5  Release of funds not justified and Utilisation Certificates not obtained 
The Nodal Department had released funds to other departments/agencies from out 
of the SDRF grants as shown in Table 3.5 .  The details of utilisation by the 
recipients and the detailed statement of accounts thereon were, however, not 
obtained and placed on record. 
Table 3.5: Instances of fund releases to departments/agencies 
Year Department/Agency Recorded reason Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
2017-18 Animal Husbandry Fodder 500.00 
Aero India show  Not on record 27.20 
2018-19 Energy Department Flood infrastructure damage 521.00 
Source: Information furnished by the department. 
In this connection, audit observed the following: 
➢ The funds under SDRF were released to the DCs of the districts for ensuring 
temporary restoration of the damages caused due to disasters in the 
respective districts and the DCs in turn released the funds to implementing 
agencies for immediate repairs to infrastructure like roads, water supply, 
electricity, etc.  The Nodal D epartment could not  clarify the reasons for 
releasing funds to the Energy Department separately. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
38 
As the department concerned was to allocate funds from out of their budget 
grants for permanent restoration of the damages caused by the disasters, the 
possibility of duplication in release of funds for same works/purpose both 
by the Revenue department and the department concerned cannot be ruled 
out. 
➢ Though a sum of ₹92.00 crore had been released for purchase of fodder 
during drought, reasons for release of an additional amount of ₹5.00 crore 
to the Commissioner, Animal Husbandry Department were not on record. 
Further, it is also not ascertainable as to why the funds were released to the 
Commissioner, Animal Husbandry Department while the responsibility for 
purchase of fodder lies with the respective taluks. 
➢ Since SDRF funds are to be used for meeting the expenditure for providing 
immediate relief to the victims, the justification and reasons for release of 
₹27.20 lakh out of SDRF grants  towards Aero India show were not on 
record. 
The Government did not furnish any replies but stated (August 2024) that 
necessary details would be obtained from concerned departments. 
 
Recommendation 6: The State Government should obtain utilisation certificates 
periodically from the authorities concerned in order to monitor utilisation of 
grants. 
3.1.6 Misappropriation of SDRF grants 
Scrutiny of records of the Tahsildar, Chintamani taluk  under Chikkaballapur a 
district revealed that an office assistant had misappropriated an amount of ₹18.59 
lakh during the period 2017 -18 by forging the signature of the Tahsildar on 59 
cheques and a complaint was lodged with the police authorities during November 
2017.  Further developments in this regard were not forthcoming from the records. 
3.1.7 Payment of compensation under SDRF to ineligible cases 
The NDRF/SDRF guidelines stipulate payment of compensation to those affected 
by natural calamities like house collapse, water flooding into houses, serious 
injuries, etc.  The guidelines also provide for compensation payment to human and 
cattle deaths due to lightning, drowning (including those who participated in rescue 
operations) during natural calamities. 
On test-check of records relating to payment of compensation under SDRF, audit 
observed that the compensation was paid in the below-mentioned instances, though 
the cause of death of human/cattle was not related in any manner to natural 
calamities/disasters.   
A total of ₹1.81 crore was paid by the taluks of Haveri district and ₹2.00 lakh by 
Jewargi taluk of Kalaburagi district, out of SDRF fund, towards suicide deaths and 
deaths due to snake bite.  These cases were actually to be paid by the Department 
of Social Security and Pensions through DCs.  
In Kalaburgi district, compensation of ₹25.00 lakh had been paid out of SDRF 
grants to an army personnel who died in Naxal attack in Chattisgarh , while the 
compensation was to be borne by the Department of Sain ik Welfare and 
Resettlement. 

Chapter III: Financial Resources and Utilisation  
39 
Apart from the compensation, audit observed ineligible utilisation of SDRF grants 
by Kamalapur taluk under Kalaburgi district towards  honorarium for persons who 
conducted crop loss survey (₹0.51 lakh).  
3.1.8 Inadmissible expenditure under SDRF 
As per the guidelines, SDRF grants shall be used for meeting the expenditure 
towards immediate temporary restoration of damaged infrastructure due to 
disasters within the prescribed norms of SDRF.  The maximum expenditure that 
can be incurred on any such individual restoration work was ₹2.00 lakh . The 
permanent restoration of damaged infrastructure to normalcy was to be taken up 
through the regular budget grants of the respective departments.  
Audit scrutiny of records at district level showed execution of numerous works 
regarding repair/restoration of damaged infrastructure above the prescribed 
monetary limit of ₹2.00 lakh, which was inadmissible under SDRF. The district -
wise illustrative instances of execution of works in violation of the guidelines and 
monetary limits are shown in Appendix 3.5.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that suitable instructions would be issued 
to Deputy Commissioners to investigate the reported cases and to take necessary 
legal action against the erring Officers and directions would be given to districts to 
incur expenditure strictly as per SDRF norms only towards temporary restoration 
of infrastructure damages. 
Recommendation 7: The State Government should direct the authorities to 
adhere to accounting standards and conduct  a thorough investigation into 
irregular financial transactions. 
The Drought Manual mandated the  State Government to monitor their drought 
expenditures regularly through monitoring mechanisms like monthly expenditure 
statements (both at State and district levels), UCs and internal and external audits.  
As per the information furnished by the Revenue Department, a total amount of 
₹5,791.47 crore had been incurred towards drought management in the State during 
the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20. However, the details of district -wise releases or 
items towards which the expenditure had been booked were not furnished to audit. 
Besides, audit observed that the State Government/nodal department did not 
maintain incident-wise data on accounts or expenditure.  Besides, none of the test-
checked district administrations had submitted the required UCs  to the State 
Government/nodal department either incident -wise or for the total amount 
received/expended. Internal or external audit of the accounts of drought 
expenditure was not arranged by the State Government. Evidently, the efforts of 
the State Govern ment in preparing and monitoring the expenditure on drought 
relief were inadequate and thus, ineffective.  
The State Government replied (August 2024) that during Kharif 2023, all the relief 
as per the SDRD/NDRF norms is being disbursed through K2 treasury mechanism 
to maintain transparency and accountability instead of paying input subsidy 
through funds maintained in a bank account.  
3.1.9 Receipts of donations and expenditure therefrom 
The department in response to Audit seeking information on the donations received 
from business firms, contributions from Non -Government Organisations/public 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
40 
etc., stated (August 2022) that ₹88.82 crore was received as financial donations 
and ₹1.52 crore was spent.  
Audit observed from the records made available that  the Revenue Department 
(DM) did not maintain the required records19 viz., receipt book, remittance register 
and the cashbook for recording the transactions towards receipt of donations.  Thus, 
Audit verified the bank pass sheets and noticed that the department had received 
donations of ₹135.21 crore and had spent ₹35.63 crore between the period August 
2019 and September 2023.  Clear details of the donors were not ascertainable as 
the bank extract contained only the cheque number. The quantum of donations 
received varied from ₹10 to ₹10.47 crore in individual cases.  A review of the 
available records showed that out of the expenditure of ₹35.63 crore, Audit could 
not trace expenditure of ₹2.34 crore and an amount of ₹1.00 crore was recorded to 
have been transferred to KSDMA account, the reasons for which were not 
forthcoming from records made available. 
 
Thus, in the absence of complete records, Audit could not ascertain the total 
amount received and remitted to the Government.  The withdrawal of funds from 
this account which received donations without recording details was fraught with 
the risk of embezzlement  of funds going unnoticed.  The matter needs to be 
investigated. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that action would be taken to maintain 
proper records in respect of donations received and an Audit team will be 
constituted to probe any irregularities that have taken place. 
 
 
19 Rule 21 of the Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983 , states that the Head 
of an Office where money is received on behalf of the Government shall give the payer a receipt 
duly signed by him after he has satisfied himself, before signing the receipt and initialling its 
counterfoil, that the amount has been properly entered in the cash book. 

 
Chapter 
-
 
IV
 
Drought
 
 


41 
CHAPTER IV 
Drought 
In this chapter, issues related to impact of drought, drought management, 
response and relief measures are discussed. The State Government did not bring 
out region specific guidelines for management of drought though the State had 
experienced extensive drought regularly. Though the State was the first to 
establish the Drought Monitoring Cell way back in 1988, the weather 
monitoring system was flawed with deficiencies such as non -functional 
equipment, non-installation of soil moisture sensors. The State Government did 
not have sufficient details regarding socio-economic factors like decline in dairy 
production, industrial and energy production losses, and the adverse impact on 
environment. 
The efforts of the State Government in managing drought were not 
comprehensive as preparedness and mitigation measures like forecast 
mechanism, water conservation, rainwater harvesting, regulating groundwater 
extraction etc., were inadequate. The water supply project taken up for drought 
mitigation covering two of the test -checked districts ( Chikkaballapura and 
Ramanagara) was inordinately delayed due to frequent changes in design and 
alignment. The achievement in completion of the items of work in the test -
checked districts was insufficient.  
Relief employment was provided through MGNREGS only to 2.39 per cent of 
the households in drought affected areas, which was very meagre and thus, did 
not present an economic rationale for interventions  in drought response, relief 
and mitigation measures. 
 
4.1 Introduction 
 
Drought is a natural hazard and one of the most disastrous among the different 
natural hazards, as it severely affects all the sectors of society. Its impact, i.e., 
the damage to the ecology, disruption of socio -economic conditions of 
communities, the long-term effects of malnutrition on health and morbidity etc., 
are generally non -structural and difficult to quantify and can be reduced only 
through mitigation and preparedness.  
The National Commission on Agriculture in India had classified (1976) drought 
into three types: meteorological, agricultural and hydrological.  Meteorological 
drought is defined as a situation when there is a significant decrease from 
normal precipitation over an area ( i.e., more than 10 per cent). Hydrological 
drought results from prolonged meteorological drought resulting in depletion of 
surface and sub -surface water resources.  Agricultural drought is a situation 
when soil moisture and rainfall are inadequate to support healthy crops. 
4.2 Drought profile of the State 
Karnataka is an agrarian State  with more than 70 per cent of the people 
depending on agriculture and most of the cultivable area is rain-fed.  Karnataka 
ranks next to Rajasthan concerning drought.  Drought in the State is a common 
phenomenon due to spatial and temporal variation in rainfall within the region 
and within the seasons as well.  Due to this variability, both spatially and 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
42 
temporally, different regions are simultaneously prone to disasters like floods 
and drought in the State.  As per the data available with KSNDMC  for the 
period from 2001 to 2022, the State was affected by drought for about 15 years.  
Due to sufficient/excess rainfall since the year 2019, the State ha s not been 
subjected to drought during 2019 -23. The map showing the frequency of  
drought occurrence during the years 2001 to 2021 is depicted in Chart 4.1 
below. 
Chart 4.1: The map showing the frequency of drought occurrence during 
the years 2001 to 2021 
 
 
 
 
During the period 2017-2023 covered in the performance audit, while the State 
was affected by severe drought during the year 2018, the intensity of the drought 
during 2019 was comparatively less. The number of taluks notified as drought-
affected under the test-checked districts is shown in Table 4.1. 
 
 
 


Chapter IV: Drought  
43 
Table 4.1: Number of taluks affected by drought in test-checked districts 
District Total number 
of taluks 
Number of taluks affected 
2018 2019 
Belagavi 14 10 1 
Chikkaballapura 6 6 3 
Dakshina Kannada 7 5 0 
Davanagere 7 6 1 
Haveri 8 7 0 
Kalaburagi 11 7 3 
Kodagu 3 3 0 
Ramanagara 4 4 2 
Shivamogga 7 4 0 
Source: Information furnished by Revenue Department. 
Similarly, the year-wise data on the number of taluks affected by drought during 
2001-2022 is shown in Appendix 4.1. 
 
Audit observed that the taluks under the districts covered under western ghats 
which used to receive average rainfall over 3000 mm were also distressed by 
drought, thus, evidencing ineffective mitigation measures. 
4.2.1 Drought declaration 
Drought declaration signifies the beginning of Government response to 
conditions representing a drought situation. The Drought Manual brought out 
by the GoI specified a detailed modality for monitoring and determination of 
spatial expanse and intensity of drought based on objective parameters, to be 
further established on the basis of ground truthing through field verification. 
State Government was to adhere to the stipulations of the manual for an 
objective, transparent and timely declaration of drought. 
Of the six years covered under the PA, State had encountered drought during 
the years 2018 and 2019. During 2018, while 100 taluks were declared drought 
hit in the Kharif season, the number of taluks affected with drought increased 
to 156 during the Rabi season. The effect of drought continued till the Kharif 
season of 2019 wherein 49 taluks were declared  by State Government as 
drought affected. 
4.2.2 Impact of drought 
The drought severely impacts the economic, environmental and social sectors 
at macro and micro levels, both directly and indirectly. The impact of drought 
has been linked mostly to the agricultural sector, as deficiency of precipitation 
over an extended period, results in depletion of soil moisture which in turn  
reduces crop production. Year-wise quantum of crop loss, as estimated by the 
State Government , during the years from 2013 to 2018 20  due to drought 
situation in the State is shown in Table 4.2. 
 
 
20  State did not face drought during 2020-2022. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
44 
Table 4.2: Estimated crop loss in the State due to drought 
Year Estimated crop loss (₹ in crore) 
Agriculture Horticulture Total 
2013 1,016.99 702.30 1,719.29 
2014 2,706.17 882.90 3,589.07 
2015 21,204.51 1,164.70 22,369.21 
2016 22,533.58 1,757.28 24,290.86 
2018 26,514.32 1,532.63 28,046.95 
Total 80,015.38 
     Source: Memoranda furnished by the department. 
As could be seen from the data above, there was a persistent rise in the quantum 
of loss year after year indicating the upsurge of vulnerability of the State to 
climatic variations.  Besides, drought can result in household food insecurity, 
water-related health risks , loss of livelihood , etc. which affects agriculture as 
well as other sectors of the economy. 
As a relief measure for the population affected by drought, the NDRF/SDRF 
norms permit the State Government to compensate the loss of crops due to 
natural hazards at the prescribed rates. The State Government supplemented the 
compensation additionally through its funding.   
Audit observed that the compensation was disbursed through an exclusive portal 
called ‘Parihara’, developed (2016) by the State Government and in the State, 
a total financial compensation of ₹1,625.39 crore had been paid to the drought 
affected landholders during the year 2018-19. 
4.3 Drought Management 
Besides the components of disaster management cycle, drought management in 
particular encompasses three vital components  viz., drought intensity 
assessment and monitoring, drought declaration and prioritization of areas for 
drought management, and development and implementation of drought 
management strategies.   The primary responsibility of managing drought  is 
that of the State Government and the Central Government supplements the 
efforts of the State Government in effective drought management and provides 
additional resources (foodgrains/financial assistance etc.) to combat the 
situation.  The State Government should ensure that the declaration of drought 
is in accordance with the modalities and timelines prescribed so that 
relief/assistance can be provided to the drought-affected people on time. 
4.3.1 Framework for drought management 
As part of the NDM Guidelines, GoI brought out ( September 2010 ) the 
‘Management of Drought’ guidelines which were updated in December 2020.  
The GoI also had in place the Manual for Drought Management, 2009  which 
was revised in December 2016 . This manual serves as a guide to the 
Governments and agencies engaged in the prevention, mitigation and 
management of drought.  
Though the State experienced drought situation during most of the years in the 
past two decades, and the State Government  was aware of the spatial and 
temporal variation of climate/rainfall among the various parts of the State, the 

Chapter IV: Drought  
45 
State Government/KSDMA did not bring out region -specific guidelines for 
management of drought .  The topography of the State  is distributed widely 
among vivid climatological regions like humid, sub-humid, semi-arid and arid 
besides heavy rainfall/dense forest western ghats  and malnad region .  Hence, 
there is a need for exclusive region-based guidelines stipulating suitable water 
harvesting/conservation measures, crop ping pattern, contour cultivation 
methods, sub-surface barriers, irrigation systems, etc., to combat the hazards of 
drought. 
The State Government did not furnish any reasons for not publishing region -
specific guidelines for the State. 
4.3.2 Deficient forecast mechanism  
As provided in the Drought Manual, the State Government was expected to 
develop monitoring systems at the smallest administrative unit levels (e.g. Sub-
division/Hobli/Taluk/Gram Panchayat etc.), to enable generation of sharper and 
credible observation data that are reflective of ground realities.   However, the 
weather monitoring system in the State was flawed with d eficiencies as 
discussed below. 
4.3.2.1 Non-functional/malfunctioning weather monitoring equipment 
The SDMP vests the re sponsibility of monitoring key indicators for drought 
declaration to KSNDMC . Though the Government established the Drought 
Monitoring Cell way back in 1988  in the State, the forecast mechanism was 
deficient due to under -performance of the installed equipment, as discussed 
below. 
The KSNDMC installed Telemetric Rain Gauges ( TRGs) and Telemetric 
Weather Stations (TWSs) in a phased manner (2009-2015) and refurbished the 
instruments at different intervals with an annual maintenance contract. On 
verification of functionality of these TRGs and TWSs , audit observed that the  
number of these equipment which remained non -functional witnessed an 
increasing trend, as shown in the Table 4.3 below. 
Table 4.3: Functionality status of TRGs and TWSs in the State 
 
Year TRGs TWSs 
Total installed Non-functional Total installed Non-functional 
Upto 2018 5,891 12 834 4 
2019 6,240 31 834 5 
2020 6,343 159 834 27 
2021 6,358 246 834 51 
2022 6,358 968 834 102 
2023 6,358 2,770 834 463 
Source: Information furnished by KSNDMC through email (Status as of 8 December 2023). 
As of December 2023, the percentage of defective instruments was 43 and 52 
respectively. However, effective action had not been taken by KSNDMC either 
to repair or replace the defective instruments to obtain the realistic data of 
weather parameters.   

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
46 
Audit also observed that KSDNMC had not revised the annual maintenance  
contract for 1,289 TRGs since March 2022 and for 670 TRGs since March 2023, 
which resulted in non-/malfunctioning of the instruments. Further, a total of 153 
TRGs (costing around ₹68 lakh – average cost of ₹45,000/- each) were recorded 
as “stolen” and 138 TRGs were recorded as ‘damaged’ . Hence, data was not 
being recorded from these instruments.  Neither had KSNDMC nor the 
maintenance agency taken any action to ascertain the reasons for theft/damage 
nor were any complaints filed with the police authorities.  Photographs 
depicting the damaged equipment are shown in the Exhibit 4.1 below. 
Exhibit 4.1: Photographs showing damaged and non-functional weather 
forecast equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 
 
 
Source: KSNDMC. 
During the exit conference (January 2024) the State Government attributed the 
deficiencies in forecast mechanism to absence of maintenance contracts for 
installed equipment and assured that the issues would be looked into in detail.  
Apparently, vital decisions for disaster management are being taken in the State 
through a deficient forecast mechanism. Reply of the Government highlights its 
negligence in initiating timely action to renew maintenance contract s (lapsed 
two years back ) or to install new equipment which are  crucial for effectively 
monitoring weather parameters and planning preparatory measures. 


Chapter IV: Drought  
47 
4.3.2.2 Non-installation of soil moisture sensors 
Measuring soil moisture and moisture adequacy in agricultural systems is one 
of the crucial components in disaster management, particularly for declaration 
of drought in a specific location. Soil moisture is highly dynamic in space and 
time and is measured using soil sensors or satellite remote sensing. 
Though Karnataka was second to Rajasthan in encountering ill effects of 
drought recurrently, the Government had not taken measures for  procurement 
and installation of soil moisture sensors in the State, which could help in region 
specific drought mitigation plans. 
 
4.4 Preparedness Against Drought 
 
4.4.1 Drought monitoring and preparedness 
The preparedness for drought involves strategic planning and resource 
management to mitigate its impact on communities and ecosystems. Proactive 
measures are essential to ensure resilience and sustainability in the context of 
prolonged water scarcit y situations. The flowing paragraphs reveal the 
omissions in this regard. 
 
4.4.1.1 Absence of State Crisis Management Plan 
As per Section 2.1.1 of the Drought Manual, 2016 of GoI, it was essential that 
along with a drought monitoring system, medium and long -term area-specific 
plans be prepared for drought proofing of susceptible areas.  In addition, Crisis 
Management Plans21 were to be formulated with care to deal with drought in 
the short term. Such well -conceived plans, when executed promptly, can go a 
long way in mitigating distress and disruption to the rural economy and society. 
As provided in the Crisis Management Plan of the GoI, the parameters which 
may indicate an onset of drought condition s are (i) Rainfall (ii) Progression of 
sowing (iii) Remote sensing based Vegetative Indices, (iv) Soil Moisture Based 
Indices and (v) Hydrological Indices (Ground water drought index), which are 
to be monitored. Since crisis management plan relies upon forecast mechanism 
to predict, prevent and manage drought, deficiencies in forecast mechanism  as 
discussed in preceding paragraphs  could be attributable to non -preparation of 
an effective Crisis Management Plan. 
Further, audit observed from the records made available that the State 
Government/KSDMA/SEC had not formulated the Crisis Management Plan in 
the State during any of the years (covered under audit) affected by drought.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that Crisis Management Plan was 
formulated during 2023 -24 by the Departments of Agriculture, R ural 
Development and Panchayat Raj and Animal Husbandry to manage drought. 
The reply thus is in agreement with the Audit observation that no crisis 
management plan was in place prior to 2023-24. 
 
21  Crisis Management Plan is part of overall spectrum of drought management  but is focused 
on management interventions required during the time of crisis. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
48 
4.4.1.2 Ineffective Crop Weather Watch Group 
The State Government had set up a Crop Weather Watch Group (CWWG) in the 
State to monitor the drought situation in the State on the lines of the CWWG at 
the national level.  As per the Drought Manual of GoI, 2020, the CWWG was 
to meet once a week  during the rainy season (June to September) and the 
frequency of their meetings was to be increased during drought occurrence to 
monitor the status of the drought. Audit observed that the CWWG did not meet 
as envisaged during the years 2017 to 2022. The number of meetings of CWWG 
varied between zero and six as against the required 16 meetings during the 
monsoon period of a year.   
On scrutiny of the minutes of the meetings held during the drought year of 2018-
19, audit further observed that the CWWG decided (28 July 2018) to meet every 
week to oversee the drought situation in the State.  However, no meetings were 
held thereafter during 2018. Lack of adequate supervision and guidance by the 
CWWG resulted in affecting the preparedness and response to  drought 
encompassing the State, including those districts/taluks which had faced severe 
rain/flood/landslides three months back. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that as the State experienced flood 
during the past four years and was drought hit only during 2023-24, the CWWG 
is actively functioning  and met 14 times.  Reply is not tenable as CWWG is 
required to meet to discuss issues arising not only during drought but also during 
other natural calamities.  However, the reply is silent on shortfall in meetings 
of CWWG during drought year of 2018 where the estimated crop loss was to 
the tune of ₹28,046 crore. 
4.4.1.3 Drought Management Information System 
The Drought Manual stipulated  that the State Government should develop a 
Drought Management Information System (DMIS) at the State level on 
different aspects of drought management, which was to be replicated at the 
district and taluk levels with information at each level supporting th e DMIS at 
the higher level.  The DMIS was to be updated every week during the period 
of drought. 
The State Government/nodal department did not maintain the stipulated DMIS, 
either at the State level or district/taluk levels. As a result, the required 
information on key indicators of drought as well as the important interventions 
for drought relief like employment, support to farmers, food security, drink ing 
water, supply of feed and fodder as well as health and hygiene were not captured 
and compiled. In the absence of DMIS, the Government lost the opportunity of 
maintaining crucial time series  data on  key indicators, for the State or a 
particular region, for future planning and preparedness. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that  information related to Drought 
relief had been collected from the districts during Kharif Drought 2023 and had 
been put on a GIS public platform, which is to be further refined. 
4.4.1.4 Absence of Standard Operating Procedure 
Drought Manual also prescribed preparing/issuing Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) for collection, updation of data related to the drought 

Chapter IV: Drought  
49 
variables. Besides, the SDMP also stipulated preparation, regular reviews and 
improvement of SOPs, protocols, etc., which were to complement its plan.  
However, in the absence of DMIS coupled with infrequent meetings of CWWG, 
the required SOPs were not prepared /issued in the State either prior to or after 
declaration of drought .  The  drought declaration orders merely included 
instructions like providing employment under MGNREGS to landless 
labourers, supply of drinking water, protection of livestock, supply of fodder, 
etc., under SDRF grants. 
4.4.2 Drought mitigation measures  
Drought mitigation measures are to reduce soil erosion, augment soil moisture, 
restrict surface run-off of rainwater and improve the efficiency of water use. It 
involves a wide range of soil and water conservation measures and farm 
practices. Karnataka experienced a strange situation in 2018. While there was a 
shortfall of rain in many parts of the State, test-checked southern districts like 
Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu etc., were affected by heavy rainfall  coupled 
with devastating flood/landslides during August.  However, these districts, 
along with other districts, were declared (December 2018) drought -hit during 
the Rabi season of the same year.   
This is indicative of the fact that t he State Government/district administrations 
did not  initiate proper and adequate mitigative measures  like water 
conservation, water harvesting, artificial groundwater recharging activities etc., 
as commented in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.4.2.1 Absence of monitoring by the nodal department 
Implementing the drought management measures would require a continuous 
flow of information from the village  level to the highest level of decision -
making in the State and a responsive administrative structure. The SDMPs 
prescribe departments to prepare and update a robust database of micro -level 
details on rainfall, reservoir/ lake water levels, surface water/ ground water, soil 
moisture, sowing/ crop conditions and socio-economic factors at the end of the 
South West and North-East monsoons. 
However, the nodal department for  preparation of information on the SDMP 
and management of disasters in the State was not in possession of any 
information regarding activities/measures taken up by the respective 
department/s 22  and hence, did not provide any information regarding the 
compliance with NDMA guidelines/manual. The nodal department , thus, did 
not ensure  accountability and did not effectively monitor the 
activities/initiatives operationalised by other departments towards management 
of drought in the State. These measures could have gone a long way in reducing 
the severity of the drought. 
 
22  Agriculture, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj, Animal husbandry etc. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
50 
Thus, absence of effective coordination amongst the  related departments to 
initiate necessary drought mitigation measures, led to protracted drought over 
the years in Karnataka.  
4.4.2.2 Absence of a Mission/Task Force  
The Drought Manual, 2016 of GoI  recommended that the State 
Government/relief administration should set up a mission/task force for drought 
mitigation, which would not engage in actual day -to-day drought management 
but would be a body advising the State Governme nt on policies and 
programmes. The mission/task force should include experts on water resources, 
agriculture, forestry and related subjects, senior Government officials dealing 
with these subjects and NGOs.     
Audit observed that , as of 2022 -23, the envisaged mission/task force had not 
been set up in the State  for drought mitigation. Consequently, the mandated 
activities such as analysing the patterns of drought, distribution of impacts 
across sectors in the State, developing a database on the different indices of 
drought and suggesting policies and programmes for drought mitigation were 
not carried out.  
In the exit conference, the Government stated (January 2024) that the Task 
Forces have been formed (November 2023) and strengthened for carrying out 
envisaged functions like analysis of drought patterns and preparation of 
database, ensuring water harvesting/conservation initiatives, etc. 
The Government has given a misleading reply as Audit observed that the Task 
Force was not at all constituted at the State level as per the Drought Manual 
which stipulated formation of such a task force for advising on the issues of 
policies and programmes for drought management. The task force as referred to 
by the Government was constituted only at the Taluk Level but not at the State 
level, which is the Audit observation. 
4.4.2.3 Inadequate drought risk and vulnerability assessment 
The mission/task force on drought mitigation  was required to conduct drought 
risk and vulnerability assessment for the State, which includes identification of 
drought-prone areas of the State, nature and severity of drought, vulnerable 
economic sectors, communities and individuals.  The assessment was to 
evaluate the socio-economic cost of drought, by estimating crop losses, decline 
in dairy p roduction, livestock losses, industrial and energy production losses 
and the adverse impact on the environment in the State. Such an assessment is 
important for presenting an economic rationale for interventions and identifying 
mitigation measures. 
Though the data on the drought -prone areas, estimated crop loss and loss of 
livestock was available with the nodal department, the details of socio -
economic factors like decline in dairy production, industrial and energy 
production losses and the adverse i mpact on environment in the State had not 
been evaluated and kept on record. 
In the exit conference, the Commissioner, KSDMA stated (January 2024) that 
the data on socio -economic factors were being collected but not documented  
and instructions would be issued to document all the relevant factors. 

Chapter IV: Drought  
51 
4.4.2.4 Non-engagement of communities/organisations for drought 
mitigation 
Wider the community participation, the greater the public awareness about 
drought issues and policies /regulations for drought mitigation are likely to be 
more acceptable in such a situation. The Drought Manual recommended  
encouraging involvement of different community institutions actively in 
drought mitigation.  Further, the State Government and district administration 
were to involve NGOs in organizing drought relief .  Non-Government 
Organizations (NGOs) and Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) have the 
advantage of local presence and community outreach which could be utilized 
for organizing distribution of relief assistance and implementing mitigation 
programmes. The State Government and district administration were also 
required to set up a coordination forum for NGOs and CSOs  at the State and 
district levels respectively.   
However, records made available showed that neither the State Government nor 
the district administrations involved communities, NGOs and CSOs in drought-
proofing/mitigation activities . Thus, in the absence of participation by 
NGOs/CSOs, the Government lost opportunities to augment drought 
management mitigative measures like alternate cropping, water conservation 
techniques, etc., at the local/regional level. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that henceforth communities will be 
actively involved in drought mitigation and management. 
Recommendation 8: The State Government should formulate guidelines for 
mitigating drought considering geo -spatial climate variations and ensure 
effective coordination among all the stakeholders in enhancing  drought 
mitigation efforts. 
4.4.2.5 Water Harvesting and Conservation  
Water harvesting and conservation refer to processes and structures of rainfall 
and runoff collection from large catchment area s and channelling them for 
human consumption.  Conservation can be attempted through artificial 
recharge 23  of groundwater , rainwater harvesting  and the other traditional 
methods, which are low-cost, community-oriented and environment-friendly.  
However, such beneficial water harvesting and conservation measures were not 
attempted and adopted entirely in the State, as evident from the fact that test-
checked Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu districts which were severely affected 
by floods were declared drought affected within a span of 3 -4 months in the 
year 2018. 
Though the Government enacted amendment to an Act 24 mandating water 
harvesting, audit observed that the jurisdiction of the Act was limited only to 
 
23  Soil conservation and artificial recharge structures include  contour bunding , contour  
trenching, contour cultivation, bench terracing, graded bunding, gully plugging, check dams, 
nalla bunding, percolation tanks, injection wells, etc. 
24  Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1964 (August 2009). 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
52 
Bengaluru urban area .  Similar action towards water harvesting had not been 
taken anywhere in the State.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that the Departments of Urban 
Development, RDPR and Water Resources would be requested to look into the 
matter and take appropriate action in this regard. 
4.4.2.6 Artificial recharge of groundwater 
Many States have implemented schemes for artificial recharge to groundwater 
and water conservation through sustainable water management practices viz., 
Jalyukt Shivar Scheme  in Maharashtra, Sujalam Sufalam Jalsanchay Abhiyan 
in Gujarat, Mukhyamantri Jal Swavlamban Abhiyan in Rajasthan, Mission 
Kakatiya programme in Telangana etc.   
However, the State of Karnataka did not formulate any such innovative schemes 
on artificial recharge to groundwater and water conservation.   
Audit observed that the Central Ground Water Board had prepared a conceptual 
document “Master Plan for Artificial Recharge” which gives the information on 
areas feasible for recharge, number and type of recharge structures feasible taluk 
wise. The State Government can use this document to devise pan -Karnataka 
schemes on artificial recharge and water conservation. However, before 
construction of any water conservation and artificial recharge structure, site -
specific technical feasibility/viability may be checked by technical experts. 
4.4.2.7 Laxity in regulation of Groundwater extraction 
Groundwater levels are also affected due to over extraction, poor recharge, 
either due to lack of adequate rainfall or poor water conservation practices.  As 
a result, water availability in borewells and open wells diminishes substantially. 
Declining groundwater level is the main indicator of probable drought 
conditions.   
The State Government enacted (April 2011)  the Karnataka Ground Water 
(Regulation and Control of Development and Management) Act, 2011 and 
established (March 2012) the Karnataka Groundwater Authority (KGW A) for 
the whole of the State. The Act mainly focuses on regulation of ground water in 
notified areas/blocks. It is pertinent to state that the All India Performance Audit 
Report of CAG on Ground Water Management and Regulation  (Union Report 
No. 9 of 2021) points to the variation between the Karnataka Act and CGWA 
guidelines and stresses on uniformity of both.  The Act, therefore, needs to be 
modified and reoriented based on the CGWA g uidelines to ensure stringent 
regulation and control groundwater extraction in Karnataka. 
Audit observed that the KGWA could not  control inordinate extraction of 
groundwater, though the State was affected by recurrent drought hazard in as 
much as it:   
❖ could not  control illegal and inordinate extraction of groundwater for 
commercial purposes through private water tankers; 
❖ Neither possessed the time-series data on the number of borewells in the 
State nor data on the total number of borewells drilled  in the water 
distressed notified taluks; 

Chapter IV: Drought  
53 
❖ Did not maintain data on high-rise buildings and groundwater extraction 
therefrom. 
❖ Did not adhere to/enforce the norms prescribing a minimum distance of 
500 meters between two borewells. 
 
The laxity in groundwater regulation resulted in a persistent increase in notified 
groundwater distressed taluks from 35 in the year 2012 to 45 in the year 2020  
indicating a drift towards the danger of water extinction due to over-exploitation 
of groundwater . District-wise status of groundwater extraction is shown in 
Exhibit 4.2 below. 
Exhibit 4.2: District-wise status of groundwater extraction 
 
Source: KSNDMC. 
The number of taluks notified as groundwater distressed in the test -checked 
districts is shown in Table 4.4 below. 
Table 4.4: Groundwater distressed taluks under test-checked districts 
District 
Number of taluks notified as 
groundwater distressed 
2012 2015 2017 2020 
Total taluks notified in the State 35 30 43 45 
Belagavi 4 1 3 3 


PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
54 
District 
Number of taluks notified as 
groundwater distressed 
2012 2015 2017 2020 
Chikkaballapur 5 5 5 6 
Davanagere 1 1 3 2 
Ramanagara 2 1 2 2 
Total (% with reference to notified taluks) 12 (34) 8 (27) 13 (30) 13 (29) 
Source: Triennial data furnished by KGWA. 
State Government or the district administrations had not taken effective 
measures for water conservation/harvesting and prevent over -exploitation of 
groundwater. Instead, the State/district authorities resorted to drilling borewells 
in more numbers extracting groundwater besides obtaining water from borewell 
owners for supply through tankers during drought periods.  This further 
aggravated the stressed groundwater levels. 
Lack of preparatory/mitigative measure s to conserve available water  through 
various procedures and uncontrolled extraction of groundwater  contributed to 
the severity of drought during the years of poor rainfall. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that the Departments of Urban 
Development, RDPR and Water Resources would be requested to look into the 
matter and take appropriate action in this regard. 
Recommendation 9: The State Government should emphasise on measures 
for water conservation and water harvesting along with enforcing regulations 
on unchecked groundwater extraction. 
[ 
Laxity in drought mitigation - a Case study of Chikkaballapura district 
As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, Chikkaballapura was one of the 
districts that was always prone to drought hazards.  Consequent to over -
exploitation of groundwater, all the taluks of the district were notified as 
groundwater distressed.  This requ ired the State Government and district 
administration to address the needs of the district and mitigate the impact 
caused by drought. Accordingly, the State Government was required to address 
the problems in drought prone eastern districts of Chikkaballapur and Kolar, 
which did not have dedicated water supply schemes, and other needy areas of 
Hassan, Chitradurga, Tumkur, Ramanagar and Bengaluru Rural Districts . An 
administrative approval was accorded (February 2014) to divert 24.01 TMC of 
water from west flowing streams to cater to the drinking water needs and filling 
of water bodies in these districts.  The original project cost of ₹8,323.50 crore 
as per approved DPR (July 2012) was revised to ₹12,912.36 crore (Febru ary 
2014) and further revised to ₹23,251.66 crore.  The project which was 
scheduled for completion by 2023 -24 remained incomplete as of August 2023 
with a total expenditure of ₹14,076.15 crore (financial progress - 60 per cent). 
Insofar as the test -checked districts were concerned, the project envisioned 
providing 5.093 TMC for drinking water and tank filling (Chikkaballapur) and 
1.834 TMC for drinking water (Ramanagara). The project was flawed with 
improper planning , resulting in frequent changes in design/alignment of the 
project due to non-availability of land and inordinate delay in implementation.  
The status of items of works proposed and completed in the test -checked 
districts is shown in Table 4.5. 

Chapter IV: Drought  
55 
Table 4.5: Status of completion of work in test-checked districts 
Item of work Chikkaballapura Ramanagara 
As per DPR Completed As per DPR Completed 
Length of pipeline (Kms.) 69.87 0 4.50 0.50 
Land acquisition (Acre-Guntas) 131.33 0 7.13 0 
 Source: Information furnished by Visvesvaraya Jala Nigam Limited. 
Thus, the objective of providing dedicated drinking water supply to the drought-
prone districts was not achieved even after 10 years of commencement of 
project construction. The completion of the project, therefore, remained a  
distant dream considering the targeted items of work vis-à-vis the achievement. 
4.4.3 Response and relief measures against drought 
Drought relief and response measures need to be planned and implemented as 
soon as the distress signs of drought are visible .  It is necessary that these 
measures are undertaken promptly so that it would mitigate the hardships faced 
by the people. Though these measures are sector-specific, they require immense 
inter-departmental coordination. 
4.4.3.1 Absence of drought relief measures 
Audit observed that while declaring the drought in the State, the districts were 
generally instructed to initiate measures towards providing employment under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS), drinking water supply, fodder supply and livestock protection, 
etc., as per the SDRF norms.   
The nodal department was not in possession of comprehensive details on any of 
the above relief measures either for the State as a whole or at the district level, 
except for funds released for financial compensation towards crop loss. Audit 
analysis of the data hosted on the official website of MGNREGS disclosed that 
additional employment provided to distressed rural population during 2018-1925 
was meagre at 2.39 per cent of the total registered households in the State. In 
respect of test -checked districts, the additional employment provided varied 
between zero and eight.  
Details of additional employment provided under MGNREGS in the State and 
test-checked districts during the drought season of 2018-19 are shown in Table 
4.6 below. While no additional employment was provided to any of the 
households in the districts of Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and Shivamogga, it 
was less than one per cent in Belagavi and Haveri districts. 
Table 4.6: Details of additional employment provided under MGNREGS 
in the State and test-checked districts during the drought season(2018-19) 
District 
Total 
registered 
households 
Households given 
employment of 
100-150 days 
Households given 
employment of 100-150 days 
in drought affected areas 
Percentage 
Belagavi 7,77,607 5,968 5,967 0.77 
Chikkaballapura 2,21,327 5,066 5,066 2.29 
Dakshina Kannada 1,62,772 902 0 0 
Davanagere 2,30,319 9,176 9,176 3.98 
Haveri 2,64,324 1,647 1,647 0.62 
 
25 Only year under the audit period during which State encountered drought. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
56 
District 
Total 
registered 
households 
Households given 
employment of 
100-150 days 
Households given 
employment of 100-150 days 
in drought affected areas 
Percentage 
Kalaburagi 4,10,512 5,028 5,028 1.22 
Kodagu 86,917 402 0 0 
Ramanagara 1,97,753 15,163 15,163 7.67 
Shivamogga 2,38,908 2,518 0 0 
Karnataka 78,67,647 1,98,947 1,88,161 2.39 
Source: Official website of MGNREGS. 
Besides, audit also observed that additional employment of 100 -150 days was 
generally given to registered households during all the years, of which the 
percentage varied between 1.87 and 3.02 during the years 2019-20 to 2021-22, 
as shown in the Table 4.7 below. 
Table 4.7: Details of additional employment provided under MGNREGS 
during non-drought years 
District Percentage of additional employment provided 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Belagavi 2.37 4.47 5.07 
Chikkaballapura 2.92 0.00 0.00 
Dakshina Kannada 1.45 1.29 0.00 
Davanagere 1.26 3.11 3.30 
Haveri 2.43 2.73 5.11 
Kalaburagi 1.91 1.61 3.23 
Kodagu 1.15 1.08 0.13 
Ramanagara 9.20 0.06 0.05 
Shivamogga 1.71 1.81 2.05 
Karnataka 2.65 3.02 1.87 
Source: Official website of MGNREGS. 
The Drought Manual issued by the GoI envisaged tax waivers and concessions 
as measures towards response and relief against drought.  However, the State 
Government did not provide sufficient relief to drought affected population 
through any sort of tax waivers and concessions like granting remission of land 
revenue, postponement of the recovery of dues from the farmers towards water, 
irrigation and electricity charges, or any other dues related to agriculture, 
converting short-term loans and rescheduling  current instal ment of medium -
term loans, waiving education/examination fees for the students in Government 
schools located in drought-affected areas, etc. 
Thus, it can be observed from the tables  (4.6 and 4.7)  above that additional 
employment provided during the drought year of 2018 -19 to 2021-22 ranged 
between 1.87 and 3.02 percentage.  
The State Government stated (August 2024)  in the context of waivers and 
concessions that it has ensured restructuring of eligible farmer loans as per RBI 
master direction on relief measures. 
Recommendation 10: The State Government should conduct a comprehensive 
water audit to address demand-supply gaps as part of the mitigation measures 
and make it mandatory to conduct borewell census at periodic intervals.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
V
 
Flood and
  
rain hazard
  


 
 
 
  
 

 
57 
CHAPTER V 
 
Flood and rain hazard 
 
Karnataka, although primarily a drought -prone state, has recently experienced 
severe flooding due to erratic climate conditions, resulting in significant losses. 
This chapter highlights deficiencies in flood risk management, particularly in 
KSNDMC projects, focusing on preparedness and compensation for damages. 
The 2021 Karnataka State Action Plan for Flood Risk  Management missed key 
elements such as community-level planning and flood-proofing measures. The lack 
of floodplain zoning regulations, despite available hazard maps, underscores a 
critical gap in risk mitigation. Additionally, non -compliance with NDMA 
guidelines revealed a lack of essential legal frameworks and documentation. 
Structural mitigation efforts have largely  been neglected, and non -structural 
measures suffered from insufficient institutional support and law enforcement, as 
illustrated by cases in Belagavi and Shivamogga. Authorities did not conduct safety 
audits and retrofit buildings, prioritizing financial compensation for damages over 
disaster resilience, which also lacked comprehensive guidelines and validation 
measures.  
 
Floods and rain hazards are closely related, as floods are a consequence of rain 
hazards. Flooding can also be caused by the overflowing of rivers, lakes, or seas, 
based on which, can be differentiated as flash flooding, riverine flooding, coastal 
flooding, urban flooding, groundwater flooding, etc.  
Frequent floods from rivers and lands getting covered with water due to heavy rain 
are common disasters in the State of Karnataka causing damage to public structures 
and private properties. 
5.1 Karnataka State Flood Profile 
Karnataka has encountered severe flooding mainly in the Krishna and Cauvery 
River basins during the monsoon season, resulting in substantial loss and damage 
to human life, property, crops, and essential infrastructure. This phenomenon has 
been primarily attributed to the occurrence of intense to very heavy rainfall, leading 
to substantial inflows into the rivers and its upstream tributaries. Consequently, 
these augmented water volumes have exerted considerable pressure on the 
reservoirs within the State, culminating in the inundation of low-lying regions and 
the extensive submergence of agricultural land situated along river and canal 
courses. 
5.1.1 Regional distribution of rainfall in the State 
The rainfall in Karnataka has been distributed into three seasons viz., pre-monsoon 
(January to May), south-west monsoon (June to September) and north-east monsoon 
(October to December).The south-west monsoon plays a dominant role contributing 
more than 70 per cent of the annual rainfall . The annual rainfall ranges from less 
than 500 mm (North Interior Karnataka) to more than 4000 mm (Western Ghats and 
coastal Karnataka), averaging to about 1,150 mm  distributed over 40 to 100 rainy 
days in a year.  
Because of the varying rainfall distribution, many a time, areas which were not 
traditionally prone to floods also experienced severe inundation. Areas with poor 
drainage facilities get flooded by accumulation of water from even moderate 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
58 
rainfall.  The flood frequency of the State during the period 2005 -2020 is shown 
in Exhibit 5.1 below. 
Exhibit 5.1: Map showing the flood frequency of the State during the 
period 2005-2020 
 
Source: KSNDMC 
Karnataka has experienced eight years 26 of flood hazard s including consecutive 
floods from 2018 to 2022 in the last ten years. The year-wise details of flood/heavy 
rain incidents under the test -checked districts during the period 2018 -202227 are 
shown in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Year-wise details of flood/heavy rain incidents under 
the test-checked districts 
District Calendar year of flood impact 
Belagavi 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
Chikkaballapura 2021 and 2022 
Dakshina Kannada 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
Davanagere 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
 
26 State experienced both drought and floods during 2018 and 2019. 
27 Year 2022 was not declared as calamity affected by the State Government, though encountered 
flood hazard. 


Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
59 
District Calendar year of flood impact 
Haveri 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
Kalaburagi 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
Kodagu 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
Ramanagara 2021 and 2022 
Shivamogga 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 
       Source: Data furnished by the Revenue Department (Disaster Management) 
5.1.2 Impact and estimated loss  
Apart from enormous damage to agriculture/horticulture sector and infrastructure, 
the floods also lead to loss of human and cattle life.  The assessment of potential 
losses resulting from floods constitutes a significant aspect of risk evaluation and 
disaster preparedness. The total estimated loss under the test-checked districts due 
to floods during the audit period is shown in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Estimated loss under the test-checked districts due to flood 
between the years 2019-2022 
(₹ in crore) 
 Name of the district 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Belagavi 17,835.50 2,283.73 2,182.84 952.30 
Chikkaballapura 0 0 748.33 542.43 
Dakshina Kannada 1,088.28 209.65 102.11 431.80 
Davanagere 18.80 31.99 309.93 427.93 
Haveri 2,720.64 602.27 1,222.02 208.51 
Kalburgi 328.80 4,981.10 626.42 285.96 
Kodagu 312.43 1,128.82 1,072.83 228.55 
Ramanagara 0 0 372.90 287.51 
Shivamogga 1,091.65 208.49 646.74 45.70 
Total 23,396.1 9,446.05 7,284.12 3,410.69 
Source: Data furnished by the nodal department 
Data pertaining to the year 2018 was not furnished by the nodal department. 
The total estimated loss of infrastructure and crops in the State due to floods during 
the audit period was to the tune of ₹97,814.77 crore. The component-wise details 
are shown in Appendix 5.1. 
 
5.2 Flood Risk Management  
 
Flood Risk Management (FRM) necessitates an ongoing process of adaptation, 
aiming to manage flood risk, reduce community vulnerability, and expedite post -
flood recovery consistently and effectively. Flood risk reduction is a systematic 
approach to identify, assess and reduce the risks of disasters. 
A pragmatic flood risk management cycle is shown in Chart 5.1. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
60 
Chart 5.1: Flood risk management cycle
 
Source: Karnataka State Action Plan for Flood Risk Management  
5.3 Preparedness towards Flood Risk Reduction 
 
5.3.1 Flood management framework – deficient State Action Plan  
The NDMA brought out (January 2008) the guidelines for Management of Floods.  
In accordance with Section 9.3 of the guidelines, all State Governments/SDMAs 
were to prepare the Flood Management Plans (FMPs) in acc ordance with these 
guidelines. The State Government, however, inordinately delayed the preparation 
of FMP for the State and brought out the ‘ Karnataka State Action Plan for Flood 
Risk Management’ only during the year 2021.    
The salient activities to be covered in the FMPs were to include identification of 
flood prone areas, preparation of flood vulnerability/flood risk/ flood hazard maps, 
and improvement of drainage, developing guidelines for flood -proofing measures 
for all existing critical lifeline structures and major public buildings in a phased 
manner.  
Besides, NDMA provided for preparation of FMPs by schools,  hospitals, 
industries, entertainment houses, major shopping complexes etc., in flood prone 
areas and carrying out mock  drills for enhancing preparedness . The State Plan, 
however, did not provide for preparation of FMPs by any of the se 
agencies/institutions.  Guidelines for flood proofing measures were not prepared.  
The State Plan did not stipulate the important milestones for implementation of 
various activities spelt out in the plan and thus the implementation of the Action 
plan was not time-bound. Thus, the State Plan did not comply with the provisions 
of the national guidelines and did not adequately address the issues relating to flood 
management. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the FRM action plan had been 
formulated by KSNDMC. However, supporting documentation was not furnished 
to Audit. 
5.3.2 Absence of institutional initiatives 
As per the NDMA guidelines, t he Government of India has taken a  number of 
initiatives in the field of flood management  and appointed  many committees/  
working groups/task forces from  time to time to look into the problem of floods 


Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
61 
and suggest remedial measures for their management. It has also issued a number 
of policy statements in this regard. 
Though it is mentioned in the State Flood Action Plan as ‘State Government had 
appointed many committees/working groups/task forces’, the details of the said 
institutional support for flood management were either not mentioned in the Action 
Plan or not furnished to audit . Audit hence is unable to assess the efficacy of 
implementation of initiatives proposed, if any. 
5.3.3 Deficient weather forecast mechanism   
Flood forecasting and warning mechanism s are the primary and crucial non -
structural measures in flood management.  A robust early warning system was to 
comprise installation of field monitoring sensors – for weather, geological, 
hydrological parameters; collection/analysis of data in real-time; simulation 
through appropriate mathematical models; customized report generation; and 
dissemination of the alerts/reports/advisories to the users. 
Audit observed that the forecast and early warning alert mechanism for flood, 
though established in the State by incurring substantial expenditure towards 
installation of TRGs and TWSs  through KSNDMC , was marred by inaccurate 
reporting due to non -/malfunctioning of the equipment  (commented under 
Paragraph 4.3.2.1 previously).  
Audit also observed serious omissions in implementation of various projects taken 
up by KSNDMC  towards flood warning/management activities which facilitated 
lapses in flood management in the State . Details of the p rojects and deficiencies 
thereon are discussed in successive paragraphs. 
5.3.3.1 Non-implementation of Real-time Decision Support System for Flood 
Early Warning and consequent non-preparation of hydrological flood 
model 
As large parts of the State were recurrently affected by floods, the KSNDMC 
proposed ( January 2021 ) to implement ‘Realtime Decision Support System for 
Flood Early Warning’ in Krishna River basin under the component of preparedness 
and capacity building. The project involved: 
• Installation of radar stream gauges and reservoir level sensors; 
• Data collection and analysis; 
• Dissemination of early warning and advisories to all the stakeholders; and 
• Developing state -of-the-art modelling tools for flood forecasting and 
inundation mapping compatible with GIS environment. 
 
KSNDMC entrusted ( July 2021) the work to a firm 28 at a project cost of ₹ 2.57 
crore. The work comprised installation and commissioning of six water level 
sensors (at reservoirs) and stream gauge sensors with velocity meter sensors (nine 
numbers) at different locations, within a period of 120 days, including 
comprehensive annual maintenance contract (CAMC) fo r a period of four years. 
As of December 2023, a total payment of ₹2.45 crore was made to the agency. 
Verification of records disclosed that : 
➢ Technical specifications of the installed equipment had not been checked, 
verified and certified by any of the technical personnel of KSNDMC, prior to 
commissioning; 
 
28 M/s. MOSERP Technologies India Private Limited, Bengaluru. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
62 
➢ As per the work order, the KSNDMC was required to provide the server, static 
IP to the server for receiving data from these instruments.  Details on 
KSNDMC providing the Server or the Static IP are not on record.  Further, 
KSNDMC was not in possession of date-wise data of the water levels/velocity 
captured by any of these sensors; 
This is an impediment for  monitoring water levels and the objective of the 
system installed was not achieved; 
➢ Each radar stream gauge was to be calibrated by the vendor once every six 
months, duly submitting the calibration certificate to KSNDMC.  However, 
neither details of calibration nor the certificates thereon were on record; 
➢ As per the Service Level Conditions, the vendor was responsible for keeping 
the equipment in good condition during the warranty/CAMC period of four 
years. 
➢ Audit verified the online functioning of these sensors and noticed (December 
2023) that, six out of the installed 15 sensors were non-functional and hence, 
data was not being captured from these equipment.  
Director, KSNDMC admitted (December 2023) that 8 out of the 24 equipment 
(gauges/sensors) installed under the project were non-functional. 
 
Thus, in the absence of basic data, the State Government/ KSNDMC could not  
create the envisaged hydrological models for flood forecasting in the State/region. 
Thus, the investment of ₹2.45 crore on the sensors and stream gauge monitors was 
rendered largely unfruitful.  
Further, KSNDMC was not in possession of documents like original invoice of 
procurement, warranty card and user guide/manual of these installed equipment.  
Thus, absence of original documents coupled with the gauges/sensors becoming 
non-functional within the maintenance period, raises doubts on the genuineness of 
equipment installed under the project. 
The Director, KSNDMC stated (December 2023) that penalty would be levied as 
per the tender clause in respect of non-functioning equipment.  Thus, it is evident 
that data on water levels was not available for creation of an envisaged model for 
flood forecasting. 
5.3.3.2 Centralised Wireless public broadcasting at vulnerable GPs – 
Unfruitful expenditure of ₹1.09 crore due to under performance 
The project of ‘Centralised Wireless public broadcasting at vul nerable GPs’ was 
proposed by  KSNDMC, as a pilot project, in January 2021  and the same was 
approved by SEC in February 2021 at a cost of ₹1.14 crore. 
The project envisaged covering 104 GPs under the districts of Belagavi, Bagalkot 
and Raichur districts, wherein it was planned to disseminate flood alert early 
warning messages centrally from the control room at KSNDMC. The contract for 
installation of required equipment and commissioning was entrusted (June 2021) 
to two firms29 with a stipulation to complete the work within three months.  As of 
December 2023, a total payment of ₹1.09 crore was paid to the firms. 
Test-check of alert message-log vis-à-vis success/published data disclosed that the 
project was under -performing as sent messages had not reached all the intended 
GPs in many instances  due to non -availability of system/network.  Hence, the 
purpose of installing the equipment at grassroot s level for alerting endangered 
 
29 M/s. Protronics Technologies – 89 GPs and M/s. Sumukha Technologies and Software Pvt Ltd 
– 15 GPs. 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
63 
population from flood early warning  through a wireless broadcasting system at a 
cost of ₹1.09 crore was not achieved. 
The Director, KSNDMC replied (July 2024) that to curtail the failure of the 
announcements due to non-availability of network, new sim cards were being 
provided free of cost to the service provider for replacement based on the ISP with 
better signal strength in the Grama Panchayat.  It further stated that as Grama 
Panchayat building construction is underway at some places, the instruments 
would be relocated/reinstalled on completion of the construction activity and at 
some places power failure issues were reported for which the Grama  Panchayat 
officials have been informed not to turn off the power supply  provided to the 
system. However, the details of success rate of messages sent subsequently after 
replacement of sim cards were not furnished to audit. Hence, audit could not ensure 
the status of functioning of the project. The project lagged due to failure in ensuring 
suitable network connectivity which should have been checked at the initial stage 
itself. 
5.3.3.3 Wasteful expenditure on preparation of urban flood model for 
Bengaluru  
Department of Science and Technology funded the work ‘Preparation of urban 
flood model for Bengaluru ’. KSNDMC was entrusted (March 2019) with 
implementation of the project. The total project outlay was ₹2.30 crore. A total sum 
of ₹1.74 crore was released during the years 2018 -19 and 2019-20. The scope of 
the work inter alia included installation of 25 TWSs and 04 ultrasonic water level 
sensors in BBMP limits at a cost of ₹16.69 lakh. As of December 2023, audit 
observed that a total expenditure of ₹1.61 crore had been incurred (90 per cent of 
the expenditure towards salaries) on the project.   
Audit observed that KSNDMC, despite being the implementing and monitoring 
agency, did not possess either the details of location of installation of equipment or 
the data obtained through the equipment since installation. Thus, while ₹1.61 crore 
has been expended on salaries, the preparation of the flood forecast alert model is 
absent. The reasons for this lapse are to be investigated. 
5.3.3.4 Non-functional water level sensors  installed on stormwater drains in  
Bengaluru 
(a)  KSNDMC took up (March 2021) the project “Strengthening the flood 
early warning system of BBMP through installing water level sensors (WLS)” at 
an outlay of ₹2.36 crore out of SDRF grants.  The project included installation of 
105 water level sensors (100 on storm water drains  and five in flood vulnerable 
streets) at different locations at a cost of ₹1.03 crore.   
Audit scrutiny of records showed that the work order was issued during July 2021 
and the firm  completed (January 2022) the installation and was paid ₹0.98 crore 
(annual maintenance charges to be paid accordingly for five years).  Audit 
verification (December 2023) revealed that 49 out of 100 WLS installed on storm 
water drains were non-functional and no information/data was available in respect 
of five WLS reportedly installed at flood vulnerable streets . This affected the 
objective of strengthening the flood earl y warning system besides rendering  the 
expenditure (incurred out of SDRF grants) on non-functional WLS unfruitful. 
The Director, KSNDMC replied (December 2023) that in the absence of watch and 
ward, some of the installed WLS were removed by BBMP and a few were stolen.   

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
64 
Audit further observed that KSNDMC had procured a total of 25 large display (65 
inches) television sets  (TVs) at a cost of ₹32.66 lakh  under this project for 
displaying the water level status of storm water drains.  Audit verification revealed 
that three TVs were given to corporations of smart cities 30, six to DCs of smart 
cities31, two were installed in the chamber of Commissioner, KSDMA and four 
TVs were being used at KSNDMC and the remaining 10 TV units were lying idle 
rendering the expenditure of ₹13.06 lakh unfruitful. Reasons for supplying the 
display units to other smart cities while the proje ct was meant for 
Bengaluru/BBMP were not forthcoming from the records. 
Director, KSNDMC stated (December 2023) that eight display units would be 
installed in BBMP after development of a new web portal for Bengaluru smart city 
and a letter has been addressed to BBMP for provision of space and other required 
infrastructure. 
(b) Audit observed that KSNDMC had implemented (February 2022) the work of 
Supply, installation, commissioning and maintenance of Telemetric Rain Gauge 
(75), Telemetric Weather Stations (29), Telemetric Water Level sensors (50) and 
IP cameras (30) under smart cities of Mangaluru, Belagavi and Hubballi-Dharwad 
at a total cost of ₹1.45 crore. Scrutiny of records revealed that 69 out of th ese 184 
equipment were non-functional (December 2023). 
Director, KSNDMC accepted (December 2023) that the equipment was not 
functioning but did not spell out action taken for rectification of defects and making 
them functional to achieve the intended objective of creation of disaster resilient 
smart cities. 
This highlights the negligence of KSNDMC authorities in (i) execution of projects, 
(ii) maintenance of equipment installed , and (iii) non -obtaining envisaged data 
from this equipment . Besides, sanctioning/release of funds under SDRF by 
SEC/Revenue Department for disaster management activities  without monitoring 
the implementation of these projects and achieving anticipated results is a pointer 
to indifference and apathy towards the project . The objective of better disaster 
management and disaster risk reduction stood affected on this account. Resultantly, 
the population of the State continued to suffer  year after year  without a 
comprehensive forecast alert mechanism against flooding. 
On the above omissions in functioning of KSNDMC, t he State Government  did 
not offer issue-wise remarks but replied (August 2024) that some of the equipment 
were non-functional due to expiry of AMC, for which action is being taken to invite 
tenders and all the omissions would be rectified. 
However, the Government had not taken timely action though the A MC of the 
equipment had  expired commencing from 2022 and water level sensor s were 
defunct even within the AMC period. Reply of the Government is silent on the 
issues of physical absence of large number of sensors installed under BBMP 
jurisdiction despite incurring expenditure under SDRF grants. 
Recommendation 11: The State Government should ensure proper functioning 
of weather forecasting mechanisms/equipment and fix responsibility for 
improper project/scheme implementation. 
 
 
30 Belagavi, Hubballi-Dharwad, Mangaluru. 
31 Belagavi, Davanagere, Hubballi-Dharwad, Mangaluru, Shivamogga, Tumakuru. 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
65 
5.3.4 Deficient floodplain zone mapping   
Disaster risk reduction frameworks e nvisage key themes encompassing risk 
reduction strategies such as early warning systems, community education, 
enhanced building codes, land use planning, and public participation in DRR.  The 
DM Act and DM Policy similarly stressed a transformative shift towards proactive 
disaster management, with a focus on long-term DRR initiatives.   
Assessment of flood hazard is the basic requirement in management of the disaster. 
Flood zonation maps were to be created by considering various relevant factors 
like rainfall and climate, size of basin, land slope and aspect ratio, gradient of 
stream networks, drainage density, la nd use and land cover, soil type, 
infrastructure, etc., along with their significance. These hazard zonation maps will 
facilitate decision -makers to formulate an efficient flood zonation plan for 
mitigating disaster risk reduction. 
Audit observed from records made available  that the State had prepared flood 
hazard zoning maps for each of the river basins (as part action plan for flood risk 
management) and identified villages prone to floods. However, such vulnerability 
mapping was not done for the plain areas which were not covered under river flow 
paths but were affected by water inundation due to heavy rainfall. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that flood zonation maps were formulated 
in consultation with the Water Resources Department and the Central Water 
Commission and the same would be strengthened. 
5.3.5 Absence of floodplain zoning regulations 
Floodplain zoning further requires laying down limitations on development of both 
the unprotect ed as well as protected areas. The State Action Plan envisaged 
enactment and enforcement of appropriate laws for implementing floodplain 
zoning regulations like eviction of encroachment into the waterways and natural 
drainage lines, restriction of unplanned growth, incorporation of specific 
provisions32 to the building by -laws, etc.  The Ministry of Water Resources and 
Central Water Commission  had circulated a draft bill on floodplain zoning way 
back in the year 1975  and various committees/task forces/working groups etc., 
have also recommended the same. 
However, the State was yet to frame and enact the Floodplain Zoning Regulations 
and thus, encroached inhabitation, unplanned growth, etc., along waterways were 
not regulated in the State despite people being affected repeatedly by floods and 
compensations being paid. 
Recommendation 12: The State Government should take immediate measures to 
prepare floo dplain zoning of all vulnerable locations and should enact 
regulations thereon. It also should contemplate shifting of villages persistently 
affected by floods to safer elevations to avoid recurrent damage as well as 
recurrent expenditure towards compensation. 
 
 
 
32  Plinth levels of all buildings to be 0.6 m above the drainage/flood submersion lines, all the 
buildings to be preferably double and multiple storeys in the areas liable to floods,  etc. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
66 
5.4 Mitigation Measures Against Flood Hazard 
5.4.1 Non-compliance to the provisions of NDMA guidelines 
As per constitutional provisions, flood management is a State  subject and as such 
the primary responsibility for flood management lies with the States. The role of 
the Central Government  is advisory, catalytic and promotional in nature.  The 
States have to investigate, plan, construct, maintain and operat e all flood 
management works.  In this direction, NDMA guidelines stipulated certain 
provisions to be complied with by the State Government.  However, the 
authorities at State Government did not comply with such provisions, which 
resulted in flawed management against flood hazard in the State .  Omissions to 
NDMA provisions and their impact are illustratively discussed below. 
❖ Legal framework for making infrastructure flood resilient 
It is stipulated that infrastructural activities by different organisations such as the 
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI), the State Public Works Department, 
other departments, etc., in the flood prone  areas need to be carried out duly 
considering the requirements for making them flood resilient.  While constructing 
highway lines and roads, due care has to be taken in aligning, locating and  
designing with respect to height and width of  embankments and providing 
adequate waterway s i.e., bridges, culverts, vents and causeways for passage of 
storm water. 
Despite mentioning the requirement of legal framework in its Flood Action Plan, 
the State did not establish a legal framework for obtaining mandatory clearances 
by agencies for construction of public infrastructure in flood -prone areas which 
resulted in  National/State highways, railways  and other roads getting flooded / 
inundated repeatedly without arrangement for passage of storm water. 
Photographs of public infrastructure flooded with rainwater in different parts of the 
State are shown as Exhibit 5.2. 
Exhibit 5.2 Photos of public spaces inundated with floods 
 
Bengaluru-Mysuru Express Way 
 
Belagavi-Kolhapur Highway 
 
School building in Ramanagara district 
 
Railway track in Dakshina Kannada 
Source: Media Reports. 


Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
67 
❖ Regulation of inhabitations in low-lying areas 
As a preventive measure, the inhabitations in the low-lying areas along the rivers, 
canals and drains were to be regulated by the State Government/SDMA/DDMAs. 
However, none of the authorities regulated such inhabitations as evidenced in audit 
in the test-checked districts of Belagavi, Dakshina Kannada, Davanagere, 
Shivamogga, etc., where the authorities operated ‘Kalaji Kendras (Relief Centres)’ 
to accommodate population living along the banks of river/canal (passing through 
the towns)  affected due to increase in the  water level  till it recede d and also 
financially compensated for inundation of houses as per norms. 
Illustration: Non-relocation of flood prone families in Belagavi district 
The villages in Belagavi district were prone to riverine floods due to their location on the 
banks of various rivers such as Krishna, Doodhganga, Ghataprabha, Malaprabha, 
Hiranyakesi and Markandeya.  Due to release of excess water from dams upstream, the 
number of villages as indicated in Table 5.3 were recurrently affected by floods and the 
district/taluk authorities were providing temporary rescue and relief measures by shifting 
the victims to Kalaji kendras (relief centres) till the flood recedes and providing 
compensation for house damages. 
Table 5.3: Details of villages prone to recurrent floods 
Sl.No Name of the taluk Number of 
villages 
No of 
families 
Population 
at risk 
Livestock 
at risk 
1 Athani 24 21,858 1,11,888 67,283 
2 Khagwada 13 24,019 43,597 51,730 
3 Chikkodi 11 34,910 1,15,461 42,939 
4 Nippani 23 26,890 1,25,219 1,10,320 
5 Raibagh 15 15,050 1,28,296 65,213 
6 Khanapur 05 808 3,028 541 
7 Hukkeri 26 1,758 8,020 2,744 
8 Belagavi 06 2,768 41,187 2,779 
9 Gokak 29 31,393 1,62,714 34,875 
10 Mudalagi 14 12,692 71,395 68,719 
11 Ramadurg 32 24,107 1,09,228 63,565 
12 Savadatti 11 11,990 83,229 21,091 
 Total 209 2,08,243 10,03,262 5,31,799 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
Despite the fact that more than 10 lakh people and 5.32 lakh livestock were at risk, 
the State Government/ district administration did not  take necessary action to 
relocate recurrently affected families to safer places . This resulted in regular 
periodical flooding affecting villages enroute, with regular compensation given 
towards damages. 
❖ Absence of timelines and priorities 
The State Governments/SDMAs were to  evolve datelines and priorities for 
carrying out detailed hydrological and morphological studies regarding the 
circumstances, in which embankments/flood walls/flood levees will be constructed 
for prevention of flooding.  
However, neither the SDM Policy nor the annual DMPs of the State and Districts 
had prioritised and fix ed definite timeframe for taking up/completion of works 
towards construction of embankments/flood walls/flood levees towards ensuring 
prevention of flood hazards, resulting in instances of same localities being affected 
with recurrent floods causing significant damage. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
68 
❖ Non-creation of temporary storage of floodwaters 
The State Government/SDMA was to study the availability of natural depressions, 
swamps and lakes in the vicinity of the rivers and wherever required and feasible, 
utilise them for temporary storage of floodwaters.  
As audit observed, all the districts including the test -checked districts were 
invariably affected by heavy rainfall and consequent flooding  causing substantial 
damage to houses/infrastructure.  However, the annual DMPs of the State and 
Districts did not contain any proposal ensuring availability of natural depressions 
along the overspreading rivers/canals in the State to initiate action to utilise 
available space for temporary storage of water during floods.  The absence of 
detention basins, which if available could have been preventive measures,  
facilitated spreading of water/inundation of agricultural fields and consequent loss 
of grown crops in the fields, which are financially compensated. 
❖ Absence of State Flood Control Board  
Taking a serious note of flooding in the country, the GoI established the Central 
Flood Control Board in the year 1954  which is responsible to lay down general 
principles and policies in connection with flood control measures, to consider and 
approve master plans for  flood control submitted by the states/river  commission, 
and to arrange for necessary assistance in connection with planning and execution 
of flood control works. 
However, despite the State being affected with recurrent floods causing damage to 
human life and infrastructure, the State Government had not put in place the State 
Flood Control Board /Technical Advisory Committee, in line with the Central 
Government. 
As regards non-compliance with NDMA norms discussed above, the Government 
replied (August 2024) that the departments concerned would be urged to strictly 
implement the regulations in flood prone areas.   This is indicative of the lack of 
effective cooperation among stakeholder departments besides laxity in regulation 
and monitoring by KSDMA/the nodal department towards disaster management  
activities, resulting in non-compliance to NDMA stipulations. 
5.4.2 Absence of structural and non-structural measures 
Protecting flood-prone areas against all return probabilities of floods is neither 
economically viable nor practically possible.  However, in order to provide a 
reasonable degree of protection against flood damages, a pragmatic approach was 
needed through a combination of structural33 and non-structural34 measures.   
The State Government/KSDMA did not  comply with the provisions of NDMA 
guidelines towards prioritisation of Structures which specified that defence 
installations, industries, public utilities like hospitals, electricity installations, 
water supply, telephone exchanges, aerodromes, railway stations, commercial 
centres, etc., were to be in such a manner that they are above the levels 
corresponding to a 100 -year frequency or the maximum observed flood levels.   
As a result, flooding/inundation of public/private properties was a common feature 
 
33  Building storages/reservoirs across the rivers, protective embankments along the riverbanks, 
channelisation of rivers, drainage improvement, diversion of flood waters, watershed management 
etc. 
34 Bioengineering based bank protection measures, vulnerability linked relocation, flood forecasting, 
floodplain zoning, restrictive land use legislations and policies in floodplains, creating awareness, 
etc. 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
69 
every time. Photographs of public utilities drowned in flood waters due to absence 
of prioritisation of structures are shown in Exhibit 5.3 below. 
Exhibit 5.3: Photographs showing inundated public utility structures 
 
 
Mangaluru floods - 2019 
 
 
A commercial complex in Belagavi - 2019 
Source: Media Reports. 
Thus, due to the absence of adequate protective measures , all of the nine test -
checked districts were affected by the flood hazard, either riverine or by heavy rain, 
including Chikkaballapura and Ramanagara which are generally not flood 
vulnerable districts as shown in Table 5.1.   
Illustration: Improper drainage system leading to flooding of houses in 
Shivamogga district 
The DDMP of Shivamogga district had identified a list of colonies in Shivamogga town 
that were prone to inundation.  These colonies were situated on the banks of Tunga River. 
The Audit team conducted ( 18 January 2023 ) a joint physical inspection of the Upper 
Tunga Dam in Gajanur and noticed that the inundation of these colonies was not due to 
release of excess water from the dam but was due to reverse influx of drainage water that 
was being released to the left bank c anal of the dam.  The Assistant Executive Engineer 
who was part of the inspection  stated that during the rainy season whenever there is an 
increase in water levels, the drainage water flows back to the houses and nearby fields 
due to non-availability of outflow path. 
Scrutiny of records showed that the Karnataka Neeravari Nigam Limited had addressed 
several letters to the Commissioner of Shivamogga City Corporation and also to the 
Principal Secretary, Director of Municipal Administration, DC, Shivamogga, Chief 
Executive Officer, Zilla Pa nchayat, Shivamogga since 2016 onwards.  However, no 
action was taken to set right the lacuna in the drainage system.  The correspondence also 
highlighted the extreme need for creating an alternate arrangement for drainage flow to 
avoid not only the inunda tion but also to safeguard the inhabitants from water 
contamination and related health hazards. 
The above illustration indicates the inability of the district administration to take 
corrective structural measures and make the district better disaster resilient.  
Undertaking necessary structura l measures, which consist  of various physical 
infrastructure and facilities required to help communities cope with disasters, was 
one of the components of FRM aimed at enhancing resilience to flood hazards.  
Audit observed that though the State was recurrently affected by floods either 
riverine or by rainwater inundation, the State Government and the district 
administration had not initiated necessary permanent structural measures to 
mitigate the impact of the flood menace. Photographs showing the damage caused 
by floods are shown in Exhibit 5.4. 


PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
70 
Exhibit 5.4:  Photographs showing the damage caused by the floods  in test-
checked districts due to the absence of structural measures 
 
 
Belagavi – 2019 
 
 
Kalaburagi – 2020 
 
 
Chikkaballapura – 2019 
 
 
 Dakshina Kannada – 2022 
Source: Media reports. 
The Deputy Commissioners of Dakshina Kannada, Davanagere and Kodagu 
districts replied  that structural measures were not taken up and affected 
population/communities were financially compensated towards the damages 
caused.  The reply is indicative of the fact that the authorities were not adequately 
inclined towards disaster risk reduction measures to avoid/mitigate the ill -effects 
of hazards. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the departments concerned would be 
urged to undertake suitable structural and non-structural mitigation measures. 
 
Recommendation 13: The State Government should implement structural and 
non-structural measures by involving all line departments to mitigate recurrent 
floods and reduce damage to public infrastructure.  
5.4.2.1 Non-involvement of line departments  
Audit observed that both the SDMP as well as the State Action Plan for Flood Risk 
Management 2021 assigned certain additional responsibilities (under various 
themes) to the departments like Public Works Department, Rural Development and 
Panchayat Raj, Housing, Urban Development, Water Resources Department, etc., 
for taking up structural and non-structural measures as mitigative action agains t 
flood in the State.  The structural measures included works like assessing 
vulnerability and taking  up nec essary action for strengthening  roads/ 
highways/expressways by implementing DRR measures , construction of multi -
purpose shelters, identification of sites for flood resistant constructions, designing  
critical infrastructure duly assessing the high flood levels/flood frequency , 
strengthening the existing critical infrastructure through retrofitting, etc.  The non -
structural measures involved  measures like regulation and enforcement of 


Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
71 
laws/norms, wetland conservation and restoration, catchment area treatment , 
promoting private participation in disaster management projects, etc. 
During the course of audit, documentation was not available to indicate the 
involvement of the Revenue Department (Disaster Management) with the line 
departments regarding preparation of Flood Action Plan or SDMPs.  Besides, the 
nodal department  had not communicated the Flood Action Plan to any of the 
departments for initiating required action  on assigned responsibilities.  
Consequently, n either the State Government /departments nor t he district 
administrations had initiated proper measures towards any sort of structural/non -
structural flood mitigative measures , and thus, exposed the State to unceasing 
distress.  
The Government, during the exit conference, acknowledged the observations  and 
stated that issues would be looked into, and action would be taken to comply with 
the NDMA guidelines and replied (August 2024) that the departments concerned 
would be urged to strictly implement regulations in flood prone area. However, the 
need for structural and non -structural measures in sync with the line departments 
need to be prioritized. 
5.4.3 Absence of Safety Audit  
Damage to houses and infrastructure is one of the major destructions caused by the 
floods invariably across the State and t he State Government was compensating 
towards damage of houses after the hazard had occurred.  Despite compensating 
for damages due to disasters, the authorities did not insist  on/ensure construction 
of disaster resilient houses by the beneficiaries.  
Audit observed that the SDMPs mentioned about the safety audit of infrastructure 
only against the hazards of earthquake and tsunami.  However, a large number of 
houses and infrastructure in the State were being affected by floods and consequent 
landslides. Thus, safety audit of houses and infrastructure in districts vulnerable to 
flood would lead to taking up disaster resilient retrofitting and rectification actions 
timely besides avoiding loss and risk to property. Safety audit would also minimise 
substantial financial burden towards payment of compensation. 
The Government accepted (January 2024) during exit conference the concept of a 
safety audit of houses which can avoid/minimise damage to houses as well as 
expenditure towards payment of compensation. 
5.5 Relief towards Flood/Rain Damage 
The global and national frameworks  advocated drifting towards disaster risk 
reduction from the earlier relief -centric concept, which  benefits the Government 
by not only  reducing continued financial burden but also by leaping towards 
building disaster resilience while minimising damage to infrastructure and human 
lives. 
Audit observed that i nstead of initiating/exploring measures towards efficient 
DRR, the Government persisted in compensating the flood -affected population 
financially as per NDRF/SDRF norms and extending additional assistance from 
State fund s.  Compensation towards damage to houses and crop loss (input 
subsidy) inter alia, comprised the major fraction of financial assistance extended 
to flood/rain-affected population. 
Lacunae noticed in the provision of relief assistance to the flood/rain affected 
population in the State and test -checked districts are discussed in subsequent 
paragraphs. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
72 
5.5.1 Non-maintenance of incident-wise data of expenditure  
For better management of disasters and to mitigate the related issues, Government 
was required to implement robust data management practices, ensuring that 
incidence-wise expenditure data is maintained, regularly updated and reviewed.  
This would also benefit the Government/decision makers to assess the magnitude 
of the disaster vis-à-vis expenditure booked by the ground authorities besides 
planning better management.  
However, the State Government/nodal department was not in possession of the  
details of either incident-wise or disaster -wise expenditure.  Hence, audit could 
not assess and vouch for component-wise expenditure  towards flood 
compensation. 
5.5.2 Compensation towards house damage 
SDRF norms prescribed (April 2015)  compensation to be paid under two 
categories for damage caused to the building i.e., (i) fully damaged/ destroyed and 
severely damaged houses and (ii) partially damaged houses. The beneficiary was 
eligible for compensation only if the damage was at least 15 per cent.  The State 
Government, however, categorised damage into four types as shown in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Categorisation of damage and compensation thereon 
(Amount in ₹) 
Category Categorization based on 
the extent of damage 
Compensation as 
per 
SDRF/NDRF 
norms 
Additional 
assistance by 
State 
Government 
Total 
compensation 
paid 
A Fully damaged –  
more than 75 per cent 95,100 4,04,900 5,00,000 
B 
B2 
Severe damage - 
(reconstruction) 
25 to 75 per cent 
95,100 4,04,900 5,00,000 
B1 Severe damage - (repair) 
25 to 75 per cent 95,100 2,04,900 3,00,000 
C Partial damage –  
15 to 25 per cent 5,200 44,800 50,000 
Source: State Government orders. 
The State Government has not prescribed any specific mechanism for inspection 
of damaged houses.  As per the prevailing procedure, on reporting an incidence of 
house damage/collapse, the revenue authorities at the village level inspect the spot 
and prepare a report assessing the damage by visual means.  Subsequently, the 
Engineer of concerned local body certifies the extent of damage for payment of 
compensation to the affected family. 
In this regard audit observed the following: 
➢ The State Government issued orders/instructions imposing/withdrawing 
conditions time and again for payment of compensation, which resulted in the 
district authorities not having a definite set of guidelines and formats for 
obtaining information and thus, payments were made arbitrarily. (For e.g., order 
instructing payment of damage compensation based on the percent age of 
damage and its withdrawal, frequent changes in categorisation of damage, etc.); 
➢ The higher compensation announced annually by the State Government based 
on the severity of the rainfall  was limited ‘only for a specific period in a year  
(monsoon)’. The houses damaged due to rainfall/other hazards during the other 
period/months of the year were not eligible for higher compensation.  Random 
verification of a few individual payment files showed that photographs which 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
73 
neither had GPS coordinates nor the signs of rain/wetness on the damaged 
portion/collapsed buildings formed the basis for payment.  The records in 
support of having rained on the date of damage as per the claim, press clippings 
etc., were also not available.  Thus,  the possibility of claiming/payment of 
compensation at a higher rate, even fo r the houses damaged during the  period 
outside the duration of the calamity, cannot be ruled out. 
➢ It can be seen from Table 5.4 that 25 per cent damage overlapped between two 
categories – B (B1, B2) and C with significant differences in compensation 
prescribed.  Audit noticed ten instances where damage recorded as 25  per cent 
was paid lower compensation under the ‘C category’ in certain cases while it 
was considered as  ‘B category’ in certain other cases and paid higher 
compensation. This ambiguity allowed Engineers to manipulate 
(increase/decrease) the percentage of damage initially assessed by the local 
authorities, to fit the case into a higher or lower category (Appendix 5.2a).   
➢ The absence of definite guidelines on the classification of damage and the huge 
difference in payment of compensation between categories allowed for arbitrary 
classification by the authorities.  Damages assessed between 70-75 per cent (13 
instances) were categorised as B1/C while damages of 26 -40 per cent (29 
instances) were categorised as B2/C (Appendix 5.2b).  
 
Illustration 
In Haveri district, 696 house damages initially categorised as C were subsequently 
categorised (reportedly on re -verification) as B1/B2 with an increase in financial 
assistance from ₹50,500 to ₹3.00/5.00 lakh per unit.  The district authorities did not 
explain the reasons for the huge upward variation in assessment of  damage from the 
minor repair level to reconstruction level.  In view of the significant difference in the 
quantum of compensation between the two categories (B1 and B2), audit could not rule 
out the possibility of fraudulent practices in certifying the extent of damage (Appendix 
5.2c). 
Audit also noticed that a total of 2,503 houses in eight taluks of Haveri district were 
identified as damaged under various categories during the year 2020-21 even when the 
rainfall received was less than normal (the departure from normal rainfall ranged 
between -13 and +8). A total compensation of ₹64.00 crore35 was paid in these cases. 
Hence, there was no relation between scientific evidence and hazard data. 
➢ The compensation amount of ₹95,100 prescribed as per SDRF norms for A and 
B categories was to be paid to the affected persons by the taluk authorities 
immediately on approval of the case , through bank transfers.  However, the 
additional financing by the State Government was to be obtained through Rajiv 
Gandhi Rural Housing Corporation Limited 36 (RGRHCL) in four instalments 
based on the progress of repair/reconstruction.  The details of compensation 
cases sanctioned for A and B categories in the State during the period from 
2019-20 to 2022-23 and the status of construction is shown in Table 5.5. 
 
 
 
 
35 Category A - ₹91,00,000; Category B1 - ₹33,50,000; Category B2 - ₹60,13,00,000; Category C 
- ₹2,62,75,000. 
36 The nodal agency for implementation of rural housing schemes in the State. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
74 
Table 5.5 Statement 37  showing the status of construction in respect of  
compensation cases sanctioned       
                                                              (number) 
Year 
Compensation 
cases 
sanctioned 
Completed 
houses 
Houses in 
progress 
Construction not 
started 
2019-20 43,397 27,691 8,756 6,950 
2020-21 8,911 4,876 3,005 1,030 
2021-22 27,039 9,819 12,002 5,218 
2022-23 31,060 2,804 18,958 9,298 
Total 1,10,407 45,190 42,721 22,496 
Source: Compiled by audit from online data available on RGRHCL portal. 
A damaged house for which a compensation of ₹ 95,100 (as per norms) as first 
instalment was paid was required to commence the reconstruction of house 
immediately and complete it as early as possible. However, it could be observed 
from the table above that 22,496 houses for which a total compensation of 
₹213.94 crore had been paid, did not commence the construction even after two-
three years of damage/payment of compensation.  Apparently, these 
beneficiaries either had alternative dwelling arrangements and were not in need 
of the additional compensation or the assessments made were not correct.  
As a result, ₹213.94 crore38 paid towards compensation remained unfruitful as 
the very objective of providing proper accommodation to the affected 
beneficiaries remained defeated.  It could also be seen that in 23,763 cases 
where compensation was paid prior to 2022 -23, construction was  at various 
stages of completion and remained incomplete.  
The State Government instructed (October 2022)  the DCs of the districts to 
cancel the compensation sanctioned in respect of houses where construction had 
not commenced and to issue  notices for speedy completion in respect of 
lingering houses. However, records showed that no action had been taken in this 
regard by the concerned officers. 
➢ On a house being damaged by flood/rain, it is stipulated that the local revenue 
authorities were to inspect the spot for assessing the damage and obtain a 
certificate from the Engineer concerned which was to be approved by the 
Tahsildar for initial payment and then by the  DC for forwarding the case to 
RGRHCL for further monitoring and payment. RGRHCL was not required to 
inspect the damaged house or certify the damage but was only to monitor further 
progress and make payments thereon.  However, audit observed discrepancies 
between categorisation as per taluk authorities and that exhibited in the 
RGRHCL portal.  Cases assessed as category A / B2 were revised to B1 (32 
instances) and vice-versa (18 instances) and also A / B1 / B2 was categorised as 
C (22 instances) (Appendix 5.2d).  It was not forthcoming as to how RGRHCL 
authorities revised/modified the category without physical inspection of the 
house. Inappropriate change of categorisation by RGRHCL, without physically 
verifying the damaged house,  points towards the possibility of depriving the 
actually damaged house/beneficiary from getting the correct compensation and 
benefitting an ineligible beneficiary with higher amount of compensation.  
Matter needs to be investigated. 
➢ One-time financial assistance of ₹50,000 under category C was being paid to 
the affected families for immediate repair.  There was, however, no system in 
 
37 The figures shown for these cases are year specific and are not progressive . 
38 Construction not started (22,496) * Initial payment (₹95,100) = ₹213.94 crore. 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
75 
place to check whether the beneficiary had utilised the compensation for 
carrying out the repairs.  
➢ Once a house was compensated for damage due to a calamity, the State 
Government should have ensured disaster resilient construction/repair. 
However, the State Government permitted (2022) to extend house damage 
compensation though the same house was provided compensation under the “C” 
category during the previous years .  This showed that the State Government 
was more intent on providing assistance rather than ensuring that the 
constructions/repairs taken up were disaster resilient.  
➢ The State Government also permitted (2022) damage compensation payment s 
to houses constructed under various government schemes which again indicates 
that the houses constructed earlier were not disaster-resilient. 
➢ There were 41 instances ( Appendix 5.2e), where the compensation was paid 
based only on the assessment done by local authorities and without certification 
by the Engineer concerned. 
➢ No timelines were prescribed for completion of the construction of houses. 
Audit could not ascertain  as to how one could assess and decide the extent of 
physical damage upto a particular percentage just through visual means without 
any scientific or engineering basis. Audit observed instances of payments though 
the damage was not clearly visible from the photographs placed on record.  Thus, 
the compensation payments were being made without comprehensive guidelines 
for damage assessment and proper validation  measures and hence, e xtension of 
undue benefits cannot be ruled out. 
At the instance of audit, the State Government revised (August 2024) the 
percentage of damage as well as quantum of compensation towards house damages 
due to rain/flood caused only during the monsoon period39.  On verification of the 
revised order, audit observed that the Government had not acted upon other 
findings in the process of payment of compensation like visual assessment of 
damage, precautionary measures towards the possibility of claiming/payment of 
compensation at higher rates, ensuring actual execution of repair work, insisting 
on disaster resilience to avoid repetition of damage/claims, etc. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that  the compensation towards house 
damage due to rain has been revised for the year 2024 -25.  However, no action 
has been taken by the State Government to investigate omissions pointed out by 
Audit and to fix responsibility on the erring officials. 
5.5.3 Input subsidy for crop loss 
The loss of crops had been catastrophic in the State due to various types of hazards, 
predominantly flood and drought and compensation  was paid (including both 
SDRF and State grants) by the State Government through the Parihara portal, as 
shown in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Details of crop compensation as per Parihara portal 
Category Type of crop 
Maximum eligible amount 
for prescribed two hectares 
Rainfed Irrigation 
A Agriculture/horticulture/annual plantation crops ₹27,200 ₹50,000 
B Perennial crops ₹56,000 ₹56,000 
C Loss of land due to silt ₹24,400 
D Loss of substantial portion of land ₹75,000 
 
39 Off-monsoon period damages to be paid as per SDRF norms. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
76 
[ 
Audit obtained and analysed the data dump of Parihara covering the period 2017-
18 to 2022 -23.  As per the information available on Parihara portal, a total of 
₹6,752.28 crore had been paid in respect of 5,91,302 number of cases during the 
period 2018-19 to 2022-23 through Parihara portal.   
Random v erification of the data (through input of data like  individual Aadhaar 
number, year, season, calamity, etc.,) showed instances of compensation having 
been paid in violation of the guidelines  (Appendix 5.3) and thus, were ineligible 
as listed below: 
i) Farmers were given compensation more than the eligible amount in one 
season under category A and category B. 
ii) Farmers having more than two hectares of land were given compensation 
under categories C and D. 
iii) Farmers receiving compensation under categories of both A/B and D for 
the same survey numbers and in the same season.  
 
The above instances are only illustrative but not exhaustive. The Government 
needs to verify and initiate action to ensure payments to only genuine beneficiaries.  
 
5.5.3.1 Irregularities noticed in distribution of crop loss compensation during 
the year 2019-20 
In Haveri district, audit observed that the DC/ADC had booked ( February 2020) 
complaints with the police authorities on the Tahsildars of all the eight taluks under 
the district alleging fraudulent payments of input subsidy towards loss of crops due 
to flood during the year 2019 -20 and in turn, the police authorities had  submitted 
the first information reports to the concerned jurisdictional magistrate courts. 
As per the procedure, the data entry operator at the taluk level was to enter all the 
details of the beneficiary into the different modules of the portal for submission to 
the next higher level.  In case of any difference in name and aadh aar number of 
the beneficiary between the e -file submitted by the operator and the RTC 40 data, 
the Village Accountant concerned should send back the file to the operator for 
correction and the corrected file was to be approved by the Tahsildar. The 
consolidated file of all the beneficiaries (in the form of XML file) would be further 
submitted to DC for approval and payment. 
As audit observed that the Parihara portal permits an option to the Village 
Accountant and the Tahsildar to approve  the case, even when the details of 
beneficiaries differ from the RTC records in specific cases like death of the original 
landholder, sale of land, donated land, etc. Exploiting this option, the Village 
Accountant and the Tahsildars of these taluks had irregularly approved payments 
towards input subsidy in cases where there were differences in the name of the 
landholder, survey number belongin g to Government land/religious places, etc., 
and made payments to fictitious bank accounts. 
However, despite passage of t hree years after filing of FIRs,  no action had  been 
taken by the DC, Haveri to expedite inquiry and take action on the delinquent 
officials. The DC, Haveri not only did not follow up the case expeditiously but also 
did not conduct an internal departmental inquiry against the subordinate officials. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the DC, Haveri had been directed to 
expedite inquiries and take legal action against the erring officials.  
 
40 Record of Rights, Tenancy and Crop Information. 

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
77 
5.5.4 Omissions in compensation towards water flooding into houses 
Habitations/houses constructed in low -lying areas are more prone to inundation 
during heavy rainfall.  Non -enforcement of building bye-law regulations and lack 
of preparedness results in houses getting flooded during heavy rainfall being a 
common and regular phenomenon. 
As per SDRF norms, houses affected due to water flooding/inundation for more 
than two days  (causing damage to household articles and foodgrains) were to be 
paid a compensation of ₹10,000 (which included a State additional grant of 
₹6,200). The norms did not prescribe any spot verification/inspection by authorities 
for payment of compensation. An application with a photograph would make a 
beneficiary eligible for payment. The compensation towards this component was 
invariably paid in all the test -checked districts.  Verification of records showed 
the following omissions. 
➢ Though water flooding was a regular feature for dwelling units constructed 
along river/water courses, the State/ district authorities did not take action  to 
rehabilitate inhabitants of such houses to safer locations or avoid  flooding 
through structural measures.  
➢ There was no documentary evidence on record in support of the claim that 
houses were inundated for more than 48 hours which had caused damage to 
household articles and food grains. 
➢ In certain cases, the photographs showed water stagnation only in the outer 
premises of the house, without a photograph of water flooding into the house.  
The payment of compensation without initiating preventive measures and proper 
verification facilitated such people to continue residing at places exposed to 
danger.  The compensation payment, therefore, had become a source of regular 
income for the families living in such houses.  
Recommendation 1 4: The State Government should streamline  the procedure 
for payment of compensation towards damages preventing ineligible payments 
and fixing accountability on concerned officials for any irregularities.  
 
5.6 Rehabilitation 
Rehabilitation and reconstruction are important compone nts of disaster 
management. In accordance with Section 39(f)(iii) of DM Act , the State 
Government is responsible for carrying out rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
Rehabilitation refers to the restoration of basic services and facilities for the 
functioning of a community or a society affected by a disaster.   
Among the test-checked districts, the rehabilitation activities for flood hazard were 
initiated only in Haveri district.  Audit observations noticed thereon are discussed 
in subsequent paragraphs. 
5.6.1 Delay in providing rehabilitation to flood-affected Mustur village 
The Mustur village in  Ranebennur taluk of Haveri district consists of nearly 350 
families and is located on the banks of both Tungabhadra and Kumudavathi rivers 
and hence was recurrently affected by flood. The then Member of the Legislative 
Assembly submitted (1992) a proposal to shift the village to a safer location but 
the same was not done.  The distressed village people subsequently represented 
(July 2014)  to the Tahsildar, Ranebennur taluk for shifting the families and 
providing flood-safe houses.  

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
78 
On verification of records and joint physical inspection  (June 2023) of the work 
site, audit observed that construction of a total of 232 houses was approved by the 
State Government (May 2016)  at a total outlay of ₹17.14 crore . However, only a 
sum of ₹3.30 crore was released  (October 2016)  to the contractor (Nirmithi 
Kendra) through DC, Haveri . Hence, contractor could only ensure partial 
completion of 116 houses (May 2019) without any basic infrastructure  and work 
remained incomplete since then. However, many families had already occupied the 
houses though they were not handed over to the department by the agency. 
The fact that families occupied the houses that were partially constructed and were 
without any infrastructure shows the urgent circumstances under which they 
continued to live earlier.  The other families who were either not allotted houses 
or the construction had not commenced/completed were forced to continue to live 
in the village with danger of floods.  
The fact clearly exhibits incomplete action by  the Government/district 
administration towards providing safer living standards to the flood distressed 
population even after 30 years of the proposal. Further measures initiated towards 
achieving envisioned disaster risk reduction, were ineffective. 
The Government did not furnish any specific reply to the observation. 
5.6.2 Safer residential sites not provided to flood affected families 
The villages of Kudala, Allapura, Haravi and Haranagiri in Hanagal taluk of Haveri 
district were recurrently affected by the flooding of Varada River water.  Hence, 
the Grama Panchayat, Kudala submitted (August 2019) a proposal to the Tahsildar, 
Hanagal for shifting the affected families to a nearby safer location.  The 
Tahsildar, Hanagal in turn forwarded a proposal ( March 2020) to the DC, Haveri 
for providing residential sites to the affected families of these villages in 
Maranabeeda village and the DC ordered (September 2020) to reserve the required 
land for the said purpose.   
Audit observed that no action was taken in this regard even as of June 2023.  In 
the meantime, 52 houses in these villages were damaged due to flood/rain and were 
paid compensation  (April 2020)  as per SDRF norms .  The Additional Deputy 
Commissioner, Haveri replied ( June 2023 ) that the villages were affected only 
during 2019-20 and were not affected during subsequent years and thus, there was 
no proposal for shifting these villages.  
Since the proposal was made by the rural population and accepted by the DC on 
grounds that the villages were being affected by recurrent floods , inaction by the 
authorities either to p rovide safer sites or initiate  adequate structural measures to 
avoid flooding is fraught with the risk of exposing the rural population to recurrent 
danger. 
The Government did not furnish any specific reply to the observation. 
[ 
5.7  Reconstruction of Infrastructure Damaged by Flood Hazard 
Reconstruction is the restoration or replacement of severely damaged physical 
structures, utilities and local infrastructure to its original status.  Reconstruction 
must be fully integrated into ongoing long-term development plans, taking account 
of future  disaster risks.  The responsibility of taking up permanent restoration/  
reconstruction vests with the respective departments through financing from their 
regular budgetary grants.  

Chapter V: Flood and rain hazard  
79 
While the nodal department was compiling the data on damages to different types 
of infrastructure by natural calamities, it was not in poss ession of the details 
regarding reconstruction/restoration of damages by the line departments, indicating 
ineffective monitoring towards providing basic connectivity/services to the  
affected population. 
Though restoration works were taken up and completed, the expenditure incurred 
for the works was in excess of the SDRF norms in many cases as pointed out in  
Paragraph 3.1.8. Audit also observed that there were delays in taking up 
reconstruction/restoration works.  Audit conducted a joint physical inspection  
(October 2022) of three bridges and two roads (State highway) damaged due to 
flood during the year 2022 -23 in Ramanagara district and noticed that the 
bridges/roads had not been restored and as a result, the public were forced to take 
alternate longer routes.  
Illustrative photographs taken during the JPV of damaged bridges are shown in 
Exhibit 5.5 below: 
 
Exhibit 5.5: Photographs showing the damaged major bridges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Source: Photographs taken during the JPV. 
Scrutiny of the proposals showed that the individual restoration works were 
estimated to cost between ₹5 lakh and ₹15 crore.  With respect to the above two 
bridge works (Harisandra and Manchenabele), DPRs were under preparation and 
the restoration works were in progress for one bridge (Suggenahalli). 
  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
VI
 
Landslides
  
 

81 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
Landslides 
 
The State had  been experiencing a spurt in incidences of landslides since 2016, 
particularly in the Western Ghats. This could be traced to factors such as population 
growth, unchecked infrastructure development, changes in land cover and land use 
besides extreme rainfall induced by climate change. 
Audit identified issues such as insufficient preparedness and commitment to 
landslide mitigation. The State Government delayed publishing the State Action 
Plan for Landslide Management until 2022. Discrepancies in hazard zonation 
maps, the absence of a landslide inventory, and non-deployment of  necessary 
monitoring equipment highlighted a critical need for effective interventions, 
particularly in Kodagu district.  
A separate case study on the Kodagu landslide events revealed a lack of guidelines 
or regulations for land use and cover to mitigate the hazard. Systemic lapses in 
government monitoring were evident in incidents like the collapsed retaining wall 
at the Deputy Commissioner's office in Madikeri. Unauthorized constructions were 
regularized, and agricultural land continued to be converted for commercial uses, 
highlighting inadequacies in disaster -resilient infrastructure planning and 
execution. 
Landslide hazards rank high among hydrogeological hazards because they pose a 
threat to life and livelihood ranging from disruptions of normal activities to 
widespread loss of life, and property, and destruction in large parts of mountainous 
regions. The primary causes of landslides are forces due to geology, weathering, 
water content, vegetation, slope angles, human activities, etc. 
 
6.1 Karnataka State Landslide Hazard Profile 
In the State, landslides affect at least 15 per cent of the total land area of Karnataka, 
mostly falling in the Western Ghat region which includes 29 taluks of seven 
districts viz., Uttara Kannada, Shivamogga, Chikkamagaluru, Udupi, Dakshina 
Kannada, Kodagu and Hassan districts.  Landslide vulnerability map of Karnataka, 
as mapped by KSNDMC is shown in Chart 6.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
82 
Chart 6.1: Landslide vulnerability map of Karnataka 
 
Source: KSNDMC. 
The landslides in the State had caused widespread damage and many casualties, 
together with significant economic losses and social disruption. The number of 
landslides and consequent human causalities recorded between the years 2009 and 
2021 is shown in Chart 6.2. 
Source: Karnataka State Action Plan: Management of Landslides-2022. 
27
 0
 12
 12
 7
 12
 5
125
219
462
161
 264
66
0
100
200
300
400
500
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Numbers
Year
Chart 6.2: Number of landslides and deaths in the State
No. of landslide events No. of deaths


Chapter VI: Landslides 
83 
It can be seen that the landslide events have increased significantly since 2016.  
This can be attributed to the growth of population and consequent infrastructure 
development in violation of the zonal regulations together with the extreme rainfall 
events triggered due to climate change (as per GSI report).  Deforestation is also a 
contributing factor to landslide. Among the test -checked districts, Dakshina 
Kannada and Kodagu were the most vulnerable and had been severely affected by 
landslides since the year 2018. 
 
Illustrative photographs showing the intensity of destruction caused by landslides 
in various parts of the State are depicted in Exhibit 6.1. 
 
Exhibit 6.1: Media reports showing the intensity of landslide destruction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Media reports. 
6.2 Landslide Impacts 
Landslide hazards have both short-term and long-term impacts on society and the 
environment. The short-term impact accounts for  the loss of life and property at 
the site and the long -term impact includes changes in the landscape that can be 
permanent, including the loss  of cultivable land and the environmental impact in 
terms of erosion and soil loss, population shift and relocation of population and 
establishments.  Like in any other disaster, the most affected by the landslides are 
the socio -economically weaker section s of the society who inhabit vulnerable 
areas. 
Neither the data on expenditure incurred by the Government towards management 
of landslip hazards over the year s nor the details of environmental damage and 
socio-economic impact thereon, on the farming community in particular,  were 
available with the Government. 
 
 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
84 
6.3 Preparedness towards Landslides 
6.3.1 Landslide management framework 
Landslides can be predicted, and the vulnerability to landslides, as well as the areas 
within landslide zones, can be clearly mapped out by land modelling utilizing 
remote sensing and Geographical Information System (GIS) technology.  This 
information was deemed crucial for the provision of early warnings, the execution 
of evacuation exercises, and general preparedness. Thus, there was a need for a 
comprehensive Landslide Risk Management Strategy  (LRMS) addressing all 
components of landslide disaster risk reduction and management, such as hazard 
mapping, regulations and policies, stabilization and mitigation of landslides, early 
warning systems, awareness programmes, capacity building, and trainin g, among 
others. 
Although the National Disaster Management Guidelines on the Management of 
Landslides and Snow Avalanches was formulated in 2009 and the specific National 
LRMS was introduced by NDMA in September 2019 , the State published the 
Karnataka State Action Plan: Management of Landslides only in 2022. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the ‘Karnataka State Action Plan: 
Management of Landslides’ addressed all the components of landslides and action 
was being taken for monitoring rainfall in moderate to high-risk areas through rain 
gauge network of KSNDMC.  
Reply is not convincing as significant gaps remain in its implementation. The  
State’s response primarily focu ssed on rainfall monitoring without addressing 
broader preventive measures and community preparedness outlined in the plan.  
Further, the devices for monitoring rainfall as indicated in the previous chapters 
are largely non-functional. 
6.3.2 Inappropriate landslide hazard zonation maps 
The strategic document of NDMA  recommended the preparation of Landslide 
Hazard Zonation maps at both macroscale and mesoscales (1:50000/25000 and 
1:10000, respectively)  employing advanced state -of-the-art tools such as 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), Terrestrial Laser Scanners, and very high -
resolution Earth Observation (EO) data.   
As per the State Action Plan: Management of Landslides-2022, the State prepared 
the district -wise susceptibility maps, which are shown in Appendix 6. 1. Audit 
observed that the test-checked districts of Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu  
possessed the zonation maps, which were prepared to adopt a scale of 1:325000 as 
against the envisaged scale of 1:10000.  However, the period during which these 
maps were prepared was not on record and thus, audit could not ensure whether 
these maps were prepared by the district administration as a tool for preventive 
action against the landslides.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that action would be taken to prepare the 
maps on a prescribed scale in consultation with GSI and other related 
departments/agencies. 
6.3.3 Absence of landslide inventory 
The preparatory measure for initiating preventive actions was to identify, map and 
list the landslides/landslips over a time series. The landslide inventories contain 

Chapter VI: Landslides 
85 
basic information about landslides such as location, classification, morphology, 
volume, run-out distance, activity, and date of occurrence etc.  Though the State 
had identified (2022)  broad zones/locations and road sections vulnerable to 
landslides, the district authorities  of the test-checked districts  were not in 
possession of landslide inventory.   
The absence of a defined framework and landslide inventory coupled with mapping 
with lesser resolution led to inadequate preparedness, and risk assessment 
ultimately exposing the vulnerable communities and infrastructure to danger. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the district authorities and KSNDMC 
would be instructed to compile data on landslide incidences as well as to prepare a 
detailed inventory to enable planning preparedness and mitigation measures.  
Further, though Government claimed to have possessed inventory of 149 5 
landslides in the State, the same was not furnished to audit. 
6.3.4 Monitoring/Forecast Mechanism 
Monitoring is an important component of landslide investigation/studies that 
includes the measurement and analysis of landslide dynamics as well as changes 
in the factors that cause landslides.  Monitoring of landslides can be both surface 
and subsurface.  The Government itself had accepted in the State Action Plan that 
landslide monitoring is generally not practised. 
6.3.4.1 Failure to deploy scientific equipment 
The primary geo -physical causes for any landsli p are the formation of 
linear/vertical cracks or piping cavities, as shown in Exhibit 6.2, which may be 
natural or have occurred due to man-made activities.  
Exhibit 6.2: Formation of linear/vertical cracks 
  
Source: Photographs furnished by KSNDMC. 
These fractures/cracks in the earth could be studied, analysed, and monitored by 
installing technologically available instruments  like a Crack meter/Joint meter 
where the cracks are visually apparent, and Inclinometer/Piezometer/Tilt meter/ 
Borehole extensometer, etc., where the subsurface deformation  and depth of 
sliding is not apparent from surface measurements and visual observations. 
Audit observed that the State Government/SDMA or the DDMAs did not initiate 
necessary action to adopt available technology and to install the forecast 
mechanism equipment  in any of the hazard -vulnerable points/locations. Hence, 
there was no established procedure for forecasting this disaster in the State.  
 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
86 
6.3.4.2 Early warning systems 
Dissemination and communication mechanisms, as far as early warning systems 
are concerned, must be operational, robust, and available around the clock. These 
should be designed to meet the needs of a wide range of different threats and 
different user communities. The landslide risk management strategy also 
recommended Landslide Monitoring and Early Warning Systems 41, Stabilization 
and Mitigation of Landslides, and the creation of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
for landslide management, capacity building, and awareness programs.  
Audit observed that the State Government had not acted upon  these 
recommendations. Thus, in the absence of advanced technological equipment and 
early warning systems, the Government/district authorities could not disseminate 
any alerts which exposed the local community to landslip hazards without a 
forecast mechanism. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that the GSI had pioneered early 
warning system for landslides in July 2024 , which will be rolled over across the 
country in the next three months.  Evidently, the early warning mechanism against 
landslides hazard was absent in the State. It is further stated that the KSNDMC had 
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Geological Survey of 
India, Kolkata towards the development of an experimental rainfall threshold -
based regional landslide forecasting system for Karnataka  and s oon after the 
project approval, actions will be taken to deploy scientific instruments . However, 
audit observed that although the MoU was entered into in March 2023,  KSNDMC 
was not in possession of details of progress in this regard. 
6.4 Mitigation Measures 
Landslide hazard management involves measures taken to avoid or mitigate the 
risk posed by landslide hazards. 
6.4.1 Absence of determined commitment towards risk reduction 
Numerous studies, including those by the Geological Survey of India (GSI), have 
linked recurring and widespread landslides in Kodagu district since 2005 to various 
factors. These factors include transverse surface cracks resulting from increased 
pore water pressure due to heavy rainwater infiltration, slope cutting for road 
construction, anthropogenic factors intensified by heavy rainfall, unregulated 
habitation expansion  disrupting the natural equilibrium, land modifications for 
agriculture and road development, extensive slope cutting along roads, structural 
modifications increasing susceptibility, destabilization due to slope toe removal, 
inadequate drainage leading to water seepage into joints and fractures, and poorly 
designed houses without basements. 
Recommendations arising from these studies  propose measures based on the 
specific causes of landslides. These measures include establishing proper drainage 
systems to manage slope water, constructing retaining walls, implementing 
inclined piles at slope toes, using stone pitching and gabions, empl oying 
biotechnical slope protection, and geometrically modifying slopes through grading 
and benching. Additional recommendations include planting stabilizing grass like 
 
41 Such as Rainfall Threshold -based Landslide Early Warning System, Ground Instrument -based 
Landslide Early Warning System, Seismicity-induced Landslide Early Warning System, etc. 

Chapter VI: Landslides 
87 
vetiver, removing loose boulders, exercising caution in construction activities 
within high and moderate susceptibility zones, and conducting detailed site -
specific studies before civil construction projects. 
However, the State Government had not taken proactive steps  to address the 
findings and recommendations from these studies.  The DCs of Dakshina Kannada 
and Kodagu districts which were affected by the recurrent landslides replied that 
either structural or non-structural measures were not taken prior to devastation and 
action had been initiated in this regard only after 2018-19. 
6.4.2 Laxity in implementation  
Furthermore, a study report titled " Landslides in Coorg District of Karnataka 
State," published in the International Journal of Innovative Research in Science, 
Engineering, and Technology (Vol. 5, Issue 6, June 2016), emphasized the role of 
land use and human activities, specifically slope excavation  being the contributory 
factor for landslides besides climatic conditions.  Nevertheless, the State 
Government and the State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) did not 
impose restrictions on infrastructure, human, or commercial activities  that 
contributed to the destruction of natural geographical conditions, thereby 
neglecting preventive measures. Additionally, no efforts were made to conduct risk 
analysis and assessment. 
The GSI in its reports on Kodagu landslides recommended to avoid vertical cut 
slopes as it unst abilises the slope and insert horizontal perforated pipes into the 
slopes which will act as weep -holes in the vertical slopes .  Audit team conducted 
(June-July 2023 ) joint physical verification  of selected reachable locations and 
stretches of roads affected by landslides under Kodagu  and Dakshina Kannada 
districts and observed the following: 
➢ The works executed towards repairs and restoration of roads were 
inappropriate as the authorities were still resorting to steep vertical cut 
formation along the roads, exposing the road and the terrain for possible 
landslips (Exhibit 6.3(a)). 
➢ Retention walls constructed to arrest further landslips were without weep hole 
facility and hence, were fraught with the risk of washing off the structure due 
to infiltration during excessive rainfall incidents (Exhibit 6.3(b)). 
Exhibit 6.3(a)    Exhibit 6.3(b) 
 
 
 
 
   Source: Joint Physical Verification. 
➢ Stabilization works were not taken up in landslide locations despite the visual 
appearance of huge natural drainage cavity (Exhibit 6.4).  
 
 
 
 
 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
88 
Exhibit 6.4: Landslide location with natural drainage cavity 
Monnangeri II Monnangeri II 
Source: Joint Physical Verification. 
 
➢ Proper drainage facilities were not provided to either new or restored road 
works. 
➢ Action was not taken by the State/District authorities to install early warning 
equipment.  
➢ State/district administration had neither restricted land conversions nor 
construction of houses unscientifically and without approval.  Instead, 
compensation at higher rates was paid in case of damage to such houses due 
to landslips. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that action had already been initiated 
to implement the recommendations of the study teams and that district 
administrations vulnerable to hazards had submitted various proposals for the 
management of landslides.  However, neither the details of the action initiated to 
implement the recommendations nor the proposals submitted by the districts were 
furnished to audit. Timelines to implement the proposals a re also needed to be 
factored to counter the increasing incidence of landslides. 
6.5 Landslides in Kodagu – A Case Study 
Kodagu witnessed major flood -cum-landslide events during the year 2018 -19 
which was very devastating as nearly as 20 lives were lost  and many properties 
were damaged.  After the devastation, the State Government/district administration 
requested the Geological Survey of India (GSI) to conduct a post -disaster 
investigation of landslides that occurred in Kodagu district. The GSI submitted its 
detailed investigation report in October 2019. 
The major causal factors for slope failures reported by GSI (which studied around 
105 landslides  and subsidence ) included geological lineaments, lithological 
factors, modification of the natural slopes, high angle (vertical or near vertical) 
slope cut for road construction, rapid modification for construction of 
infrastructure like houses, hotels, homestays, etc., large scale slope modification 
for plantations (especially coffee), blockage of natural drainages, creation of water 
tanks, ponds throughout plantation estates modifying the actual slope, etc. 
The report also highlighted  the absence of guidelines or land use/land cover 
regulations to monitor land use pattern and recommended a wide range of measures 
for arresting/mitigating the landslide hazard.  However, the State/district 
administration did not comprehensively act on the recommendations (March 2024) 
and could not mitigate landslide hazard. 


Chapter VI: Landslides 
89 
Consequently, the State Government appointed (April 2020) a High -Power 
Committee headed by the Chairman, Karnataka Biodiversity Board, Bengaluru to 
study landslides in Karnataka.  The committee submitted its report in March 2021. 
The High-Power Committee also attributed the severe landslides in the districts 
under western ghats to slope modification by human interference, drastic change 
in land use/land cover, manmade loss of vegetation, natural drainage blockage, 
forest land conversion, etc. The Committee, inter alia, recommended streamlining 
and strengthening ground-level institutional framework, possessing geo-referenced 
landslide inventory and landslide susceptibility maps, landslide risk analysis and 
management plan, developing a Comprehensive Landslide Prevention and 
Mitigation Plan (CLPMP), framing a well -defined land use policy, prevention of 
illegal roadside and forest encroachment for commercial activities, etc. 
Further, KSNDMC in consultation with the experts from Amrita Vishwa 
Vidyapeetham, Kerala, jointly investigated 42 (May-June 2022) the landslides and 
recommended measures to monitor and mitigate the landslide and related multi -
hazard disasters . The study team, after detailed field verification, noted heavy 
rainfall in a short span of time, presence of tectonic lineaments, const ruction of 
houses and disturbance to  the natural course of ephemeral drainages, changes in 
hill-slope agriculture patterns (such as coffee and rubber plantations), 
inappropriate ways of interfering with hill-slope formations etc. 
Despite these remedial reports, the Government/district administration did not 
initiate adequate measures towards mitigating hazards of landslides as discussed in 
successive paragraphs. 
6.5.1 District Land conversions - Disaster Risk Evaluation and Land 
management  
In the aftermath of the devastating landslides and based on the inputs of GSI, the 
Government imposed (November 2018) ban on land conversion from agricultural 
to non-agricultural purposes in Kodagu district .  However, the State Government 
modified (May 2019)  the order lift ing the ban on land conversions and allowed 
conversions for residential purposes up to an extent of 15 to 20 cents. As per this 
order, the following conditions were to be followed during land conversions for 
the proposed place which is: 
 
• other than non-stable area/zones notified by GSI; 
• located more than 10 meters from the river channels; 
• avoiding steep slopes and valleys; 
• at a place far from 2018 monsoon landslide-hit areas. 
 
 
The State Government further modified (June 2020)  the order and allowed land 
conversions for all including commercial purposes. A technical committee 
including a GSI scientist (later replaced by Scientists of Department of Mines and 
Geology, Madikeri) was empanelled for scrutiny and the same conditions 
stipulated in May 2019 were reiterated. 
The status of land conversions during the years 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 in Kodagu 
district is shown in Table 6.1. 
 
42 Multi-disciplinary Landslide Post-Disaster Assessment and Action Plan for Kodagu District. 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
90 
Table 6.1: Status of land conversions during the years 2018-19 to 2022-23 
Year Applications 
received 
Conversions 
approved Rejected Percentage 
of approval 
2019 1,247 541 706 43 
2020 1,365 935 430 68 
2021 1,223 903 320 74 
2022 2,717 1,914 803 70 
2023 (up to June) 463 315 148 68 
Source: Information furnished by DC, Kodagu. 
The data presented in the table clearly indicates an upward trend in the number of 
conversions and approval of applications each year.   
Audit extracted the details of 207 conversion cases43 from the ‘Bhoomi’ database 
to check whether the areas proposed for conversion were forming part of the 
vulnerable zones.  Audit observed that  the survey number -wise landslide risk 
information in the district was absent.  In the absence of critical granular level 
information, particularly relating to disaster-prone villages identified by GSI, audit 
could not ascertain whether the lands sought for conversion were in the landslide-
prone zone or not.   
The Department of Mines and Geology, which was technically responsible for site-
specific investigations for land conversions had its own challenges . It lacked the 
necessary instruments, laboratory facilities, and experts to conduct geotechnical 
studies.  The non -availability of technical data such as slope maps, landslide 
susceptibility maps, soil type maps, digitized toposheets and software hampered its 
effective functioning.   Moreover, the geologists were to conduct site inspection s 
and prepare the technical report as per the 18-point check list devised by GSI. 
Audit reviewed the geologist reports  for 20 out of 207 cases selected at random 
and noticed that the opinion/input provided against crucial parameters was either 
general or not site -specific.  The Department of Mines and Geology stated 
(September 2023) that it had only two geologists and one vehicle to cover all the 
five taluks of the district in addition to their regular duties and the number of land 
conversion applications being received is increasing at a higher pace.  It further 
stated that the department was not trained on the aspects of landslide study, terrain 
evaluation with respect to urbanisation and recommendation for land conversion 
from agriculture to non -agricultural activities. Further in the absence of the 
required maps, it could not ascertain the exact vulnerability of the area which 
applied for conversion and hence, the report was prepared based only on superficial 
observations. Thus, the geologists were unable to prepare the technical report for 
controlling unscientific constructions and ensuring proper land use management to 
mitigate future disasters. 
The report, however, contained the details of past landslide history, the elements 
at risk and the final remarks which provided an insight for the Committee to decide 
the suitability of the proposed land for conversion.  A few examples from the 18-
point checklist (which are only illustrative and not comprehensive) are given in 
Table 6.2 : 
 
 
43 Extent of land converted in excess of one acre was selected. 

Chapter VI: Landslides 
91 
Table 6.2: Illustrative details of past landslide history in Kodagu district 
Details of land 
converted 
Parameter for 
evaluation as 
recommended by GSI 
Remarks of the geologist 
Sy no. 216/20 – 
Katageri village, 
Sampaje hobli, 
Madikeri taluk - 
1 acre for 
commercial 
purpose 
Element at Risk Houses are present in both upslope and downslope area 
Excavation Required as per construction plan 
Old landslide history There was history of landslide occurrences within an area 
of 198 meters 
Final remarks 40 degrees slope towards west direction. 
In the case of multi -storeyed building s, it is suggested to 
conduct geotechnical studies to mitigate structural failures. 
A layout plan of the applied area is to be obtained by the 
applicant and the same is to be approved by the concerned 
authority adhering to standard building guidelines. 
Since a major part of the area lies in hilly terrain, the 
selection of site s and development of buildings in hilly 
areas may be done as per the Indian Standard Guidelines 
IS 14243 (Part-2):1995. 
Sy No.393/1- 
Kedemalluru 
village, Virajpet 
taluk – 6.06 acre 
for commercial 
Element at Risk No major structure is found in upslope or down slope area 
Excavation Excavation is required as per the construction plan 
Old landslide history There was a massive landslide in Thora village in August 
2019 which is at a distance of 2.9 kms from the proposed 
place of conversion. 
Final remarks The area is a sloppy terrain with 20 -to-25-degree angle 
towards west direction.  Suitable precautionary measures 
should be taken during construction without much land 
deformation. 
Sy No. 115/19 
Katageri village, 
Sampaje hobli, 
Madikeri taluk – 
8 acre - 
Commercial 
Element at Risk No major infrastructure is present in upslope and 
downslope area. 
Excavation Required as per the construction plan 
Old landslide history There was a landslide at Talathmane which is 1.6 kms from 
the proposed conversion land 
Final remarks Since a major part of the applied area lies in a hilly terrain, 
selection of site and development of buildings in hilly areas 
may be done as per the Indian Standard Guidelines. 
Sy No. 2/11 – 1 
acre and 2/12- 1 
acre.  Bettageri 
village, 
Ammathi hobli, 
Virajpet taluk – 
2 acres for 
commercial 
purpose 
Element at Risk Buildings are present at downslope side 
Excavation Required as per construction plan 
Final remarks The area in the west direction is at a slope of 40 to 45 
degrees. 
Since the applied area lies in a hilly terrain, selection of site 
and development of buildings in hilly areas may be done as 
per the Indian Standard Guidelines 
In all the above cases, the committee responsible for assessing and approving the 
land conversions accorded approval for conversion of lands from agricultural to 
non-agricultural, mainly for commercial purposes, overlooking the report of the 
geologist.  Other than the geologist, the role of the other members of the technical 
committee was only to verify the completeness of documentation to issue NOCs.   
Audit also noticed that the Tahsildars/Village accountants/Revenue Inspectors 
were certifying that the four conditions stipulated in the orders of May 2019 and 
June 2020 were complied with, though the first condition of ascertaining the 
stability of the area was not within the purview of their competency as it was a 
technical parameter.   

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
92 
On the other hand, the role of the town planning department in the technical 
committee was not established in the examined land conversion files. There was a 
shortage of technical personnel in the town planning department and city municipal 
council, both of which were connected to post -land conversion activities. There 
were only two members present out of the 10 sanctioned posts  in each of the 
institutions. 
Furthermore, the procedure for geotechnical and structural evaluation of buildings 
as per Indian Standard Guidelines, was not clearly defined .  Specific guidelines 
and bylaws related to safety in building construction were found to be absent, 
particularly after the 2018 landslides.   
During review of the 20 test -checked files, audit observed two instances wherein 
the land that already had structures built on it was submitted for conversion from 
agriculture to non-agriculture purposes.  The Committee approved the conversions 
in both cases after levying penalty.   
It is, therefore, apparent from the above observations that structures were being 
constructed unauthorisedly without being monitored by the respective authorities, 
which could disturb the stability of the slopes leading to landslips.  Thus, the 
conversions in the district were approved disregarding the primary purpose of 
protecting the district from future disasters. Blatant disregard of guidelines while 
approving conversion of land use is an invitation for further disasters and 
landslides. The State Government needs to focus on such conversions and reverse 
such incorrect conversions. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that departments concerned have been 
asked to regulate construction in the landslide prone area as per the existing rules, 
regulations and laws.  The reply highlights the lack of coordination among the 
departments in mitigating landslide hazards. 
6.5.2 Proposed corrective measures not taken up in landslide affected  
Bhagamandala 
Talakaveri or Talacauvery is the source of the river Kaveri located on Brahmagiri 
hills near Bhagamandala in Kodagu district.  In August 2020, there was a massive 
landslide along the approach road to Talacauvery temple  involving both human 
and property loss in this hazardous event.  Even before this dreaded calamity, the 
GSI had conducted studies in the year 2019  and indicated the causative factors of 
a possible landslide in future.  One of the stated factors was “the presence of forest 
trenches on upslope, parallel to ground crack , facilitate water logging and 
subsurface infiltration during monsoon season.  The ground cracks and contour 
trenches observed on the slope acted as pathway for water infiltration resulting in 
increased hydrostatic pressure and reduced shear strength.  Brah magiri hills, as 
observed, are dissected with road cuts, forest trenches and settlements making the 
slopes vulnerable”. 
Based on these observations, GSI recommended to take up following precautions 
to avoid any further eventualities in future. 
i) Appropriately designed retaining structures of suitable height with firm 
foundations are to be erected from road level for checking slope failures. 
ii) There should be a proper and adequate drainage system.   

Chapter VI: Landslides 
93 
iii) Any trenches or cracks, if present on the slope should be monitored and 
filled up with impervious material and planting of deep -rooted plants or 
vetiver grass. 
The GSI also opined that Brahmagiri Hills is a potential risk zone  due to intense 
human activities. Since this area witnessed multiple reactivations of slides from 
past years, it was not advisable to rehabilitate this landslide -affected zone till the 
slope is stabilized to the best possible extent. 
However, neither State Government nor district administration issued any circular/ 
instructions stipulating these recommendations of GSI for strict compliance by 
concerned departments for averting landslides.  Further, the DC, Kodagu had 
convened (28 December 2020) a meeting to review the precautionary measures to 
be taken as recommended by GSI.   The Assistant Conservator of Forest who was 
present in the meeting stated that a high-level committee of Forest department had 
inspected the landslide and provided its recommendations.  The DC then addressed 
(29 December 2020 ) letters to the Principal Secretary, Forest, Ecology and 
Environment Department and Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Bengaluru 
stating that there was the presence of forest trenches up to a depth of 3 km in the 
areas where the landslide occurred during February 2020 and requested to take up 
the precautionary activities as suggested by GSI. 
The DC also instructed the Public Works department  to prepare an action plan to 
take up the works such as construction of retaining wall s, proper drainages and 
culverts in the landslide affected areas and directed that the works be completed 
before the onset of next monsoon i.e., by May/June 2021.   
However, the details of works/precautionary activities taken up, if any, by the 
PWD or Forest Department on the instructions of DC were not forthcoming from 
records indicating lack of monitoring by the district administration to arrest further 
degradation of vulnerable locations. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the details would be furnished after 
seeking a report  from DC, Kodagu .  It may be noted that the draft report was 
submitted to the Government during November 2023 and the department had not 
yet sought the report/re plies from the concerned authorities even as of August 
2024. The reply evidences inaction by the nodal department towards mitigating the 
hazards of disasters and landslides, in particular. 
Recommendation 1 5: The State Government should put in place a proper 
institutional framework integrating geo -referenced landslide inventory -cum-
susceptibility maps, regulate landslide risk areas and develop a Comprehensive 
Landslide Prevention and Mitigation Plan to avoid ge ological disaster . The  
Government should also ensure thorough site assessments of land conversions 
and enforce zoning regulations.  
6.5.3 Improper design resulted in failure of the retaining wall to the Deputy 
Commissioner office building complex  
The Kodagu District Administrative Office complex at Madikeri houses the Office 
of the Deputy Commissioner and District Magistrate (DC), Kodagu and 19  other 
district level departments. The office complex was constructed by Karnataka  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
94 
Housing Board during 2013 -14 on a hillock which is a landslide -vulnerable zone 
(Exhibit 6.5).  The threat perception to the building complex was high as a couple 
of landslides occurred on the Madikeri-Mangaluru Road adjacent to the building. 
Exhibit 6.5: DC office complex situated on a hillock 
 
Source: Media report 
As a precautionary measure against probable landslips  and consequent damage to 
the office building, the DC submitted (October 2016) a proposal to the State 
Government for construction of Terra Link and Reinforced Earth (RE) Retention 
Wall (for a length 140 mts and a height of 15 mts)  and an approach road at a cost 
of ₹5.00 crore44. Audit observed that there was an inordinate delay in obtaining the 
approval of the Technical Advisory and Estimate Scrutiny Committee by the 
Public Works, Ports and Inland Division (PWPID)  and the district administration 
and the State Government accorded administrative approval to the work during 
October 2018.  However, funds for the work were not released. 
Due to the efflux of time, the Executive Engineer, PWPID, Madikeri submitted (26 
December 2018) a revised cost estimate of ₹7.00 crore for the work. The DC 
forwarded (January 2019) the revised estimate to the Government for approval and 
release of funds.  The Government approved it in May 2019 and the work was put 
to tender (December 2019).   
In the meantime, as no protection work had taken place more than three years after 
submitting the proposal, the land mass on the slope side of the building collapsed 
in August 2020 and the slid hillock portion was covered with plastic sheets to avoid 
further mud slide on to the adjacent highway. 
Subsequently, the work was awarded (November 2020) to a contractor45 for ₹7.58 
crore (including GST) with a stipulation to complete the work within 11 months. 
Though the site was handed over to the contractor during December 2020 , the 
designs for the construction of the wall and road were made available only during 
March 2021.  However, the work was stopped (July 2021) for about five months 
due to heavy rain. 
Verification of records showed that, while the work was resumed and fixing of the 
concrete panels of the RE wall was completed to a height of 14 meters, a few of 
the concrete panels of the wall got dislocated (first week of July 2022) and bulged 
 
44 Estimate prepared by Executive Engineer, PWPID based on the 2015-16 SR of Mangaluru circle. 
45 Sri UV Ramanjaneyulu of Sri Ayyappa Constructions, Hyderabad. 


Chapter VI: Landslides 
95 
out posing danger of complete collapse of the wall and the hillock.  The 
Superintending Engineer, Hassan Circle and the Chief Engineer, C and B (South), 
Bengaluru who inspected (07 and 08 July 2022) the work site attributed dislocation 
of the panels of RE wall to absence of a proper drainage facility alongside the 
worksite and consequent percolation of water/rainwater through the embankment 
abutting the RE wall (without any provision to drain out) hence they instructed 
covering the embankment with plastic sheets.  The deformation of the wall panels 
increased day by day and was thus, supported with metallic structural measures  
and sandbags, as suggested by the engineers and experts. 
To rectify the dislocation, all the concrete panels of the wall had been dismantled 
(December 2022) along with the embankment.  Experts from IISc who inspected 
the worksite during May 2023 suggested a revised drawing and design for the work 
and the same was approved.   
The work on which a total expenditure of ₹6.25 crore had been incurred and was 
scheduled for completion by November 2021, still remained incomplete even as of 
August 2023.  Audit conducted a joint physical  verification (August 2023) of the 
worksite and noticed that there was no progress in work since July 2022 and the 
entire work portion was covered with plastic covers to avoid further seepage due 
to monsoon rains (Exhibit 6.6). 
Exhibit 6.6: Retention wall location covered with plastic sheets 
 
 
 
 
Source: Photographs taken during JPV. 
Thus, the office complex as well as the lives of the employees working therein 
were threatened  due to  the improper decision for construction of the District 
Administrative Office complex on a landslide vulnerable location without proper 
protection. The problem was exacerbated by the construction of a retention wall 
without drainage facility. 
The above illustration also points to the negligent approach of the administration 
towards creation of a disaster resilience environment . The construction of a vital 
public office building on a sloppy hillock without adequate protection continuously 
exposes the life of government employees including the Chairperson of the DDMA 
(the DC) to the threat of landslides. The work which needed to be prioritised still 
languishes. 
The State Government stated (August 2024) that reply w ould be submitted after 
getting a detailed report from DC, Kodagu. 
Recommendation 16: The State Government should prepare a comprehensive 
landslide risk management strategy with zonal mapping and ensure landslide 
resilience in constructions through effective structural measures. 


P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
96 
6.6 Relief and Rehabilitation/Reconstruction 
 
As in other disasters, the State Government/district administrations paid relief 
compensation to the landslide affected population on the norms prescribed by the 
SDRF/NDRF along with additional assistance from the State  Government.  
However, the details of expenditure towards compensation  for landslides  paid 
during the audit period were not forthcoming from records of the test -checked 
districts. 
On an analysis of the data available on ‘Parihara’ portal meant for payment of 
compensation for loss of crops, audit observed that a total sum of ₹6.23 crore had 
been paid towards crop loss due to landslides during the period from 2018-19 to 
2021-22. 
6.6.1 Construction and allotment of rehabilitation houses  
Of the test -checked districts, t he Kodagu district administration had initiated 
rehabilitation measures through construction of houses 46 (at different identified 
locations) for distribution to affected families who lost their houses in the 
devastative landslides during the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 as well as to those 
whose houses were in vulnerable locations. 
A total of 730 beneficiaries  were identified for allotment of houses under 
rehabilitation programme. The details of estimated outlay, agreement with 
entrusted agencies, agreed cost, expenditure incurred on construction, handing 
over of completed houses, etc., were not made available to audit .  Hence, audit 
could not ascertain the total expenditure incurred towards construction of 
rehabilitation houses in the district. 
As per the available records, 666 houses were reportedly allotted to beneficiaries. 
The audit team conducted (20 June 2023) a joint physical inspection  of houses 
constructed at Galibeedu and Jamburu locations along with the officials of district 
administration and illustrative photographs of the houses are shown in Exhibit 6.7. 
Exhibit 6.7: Houses constructed at Galibeedu and Jamburu locations 
  
Source: Photographs taken during joint physical inspection. 
However, many houses in Galibeedu seemed unoccupied  by the beneficiaries 
primarily due to insufficient transportation options and connectivity challenges. 
 
 
46 Funded by Government and Infosys foundation. 


Chapter VI: Landslides 
97 
The Government did not offer any comments on the audit observation (August 
2024). 
6.6.2 Damaged houses/sites not taken over by district authorities  
On allotment of a house to a beneficiary as part of rehabilitation, it was required 
for the district administration to immediately take over the possession/title of the 
damaged property, to desist the family of the beneficiary from further continuing 
in the same location and meet with any disaster later.  Though the district/taluk 
administration had allotted new houses to the identified beneficiaries, it did not 
initiate any action to take possession of the properties in lieu of which the 
rehabilitated houses were allotted.   This resulted in the beneficiary’s holding 
possession of both the newly constructed house as well as the damaged house.  
Audit conducted (September 2023) a joint physical examination  of the damaged 
houses in Indiranagar and Chamundeswari  nagar of Kodagu district where many 
houses were destroyed by landslides during 2018.   The team noticed and interacted 
with three of the beneficiaries  who continued to reside in the damaged houses 
endangering their lives even though they were allotted rehabilitated houses (H.nos. 
10, 67 and 73) in Galibeedu.    
Evidently, the district administration did not ensure that families shift ed to the 
newly allotted houses  from the distressed premises to avoid further loss of 
infrastructure and human lives due to any untoward happening.  Further, the 
correspondence (February 2023) on record showed that the district administration 
had received complaints on illegal occupation of houses due to beneficiaries 
leasing/letting out the allotted new houses. 
 
The Government did not offer any comments on the audit observation (August 
2024). 
6.6.3 Providing financial assistance without ensuring landslide resilient 
construction of houses   
As a relief measure to the families of houses damaged due to landslides or the 
houses which were dangerously vulnerable to landslips, the State Government 
provided  financial assistance of ₹9.85 lakh per house  for reconstruction either in 
the same location or a different site belonging to the affected family. 
Audit observed that 83 families in Kodagu had availed the benefit, of which 73 
families had opted to construct the house on their original sites. Since the original 
sites were vulnerable to landslide disaster, the constructions taken up were to be 
landslide resilient. However, the district administration had neither insisted upon 
nor provided appropriate technical specifications for construction and thus, did not 
ensure that the houses constructed were landslide resilient  and safe from further 
disasters. 
 
The Government did not offer any comments on the audit observation (August 
2024). 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
VII
 
Other disasters
  
affecting the State
  
 


99 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
Other disasters affecting the State 
 
The other disasters such as cyclones and lightning affecting the State are dealt with 
in this section. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project which aimed to 
enhance coastal resilience faced implementation challenges leading to delays, 
reduced coverage, and unmet objectives.  
The data available with the Government on loss of lives due to lightning was 
unreliable. The alert mechanism in place for lightning was not robust due to 
insecure contracts and inappropriate early warning alerts. Delay in bringing out the 
Action Plan coupled with absence of follow -up on the action poin ts by the 
Government exposed communities to continued danger from lightning. 
In addition to the significant disasters that are discussed in the earlier chapters, the 
State had also experienced the impact of other major calamities such as cyclones, 
lightning strikes, etc.  This chapter highlights the evaluation of disaster risk 
reduction mechanism in connection to other vulnerable calamities. 
7.1 Cyclone 
Karnataka has a coastal line of 322 km running through three districts47 of the State.  
The high density of population along the coastline of Karnataka has made the 
population highly vulnerable to storm surge and high-speed winds accompanied 
by cyclone.  Further, any severe cyclone along the eastern coastline of the country 
causes heavy rainfall in the interior Karnataka region resulting in damages to crops, 
buildings and infrastructure services such as roads and often the impact would be 
severe disruption in the socio-economic life in these regions.  The State’s coastline 
was affected by  a series of cyclones Ockhi (2017), Kyarr and Maha (2019) and 
Tauktae in May 2021.  Of the test -checked districts, Dakshina Kannada was the 
only district exposed to cyclone vulnerability.  
While cyclonic storms can neither be avoided nor controlled, there is a wide scope 
for the administrations to be vigilant through appropriate and adequate 
preparedness to reduce the disaster risk and damage. 
❖ Preparedness/mitigation measures for cyclones 
Weather forecasting and early warning alert mechanism play a significant role in 
management of cyclones and disaster risk reduction. 
7.1.1 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project 
The Government of India launched (2011) the National Cyclone Risk Mitigation 
Project (NCRMP) with World Bank assistance48 to reduce vulnerability of coastal 
communities to cyclone s and other hydro meteorological hazards through four 
main components: a) Early Warning Dissemination Systems (EWDS), b) Cyclone 
Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (CRMI), c) Technical Assistance for Capacity 
 
47  Dakshina Kannada, Udupi and Uttara Kannada. 
48  As an Adaptable Programme Loan (APL) with an International Development Association (IDA) 
credit. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
100 
Building on Disaster Risk Management and d) Project Management and 
Implementation Support (managed by Ministry of Home Affairs). 
Karnataka was identified (2015) under Phase II of the project and was classified as 
a lower vulnerability State to cyclone hazard based on the frequency of occurrence 
of cyclone, size of population and the existing institutional mechanism for DM.  
The project was to be completed by the end of March 2022. The total outlay for 
the project implemented in the State through the Revenue Department (DM) was 
₹166.49 crore for the period 2015-16 to 2023-24.  
7.1.1.1 Release and Expenditure 
The State Government delayed launching of the programme though GoI had started 
releasing funds since 2015-16 and the reasons therefor were not forthcoming from 
records made available to Audit .  The delay in implementation resulted in the 
project period being extended persistently , till August 2023 and thereby denying 
the anticipated benefits to the vulnerable community.  The delay in implementation 
of the project also resulted in denial of protective measures to the coastal 
population against the Okhi, Kyarr and Taukte cyclones which affected the State’s 
coastal region. As of August 2023, audit observed that a total amount of ₹156.04 
crore was released and an expenditure of ₹138.72 crore had been incurred  on the 
project. Year-wise details of release of funds and expenditure thereon under this 
programme are furnished in Table 7.1 below. 
Table 7.1: Year-wise details of fund releases and expenditure under NCRMP 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Releases Total releases Expenditure GoI GoK 
2015-16 1.20 0.00 1.20 0.00 
2016-17 11.25 0.00 11.25 0.00 
2017-18 37.36 0.00 37.36 10.39 
2018-19 14.50 0.00 14.50 17.87 
2019-20 34.95 0.00 34.95 20.68 
2020-21 0.75 0.00 0.75 47.95 
2021-22 14.00 20.00 34.00 19.03 
2022-23 14.02 5.23 19.25 22.80 
2023-24 0.00 2.78 2.78 0.00 
Total 128.03 28.01 156.04 138.72 
Source: Data furnished by the NCRMP Cell, Revenue Department 
 
7.1.1.2 Implementation of the project 
Scrutiny of records made available to audit showed the following: 
➢ The tender for EWDS was notified only in July 2019 after a delay of more than 
three years since the commencement of the project.  There was an inordinate 
delay in execution of contracted works by the contractor 49.  To avoid further 
delay in completion of the project which required construction of A -category 
towers50, the essential component of Digital Mobile Radio s (DMRs) was 
deleted from the scope of the contract  and the department decided to install 
only the alert sirens on towers owned by BSNL.  As a result, the outlay towards 
 
49    M/s. Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited - BECIL, Noida. 
50  Towers which can withstand high speed wind during cyclones. 

Chapter VII: Other Disasters affecting the State 
101 
EWDS was reduced from ₹24.97 crore to ₹11.51 crore .  Furthermore, the 
decision to reduce the number of towers as well as delete DMRs from the scope 
of the project from originally proposed 73 to 30 had diminished the coverage 
of communities by more than 50 per cent.  
As of August 2023, though the EWDS were reportedly installed, they was not 
trial tested for proper functioning, as the vendor did not provide the necessary 
authorization since the payment for supply/installation was yet to be made.  
➢ As per the details furnished by the department, a ll the works taken up under  
CRMI component were completed (August 2023).  It would be appropriate if 
the road works executed under the project provided connectivity to Multi-
Purpose Cyclone Shelters  (MPCS) to enable the beneficiary community to 
immediately reach the shelter whenever a cyclone hit s the coastal region.  
However, the six roads constructed in the test -checked district of Dakshina 
Kannada were not provided with direct connectivity to MPCSs constructed for 
sheltering the fishermen during distress.  The DC, Dakshina Kannada stated 
(July 2023) that the district administration was not consulted for selection of 
roads. 
➢ The project outlay included providing shelter level equipment51 to each MPCS 
at a total cost of ₹2.20 crore .  None of the proposed equipment were supplied 
to any of the MPCS.  The absence of the equipment denied the vulnerable 
community, of preparedness for emergency situations at the local level and 
hampered conduct of mock drills. 
In the meantime, the GoI/NDMA instructed to close the implementation of the 
project by August 2023.  Audit observed that the contractor was paid only a sum 
of ₹1.55 crore (as against the revised contractual amount of ₹11.51 crore) till 
September 2023 and the installed equipment were neither inspected/tested for 
performance nor handed over by the contractor to the department.  The Master 
Control Room for the project was set up in the premises of KSNDMC and a joint 
physical verification (December 2023) by audit disclosed that though the server, 
computers and display units pertaining to the project were assembled in a room, 
the same was not tested/commissioned and thus, the project remained non -
functional. 
Overall, the project was not implemented in the State to the fullest spirit and 
objectives. Deficient implementation of the NCRMP, particularly the core 
component of early warning dissemination mechanism, affected the envisioned 
objectives of the project rendering the expenditure on infrastructure largely 
unfruitful. 
The Government replied (August 2024) that the NCRMP was implemented in the 
State in three coastal districts. The reduced scope of the project was approved by 
central authorities and SEC. It is further stated that  the contractor had completed 
installation of broadcasting equipment and supplied the master control facilities 
which are kept on the premises of KSNDMC.  Final payment w ould be released 
only after ensuring proper commissioning/testing of the installed equipment. 
 
51 Comprising 30 items such as inflatable tower lights for nighttime disaster management, power 
saws, search and rescue equipment, First -Aid kit, free kitchen utensils, Life Buoy/Life Jackets, 
Hand Held Mega Phone, Fire Extinguishers, etc. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
102 
The reply of the Government is silent about the reasons for inordinate delay as well 
as drastic reduction in scope of work/coverage of population. Evidently, the project 
had not been rolled out in the State (August 2024) even after a delay of more than 
five years since commencement, which rendered the entire expenditure unfruitful.  
[ 
❖ Reconstruction/protection works  
Test-check of records relating to protection and reconstruction activities taken up 
by the Dakshina Kannada administration showed that the coastal line was severely 
exposed/affected to cyclones and sea erosion and the district administration had 
proposed (June-July 2023) protection/reconstruction works costing ₹19.84 crore 
and requested the State Government to release funds. 
However, funds were not released for taking up these works, even as of January 
2024. This signals the inattention of the Government towards disaster risk 
reduction frameworks. 
 
7.2 Lightning 
Lightning is a sudden electrostatic discharge that occurs during a Thunderstorm.  
This discharge occurs between electrically charged regions of a cloud called intra-
cloud lightning, between Cloud to Cloud or between a cloud and the ground.  
7.2.1 Lightning profile of Karnataka State 
Karnataka is known for its diverse landscapes and climatic variations.  Like other 
disasters, Lightning and thunderstorms were regularly witnessed due to which 
there was a continuous disastrous effect on lif e and property in recent years. 812 
persons had lost their lives in the State in lightning incidence over a decade, which 
was more in the northern part of the State.   
Map showing the district -wise and Chart with year -wise details of human deaths 
due to lightning are shown in Chart 7.1: 

Chapter VII: Other Disasters affecting the State 
103 
Chart 7.1: Deaths recorded in Karnataka due to lightning 
during 2011-2021 
 
Source: KSNDMC. 
7.2.1.1 Reliability of the data 
The details of a number of human/cattle deaths and loss of other types reported due 
to lightning hazard vis-à-vis expenditure incurred towards payment of 
compensation under the test-checked districts are shown in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: Details of deaths vis-à-vis compensation paid in test-checked 
districts 
Year 
Human 
deaths 
(in numbers) 
Compensation 
paid 
(₹ in crore) 
Livestock 
deaths (in 
numbers) 
Compensation 
paid 
(₹ in crore) 
Total 
compensation 
paid 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 29 1.32 73 0.10 1.42 
2018-19 32 1.59 93 0.10 1.69 
2019-20 37 1.85 351 0.57 2.42 
2020-21 37 1.85 49 0.06 1.91 
2021-22 33 1.65 121 0.29 1.94 
2022-23 21 1.05 90 0.16 1.21 
Total 189 9.31 777 1.28 10.59 
Source: As compiled by audit based on the data furnished by the test-checked districts (Status as 
of September 2023). 
 


PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
104 
While Ramanagar district authorities did not maintain/furnish the details of human 
deaths due to lightning, the details of cattle deaths, if any, were not furnished by 
six52 out of the nine test-checked districts.  
Audit observed discrepancies between the statistics pertaining to the loss of human 
lives by lightning furnished by the district authorities and district level data shown 
in the Thunderstorm and Lightning Action Plan - 2022 published by the Revenue 
Department (Disaster Management).  
Illustration 
As per the data furnished by Kalaburagi district authorities to audit, the total death 
toll was 61 during the period 2017 -2022.  However, the Thunderstorm and 
Lightning Action Plan-2022 indicated the number of deaths as 7 during 2021 and 
zero during the other years.Similarly, the Kalaburagi District Disaster 
Management Plan 2022-23 reported that a total of 15 persons died from lightning 
strikes and torrential rains during the years 2018 -19 and 2019-20 as against 20 
deaths, as per data provided by Kalaburagi district authorities.   
Thus, as seen from the above illustrative case, the data on which the State 
Government/KSDMA was proposing the actionable points was not reliable. 
Evidently, the KSDMA/nodal department was not obtaining the actual data from 
the districts concerned and vali dating the same before publishing authentic 
documents which will be the repositories for decision-making and future planning. 
Further, though it was categorically mentioned in all lightning -related policy 
documents of the Government that hazard causes severe damage to property, the 
details regarding the loss of property and livestock in the State over the years had 
not been collected and compiled for the State as a whole, despite compensating for 
the same.   
The Government replied (August 2024) that an IT system would be put in place to 
collate comprehensive details on human and animal loss due to lightning and other 
disasters. 
7.2.1.2 Forecast and dissemination 
The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) under the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences, is the nodal agency for providing weather information and forecast, 
including warnings for all weather-related hazards.  In addition, as a detection and 
forecast mechanism for lightning, the State Government had operationalized (June 
2018/March 2020) a system to provide early warnings to the Government 
authorities and public across the State about the Thunderstorm & Lightning strikes, 
as discussed below. 
❖ Insecure contract for procurement of data towards early warning for 
lightning   
KSNDMC had entered ( October 2017) into a service contract with a firm 53, for 
obtaining basic data for providing early warning to public on lightning activities 
and development of a mobile app called “ SIDILU”. However, the contract was 
rescinded (November 2019) after making a payment of ₹73.75 lakh due to a dispute 
 
52  Chikkaballapur, Haveri, Kalaburagi, Kodagu, Ramanagara and Shivamogga. 
53   M/s. Cost Prize Online India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru. 

Chapter VII: Other Disasters affecting the State 
105 
(on payment issues) between the agency and the vendor, which rendered the entire 
expenditure wasteful.   
Again, in the month of March 2020, KSNDMC entered into a contract with another 
firm54 for a total cost of ₹2.95 crore covering a period of five years and the SIDILU 
app was launched in the month of May 2020 . As of December 2023 , a total 
payment of ₹1.91 crore was paid to the firm.  
However, audit observed that both the firms with which KSNDMC contracted were 
not in possession of any lightning monitors of their own but were obtaining data 
from another firm 55. Thus, the contracted firms were only intermediary service 
providers.   
Reasons for KSNDMC not contracting directly with firms/agencies owning the 
lightning monitors were not forthcoming from the records. 
In the absence of a copy of the agreement between the original source agency and 
vendor (along with the terms and conditions) and a lawful commitment on the part 
of the source agency for provision of services during the entire contract period 
without breach, the contract for lightning alerts with the intermediary firm was 
rendered insecure and was fraught with the risk of expenditure going wasteful 
recurrently. 
❖ Inappropriate early warning alerts 
The Thunderstorm and Lightning Action Plan - 2022, mentions that 96 per cent of 
the total lightning-related deaths in the country are amongst the people working in 
the fields, mainly farmers in rural areas.  Audit observed that the IMD at the State 
level issues the lightning warnings in the form of ‘ Nowcast’.  Typical Nowcast 
lightning warnings issued by IMD are as shown in Appendix 7.1.   
Audit observed that the early warnings are not location specific but cover a wide 
area covering many districts. Hence, dissemination of the warnings to people of 
specific locations likely to be affected by disaster is not only difficult but  also 
practically hard to implement.  
The State Government also developed a Mobile App called “SIDILU”  for 
disseminating location-specific information  about lightning s trikes in the State 
based on the real time lightning data to the registered mobile numbers. 
 Details of alerts issued (through the app and tele -messages) under test-checked 
districts during audit period are shown in Table 7.3. 
Table 7.3: Lightning alerts issued for test-checked districts during the years 
from 2018 to 2023 
(in numbers) 
District 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Belagavi 4,442 7,550 2,549 7,688 5,036 3,421 
Chikkaballapura 173 4,796 507 2,593 1,687 820 
Dakshina Kannada 6,862 10,813 2,830 9,202 3,324 3,933 
Davanagere 890 4,868 2,275 3,358 1,589 1,100 
Haveri 2,318 4,908 1,821 4,178 2,242 1,332 
 
54 M/s. MOSERP Technologies India Private Limited, Bengaluru. 
55 M/s. Earth Networks. 

PA on Disaster Management in Karnataka 
106 
District 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Kalaburagi 2,086 4,929 1,131 7,765 4,796 3,471 
Kodagu 768 3,554 1,009 2,327 982 941 
Ramanagara 402 4,497 836 1,972 1,805 864 
Shivamogga 239 6,069 2,875 5,842 2,505 1,731 
Source: Data furnished by KSNDMC. 
 
Despite these efforts, it could be observed that the deaths due to lightning had not 
shown any decreasing trend over the years (refer Table 7.2) evidencing the need of 
a robust mechanism at grass root level for community awareness for taking 
precautions from lightning strikes,  in conjunction with advanced technological 
methods.  For instance, 91 human deaths had been reported during 2020-2023 even 
after launching of SIDILU app and IMD nowcast.  
The Government replied (August 2024) that lightning alerts were issued through 
Common Alerting Protocol, which is a location based alert dissemination system. 
However, it could be observed from Exhibit  7.1, that alerts issued a re specifying 
vulnerability at district level covering vast area rather than particular locations. 
7.2.2 Preventive/Mitigative measures 
While loss or damage due to lightning cannot be avoided, it can be reduced through 
a robust early warning and information dissemination mechanism till the last mile 
along with a strong capacity -building arrangement. Hence, there was the 
requirement for a proper mandate and defined guidelines and action plan. 
While the NDMA had not issued any exclusive guidelines for the management of 
lightning, it published the “ Guidelines on Prevention and Management of 
Thunderstorm and Lightning/Squall/Dust/Hailstorm and Strong Winds ” in March 
2019. The State Government thereafter took three years to bring out the 
‘Thunderstorm and Lightning Action Plan - 2022’. 
Neither the State Government nor the test-checked districts have initiated effective 
measures towards IEC activities, community awareness camps, etc. 
7.2.3 Absence of follow up on the action points 
The Thunderstorm and Lightning Action Plan - 2022,  inter alia, suggested the 
following actionable strategies for effective management of lightning hazard: 
➢ Installation of Doppler Weather Radars for better monitoring of situations; 
➢ Periodical review and evaluation of the efficiency and reliability of the 
early warning system. 
➢ Systemic study of past lightning occurrences by any expert agency or 
group. 
➢ Collaboration with NGOs/CSOs and sharing of data between different 
agencies for preparation of advanced preparedness, mitigation, and 
response plans. 
➢ Conducting mass awareness campaigns based on communication strategy 
and research insights. 
However, records made available showed that the State Government had not 
initiated any action in this regard  even as of August 2024 .  The Action plan also 
did not  suggest required capacity-building measures to minimise the loss of 
human/animal lives and property due to this disaster.  

 
 
 
 
 
  
Appendices
  
 


109 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.4.2, Page No. 14) 
Deficiencies in achieving the objectives of SDMP 
Defined objectives Deficiency in achievement 
Strengthen disaster 
risk governance at all 
levels from local to 
centre 
State Government did not publish its Disaster Risk Reduction Road Map 
with committed timelines to ensure a disaster resilient Karnataka (Paragraph 
2.1.4.1). 
Local authorities neither prepared their disaster management plans nor were 
consulted for preparation of district/State plans ( Paragraph 2.1.6.2 and  
2.1.4.2). 
Despite substantial investment on equipment and projects, the deficiencies 
in forecast mechanism rendered the disaster risk governance unfruitful 
(Paragraph 5.3.3)  
Invest in disaster risk 
reduction for 
resilience through 
structural, non -
structural and 
financial measures, as 
well as 
comprehensive 
capacity development 
The State Government and the district administration had not initiated 
necessary permanent structural measures to mitigate the impact of the flood 
menace (Paragraph 5.4.2). 
In test checked districts ( Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu districts) which 
were affected by recurrent landslides, neither structural nor non -structural 
measures were taken prior to devastation (Paragraph 6.4.1) 
The State/Kodagu district administration did not comprehensively act on 
recommendations in the GSI report, due to which the district encountered 
more severe landslides in the subsequent years (Paragraph 6.5) 
Funds released for capacity building activities to the districts and CDM-ATI 
were 12 and 11 per cent respectively of the total releases towards capacity 
building. (Paragraph 3.1.4.2) 
Strengthen disaster 
risk modelling, 
assessment, mapping, 
monitoring and multi-
hazard early warning 
systems 
The nodal department for preparation of information on the SDMP and 
management of disasters in the State was not in possession of any 
information regarding activities/measures taken up by the respective 
department/(s) (Paragraph 4.4.2.1) 
In the absence of basic data, the State Government/KSNDMC could not 
create the envisaged hydrological models for flood forecasting in the 
State/region, whereby the investment of ₹2.45 crore on the sensors and 
stream gauge monitors was rendered largely unfruitful (Paragraph 5.3.3.1).  
Purpose of installing required equipment at grassroots level for alerting 
endangered population from flood early warning through a wireless 
broadcasting system at a cost of ₹1.09 crore was not achieved (Paragraph 
5.3.3.2) 
As of December 2023, despite an expenditure of ₹1.61 crore with respect to 
the project pertaining to ‘Preparation of urban flood model for Bengaluru’ 
the flood forecast alert model is yet to be prepared. (Paragraph 5.3.3.3) 
As of December 2023, 49 out of 100 WLS installed on storm water drains 
were non-functional (Paragraph 5.3.3.4). 
The State had prepared flood hazard zoning maps for each of the river basins 
and identified villages prone to floods, however, such vulnerability mapping 
was not done for the plain areas, which were not covered under river flow 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
110 
Defined objectives Deficiency in achievement 
paths but were affected by water inundation due to heavy rainfall . 
(Paragraph 5.3.4) 
The State was yet to frame and enact the Floodplain Zoning Regulations  
(Paragraph 5.3.5) 
In the absence of advanced technological equipment and early warning 
systems, the Government/district authorities could not disseminate any 
alerts (Paragraph 6.3.4.2) 
Promote “Build Back 
Better” in recovery, 
rehabilitation and 
reconstruction 
There were instances of (i) delays in taking up reconstruction/restoration 
works due to which the public were forced to take alternate longer routes. 
(ii) incomplete occupation of constructed houses by affected families . (iii) 
occupation of damaged houses. (Paragraph 5.7,6.6.1 and 6.6.2) 
Prevent disasters 
and achieve 
substantial 
reduction of disaster 
risk and losses in 
lives, livelihoods, 
health, and assets 
(economic, 
physical, social, 
cultural and 
environmental) 
State Government did not initiate preventive/mitigative measures like 
water harvesting, ground water recharge, controlling ground water 
extraction, etc., against drought resulting in State experiencing 
drought repeatedly causing huge loss of agricultural crops and socio-
economic disorders (Paragraphs 4.4.2). 
Absence of flood zonation maps and preventive actions against flood 
hazard resulted in same villages/localities being affected by floods 
causing loss of public infrastructure and livelihood. (Paragraph 5.3.5) 
Unauthorized constructions were regularized, and agricultural land 
continued to be converted for commercial uses, highlighting 
inadequacies in disaster -resilient infrastructure planning and 
execution (Paragraphs 6.5.1). 
While the project for cyclone risk mitigation was not commissioned 
the recommendations against lightning were not implemented 
exposing the communities to danger of hazards. (Paragraph 7.1.1 and 
7.2.3) 
Empower both local 
authorities and 
communities as 
partners to reduce 
and manage disaster 
risks 
None of the local authorities in the test-checked districts had prepared 
the required DM plans (Paragraph 2.1.6.2) 
Neither the State Government nor the district administrations  
involved communities, NGOs and CSOs in drought -
proofing/mitigation activities (Paragraph 4.4.2.4) 
Capacity 
development at all 
levels to effectively 
respond to multiple 
hazards and for 
community-based 
disaster 
management 
Expenditure of the Government towards capacity building and 
preparedness during the Audit period was grossly inadequate 
(Paragraph 2.2).  
No funds were provided to DDMAs towards capacity building and 
training till the year 2020-21 (Paragraph 2.2.6). 
 None of the authorities like KSDMA, SEC or Revenue  Department 
(Disaster Management) had taken up effective IEC activities  at the 
macro level towards disaster management (Paragraph 2.2.7).  

Appendices  
111 
Defined objectives Deficiency in achievement 
Promote the culture 
of disaster risk 
prevention and 
mitigation at all 
levels 
While the communities at the gross root level were not provided 
training to promote the culture of disaster risk mitigation, the training 
provided to government employees and the elected representatives 
was inadequate (Paragraphs 2.2.3 and 2.2.6) 
None of the publications for disaster risk prevention and management 
were published in regional language, to enable ease of understanding 
the stipulated disaster risk mitigation strategies. State Government did 
not provide publicity among communities/public regarding the NIDM 
courses on disaster risk management awareness, available free of cost 
(Paragraphs 2.1.7 and 2.2.7). 
Build and 
strengthen the 
resilience of poor 
communities to 
prevent disasters 
aggravating poverty 
and to protect 
livelihoods 
The district/taluk authorities had significant unspent balances at the 
end of March 2023 (Paragraph 3.1.4.1) 
During 2017-23, KSNDMC spent ₹21.77 crore and as at the end of 
March 2023 held a balance of ₹27.04 crore in its bank account which 
constituted more than 50 per cent of the releases.  There was payment 
of compensation under SDRF to ineligible cases. 
No additional employment was provided under MGNREGS to any of 
the households in the districts of Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and 
Shivamogga (Paragraph 3.1.4.2, 3.1.7 and 4.4.3.1) 
None of the authorities regulated inhabitations in low lying areas 
along rivers, canals and drains, as evidenced in audit in the test -
checked districts of Belagavi, Dakshina Kannada, Davanagere, 
Shivamogga, etc (Paragraph 5.4.1) 
Payment of compensation without initiating preventive measures and 
proper verification allowed people to continue residing at places 
exposed to danger (Paragraph 5.5.4)  
Promote disaster -
resilient schools, 
colleges and other 
educational 
facilities 
None of the educational institutions prepared their disaster 
management plans (Paragraph 2.1.6.3) 
Strengthening and 
promoting the 
resilience of new 
and existing critical 
infrastructure 
The State did not establish a legal framework for obtaining mandatory 
clearances by agencies for construction of public infrastructure in 
flood-prone areas There was no safety audit of houses in districts 
vulnerable to flood which otherwise would have led to taking up 
disaster resilient retrofitting and rectification actions timely. Disaster 
resilience was not adequately promoted while constructing/repairing 
infrastructure, affecting resistance to floods (Paragraph  5.4.1, 5.4.3 
and 5.5).  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
112 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.3, Page No. 31) 
Discrepancies in accounts between Revenue Department and Accountant General (A and E) 
 
Receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening Balance NDRF grants SDRF grants State matching grants 
As per 
department 
As per 
AG Difference As per 
department 
As per 
AG Difference As per 
department 
As per 
AG Difference As per 
department 
As per 
AG Difference 
2017-18 1235.52 1235.52 0 913.04 913.04 0 228.75 228.75 0 76.25 76.25 0 
2018-19 0 42.16 42.16 959.84 959.84 0 288.00 288.00 0 32.00 32.00 0 
2019-20 434.62 434.62 0 2744.26 2905.28 161.02 204.00 507.00 303.00 132.00 369.00 237.00 
2020-21 0  0 0 577.84 689.27 111.43 632.40 632.80 0.40 210.80 210.40 0.40 
2021-22 0  2.42 2.42 1734.3 1623.3 -111.00 632.40 632.80 0.40 210.80 210.40 0.40 
2022-23 0  2.42 2.42 939.83 939.83 0 664.01 664.00 0.01 221.33 221.34 0.01 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Expenditure as 
per department 
Expenditure booked in 
AG (A&E) Difference 
2017-18 2,411.61 2,411.58 0.03 
2018-19 1,207.22 1,196.96 10.26 
2019-20 4,899.52 4,879.43 20.09 
2020-21 2,238.37 2,235.56 2.81 
2021-22 5,003.75 4,965.14 38.61 
2022-23 2,939.41 2,897.58 41.83 
Source: Information furnished by department and AG (A&E) office.

Appendices  
113 
 Appendix 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.4.1, Page No. 33) 
Instances of non/improper maintenance of cash books 
 
District Deficiencies observed 
Belagavi 
Tahsildar, Athani – Cash book was not written from 19.7.2019 to 
31.3.2023 
Tahsildar, Mudalgi – 2018-19 to 2022-23 
Tahsildar, Nippani – 25.03.2021 to 31.03.2023 
Tahsildars, Belagavi, Chikkodi, Hukkeri, Kagawad and Ramdurg 
– Partially written. 
Chikkaballapura 
Cash book was not maintained by Tahsildar, Chintamani till 
November 2021; Tahsildar, Bagepalli till December 2021; 
Tahsildar, Gowribidanur for the year 2017 -18, Tahsildar, 
Gudibande till May 2019, Tahsildar, Shidlaghatta till December 
2020 and Tahsildar, Chickaballapur for the year 2017-18. 
Dakshina 
Kannada 
Cash book was not maintained by Tahsildar, Sullia up to 2021-22; 
Tahsildar, Moodabidri up to 2018 -19; Tahsildar, Kadaba up to 
2020-21 and Tahsildar, Belthangady up to 2021-22. 
Tahsildar, Bantwal did not produce any records relating to DM 
funds though ₹7.03 crore was released during the period 2017 -
2023. 
The taluk authorities had written the cash book based on bank 
pass sheet entries and not as and when the transactions occurred. 
The cash book entries did not contain proper narration of 
payments made except for name of the beneficiary and amount in 
all the taluks. 
Davanagere 
Tahsildar, Davanagere had shown only one entry for each month 
without distinctly showing each transaction. 
Cash book was not maintained by Tahsildar, Jagalur till May 
2019. 
Haveri 
Cash book was not maintained by Tahsildar, Shiggaon till 
30.06.2018 and Tahsildar, Rattihalli had not written for the year 
2020-21. 
Kodagu 
Tahsildar, Somwarpet had not written the cash book for the year 
2017-18. 
Shivamogga Tahsildar, Shivamogga had not written cashbook for the entire 
year 2022-23 
 
  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
114 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.4.1, Page No. 33) 
Statement showing the taluk wise number of bank accounts operated by 
Tahsildars in test-checked districts 
 
District Taluk Number of bank 
accounts 
Belagavi 
Belagavi 03 
Gokak 03 
Khanapur 02 
Nippani 04 
Ramdurg 04 
Chikkaballapura Chikkaballapura 05 
Gauribidanur 05 
Davanagere Davanagere 02 
Nyamathi 02 
Haveri 
Byadagi 06 
Hanagal 02 
Haveri 04 
Hirekerur 04 
Ranebennur 04 
Rattihalli 03 
Savanar                                                               02 
Shiggaon 06 
Kodagu Somwarpet 02 
Virajpet 02 
Shivamogga 
Shivamogga 03 
Bhadravathi 03 
Sagara 02 
Soraba 02 
Source: Information furnished by taluk authorities. 
 

Appendices  
115 
Appendix 3.4  
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.4.1, Page No. 34) 
Statement showing the discrepancy in release of funds between books of accounts 
of the district and taluks for the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 
 
District: Belagavi 
(₹ in crore) 
Taluk Releases as per 
district accounts 
Receipt as per taluk 
accounts Difference 
Belagavi 23.49 12.91 10.58 
Hukkeri 22.81 21.74 1.07 
Kittur 7.13 6.74 0.39 
Ramdurg 30.03 28.85 1.18 
Gokak 60.08 59.53 0.55 
Chikkodi 103.03 102.89 0.14 
Raibag 61.23 42.44 18.79 
Athani 93.45 75.31 18.14 
 
 
  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
116 
Appendix 3.5  
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.8, Page No. 39) 
Illustrative instances of execution of works in violation of the guidelines and 
monetary limits under SDRF grants 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of 
the taluk Name of the work Estimated 
cost Expenditure 
Kalaburagi District 
Chittapur Firozabad-Kamalapur State highway No.125 
chainage 44.20 km repair to bridge 
55.00 53.81 
Aland Repairs to bridge at Km 43.00 on Basavakalyan-
Raichur (SH-51) road 
10.00 9.76 
Kalaburagi Repairs to Electrical Installations and Allied 
Equipments at Saradagu Head works and IPS 
Kotnoor for water supply system in Kalaburagi 
city 
28.13 28.13 
Sedam 
Repairs to Mudhol-Yanagundi Road of chainage 
0.00 km to 0.50 km 
20.00 18.89 
Repairs to check dam in Udagi-Kurukunta-
Hayyala road at chainage 23.80 km 
18.00 17.99 
Dakshina Kannada District 
Bantwal 
Repairs to school building at Talemogaru 10.00 NA 
Repairs to school building at pudu maple 10.00 NA 
Repairs and widening of road at Pudu GP 20.00 NA 
Road repair at Pajeer village 20.00 NA 
Road repair at Balepuni village 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Geru paddu 10.00 NA 
Mangaluru  
Construction of drainage at Ward No.2 10.00 NA 
Asphalting of road in Derebylu 12.00 NA 
CC road at ward No.52 10.00 NA 
Repairs to road at Belma gram panchayat 15.00 NA 
Repairs to junction at Belma gram panchayat 15.00 NA 
Repairs to Government school building at Belma 
GP 
15.00 NA 
Construction of retaining wall to house 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Manjanadi GP 15.00 NA 
Road repair at Manjanadi GP 20.00 NA 
Road repair at Pavuru GP 15.00 NA 
Road repair at Pavuru GP 15.00 NA 
Road repair at Hirekala GP 15.00 NA 
Road repair at Hirekala GP 15.00 NA 
Road repair at Hirekala GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Munnur GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at someswara GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Konaji GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Konaji GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Konaji GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Konaji GP 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Ullal 15.00 NA 
Road work at Ullal 10.00 NA 
School building repair at Ullal 20.00 NA 

Appendices  
117 
Name of 
the taluk Name of the work Estimated 
cost Expenditure 
Electricity repair to Tippu Sultan school building 
at Ullal 
15.00 NA 
Construction of drainage at Sundarbagh, Ullal 10.00 NA 
Road repair at Kotekar Town Panchayat 20.00 NA 
Construction of bridge at Kotekar 10.00 NA 
Belagavi District 
Savadatti 
Repairs to school buildings Manavalli village 12.00 10.80 
Repairs to school buildings Manavalli village 9.00 8.10 
Repairs to school buildings Mulluru village 10.50 10.50 
Repairs to school buildings Holi village 7.50 6.75 
Repairs to school buildings Theredakoppa 
Thanda village 
6.00 5.40 
 
  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
118 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.2, Page No. 43) 
Data on taluks affected by drought during 2001-2022 
 
Source: KSNDMC. 
 
  


Appendices  
119 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-5.1.2, Page No. 59) 
Estimated loss of infrastructure and crops in the State districts due to flood 
between the years 2018-2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Nature of 
damage 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Agriculture crop 313.52 13829.24 14090.27 8137.00 4975.82 
Horticulture crop 1043.82 926.10 2155.80 1471.00 1428.11 
Plantation crop 863.36  475.36  650.02 1401.90 265.51 
Roads 1452.81 7034.03 4369.12 4325.73 3283.15 
Bridges 90.04 1020.09 700.18 865.14 452.32 
Houses 167.51 9621.87 430.75 690.08 699.51 
Water supply and 
Sanitation units 
6.34 122.94 37.60 39.09 11.60 
Tanks 25.10 63.61 58.39 53.83 67.11 
Total 5980.50 35112.24 24512.13 19004.77 13205.13 
Source: Data furnished by the nodal department. 
 
 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
120 
Appendix 5.2  
(Reference: Paragraph-5.5.2, Page No. 73) 
Discrepancies in house damages 
 
 a) 25 per cent of damage categorized as C and B 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID 
Percentage of 
damage as per 
department 
Category in 
RGRHCL website 
Ramanagara 
Kanakapura 368424 25 B1 
Kanakapura 367593 25 C 
Magadi 367942 25 C 
Shivamogga 
Shikaripura 589696 25 B1 
Shivamogga 579770 25 C 
Soraba 577862 25 C 
577694 25 B1 
Chikkaballapura Sidlaghatta 375741 25 C 
Davanagere Channagiri 693547 25 C 
676265 25 C 
 
(b) (i) Cases where 25 per cent to 40 per cent of damage categorised as A or B2 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID 
Percentage of 
damage as per 
department 
Category in 
RGRHCL website 
Belagavi 
Ramdurg 
1681085 26 B2 
1678875 30 B2 
1679626 35 B2 
1692912 26 B2 
1678162 40 B2 
Hukkeri 
1681085 26 B2 
1681220 28 B2 
1679282 28 B2 
1679447 28 B2 
Bailhongal 
1685715 30 B2 
1680510 35 B2 
1697380 30 B2 
Shivamogga 
Shivamogga 
587698 35 B2 
587741 40 B2 
587740 40 B2 
Shikaripura 588332 35 B2 
Bhadravathi 587929 28 A 
Soraba 580420 27 B2 
Sagara 
588011 28 B2 
588216 24 B2 
588014 22 B2 
Chikkaballapura Gauribidanur 
374398 20 B2 
374400 23 B2 
374397 25 B2 
374401 24 B2 
374403 25 B2 
374402 23 B2 

Appendices  
121 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID 
Percentage of 
damage as per 
department 
Category in 
RGRHCL website 
Ramanagara Magadi 367882 40 B2 
Davanagere Nyamathi 680248 30 B2 
 
(ii) Cases where 70 per cent to 75 per cent of damage categorised as B1 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Percentage 
of damage 
as per 
department 
Category in 
RGRHCL website 
Chikkaballapura 
Chintamani 
367512 71 B1 
367514 74 B1 
367713 74 B1 
367551 74 B1 
367434 74 B1 
367318 72 B1 
Bagepalli 366436 74 B1 
Gauribidanur 
366764 74 B1 
366648 74 B1 
366879 74 B1 
367151 74 B1 
374576 74 B1 
374176 74 B1 
 
(c)  Upward revision of category of damages in Haver district 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID Revision of category Excess paid due to 
revision (in ₹) 
Haveri 
Savanur 
643035 C to B1 250000 
643649 C to B1 250000 
643308 C to B1 250000 
645911 C to B1 250000 
640195 C to B1 250000 
642048 C to B1 250000 
644865 C to B1 250000 
648225 C to B1 250000 
646325 C to B1 250000 
Hanagal 
678782 C to B2 450000 
683632 C to B2 450000 
684212 C to B2 450000 
687982 C to B2 450000 
689836 C to B2 450000 
Haveri 
664081 C to B2 450000 
669411 C to B2 450000 
678874 C to B2 450000 
681054 C to B2 450000 
Hirekerur 
664252 C to B2 450000 
666268 C to B2 450000 
667497 C to B2 450000 
Rattihalli 665583 C to B2 450000 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
122 
667484 C to B2 450000 
667553 C to B2 450000 
Shiggaon 
679291 C to B2 450000 
679299 C to B2 450000 
679796 C to B2 450000 
683815 C to B2 450000 
 
(d)   Discrepancies in category of damage between department and RGRHCL 
website 
(i) A/B1/B2 to C: 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID 
Category of 
damage as per 
department 
Category of 
damage as per 
RGRHCL website 
Ramanagar 
Kanakapura 
368667 B1  C 
362112 B1 C 
Magadi 
368659 B2 C 
368946 B C 
368504 B C 
367966 B1  C 
368499 B C 
367965 B C 
369018 B  C 
368412 B  C 
368502 B C 
368498 B C 
368036 B  C 
369018 B  C 
Chikkaballapura 
 
Shidlaghatta 368052 B1 C 
Gudibande 
376071 B2 C 
375760 B2 C 
375756 B1 C 
375911 A C 
374451 B1 C 
366056 B1 C 
 
(ii) C to B1/B2: 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Category 
of damage 
as per 
department 
Category of 
damage as 
per 
RGRHCL 
website 
Excess paid 
due to revision 
(in ₹) 
Chikkaballapura Gauribidanur 
365944 C B2 450000 
375661 C B1 250000 
374398 C B2 450000 
374400 C B2 450000 
374397 C B2 450000 
374401 C B2 450000 
374403 C B2 450000 
374402 C B2 450000 

Appendices  
123 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Category 
of damage 
as per 
department 
Category of 
damage as 
per 
RGRHCL 
website 
Excess paid 
due to revision 
(in ₹) 
Gudibande 366051 C B2 450000 
367960 C B2 450000 
Shivamogga 
Thirthahalli 
586077 C B2 450000 
584793 C B2 450000 
584673 C B2 450000 
Sagara 588014 C B2 450000 
588216 C B2 450000 
 
(iii) B1 to B2: 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Category 
of damage 
as per 
department 
Category 
of damage 
as per 
RGRHCL 
website 
Excess paid 
due to 
revision (in ₹) 
Shivamogga Bhadravathi 587929 B1 A 200000 
Chikkaballapura 
Bagepalli 
367078 B1 B2 200000 
367081 B1 B2 200000 
367085 B1 B2 200000 
367093 B1 B2 200000 
367096 B1 B2 200000 
367106 B1 B2 200000 
Gudibande 
366147 B1 B2 200000 
366227 B1 B2 200000 
366223 B1 B2 200000 
366216 B1 B2 200000 
Gauribidanur 365950 B1 B2 200000 
365960 B1 B2 200000 
Sidlaghatta 376105 B1 B2 200000 
 
iv) A/B2 to B1 cases 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Category of 
damage as per 
department 
Category of damage 
as per RGRHCL 
website 
Chikkaballapura 
Sidlaghatta 375749 B2 B1 
368046 B2 B1 
Gauribidanur 
366724 B2 B1 
367710 B2 B1 
366764 B2 B1 
366653 B2 B1 
366655 B2 B1 
366645 B2 B1 
366648 B2 B1 
366750 B2 B1 
366770 B2 B1 
366879 B2 B1 
367151 B2 B1 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
124 
366698 B2 B1 
375812 B2 B1 
374576 B2 B1 
374176 B2 B1 
Gudibande 
366101 B2 B1 
366086 B2 B1 
366084 B2 B1 
374500 B2 B1 
374178 A B1 
Bagepalli 
366018 B2 B1 
366436 B2 B1 
367932 B2 B1 
367933 B2 B1 
368041 B2 B1 
366155 B2 B1 
367146 B2 B1 
367693 B2 B1 
367090                B2 B1 
366131  B2 B1 
 
v) B1 to B2 cases: 
District Taluk Beneficiary 
ID 
Category of 
damage as 
per 
department 
Category of 
damage as per 
RGRHCL 
website 
Financial 
implication 
(in ₹) 
Chikkaballapura 
Chintamani 
367403 B1 B2 200000 
367661 B1 B2 200000 
367662 B1 B2 200000 
367318 B1 B2 200000 
Gauribidanur 365950 B1 B2 200000 
365960 B1 B2 200000 
Gudibande 
366147 B1 B2 200000 
366227 B1 B2 200000 
366223 B1 B2 200000 
366216 B1 B2 200000 
Bagepalli 
367093 B1 B2 200000 
367096 B1 B2 200000 
367106 B1 B2 200000 
367081 B1 B2 200000 
367078 B1 B2 200000 
 
e) Cases where the Engineer’s report is not on record: 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID Percentage damage as per 
department 
Shivamogga Hosanagara 
585944 B (50) 
585801 C 
585775 C 
585828 B (50) 
585836 C 
585839 B (75) 
585789 B (50) 

Appendices  
125 
District Taluk Beneficiary ID Percentage damage as per 
department 
585786 A 
585785 C 
585849 B (50) 
585804 A 
584468 A 
Sagara 
588013 B (50) 
580009 B (50) 
588011 B (50) 
588216 B (50) 
588014 B (50) 
587887 B (50) 
Shivamogga 
587698 B (35) 
587741 B (40) 
587740 B (40) 
Chikkaballapura 
Chintamani 
367392 B1 
367658 B1 
367194 B1 
367409 B1 
367255 B1 
367227 B1 
367617 B1 
Sidlaghatta 
375741 25 
375653 -- 
375657 -- 
374227 -- 
374235 -- 
Gauribidanur 
366698 -- 
374405 A 
375812 B2 
375661 B1 
Gudibande 366091 -- 
Bagepalli 
368055 -- 
366111 -- 
366131 B2 
 

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
126 
Appendix 5.3  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.5.3, Page No. 76) 
Illustrative cases of irregular payment of compensation towards crop loss under 
Parihara portal 
 
(i) Farmers given compensation more than the eligible amount 
Aadhaar 
Number Type of crop Year/season Calamity Amount 
paid (in ₹) 
XXXXXXXX4809 Horticulture 2019-20/ Kharif Flood 58120 
XXXXXXXX7329 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61918 
XXXXXXXX1684 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61918 
XXXXXXXX7646 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61918 
XXXXXXXX2041 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61557 
XXXXXXXX1660 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61557 
XXXXXXXX7309 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61918 
XXXXXXXX2149 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61198 
XXXXXXXX6723 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 61198 
XXXXXXXX5987 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 64798 
XXXXXXXX0523 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Flood 62638 
 
(ii) Farmers having more than two hectares of land paid compensation under 
category C and D 
Aadhaar 
Number 
Type of 
crop Year/season Calamity 
Amount 
paid  
(in ₹) 
Extent of land 
holding 
XXXXXXXX2956 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif 
Landslide 74999 More than 14 
acre Desilting 16567 
XXXXXXXX8898 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 6 acre 
XXXXXXXX7329 Perennial 2019-20/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 28 
acre 
XXXXXXXX5727 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 12 
acres 
XXXXXXXX3822 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 15 
acres 
XXXXXXXX4302 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 59999 More than 8 
acres 
XXXXXXXX1672 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 10 acres 
XXXXXXXX7077 Perennial 2018-19/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 6 acre 
XXXXXXXX6260 Perennial 2019-20/ 
Kharif Landslide 74999 More than 5 
acres 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
127 
 
(iii) Farmers paid compensation under categories both A/B and D categories 
Aadhar 
Number Type of crop Year/season Calamity Amount 
paid (in ₹) 
XXXXXXXX2956 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif 
Landslide 74999 
Desilting 16567 
Flood 35998 
XXXXXXXX7329 Perennial 2019-20/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 55999 
XXXXXXXX6770 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 35999 
XXXXXXXX5727 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 35999 
XXXXXXXX7415 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 35999 
XXXXXXXX3822 
 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 50398 
XXXXXXXX3904 Perennial 2019-20/Kharif Landslide 67499 
Flood 35799 
XXXXXXXX4302 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 59999 
Flood 43199 
XXXXXXXX2163 Perennial 2019-20/Kharif Landslide 44999 
Flood 45359 
XXXXXXXX7836 Perennial 2019-20/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 47375 
XXXXXXXX1672 Perennial 2018-19/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 35999 
XXXXXXXX6260 Perennial 2019-20/Kharif Landslide 74999 
Flood 34718 
 
  

P A on Disaster Management in Karnataka  
128 
Appendix 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-6.3.2, Page No. 84) 
District-wise landslide susceptibility maps 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Karnataka State Action Plan: Management of Landslides – 2022.  


Appendices  
129 
 
 
Appendix 7.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-7.2.1.2, Page No.105) 
Nowcast lightning warnings issued by IMD 
 
 
 
 
 
       Source: Social media (X) handle of KSNDMC. 
  


130 
Abbreviations 
AG (A&E) Accountant General (Accounts & Entitlements) 
APL Adaptable Programme Loan 
ATI Administrative Training Institute 
BBMP Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
CAP Common Alerting Protocol 
CDM Centre for Disaster Management 
CLPMP Comprehensive Landslide Prevention and Mitigation Plan 
CRMI Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure 
CSC Cabinet Sub-Committee  
CSOs Civil Society Organisations 
CWWG Crop Weather Watch Group 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DDMA District Disaster Management Authority 
DDMP District Disaster Management Plan 
DEOC District Emergency Operation Centre 
DGP Director General of Police 
DM Disaster Management 
DMIS Drought Management Information System  
DMP Disaster Management Plans 
DMR Digital Mobile Radio 
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction 
EO Earth Observation 
EWDS Early Warning Dissemination Systems 
FMP Flood Management Plans 
FRM Flood Risk Management 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GPRS General Packet Radio Service 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GSI Geological Survey of India 
IDA International Development Association 
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis 
IEC Information, Education, and Communication 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IMD Indian Meteorological Department 
IRS Incident Response System 
IRT Incidence Response Teams 
KGWA Karnataka Ground Water Authority 
KSDMA Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority 
KSNDMC Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre 
LRMS Landslide Risk Management Strategy 
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 

Appendices  
131 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPCS Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelters 
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project  
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NDMIS National Disaster Management Information System 
NDRF National Disaster Response Force  
NEC National Executive Committee  
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations 
NIDM National Institute for Disaster Management 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
PA Performance Audit 
PRED Panchayat Raj Engineering Department 
PWD Public Works Department 
PWPID Public Works, Ports and Inland Division 
RE Reinforced Earth 
RDPR Rural Development and Panchayat Raj 
RGRHCL Rajiv Gandhi Rural Housing Corporation Limited 
RWS Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Department 
SCMC State Crisis Management Committee 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority 
SDMF State Disaster Mitigation Fund 
SDMP State Disaster Management Plan 
SDRF State Disaster Response Force 
SDRMF State Disaster Risk Management Fund  
SEC State Executive Committee 
SEOC State Emergency Operation Centre 
SFDRR Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SWD Storm Water Drain 
TRGs/TWSs Telemetric Rain Gauges / Telemetric Weather Stations 
UA V Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
UN United Nations 
UNDRR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
VSAT Very Small Aperture Terminal 
 