 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
Construction and Operation  
of  
Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttar Pradesh  
Report No. 12 of 2025 
(Performance Audit-Commercial) 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page  
Preface - v 
Executive Summary - vii 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
Introduction to Lucknow Metro Rail Project 1.1 1 
Agency-wise funds sanctioned for N-S corridor 
(Phase-IA) 
1.2 1 
Audit objectives 1.3 2 
Audit criteria 1.4 3 
Audit scope and methodology  1.5 3 
Sample selection 1.6 4 
Structure of the Report 1.7 4 
Limitations due to records not produced 1.8 4 
Acknowledgement 1.9 5 
Chapter II 
Planning 
Policy framework 2.1 7 
Alternative Analysis not included in DPR as required 
in the guidelines of M inistry of Urban Development , 
GoI 
2.2 7 
Exclusion of Mahanagar Metro Station without 
approval from the competent authority 
2.3 8 
Conditions of in-principle approval of GoI not 
adhered to 
2.4 8 
No Objection Certificate for groundwater extraction 
not obtained 
2.5 9 
Conclusion 2.6 10 
Recommendations 2.7 10 
Chapter III 
Contract and Project Management 
Exclusion of a technically qualified bidder (M/s 
Gammon India Limited) from financial bid 3.1 12 
Provision for additional performance guarantee not 
included in notice inviting tender (NIT) 3.2 13 
Irregular grant of plant and machinery advance 3.3 14 
Irregular payment for material at site 3.4 15 
Loss due to short recovery of license fee 3.5 16 
Change in scope of works 3.6 17 
Variations 3.6.1 17 
Extra Items 3.6.2 19 
Works executed on quotation basis 3.7 21 
Payment of royalty on minerals  3.8 22 
Form MM-11 for minerals used not obtained from 
contractors 3.8.1 22 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
ii 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page  
Mining permit not obtained for extraction of ordinary 
soil 3.8.2 23 
Construction of depot on disputed land 3.9 24 
Conclusion 3.10 25 
Recommendations 
 3.11 26 
Chapter IV 
Operation and Maintenance 
Irregular appointment of private security firm 4.1 27 
Technical evaluation by the IIT, Kanpur 4.2 28 
Vulnerability of the CBTCS to malfunction   4.2.1 28 
Quality issue of rails of Rolling Stock 4.2.2 29 
Noise level found higher than the permissible limits 4.2.3 30 
Interim Speed Certificate for operation of rolling stock 
not renewed 
4.3 32 
Office building not insured 4.4 32 
Conclusion 4.5 33 
Recommendations 4.6 33 
Chapter V 
Revenue Management 
Financial performance not achieved by the Company 
as envisaged in DPR 
5.1 35 
Financial irregularities 5.2 38 
Rent payment without obtaining tax invoices resulted 
in loss to exchequer 
5.2.1 38 
Electricity duty collected from commercial 
establishments not remitted to the State Government 
5.2.2 39 
Property Development 5.3 40 
Optimal revenue not realised from commercial and 
parking spaces 
5.3.1 40 
Delayed acquisition and development of land 5.3.2 41 
Conclusion 5.4 42 
Recommendations 5.5 43 
APPENDICES 
Number Particulars Page 
No. 
I(a) List of selected major category contract agreements of 
Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
45 
I(b) List of selected contracts for miscellaneous works of 
Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
47 
II Records not furnished to Audit 50 
III Calculation of interest as per clause 11.2.6 of GCC on 
Plant & Machinery advance 
51 
IV Irregular payment for material at site paid to contractor 52 
V (a) Details of approval of variations (LKCC-04) 53 
V (b) Details of approval of variations (LKCC-07)  55 
VI Abstract of contract agreement (LKCC-04) 57 

Table of Contents 
 
iii 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page  
VII Procurement through obtaining quotations 58 
VIII Calculation of Service Tax/GST against rent paid 60 
IX Calculation of electricity duty collected by the Company 
but not remitted to State Government 
61 
X Position of revenue realised from commercial and 
parking spaces 
63 
List of abbreviations 65-66 
 
 
 
 
  

 
v 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Uttar Pradesh 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India and Section 19A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, as amended from time to time. 
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Construction and 
Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project’, covering the period November 2013 
to March 2023. The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to 
notice in the course of test-audit for the period November 2013 to March 2023; 
matters subsequent to the year 202 2-23 have also been included wherever 
necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 

 
  
Executive Summary 
 

 
  

vii 
Executive Summary 
 
Why did we take up this audit? 
Government of Uttar Pradesh (GoUP ) in the Budget for 2013 -14 included an 
announcement for metro rail project in Lucknow. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
Ltd. (DMRCL) prepared Detailed Project Report (DPR) with two corridors i.e., 
North-South corridor covering 22.88 km and East-West corridor covering 11.10 
km. The DPR was finally approved in October 2013 and in -principle approval 
of North -South corridor i.e., Phase -1A of the project was granted by 
Government of India (GoI) in December 2013.  
Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation Limited (the Company) was incorporated in 
November 2013 to execute Lucknow Metro Rail Project. The work on  
North-South corridor of Lucknow Metro was commenced in September 2014 
and completed in March 2019 with 22.88 km of length. Name of the Company 
was later changed to Uttar Pradesh Metro Rail Corporation Limited (UPMRCL) 
on 23 October 2019. This Company is a joint venture of GoI and GoUP with 
50:50 equity contribution. 
Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Phase -IA of Lucknow 
Metro Rail Project was taken up with the objective to examine whether                
(i) effective planning was done to ensure economic viability and selection of the 
most appropriate technologies; (ii) implementation in terms of project execution 
and contract management was done with due care, economical, and in a timely 
and transparent manner; (iii) an adequate mechanism was in existence to 
monitor the project to ensure timely completi on and conformity of works 
executed with laid down specifications; and (iv) the operation and maintenance 
were efficient, and the planned benefits were achieved after commercial 
operation. 
The Performance Audit covered the activities of Phase-1A of the project for the 
period since its inception in November 2013 to March 2023. A total of 51  
(21 major works and 30 minor works) contracts involving ₹ 4,987.21 crore out 
of total 144 contracts relating to civil, rolling stock, track, electrical, signalling 
& telecom, property development and operation & maintenance were covered 
in audit. The Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IIT Kanpur) was engaged 
for providing technical consultancy during review of the technical aspects of the 
Phase-1A project. 
What have we found? 
(A) Planning 
The Company did not include ‘Alternative Analysis’ for evaluation of available 
technologies, in the DPR of Lucknow Metro Rail Project, as envisaged in the 
‘Guidelines for preparation of DPR for Integrated Mass Transit System 
Development Plans (Bus based/Rail based)’ issued by Ministry of Urban 
Development, Government of India in November 2006. This guideline required 
detailed evaluation of various alternative technologies to solve the existin g 
public transportation problems. 
The GoI accorded in -principle approval (December 2013) for taking up the 
Phase-1A of Lucknow Metro Rail Project covering a total length of 22. 88 km 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
viii 
stations in North-South corridor and excluded Mahanagar Metro station, which 
had second highest projected daily loading capacity in 2021 as per the DPR, 
from the project without approval from the concerned authority.  
The Company did not comply with conditions contained in the in -principle 
approval of the GoI to the project such as periodic fare revision, setting up of 
District Urban Transport Fund and framing of advertising and parking policy. 
For bulk extraction of ground water, any commercial organisation was 
mandatorily required to apply and obtain permission from Central Ground 
Water Authority ( CGWA)/Ground Water Department, GoUP (GWD). Audit 
found that Company did not get registered in CGWA/GWD, UP for obtaining 
NOC during 2013-23.  
(B) Contract and Project Management 
The company did not open the financial bid of M/s Gammon India Limited 
despite its name being recommended by the technical evaluation committee. In 
reply, the State Government stated that it was a conscious decision of the Board 
based on past performance of M/s Gammon India Limited at Delhi and Chennai 
metro project and lack of desirable safety measure and avoidable delay in these 
projects. The reply was not acceptable because if the Company had prior 
information about the unsatisfactory past performance of M/s Gammon India 
Limited, it should not have allowed M/s Gammon India Limited to participate 
in the technical bidding stage itself. 
Government order for obtaining Additional Performance Guarantee (APG) was 
not followed for the execution of below to the departmental rates in the contract 
agreement of LKCC-07 and the Company did not obtain APG to safeguard its 
interest. Plant & Machinery  advance was irregularly paid to the contractor for 
the plants and machineries already owned by him in violation of the contract 
agreement (LKCC -07). Similarly, another contractor was irregularly paid 
excess amount of advance for material at site contrary to the provisions of the 
contract conditions of LKCC-04 works. 
A lump sum work of Schedule E (miscellaneous work under DSR -2014) of 
LKCC-07 was executed to ` 51.40 crore against the bonded cost of  
` 15.75 crore. The Company provided the details of items of works of only  
` 1.30 crore despite repeated requests were made for providing in Audit.  The 
State Government did not respond on this issue.  
The Company awarded (June 2017) a contract for advertisement rights in trains 
of Metro Phase -1A (N -S Corridor). Despite taking over 12 train sets, the 
licensee had not paid license fee to the Company. Moreover, the Company 
relieved the licensee from the license fee payment instead of acting as per 
provisions of the licensee agreement for recovery of license fee including Goods 
and Services Tax (GST). In reply, the State Government stated that license fee 
was not collected as the advertising agency had not utilised these train sets. The 
reply was not acceptable since  the licensee was bound to pay lice nse fee for 
these 12 train sets as per the license agreement. 
The Project authorities of the Company neither collected Form MM-11 (transit 
pass) before making payment to the contractor nor ensured the deductions of 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
royalty and price of minerals amounting to ` 3.16 crore from the contractor. The 
Company did not obtain permit from Geology and Mining Department for 
extraction of ordinary soil during construction of underground stations and 
ramps. Further, the Company did not collect royalty from other Government 
departments for ordinary soil tra nsferred to them and did not deposit the same 
in Government Account.  
The Company procured 25.80 hectares of land for construction of depot of 
Lucknow Metro. However, 1.98 hectares (7.67 per cent) out of this land was  
disputed and already under litigation.  The Company constructed depot on the 
acquired land including the disputed land. Audit noticed that the tripartite 
agreement among the Company, Additional District Magistrate (Land 
Acquisition), and parties related t o disputed land lacked signatures of some of 
the related parties. This agreement was not registered also. As such, the 
agreement was not legally enforceable and may attract  litigation in case of 
disagreement among the parties. In reply, the State Government stated that the 
tripartite agreement on stamp paper was not required as the ownership of 
disputed land was not clear. Needless expenditure on stamp duties and 
registration fee would have to be borne by the Company.  The reply was not 
acceptable because construction of the depot on the disputed land was against 
the financial rules. Also, non-registered tripartite agreement was not legally 
enforceable. 
(C) Operation & Maintenance  
The Company did not opt for open tender process for the engagement of security 
firm and awarded the contract to M/s G4S on nomination basis without any 
recorded justification as to why this particular security firm was selected. This 
was in violation of the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) Guidelines and 
provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR). 
The tests conducted by IIT , Kanpur on the rail samples provided by the 
Company to determine the hardness value of rails at depot area and mainline, 
revealed that the hardness value was less as compared to the Indian Railway 
Standard (IRS) specification issued in December 2009.  In reply, the State 
Government stated that the tests have not been conducted by IIT in accordance 
with prescribed codal provisions. The earlier test s carried out during 
procurement demonstrated that the hardness measured satisfied the  provisions 
enumerated in “IRS -T-12-2009”. In response, IIT Kanpur stated that testing 
procedures applied by it were as per the standards (IS 1500:2005)  which was 
standard practice. 
A certified cyber security agency for routine Vulnerability Assessment and 
Penetration Testing (V APT) was not empanelled to examine the security and 
therefore, the metro system was susceptible to threat and malfunction. 
The Company did not determine any benchmark for maintaining noise level 
within the permissible limit. Thus, the objective for providing comfortable 
environment inside the Metro trains and outside at the stations was not fulfilled. 
The Interim Speed Certificate (ISC) was not renewed despite its requirement 
after expiry of five years from the date of its issue (March 2017). In absence of 
ISC, wear and tear in wheel of rolling stock and adjustment needed thereof could 
not be ascertaine d. By not renewing the Speed Certificate after expiry of five 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
x 
years, the Company has taken unnecessary risk with the safety of passengers. In 
reply, the State Government stated that as per Procedure for Safety Certification 
and Technical Clearance of Metro System (PSTM) -2015, Interim Speed 
Certificate (ISC) shall remain valid till the issuance of the final speed certificate 
as no extension provision of ISC (such as 5 years) is defined. The reply was not 
factual because the PSTM -2015 does not state that ISC shall remain valid till 
the issuance of the Final Speed Certif icate. Therefore, ISC issued to Lucknow 
metro was valid only for five years as specifically mentioned in ISC  and was 
required to be renewed thereafter. 
(D) Revenue Management 
Revenue generation through Property Development by metro projects is a 
global practice as the metro projects are highly capital intensive and the only 
way to become financially sustainable without government subsidies, is by 
generating Non-Fare Box Revenue  from property development activities viz. 
advertisements, retailing, real estate at metro stations, etc. 
Operating revenue of the Company increased from ` 5.55 crore to ` 99.35 crore 
(1690.10 per cent) during the period 2017 -18 to 2023-24 with average growth 
of 281.62 per cent. During this duration, operating expenses also increased from 
` 16.17 crore to ` 76.11 crore.  Nevertheless, it was  encouraging for the 
Company that it earned operating revenue more than the operating expenses 
after five years of operations of Lucknow Metro Rail Project. 
Further, the company could not achieve the year-wise footfall and revenue from 
operations anywhere near the projections envisaged in the DPR. In reply, the 
State Government stated that year -wise footfall and revenue operations 
projected in the DPR was made considering combined traffic from both North-
south and East-West corridors, however, East-West corridor could not be made 
operational. 
The Company did not insure its administrative office building taken from a 
Society on rent in violation of terms of the rent deed. The Company paid rent 
without payment of Service Tax/GST as the Society was not registered with 
Service Tax/GST authorities. This resulted in loss of Service Tax/GST revenue 
to the Government. 
The Company was issued electricity energy bill by the DISCOM at the rate of 
` 7.30 KV Ah among other charges under HV -3B category. The Company 
collected electricity charges at higher rate of ` 8.75 KV Ah from its commercial 
tenants resulting in higher collection of electricity duty also from July 2019 to 
August 2022. This higher collection of electricity duty was retained by  the 
Company unauthorisedly and not remitted to the State Government or the 
DISCOM. In reply, the Company stated that it was charging higher tariff on its 
commercial tenants to recover the cost of maintenance of infrastructure built by 
it. The reply was not acceptable because the Company may collect higher tariffs 
to recover the cost incurred by it for construction and maintenance of 
transmission and distribution networks, but electricity duty collected by it 
should be remitted directly to the Government or through DISCOM. 
The revenue of Lucknow Metro mainly consists of fare box collection and non-
fare box collection (property development, advertisement, parking, etc.). Audit 

Executive Summary 
 
xi 
noticed that company could not explore the possibility of leasing out 54,196 sq. 
ft. available commercial spaces as of March 2025. Besides, bids for 15,984.54 
sq. ft. available parking spaces were also not invited by the Company during 
2017-24.  
The GoUP identified (October 2013) land to be provided to the Company for 
property development but the same was handed over to the Company in April 
2022 after lapse of more than eight years. Moreover, the Company did not utilise 
86.10 acres of land for pro perty development after lapse of almost three years 
since receipt of the same. 
Way forward: What we recommend? 
Audit recommends that the Company should: 
• ensure that any change if required in metro station conceived under the 
Project is carried out only after the approval of the authority who had 
sanctioned the original Project. 
• ensure obtaining No Objection Certificate from Ground Water 
Department, GoUP for extraction of ground water. 
• ensure that terms of contract are adhered to and a system should be in 
place to recover dues and irregular/excess payment of advance. 
• fix responsibility where variation & extra items are beyond limits in a 
contract without sanction from proper delegated authority, thus vitiating 
the contract integrity. 
• obtain Form MM-11 (transit pass) from the contractors to ensure that the 
minerals used in the construction works of the metro have been procured 
from legal sources  and royalties etc. are deposited in Government 
Account.  
• ensure full compliance with the statutory provisions, rules, C entral 
Vigilance Commission guidelines, I ndian Railway Standards/ 
specifications, agreements, etc. 
• ensure to empanel a certified cyber security agency for routine 
vulnerability assessment and penetration testing to avoid susceptible 
threat and malfunctioning of the communication -based train control 
system. 
• devise ways to attract commuters into the metro by providing end to end 
connectivity to increase the ridership and revenue. 
• ensure timely development of land available for property development 
and also ensure realisation of optimal revenue from developed properties 
through timely leasing out of available commercial and parking spaces. 

 
 
  
Chapter I 
Introduction 

 
  

1 
Chapter-I 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction to Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
In view of the intra -city traffic volume in Lucknow and the urgent need for a 
full-fledged Integrated Multi Modal Mass Rapid Passenger System, 
Government entrusted the task for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
to Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Lt d. (DMRCL) in 2009. The DMRCL 
submitted the draft DPR in April 2011. 
Thereafter, the matter was taken up in right earnest w.e.f. January 2013 and the 
Budget of GoUP for 2013-14 included an announcement for Metro rail project 
in Lucknow. GoUP established a Metro Cell in May 2013 under the jurisdiction 
of Secretary, Housing and Urban Pla nning Department.  DMRCL submitted 
(July 2013) the revised DPR with two corridors i.e. North-South and East-West. 
The DPR was finally approved in October 2013 and in-principle approval of the 
Phase-IA of the project i.e. North -South (N-S) corridor was granted by GoI in 
December 2013.  
A Special Purpose Vehicle namely Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
(the Company) was incorporated in November 2013 to execute and operate the 
metro rail in Lucknow. Subsequently, the need of various Metro rail projects 
was felt in the State and the name of the Company was changed to Uttar Pradesh 
Metro Rail Corporation Limited on 23 October 2019.  The Company is a joint 
venture between the Government of India (GoI) and the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh (GoUP) with 50:50 equity participation. The Company is under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), 
Government of India (GoI) and Housing and Urban Planning Department 
(HUPD), Government of Uttar Pradesh (GoUP).  
The Board of Directors of the Company consists of 14 Directors. The Chairman 
of the Company is the nominee of the GoI while the Managing Director is the 
nominee of the GoUP. The Managing Director is assisted by four functional 
Directors viz., Director (Works & Infrastructure), Director (Finance), Director 
(Rolling Stock & Signalling) and Director (Operations). The Board of Directors 
of the Company also has four GoI nominee Directors and four GoUP nominee 
Directors. 
The work on North -South corridor (Phase -IA) of Lucknow Metro was 
commenced in September 2014  and completed in March 2019 with 22.88 km  
of length.  
1.2 Agency-wise funds sanctioned for N-S corridor (Phase-IA) 
The details of total sanctioned fund of ₹ 6,928.00 crore and details of total 
expenditure incurred of ₹ 6,868.75 crore for Phase -IA are depicted in  
Table 1.1 and Chart 1.1: 
 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
2 
Table 1.1 
Allocation of funds and expenditure incurred for N-S corridor (Phase-IA) 
as of 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Sources of fund Total funds 
sanctioned* 
Total funds 
received 
Expenditure 
incurred 
1 EIB1 loan (through GoI)  3,502.00 3,502.00 3,502.00 
2 GoI Equity 1,003.00 1,003.00 1,003.00 
3 GoI subordinate debt2 (SD) for 
50 per cent central Taxes 
297.00  297.00  297.00  
4 GoUP Equity 1,003.00 1,003.00 1,003.00 
5 GoUP subordinate debt (SD) for 
50 per cent central Taxes 
449.00 449.00 449.00 
6 Grant from Local Bodies 245.00 233.75 233.75 
7 GoUP SD for cost of land for 
other than State Government Land 
381.00 381.00 381.00 
8 IDC3 48.00 0.00 0.00 
 Total 6,928.00 6,868.75 6,868.75 
(*Share of sanctioned cost as approved by GoI vide letter dated January 2016) 
Chart 1.1 
1.3 Audit objectives 
Performance Audit on “Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail 
Project” was conducted with the objectives to verify whether:  
• Effective planning was done to ensure economic viability and selection of 
the most appropriate technologies;  
 
1  European Investment Bank. 
2  Type of loan with least repayment priority. 
3  Interest During Construction. 
51%
14%
4%
14%
6% 4%
6%
1%
Breakup of total funds sanctioned
EIB loan (through GoI)
GoI Equity
GoI subordinate debt (SD) for
50% central Taxes
GoUP Equity
GoUP subordinate debt (SD)
for 50% central Taxes
Grant from Local Bodies
GoUP SD for cost of land for
other than State Govt. Land
IDC

Chapter I : Introduction 
 
3 
• Implementation in terms of project execution and contract management was 
done with due care, economical and in a timely and transparent manner; 
• An adequate mechanism was in existence to monitor the project, to ensure 
timely completion and conformity of works executed with laid down 
specifications; and  
• Operation and maintenance was efficient, and the planned benefits were 
achieved after commercial operation of the Phase-IA.  
1.4 Audit criteria 
The criteria for the Performance Audit were derived from the following sources:   
• Agenda and Minutes of meetings of the Board of Directors (BoD) and other 
sub committees;  
• Schedule of Powers (SoP);   
• Detailed Project Reports;  
• Applicable General Financial Rules (GFRs);  
• Guidelines issued by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC);  
• Directions and guidelines issued by the Administrative Ministry;  
• Policies, standards, directives and guidelines of the DMRC/UPMRC;  
• General Conditions of Contracts (GCC) and Special Conditions of Contracts 
(SCC);  
• National Urban Transport Policy, 2006; and  
• The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978. 
1.5 Audit scope and methodology 
The Performance Audit covered planning, implementation, monitoring and 
operations and maintenance of North -South corridor (Phase -IA) of Lucknow 
Metro Rail Project and outcome of the activities of Phase -IA of the project for 
the period since its commencemen t in November 2013 to March 2023. The 
Performance Audit was conducted between April 2022 and October 2023. 
Audit methodology included review and examination of the agenda and minutes 
of the meetings of the Board. Questionnaire, audit enquiries and audit 
requisitions were also issued to the Company for clarification, information and 
records. Besides, Indian Inst itute of Technology, Kanpur (IIT Kanpur) was 
appointed as Technical Consultant on 18 December 2023 to review the technical 
aspects of civil works, signalling and telecom, rolling stock, noise & vibrations, 
heating, ventilation & air conditioning and electrical works executed by the 
Company. The IIT, Kanpur submitted its findings in August 2024 and the same 
have been suitably incorporated in Chapter IV of this report. 
The Entry Conference with Principal Secretary, Housing & Urban Planning 
Department, GoUP and the Company was held on 25 August 2022 wherein 
scope and coverage of audit, audit objectives and criteria, proposed techniques 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
4 
of evidence collection, etc. were discussed. The draft Audit Report was issued 
to GoUP and the Company on 11 June 2024 . Reply of the GoUP on the draft 
Audit Report was received in September 2024. An Exit Conference was held on 
29 October 2024 with the Principal Secretary, Housing & Urban Planning 
Department, GoUP and the Company to discuss the audit observations. Replies 
of the Government have been duly considered and relevant portions have been 
incorporated in this Report. Besides, the draft Report was also issued in April 
2025 to the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  (HoHUA), GoI 
for their comments. A meeting was also held on 8 May 2025 with the Director, 
MRTS-II of MoHUA in the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India for obtaining comments on the draft Report. However, no comments was 
received from the Ministry till May 2025.  
1.6 Sample selection 
A total of 51 contracts (consist of 21 major works and 30 minor works ) were 
selected using stratified random sampling methodology. The details of the 
selected contracts are given in Appendix-I (a & b). The Audit coverage in terms 
of number of contracts was 61.76 per cent4 for major contracts and 27.27 per 
cent5 for miscellaneous contracts (in terms of monetary value it was 87.32  per 
cent6 for major contracts and 37.97  per cent 7 for miscellaneous contracts)  
executed for the Phase-IA project. 
1.7 Structure of the Report 
The Report consists of five chapters. Chapter -I of the Report gives the 
background information of the Company, the need for North -South corridor 
project (Phase -IA), audit objectives, scope of audit, audit criteria, audit 
methodology, sample selection, etc. Audit find ings have been broadly 
categorised into four chapters aligning with four audit objectives. 
Chapter-II relates to Planning and contains audit findings on the first audit 
objective and brings out inefficiencies in planning. Chapter-III on Contract and 
Project Management contains audit findings on the second and third audit 
objective which indicate  deficiencies in project execution and contract 
management. Chapter-IV on Operation and Maintenance contains audit findings 
on the fourth audit objective and highlights deficiencies in operation and 
maintenance leading to shortfall in achievement of planne d benefits after 
commercial operation. Chapter-V on Revenue Management contains audit 
findings also on the fourth audit objective and highlights deficiencies in revenue 
generation. 
1.8  Limitations due to records not produced 
Documents which were not provided to audit by the Company is attached as 
Appendix-II. Hence, audit could not form an opinion on the related issues.   
 
4  Total 21 contracts selected out of 34 major contracts. 
5  Total 30 contracts selected out of 110 miscellaneous contracts. 
6  ₹ 4,962.09 crore out of ₹ 5,682.72 crore for major contracts. 
7  ₹ 25.12 crore out of ₹ 66.15 crore for miscellaneous contracts. 

Chapter I : Introduction 
 
5 
1.9 Acknowledgement 
The assistance provided by the Technical Consultant (IIT Kanpur) and the 
cooperation extended by the Company, Housing and Urban Planning 
Department, GoUP, during the conduct of this audit is appreciated and 
acknowledged. 

 
 
  
Chapter II 
Planning 

 
  

7 
Chapter-II 
 
Planning 
 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The Company did not include ‘Alternative Analysis’ for evaluation of 
various alternative technologies in the Detailed Project Report, as 
required in the guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development. 
➢ The State Government/ Company did not comply with conditions 
contained in the in -principle approval of GoI of the project such as 
periodic fare revision, setting up of District Urban Transport Fund and 
framing of advertising and parking policy. 
➢ The Company did not obtain No Objection Certificate for extraction of 
groundwater since commencement for bulk commercial use of 
groundwater either from Central Ground Water Authority or Ground 
Water Department, GoUP. 
2.1 Policy framework 
Policy is a deliberate system of principles to guide decisions and achieve 
rational outcomes.  A statement of intent, it usually assists senior  management 
with decisions that must be based on the relative merits of several factors. 
Audit reviewed the approval of the initial Phase -IA (North-South corridor) of 
Lucknow Metro Rail Project and assessed whether effective planning was in 
place and observed deficiencies as brought out in the following paragraphs: 
2.2 Alternative Analysis not included in DPR as required in the guidelines 
of Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI 
MoUD issued (November 2006) common guidelines for preparation of DPR for 
Integrated Mass Transit System Development Plans as Project Reports for Mass 
Transit System were not being prepared in line with the National Urban 
Transport Policy, approved by the GoI in April 2006. 
Audit observed that Para 4.3 ‘Alternative Analysis’ of the above guidelines 
stipulated that evaluation of various alternative technologies to solve the 
existing problems with cost benefit analysis, technical feasibility including 
evaluation of lowest cost options like traffic  management, rationalization, etc. 
for choosing a particular technology/system concept was to be included in the 
DPR. However, no such para was included in the DPR of Lucknow Metro Rail 
Project. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024)  that Alternative 
Analysis Report was not mentioned in the National Urban Transport Policy, 
approved by the Gol in April 2006. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
8 
The reply was not acceptable because the detailed guidelines issued in 
November 2006 for preparation of DPR for integrated mass transit system 
development plans was based on the National Urban Transport Policy, 2006 and 
conducting ‘Alternative Analysis’ was part of the guidelines.  
2.3 Exclusion of Mahanagar Metro Station without approval from 
competent authority 
The GoI accorded in -principle approval (December 2013) for taking up the 
Phase-1A (N-S corridor) of Lucknow Metro Rail Project covering a total length 
of 22.88 kilometres  with 22 stations . The DPR of the Project , MoU signed 
between GoI and GoUP, Finance Contract executed between GoI and European 
Investment Bank (EIB) and the Project Agreement executed between EIB and 
the Company  mentioned in their documents for construction of 22 metro 
stations in N-S corridor. One of the metro stations named Mahanagar in the DPR 
was ranked third in terms of daily loading capacity in 2015 and subsequently in 
2020 this was to be second in terms of daily loading capacity. 
Audit noticed that the Company constructed only 21 metro stations in N -S 
corridor and excluded Mahanagar Metro station from the project. As mentioned 
above, Mahanagar station, which was to have the second highest daily loading 
capacity8 in 2020, was not constructed. No record was submitted to show that 
the proposal for exclusion of Mahanagar station was forwarded to GoI and 
GoUP, and whether approval was taken from the concerned authority. Thus, the 
Company had excluded Mahanagar station from approved project without 
approval. This resulted in violation of the provisions of DPR, MoU, the Finance 
Contract and the Project Agreement and non-achievement of the metro facility 
to the locality as well. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the matter was not 
hidden from the GoI as MoHUA has notified the alignment of N-S corridor with 
21 stations only after comparison with the originally sanctioned DPR.  
Reply was not convincing. The Company had submitted index plan of Lucknow 
metro for notification to the GoI. On verification of the letter sent to the OSD 
(Urban Transport), MoHUA, it was seen that the management had clearly stated 
about other major change s in plan like construction of an underground station 
at Chaudhary Charan Singh airport in place of elevated station as proposed in 
the DPR. However, the management did not mention the omission of the 
Mahanagar metro station which was approved in the DPR, in the letter. Further, 
a separate approval for variation from DPR should have been sought from GoI 
with justification.  
2.4 Conditions of in-principle approval of GoI not adhered to 
In-principle approval to the North -South corridor of the Lucknow Metro Rail 
Project was granted by GoI on 27 December 2013 subject to 18 conditions . 
Audit noticed that the State Government/the Company did not comply with the 
following conditions: 
 
8  Boarding on both directions (Up & Down). 

Chapter II : Planning 
 
9 
Table 2.1 
Conditions of in-principle approval of GoI not complied 
Clause Compliance by the State Government/the 
Company 
Clause 2 N (iv) provided for periodic fare 
revision for the Metro rail as well as other 
competing modes. 
No such arrangement was put in place by 
GoUP. 
As per Clause 2 N (vi), a Dedicated Urban 
Transport Fund (DUTF) was to be set up at 
the State level as well as at the City level. 
Dedicated Urban Transport Fund was not set 
up at City level. 
As per Clause 2 N (xi), the State Government 
should come up with an advertisement policy 
which taps advertisement revenue. 
No such advertisement policy was put in 
place by GoUP. 
As per Clause 2 N (xii), the State Government 
should come up with a parking policy. 
No such parking policy was put in place by 
GoUP. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the revenue 
operation in full corridor commenced from March 2019. The increasing trend 
of ridership was drastically affected due to COVID-19. But now it has recovered 
and being periodically reviewed. As there is no time frame for revision of fare, 
proposal for the same would be sent when needed. DUTF has already been 
established at the State level in February 2014. In line with Metro Act, Non-fare 
box earning is mainly through advertisement. 
Reply was not acceptable because a time frame should have been fixed for 
review of the fare as per the clause 2N(iv). DUTF was not established at the city 
level. The Company should also frame an advertising policy as per clause 2 
N(xi). With regard to parking policy, no reply has been furnished by the State  
Government. 
2.5 No Objection Certificate for ground water extraction not obtained  
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (3) of Section 3 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) 
was constituted (January 1997) to regulate and control management and 
development of ground water resources in the country. CGWA issues necessary 
regulatory directions for this purpose, including grant of No Objection 
Certificates (NOC) for extraction of ground water to industries/infrastructure 
projects/Mining Projects, etc.  Similarly, Uttar Pradesh Ground Water 
(Management and Regulation) Act, 2019 provides that 
commercial/industrial/infrastructure or bulk user of groundwater who has sunk 
or desires to sunk a well for extracting ground water shall have to be registered 
in the Ground Water Department, GoUP and obtain a valid NOC. 
Audit observed that the Company did not get registered in CGWA or Ground 
Water Department, GoUP and did not obtain NOC for extraction of ground 
water during 2013-23.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the application for 
water connections at Metro stations was processed in 2016 itself.  

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
10 
The reply was not acceptable because the Company did not apply for extraction 
of ground water since commencement to till date for bulk commercial use of 
groundwater either to CGWA or Ground Water Department, GoUP after 
enactment of Ground Water (Management and Regulation) Act, 2019. 
2.6 Conclusion 
The Company did not include Alternative Analysis for evaluation of various 
alternative technologies in the DPR as required under MoUD Guidelines of 
2006. Mahanagar Metro Station was excluded without approval of the 
competent Authority. Four out of 18 conditions of in-principle approval of GoI 
were not followed by the GoUP/the Company. The Company did not get 
registered in Central Ground Water Authority/Ground Water Department of 
GoUP and did not obtain NOC for extraction of ground water during 2013-23.  
2.7 Recommendations  
1. The Company should ensure that any change if required in metro station 
conceived under the Project is carried out only after approval of the 
authority who had sanctioned the original Project. 
2. The Company should ensure obtaining No Objection Certificate from 
Ground Water Department, GoUP for extraction of ground water. 

 
  
Chapter III 
Contract and Project Management 

 
  

11 
Chapter – III 
 
Contract and Project Management 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The Company did not take cognizance of the Government order for 
obtaining additional performance guarantee and therefore, did not collect 
additional performance guarantee amounting to ` 75.30 crore for a 
contract executed below 11.5 per cent of the estimated cost. 
➢ Plant & Machineries advance amounting to ` 31.74 crore was irregularly 
disbursed to the contractor though the contractor already owned these 
plant & machineries. 
➢ The contractor was irregularly paid excess amount of ` 14.01 crore at a 
time as provisional payment for material at site under the contract 
agreement of LKCC -04 overlooking the conditions contained in the 
contract. 
➢ The Company relieved the licensee towards payment of licence fee of     
` 115.92 lakh (including GST) despite breach of contract by the licensee. 
➢ The Company approved quantity variations beyond the permissible limit 
of 15 per cent without referring it to the administrative department of the 
Government.  
➢ A lump sum works of Schedule E (miscellaneous work) costing  
` 15.75 crore under LKCC-07 was concluded to ` 51.40 crore. However, 
the Company provided the details of items only of ` 1.30 crore despite 
repeated requests made in Audit. 
➢ The Project authorities neither collected valid transit pass before making 
payment to the contractor nor ensured the deductions of royalty and price 
of minerals amounting to ` 3.16 crore from the contractor. 
➢ The Company did not obtain permit from Geology and Mining 
Department for extraction of ordinary soil during construction of 
underground stations and ramps. Further, the Company did not collect 
royalty from other Government departments for ordinary soil transferred 
to them and did not deposit the same in Government Account. 
➢ The Company constructed depot on 1.983 hectares of land which was 
disputed and under litigation without adopting proper safeguards. 
Compliance to rules and procedures for tendering and contract management is 
essential for execution of works in an economic, efficient, effective and 
transparent manner.  
Audit analysed procurement of goods and services at the pre -tender9, tender10 
and execution stages by reviewing 21 major work contracts valuing ` 4,962.09 
crore and 30 miscellaneous work contracts valuing ` 25.12 crore related to 
construction and operation of North -South corridor to assess whether project 
 
9  Pre-tender stage includes cost estimation, finalisation of bidding criteria, preparation of Notice Inviting Tender 
etc.  
10  Tender stage includes opening of bids, evaluation of bids, award of work etc.  

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
12 
execution and contract management was done with due care, economical and in 
a timely and transparent manner.  The significant deficiencies noticed are 
brought out in the following paragraphs:  
3.1 Exclusion of a technically qualified bidder ( M/s Gammon India 
Limited) from financial bid 
Audit observed  that the Company invited (June 2014) open tender through 
Interim Consultant DMRC, for contract agreement LKCC-0111 in two packages 
namely Technical Package and Financial Package.  The estimated cost of this 
work was ` 541.00 crore inclusive of all taxes. Twenty-four firms purchased the 
tender documents, out of which eight firms submitted the bids within the 
stipulated time.  
During the perusal of the minutes of the evaluation committee meeting                   
(9 September 2014),  Audit noticed that out of eight bids received, five were 
considered substantially responsive and generally compliant to technical 
requirements of the tender conditions as detailed below: 
1. M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited 
2. M/s Afcons Infrastructure Limited 
3. M/s Gammon India Limited 
4. M/s Simplex Infrastructures Limited 
5. M/s PLL-CR19B (JV) 
The above recommendations of the Evaluation Committee on technical bids 
were accepted by the Managing Director also.  Thereafter, minutes of meeting 
of the Evaluation Committee (September 2014) which met to open the financial 
offers of the technically responsive bidders, revealed that Board of the Company 
had approved the opening of financial packages of only four tender ers, out of 
the five recommended by the Evaluation Committee . M/s Larsen and Toubro 
Limited got the contract on being found the lowest bidder in the financial 
bidding.  
Audit in this respect further observed that M/s Gammon India Limited was 
excluded from the tender process at this late stage. The file related to the 
correspondence between the Company, Interim Consultant (DMRC) and M/s 
Gammon India Limited on this issue was not provided to Audit. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that it was a conscious 
decision of the Board based on past performance of M/s Gammon India Limited 
at Delhi and Chennai metro project and lack of desirable safety measure and 
avoidable delay occurred in these projects. 
The reply was not acceptable because if the Company had prior information 
about the unsatisfactory past performance of M/s Gammon India Limited,  
 
11  Construction of elevated viaduct, 8 elevated stations viz. Transport Nagar, Krishna Nagar, Singar nagar, 
Alambagh, Alambagh Bus Station, Maviaya, Durgapuri and Charbagh Railway Station from chainage 687.140 
m to 9171.440 m (excluding construction of specia l span of approx. 230 m at Maviaya Railway Crossing) and 
connecting elevated viaduct and ramp to Depot at PAC ground Transport Nagar on North South Corridor of 
Lucknow Metro at Lucknow. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
13 
it should not have allowed M/s Gammon India Limited to participate in the 
technical bidding stage itself. The required eligibility condition should have 
been suitably built in the eligibility criteria. Moreover, on being asked by Audit 
to provide relevant documents in support of the claim that the past performance 
of M/s Gammon India Limited was not satisfactory, the Company provided 
(April 2025) clippings of different newspapers containing news regardin g 
collapse of structure of a flyover in 2007 being bui lt by M/s Gammon India 
Limited in Hyderabad and collapse of a bridge in 2009 being built for DMRCL 
in Delhi. Thus, the Company relied on the newspapers clippings instead of 
trying to get direct confirmation from the DMRCL and from concerned 
authority in Hy derabad. It is pertinent to point out that DMRCL had banned 
(November 2010) M/s Gammon India Limited for a period of only two years. 
3.2  Provision for additional performance guarantee not included in 
notice inviting tender (NIT) 
GoUP Order (June 2012) specifies the provision for taking up the additional 
performance guarantee from the qualified contractor @ 0.5% per per cent for 
the contracts executed below 10 per cent  of the departmental rates and the 
additional performance guarantee shall be taken up from the qualified contractor 
for the contracts executed 10 per cent or more below to the departmental rates, 
@ 1% per per cent, to safeguard the works. 
Scrutiny revealed that the contract agreement LKCC-07 was executed 11.15 per 
cent below the departmental rates and the work  was awarded to M/s L&T Ltd. 
in November 2016 . Performance security along with additional performance 
guarantee amounting to ` 142.83 crore12 was required to be collected from the 
contractor before execution of the agreement. The Company received only 
performance security of ` 67.53 crore13 in the form of bank guarantee from the 
contractor before start of work. Audit observed that the Company had not 
included the provisions of obtaining additional performance guarantee in the 
contract conditions and notice inviting tender. The details of add itional 
performance guarantee due from the contractor is given in the table-3.1 below:  
Table-3.1 
Details of additional performance guarantee due from the contractor 
Bonded cost14  
(` in crore) 
Rates quoted by the 
contractor Below (%) 
Calculation of required additional 
performance guarantee @ 1% per per cent 
below (` in crore) 
675.33 11.15 675.33 X 11.15% = 75.30 crore 
(Source: Information provided by UPMRCL) 
As evident from above table, ` 75.30 crore additional performance guarantee 
for the contract finalised below the departmental rates 11.15 per cent, was not 
taken up before signing the contract to safeguard the government interest. 
In reply, State Government stated  (September 2024) that the Company is a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 as 
a 50:50 joint venture between the GoI and the GoUP. Therefore, the said circular 
 
12  Performance guarantee: ` 67.53 crore and Additional Performance Guarantee: ` 75.30 crore. 
13  10 per cent of the contract value ` 675.33 crore. 
14  Bonded cost of a work is the cost of the work as per contract/agreement. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
14 
was not binding on the Company and contract conditions were same as being 
followed by all other metro companies. Moreover, the contract has been 
successfully completed by the contractor. 
The reply was not acceptable because the clause 14.17 of the MoU made with 
the GoI and GoUP emphasized that the Company shall follow CVC guidelines 
and the procurement  policies/guidelines of GoUP for tenders and contracts. 
Thus, taking cognizance of the said Government order, the Company should 
have included the provisions for obtaining additional performance guarantee in 
their notice inviting tenders for those contracts which were executed below the 
departmental rates, to safeguard the Government interest. 
3.3 Irregular grant of Plant and Machinery advance 
As per clause 11.2.2 of GCC and SCC of the contract agreement (LKCC -07), 
interest free Plant and Machinery  advance15 limited to five per cent of the 
original contract value was payable to the contractor for the plant, equipment 
and machinery provided the same have reached the site, or in the case of new 
items meant specifically for the work, firm purchase order has been placed and 
the invoices received. Clause 11.2.2 of GCC provides that the advance will be 
given only if the plant/ machinery has been purchased for this contract and not 
for those which are already in the books of the contractor. Clause 11.2.6 of GCC 
stipulates that the advances sh all be used by the contractor strictly for the 
purpose of the contract and for the purpose for which they are paid. Under no 
circumstances, the advances shall be diverted for other purposes. Any such 
diversion shall be construed as a breach of contract and  the contractor shall be 
asked to return the advances at once and pay interest at 15 per cent per annum 
till the advance is recovered back from him. The contractor shall return the 
advance and pay the interest in one go without demur.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that the project authorities of the Company 
executed a contract agreement (LKCC -07) valuing ` 675.33 crore with M/s 
L&T Ltd. in November 2016. The contractor applied (March 2017) for plant & 
machinery advance of ` 31.74 crore for machineries/equipment within the 
prescribed limit of five per cent of the contract value  as detailed in the table 
below: 
Table-3.2 
Details of Plant & Machinery advance to the contractor 
(` in crore) 
Description of machinery Old/New 
machinery 
Assessed 
Value  
Claimed amount of 
machinery advance by 
the contractor 
(80 per cent of assessed 
value)  
Weigh Bridge-100T-02 No. New 0.25 - 
Certified Assess Value of P&M old 
equipment as on March 2016 
Old 39.42 - 
Total amount of old and new Plant & Machinery 39.67 31.74 
(Source: Information provided by UPMRCL) 
 
15  The new plant and machinery shall be valued by the engineer at 80 per cent of purchase price, or for old items in 
working order 80 per cent of the depreciated value as assessed by the engineer. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
15 
Audit, however, observed that invoices/bills were not made available by the 
contractor to support the evidence of procurement of plant & machineries.  The 
contractor merely produced assessment certificate of Chartered Accountant  
(23 March 2017) with respect to machineries/equipment valuing ` 39.67 crore 
available as per books of accounts of the contractor.  It indicated that the 
advances were paid to the contractor for already owned plant & machineries and 
the advances paid to the contractor was either diverted or utilised for other 
purposes. Thus, the contractor was extended undue favours for providing plant 
and machinery advance by the Company. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that advance was given 
in accordance with SCC. Under clause 1.5 of GCC, SCC of Contract is above 
GCC of Contract in order of priority. Thus, there was no violation of contract 
clause.  
The reply was not acceptable though SCC says that plant and machinery 
advance could have been granted to the contractor but the term of SCC was to 
be read in conjunction with GCC for granting the advance. Entire clause of GCC 
was not replaced unless specifically men tioned in SCC against the relevant 
clause. The disbursement of plant & machineries advances of  ` 31.74 crore was 
irregular and undue advantage given to the contractor. Interest @ 15 per cent 
per annum amounting to ` 4.32 crore (Appendix-III) is thus recoverable from  
the contractor. 
3.4 Irregular payment for material at site 
As per clause 11.3.1 of GCC of contract agreement LKCC -04, a provisional 
payment on account of main construction materials required for the permanent 
works, shall be paid on request of the contractor after these materials are brought 
to site. The payment s hall be limited to 80 per cent  of the actual value or 
assessed value of these materials and the total of such provisional payment on 
account of construction materials at a time shall be limited to three per cent of 
original contract value or likely average consumption of such materials for three 
months, whichever is less and at any time the total outstanding provisional 
payment against materials at site shall not exceed  four per cent of the original 
contract value. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Company executed (September 2015) a 
contract agreement (LKCC-04) with M/s Canon Fasteners valuing ` 85.55 crore 
for civil architectural finishes, water supply , sanitary installation, drainage, 
external development, firefighting, fire detection and E&M works for eight 
number elevated stations from Transport Nagar to Charbagh on priority section 
of N-S Corridor. Audit observed that the Company made provisional payment 
of ` 20.86 crore (80 per cent of the value of works ex ecuted) which included 
payment of ` 14.03 crore for the material at site 16 to the contractor as per 4 th 
running bill . However, the maximum admissible provisional payment for 
material at site to the contractor for the works was only ` 3.42 crore  
(four per cent of the original contract value of ` 85.55 crore) and limited to three 
per cent (` 2.57 crore) of contract value at a time as per terms & conditions of 
 
16  ` 6.93 crore for material at site as per BOQ items and ` 7.10 crore for material at site as per extra items. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
16 
the contract agreement. Audit observed that the contractor was irregularly paid 
excess amount of ` 14.01 crore at a time which was contrary to the provisions 
of contract conditions of LKCC-04 works (Appendix-IV). 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that Clause 17.2 deals 
with the claim. The payment was not for material at site but part payment of 
material component of finished item to avoid further litigation for legitimate 
payment of contractor. The payment was not made under Clause 11.3.1 but 
under Clause 17.2. The audit was erroneously interpreting that Clause 17 was 
only for claims to be settled in case of disputes, conciliation and arbitration. 
Clause 17.1 states that if the contractor intends to claim any additional payment 
under any clause of these Conditions or otherwise, the Contractor shall give 
notice to the Engineer and in any event within 28 days of the start of the event 
giving rise to the claim. Thus, Clause 17.2 is not only for claims to be settled in 
case of disputes, conciliation and arbitration but in any event within 28 days of 
the start of the event giving rise to the claim. As payment was made for material 
component of finished item and payment for remaining component made afte r 
completion of finished item, there is no excess payment. 
The reply was not acceptable because Clause 17.2 of GCC  did not provide for 
payment of material at site. The clause states the procedure for claims to be 
settled in case of disputes, conciliation and arbitration.  Whereas, the Clause 
11.3.1 of GCC  stipulates the provision for payment of material at site. The 
Government contention was not correct because in 4th running bill the payment 
was made for the material component and not for the finished items. As per 
clause 11.3.1 maximum upto four per cent of the original contract at any time  
or limited to three per cent of contract value, at a time was allowed to be paid 
to the contractor for the work as provisional payment for material at site. Thus, 
the contractor was irregularly paid excess amount of ` 14.01 crore17 at a time 
which was contrary to the provisions of contract conditions. 
3.5 Loss due to short recovery of license fee 
The Company awarded (June 2017) a contract for advertisement rights in trains 
of Metro Phase-1A (N -S Corridor) comprising of 22.88 kilometres and 21 
stations to M/s Abhi Advertising, Godaulia, Varanasi (the Licensee) at a license 
fee of ` 1,25,555 per train set (consisting four coaches) per month. License fee 
was payable in advance on quarterly basis, 15 days prior to the end of running 
quarter as per Clause 6.5 of the contract agreement. Licensee was to pay interest 
of 24 per cent per annum in case of payment of license fee and other dues after 
due date. As per Clause 6.9.1 of the contract agreement, interest was to be 
charged for the full month if payment by due date was defaulted and would 
continue to accrue on compounding basis until license fee and other dues were 
finally paid. 
As per clause 6.2 of the contract agreement, the trains from depot shall be 
handed over after due acknowledgment from the concerned depot in -charge as 
 
17  Payment of material at site advance was made in 1 st and 2 nd running bill of  ` 2.50 crore and  ` 2.57 crore 
respectively (as per the provisions in each time) and recoveries ( ` 1.67 crore) with outstanding ( ` 3.40 crore) 
were made by the Company before 4th running bill. The contractor was eligible for the advance only ` 0.02 crore. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
17 
per the prescribed pro -forma. Clause 3.5 of the agreement provided that there 
may be maximum 20 trains in the depot for availability of advertisement spaces.  
The Company handed over 12 train sets in February 201918 to the Licensee. The 
trains were taken over (March 2019) by Licensee from depot without payment 
of licence fee in advance.  The Company invoiced 19 ` 115.92 lakh license fee 
with GST for advertising rights of 12 train sets for the period April 2019 to 
October 2019. However, the Licensee did not pay the license fee and informed 
(September 2019) the Company that market scenario was not encouraging 
enough to cater the advertiseme nt inventory of all these 20 train sets and 
requested to hand over 12 train sets with effect from the taking over date. The 
Company did not accept (October 2019) request of the licensee as no such 
clause provisioned in the license agreement and advised the licensee to clear all 
pending dues as per invoices issued on the basis of billing cycle of the contract. 
Later, the Com pany terminated (October 2019) the agreement and forfeited 
security deposit amounting to ` 22.60 lakh of the licensee. On the other hand, it 
agreed (May 2021) with the contention of the licensee as well that 12 train sets 
were not utilised for advertising purpose and decided to issue credit notes 20 
worth ` 98.24 lakh to the Licensee excluding GST . Thus, the Licensee was 
relieved towards payment of ` 115.92 lakh license fee including GST. 
The Company should have recovered remaining ` 93.32 (`115.92 - `22.60) lakh 
license fee including GST with 24 per cent per annum interest as per agreement 
provisions to save its revenue instead of relieving the licensee by issuing credit 
notes. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that  the advertising 
agency was utilizing 08 train sets, being run in priority section of N -S corridor 
of Lucknow Metro, out of the total 20 train sets. Hence, credit notes were issued 
for train sets 09 to 20. 
The reply was not acceptable since as per the license agreement, the licensee  
was supposed to utilise the full 20 train sets for advertising. Even if the licensee 
was unable to utilise 12 train sets due to lack of market for advertisement, the 
licensee was bound to pay license fee for these 12 train sets as per the agreement. 
Undue benefit was extended by the Company to the licensee by not taking 
further action to recover remaining amount of the license fee.  
3.6 Change in scope of works 
 
3.6.1 Variation 
Paragraph 318 of Financial Handbook V ol-VI of GoUP provides that detailed 
estimates must be prepared for every work proposed to be carried out, followed 
by Technical Sanction (TS) to the detailed estimate by the competent authority 
which gives guarantee that the proposals are structurally sound, and the 
estimates are accurately calculated and based on adequate data. Besides, the 
 
18  Train sets 1 to 8 were already handed over to the Licensee prior to this. 
19  Invoices Nos. LMRC/PD/2018/147 dated 25 March 2019 & LMRC/PD/2019/58 dated 18 July 2019.  
20  A credit note is a note issued by the Company to the licensee, in order to settle the liabilities in the account of the 
company. (V oucher Nos. LKO/JV/May21/128-129 dated 31 May 2021). 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
18 
state government issued an order in June 1995, which, among other things 
stipulates that cases involving variations in the original cost estimates exceeding 
15 per cent should be forwarded to the administrative department for approval. 
Scrutiny of records of test check contracts revealed that the MD of the company 
had approved quantity variations/extra items during the construction of 
following works: 
Table-3.3 
Details of variations in the quantities and extra items 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the work 
Estimated 
cost of the 
work  
Bonded cost 
of the work 
Cost of 
the 
variations/ 
extra 
items 
Actual 
cost of 
the 
work 
Col. 
(4+5) 
Variation 
against 
bonded 
cost (in 
per cent) 
Variation 
against 
estimated 
cost (in 
per cent) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 LKCC-03 145.60 130.51 44.97 175.48 34.46 30.89 
2 LKCC-04 96.85 85.55 25.86 111.41 30.23 26.76 
3 LKCC-09 95.25 80.94 26.04 106.98 32.18 27.34 
Total 337.70 297 96.87 393.87   
(Source: correspondence files of the contract agreements) 
It was evident from above table that the cost of work increased by 27 to  
31 per cent to the estimated cost (total estimated cost: ` 337.70 crore; increased 
cost: ` 393.87 crore). However, cases of such variations (above 15 per cent to 
estimated cost) were not forwarded to the administrative department which in 
case of the Company  is Housing & Urban Planning Department, GoUP, for 
approval. Variations in all three cases were approved by MD  of the Company. 
It is also pertinent to mention that the circumstances or justifications under 
which these variations occurred in all three contracts were neither documented 
in the records of Company nor elaborated upon by the MD while sanctioning 
such substantial deviations beyond the estimated costs. As a result, the rationale 
behind the approval of the MD of these variations could not be verified. 
Scrutiny further revealed that the contract agreement (LKCC-04) executed with 
M/s Canon Fastner was valuing ` 85.55 crore. The works of LKCC -04 were 
distributed in three schedules 21. Audit observed that 87 items of work valuing  
` 19.66 crore were to be executed under Schedule-A. The project authorities of 
the Company approved variations in the quantities of 28 items valuing  
` 1.96 crore which were substantially increased ranging between 29 to  
2362 per cent. As a result, the cost of these works was also increased more than 
three times (` 6.57 crore) as detailed in Appendix-V(a). 
Furthermore, a contract agreement (LKCC -07) was also executed with  
M/s L&T Ltd. (September 2016) costing ` 675.33 crore.  The work was 
distributed in six parts22. Audit analysed and found that there were 112 items of 
 
21  Schedule A: bonded cost  ` 19.66 crore, schedule B: bonded cost  ` 39.09 crore and schedule C: bonded cost  
` 26.79   crore. 
22  Schedule A: Bonded cost  ` 15.59 crore, Schedule B: Bonded cost  ` 506.32 crore, Schedule C: Bonded cost  
`  86.21 crore, Schedule D: Bonded cost  ` 24.76 crore, Schedule E: Bonded cost  ` 15.75 crore and Schedule  
F: Bonded cost ` 26.70 crore. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
19 
works to be executed under Schedules A to C.  In 30 out of 112 item of works 
costing ` 31.54 crore the variations in quantities were approved by the Company 
ranging between 26 to 1860 per cent. Resultantly, the cost of 30 item of works 
was increased to ` 63.63 crore 23 as detailed in Appendix-V(b). Audit also 
observed that the estimated and bonded cost 24 of the lump sum works of 
Schedule E (miscellaneous work under DSR -14) was ` 15.00 crore and                  
` 15.75 crore respectively. However, the work of Schedule E was concluded to 
` 51.40 crore and the variations/extra items were approved by the Company. 
The Company provided the details of items of works of only ` 1.30 crore 
executed under the Schedule E against the final payment of bill of  ` 51.40 crore 
despite repeated requests by Audit. Therefore, audit could not ascertain the 
reasons for huge increase in the cost without complete details of item of works 
actually executed. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the reasonable 
variations in quantities can be allowed during the execution in terms of the 
contract. Most of variations mentioned are due to change in Bill of Quantity 
(BOQ) quantity due to site conditions, where tendered & accepted contractual 
BOQ rates were used. Further, after execution of work, variation in individual 
items or the group of items has been dealt as per clause 12.5(ii) (f).  The 
delegation of power under Schedule of Power for all the Metros in India is 
derived as per General Financial Rules. An MoU was executed (March 2016) 
between GoI, GoUP and Company. As per Para 15.1 of MoU, the management 
of the Company vests entirely with the Board of Directors as it is neither a 
central PSU nor a state PSU, but a board governed company. Thus, all variation 
were dealt as per guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance, GoI, contractual 
provisions and SOPs and MoU executed between GoI & GoUP. 
The reply was not acceptable because clause 12.5(ii)(f) of the respective 
contract conditions elaborate the procedure of determining the rates of the 
quantity executed over and above the contracted quantity. It did not have any 
relation with the power of s anctioning the variation in the estimated quantity. 
Further, any variation in the estimated quantity should have been supported by 
the rationale. However, the MD who had originally approved the estimates later, 
exercising its delegated power, sanctioned co st variations ranging from  
27 per cent to 31 per cent without providing any rationale. Also, the cumulative 
variations of 27 per cent  to 31 per cent  across the three contracts included 
variations in certain individual items of work, which were as high as  
2362 per cent . This was contrary to the principles of transparency and 
accountability in contract management.  
3.6.2 Extra Items 
CPWD works manual defines the extra items that are completely new and are 
in addition to the items contained in the schedule of quantities of the contract . 
Clause 7.1 of technical standards (for track structure for Metro Railway/MRTS 
Systems issued by the Railway Board in December 2011) states that the  
 
23  Bonded cost: ` 31.54 crore + variation approved ` 32.09 crore = ` 63.63 crore. 
24  An estimated cost is an approximate calculation of how much something might cost and bonded cost is an agreed 
cost on which the contractor will execute the work. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
20 
derailment guard should be provided inside/outside of running rail on viaduct 
as well as tunnel and at grade section locations as specified by metro railway.  
The procedure for safety certification and technical clearance of metro system 
(February 2015) also envisaged the same provision. 
(i)  A contract agreement ( LKT-5) costing ` 99.34 crore and  € 0.13 crore 
was executed (January 2016) with M/s Kalindee Rail Nirman (Engineers) Ltd. 
for supply, installation, testing and commissioning of Ballastless track of 
standard gauge of N-S corridor in elevated and underground sections along with 
ballasted/ballastless tracks in Transport Nagar depot of Lucknow Metro Rail 
Project Phase -IA. Scrutiny of records revealed that the contractor requested 
(October 2017) the Company for inclusion of new item viz. ‘casting of 
derailment guard’ in tunnel portion of the track. The contractor requested (April 
2018) that the derailment guard was not included in the tendered BoQ , hence, 
the Company may approve the derailment guard work as extra item costing          
` 3.89 crore 25. On recommendation of the General Consultant, the Company 
agreed upon execution of the casting of derailment guard work as per the 
technical standard 26 issued in December 2011.  The Company approved the 
casting of derailment guard work as extra item which was already known and 
necessary for execution and paid ` 2.00 crore 27 to the contractor. Thus, 
exclusion of the provision of casting of derailment guard in the tendered BoQ 
deprives the Company from getting, more competitive rates for the work. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that t he estimated 
quantity of derailment guard could not be worked out during tendering stage in 
the absence of detailed guidelines which was issued in December 2015 which 
duly stipulates the locations where the derailment guard is to be provided 
whereas last date of submission of tender document was 30 September 2015 and 
thus, could not be incorporated in the schedule of quantity as an item. 
The reply was not acceptable because in respect of providing the derailment 
guard, the metro authorities were required to follow the technical standard for 
track structure for Metro Railway/MRTS systems as per order issued by 
Railway Board in December 2011. Besides, in February 2015, Research 
Designs & Standards Organisation, Ministry of Railways, GoI (RDSO) also 
issued procedure for safety certification and technical clearance of Metro 
system which inter alia  included provision (Para 8) for providing for t he 
derailment guard. In December 2015, RDSO reiterated the provision for 
derailment guard and included provision for the location of the derailment 
guard. Hence, provision for providing derailment guard was available even at 
the time of inviting tenders wh ich should have been included in the original 
contract. 
(ii)  Similarly, the project authorities executed (September 2015) a contract 
agreement with Canon Fasteners (LKCC -04) for civil architectural finishes, 
water supply sanitary installation, drainage, external development, firefighting, 
fire-detection and E&M works for eight elevated stations28. The bonded cost of 
the entire work was ` 85.55 crore against the estimated cost of ` 96.85 crore.). 
 
25  Contractor offered for laying of 6275 track meters at the rate of ` 6196 per track meter. 
26  Issued by Railway Board dated 23.12.2011 which envisages the derailment guard should be provided 
inside/outside of running rail on viaduct as well as tunnel sections which was specified by the Metro Railway. 
27  For actual execution of derailment guard 4728.549 track meter at the rate of ` 4242.47 per track meter. 
28  From Transport Nagar station to Charbagh station. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
21 
Audit observed that the entire works valuing ` 76.00 crore only was executed 
against the bonded cost of ` 85.55 crore and the works valuing ` 35.35 crore 
(41 per cent of the bonded cost ) was executed as extra item . The details are 
given in the Appendix-VI. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the tender 
document was prepared on the basis of estimate and an estimate was an 
approximate calculation or judgment of the value, number, quantity, or extent 
of something. Estimate was typically based on available information but not 
exact, serving as an educated guess or rough assessment. It was the first work 
of organisation for the station finishing work and estimate was prepared on the 
basis of available information. The variations have been d ealt as per contract 
clause 12.5 of GCC and payment has been made after approval of competent 
authority.  
The reply was not acceptable because a large number of works sanctioned and 
executed as extra item indicates that the project authorities of the Company did 
not determine the specifications of these works correctly, leading to increased  
cost by ` 25.80 crore29. 
3.7 Works executed on quotation basis 
GCC clause 12.5 (g) of LKCC-06 and LKCC -09 states that in case Engineer 
introduces an item for which the contract does not contain any rates or prices 
applicable to the varied works, the rate of such items shall be derived, wherever 
possible, from rate for similar items available in the Bill of Quantities of t he 
accepted tender. In case this is not possible, the rate may be decided on the basis 
of cost of materials at current market price. 
Test-check of the records disclosed that the non-DSR items/new items of works 
under contract agreements LKCC -06 and LKCC -09 were carried out by 
obtaining quotations valuing ` 5.34 crore30 (Appendix-VII). Audit noticed that 
these quotations were collected by the contractors themselves and the lowest 
rate of the quotations were allowed by project authorities of the Company. The 
Company only ascertained the genuineness of contractor’s profit, overhead 
charges, etc. without verifying the rates at their own level and the rates 
mentioned in quotation remained same as received from the contractor. 
In reply, State Government stated (September 2024) that the Company followed 
the clause 12.5 (g) of GCC of LKCC-06 and LKCC-09. Thus, the rate for items 
which were not available in BOQ was determined on the basis of current market 
rate of material, hire ch arges of plant & machinery, labour etc. Accordingly, 
contractor had to submit the supporting documents in support of his claimed 
rate for Non-DSR items. All the cost proposals submitted by the contractor were 
independently verified by the executing authori ties of the Company  for the 
genuineness of rates and modification were done in analysis of rates if it were 
found on higher side. The verification of genuineness of rates by Company was 
same as collection of separate quotation. 
 
29  ` 76.00 crore + ` 35.35 crore- ` 85.55 crore = `  25.80 crore. 
30  LKCC-6: ` 2.02 crore and LKCC-9: ` 3.32 crore. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
22 
The fact remains that the company adopted the same rate which was provided 
by the contractor itself and did not obtain the rates through a market survey or 
independent assessment in order to ensure the genuineness of the rates. The 
Company only ascertained the genuineness of contractor’s profit, overhead 
charges, etc.  
3.8 Payment of royalty on minerals 
 
3.8.1 Form MM-11 not obtained from contractors 
The Uttar Pradesh Minor Minerals Concession Rules, 1963 and the Uttar 
Pradesh Minerals (Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) 
Rules, 2002 and 2018 stipulate that no person shall transport any mineral 
without a valid transit pass (Form MM-11). The Government of Uttar Pradesh, 
in its order dated 15 October 2015 stated that apart from royalty, the price of 
mineral (ordinarily five times of royalty) be deducted from the contractor’s bill 
and deposited into the treasury, if the contractors do not produce Form MM-11. 
Scrutiny of records pertaining to the works under contract agreement LKT -05 
revealed that the contractor 31 brought 24,062.59 cum loose quantities of track 
ballast material for laying of ballasted track in depot and was paid ` 5.90 crore32 
for the supplies of ballast made till March 2019. Similarly, 76,102.72 cum 
concrete works were executed for construction of eight elevated stations under 
the contract agreement LKCC-07. Audit observed that the project authorities of 
the Company neither obtained copies of MM -11 of the material consumed for 
the project to ascertain the minerals brought from the legal quarries nor 
imposed/deducted royalty and price of minerals as provision ed in the 
Government order of October 2015.  As consumption statement were not 
provided by the Company, audit could not work out the amount of royalty and 
price of minerals involved.  
Apart from above, 36,611.20 cum coarse sand and sand involving royalty of 
` 52.59 lakh were also consumed in the LKCC -07 work. However, neither  
MM-11 forms were obtained from the contractor nor royalty and price of 
minerals amounting to ` 3.16 crore was deducted from the bills of the contractor 
by the project authorities of the Company, as detailed in the table below:  
Table-3.4 
Calculation of royalties and price of minerals to be levied for use of coarse sand and sand 
without submission of Form MM-11 
(Amount in `) 
  Item of work in 
LKCC-07 
Name of 
minerals 
Executed 
quantities 
(in cu.m.) 
Rate of 
royalty 
per 
cu.m.` 
Royalty 
amount  
Royalty along 
with five times 
penalty  
Schedule B 13 (a) Coarse Sand 34,161.62 150.00 51,24,243.00 3,07,45,458.00 
Schedule C 1 (a) Sand 2,449.58 55.00 1,34,726.90 8,08,361.40 
Total  36,611.20  52,58,969.90 3,15,53,819.40 
(Source: Information provided by UPMRCL) 
 
31  Kalindee Rail Nirman (Engineers) Ltd. 
32  At the rate of ` 2450 per cum for 24062.59 cum quantity. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
23 
Thus, project authorities of the Company did not ensure that minerals consumed 
in the metro works were procured from legitimate source after payment of 
royalty.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2014) that as per clause 5.8 of 
GCC, the contractor shall pay all traffic surcharges and other royalties, licence 
fees, rent and other payments or compensation, if any, for getting stone, sand, 
gravel, clay or other materials. As the responsibility of payment of duties and 
royalties lies with contractor, Form MM -11 was not required on part of the 
Company as it was under the ambit of contractor to supply at location specified 
by the Company. Further, there are a lot of transactions done by contractor for 
completion of project, however, all those transactions do not come under 
purview of the Company as there are separate government departments for 
ensuring legality and compliance of all those transactions. 
The reply was not acceptable because the engineers-in-charge were required to 
ensure that minerals brought by the contractors and consumed in the works were 
royalty paid minerals and obtained from legal sources. The project authorities 
should have deducted royalty and price of minerals from the contractor’s bill in 
cases of non-submission of MM-11 forms by the contractor. 
3.8.2 Mining permit not obtained for extraction of ordinary soil   
Rule 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Minor Minerals (Concession) Rules, 1963 envisaged 
that no person shall undertake mining operations in any area within the State of 
any minor mineral to which these rules are applicable except under and in 
accordance with the ter ms and conditions of mining lease or mining permit 
granted under these Rules. Royalties on extraction of ordinary soil is payable to 
Government account at the rate of ` 30 per cubic meter as per GoUP notification 
of January 2016.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that four underground stations 33 were constructed 
under N-S corridor. Audit observed that the Company did not obtain permit for 
extraction of ordinary soil from Geology and Mining Department of GoUP and 
excavated 6,39,277.50 cubic meter ordinary soil during construction of 
underground stations and ramps. The Company disposed off 4,63,054.50 cubic 
meter excavated ordinary soils on demand made by other Government 
departments34 after utilizing 1,76,223 cubic meter ordinary soils in Lucknow 
Metro Rail Project The disposal plan for excavated ordinary soil was not 
included in the approved DPR. Audit further noticed that the Company did not 
collect royalty of ` 1.39 crore 35 from other Government departments for 
4,63,054.50 cubic meter ordinary soil transferred to them and did not deposit 
the same in Government Account.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that as per clause 10.4 
of the MoU between GoUP and GoI, GoUP exempted Company from its 
state/local taxes and duties/levies or reimburse the same. Audit is rightly 
interpreting that royalties for earth are to be paid to the Government but shall be 
 
33  Chaudhary Charan Singh Airport,  Hussainganj, Sachivalaya and Hazratganj. 
34  Irrigation Department, Lucknow Development Authority, Lucknow Cantonment Board, etc. 
35  4,63,054.50 cum x ` 30 per cum. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
24 
the case when Company or its contractor was involved in selling of earth to third 
party. Here earth was used either by the Company for its own use to reduce the 
cost of project funded by the Government or given to other Government 
department to reduce the cost of earth filling to save the cost of Government in 
filling the Government land. Even if the Company collects the royalties from 
other Government department, it was to be borne by the Government and again 
deposited in Government account.  
The reply was not acceptable as the excavation of soil was taken up by the 
Company without obtaining permit from the Geology and Mining Department. 
Further, as other Government departments were not exempted from payment of 
royalty, the Company should have collected royalty from them and deposited in 
Government account. 
3.9 Construction of depot on disputed land 
Section 378 of Financial Handbook, V ol-VI of GoUP envisaged that no work 
should be commenced in the land which has not been duly made over by the 
responsible civil officers. 
Scrutiny revealed that the Company procured (August 2016) 21.983 hectares of 
Government land and 3.813 hectares of private land for construction of depot 
of Lucknow Metro (N -S Corridor). The GoUP instructed District Magistrate, 
Lucknow (February 2015) for providing private land to the Company through 
negotiation with the landowner(s).  Audit observed that five private lands 
measuring 1.983 hectares were disputed and already under litigation.  Audit 
noticed that the Company constructed depot on the acquired land including the 
disputed lands. Audit further noticed that a tripartite agreement 36 was prepared 
(March 2016) for  acquisition of the disputed land with a view to complete 
Lucknow Metro project timely. Conditions included in the tripartite agreement 
articulated that the payment would be made to those landowner(s) in whose 
favour Hon’ble courts shall give decision. 
Audit further observed that the tripartite agreement was not registered and not 
prepared on stamp papers to ensure legal bindings on the concerned parties. The 
tripartite agreement contained that ` 15.78 crore has been deposited in the 
accounts of Additional District Magistrate (Land Acquisition), Lucknow  for 
compensation of land and would be disbursed to the party after final decision of 
Hon’ble court. Audit noticed that the tripartite agreement did not possess the 
signature of all members involved in disputed land as detailed in table below:  
 
36  Additional District Magistrate (Land Acquisition), the Company and all parties related to disputed land. 

Chapter III : Contract and Project Management 
 
25 
Table-3.5 
Details of tripartite agreement 
Gata 
No. 
Area of 
land 
(in 
hectare) 
Claimant of land 
ownership 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Signature of 
disagreed 
parties on 
tripartite 
agreement 
Cases in the 
court 
92 0.392 1.Bhurabhai 
representative of Sant 
Asharam Ashram 
2(a) Rakesh Pal 
2(b) Smt. Munni Devi 
3(c) Smt. Saroj Agrawal 
3.12 Shri 
Bhurabhai 
Civil Court, 
Lucknow 
150/1 0.418 1. Bharabhai 
2. Gagan Gurnani 
3.32 Bharabhai 
Gagan 
Gurnani 
Civil Court, 
Lucknow 
150/2 0.506 1. Ambarish 
2. Kamlesh 
4.03 None of the 
parties 
Board of 
revenue, 
Lucknow 
150/3 0.506 1. Ambarish 
2. Kamlesh 
4.03 None of the 
parties 
Board of 
revenue, 
Lucknow 
119 0.161 1. Ambarish 
2. Kamlesh 
1.28 None of the 
parties 
Board of 
revenue, 
Lucknow 
Total 1.983  15.78   
(Source: Information provided by UPMRCL) 
As evident from the above table, the tripartite agreement was not legally 
enforceable on the claimant(s) who did not sign the agreement . In case of 
disagreement with the terms & conditions and to receive amount as determined 
by the Company, it may further attract litigations.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the tripartite 
agreement was executed by Additional District Magistrate (Land Acquisition), 
Lucknow. The agreement was executed between Additional District Magistrate 
(Land Acquisition), the Company and the party who possesses the disputed land. 
The tripartite agreement on stamp paper was not required as the ownership of 
disputed land was not clear . Needless expenditure on stamp duties and 
registration fee would have to be borne by the Company. 
The reply was not acceptable because construction of the depot on the disputed 
land, which was not properly acquired by the Company, was against the 
financial rules. Also, the need for preparing agreement was felt due to unclear 
ownership of disputed land. The tripartite agreement contained that all persons 
claiming ownership of disputed land would be a party. Hence, a legitimate 
agreement was to be ensured by the Company for effective legal bindings on 
the parties to avoid further occurrence of litigation. 
3.10     Conclusion 
A number of deficiencies in contract management and project execution were 
noticed. Government orders for obtaining Additional Performance Guarantee 
was not followed for the execution of below the departmental rates contract  to 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
26 
safeguard the interest of the Company. Irregular payment of plant & machinery 
advance was made to the contractor for already owned plant & machineries 
based on assessment certificate prepared by Chartered Accountant. The 
contractor was irregularly paid exc ess amount of advance for material at site 
contrary to the provisions of the contract conditions. Licensee for advertisement 
rights in trains was relieved from paying license fee . The instances of 
sanctioning of variations over the estimated cost of works without justifying the 
circumstances under which these variations had taken place.  Variations and 
extra items were allowed beyond limits. The project authorities did not ensure 
submission of Form MM -11 by the contractors to ensure that minerals 
consumed in the metro works were royalty paid and procured from legal 
sources. The Company constructed depot on 1.983 hectares of land which was 
disputed and under litigation without adopting proper safeguards. 
3.11 Recommendations  
3. The Company should ensure that terms of contract are adhered to and 
system should be in place to recover dues and irregular/excess payment 
of advance.  
4. Responsibility should be fixed where variation & extra items are beyond 
limits in a contract without sanction from proper delegated authority, 
thus vitiating the contract integrity.  
5. The Company should obtain Form MM -11 (transit pass) from the 
contractors to ensure that the minerals used in the construction works 
of the metro have been procured from legal sources  and royalties etc. 
are deposited in Government Account. 

 
 
  
Chapter IV 
Operation and Maintenance 

 
  

27 
Chapter IV 
 
Operation and Maintenance 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The firm M/s G4S Secure Solutions was appointed for security 
arrangements at the Metro stations on direct negotiation basis without 
tendering and without any recorded justification as to why this particular 
security firm was selected, violating the CVC guidelines (May 2006) and 
General Financial Rules, 2005. 
➢ A certified cyber security agency for routine Vulnerability Assessment 
and Penetration Testing (V APT) was not empanelled to examine the 
security thus, the metro system was always susceptible to threat and 
malfunction. 
➢ The hardness value of rail samples was less as compared to the Indian 
Railway Standard specification  which may lead to higher rate of wear 
and tear of the rail reducing the rail life. 
➢ The Company did not determine any benchmark for maintaining noise 
level within the permissible limit. Thus, the goal for providing 
comfortable environment inside the Metro trains and outside at the 
stations was not achieved. 
The Company follows a mix approach for operation and maintenance where the 
core operation and maintenance of major assets are done in -house with the 
regular staff specially recruited and trained for this purpose. The non -core and 
offline activities37 are generally outsourced though some of them are managed 
in-house.  
Audit reviewed the operational efficiency of the Company and findings thereof 
have been brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
4.1  Irregular appointment of private security firm 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines (May 2006) provide that the 
preferred mode of awarding contracts is through open competitive bidding . 
Further, Rule 181 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005 provided that the 
Ministry or Department should issue advertised tender enquiry for estimated 
value of works or service above ` 10 lakh. Rule 184 of the GFR, 2005 provided 
that in case of outsourcing by choice, detailed justification including the 
circumstances leading to such choice should be recorded. 
The Company decided 38 (June 2016) to appoint M/s G4S Secure Solutions 
(G4S) for security arrangements on direct negotiation basis to set the right 
systems in place from beginning . A contract for guarding services was entered 
(September 2016) between M/s G4S and the Company for three years which 
was continuing till March 2023. The initial monthly cost to be paid to M/s G4S 
was ` 32.72 lakh. 
 
37  Housekeeping, maintenance of office building, etc. 
38  Board of Directors (BoD) of the Company in its 25th meeting (June 2016). 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
28 
The Board of Directors ( BoD) did not resort to open tendering process for 
engagement of security personnel and awarded the contract to M/s G4S on 
nomination basis without any recorded justification as to why this particular 
security firm was selected. This was in violation of the CVC guidelines and 
provisions of GFR . The  contract was renewed thereafter  and payment of  
` 76.04 crore was made to the contractor G4S during the period November 2016 
to March 2022. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that  Metro security in 
India is considered highly critical and all metros are having airport like security 
in line with categorisation specified by Intelligence  Bureau ( IB). In view of 
extremely high cost of security by CISF, it was decided to go for hybrid model 
of security for the first time in country, where crucial security will be managed 
by U.P. Police and assistance will be provided by private security.  There is past 
history of assisting CISF at DMRC or airport security. On the basis of above , 
Lucknow me tro had entered into a contract with G4S Secure Solution (I) 
Limited. Over the period, with maturity of private security agencies in recent 
time with large number of agencies assisting at airport security and 
implementation of the Private Security Agencies  (Regulation) Act, 2005, 
Lucknow metro has also appointed a new security contractor through open 
tender process since March 2023. 
The reply was not acceptable. The contract should have been executed through 
open tendering by following the Rules and CVC guidelines keeping in view the 
security service requirements. Moreover, there was no recorded justification as 
to why the particular security firm M/s G4S was selected  in September 2016 . 
Thus, propriety rules were completely ignored. Responsibility needs to be fixed. 
4.2 Technical evaluation by the IIT, Kanpur 
During the course of audit various construction contracts and contracts related 
to track installation, signalling, rolling stock, noise and vibration, etc. were 
studied. To evaluate the technical parameter and issues related to these 
contracts, identified by the Audit, IIT, Kanpur was engaged. IIT, Kanpur 
examined these issues, and the findings thereof are discussed in the following 
paragraphs.  
4.2.1  Vulnerability of the CBTCS to malfunction   
Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) system utilizes 
telecommunications between trackside equipment and trains to optimize track 
space utilization.  CBTC system represents a new era in real -time train transit 
control, offering benefits such as reduced maintenance costs, increased 
flexibility, and enhanced interoperability with centralized control system. By 
employing a moving block system, CBTC system enables trains to operate in 
closer proximity, allowing for a higher frequency of train movements without 
compromising safety. This system can dynamica lly adjust train speeds to 
prevent congestion and recover from delays, resulting in smoother rides and 
energy savings. 

Chapter IV : Operation and Maintenance 
 
29 
IIT, Kanpur, while assessing vulnerability of the CBTC system to interference 
and jamming,  observed that currently, the security was being examined by 
Intelligence Bureau only. As a standard practice, it was necessary to empanel a 
certified cyber security agency for routine Vulnerability Assessment and 
Penetration Testing (V APT) and generate security audit reports. IIT, Kanpur 
specified that without V APT, the system was suscept ible to threat and 
malfunction which may lead to immediate shutdown of the entire metro system. 
If such downtime occurs during working hours, it may be difficult to remedy. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that CBTC System was 
stand-alone proven system across the globe and designed on failsafe principle. 
The CBTC System provided by M/s Alstom was internationally approved and 
was in use in various metros globally. V APT is a new concept and same has not 
been incorporated by any other metro in India till now. No such testing is known 
so far at any metro. Considering the global scenarios on cyber security, the 
Company itself has taken lead to initiate the V APT to ensure the security of the 
CBTC System at large. 
4.2.2 Quality issues of rails of Rolling Stock 
As per Indian Railway Standards IRS-T-12-2009, Hardness value of rail should 
not be less than 260 BHN for HH 880 rail head (Depot area) and hardness value 
should be in the range of 340-390 BHN for HH 1080 (main Line).  
Hardness testing was carried out by the IIT Kanpur at Advance Centre for 
Materials Science (ACMS), Material Testing Laboratory of IIT, Kanpur by 
using Universal Hardness Testing Machine FH-10; Tinius-Olsen Ltd. The tests 
were carried out for three times on each sample provided by the Company. The 
test on both rails revealed following results: 
SAIL 880 Nippon 1080 
At 31.25 Kgf, 229.07 BHN  
At 62.5 Kgf, 242.52 BHN 
At 31.25 Kgf, 291.78 BHN  
At 62.5 Kgf, 308.79 BHN 
(Note: Dwell time (duration) for each test was 10 Second) 
IIT, Kanpur observed that for both the samples, the hardness value was less as 
compared to the Indian Railway Standard Specification. Actual hardness values 
measured were in the range of 229.07 to 242.52 BHN (Depot area) and 291.78 
to 308.79 BHN (main Line). This indicates that the Company has used rails of 
relatively less hardness. This may result in increased maintenance cost for the 
Company due to decreased life of rails and wheels. 
The State Government stated (September 2024) that Brinell Hardness test was 
required to be carried out as per Clause 19 of IRS -T-12-2009 (including ACS 
1 to 5) and IS:1500. As per table - 2 and 3 of IS: 1500 , Force-diameter ratio 
should be 30 and load to be applied should be 187.5 Kgf for 2.5 mm ball 
diameter. But, the load applied on samples by IIT, Kanpur is 1/6 th and 1/3rd of 
the standard load to be applied as per the provision of “Method for Brinell 
Hardness Test for Metallic Materials” (IS:1500). Thus, the tests have not been 
conducted in accordance with prescribed codal provisions. Tests earlier carried 
out during procurement demonstrated that the hardness measured satisfied the 
provisions enumerated in “IRS-T-12-2009”.  

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
30 
In response, IIT, Kanpur show ed its disagreement with the State Government 
reply and stated that the technical team of IIT, Kanpur had reviewed the earlier 
submitted test report to the Company and found that testing procedures were as 
per the standards (IS 1500:2005). IIT, Kanpur has followed the Force-Diameter 
Ratio Table and accordingly modified the applied load as per the code. This is a 
standard practice. 
IIT, Kanpur did the hardness tests as follows: 
SAIL 880 Nippon 1080 
At 5 mm indenter and 750 Kgf, 226 BHN 
At 10 mm indenter and 3000 Kgf, 241 BHN 
At 5 mm indenter and 750 Kgf, 254 BHN 
At 10 mm indenter and 3000 Kgf, 270 BHN 
In this context it was noted that the comment that “ load applied on samples is 
1/6th and 1/3rd of the standard load to be applied” was misleading. The IS:1500 
standard requires the test to maintain a specific Force -Diameter ratio. IIT, 
Kanpur had conducted repeated test and stated that the smaller value of hardness 
than recommended obtained from the repeated experiments indicate there may 
be higher rate of wear and tear of the rail which will reduce the rail life faster. 
Further, if the wheel hardness does not match with the rail hardness, there would 
be possibility of the wheel deformation which wi ll affect the stability of the 
rolling stocks. 
4.2.3 Noise level found higher than the permissible limits 
For conducting tests for measurement of noise level inside and outside the 
trains, IIT, Kanpur reported that the Guidelines and Principles for the Design of 
Rapid Transit Facilities (1973) issued by the Institute for Rapid Transit, 
Washington DC stipulates that to ensure passenger comfort, the sound level 
should remain in the range of the permissible limit 65 dB to 75 dB during the 
normal operation at specified speeds. As per the guidelines, the main goal of the 
rapid transit system was to control noise and vibration by providing system 
patrons with an acoustically comfortable environment through maintaining 
noise levels in vehicles and stations within the acceptable limits. 
To measure the noise levels within the metro and at the platform for ensuring 
passenger’s comfort, the technical team of IIT, Kanpur conducted tests at a 
uniform metro speed of 40 kmph at different tracks (elevated and tunnels). IIT, 
Kanpur found that by and large the sound intensity was not very high, yet they 
were generally higher dB than  the internationally accepted sound level  as 
detailed in table-4.1 below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter IV : Operation and Maintenance 
 
31 
Table-4.1 
Position of test results of noise of metro vis-à-vis accepted level 
Sl. 
No. 
Name/place 
of metro 
station 
Elevated/ 
Under 
ground 
Station 
Test condition 
(Static/ Dynamic) 
(Interior/ 
Exterior) of 
Metro 
Accepted 
level of 
noise  
(in dB) 
Test result 
found by 
IIT, 
Kanpur (in 
dB)  
(Max. & 
Min.) 
1 Munshipulia  Elevated Static & door open Interior 65 76.1 to 74.9 
2 Munshipulia Elevated Static & door 
closing 
Interior 65 76.2 to 73.5 
3 Munshipulia 
to KD Singh 
Babu 
Stadium 
Elevated Dynamic Interior 75 83.4 to 62.4 
4 Munshipulia Elevated Static& door open Exterior 60 81.7 to 80.0 
5 Munshipulia Elevated Metro leaving from 
platform 
Exterior 75 82.4 to 79.4 
6 Hazratganj Under 
ground 
Static Exterior 67 81.3 to 78.0 
(Source: Test report of IIT, Kanpur) 
As evident from table above, in static condition of metro, interior noise level 
was measured at Munshipulia stations inside the Metro train where the test 
result was found higher ranging from 76.1 dB to 76.2 dB  against the 
internationally best practices adopted value of 65 dB . The interior noise level 
was also measured inside the metro on dynamic condition on elevated and 
tunnel stations 39 where test results found higher 83.4 dB against the 
internationally best practices adopted value of 75 dB from Munshipulia to KD 
Singh Babu Stadium . Similarly, exterior noise tests were conducted at seven 
places40 for measurement of exterior noise. The test result on static and leaving 
conditions of Metro was found higher at 81.7 to 82.4 dB against the 
internationally best practices adopted value of 60 dB to 75 dB respectively. In 
one out of four places selected 41 for measurement of noise level on exterior of 
metro, the test result found higher 81.3 dB against the permissible limit of  
67 dB at stationery condition . All tests were carried out during non -revenue 
hours42 on the request of Metro Authorities to minimize external noise factors. 
In reply, State Government stated (September 2024) that the “Guidelines and 
Principles for the Design of Rapid Transit Facilities” issued by “Institute for 
Rapid Transit”, Washington, D.C. is not a Standard and is only a guideline. 
These guidelines acknowl edge that it is impossible to set a universal standard 
applicable to all transit systems and that each transit system is governed by its 
own authorising statutes and regulations. Consequently, these guidelines are not 
binding to the rolling stock of Lucknow Metro. 
 
39  From Munshi Pulia to KD Singh Babu Stadium station and KD Singh Babu Stadium station to Hazratganj station. 
40  Three places at Munshi Pulia Metro station and four places at Hazratganj underground Metro Station. 
41  At underground station Hazratganj. 
42  Metro not available for general public. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
32 
The reply may be seen in view of the fact  that the guidelines and principles 
issued by the ‘Institute’ recommended for acceptance of the best practice for 
design and construction of new rapid transit systems. Moreover, the Company 
did not determine any benchmark for maintaining noise level within the 
permissible limit. Thus, the goals for providing comfortable environment inside 
the Metro trains and outside the stations was not fully achieved. 
4.3 Interim Speed Certificate for operation of rolling stock not renewed 
As per point no. 8.6 of the Interim Speed Certificate (ISC) for operation of 
rolling stock over N -S Corridor, the certificate shall be valid for a maximum 
period of five years from the date of issue. In case Final Speed Certificate is not 
issued during thi s period, the Company shall approach Research Designs & 
Standards Organisation (RDSO) sufficiently in advance for extension of validity 
of this Interim Speed Certificate. 
Audit noticed that the ISC was not renewed despite expiry of five years from 
the date of issue of the ISC (March 2017). In absence of non -renewal of ISC, 
wear and tear in wheel of rolling stock and adjustment needed thereof could not 
be ascertained. Thus, by not renewing the Speed Certificate after expiry of five 
years, the Company has taken unnecessary risk with the safety of passengers. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that  as per Procedure 
for Safety Certification and Technical Clearance of Metro System  
(PSTM)-2015, Interim Speed Certificate (ISC) shall remain valid till the 
issuance of the final speed certificate (to assess the riding quality & stability 
with worn-out wheels and rails) as no extension provision of ISC (such as 5 
years) is defined.  
The reply was not factual because the PSTM-2015 does not state that ISC shall 
remain valid till the issuance of the Final Speed Certificate. Therefore, ISC 
issued to Lucknow metro was valid only for five years as specifically mentioned 
in ISC. This implies that the Company was supposed to reach out to the RDSO 
for the renewal of the certificate. 
4.4  Office building not insured 
A tenancy lease deed was executed (October 2015) between the Smarakon, 
Sangrahalayon, Sansthao, Paarkon Va Upvano Aadi Ki Prabandhan Suraksha 
Evam Anurakshan Samiti (Society) and t he Company for taking at lease the 
Administrative Building of Dr. BR Ambedkar Samajik Parivartan Sthal  to 
establish corporate office of the Company.  
Clause 2(k) of the deed provided that the Company would keep the building 
insured in the joint names of the Society and the Company against loss or 
damage by fire on a sum equivalent to the cost of building with leading National 
Insurance Company. Whenever during the said term, the said building or any 
part thereof respectively is destroyed or damaged whether by fire o r hurricane 
or earthquake or riots or otherwise, the Company would reinstate and rebuild 
the same to the satisfaction of the Society /GoUP.  

Chapter IV : Operation and Maintenance 
 
33 
However, the Company did not carry out insurance of the building, thus, 
resulting in violation of terms of the deed which was open to risk and liability 
in case of damages to the building.  
In reply, the State Government accepted (September 2024) the facts and stated 
that the management of the Company has decided to get the building insured 
from leading National Insurance Company in the joint names of the Society and 
the Company.  
4.5 Conclusion 
There were deficiencies in operation and maintenance.  Private security firm 
was appointed on nomination basis in violation of the provisions of the CVC 
Guidelines and GFR.  Security of CBTC system was not examined from a 
certified cyber security agency for routine Vulnerability Assessment and 
Penetration Testing.  Company used rails of less hardness.  Interim speed 
certificate was not renewed after expiry. The Company did not get rented office 
building insured making it open to risk and liability in case of damages to the 
building. 
4.6 Recommendations 
6. The Company should ensure full compliance with the statutory 
provisions, rules, C entral Vigilance Commission guidelines, I ndian 
Railway Standards/specifications, agreements, etc. 
7. The Company should empanel a certified cyber security agency for 
routine vulnerability assessment and penetration testing to avoid 
susceptible threat and malfunctioning of the communication based 
train control system. 
 

 
 
  
Chapter V 
Revenue Management 

 
  

35 
Chapter V 
 
Revenue Management 
Brief snapshot of the chapter: 
➢ The Company collected electricity duty amounting to ` 17.42 lakh  
during the period July 2019 to August 2022 due to collection of energy 
charges at higher rate and the same was retained by the Company 
unauthorisedly and not remitted to the Government or the DISCOM. 
➢ The company did not ensure payment of service tax/GST on rent paid by 
it for the office building. 
➢ The Company could not generate revenue from operations  as per the 
projections made in the DPR during March 2019 (commissioning of the 
project) to 2023-24 due to low ridership. 
➢ The Company could not achieve the revenue targets from commercial 
and parking spaces as it could not lease out the entire space available for 
commercial use. 
➢ The GoUP identified (October 2013) land to be provided to the Company 
for property development but the same was handed over to the Company 
in April 2022 after lapse of more than eight years. Moreover, the 
Company did not utilise 86.10 acres of land for pro perty development 
after lapse of almost three years since receipt of the same. 
Revenue generation through Property Development by metro projects is a 
global practice as the metro projects are highly capital intensive and the only 
way to become financially sustainable without government subsidies, is by 
generating Non-Fare Box Revenue  from property development activities viz . 
advertisements, retailing, real estate at metro stations, etc. 
The Company has a Property Development Cell for looking after generation of 
revenue from property development and advertisement businesses related to 
Non-Fare Box Revenue. It conducts studies for estimation of reserve prices or 
action plan for generating revenue to meet the targets set by the Company.  Audit 
reviewed the financial management of the Company and findings thereof have 
been brought out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.1  Financial performance not achieved by the Company as envisaged in 
DPR 
The DPR of the project is a guiding document which ensures the viability of the 
project. As per the DPR for N -S corridor, the ridership was estimated as  
4.29 lakh in 2019 -2043.  As against this, the actual ridership was 0.54 lakh in 
2019-20 which was 87.41 per cent short of the original projection . The 
year-wise projected ridership and actual ridership has been detailed in Table 5.1 
below:   
 
 
43  Entire section of the N-S Corridor became operational from March 2019. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
36 
Table 5.1 
Year-wise details showing projected, actual ridership and shortfall 
Year Projected daily ridership 
as per DPR 
Actual daily 
ridership  
Percentage 
shortfall 
2017-18 4,29,250 10,054 NA44 
2018-19 4,29,250 12,787 NA 
2019-20   4,29,250 53,782 87.47 
2020-21 6,44,659 25,888 95.98 
2021-22 6,44,659 37,885 94.12 
2022-23 6,44,659 59,154 90.82 
2023-24 6,44,659 71,016 88.98 
Total 38,66,386 2,70,566  
(Source: DPR of the project and data provided by UPMRCL) 
Chart 5.1
 
It could be seen from above that in none of the year during 2019 -24, the actual 
ridership was anywhere near to the ridership as projected in the DPR, adversely 
affecting the revenue generation from the operation of the metro as detailed in 
table-5.2 and 5.3. 
Table-5.2 
Projected revenue from operations as per DPR 
(` in crore) 
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Fare Box Revenue (a) - 333.00 350.00 480.00 503.00 586.00 615.00 
Non fare Box Revenue (b) - 33.00 35.00 48.00 50.00 59.00 62.00 
Revenue from Operations 
(c)=(a)+(b) 
- 366.00 385.00 528.00 553.00 645.00 677.00 
(Source: table 14.9.1 of DPR) 
 
44  During 2017-18 and 2018 -19 only priority section from Chaudhary Charan Singh (CCS) Airport to Charbagh 
was commissioned and hence shortfall has not been calculated. 


Chapter V : Revenue Management 
 
37 
Table-5.3 
Financial performance of the Company 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24  
Fare Box Revenue (a) 4.35 10.80 54.73 15.94 35.60 66.44 77.02 
Non-fare Box Revenue (b) 1.20 4.24 12.79 9.71 9.79 24.76 22.33 
Revenue from Operations 
(c)=(a+b) 
5.55 15.04 67.52 25.65 45.39 91.20 99.35 
Operating Expenses (d) 16.17 28.19 67.75 58.00 66.28 88.41 76.11 
Percentage of revenue 
generation against the 
projection in the DPR 
- 4.11 17.54 4.86 8.21 14.14 14.67 
Operating Ratio 
= (d)x100/(c) 
(in per cent) 
291.09 187.40 100.34 226.17 146.02 96.94 76.61 
(Source: Financial statements of the Company) 
Chart-5.2 
 
It is evident from above that operating revenue of the Company increased from 
` 5.55 crore to ` 99.35 crore (1690.10 per cent) in the last seven years with 
average growth of 281.62 per cent. There was consistent growth in the operating 
revenue of the Company except 2020 -21 and 2021-22 due to covid pandemic. 
During this period, operating expenses also increased from ` 16.17 crore to 
` 76.11 crore. The Company was unable to meet operating expenses (except 
2022-23 and 2023 -24) from revenue from operations. Nevertheless, it was  
encouraging for the Company that it earned operating revenue more than the 
operating expenses after five years  of operation s of Lucknow Metro Rail 
Project. 
Further, the Company in none of the years (2018-19 to 2023-24) could generate 
revenue from operations anywhere near to the projections made in the DPR in 


Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
38 
respect of N-S corridor. The Company could not achieve the target of revenue  
from operation during 2018 -19 to 2023 -24, and could achieve revenue in the 
range of 4.11 per cent (2018-19) and 17.54 per cent (2019-20) only of the target 
set under DPR.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that comparison of 
actual revenue from N -S corridor with projected revenue in DPR for  
N-S corridor is not rationale because projected revenue in DPR for N-S corridor 
was calculated considering additional traffic  coming from E -W corridor also, 
but in current scenario E -W corridor is not in existence. As per Government 
order, the interest earned on short term investment of funds received by Metros 
towards equities and interest free subordinate debt shall be recognized in the 
statement of Profit and Loss. It may be noted that only part section of 8 Km was 
opened till 2019 and subsequently after opening of full section, ridership pattern 
was totally disturbed due to Covid-19 as metro operation was closed two times. 
In 2022-23, Company has earned ` 167.59 crore while operating Lucknow & 
Kanpur metro. The total expenditure to ensure smooth operation in these cities 
was ` 157.71 crore. These metros were able to meet their expenditure on cash -
in cash -out basis. H owever, these metros will be considered in loss if loan 
repayment was also included as about ` 300 crore are to be repaid. 
The reply was not acceptable because audit has compared the low revenue 
generation with respect to projection made in the DPR in respect of N -S 
corridor. Further, interest earning on the short-term investment is not a regular 
business of the Company and such interest income will seiz e to incur as the 
capital work finishes. 
The Lucknow and Kanpur metro may be operating smoothly on cash -in cash-
out basis, but the project feasibility was not made on cash -in cash-out basis. 
Actual performance of a Company is decided only after it repays/provision for 
all its liabilities. Thereaf ter, the final profit and loss account depicts the true 
status of the Company. 
5.2 Financial irregularities 
The exchequer had to suffer a loss of Service tax due to inaction on the part of 
the Company. The company wrongfully collected electricity duty and retained 
the same with it. Thus, the Company lacked a system to correctly interpret 
various laws and rules due to which various financial irregularities were noticed 
as stated in following paragraphs: 
5.2.1  Rent payment without obtaining tax invoices resulted in loss to 
exchequer  
As per Section 65(105) (zzzz) of the Finance Act 1994, the term taxable service 
for renting of immovable property meant any service provided or to be provided 
to any person, by any other person in relation to renting of immovable property 

Chapter V : Revenue Management 
 
39 
for use in the course of furtherance of business or commerce. Further, Para 5 of 
the Schedule II of the CGST Act, 2017 also provided that renting of immovable 
property was supply of service. Further, section 73 (10) of the CGST Act, 2017 
specifies time limit45 for demand and recovery of the tax not paid. 
The Company took (February 2015) on rent a building from the Society46 for its 
corporate office on a monthly lease rent of ` 3.05 lakh with escalation of 15 per 
cent after every three years. The Company paid ` 94.86 lakh rent to the Society 
for the period February 2015 to September 2017.  The Society was unregistered 
with Service Tax/GST authorities till December 2017. Therefore, it neither 
demanded nor the Company had paid Service Tax/GST on the renting service 
and the rent was paid by the Company without receipt of tax invoice.  The 
Company did not insist for tax invoices. There was loss of Service Tax/GST 
revenue amounting to ` 14.19 lakh to the Government ( Appendix-VIII) since 
the time limit specified in the CGST Act, 2017 for demand and recovery of tax 
not paid had already lapsed in December 2020.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that the Company was 
liable to pay the rent along with all taxes and other charges to the service 
provider. As per clause 2 (c) of the agreement, Company had to pay the rent on 
monthly basis to the Society, in advance for each month.  Further, service 
provider falls under forward charge mechanism and the liability to issue tax 
invoices timely and to pay GST is of service provider. However, Company was 
not at default as it paid rent along with the taxes a nd other charges as per 
agreement and tax invoices. 
The reply was not acceptable because the Company did not pay any taxes to the 
Society. The Company should have insisted/put a condition upon the Society to 
get itself registered so that the Society was made liable to pay the service tax. 
The Company did no t insist on the service provider to get itself registered in 
Central Excise & Service Tax Department resulting into loss to the exchequer.  
5.2.2 Electricity duty collected from commercial establishment s not 
remitted to the State Government 
Section 4 (1) of the UP Electricity Duty Act, 1952 provided for payment of the 
electricity duty to the State Government.  The Company falling under the 
category of non -government rail was provided electricity connection under  
HV-3B category and it was issued electricity energy bill by the DISCOM at the 
rate of ` 7.30 KV Ah among other charges as per the tariff decided by the UP 
Electricity Regulatory Commission. This also included electricity duty at the 
rate of 7.5 per cent  of total energy bill and according ly, the Company paid 
energy charges along with electricity duty to the DISCOM. 
 
45  Within three years from the due date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year for which tax is not/short 
paid. 
46  “Smarakon, Sangrahalayon, Sansthao, Paarkon Va Upvano Aadi Ki Prabandhan Suraksha Evam Anurakshan 
Samiti” 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
40 
However, while issuing electricity bill to its commercial tenants, the company 
demanded energy charges at the rate of ` 8.75 per unit. This also led to enhanced 
collection of electricity duty on the total energy bills.   
Thus, due to collection of energy charges at higher rate , electricity duty 
amounting to ` 17.42 lakh on test checked sample bills was collected during the 
period July 2019 to August 2022, as detailed in Appendix-IX. This amount was 
retained by the Company unauthorisedly and not remitted to the Government or 
the DISCOM.  
In reply, the Company stated (April 2025) that it was not utilizing transmission 
and distribution systems of the DISCOM, but it utilized the infrastructure built 
by it and the same was also being maintained by the Company. In order to 
recover the cost of maintenance, it was charging higher tariff on its commercial 
tenants.  
The reply of the Company was not acceptable because the Company may collect 
higher tariffs to recover the cost incurred by it for construction and maintenance 
of transmission and distribution networks, however, any electricity duty 
collected by it should have been remitted directly to the Government or through 
DISCOM. 
5.3 Property Development 
 
5.3.1 Optimal revenue not realised from commercial and parking spaces 
Chapter 14 of DPR of Lucknow Metro Rail Project estimated that other 
revenues from Property Development at ten per cent of the fare box revenue 47 
during operations. Apart from property development on metro stations it would 
be possible to raise resources through leasing of parking rights at stations, 
advertisement on trains and tickets, advertisements within stations and parking 
lots, advertisement on viaducts, columns, and other metro structures,  
co-branding rights to corporate, film shootings and special events on metro 
premises. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Company identified 53,174.16 sq. ft. bare 
commercial space and 15,984.54 sq. ft. parking space of eight priority stations 
and invited bids in December 2016. The revenue from these spaces was 
estimated to ` 42.28 lakh 48 per month. Subsequent bids were invited in 
December and January 2019 . However, only 6,768 sq. ft. 49 area of bare 
commercial spaces was leased out till January 2019 and monthly revenue of        
` 12.00 lakh was received.  No bids were received for the parking spaces 
included in tender of December 2016 and the Company did not include parking 
spaces in the subsequent tenders. The Company, further, invited bids for 
 
47  The fare box collection is the revenue from ridership. 
48  ` 39.88 lakh from bare commercial space and ` 2.40 lakh from parking space. 
49  Commercial space 1285 in January 2018 and 5483 sq.ft. in January 2019. 

Chapter V : Revenue Management 
 
41 
1,08,684 sq. ft. bare commercial spaces between April 2019 and June 2021 for 
the entire stretch of N-S corridor. However, only 45,197 sq. ft. (42 per cent) bare 
commercial space with monthly revenue of ` 55.38 lakh was leased out by the 
Company.  
Audit further asked (March 2025) for action taken by the Company for bidding 
of the remaining 62,948 sq. ft. bare commercial space and 15,984.54 sq. ft. 
available parking space. In response, the Company intimated (April 2025) that 
8,751 sq. ft. bare commer cial space with monthly earning of ` 12.59 lakh has 
also been leased out till February 2025. Thus, 54,196 sq. ft. bare commercial 
space involving reserve price of ` 33.01 lakh per month was still not auctioned 
as of March 2025 ( details given in Appendix-X). No records/information in 
respect of subsequent bidding, if any, of the available 15,984.54 sq. ft. parking 
space was provided to Audit. 
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that regular tendering 
was being done for monetisation of commercial spaces. Due to such strenuous 
efforts, Company has succeeded to earn more than 10 per cent  of fare -box 
revenue from property development.  Only eight km section was opened till 
2019 and property development earnings increased after opening of full section. 
The reply was not acceptable because the Company has intimated about the 
achievement of fare box revenue, whereas the audit comment was on not 
generating revenues from bare commercial and parking spaces already available 
with the Company which were not leased out as of March 2025. Resultantly, the 
Company could not earn the estimated revenue amounting to ` 43.05 crore 
(January 2016 to February 2025) from property development (as detailed in  
Appendix-X). 
5.3.2 Delayed acquisition and development of land 
Chapter 14 of DPR prescribes that the revenue of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
mainly consists of fare box collection and other incomes from property 
development, advertisement, parking etc. 30 per cent  of total available land 
would be meant for property development which shall be used for commercial 
activity and remaining 70 per cent  shall be used for residential activity 
development. The estimated income from rental revenue would accrue from 
2018-19. Out of the estimated rental income, the Company would be able to 
repay loan and interest after meeting the maintenance expenditure. For this 
purpose, the estimation of 60 hectares of land were made in the DPR for 
calculation of FIRR50 from property development.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that primarily prepared DPR by DMRCL proposed 
to maintain minimum 4.55 per cent  FIRR for Lucknow Metro Rail Project. 
However, GoUP directed DMRCL (August 2013) to maintain FIRR more than 
 
50  Financial Internal Rate of Return: is an indicator to measure the financial return on investment of an income 
generation project and is used to make the investment decision. 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
 
42 
eight per cent.51. To achieve FIRR more than eight per cent, 150 acre land was 
to be made available by the GoUP free of cost as committed liability.  GoUP 
identified (October 2013) 150 acres of land in Chak Ganjaria City  Project at 
Lucknow for the Company and decided to levy development charges on the 
Company for payment to Lucknow Development Authority.  Scrutiny further 
revealed that GoUP changed (February 2020) its  own decision of providing  
150 acre land and agreed upon for only 86.83 acres land after making adjustment 
of internal/external development charges of approximately ` 328 crore.  The 
Company reiterated numerously 52 to GoUP for providing 150 acre land.  
However, only 86.10 acres of land was made available to the Company in April 
2022. Thus, the Company got the land after lapse of more than eight years after 
identification of land by the GoUP. Audit further noticed that the Company had 
not utilised 86.10 acres of land for property development after lapse of three 
years from receipt of the land.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2024) that it was decided at 
Government level to give 150 acre land to the Company in place of fund and 
expenses on internal and external development of the land was to be borne by 
the Company. Later, land e quivalent to the expenses to be borne by the 
Company was adjusted and it was decided to give 86.10 acre land in place of 
150 acres. Otherwise, the Company would have to pay ` 328 crore as 
development fee which would have been huge financial burden on the 
Company. 
The reply was silent regarding delay in providing land to the Company. 
Moreover, the Company did not utilise 86.10 acres land for property 
development after the lapse of three years from receipt of the land. 
5.4 Conclusion 
The Company did not achieve projected revenue as envisaged in the DPR till 
March 2024. The Company was unable to meet even operating expenses from 
revenue from operations during 2017-18 to 2021-22. Rent for the office building 
was paid without payment of service tax/GST resulting into loss to the 
exchequer. Electricity duty collected by the Company was not re mitted to the 
Government. The Company could not lease out 54,196 sq. ft. bare commercial 
spaces involving reserve price of ` 33.01 lakh per month. Besides, no bids were 
received for 15,984.54 sq. ft. parking spaces available with the Company which 
were included in the tender of December 2016 and the Company did not include 
the available parking spaces in subsequent tenders during 2017 -24. The 
Company did not utilise 86.10 acres of land for property development even after 
lapse of almost three years since receipt of the same.  
 
 
51  On suggestions of Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi (MoHUA), GoI. 
52  August 2017, March 2018 and January 2020. 

Chapter V : Revenue Management 
 
43 
5.5 Recommendations 
8. The Company should devise ways to attract commuters  into the metro by 
providing end to end connectivity to increase the ridership and revenue. 
9. The Company should ensure timely development of land available for 
property development and realisation of optimal revenue from developed 
properties through timely leasing out of available commercial and parking 
spaces. 
 
 
 
 
                        (RAJ KUMAR) 
PRAYAGRAJ                                       Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
THE                                                                           Uttar Pradesh 
     
 
 
COUNTERSIGNED 
 
 
 
 
       (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
NEW DELHI           Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
THE 

 
 
  
Appendix 

 
 
 
  

45 
Appendix-I (a) 
(Reference: Paragraph no.1.6) 
List of selected major category contract agreements of Lucknow Metro Rail Project  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Description Contract 
No. 
Contract 
Value 
(` in crore) 
1 M/s Gulermak-TPL 
Joint Venture 
Underground Twin Tunnelling including 3 
underground stations including Ramp, 
architectural & E&M Works 
LKCC-06 1,190.52 
2 M/s Larsen & 
Toubro Limited 
Elevated Packages for K.D. Singh babu to 
Munshi Pulia  
LKCC-07 675.33 
3 Larsen & Toubro 
Limited 
Construction of elevated viaduct, eight elevated 
stations from Transport Nagar to Charbagh/c 
ramp to depot (LKCC-01) including extra items, 
negative Escalation and variation for elevated 
viaduct and Amausi Extension towards CCS 
Airport - Contractor Larson & Toubro Limited 
LKCC-01 630.68 
4 SAM (India) Built 
Well Pvt. Ltd. 
Civil and E&M works for Depot including 
variations + Misc. Contracts for depot items + 
Evergreen Landscape & Horticulture + Kitchen 
Planning + Furniture of DCC building + 
Auditorium & Class setup of Training Centre 
LKCC-03 130.51 
5 Canon Fastners, 
Delhi 
Architect and E&M works for 8 Nos stations of 
priority corridor + Signage LKSG-01 
LKCC-04 85.55 
6 M/s K.S.M Bashir 
Mohmmad & Sons 
Staff Quarters and officer’s colony LKCC-09 80.93 
7 
Systra MV A 
Consulting India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Detailed designed contract 
LKDD-01 14.41 
8 
 
5.75 
9 Larsen & Toubro 
Limited 
25kv Flexible/Rigid OHE (LKE01 & 2) &  
Receiving & Auxiliary Main/ Traction sub 
stations 
LKE-1&2 363.33 
10 BLT-Stone India 
Consortium 
Escalators  LKE 04 53.09 
11 M/s Kalindee Rail 
Nirman (Engineers) 
Limited 
Track Laying LKT-5 109.47 
12 V ossloh Fastening 
Systems GmbH 
Fastenings systems LKT-3 51.02 
13 Mitsui &  Co. Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Track work in Viaduct, Station and Depot: 
Tender for supply of Head Hardened Rail  
LKT-01 39.88 
14 Consortium of 
AYESA-KARNA-
AARVEE-
GEODATA 
General Consultancy work LKGC-01 234.57 
15 
  
14.38 
16 Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation Ltd. 
Interim Consultancy - 13.00 
17 CBM Industries Ltd. Signage work LKSG-02 14.40 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
46 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Description Contract 
No. 
Contract 
Value 
(` in crore) 
18 M/S Larsen & 
Tourbo Limited 
Telecom. System LKS 02 112.30 
19 M/S Datamatics 
Global Services Ltd. 
Automated Fare collection system LKS-01 63.92 
20 Consortium of 
ALSTOM Transport 
India Ltd., 
Bangalore & 
ALSTOM Transport 
SA France 
Rolling Stock (cars) & Signalling LKRS-01 1069.81 
21 M/s KPIT 
Technologies Ltd. 
ERP LKERP-01 9.24 
Total                                                               ` 4,962.09 
 

Appendices 
47 
Appendix-I(b) 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-1.6) 
List of selected contracts for miscellaneous works of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Description Contract no. Contract 
Value 
(` in 
crore) 
1 BVG India Ltd. Mechanized Cleaning and 
Housekeeping Works of Rolling 
Stock (Metro Trains), Transport 
Nagar Depot and 21 Nos. Metro 
Stations from CCS Airport to 
Munshipulia, of Lucknow Metro 
at Lucknow. 
LKHK-02 15.21 
2 Indradev 
Associates 
Maintenance contract for civil 
works from CCS Airport to 
Munshipulia Metro Station and 
Transport Nagar Depot”. 
LKCM-01 3.11 
3 Abhi Advertising Advertisement Rights of Lucknow 
Metro Trains in Priority Section of 
LMRCL Network of Phase-I. (For 
13 sets) 
LKAR-02 1.96 
4 Saumya Traders Maintenance cum Rate contract 
for E&M works at Transport 
Nagar Depot and 8 Stations of 
Priority section (TPNR-CHBG) of 
Lucknow Metro Rail Co. Ltd. 
LKE-MCRC-1 1.63 
5 Shri 
Ramswaroop 
Digital 
Technologies 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Custom HRMS Module 
Development and AMC 
LKERP-02 0.74 
6  FEAG 
Engineers & 
Construction Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Maintenance cum Rate contract 
for E&M works at Transport 
Nagar Depot and 8 Stations of 
Priority section (TPNR-CHBG) of 
Lucknow Metro Rail Co. Ltd. 
LMRC/O&M/E&M/25/Rate 
Contract -3/2019   
dated 10.06.2019 
0.54 
7  Oasis Comprehensive Annual 
maintenance Contract of 29 no. 
Escalator of Priority 
UPMRCL/ Escalators/AMC-2/01 0.51 
8 Nugen Innova Proposal for computerised 
maintenance management system 
(CMMS) 
LKE-CMMS 0.50 
9 Saransh Maintenance cum Rate Contract of 
Maintenance at Depot & stations 
of Priority section (TPNR-CHBC) 
of UPMRC 
LMRC/O&M/ E&M/25/Rate 
contract 
dated 20.03.2018 
0.19 
10 D.K. Enterprises Refilling Cartridge UPMRC/Stores/2020/017/1 0.10 
11  Coffee Day 
Global Limited 
Tea Coffee vending LMRC/Stores/17/001/2020 0.08 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
48 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Description Contract no. Contract 
Value 
(` in 
crore) 
12 Balaji 
Enterprises 
Rectification of faulty lights of 
workshop & IBL at Depot and 
Station 
LMRC/E&M/24/Quotation/2019/ 
Workshop 
dated 26.07.2019 
0.08 
13  Oasis Annual maintenance of drinking 
water fountain of all 21 metro 
stations (CCAP-MSPA) LMRC 
UPMRC/O&M/E&M/WF/AMC-
2 
0.07 
14 Amazon Internet 
Services Pvt Ltd. 
Amazon Web Services LMRC/ IT/Cloud/2021  0.07 
15 Oasis Annual maintenance of drinking 
water fountain of all 21 metro 
stations (CCAP-MSPA) LMRC 
UPMRC/O&M/ 
E&M/WF/AMC-1 
0.05 
16 Cummins India 
Ltd. 
D1 check/repair of 01 no. 
Cummins engine of CMV (Tower 
wagon) with spare and 
consumable by original equipment 
manufacturer (M/s Cummins India 
Ltd.) for traction wing of UPMRC 
(including GST) 
D1 check 01 no of Cummins 
Engine of CMV 
0.04 
17 Maharaja Baba 
Enterprises 
SITC of streetlights at TPNR 
depot and artwork lights at various 
stations of Lucknow metro 
LKE-ENM-02/LOA   0.04 
18 Aparna Baranwal Annual Recharge & AMC of DTH 
connections for UPMRC officers 
LKDTH-01 0.04 
19 J C Engineering 
and commercial 
construction 
Supply Installation of various 
LED lights on occasion of 
Republic Day 2020 at TPN Depot 
and three nos. of UG stations 
UPMRC/O&M/E&M/24/ 
Republic Day /2020/LOA 
dated 21.01.2020 
0.04 
20 Hitachi Comprehensive annual 
maintenance for H1 Rel. make 
UPS System (2*5 KV A installed 
TPNR RSS and MSPA RSS for 2 
years 
CAMC of UPS System 0.03 
21 Saumya traders Providing of Decorative lightings 
at different locations on various 
occasion 
LMRC/O&M/E&M/24/ 
quotation/2018 
dated 14-8-2018 
0.03 
22 Noida Testing 
laboratories  
Proposal for rate contract of oil 
testing auxiliary and booster 
transformer installed at MSPA 
RSS & TPNR RSS & main line 
balance section (CCAP-MSPA) 
Proposal for rate contract of oil 
testing  
0.02 
23 BSNL Broad Band Connectivity at 
UPMRC colony 
UPMRC/IT/ Internet/Colony 0.01 
24 Saumya traders Providing of Decorative lightings 
at different locations on occasion 
of visit of PM 
LMRC/O&M/ 
E&M/24/quotation/PM visit 
/2018 
dated 26-7-2018 
0.01 

Appendices 
49 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Description Contract no. Contract 
Value 
(` in 
crore) 
25 National 
insurance 
company limited 
Renewal of insurance policy and 
payment of road tax for rail cum 
road vehicle 
UPMRC/RS/ 
19-20/RRV/ Certification/05 
0.006 
26 J K Enterprises Comprehensive Annual 
Maintenance contract of 3 nos. 
Kent Perk RO water 
purifier/cooler in workshop area 
TPNRD Depot. 
UPMRC/RS/ 
20-21/RO/CAMC 
0.006 
27 J K Enterprises Comprehensive Annual 
Maintenance contract of Kent Perk 
RO at DCC. 
LMRC/O&M/ E&M/25/AMC-1/ 
2019 
0.005 
28 Noida Testing 
laboratories  
Proposal for oil testing auxiliary 
and booster transformer installed 
at MSPA RSS & main line balance 
section (KDSS-MSPA) 
Transformer oil testing   0.005 
29 Godrej and 
Boycee Mfg. Ltd 
Furniture LMRC/store/rate 
contract/furniture/1 
0 
30 ITI ltd. e-tendering UPMRC/stores/ 
e-tendering/2019 
0 
  Total  25.122 
 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
50 
Appendix-II 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-1.8) 
Records not furnished 
 Sl. No. Details 
1. With reference to the contract package LKCC -01, the file related to the correspondences 
between UPMRCL, interim consultant (DMRC) and M/s Gammon India Ltd. 
2. Contract records of General Consultancy (LKGC -01) related to contract package for 
Administrative Building, or its construction. 
3. Copy of written structure/set of rules, regulation, instructions for Contract Management cell 
approved by the competent authority. 
4. Copy of challans for deposit of service tax from February 2015 to September 2017  
5 Contract records of contract package LKCC-03 
6 Permission for earth excavation from Geology and Mining Department. 

Appendices 
51 
Appendix-III 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.3) 
Calculation of interest as per Clause 11.2.6 of GCC on Plant & Machinery Advance (LKCC-07) 
Vr. No./ Date of 
disbursement  
Amount 
disbursed  
(in `) 
Vr. No./Date of 
recovery  
Amount 
recovered  
(in `) 
Unrecovered 
Amount  
(in `) 
Period for which the 
amount was with 
contractor 
Days Amount of interest to be 
recovered (@ 15% p.a.)  
(in `) 
2879/03.04.17 317414842 - 0 317414842 03.04.2017 to 15.10.2017 195 25436668.85 
    1609/16.10.2017 22593832 294821010 16.10.2017 to 15.11.2017 31 3755938.89 
    1823/16.11.2017 27166329 267654681 16.11.2017 to 19.12.2017 34 3739832.53 
    2071/20.12.2017 32902100 234752581 20.12.2017 to 28.01.2018 40 3858946.54 
    2400/29.01.2018 47878192 186874389 29.01.2018 to 18.02.2018 21 1612751.58 
    2555/19.02.2018 42464035 144410354 19.02.2018 to 15.03.2018 25 1483668.02 
    2836/16.03.2018 36815722 107594632 16.03.2018 to 27.03.2018 12 530603.66 
    3020/28.03.2018 22537994 85056638 28.03.2018 to 25.04.2018 29 1013688.70 
    3317/26.04.2018 4640024 80416614 26.04.2018 to 23.05.2018 28 925341.86 
    267/24.05.2018 34670348 45746266 24.05.2018 to 03.07.2018 41 770793.25 
    674/04.07.2018 30726033 15020233 04.07.2018 to 19.07.2018 16 98763.18 
    838/20.07.2018 15020233 0     0.00 
  317414842   317414842       43226997.06 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
52 
Appendix-IV 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.4) 
Irregular payment for material at site paid to contractor 
(Amount in `) 
Material Advance/ 
RA Bill 
Material Advance 
paid 
Material Advance 
recovered 
Balance Material 
Advance 
Voucher 
Number 
Date 
Ist material Advance 2,49,90,763 0 2,49,90,763 276 19.05.2016 
IInd RA/bill 0 83,30,254 1,66,60,509 419 06.07.2016 
IIIrd RA/Bill 0 83,30,254 83,30,255 698 12.08.2016 
IInd material Advance 2,56,63,648 0 3,39,93,903 858 31.08.2016 
Total 5,06,54,411 1,66,60,508 3,39,93,903     
Contract value  85,54,54,948     
Maximum 4% Material Advance admissible to contractor 3,42,18,198     
Balance Material Advance recoverable from contractor 3,39,93,903     
Material Advance due to contractor 2,24,294.92  
Say ` 0.02 crore 
  
Provisional payment to contractor for material at site in 4th RA/bill 14,02,98,364  
Say ` 14.03 crore 
  
Excess payment to contractor for material at site 14,00,74,069  
Say ` 14.01 crore 
  
 
 
 

Appendices 
53 
Appendix-V (a) 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.6.1) 
Details of approval of variations (LKCC-04) 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
DSR 
Code No. 
Particular Unit As per 
BOQ 
BOQ 
Rate 
Amount Executed 
quantity 
Executed 
Amount 
Variation 
in 
quantities 
Per cent 
Variation 
Excess 
Amount 
1.  5.9.3 Centering and Shuttering: -suspended 
floor, roof, landing, balconies and 
access platform 
Sqm 160 401.65 64264 3939.73 1582392.555 3779.73 2362.33 1518128.6 
2.  5.3 RCC work in beams, suspended floors 
roof etc. 
Cum 45.84 6778.2 310712.688 716.92 4859427.144 671.08 1463.96 4548714.5 
3.  18.8.4 Water Supply - concealed work 
including cutting chases and making 
good the wall etc.  32mm nominal 
outer dia pipes 
Mtr 80 422.4 33792 1158.28 489257.472 1078.28 1347.85 455465.47 
4.  22.5 Providing and laying water proofing 
treatment in sunken portion of WCs, 
bathrooms etc. 
Sqm 349.04 283.1 98813.224 4944.96 1399918.176 4595.92 1316.73 1301105 
5.  12.41.2 providing and fixing on wall face 
unplasticized rigid PVC 110 metre 
diameter 
Mtr 160 231.65 37064 1990.2 461134.0725 1830.65 1144.16 424070.07 
6.  5.22A.6 Steel reinforcement - thermo-
mechanically 
Kg 7900.8 68.1 538044.48 96892.57 6598384.017 88991.77 1126.36 6060339.5 
7.  13.45.1 Finishing Wall - priming coat of 
exterior primer applied @ 
2.20kg/10Sqm  
Sqm 800 146.45 117160 7227.19 1058420.511 6427.18 803.4 941260.51 
8.  5.9.5 Centering and Shuttering: -Lintels, 
beams, girders, bressumers, and 
cantilevers. 
Sqm 598.96 332.15 198944.564 5287.52 1756249.768 4688.56 782.78 1557305.2 
9.  8.7.2 Providing and fixing cramps - 
Stainless steel cramps 
Kg 500 574.65 287325 2097.41 1205276.657 1597.41 319.48 917951.66 
 
10.  6.1.1 Brick work- cement mortar 1:4  Cum 44.88 4918.65 220749.012 184.38 906654.7545 139.45 310.72 685905.74 
11.  4.20.2.1 M-15 grade plain cement concrete 
work 
Cum 826.16 6540.9 5403829.944 3071.3 20089066.17 2245.14 271.76 14685236 
12.  8.5 Extra for Providing opening or 
required size & shape for wash 
basins/kitchen sink in kitchen 
platform, vanity counters and stone 
work 
Rmt 32 386.6 12371.2 110 42526 78 243.75 30154.8 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
54 
Sl. 
No. 
DSR 
Code No. 
Particular Unit As per 
BOQ 
BOQ 
Rate 
Amount Executed 
quantity 
Executed 
Amount 
Variation 
in 
quantities 
Per cent 
Variation 
Excess 
Amount 
13.  13.41.1 New work ( two or more coats) over 
and including water thinnable priming 
coat with cement primer 
Sqm 21000 89.7 1883700 71698.07 6431316.879 50698.07 241.42 4547616.9 
14.  8.8.1.2 Fastener with threaded dia 10mm Each 2000 28.35 56700 5715 162020.25 3715 185.75 105320.25 
15.  13.6.1 12 mm cement plaster 1:4 Sqm 4350 242.05 1052917.5 11326.6 2741603.53 6976.6 160.38 1688686 
16.  19.19.2.2 RCC main hole cover: MD-10 circular 
shape 500 mm internal dia -meter  
Each 24 909.25 21822 55 50008.75 31 129.17 28186.75 
17.  21.8.1 Filling the gap in between aluminum 
frame and adjacent RCC/Brick stone 
work: up to 5mm width 
Mtr 1100.8 88.75 97696 2474.51 219612.7625 1373.71 124.79 121916.76 
18.  18.8.3 Canceled work: 25mm nominal outer 
dia 
Mtr 200 351.3 70260 448.7 157628.31 248.7 124.35 87368.31 
19.  19.21.1 Makin connection of drain or sewer 
line: for pipes 100 to 250 mm 
diameter 
Each 8 364.6 2916.8 17 6198.2 9 112.5 3281.4 
20.  18.17.4 Providing and fixing gun metal gate 
valve: 50 mm nominal bore. 
Each 32 750.75 24024 67 50300.25 35 109.38 26276.25 
21.  10.25.2 In gratings, frames guard bar ladder, 
railings brackets etc. 
Kg 53493.68 90.10 4819780.57 101538.74 9148640.47 48045.06 89.81 4328860 
22.  24.3.3 Supply and assembling lower in and 
fixing in vertical position in bourwel 
unplasticized PVC 200 mm dia 
Mtr 160.00 878.60 140576.00 292.95 257385.87 132.95 83.09 116809.9 
23.  17.28.1.2 Providing and fixing PVC 40mm dia Each 32.00 82.60 2643.20 57.00 4708.20 25.00 78.13 2065 
24.  8.3.2 Granite work. Rmt 3162.40 230.55 729091.32 5389.45 1242537.70 2227.05 70.42 513446.4 
25.  8.2.2.2 Granite of any colour and shade /area 
of slab over 0.50 sqm. 
Sqm 136.48 3907.40 533281.95 201.45 787145.73 64.97 47.60 253863.8 
26.  21.1.1.3 Polyster powder coated aluminium  Kg 7155.20 385.10 2755467.52 10048.04 3869500.20 2892.84 40.43 1114033 
27.  8.4 extra for fixing marbl e/ granite stone 
over and above corresponding basic 
items 
Rmt 170.40 247.40 42156.96 222.75 55108.35 52.35 30.72 12951.39 
28.  19.26.2 Rectangular manhole 120X90cm with 
circular cover of 500mm of grade md 
-10 
Each 24.00 2503.55 60085.20 31.00 77610.05 7.00 29.17 17524.85 
  Total       19616189.13   65710032.80     46093844 
 
 
 

Appendices 
55 
Appendix-V (b) 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.6.1) 
Details of Approval of Variations (LKCC-07) 
Sl. No. Schedule Item No. As per BoQ Rate Unit Bonded cost 
(in `) 
Executed 
quantities 
Variation in 
quantities 
Variation 
(in per cent) 
Excess amount 
(in `) 
1 A G01/2  125.00 2601.73 RM 325216.25 280.00 155.00 124.00 403268.15 
2 8.1 10.00 18279.70 Nos. 182797.00 59.00 49.00 490.00 895705.30 
3 8.2 10.00 28348.83 Nos. 283488.30 40.00 30.00 300.00 850464.90 
4 8.3 5.00 45759.16 Nos. 228795.80 98.00 93.00 1860.00 4255601.88 
5 B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
V01/2 31 100509.53 MT 3115795.43 312.147 281.147 906.93 28257952.83 
6 12 1510.78 5800.35 Cum 8763052.77 2332.036 821.256 54.36 4763572.24 
7 V02/1 2578.3 12448.78 Cum 32096689.47 5826.786 3271.7 126.89 40728673.53 
8 2 868.38 9277.37 Cum 8056282.56 1233.275 364.9 42.02 3385312.31 
9 V03/2 360 1555.02 Cum 559807.20 1010 665.4 184.83 1034710.31 
10 3 1450 10893.76 Cum 15795952.00 2743.58 1293.58 89.21 14091950.06 
11 5 1387.3 10893.76 Cum 15112913.25 3796.65 2420.58 174.48 26369217.58 
12 7 112.49 10893.76 Cum 1225439.06 361.29 287.51 255.59 3132064.94 
13 V04/2 17640.85 1955.13 MT 34490155.06 22473.6 4871.35 27.61 9524122.53 
14 3 288 12213.14 Cum 3517384.32 590.7 302.7 105.1 3696917.48 
15 4 72 1555.02 Cum 111961.44 590.7 518.7 720.42 806588.87 
16 5 918 2178.51 MT 1999872.18 1476.69 1341.98 146.19 2923516.85 
17 8 1008.32 12213.14 Cum 12314753.32 2436.78 1561.68 154.88 19073016.48 
18 9 2570 1955.13 MT 5024684.10 20224.14 17816.72 693.26 34834003.77 
19 10 1 167352.24 Nos. 167352.24 8 7 700.00 1171465.68 
20 11 1 446625.7 Nos. 446625.70 2 2 200.00 893251.40 
21 12 1 423956.97 Nos. 423956.97 2 1 100.00 423956.97 
22 V05/2(ii) 124424.2 158.33 RM 19700083.59 157046.3 32752.84 26.32 5185757.16 
23 3 (i) 176.65 158424.66 MT 27985716.19 264.07 87.42 49.49 13849483.78 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
56 
Sl. No. Schedule Item No. As per BoQ Rate Unit Bonded cost 
(in `) 
Executed 
quantities 
Variation in 
quantities 
Variation 
(in per cent) 
Excess amount 
(in `) 
24 (ii) 7070.08 270.01 RM 1908992.30 9671.36 2601.22 36.79 702355.41 
25 (iv) 1536 11435.01 Nos. 17564175.36 3366 964 62.76 11023349.64 
26 4 (i) 242.87 158424.66 MT 38476597.17 308.589 97.13 39.99 15387787.23 
27 (iv) 784 11435.01 Nos. 8965047.84 664 218 27.81 2492832.18 
28 V06/2 (i) 80.37 110660.76 MT 8893805.28 546.11 459.63 571.89 50863005.12 
29 V07/1 17438400 1.64 Cum 28598976.00 23145184 5994323.2 34.37 9830690.05 
30 C S02/4 1633.84 11646.11 Cum 19027880.36 2494.15 866.95 53.06 10096595.06 
Total 315364248.51 Total 320947819.69 
Say (` in crore) 31.54 Say (` in crore) 32.09 
 
 
Schedule-E Misc. Works Under DSR 2014 
Item Description Unit Quantities Rate Amount 
(` in crore) 
Final Revised  
(` in crore) 
 Final Execution  
(` in crore) 
1 Items covered in DSR 2014 but not 
mentioned in Schedule A, B, C & D 
Lump Sum  Not available 
  
15.00  47.00  48.95 
Total of Schedule E  15.00  47.00  48.95 
Above 5% 15.75 49.35 51.40 
 Variation (per cent) 226% 
 
 

Appendices 
57 
Appendix-VI 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.6.2 (ii)) 
Abstract of contract agreement (LKCC-04) 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of 
Sub Heads 
BOQ 
Amount 
Quoted 
rate in 
per 
cent 
below/ 
above 
Quoted 
Amount 
Up-to-date 
work done 
Extra Item Total 
Executed 
cost 
1 Schedule A (DSR 2014 items) 22.12 -0.111 19.66 12.82 32.45 45.27 
2 Schedule B (NDSR items) 44.93 -0.13 39.10 40.53 1.77 42.30 
3 Schedule C -E&M Works 29.80 -0.10 26.79 22.65 1.14 23.79  
Total 96.85 
 
85.55 76.00 35.35 111.36 
 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
58 
Appendix-VII 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-3.7) 
Procurement through obtaining quotations  
Contract no. Particular New item Value of work 
(in `) 
LKCC-06 Extra Item 3(2) Acoustic Insulation of ceiling using Mineral 
Rockwool 
4374579.00 
 Extra item 3(6) Providing and fixing of 6 mm thick Lacquered 
glass on toilet wall 
2814722.00 
 Extra Item variation 
EI 1(2) 
Providing 13.52 mm thick laminated toughened 
glass lift canopy 
1463616.00 
 Extra Item 5(5) For providing 12 mm thick toughened curved glass 
railing at Hazratganj station 
475238.00 
 Extra Item 6(1) Retro Reflective boards inside tunnel for cross 
passage marking 
145286.00 
 Extra Item 6(2) Providing Radiant Glow Fluorescent paint on 
tunnel eye and cross passage location inside tunnel 
578168.00 
 Extra Item 6(5) Providing and Laying S&S non pressure NP4 RCC 
pipes 1600 mm diameter 
390236.00 
 Extra Item 6(8) Providing and painting Deco PU paint over 
concrete surface and providing & laying yellow 
visibility vitrified tile (1200 mm X 100 mm X 12 
mm) at Platform level. 
1188002.00 
 Extra Item 6(9) Providing and Installation of 12 mm thick 
toughened glass for AFC barrier and 12 mm thick 
toughened glass for urinal partition 
1030932.00 
 Extra Item 6(11) Providing and Fixing of Dholpur/Agra stone slab 
flooring in place of original restoration works 
6206325.00 
 Extra Item 6(4) Providing and fixing of frosted film on clear glass 107063.00 
 Extra Item (I) Display rack with storage souvenir shelf (as per 
drawing no UPMRC/SM/INT/D/002/R2) and 
UPMRC/SM/INT/D/003/R2 dated 03.11.2020 
567250.66 
 Extra Item (III) Trophy shelf (as per drawing no. 
UPMRC/SM/INT/D/004/R1 dated 03.11.2020 
687446.82 
 Extra Item (IV) Providing and fixing of glass film 3m as per 
approved design 
175014.00 
 Total 20203878.48 
 
Contract no. Particular New item Value of work 
(in `) 
LKCC-09 Extra Item -2 Providing and fixing tabletop wash basin 219602.00  
Extra Item -3 Providing and fixing Wall hang WC 244470.00  
Extra Item -4 Providing and fixing Cancealed Cisten 168390.00  
Extra Item -5 Providing and fixing SS Kitchen Chimney of Kaff 
make 
141518.00 
 
Extra Item -6 Providing and fixing Stenless steel kithen sink 
with drain board 
64438.00 
 
Extra Item -8 Boring and instalation of 300mmx150mm dia and 
425mtr depth tube well 
6540561.00 
 
Extra Item -9 Painting of external wall with textured paint 12269600.00  
Extra Item -10 Providing and laying in position cement concret 
1:4:8 
8565128.00 
 
Extra Item -15 Providing and making of Bed with two bed side 
table 
510000.00 

Appendices 
59 
Contract no. Particular New item Value of work 
(in `)  
Extra Item -18 Providing and fixing Toilet Vanity of size 750mm 
x 550mm 
736680.00 
 
Extra Item -20 Providing and fixing 450mm long SS Tower Bolt 888030.00  
Extra Item -21 Providing and fixing 110x110mmx110mm 
unplasticised PVC Tee 
30588.00 
 
Extra Item -22 Providing and fixing uPVC Tap 110mm 1496.00  
Extra Item -26 Providing and fixing Armstrong make 10.5 mm 
thick wooden flooring  
924912.00 
 
Extra Item -27 Extra payment for additional quantity of admixture 
used in RCC as per design mix 
1876800.00 
  Total 33182213.00 
 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
60 
 Appendix-VIII 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 5.2.1) 
Calculation of Service Tax/GST against rent paid 
Date of payment of 
rent 
Rent 
Amount 
(in `) 
Rent period Service Tax53/GST54 
(in `) 
02.11.2015 2175761 February2025 -September 
2015 
304606.54 
29.06.2016 3046065 October 2015-July 2016  456909.75 
10.08.2016 304606 August 2016 45690.90 
09.09.2016 304606 September 2016 45690.90 
28.09.2016 304606 October 2016 45690.90 
28.10.2016 304606 November 2016 45690.90 
13.12.2016 304606 December 2016 45690.90 
28.12.2016 304606 January 2017 45690.90 
27.01.2017 304606 February 2017 45690.90 
07.03.2017 304606 March-2017 45690.90 
07.04.2017 304606 April 2017 45690.90 
05.05.2017 304606 May 2017 45690.90 
23.05.2017 304606 June 2017 45690.90 
28.06.2017 304606 July 2017 45690.90 
11.08.2017 304606 August 2017 54829.08 
03.09.2017 304606 September 2017 54829.08 
Total  9486310   1419465.00 
 
 
 
53  Rate of service tax was 14 per cent vide Service Tax Notification 14/2015 thereafter it becomes 15 per cent according to section 161 of 
the Finance Act, 2016. 
54  Rate of GST was 18 per cent vide Notification No. 11/2017 Central Tax (Rate). 

Appendices 
61 
Appendix-IX 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 5.2.2) 
Calculation of electricity duty collected by the Company but not remitted to State Goverment 
(Amount in `) 
Month Sanction 
Load(in KW) 
Fixed 
Charges per 
Kw/Month  
Fixed Charges  
(4)=(2)*(3) 
Total KWH Electricity 
Charge by the 
Company @ ` 
7.30 per unit 
(6)=(5)*7.30 
Electricity duty paid 
by the Company 
(7)={(4)+(6)}*7.5/100 
Electricity duty 
collected by the 
Company from 
commercial 
tenants 
Electricity 
Duty collected 
by the 
Company but 
not remitted 
(9)=(8)-(7) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
Jul-19 388.9 300.0 116670.0 47364.8 345763.0 34682.5 56247.3 21564.8 
Aug-19 612.4 300.0 183720.0 63216.4 461479.7 48390.0 89064.4 40674.5 
Sep-19 1260.8 300.0 378240.0 75340.9 549988.6 69617.1 127952.1 58335.0 
Oct-19 786.4 300.0 235920.0 75974.2 554611.7 59289.9 100014.8 40724.9 
Nov-19 852.9 300.0 255870.0 127358.0 929713.4 88918.8 137493.0 48574.3 
Dec-19 857.4 300.0 257220.0 133305.0 973126.5 92276.0 141138.1 48862.1 
Jan-20 947.4 300.0 284220.0 93722.2 684172.1 72629.4 120516.2 47886.8 
Feb-20 972.4 300.0 291720.0 87762.2 640664.1 69928.8 116276.1 46347.2 
Mar-20 1010.4 300.0 303120.0 114626.0 836769.8 85491.7 140713.0 55221.3 
Apr-20 992.4 300.0 297720.0 17994.7 131361.3 32181.1 96730.4 64549.3 
May-20 992.4 300.0 297720.0 28300.7 206595.1 37823.6 107187.0 69363.4 
Jun-20 1188.4 300.0 356520.0 66741.5 487213.0 63280.0 129695.9 66416.0 
Jul-20 871.0 300.0 261300.0 37835.7 276200.6 40312.5 102994.6 62682.0 
Aug-20 834.0 300.0 250200.0 58643.6 428098.3 50872.4 93559.9 42687.6 
Sep-20 834.0 300.0 250200.0 78874.3 575782.4 61948.7 104033.0 42084.3 
Oct-20 834.0 300.0 250200.0 86843.9 633960.5 66312.0 106189.8 39877.7 
Nov-20 834.0 300.0 250200.0 69058.0 504123.4 56574.3 94218.0 37643.7 
Dec-20 874.0 300.0 262200.0 7375.0 53837.5 23702.8 98504.0 74801.2 
Jan-21 934.0 300.0 280200.0 77013.0 562194.9 63179.6 103083.0 39903.4 
Feb-21 944.7 300.0 283410.0 80906.0 590613.8 65551.8 106001.0 40449.2 
Mar-21 964.7 300.0 289410.0 105187.0 767865.1 79295.6 122692.0 43396.4 
Apr-21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
May-21 863.2 300.0 258960.0 64247.0 469003.1 54597.2 95917.0 41319.8 
Jun-21 863.2 300.0 258960.0 68838.0 502517.4 57110.8 102060.0 44949.2 
Jul-21 888.2 300.0 266460.0 926.3 6761.8 20491.6 113876.9 93385.3 

Performance Audit on Construction and Operation of Lucknow Metro Rail Project 
62 
Month Sanction 
Load(in KW) 
Fixed 
Charges per 
Kw/Month  
Fixed Charges  
(4)=(2)*(3) 
Total KWH Electricity 
Charge by the 
Company @ ` 
7.30 per unit 
(6)=(5)*7.30 
Electricity duty paid 
by the Company 
(7)={(4)+(6)}*7.5/100 
Electricity duty 
collected by the 
Company from 
commercial 
tenants 
Electricity 
Duty collected 
by the 
Company but 
not remitted 
(9)=(8)-(7) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
Aug-21 931.0 300.0 279300.0 122835.0 896695.5 88199.7 134534.0 46334.3 
Sep-21 927.3 300.0 278190.0 132326.0 965979.8 93312.7 140590.9 47278.2 
Oct-21 1012.2 300.0 303660.0 132010.0 963673.0 95050.0 134891.8 39841.8 
Nov-21 1008.0 300.0 302400.0 106814.0 779742.2 81160.7 126211.0 45050.3 
Dec-21 994.0 300.0 298200.0 103449.0 755177.7 79003.3 123413.0 44409.7 
Jan-22 1046.2 300.0 313860.0 95163.0 694689.9 75641.2 120557.5 44916.2 
Feb-22 989.2 300.0 296760.0 96003.0 700821.9 74818.6 118149.5 43330.9 
Mar-22 996.2 300.0 298860.0 143418.0 1046951.4 100935.9 148545.5 47609.7 
Apr-22 1012.2 300.0 303660.0 175706.0 1282653.8 118973.5 170318.4 51344.9 
May-22 1179.2 300.0 353760.0 235558.0 1719573.4 155500.0 215141.6 59641.6 
Jun-22 1211.2 300.0 363360.0 242147.0 1767673.1 159827.5 220479.9 60652.4 
Jul-22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Aug-22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
  32707.90     3252883.40 23746048.60   4258990.50 1742109.10 
 

Appendices 
63 
Appendix-X 
(Reference: Paragraph no.-5.3.1) 
Position of revenue realised from commercial and parking spaces   
 
Name of 
Tender 
Month 
of NIT 
Area 
Available 
(in sq. 
ft.) 
Area 
added/ 
removed 
in 
previous 
vacant 
area 
(in sq. 
ft.) 
Total 
area 
available 
for new 
tender 
(in sq. 
ft.) 
Minimum 
Reserve 
Price 
(` in 
lakh) 
Area for 
which 
tender 
invited 
(in sq. 
ft.) 
Agreement 
executed 
for the 
area (in 
sq. ft.) 
Minimum 
reserve 
price of 
agreement 
area 
(` in lakh) 
Agreement 
amount 
(H-1) 
(` in lakh) 
Vacant 
area (in 
sq. ft.) 
Minimum 
reserve 
price per 
month 
(` in 
lakh) 
Total 
vacant 
months 
Total 
revenue 
foregone 
(` in 
lakh) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
LKPD-01 Jan 2016 53174.16 0 53174.16 39.88 53174.16 0 0.00 0.00 53174.16 39.88 13 518.45 
PD Area 
concourse 
Jan 2018 53174.16 0 53174.16 39.88 2493.00 1285.00 2.65 4.35 51889.16 37.23 12 446.76 
LKPD-02 Jan 2019 51889.16 0 51889.16 37.23 23539.00 5483.00 7.13 7.65 46406.16 30.10 3 90.30 
LKPD  
3 to 05 
April 
2019 
46406.16 52453.84 98860.00 82.45 98860.00 12916.00 13.17 29.47 85944.00 69.28 10 692.80 
LKPD-6  Feb 2020 85944.00 -539.00 85405.00 70.99 85405.00 18648.00 12.90 14.99 66756.00 58.08 15 871.20 
LKPD-07 June 
2021 
66756.00 9824.00 76580.00 53.67 76580.00 13632.00 9.72 10.92 62948.00 43.95 21 922.95 
LKPD-11 LAO 
Jan. 2024 
62948.00 0.00 62948.00 43.95 Not given 6473.00 6.94 7.42 56475.00 37.01 9 333.09 
LKPD-13 LAO 
Feb. 
2025 
56475.00 0 56475.00 37.01 Not given 2278.00 4.00 5.17 54197.00 33.01 13 429.16 
Total 4304.71 
 
 

 
64 
 

 
  
Abbreviations 

 

65 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation                   Full Form 
AAR Alternative Analysis Report 
BCC Backup Control Centre 
BoD Board of Directors 
BoQ Bill of Quantity  
CA Charted Accountant  
CBTCS Communication Based Train Control System 
CE Chief Engineer 
CCS Chaudhary Charan Singh 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
CGWA Central Ground Water Authority 
dB Decibel  
DMRCL Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DSR Delhi Schedule of Rate 
EC Environment Clearance 
EIB European Investment Bank 
EW East West Corridor 
FIRR Financial Internal Rate of Return 
GCC General Conditions of Contracts 
GeM Government e Market 
GO Government Order 
GoI Government of India 
GoUP Government of Uttar Pradesh 
GST Goods & Services Tax 
GWD Ground Water Department 
GFRs General Financial Rules 
HUPD Housing and Urban Planning Department 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IDC Interest During Construction 
IIT Kanpur Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
ISC Interim Speed Certificate 
LMRCL Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
LD Liquidated Damage 
MD Managing Director 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affair  
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRTS Mass Rapid Transit System 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NS North South Corridor 
OCC Operation and Control Centre 
PD Property Development 
PSTM Procedure for Safety Certification and Technical Clearance of Metro 
System 

List of Abbreviations 
66 
Abbreviation                   Full Form 
RDSO Research and Design Standard Organisation  
RFP Request for Proposals 
ROD Revenue Operations Date 
SCC Special Conditions of Contracts 
SoP Schedule of Powers 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TS Technical Sanction 
UPPCL Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd. 
UPRC Uttar Pradesh Regulatory Commission 
USD United States Dollar  
V APT Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing 
 
 
 
 
 
 