 
 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report of the 
  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 on 
 Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National 
 Rural Employment Guarantee Act  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Government of Kerala 
 Report No.9 of 2025 
  (Performance Audit - Civil) 


 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
on 
 
Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No.9 of 2025 
(Performance Audit - Civil) 

 
 
 i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Description 
Reference 
Paragraph Page 
Preface - v 
Executive Summary - vii 
Chapter I - Overview 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Goals of MGNREG Act 1.2 1 
Implementation of MGNREG Act in Kerala 1.3 1 
Organisational Structure of MGNREG Scheme 1.4 2 
Roles and responsibilities at different levels 1.5 2 
Overview of MGNREGS Process 1.6 3 
Funding Pattern 1.7 3 
Financial Outlay and Physical Performance 1.8 4 
Management Information System - NREGASoft 1.9 5 
GeoMGNREGA – Geographic Information System 
Implementation 1.10 5 
Chapter II - Audit Framework 
Audit objectives 2.1 7 
Audit criteria 2.2 7 
Audit scope and methodology 2.3 7 
Audit Sampling 2.4 8 
Previous audit findings on MGNREGS 2.5 8 
Acknowledgement 2.6 9 
Audit Findings 2.7 9 
Chapter III - Planning and Capacity Building 
Planning process 3.1 11 
Preparation of Annual Work Plan and Labour Budget 3.2 11 
Non-preparation of Convergence plan 3.3 15 
Capacity Building 3.4 16 
Chapter IV - Financial Management 
Funding pattern 4.1 23 
Release and utilisation of funds 4.2 24 
Delay in release of funds by the State 4.3 26 
Shortfall in receipt of funds for Administrative Expenses 4.4 26 

 
 
 ii 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Description 
Reference 
Paragraph Page 
Inadmissible Administrative expenses 4.5 27 
Outstanding liabilities 4.6 28 
Delay in payment of wages and rejection of compensation for 
delayed payments 4.7 30 
Delay in payment of wages under Tribal Plus scheme 4.8 32 
Irregularities in the management of Corpus Fund for Advance 
Wage Payments to ST Workers under MGNREGS 4.9 33 
Discrepancies in disbursement of Onam Festival Allowance 4.10 34 
Chapter V - Registration and Employment 
Registration and issue of job cards 5.1 37 
Employment generation 5.2 40 
Non-payment of unemployment allowance 5.3 42 
Social Security - Insurance coverage to MGNREGS workers 5.4 43 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 5.5 43 
Chapter VI - Execution of Works 
Status of execution of works 6.1 48 
Non-compliance with the mandated 60:40 Wage-to-Material 
Ratio 6.2 51 
Non-permissible works 6.3 52 
Malpractices noticed in Pudur GP 6.4 52 
Non-verification of the bills/vouchers at the worksite 6.5 55 
Excess payment 6.6 55 
Unfruitful expenditure 6.7 55 
MIS login credentials – deficiencies 6.8 58 
Pendency in geo-tagging of works 6.9 58 
Irregular payment of MGNREGS wages 6.10 59 
Chapter VII - Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit 
Framework for Monitoring 7.1 61 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 7.2 65 
Social Audit 7.3 66 
 

 
 
 iii 
Table of contents  
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. Description Page 
1.1 Roles and responsibilities at different levels for 
implementation of MGNREGS 69 
3.1 Timelines suggested for preparation of Annual plan and 
Labour Budget 70 
3.2 Sanctioned strength and Men-In-Position 71 
4.1 Delay in release of funds by GoK 72 
4.2 Details of delay in wage payments 73 
4.3 Illustrative cases of incorrect calculation of delays 74 
4.4 Details of unresolved failed transactions 76 
5.1 Delay in issue of job cards 77 
5.2 Details of unemployment allowance 79 
6.1 Malpractices noticed in skilled/semi-skilled muster rolls  80 
6.2 Malpractices noticed in unskilled muster rolls  85 
6.3 Irregular payment of MGNREGS wages 87 
 Glossary of abbreviations used in the Report  89 

 
 
v 
PREFACE  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the period 
ended 31 March 2024 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the 
State of Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India for being placed 
in the State Legislature. 
 
This Report contains the results of Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act’ covering the 
period 2019 -20 to 2023 -24. Instances relating to the period subsequent to  
2023-24 are also included wherever found necessary. 
 
The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

 
 
vii 
 
 
  
Executive 
Summary 

 
 
viii 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 

 
 
vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act ( MGNREG 
Act) is a landmark social security initiative of Government of India (GoI) that  
has played a transformative role in empowering rural communities in the last 19 
years, by providing a legal guarantee of 100 days of wage employment in a 
financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do 
unskilled manual work. In Kerala too, MGNREG Act has had a marked impact 
as an effective programme to revive the rural economy and ensure liv elihood 
security for the rural poor. Over the last five years, the scheme has provided 
employment to 77.21 lakh households in the State and ₹18,806.62 crore has 
been expended towards this.  
Considering how pivotal the scheme has been in empowering rural poor in the 
last two decades, we undertook this audit to assess the implementation of the 
scheme in the State, by examining the process of planning , generation of 
employment opportunities , creation of assets and monitoring and grievance 
redressal mechanism. As part of this examination, we selected twenty -four 
Grama Panchayats in three districts viz., Thiruvananthapuram, Palakkad and 
Kasaragod, for detailed scrutiny. 
The MGNREGS was intended to be a bottom -up, people -centred, demand -
driven, self-selecting scheme and was to be purely dependent on the demand by 
beneficiary in the Grama Sabha . However,  we found that the State gave 
additional targets to GPs for creation of individual assets like construction of 
cattle shed, poultry shed, etc ., over and above the demand raised by the 
beneficiaries, thereby infringing on the right of the Grama Sabha.  This 
ultimately led to non -identification of beneficiaries by GPs and non -
implementation of 88.73 per cent of individual projects included in their Annual 
Plan. We found that demand for work declined by 13.77 per cent during the 
period 2020-21 to 2023-24. As a result of the declining demand for work, the 
person days of employment generated declined by six per cent. We also found 
that 16 to 22 per cent  of works included in the Annual Plan  and for which 
Administrative and Technical Sanctions had been obtained did not take off. 
We also noticed absence of a convergence plan for identifying projects 
implemented by other departments which could have been converged with 
MGNREGS, though GPs had executed various schemes through institutions 
under Agriculture, Animal Husbandry departments , etc., thereby losing out an 
opportunity to optimise resource utilisation. 
Social inclusion has been a cornerstone of the scheme with prioritisation of 
women and marginal communities in the coverage. We found that women 
constituted a significant majority of beneficiaries in Kerala, accounting for 90 
per cent  of total person -days, the highest in the country. With regard to 
empowering marginali sed communities, especially differently abled and 
vulnerable persons, average days of employment provided to differently abled 
persons ranged between 51 days and 62 days. However,  in the absence of 
baseline survey, special drives/special Rozgar Diwas, IEC activities , etc., to 
assess/invite demand from various sections of people including differently 

 
 
viii 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
abled, we could not draw an assurance that capturing of demand for jobs by all 
the needy was ensured. 
The MGNREGS’ role as a crucial safety net for rural households by providing 
livelihood security for the poor cannot be emphasised enough. However, we 
noticed instances such as issuance of job cards after a delay of 264 days, 
payment of wages and material cost after 22 months of closure of muster roll, 
non-reckoning actual date of payment for calculation of delay compensation and 
rejection of claims for delay compensation . Though MGNREG Act stipulated 
for payment of wages within 15 days of closure of muster roll, wages amounting 
to ₹269.27 crore was paid after 16 to 90 days and ₹39.2 4 crore was paid after 
three months from the date of closure of muster rolls. We also found that an 
amount of ₹43.59 crore was outstanding (December 2024) towards payment in 
respect of unskilled wages, semi -skilled/skilled wages, material and taxes 
during the period from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24. Further, 19 ,792 transactions 
towards payment of wages and material were pending regeneration for a period 
ranging from six months to more than four years. We noticed that lapse on the 
part of the State in ensuring timely release of funds also contributed to delayed 
payment of wages and material cost. There was delay ranging from eight days 
to four months in the release of State share by GoK.  We also saw that dated 
receipts on receiving application for job card/work were not issued violating the 
mandatory transparency provision to ensure the provision of work within 
stipulated time. These instances are persuasive of the fact that the beneficiaries 
were denied the livelihood security envisioned by the MGNREG Act. 
To provide social security to the beneficiaries of MGNREG  Act, the scheme 
provided for enrollment of the beneficiaries in insurance schemes viz. Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (P M-JAY), Aam Admi Bima Yojana and PM 
Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY). However, during beneficiary survey we 
found that 44.01 per cent of beneficiaries surveyed were not enrolled in any of 
the insurance schemes , indicating that the  State has not fulfilled its 
responsibilities regarding sensitising and enrolling job card holders in insurance 
schemes.   
Project 'UNNATI', introduced by GoI, intended to upgrade skills of the 
MGNREGS beneficiaries by providing training to one adult member in a 
household, who had completed 100 days of work under MGNREGS , so that 
they could migrate from current partial work to full -time employment and 
thereby reduce their dependence on MGNREGS. We found that though 22.53 
lakh households completed 100 days of work during the period 2019 -20 to 
2023-24 and became eligible for enrollment under the scheme, only 3 ,272 
members from these households were provided skill training. IEC activities as 
envisaged in the 'UNNATI’ guidelines, for wider publicity of the scheme was 
also not seen conducted. 
The MGNREG Act is designed to promote sustainable rural development with 
emphasis on creation of durable assets. Our examination showed that the wage-
to-material ratio fell significantly below mandated 60:40, as the share of 
material component in works were very low and ranged between 11 and 18 per 
cent during the audit period. Further, the expenditure towards material 
component decreased drastically by 37 per cent during 2023-24, though there 
was nine per cent  increase in expenditure towards wages, compared to the 

 
 
ix 
Executive Summary  
previous year. We also noticed that expenditure incurred on 99 per cent  of 
works executed by test checked GPs was below ₹five lakh. This establishes the 
disconnect between the scheme objective of creation of durable assets and the 
Annual Plans actually prepared. Further, the vital aspect of ascertaining quality 
and durability of assets created under MGNREGS was neglected by the State 
by choosing to not appoint the independent Director (QM)  at the State level, 
non/short appointment of State and District Quality Monitors and by not ensuring 
effective follow up actions in respect of quality monitoring activities. 
The MGNREG  Act includes robust mechanism to ensure oversight and 
accountability in its implementation. However, it is a matter of concern that we 
noticed several deficiencies in the working of oversight mechanisms.  Mates, 
envisaged for supervision of the work and  capture daily attendance, were not 
engaged by any of the GPs. We unearthed instances of malpractices carried out 
in muster rolls in Pudur GP, wherein the perpetrators exploited the loopholes in 
the system such as manual entry of skilled beneficiaries into the muster roll, not 
monitoring skilled labour through National Mobile Monitoring System 
(NMMS), absence of Aadhaar -based payment system for semi skilled/skilled 
wage payments as well as lack of monitoring by GP/DP/State and  engaged in 
fraudulent practices  to misappropriate MGNREGS funds . We noticed that 
salaries of 33 Government employees, to the tune of ₹16.05 crore, engaged in 
various posts in MGNREGS were paid from the fund meant for Administrative 
expenses of MGNREGS in violation of GoI instructions . We also noticed 
failures in monitoring and grievance redressal system viz., non -empowering 
State Vigilance Cell after its constitution in January 2021, absence of follow-up 
action on review reports of district ombudspersons by LSGD, absence of 
effective complaint tracking system, non-submission of  Annual Reports on the 
outcome of the scheme in the State Legislature by State Employment Guarantee 
Council (SEGC) for facilitating oversight by elected representatives etc. 
However, it is noteworthy that the State was able to register 84.17 per cent and 
98.72 per cent  achievement in the conduct of Social Audit during the years 
2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. 
At the end of our audit effort, we concluded that, while MGNREG Act has been 
a game changer in the rural welfare framework for the State, even after 19 years 
of sustained investment in the scheme, it continues to face challenges in its 
implementation. This is because of the inability of the State to address persistent 
deficiencies in planning, execution, and monitoring of the scheme. Deficiencies 
in bottom-up planning, manpower shortages and delay in fund releases have 
collectively impeded the effective del ivery of wage employment and asset 
creation. Low priority given to asset creation works and instances of financial 
irregularities further underscore challenges in achieving and sustaining the 
scheme’s objectives. Additionally, ineffective vigilance and grievance redressal 
mechanisms have weakened transparency and accountability. In order to 
ensure that MGNREG Act fulfills its mandate and maximises its impact, urgent 
corrective measures are needed to strengthen planning, resource management, 
timely release o f funds and strengthened monitoring and grievance redressal 
mechanisms. Accordingly, we have recommended following key 
recommendations in this Report:

 
 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
x 
• The Government may ensure preparation of convergence plan by GPs 
for ensuring convergence of MGNREG S with other schemes 
implemented by GPs. 
• The Government may direct the Grama Panchayats to engage Mates in 
every work site and pay semi -skilled wages, to ensure effective 
supervision of works. 
• The Government may ensure timely release of funds in adherence to the 
prescribed timelines of the Scheme. 
• The Government may take action to recoup the inadmissible expenditure 
incurred under MGNREGS.  
• The Government may direct G rama Panchayats to conduct surveys, 
special drives and to utilise available data with various line departments 
to identify eligible households and differently abled individuals 
including vulnerable persons and provide employment under the 
scheme. 
• The Government may ensure that the demand for labour gets accurately 
recorded, including issuing dated receipts by the GPs, and matched with 
the actual provision of labour to calculate the entitled unemployment 
allowance payable to the beneficiaries. 
• The Government may take concrete efforts to improve wage -material 
ratio by focussing on the creation of durable assets for strengthening the 
livelihood resource base of the rural poor. 
• The Government may ensure proper functioning of the vigilance and 
monitoring mechanism to ensure transparency and accountability and 
effective implementation of the scheme in the State. 
 

 
 
Performance Audit on 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act  
 
 
 
  
Overview 1 
Chapter 
 

  
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
 

 
 
1 
CHAPTER I 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
 
1.1 Introduction 
Access to work enables individuals to contribute to society and improve their 
living conditions, making it a key component of a healthy and equitable society. 
Guaranteeing the right to work ensures that everyone, regardless of their 
background or circumstances, has the opportunity to secure a livelihood and live 
with dignity. When work is treated as a right, it becomes a social responsibility 
to ensure that no one is left behind in the pursuit of economic and social well -
being.  
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
(MGNREG Act) addresses these principles by establishing the right to work for 
rural populations. The mandate of the Act is to enhance the livelihood security 
of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household whose 
adult members  volunteer to do unskilled manual work. Creation of durable 
assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base of the rural poor are other 
important objectives of the scheme. 
1.2 Goals of MGNREG Act 
 
1.3 Implementation of MGNREG Act in Kerala 
Government of Kerala (GoK) in February 2006 notified the Kerala Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (KREGS) as required under MGNREG Act, 
2005. Wayanad and Palakkad districts were included in the first phase of the 
scheme. Idukki and Kasar agod districts were included in the second phase 
notified on 1 April 2007 and the scheme was extended to all the remaining 
districts from April 2008. 
• Social protection for the most vulnerable people living in rural India by providing 
employment opportunities.  
• Livelihood security for the poor through creation of durable assets, improved 
water security, soil conservation and higher land productivity.  
• Drought-proofing and flood management in rural India.  
• Empowerment of the socially disadvantaged, especially women, Scheduled Castes 
(SCs) and Schedules Tribes (STs), through the processes of a rights -based 
legislation. 
• Strengthening decentralised, participatory planning through convergence of 
various anti-poverty and livelihoods initiatives.  
• Deepening democracy at the grassroots by strengthening Panchayat Raj 
Institutions.  
• Effecting greater transparency and accountability in governance. 
Chapter 
1 
Overview 

  
 
2 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
1.4 Organisational Structure of MGNREG Scheme  
The organisational structure at State, District, Block and Grama Panchayat level 
is presented in Chart 1. 
Chart 1.1: Organisational structure 
State Level Organogram 
 
District Level Organogram 
 
Block Level Organogram   Grama Panchayat Level Organogram 
(Source: Details furnished by MGNREGS State Mission) 
1.5 Roles and responsibilities at different levels 
The scheme implementation in the State is coordinated by the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS (MGNREGS) State Mission, with the Mission Director at the helm. 
The District Collectors who hold the charge of District Programme  
Co-ordinators are entrusted with the responsibility of overseeing the 
implementation of the scheme at district level. At the Block level, Block 
Development Officers (BDOs), who hold the charge of Block Programme 
Officers, monitor the scheme. The field level implementation of the scheme is 
entrusted with Grama Panchayats. Grama Panchayat Secretary acts as the 
registration officer who is responsible for issuing job cards under the scheme.  


 
 
3 
Chapter I - Overview  
State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) set up by the State Government 
under Section 12 of MGNREG Act advises the State Government on the 
implementation of the scheme, reviews the monitoring and grievance redressal 
mechanisms and suggests improvements, evaluates the scheme within the State 
and recommends the proposals of works to be submitted to the Central 
Government. 
The institutional mechanism put in place by GoK for the implementation of 
MGNREGS and the roles and responsibilities of officials at different levels are 
summarised in Appendix 1.1. 
1.6 Overview of MGNREGS Process 
An overview of MGNREGS process is given in the Chart 1.2. 
Chart 1.2: Overview of MGNREGS process 
 
(Source: MGNREG Act, 2005 and MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013) 
1.7 Funding Pattern  
MGNREGS is a Centrally Sponsored scheme implemented on a cost sharing 
basis between the Government of India (GoI) and the State Government. The 
GoI bears the entire cost of wages for unskilled manual workers and 75 per cent 
of the cost of material including wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers.  
Administrative expenses up to six per cent of total expenditure (including up to 
0.5 per cent expenditure on Social Audit) is also borne by the GoI whereas the 
State Government bears 25 per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled 
and semi-skilled workers.  
Registration
• Application 
for Job Cards
• Issue of 
Job Cards
Planning for 
Works
• Labour 
Budget 
Preparation
• Identification 
of Works
• Grama Sabha 
Approvals
• Application 
for Work –
Demand 
Registration
• Allotment of 
Work
Execution of 
Works
• Muster Roll 
Management
• Worksite 
Facilities
• Measurement 
and Check 
Measurement
• Geotagging 
of Assets
Payment of 
Wages
• Payment 
Generation and  
Approvals
• Payment of 
Wages 
through 
Banks / 
Postal Dept.
• Aadhaar 
based 
payments 
• Regeneration 
of Rejected 
Payments 
Transparency & 
Accountability
• Extensive use of 
ICT and Mobile 
Technology (Area 
Officers App / 
NREGA Mobile 
Monitoring 
System (NMMS)
• Social Audit
• Vigilance Wing
• Ombudspersons
• Quality Control 
Wing
• State Employment 
Guarantee Council 
(SEGC)


  
 
4 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
The State Government also bears the entire expenditure towards compensation 
allowance for delayed payment of wages to the workers, unemployment 
allowance and administrative expenses of the State Employment Guarantee 
Council (SEGC).  The fund sharing pattern for MGNREGS between Centre and 
State is exhibited in Chart 1.3. 
Chart 1.3: Fund flow under MGNREGS 
(Source: Schematic diagram prepared by Audit based on Operational Guidelines) 
1.8 Financial Outlay and Physical Performance 
A summary of expenditure reported on MGNREGS  in the State along with a 
few performance parameters for the period 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 is given in 
Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Performance Parameters of MGNREGS in the state 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expenditure under MGNREGS      
Total expenditure (₹ in crore) 2709.04 3900.01 4164.92 4028.16 4004.49 
Average expenditure per district (₹ in crore) 193.50 278.57 297.49 287.73 286.03 
Average wage cost per person per day (In ₹) 270.40 290.54 290.77 310.46 331.85 
Person days of employment generated      
Total employment generated (Days in crore) 8.02 10.11 10.60 9.55 9.79 
Employment generated per rural household 
(In days) 55.75 63.25 64.41 62.26 67.7 
(Source: Details furnished by the State Mission) 
It can be seen from the table that average wage cost per person per day increased 
from ₹270 to ₹332 and the employment generated per household increased from 
56 days to 68 days during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
As per the MIS data, women were fairly represented at around 90 per cent  
during the audit period. Regarding employment generation for women , Kerala 
consistently held first position during the period 2019-20 and 2023-24. Further, 


 
 
5 
Chapter I - Overview  
the percentage of employment provided to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes against registered was around 50 per cent and 60 per cent respectively.  
1.9 Management Information System - NREGASoft 
Transparency and Accountability are the basic features of MGNREG Act. Para 
13 (a) of Schedule I of the Act stipulates that all information relating to its 
implementation shall be pro -actively put in public domain. To achieve this, 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), GoI has developed NREGASoft 
which is a workflow based, web enabled Management Information System 
(MIS) hosted at the portal https://nrega.nic.in. NREGASoft (hereinafter 
referred to as MIS) provides for recording of all transaction details of different 
processes in the implementation of MGNREG  Act and placing t he same in 
public domain.  
All the entities involved (Central/State/District/Block and Grama Panchayat 
levels) are expected to carry out timely updating of data so as to represent the 
picture of scheme implementation almost on or close to real-time basis in the 
public domain (https://nrega.nic.in), thereby ensuring transparency and 
accountability.   
1.10 GeoMGNREGA- Geographic Information System Implementation  
The MoRD, GoI is implementing GeoMGNREGA for geo -tagging of assets 
created under MGNREGS in partnership with the National Remote Sensing 
Centre (NRSC) of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). It follows a 
systematic creation of a database on assets using technological interventions 
like mobile -based photo geo -tagging and a Geographic Information System 
(GIS) for online recording and monitoring.  
The GIS database and maps can be used for analysis and planning for works 
under MGNREGS. The BHUVAN geoportal of NRSC has been customised for 
this purpose. The database is accessible to the Ministry and States for 
monitoring and database creation, respectively. The location of each asset is to 
be geotagged along with three stage photographs (before taking up the work, 
during execution of work and after completion of the work).  
 

 
 
15 
Chapter I - Overview  
 
 
 
  
Audit  
Framework 
 Chapter 
2 

  
 
16 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 

 
 
7 
CHAPTER II 
AUDIT FRAMEWORK 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit on implementation of MGNREG Act 
in the State of Kerala were to assess whether: 
2.2 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria for evaluating the performance audit were derived mainly from: 
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, 
MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 and amendments thereto, 
and Rules issued under the Act 
 Kerala Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, 2006 
 Annual Master Circulars issued by the Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD), Government of India 
 Orders, circulars and instructions issued by the Government of Kerala 
and MoRD, Government of India 
 Kerala Financial Code and General Financial Rules.  
2.3 Audit scope and methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted from June 2024 to November 2024 
covering the period from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 including spillover works 
executed during 2024 -25. Audit methodology included scrutiny of basic 
records, registers and files maintained in the Grama Panchayats  (GP)/Block 
Panchayats (BP), issuing Audit enquiries, field visits, joint beneficiary survey 
etc. Information was also collected from Department of Local Self Government 
(LSGD), Principal Directorate (LSGD), State Mission and District missions 
Chapter 
2 
Audit Framework 

 
 
 8 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
(MGNREGS), MGNREGA Social Audit Society, Kudumbashree and other 
offices involved in the implementation of the scheme. 
An entry conference with the Secretary, LSGD was held on 30 July 2024 in 
which audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology were discussed . On 
conclusion of Audit, an exit conference was conducted with Additional Chief 
Secretary, LSGD on 09 June 2025, wherein the audit findings were discussed.  
Remarks offered by Government on the audit findings have been suitably 
incorporated in this Report. 
2.4 Audit Sampling 
Out of 14 districts implementing the scheme, three districts (21.43 per cent) 
were selected for audit. While selecting the districts, the coverage of 
geographical representation of the different parts in the sample was done to a 
larger extent. In each district, two BPs and four GPs in each selected BP were 
selected for detailed scrutiny of records. Units selected for  audit are given in 
Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Sampled Units in the State of Kerala 
 District Block 
Panchayat Grama Panchayat 
Kasaragod 
Kasaragod  Badiadka Kumbala 
Madhur Chengala 
Neeleshwaram 
Padne Thrikkaripur 
Pilicode Kayyur -
Chimmeni 
Palakkad 
Attappadi* Agali Pudur 
Sholayur  
Malampuzha 
Puthuppariyaram Malampuzha 
Pudussery Marutharode 
Akathethara  
Thiruvan- 
anthapuram 
Vellanad Kattakkada Tholicode 
Kuttichal Vellanad 
Chirayinkeezhu Mudakkal Vakkom 
Kadakkavoor Anchuthengu 
*Since there are only 3 GPs in Attappadi Block one extra GP from Malampuzha Block was 
selected  
Ten works from each GP were selected for detailed scrutiny. Ten to 15 
beneficiaries from each GP (total 334 beneficiaries) were selected for 
beneficiary survey. 
2.5 Previous audit findings on MGNREGS 
Performance audit of MGNREGS for the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12 was 
conducted during March to June 2012 and the findings were included in the 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
March 2012 (Report No.2 of the year 2013 , Government of Kerala). The 
Committee on Local Fund Accounts discussed the Performance Audit Report 
in July 2022. Recommendations of the Committee are awaited. 


 
 
9 
Chapter II – Audit Framework  
2.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the officials of 
State Government and Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs)  at various stages for 
conduct of the Performance Audit. 
2.7 Audit Findings  
Audit findings are organised into five chapters: 
 Planning and Capacity Building 
 Financial Management 
 Registration and Employment  
 Execution of Works 
 Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit  
 
 

 
 
9 
Chapter II – Audit Framework  
  
Chapter 
3 
Planning and  
Capacity Building 

 
 
 10 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
CHAPTER III 
PLANNING AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Planning process 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  Scheme 
(MGNREGS) is a demand-driven wage employment programme where jobs are 
offered whenever there is a demand for work. This necessitates prior assessment 
of the quantum and timing of work likely to be demanded. Concomitantly, a 
shelf of projects has to be prepared and prioritised t o meet this demand. This 
matching of demand and supply of work is the process of planning under 
MGNREGS and this has to be achieved through the preparation of a Labour 
Budget (LB). A well-planned approach helps in identifying local needs, setting 
realistic targets and fostering sustainable development. Capacity building and 
technical support of rural development functionaries and Panchayat Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) are also important for the effective implementation of the 
scheme.  
3.2 Preparation of Annual Work Plan and Labour Budget   
The Development Plan is an Annual Work Plan for MGNREGS and is to be 
prepared by every Grama Panchayat (GP) after considering the 
recommendations of Grama Sabha.  According to MGNREG  Act Operational 
Guidelines, 2013 the District Programme Co -ordinator (DPC) has to ensure 
strict adherence to the principle of bottom -up approach from planning stage to 
approval of the selected shelf of projects in the district.  
Test checked PRIs have not conducted baseline surveys to assess quantum and 
timing of demand for employment. In the absence of surveys , GPs could not 
prepare a realistic development plan at the grassroots level. There was delay 
of up to four months in the preparation and approval of Labour Budget and 
Annual Action Plans by test checked GPs. One to seven  test checked GPs 
prepared Annual Plans and Labour Budgets after submission of Labour 
Budget to MoRD by the State  during the audit period . Non -adoption of 
bottom-up approach in preparing Labour Budget led to lesser participation of 
PRIs in the preparation of Annual Plan and Labour Budget. Preparation of plan 
without assessing individual requirements led to non-implementation of 88.73 
per cent of individual beneficiary works included in the Annual Plan. Non -
preparation of convergence plan resulted in non -identification of projects 
implemented by other departments which could have been converged with 
MGNREGS. Audit noticed several shortcomings in capacity building such as 
non-deployment of sufficient manpower, non-conduct of training etc. Against 
5,069 contract posts sanctioned under various categories, only 4,794 personnel 
were deployed and 275 posts remained vacant. Mates were not deployed in 
work sites though Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for engagement of 
Mates in every work site. 
Chapter 
3 
Planning and Capacity Building 

 
 
12 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
The assessment of need for asset creation through MGNREGS is to be 
undertaken at the community level, by the GP through participatory processes. 
The outputs of these processes need to be consolidated at the GP level and 
presented before the Grama Sabha for approval. An intermediate consolidation 
of all the plans prepared by GPs is carried out at the Block level. Section 14(6) 
of the MGNREG Act mandates the DPC to prepare district level plans and 
submit to the District Panchayat.  The District level Annual Action Plan and 
Labour Budget is consolidated at the State level and sent to MoRD for approval. 
Various stages of the planning process are depicted in Chart 3.1: 
Chart 3.1: Various stages of planning process 
(Source: Annual Master Circulars issued by MoRD) 
The Labour Budget comprises a month-wise anticipated quantum of demand for 
work along with a plan that outlines the quantum and schedule of work to be 
provided for those who demand work. The Empowered Committee chaired by 
the Secretary, MoRD approves the Labour Budget of the State. 
Audit observed various shortcomings in the preparation of Annual Work Plan 
and Labour Budget during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 as discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs: 


 
 
13 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
3.2.1 Non-conduct of Baseline Survey  
Operational Guidelines of MGNREG  Act mandated that  each GP conduct a 
survey of job card holders to establish a baseline to assess the quantum and 
timing of demand for employment in the GP. The survey was to elicit 
information on the seasonal demand for labour from each job card holder in the 
GP. The baseline survey was to be undertaken in the year 2013-14 in every State 
and survey for reassessment of the baseline details was to be conducted every 
five years to account for the changes in the local pattern of  livelihoods and 
opportunities for work in production activities. Programme Officer at Block 
Level was to ensure the conduct of the baseline surveys.  
Audit noticed that GoK/PRIs had not taken any initiative to conduct baseline 
survey to assess the quantum and timing of demand (March 2024). In the 
absence of surveys, GPs could not ascertain the expected demand for work, 
nature/type of works to be carried out and timing of demand for employment.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that a survey specifically named as baseline 
survey was not conducted in the State. However, for ensuring the expected 
demand and timing of demand for employment, a comprehensive bottom -up 
planning process is adopted in the State which includes the active participation 
from the Neighbourhood groups. It was also stated that during the year 2019 -
20, a detailed survey for preparing GIS plan was conducted and details of 
requirement of works in each household plot were identified and included in the 
GIS plan of GPs with the approval of Grama Sabha. 
Audit acknowledges that GIS mapping was carried out to identify asset creation 
works that could be taken up in individual household lands,  but the survey did 
not assess the demand and timing of work . Therefore, the exercise carried out 
fell short of the baseline survey deliverables.  Further, the argument that 
comprehensive bottom -up planning process was adopted to assess  expected 
demand and timing is not tenable as Audit noticed deviation from the bottom-
up approach as detailed in Paragraph 3.2.2. Further, there were no recor ds to 
prove that quantum and timing of demand were ascertained in neighbourhood 
group meetings.  
3.2.2 Non-adherence to Bottom-Up Approach  
According to MGNREG Act, GPs were responsible for identification of the 
projects to be taken up under the scheme, on the basis of recommendations of 
the Grama Sabha. However, Audit noticed that bottom -up approach was not 
strictly adhered to in the preparation of Annual Plan and Labour Budget in test 
checked GPs. State Mission set additional targets for creation of individual 
assets like construction of compost pits, soak pits, work shed, poultry shed, etc. 
Test checked GPs either included the additional targets in the Action Plan 
prepared by them or prepared additional Action Plan to incorporate the 
additional target s. Audit noticed that during the period from 2019 -20 to  
2023-24, additional targets contributed between seven and 40 per cent of total 
works included in the Annual Plan. Thus, bottom-up approach as envisaged was 
not adopted for the preparation of Annual Plan in the State. Non -adherence to 
bottom-up approach resulted in inclusion of individual beneficiary -oriented 
projects in the Annual Plan without identifying beneficiaries as detailed  in 
Paragraph 3.2.2.1. 

 
 
14 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
In the exit conference, Additional Chief Secretary, LSGD agreed to the Audit 
finding and assured to critically look into the process of setting target for asset 
creation by State Mission. 
3.2.2.1  Non-identification of beneficiaries for creation of individual 
assets while preparing Annual Plan  
The MGNREGS is a bottom-up, people-centred, demand-driven, self-selecting, 
rights-based programme. Works to be executed in the Grama Panchayat area 
were to be identified on the basis of the recommendations of Grama Sabha. 
Audit noticed that 21 to 35 per cent of the projects taken up during the period 
2019-20 to 2023 -24 pertained to creation of assets in the lands owned by 
individual beneficiaries viz., construction of cattle sheds, poultry sheds, soak 
pits, compost pits, etc. However, beneficiaries in whose  land the work was to 
be taken up was not identified in respect of 20 to 3 4 per cent  of individual 
beneficiary-oriented works included in the Annual Plan. Audit noticed that test 
checked GPs created a huge buffer of individual projects in the Annual Plan, 
instead of identifying community level projects to meet the demand for work. 
Inclusion of individual beneficiary-oriented works in the Annual Plan without 
assessing individual requirements led to non-implementation of 88.73 per cent 
of individual projects included in the Annual Plan. 
Government stated (June 2025) that through GIS survey conducted during the 
year 2019 -20, details of works in each household plot were identified and 
included in the GIS plan of GPs with the approval of Gram a Sabha. As the 
individual assets created by GPs were much less than that approved in GIS plan, 
targets were fixed and monitored from the State and district missions. Regarding 
non-identification of beneficiaries, it was stated that though GoK had directed 
GPs to select beneficiaries while preparing plan, some GPs were not following 
this direction.  
Reply is not tenable as the GIS survey mapped multiple works such as 
construction of cattle shed, azol la tank1, farm pond, compost pit , etc., against 
each household. Work s to be taken up in a year is purely dependent on the 
demand by beneficiary in the Grama Sabha. Hence, fixing additional targets 
over and above the Annual Plan approved by Grama Sabha violated the bottom-
up approach. 
Recommendation 1: The Government may ensure the bottom-up approach in 
planning for MGNREGS. 
3.2.3 Non-adherence to timeline in preparation of Labour Budget 
The sequence of approvals laid down under the Act necessitated time bound 
coordination between different levels so that the spirit and intent of the Act was 
maintained especially in terms of retaining the work priorities. It was therefore 
legally imperative to avoid any delay in the approval of the development plan 
at any level, while ensuring that the priorities of the Grama Sabha/GP were 
upheld. Paragraph 6.8 of Annual Master Circular (AMC), 2019 -20 suggested 
timelines for the planning process, commencing  from launch of Gram a 
Panchayat level planning process on 02 October to submission of Labour 
 
1    An Azolla tank is a shallow, often lined, container used for cultivating Azolla, a free -floating aquatic 
fern that can be used as a nitrogen-rich fertilizer, animal feed or even a bio-scavenger.  

 
 
15 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
Budget to Central Government by 10 February every year. Timeline prescribed 
for each level is detailed in Appendix 3.1. 
Audit noticed that 75 to 100 per cent of test checked GPs did not adhere to the 
timeline prescribed for preparation of Labour Budget and Annual Action Plans 
during the audit period and delays ranged from three days to four months. Delay 
in approval of Labour Budget by test checked GPs is shown in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Delay in approval of Labour Budget of 24 test checked GPs 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Number of GPs approved Labour Budget 
(LB) after due date (05 December) 18 22 24 24 23 
Number of GPs approved LB after due date 
of submission of consolidated LB by BP (20 
December) 
11 17 23 19 23 
Number of GPs approved LB after due date 
of submission of consolidated LB by DP (31 
January) 
1 3 4 5 8 
Number of GPs approved LB after due date 
of submission of consolidated LB by the 
State to MoRD (10 February) 
1 1 2 4 7 
(Source: Details furnished by test checked GPs) 
It is seen from the above table that during 2019-20 to 2023-24: 
 18 to 24 GPs had approved their Labour Budgets after the due date of 
05th December. 
 11 to 23 GPs approved Labour Budgets after submission of Annual Plan 
and Labour Budget by respective BPs to DPCs 
 One to seven GPs approved Action Plan and LB after the Labour Budget 
was forwarded by the State to MoRD. 
From the above, it is evident that the Labour Budget proposed by State to MoRD 
was not based on Labour Budget prepared by Grama Panchayats. Non -
adherence to timeline by GPs led to non -adoption of bottom -up approach in 
preparing Labour Budget and denial of the right of Grama Sabhas in deciding 
the nature/priority of works to be taken up under MGNREGS. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that though GoK had directed GPs to 
adhere to the timeline prescribed for the planning process, some GPs were not 
following the timeline.  In the exit meeting  (June 2025)  Additional Chief 
Secretary, LSGD assured to initiate action to adhere to timeline by GPs by 
addressing issues relating to avoidable delays. 
3.3 Non-preparation of Convergence plan 
One of the goals of MGNREG  Act was to strengthen decentralised, 
participatory planning through convergence of various anti -poverty and 
livelihood initiatives. According to MGNREG Act, the State Government 
should take concrete steps to achieve effective inter-departmental convergence 
of works with other Government schemes/programmes till the last mile 
implementation level so as to improve the quality and productivity of assets and 

 
 
16 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
bring in synergy to holistically address the multiple dimensions of poverty in a 
sustainable manner.  
Audit noticed that though GPs implemented various schemes through 
institutions under Agriculture, D airy Development, Animal husbandry 
departments, etc., convergence of their projects with MGNREGS was not 
planned. Further, directions (October 2022) of GoK to constitute convergence 
committee at all levels to ensure convergence of schemes with MGNREGS was 
also not complied with by the test checked PRIs.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that financial convergence was difficult, as 
the works created in the MIS for convergence would not be shared to SECURE 
software for preparing estimate. It was also stated that t hough financial 
convergence was not possible, technical convergence with departments like 
Animal Husbandry, Agriculture, D airy Development, Forest, Suchitwa 
Mission, etc., were fruitfully used in the implementation of the scheme.  
Reply is not tenable as the reply is silent on the non-preparation of convergence 
plan by GPs. Further, test checked GPs had confirmed that technical expertise 
and know-how of the departmental officials were not converged in the works 
implemented by test checked GPs. Difficulty pointed out for  financial 
convergence cannot be accepted as Audit noticed financial convergence with 
Department of Women and Child Development for construction of Anganwadi 
buildings. 
Recommendation 2: The Government may ensure preparation of convergence 
plan by GPs for ensuring convergence of MGNREGS with other schemes 
implemented by GPs. 
3.4 Capacity Building 
A key pre-requisite for proper implementation of any scheme is to ensure that 
adequate capacities exist at all levels. Capacity building and technical support 
of State/District/Block level rural development functionaries and Panchayat Raj 
Institution (PRI)  officials form the most strategic aspect in effectively 
implementing rural development schemes. 
3.4.1 Adequacy of manpower for implementation of the scheme 
The MGNREG Act recognises the crucial role of adequate manpower support 
for successful implementation of the scheme. The Act required the State 
Government to designate a Programme Co -ordinator at the district level and a 
Programme Officer at block level with necessary staff and technical support for 
effective implementation of the scheme. Supporting staff could also be hired, 
on a contract basis, to provide professional services at the  State level. The 
recruitment policy for the functionaries was to be decided by the State 
Government. Audit noticed deficiencies in manpower allocation at various 
levels for implementation of MGNREGS as detailed below: 
 Additional District programme Co-ordinators: A full-time Additional 
DPC was to be appointed to look into the day -to-day operations of 
MGNREGS and provide leadership in programme implementation at the 
district level. However, instead of Additional DPC, GoK sanctioned 
(2009) posts of Joint Programme C o-ordinator (JPC) in the rank of Joint 

 
 
17 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
Development Commissioner of Rural Development Department. Further, 
JPCs were appointed only in 10 out of 14 districts. In four districts viz., 
Kasaragod, Kottayam, Pathanamthitta and Ernakulam, Project Director, 
Poverty Alleviation Unit of District Panchayat was holding additional 
charge of JPC. Audit observed that failure to appoint Additional 
DPCs/JPCs has left four districts without dedicated officers to coordinate 
and implement the scheme. 
 Personnel on contract basis: Against 5,069 contract posts sanctioned (up 
to March 2024) under various categories on contract basis in the State, 
only 4 ,794 personnel were deployed and 275 posts remained vacant 
(March 2024). Category wise sanctioned strength and men-in-position are 
given in Appendix 3.2. Audit noticed that 19 posts of Accredited 
Engineers and 61 posts of Overseers, entrusted with the responsibility of 
ground level implementation/supervision of the MGNREGS works, were 
vacant in GPs. Further,  173 posts of Accountant -cum-IT Assistant, 
entrusted with the proper accounting and data entry of MGNREGS works 
were vacant in GPs (March 2024). At the State level, post of Programme 
Officer (Grievance Redressal) remained vacant since 2017.  
 Representation of SCs, STs and di fferently abled : MGNREG Act 
Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for adequate representation of 
SCs, STs, differently abled  etc., in the contractual employment, in 
accordance with the reservation policy of the State. The GoK in 2017 , 
issued reservation policy for appointment of MGNREGS contract staff.  It 
was seen that, against the requirement of eight per cent posts for SC (406) 
and two per cent posts for ST (101) only six per cent posts (307) and 1.50 
per cent posts (77) respectively were sanctioned for SC and ST category 
persons (March 2024). Audit noticed that implementation of Reservation 
policy was not monitored by the State Employment Guarantee Council 
(SEGC). Further, reservation policy for appointment of  differently abled 
persons in the contract staff of MGNREGS was not formulated by GoK 
(March 2024).   
 Bare Foot Technician (BFT): Schedule I para 16 of MGNREG Act, 2005 
and Operational Guidelines , 2013 stipulated for deployment of suitable 
persons from the families of workers who may be trained or skilled and 
deployed as barefoot engineers for assisting A ccredited Engineer/ 
Overseer. Audit noticed that only 157 workers were trained (July 2025) as 
Bare Foot Technicians and 149 personnel were deployed in GPs. 
However, as of July 2025 only 117 BFTs were available. Of the 24 test 
checked GPs, only three GPs2 had BFTs. Audit noticed that no action was 
taken by GP/BP/DP/State to identify suitable persons for imparting 
training and deploying as BFTs. In the absence of BFTs, giving mark outs 
in the field in test checked GPs were carried out by the working Mates, 
which violated the principle of transparency as detailed in Paragraph 
3.4.1.1.  
 Gram Rozgar Sahayaks: MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013, 
stipulated for appointment of at least one Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) in 
every GP, except in GPs where demand for work under MGNREG Act is 
almost non-existent. The GRS was to oversee the process of registration, 
 
2  Agali, Sholayur and Pudur GPs 

 
 
18 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
distribution of job cards, provision of dated receipts against job 
applications, recording attendance of labourers, ensuring attendance of 
Mates on time in the worksite, etc. However, no dedicated GRS was 
appointed in any of the GPs in the State during the audit period. 
Audit observed that vacancies in crucial roles of scheme implementation have 
resulted in delay in issue of job cards, delay in completion of works taken up, 
delay in payment of wages, shortfall in conducting Rozgar Diwas, etc ., as 
mentioned in Paragraphs 4.7.1, 5.1.2 and 5.5.3.  
In the exit meeting (June 2025) ACS, LSGD assured to look into the matter and 
stated that if any critical area of scheme implementation is affected by shortage 
of manpower, dedicated JPC, BFT, GRS etc., then appropriate action would be 
taken for ensuring that prescribed manpower is provided for scheme 
implementation. Government stated (June 2025) that a proposal for sanctioning 
additional posts is under consideration of the Government. 
Recommendation 3: The Government may take action to fill the vacant posts 
under MGNREGS by providing adequate representation to SC/ST and 
differently abled persons. 
3.4.1.1  Non-deployment of Mates  in worksites  
According to Para 4.1.2 of Operational Guidelines , 2013 and Annual Master 
Circular (AMC), 2019-20, a Mate or worksite supervisor is required for each 
worksite and at least one Mate should be present for every fifty workers 3. The 
Mates were to supervise the work, capture daily attendance in muster roll, give 
daily mark-outs to groups of labourers and record initial weekly measurements, 
etc. The Mates were to be paid wage at a rate equal to semi-skilled labour under 
material component of the scheme. Operational Guidelines also stipulated that 
a person working as a Mate should not be a worker on the same MGNREGS 
work site at the same point of time. 
However, instead of deploying Mates to every work site, GoK issued orders 
(October 2008) for deploying Mates only if the number of workers in the site 
exceeded 404. It was also directed to entrust duties of the Mate to one of the 
unskilled workers in the site. Audit noticed that Mates, as envisaged in Operational 
Guidelines, were not deployed in any of work sites in the test checked GPs.   
Audit noticed that test checked GPs engaged a worker included in the muster 
roll as Mate and was paid unskilled wages. As such, works were executed 
without any supervision in test checked GPs. Further, working Mates were 
entrusted with duties such as recording measurements of works, giving daily 
mark outs, etc., without imparting any training or technical knowledge. Audit 
observed that recording measurements by the person who executed the work 
was against the principle of transparency and accountability. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that working Mates were not required to 
record measurements of the work. They were supposed to ensure only the 
attendance of the workers. The reply is not tenable as one of the duties assigned 
(October 2008) to the Mates by th e State was recording of daily/weekly 
 
3  According to revised guidelines (March 2021) one Mate was to be engaged for every 20 workers up to 
40 workers 
4  In September 2022, the condition was revised to every 20 workers  

 
 
19 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
measurements in the works. Audit  had noticed instances of recording 
measurements of works by working Mates in test checked GPs. Further, 
ensuring attendance of workers by the working mates/ workers themselves is 
against the principle of transparency. 
Recommendation 4: The Government may direct the Grama Panchayats to 
engage Mates in every work site and pay semi -skilled wages, to ensure 
effective supervision works. 
3.4.2 Skill development projects for MGNREGS workers – UNNATI  
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 aims 
at building sustainable livelihoods for rural households. Though the main thrust 
is on providing unskilled manual work for 100 days to eligible rural households, 
in a growing economy, it  is imperative that the workforce is migrated towards 
skilled work so that their income increases permanently in a significant manner.  
Project 'UNNATI', introduced by GoI (2019-20), was a skilling project intended 
to upgrade the skill base of the MGNREGS beneficiaries so that they could 
move from the current partial employment to full-time employment and thereby 
reduce their depend ence on MGNREGS. This project was meant to provide 
training through RSETI/KVK/DDU-GKY5 programmes to one adult member of 
age 18-45 years in a household who had completed 100 days of work under 
MGNREGS in the previous financial year. The project introduced in 2019 -20 
was extended till March 2025. 
According to the guidelines, the trainees were to be paid stipend for 100 days in 
DDU-GKY and for 30 days in RSETI and KVK. The rate of daily stipend was 
unskilled wage. GoI released an amount of ₹6.85 crore (2019-20) towards 
payment of stipend. GoK designated Kudumbashree State Mission as the nodal 
agency for implementation of the scheme. 
Audit noticed that though 22.53 lakh households completed 100 days of work 
during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 and became eligible for enrollment under 
the scheme, only 3 ,272 members from these households were provided skill 
training and only ₹48.30 lakh was spent towards stipend. Details are given in 
Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Details showing number of MGNREGS members trained and paid stipend  
Year Number of eligible 
households 
Number of MGNREGS 
members trained 
Stipend paid 
(₹ in lakh) 
2019-20 2,51,141 0 0 
2020-21 4,70,410 398 0 
2021-22 5,12,822 511 2.73 
2022-23 4,49,638 272 4.05 
2023-24 5,69,102 2091 41.52 
Total 22,53,113 3272 48.30 
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission) 
Though UNNATI guidelines issued by MoRD stipulated for conducting 
specific Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities to ensure 
 
5  Rural Self Employment Training Institute/Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Deen Dayal Upadhyay a Grameen 
Kaushalya Yojana 

 
 
20 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
wider publicity of the scheme, none of the test checked GPs conducted any 
awareness programmes in this regard. Poor implementation of project has also 
resulted in idling of funds to the tune o f ₹ 6.37 crore. Audit observed that 
effective IEC activities and timely updating of job cards could have ensured 
availing of the benefit of UNNATI scheme by more members of MGNREGS 
households. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that as the UNNATI guidelines allowed 
nomination of members of families who completed 100 days during the year 
2018-19 only, new members of family who were added on attaining 100 days 
could not be given training. This resulted in poor progress in  the number of 
UNNATI beneficiaries and expenditure in the initial years. The guidelines were 
revised in 2023-24 allowing to provide training to members who completed 100 
days in any of the previous years.   
The reply is not tenable as the UNNATI guidelines (December 2019) did not 
specifically mention that only those who completed 100 days of wo rk in the 
year 2018-19 could be trained. Further, in addition to new members, any of the 
members in the age group 18 -45 years in the eligible households could be 
selected for skill development training. This also indicated absence of regular 
updating of job cards.  
3.4.3 Training of MGNREGS staff and Mates 
Paragraphs 5.2.2 and 5.2.4 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for setting 
up Human Resource Development and Capacity Building Divisions at the State 
level as well as at district levels with full -time dedicated resource persons for 
imparting training and field-based hand-holding support to the implementation 
teams. Operational Guidelines prescribed separate training programmes and 
modules for impar ting training to Programme Officers and Assistant 
Programme Officers, Technical staff and Mates.  At the  State level, Kerala 
Institute of Local Administration (KILA) was identified as training agency by 
the State. Audit noticed the following: 
 District-level Human Resource Development and Capacity Building 
Divisions were not set up in test checked districts.  
 Though Operational Guidelines prescribed for conduct of training on 
watershed related works (Course II) to Accredited Engineers, Overseers, 
etc., no such training programme was conducted by KILA. 
 Though Operational guidelines vested the responsibility of preparation of 
District level Annual Plans for training and capacity building with 
District Programme Co-ordinators, no District level training plans were 
prepared.  
 Though KILA claimed to have imparted training to Mates, scrutiny of the 
training module, for the period from 2019 -20 to 2022 -23, revealed that 
only a classroom session of 45 minutes was included in the module for 
imparting training to record measurements. Only from 2023-24 onwards 
practical/onsite training on recording measurements, giving daily mark 
outs to groups , etc., were imparted to Mates. Audit observed that 
unskilled labourers assigned to the role of Mates by GPs performed their 
duties without recei ving any proper training. During the beneficiary 
survey conducted by Audit among Mates, all 120 Mates surveyed in 24 

 
 
21 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
GPs informed that they were not given training for recording 
measurements. Audit observed that training imparted to Mates became 
ineffective as KILA did not focus on the critical skills required by 
unskilled labourers to function as Mates.  
Audit observed that inadequate training may result in lack of awareness of the 
scheme among the personnel involved in the implementation, leading to 
ineffective planning and poor quality of work execution.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that though training programmes with the 
module specified in the Operational Guidelines were not conducted, the subjects 
mentioned in the module were included in the training conducted by KILA and 
Integrated Watershed Development and Management Kerala (IWDMK). It was 
also stated that as the State prefers the appointment of qualified candidates, the 
modules mentioned in the Guidelines did not have much relevance.  
Reply is not acceptable as against 30 days training programme (in three phases 
with assessment of the field work done at the end of second and third phase) on 
watershed related works, only two to five day s training programme was 
conducted. Criticality of the training is to be viewed in the context of watershed 
related works executed by GPs extending up to 40 per cent of the total works.  
 

 
 
27 
Chapter III – Planning and Capacity  Building   
  
Financial 
Management 
Chapter 
4 

 
 
 28 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 

 
 
23 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Funding pattern 
The MGNREGS is a demand -driven wage employment programme 
implemented on a cost -sharing basis between the Centre and the States. 
Releases of Central share of funds are based on the projection of labour demand 
in the agreed-to Labour Budget. Section 22 of the Act provides the framework 
for the funding pattern. Fund sharing pattern is detailed in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Fund sharing pattern of the scheme  
Details of Component GoI Share State Share 
Wages for unskilled manual workers  100 per cent Nil 
Wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers  75 per cent 25 per cent 
Cost of material  75 per cent 25 per cent 
Unemployment allowance  Nil 100 per cent 
There was delay ranging from eight days to four months in the release of State 
share by GoK. Delay in release of funds led to delay in release of skilled/semi-
skilled wages and material costs. Wages aggregating ₹269.27 crore were paid 
after 16 to 90 days, and wages of ₹39.2 4 crore was paid after three months 
from the date of closure of muster rolls. Though there was nine per cent  
increase in expenditure towards wages during 2023 -24, the expenditure 
towards material component decreased drastically by 37 per cent, indicating 
that the State had taken up lesser projects involving material component during 
2023-24. During 2020-21, though material funds to the tune of ₹916.27 crore 
was available, expenditure towards material including skilled and semi-skilled 
wages was only ₹752.94 crore (82 per cent ), indicating that the State 
Government failed in optimum utilisation of the resources for material 
component available with them. Though MGNREG  Act Operational 
Guidelines stipulated that salary/remuneration of function aries already 
engaged by the GoK/PRIs should not be booked under the administrative costs 
of MGNREGA, GoK met salary expenses of Government officials from 
Administrative Expenses Fund. An amount of ₹4 3.59 crore was outstanding 
(December 2024) towards payment in respect of unskilled wages, semi -
skilled/skilled wages, material and taxes for the period from 2019 -20 to  
2023-24. 19 ,792 transactions towards payment of wages and material s 
pertaining to the period from 2019 -20 to 2023-24 were pending regeneration 
for a period ranging from six months to more than four years. Only 20 to79 
per cent of the wages due for payment was paid to tribal plus beneficiaries 
within the financial year, which defeated the objectives of the Tribal Plus 
scheme. Audit also noticed discrepancies in disbursement of Onam Festival 
allowance such as transfer of allowance of multiple beneficiaries to single bank 
account. 
Chapter 
4 
Financial Management 

 
 
 24 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Details of Component GoI Share State Share 
Compensation for delayed payment of 
wages to the workers Nil 100 per cent 
Administrative Expenditure  
Up to  six per cent of total 
expenditure, including up 
to 0.5 per cent expenditure 
on Social Audit 
Expenditure of 
SEGC 
(Source: MGNREG Act and Operational Guidelines 2013) 
According to Section 21(1) of the MGNREG Act, the State Government may, 
by notification, establish a fund called the State Employment Guarantee Fund 
(SEGF) for the purpose of the implementation of the scheme. Grant from the 
Central Government and corresponding State share were to be credited to the 
SEGF. 
In addition to providing State share as mentioned in Table 4.1, GoK had 
formulated schemes for providing additional benefits to MGNREGS workers as 
detailed in Table 4.2: 
Table: 4.2: Additional benefits envisaged to MGNREGS workers by the State 
Name of scheme Particulars 
Kerala Tribal plus 
scheme 
Launched in 2018; provides additional 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment to every Scheduled Tribe (ST) household 
in every financial year. 
Corpus Fund for 
Advance payment 
of wages to ST 
Households in 
specified areas 
Corpus fund of ₹11.12 crore was created with Kudumbashree 
for making advance payment of 90 per cent of the wages to 
each ST worker at the end of each week. This project was 
implemented in Wayanad district, Aralam Farm in Kannur 
district and Attappadi block in Palakkad district. 
Special Reward - 
Onam Festival 
Payment of an amount of ₹1000 to each MGNREGS 
household in the State who completed 100 days of 
employment in the previous year. 
(Source: Orders issued by GoK) 
4.2 Release and utilisation of funds 
According to Operational Guidelines Central share of funds would be released 
in two tranches. First tranche of Central share would be based on proportionate 
fund requirement projected for the first six months of the financial year, subject 
to a maximum of 50 per cent  of the total fund required for the whole year. 
Second tranche could be claimed by the State on utili sing 60 per cent  of 
available funds. GoI release of second tranche would be based on (i) unspent 
balances and (ii) actual performance against the agreed-to Labour Budget (LB) 
during the year. Details of funds received and expenditure incurred during the 
period 2019-20 to 2023-24 are indicated in Table 4.3 and Table 4.4. 
 
 
 

 
 
25 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
Table 4.3: Details of funds released and expenditure incurred during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year OB 
Release 
of 
Wages 
Central Release State 
material 
Misc. 
Receipt6 
Total fund 
availability Expenditure CB 
Material Admin 
2019-20 19.07 2212.53 258.59 118.54 104.84 5.80 2719.37 2709.04 10.33 
2020-21 10.33 3019.30 718.60 178.50 197.67 15.23 4139.63 3900.01 239.62 
2021-22 239.62 3236.53 432.74 40.19 203.91 18.19 4171.18 4164.92 6.26 
2022-23 6.26 3043.72 735.08 146.13 245.04 16.09 4192.32 4028.16 164.16 
2023-24 164.16 3324.37 372.17 187.67 124.06 7.25 4179.68 4004.49 175.19 
Total  14836.45 2517.18 671.03 875.52 62.56  18806.62  
(Source: Details received from State Mission) 
Table 4.4: Details of expenditure incurred (component-wise) 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Wages Material7 Administrative Other 
expenditure Total 
2019-20 2215.14 369.37 124.53 0.00 2709.04 
2020-21 3016.73 752.94 130.34 0.00 3900.01 
2021-22 3224.95 820.44 119.53 0.00 4164.92 
2022-23 3043.72 847.85 136.58 0.01 4028.16 
2023-24 3324.37 535.43 132.96 11.73 4004.49 
Total 14824.91 3326.03 643.94 11.74 18806.62 
(Source: Details received from State Mission) 
Audit noticed that though there was nine per cent  increase in expenditure 
towards wages during 2023-24 compared to 2022-23, the expenditure towards 
material component decreased drastically by 37 per cent, indicating that the 
State had taken up lesser projects involving material component during 2023 -
24. Further, during 2020-21, though material funds to the tune of ₹916.27 crore  
was available, expenditure towards material including skilled and semi -skilled 
wages was only ₹752.94 crore (82 per cent ), indicat ing that the State 
Government failed in optimum utilisation of the resources for material 
component available with them, which resulted in delayed payment of wages 
and pendency in payment of bills for materials besides creation of liability to 
the State Government for payment of compensation for delay. 
The Government stated (June 20 25) that the State did not receive sufficient 
material funds in any of the financial years. Due to delay in getting the material 
fund, the vendors/suppliers were not very interested in participating in the 
bidding of MGNREGS works. Also delay in getting funds badly affected the 
individual beneficiaries who advanced fund for their individual assets.   
The reply substantiates the audit finding that delay in release of skilled/semi -
skilled wages and material fund led to backing out of the beneficiaries and 
vendors from participating in the scheme as detailed in Paragraph 6.7.4. 
 
6  UNNATI, Anganwadi construction funds, interest, bank rejection, refunds, etc. 
7  Includes semi-skilled and skilled wages 

 
 
 26 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
4.3 Delay in release of funds by the State  
According to MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013 and fund release 
orders issued by MoRD, the Central funds along with corresponding State share, 
was to be released by the State to the State Nodal Account (SNA)/State 
Employment Guarantee Fund concerned within a maximum period of 15 days 
from the receipt of Central share. However, audit noticed delay ranging from 
eight days to four months in release of funds by GoK. Details are as given in 
Appendix 4.1.  Delay in release of funds resulted in delay in release of 
skilled/semi-skilled wages and material costs. Audit noticed instances of delay 
up to 22 months in releasing material cost borne by the beneficiaries during 
construction as detailed in Paragraph 6.7.4. Audit observed that the delay in 
release of payment of wages and cost of materials adversely impacted the taking 
up of material works by beneficiaries.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective measures will 
be taken to avoid the delay. 
Recommendation 5: The Government may ensure timely release of funds 
adhering to the timeline prescribed for the scheme. 
4.4 Shortfall in receipt of funds for Administrative Expenses 
In order to augment human resources and develop capacity for critical activities, 
the GoI was to provide up to six per cent of the total expenditure (including up 
to 0.5 per cent towards social audit) on MGNREGS in a financial year towards 
Administrative Expenses (AE). The State Governments were advised to 
supplement this, if required, for effective implementation of the provisions of 
MGNREG Act. Administrative Expenses fund was also meant for conducting 
IEC activities, imparting training to functionaries, etc. Details showing AE fund 
due, received and expenditure incurred are given in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Details of Administrative Expenditure funds due, received and expended 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl.No Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
1 
Total expenditure 
towards wages and 
materials 
2584.51 3769.66 4045.39 3891.58 3859.80 18150.94 
2 
Admissible 
Administrative 
Expenditure (AE) 
at the rate of 5.5 
per cent 
142.15 207.33 222.50 214.04 212.29 998.31 
3 AE received  118.54 178.50 40.19 146.13 187.67 671.03 
4 AE utilised  124.53 130.34 119.53 136.58 132.96 643.94 
5 Shortfall in receipt 
of AE 23.61 28.83 182.31 67.91 24.62 327.28 
6 Shortfall (per cent) 16.61 13.91 81.94 31.73 11.60  
7 
Percentage of 
expenditure against 
AE received 
105.05 73.02 297.41 93.46 70.85  
(Source: Details furnished by State Mission, MGNREGS-Kerala) 

 
 
27 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
As seen from the table above, there was shortfall in receipt of administrative 
expenditure funds during 2019-20 to 2023-24. Against ₹998.31 crore due, only 
₹671.03 crore (67.22 per cent) was received during the period. Audit noticed 
that during the year 2021 -22, against total available Administrative Expenses 
Fund of ₹88.35 crore, expenditure towards administrative expenses was 
₹119.53 crore, indicating that the Administrative Expenditur e was partly met 
out of funds received towards material component as fu nds towards both 
material and Administrative Expenditure were kept in a single account till July 
2023.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that though State submitted Utilisation 
Certificates, necessary funds were not received towards administrative 
expenses. Due to shortage of funds, IEC activities were affected. Training 
programmes were organised with the help of KILA.  
4.5 Inadmissible Administrative expenses  
According to para 12.5.6 of MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines , 
salary/remuneration of functionaries already engaged by the Government/PRIs 
should under no condition be booked under the administrative costs of 
MGNREG Act. However, audit noticed that 33 Government employees 
engaged in various posts in MGNREGS were paid from Administrative 
expenses of MGNREGS during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24. Salary expenses 
of these officers worked out to ₹16.05 crore during the five year period. Though, 
State Mission had requested (May 2019) GoK to allocate funds to meet salary 
expenses of these officials, no action was taken by GoK and salary expenses 
still continue to be met from MGNREGS funds.  
Audit noticed that Internal Audit wing of MoRD had raised objection (October 
2018) to the payment of salaries to above officers from the Administrative 
expenses fund and directed to refund the expenditure incurred during 2015 -16 
to 2017-18. However, no action was taken by GoK till date (June 2025). 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective action will be 
taken to prevent recurrence in future.  
4.5.1 Unauthorised appointment of DEO and payment of wages from 
Administrative Expenses fund 
With the objective of setting up a dedicated administrative structure for the 
implementation of MGNREGS, GoK had issued orders (August 2009) 
prescribing posts, staff strength at various levels and educational qualifications 
for appointing personnel on contract basis to these posts. Qualification for the 
post of Accountant -cum-Data Entry Operator was fixed as B.Co m with 
PGDCA. However, Pudur GP engaged one Data Entry Operator with 
educational qualification of Plus two and Diploma in Computer Applications on 
daily wages with effect from 01  May 2010, without obtaining Government 
sanction and his wages were met from the administrative fund of MGNREGS. 
Though, Pudur GP received (February 2012) one additional post of Accountant-
cum-Data Entry Operator, instead of appointing personnel with prescribed 
qualifications, the DEO was allowed to continue in the post. The DEO was 
dismissed (30 August 2024) only after identification of the malpractices carried 
out in the muster rolls and misappropriation of Government funds in the GP as 
brought out in Para graph 6.4. The appointment of DEO on daily wage basis 

 
 
 28 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
against the directions of the Government led to unauthorised payment of ₹22.14 
lakh from MGNREGS fund. Audit observed that unauthorised appointment and 
drawal of salary for more than 12 years also indicates serious flaw in the 
oversight by BP/DP/State Mission. 
While confirming that the DEO was dismissed on the basis of discovery and 
confirmation of financial irregularities related to distribution of wages of skilled 
labour in the ward in which he was in charge, the Government stated (June 
2025) that post of DEO was created based on  the recommendation of the State 
Employment Guarantee Council ( SEGC). Further, the Commissioner of Rural 
Development (CRD) had directed  District Programme Co -ordinators (DPCs) 
and Joint Programme Co -ordinators (JPCs) to engage DEOs on d aily wage 
basis, based on the workload of the Gram a Panchayats. It was also stated that 
the DEO was paid only for the days that he had worked and as such there was 
no financial loss. 
Reply is not tenable as CRD had directed DPCs and JPCs to appoint Computer 
Data Entry Operator cum Accountant on daily wage basis, if required. Instead, 
the GP appointed DEO without prescribed qualification. Payment of wages to a 
person without prescribed qualification and without Government sanction is 
irregular. 
Recommendation 6: The Government may take action to recoup the 
inadmissible expenditure incurred under MGNREGS.  
4.6 Outstanding liabilities 
With a view to streamline the fund flow system and to empower the State 
Governments/grass-root level implementation agencies to deliver entitlements 
as per the objectives of the MGNREG Act, the Central Government introduced 
(May 2016) National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) for wage 
payments. Payment of unskilled wages was entirely the responsibility of GoI 
and released directly to the beneficiary and release of payment towards 
skilled/semiskilled wages/material/administrative components were to be made 
by the State. MGNREG Act stipulated for payment of wages within 15 days of 
closure of muster roll. One of the duties of the JPC, District Panchayat (DP) and 
Block Panchayat (BP) was to ensure timely processing of all Fund Transfer 
Orders (FTOs) for payments. 
However, Audit noticed that an amount of ₹43.59 crore was outstanding, as of 
December 2024, towards payment of unskilled wages, semi -skilled/skilled 
wages, material and taxes for the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 as detailed in 
Table 4.6: 
Table 4.6: Details of pending payments 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Unskilled 
wages 
Skilled/Semi-
skilled wages Material Tax Total 
2019-20 2.81 51.58 210.93 1.00 266.32 
2020-21 2.3 25.17 107.42 0.19 135.08 
2021-22 3.56 47.10 202.52 1.27 254.45 
2022-23 2.13 23.26 355.45 1.49 382.33 
2023-24 4.47 99.75 3118.04 98.87 3321.13 
Total 15.27 246.86 3994.36 102.82 4359.31 
(Source -NREGASoft MIS Report R8.1.5)  

 
 
29 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
It can be seen from the table that wages to an extent of ₹2.62 crore was pending 
for nine months to more than four years. Denial of wages would have an adverse 
impact on the sustenance of rural poor who depended on these payments for 
their livelihood.  Similarly, the Department had not cleared the dues of ₹39.94 
crore on material for  a period ranging from eight months to more than four 
years. Non-payment of dues to workers/suppliers over long periods indicated 
ineffective oversight mechanism and  undermined the scheme's objective of 
providing timely financial assistance to beneficiaries. Furthermore, failure to 
pay dues for materials discourages suppliers and beneficiaries from 
participating in the scheme, potentially hindering work progress and timely 
completion.  
Audit noticed that one of the reasons for failure to clear these payments was 
rejection of transactions. Transactions got rejected due to reasons viz., de-
seeding of Aadhaar number from National Payments Corporation of India 
(NPCI) mapper by bank, incorrect/closed bank account, invalid bank identifier, 
mismatch in IFS Code of bank account, non -matching of payee account with 
registered vendor, etc. MoRD had instructed (December 2020) that regeneration 
of rejected transactions should be done in a time bound m anner and the field 
functionaries should ensure that failed transactions are regenerated within two 
days. However, audit noticed that 19,792 transactions towards payment of 
wages and material pertaining to the period from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 were 
pending regeneration or awaiting response of the bank as detailed in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Status of rejected transactions  
Year 
Wages Materials 
No. of rejected Transactions 
pending regeneration 
Amount involved in 
transactions pending 
regeneration (₹ in lakh) 
No. of rejected transactions 
pending bank response   
Amount involved in rejected 
transactions pending bank 
response 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of rejected Transactions 
pending regeneration  
Amount involved in 
transactions pending  
regeneration (₹ in lakh) 
No. of rejected transactions 
pending bank response  
Amount involved in rejected 
transactions pending bank 
response (₹ in lakh) 
2019-20 11 0.17 156 1.85 1048 46.32 482 25.47 
2020-21 0 0.00 86 1.23 1216 55.36 1110 97.87 
2021-22 4 0.03 242 3.26 1779 143.74 10716 996.81 
2022-23 6 0.03 121 1.59 215 16.64 1246 290.40 
2023-24 35 0.39 290 4.11 465 84.19 564 93.15 
Total 56 0.62 895 12.04 4723 346.25 14118 1503.70 
(Source -NREGASoft MIS Report R8.1.5)  
As seen from the table above, 95 1 rejected transactions involving wages 
amounting to ₹12.6 6 lakh and 18,841 rejected transactions involving material 
bills amounting to ₹18 49.95 lakh  were either pending for regeneration or 
pending for bank response after regeneration for a period ranging from six 
months to more than four years.  

 
 
 30 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Audit noticed that in test checked GPs, non-updating of bank account numbers 
of the beneficiaries and non -mapping with Aadhaar number for semi-
skilled/skilled/material payments had resulted in rejection of transactions and 
undue delay in payment of wages/cost of materials to the wage 
seekers/beneficiaries. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that regeneration of rejected transactions 
was given priority consideration by the State. It was also stated that appropriate 
corrective actions will be implemented to prevent recurrence in future.  
However, the fact remains that wages to be paid within 15 days were pending 
for a period up to four years due to lack of effective action by the GPs. This also 
indicated ineffective oversight by BPs/DPs/State in ensuring adherence to the 
Government instructions. 
Recommendation 7: The Government may take action to reduce the pendency 
with regard to regeneration of failed transactions and payment to the 
beneficiaries. 
4.7 Delay in payment of wages and rejection of compensation 
for delayed payments 
The MGNREG Act mandated for payment of compensation for delay, at the rate 
of 0.05 per cent of the unpaid wages per day, in case payment of wages was not 
made within fifteen days from the date of closure of the muster roll. The Act 
also prescribed that the computer system should have a provision to 
automatically calculate the compensation payable based on the date of closure 
of the muster roll and the date of deposit of wages in the accounts of the wage 
seekers. The State Government was liable to pay the compensation upfront after 
due verification , within the time limits as specified above and recover the 
compensation amount from the functionaries or agencies who were responsible 
for the delay in payment.  
In order to track/fix responsibility on various functionaries and apportion 
recoveries as per delays, the GoK prescribed timelines as detailed in Table 4.8.  
Table 4.8: Timelines prescribed for wage payment 
Sl. 
No. Process/Workflow Step 
Person/Agency/ 
Authority responsible 
for the step 
Time 
allotted 
for step 
Number of days 
from date of 
e-NMR closure 
1. 
From closure of muster roll  
till signing of FTO by second  
signatory 
Accredited Engineer, 
Assistant Secretary, 
Secretary 
eight days Up to T+8 
2. Wage credit into the account 
of the wage seeker 
MoRD/PFMS New 
Delhi/Nodal 
Bank/NPCI  
seven days T+9 to T+15 
(Source: MGNREG Act Guidelines for timely payment of wages) 
In order to meet the objective of making the timely payment to the MGNREG 
Act beneficiaries, it was essential that all stakeholders in this system adhered to 
the timelines advised.  However, scrutiny of MIS reports and records in test 
checked GPs revealed that provisions of the Act regarding timely payment of 
wages and payment of c ompensation for delayed payment of wages were not 
adhered to as detailed in subsequent paragraphs: 

 
 
31 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
4.7.1 Delay in payment of wages and non -reckoning actual date of 
payment for calculating delay 
The MGNREG Act mandated for payment of compensation in case wages were 
not paid within 15 days of closure of muster roll. This required calculation of 
delay from the date of closure of muster roll till the date of credit of wages into 
the account of the beneficiary. However, audit noticed that there were no MIS 
reports in public domain which could give the consolidated status of payment 
of wages from the date of closure of muster roll to the actual credit of wages to 
the beneficiaries. The Report – R14.5 (Delayed Payment) tracked the status only 
till signature of FTOs by the second signatory and  not till actual date of credit 
of wages to the beneficiary account . The report showed that 98 per cent  of 
payments were made within the mandated period of 15 days. Details of delayed 
payments as per MIS reports are given in Appendix 4.2. Further scrutiny of 
delayed wage payments (₹308.5 1 crore) showed that wages aggregating 
₹269.27 crore were paid between 16 and 90 days, and wages of ₹39.2 4 crore 
were paid after three months (90 days) from the date of closure of muster rolls.  
Audit noticed that non -reckoning delay till the actual date of credit of wages 
into the beneficiaries’ account resulted in partial/non -calculation of delays. 
Detailed scrutiny of calculation of delays during 2023 -24 in the test checked 
GPs revealed that ag ainst MIS calculated delay of nil to 34 days, actual delay 
ranged from eight days to 180 days. Illustrative cases noticed are tabulated in 
Appendix 4.3. Audit observed that incorrect calculation of delay violated the 
provisions of the Act and led to incorr ect calculation of compensation for 
delayed payment.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that delay may occur due to technical issue 
with digital signature and also when the Secretary/Asst . Secretary gets 
transferred from one station to another.  De -enrolling/enrolling of the Digital 
Signature Certificate of new officers takes 24 hours which is not in the control 
of officials at the GP level. It was also stated that delay caused at GP level will 
be examined and appropriate corrective actions will be implemented. 
However, Audit is of the view that technical issues with digital signature, de -
enrolling/enrolling delay, etc., should have been sorted out in time to ensure 
timely payment of wages as mandated by the Act.   
4.7.2 Unjustified rejection of compensation for delayed payments 
The MGNREG Act mandated for payment of compensation for delay, at the rate 
of 0.05 per cent of the unpaid wages per day, in case payment of wages was not 
made within fifteen days from the date of closure of the muster roll.  The 
NREGASoft (MIS Report R14.1-Delayed Compensation) had a provision to 
calculate the total compensation payable. However, the Kerala MGNREGS 
Payment of Compensation (for Delayed Wage Payment) Rules, 2023 allowed 
the Programme Officers to reject the claims for payment of compensation citing 
reasons viz., delay due to technical issue with Digital signature or MIS issues, 
natural calamities, or funds not available at the paying Authority level and 
detailed reasons for rejection were to be given in the MIS.  
Audit noticed that though NREGASoft had calculated ₹49 1.73 lakh towards 
delay compensation payable during the audit period for 677 lakh days of delay, 
Block Programme Officers rejected delayed compensation of ₹487.29 lakh (99 

 
 
 32 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
per cent ), for which detailed reasons were not available in public domain 
(NREGASoft). Details of delayed compensation calculated and rejected as per 
MIS are given in Table 4.9.  
Table 4.9: Details of delayed compensation and rejection 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Delayed 
compensation Rejection Reason (In days) 
Amount 
rejected 
Percen-
tage of 
total 
rejection 
Percen-
tage of 
rejection 
under 
Compe-
nsation 
not due 
Approved 
amount of 
compen-
sation for 
delay 
(percen-
tage) 
Payable 
(Delay in 
days) 
Payable 
amount 
  
Natural 
calamities 
Compen-
sation not 
due 
Total 
rejected 
2019-20 5261300 38.39 3615 4855250 4863904 35.85 92.45 99.82 2.54 (6.62) 
2020-21 23711842 173.58 21631 23452167 23474185 172.18 99.00 99.91 1.40 (0.81) 
2021-22 1818165 12.16 8 1809053 1809061 12.10 99.50 100.00 0.06 (0.49) 
2022-23 24714967 173.95 53427 24608225 24661673 173.60 99.78 99.78 0.35 (0.20) 
2023-24 12160180 93.65 9782 12138373 12148158 93.56 99.90 99.92 0.09 (0.10) 
Total 67666454 491.73 88463 66863068 66956981 487.29 98.95 99.86 4.44 (0.90) 
(Source: MIS Reports R14.1) 
Audit noticed that 99.8 6 per cent of the total rejection was on the ground of 
‘Compensation not due’. Rejection on this ground was incorrect as it was 
applicable in cases where wages had been paid in time but details were not 
entered in MIS. This was not possible in Ne -FMS system, as wage payments 
could not be processed without the data entry in MIS. Further, delay in payment 
of wages and non -reckoning actual date of payment for calculation of delay 
compensation together with rejection of claims for delay compensation has 
denied the benefi ciaries the livelihood security envisioned by the MGNREG 
Act. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that Delay Compensation Rules have been 
framed in line with the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) issued by the 
MoRD in May 2017. As per the SOP, the compensation due can be rejected in 
the event of compensation not due, natu ral calamities and non -availability of 
funds at the paying authority level. 
Reply is not tenable as the SOP issued by MoRD in 2019 -20 does not permit 
rejection of compensation on the ground of non -availability of funds. Further, 
Ne-FMS system is implemented in the State and wage payments were processed 
after data entry in MIS.  As  such possibility of rejection on the ground of 
‘compensation not due’ does not arise.  
4.8 Delay in payment of wages under Tribal Plus scheme  
The GoK, in July 2019, launched Tribal Plus scheme for providing additional 
100 days of guaranteed wage employment to every Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
household in every financial year. All the ST families who had completed 100 
days of work in MGNREGS was included i n this scheme. Payment for wages 
and material for the works was to be funded by GoK through Scheduled Tribes 
Development Department. However, audit noticed that only 20 to 79 per cent 

 
 
33 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
of the wages due was paid to tribal plus beneficiaries within the financial year  
due to delay in release of funds by GoK. Details are given in Table 4.10. 
Table 4.10: Details of wages paid to Tribal Plus beneficiaries  
Year 
Number 
of FTOs 
generated 
(In lakh) 
Total amount 
required 
including 
previous year 
balance  
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount 
received/ 
wages paid 
(₹ in lakh) 
Percentage 
of wage 
paid 
Employment 
generated 
(In days) 
Amount 
pending at 
the close of 
the financial 
year  
(₹ in lakh) 
2019-20 996.61 996.61 200.00 20.07 361090 796.61 
2020-21 3633.65 4430.26 1893.00 42.73 1227583 2537.26 
2021-22 3914.40 6451.66 5108.00 79.17 1322434 1343.66 
2022-23 3677.66 5021.32 3964.77 78.96 1182527 1056.55 
2023-24 5166.38 6222.93 2854.94 45.88 1551466 3367.99 
 17388.70  14020.71    
(Source: Details furnished by MGNREGS State Mission) 
Audit noticed that as of March 2024, ₹33.68 crore was pending towards 
payment of wages. Due to delay in release of funds, there was delay ranging 
from 59 to 205 days in receipt of wages by tribal plus beneficiaries. Audit 
observed that timely payment of wages being the crux of the Tribal Plus scheme, 
delay in release of funds by GoK undermined the very objective of the scheme. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that steps will be taken to ensure timely 
disbursement of funds. However, the fact remains that a scheme formulated by 
the State for providing additional benefits to the Scheduled Tribes failed to 
achieve its objectives due to failure of the State to ensure timely release of funds. 
4.9 Irregularities in the management of Corpus Fund for 
Advance Wage Payments to ST Workers under MGNREGS 
With the aim to address delays in wage disbursement under MGNREGS, GoK, 
in March 2018, established a Corpus Fund for effecting advance wage payments 
to Scheduled Tribe (ST) workers in specified areas on weekly basis. The corpus 
amount of ₹11.13 crore was transferred (March 2018) to the bank account held 
by the Director, Kudumbashree State Mission and authori sed Kudumbashree 
Community Development Society ( CDS)/Area Development  Society(ADS) 
units to disburse 90 per cent of wages in advance to the ST workers in specified 
areas8. The advance was to be deposited in the bank account of the beneficiary 
in which MGNREGS wages were credited by GoI, after executing a tri -partite 
agreement between the beneficiary, ADS and the bank for ensuring that the 
advanced amounts would be reimburs ed after receipt of wage payments from 
GoI.  
Scrutiny of Kudumbashree State Mission records and Ooru Samithi bank 
statements in test checked units revealed that out of ₹11.12 crore, ₹10.30 crore 
 
8  This initiative was initially for ST workers in Wayanad District and Attappadi Block of Palakkad 
District and later extended to Aralam Farm in Kannur district in June 2019. 
 

 
 
 34 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
was disbursed to the beneficiaries and balance amount was retained in the Ooru 
Samithi bank accounts. However, the system of payment of advance to 
beneficiaries was discontinued from 2022-23. Audit noticed that out of ₹11.12 
crore disbursed to 112 Ooru Samithis only ₹7.34 crore was returned to the State 
Mission till date (December 2024). 
Audit test checked 112 Ooru Samithi bank accounts and noticed irregular cash 
withdrawal of ₹3.48 lakh for personal purpose by two Ooru Samithis. 
Kakkuppadi Thazhe Ooru Samithi in Agali GP withdrew ₹1,00,000 and Mele 
Manchikandi Ooru Samithi in Pudur GP wit hdrew ₹2,48,250 for personal 
purposes violating Government instructions. 
Audit further noticed that four Ooru Samithis in Attappadi BP received (January 
2019) ₹12 lakh ( at the rate of  ₹ three lakh each) towards payment of advance 
wages. Of ₹12 lakh, ₹7.36 lakh was disbursed (January 2019 to January 2020) 
to beneficiaries towards advance. On scrutiny of their bank accounts, audit 
noticed that these SB accounts were not operational from J uly 2022 leaving 
balances at nil (October 2024). On enquiry with the bank by Audit, the bank 
transferred (December 2024) the amount of ₹8.25 lakh  (including interest 
accrued till July 2022) to the Account of the District Project Officer. Audit 
noticed that though ₹7.36 lakh was disbursed to the beneficiaries towards 
advance, only ₹2.92 lakh was recouped by the Ooru Samithis from the 
beneficiaries. 
Thus, Audit observed that misuse of funds and non -disbursement of  advance 
amounts by Ooru Samithis defeated the objectives of the scheme. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that recovery details would be made 
available from Kudumbashree and necessary action will be initiated. It was also 
stated that appropriate corrective actions will be taken to prevent recurrence in 
future. However, Government reply is silent on the discontinuation of the 
project by Kudumbashree. 
4.10 Discrepancies in disbursement of Onam Festival Allowance  
The Government of Kerala had sanctioned Onam festival allowance of ₹1,000 
to each MGNREGS worker who worked for at least 100 days 9 in the previous 
year. This allowance was distributed through GPs up to 2020-21 and through 
Block Programme Officers since 2021 -22. Scrutiny of the Bill Information 
Management System  (BiMS) portal 10 and bill status report, audit identified 
discrepancies in the disbursement process such as irregular transfer of 
allowance of multiple beneficiaries to single beneficiary  and non-receipt of 
allowance by beneficiaries due to unresolved failed transactions as detailed 
below: 
4.10.1 Transfer of allowance of multiple beneficiaries to a single Bank Account 
Wages under MGNREGS were transferred directly to the Aadhaar-linked bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries. However, instead of transferring to Aadhaar -
linked bank accounts of beneficiaries, Onam festival allowance s of multiple 
beneficiaries were transferred from the Treasury Savings account using BiMS 
 
9  Stipulation for completion of 100 days was reduced to 75 days during 2020-21 due to Covid  
10  Bill Information Management System (BiMS) is an e-bill portal of GoK for claim settlement 

 
 
35 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
software to a single bank account of one of the beneficiaries by the Block 
Programme Officers. Audit noticed instances of transfer of payment in respect 
of three to 66 beneficiaries to a single bank account  during the period 2021-22 
to 2023-24 as detailed in Table 4.11.  
Table 4.11: Allowance of multiple beneficiaries transferred to a Single Bank Account 
District Name of PRI Number of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
paid  
(In ₹) 
Number of bank 
accounts to which 
amount credited 
Thiruvana
nthapuram  
Chirayinkeezhu BP 
66 66000 Single Bank Account  
5 5000 Single Bank Account  
3 3000 Single Bank Account  
134 134000 67 Bank Accounts 
Vellanad BP 107 107000 54 Bank Accounts 
Palakkad  Malampuzha BP 60 60000 30 Bank Accounts 
Attappadi BP 221 221000 111 Bank Accounts 
Kasaragod Kasaragod BP 34 34000 17 Bank Accounts 
 Neeleshwaram BP 72 72000 36 Bank Accounts 
Total  702 702000  
(Source: Details collected from BiMS portal) 
Irregular disbursement of Onam Allowances resulted in duplicate/multiple 
payments to certain beneficiaries while others did not receive their entitled 
allowance in the test checked districts.  
Audit also noticed instances of failed transactions amounting to ₹2.07 lakh 
remaining unresolved for over three years due to reasons viz., incorrect bank 
account number, depriving beneficiaries the benefit of festival allowance 
granted to them by Government.  Details are given in Appendix 4.4 . Failed 
transactions occurred due to negligence in resolving issues flagged on the BiMS 
dashboard while making payments by GPs/BPOs.  
Audit observed that these discrepancies have prevented eligible MGNREGS 
workers from receiving their rightful Onam festival allowance, undermining the 
intention of formulating the scheme. 
Regarding transfer of allowance of multiple beneficiaries to single account, the 
Government stated (June 2025) that detailed enquiry will be initiated and 
appropriate corrective actions will be implemented to prevent recurrence in 
future.

 
 
27 
Chapter IV – Financial Management  
 
  
Chapter 
5 
 
Registration and 
Employment 

 
 
 28 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
  

 
 
37 
 CHAPTER V    
REGISTRATION AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Registration and issue of job cards 
The first step in guaranteeing the beneficiary’s right to 100 days of employment 
under MGNREGS was registration of the household with the GP. According to 
MGNREG Act, it was the duty of the GP to register the household, after making 
suitable enquiries, and issue a job card.  The application for the job card could 
be given on plain paper to the GP or the individual could appear personally and 
make an oral request. The job card was to be issued to the beneficiaries within 
15 days of receipt of application.   
The process for registration of households, issue of job cards and employment 
allocation is detailed in Chart 5.1. 
None of the test checked GPs  conducted the door -to-door survey to identify 
eligible households who were missed out and wished to be registered under the 
Act. Against the timeline of 15 days fixed for issuing job cards, audit noticed 
delay up to 264 days in the issue of job cards. Though it was mandatory to issue 
dated receipts on receiving application for job card, seven of the 24 test checked 
GPs did not issue dated receipts. 14 ,353 job cards were deleted stating reason 
as “not willing to work” by test checked GPs in violation of the MGNREG Act. 
Audit noticed that demand for work declined by 14 per cent during 2023-24 
compared to 2020-21. As a result of the declining demand for work, the person 
days of employment generated declined by six per cent during the period 2021-
22 to 2023 -24. Low percentage of active job cards/workers also pointed to 
ineffective IEC activities, leading to poor awareness levels of entitlements 
among potential beneficiaries. In test checked BPs, the percentage of 
households provided with employment of 100 days and above ranged between 
19 per cent  and 58 per cent . The percentage of employment provided to 
differently abled persons at the State level ranged from 24.88 per cent (2019-
20) to 69.47 per cent (2022-23). Of the test checked 24 GPs, dated receipts, on 
receiving application for work, were not issued to the wage seeker by 13 GPs. 
Non-issue of dated receipts violated the mandatory transparency provision to 
ensure the provision of work within stipulated time. 
Chapter 
5 
Registration and Employment 

 
 
 38 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Chart 5.1: Registration process, Job card and Employment allocation 
(Source: MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013) 
Scrutiny of the process of registration and allocation of employment in test 
checked GPs revealed the following: 
5.1.1 Non-conducting door-to-door survey 
Para 3.1.1 (ii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for conducting a door-
to- door survey by each GP every year to identify eligible households who were 
missed out and who wished to be registered under the Act. The survey team was 
to associate/involve GP members, village level government functionary, 
Panchayat Secretary, SC and ST members, SHG leaders, Anganwadi workers, 
ASHAs, etc. Special efforts were to be made to reach out to disadvantaged 
groups like destitutes, differently abled, primitive tribal groups, nomadic tribal 
groups, SCs/STs, etc. Apart from identification of eligible households, details 
of individuals in the registered households were also to be verified and 
compared with the details in the MIS. 
Audit noticed that none of the test checked GPs conducted door-to-door survey 
during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. Further, no directions were issued 
by MGNREGS State Mission for conducting door to door survey. In the absence 
of door-to-door survey o f households, it could not be ensured that all eligible 
households, disadvantaged groups , etc., who wish to be registered, were 
included, thereby defeating the fundamental objective of the scheme. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that audit observation has been noted and 
appropriate corrective actions will be taken. 
5.1.2 Delay in issue of job cards 
According to Operational Guidelines, the job card is to be issued to the 
beneficiaries within 15 days of receipt of application. Audit noticed that though 
MGNREG Act Schedule II stipulated for issuing dated receipts on receiving 


 
 
 39 
Chapter V – Registration and Employment  
application for job card, seven11 of the 24 test checked GPs did not issue dated 
receipts. In the absence of dated receipts, issuance of job card within the 
prescribed period of 15 days could not be ascertained in audit. 
Test check of applications received and dated receipts issued by nine GPs, 
during the period 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, revealed that though these GPs had 
issued dated receipts from front office on receipt of application for job cards, 
entry in MIS was made three to 249 days later than actual date of receipt of the 
application. With reference to the actual date of receipt, delay in issue of job 
cards ranged from three to 264 days. Audit noticed that delay indicated in MIS 
in respect of these job cards was zero to 204 days. Details are given in Appendix 
5.1. Audit observed that test checked GPs indicated a later date in MIS to 
circumvent indication of delay in MIS. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that date of Job card issued is reflected in 
the MIS only when a command for printing is given in the MIS. In the State, 
physical Job Cards are issued following the direction of MoRD. If the GP 
officials forget to give print option in the MIS, it will be reflected in the MIS as 
job card not issued. It was also stated that audit observation has been noted and 
appropriate corrective action will be implemented to prevent the recurrence in 
future. 
Reply is not tenable as process of registration of beneficiaries could be 
commenced in MIS only if job card application is registered in MIS. Delay of 
up to 249 days in registering application of job card in MIS indicates that there 
was delay in issue of job cards. 
5.1.3 Irregular cancellation of Job cards 
According to the Operational Guidelines, 2013 and Annual Master Circulars 
issued by GoI, no Job Card should be cancelled in a routine manner and 
certainly not on the ground of non -demand/non-reporting for work. The Job 
Cards could be cancelled, only if, (i) the household migrated permanently to the 
urban areas/to a different Grama Panchayat, (ii) job card proved to be duplicate 
or (iii) it was registered based on forged documents. Before cancellation of Job 
Cards, the Programme Officers should conduct independent verification of facts 
and give the person concerned an opportunity to be heard. List of all cancelled 
Job Cards should be made public and should be presented to the Grama Sabha. 
Scrutiny of cancelled job cards in test checked GPs revealed the following: 
(i) Out of 17,879 job cards deleted by the test checked GPs , 14,353 job 
cards (80.2 8 per cent ) were deleted stating reason as “not willing to 
work”. Further, the list of deleted cards was not presented in Grama 
Sabha. This violated stipulated conditions and procedure prescribed for 
deletion of job cards.  
(ii) Audit noticed that details of deleted job cards were not available in MIS. 
Thus, the requirement of having details of deleted card s in public 
domain for ensuring transparency and accountability was not satisfied.  
(iii) Deleted job cards could be restored only by the State Mission. Scrutiny 
of restored job cards revealed that application for restoration of deleted 
 
11  Chirayinkeezhu, Vellanad, Agali, Pudur, Akathethara, Puthuppariyaram and Padne GPs 

 
 
 40 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
cards forwarded by JPC did not indicate any reason for deletion/  
restoration of job cards. Audit observed that proper verification of 
reason for restoration/deletion was not ascertained by State Mission 
before restoring deleted job cards. Once restored, MIS did not capture 
date of deletion and restoration, and the card appears to have never been 
deleted in the MIS. This feature may result in restoring deleted card 
without proper authorisation and illegal usage of job card.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that the request for resumption of job card 
is received from the districts once it is identified that the deletion of job card 
was done by mistake. To ensure the right of workers to work under the scheme, 
the requests from districts are immediately processed at the State Mission for 
providing employment to the workers.  
The reply substantiates the audit finding that job cards were deleted incorrectly 
and without any verification with the persons concerned. 
5.2 Employment generation  
The Act guaranteed 100 days of employment to every household whose adult 
members are willing to undertake unskilled manual labour. Details of 
employment demanded and provided in the State under MGNREGS during the 
period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 are shown in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Details of employment demanded and provided under MGNREGS  
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Total Job cards issued (In lakh) 36.41 39.00 40.97 41.03 39.74 
Household demanded employment 
(In lakh) 15.92 17.65 17.47 16.31 15.22 
Households that availed employment 
(In lakh) 14.39 16.17 16.45 15.51 14.69 
Total person days generated (In lakh) 802.30 1023.00 1059.66 965.78 994.59 
Person days per household 55.75 63.27 64.42 62.27 67.71 
Household provided 100 days of 
employment (In lakh) 2.51 4.70 5.13 4.50 5.69 
(Source: Information furnished by the Department and MIS data) 
The above data reveals that not even half of the households registered had 
demanded work during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. Audit noticed that 
demand for work declined by 13.77 per cent during the period 2020-21 to 2023-
24. As a result of the declining demand for work, the person days of employment 
generated declined by six per cent during the period 2021-22 to 2023-24. 
Audit noticed that in the test checked BPs, the percentage of households who 
were provided with employment for one to 30 days ranged from nine per cent 
to 33 per cent . Households ranging from 17 per cent  to 26 per cent  were 
provided employment for 71 to 99 days whereas 19 per cent  to 58 per cent  
households were provided employment for 100 days and above.   
Audit noticed that though Tribal Plus scheme of GoK provided additional 100 
days of employment to every Scheduled Tribe (ST) household in every financial 
year, Attappadi, a tribal BP could register 100 days employment only to 58 per 
cent of the households. 

 
 
 41 
Chapter V – Registration and Employment  
5.2.1 Employment to the differently abled persons 
Operational Guidelines , 2013 stipulated for conducting a special drive to 
identify all persons with disability and other vulnerable persons (nomadic tribal 
group, HIV positive person, internally displaced persons, etc.) and providing 
100 days of work to each of the household s they belong to, within a specified 
timeframe. Paragraph 9.2.2 mandated that State Government should designate 
an officer in each District as a Co -ordinator (Vulnerable Groups) who would 
exclusively look after the needs and requirements of the special categories and 
create enabling conditions for their inclusion in MGNREG Act works. The Co-
ordinator (Vulnerable Groups) was to hold a monthly meeting to review the 
progress of such implementation with Block/Grama Panchayat level officials 
and submit monthly and quarterly progress reports to the DPC. 
The percentage of employment provided to differently abled persons at the State 
level ranged from 24.88 per cent (2019-20) to 69.47 per cent (2022-23) of the 
registered differently abled persons. Details are given in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Details of employment provided to differently abled persons 
Year 
Number of 
differently 
abled persons 
registered 
Number of 
differently 
abled persons 
worked 
Percentage 
at State level 
Average days of 
employment provided 
to persons worked 
2019-20 7867 1957 24.88 51 
2020-21 4780 2238 46.82 62 
2021-22 4561 2735 59.96 60 
2022-23 3826 2658 69.47 57 
2023-24 3867 2563 66.28 62 
(Source: NREGASoft MIS Report R5.1.2) 
It was seen that average number of days of employment provided to differently 
abled persons ranged from 51 days to 62 days. Audit noticed that no special 
drive was conducted in test checked GPs for identifying the differently abled 
and other vulnerable persons. Further, Co -ordinator (Vulnerable Groups) was 
not posted to any of the districts in the State. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that t he scheme was demand driven. The 
demand for employment may vary according to weather, workers health, 
availability of other job opportunities , etc. Hence, their participation could not 
be ensured. However, the State was taking earnest efforts to ensure that 
employment was provided to all families willing to work under the scheme. It 
was also stated that the State was comparatively in a better position at national 
level in providing 100 days employment. Regarding employment to vulnerable 
groups, it was stated that special focus was given to this matter and instructions 
were issued to ensure that the scheme becomes more beneficial to them.  
However, Audit is of the view that though the scheme is demand driven, in the 
absence of baseline survey, special drives/special Rozgar Diwas, IEC activities, 
etc., to assess/invite demand from various sections of people including 
differently abled, capturing of demand for jobs by all the needy could not be 
ensured. Regarding employment to vulnerable groups, reply is silent on the non-
engagement of Co-ordinator (Vulnerable Groups), envisaged in the Operational 
Guidelines, to exclusively look after the needs  and requirements of the special 
categories. 

 
 
 42 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Recommendation 8: The Government may strive towards achieving 100 days 
guaranteed wage employment as stipulated under MGNREG Act.  
5.2.2 Dated receipt for demand for work  
According to Para 2.1.1 (iii) of Operation al Guidelines, 2013, on receipt of 
application for work, dated receipt for the application should be given to the 
wage seeker. The GP/P rogramme Officer ( PO) was bound to accept valid 
applications for work and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Refusal to 
accept work applications and to provide dated receipts would be treated as a 
contravention under Section 25 of MGNREG Act. 
Of the 24 test checked GPs, 13 GPs had not issued dated receipts to the wage 
seeker on receiving application for work. Though the test checked 11 GPs issued 
dated receipts, instead of providing individual receipts only single receipt was 
provided on receip t of group application for work, even though  Operational 
Guidelines stipulated for providing individual receipts even for group demand.  
During the beneficiary survey, 271 of the 334 beneficiaries surveyed responded 
that they were not issued dated receipts for the applications submitted to GPs, 
demanding work. In the absence of dated receipts, the mandatory provision of 
providing employment within 15 days of demand could not be ascertained in 
audit. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective actions will be 
implemented. 
5.3 Non-payment of unemployment allowance 
According to Section 7 of the MGNREG Act, 2005, an applicant not provided 
with employment within fifteen days of receipt of his/her application seeking 
employment, he/she would be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance. The 
allowance should not be less than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty 
days and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the 
financial year. According to Section 8(3) of the Act, the State Government 
should take all measures to make the payment of unemploymen t allowance to 
the households concerned as expeditiously as possible.  
Audit noticed that only an amount of ₹3.2 5 lakh was calculated towards 
unemployment allowance for the period from 2019 -20 to 2023-24. But, in the 
absence of dated receipts for applications for work, correctness of calculation 
of unemployment allowance could not be ascertained. Of ₹3.25 lakh an amount 
of ₹1.47 lakh was paid and ₹1.78 lakh was pending for payment (March 2024). 
Details are given in Appendix 5.2. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that though amount needed to be paid to 
the workers were sanctioned to the districts in July 2024, the amount could not 
be transferred to the beneficiaries due to technical issues in the MIS viz., 
inability to generate wage list, inability to create FTOs, FTOs were not available 
for the first signatory , etc. It was also stated that as of June 2025 , only ₹1.16 
lakh was pending for payment. 
Reply is not tenable as payment of unemployment allowance of ₹1.10 lakh 
pertaining to the period 2021-22 remaining pending till date (June 2025) is not 

 
 
 43 
Chapter V – Registration and Employment  
justified. This also indicates the lack of initiative on the part of the State in 
addressing the technical issues to ensure timely payment to the beneficiaries. 
Recommendation 9: The Government may ensure that the demand for labour 
may be accurately recorded, including issuing dated receipts by the GPs, and 
matched with the actual provision of labour to calculate the entitled 
unemployment allowance.  
5.4 Social Security - Insurance coverage to MGNREGS workers 
According to p aragraph 8.9 (i) and (ii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 , 
MGNREGS beneficiaries are covered under the Janashree Bima Yojana 
(JBY)12 and Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY)13. RSBY has been 
extended to all MGNREG S workers/beneficiaries who have worked for more 
than 15 days in the preceding financial year. RSBY was subsumed in PM-JAY 
in 2018 and JBY was subsumed in Aam Admi Bima Yojana in 2013. 
Apart from the above insurance schemes, MGNREGS workers were also 
eligible for accident insurance cover under PM Suraksha Bima Yojana  
(PMSBY). The beneficiaries themselves could register to avail the insurance 
cover under PMSBY through e-Shram portal launched on 26 August 2021. The 
e-Shram portal was a centrali sed database of unorgani sed workers in India, 
including those who work in MGNREG S. The portal was designed to  help 
workers access Government schemes and social security benefits . DPCs and 
POs were required to create awareness among workers about these schemes. 
In test checked blocks, only 35 per cent to 69 per cent of active workers were 
registered in e -Shram portal. Action was not taken to ensure enrolment of all 
eligible workers in insurance schemes by GPs after 2018. Audit noticed that 
though Annual Master Circular 2022 -23 stipulated for inclusion of social 
security scheme details in job cards to create awareness among beneficiaries, 
these details were not included in job cards issued by the test checked 
GPs. Beneficiary survey conducted by audit revealed that 44.01  per cent  of 
beneficiaries surveyed were not enrolled in any insurance schemes. 
Audit observed that sensitising and enrolling job card holders under these Bima 
Yojnas and further extending due benefits to them under it in case of unpleasant 
circumstances are some of the paramount responsibilities of the State. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that Audit observation has been noted and 
awareness programmes on the insurance schemes will be conducted for the 
workers. 
5.5 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
An important precondition for ensuring effective implementation of MGNREG 
Act was the creation of awareness among rural people and other stakeholders, 
particularly MGNREGS workers, in respect of the scheme provisions as well as 
their rights and entitlements. The IEC activities were to aim at facilitating 
dissemination of right based provisions of the Act to ensure that the workers 
 
12  JBY provided life coverage and disability benefits to rural people 
13  RSBY implemented by Ministry of Labour and Employment provided health insurance coverage 
for BPL families 

 
 
 44 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
know their right to demand wage employment and exercise their right by 
applying for jobs as per their need. Guidelines identified communication as an 
integral part of the implementation process and suggested a few modes of 
communication for conducting IEC activities such as conduct of meetings, wall 
paintings, door -to-door contact programmes, engagement of SHGs for 
educating the beneficiaries on their rights and entitlements , etc. Audit noticed 
deficiencies as detailed below: 
5.5.1 Non-preparation of IEC Plan 
Para 5.4.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for developing an IEC 
plan for the scheme with focus on reaching out to the registered workers as well 
as other groups which could benefit from the scheme. The IEC plan should 
clearly indicate State, Di strict, Block and local level activities. Annual Master 
Circulars prescribed for nominating State IEC Nodal officers to look after IEC 
activities in the State. 
Audit noticed that though a  Programme Officer (IEC) was posted in August 
2009 as nodal officer in the State Mission, Annual IEC plan was prepared only 
for the year 2022-23. Further, no action was taken to ensure the conduct of IEC 
activities at lower levels. Of the 24 test checked GPs, IEC activities were 
undertaken by only four GPs and incurred only ₹8,400 from Administrative 
Expenditure Fund during the audit period. 
Audit noticed that despite the State Mission’s instruction (April 2019) to JPCs 
to widely advertise individual beneficiary asset creation projects and eligibility 
criteria in newspapers to attract more beneficiaries, no such activities were 
carried out. 
The MoRD Guidelines on UNNATI skilling project launched in 2019 -20 
though stipulated for giving wide publicity through IEC activities about the 
project, no specific IEC activities were undertaken resulting in ineffective 
implementation of UNNATI as detailed in Paragraph 3.4.2. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that d ue to the shortage of Administrative 
Expenses Fund, IEC activities were affected under the scheme. The IEC plan 
for the State has been prepared for the year 2025-26 and provided to the districts.  
However, the fact remains that PRIs/State failed to fully utilize one of the 
important means available for registering demands, creating awareness and 
redressing grievances. 
5.5.2 Non-inclusion of MGNREGS services in Citizen’s Charter 
According to para 13.12.1 of Operational Guidelines, Citizens’ Charter should 
cover all aspects of the duties of panchayats and officials under the MGNREG 
Act. It should describe the specific steps involved in implementing the 
provisions of the Act and lay  down the minimum service levels mandated by 
these provisions on the Panchayats and the officers concerned. Though test  
checked GPs in Kerala had published and displayed citizen charter in Panchayat 
offices, minimum service levels for MGNREGS activities were not included in 
the published charter.    
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate action will be 
implemented. 

 
 
 45 
Chapter V – Registration and Employment  
5.5.3 Shortfall in conducting Rozgar Diwas 
Para 3.3 (i) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for organizing Rozgar 
Diwas by every GP at least once every month. At this event, the GP should 
proactively invite applications for work from potential workers for the current, 
as well as subsequent q uarters. The ‘Employment Guarantee Day’ should be 
earmarked for processing work applications and related activities such as 
disclosure of information, allocation of work, payment of wages and payment 
of unemployment allowances. Audit noticed that test chec ked GPs failed to 
achieve the envisaged target of conducting monthly  Rozgar Diwas during the 
period 2019-20 to 2023 -24. Shortfall in organi sing the Rozgar Diwas ranged 
between 36 per cent and 98 per cent.  
Audit noticed that the State Mission had directed (July 2022) GPs to conduct 
special Rozgar Diwas once in three months for analysing work demand of 
differently abled and elderly people and finding solutions to the problems they 
face in worksites. But Special Rozgar Diwas was not conducted by any of the 
test checked GPs. 
Audit observed that non -conducting IEC activities had resulted in poor 
dissemination of the rights and entitlements available under the scheme. This 
was also evident from the beneficiary survey conducted by Audit.  
Regarding non-conduct of Rozgar Diwas, Government stated (June 2025) that 
though directions were issued for conducting Rozgar Diwas once in a month, 
there was a gap in organising the event properly.  
However, the r eply is silent about non -conducting special Rozgar Diwas by 
GPs. 
Recommendation 10: The Government may 
• prepare a State level IEC plan and take action to strengthen the IEC 
activities to create adequate awareness among the beneficiaries and 
public regarding the rights/entitlements available under MGNREG 
Act. 
• direct GPs to conduct surveys and special drives and utilise available 
data with various line departments to identify eligible households and 
differently abled individuals including vulnerable persons and provide 
employment under the scheme.
     IEC- Beneficiary survey results 
Survey of 3 34 beneficiaries in 24 test checked GPs  revealed ineffective IEC 
activities as given below: 
• 81.14 per cent (271 numbers) of beneficiaries stated that they did not receive 
dated receipts to ensure eligibility for unemployment allowances. 
• 44.01 per cent  (147 numbers) of beneficiaries were not enrolled in any 
insurance schemes.    
• 55.69 per cent  (186 numbers) of beneficiaries were not aware about the 
grievance redressal mechanism involving ombudsperson at the district level.  

 
 
 47 
Chapter V – Registration and Employment  
  
Chapter 
6 
 
 
Execution of 
Works 

 
 
 48 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 

 
 
47 
CHAPTER VI 
EXECUTION OF WORKS 
 
 
 
The MGNREGS has the potential to transform rural areas by creating durable 
assets that would not only enhance the livelihood security of rural poor but also 
result in substantial infrastructural development in rural areas.  Creation of 
durable assets and securing livelihood of rural households can also be facilitated 
through convergence of MGNREG Act works with resources of other 
programmes/schemes available with Grama Panchayats (GPs) and other line 
departments. 
Section 4 (3), Schedule I of MGNREG Act categorises the works taken up under 
MGNREGS into four categories as shown in the Chart 6.1. 
Chart 6.1: Work categories under MGNREGS 
(Source: MGNREG Act, 2005) 
Of 15.58 lakh  works that obtained Administrative and Technical Sanctions  
during the audit period , 75,167 works were remaining incomplete, after 
incurring expenditure of ₹662 crore and 3.09 lakh works (19.87 per cent) were 
not taken up.  The wage-to-material ratio fell significantly below the mandated 
60:40 during the period 2019 -20 to 2023-24. Though State Mission received 
an amount of ₹ 18.46 crore (March 2017) towards G oI and State Share for 
construction of 923 Anganwadi centres, only 3 01 Anganwadi centres were 
completed (March 2024) incurring an expenditure of ₹5.25 crore. Audit 
noticed instances of malpractices carried out in muster rolls in Pudur GP 
resulting in misappropriation of MGNREGS funds to the tune of ₹6. 02 lakh. 
Scrutiny of t he test checked 240 works revealed that 1 2 works completed 
incurring expenditure of ₹ 22.88 lakh during the audit period were either 
defunct or not in use rendering the expenditure unfruitful. 
 
Chapter 
6 
Execution of Works 


 
 
 48 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
6.1 Status of execution of works  
Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for formulating a strategy to address 
incomplete works. Works initiated were to be completed in a timely manner to 
ensure that meaningful benefits accrued to the local community. 
The status of works approved, completed and ongoing at State level during the 
period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 are given in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Details of works approved, completed and ongoing (State level) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Total Works 
approved by GP 
Works  obtained 
AS/TS during 
the year  
Works 
Completed 
Works 
Physically 
completed14 
Works Ongoing 
Works 
Suspended  
Work not started 
after obtaining 
AS/TS 
Number 
of works 
Number 
of works 
Number 
of works 
Expen-
diture 
(₹) 
Number 
of works 
Expen-
diture 
(₹) 
Number 
of works 
Expen-
diture 
(₹) 
Number 
of works 
Expen-
diture 
(₹) 
Number 
of works 
2019-20 507976 297556 224831 300513.54 3294 1638.01 3941 2571.25 8 0.58 65482 
2020-21 523342 371979 288553 405627.00 2812 1198.74 4410 2524.59 2 0 76202 
2021-22 449007 331787 262608 402481.00 827 63.57 6433 4642.08 0 0 61919 
2022-23 329048 244304 192269 338494.90 184 2.99 11833 11772.91 0 0 40018 
2023-24 380408 312224 197803 310801.60 3 0.39 48550 44689.66 0 0 65868 
Total 2189781 1557850 1166064 1757918.04 7120 2903.70 75167 66200.49 10 0.58 309489 
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission) 
It can be seen that: 
 Of the 15.58 lakh works that obtained Administrative and Technical 
Sanctions (AS and TS) during the Audit period, 75.31 per cent (11.73 
lakh) works were completed (including physically completed). The 
percentage of completion was in the range of 63.35 to 79.40 per cent 
during the five year period.  
 75,167 works were ongoing or remaining incomplete  (July 2025), after 
incurring an expenditure of ₹662 crore. This not only indicates that the 
assets remained incomplete and unusable to the community/individual 
beneficiaries but also indicate s that the wage benefits were delayed to 
the beneficiaries. 
 Of 15.58 lakh works that received AS/TS, 3.09 lakh works (19.87 per 
cent) were not taken up.  The percentage of works not taken up was in 
the range 16.38 to 22.01 per cent during the five year period evidencing 
that works were being approved in a routine manner rather than insisting 
on completion of works already taken up. 
Audit noticed that though Operational Guidelines prescribed for formulating a 
strategy for completion of incomplete works by GPs and State Governments 
 
14  Completed but not entered in MIS 

 
 
 49 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
were urged to issue necessary directions in this regard, huge pendency indicated 
that no concerted efforts were taken to complete the incomplete works.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that necessary action will be taken to ensure 
timely completion of works. It was also stated that 91.92 per cent of works taken 
up were completed as of June 2025. Delay in getting material fund, local issues, 
technical issues etc were the reasons for non-completion of the works.  
However, the fact remains that the efforts under the scheme to improve the 
quality of life of the rural poor by creating durable assets fell short of the 
objective in the absence of timely completion of works. 
Recommendation 11: The Government may review the status of pending 
works and devise a proper course of action either to complete them or close 
them including fixing of responsibility for loss to Government exchequer. 
6.1.1 Works reported as completed after incurring less than five per cent 
of the sanctioned estimate 
Scrutiny of the MIS Report No . R6.12 (Dynamic Report for Monitoring  and 
details of works) of test-checked GPs for the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24, 
revealed that 103 works were shown as completed even though the expenditure 
incurred on these works was less than 5 per cent of the sanctioned estimated 
cost.  Details are given in Table 6.2.  
Table 6.2: Expenditure (less than 5 per cent of estimated cost) on works shown as completed 
(₹ in lakh) 
Block Year Number of 
works 
Estimate 
amount  Expenditure Percentage of 
expenditure 
Chirayinkeezhu 2021-22 32 17.78 0.42 2.36 
2022-23 3 1.70 0.01 0.59 
Vellanad 2021-22 3 1.32 0.02 1.52 
2022-23 2 0.78 0.02 2.56 
Attappadi 2021-22 10 1.76 0.02 1.14 
2022-23 8 0.97 0.02 2.06 
Malampuzha 2021-22 26 8.95 0.16 1.79 
2022-23 5 4.11 0.17 4.14 
Kasaragod 2021-22 2 0.85 0.03 3.53 
2022-23 1 0.50 0.02 4.00 
Neeleshwaram 
2021-22 9 7.21 0.05 0.69 
2022-23 1 0.28 0.00 0.00 
2023-24 1 0.30 0.00 0.00 
  103 46.51 0.94  
(Source: Details furnished by MGNREGS State Mission) 
It is seen from the table that expenditure incurred on these works ranged from 
zero to 4.14 per cent of the estimated cost. Details of physical progress achieved 
in respect of these works were not available in the MIS. Audit noticed that 
expenditure on these works were part payment of unskilled wage component 
and meagre expenditure was incurred on material though provided in the 
estimates. 

 
 
 50 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective actions will be 
implemented. 
6.1.2 Category-wise works undertaken 
Schedule I Para 4 of the MGNREG Act provides the list of permissible works, 
which are categorized into four, as shown in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: List of permissible works 
Category A Public works relating to Natural Resource Management 
Category B Community assets or individual assets for vulnerable sections 
Category C Common infrastructure including for NRLM compliant Self-Help Groups 
Category D Rural Infrastructure 
(Source: MGNREG Act) 
These four categories were further divided into 23 sub -categories. These sub - 
categories covered 266 types of works permissible under the Programme. 
Category-wise status of works undertaken by the test checked GPs during the 
period 2019 to 2024 are detailed in Table 6.4. 
Table 6.4: Category-wise works undertaken in selected GPs 
Category of 
Works 
Total number of 
works taken up 
Number of 
works completed 
Number of 
ongoing works 
Number of works 
not started yet 
A 20,366 15,953 1,657 2,756 
B 17,621 12,399 1,512 3,710 
C 125 31 43 51 
D 13,064 6,501 2,454 4,109 
Total 51,176 34,884 5,666 10,626 
(Source: Details furnished by test checked GPs) 
Audit noticed that only 125 works (0.25 per cent) were taken up under category 
C, which included works for promoting agricultural productivity by creating 
durable infrastructure required for bio -fertilizers and post -harvest facilities 
including pucca storage facility for agricultural produce and common work-
sheds for livelihood activities of NRLM compliant Self -Help Groups (SHGs). 
Furthermore, of the 125 works taken up, only 31 works (25 per cent) have been 
completed. Not taking up works  under category C together with poor 
implementation of taken up works indicates that adequate importance was not 
given by  test checked  GPs for creation of  durable community level 
infrastructure for  promoting agricultural productivity thereby ensuring 
livelihood security of the rural poor. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that out of the 266 permitted works under 
MGNREGS, only three works are listed under category C. Due to this the 
number of works taken up under category C was low.  
Audit is of the view that though only three types of works are listed under 
category C, in view of the presence of large number of ( 2,45,739) NRLM 
compliant SHGs in the State 15, works related to creation of infrastructure for 
promoting livelihood activities of SHGs could have been taken up.  Further, the 
 
15  as of 01 July 2025  

 
 
 51 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
reply is silent about the 75 per cent  of the works taken up remaining 
incomplete/not started. 
6.2 Non-compliance with the mandated 60:40 Wage-to-Material Ratio 
One of the objectives of MGNREG Act was the creation of durable assets and 
thereby strengthening the livelihood resource base of the rural poor.  
A c c o r d i n g  to  MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013, ratio of wage 
cost to material costs should not be less than the minimum norm of 60:40. This 
60:40 ratio should be maintained at the GP level for all works undertaken by the 
GP. 
However, it was noticed that the wage-to-material ratio fell significantly below 
the mandated 60:40 in the test checked BPs during the period 2019-20 to 2023-
24 as shown in Chart 6.2.  
Chart 6.2: Wage-to-Material ratio 
(Source: Details furnished by State Mission, MGNREGS, Kerala)  
The material cost including skilled and semi -skilled wages ranged from 11 to 
18 per cent  indicating that the test checked BPs gave very low priority for 
creation of durable assets.  
This was also evident from the analysis of expenditure incurred on works 
undertaken by test checked GPs. Audit noticed that during the period from 
2019-20 to 2023 -24, expenditure of 99 per cent  of works executed by test 
checked GPs was below ₹five lakh. Expenditure analysis of works executed by 
test checked GPs is depicted in Chart 6.3. 
Chart 6.3: Chart showing expenditure analysis of works executed 
(Source: Details furnished by State Mission, MGNREGS, Kerala) 
88.85 82.30
90.26 86.43 86.79
11.15 17.70
9.74 13.57 13.21
0
20
40
60
80
100
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Percentage
Wage percentage Material percentage
0.44
0.72
0.51
0.22
0.54
15.97
22.58
24.55
28.01
34.53
30.33
35.07
26.26
31.30
20.61
53.26
41.63
48.68
40.48
44.32
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Percentage of works executed
Below ₹1 Lakh Between ₹1 Lakh  and ₹3 Lakh Between ₹3 Lakh and ₹5 Lakh Above ₹5 Lakh

 
 
 52 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
It is seen from the chart that expenditure of 40 to 53 per cent of works executed 
was below ₹ one lakh and expenditure incurred on 65 to 84 per cent of works 
was below ₹ three lakh. Preparation of Annual Plans, with significant portion of 
works costing below ₹three lakh together with low expenditure on materials, 
indicates that the test checked GPs neglected the scheme objective of creation 
of durable assets while preparing Annual Plans.   
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective action will be 
implemented. 
Recommendation 12: The Government may take concrete efforts to improve 
wage- material ratio by creation of durable assets for strengthening the 
livelihood resource base of the rural poor.  
6.3 Non-permissible works  
According to the Operational Guidelines, only those components of admissible 
works that lead to the creation of durable assets should be taken up under 
MGNREGS. Items of expenditure that are recurring in nature and/or do not lead 
to creation of durable assets, were not permitted under MGNREGS. Besides, it 
was the duty of the Block Programme Officer (BPO) and District Programme 
Co-ordinator (DPC) to scrutinise the Annual Plans of GPs against the list of 
permissible works as specified in MGNREG  Act while cons olidating the 
Annual Action Plan at Block and District level. 
Audit noticed that three test checked GPs carried out canal cleaning work  
continuously for three years during the period 2019-20 to 2021-22 incurring 
expenditure of ₹261.58 lakh. Details are given in Table 6.5. 
Table 6.5: Non-permissible works done 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of GP Work details Sanctioned 
amount  
Amount 
spent 
1 Akathethara Cleaning of canal 
continuously for three years 90.30 82.59 
2 Marutharode Cleaning of canal 
continuously for three years 154.82 125.82 
3 Pudussery Cleaning of canal 
continuously for three years 61.58 53.17 
   Total 261.58 
(Source: Details furnished by test checked GPs) 
Execution of non -permissible works continuously for three years by the GPs 
indicated negligence on the part of BPO and DPC while approving Annual Plan 
of GPs. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective action would be 
taken to prevent recurrence in future.  
Recommendation 13: The Government may take action to recoup 
inadmissible expenditure incurred under MGNREGS. 
6.4 Malpractices noticed in Pudur GP 
Implementation of a work commences with generation of Muster Roll by BPO. 
For unskilled wages, Muster Rolls were generated with names of beneficiaries 
printed in the Muster Roll. However, for skilled/semi -skilled wages, blank  

 
 
 53 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
Muster Rolls were generated by BPO and names of skilled/semi -skilled 
beneficiaries who attend the work were entered in the Muster Roll by the Mate. 
On completion of the muster roll Accountant carried out the data entry in the 
MIS. 
Bank account details of beneficiaries were  captured in the  MIS by GP at the  
time of registration. Bank account details once registered could be changed only 
with the permission of JPC on the recommendation of the BPO. Audit noticed 
that no specific procedure was prescribed by State Mission for effecting such 
changes. Procedure followed by Attapadi BP was as below: 
• A copy of the written request signed by the Secretary of the GP  with 
designation seal and office seal showing the name of beneficiary, 
skilled/unskilled registration number and bank account number was to 
be sent to BPO by e-mail. 
• The BPO after scrutiny would forward this to the JPC for unfreezing the 
present bank account in the MIS to make changes. 
• On unfreezing, the GP would make necessary changes in the bank 
account data and intimate the same to BPO for freezing the accounts. 
On scrutiny of payment of works executed  in Pudur GP, Audit noticed multiple 
types of malpractices carried out in Muster Rolls and in MIS, to siphon off 
Government money, through which skilled and unskilled wages of ₹6.02 lakh 
were paid to persons who did not participate in the works. Details are as below: 
I. Malpractices noticed in skilled muster rolls 
Instances of malpractices noticed in skilled muster rolls are detailed below: 
(i) Audit noticed 16 instances involving wage payments of ₹71,700 in which 
names of the beneficiaries participated in the work were removed from the 
physical muster roll, after closure of the muster roll, and replaced them with 
persons who did not participate in the work. Corresponding entries were 
made in MIS and  wages paid to persons who had not worked. Fake 
signatures of these persons were also made in the muster rolls. Details are 
given in Appendix 6.1, Case 1.  
(ii) In 21 instances involving wage payments of ₹89,450, persons who did not 
participate in the particular work were added to the physical muster roll of 
that job, after closure of the muster  roll. Fake signatures of  these persons 
were also made in the muster rolls. Corresponding entries were made in 
MIS and wage paid to persons who did not participate in the work. Details 
are given in Appendix 6.1, Case 2. 
(iii) In 15 instances, involving ₹66,210, Bank Account numbers of the 
beneficiaries who participated in the work were replaced in the MIS with 
Account numbers of persons who did not participate in that work. Hence, 
wages were paid to the persons who did not part icipate in the work. No 
change was made in the physical muster roll. Details are given in Appendix 
6.1, Case 3. 
 

 
 
 54 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
For changing the account number of the beneficiary, a request signed by 
the MGNREGS staff of the GP, showing the designation as “for Secretary” 
was sent to BPO. No supporting documents were attached to confirm  that 
the changed bank account number belonged to the beneficiary shown in the 
request. Though the request was not signed by the Secretary of the GP, 
BPO without any verification recommended JPC to unfreeze  the bank 
account for effecting changes in the Account Number of the beneficiary. 
As Aadhaar based payment system was not introduced for the payment of 
wages of skilled/semi -skilled workers, MIS did not detect any mismatch 
between the name in the bank account and name in the Aadhaar and amount 
was transferred to the bank account of persons who did not participate in 
the work.  
(iv) In 25 instances involving ₹1,16,142 no change was made in the physical 
muster roll, but instead of recording the name of beneficiary who actually 
participated in the work in the MIS, the name of person who did not 
participate in the work was recorded. Hence, physical muster roll and e -
muster roll in MIS indicated names of different persons an d wages were 
paid to persons who did not participate in the work. Details are given in 
Appendix 6.1, Case 4. 
In the presence of Grama Panchayat Secretary, Audit interacted with Mates, 
who participated in the works in which physical muster rolls were found 
tampered. Mates stated that the alterations were not made by them and these 
persons did not participate in the respective works, indicating that the alterations 
in the muster rolls were made by the MGNREGS staff. 
Though beneficiaries who had participated in the work did not receive wages, 
due to persistent delay in receiving the wages of skilled/semi -skilled workers, 
many of the workers could not identify non -receipt of wages for a particular 
work. 
II. Malpractices with respect to Unskilled muster rolls 
In 139 instances (51 works) involving ₹2,58,562, Audit noticed that along with 
group demand applications submitted  by the beneficiaries, new names were  
inserted by Mate/MGNREG Staff and created bogus demand for work.  Muster 
rolls were generated by including names of persons who did not demand work. 
While closing the muster roll fake signatures of the added persons were made 
in the muster roll as a proof of attendance. Details of works and payment 
made are given in Appendix 6.2. 
On interaction with three beneficiaries in the presence of the Secretary, Pudur 
GP, the beneficiaries stated that they did not participate in the work and the 
unskilled wages received were collected from them by the Mates.  
Audit observed that perpetrators exploited the loopholes in the system such as 
manual entry of skilled beneficiaries into the muster roll and not monitoring 
skilled labour through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS), absence 
of Aadhaar based payment s ystem for skilled/semi-skilled wage payments as 
well as lack of monitoring by GP/DP/State Mission  and engaged in fraudulent 
practices to misappropriate MGNREGS funds to the tune of ₹6.02 lakh. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that directions were given to JPC, Palakkad 
to file an FIR against the defaulting officials of Pudur GP. It was also stated that 

 
 
 55 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
appropriate corrective action will be implemented to prevent recurrence in 
future. 
Recommendation 14: Government may address the system deficiencies and 
take necessary corrective action to prevent recurrence in future 
6.5 Non-verification of the bills/vouchers at the worksite 
Para 7.11.5 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated for verification and 
certification of all the bills/vouchers of the worksite by workers themselves. 
When a work is in progress, the workers engaged in that work, should select not 
less than five workers from among themselves, on a weekly rotational basis, for 
scrutiny and certification of bills at  least once a week. Scrutiny of records of 
275 sampled works in the selected 24 GPs revealed that the system for 
verification/certification of bills/vouchers, envisaged for ensuring the quantity 
of materials supplied, was not operationalised.  
6.6 Excess payment  
Pudur GP constructed a pond -Vellingiri Pudur Kulam Nirmanam (Work code: 
1606002002/IF/498797) for an individual beneficiary (April 2021) through  
MGNREGS by incurring expenditure of ₹1.50 lakh. On Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV), audit noticed that a well was constructed instead of a pond. 
Scrutiny of Measurement Book (MB) of the work revealed that depth  of the 
well was recorded as six metre and radius as 2.65 metre. However, actual 
dimensions were three metres depth and 1.8 metre radius. Audit observed that 
payment was made without ascertaining exact measurements by A ccredited 
Engineer, resulting in excess payment of ₹0.59 lakh. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate corrective action will be 
initiated. 
6.7 Unfruitful expenditure  
Creation of durable assets and strengthening of rural livelihood base were 
important objectives under the scheme. However, JPV of the 240 test checked 
works revealed that 12 works completed during the audit period incurring 
expenditure of ₹22.88 lakh were either defunct or not in use rendering the 
expenditure incurred unfruitful. Details are given in succeeding paragraphs. 
6.7.1 Construction of Anganwadi Centres 
Anganwadi Centres were constructed under MGNREGS in convergence with 
the Integrated Child Development Scheme ( ICDS) of the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development (MWCD) from 2016 -17 onwards. MGNREGS 
provides ₹ five lakh per  Anganwadi centre  and the additional amount for 
construction should be borne by ICDS/MWCD and/or any other scheme. The 
MGNREGS contribution was enhanced to ₹ eight lakh from January 2023. 
State Mission received (March 2017) an amount of ₹18.46  crore towards GoI 
and State Share  for construction of 923 Anganwadi centres. Though 675 
Anganwadi Centres were taken up,  only 301 Anganwadi Centres were 
completed (March 2024) incurring expenditure of ₹5.25 crore. Scrutiny of 

 
 
 56 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
construction of Anganwadi buildings in test checked GPs revealed the 
following: 
 Kattakada GP  commenced construction of an  Anganwadi building 
(Work Code 1614011002/AV/2182) during March 2018. As per MIS, 
the building was completed during 2021 -22 incurring expenditure of 
₹4.27 lakh. However, during JPV (December 2024), Audit noticed that 
the building remained  incomplete with flooring and electrification 
works pending. It was seen that the estimate was prepared and TS was 
accorded for ₹five lakh without including flooring and electrification. 
Though unskilled wage component was included in the estimate, no 
expenditure was incurred towards unskilled wages.  
 Malampuzha GP prepared estimate of ₹10.85 lakh for construction of 
Anganwadi building. Though the work was commenced in March 2018, 
work remained incomplete and expenditure of only ₹1.69 lakh was 
incurred (March 2024). During JPV , Audit noticed that only the 
foundation was constructed and the site was in abandoned condition. 
Non-completion of Anganwadi buildings even after six years of commencement 
of construction indicates laxity on the part of GPs in ensuring timely completion 
of projects taken up, resulting in non-achievement of intended objectives of the 
project and unfruitful expenditure of ₹5.96 lakh. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate action will be initiated to 
complete the construction of Anganwadi buildings. 
6.7.2 Infructuous expenditure due to non -maintenance of saplings 
planted under Tree Plantation schemes 
According to MGNREG Act , 2005, tree plantation is a permissible work.  
Afforestation, tree plantation and horticulture in common and forest lands, road 
margins, canal bunds, tank foreshores and coastal belts should be implemented 
by providing right of usufruct to the vulnerable households covered in 
Paragraph 5 of Schedule I of the Act. According to Para 7.6 of Annual Master 
Circulars (AMC), the plantation works may cover the cost of labour and 
material component as per the estimate prepared including the ma intenance 
period for three to five  years (depending on the species). Further, for the 
protection of plantations, live fencing should be preferred, supported with ditch 
cum bund and for protection of  individual plants,  tree guards prepared from 
locally available plant material like Bamboo, etc., should be preferred. 
Scrutiny of four tree planation works implemented by three test checked GPs16, 
incurring expenditure of ₹5.14 lakh, revealed that estimates in respect of two 
works did not include fencing and maintenance required for the saplings. During 
JPV (June 2024) Audit noticed that there was no trace of planted saplings at the 
site in any of the four test checked sites. Absence of maintenance resulted in 
destruction of planted saplings. As such, the purpose of tree plantation project 
viz., afforestation and to provide livelihood for the poor did not materiali se 
resulting in infructuous expenditure of ₹5.14 lakh. 
 
16  Malampuzha, Kumbala and Madhur GPs 

 
 
 57 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
6.7.3 Execution of land development works 
According to MGNREG Act, categories A, B and C works are permissible 
works under land development. According to Annual Master Circular, 
durability of land development work should be for 15 to 25 years. 
Audit noticed that though land development works in the lands of individual  
households were permissible only for households mentioned  in para 5  of 
Schedule I, two test checked GPs 17 granted three individual land development 
works to SHGs/Joint Liability Groups (JLGs). An amount of ₹7.30 lakh was 
incurred for these land development works. However, Audit noticed that the 
lands were taken on lease by the SHGs/JLGs for three years. Durin g JPV no 
trace of farming activity carried out in the developed land were noticed even 
during the lease period. 
Implementation of land development works aimed at improving productivity, 
in the lands of beneficiaries other than those prescribed in the Act coupled with 
failure of GPs to ensure the farming activities on the developed lands indicates 
laxity of GPs in aligning with the objectives of the scheme. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate action will be implemented 
to prevent its recurrence.  
6.7.4 Construction of Goat sheds  
Construction of Goat sheds in Kuttichal GP and Pudussery GP were taken up 
by the GPs under the category  B, improving productivity of the lands of 
households under Para 5 of the Act. However, during JPV, Audit noticed that 
Goat sheds constructed in two GPs remained either incomplete or not utili sed 
due to non -receipt of material cost incurred by the beneficiaries as detailed 
below: 
Kuttichal GP - As per the MIS, construction of Goat shed  with the estimated 
cost of ₹75,760 was commenced during November 2021 and was completed in 
January 2024. An amount of ₹2,037 was shown as expenditure in the MIS. 
During JPV, Audit noticed (August 2024) that the Goat Shed was incomplete 
and only foundation was constructed. The beneficiary stated that the work was 
started with borrowed money and as there was no guarantee when the cost of 
material would be reimbursed from the GP, the material supplier stopped supply 
of materials on credit. The beneficiary sold his goats to make good the money 
he borrowed for the construction. 
Pudussery GP - The goat shed was constructed during 2020-21 with a total cost 
of ₹73,108. During JPV , Audit noticed that there was no goat rearing by the 
family. It was reported that the goat shed was constructed by borrowing money 
from other sources. Due to delay in receipt of material cost, the family sold their 
goats and paid the debt owed in connection with construction of goat shed. Audit 
noticed that though the work was completed in March 2021, FTO for material 
was generated only during January 2023 i.e., after a lapse of 22 months. 
Audit observed that due to lapse on the part of the State/GPs in timely release  
of material cost, the intended benefit was not obtained by the households. 
 
17  Anchuthengu and Mudakkal GPs 

 
 
 58 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
The Government stated (June 2025) that appropriate action will be initiated to 
ensure timely availability of funds. 
6.7.5 Construction of a Market centre in Ward 4 – Thrikkaripur GP 
Thrikkaripur GP  constructed (August 2021) a Marketing Centre under the 
scheme by incurring expenditure of ₹3.73 lakh. During JPV (November 2024), 
Audit noticed that the building was  in a deserted condition and  remained 
unutilised since completion of construction . The Secretary, Thrikkaripur GP 
stated that the vendors were reluctant to occupy the building as the building was 
not facing the PWD road. Audit observed that the wrong  selection of site 
resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹3.73 lakh incurred on the work.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that necessary action would be initiated. 
6.8 MIS login credentials – deficiencies  
There were two to three Accountant-cum-IT Assistants (AITA) in each selected 
GP. As per the job roles of AITAs, the majority of works were related to the 
data entry in MIS viz.,  registration, demand creation, preparation of Labour 
Budget, Muster Roll generation, Job creation, timely payment of wages, Job 
Card creation, updating of  skilled/semi-skilled worker registration, creation of 
demand for work in MIS, intimating Block Panchayat to create Muster rolls, 
Muster roll filling and wage list generation of skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled 
workers and sending the wage lists to the Secretary to generate FTOs, vendor 
registration, entering vendor account details in MIS and freezing the acco unts, 
material list generation, entry of bank account details in PFMS/NeFMS, 
reprocessing rejected FTO, etc.  
While verifying the MIS in the selected GPs, Audit noticed that though there 
were two to three AITAs in each GP, there was only one username and password 
for data entry in MIS. Hence, the login credentials were shared among the 
AITAs of each GP  and it was  not possible to identify the user  who had made 
any mistake or  done any manipulation in the MIS data. Usage of single 
username and password by multiple users makes it difficult to fix responsibility 
in the case of data manipulation. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that necessary action will be taken to ensure 
that staff have separate login credentials. 
6.9 Pendency in geo-tagging of works  
With an objective to improve the transparency, Operational Guidelines, 2013 
stipulated for geo-tagging of all MGNREGS assets. Geo-tagged time-stamped 
photographs of the site before the start of work (Stage I), at intermediate stage 
(Stage II) and after its completion (Stage III) should be taken as a record of the 
work and attached to Project Completion Report and uploaded onto 
NREGASoft at three stages - beginning of the work, mid -way and on work 
completion. In respect of complete d works, it should be geo-tagged within 30 
days of completion of work. 
Scrutiny of MIS data regarding geo -tagging of assets created during 2019 to 
2024 for the selected blocks revealed the following:  

 
 
 59 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
 In stage I, out of 74,770 works (December 2024), 11 ,157 (14.92 per 
cent) works were shared but not geo -tagged and 807 (1.08 per cent ) 
works were still pending for sharing. 
 In stage II, out of 59,254 works, 2,055 (3.47 per cent) works were shared 
but not geo -tagged and 1 ,932 (3.26 per cent) works were pending for 
sharing. 
 In stage III, out of 48 ,655 works, 6 ,946 works (1 4.28 per cent) were 
shared but not geo-tagged. 
Pendency in geo-tagging works indicated laxity on the part of GPs to adhere to 
the provisions in the guidelines envisaged to ensure transparency in the 
implementation of works. 
6.10 Irregular payment of MGNREGS wages  
Audit noticed that the 11 Animators 18 working at Tribal Kudumbashree  
Mission, Agali, Attappadi had recorded attendance in MGNREGS jobs on the 
same days they claimed to have worked as Animators. Similarly, members of 
Pudur GP and Agali GP were paid unskilled wages on same days they attended 
the board meetings of the Panchayats. The  irregular payments in these cases 
worked out to ₹0.98 lakh. Details are given in Appendix 6.3. Audit observed 
that non -deployment of Mates as envisaged in the guidelines and poor 
monitoring of the MGNREGS works by the GP officials resulted in recording 
fake attendance.
 
18  Community resource persons of Kudumbashree mission in Scheduled Tribe areas 

 
 
 71 
Chapter VI – Execution of Works  
  
Chapter 
7 
 
 
Monitoring, Grievance 
redressal and Social Audit 

 
 
 72 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 

 
 
 61 
Chapter VII – Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit   
CHAPTER VII 
MONITORING, GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND SOCIAL 
AUDIT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The substantial funds involved in the implementation of MGNREGS coupled 
with its implementation across the State in 941 GPs, makes the monitoring and 
evaluation of the scheme challenging. It was thus imperative to have  a robust 
and efficient monitoring, evaluation and review mechanism of the scheme. 
Chapter 14 of the MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013 specifies the 
aspects of  quality management and quality monitoring mechanisms. The 
MGNREGS deals with the creation of assets, hence, to ensure that the created 
assets achieve the objectives and to ensure that the assets created are durable, 
quality management is vital. Quality Man agement has three distinct aspects 
such as quality control at site, quality supervision and quality monitoring. 
Besides, quality management other aspects such as State Employment 
Guarantee Council, Social Audit, transparency and accountability through 
grievance redressal mechanism and system of Ombudsperson also forms part of 
monitoring of MGNREGS. Analysis of the monitoring mechanism in the State, 
districts and test checked PRIs revealed the following: 
7.1 Framework for Monitoring 
The MGNREG Act, 2005 and the Operational Guidelines, 2013 prescribe 
monitoring at State level and District level through Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committees, District Quality Monitors, State Quality Monitors, State 
Employment Guarantee Council and Social A udit by Social Audit Unit . 
Monitoring framework is depicted in Chart 7.1. 
Though State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) was to prepare Annual 
Report on the outcome of the scheme and present before State Legislature, 
Annual Reports only for the years 2021-22 and 2023-24 were prepared. None 
of the Reports were placed in State Legislature till date (March 2024). State 
Vigilance Cell (SVC) though constituted, no further orders/guidelines were 
issued by the State for empowering the Cell to function as envisaged in the 
guidelines. The very important aspect of ascertaining quality of assets created 
under MGNREGS was neglected by the State due to non -appointment of 
Director (QM) at the State level and delay in appointing State and District 
Quality Monitors. Non-submission of action taken report by GP/BP, absence 
of effective complaint tracking system, etc., indicated ineffective functioning 
of Ombudspersons in ensuring transparency in implementation of 
MGNREGS. There was short release of GoI funds to the tune of ₹50.71 crore 
towards Social Audit. Social Audit conducted in GPs ranged from 21.52 per 
cent to 98.72 per cent during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
Chapter 
7 
Monitoring, Grievance redressal 
and Social Audit 

 
 
 62 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Chart 7.1: Monitoring Framework for MGNREGS works at State level 
(Source: MGNREG Act, 2005 and MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013) 
7.1.1 Functioning of State Employment Guarantee Council 
Section 12 of MGNREG Act, 2005 envisaged setting up of State Employment 
Guarantee Council (SEGC) for the purpose of regular monitoring and reviewing 
the implementation of the Act at the State level. The SEGC was constituted in 
September 2009 with the Minister for LSGD as the Chairman to advise the 
Government on the implementation of the scheme and also to evaluate and 
monitor it. 
According to Section 12 (3) of MGNREG Act,  2005 SEGC should prepare  
Annual Report on outcome of the scheme and present before State Legislature, 
facilitating oversight by elected representatives. This Report should contain, 
inter alia, the action taken by the State Government on the findings of the social 
audit and summary report of cases disposed by Ombudsperson. Audit noticed 
that Annual Reports only for the years 2021 -22 and 2023-24 were prepared by 
SEGC. Further, no reports were placed in the State Legislature till date (March 
2024). 
This contravened the provisions of the Act as well as directions of MoRD. 
Moreover, the envisaged monitoring and steering of the scheme at the highest 
level was reduced to being a perfunctory exercise, reducing accountability of 
Executive to the Legislature. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that SEGC had approved Annual Reports 
for 2021-22 and 2023-24. However, the reply is silent on the non-submission of 
the reports before Legislature till date. 
7.1.2 Vigilance Monitoring Mechanism 
According to the MGNREG Act Operational Guidelines, 2013 the State should 
make an arrangement for a three -tier vigilance mechanism viz., at the State, 
district and GP level to proactively detect irregularities in the implementation 
of the Act and to follow up detected irregularities  and malfeasance, including 
those identified during social audit and ensure that the guilty are punished and 
recoveries of misspent funds duly made good. These cells were required to be 
set up for receiving complaints about the i mplementation of the scheme, for 
conducting regular field visits to detect irregularities, and for taking suo-moto 
action based on reports appearing in the media, visit to the work sites and 
interaction with workers. The GoK issued orders constituting State and District 


 
 
 63 
Chapter VII – Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit   
Vigilance Cells in January 2021. Analysis of functioning of State, District and 
GP level vigilance monitoring mechanism revealed the following: 
 State Vigilance Cell -  Audit noticed that other than issuing sanction 
(January 2021) for constitution of State Vigilance Cell (SVC) no further 
orders/guidelines were issued by the State for empowering the cell to 
function as envisaged in the guidelines. Further, no  action plan was 
prepared for the functioning of the Vigilance Cell and annual reports on 
its activities were not submitted to the Government. In the absence of 
action plan, no activities as envisaged in the guidelines were carried out 
by the SVC. It was also noticed th at no suo-moto action was taken on 
the basis of media reports and visits to  worksites, interaction with 
workers, etc. 
 District Vigilance Cells - Audit noticed that though GoK had issued 
orders (January 2021) for constitution of District Vigilance Cells (DVC), 
the Cells were not constituted in the test checked districts as the post of 
Assistant Development Commissioner (General), the head of DVC, 
became extinct consequent to the  integration of various wings of LSGD. 
Though orders were issued (January 2024) for re-constituting the DVCs 
with Assistant Director (Administration), as head, the DVCs have not 
commenced their function (January 2025). 
 Vigilance and monitoring committee at GP level - According to para 
13.6.4 of Operational Guidelines 2013, the Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committee (VMC) at GP level should act as a forum for concurrent 
social audit.  The functions of the VMC include assessing quality of 
works, assessing cost, end to end reporting on work, qualitative 
assessment of nature of work, etc. Audit noticed that though Monitoring 
Committee reports were to be placed at the next meeting of the Gram a 
Sabha, none of the monitoring committees in test checked GPs 
submitted monitoring reports.   
Agreeing to the audit observation that SVC was not provided with manpower 
for empowering the Cell, the Government stated (June 2025) that functioning 
of Vigilance Cell would be intensified and annual reports will be submitted to 
SEGC.  
7.1.3 Quality Monitoring 
As substantial amounts are being spent through MGNREG S, if implemented 
effectively, the programme has the potential to transform rural areas by creating 
durable assets that would not only enhance the livelihood security of rural poor 
but also result in substantial  infrastructural development in rural areas. It is 
therefore of utmost importance to ensure quality and durability of assets being 
created under MGNREG S. Scrutiny of quality monitoring mechanisms in the 
State and districts revealed the following: 
7.1.3.1  State  level  Quality  Monitoring 
Paragraph 14.7 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 specified that State Quality 
Monitoring Unit comprising State Quality Monitors (SQM) for each district in 
the State and a Nodal Officer of the rank of at least Superintending Engineer 
(SE), designated as Director (QM), should be constituted.  Further, A nnual 

 
 
 64 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Master Circular (AMC)  2019-20 specified that a Quality Monitoring Cell 
should be constituted at the State and District levels. Provisions related to 
appointment of Director (QM) and SQM were not adhered to in any of the test-
checked districts as discussed below: 
 Director (QM) was not appointed. State MGNREGS Engineer in the 
State Mission was assigned with analysis of SQM reports. The State 
Engineer was in the cadre of Assistant Executive Engineer.  
 State Quality Monitors were appointed only in March 2023. Though 
SQM was to inspect at least 10 per cent of work sites, since appointment 
of SQM only 28 works were inspected (May 2025) in test checked three 
Districts. 
 Though corrective action on the remarks of the monitored works should 
be sent by GP to the DPC/PO, corrective  action by GP/BP was not 
ensured by DPC/PO/SQMs. 
 Though district wise quarterly reports containing measures to be taken 
to prevent recurrence of deviations in planning, designing, selection of 
worksites, etc., was to be prepared by the SQM and submitted to State 
Government, no quarterly reports were submitted in respect of six districts 
and only one quarterly report was submitted in respect of five districts. 
 Though action taken on the reports and suggestions of SQMs  was to be 
reviewed by the SEGC, no action taken reports on the suggestions of 
SQM were prepared by the State Mission (November 2024). 
Due to delay in appointment of State Quality Monitors and non -ensuring the 
effective functioning of the State quality monitoring mechanism, quality and 
durability of the executed works were not ensured and corrective action 
envisaged for ensuring quality of works did not materialise. 
7.1.3.2  District  Level Quality  Monitoring 
According to Annual Master Circulars issued from  2019-20 to 2023-24 there 
should be a District Quality Monitoring (DQM) cell which would have a panel 
of 10 to 15 technical officials in the  cadre of retired  Assistant Engineer and 
above under Executive Engineer/Superintending Engineer. Audit noticed that 
provisions related to DQM were not adhered to as detailed below: 
 Only in Pathanamthitta and Ernakulam districts, DQM Cells were 
constituted with prescribed number of members. DQM was not 
constituted in Malappuram district. Of the test checked districts, DQM 
was not functioning since 2021-22 in Kasaragod district. 
 Though DQM was to m onitor and evaluate at least 10  per cent of the 
works executed under the scheme, DQM cell conducted (January 2025) 
annual inspection of only 99 to 628 completed works in test checked 
districts. 
 Though action taken report on the remarks of the monitored works 
should be obtained regularly from GP/BP, action taken reports were not 
obtained from GP/BP.  
 Though outcome of DQM reports was to be submitted to SEGC, 
outcome of DQM reports was not prepared and submitted to SEGC by 
the State Engineer. 

 
 
 65 
Chapter VII – Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit   
Thus, the very aspect of ascertaining quality of assets created under MGNREGS 
was neglected by the State due to non -appointment of independent Director 
(QM) at the State level, non/short appointment of State and District Quality 
Monitors and by not ensuring effective follow up actions in respect of quality 
monitoring activities during the audit period.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that the post of State Engineer, entrusted 
with monitoring of activities of SQM was lying vacant for a long period. This 
affected monitoring activities of SQM. During 2024 -25, monitoring of SQM 
and DQM has been improved. 
However, the fact remains that the system envisaged to ensure quality and 
durability of assets created fell short of its objectives. This should be viewed in 
the light of GPs giving very low importance to asset creation works as 
mentioned in Paragraph 6.2. 
Recommendation 15: The Government may strengthen the quality monitoring 
system and ensure adequate follow up of Quality Monitoring Reports. 
7.2 Grievance Redressal Mechanism  
According to MGNREG Act , 2005, the State Government shall, by rules, 
determine appropriate grievance redressal mechanisms at the block level and 
the district level for dealing with any complaints by any person in respect of 
implementation of the scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such 
complaints. Kerala Rural employment guarantee (Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism) Rules, 2009 designated the Programme Officer at the block level  
and the District Programme Co -ordinator at the district level as the Grievance 
Redressal Officers. Monthly Reports on complaints received and disposed must 
be sent from GP/PO/DP C to the State and then to GoI. This should also be 
placed on the website. Audit noticed following deficiencies in the grievance 
redressal mechanism as detailed below: 
 According to Annual Master Circular, 2019-20, complaint register could 
be printed and pasted from MIS report i.e. R10.2 Complaint Register. 
However, Audit noticed that no complaints were seen registered in MIS 
since 2018 in respect of test checked GPs/BPs/DPs.  
 Though Operational Guidelines stipulated for registering all grievances 
identified during social audit with the designated authority at the District 
level and Block level for disposal and action, these complaints (2 ,412 
numbers19) were not registered by these authorities.  
 Though Operational Guidelines prescribed for appointment of 
Programme Officer (Grievance Redressal) at the State level, the post 
remained vacant since 2017.  
 Though complaints were received by the State Mission, complaint 
register was not maintained during the audit period. In the absence of 
any mechanism to track the action taken till disposal of complaints, 
Audit could not ensure final disposal of complaints received. 
 During beneficiary survey, 55.93 per cent of beneficiaries stated that 
they were unaware about grievance redressal mechanism available at 
 
19  Pertaining to the period 2021-22 to 2023-24 

 
 
 66 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
district level and about Ombudsperson for grievance redressal. Lack of 
awareness of beneficiaries about the grievance redressal mechanism 
should be read with non-conducting IEC activities by test checked GPs.  
The Government stated (June 2025) that the State Mission started to maintain 
complaint register from 2024-25. It was also stated that instructions were issued 
to exhibit an information board at every BP and GP regarding grievance 
redressal mechanism.  
However, the reply is silent on non -registering complaints received by 
GPs/BPs/DPs in the MIS-Complaint register. 
7.2.1 Functioning of Ombudsperson 
The MGNREG Act , 2005  provided for establishment of the office of 
Ombudspersons in all districts for expeditious redressal of grievances regarding 
implementation of MGNREGS keeping with the principles of transparency and 
accountability. Ombudsperson was to send monthly and ann ual report and list 
of awards passed to Chief Secretary and Secretary in charge of MGNREG Act. 
In the reports, Ombudsperson should highlight action to be taken against erring 
MGNREG Act functionaries. 
Though GoK  constituted a selection committee for preparing a panel of 
ombudspersons for 14 districts in 2017, ombudspersons panel was finalised and 
14 ombudspersons were appointed only during 2021-22. As of June 2025, there 
were Ombudsperson in 13 districts. Audit noticed deficiencies in the functioning 
of the Ombudspersons as given in Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1: Deficiencies in the functioning of Ombudspersons 
Provisions Audit findings 
Action taken reports (ATR) on awards 
passed by Ombudspersons should be 
submitted by GP/BP  within two 
months of award. 
In the  selected districts except 
Palakkad, ATR was submitted only for  
three per cent  (15 of 484 awards ) of 
awards passed by Ombudspersons 
A complaint register has to be 
maintained by Ombudspersons for 
tracking disposal of complaints and 
dated receipts were to be issued to 
the complainant. 
No dated receipt for complaints received 
was issued to complainants except in 
Palakkad.  
(Source: Details furnished by State Mission) 
In the absence of ATRs by GPs/BPs and effective complaint tracking system, 
redressal of all grievances could not be ensured in audit. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that laxities on the part of officials in taking 
timely action on Ombudsperson awards would be viewed seriously. 
Recommendation 16: The Government may ensure proper functioning of the 
vigilance and monitoring mechanism to ensure transparency, accountability 
and effective implementation of the scheme in the State. 
7.3 Social Audit  
Social Audit is the audit conducted by the people especially by those who are 
affected by or are the intended beneficiaries of the scheme.  Section 17 of the 
MGNREG Act, 2005 authorised Grama Sabha for monitoring the execution of 

 
 
 67 
Chapter VII – Monitoring, Grievance redressal and Social Audit   
works within the GP and conducting regular social audits of all the projects 
under the scheme taken up within the GP.  
According to MGNREG Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011, the State Government 
should facilitate conduct of social audit of the works taken up under the Act and 
should establish an independent organisation to facilitate the conduct of social 
audit by Grama Sabha. Accordingly, Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Social Audit 
Society, Kerala ( MGNSASK) was constituted and the unit functions as  an 
independent society, registered (January 2017) under the Travancore – Cochin 
Charitable Societies Act, 1955. Audit observations relating  to functioning of 
the Social Audit Unit (SAU) in the State are as follows: 
7.3.1 Short fall in receipt of funds for Social Audit 
According to Operational Guidelines, up to  0.5 per cent  from the State’s 
entitlement of six per cent  towards administrative expenditure,  should be  
earmarked for the State’s Social Audit. The funds for the Social Audit Unit 
(SAU) were released by GoI to the SAU’s independent bank account through 
the respective State Governments.  
Audit noticed that against admissible amount of ₹94.03 crore during the period 
2019-20 to 2023 -24, GoI had released only ₹43.32 crore. Thus, there was a 
shortfall of ₹50.71 crore in release of funds for social audit. 
7.3.2 Coverage of Social Audit 
According to the MGNREG Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011, social audit should 
be conducted in every GP, at least once in six months.  Details of social audits 
conducted in the State during 2019-20 to 2023-24 are given in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: Coverage of Social audit by MGNSASK in the State 
Year Total number of audits to be 
conducted in 941 GPs 
Number of Social 
Audits conducted 
Percentage of 
achievement  
2019–20 1882 405 21.52 
2021–22 941* 499 53.03 
2022–23 1882 1584 84.17 
2023–24 1882 1858 98.72 
(Source: Details furnished by Social Audit Unit) 
* Social Audit was not conducted during the financial year 2020-21 and 2021-22 (first cycle) 
due to the outbreak of the covid-19 pandemic. 
 Though percentage of social audit conducted was very low in the 
initial years, State could register 84.1 7 per cent and 98.72 per cent 
achievement during the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. 
(a) Settlement of Social Audit Observations 
As per the MIS data, 22,729 observations worth ₹28.42 crore were raised in 
social audits during the period 2021 -22 to 2023-24. This included 4718 issues 
pertaining to financial misappropriation involving ₹4.49 crore. Details are given 
in Table 7.3. 


 
 
 68 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Table 7.3: Year wise and category wise Social Audit observations 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Financial 
misappropriation 
Financial 
deviation Process violation Grievances Total 
Number 
of issues 
reported 
Amount  
Number 
of issues 
reported  
Amount  
Number 
of issues 
reported 
Amount  
Number 
of issues 
reported 
Amount  
Number 
of issues 
reported 
Amount  
2021-22 70 9.23 43 194.67 640 1.28 114 0 867 205.18 
2022-23 709 123.16 824 1041.91 4479 26.35 882 4.50 6894 1195.92 
2023-24 3939 316.83 1657 1089.96 7956 30.78 1416 3.16 14968 1440.73 
Total 4718 449.22 2524 2326.54 13075 58.41 2412 7.66 22729 2841.83 
(Source: NREGASoft MIS data and details furnished by SAU) 
According to para 13.4.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 the JPC should ensure 
time bound corrective action on the social audit report. It was seen that against 
22,729 social audit observations, 20,943 (92.14 per cent ) cases were settled 
(March 2025). 
Though 4,718 cases of misappropriation involving ₹4.49 crore were identified, 
only 2 ,102 cases were decided as final recoverable involving ₹68.76 lakh . 
Against ₹68.76 lakh, recovery of ₹68.55 lakh was done (2,094 cases). 
The Government stated (June 2025) that in many cases financial deviation cases 
were also booked as financial misappropriation and were corrected by BPO and 
DPC during final verification. 
   (PREETHI ABRAHAM) 
Thiruvananthapuram, Accountant General (Audit I), 
The 15 January 2026 Kerala 
Countersigned 
 New Delhi, (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The 19 January 2026 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
69 
Appendices  
Appendices 
  
Appendices 

 
 
 
 70 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 
 

 
 
69 
Appendices  
Appendix 1.1 
Roles and responsibilities at different levels for implementation of MGNREGS 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5, Page 3) 
Level Designated 
Officers Roles and Responsibilities 
State  
level 
The Principal 
Secretary (LSGD) Overall Supervision of Implementation as convenor of SEGC 
Mission Director, 
MGNREGS State 
Mission 
Head of MGNREGS Mission. Responsible for overall 
implementation of the scheme in the State. 
State Mission 
Management team  
Team consists of Joint Director (R ural Employment), Programme 
Officers for IEC, Planning , Evaluation and Monitoring, training, 
Assistant Directors, Finance Manager etc ., to assist Mission 
Director in leading State level implementation of the scheme. 
State MGNREGS 
Engineer 
Monitors SQM and DQM reports, deals with SECURE software 
and updating local market rates.  
District 
level 
District Collector, 
designated as 
District Programme 
Co-ordinator (DPC) 
Overall co -ordination and implementation of the scheme in the 
district. 
Joint Programme 
Co-ordinator (JPC) 
• Reports to DPC  
• Responsible for overall programme management in the district 
• Proper management and monitoring of funds  
• Overall monitoring of the Management Information System 
(MIS) of MGNREGS, and all other IT related activities at 
district level  
• Ensures quality and effectiveness of N ational Resource 
Management works planned and executed under MGNREGS.  
Block 
level 
Programme Officer 
(Co-ordinator for 
MGNREGS at 
Block level) 
• Responsible for matching demand with work  
• Ensures effective implementation of the scheme at Block level 
• Co-ordinates with the Project Director - District Rural 
Development Agency 
Joint BDO (EGS)/ 
Assistant 
Programme 
Officer (APO) 
• Assists the Programme Officer 
• In-charge of MIS at Block level 
• Uploads the work orders, pay orders, issues muster rolls, etc. 
Grama 
Panchayat 
(GP) level  
Panchayat 
Secretary 
• Receives applications for Job Cards, employment 
• Maintains muster roll, ensures timely payments 
• Second signatory of FTO  
• Responsible for maintenance of assets  
Assistant 
Secretary 
• First signatory of FTO  
• Assists Panchayat Secretary in the preparation of Labour 
Budget/Annual Action Plan 
• Muster Roll generation, Job Creation 
• Supervises all the MGNREGS works for ensuring quality cum 
durability.  
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission)  

 
 
 
 70 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Appendix 3.1 
Timelines suggested for preparation of Annual plan and Labour Budget 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.3, Page 15) 
Action to be taken Due date 
Launch of Grama Panchayat level planning process 
and discussion of the planning process by Grama 
Sabha/Ward Sabha. 
02 October 
Special Grama Sabha for approval of the Grama 
Panchayat level annual action plan By 30 November 
Submission of Grama Panchayat Level Plan to the 
Block Panchayat By 05 December 
Approval of Block Level Consolidated Annual Plan 
by Block Panchayat and submission of the same to 
District Programme Co-ordinator/District Collector 
(The consolidated Labour Budget including all 
interventions proposed for the Block level should be 
approved by the Block Panchayat/Panchayat) 
By 20 December 
Presentation of Block Plans by Programme Officer 
before DPC in the suggestive format circulated by 
the Ministry and appraisal of same by the DPC. 
By 19 January 
Presentation of District Annual Plan and Labour 
Budget to District Panchayat by the District 
Programme Co-ordinator/Collector (all 
interventions proposed for the District should be 
approved at the District level) 
By 20 January 
Approval of District Annual Plan by the District 
Panchayat and submission of the same to State 
Government. The DPC/ADPC will present the plan 
before the State Government in the suggestive 
format circulated by the Ministry and the same will 
be appraised before collation into State Plan. 
By 31 January 
Submission of Labour Budget to the Central 
Government in the suggestive format circulated by 
the Ministry. 
By 10 February 
Meetings of the Empowered committee and 
finalisation of the Labour Budget 20 February onwards 
Communication of the Labour Budget to the States 
by Ministry and further by the States to Districts, 
Blocks, and Grama Panchayats 
By 31 March 
(Source: Annual Master Circulars)  

 
 
71 
Appendices  
Appendix 3.2 
Sanctioned strength and Men-In-Position 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.4.1, Page 17) 
 Posts Sanctioned 
Strength 
Men in Position (As 
on 31 March 2024) Vacancy 
GP level 
Accredited Engineer 905 886 19 
Overseer 1472 1411 61 
Accountant-cum-IT Assistant 
(AITA)  2178 2005 173 
Total 4555 4302 253 
BP level 
Accredited Engineer 152 151 1 
AITA       230 224 6 
Other post (DEOs) 8 2 6 
Total 390 377 13 
District 
level 
District Engineer 14 14 0 
District ITP 14 12 2 
AITA 14 12 2 
District electronic fund 
management system operator  14 13 1 
Ombudsperson office AITA 14 14 0 
Agri Engineer 47 43 4 
Total 117 108 9 
State level 
State Project Officer - GIS 
(Cluster Facilitation Project)  1 1 0 
Electronic Fund Management 
System (e-FMS) Consultant  1 1 0 
State ITP   1 1 0 
Data Entry Operator  1 1 0 
Computer Operator e-FMS  1 1 0 
Assistant  2 2 0 
Total 7 7 0 
 Grand Total  5069 4794 275 
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission)  

 
 
 
 72 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Appendix 4.1 
Delay in release of funds by GoK 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3, Page 26) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Tranche/ 
Instalment 
Date of 
receipt of 
Central 
Share 
Central 
Share 
Amount  
State 
Share  
Total share 
(Central 
and State)  
Release to 
SNA 
Account  
Date of 
receipt in 
SNA 
Account 
Delay in 
release 
(days) 
2019-20 
1/1 12/04/2019 2,621.35 873.78 3,495.13 3,495.13 26/06/2019 60 
1/2 06/08/2019 16,822.33 5,607.44 22,429.77 
10,000.00 07/09/2019 17 
5,000.00 25/10/2019 65 
5,000.00 25/11/2019 96 
2,429.77 24/12/2019 125 
1/3 25/10/2019 2,257.77 752.59 3,010.36 3,010.36 24/12/2019 45 
1/4 31/12/2019 77.62 25.87 103.49 103.49 20/02/2020 36 
1/5 06/02/2020 450.00 150.00 600.00 445.70 16/06/2020 116 
154.30 25/06/2020 125 
1/6 13/02/2020 887.12 295.70 1,182.82 1,182.82 25/06/2020 118 
2020-21 
1/1 21/04/2020 32,689.11 10,896.37 43,585.48 32,689.11 14/05/2020 8 
10,896.37 21/07/2020 76 
1/2 03/09/2020 6,093.42 2,030.94 8,124.36 2,030.94 18/11/2020 61 
6,093.42 19/11/2020 62 
1/3 27/11/2020 15,172.90 5,057.13 20,230.03 15,172.90 12/01/2021 31 
5,057.13 13/01/2021 32 
2/1 22/03/2021 21,300.00 7,099.29 28,399.29 
17,904.71 31/03/2021 NA 
7,099.29 04/05/2021 28 
3,395.29 04/05/2021 28 
2021-22 1/1 25/05/2021 39,878.91 13,291.64 53,170.55 39,878.91 23/06/2021 14 
13,291.64 24/06/2021 15 
2022-23 
1/1 30/06/2022 51,035.70 17,013.23 68,048.93 
17,011.90 11/07/2022 NA 
51,035.70 08/07/2022 NA 
1.33 05/07/2022 NA 
1/2 
13/02/2023 17,769.30 5,921.77 23,691.07 17,769.30 16/03/2023 16 
5,921.77 20/03/2023 20 
13/02/2023 4,703.20 1,569.06 6,272.26 4,703.20 24/03/2023 24 
1,569.06 27/03/2023 27 
2023-24 
1/1 18/07/2023 28,594.74 9,531.58 38,126.32 28,594.74 26/09/2023 55 
9,531.58 09/11/2023 99 
1/2 14/02/2024 8,622.63 2,874.21 11,496.84 8,622.63 25/03/2024 25 
2,874.21 25/03/2024 25 
(Source : AG (A&E) figures, department figures, TSB statement, bank statements of State Mission) 
  

 
 
73 
Appendices  
Appendix 4.2 
Details of delay in wage payments 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.7.1, Page 31) 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Total 
wage 
payable 
(R7.2.2) 
Total wage 
paid 
Payment within 
15 days 
(Percentage) 
Delayed wage payment 
Payment 
beyond 
15 days 
Pending 
wage 
payment 
Total 
(Percentage) 
2019-20 2200.58 2200.50 2187.89 (99) 12.61 0.08 12.69 (01) 
2020-21 3014.22 3013.91 2982.24 (99) 31.67 0.31 31.98 (01) 
2021-22 3125.34 3125.24 3122.36 (99) 2.87 0.10 2.97 (0.1) 
2022-23 2998.77 2998.73 2764.39 (92) 234.33 0.04 234.37 (08) 
2023-24 3300.60 3300.59 3273.55 (99) 27.03 0.01 27.04 (01) 
Total 14639.51 14638.97 14330.43 (98) 308.51 0.54 309.05 (02) 
(Source: MIS Reports R14.6 and R7.2.2) 
  

 
 
 
 74 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Appendix 4.3 
Illustrative cases of incorrect calculation of delays 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.7.1, Page 31) 
Name of Grama 
Panchayat 
Muster Roll 
(MR) No. 
Date of closure 
of Muster Roll 
(T) 
Date of 
second 
Signatory 
No. of days 
(second 
signatory 
from 
closure of 
MR) 
Delay 
calculated 
by MIS 
Date of 
actual credit 
of wages 
Delay in 
actual credit 
of wages 
(1) (2) (3) (4) = (3)-(2) (5) = (4)-15 
days (6) (7) = (6)-(2)-
15 days 
Illustrative cases of delays where compensation was calculated partially  
Anchuthengu 24650 15/02/2023 03/03/2023 16 1 22/03/2023 20 
Chirayinkeezhu 23458 12/02/2023 15/03/2023 31 16 31/03/2023 32 
Kadakkavoor 23437 02/02/2023 16/03/2023 42 27 31/03/2023 42 
Mudakkal 23427 07/02/2023 23/02/2023 16 1 27/06/2023 125 
Vellanad 50167 05/02/2023 03/03/2023 26 11 22/03/2023 30 
Kattakkada 50938 06/02/2023 15/03/2023 37 22 31/03/2023 38 
Kuttichal 51255 09/02/2023 04/03/2023 23 8 15/05/2023 80 
Tholicode 50396 05/02/2023 03/03/2023 26 11 22/03/2023 30 
Pudur 33801 14/12/2023 20/01/2024 37 22 12/03/2024 74 
Agali 34112 02/02/2023 15/03/2023 41 26 31/03/2023 42 
Sholayur 34798 30/01/2023 14/03/2023 43 28 31/03/2023 45 
Malampuzha 11620 02/02/2023 15/03/2023 41 26 31/03/2023 42 
Puthupariyaram 12435 12/02/2023 06/03/2023 22 7 22/03/2023 23 
Pudussery 11659 02/02/2023 16/03/2023 42 27 31/03/2023 42 
Akathethara 12088 04/02/2023 01/03/2023 25 10 22/03/2023 31 
Marutharode 12177 08/02/2023 06/03/2023 26 11 22/03/2023 27 
Padne 26262 31/01/2023 14/03/2023 42 27 31/03/2023 44 
Pilicode 26612 27/01/2023 17/03/2023 49 34 29/03/2023 46 
Thrikkaripur 26451 03/02/2023 15/03/2023 40 25 31/03/2023 41 
Kayyur 
Chimmeni 26431 30/01/2023 14/03/2023 43 28 31/03/2023 45 
Madhur 14057 30/01/2023 15/03/2023 44 29 31/03/2023 45 
Kumbala 14870 17/02/2023 15/03/2023 26 11 31/03/2023 27 
Badiadka 13305 30/01/2023 10/03/2023 39 24 24/03/2023 38 
Chengala 13561 01/02/2023 14/03/2023 41 26 31/03/2023 43 
Illustrative cases of delays where compensation was not calculated 
Anchuthengu 112 02/04/2022 08/04/2022 6 0 04/05/2022 17 
Chirayinkeezhu 14214 20/11/2022 29/11/2022 9 0 27/01/2023 53 
Kadakkavoor 13108 17/09/2023 19/09/2023 2 0 09/11/2023 38 
Mudakkal 12000 31/10/2022 10/11/2022 10 0 14/12/2022 29 
Vellanad 54116 08/02/2024 13/02/2024 5 0 09/04/2024 46 
Kattakkada 49799 10/01/2024 17/01/2024 7 0 16/03/2024 51 
Kuttichal 25145 17/10/2022 21/10/2022 4 0 14/12/2022 43 
Tholicode 51960 17/02/2022 24/02/2022 7 0 03/04/2022 30 

 
 
75 
Appendices  
Name of Grama 
Panchayat 
Muster Roll 
(MR) No. 
Date of closure 
of Muster Roll 
(T) 
Date of 
second 
Signatory 
No. of days 
(second 
signatory 
from 
closure of 
MR) 
Delay 
calculated 
by MIS 
Date of 
actual credit 
of wages 
Delay in 
actual credit 
of wages 
(1) (2) (3) (4) = (3)-(2) (5) = (4)-15 
days (6) (7) = (6)-(2)-
15 days 
Pudur 24477 13/10/2023 19/10/2023 6 0 27/11/2023 30 
Agali 27764 02/12/2022 09/12/2022 7 0 27/01/2023 41 
Sholayur 19767 09/09/2023 15/09/2023 6 0 07/11/2023 44 
Malampuzha 9294 14/12/2023 18/12/2023 4 0 12/03/2024 74 
Puthupariyaram 7989 12/11/2023 15/11/2023 3 0 01/01/2024 35 
Pudussery 10800 24/01/2024 27/01/2024 3 0 25/03/2024 46 
Akathethara 5216 11/09/2023 12/09/2023 1 0 07/11/2023 42 
Marutharode 8308 13/11/2023 17/11/2023 4 0 01/01/2024 34 
Padne 45458 24/03/2022 30/03/2022 6 0 05/10/2022 180 
Pilicode 33423 10/01/2022 17/01/2022 7 0 01/04/2022 66 
Thrikkaripur 13232 15/09/2023 18/09/2023 3 0 10/11/2023 41 
Kayyur 
Chimmeni 23182 09/01/2023 12/01/2023 3 0 01/02/2023 8 
Madhur 9265 17/11/2022 23/11/2022 6 0 27/01/2023 56 
Kumbala 19117 29/03/2022 31/03/2022 2 0 14/05/2022 31 
Badiadka 7199 16/10/2022 18/10/2022 2 0 14/12/2022 44 
Chengala 11407 10/12/2023 15/12/2023 5 0 12/03/2024 78 
(Source: NREGASoft MIS Report R14.1, R4.2, R7.1.1) 
 
  

 
 
 
 76 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Appendix 4.4 
Details of unresolved failed transactions 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.10.1, Page 35) 
Name of Block 
Panchayat 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹) Date Reason 
Attappadi BP 
35 35000 04/09/2022 
Account Closed; Account 
does not exist; Operation 
suspended; Invalid account 
status 
3 3000 30/09/2022 
8 8000 18/08/2021 
14 14000 02/09/2021 
4 4000 24/08/2023 
47 47000 26/08/2023 
Neeleshwaram BP 5 5000 09/08/2023 Invalid account status 
Chirayinkeezhu BP 7 7000 01/10/2022 Account does not exist 
Kasaragod BP 
14 14000 11/05/2021 Wrong IFS Code, Account 
does not exist  
41 41000 20/09/2021 Account does not exist, 
blocked account 
11 11000 19/08/2021 Account does not exist 
4 4000 23/09/2021 Account does not exist 
Malampuzha BP 
8 8000 15/09/2023 Account does not exist, 
blocked account 
1 1000 11/11/2021 Return 
1 1000 22/10/2021 Error in deformator 
4 4000 15/11/2021 Return  
 207 207000   
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission) 
  

 
 
77 
Appendices  
Appendix 5.1 
Delay in issue of job cards 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2, Page 39) 
Name of GP 
Job card number 
Receipt date as 
per ILGMS20 
Receipt date as 
per MIS 
JC issue date as 
per MIS 
Delay in issue of 
JC 
Difference 
between receipt 
dates of ILGMS 
and MIS 
Delay in issue of 
JC as per MIS 
data 
Badiadka  KL-001-001/465 25-05-2022 30-05-2022 28-06-2022 19 5 14 
Badiadka KL-001-004/535 21-05-2022 24-05-2022 24-12-2022 202 3 199 
Badiadka KL-001-006/513 21-05-2022 24-05-2022 28-09-2022 115 3 112 
Badiadka KL-001-001/464 20-05-2022 24-05-2022 24-09-2022 112 4 108 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-005/342 05-03-2024 08-05-2024 08-05-2024 49 64 0 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-011/428 04-03-2024 04-04-2024 04-04-2024 16 31 0 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-018/524 19-02-2024 05-03-2024 08-05-2024 64 15 49 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-019/522 19-02-2024 24-02-2024 11-04-2024 37 5 32 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-010/309 18-11-2023 05-12-2023 08-05-2024 157 17 140 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-001/444 06-11-2023 15-11-2023 30-03-2024 130 9 121 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-017/370 11-10-2023 27-10-2023 31-03-2024 157 16 141 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-011/425 09-10-2023 31-10-2023 04-04-2024 163 22 141 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-012/256 03-10-2023 19-10-2023 08-05-2024 203 16 187 
Thrikkaripur  KL-005-007/472 30-09-2023 10-10-2023 31-03-2024 168 10 158 
Pilicode  KL-004-010/394 08-09-2023 30-09-2023 30-09-2023 7 22 0 
Pilicode  KL-004-009/490 17-05-2023 03-07-2023 12-07-2023 41 47 0 
Pilicode  KL-004-015/379 24-04-2023 08-05-2023 07-09-2023 121 14 107 
Kuttichal  KL-003-003/544 07-12-2023 10-12-2023 21-01-2024 30 3 27 
Chengala KL-003-003/598 16-03-2023 20-11-2023 20-12-2023 264 249 15 
Madhur  KL-005-002/185 07-01-2025 07-02-2025 01-03-2025 38 31 7 
Madhur  KL-005-010/76 22-11-2024 20-12-2024 20-12-2024 13 28 0 
Madhur  KL-005-014/199 07-05-2024 07-06-2024 24-06-2024 33 31 2 
Madhur  KL-005-018/251 05-04-2024 29-05-2024 29-05-2024 39 54 0 
Madhur  KL-005-015/186 02-04-2024 21-05-2024 24-05-2024 37 49 0 
Madhur  KL-005-009/146 28-02-2024 28-04-2024 28-04-2024 45 60 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-008/436 28-12-2022 26-05-2023 29-05-2023 137 149 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-005/590 20-12-2022 25-01-2023 25-01-2023 21 36 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-013/431 14-12-2022 25-12-2022 31-01-2023 33 11 22 
Kattakkada  KL-002-015/523 05-12-2022 28-12-2022 31-01-2023 42 23 19 
Kattakkada  KL-002-015/520 05-12-2022 07-01-2023 07-01-2023 18 33 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-016/470 05-12-2022 07-01-2023 07-01-2023 18 33 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-020/387 28-11-2022 10-12-2022 31-01-2023 49 12 37 
Kattakkada  KL-002-012/506 23-11-2022 08-12-2022 19-12-2022 11 15 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-014/447 19-11-2022 30-12-2022 31-01-2023 58 41 17 
 
20  Integrated Local Governance Management System is a digital platform for Local Self Government 
Institutions to cater to their governance requirements 

 
 
 
 78 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Name of GP 
Job card number 
Receipt date as 
per ILGMS20 
Receipt date as 
per MIS 
JC issue date as 
per MIS 
Delay in issue of 
JC 
Difference 
between receipt 
dates of ILGMS 
and MIS 
Delay in issue of 
JC as per MIS 
data 
Kattakkada  KL-002-019/471 04-11-2022 22-11-2022 22-11-2022 3 18 0 
Kattakkada  KL-002-007/454 20-03-2024 20-05-2024 20-05-2024 46 61 0 
Kumbala  KL-004-005/485 24-05-2022 31-05-2022 05-01-2023 211 7 204 
Kumbala  KL-004-010/501 27-05-2022 01-06-2022 26-09-2022 107 5 102 
Kumbala  KL-004-010/502 03-06-2022 17-06-2022 15-09-2022 89 14 75 
Kumbala  KL-004-010/504 13-06-2022 03-08-2022 07-11-2022 132 51 81 
Kumbala  KL-004-011/278 21-06-2022 28-06-2022 07-11-2022 124 7 117 
Kumbala  KL-004-008/482 21-06-2022 23-02-2023 03-03-2023 240 247 0 
Kumbala  KL-004-007/484 24-06-2022 07-07-2022 05-01-2023 180 13 167 
Kumbala KL-004-007/486 24-06-2022 22-09-2022 29-09-2022 82 90 0 
Kumbala  KL-004-011/279 24-06-2022 07-07-2022 07-11-2022 121 13 108 
Kumbala  KL-004-010/503 25-06-2022 20-07-2022 31-10-2022 113 25 88 
Kumbala  KL-004-011/280 19-07-2022 26-08-2022 07-11-2022 96 38 58 
Kumbala  KL-004-012/146 25-07-2022 08-08-2022 07-11-2022 90 14 76 
Kumbala  KL-004-002/232 10-08-2022 26-08-2022 05-01-2023 133 16 117 
Sholayur  KL-003-004/552 21-07-2022 10-08-2022 10-08-2022 5 20 0 
Sholayur  KL-003-001/451 27-07-2022 05-08-2022 19-09-2022 39 9 30 
Sholayur  KL-003-008/355 01-08-2022 15-08-2022 12-09-2022 27 14 13 
Sholayur KL-003-014/419 22-08-2022 28-10-2022 28-10-2022 52 67 0 
Sholayur KL-003-008/358 27-09-2022 01-10-2022 01-11-2022 20 4 16 
Sholayur KL-003-003/445 30-09-2022 19-10-2022 19-10-2022 4 19 0 
Sholayur KL-003-009/330 16-12-2022 29-12-2022 04-02-2023 35 13 22 
Sholayur KL-003-007/440 11-01-2023 31-07-2023 31-07-2023 186 201 0 
Sholayur KL-003-008/362 12-04-2023 04-05-2023 04-05-2023 7 22 0 
(Source: NREGASoft MIS Report R1.4) 
  

 
 
79 
Appendices  
Appendix 5.2 
Details of unemployment allowance 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3, Page 42) 
Year Amount to be paid (₹) Amount paid (₹) Amount due (₹) 
2019-20 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2020-21 800.25 800.00 0.25 
2021-22 2,65,734.75 99,706.00 1,66,028.75 
2022-23 28,301.00 21,923.00 6,378.00 
2023-24 31,052.25 25,055.00 5,997.25 
Total 3,25,888.25 1,47,484.00 1,78,404.25 
(Source: Details furnished by the MGNREGS State Mission)  

 
 
 
 80 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Appendix 6.1 
Malpractices noticed in skilled/semi-skilled muster rolls 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.4, Page 53) 
Case I 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll No. 
Date of 
work Work done by Wages were paid to 
No. 
of 
days 
Wages 
paid 
(₹) 
Work Name: Venthavetty Pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/490798) 
1 4833 01.06.23-
07.06.23 
Shri. Mallan (S-
KL-008/18827) 
Shri.Kannan (S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 5 3250 
2 4834 08.06.23-
14.06.23 
Shri. Mallan (S-
KL-008/18827) 
Shri.Kannan (S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 6 3900 
3 4835 15.06.23-
21.06.23 
Shri. Mallan (S-
KL-008/18827) 
Shri.Kannan (S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 6 3900 
4 4836 22.06.23-
28.06.23 
Shri. Mallan (S-
KL-008/18827) 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
Work Name: Cheerakadavu Checkdam Nirmanam Phase 1 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/17140) 
5 33148 02.12.23-
08.12.23 
Shri. Puva 
Kounder (S-KL-
011/697442) 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
6 33148 02.12.23-
08.12.23 
Shri. Bhadran (S-
KL-011/30350) 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Thekkuvetta Pradesath Gully plugging Phase 1 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/17099) 
7 28229 01.11.23-
07.11.23 
Shri. Vellingiri (S-
KL-011/19413) 
Shri. Anand (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/393863) 6 5100 
8 35870 20.12.23-
26.12.23 
Shri. Murugan (S-
KL-011/556728) 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Pattanakkal Pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/490493) 
9 30994 22.11.23-
28.11.23 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-005/30692) 
Shri.Kannan (S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 6 5100 
10 30995 29.11.23-
05.12.23 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-005/30692) 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
11 35646 13.12.23-
19.12.23 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-005/30692) 
Shri. Raju(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/20175) 6 5100 
12 38178 27.12.23-
02.01.23 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-005/30692) 
Smt. Malar(S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 5100 
Work Name: Nachukona Bhagath Thoduside Kettu(Work Code: 1606002002/WC/GIS/62924) 
13 47754 26.03.24-
30.03.24 
Shri. Murukan (S-
KL-011/267864) 
Shri.Kasumani (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/174866) 5 4250 
Work Name: Thazhe Chootra Pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/471857) 
14 4516 24.05.23-
30.05.23 
Shri. Kumar (S-
KL-005/37812) 
Shri. Ramkumar(S-KL-06-002-002-
009/439596) 6 3900 
15 10861 20.07.23-
26.07.23 
Shri. Kumar (S-
KL-005/37812) 
Shri.Anand (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/393863) 6 3900 
16 10861 20.07.23-
26.07.23 
Shri. Murukesh (S-
KL-005/528338)  
Shri.Ramkumar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/439596) 6 3900 
     Total 71700 
 

 
 
81 
Appendices  
Case – II 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll No. Date of work 
Name of person who has not worked 
was added in the muster roll and 
wages were paid 
No. of 
days 
Wages paid 
(₹) 
Work Name: Pattanakkal Varagar Puzha Side Kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/490783) 
1 4673 27.05.2023 - 
02.06.2023 
Smt. Lakshmi(S-KL-06-002-002-
013/514259) 6 3900 
2 4676 03.06.2023 - 
09.06.2023 
Smt. Lakshmi(S-KL-06-002-002-
013/514259) 6 3900 
3 4677 10.06.2023 - 
16.06.2023 
Shri. Rajendran (S-KL-06-002-002-
005/662620) 6 3900 
4 14289 26.07.2023 - 
01.08.2023 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
5 14292 02.08.2023 - 
08.08.2023 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 3900 
6 14293 09.08.2023 - 
15.08.2023 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
7 14294 16.08.2023 - 
22.08.2023 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
Work Name: Cheerakadavu 70 acare Pradhesath Gully Plugging phase 1 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/529780) 
8 40485 07.02.23-
13.02.23 
Shri. Kannan(S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 6 3900 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Pradeshath Gully plugging (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/619020) 
9 49350 16.03.24-
22.03.24 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Nachukona Bhagath Thoduside Kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/GIS/62924) 
10 47752 12.03.24-
18.03.24 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
11 47752 12.03.24-
18.03.24 
Smt.Malar(S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 5100 
12 43304 24.02.24-
01.03.24 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Olavangara Thoduside Kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/547507) 
13 9277 07.07.23-
13.07.23 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
14 9276 30.06.23-
06.07.23 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
15 9275 23.06.23-
29.06.23 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 3900 
Work Name: Chalayur Pradeshath Checkdam Nirmmanam (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/1840) 
16 38179 27.12.23-
02.01.24 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagarpuzhayoram sidekettu phase 3 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/50371) 
17 44393 08.02.24-
12.02.24 
Shri.Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 5 4250 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/471860) 

 
 
 
 82 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll No. Date of work 
Name of person who has not worked 
was added in the muster roll and 
wages were paid 
No. of 
days 
Wages paid 
(₹) 
18 40122 27.12.21-
02.01.22 
Smt. Sudha(S-KL-06-002-002-
005/365672) 6 3900 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Thodu sidekettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/552976) 
19 4514 24.05.23-
30.05.23 
Smt. Lakshmi (S-KL-06-002-002-
013/514259) 6 3900 
20 4515 31.05.23-
06.06.23 
Shri. Ramkumar(S-KL-06-002-002-
009/439596) 6 3900 
Work Name: Kuppan colony Pradheshath Gully plugging.  (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/65374) 
21 43584 17.02.24-
23.02.24 
Shri. Kumaran(S-KL-06-002-002-
008/683771) 6 5100 
    Total 89450 
Case III 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll 
No. 
Date of 
work Work done by Wage was paid to 
No. 
of 
days 
Wages 
paid (₹) 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar Puzhaside kettu (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/619022) 
1 25096 05.10.23-
11.10.23 
Shri. Rangaswami (S-
KL-005/19130) 
Smt. Thankamani 6 5460 
2 25097 12.10.23-
18.10.23 
Shri. Rangaswami (S-
KL-005/19130) 
Smt. Thankamani 5 4250 
3 25098 19.10.23-
25.10.23 
Shri. Rangaswami (S-
KL-005/19130) 
Smt. Thankamani 6 5100 
4 25099 26.10.23-
01.11.23 
Shri. Rangaswami (S-
KL-005/19130) 
Smt. Thankamani 5 4250 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar puzhayoram side kettu phase 3 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/50371)  
5 35864 27.12.23-
02.01.24 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 5100 
6 41540 20.01.24-
26.01.24 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 5100 
7 41541 27.01.24-
02.02.24 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 5100 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/471860) 
8 40122 27.12.21-
02.01.22 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Thoduside kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/552976) 
9 4514 24.05.23-
30.05.23 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
10 4515 31.05.23-
06.06.23 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar puzhayoram side kettu (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/451971) 
11 19312 02.09.21-
08.09.21 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
12 19313 09.09.21-
15.09.21 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 

 
 
83 
Appendices  
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll 
No. 
Date of 
work Work done by Wage was paid to 
No. 
of 
days 
Wages 
paid (₹) 
13 19314 16.09.21-
22.09.21 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
14 19315 23.09.21-
29.09.21 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 6 3900 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Thodu sidekettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/619025) 
15 25319 05.10.23-
09.10.23 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Eswari 5 4550 
     Total 66210 
Case IV 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll 
No. 
Date of 
work Work done by Wage was paid to 
No. 
of 
days 
Wages 
paid (₹) 
Work Name: Pattanakkal Varagar Puzha Side Kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/490783) 
1 4676 03.06.23-
09.06.23 
Shri. Kannan(S-KL-
005/15907) 
Shri. Rajendran (S-KL-06-002-
002-005/662620) 6 3900 
2 4677 10.06.23 - 
16.06.23 
Shri. Kannan(S-KL-
005/15907) 
Shri. Kannan(S-KL-06-002-002-
007/542719) 6 3900 
Work Name: Cheerakadavu Checkdam Nirmanam Phase 1 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/17140 
3 33144 25.11.23-
01.12.23 
Shri. Bhadran (S-KL-
011/30350) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 5100 
4 33144 25.11.23-
01.12.23 
Shri. Puva Kounder 
(S-KL-011/697442) 
Shri. Ramkumar(S-KL-06-002-
002-009/439596) 6 5100 
Work Name: Thekkuvetta Pradesath Gully plugging Phase 1(Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/17099) 
5 28232 22.11.23-
28.11.23 
Shri. Vellingiri (S-
KL-06-011/19413) 
Shri. Ramkumar (S-KL-06-002-
002-009/439596) 6 5100 
6 35869 13.12.23-
19.12.23 
Shri. Murugan (S-
KL-06-011/556728) 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-
002-008/683771) 6 5100 
Work Name: Pattanakkal Pradesath Gully Plugging(Work Code: 1606002002/WC/490493) 
7 30993 15.11.23-
21.11.23 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-06-005/31009) 
Shri. Kannan (S-KL-06-002-
002-007/542719) 6 5100 
8 43138 31.01.24-
06.02.24 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-06-005/30692) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 5100 
Work Name: Cheerakaadavu 70 acare Pradhesath Gully Plugging phase 1(Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/529780) 
9 40490 28.02.23-
06.03.23 
Shri. Panali Andi (S-
KL-06-011/36271) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 3900 
10 47483 25.03.23-
31.03.23 
Shri. Rangan (S-KL-
06-011/8275) 
Shri. Kannan (S-KL-06-002-
002-007/542719) 6 7800 
11 47482 18.03.23-
24.03.23 
Shri. Panali (S-KL-
06-011/36271) (Only 
one person was 
worked on these 
days) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 1866 
Shri. Rajkumar (S-KL-06-002-
002-005/662618) 6 1866 
Work Name: Nachukona Bhagath Thoduside Kettu (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/GIS/62924) 
12 47751 05.03.24-
11.03.24 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-011/280587) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 5100 

 
 
 
 84 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Muster 
roll 
No. 
Date of 
work Work done by Wage was paid to 
No. 
of 
days 
Wages 
paid (₹) 
13 47751 05.03.24-
11.03.24 
Shri. Murukan (S-
KL-011/267864) 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-
002-008/683771) 6 5100 
14 47753 19.03.24-
25.03.24 
Shri. Murukan (S-
KL-011/267864) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 5 4250 
15 47753 19.03.24-
25.03.24 
Shri. Maruthan (S-
KL-011/280587) 
Shri. Murukesh (S-KL-06-002-
002-008/687785) 5 4250 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar Puzhaside kettu (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/619022) 
16 30125 15.11.23-
21.11.23 
Shri. Rangan (S-KL-
005/190097) 
Shri. Raju (S-KL-06-002-002-
008/20175) 6 5100 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar puzhayoramside kettu phase 3 (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/GIS/50371) 
17 35859 13.12.23-
19.12.23 
Shri. Maruthachalam 
(S-KL-005/14879) 
Smt. Kali (S-KL-06-002-002-
005/539008) 6 5100 
Work Name: Thazhe Ummathampadi Varagar puzhayoramside kettu (Work Code: 
1606002002/WC/451971) 
18 19315 23.09.21-
29.09.21 
Shri. Murukan (S-
KL-005/38362) 
Shri. Krishnan (S-KL-06-002-
002-005/38943) 5 3250 
Work Name: Thazhe Chootra Pradesath Gully Plugging (Work Code: 1606002002/WC/471857) 
19 10859 06.07.23-
12.07.23 
Shri. Murukesh (S-
KL-005/528338) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 3900 
20 10859 06.07.23-
12.07.23 
Shri. Kumar (S-KL-
005/37812) 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-
002-008/683771) 6 3900 
21 10860 13.07.23-
19.07.23 
Shri. Murukesh (S-
KL-005/528338) 
Smt. Malar (S-KL-06-002-002-
009/636635) 6 3900 
22 10860 13.07.23-
19.07.23 
Shri. Kumar (S-KL-
005/37812) 
Shri. Kumaran (S-KL-06-002-
002-008/683771) 6 3900 
Work Name: Pudur Varagar Puzha Road Concrete 1st Reach (Work Code: 
1606002002/RC/386337) 
23 25804 08.01.23-
14.10.23 
Shri. Shameed (S-
KL-006/687020) 
Shri. Muhammed Shafi N (S-
KL-06-002-002-006/687025) 7 6370 
24 25804 08.01.23-
14.10.23 
Smt. Fathima (S-KL-
006/687021) 
Smt. Sainaba (S-KL-06-002-
002-006/687028) 7 6370 
25 25805 15.10.23-
16.10.23 
Shri. Jamsheer (S-
KL-006/687018) 
Smt. Sainaba (S-KL-06-002-
002-006/687028) 2 1820 
     Total 116142 
(Source: Details collected by Audit from the GP)  

 
 
85 
Appendices  
Appendix 6.2 
Malpractices noticed in unskilled muster rolls 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.4, Page 54) 
Sl. 
No. Year Work Code Muster Roll Number 
Number 
of 
instances 
Amount 
(₹) 
Sri. Kumaran (Job Card No. KL-06-002-002-006/116) 
1. 2019-20 1606002002/WC/355808 13743 1 1656 
2. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/736567 10663, 10667 2 3732 
3. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/756152 21718 1 1866 
4. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/809128 23637, 23639, 25214, 25216 4 7464 
5. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/807692 28424 1 1866 
6. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/807661 33244, 35921, 35923 3 5598 
7. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/529780 40283, 40289, 40294 3 4665 
8. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/490897 43949, 43950 2 3732 
9. 2023-24 1606002002/WC/490791 4157, 4160, 4163, 4166 4 7992 
10. 2023-24 1606002002/WC/615918 21678, 21679, 21680 3 5661 
11. 2023-24 1606002002/WC/GIS/17118 28064, 28067, 28071, 28074 4 7326 
   Total 28 51558 
Mohammed Shafeeq and Beekutty (Job Card No. KL-06-002-002-005/356) 
12. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/451966 22937, 22943, 22946 3 10656 
13. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/490774 19618, 19619 2 3110 
14. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810032 23144 1 3732 
15. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/809992 26991, 26992, 26988 3 5598 
16. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810043 33267 1 3732 
17. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/470278 41796 1 3732 
18. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/811126 45073, 45075, 47472 3 11196 
   Total 14 41756 
Smt. Sreedevi (Job Card No. KL-06-002-002-005/361) 
19. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/471859 50468 1 296 
20. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/547508 19616, 19617 2 3732 
21. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810032 23144 1 1866 
22. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/809992 26992, 26989 2 3732 
23. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810043 33268 1 1866 
24. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/470278 41797 1 1866 
25. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/811126 45074, 45076, 47473 3 5909 
   Total 11 19267 
Smt. Lokanayaki Sakthivel and Sri. Sakthivel (Job Card No. KL-06-002-002-005/360) 
26. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/471843 44856 1 1776 
27. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/452004 51324, 51325, 51326, 51328, 
52186 5 14178 
28. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/498544 4406, 4410 2 933 
29. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/756765 10658 1 1244 
30. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/740336 13852, 13855, 16502, 30222 4 4976 
31. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/470278 
18963, 18965, 20312, 20314, 
24808, 24813, 25307, 30227, 
33753, 33754, 33759 
11 12440 

 
 
 
 86 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Sl. 
No. Year Work Code Muster Roll Number 
Number 
of 
instances 
Amount 
(₹) 
32. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/565453 40144, 40145, 40146, 40148, 
40150 5 10574 
33. 2023-24 1606002002/WC/565453 10820, 10823 2 2997 
34. 2023-24 1606002002/WC/619022 
17763, 17775, 17778, 17781, 
25052, 25057, 25063, 30059, 
30061 
9 12321 
35. 2023-24 1606002002/IF/GIS/49945 36904, 36907, 40933, 43451 4 7659 
36. 2023-24 1606002002/IF/1066793 46423, 46424, 46425, 46426, 
50310 5 10323 
   Total 49 79421 
Smt. Lakshmi Amma (Job Card No. KL-06-002-002-005/39) 
37. 2020-21 1606002002/WC/403900 56786, 56788, 56795, 56797, 
60424 5 8584 
38. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/403900 2193 1 1776 
39. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/409152 3340, 3344, 3348  3 5032 
40. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/433798 7165, 7166, 7167, 7168 4 7104 
41. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/403900 15434 1 1776 
42. 2021-22 1606002002/WC/451966 16449, 16450, 16451, 16752, 
22937, 22943, 22946 7 12432 
43. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/498549 7188 1 1866 
44. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/471846 8098, 8099 2 3732 
45. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/498544 11038, 11039 2 3732 
46. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/547508 19616, 19617 2 3732 
47. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810032 23145, 23147 2 3421 
48. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/809992 26989, 26992 2 3732 
49. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/810043 33268 1 1866 
50. 2022-23 1606002002/WC/470278 41797 1 1866 
51. 2022-23 1606002002/IF/811126 45074, 45076, 47473 3 5909 
   Total 37 66560 
(Source: Details collected by Audit from the GP) 

 
 
87 
Appendices  
Appendix 6.3 
Irregular payment of MGNREGS wages 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.10, Page 59) 
 
Details of Animators working in MGNREGS and as Animators on the 
same days 
1. Name of Grama Panchayat: Pudur 
Sl. 
No. Job Card No. Month 
and year 
Working 
days as per 
Animator 
Work Diary 
Working 
days as per 
Job Card 
Common 
days 
Wage 
given 
1 KL-06-002-002-003/416 Aug-23 14 24 9 2997 
2 KL-06-002-002-012/17 Mar-24 17 18 9 2997 
3 KL-06-002-002-012/17 Jan-24 20 18 11 3663 
4 KL-06-002-002-012/17 Feb-23 28 11 11 3421 
5 KL-06-002-002-010/325 Jan-23 26 16 15 4665 
6 KL-06-002-002-010/325 Feb-23 25 20 17 5287 
7 KL-06-002-002-006/383 Jun-21 30 19 17 5032 
9 KL-06-002-002-006/383 Dec-21 30 23 22 6512 
10 KL-06-002-002-006/383 Feb-22 27 23 23 6808 
11 KL-06-002-002-006/383 Sep-23 28 20 18 5994 
12 KL-06-002-002-006/383 Mar-24 21 12 6 1998 
 Total     49374 
 
 
2. Name of Grama Panchayat: Agali 
 Sl. 
No. Job Card No. Month 
and year 
Working 
days as per 
Animator 
Work Diary 
Working 
days as per 
Job Card 
No. of 
Common 
days 
Wage 
given 
1 KL-06-002-001-006/550 08/2023 31 18 18 5994 
2 KL-06-002-001-005/1039 11/2023 20 24 15 4995 
3 KL-06-002-001-019/426 12/2023 20 17 10 3330 
4 KL-06-002-001-019/426 07/2023 31 15 15 4995 
5 KL-06-002-001-019/119 07/2023 31 19 19 6327 
6 KL-06 002 001 016/512 11/2023 20 20 11 3663 
7 KL-06 002-001 014/236 07/2023 31 23 23 7659 
8 KL-06-002-001-018/333 03/2024 20 24 17 5661 
 Total     42624 

 
 
 
 88 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
 
Details of Members working in MGNREGS and attended Board meetings 
at the same time 
1. Name of Panchayat: Pudur 
Sl. 
No. Job Card No. Work Code Date Wages 
given 
1 KL-06-002-002-009/245 1606002002/WC/505884 27.02.2023 311 
2 KL-06-002-002-009/245 1606002002/WC/505884 09.03.2023 311 
3 KL-06-002-002-010/176 1606002002/IF/810421 22.03.2023 311 
4 KL-06-002-002-009/245 1606002002/WC/505884 22.03.2023 311 
5 KL-06-002-002-012/78 1606002002/WC/490445 23.06.2023 333 
   Total 1577 
 
2. Name of Panchayat: Agali 
Sl. 
No. Job Card No. Work Code Date Wages 
given 
1 KL-06-002-001-003/182 1606002001/IF/595104 29.07.2021 295 
2 KL-06-002-001-003/182 1606002001/IF/595104 16.08.2021 295 
3 KL-06-002-001-003/182 1606002001/IF/595104 06.09.2021 295 
4 KL-06-002-001-003/182 1606002001/IF/617223 30.10.2021 295 
5 KL-06-002-001-005/393 1606002001/IF/678615 21.12.2021 295 
6 KL-06-002-001-005/393 1606002001/IF/678615 04.01.2022 295 
7 KL-06-002-001-013/482 1606002001/WC/433393 19.08.2022 311 
8 KL-06-002-001-014/83 1606002001/FP/394751 02.05.2023 333 
9 KL-06-002-001-014/83 1606002001/FP/394751 03.05.2023 333 
10 KL-06-002-001-014/83 1606002001/FP/394751 15.05.2023 333 
11 KL-06-002-001-021/357 1606002001/WC/531551 21.07.2022 311 
12 KL-06-002-001-021/357 1606002001/WC/531551 15.10.2022 311 
13 KL-06-002-001-021/357 1606002001/WC/531551 22.11.2022 311 
   Total 4013 
(Source: Details collected by Audit from the respective GPs) 
 
 
 

 
 
89 
Glossary  
Glossary of abbreviations used in the Report 
Abbreviation Full form 
ADS Area Development Society 
AE Administrative Expenses 
AITA Accountant-cum-IT Assistant 
AMC Annual Master Circular 
APO Assistant Programme Officer 
AS Administrative Sanction 
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BDO Block Development Officer 
BFT Bare Foot Technician 
BiMS Bill Information Management System 
BPO Block Programme Officer 
BP Block Panchayat 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CDS Community Development Society 
DDU-GKY Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gramin Kaushalya Yojana 
DEO Data Entry Operator 
DPC District Programme Co-ordinator 
DP District Panchayat 
DQM District Quality Monitoring 
DVC District Vigilance Cell 
e-FMS Electronic Fund Management System 
FTO Fund Transfer Order 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GoK Government of Kerala 
GP Grama Panchayat 
GRS Gram Rozgar Sahayak 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Scheme 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
IT Information Technology 
JBY Janashree Bima Yojana 
JLGs Joint Liability Groups 
JPC Joint Programme Co-ordinator 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
KILA Kerala Institute of Local Administration 
KREGS Kerala Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra 
LB Labour Budget 
LSGD Local Self Government Department 
MGNREG Act Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 

 
 
 
 90 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of MGNREGA  
 
Abbreviation Full form 
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
MGNSASK Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Social Audit Society, Kerala 
MIS Management Information System 
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
MR Muster Roll 
MWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development  
Ne-FMS National Electronic Fund Management System 
NMMS National Mobile Monitoring Service 
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India 
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PGDCA Postgraduate Diploma in Computer Application 
PM-JAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PRIs Panchayat Raj Institutions 
QM Quality Monitors 
RSBY Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RSETI Rural Self Employment Training Institute 
SAU Social Audit Unit 
SC/ST Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe 
SE Superintending Engineer 
SECURE Software for Estimate Calculation Using Rural rates for Employment 
SEGC State Employment Guarantee Council 
SEGF State Employment Guarantee Fund 
SHG Self Help Group 
SNA State Nodal Account 
SQMs State Quality Monitors 
SVC State Vigilance Cell 
TS Technical Sanction 
VMC Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
 
 

 
 
97 
Glossary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 
 
