GOVERNMENT OF MIZORAM
www.cag.gov.in
© 
   COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA
lR;eso t;rs
REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA
FOR THE YEAR 2015-16
MARA  AUTONOMOUS DISTRICT COUNCIL
SIAHA, MIZORAM
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest
yksdfgrkFkZ lR;fu”Bk
www.cag.gov.in
2021

REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA
FOR THE YEAR  2015-16
MARA AUTONOMOUS DISTRICT COUNCIL
SIAHA, MIZORAM
Laid before the Council on 26 July 2022

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
Particulars Paragraph(s) Page(s)
Preface iii
Overview v
CHAPTER-I
Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts
Profile of the Mara Autonomous District 
Council 1.1 1
Rules for the management of the District 
Fund 1.2 2
Administrative Set-up of the Council 1.3 3
Maintenance of Accounts 1.4 5
Internal Control 1.5 6
Recommendations 1.6 7
CHAPTER-II
Autonomous District Council Funds
Introduction to District Fund 2 9
Receipts and Expenditure 2.1 10
Conclusion 2.2 14
Recommendations 2.3 15
CHAPTER-III
Comments on Accounts
Introduction to Accounts and Comments on 
Council Accounts 3 17
Overstatement of Personal Ledger Account 3.1 17
Discrepancies in Statements constituting 
Annual Accounts 3.2 19
Absence of detailed budget and non-
booking of Capital Expenditure 3.3 20
Non-maintenance of General Ledger and 
various other registers 3.4 21
Conclusion 3.5 23
Recommendations 3.6 23

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
ii
CHAPTER-IV
Compliance Audit Observations
Non-rationalisation of posting of school 
teachers 4.1 25
Execution of Rashtriya Krishi Vikash 
Yojana (RKVY) 4.2 26
Execution of works under North Eastern 
Council Fund – Hill Terracing 4.3 30
Execution of works under NITI Aayog 4.4 31
Maintenance of vehicles 4.5 36
Shortcomings in the utilisation of one-time 
assistance fund 4.6 39
Expenditure on Travelling Allowance (TA)/ 
Daily Allowance (DA) 4.7 41
Outstanding Inspection Reports 4.8 42
Conclusion 4.9 42
Recommendations 4.10 44
APPENDICES
Appendix 
No. Appendix Page
I
Statement showing the details of teachers'  
vis-à-vis enrolment of students in Middle 
Schools and Primary Schools under School 
Education, MADC as of March 2016
47
II
Statement showing the details of advances 
disbursed to 22 contractors for execution 
of various works by PWD, MADC during  
2015-16
54
III
Statement showing the details of expenditure 
incurred towards construction of RCC Water 
tanks during 2015-16
58
IV
Statement showing the details of expenditure 
incurred towards maintenance of vehicles 
by Local Administration Department during  
2015-16
61
V
Statement showing the details of expenditure 
incurred in Motor Vehicles in test checked 
departments during 2015-16
65
ii

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
iii
PREFACE
This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor 
of Mizoram under paragraph 7(4) of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution of India.  It relates mainly to the points arising from 
audit of financial transactions of the Mara Autonomous District 
Council, Siaha, Mizoram.
The cases mentioned in this Report are those which came to 
notice in course of test check of accounts for the year 2015-16  
and on the basis of information furnished and records made 
available by the Mara Autonomous District Council.
This Report contains four Chapters, the first of which deals 
with the Constitution of the Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Siaha the rules for the management of the District Fund and 
maintenance of accounts by the District Council.  Chapter-II 
depicts Autonomous District Council Fund position. Chapter-III 
deals with the Comments on Accounts and Chapter-IV deals 
with compliance issues during test-audit of the transactions of 
the Council for the year 2015-16.
iii

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
iv

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
A
OVERVIEW

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
B

v
OVERVIEW
This Report contains four Chapters. Chapter-I provides a 
background on the formation of the Autonomous District 
Council, rules for the management of the District Fund and 
relevant Constitutional provisions on maintenance of Accounts. 
Chapter-II gives an overview on the financial position of the 
Council and budgetary process during the year.  Chapter-III 
deals with audit comments on annual accounts of the Council 
for the year 2015-16.  Chapter-IV of the Report deals with the 
audit findings pertaining to transaction audit of the Council and 
contains seven paragraphs.
Internal Control
An evaluation of internal control system in the Council revealed 
that internal control mechanism was weak which is evident 
from persistent irregularities like discrepancy in cash balances 
as per annual accounts, retention of heavy cash balances, delay 
in depositing the Council’s revenue, incurring of unfruitful 
expenditure, non-maintenance of records, etc.  Due to weak 
internal controls, examination of the annual accounts and 
transactions of the Council was constrained to that extent. 
Above failure in internal controls under Financial Management 
is fraught with risks of fraud, misappropriation and financial 
irregularities, which might remain undetected.
Recommendations
The Council may ensure posting of adequate staff against 
sanctioned posts for smooth conduct of entrusted functions.  
Besides, they may also seek the help of State Government and 
utilise its training facilities for training and capacity building at 
all levels in the administrative hierarchy of the Council ensuring 
proper book keeping, record maintenance, supervision, control 
and monitoring.

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
vi
The Member-in-charge of the Financial Affairs may monitor the 
timely preparation as well as timely submission of Accounts and 
may ensure adequate staff is posted against sanctioned strength 
in the Council.
The Council may strengthen its internal control mechanism, make 
internal Audit wing functional and take action on deficiencies in 
record management.
A synopsis of the important findings contained in the Report is 
presented below:
2.  Autonomous District Council Funds
Grants-in-Aid and Central/ State Government assistance constitutes 
99 per cent (₹102.31 crore) of the Council’s total receipts.
Out of the total expenditure of ₹ 104.47 crore for the year 2015-16, 
₹ 87.56 crore constituting 83.81 per cent spent on administrative 
costs, notably salaries.  The balance amount of ₹ 16.91 crore was 
spent on development activities, including creation of assets.
(Paragraph 2.1)
Comparative analysis of two revenue Departments i.e. 
Land Revenue and Forest showed that their administrative 
expenditure (Pay & allowances) was very high and exceeded 
the Revenue collected.
(Paragraph 2.1)
Recommendations
Council may map its administrative expenditure with respect 
to its income from own sources and spend wisely on revenue 
generation activities for financial sustainability.
The Council may need to identify and implement internal  
cost-saving measures, while not compromising on its core 
functions.  They need to cut down on the overall administrative 
expenditure and administrative expenditure of revenue earning 
Departments, considering their heavy cost of collection of 
revenues.
Council may also seek guidance from the State Government for 
Budget preparation, management of administrative expenses, 

Overview
vii
cost saving measures and monitoring of utilisation of funds while 
implementing Government Schemes including types of records 
to be maintained with respect to Schemes, expenditure control 
and other monitoring tools used by State Government.
3. Comments on Accounts
Council retained huge cash balances without immediate need of 
money at the end of the months (January, February and March 
2016).
(Paragraph 3.1)
Discrepancies in statements of Annual Accounts with respect 
to Receipt and Expenditure under Non lapsable Central Pool of 
Resources and NITI Aayog assistance were noticed.
(Paragraph 3.2)
Capital Expenditure was not booked as per Statement No. 2 
and was also understated due to misclassification and Revenue 
Expenditure was overstated by ₹ 4.42 crore.
(Paragraph 3.3)
Improper maintenance of records with respect to Stores, stocks 
and works was noticed.
(Paragraph 3.4)
Recommendations
Council should adhere to MADCF Rules with respect to revenue 
collected and ensure that receipts are remitted to treasury 
promptly.
They may avoid holding of cash without immediate needs.
Council is advised to device a system of periodical review of 
accounting records to identify coexisting mistakes within the 
accounting period so that corrective action may be taken.
Council may reconcile the Closing balances at Treasury with 
Cashbooks before compiling Annual Accounts.  Discrepancies 
in Annual Accounts with Receipts and Expenditure be reconciled 
and minimised.

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
viii
Receipts and Expenditure to be correctly classified under Capital 
and Revenue categories as per Format of Accounts; and
Council may maintain consistency in Statements constituting 
Annual Accounts.
4. Compliance Audit Observations
	The posting of teachers in school was not rationalised. In  
50 Middle Schools, there was an overall shortage of 44 
teachers; 29 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and five, while 15 had excess deployment of teachers 
ranging between one and seven; while the remaining six 
Middle Schools had teachers as per the norm.
(Paragraph 4.1)
	In 107 Primary Schools, there was an overall excess of  
43 teachers; 36 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and six, while 50 had excess teachers deployed ranging 
between one and five; while the remaining 21 Primary 
Schools had teachers as per the norm.
(Paragraph 4.1)
	Council did not put in place a system to ensure actual 
utilisation of the cash assistance provided to the beneficiaries 
under RKVY Scheme.
(Paragraph 4.2)
	Expenditure of ₹ 34.70 lakh from RKVY scheme for 
construction of wood bund, retaining wall and check dam 
could not be verified in absence of muster rolls showing 
details of wages paid to labourers and supporting vouchers 
for the purchase of materials. 
(Paragraph 4.2)
	Expenditure of ₹ 140.68 lakh on construction work started to 
be executed under North Eastern Council Fund, could not be 
verified in absence of proper records.
(Paragraph 4.3)
	Deficiencies such as works executed without tendering,  
non-maintenance of records in support of payments to 

Overview
ix
Contractors, diversion of funds and non-deduction of labour 
cess were noticed in the execution of works from assistance 
provided to the Council, by NITI Aayog.
(Paragraph 4.4)
	Council incurred expenditure on repair and maintenance of 
motor vehicles beyond the prescribed limit and in violation 
of prescribed rules.
(Paragraph 4.5)
	Expenditure of ₹10 lakh on procurement of tools and 
equipment was in violation of MADCF Rules, 2010.
(Paragraph 4.6)
	Expenditure of ₹6.44 lakh towards TA/ DA during 2015-16 
could not be vouched as correct in absence of documents and 
verification by the Council’s Executive Secretary.
(Paragraph 4.7)
Recommendations
Council may ensure compliance to State norms in respect 
of appointments of teachers in its schools and carry out 
rationalisation in deployment of teachers across Council area.
Council may follow due procedures while making payments to 
contractors, verify relevant records and ensure authenticity of 
bills produced.
Council may develop adequate monitoring system to ensure 
intended benefits to the beneficiaries for which grants are 
disbursed under various purposes.
Council may adhere to scheme guidelines during implementation 
so as to achieve intended benefits. Council may also ensure 
maintenance of proper records with respect to transactions made 
out of scheme funds in interest of transparency in execution of 
scheme and prevention of risk of misappropriation of funds, 
etc.
Council may ensure that Departments follow tendering 
procedures for award of works.  Responsibility may be fixed for 
the lapses in following prescribed procedures in this regard.

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
x
Council may investigate and fix responsibility for diversion of 
funds.
Council may ensure timely deduction and transfer of Labour Cess 
to the Building and other Construction Labour Welfare Board of 
the State so that fund can be utilised on welfare activities for 
building and other construction workers.
Systems for strengthening internal controls and checks in the 
Council Departments and Subordinate offices may be put in 
place on priority so that proper records in support of activities 
may be maintained. 
Council may constitute Audit Committee to discuss Audit Reports 
and ensure action on audit observations.

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
C
CHAPTER-I
Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of 
Accounts

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
D

1
CHAPTER-I
Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts
1.1	 Profile	of	the	Mara	 Autonomous	District	Council
The erstwhile Pawi-Lakher Regional Council was re-organised 
in April 1972 into three Regional Councils1 by the Government 
of Mizoram.  In terms of paragraph 20 B of Sixth Schedule of the 
Constitution of India, Lakher Regional Council was elevated2 to 
the status of a District Council.  The Lakher Regional Council 
was renamed as the Mara Autonomous District Council (MADC) 
in May 1989.
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India vested District 
Councils with powers to enact laws on matters listed in 
paragraph 3 (1) of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of 
India.  The main subjects included allotment, occupation, use, 
etc. of land; management of forests other than reserve forests, 
use of any canal or water -course for agriculture; regulation of 
the practice of “ Jhum3” or other forms of shifting cultivation; 
establishment of village or town committees or Councils and 
their powers, village or town administration including police, 
public health & sanitation and inheritance of property.
Paragraph 6 (1) of the Schedule empowers the Council to 
establish, construct or manage primary schools, dispensaries, 
markets, cattle, ponds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and 
waterways in the Autonomous District. Paragraph 8, ibid, further 
1 Pawi, Lakher and Chakma Regional Councils
2 w.e.f. 29 April 1972 under the Mizoram District Council’s (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Order, 1972
3 “Jhum” cultivation is a local name for slash and burn agriculture practiced 
by the tribal groups in the north-eastern states of India. Crops are grown in 
this cultivation by clearing the trees and other vegetation and then burning 
the fields. Land burning allows the addition of potash to the soil, which in 
effect increases soil fertility and nutrient content

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
2
empowers the Councils to assess, levy and collect within the 
Autonomous District, revenue in respect of land and buildings, 
taxes on profession, trade, callings and employment, animals, 
vehicles and boats, tolls on passengers and goods carried in 
ferries and taxes for maintenance of schools, dispensaries and 
roads.
The MADC consists of 28 Members including 25 elected 
Members and Governor on the recommendation 4 of the Chief 
Executive Member nominates three persons to be Members 
of the Council. The Council is headed by a Chief Executive 
Member (CEM).  The Council is headquartered at Siaha, South-
Eastern Mizoram.
1.2 Rules for the management of the District Fund
The Sixth Schedule provides for the Constitution of a District 
Fund for each Autonomous District. All money received by the 
Council in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution 
are to be credited in the District Fund.  In accordance with the 
provisions contained in paragraph 7 (2) of the Schedule, the 
Mizoram Autonomous District Council Fund (MADCF) Rules, 
1996 (Revised in 2010) came into effect from 26 November 
1996.  These Rules provide the procedure for payment of 
money into the said fund, withdrawal of money there from, 
custody of money therein and any other matter connected 
with or ancillary to these matters. Under the Rules, all money 
pertaining to the District Fund are held in Treasury in Personal 
Ledger Accounts of the District Council as a Deposit Account.  
Money is drawn from the Treasury by cheques signed by 
the Executive Secretary, MADC.  Management of financial 
affairs of the Council is entrusted to “Member-in-charge of the 
4 Rule 7(4) of the Mara Autonomous District Council (Constitution, 
Conduct of Business, etc.) Amendment Rules, 2011

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
3
Financial Affairs” under Rule 32 (2) of Part III of the Mizoram 
Autonomous Districts (Constitution and Conduct of Business 
of the District Councils) Rules, 1974.
1.3 Administrative Set-up of the Council
(a) Administrative Set-up
Administration of MADC and its subordinate offices are 
managed from its headquarters at Siaha District.  A flow chart of 
administrative set-up is given in Chart-1.1.
Chart-1.1:  Administrative set-up of the Council
Executives Superintendents Accountants Cashier
 
Executive Secretary
Chief Executive 
Member, MADC
Finance and Accounts 
Department
 General Adminstration  and 
Control Department
Law and Judiciary 
Department
Rural development, Planning 
Department, etc.
Source: MADC records
The Finance Department is responsible for observation of 
financial procedure in general in all Departments and to regulate 
the business of the Finance Department.

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
4
The General Administration & Control Department is responsible 
for seeing that the rules and principles relating to services in 
general are properly followed.
(b)  Manpower Management
Rule 7 to 9 of the Mara Autonomous District Council (Transaction 
of Business) Rules, 2011 governs the requirement and positioning 
of staff in the Council. Mara Autonomous District Council had 
1,573 (76 per cent ) staff in position against the sanctioned 
strength of 2,075, the Sanctioned strength and person in position 
in Finance department is given in the table below:
Sanctioned Posts and Men-in-Position under Finance Department 
for the year 2015-16:
Sl. 
No. Name of post Sanctioned 
Posts
Men-in-
Position
1. Executive Secretary 1 1
2. Deputy Secretary (Finance) 1 0
3. Senior Accounts Officer 1 1
4. Finance & Accounts Officer 2 1
5. Assistant Accounts Officer 4 4
6. Accountant 6 4
7. Junior Accountant 3 0
8. UDC 4 0
9. LDC/ Accounts Assistant 7 3
10. Computer Operator-III 1 0
11. Computer Operator-IV 1 1
12. Peon/Chowkidar 5 5
13. Personal Attendant 28 28
Total 64 48
The Council was managing its various functions and activities 
with 76 per cent  of Sanctioned Strength. Moreover, Finance 
Department had only 48 persons in position against the 
sanctioned strength of 64 persons in position.

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
5
The Staff position as per Sanctioned Strength was inadequate to 
cope up with the multiplicity of functions. Inadequacy of staff at 
all levels in the administrative hierarchy not only affected efficient 
performance of the Council but also adversely affected records 
and  book keeping, maintenance, monitoring of implementation 
of schemes, etc.
The Council may ensure posting of adequate staff against 
sanctioned posts for smooth conduct of entrusted functions.  
Besides, they may also seek the help of State Government and 
utilise its training facilities for training and capacity building 
at all levels in the administrative hierarchy of the Council 
for ensuring proper book keeping, record maintenance, 
supervision, control and monitoring.
1.4 Maintenance of Accounts
In pursuance of paragraph 7 (3) of the Sixth Schedule, the 
accounts of the District Council are required to be maintained in 
the form as prescribed by the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India with the approval of the President of India.
As per Rule 123 of MADCF Rules, 2010, the Member-in-
charge of the Financial Affairs shall forward the accounts to 
the Accountant General (AG) (Audit) by 30th  June each year.  
These accounts, duly test-checked locally by the AG (Audit), 
together with connected audit reports, shall be submitted 
to the Governor who shall cause them to be laid before the 
District Council. Action-taken-notes on the said Reports shall 
be submitted by the District Council to the Governor of the 
State who shall give such directions as considered necessary 
in public interest to the District Council.
Annual Accounts of the Council for the year 2015-16 were 
prepared in the prescribed format, but the Accounts were sent to 
AG (Audit) after a delay of 13 months (August 2017). 

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
6
The Member-in-charge of the Financial Affairs may monitor 
the timely preparation as well as timely submission of Accounts 
and may ensure adequate staff is posted against sanctioned 
strength in the Council.
The results of test check of the Annual Accounts for the year 
2015-16 are discussed in succeeding chapters.
1.5 Internal Control
Internal control mechanism is an integral and continuous 
process of any management in ensuring prudent financial 
management which serves as an effective mechanism to ensure 
accountability.
Rule 144 of the MADCF Rules also requires the Council 
management to introduce a suitable system for internal audit 
with the approval of the Governor and in consultation with the 
AG (Audit).
Audit, however, noted that such system had not been put in place 
by the Council Authorities till date (April 2019).
Besides it was also seen that there was:
	absence of office procedure, Accounting, Budget and Internal 
Audit Manuals;
	non-maintenance of Asset Register and absence of physical 
verification of assets;
	non-maintenance of ledger accounts with respect to works; 
and
	absence of stock registers, bills and vouchers in support.
The Council stated (April 2018) that internal audit mechanism 
would be introduced in the near future.
The status of introduction of internal audit mechanism was 
awaited (April 2019).

Chapter-I : Constitution, Rules and Maintenance of Accounts 
7
Due to weak internal controls, the attempt on the part of Audit 
to examine the annual accounts and transactions of the Council 
was constrained to that extent. Above failure in internal 
controls under Financial Management is fraught with risks 
of fraud, misappropriation and financial irregularities, which 
might remain undetected.
Effective internal control reduces the risk of asset loss, and 
helps to ensure that information is complete and accurate, 
financial statements are reliable, and day-to-day operations are 
conducted in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws 
and regulations. Council may establish a strong internal control 
system for good governance.
1.6 Recommendations
i. The Council may ensure posting of adequate staff against 
sanctioned posts for smooth conduct of entrusted functions.  
Besides, they may also seek the help of State Government and 
utilise its training facilities for training and capacity building 
at all levels in the administrative hierarchy of the Council 
for ensuring proper book keeping, record maintenance, 
supervision, control and monitoring.
ii. The Member-in-charge of the Financial Affairs may monitor 
the timely preparation as well as timely submission of 
Accounts and may ensure adequate staff is posted against 
sanctioned strength in the Council.
iii. The Council may strengthen its internal control mechanism, 
make internal Audit wing functional and take action on 
deficiencies in record management.

E
Chapter-II : Autonomous District Council Funds 
CHAPTER-II
Autonomous District Council Funds

F
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16

9
Autonomous District Council Funds
2. Introduction to District Fund
Sixth Schedule provides for a District Fund for each autonomous 
region and a Regional Fund to which shall be credited all moneys 
received by the District Council for that district and the Regional 
Council for that region in the course of the administration of such 
district or region respectively in accordance with the provisions 
of the Constitution. The District Fund of the Autonomous District 
Council constituted under the provisions of sub-paragraph (I) of 
paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India 
to which shall be credited all moneys received by the District 
Council in the course of the administration of the Autonomous 
District Council in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution.
The ADC fund comprises receipts from its own resources and 
shared revenue and grants/ loans & advances from State / Central 
governments.  Broad classification is as discussed below:
A. District Fund
District Fund further had two divisions namely: (i) Revenue 
Section for Revenue Receipts and Expenditures and (ii) Capital 
Section for Capital Receipts and Expenditures, Public Debt, Loans 
and Advances. The first division shall deal with the proceeds of 
taxation and other receipts classed as revenue and expenditure 
met there from. It shall also include the grants and contributions 
received from the Government and also grants and contributions 
by the Council. The second division shall deal with expenditure 
of Capital nature met from borrowed funds. It also comprised of 
loans received and their repayments by the Council and loans 
and advances and their recoveries by the Council.
CHAPTER-II

10
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
B. Deposit Fund
Deposit Fund covers transactions relating to Deposits, General 
Provident Fund (GPF), other funds and advances such as Cess, 
Income Tax, Sales Tax and Security Deposits, etc. where the 
Council incurs a liability to repay the moneys received or has a 
claim to recover the amount paid.
2.1 Receipts and Expenditure
The Receipts and Expenditure of the Council for the year 2015-16 
were as under:
Table-2.1: Details of Receipts and Disbursement of the Council 
during the year 2015-16
(₹	in	lakh)
PART-I: DISTRICT FUND
Receipts Disbursements
Revenue Section
i Taxes on Income 
& Expenditure 55.19 i
District Council & 
District Council 
Secretariat
520.01 
ii Land Revenue 20.76 ii Administration of 
Justice 85.10 
iii
Other 
Administrative 
Services
7.34 iii Executive 
Members 93.18 
iv Other General 
Economic Services 5.94 iv Secretariat 
General Services 267.75 
v Forest 22.99 v Finance & 
Accounts 609.30 
vi Taxes on Vehicles 0.34 vi Land & Revenue 374.81 
vii Public Works 5.89 vii
Education & 
Human Resources 
(Primary Section)
2,747.19 
viii
Grants-in-Aid 
from the State 
Government (Plan) 
NLCPR, NITI 
Aayog, RKVY
3,102.77 viii
Education & 
Human Resources 
(Middle Section)
1,820.09 

11
Chapter-II : Autonomous District Council Funds 
PART-I: DISTRICT FUND
Receipts Disbursements
ix
Grants-in-Aid 
from the State 
Government 
(Non-Plan)
7,128.51
ix
Education 
(Direction & 
Administration)
115.51 
x Board of School 
Education 80.50 
xi Adult Education 33.17 
xii Hindi Education 18.82 
xiii District Library 11.90 
xiv Local 
Administration 735.39 
xv Forest 507.85 
xvi Social Welfare 93.05 
xvii Road Transport 116.05 
xviii Public Works 758.78 
xix Art & Culture 57.31 
xx Rural 
Development 322.30 
xxi Agriculture & 
Horticulture 373.30 
xxii Soil & Water 
Conservation 261.06 
xxiii
Animal 
Husbandry & 
Veterinary
148.91 
xxiv Industry 53.52 
xxv Fisheries 60.44 
xxvi Public Health 
Engineering 53.45 
xxvii Sericulture 29.57 
xxviii Sports & Youth 
services 40.06 
xxix Co-operative 21.99 
xxx Waterways 36.46 
Total Revenue 
Receipts
10,349.74 Total Revenue 
Expenditure
10,446.82

12
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
PART-I: DISTRICT FUND
Receipts Disbursements
Capital Section
Capital Receipts - Capital 
Disbursements -
Total Capital Receipts - Total Capital 
Disbursements - 
Debt Section
i
Loans received 
from the State 
Government
- i
Repayment of 
Loan received 
from the State 
Government
- 
ii Recovery of Loans 
and Advances - ii
Disbursement 
of Loans and 
Advances
- 
iii
Loans received 
from other 
sources: 
- iii
Disbursement of 
Loans from other 
sources:
- 
Total Debt Receipts - Total Debt 
Disbursements - 
Total of Part I: 
District Fund 10,349.74 Total of Part I: District 
Fund 10,446.82 
PART-II: DEPOSIT FUND
Deposit Section
Deposit Receipts - Deposit 
Disbursements - 
Total of Part II
Deposit fund - Total of Part II 
Deposit fund - 
Overall position
Total Receipts 
(Part I + Part II) 10,349.74 Total Disbursements 
(Part I + Part II) 10,446.82
Opening Balance 
(Part I + Part II) 592.00 Closing Balance 
(Part I + Part II) 494.92 
Grand Total 10,941.74 Grand Total 10,941.74
Source: Annual Accounts of the Council for the year 2015-16
As per Receipt and Expenditure Statement of the Council, during 
2015-16, Council generated ₹ 1.18 crore (one per cent) from 
its own sources and taxes, received ₹ 71.29 crore (69 per cent) 
as Grants-in-Aid (Non-Plan), ₹ 20.28 crore (20 per cent ) as  

13
Chapter-II : Autonomous District Council Funds 
Grants-in-Aid (Plan) from the State Government. They also 
received ₹ 10.75 crore as grant from NITI Aayog, Non-lapsable 
Central pool of Resources (NLCPR), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojna (RKVY), Thirteen Finance Commission Grants and North 
Eastern Area grants.
As such, Grants-in-Aid and Central/ State Government assistance 
constitutes 99 per cent of the Council’s total receipts. The over 
reliance on Grants-in-Aid and assistance from Government 
indicate the financial vulnerability of the MADC as any disruption 
in revenue flow from these sources would affect the functioning 
of the Council.
Total receipts of the Council were at ₹ 103.50 crore in 2015-16 
while expenditure during the year increased by seven per cent 
from ₹ 98.06 crore in 2014-15 to ₹ 104.47 crore in 2015-16.
It was observed that out of the total expenditure of ₹ 104.47 crore 
for the year 2015-16, ₹ 87.56 crore constituting 83.81 per cent 
was spent on administrative costs, notably salaries.  The balance 
amount of ₹ 16.91 crore was spent on development activities, 
including creation of assets.
Review of earning by own resources and comparison of revenue 
generated and expenditure to earn that revenue by departments 
of the Council, is given in the Table-2.2:
Table-2.2: Comparison of revenue earned and expenditure 
by the departments
(₹	in	lakh)
Department Revenue 
Earned
Total 
Expenditure
Pay & 
allowances 
(% of total 
expenditure 
under the 
head)
Expenses 
on other 
(% of total 
expenditure 
under the head)
Forest 22.99 507.85 467.37 (92%) 40.48 (8%)
Land 
Revenue 20.76 374.81 340.84 (91%) 33.97 (9%)
Source: Annual Accounts Statement 5 & 6

14
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
It is evident from above that revenue generation departments 
viz. Land Revenue and Forest were not able to meet their 
administrative expenses. Reasons for low realisation of revenue 
nor arrears if any, were not on records. This indicated high 
dependence of MADC on State Government funding to meet its 
financial needs and high administrative costs.
The Council may need to identify and implement internal  
cost-saving measures while not compromising on its core 
functions. They need to cut down on the overall administrative 
expenditure and high cost of these two Departments, considering 
their heavy cost of collection of revenues.
Further, efforts could be initiated to comprehensively map 
untapped, but eligible, revenue sources and put in place a plan 
for strict enforcement of tax and fee collections.
2.2 Conclusion
Grants-in-Aid and Central/ State Government assistance 
constitutes 99 per cent of the Council’s total receipts.
Out of the total expenditure of ₹ 104.47 crore for the year 2015-16, 
₹ 87.56 crore constituting 83.81 per cent spent on administrative 
costs, notably salaries.  The balance amount of ₹ 16.91 crore was 
spent on development activities, including creation of assets.
Comparative analysis of two revenue Departments i.e. 
Land Revenue and Forest, showed that their administrative 
expenditure (Pay & allowances) was very high and exceeded 
the Revenue collected.

15
Chapter-II : Autonomous District Council Funds 
2.3 Recommendations
i. Council may map its administrative expenditure with 
respect to its income from own sources and spend wisely on 
revenue generation activities for financial sustainability.
ii. The Council may need to identify and implement internal 
cost-saving measures, while not compromising on its 
core functions. They need to cut down on the overall 
administrative expenditure and administrative expenditure 
of its revenue earning Departments, considering their 
heavy cost of collection of revenues.
iii. Council may also seek guidance from the State Government 
for Budget preparation, management of administrative 
expenses, cost saving measures and monitoring of utilisation 
of funds while implementing Government Schemes, 
including types of records to be maintained with respect to 
Schemes, expenditure control and other monitoring tools 
used by State Government.

G
Chapter-III : Comments on Accounts 
CHAPTER-III
Comments on Accounts

Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16

17
Comments on Accounts
3. Introduction to Accounts and Comments on Council Accounts
The annual accounts of the District Council shall record all 
transactions, which take place during a financial year commencing 
from 01 April to 31 March. The annual accounts of the District 
Council shall be maintained in such forms as prescribed by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
The MADC prepares its annual accounts in the prescribed 
format containing the following seven statements, which detail 
the receipts and disbursements of the MADC for the year with 
bifurcation of the expenditure under revenue, capital, plan and 
non-plan:
The MADC annual accounts for the year 2015-16 contain the 
following seven statements as given in Table-3.1:
Table-3.1
Sl. No. Statement No. Particulars of statements
1. Statement No. 1 Summary of Transactions 
2. Statement No. 2 Capital Outlay - progressive Capital 
Outlay
3. Statement No. 3 Debt Position
4. Statement No. 4 Loans and Advances by the MADC
5. Statement No. 5 Detailed Revenue by Minor Heads
6. Statement No. 6 Detailed account of revenue expenditure 
by Minor Heads 
7. Statement No. 7
Statement of receipts, disbursements and 
balances under Heads relating to District 
Fund and Deposit Fund
3.1 Overstatement of Personal Ledger Account
Statement No. 7 of Annual Accounts of the Council depicts receipts, 
disbursements and balance under heads relating to District Fund and 
Deposit Fund.  In the statement-7 pertaining to the year 2015-16, 
balance of Personal Ledger Accounts (PLA) on 31 March 2016 
CHAPTER-III

18
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
was shown as ₹  494.92 lakh. However, as per Statement No. 3 
(Ways & Means of MADC) of the Annual Accounts, ₹ 3.40 lakh 
was shown under the PLA and ₹ 491.52 lakh was retained in cash 
by MADC.  This resulted in overstatement of PLA.
As per Rule 33 of MADCF Rules, 2010, no money should 
be drawn from the Fund unless it is required for immediate 
disbursement.  Further, it is not permissible to disburse 
advances from the Fund either for execution of works, the 
completion of which is likely to take considerable time or to 
prevent the lapse of budget grants.
Scrutiny of main cash book (2015-16) revealed that Council 
retained huge cash balances at the end of the month as shown 
below:
Date Closing	balance	(₹	in	lakh)
31.01.2016 59.13
28.02.2016 60.48
31.03.2016 491.52
Source: Cash books of the Council
The reason for retention of huge cash balance was not on record.  
Keeping huge cash balance is fraught with the risk of temporary 
misappropriation of funds.
Council in its reply (April 2018) stated that money was drawn 
as per requirement from PLA.  Cash balance was required since 
most of the bills were lying unpaid due to non-completion of 
works and the decision of the Executive Committee was awaited 
for making payment.  Further, the Council added that PLA does 
not lapse at the end of the year and all bills passed by the Treasury 
were paid in the next few days without much cash balance left.
The reply was not acceptable since cash balance increased, 
during the last quarter of 2015-16 indicating that money was 
drawn from treasury without immediate requirement, which is 
gross violation of prescribed rules.

19
Chapter-III : Comments on Accounts 
Council should adhere to Fund Rules with respect to revenue 
collected and remitted to treasury and avoid holding of cash 
without immediate needs.
3.2 Discrepancies in Statements constituting Annual Accounts
(A) Seven Statements prescribed by the CAG have significance in 
presenting various financial aspects of the Council.  Statement-5 
of the Annual Accounts contains details about Receipts of the 
Council during the year while Statement-1 depicts summary of 
transaction of the Council during the year.
Review of Annual Accounts along with Receipt and Expenditure 
Statement revealed that Council had received ₹ 764.00 lakh under 
NITI Aayog schemes. However, in Statement 5 it was shown 
as ₹ 451.61 lakh.  The discrepancy in statements constituting 
Annual Accounts should have been reviewed and reconciled at 
the time of compilation of Annual Accounts.
(B) The objective of NLCPR Scheme is to fill up the gap in 
infrastructure sector of the North Eastern Region through 
sanctioning the projects prioritised by the State Governments. 
Review of Receipt and Expenditure Statement along with Annual 
Accounts, revealed that Council had incurred an expenditure 
₹ 167.11 lakh under NLCPR scheme during 2015-16. However, 
as per Statement-6 of the Annual Accounts, Council booked 
₹ 145.58 lakh as expenditure under NLCPR. Difference of 
₹ 21.53 lakh was not explained anywhere in Annual Accounts.
Thus, due to inconsistency in booking of transactions in 
statements constituting Annual Accounts, correct expenditure 
under NLCPR could not be ascertained.
Reply from Council is awaited (June 2021).
Discrepancies in Statements constituting Annual Accounts 
should have been reconciled before compilation of Annual 
Accounts.

20
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
3.3	 	Absence	 of	 detailed	 budget	 and	 non-booking	 of	
Capital Expenditure
As per Rule 120 and 121 of Mizoram Autonomous District 
Council Fund Rules, 2010 Statement of estimated revenue 
and expenditure as well as any supplementary estimates or 
demands for grants (Annual budget) was to be prepared by the 
Member-in-charge of Financial Affairs. As per MADCF Rules, 
2010, expenditure on Capital outlay shall be classified with 
relevance to the functions and objects in the Revenue Accounts. 
Statement No.2 of the Annual Accounts of the Council depicts 
the progressive Capital outlay at the end of the financial year.
It was however, noticed that the budget of the Council for the 
year 2015-16 did not exhibit item-wise estimated Capital and 
Revenue expenditure distinctly. As such, Audit could not ascertain 
the actual allocation against activities taken up during the year 
and any deviation from the planned activities or shortfalls as per 
the budget.
Further, it was seen that expenditure of ₹ 441.88 lakh incurred on 
Capital items was shown as Revenue expenditure in Statement 
No-6 (Detailed Accounts of Revenue Expenditure) of Annual 
Accounts 2015-16 instead of reflecting it in Statement No-2.: 
Capital Outlay.
This resulted in understatement of Capital Outlay and 
overstatement of Revenue Expenditure by ₹ 441.885 lakh.
5
Department Capital item Amount 
(₹	in	lakh)
Secretariat General Services Building 2.50
Education and Human Resources P/S School Building (SPA) 95.00
Local Administration Market 90.00
Public Works
Mara Student Hostel at 
Aizawl (NLCPR) 145.58
MDC Hostel (SPA) 108.80
Total 441.88

21
Chapter-III : Comments on Accounts 
Thus, absence of detailed budgeting against Revenue and Capital 
heads led to misclassification of expenditure.
Reply of the Council is awaited (June 2021).
Council should adhere to prescribed format of Accounts and 
exhibit Capital and Revenue expenditure correctly in the 
Annual Accounts.
Council may prepare budget in prescribed format in detail so 
that transactions may be recorded under appropriate Revenue 
and Capital head by which Council will have better control 
over expenditure and exhibit the same correctly in the Annual 
Accounts.
3.4  Non-maintenance of General Ledger and various 
other registers
MADCF Rules provide for maintenance of General Ledger and 
a number of other registers for better financial management.  
Scrutiny of records of MADC revealed the following:
	The Council did not maintain General Ledger as prescribed 
under Rule 148 (1) of MADCF Rules, which provided for 
maintenance of General Ledger separately in two volumes–
one for Receipt transactions and the other for Expenditure 
under each budget head.
	The Council did not maintain Control Ledger as prescribed 
under Rule 148 (2) of MADCF Rules, which provided for 
maintenance of Control Ledger to record total transactions 
under all budget heads in a month as recorded in the General 
Ledger.
	The Council did not maintain Register of Lands, Buildings 
and other properties belonging to the Council, since its 
inception, as prescribed under Rule143 of MADCF Rules.
	During 2015-16, the Council did not carry out annual physical 
verification of Fixed Assets as prescribed under Rule 192 (1) 

22
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
of the General Financial Rules, 2005, which provided for 
physical verification of Fixed Assets at least once in a year 
and investigation of any discrepancies noticed during such 
verification.
	During 2015-16, the Council did not maintain Register of 
Works as prescribed under Rule 102 of the MADCF Rules, 
which provided for maintenance of Register of Works, 
in the prescribed format, containing a detailed record of 
expenditure relating to each sanctioned amount.
	Five test checked departments 6 did not maintain Stock 
Accounts as prescribed under Rules 135 (1), (2) and 136 of 
MADCF Rules, although, these departments had procured  
non-consumable goods7 worth ₹ 24.04 lakh during the year 
2015-16.  Non-maintenance of stock accounts was fraught 
with the risk of misappropriation.
Proper maintenance of above records is necessary for 
transparent, accurate picture of the affairs of the Council and 
for taking appropriate decisions by the management. Non-
maintenance of these records are not only fraught with the risk 
of misappropriations, etc., but this also led to misclassification 
of nature of expenditure.
Council stated (April 2018) that relevant records/ registers would 
be maintained by the departments concerned in future.
Council may ensure proper maintenance of accounting and 
those records with respect to works executed, stores and stocks 
6 Public Health Engineering Department, 2. Planning & Programme 
Implementation Department, 3. Information & Publicity Department, 4. Art 
& Culture Department and 5. Land Revenue & Settlement Department
7 1. Public Health Engineering Department: ₹ 1.64 lakh, 2. Planning & 
Programme Implementation Department: ₹ 2.35 lakh, 3. Information 
& Publicity Department: ₹ 1.81 lakh, 4. Art & Culture Department: 
₹ 1.12 lakh, and 5. Land Revenue & Settlement Department: ₹ 17.12 lakh 
= ₹	24.04	lakh

23
Chapter-III : Comments on Accounts 
for transparency and accountability with respect to purchases, 
utilisation of items and overall accuracy of Accounts.
3.5 Conclusion
In this Chapter, audit emphasis was on the classification and 
accounting treatment of transactions in Annual Accounts, 
internal control and record keeping,  etc .  As such following 
discrepancies were noticed:
	Council retained huge cash balances without immediate 
need of money.
	Capital Expenditure was not booked as per Statement 2 and 
was also understated due to misclassification and Revenue 
Expenditure was overstated by ₹ 4.42 crore.
	Discrepancies in statements of Annual Accounts with respect 
to Receipt and Expenditure under Non lapsable Central Pool 
of Resources and NITI Aayog assistance were noticed.
	Improper maintenance of records with respect to Stores, 
stocks and works was noticed.
3.6 Recommendations
i. Council should adhere to MADCF Rules with respect 
to revenue collected and ensure receipts are remitted to 
treasury promptly.
ii. They may avoid holding of cash without immediate needs.
iii. Council is advised to device a system of periodical review of 
accounting records to identify coexisting mistakes within the 
accounting period so that corrective action may be taken.
iv. Council may reconcile the Closing balances at Treasury 
with Cashbooks before compiling Annual Accounts. 
Discrepancies in Annual Accounts with Receipts and 
Expenditure be reconciled and minimised.

24
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
v. Receipts and Expenditure to be correctly classified under 
Capital and Revenue categories as per Format of Accounts; 
and
vi. Council may maintain consistency in Statements constituting 
Annual Accounts.

I
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
CHAPTER-IV
Compliance Audit Observations

J
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16

25
Compliance Audit Observations
Compliance Audit observations highlighted the deficiencies 
observed in the management of MADC having financial 
implications.  The main irregularities observed during audit are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
4.1 Non-rationalisation of posting of school teachers
In order to achieve better administrative control, quality 
improvement and expedite rationalisation of posting of Primary 
School teachers, the State Government issued Notification 
(August 2002) suggesting the norms for availability of teachers 
based on enrolment of pupils as shown in Table-4.1:
Table-4.1:  Criteria for posting of teachers
Sl. No. Enrolment of pupils Suggested strength of teachers
1. 21 – 40 2 – 3
2. 41 – 100 4 – 5
3. 101 – 150 5 – 6
4. 151 – 200 7 – 8
5. 200 and above 8 – 10
Source: State Government’ s Notification (August 2002)
Audit noticed that the Education & Human Resource Department, 
MADC did not adopt the State Government’s norms. Further, 
there was no rationale or defined criteria for posting of school 
teachers in relation to pupil enrolment. The position of teachers’ 
vis-à-vis pupils’ enrolment as of March 2016 is given in 
Appendix-I.
It was observed that posting of teachers was not rationalised as 
of March 2016, as detailed below:
(i)  In 50 Middle Schools, there was an overall shortage of  
44 teachers; 29 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and five, while 15 had excess deployment of teachers 
ranging between one and seven; while the remaining six 
Middle Schools had teachers as per the norm.
CHAPTER-IV

26
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
(ii)  In 107 Primary Schools, there was an overall excess of  
43 teachers; 36 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and six, while 50 had excess teachers deployed ranging 
between one and five; while the remaining 21 Primary 
Schools had teachers as per the norm.
Excess of teachers in some Primary Schools even when there 
was an overall shortage of 44 teachers and shortage of teachers 
in some Middle Schools even when there was an overall excess 
of 43 teachers indicated that posting of school teachers was done 
in an ad-hoc manner resulting in skewed distribution of teaching 
resources. Besides, it had adverse impact on teaching in schools 
where there was shortage of teachers. Posting of teachers needed 
to be rationalised in all the Middle and Primary Schools to 
improve quality of education.
Thus, non-adoption of State Government’s orders led to lop-
sided deployment of teaching staff in schools and consequently 
depriving students’ access to adequate number of faculties. It 
also led to recruitment of excess Middle School teachers in terms 
of the State Government norms.
Reasons for non-adoption of State Government orders by the 
Council were not on record.
The Council stated (April 2018) that steps would be taken to 
rationalise the posting of school teachers. Action taken to 
rationalise posting of school teachers was awaited (April 2019).
Council may review and revise its policy relating to appointment 
of teachers and ensure compliance to State Government norms 
in respect of appointments of teachers in its schools.
4.2	 Execution	of	Rashtriya	Krishi	 Vikash	Y ojana	(RKVY)
A. Animal Husbandry & Veterinary Department
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana was initiated in 2007 as an umbrella 
scheme for ensuring holistic development of agriculture and 
allied sectors by allowing states to choose their own agriculture 

27
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
and allied sector development activities as per the district/ state 
agriculture plan.  The main objectives of the scheme are-
(i)  To strengthen the efforts of farmers through creation of 
required pre and post harvest Agri-infrastructure that 
increases access to quality inputs, storage, market facilities 
etc. and enables farmers to make informed choices.
(ii)  To provide autonomy, flexibility to States to plan and execute 
schemes as per local farmers’ needs.
The Council received ₹ 78.90 lakh during the year 2015-16 
under RKVY to provide financial assistance to beneficiaries for 
implementation of activities e.g.- Livelihood through Piggery 
development, Strengthening of Poultry farmers, Backyard Goat 
Farming and other irrigation facilities like Construction of 
Check Dam, Construction of Wooden bund and construction of 
retaining wall, etc.
During the year, the Animal Husbandry & Veterinary 
Department (AH&VD) distributed ₹ 57.00 lakh out of the funds 
available under RKVY , as assistance to 190 beneficiaries for 
implementation of activities such as Livelihood through Piggery 
development, Strengthening of Poultry farmers and Backyard 
Goat Farming.  Details are mentioned in Table-4.2:
Table-4.2
(₹	in	lakh)
Sl. 
No. Particulars No. of 
beneficiaries
Rate of 
assistance  
per head
Amount 
1. Livelihood through 
Piggery development 92 30,000 27.60
2. Strengthening of Poultry 
farmers 86 30,000 25.80
3. Backyard Goat Farming 12 30,000 3.60
Total 190 - 57.00
Source: Council’ s records

28
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Audit observed that the Council did not put in place a system 
to ensure actual utilisation of the assistance provided to the 
beneficiaries.  Thus, Audit could not ascertain how the Council 
ensured that the funds were actually utilised for the purposes 
for which they were released and whether the projected benefits 
had accrued to the beneficiaries.
While accepting the facts, the Council stated (September 2017) 
that photographic evidence was obtained by the Department 
while carrying out inspection and monitoring. Further, stated that 
Utilisation Certificates would be obtained from the beneficiaries 
and furnished in due course.
For verification of the replies submitted, a joint physical 
inspection was conducted by Audit with officials of the 
Department in December 2017. Audit observed that seven out 
of twelve beneficiaries interviewed continued their respective 
trades whereas five beneficiaries could not continue due to death 
of livestock.  The Department was unaware of the same since 
the beneficiaries had not reported the matter. This showed lack 
of monitoring on the part of the Department, which resulted 
in the Department being unaware that the intended benefits of 
the Scheme were not achieved in 41.60 per cent of cases test 
checked.
Council may carry out studies to measure the benefits/ outcomes 
of the schemes implemented.
B. Soil & Water Conservation Department
During 2015-16, out of the funds available under RKVY , the 
Soil & Water Conservation Department (S&WCD) incurred an 
expenditure of ₹ 34.70 lakh for execution of 28 departmental 
works, namely Construction of Check Dam, Construction of 
Log-wood Bund and Construction of Retaining Wall. The fund 
was disbursed as per details in Table-4.3.

29
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
Table-4.3
(₹	in	lakh)
Sl. No. Name	of	work Expenditure
1. Construction of Check Dam (22 locations) 22.20
2. Construction of Log-wood Bund (five locations) 5.50
3. Construction of Retaining Wall (one location) 7.00
Total 34.70
Source: Council’ s records
Audit noticed that all these the works were executed 
departmentally by engaging muster-roll labourers. A first and 
final bill for ₹ 34.70 lakh was passed in the form of contractor’s 
bill, showing the quantity of works done and rates as per 
detailed estimates and Measurement Books (MBs), which were 
prepared by the Assistant Engineer (AE)/ Junior Engineer (JE) 
concerned.
Audit observed that muster rolls showing details of wages paid to 
labourers and supporting vouchers for the purchase of materials 
were not on record.  Additionally, Registers of Work were not 
maintained by any of the AEs/ JEs.  In the absence of muster 
rolls and supporting vouchers, Audit could not ascertain the 
authenticity and regularity of the expenditure of ₹ 34.70 lakh.  
The Scheme was also not properly monitored as the assets created 
were not verified on ground.  Non-availability of basic records 
like muster rolls of supply vouchers of the expenditure of the 
Scheme funds is fraught with chances of diversion of funds. The 
Council assured (April 2018) that record in support of execution 
of works by the department would be maintained in future.
Council may follow due procedure while making payments to 
contractors, verify relevant records ensure authenticity of bills 
produced and that the works have actually been executed by 
the Department.

30
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
4.3	 	Execution	 of	 works	 under	 North	 Eastern	 Council	
Fund - Hill Terracing
The Soil & Water Conservation Department (S&WCD) incurred 
an expenditure of ₹  140.68 lakh for execution of “Hill Terrace 
construction at degraded Jhumland under North Eastern Council 
Fund (NECF) during 2015-16. Details are as given in Table-4.4.
Table-4.4: Details of construction from North Eastern Council 
Fund
(₹	in	lakh)
Sl. 
No.
Particulars Area
(in hectares)
Expenditure 
incurred
1. Construction of Hill Terrace at Tisi 59.79 62.15
2. Construction of Hill Terrace at Theiri 56.71 64.46
3. Construction of Hill Terrace at Chakhei 12.88 14.07
Total 129.38 140.68
Source: Council’ s records
Scrutiny of records revealed that the works were executed 
departmentally by engaging muster-roll labourers. A first and 
final bill for ₹ 140.68 lakh was passed in the form of contractor’s 
bill, showing the quantity of works done and rates as per detailed 
estimates and Measurement Books (MBs), which was prepared 
by the AEs/ JEs concerned.
Audit further noticed that muster rolls showing details of wages 
paid to labourers and supporting vouchers for the purchase of 
materials were not on record. Additionally, Registers of Work 
were not maintained by any of the AEs/ JEs.
Council in its reply stated (September  2017) that muster rolls 
and vouchers were not insisted upon by the funding agencies 
and as such no records were maintained.  The Council further 
stated that relevant records such as muster rolls in support 
of works executed departmentally would be maintained  
in future.

31
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
A joint physical verification (December  2017) of two sites was 
conducted with Department officials.  Audit however, found 
that 50 per cent of the estimated cost was spent by executing 
the work departmentally and the remaining 50 per cent was 
disbursed in cash to the Jhumland owners.  There was no 
provision for disbursement of cash to the beneficiaries in 
the estimates.  The Department did not maintain any Actual 
Payee Receipts in support of release of the amount to these 
beneficiaries.  As such, the veracity of cash payment could not 
be checked during audit and the expenditure remained doubtful 
and fraught with risk of misappropriation and embezzlement 
of funds.
It was further observed that Hill Terracing was done in a sporadic 
manner and the entire Jhumland was not covered.  Also, the work 
was not easily identifiable due to growth of weeds.
Thus, the veracity of the expenditure of ₹ 140.68 lakh incurred 
on Hill Terracing remains doubtful. As such, appropriate 
administrative action may be initiated against the officials for 
violation of the scheme guidelines.
Council may adhere to scheme guidelines while implementing 
it to achieve intended benefits. Council may also ensure 
maintenance of proper records with respect to transactions 
made out of scheme funds to preserve transparency in 
execution of scheme and prevention of risk of misappropriation 
of funds, etc.
4.4	 Execution	of	works	under	NITI	Aayog	(One	Time	Assistance)
The Government of Mizoram allocated and released 
(28 March 2016) ₹ 764.00 lakh from NITI Aayog as ‘One Time 
Assistance to Sixth Schedule Areas’ to the Council for the year 
2015-16.

32
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
The following deficiencies were noticed in the execution of 
works under NITI Aayog:
A.		Public	Works	Department	-	Irregular	award	of	work
The Public Works Department (PWD) was allocated ₹ 107 lakh 
for execution of various works.  As per cash book, ₹ 60 lakh 
was disbursed to 22 contractors as an advance for execution 
of various works on 31 March 2016.  Details are as shown in 
Appendix-II.  It was observed during audit that:
•	 The PWD awarded works to 22 contractors without calling 
tenders in contravention of the MADCF Rules thereby 
depriving the Council the benefits of obtaining competitive 
bids.
•	 Four works were awarded to multiple contractors.
•	 Advance payments of ₹ 60 lakh were made before issue of work 
orders8 in contravention of Rule 107 of the MADCF Rules.
Reasons for award of works without calling tenders, issuance of 
one work order to multiple contractors and payment of advances 
before issue of work orders was not on record.
While accepting the facts, the Council stated (April 2018) that 
necessary action will be taken to rectify the shortcomings in 
future.
It is recommended that administrative action be initiated 
against the officials responsible for violation of the established 
norms and procedures.
B. Public Health Engineering Department - Non-adherence 
to prescribed Rules
The Council allocated and released (March 2016) ₹ 17 lakh to 
Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) for construction 
of RCC water tanks in rural areas. Details of construction 
8 Work orders were issued between 22 April 2016 and 31 May 2016 and the 
works were commenced between 25 April 2016 and 01 June 20016

33
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
works have been shown in Appendix-III.  Audit observed the 
following:
•	 Execution	of	works	prior	to	issue	of	Administrative	and	
Expenditure sanction
The Department issued work orders (February 2016) to 20 
contractors. All the 20 works commenced (February 2016) 
and recorded as completed and measured either on or before 
30 March 2016. Payments to the contractors were also made on 
31 March 2016.
Audit however noticed that all the works were awarded and 
executed prior to receipt of Administrative and Expenditure 
sanction (28 March 2016). The works were said to have been 
executed by the MADC in anticipation of receipt of funds.
The Council stated (April 2018) that sanction of ₹ 17 lakh 
was received on the verge of closing of financial year. It was 
imperative that works for construction of water tanks were 
completed before the end of financial year.  The Council also 
stated that such lapses would be avoided in future.
The reply was not acceptable since the works could not be 
executed in anticipation of the Administrative and Expenditure 
sanction. As such, this calls for investigation in the matter to 
check about the authenticity of work done.
•	 Award	of	work	without	calling	tenders
As per Rule 95 of MADCF Rules, 2010, all works shall be 
awarded after inviting tenders in the most open and public 
manner and executing agreement in writing, which should be 
previously and definitely expressed, and also should state the 
quantity and quality of the work to be done, the specifications 
to be complied, the conditions to be observed, the security to be 
lodged, the terms upto which the payments will be made, and the 

34
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
penalties exacted with any provisions necessary for safeguarding 
the property entrusted to the contractor.
Audit noticed that the Department awarded (February 2016) 
works to local contractors without inviting tenders in violation 
of MADCF Rules. Moreover, there were no records of the 
conditions and consideration under which the contractors were 
selected, and works were awarded without specific terms and 
conditions. Execution of works and making payment thereon is 
a violation of rules.
While accepting the facts, the Council stated (April 2018) that 
relevant rules would be followed in future.
It is recommended that administrative action should be initiated 
against the officials responsible for violation of the established 
norms and procedures.
•	 Selection	of	work	sites
The selection of site or location of water tanks in rural areas was 
not on record. The Council stated (April 2018) that site selection 
was done on the proposal of works of the Village Councils which 
were approved by the MADC. It was also stated that relevant 
records/ selection register would be maintained in future.
In the absence of relevant records, audit could not ascertain the 
claim of the Council regarding the process of selection of work 
sites.
•	 Construction of Retaining Wall instead of RCC water 
tank	in	New	Colony-IV ,	Siaha
Audit noticed that construction of RCC water tank was changed 
to retaining wall on the verbal instruction of the higher authority 
for construction of the same at a water point in New Colony, 
Siaha for ₹one lakh without preparing a revised estimate.

35
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
Scrutiny of records, however, revealed that the First and Final 
bill and the MBs were prepared as per the estimate for RCC 
water tank.
While accepting the fact, the Council stated (April 2018) that 
due to limited time the bill and MB could not be changed. The 
Council also stated that proper construction manual will be 
followed to avoid such irregularities in future.
This being a case of diversion of fund, the matter needs 
investigation and fixing of responsibility.
Council may ensure strict adherence to prescribed rules for 
better financial control and to avoid cost and time over run.
•	 Non-deduction	of	Workers’	cess
As per Department of Labour, Employment and Industrial 
Training, Government of Mizoram Office Memorandum 
(March 2012 and May 2012) “all the Departments shall ensure 
deduction of cess at the rate of one per cent on the cost of 
construction works/ projects from the contractors’ bills according 
to the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess 
Act, 1996 and the Central Rules made there under in 1998.  The 
provisions of these Acts and Rules were implemented by the 
State Government since March 2011”.
However, Department did not deduct Labour Cess amounting 
to ₹ 17,000 from 20 contractors’ bills. Non-deduction of Labour 
Cess not only resulted in undue benefits to the contractors but it 
also led to denial of benefits to construction workers.
The Council stated (April 2018) that the matter will be discussed 
in the District Council session.  However, the decision of the 
Council was awaited (April 2019).

36
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Council may ensure timely deduction and transfer of Labour 
Cess to the Building and other Construction Labour Welfare 
Board of the State so that fund can be utilised on welfare 
activities for building and other construction workers, who 
work in high-risk environment.
4.5 Maintenance of vehicles
As per delegation of financial powers notified (April 2013) by 
the Finance Department, MADC, the financial power of all heads 
of administrative department under MADC in respect of Motor 
vehicle was ₹1,500 subject to prior approval from the Executive 
Member concerned.  In case of bill above ₹1,500, report from 
the Motor Vehicle Inspector (MVI), Road Transport Department, 
MADC shall be obtained.
A. Local Administration Department
The Executive Committee, MADC accorded (03 June 2015) 
approval for utilisation of ₹ nine lakh9 towards maintenance and 
repairing of vehicles under Local Administration Department 
(LAD).
Scrutiny of records of the LAD revealed that ₹ nine lakh was 
utilised towards maintenance and repair of vehicles including 
procurement of High-Speed Diesel (HSD).  Details are given in 
Appendix-IV
It was observed during audit that:
•	 There was no expenditure sanction order for all the payments 
made towards procurement of HSD of ₹ two lakh and repair 
of vehicles for ₹ seven lakh.
•	 There were no bills/vouchers in support of expenditure of 
₹ 18,000 (Sl. No. 14 and 25) of Appendix-IV.
9 10 per cent contractor’s profit portion of execution of Main Market Building 
at Tipa-V under Special Plan Assistance Fund 2014-15 of ₹ 90 lakh

37
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
•	 The vehicle numbers were not available in respect of expenditure 
for ₹ 1,30,000 (Sl. No. 15 and 19) of Appendix-IV.
•	 Stock and Issue register in connection with procurement 
and issue of 3,800 litres of HSD was not maintained.
•	 Relevant records such as car diary, log book, inventory 
register, etc. were not maintained.
•	 Though all of the bills were above ₹1,500, report of the 
MVI was not obtained in contravention of the delegation of 
financial powers.
Thus, the genuineness of the expenditure of ₹ nine lakh could 
not be validated in audit.
Similarly, the LAD was allocated (July 2015) ₹ 0.50 lakh out 
of total allocation of ₹ 65.00 lakh under Infrastructure scheme 
under Thirteenth Finance Commission for “Maintenance of 
Vehicle and POL10”.  It was noticed that the LAD incurred an 
expenditure of ₹97,200 towards repair of the vehicles.
Scrutiny of records revealed the following:
•	 There was no expenditure sanction order for all the payments 
towards repair of vehicles for ₹ 97,200.
•	 Relevant records such as car diary, log book, inventory 
register, etc. were not maintained.
•	 The Department did not obtain report from the MVI, 
Transport Department in contravention of delegation of 
financial powers.
•	 An expenditure of ₹ 97,200 was incurred against the 
allocation of ₹ 50,000 towards maintenance of vehicles 
resulting in excess expenditure of ₹ 47,200.
In view of the facts mentioned above, the genuineness of the 
expenditure of ₹ 97,200 could not be vouchsafed.
10 Petrol, Oil and Lubricant

38
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
The Council stated (April 2018) that relevant records such as 
stock and issue register, car diary, log book, report of MVI, etc. 
will be maintained in future.
Council may ensure action against the officials at fault after 
conducting necessary investigation.
Council may provide adequate budget for running and 
maintenance of vehicles.
B. Expenditure on Motor Vehicles
Scrutiny of records of five test checked departments11 under the 
Council revealed that an expenditure of ₹ 6.65 lakh was incurred 
towards maintenance of motor vehicles (MV) during 2015-16. 
Bill amounts ranged from ₹ 1,600 to ₹ 64,570 per bill as detailed 
in Appendix-V.
Audit observed that departments did not obtain prior permission 
from the Executive Member concerned for incurring expenditure 
under MV head. None of the departments had obtained 
assessment report from the MVI for expenditure incurred on 
vehicle maintenance beyond ₹ 1,500 per bill. Payment was done 
directly without expenditure order of the Head of Departments.  
Further, departments having motor vehicles did not maintain log 
books and car diary to ascertain the mileage covered and all the 
necessary maintenance done on the vehicles.  Moreover, MV 
bills were not endorsed and certified by the Executive Secretary 
of the Council, which is a violation of MADCF Rules.  None 
of the departments maintained stock and issue register of POL 
purchase and coupon system of POL was not found maintained 
in the departments.  There was an expenditure of ₹ 5,67,008 
(₹ 6,64,508 minus ₹ 97,500) on motor vehicles beyond the 
11 1. General Administration Department, 2. Agriculture & Horticulture 
Department, 3. Art & Culture Department, 4. Public Health Engineering 
Department and 5. Planning & Programme Implementation Department

39
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
financial power of the Head of Department as detailed in 
Appendix-V .
The Council stated (April 2018) that relevant rules would be 
followed in future. Action taken on compliance with rules was 
awaited as of April 2019.
Council may ensure strict adherence to the prescribed limits to 
keep its administrative cost within allocation.
4.6 Shortcomings in the utilisation of one-time assistance fund
The Planning & Programme Implementation Department 
(Department) was allocated ₹ 10.00 lakh as One-Time Assistance 
for purchase of tools and equipment. As per sanction order, the 
amount should not be utilised for any other purpose other than 
for which it was sanctioned.
The Department incurred an expenditure of ₹ 10.00 lakh as 
detailed in Table-4.5:
Table-4.5: Details of expenditure out of One-Time Assistance for 
purchase of tools and equipment
(Amount	in	₹)
Sl. 
No.
Vr. No. & date 
of payment Amount Bill No. & 
date Particulars Name of  
store
1. 1/31.03.16 6,12,500 11/30.03.16 175 bundles of 
GCI Sheets
M/s N. 
Nadaw 
Store
2. 2/31.03.16 3,00,000 17/31.03.16
42 life jackets, 
20 helmets, 40 
hand gloves, etc.
M/s Five 
Sister 
Store
3. 3/31.03.16 46,350 10/14.02.16
Engine 
overhauling, 
battery sup, 
Dynamo sup, 
Radiator, etc. for 
MZ-03-1443
M/s Puia  
Motor 
Works

40
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Vr. No. & date 
of payment Amount Bill No. & 
date Particulars Name of  
store
4. 4/31.03.16 41,150 18/15.03.16
Brake pad 
changing, brake 
lining, wheel 
bearings, oil, 
rear hub shaft, 
etc. for MZ-03-
3634
M/s Puia  
Motor 
Works
Total 10,00,000 -- -- --
Source: Council’ s records
Audit observed that the following:
•	 The proposed list of tools and equipment for procurement 
was not on record.
•	 The Department procured 175 bundles of GCI sheets and 
tools and equipment worth ₹ 9,12,500 (₹ 6,12,500 plus 
₹ 3,00,000) from two firms without inviting tender in 
contravention of MADCF Rules.
•	 Supply order, as well as expenditure sanction of the Head of 
Department, was not on record.
•	 The tools and equipment procured were not recorded in 
the stock and issue register maintained by the department. 
Moreover, the bills/ vouchers were not countersigned by the 
Executive Secretary of the Council.
•	 ₹ 87,500 (₹ 46,350 plus ₹ 41,150) was diverted towards repair 
charges of two vehicles, i.e., MZ-03-3634 and MZ-03-1443.  
The department, however, did not maintain records such as 
vehicle log books and car diary.
Further, report of the MVI, to justify these repairs was neither 
obtained nor was the bills/ vouchers countersigned by the 
Executive Secretary of the Council.

41
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
Reasons for not inviting tender/ quotations and approval for 
diversion of fund were not on record.
While accepting the fact the Council stated (April 2018) that 
relevant rules and procedures would be followed in future.
The reply of the Council is not convincing as the case is another 
instance of flouting the provision of the procurement rules.
Council may take necessary action against persons concerned 
for above lapses.
4.7 Expenditure on Travelling Allowance/ Daily 
Allowance
As per the Delegation of Financial Power as contained in 
MADC Notification dated 17 April 2013, the nature of power 
delegated to Head of Departments on Expenditure on Travelling 
Allowance (TA)/ Daily Allowance (DA) is ₹ 1,500 where all 
Head of Departments shall or may otherwise require a detailed 
tour of official duty only within MADC Area.
Scrutiny of records of six test checked departments 12 revealed 
that the departments spent ₹ 6.44 lakh towards TA/ DA during 
2015-16.
Audit observed that:
•	 No travelling ticket and mode of travel was attached with 
the TA/ DA bills to ascertain actual journey performed.
•	 Payment of TA/ DA was made without expenditure order of 
the Head of Departments.
•	 Hotel/ lodging receipts were not found attached with any of 
the TA/ DA bills.
12 1. Agriculture and Horticulture Department, 2. Art and Culture Department, 
3. Information and Publicity Department, 4. Public health Engineering 
Department, 5. Planning and Programme Implementation Department 
and 6. Sericulture Department

42
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
•	 TA bills were not endorsed and certified by the Executive 
Secretary of the Council which is must for passage of the TA 
bills as per MADCF Rules, 2010.
•	 An expenditure of ₹ 5,16,990 was incurred on TA/ DA 
beyond the Delegated Financial Power of the Head  
of Departments.
The Council in its reply (April 2018) stated that the departments 
concerned will be instructed to follow relevant rules in future.  
However, the instructions imparted to the departments were 
awaited (April 2019).
The reply was not acceptable as Council did not observed rules 
while finalising the claims.
The Council should scrutinise the travel bills, take necessary 
action to recover excess amount paid as TA/ DA and take 
action against persons responsible for passing bills in violation 
of prescribed rules/ procedures.
4.8 Outstanding Inspection Reports
As per Rule 147 of MADCF Rules, 2010 Audit objections and 
Inspection Reports issued by Accountant General (Audit) or 
the Examiner of Local Accounts shall be replied to and settled 
expeditiously.
Audit observations on financial irregularities and defects in 
maintenance of annual accounts noticed during the local audit 
which are not settled on the spot are communicated to the 
Executive Secretary, MADC and to the next higher authorities 
through Audit Inspection Reports.  However, at the end of 
2015-16, 10 Inspection Reports containing 78 Paragraphs were 
awaiting remedial measures.
4.9 Conclusion
The audit focuses on the functioning of the Council, viz. 
financial management, development activities, internal control 

43
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
and monitoring, etc. Based on issues highlighted in this report 
it is concluded that:
	The posting of teachers in school was not rationalised. In  
50 Middle Schools, there was an overall shortage of  
44 teachers; 29 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and five, while 15 had excess deployment of teachers 
ranging between one and seven; while the remaining six 
Middle Schools had teachers as per the norm.
	In 107 Primary Schools, there was an overall excess of  
43 teachers; 36 had a shortage of teachers ranging between 
one and six, while 50 had excess teachers deployed ranging 
between one and five; while the remaining 21 Primary 
Schools had teachers as per the norm.
	Council did not put in place a system to ensure actual 
utilisation of the cash assistance provided to the beneficiaries 
under RKVY Scheme.
	Expenditure of ₹ 34.70 lakh from RKVY scheme for 
construction of wood bund, retaining wall and check dam 
could not be verified in absence of muster rolls showing 
details of wages paid to labourers and supporting vouchers 
for the purchase of materials.
	Expenditure of ₹ 140.68 lakh on construction work started 
to be executed under North Eastern Council Fund, could not 
be verified in absence of proper records.
	Deficiencies such as- works executed without tendering,  
non-maintenance of records in support of payments to 
Contractors, diversion of funds and non-deduction of labour 
cess were noticed in the execution of works from assistance 
provided to the Council, by NITI Aayog.
	Council incurred expenditure on repair and maintenance of 
motor vehicles beyond the prescribed limit and in violation 
of prescribed rules.

44
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
	Expenditure of ₹ 10 lakh on procurement of tools and 
equipment was in violation of MADCF Rules, 2010.
	Expenditure of ₹ 6.44 lakh towards TA/ DA during 2015-16 
could not be vouched as correct in absence of supporting 
documents and verification by the Council’s Executive 
Secretary.
4.10  Recommendations
The Council may consider the following recommendations:
i. Council may ensure compliance to State norms in respect 
of appointments of teachers in its schools and carry out 
rationalisation in deployment of teachers across Council area.
ii. Council may follow due procedures while making 
payments to contractors, verify relevant records and ensure 
authenticity of bills produced.
iii. Council may develop adequate monitoring system to ensure 
intended benefits to the beneficiaries for which grants are 
disbursed under various purposes.
iv. Council may adhere to scheme guidelines during 
implementation so as to achieve intended benefits. Council 
may also ensure maintenance of proper records with respect 
to transactions made out of scheme funds in interest of 
transparency in execution of schemes.
v. Council may ensure that Departments follow tendering 
procedures for award of works. Responsibility may be fixed 
for the lapses in following prescribed procedures in this 
regard.
vi. Council may investigate and fix responsibility for diversion 
of funds.
vii. Council may ensure timely deduction and transfer of 
Labour Cess to the Building and other Construction Labour 
Welfare Board of the State so that fund can be utilised 

45
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit Observations 
on welfare activities for building and other construction 
workers.
viii. Systems for strengthening internal controls and checks in 
the Council Departments and Subordinate offices may be 
put in place on priority so that proper records in support of 
activities may be maintained; and 
ix. Council may constitute Audit Committee to discuss Audit 
Reports and ensure action on audit observations.
Aizawl
The 20 October 2021
(LHUNKHOTHANG HANGSING) 
Principal Accountant General
Countersigned
New Delhi
The 29 October 2021
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General  
of India


K
Appendices
APPENDICES

L
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16

47
Appendix-I
Statement	showing	the	details	of	teachers’	vis-à-vis enrolment of 
students in Middle Schools and Primary Schools under School 
Education, MADC as of March 2016
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1)
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
A. Middle School:
1. Meisavaih 6 24 27 51 5 1
2. New Colony 7 21 31 52 5 2
3. Eastern 4 37 33 70 5 -1
4. Lorrain 15 78 87 165 8 7
5. Beulah 5 58 44 102 6 -1
6. ECM 8 59 60 119 6 2
7. Auxilium 7 73 96 169 8 -1
8. Meisatlah 7 67 60 127 6 1
9. Council Vaih 7 32 21 53 5 2
10. Amobyu 4 5 4 9 3 1
11. Theiva 5 34 31 65 5 0
12. Phura 2 41 56 97 5 -3
13. Kiasie 2 27 16 43 5 -3
14. Laty 4 1 11 12 3 1
15. Pala 3 14 30 44 5 -2
16. Chhaolo 5 56 41 97 5 0
17. Chakhei 3 34 36 70 5 -2
18. No-aotla 6 56 36 92 5 1
19. Amotlah 2 21 20 41 5 -3
20. Tisopi 3 28 21 49 5 -2
21. Siata 5 33 28 61 5 0
22. Thiahra 4 16 22 38 3 1
23. Lobo 3 42 33 75 5 -2
24. Iana 2 33 25 58 5 -3
25. Kaladan 2 14 9 23 3 -1
26. Phusa 3 12 8 20 3 0
27. Siasi 2 18 17 35 3 -1
28. Saikao 6 27 24 51 5 1
29. Tipa ‘B’ 4 38 29 67 5 -1
APPENDICES

48
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
30. Tipa’V’ 7 8 14 22 3 4
31. Tipa ‘D’ 2 29 20 49 5 -3
32. Theiri 2 30 33 63 5 -3
33. Khopai 3 39 56 95 5 -2
34. Mawhro 3 24 36 60 5 -2
35. Chheihlu 3 31 31 62 5 -2
36. Tisi 3 40 33 73 5 -2
37. Chapi 4 33 39 72 5 -1
38. Zyhno 1 56 74 130 6 -5
39. Laki 2 35 25 60 5 -3
40. Siatlai 4 11 14 25 3 1
41. Ahmypi 3 14 23 37 3 0
42. Tokalo 2 19 15 34 3 -1
43. Model 1 8 10 18 3 -2
44. Education Vaih 0 32 28 60 5 -5
45. Kaochao ‘E’ 0 36 30 66 5 -5
46. Zero 1 15 26 41 5 -4
47. Bymary 4 15 11 26 3 1
48. Lopu 0 46 37 83 5 -5
49. New Laty 6 25 21 46 5 1
50. Vahia 5 22 38 60 5 0
Total 192 1,567 1,570 3,137 236 -44
B. Primary School:
1. AMOBYU B P/S 
- I (Amobyu) 8 17 23 40 3 5
2. AMOBYU B P/S 
- II (Amobyu) 4 39 24 63 5 -1
3. AMOBYU ‘CH’ 
P/S (Amobyu ‘Ch’) 6 37 20 57 5 1
4. AMOTLAH P/S - 
I (Amotlah) 5 28 27 55 5 0
5. AMOTLAH P/S - 
II (Amotlah) 2 21 25 46 5 -3
6. BAZAR P/S  
(Siaha) 9 40 39 79 5 4
7. CHAKHEI - I P/ 
S-I (Chakhei) 5 43 39 82 5 0

49
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
8. CHAKHEI - I P/ 
S-II (Chakhei 3 44 35 79 5 -2
9. CHAKHEI - II 
P/S (Chakhei) 5 33 33 66 5 0
10. CHAKHEITLAH 
P/ S  (Chakhei 6 36 34 70 5 1
11. CHHAOLO P/S - 
I (Chhaolo) 6 46 35 81 5 1
12. CHHAOLO P/S - 
II (Chhaolo) 4 27 22 49 5 -1
13. CHHAOLO - II 
P/S (Chhaolo-II) 5 39 50 89 5 0
14. COLLEGE V AIH 
- I P/S - I (Siaha) 9 39 33 72 5 4
15. COLLEGE V AIH 
- I P/S - II (Siaha) 5 40 17 57 5 0
16. COLLEGE V AIH 
- II P/S (Siaha) 5 33 39 72 5 0
17. COUNCIL V AIH 
P/S (Siaha) 11 62 50 112 6 5
18. ECM V AIH P/S 
(Siaha) 9 39 46 85 5 4
19. IANA P/S- I 
(Iana) 6 38 36 74 5 1
20. IANA P/S- II 
(Iana) 6 31 27 58 5 1
21. KAOCHAO ‘E’ P/S 
- I (Kaochao ‘E’) 7 17 18 35 3 4
22.
KAOCHAO ‘E’ 
P/S - II  
(Kaochao ‘E’)
1 12 11 23 3 -2
23.
KAOCHAO ‘E’ 
P/S - III (Kaochao 
‘E’)
1 27 32 59 5 -4
24. KIASIE P/S - I 
(Kiasie) 6 28 22 50 5 1
25. LATY P/S (Laty) 3 35 33 68 5 -2
26. LOBO P/S - I  
(Lobo) 6 24 24 48 5 1

50
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
27. LOBO P/S- II  
(Lobo) 5 49 42 91 5 0
28. L.E.S.  (Siaha) 7 206 224 430 10 -3
29. MAISA P/S  
(Maisa) 7 23 28 51 5 2
30. MEISATLAH P/S 
- I  (Siaha) 9 55 52 107 6 3
31. MEISA V AIH P/S 
- I (Siaha) 10 49 36 85 5 5
32. MEISA V AIH P/S 
- II  (Siaha) 3 26 36 62 5 -2
33. NEW COLONY 
-I P/S   (Siaha) 3 65 86 151 8 -5
34. NEW COLONY 
-II  P/S (Siaha) 8 13 17 30 3 5
35. NEW COLONY 
-III  P/S (Siaha) 8 30 38 68 5 3
36. NEW LATY P/S - 
I  (New Laty) 4 19 20 39 3 1
37. NEW LATY P/S - 
II  (New Laty) 3 24 25 49 5 -2
38. NEW SAIKAO 
P/S (New Saikao) 4 15 26 41 5 -1
39. NEW SIAHA P/S 
- I  (Siaha) 8 15 15 30 3 5
40. NEW SIAHA P/S 
- II  (Siaha) 10 54 56 110 6 4
41. NO-AOTLAH P/S 
- 1 (No-aotlah) 5 44 42 86 5 0
42.
NO-AOTLAH 
P/S - 1I  (No-
aotlah)
5 36 41 77 5 0
43.
NO-AOTLAH 
P/S - 1II  (No-
aotlah)
3 52 54 106 6 -3
44. OLD SIAHA  
(Siaha) 10 78 63 141 6 4
45. PALA P/S  (Pala) 8 27 22 49 5 3
46. PHURA P/S - I  
(Phura) 4 42 32 74 5 -1

51
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
47. PHURA P/S - II 
(Phura) 4 57 49 106 6 -2
48. PHURA P/S - III  
(Phura) 1 13 15 28 3 -2
49. RIASIKA P/S  
(Riasika) 2 23 19 42 5 -3
50. SIAHATLAH P/S 
- I (Siaha) 5 33 47 80 5 0
51. SIAHATLAH P/S 
- II (Siaha) 5 31 34 65 5 0
52. SIAHATLAH P/S 
- III  (Siaha) 6 31 55 86 5 1
53. SIASI P/S (Siasi) 6 39 36 75 5 1
54. SIA TA P/S - I 
(Siata) 5 23 25 48 5 0
55. SIATA P/S - II  
(Siata) 6 42 35 77 5 1
56. SIATA P/S - III  
(Siata) 2 30 16 46 5 -3
57. THEIV A P/S - I  
(Siata) 7 28 22 50 5 2
58. THEIV A P/S - II 
(Siata) 3 32 28 60 5 -2
59. THIAHRA P/S 
(Thiahra) 5 45 43 88 5 0
60. THOSAI P/S  
(Siaha) 6 15 12 27 3 3
61. TIPI ‘ F’ P/S 
(Tipi ‘F’) 6 32 27 59 5 1
62. TISOPI P/S - I 
(Tisopi) 5 41 36 77 5 0
63. TISOPI P/S - II  
(Tisopi) 3 17 14 31 3 0
64.
ZERO P/S - I  
(Amobyu 
Vaihthie)
6 22 28 50 5 1
65. ZERO P/S - II 
(Amobyu Vaihthie) 3 40 20 60 5 -2
66. AHMYPI P/S  
(Ahmypi) 5 42 34 76 5 0

52
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
67. BYMARI P/S  
(Bymari) 5 60 40 100 5 0
68. CHAPI P/S - I 
(Chapi) 6 36 26 62 5 1
69. CHAPI P/S - II 
(Chapi) 6 28 62 90 5 1
70. CHAPI P/S - III  
(Chapi) 3 18 23 41 5 -2
71. CHHEIHLU P/S - 
I  (Chapi) 6 50 37 87 5 1
72. CHHEIHLU P/S - 
II  (Chapi) 4 87 39 126 6 -2
73. KHOPAI P/S - I  
(Khopai) 5 71 61 132 6 -1
74. KHOPAI P/S - II  
(Khopai) 4 75 49 124 6 -2
75. LAKI P/S - I  
(Laki) 6 44 48 92 5 1
76. LAKI P/S - II  
(Laki) 8 63 51 114 6 2
77. LODAW P/S  
(Lodaw) 4 19 20 39 3 1
78. LOMASU P/S  
(Lomasu) 4 39 39 78 5 -1
79. LOPU P/S - I  
(Lopu) 4 46 32 78 5 -1
80. LOPU P/S - II  
(Lopu) 4 33 33 66 5 -1
81. LOPU P/S - III 
(Lopu) 4 37 46 83 5 -1
82. MAWHRO P/S - 
I (Lopu) 6 21 32 53 5 1
83. MAWHRO P/S - 
II (Mawhro) 2 28 24 52 5 -3
84. MIEPU P/S - I 
(Miepu) 5 23 19 42 5 0
85. MIEPU P/S - II 
(Miepu) 6 8 18 26 3 3
86. SAIKAO P/S - I 
(Saikao) 10 26 26 52 5 5
87. SAIKAO P/S - II 
(Saikao) 5 33 31 64 5 0

53
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Name of School 
and Location
No. of 
Teacher
No. of Student Required No. 
of teacher 
as per State 
Government’s	
norms
Shortage/ 
ExcessBoys Girls Total
88. LORRAIN VILL 
P/S (Saikao) 6 14 30 44 5 1
89. SIATLAI P/S 
(Siatlai) 5 33 26 59 5 0
90. THEIRI P/S - I 
(Theiri) 7 25 31 56 5 2
91. THEIRI P/S - II 
(Theiri) 4 27 36 63 5 -1
92. TIPA ‘B’ P/S - I 
(Tipa ‘B’) 6 22 25 47 5 1
93. TIPA ‘B’ P/S - I I 
(Tipa ‘B’) 2 26 27 53 5 -3
94. TIPA ‘D’ P/S 
(Tipa ‘D’) 7 20 18 38 3 4
95. TIPA ‘V’ P/S - I 
(Tipa ‘V’) 8 9 8 17 3 5
96. TIPA ‘V’ P/S - II 
(Tipa’V’) 7 42 35 77 5 2
97. NEW LIGHT P/S 
(Tipa ‘V’) 2 83 84 167 8 -6
98. TISI P/S - I (Tisi) 7 25 24 49 5 2
99. TISI P/S - II 
(Tisi) 8 7 15 22 3 5
100. TISI P/S - III 
(Tisi) 5 49 22 71 5 0
101. TOKALO P/S - I 
(Tokalo) 6 29 18 47 5 1
102. TOKALO P/S - II 
(Tokalo) 3 30 35 65 5 -2
103. V AHIA P/S - I 
(Vahia) 4 45 48 93 5 -1
104. V AHIA P/S - II 
(Vahia) 3 41 43 84 5 -2
105. ZYHNO P/S - I 
(Zyhno) 4 28 28 56 5 -1
106. ZYHNO P/S - II 
(Zyhno) 6 43 38 81 5 1
107. LOTAI P/S 
(Zyhno) 6 36 26 62 5 1
Total 571 3,912 3,717 7,629 528 43
Source: Council’ s record

54
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Appendix-II
Statement	showing	the	details	of	advances	disbursed	to	22	contractors	for	execution	of	various	works	by	PWD,	
MADC during 2015-16
(Reference: Paragraph-4.4(A))
(`	in	lakh)
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
work
Name of 
Contractor
Voucher 
No.
Work	Order	
No. Date Estimated 
Amount
Advance 
Payment 
made on 31 
March 2016
Period of execution Measure-
ment 
Book	No.
Page 
No.
From To
(A)   Construction of RCC Culvert
1. PMGSY Road 
at Vahia
H. Beimo of 
Vahia 87
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/58 
09.05.16 4.00 1.50 13.05.16 16.06.16 1 1 to 3
2. R. Kama V . Pattua of 
Vahia 88
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/59
09.05.16 5.00 2.00 13.05.16 18.06.16 1 4 to 5
3.
Zuali paw 
Tikhao 
Pachiahpa
HC. 
Beichono of 
Vahia
89
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/60
09.05.16 5.00 2.00 13.05.16 17.06.16 1 6 to 7
4. R. Akha
RL Paw-u & 
Friends of 
Meipu
90
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/62
09.05.16 8.00 3.00 13.05.16 18.06.16 1 8 to 9
5.
Zuali paw 
Tikhao 
Pachiahpa
K. Beihu of 
Vahia 91
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/61
09.05.16 14.00 5.00 13.05.16 20.06.16 1 10 to 
12

55
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
work
Name of 
Contractor
Voucher 
No.
Work	Order	
No. Date Estimated 
Amount
Advance 
Payment 
made on 31 
March 2016
Period of execution Measure-
ment 
Book	No.
Page 
No.
From To
6. Moko 
Pachiepa
KC. Zittua, 
ECM viah 92
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/63
09.05.16 4.00 1.50 13.05.16 21.06.16 1 13 to 
15
7.
Chheihlu and 
Chakhei Road 
at RiBako
TT. Vachhue 
of Chakhei 93
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/48
25.04.16 12.00 5.00 26.04.16 27.05.16 5 1 to 3
8.
Chakhei to 
Chheihluroat 
at R. Leihlai
VCP 
Chheihlu 94
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/49
25.04.16 5.00 2.00 26.04.16 20.05.16 5 3 to 5
9. Chakhei to 
Chheihlu road 
B. Viacho of 
Chekhei-II 95
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/70
25.04.16 5.00 2.00 26.04.16 27.05.16 5 5 to 7
10. Council Viah, 
Siaha
H. Thanga 
& Friends of 
Siaha
102
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/44 
25.04.16 13.00 5.00 26.04.16 24.05.16 2 1
Total (A) 75.00 29.00 -- -- -- --
(B) Construction of Bouldering of Stone
11.
approach to 
Kalytla at 
Zero
C. Kawlua 
& Party of 
Amobyu  ‘B’
96
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/54
06.05.16 4.00 1.50 09.05.16 24.05.16 2 2
12.
approach to 
Kalytla at 
Zero
Zahnei & 
Friend of 
Zeropoint
97
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/55
06.05.16 4.00 1.50 09.05.16 24.05.16 2 6 to 7

56
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
work
Name of 
Contractor
Voucher 
No.
Work	Order	
No. Date Estimated 
Amount
Advance 
Payment 
made on 31 
March 2016
Period of execution Measure-
ment 
Book	No.
Page 
No.
From To
13.
approach to 
Kalytla at 
Zero
K. Dinsanga 
of Zeropoint 98
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/67
30.05.16 5.00 2.00 01.06.16 29.06.16 2 9 to 
10
14.
Const. of 
Theiva to 
Saikao Road
Beitua & 
Party of 
Theiva
99
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/65
19.05.16 13.00 5.00 20.05.16 15.06.16 3 4 to 7
15.
Const. of 
Theiva to 
Saikao Road
HC. Macho 
& Friend of 
Lobo
100
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/51
05.05.16 13.00 5.00 20.05.16 19.06.16 3 7 to 
10
16.
Const. of 
Theiva to 
Saikao Road
Vabei of 
Saikao 101
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16
31.05.16 6.00 2.00 01.06.16 15.06.16 3 10 to 
12
Total (B) 45.00 17.00 -- -- -- --
(C) Rigid pavement 
17.
Rigid 
pavement at 
Zyhno
VCP of 
Zyhno 103
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/40
22.04.16 3.00 1.00 01.06.16 29.06.16 2 11
18.
Ridgid 
pavement at 
Zyhno
LC. Lawkhei 
of Zyhno 104
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/39
22.04.16 3.50 3.00 01.06.16 29.06.16 2 12
Total (C) 6.50 4.00 -- -- -- --

57
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
work
Name of 
Contractor
Voucher 
No.
Work	Order	
No. Date Estimated 
Amount
Advance 
Payment 
made on 31 
March 2016
Period of execution Measure-
ment 
Book	No.
Page 
No.
From To
(D)	 Maintenance	of	Mini-truckable	Road
19. Tisi to Siata N. Zalo of 
Tisi 105
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/35
22.04.16 5.50 2.00 25.04.16 19.05.16 3 12 to 
13
20. Tisi to Siata N. Zawsie of 
Tisi 106
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/36
22.04.16 5.00 2.00 25.04.16 16.05.16 3 14 to 
15
21. Tisi to Siata S. Laikhu of 
Tisi 107
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/37
22.04.16 5.00 2.00 25.04.16 17.05.16 3 15 to 
16
22. Tisopi to 
Bualpui ‘G’
LC. Beiru of 
Old Tisopi 108
MADC.71/
PWD/2015-
16/43
25.04.16 24.00 4.00 26.04.16 27.05.16 3 1 to 4
Total (D) 39.50 10.00 -- -- -- --
Total 166.00 60.00 -- -- -- --
Source: Council’ s record

58
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Appendix-III
Statement	showing	the	details	of	expenditure	incurred	towards	construction	of	RCC	Water	tanks		during	2015-16
(Reference: Paragraph-4.4(B))
(in ` )
Sl. 
No.
Voucher 
No. & date
Work	order	No.	
& Date
Name of 
contractor
Location 
of	work
Date of 
Com-
mence-
ment
Date of 
Comple-
tion
Date of 
Measure-
ment 
Measure-
ment	Book	
No. & 
Page No.
Esti-
mated 
amount
Amount 
paid to 
contrac-
tor
one 
per cent 
Cess 
amount 
1. 36/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/22 
of 24.02.16
Vunga of Tipa 
‘B’ Tipa ‘B’ 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 1-6 70,000 70,000 700 
2. 37/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/23 
of 24.02.16
MTP President, 
Tipa Village Tipa 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 7-12 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
3. 38/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/24 
of 24.02.16
KTP President, 
Chapi Chapi 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 13-18 70,000 70,000 700 
4. 39/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/25 
of 24.02.16
VCP of Tipa-I Tipa-I 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 19-24 70,000 70,000 700 
5. 40/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/26 
of 24.02.16
VCP of Old 
Tisopi Tisopi 25.02.16 18.03.16 NA 55/PHED& 
25-30 70,000 70,000 700 
6. 41/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/27 
of 24.02.16
MCHP President Chhaolo-
II 25.02.16 18.03.16 NA 55/PHED 
& 31-36 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 

59
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Voucher 
No. & date
Work	order	No.	
& Date
Name of 
contractor
Location 
of	work
Date of 
Com-
mence-
ment
Date of 
Comple-
tion
Date of 
Measure-
ment 
Measure-
ment	Book	
No. & 
Page No.
Esti-
mated 
amount
Amount 
paid to 
contrac-
tor
one 
per cent 
Cess 
amount 
7. 42/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/28 
of 24.02.16
J. Hrako of 
Chakheiltah
Chakhiel-
tah 25.02.16 22.03.16 23.03.16 55/PHED 
& 37-42 70,000 70,000 700 
8. 43/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/29 
of 24.02.16
K. Thaongduna 
of Tipa Tipa-V 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 43-48 70,000 70,000 700 
9. 44/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/30 
of 24.02.16
C. Zawko of 
Laki Laki 25.02.16 22.03.16 23.03.16 55/PHED& 
49-55 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
10. 45/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/31 
of 24.02.16
K. Khaihlo of 
Chapi-III Chapi-III 25.02.16 22.03.16 23.03.16 55/PHED 
& 56-61 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
11. 46/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/32 
of 24.02.16
K.C. Tlehmo of 
Lopu-I Lopu-I 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 62-67 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
12. 47/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/33 
of 24.02.16
C. Vabeimotha 
of Lopu-II Lopu-II 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 68-73 70,000 70,000 700 
13. 48/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/34 
of 24.02.16
S. Thalo of 
Zyhno Zyhno 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 74-79 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 

60
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Voucher 
No. & date
Work	order	No.	
& Date
Name of 
contractor
Location 
of	work
Date of 
Com-
mence-
ment
Date of 
Comple-
tion
Date of 
Measure-
ment 
Measure-
ment	Book	
No. & 
Page No.
Esti-
mated 
amount
Amount 
paid to 
contrac-
tor
one 
per cent 
Cess 
amount 
14. 49/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/35 
of 24.02.16
H. Vacho of 
Khaikhy Khaikhy 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 80-85 70,000 70,000 700 
15. 50/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/36 
of 24.02.16
B. Laiba of 
Supha Supho 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 86-90 70,000 70,000 700 
16. 51/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/37 
of 24.02.16
VCP of Chheihlu Chheihlu 25.02.16 21.03.16 22.03.16 55/PHED 
& 91-96 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
17. 52/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/38 
of 24.02.16
Lalliani of N. 
Colony-IV
N. 
Colony-
IV
25.03.16 18.03.16 Nil 55/PHED& 
97-102 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
18. 53/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/39 
of 24.02.16
C. Khaily of 
Miepu Miepu 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED& 
103-108 70,000 70,000 700 
19. 54/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/40 
of 24.02.16
V . Palta of VahiaVahia 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 108-113 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
20. 55/31.03.16
No.MADC.45/
PHE/2015-16/41 
of 24.02.16
H. Chhuanawma 
of Phura Phura 25.02.16 29.03.16 30.03.16 55/PHED 
& 114-119 1,00,000 1,00,000 1,000 
Total 17,00,000 17,00,000 17,000
Source: Council’ s record

61
Appendices
Appendix-IV
Statement showing the details of expenditure incurred towards maintenance of vehicles by the Local 
Administration Department during 2015-16
(Reference: Paragraph-4.5(A))
(in ` )
Sl. 
No. Bill No. & date Paid to Particular/ 
Vehicle No. Amount
Date of 
payment as per 
Cash	Book
Voucher 
No. & 
date
Remark
I.  Expenditure out of Special Plan Assistance Fund 2014-15 (10 per cent	contractor’s	profit	portion	of	execution	of	Main	Market	
Building at Tipa V)
1. Nil of 22.04.15 Manager, Apaw Motor 
Works, N Colony, Siaha
MZ03-3968 
(Pickup) 4,195 30.06.15 NA
1. No Sanction order.
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well as 
in the Cash book.
2. Nil of 15.05.15 Manager, Nusia Motor 
Works, College Veng, Siaha
MZ03-3968 
(Pickup) 3,350 30.06.15 NA
3. 10 of 17.05.15 Manager, JL Motor Works, 
N colony, Siaha MZ03- 66,700 30.06.15 NA
4. 124 of 17.05.15 Manager, JL Motor Works,  
N colony, Siaha
MZ03-4447 
(Tipper) 1,34,850 30.06.15 NA
5. 125 of 17.05.15 Manager, JL Motor Works,  
N colony, Siaha
MZ03-4447 
(Tipper) 91,950 30.06.15 NA
6. Nil of 29.05.15 Manager, Saron Motor Parts, 
Siaha
MZ03-4447 
(Tipper) 2,600 01.07.15 NA
7. 5588 of 04.07.15 Manager, J Rama Filling 
Station, Siaha
High Speed Deisel 
(3800 ltrs.) 2,00,000 01.07.15 NA
8. 162 of 02.07.15 Manager, JL Motor Works,  
N colony, Siaha MZ03-2862 13,550 02.07.15 NA

62
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No. Bill No. & date Paid to Particular/ 
Vehicle No. Amount
Date of 
payment as per 
Cash	Book
Voucher 
No. & 
date
Remark
9. 30/2015 of 
13.07.15
Manager, Vee & Cee Motor 
Works, Siaha MZ03-3969 17,270 13.07.15 NA 1. No Sanction order.
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well as 
in the Cash book.
10. 31/2015 of 
13.07.15
Manager, Vee & Cee Motor 
Works, Siaha MZ03-3969 1,235 13.07.15 NA
11. Nil of 15.07.15 Manager, JL Motor Works,  
N colony, Siaha MZ03-3531 5,100 15.07.15 NA
12. 17 of 07.08.15 Manager, JL Motor Works,  
N colony, Siaha MZ03-3531 1,35,250 05.08.15 NA 1. No Sanction order. 
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well 
as in the Cash book.13. Nil of 15.08.15 Manager, Nusia Motor 
Works, College Veng, Siaha MZ03-3968 3,650 15.08.15 NA
14. NA M. Hneido, SI MADC MZ03-3968 4,000 27.08.15 NA
1. No Sanction order. 
2. Bill/ Vr. No. not on record 
on the body of the bill as 
well as in the Cash book.
15. Nil of 23.08.15 Manager, VTS Tyres Woks, 
College Veng, Siaha NA 10,000 30.08.15 NA
1. No Sanction order. 
2. Vehicle No. & Vr. No. not 
on record
16. Nil of 03.09.15 Manager, Apaw Motor 
Works, N Colony, Siaha MZ03-3968 4,600 03.09.15 NA 1. No Sanction order. 
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well 
as in the Cash book.
17. Nil of 09.09.15 Manager, H. Nancy Motor 
Spare parts MZ03-2862 5,000 09.09.15 NA
18. 9008 of 14.09.15 Manager, Kaleb Motor 
Works, College Veng, Siaha MZ03-2862 5,100 14.09.15 NA

63
Appendices
Sl. 
No. Bill No. & date Paid to Particular/ 
Vehicle No. Amount
Date of 
payment as per 
Cash	Book
Voucher 
No. & 
date
Remark
19. Nil of 16.11.15 Manager, VTS Tyres Woks, 
College Veng, Siaha NA 1,20,000 16.11.15 NA
1. No Sanction order. 
2. Vehicle No. & Vr. No. not 
on record
20. Nil of 02.12.15 Manager, FC Tyre Works, 
College Veng, Siaha
MZ03-4447 
(Tipper) 4,900 02.12.15 NA
1. No Sanction order. 
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well 
as in the Cash book.
21. Nil of 17.10.15 Manager, JL Motor Works, 
N colony, Siaha MZ03-2839 6,200 02.12.15 NA
22. Nil of 04.12.15 Manager, VTS Tyres Woks, 
College Veng, Siaha MZ03-2862 6,100 04.12.15 NA
23. Nil of 01.02.16 Manager, Saron Motor Parts, 
Siaha MZ03-3968 11,940 01.02.16 NA
24. Nil of 03.02.16 Manager, FL Motor Works, 
N Siaha MZ03-3969 4,950 03.02.16 NA
25. NA M. Hneido, SI MADC MZ03-3531 14,000 15.03.16 NA
1. No Sanction order. 
2. Bill/ Vr. No. not on record 
on the body of the bill as 
well as in the Cash book.
26. Nil of 10.03.16 Manager, Saron Motor Parts, 
Siaha MZ03-3531 9,710 17.03.16 NA 1. No Sanction order.  
2. Vr. No. not on record on 
the body of the bill as well as 
in the Cash book.
27. Nil of 10.03.16 Manager, Nusia Motor 
Works, College Veng, Siaha MZ03-3531 5,000 17.03.16 NA
28. Nil of 09.03.16 Manager, VTS Tyres Woks, 
College Veng, Siaha
MZ03-4447 
(Tipper) 8,800 17.03.16 NA
Total 9,00,000 -- -- --

64
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No. Bill No. & date Paid to Particular/ 
Vehicle No. Amount
Date of 
payment as per 
Cash	Book
Voucher 
No. & 
date
Remark
II. Expenditure out of Infrastructure scheme under Thirteenth Finance Commission:
1. Nil of 22.8.15 PekPek Motor Work, College 
Veng, Siaha MZ03-3968 1,200 22.10.15 42 of 
22.10.15 --
2. Nil of 23.11.15 Mana Motors, Bawngkawn, 
Aizawl MZ05-5092 5,118 23.11.15 48 of 
23.11.15 --
3. Nil of 8.12.15 Kay Dee Motor Works, 
Bawngkawn, Aizawl MZ03-2839 90,882 08.12.15 77 of 
8.12.15 --
Total 97,200 -- -- --
Source: Council’ s record

65
Appendices
Appendix-V
Statement	showing	the	details	of	expenditure	incurred	in	Motor	Vehicles	in	test	checked	departments	during	2015-16
(Reference: Paragraph-4.5 (B))
(in ` )
Sl. 
No. Department Voucher 
No.& date
Amount 
paid
Ceiling as 
per Financial 
power
Excess To whom paid & purpose
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (4-5) 7
1.
General Administration 
Department
26/20.05.15 2,150 1,500 650 M/s Vee & Cee Motor works
2. 27/20.05.15 10,800 1,500 9,300 PS to CEM, POL
3. 28/20.05.15 8,130 1,500 6,630 M/s HPK Tyres Works; two tyres
4. 29/20.05.15 4,757 1,500 3,257 V . Zacho, ES for POL
5. 30/20.05.15 1,857 1,500 357 T. Beihrozi, LDC for POL
6. 40/05.06.15 25,000 1,500 23,500 Babul Addin Laskhar, loading charge
7. 47-48/15.06.15 1,960 1,500 460 M/s T.I. Automobiles, Siaha; motor parts
8. 49/16.06.15 23,799 1,500 22,299 M/s Mana Motors Aizawl; motor accessories
9. 50/18.06.15 2,300 1,500 800 M/s RPS automobiles; motorparts
10. 51/18.06.15 1,600 1,500 100 M/s Carz spa cars beauty clinics; motor servicing
11. 75/09.09.15 64,570 1,500 63,070 M/s Vee & Cee Motor works; motor repairing
12. 76/09.09.15 3,350 1,500 1,850 M/s Hauva& Sons, Motor parts
13. 77/09.09.15 14,800 1,500 13,300 M/s Mapuii Tyre works Aizawl; two MRF tyres
14. 78/09.09.15 10,280 1,500 8,780 PS to CEM, POL
15. 79/09.09.15 5,000 1,500 3,500 V . Zacho ES for POL
16. 80/09.09.15 2,000 1,500 500 T. Beihrozi, LDC for POL
Sub-Total 1,82,353 24,000 1,58,353 --

66
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No. Department Voucher 
No.& date
Amount 
paid
Ceiling as 
per Financial 
power
Excess To whom paid & purpose
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (4-5) 7
17.
Agriculture & Horticulture 
Department
29/19.06.15 1,600 1,500 100 M/s Autoplus Signage
18. 46/22.06.15 3,950 1,500 2,450
M/s Vee & Cee Motor works, Siaha,19. 47/22.06.15 4,350 1,500 2,850
20. 48/22.06.15 2,050 1,500 550
21. 50/22.06.15 1,700 1,500 200
M/s Vee & Cee Motor works, Siaha,
22. 51/22.06.15 2,350 1,500 850
23. 52/22.06.15 4,010 1,500 2,510
24. 53/22.06.15 10,250 1,500 8,750
25. 54/22.06.15 2,640 1,500 1,140
26. 55/22.06.15 5,050 1,500 3,550
27. 56/22.06.15 1,650 1,500 150
28. 57/22.06.15 8,000 1,500 6,500 M/s HPK Tyre works, Siaha
29. 58/22.06.15 3,050 1,500 1,550 M/s Lucas Dynamo & battery works, Siaha30. 59/22.06.15 4,735 1,500 3,235
31. 60/22.06.15 1,770 1,500 270 M/s Universal Auto parts store, Siaha
32. 63/22.06.15 2,000 1,500 500 M/s J. Rama F/S, Siaha; POL33. 65/22.06.15 2,000 1,500 500
34. 93 & 
94/04.08.15 3,000 1,500 1,500 M/s J. Rama F/S, Siaha
35. 98/04.08.15 2,500 1,500 1,000 M/s Elcy Automobiles, Aizawl; motor parts

67
Appendices
Sl. 
No. Department Voucher 
No.& date
Amount 
paid
Ceiling as 
per Financial 
power
Excess To whom paid & purpose
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (4-5) 7
36. Agriculture & Horticulture 
Department
102/04.08.15 2,850 1,500 1,350 M/s L. Flody Motor parts; motor parts
37. 108/04.08.15 2,700 1,500 1,200 M/s Elcy Automobiles, Aizawl; motor parts
38. 127/15.10.15 31,000 1,500 29,500 M/s HPK Tyres works, Siaha; 4 nos. tyres
Sub-Total 103,205 33,000 70,205 --
39.
Art & Culture Department
286/16.06.15 10,000 1,500 8,500 M/s J. Rama Filling Station, XP-130.12 Ltr
40. 327/06.08.15 7,000 1,500 5,500 M/s J. Rama Filling Station XP-74.90 Ltr & HSD-
44.30
41. 336/14.10.15 3,000 1,500 1,500 M/s J. Rama Filling StationXP-65.1 Ltr
42. 350/18.01.16 11,950 1,500 10,450 M/s J. Rama Filling StationXP-179.2 Ltr
43. 351/18.01.16 18,050 1,500 16,550 Naney, Manager, H. Zalai & Sons
44. 325/06.08.15 9,500 1,500 8,000 Palai, Driver vehicle hiring
Sub-Total 59,500 9,000 50,500 --
45.
Public Health Engineering 
Department
13/19.06.15 10,000 1,500 8,500
M/s J.L. Moors works46. 18/10.08.15 12,000 1,500 10,500
47. 24/16.10.15 8,000 1,500 6,500
48. 29/18.01.16 22,000 1,500 20,500
49. 31/20.01.16 3,500 1,500 2,00 M/s Mami Store (POL)50. 32/20.01.16 4,500 1,500 3,00
Sub-Total 60,000 9,000 51,000 --

68
Audit Report of Mara Autonomous District Council for the year 2015-16
Sl. 
No. Department Voucher 
No.& date
Amount 
paid
Ceiling as 
per Financial 
power
Excess To whom paid & purpose
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (4-5) 7
51.
Planning & Programme 
Implementation Department
29/06.08.15 2,300 1,500 800 M/s H. Nancy Motor Spare Parts Siaha
52. 30/06.08.15 8,510 1,500 7,010 M/s Puia Motor Works
53. 31/06.08.15 15,000 1,500 13,500 M/s Vee & Cee Motor Works
54. 38/06.08.15 4,000 1,500 2,500 M/s H. Nancy Motor Spare Parts
55. 41/06.08.15 7,550 1,500 6,050 M/s Kaleb Motor Works
56. 45/06.08.15 18,050 1,500 16,550 M/s Nusia Motor Works
57. 46/06.08.15 2,860 1,500 1,360 M/s Vee & Cee Motor Works
58. 48/06.08.15 36,200 1,500 34,700
M/s H. Nancy Motor Spare Parts59. 65/15.10.15 8,680 1,500 7,180
60. 67/15.10.15 23,800 1,500 22,300
61. 68/15.10.15 15,000 1,500 13,500 M/s H.P.K Tyre Works, two nos. tyre
62. 72/15.10.15 20,000 1,500 18,500 M/s H.P.K Tyre Works, three nos. tyre
63. 76/15.10.15 10,000 1,500 8,500 M/s H. Nancy Motor Spare Parts
64. 3/31.03.16 46,350 1,500 44,850 M/s Puia Motor Works65. 4/31.03.16 41,150 1,500 39,650
Sub-Total 259,450 22,500 236,950 --
Grand Total 6,64,508 97,500 5,67,008 --
Source: Council’ s record

GOVERNMENT OF MIZORAM
www.cag.gov.in
© 
   COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA
lR;eso t;rs
REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA
FOR THE YEAR 2015-16
MARA  AUTONOMOUS DISTRICT COUNCIL
SIAHA, MIZORAM
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest
yksdfgrkFkZ lR;fu”Bk
www.cag.gov.in
2021