 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
for the period ended March 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 11 of 2025 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
for the period ended March 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 11 of 2025 
 

 
 i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Description Reference 
Paragraph Page  
Preface  iii 
Overview  v 
Chapter I - Introduction 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit – Office of the Accountant General 
(Audit I), Kerala 1.3 2 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.4 2 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.5 3 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Chapter II - Functioning of University of Calicut 5 
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATION 
Chapter III - Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 51 
Chapter IV - Compliance Audit paragraphs 
Misappropriation 
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
Suspected misappropriation of ₹1.05 lakh of Government 
money 4.1 77 
Loss of assistance/revenue 
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
Loss due to failure in claiming eligible exemption from 
income tax 4.2 79 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Loss of Government of India assistance of ₹6.85 crore 4.3 80 
Wasteful expenditure 
SCHEDULED CASTES DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Construction of building without ensuring transfer of 
ownership of land resulted in wasteful expenditure of 
₹84.32 lakh 
4.4 82 
Providing undue benefit 
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT 
Undue benefit to contractors 4.5 84 
 
  


 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
ii 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. Description Page  
1.1 Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports and 
paragraphs as on 31 October 2024 87 
1.2 Details of Action Taken Notes pending as of October 2024 88 
1.3 Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending discussion 
by the Public Accounts Committee as of October 2024 89 
2.1 List of institutions covered in Audit 90 
2.2 Strategic Priorities and Goals set under Strategic Plan 91 
2.3 Percentage of scores obtained by the University across NIRF 
Ranking Parameters 92 
2.4 Revision of Syllabus/Curriculum 93 
2.5 Delay in preparation/submission/audit of annual accounts 94 
2.6 Details of uneconomic institutions and intake of students in the 
institutions 95 
2.7 Teachers appointed without specific qualifications in CUTECs 97 
2.8 Department-wise details of NCA vacancy 99 
2.9 Details of promotions granted under CAS to Retired teachers  100 
2.10 Instances where internal marks awarded exceeded the maximum 
permissible limit 101 
2.11 Number of students who were awarded maximum internal marks 
in respective courses without having sufficient attendance  102 
2.12 Change in the examination results following revaluation  103 
2.13 Change in marks on revaluation of answer scripts 104 
2.14 Details of delay in conduct of examination and publication of 
results  105 
2.15 Details of facilities available for differently abled persons 107 
2.16 Details of properties let out by the University 109 
2.17 Details of properties sublet by Co-operative societies 110 
3.1 Organisational Chart 111 
3.2 Institutions selected for Audit 112 
3.3 Details of Inquiry/Inspections 113 
3.4 Delay in receipt of Audit reports and issue of Audit Certificates 
to the societies 114 
3.5 Details of year-wise surrender of funds 115 
3.6 Details of outstanding loans and shares in selected districts 116 
3.7 
Comparison of district-wise details of outstanding shares and 
loans in Monthly progress report of Joint Registrar with Half 
yearly statement of RCS as of March 2024 
117 
3.8 Irregularities in utilisation of Government assistance by societies 
as revealed in Joint Physical verifications 118 
4.1 Details of Road Restoration Works not executed/completed 123 

 
 iii 
PREFACE 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the period 
ended March 2024 is prepared for submission to the Governor of Kerala under 
Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India, for being laid before the Legislature 
of the State. 
 
The Report contains significant results of Audit of the Departments and 
Autonomous Bodies of the Government of Kerala including Departments of  
Co-operation, Fisheries, Health and Family Welfare, Higher Education , 
Scheduled Castes Development and Water Resources. 
 
The instances mentioned in this report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2023-24 as well as those, which came to notice 
in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports. 
Instances relating to the period subsequent to 202 3-24 are also included, 
wherever found necessary. 
 
The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

 
 
 
  
OVERVIEW 

 
 
 

 
 v 
OVERVIEW 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains one 
Performance Audit paragraph, one Subject -specific Compliance Audit 
paragraph and five Compliance Audit paragraphs including instances of non-
adherence to codal provisions , absence of supervisory control , loss of 
assistance/revenue, wasteful expenditure , providing of undue benefit, etc., 
involving ₹1394.64 crore. The major audit findings are mentioned below. 
Performance Audit 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
Performance Audit of University of Calicut, established in 1968 as Kerala's 
second University, revealed significant administrative, academic, and financial 
shortcomings. The strategic plan lacked Syndicate approval and timelines  and 
key quality assurance mechanisms such as the College Development Council 
(CDC) and a centralised Management Information System (MIS) were not in 
place. The CDC functioned as a branch of the University only, without 
representation of the State Government and Principals of affilia ted colleges. 
Syllabi of 24 out of 45 categories of programmes were not revised as per UGC 
norms. As the approved amendment to the Statute was yet to take effect , 
stakeholders such as industrialists, entrepreneurs and students were not included 
in any of the 119 Boards of Studies.   The University of Calicut was ranked at 
64th position in the NIRF ranking in 2019 and improved its position to 54 th in 
2020. Thereafter there was steady drop in the ranking and the University stood 
at 89 th position in 2024.    The University’s distance education programmes 
conducted in 2020 -21 lacked UGC recognition, affecting 32,651 students. 
Furthermore, non -adherence of UGC norms in Ph.D. admissions and poor 
research outcomes, with 41 out of 145 research scholars not submitti ng their 
theses despite substantial funding were observed.  
We observed delay on the part of the University, ranging from four to five 
months in preparation of annual accounts and seven to eight months in 
submission of accounts to Kerala State Audit Department (KSAD). There was 
also delay of 10 to 19 months in cond uct of audit by KSAD.  Deficiencies in 
financial management w ere evident from the loss of central assistances. Even 
after 47 years, a self -sustaining pension fund was not created and advances 
drawn by officials during the period from 1975-76 to 2023-24 worth ₹6.79 crore 
remained unsettled. Irregularities in Human resource management included 
appointment of guest faculties exceeding the permissible limit and  teachers 
without required qualifications being appointed on contract/hourly basis in 
University departments, affiliated colleges and in  teacher education centres. 
Grant of promotions to candidates without adhering to UGC norms and 
promotions granted to posts discontinued by the Government were also noticed. 
Examination processes suffered from inconsistenci es in evaluation, non -
finalisation of results, non-awarding of eligible moderation marks, awarding of 
excessive moderation marks and delay in conduct of examinations and 
publication of results. Despite a Committee Report recommending reclamation 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
vi 
of 105.7 cents of land was available since 2012, the University was yet to take 
a decision. Basic infrastructure facilities such as classrooms, accessibility 
features like lift, ramp/rail remained inadequate in the selected Departments. 
Out of 1 69 buildings, 74 buildings had not been assigned building numbers, 
indicating that the buildings were constructed without obtaining permission 
from LSGIs. This constitute d a violation of Kerala Panchayat Building Rules  
and rendered the buildings unauthorised. 
Recommendations: 
i. The University may ensure that defined timelines and milestones are fixed 
for achieving Strategic Plan of the University along with mechanism for 
monitoring the progress of achievement. 
ii. Guidelines issued by UGC /Regulatory bodies may be adhered to and 
amendments made may be placed before the immediate Syndicate 
meeting for timely incorporation into the University’s Regulations. 
Further, Government may prescribe a timeline for such incorporations.  
iii. In order to safeguard academic standards and protect students ’ interests, 
University may ensure that programmes offered are recognised by the 
UGC. 
iv. Government may ensure that the University’s accounts are duly prepared 
and submitted to the Kerala State Audit Department (KSAD) within the 
stipulated timeframe, and that the KSAD completes the audit in 
accordance with the prescribed schedule. 
v. Government and the University may ensure strict compliance with the 
conditions prescribed for receiving funds from the UGC and other 
centrally sponsored schemes. Additionally, proper monitoring 
mechanisms should be in place to oversee the utilisation of these funds. 
vi. Government may, in consultation with the University ensure that services 
of adequate number of qualified faculties are available in its institutions. 
vii. University may consider implementing an objective and rigorous answer 
script evaluation system and hold evaluators accountable for laxity in 
valuation process and also incorporate adequate checks in the tabulation 
software to ensure that moderations are provided to students uniformly as 
per regulations. 
viii. University may ensure that all institutions under its jurisdiction meet at 
least a minimum set of infrastructure standards, which must be outlined 
based on the current guidelines of the UGC and other relevant regulatory 
bodies. 
ix. University may formalise agreements with all parties to whom land and 
buildings were leased out. These agreements must include provisions for 
the periodic revision of rent or lease rates to ensure alignment with 
prevailing market conditions. 
(Chapter II) 

 
 
Overview 
vii 
Subject-specific Compliance Audit 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) of the Department of  
Co-operation, Government of Kerala, conducted from July 2024 to February 
2025, evaluated the regulation of 16,393 co-operative societies under the Kerala 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1969 (KCS Act) and Rules for the period 2019-24. 
The audit aimed to assess statutory co mpliance, administrative controls and 
monitoring mechanisms and revealed systemic deficiencies that undermined the 
development of co-operative movement in Kerala. 
As of March 2024, 12,416 societies were functional, 3,291 were non-functional 
and 686 were under liquidation. Delays in registration were rampant, with 60 
per cent of 248 applications processed beyond the mandated 90 days, including 
cases delayed up to 1,007 days. Classification of societies, required to be revised 
every three years, was not done, leading to outdated staffing norms. The Co -
operative Examination Board conducted recruitments by not adhering to  
current classifications, resulting in excess staffing in four societies. The post of 
Co-operative Vigilance Officer, mandated to be handled by a Deputy Inspector 
General of Police, was held by Joint Registrars until August 2024. Of 247 
vigilance reports, 195 were delayed by six months to over five years , with 
inadequate follow-up on 185 cases. 
Non-functional societies, labelled “Dormant” or “Records Not Available” 
(RNA), persisted for up to 46 years, with 3,355 RNA and 302 dormant societies 
awaiting revival or liquidation, risking record loss and unrecovered dues. The 
Co-operative Audit Monitoring and Information System (CAMIS) displayed 
outdated data, excluding unaudited societies, and showed discrepancies in the 
number of functional societies with the figures of R egistrar of Co -operative 
Societies.  
The Department surrendered significant Plan funds, with utilisation dropping to 
12.47 per cent  in 2023 -24 due to pending clearances and expenditure 
restrictions, violating the fiscal discipline requirements laid down by the Kerala 
Budget Manual. Outstanding Government/National Co-operative Development 
Corporation loans and shares totalled ₹1,173.29 crore, with ₹492.94 crore 
remaining unrecovered in 315 cases in test  checked districts . We observed 
mismatches in data maintained by RCS with that of Joint Registrars. 
Uncollected audit fees amounted to ₹16 crore, with ₹6.63 crore pending over 
five years, alongside ₹35.44 crore and ₹140.72 crore owed to the Co -operative 
Member Relief Fund and Professional Education Fund, respectively. 
Of 15,273 audit certificates issued, 7,172 were delayed by two to 22 months, 
and 2, 487 were not forwarded to societies. No rectification reports were 
submitted for 1 2,786 audit certificates, leaving defects like misappropriation 
unaddressed. Inspections were irregular, with 354 societies uninspected for five 
years and no rotation registers maintained. Over 147 arbitration  and 9,047 
execution cases remained pending for over five years, locking up funds. 
Overall, the compliance to  strict adherence to timelines of registration, 
mandatory triennial revisions of classification, a centralised online platform for 
transparency, statutory action on dormant/RNA societies, timely audits and 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
viii 
inspections, and recovery of dues was not efficient. The RCS must ensure that 
societies repay loans, remit fees, and utilise assistance effectively to restore 
accountability and strengthen Kerala’s co-operative sector. 
Recommendations: 
x. The RCS may ensure that registration and returning/rejection of 
applications of societies are done in adherence to prescribed timelines. 
xi. Government/RCS may devise a system to revise the classification norms 
and classify societies every three years. It may be ensured that societies 
submit latest classification certified by the Registrar  while applying for 
recruitment through the Co-operative Examination Board. 
xii. Government may ensure that the Department establishes a centralised and 
inclusive online platform that enables citizens to view the details of all 
registered co-operative societies, in the interest of improving public trust, 
accountability and accessibility. 
xiii. The RCS may take steps to avoid delay in forwarding Special Reports and 
Vigilance Reports and initiate timely action on these reports. The 
timelines prescribed for inquiries/inspections under Sections 65, 66 and 
68 should be strictly adhered to. 
xiv. The RCS may review Audit Certificates/Memoranda issued by Director 
of Co -operative Audit including significant deficiencies in working of 
societies and ensure that the observations of DCA are acted upon by 
societies in a timely manner.  
xv. Government may consider introducing IT systems to enable conduct of 
audit and issue of Audit reports and Audit Memoranda and real time 
monitoring of the same.  
xvi. Government/RCS may consider introducing MIS to track accounting of 
Government assistance and to ensure that the societies repay their 
outstanding dues of Government/NCDC loans and shares within 
prescribed time limit.  
(Chapter III) 
Compliance Audit paragraphs 
Audit noticed instances where funds released by the Government of Kerala for 
creating public assets for the benefit of the community remained 
unutilised/blocked due to misappropriation of Government money, loss of 
assistance/revenue, wasteful  expenditure on buildings, providing of undue 
benefit, etc., owing to lack of administrative oversight and concerted action at 
various levels. The details are given below. 
Misappropriation 
• Violation of codal provisions and laxity on the part of the Head of the 
Office resulted in suspected misappropriation of ₹1.05 lakh as short 
remittances at the Office of the Assistant Executive Engineer, Harbour 
Engineering Sub Division, Thalai, Kannur District. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 

 
 
Overview 
ix 
 
Loss of assistance/revenue 
• Failure on the part of Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare Fund Board in 
claiming eligible income tax exemption and consequent deduction of tax 
at source on the interest income resulted in avoidable revenue loss of 
₹72.02 lakh. 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
• Government of Kerala’s lack of timely action in releasing  the 
Government of India (GoI) assistance to Government Medical College, 
Kozhikode led to a loss of ₹6.85 crore of GoI funds, thereby increasing 
the burden on the State exchequer.  This also led to blocking up of ₹1.37 
crore of GoI funds on incomplete works of setting up of College of 
Paramedical Education at Government Medical College, Kozhikode. 
(Paragraph 4.3) 
Wasteful expenditure 
• An expenditure of ₹84.32 lakh incurred by the Scheduled Castes 
Development Department on the construction of a community hall at 
Pattuparambu Scheduled Caste Colony, Thykkattusserry Block, 
Alappuzha proved wasteful, as the construction was undertaken on a 
private land without ensuring the transfer of ownership of land to the 
Department. 
(Paragraph 4.4) 
Providing undue benefit 
• Incorrect deduction of amount for work not executed in the case of two 
works by Water Resources Department  resulted in bestowal of undue 
benefit tantamount to ₹53.78 lakh to the contractors. 
(Paragraph 4.5) 
 

 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 

 
 
 

 
 1 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1. About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and activities 
and compliance audit of Government Departments and Autonomous Bodies. 
Performance audit includes examination of whether the objectives of the 
programme/activity/department are achieved economically, efficiently and 
effectively. Compliance audit, on the other hand, refers to examination of 
transactions relating to expenditure of the audited entities to ascertain whether 
the provisions of the Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules, regulations 
and various orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities are being 
complied with. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State Legislature 
important results of audit. The audit findings are expected to enable the Executive 
to take corrective action as also to frame policies and directives that will lead to 
improved financial management of the organisations, thus contributing to better 
governance.  
This chapter explains the profile of units under audit jurisdiction, planning and 
extent of audit and follow-up on previous Audit Reports. 
1.2. Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 
There were 47 Departments in the State at Secretariat level during 2023-24. The 
Accountant General (Audit I), Kerala (AG (Audit I)), conducts audit of 33 
Secretariat Departments1, all Public Sector Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies 
thereunder and Local Self -Government Institutions (LSGIs) in the State. The 
Departments are headed by Additional Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ 
Secretaries, who are assisted by Directors/ Commi ssioners and subordinate 
officers under them. 
A comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government during the 
year 2023-24 and in the preceding four years is given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Comparative position of expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Disbursements 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Revenue expenditure 104719.92 123446.33 146179.51 141950.93 142626.34 
General services 55504.03 50360.72 70110.00 69831.68 78185.16 
Social services 34044.77 44832.44 50695.61 50275.91 44005.28 
Economic services 9107.25 18760.72 15713.81 12280.82 11414.83 
Grants-in-aid and contributions 6063.87 9492.45 9660.09 9562.52 9021.07 
Capital expenditure 8454.80 12889.65 14191.73 13996.56 13584.45 
General services 157.42 259.84 268.26 306.89 247.26 
Social services 1090.64 2277.90 3342.63 3030.08 2945.57 
Economic services 7206.74 10351.91 10580.84 10659.59 10391.62 
Total 113174.72 136335.98 160371.24 155947.49 156210.79 
(Source: Finance Accounts of respective years) 
 
1  The Accountant General (Audit II), Kerala conducts audit of 15 Secretariat Departments (In the case 
of Fisheries and Ports Department, auditee institutions under Fisheries Department are audited by AG 
(Audit I) and those under Ports Department by AG (Audit II)). 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
2 
1.3. Authority for Audit – Office of the Accountant General (Audit I), 
Kerala 
The authority for audit by the C&AG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (C&AG's (DPC) Act). C&AG 
conducts audit of expenditure of the Departments of the Government of 
Kerala (GoK) under Section 13 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole 
auditor in respect of 25  Autonomous Bodies which are audited under Sections 
19 and 20(1) of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. In addition, C&AG also conducts audit 
of 121 Autonomous Bodies which are substantially funded by the Government, 
under Section s 14 and 15 of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act besides 8,392 aided 
educational institutions 2, 50 Public Sector Undertakings and 1,200 LSGIs 3. 
Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in th e Auditing 
Standards and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, issued by the C&AG. 
1.4. Planning and conduct of audit 
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks associated with various 
Departments of Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/ 
complexity of activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of 
overall internal controls and concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings 
are also considered in this exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency 
and extent of audit are decided.  
After completion of audit, Inspection Reports (IRs) containing audit 
observations are issued to the Heads of the Offices and Departments. The 
Departments are requested to furnish replies to the audit observations within 
four weeks from the date of receipt of the IRs. Whenever replies are received, 
audit observations are either settled or further action for compliance is advised. 
The important audit observations arising out of these IRs are processed for 
inclusion in the Reports of the C&AG of India, which a re submitted to the 
Governor of the State under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India for 
placing in the State Legislature.  
During 2023 -24, the Office of the AG (Audit I) carr ied out the audit 
(compliance, performance and financial audits) of 980 units of various 
departments/ organisations under its jurisdiction.  
 
2  Government-aided Colleges: 192 
 Government-aided Engineering Colleges :03 
 Government -aided Polytechnic Colleges: 06 
 Government-aided Higher Secondary Schools: 856  
 Government-aided Vocational Higher Secondary Schools: 128 
 Government-aided LP Schools: 3903 
 Government-aided UP Schools: 1870; and  
 Government-aided High Schools: 1434 
3  Grama Panchayats: 941, Block Panchayats: 152, District Panchayats: 14,  Municipalities: 87  
Municipal Corporations: 6. AG (Audit I) brings out an Audit Report on LSGIs every year, comprising 
of observations relating to audit of LSGIs. 

 
 
Introduction 
3 
1.5. Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 
 
1.5.1. Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit Objections/ 
Inspection Reports/ timely disposal of draft audit paragraphs and matters 
pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee, issued by the State Government 
in 2017 provides for prompt response by the Executive to the Inspection Reports 
(IRs) issued by the Accountant General for rectification, in compliance with the 
prescribed rules and procedures and accountability for the defic iencies, lapses 
etc., noticed during audit. The Heads of Offices and next higher authorities are 
required to comply with the audit observations contained in the IRs, rectify the 
defects and omissions and report their compliance to the Accountant General 
within four weeks of receipt of IRs. Status of pending IRs are being sent 
periodically to the Secretaries of the Departments to facilitate monitoring of 
audit observations. 
As on 31 October 2024, 5,294  IRs (26,951 paragraphs) (issued upto 31 March 
2024) were outstanding in respect of 29 Departments. Details of IRs and 
paragraphs outstanding are given in Appendix 1.1. 
1.5.2. Response of Departments to the paragraphs included in this 
Report 
Performance Audit and Compliance Audit paragraphs were forwarded to the 
Additional Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of Departments 
concerned during February 2025 to June 2025 for furnishing replies. Of the one 
Performance Audit paragraph, one Subject -specific Compliance Audit 
paragraph and five Compliance Audit paragraphs featured in this Report, 
response of Government was received for all the paragraphs.  The replies 
received were suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.5.3. Follow-up on Audit Reports 
According to the Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit 
Objections/ Inspection Reports/ timely disposal of draft audit paragraphs and 
matters pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee issued by the State 
Government in 2017, the Administr ative Departments should submit 
Statements of Action Taken Notes on audit paragraphs included in the Reports 
of the C&AG directly to the Legislature Secretariat, with copies to the 
Accountant General within two months of their being laid on the Table of th e 
Legislature. As of October 2024, 10 Administrative Departments failed to 
comply with the instructions and did not submit Statements of Action Taken 
Notes of 41 paragraphs for the period 2020 -21 to 2023 -24 as detailed in  
Appendix 1.2.  
1.5.4. Paragraphs pending discussion by the Public Accounts Committee  
Ninety-three paragraphs pertaining to 12 Departments for the period 2020-21 to 
2023-24 were pending discussion by the Public Accounts Committee as of 
October 2024 (Appendix 1.3). 

 
 v 
 
  
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 

 
 
 
 

 
 5 
CHAPTER II 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
 
2.1. Introduction 
University of Calicut , the second University , was established by the 
Government of Kerala in 1968. The Calicut University Act, 1975 (Act) gives 
the framework for the functioning of the University.  The University caters to 
the higher educational needs in the districts of Kozhikode 4, Malappuram, 
Palakkad, Thrissur and major parts of Wayanad 5 providing undergraduate, 
postgraduate, integrated postgraduate courses and research activities through 31 
teaching and research departments, four cost based departments, 12 Centres for 
Computer Science and Information Technology (CCSIT), 11 Teacher Education 
Centres (CUTEC), six School s of Management Studies (SMS), 4256 affiliated 
colleges and 119 Boards of Studies (BoS) under 10 faculties. The University 
has been accredited by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC) at A + grade level with CGPA of 3.45 points for the five -year period 
2022-27, valid till 20 September 2027. 
2.1.1. Organisational set up 
The Honourable Governor of Kerala is the Chancellor of the University. The 
Minister of Higher Education is the Pro Chancellor. The Vice Chancellor, 
appointed by the Governor, is the Principal Academic and Executive Officer. 
The academic activities are gove rned by the Guidelines, Regulations and 
Circulars issued by the University Grants Commission (UGC), All India 
Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and other regulatory bodies in the 
Education sector. The Registrar, appointed by the Syndicate on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the Vice Chancellor 
and Chairman and two other Syndicate members, is in charge of the 
administration of the University and has the power to fix the functions and 
duties of the officers and employees of the University, other than those working 
under the direct supervision of the Controller of Examinations and the Finance 
Officer. 
2.1.2. Authorities of the University  
The activities of the University are organised and supervised by (i) the Senate 
(ii) the Syndicate (iii) the Academic Council (iv) the Faculties (v) the Boards of 
Studies (vi) the Students' Council and (vii) the Finance Committee. Functions 
of the authorities are detailed in Chart 2.1.  
  
 
4     Formerly known as Calicut. 
5  excluding Mananthavady -Taluk 
6  details as per Annual Report 2023 of the University  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
6 
Chart 2.1: Functions of the Authorities in the University 
 
2.2. Audit Objectives 
Performance Audit on ‘Functioning of University of Calicut’ was conducted to 
ascertain whether; 
• the academic activities of the University were planned  and properly 
executed.  
• creation and development of human resources and infrastructure 
facilities were adequate and as per norms, to impart quality education. 
• financial management of the University was conducted properly and 
was in accordance with relevant Rules and Regulations. 
2.3. Audit Criteria 
The functioning of the University was assessed against the following criteria: 
Board of Studies 
Shall have the power to make 
recommendations regarding courses of 
study and examinations in the subject 
with which it deals 
Senate 
The Supreme Authority of the University 
having the power to review the action of the 
Syndicate and Academic Council 
Syndicate  
The Chief executive body of the University 
having general superintendence and control 
over the institutions of the University 
Academic Council 
Academic body of the University 
responsible for the maintenance of 
standards of instruction, education 
and examination.  
Faculties 
Power to make recommendations to the 
Academic Council/Syndicate on all matters 
relating to  the courses of study, 
examinations 
Students Council 
Council which makes 
recommendations to the 
Syndicate and Academic Council 
in matters relating to the 
academic work of the students 
Finance Committee 
Advises the University on all 
matters relating to Finance 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
7 
• The Calicut University Act, 1975, the Statutes and Ordinance 
thereunder. 
• Guidelines and regulations issued by the University and regulatory 
authorities like UGC, AICTE, NCTE, NAAC etc. 
• Orders issued by Government of India and Government of Kerala  
• Kerala Financial Code, 2016 
• The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
• Kerala PWD Manual, 2012  
• Kerala Panchayat Building Rules, 2019 
2.4. Audit, Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted from 22 July 2024 to 31 March 2025 
covering the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. The institutions and Departments 
covered in the Audit along with the sampling methodology adopted for the 
selection are given in Appendix 2.1. Methodology of audit involved scrutiny of 
documents/ files, joint physical verification of laboratories, civil works and  
survey of students and faculties of the University. Apart from the above, records 
of General and Academic branch, Administrative bra nch and Engineering 
Department were also verified. The dump data for the last five years available 
in the Software Applications maintained by Calicut University Computer Centre 
was also examined. 
An Entry Conference was held with the Principal Secretary, Higher Education 
Department and the Vice Chancellor and other University officials on 
02 September 2024 wherein the scope, objectives, criteria and methodology of 
audit including selection of sampl es were discussed. An Exit conference was 
held with the Principal Secretary, Higher Education Department on 28 July 
2025 to discuss the audit findings. The replies furnished by Government of 
Kerala have been suitably incorporated. 
2.5. Planning 
2.5.1. Lack of timelines and measurable milestones in Strategic Plan  
University of Calicut constituted (April 2021) a Committee to frame the 
Strategic Plan document of the University. The Committee finalised the 
Strategic Plan of the University, and the Vice Chancellor accorded (November 
2021) sanction to implement the Strategic Plan. In the Strategic Plan, University 
identified seven7 strategic priority areas and set strategic goals in each area as 
detailed in Appendix 2.2.  
Audit observed that the Strategic Plan was not approved (February 2025) by the 
Syndicate, and no timeline was set to achieve the strategic goals. Further, no  
 
7  i) Governance and management ii) Teaching and Learning iii) Academic Research and Innovation  
iv) Academic Support Services v) Student Support Services vi) Community and Outreach activities 
and vii) Facilities, Systems and Infrastructure 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
8 
mechanism was in place to measure/monitor the progress of achievement of 
goals.  
Government agreed (July 2025) to the audit findings and stated that  the 
University has prioritised the formulation of an Institutional Development Plan 
(IDP) to guide its future growth and development. The proposed IDP will 
address the shortcomings by incorporating a comprehensive action plan with 
specific timelines, measurable milestones and clearly assigned responsibilities 
for each initiative. Once implemented, the new IDP will supersede the existing 
Strategic Plan making it obsolete.  
Government response indicating implementation of IDP does not instill 
confidence, as the Strategic Plan proposed way back in 2021 was yet to be 
implemented.  
2.5.2. Inadequate representation in the authorities of the University 
The Senate, Syndicate and the Academic Council are the authorities of the 
University. Section 43(1) of the Calicut University Act, 1975 (Act) specifies 
that all vacancies among the members  (other than ex-officio members) of any 
authority or body of the Uni versity shall be filled, as soon as possible. Audit 
observed that during the audit period, the three authorities were reconstituted 
twice (March 2019 and June 2023).  
On verifying the Annual Reports and Minutes of the meetings held by the 
authorities during the period 2019 -24, the following deficiencies were noticed 
in the reconstitution/functioning: 
Senate  
• The number of vacancies in the Senate increased from seven to 43 
between two reconstitutions, which remained vacant until the next 
reconstitution in June 2023.  
• Of the 20 meetings held during the audit period, Government 
representatives from the Departments of General Education and 
Information Technology and Directors of Collegiate Education and 
Technical Education attended none of the meetings. The Secretary to 
the Department of Finance attended two meetings (January and March 
2022), while the Secretary to Higher Education and the Chairman of 
the State Advisory Board attended just one meeting each. 
Syndicate 
• The vacancy of members was 17.24 per cent  at the time of its 
reconstitution in 2019, which increased to 58.62 per cent in 2023 at the 
time of its subsequent reconstitution.  
Academic Council 
• The number of vacant posts in the Academic Council increased from 
one to 77 during 2019 to 2023 till the next reconstitution in June 2023.  
Audit observed that non -filling of vacancies in time and non -attending of the 
meetings by the key members resulted in non-compliance of the Act. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
9 
In the reply (July 2025), Government attributed  non-conduct of election to the 
Senate from the Principal Constituency due to stay by High Court, outbreak of 
Covid-19 pandemic, procedural delays etc., as the reasons for inadequate 
representation in the authorities of the University. 
Audit acknowledges the Government response that the vacancies occurred due 
to Covid -19 pandemic, however, audit noted that the vacancies in these 
authorities continued beyond the Covid period.  
2.5.3. Improper constitution of College Development Council 
According to  UGC guidelines on College Development Council  (CDC), 
1985, the University may set up a CDC  for ensuring proper planning and 
integrated development of affiliated colleges and for providing the colleges with 
necessary assistance and guidance. The guidelines stipulate that the CDC must 
consist of the Vice Chancellor , Coordinator/ Director/ Dean of the Council 8, 
Principals of some affiliated colleges and senior teachers of the University 
teaching Departments and a representative of the State Government. The CDC 
must meet at regular intervals at least twice in an academic year to review the 
implementation of vari ous programmes and activities. The Director was 
expected to visit the colleges at least twice a year and to hold meetings of 
Principals of colleges. 
However, Audit observed that, as against the above, the CDC functioned as a 
branch of the University and not as a council. It was supported by four District 
level Inspection Commissions (DLIC) and an affiliation sub -committee. The 
Director was not appointed on the recommendation of the Selection Committee 
and the charge of Director was entrusted to faculties during the audit period.  
Representative of the State Government and Principals of affiliated colleges 
were not included as members of the council. In the absence of a CDC 
constituted in line with UGC guidelines, no meetings of the council were seen 
conducted during the audit period. 
Thus, CDC which was intended to act as a vital link between the University and 
its affiliated colleges to ensure proper and integrated development of affiliated 
colleges, did not serve the purpose due to improper constitution  and non -
conduct of meetings. 
The Registrar accepted (October 2024) that the current CDC was only a part of 
the broader CDC envisioned by the UGC. Government replied (July 2025) that 
the CDC acts as a strategic arm of the University, working in compliance with 
the statutory provisions to guide, support, and monitor the development of 
affiliated colleges, ensuring adherence to quality standards and fostering overall 
academic excellence. However, the current structure and position of the CDC 
will be re-evaluated to review if it is mandatory to form a council, based on the 
UGC guidelines on CDC  formation, and the matter will be presented to the 
relevant bodies for consideration.  During the Exit conference (July 2025) the 
Principal Secretary emphasi sed the need for devising a structured format in 
 
8  The Coordinator/Director/Dean of the Council was  to be appointed by the Syndicate on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the VC as the Chairman, a nominee of the 
UGC and a nominee of the Syndicate of the University. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
10 
which details are to be filled in by the colleges and the University can cross 
check the same. 
Audit noted that the constitution of CDC was not in accordance with the 
directions of UGC and there was no evidence of CDC meeting regularly, as laid 
down in UGC Guidelines. 
2.5.4. Inspection of affiliated colleges 
According to Section 40 of the Calicut University First Statutes, 1977, every 
college shall be subject to inspection 9 from time to time and the report of such 
inspection shall be forwarded to the Principal of the College concerned and his 
explanation called for before any action is taken on it. Further, Section 77 of the 
Act states that, at the end of every four years from the commencement of the 
Act, the Vice Chancellor shall submit a report to the Government on the 
conditions of affiliated colleges.  
Audit observed that instead of conducting periodic inspections , affiliated 
colleges were inspected by the  four District Level Inspection Commissions  
(DLICs) only on the occasions of affiliation of additional programmes, 
permanent increase in seats or upon receipt of any complaints on the functioning 
of colleges, establishment of new colleges, extension/ conferment of 
autonomous status etc. Report as required under Section 77 of the Act, was also 
not furnished to the Government.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the University effectively constitutes and 
utilises inspection bodies for the purpose of inspecting affiliated colleges, and 
the University has operationalised this by establishing four DLICs. Government 
further stated that DLICs conduct hundreds of inspections every year on various 
occasions and conducting periodical inspections beyond this was challenging. 
Though, the reply speaks about several inspections, no documentary evidence 
was provided regarding the inspections conducted. Further, reply was silent 
about the Report to be submitted by the VC to the Government at the end of 
every four years. 
2.5.5. Non-inclusion of industrial representative in Board of Studies 
Section 28(5) of C alicut University First Statutes, 1976 allows each Board  of 
Studies (BoS) to consult specialists to bridge the gap between the University 
and Industry, for other relevant academic inputs and to create employment -
oriented curriculum/ syllabus. Audit noticed that an Amendment to the Statute 
to include industrial representatives in each BoS was initially approved by 
Syndicate in September 202310, however the same was yet to take effect (April 
2025). Further, it was observed (January 2025) that stakeholders such as 
industrialists, entrepreneurs and students were not included in any of the 119 
BoS. Thus, the intention of bridging the gap between the University and the 
Industry remained unfulfilled due to the delay in amendment of Statute. 
 
9      by one or more persons appointed by the Vice Chancellor or the Syndicate or by the Board of Inspection 
10  This was initially approved by Syndicate in September 2023. It was again placed before the Syndicate 
in March 2025 after complying with the directions given by the Senate on 06 June 2024.  

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
11 
Government replied (July 2025) that amendment of the Statute by inclusion of 
industrial representative was approved by the Syndicate on 20 March 2025 and 
would be submitted to the Hon’ble Chancellor for his consideration 
immediately after receiving approval from the Senate. 
2.5.6. Functioning of Internal Quality Assurance Cell  
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) directed (January 
2006) the University to establish an Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) for 
regular monitoring of the institution. IQAC 11 was expected to meet quarterly 
and develop quality benchmarks, obtain feedback from stakeholders and 
maintain institutional database through Management Information Systems 
(MIS). Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) were also expected (April 2017) to 
undertake continuous Academic and Administrative Audits (AAA) to improve 
the quality and sustenance of education. The outcome of AAA was to be placed 
in IQAC and Syndicate and plan of action prepared to implement the 
suggestions accepted by IQAC/ Syndicate. 
Audit observed that IQAC had not developed (February 2025) a centralised MIS 
to streamline data management and had not obtained action taken reports on 
AAA from the respective departments. Further, IQAC or Syndicate had not 
discussed AAA Reports of the two  AAAs conducted 12 by evaluating the 
performance of the Departments against 31 parameters under 12 categories13. 
Audit analysed the performance of nine selected teaching Departments 
(including one cost -based Department) on the basis of the grading scores 14 
obtained by them during the two AAAs and observed the following:  
• Only two15 Departments achieved scores above 50 per cent in the first 
AAA and none of the departments scored above 50 per cent  in the 
second AAA. 
• In comparison to the first AAA, scores of seven departments relegated 
in the second AAA. 
• While three16 Departments discussed the first AAA report, none of the 
Departments discussed the second AAA report. 
Government replied (July 2025) that IQAC has already taken steps to identify 
an appropriate MIS software that meets its requirements and the Board meeting 
held in February 2025 had recommended to invite officials from Mahatma 
Gandhi University, Kottayam fo r a demonstration of their web -based MIS 
software. It was also stated that the gaps in the follow -up procedures of AAA 
 
11    constituted in the University in June 2007 
12   first one covering the academic years 2016 -17 to 2020-21 in 34 departments (October 2021) and the 
second covering the academic years 2021 -22 to 2022 -23 in 36 departments (August to September 
2023) 
13  Programmes offered, Faculty, Research, Students, Support Staff, Teaching Learning and Evaluation, 
Feedback mechanism, Activities of the department, Infrastructure facilities of the department, 
Uniqueness of the department and innovative practices, Strength  Weakness Opportunities and 
Challenges (SWOC) and Future Plans. 
14  Scores of second AAA pertaining to Department of Journalism and Mass Communication and 
Department of  Environment were not furnished to audit.  
15  Statistics and Education 
16  Chemistry, Physics and Russian and Comparative studies 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
12 
process were identified by IQAC and it was decided to establish a structured 
mechanism to ensure systematic implementation of expert recommendations 
emerging from the AAA process.  
Audit observed that though the Board had recommended to invite officials from 
another University for a demonstration, further action in this regard was pending 
(July 2025). 
2.5.7. Drop in National Institutional Ranking  
The National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) is an initiative by the 
Ministry of Education, GoI, to rank HEIs in the country. It evaluates institutions 
based on five broad parameters with sub parameters under each for ranking 
various universities an d institutions annually. The University of Calicut was 
ranked at 64 th position in the NIRF ranking (University category) in 2019 and 
improved its position to 54 th in 2020. Thereafter there was steady drop in the 
ranking and the University stood at 89th position in 2024.  
Score obtained by the University with respect to parameters fixed for the 
ranking during the period 2022 -24 is given in Appendix 2.3. Analysis of the 
score obtained under each sub parameter revealed that in 10 17 out of 16 sub 
parameters, the score obtained by the University was 50 per cent or below.  
Concurring with the audit findings , Government stated (July 2025) that 
subsequent to announcement of 2024 NIRF ranking, IQAC conducted a 
parameter-wise gap analysis comparing the scores obtained by the University 
with those of top -performing affiliating universities in Kerala and with India n 
Institute of Science serving as the benchmark and also stated that measures were 
taken to improve the University’s score in the future. 
2.6. Academic and Research Activities 
2.6.1. Continuation of affiliation of Engineering college in violation of 
Government directions 
A P J Abdul Kalam Technological University (APJAKTU) Act came into force 
in May 2014. Department of Higher Education, GoK issued orders (March 
2015) mandating affiliation to APJ AKTU, for all undergraduate and 
postgraduate engineering courses starting from the 2015 -16 academic year 
onwards. Section 60 of APJ AKTU Act stipulates that the institutions in the 
technological branch maintained by other Universities of the State as their 
departments or their respective constituent colleges do not come under the 
jurisdiction of KTU. Audit observed that despite not  maintaining a 
technological branch, Calicut University continued to offer B.Tech courses 
through Institute of Engineering and Technology (IET) which was in violation 
of the Government order.  
 
17  Student strength including doctoral students, online education, combined metric for publications,  
combined metric for quality of publications, IPR and patent published and granted, footprint of projects 
and professional practice, metric for number of Ph.D students graduated, percentage of students from 
other States/countries, economically and socially challenged students and Academic Peers and 
employers. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
13 
Government stated (July 2025) that being a constituent college of the 
University, IET was not required to be affiliated under APJAKTU. Further, 
during the Exit conference (July 2025) , the VC stated that the University had 
not opted for affiliation under APJ AKTU, given that it already had its own 
faculty of Engineering. 
Audit observed that Government had directed (January 2018) the University to 
take urgent necessary action to affiliate all Colleges of Engineering under it to 
APJAKTU, before the commencement of academic admission of 2018 -19. 
Thus, continuation of B.Tech courses through IET was in violation of 
Government directions. 
2.6.2. Non-revision of syllabus/ curriculum  
Considering the pace at which conceptual innovations and technology are 
changing, UGC recommended (January 2017)  that curricula of all academic 
Departments should be reviewed and revised at least once in three years.  
Audit observed that syllabi of 2418 out of 45 categories of programmes were not 
revised during the last three years and notably the syllabus of BA, LLB was last 
revised in 2011. The details are given in Appendix 2.4.  
Government replied (July 2025) that the syllabi of a few programmes not falling 
under major categories viz., BA/B.Sc/B.Com/MA/M.Sc/M.Com had not been 
revised regularly, and action has been initiated to identify these programmes 
and to revise the syllabi.  
2.6.3. Delay of six years in completion of B.Sc. Printing Technology 
Course 
The Syndicate decided (March 2014) to introduce three -year B.Sc. Printing 
Technology programme as part of the School of Distance Education (SDE) 
utilising the facilities available in CUIET. The programme commenced in  
2014-15 with an intake of 34 students, against an intake capacity of 60.  
Audit observed that the University was able to complete the course only in May 
2023, eight years after the programme was introduced 19. The final results were 
published, supplementary/improvement examinations for all the six semesters 
were conducted between November 2023 and April 2024. Audit noticed that the 
completion of the course was delayed due to reasons like uncertainty regarding 
Regulations to be followed, anomalies in the syllabus, delay in conduct of 
practical examinations due to objections raised by the students of CUIET 
regarding the usage of their laboratory facilities. 
Audit observed that the prolonged delay of six years in completing the course 
due to regulatory ambiguities, poor academic planning and lack of institutional 
readiness adversely affected the 34 students enrolled for the programme.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the University is committed to ensure that 
such issues in the conduct of courses will not be repeated in the future. 
 
18  Includes four courses (Faculty of Journalism, Faculty of Science, Faculty of Language and Literature, 
Faculty of Fine Arts) in which the syllab i of UG courses were revised and  of PG courses were not 
revised  
19  November 2014 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
14 
2.6.4. School of Distance Education - Loss of UGC recognition  
University Grants Commission (Open and Distance Learning) Regulations, 
2017, lay down the minimum standards of instructions for the grant of degree, 
through Open and Distance Learning mode (ODL). As per the above 
Regulations, in HEIs offering ODL programme s, a Centre for Internal Quality 
Assurance (CIQA) headed by a full -time Director, a senior academician of the 
rank of Professor was to ensure the quality of the programmes offered. Further, 
under the UGC (ODL and Online Programmes) Regulations, 2020 if a H EI 
offers any programme in ODL mode, after withdrawal  of or fails to obtain 
recognition, the degree obtained pursuant to such programme in HEIs, shall not 
be treated as a valid qualification.  
In the year 2019 -20, 26 programmes 20 were conducted by the University. 
However, Audit observed that none of these programmes received UGC 
recognition for the academic year 2020 -21, due to non -appointment of a full 
time Director and non -maintenance of prescribed faculty strength. 
Consequently, the courses were conducted through private registration mode 
without providing contact classes or study materials to 32,651 students. The lack 
of recognition for the programmes by UGC also raises question about the 
validity of degree certificate awarded to the students. 
Government stated (July 2025) that the University had submitted its application 
for the July 2020 session under the earlier guidelines and might have secured 
recognition had the UGC not annulled those applications due to the pandemic. 
The University cannot be held accountable for this.  It was also stated that the 
applications invited for the year 2020 -21 were under the newly implemented 
UGC Regulations containing more stringent requirements, which the University 
was unable to satisfy. Further, it was stated  that the students admitted under 
private registration followed the same syllabus and were awarded the same 
certificate as those in the ODL mode. 
Audit acknowledges the constraints faced by the University in obtaining 
recognition for ODL programmes, however, the fact remains that the degree 
obtained through ODL programmes conducted without UGC approval is not a 
valid qualification. 
2.6.5. Admissions to Ph.D programme without adhering to the UGC  
directions 
According to UGC (Minimum Standards and Procedure for award of M.Phil/  
Ph.D Degree) Regulations, 2016 (Regulations 2016) and its second Amendment 
dated 16 October 2018, HEIs were required to admit candidates for M.Phil / 
Ph.D programmes through a two-stage process, an entrance test with weightage 
of 70 per cent and an interview/viva-voce with 30 per cent weightage.   
Audit observed that though the candidates for the Ph.D programme were 
admitted through a two-stage process, the prescribed weightage (70:30) was not 
followed, instead the admissions were conducted in accordance with the Clauses 
 
20 12 Master’s programmes and 14 Bachelor's programmes 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
15 
4.8 and 4.921 of the University Research Regulations 2016. In the case of M.Phil 
programme, no interview was conducted, and the candidates were admitted 
solely based on the entrance test. The Academic Council did not amend the 
Calicut University Regulation 2016 to inco rporate the provisions of the UGC 
(second amendment) 2018. As a result, 110 scholars admitted to Ph.D 
programme and 78 students to M.Phil22 programme during the period 2019-24 
in the selected departments, were admitted without complying with the UGC 
directions. 
Government replied (July 2025) that prior to June 2024 examinations, UGC 
NET qualified candidates were not awarded marks and hence UGC regulations 
regarding admission could not be implemented earlier. In the absence of such 
scores, ranking could not be carried out. However, starting from 2024, UGC has 
started providing NET scores and accordingly from 2024, Ph.D admissions for 
candidates having NET scores are conducted by assigning 70 per cent  
weightage to NET score and 30 per cent  weightage for marks obtain ed in 
interview.  
The reply is not acceptable as audit observation was specifically regarding non-
compliance of UGC Regulations 2018 prescribing 70:30 weightage in the two-
stage admission process of Ph.D programme conducted by the University for all 
PG students, not for NET qualified students alone. The 70:30 weightage under 
the Regulations, was applicable to all Ph.D admissions conducted by the 
University, including those for candidates not holding a NET qualification.  
2.6.6. Functioning of Directorate of Project 
In accordance with Calicut University Research Projects Regulations 2020 
(CURPR 2020), the University decided to facilitate research and development 
activities and a Project Cell was established in the University (30 April 2021). 
CURPR 2020 envisaged a Pro ject Advisory Committee 23 to be constituted by 
the VC for the management of all activities related to the Directorate of Projects 
(DoP).  
Guidelines for Establishment of Research and Development Cell in HEIs issued 
(04 March 2022) by UGC envisions to put in place a robust mechanism for 
developing and strengthening the research ecosystem and the Cell was to act as 
a liaison between researcher s and relevant research funding agencies, extend 
guidance in preparation and submission of project proposals and post  
sanctioning of the grants to oversee adherence to timelines. Assessment of the 
functioning of the DoP revealed the following deficiencies: 
• Project Advisory Committee, as required in CURPR 2020 was 
constituted only in March 2025 which meant that the activities related 
to the DoP were not monitored as required by CURPR 2020. 
 
21  According to these Clauses, all candidates getting a minimum prescribed mark are qualified to apply 
for registration to Ph.D programme and an interview/ viva-voce shall be conducted in such a way that 
the candidates would be required to discuss their research interest/area through a presentation. 
22  New admissions for M.Phil programme were discontinued from 2021-22 onwards 
23  Consisting of (i) the VC (ii) the Pro VC (iii) the Convenor, Standing Committee of Syndicate on 
Courses and Research (iv) the Director, Directorate of Projects (v) two faculties from University 
Teaching departments, nominated by the VC (vi) one external expert nominated by the VC 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
16 
• During the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, DoP had given endorsement for 
228 Project Proposals submitted by the faculties, but projects were 
sanctioned by the external funding agencies only in 17 cases (seven per 
cent).  
Audit observed that the functions of DoP in facilitating the research projects 
defined at the time of constitution w ere not modified subsequently in line with 
UGC guidelines issued in March 2022. Consequently, the DoP was not acting 
as a liaison between researchers and relevant research funding agencies and also 
not extending guidance in preparation and submission of proje ct proposals, as 
envisaged by UGC.  
Government replied (July 2025) that the guidelines issued by UGC in March 
2022 will be strictly adhered to in future and necessary modifications will be 
made in the existing Project Regulation of the University . During the Exit 
conference (July 2025), the Principal Secretary also added that the DoP mainly 
served as an administrative body and could not review the project proposals. 
Audit observed that according to UGC norms DoP was expected to function as 
a liaison body. 
2.6.7. Non-completion of research works by research scholars  
As per Calicut University First Statutes, 1977, full-time research students shall 
submit the thesis within a period of five years and the Syndicate shall have the 
power to extend this time limit by one year in exceptional cases. Further, as per 
Calicut University Research Regulations 2016, a research scholar shall appear 
before the Research Advisory Committee (RAC) once in six months to make a 
presentation of the progress of his/ her work for evaluation and for further 
guidance. The six-monthly progress reports shall be submitted by the RAC to 
the University/ College with a copy to the research scholar. In cases of 
unsatisfactory progress, RAC is required to record the reasons and suggest 
corrective measures. If the research scholar fails to implement these corrective 
measures, the RAC may recommend to the institution, with specific reasons, for 
cancellation of the registration of the research scholar. 
Audit observed that during the period of audit, out of the 145 research scholars 
who were awarded the University Research Fellowship (URF) and whose theses 
were due for submission within the above -mentioned period, 41 scholars 
(representing 28.3 per cent) either discontinued their research work or failed to 
submit their theses within the prescribed time limit.  
Similarly, in researches funded by agencies such as UGC, CSIR, DST 24, 
ICSSR25, NFOBC 26, NFSC/ST and State Government, out of 181 research 
scholars whose theses submission was due during the period of audit, 44 
scholars (24.31 per cent) either discontinued their research work or failed to 
submit their theses within the prescribed time limit. 
Out of the 85 research scholars (URF and other agencies funded research) who 
did not submit the theses in time, 16 were from the selected departments. Audit 
 
24  Department of Science and Technology 
25  Indian Council of Social Science and Research 
26  National Fellowship for OBC  

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
17 
scrutinised the minutes of the RAC meetings made available to audit for the 
period 2019-24 in these selected departments and observed that the non-conduct 
of meetings ranged from 50 per cent to 100 per cent and the departments had 
not recommended for any corrective measures or cancellation of registration of 
the research scholar with specific reason, except in one case in the Department 
of Education. 
Audit observed that inadequate number of meetings by RAC resulted in deprival 
of monitoring and timely corrective measures by RAC. During the Exit 
conference (July 2025) Accountant General reiterated the importance of proper 
functioning of RAC and stated that non-completion of research by scholars also 
affects the opportunity of eligible students as there is limitation regarding the 
number of students a professor can guide.  
Government replied (July 2025) that from 2024 Ph.D admissions onwards , it 
will be made mandatory to upload a six-monthly progress report recommended 
by the RAC on the college portal and that the term fees will be accepted only 
upon submission and recommendation of the progress report by RAC. However, 
the reply is silent about progress of research by the existing research scholars. 
2.6.8. Functioning of Intellectual Property Rights Cell  
As per orders (April 2018) of the VC, a five-member committee was constituted 
to lead the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Cell 27. The committee was 
required to meet at least twice a year and advise the University on all matters 
relating to IPR. To identify the reasons for generation of lesser number of 
patents an IPR Professional was inducted 28 to the University for an internship. 
The IPR professional submitted a Report (December 2023) with 
recommendations for improving IPR management. In January 2024 it was also 
decided to appoint a patent agent, to regulate the patent filing activities of the 
University.  
Audit noticed that after the constitution of the committee in 2018, IPR cell 
conducted only two meetings29 during the audit period against the requirement 
to convene at least two meetings annually. University had not allocated any fund 
to the IPR cell during the audit period, except in 2023 -24. Out of the ₹20 lakh 
allocated in 2023-24, only ₹13,955 was utilised. Though the recommendations30 
included in the  Report submitted by the IPR professional were being 
implemented, the appointment of patent agent remained pending (March 2025). 
Further, only two patents31 were filed by the University during the audit period, 
of which one32 was granted. 
While acknowledging the concerns raised regarding the limited activity of the 
IPR cell, Government stated (July 2025) that steps were initiated to conduct 
periodic discussions and that administrative process for appointment of patent 
agent was in its final stage. The IPR Cell has already drafted an Annual activity 
 
27  Established in the year 2009 with the aim of sensitising the students, researchers and faculty members 
about significance of IPR and to advise and guide them on IPR related issues. 
28  From September to December 2023 
29  On 19 August 2022 and 22 January 2024 
30  Strengthen institutional support, expand awareness initiatives, clarify and strengthen policies etc. 
31  2019-20 and 2023-24 
32  Filed in 2023-24 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
18 
plan which includes faculty and scholar sensitisation workshops , patentability 
assessment clinics, IPR awareness campaigns, filing support in collaboration 
with the agent etc. 
2.7. Financial Management 
According to Section 45(1) of the Calicut University Act, all grants and loans 
received from the GoK, GoI, UGC and from any other source, all revenues, all 
fees received, all incomes such as rent and profits derived from properties, all 
endowments and dona tions received, all other miscellaneous receipts and all 
deposits, remittances and service funds received in connection with the affairs 
of the University shall form one consolidated fund named ‘The Calicut 
University Fund’. This fund is to be used as stip ulated in the Act, Statutes, 
Ordinance and Rules.  
The details of receipts and utilisation of the University fund are detailed in 
Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1. Year-wise details of receipt and expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
State Grant Earmarked Funds33 
Fund received from 
other Agencies such 
as UGC, RUSA, etc. 
Own 
fund34/Miscellaneous 
receipts35 
Receipt Utilisation* Receipt Utilisation Receipt Utilisation Receipt Utilisation Plan NP Plan NP 
2019-20 8.00 235.21 13.13 235.21 6.38 5.20 3.31 3.51 201.76 99.18 
2020-21 13.69 211.69 8.00 211.69 3.50 5.47 3.14 2.62 173.79 93.47 
2021-22 13.14 222.27 14.26 222.27 4.53 5.31 2.00 3.01 226.64 214.72 
2022-23 20.68 224.12 34.87 224.12 4.73 4.01 2.16 3.82 255.50 223.53 
2023-24 11.00 244.50 18.39 244.50 5.11 6.25 6.77 3.16 248.32 205.42 
Total 66.51 1137.79 88.65 1137.79 24.25 26.24 17.38 16.12 1106.01 836.32 
* Funds utilised in excess of receipts were met from own fund of the University  
(Source: Details furnished by Finance wing of the University)  
During the period from 2019 -20 to 2023-24, 48 per cent of the receipts of the 
University was from Non Plan Grants provided by GoK  and 47 per cent from 
own fund and miscellaneous receipts. Remaining five per cent was contributed 
as grant by other agencies like UGC/ICSSR, earmarked funds and plan fund 
allocation by GoK. 
2.7.1. Delay in Preparation of Annual Accounts  
According to Sections 48 and 49 of the Act, the University's annual accounts 
are prepared under the Syndicate’s direction and submitted to Go vernment for 
audit. The annual accounts together with the audit report thereon are published 
by the Syndicate, placed before the Senate, and submitted to the Government. 
Once received, the Government lays the accounts before the State Legislative 
Assembly. 
According to Section 9(1) of the Kerala Local Fund Audit Act, 1994 (KLFA 
Act), the Executive Authority must prepare and present the accounts relating to 
 
33  Grants from UGC, grants from outside agencies, grants for individual research projects etc. 
34    Examination fee, affiliation fee, income from self-financing institutions etc. 
35  Recoveries, interest on loans and advances, donations etc. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
19 
a financial year within four months of the close of that financial year. Section 
10 mandates that the audit of the accounts prepared and presented must be 
completed within six months of the date of its presentation for audit. 
Audit noticed delay on the part of the University, ranging from four to five 
months in preparation of annual accounts, seven to eight months in submission 
to Kerala State Audit Department (KSAD), and 10 to 19 months in conduct of 
audit by KSAD as detailed in Appendix 2.5. 
Thus, due to the delay on the part of the University and KSAD, audit report 
relating to a particular year was being received by the University for remedial 
action after elapse of two to three years from the close of the financial year.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the University has initiated the process of 
computerising the accounting system to avoid delay. It was also stated that 
University had submitted the annual accounts to the Government within the time 
period stipulated during 2021-24.  
Audit observed that timeline was prescribed for preparation of accounts and 
audit of accounts by KSAD, for which delays were noticed by audit. However, 
no timeline was prescribed for submission of annual account/ audit report to 
Government. Hence, the contention that the annual accounts were submitted to 
Government within the time period is not tenable. 
2.7.2. Functioning of Internal Audit Wing of the University  
The University constituted (March 2010) an Internal Audit Wing (IAW) with 
the aim of ensuring financial discipline and propriety in financial transactions.  
During the audit period, the wing functioned with less than 50 per cent of the 
sanctioned manpower. The extent of coverage of units during the period 2019 -
20 to 2023-24 was as given in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Internal Audit of functional units of the University 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Total no. of auditable units 72 72 72 72 72 
No. of units scheduled for audit 21 5 25 34 21 
No. of units in which internal 
audit was conducted 21 5 25 34 21 
(Source: Details received from IAW) 
Audit observed that IAW had not prepared a schedule so as to cover the entire 
units within a specified period. Out of 20 selected departments/centres, four 36 
units were not covered in internal audit even once during the period 2019-20 to 
2023-24, which includes units like Pareeksha Bhavan entrusted with 
University’s core activities such as conducting examinations and Central 
Sophisticated Instrumentation Facility (CSIF), where costly scientific 
equipment are maintained.  
Government stated (July 2025) that considering the audit findings steps will be 
initiated to strengthen the IAW and to provide adequate training to its staff. An 
audit schedule will also be prepared prioritising high risk units as regards core 
activities, fund transaction etc. 
 
36  CUTEC Sulthan Bathery, CCSIT Aranattukara, Pareeksha Bhavan, CSIF 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
20 
2.7.3. Non-receipt of assistance of ₹2.3 7 crore due to non -settlement of 
previous UGC research projects  
The objective of the General Development Assistance (GDA) Scheme to State 
Universities (XI and XII Plan) 37 implemented by UGC was to improve the 
infrastructure and basic facilities in Universities and to promote enhancement 
of quality. The Universities were expected to utilise the grants in a time bound 
manner and submit the Utilisation Certificate to the effect that the grant was 
utilised for the purpose for which it was sanctioned. The Utilisation Certificate 
was to be furnished as early as possible after the closure of a particular financial 
year. 
Details of allocation of UGC fund, release, utilisation etc., from UGC under 
GDA scheme and merged scheme38 to the University are detailed in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Allocation, utilisation and amount to be reimbursed by UGC 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Scheme Allocation Amount 
Released 
Interest 
Accrued 
Amount utilised  
 (balance met 
from own funds) 
Amount to be 
reimbursed by 
UGC 
1 XII Plan GDA 14.52 11.62 1.29 14.55 1.64 
2 XI Plan GDA 9.27 5.71 0 5.89 0.18 
3 XI (IQAC) 0.05 0 0 0.009 0.009 
4 XI Plan (Merged) 5.50 3.25 0.01 3.81 0.55 
Total 2.37 
(Source: Data furnished by Administration wing of the University) 
The University submitted (August 2019-May 2020) the final audited Utilisation 
Certificate and Statement of Expenditure in respect of GDA received during XII 
Plan period to UGC. The Registrar requested (June 2020) UGC to settle the XI 
and XII plan accounts and issue final orders so as to effect the reimbursement 
of the due amou nt. Subsequently, the Registrar again requested (July 2021) 
UGC to release the amount due under GDA, which was expended from the own 
fund of the University, in anticipation of release of funds. In response to this 
request, UGC directed (September 2022) the  University to immediately settle 
all outstanding grants received under various UGC schemes 39, failing which 
administrative and legal action would be initiated against the University.  
From the status of settlement of accounts relating to the 17 research projects 
implemented under various UGC schemes from 2009 onwards, Audit observed 
that final audited accounts and statement of expenditure along with UC for four 
projects were yet to be submitted to UGC (March 2024).  
Government replied (July 2025) that out of the 17 UGC assisted projects, 16 
projects had been completed successfully, and settlement of one Special 
Assistance Programme (SAP) was under process.  
Thus, non-settlement of the accounts within the prescribed time period  by the 
University led to non -receipt of ₹2.3 7 crore of GDA under UGC XI and XII 
Plan, due to the University. 
 
37  XI Plan 2007-12, XII Plan 2012-17 
38  Instrumentation maintenance facility, basic facility for women etc. 
39  UGC Special Assistance Programme, UGC major research projects etc. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
21 
2.7.4. Loss of ₹8.79 crore as Central Assistance due to non-disbursement 
of Seventh Central Pay Commission arrears 
The Department of Higher Education, MHRD , GoI accepted the UGC Pay 
Review Committee’s recommendations (November 2017) to revise pay scales 
for teachers in HEIs, effective from 01 January 2016, in accordance with UGC 
Regulations40 (July 2018). GoI informed (July 2018) GoK to submit the 
reimbursement proposals in the prescribed format and that GoI would reimburse 
50 per cent of the additional financial burden under the Seventh Central Pay 
Commission (CPC) from 01 January 2016 to 31 March 2019, subject to 
compliance with UGC Regulations 2018. 
GoK decided (June 2019) to implement the CPC recommendations, with arrears 
to be paid later, depending on the release of GoI assistance and the State’s fiscal 
position and directed (September 2019), all State Universities to incorporate the 
UGC Regulations in their Statutes within a month. Accordingly , the Registrar 
of Calicut University, notified (February 2020) implementation of UGC 
Regulations 2018, effective from 18 July 2018. GoK also ordered (May 2020) 
the release of the arrears to be credited to the teachers’ GPF accounts. However, 
in July 2022, GoI informed GoK its decision to discontinue the reimbursement 
scheme with effect from April 2022. Consequently, on 21 January 2023, GoK 
withheld the arrear payments.  
Audit observed that though the University had implemented the Seventh UGC 
pay revision scheme, arrears amounting to ₹17.59 crore from 01 January 2016 
to 31 March 2019 were not disbursed to the teaching staff. Further, the UGC 
Regulations on qualifications, selection committees, etc., were not incorporated 
in the University's Statutes, nor in the Calicut University Act. Due to non -
compliance with GoI directions by GoK and the University, the University did 
not receive ₹8.79 crore of Central assistance. 
In reply (July 2025), Government stated that given the procedural requirements, 
the amendment of University Statutes and Regulations took longer than the 
stipulated timeline.  During the Exit conference (July 2025) the Principal 
Secretary stated that all the documents were submitted to GoI for receiving the 
assistance. 
Government reply is not acceptable as Audit observed that the University has 
not amended the statutes till date (September 2025). Further , instead of 
disbursing the amount and subsequently sending the details for reimbursement, 
GoK had submitted an undertaking outlining the amount proposed to be released 
to teachers in State Universities and colleges as payment of arrears on account 
of revision of salary on implementation of UGC revised pay scales scheme for 
the period from 01 January 2016 to 31 March 2019. 
 
40  UGC Regulations on Minimum qualifications for appointment of Teachers and Other staff of 
Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education, 2018. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
22 
2.7.5. Uneconomical institutions under the University 
The University operated 41 41 Institutions under Self -financing mode in five 
districts viz., Thrissur, Malappuram, Palakkad, Kozhikode and Wayanad under 
the Directorate of University Study Centre (DUSC) on ‘no profit no loss’ basis.  
When the income of all the institutions were reckoned together, the institutions 
were generating more income than expenditure except during  2023-24. 
However, Audit noticed that; 
• Six institutions 42 were continuously running in loss during all five 
years, the highest loss being that of IET, Kohinoor (₹6.32 crore). The 
combined loss recorded by these institutions was ₹8.58 crore. 
• Two institutions 43 were running in loss during the last four years 
recording a combined loss of ₹0.39 crore.  
• Six institutions44 recorded profit and loss intermittently during the five-
year period and recorded a combined loss of ₹0.39 crore.  
Details are given in Appendix 2.6. It was also noticed that during the five years, 
the average intake of students to all the courses conducted by the above 
institutions (which recorded continuous loss) ranged between 20 to 72 per cent 
of the intake capacity. The intake of students averaged above 50 per cent only 
in three courses viz., B.Sc. Computer Science of CCSIT Thalikulam (53), 
Department of Law (72) and Information Technology of IET Kohinoor (63) 
(Appendix 2.6). This indicated that low intake of students was a factor affecting 
the financial performance of the institutions.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the loss incurred by the institutions was 
ascertained and measures were being taken to improve the financial status of 
the centres. As part of this, courses at IET were revamped, the centres were 
directed to devise strate gies to improve the intake of students and it was also 
decided to review the feasibility of existing courses in the centres with less than 
40 per cent intake. 
2.7.6. Non-Constitution of Pension Fund in Calicut University 
According to the Calicut University First Ordinances, 1978, a Pension Fund 
must be established and used solely for paying pensions to retired employees 
and officers of the University, subject to the provisions of the Act.  
Audit observed that against the requirement of ₹1,461.44 crore by the 
University for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, GoK had released only ₹1,137.79 
crore towards pay, pension, DCRG and other non -plan expenditure which 
resulted in a deficit of ₹323.65 crore during the audit period. 
 
41  As of 2023 -24, 12 Centres for Computer Science and Technology, 11 Calicut University Teacher 
Education Centres, six Schools of Management Studies, four Cost Based Departments, Institute of 
Engineering and Technology, CU Regional Centre, School of Health Sc ience, Centre for Physical 
Education, B.P.Ed. Centre, Centre for Costume and Fashion Designing (CC&FD), Centre for PG 
Studies in Social Work (CPGSSW), Radiation Physics 
42  CCSITs – Kuttipuram, Manjeri, Muttil, Peramangalam, Pullut and IET Kohinoor 
43  CCSIT Thalikulam and Department of Law CU Campus 
44  CCSIT Pudukkad, CPGSSW Sulthan Bathery, CU Regional Centre, Perambra, CUTECs - Chalakudy, 
Vatakara, SMS Vatakara 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
23 
Since 1977, the University had maintained a savings account (TPA 70) and three 
fixed deposits under the Registrar’s name in the Sub Treasury, Tirurangadi, for 
the Pension Fund. However, adequate funds were not deposited and only 
₹141.08 crore (including ₹100 crore invested in 2023) was earmarked (January 
2025).  
Audit observed that though fixed deposit of ₹141.08 crore was earmarked for 
Pension Fund, the University had not constituted Pension Fund till date. Thus, 
even after 47 years from the issue of Calicut University first Ordinance, the 
University was yet to constitute a self-sustaining pension fund. 
In the Government reply (August 2025) it was stated that the University was 
facing significant challenges in meeting its non -plan expenditure, particularly 
salary, pension, DCRG etc., due to insufficient non-plan grants. The University 
had reported that, owing to financial constraints, it was unable to create a 
pension fund without assistance from GoK and had requested to grant a 
lumpsum amount as corpus fund. However, the request could not be considered 
favourably in view of the financial constraints. 
2.7.7. Advances amounting to ₹6.79 crore pending settlement  
According to Article 99 of Kerala Financial Code , temporary advances should 
be adjusted within three months of the date of drawal by presenting final bills 
with all supporting vouchers. In case of non -submission of the final bill within 
the stipulated time frame of three months, interest at 18 per cent 45 will be 
charged on the entire amount of advance from the date the amount was 
withdrawn to the date of recovery of the amount. 
Audit observed that advances drawn for various purposes during the period from 
1975-76 to 03 October 201146, amounting to ₹4.79 crore, and those drawn from 
04 October 2011 to 31 March 2024, amounting to ₹ two crore, were pending 
settlement (January 2025). Out of the total ₹6.79 crore pending, ₹4.79 crore was 
pending for more than 10 years, ₹ 4.47 lakh was pending for five to 10 years, 
₹9.09 lakh was pending for one to five years and ₹ 1.86 crore upto one year. 
Additionally, the interest on the advances drawn after 04 October 2011 alone 
worked out to ₹20 lakh (for the period from 04 October 2011 to 31 March 2024). 
Government stated (July 2025) that a Recovery cell was constituted in the 
University in the year 2015. Following its establishment, measures were 
implemented to settle the advances pending prior to 2009 -10, which w ere 
impeded by factors including retirement or demise of original drawers and 
deterioration or loss of supporting documentation. In respect of advances 
pertaining to the period post 2009-10, it was informed that the process of settling 
is ongoing.  
Since the advances had not been settled, audit could not ascertain whether the 
entire amount was utilised for the purpose for which it was sanctioned, or if any 
amount was retained by the officials who had availed the advance. Further,  
 
45  Effective from 04 October 2011 
46  Government of Kerala vide GO(P)/No.419/11/Fin. dated 04.10.2011 has stipulated that penal interest 
of 18 per cent per annum will be charged on the unutilised portion of advance from the date of drawal 
of advances. The rate of penal interest was not specified earlier. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
24 
inordinate delay in settlement of advances indicates lack of effective financial 
control by the University. 
2.7.8. Non-utilisation of University Medical Inspection Fee 
The University had been collecting Medical Inspection Fee of ₹20 per student 
since April 2019, which was revised to ₹25 per student from June 2023. The 
UGC Guidelines on Students’ Entitlements 2013, emphasise that students are 
entitled to reasonable health care, including free and periodic health check-ups 
and treatment/hospitalisation in case of emergencies.  Further, under Calicut 
University First Statutes, 1977, every college is required to have attached to it a 
Medical Officer to conduct the medical inspection of students. 
From the scrutiny of records at eight selected study centres, it was observed that 
₹63,760 was collected as medical inspection fee during the period from  
2019-20 to 2023 -24. However, seven centres 47 had not conducted any health 
check-ups for students during the audit period. 
Government replied (July 2025) that necessary directions will be issued to the 
Centres to render the services for which special fees are collected. 
2.8. Human Resources 
2.8.1. Engagement of guest faculties in excess of the limits prescribed by 
UGC  
According to the UGC Regulations 2018, the number of contract appointments 
was not to exceed 10  per cent  of the total number of faculty positions in a 
College/ University. The numbers of permanent and guest faculties during the 
period 2019-20 to 2023-24 in the University are shown in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Faculty details-Sanctioned Strength and Persons in Position (PIP) 
 Year Sanctioned 
Strength PIP  
Permanent Faculty Guest Faculty Percentage of 
guest 
faculties PIP Vacancy Maximum 
admissible PIP 
2019 242 213 124 118 24 89 36.78 
2020 250 203 116 134 25 87 34.80 
2021 243 220 159 84 24 61 25.10 
2022 242 278 171 71 24 107 44.21 
2023 241 249 165 76 24 84 34.85 
2024 242 298 156 86 24 142 58.68 
(Source: Annual Report of the University)  
Audit observed that during the audit period, the University had engaged guest 
faculty in the range of 25.10 to 56.68 per cent of the sanctioned strength against 
the maximum permissible limit of 10 per cent.  
Government replied (July 2025) that the University had resorted to engagement 
of guest faculty where the services of temporary teachers were indispensable for 
the uninterrupted conduct of academic activities. The University Statute confers 
upon the Vice Ch ancellor the authority to appoint guest faculty under such 
circumstances. The appointment of permanent faculty members took place only 
in 2021.  
 
47  All centres except CCSIT Calicut 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
25 
The appointment of guest faculties in excess of the prescribed limit was in 
violation of UGC regulations. Further, Audit noticed that several guest faculties 
engaged by the University were underqualified as detailed in subsequent 
paragraphs of this Report, thereby compromising the quality of education. 
2.8.2. Appointment of Teachers without prescribed qualification   
UGC Regulations 201848 mandate a Master’s degree with 55 per cent marks in 
the relevant/allied subject and NET/SLET/SET, as minimum qualification for 
Assistant Professors and equivalent positions , provided that , candidates 
awarded with Ph.D. in accordance with the UGC Regulations, shall be 
exempted from the requirement of minimum eligibility condition. Clause 13.0 
stipulates that contract/hourly basis appointments must follow the same 
eligibility criteria as regular appointments.  
Audit observed that teachers without prescribed qualifications were working in 
the University Departments, Centres and affiliated colleges, the details of which 
are presented below. 
Appointments in University Departments: On verification of the 
qualification of faculties in eight selected Teaching and Research Departments 
during the audit period, it was observed that 60 per cent  of the Assistant 
Professors engaged in the Department of Statistics were on hourly basis and 
lacked the prescribed qualifications of NET/Ph.D.  
Government stated (July 2025) that guest faculties were engaged only when the 
services of temporary teachers were essential to ensure uninterrupted and 
effective academic functioning. This was done by invoking the statutory powers 
of the Vice Chancellor and in accordance with the University’s guidelines. 
The reply is not acceptable since the guidelines issued by the University cannot 
supersede UGC Regulations and appointing faculties without adequate 
qualifications may adversely impact the quality of education imparted. 
Appointments in Affiliated Colleges: On analysis of the database in the 
college portal of the University, audit noticed that 2035 guest faculties across 
74 affiliated colleges 49, did not possess qualifications as required under the 
UGC guidelines. To substantiate the findings, Audit selected eight colleges 50 
from the abovementioned colleges and observed that, 91 (47 per cent) out of 
193 teachers did not possess the qualifications required as per UGC 
Regulations, 2018.  
From the analysis of database, Audit also observed that 10,704 faculties in 199 
unaided Arts and Science colleges did not possess the required qualifications. 
According to Kerala Self -financing College Teaching and Non -teaching 
Employees Act 2021, faculties in unaided colleges who did not possess the 
required qualifications on the date of commencement of the Act were to obtain 
the qualification within the date notified by GoK. However, notification 
prescribing the date by which qualification was to be attai ned by faculties was 
not prescribed by GoK till date (July 2025). 
 
48  Clauses 3.4 and 4.1 
49  40 aided and 34 Government Arts and Science colleges 
50  four aided colleges and four Government colleges  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
26 
Government stated (July 2025) that directive will be issued to all affiliated 
colleges to appoint UGC qualified teachers before the start of the next academic 
year, upload the details to the centralised college portal and that failure to 
comply with the Government directions will result in actions including 
withholding affiliation.  
Appointments in Teacher Education Centres (CUTECs): As per National 
Council for Teacher Education Regulations (NCTE), 2014 and Amendment of 
2019, prescribing the qualification for appointment to the post of Assistant 
Professors in institutions offering Teacher Education, Assistant Professors must 
have prescribed qualifications including NET/Ph.D. 
The University is running 11  University Teacher Education Centres (CUTEC) 
(March 2024). Audit observed that during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, only 
two51 out of 11 CUTECs, had qualified teachers as prescribed in the NCTE 
Regulations. The details  are given in Appendix 2.7.  
Government replied (July 202 5) that appointment of 63 teachers without 
prescribed qualifications, with a few exemptions was done before the NCTE 
Regulations 2014 came into force. Since then, the contracts have been renewed 
annually based on the appraisal report filed from the centres. 
The reply is not acceptable as the University should have complied with the 
NCTE regulations issued from time to time and appointed qualified teachers to 
ensure the quality of education imparted. 
2.8.3. Non-filling of reserved category vacancies 
In accordance with Section 15(a) of the KS&SSR 52, if no suitable candidate is 
available from a specified community or group, the vacancy shall remain 
unfilled and be notified separately for that community. If no candidate is found 
after two subsequent re -notifications, the vacancy will be filled through  direct 
recruitment from among the available candidates belonging to the Other 
Backward Classes (OBC). In the absence of suitable OBC candidates, the 
selection shall be made from Scheduled Castes (SC) candidates, and if SC 
candidates are also unavailable, the vacancy will be filled from Scheduled 
Tribes (ST) candidates. 
Following the appointments made in the academic year 2021 -22, 11 posts of 
Associate Professor (out of 29 posts notified in 2019), 10 posts of Assistant 
Professor (out of 63 posts), and four posts of Professor (out of 24 posts) 
remained vacant 53 at the University as no eligible candidates were available.   
Detailed department-wise and post -wise information on vacancies due to No 
Candidate Available (NCA), as provided by the University, is given in 
Appendix 2.8. 
Government replied (July 2025) that the University could not issue notification 
for special recruitment for the NCA vacancies of Assistant Professor as a Writ 
Appeal filed in 2021 by one of the candidates was pending at the High Court. 
As the Court had sta yed all proceedings relating to recruitment process,  
 
51  CUTEC Manjeri and CUTEC Chalakkudy 
52    Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules 
53  as per the appointment chart  

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
27 
notification for NCA vacancies was issued in July 2024 on disposal of the court 
case. 
The reply is not acceptable as notification for NCA vacancies pertaining to 
Assistant Professor was issued in July 2024 after a lapse of one year from the 
disposal of the case in February 2023. Further, the reply was silent regarding 
the notification process in respect of the other two posts. 
2.8.4. Recruitment of contract/daily wage staff without complying  with 
the Employment Exchanges Act, 1959 
The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
insists that every establishment in the Public Sector (establishment owned, 
controlled or managed by the Government or a Department of the Government) 
shall, before filling any vacancy in any employment in that establishment, notify 
the vacancy to the Employment Exchange concerned.  GoK directed (05 January 
1988) to use the services of Employment Exchanges for vacancies outside the 
purview of Public Service Commission, warning that vi olations would lead to 
serious consequences, including prosecution.  
Audit observed that since 2001, a total of 704 employees54 were appointed on a 
contract or daily wage basis by the University. It was observed that these 
appointments were made without utilising  the services of Employment 
Exchanges or obtaining the requisite non -availability certificates, thereby 
constituting a violation of the applicable legislation.  
Government replied (July 2025) that the University is committed to comply with 
all relevant Statutes and regulations including the Employment Exchanges Act, 
1959 and will take necessary steps to prevent similar instances of non -
compliance in the future. 
2.8.5. Promotion of retired teachers to the post of Professor under 
Career Advancement Scheme  
According to Paragraph 6.3, Clause V of the UGC Regulations 2018, for 
promotion under Career Advancement Scheme (CAS), the applicant teacher 
must be on the role and in active service of the University/College on the date 
of consideration by the Selection Committee. Government of Kerala issued 
orders (20 February 2021) to provide prom otion under CAS in Colleges, both 
Government and Aided, strictly in accordance with the norms, standards and 
procedures set out in the UGC Regulations.  
The Assistant Registrar instructed (18 January 2022) that retired and relieved 
teachers of affiliated Colleges, whose placement as Professor was due on or 
after 18 July 2018, may process the proposals from the Colleges where they 
were actively on role on the CAS due date.  
Audit observed that, during the period October 2022 to November 2024, 13 
teachers of Aided Colleges who were not on the role and in active service on 
the date of consideration by the Selection Committee, were granted promotion 
from the post of Associate Pr ofessor (Academic Level 13A) to the post of 
Professor (Academic Level 14) under CAS by the University ( Appendix 2.9). 
 
54  536 non-teaching and 168 teaching staff (February 2025) 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
28 
The irregular promotions resulted in excess drawal of pay and allowances 
amounting to ₹11.92 lakh in addition to retirement benefits.  
Government replied (July 2025) that all the teachers listed by Audit were in 
active service in the College on their due date of promotion and had met the 
eligibility criteria for promotion to the post of Professor. The date of 
consideration by the Selection Committee is not the date of meeting of the 
Selection Committee, but the date that is considered by the Selection Committee 
to effect the promotion. Moreover, there can be instances where a delay in 
constituting a Selection Committee for various reasons can push an incumbent  
out of role. 
The reply is not acceptable as the UGC guidelines stated that for appointments 
under CAS, the applicant teacher must be on the role and on active service of 
the University/College on the date of consideration by the Selection Committee. 
2.8.6. Delay in initiating action and non -recovery of dues from an  
Assistant Professor who violated Citizenship Act, 1955 
Section 9(1) of the Citizenship Act, 1955 stipulates that any citizen of India who 
by naturalisation, registration or otherwise voluntarily acquires, the citizenship 
of another country shall, upon such acquisition, cease to be a citizen of India. 
Further, as per Clauses 2 (a) and (i) under Section 7B of this Act, an overseas 
citizen of India shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on a citizen of India 
under Article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of opportunity in 
matters of public employment.  
A Lecturer 55of Department of Life Sciences of the University was on leave 
without allowance for a period of five years 56 in two spells to pursue higher 
studies57. The official’s request for further extension of leave was rejected by 
the Syndicate (13 December 2006) and he was directed to join duty. The 
University issued (18 August 2007) a show cause memo and the Syndicate 
resolved (22 December 2007) to initiate discipli nary action. Subsequently the 
official was removed (02 July 2010) from service effective from 01 January 
2006. 
The official appealed (20 November 2010) to the Chancellor against the penalty 
and the Chancellor directed the University for fresh consideration and 
appropriate decision in accordance with law after affording an opportunity of 
being heard, to the appellant. The official was reinstated as a Lecturer in Life 
Sciences on 26 November 2013. Upon receiving an email petition (18 
November 2020) along with details of the official’s passport revealing that he 
had acquired British citizenship in the y ear 2008 , the Un iversity initiated 
(October 2021) an inquiry and suspended the official from service (03 
December 2021). Consequently, based on the inquiry report (May 2022) the 
official was terminated from service (June 2022).  
The official suppressed the fact of renouncing Indian citizenship (31 May 2008) 
and acquiring British citizenship  thereby constituting violation of Service 
Conduct Rules and the Citizenship Act and received an amount of  ₹76.88 lakh 
 
55  Redesignated as Assistant Professor vide University order dated 21.03.2016 
56  from 18 November 2000 to 31 December 2005 
57  Post Doctoral fellowship in the Department of Medicine, University of California and M.Sc. Bio -
informatics course in the School of Crystallography, Birkbeck College, London 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
29 
as pay and allowances (November 2013 to March 2022). Audit observed that 
despite receiving concrete evidence against the official, there was a delay of 11 
months on the part of the University in initiating inquiry against him. The 
University had also not recovered ₹18.91 lakh (March 2025) outstanding as 
dues58 towards advance drawn and rent of residential quarter.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the official has been directed (June 2025) to 
settle ₹8.16 lakh with penal interest of 18 per cent  on the entire amount of 
advance from the date of drawal. It was further stated that, as the official had 
not responded positively to the request for clearing other outstanding dues, the 
University has decided to seek legal opinion on initiating appropriat e action to 
recover the dues. 
2.8.7. Granting of promotion to posts discontinued by Government  
GoK’s directive (26 February 2011) in the Ninth Pay Revision Commission 
implementation orders, required to discontinue  the practice of granting 
promotion to posts such as Pool Officer, Pump Operator Higher Grade and 
Senior Electrician. According to the order, only the incumbents who were 
already holding these posts as on the date of ninth pay revision order were 
eligible to receive the corresponding revised scale. The Syndicate decided (27 
April 2011) to implement the pay revision orders and decided (September 2012) 
to abolish the posts as and when the incumbents vacate the post and to make 
amendments to the Calicut University Ordinance in this regard. However, even 
after a lapse of 13 years from the pay revision order, modification to the 
Ordinance was not made (March 2025). Audit noticed that the following 
promotions were made during the period 2014 -20 in violation of the 
Government order. 
• Promotion to the post of Pool Officer 
Since the modification to the Ordinance was not made, officials in the 
post of Section Officer (Fair Copy and Dispatch) Higher grade which 
was the feeder category of Pool Officer, approached the Court and 
obtained orders favouring them. The Honourable High Court directed59 
the University to fill up the vacancies in the post of Pool Officer and to 
consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the post.  As a 
result, 11 persons were promoted to the post of Pool Officer. 
• Promotion to the post of Senior Electrician and Pump Operator 
Higher Grade 
The University followed the practice of granting promotion to the 
discontinued posts and six officials were promoted to the post of Senior 
Electrician and seven to the post of Pump Operator Higher Grade. 
The practice of granting promotion to non-existent posts would create 
avoidable financial liability to the University. Had the University acted 
promptly and amended the Ordinance, the litigations, and consequent 
promotions could have been avoided.  
 
58  ₹8,16,000 drawn as advance on 30 July 2019 for the Global Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN) 
Programme, ₹7,95,600 as interest at the rate 18 per cent till 31 December 2024 and ₹2,79,528 towards 
rent and penal rent of residential quarter 
59  During the period 2013-16 in four court cases  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
30 
Government replied (July 2025) that steps have been initiated by the University 
to make necessary amendments in the Ordinances and to place the proposal 
before the Syndicate.  
However, Audit noticed that the University is yet to implement the orders issued 
by GoK in 2011, indicating laxity on the part of the University in abiding by the 
directions of GoK. 
2.9. Examination 
2.9.1. The Examination Process of the University 
The examinations for all UG and PG programmes in the affiliated colleges are 
conducted at various examination centres as per the examination calendar 
prepared by the University. Answer scripts are evaluated at University -
designated valuation camps. After valuation, the answer scripts are tabulated at 
Pareeksha Bhavan. The process of tabulation involves adding of internal marks, 
grace marks60 and application of moderation as per the orders of Pass Board 61, 
to the marks awarded in the answer script. Grace marks and revaluation marks 
are effected before adding moderation. Mark sheets and Certificates are issued 
to students who clear the examinations. Students can apply for revaluation 
within 10 days/working days of publication of results by paying the prescribed 
fee. There is no revaluation for Multiple Choice Question (MCQ) examinations. 
The tabulation of results is done through ‘Tabulation Software’. From 
November 2022, the processes of examination and valu ation were integrated 
into the College Portal Software in a phased manner.  
To assess the integrity of the database and to verify whether internal controls 
were adequate, audit conducted analysis of database of Student Portal, College 
Portal and UG/PG Tabulation Software received from the University as of 
December 2024. The audit findings emanating from this examination are 
detailed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.9.2. Significant difference in the marks awarded in the valuation of 
answer scripts  
The evaluation process for each course conducted by the University comprises 
two components: internal assessment (20  per cent  weightage) and external 
evaluation (80 per cent weightage). Answer scripts are evaluated by examiners 
using a well -defined scheme of valuation and answer keys provided by the 
University.  
The initial evaluation of the answer scripts is done by the Additional 
Examiner62. The Chief Examiner then evaluates a minimum of 10 per cent of 
these answer scripts and re-tabulate all answer scripts. The Chairman oversees 
 
60  Participation in National Service Scheme (NSS), performance in various arts and sports activities, etc. 
61  Chairpersons of the centralised valuation camps for each discipline who are members of the Board of 
examinations collectively serve as the Pass Board for their respective disciplines. Pass Board decides 
on the moderation to be awarded, if any. 
62  in exceptional cases such as low enrolment, insufficient availability of qualified faculty etc., the Chief 
examiner/Chairman may assume the role of an Additional examiner. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
31 
the re -tabulation63 of marks, making corrections wherever discrepancies are 
identified. If no discrepancies are identified, the Chief examiner or Chairman 
may leave the marks unchanged. If discrepancies arise among the marks 
awarded by the evaluators, the marks assigned by t he most recent evaluator is 
considered final.  
Significant differences were noticed in the marks awarded by Additional 
examiner, Chief examiner and Chairman in the valuation process , as discussed 
below. 
2.9.2.1. Significant difference in marks awarded for theory papers   
Analysis of the College Portal database revealed significant variations in the 
marks awarded for theory papers by the Additional examiner and Chief 
examiner and between Additional examiner/ Chief examiner, and Chairman, as 
detailed in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5: Differences in the marks awarded by the examiners 
Exam Year Number of answer 
scripts valued 
No. of answer scripts 
with difference in the 
marks awarded by the 
Additional examiner and 
Chief examiner 
No. of answer scripts with 
difference in the marks 
awarded by Additional 
examiner/ Chief examiner 
and Chairman 
2022* 20630 3248 46 
2023 815526 75312 4076 
2024 2478846 212274 12030 
Total 3315002 290834 16152 
* valuation was done through the College Portal in a phased manner from November 2022 
(Source: Data obtained from the College Portal) 
Audit observed that out of 32,37,975 64 answer scripts evaluated by Additional 
examiner, difference in marks ranging from one per cent to 93 per cent of the 
maximum marks occurred in 2,90,834 answer scripts (8.98 per cent ) on  
re-evaluation/scrutiny by the Chief examiner. 
The re-tabulation process by Chairman culminated in changes to the marks in 
16,152 answer scripts. Analysis of these variations showed that the difference 
in marks ranged from one per cent to 90 per cent of maximum marks. In 127 
answer scripts the variation between the marks awarded by the Additional 
examiner and the Chief examiner was greater than 40 per cent of maximum 
marks. Answer scripts valued by Additional examiner/ Chief examiner when 
scrutinised by the Chairman, the variation was more than 40 per cent  in 80 
answer scripts. 
Despite the fact that answer scripts were evaluated by examiners using a well -
defined scheme of valuation and answer keys provided by the University, there 
was significant variation in marks when answer scripts were re -evaluated/ 
scrutinised.  
 
63  Re-tabulation is the process of rechecking the totalling of marks awarded to a student in his answer 
script. It does not involve re -evaluating the answers, but rather ensures that : All questions have been 
marked, marks have been correctly added, and marks have been correctly transferred to the cover page 
or result sheet. 
64 Out of 33,15,002 answer scripts valued, 77,027 were first valued by the Chief examiner. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
32 
Government stated (July 2025) that significant discrepancies between the marks 
occurred primarily due to errors in entry of marks or calculation by the 
Additional examiner which were identified and rectified by the Chief examiner 
during detailed verification. It was also assured that the audit observations were 
being taken seriously, and appropriate corrective measures will be taken. 
Further, during the Exit conference (July 2025) the Principal Secretary 
emphasised a zero error policy for the examination system.  
Audit observed that, since it is not mandatory to subject all the answer scripts 
to re-evaluation by the Chief examiner, the possibility of discrepancy if any, in 
the remaining answer scripts would remain undetected. 
2.9.2.2. Significant difference in marks awarded for Objective type 
examination   
According to various Regulations , Choice Based Credit Semester System UG 
Regulations 2019 (UG Regulations 2019) , Calicut University Choice Based 
Credit Semester System UG Regulation s 2014 (UG Regulation s 2014) and 
Choice Based Credit Semester System PG Regulation s 2019 (PG Regulation s 
2019) of the University, internal assessment for students of School of Distance 
Education (SDE) would be based on the marks obtained in ‘fill in the blank 
type’/MCQ examination conducted along with the external examination of 
SDE. The marks for the external examination and the objective type 
examination were evaluated and entered in the database separately. 
Analysis of the College Portal database revealed significant variations in the 
marks awarded by the Additional examiner/Chief examiner/Chairman as 
detailed in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Difference in the marks awarded by the examiners 
Year of the 
Examination* 
Number of answer 
scripts valued 
No. of answer scripts with 
difference in the marks 
awarded by the Additional 
examiner and Chief examiner 
No. of answer scripts with 
difference in the marks 
awarded by Additional 
examiner/ Chief examiner 
and Chairman 
2023 165944 1095 240 
2024 548712 2665 385 
Total 714656 3760 625 
* Discrepancies were not noticed during the year 2022 
 (Source: Data obtained from College Portal) 
Audit observed that out of 6,97,569 65 answer scripts, 3,760 answer scripts 
showed difference in marks ranging from four per cent to 95 per cent of the 
total marks when re-evaluated/scrutinised by Chief examiner. On re-tabulation 
of the answer scripts by the Chairman, 625 answer scripts exhibited difference 
ranging from four per cent to 92 per cent of the maximum marks. In two cases 
the mark that was originally awarded as ‘zero’ increased upto 10 marks.  
In 142 answer scripts the variation between the marks awarded by the 
Additional examiner and the Chief examiner was greater than 40 per cent of 
maximum marks. Answer scripts valued by Additional examiner/Chief 
 
65  Out of 7,14,656 answer scripts 17,087 answer scripts were first valued by Chief examiner 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
33 
examiner when scrutinised by the Chairman, the variation was more than 40 per 
cent in 13 answer scripts. 
Audit observed that  variations in marks awarded for the objective type 
examinations at different levels of valuation was unjustifiable. Since MCQ/fill 
in the blank evaluations were objective type and based on pre -determined 
answer keys, discrepancies in the marks awarded should ideally be ‘Nil’.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the differences were attributed to errors in 
entry of marks by examiners which were subsequently identified and corrected 
by Chief  examiner/Chairman. It was also stated that appropriate instructions 
will be issued to all examiners and that the existing system will be strengthened 
and additional measures taken to address the shortcomings and enhance the 
integrity of the evaluation process. 
As stated in the preceding paragraph, since it is not mandatory to subject all the 
answer scripts to re -evaluation by the Chief examiner, the possibility of 
discrepancy if any, in the remaining answer scripts would remain undetected. 
Further, lack of reval uation procedure for MCQ based examinations deprives 
the students of remedial action if he/she feels that they have been awarded lesser 
marks. Hence, the reply is not acceptable. 
2.9.3. Non-finalisation of final results in UG/PG Programmes 
During the period 2019 -2366, Pareeksha Bhavan tabulated 1,11,67,145 answer 
scripts of Under Graduate (UG) programmes and 16,78,845 answer scripts of 
PG programmes in affiliated colleges.  
On verifying the UG tabulation database, Audit observed that results of 116 UG 
answer scripts67 were yet to be finalised (December 2024), out of which , in 57 
cases the reason for non -finalisation was not recorded by Pareeksha Bhavan. 
Additionally, in the year 2023, results of two UG answer scripts were withheld 
due to non-receipt of marks from the valuation camp.  
Similarly, in PG programmes, results of 3908 answer scripts68 out of 16,78,845 
were yet to be finali sed (December 2024), of which in 3894 cases , the reason 
for non-finalisation was not seen recorded.  
Due to non-finalising of results of answer scripts, examination results were not 
declared in the above cases. Audit noticed lack of transparency in these cases, 
as no reasons were attributed by the University for not finalising the answer 
scripts.  
Government stated (July 2025) that non -finalisation of results occurred due to 
reasons such as complications in consolidating results of re -admission 
candidates transitioning from one stream to another stream, wrong registration 
of course/paper and delay in receipt of marks. The cases pointed out by Audit 
were being reviewed and necessary corrective actions taken to address the issue. 
It was also stated that measures will be implemented to ensure timely and 
accurate processing of results. Further, d uring the Exit conference (July 2025) 
 
66  Figures pertaining to the year 2024 not included as finalisation process was yet to be completed 
67  53 cases in 2019, 08 in 2020, 05 in 2021, 10 in 2022 and 40 in 2023 
68  25 cases in 2019, 38 in 2020, 37 in 2021, 119 in 2022 and 3689 in 2023 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
34 
the Principal Secretary stated that a specific time frame should be set for 
finalising the pending answer scripts. 
2.9.4. Non-awarding of moderation marks in UG/PG examinations  
The UG examination process was governed by Clause 8 of Regulations 2014 
and 2019. The provisions for awarding moderation marks in the evaluation 
process outlined in Clause 9.4 of CUC BCSS 2014, stipulates that moderation 
was to be capped at five per cent of total external marks per semester, with a 
maximum of 10 per cent per course69. If a student fails in a single subject, this 
limit can be increased to 15  per cent. The Board of Examiners concerned may 
apply moderation percentages within these limits. However, as per Clause 8.9 
of CBCSS 2019, moderation was to be granted as per the orders of the Academic 
Council. 
Tabulation of marks for UG programmes in affiliated colleges was managed 
using the CBCSS tabulation software. After the entry of marks is completed, 
the respective section finalises the marks and generates moderation statistics. 
Based on this statistics, t he Pass Board determines the applicable moderation. 
Once the Pass Board minutes is approved by the VC , the digital wing 
implements the moderation as per the approved records. If modification in 
marks is effected due to revaluation, grace marks, etc., resetting the moderation 
to zero , and if a candidate still requires moderation to pass, the necessary 
moderation is applied manually. 
For Postgraduate (PG) programmes, the Credit Semester System (CUCSS PG -
2010) was introduced in 2010 and replaced by CBCSS PG Regulations 2019 for 
2019 admissions onwards. Although these regulations do not explicitly mention 
moderation, it was applied as per Academic Council’s orders.  
The discrepancies observed in the awarding of moderation marks are detailed 
in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.9.4.1. Non-awarding of moderation marks resulting in UG/PG students 
failing examinations  
On an analysis of the data in UG tabulation database regarding moderation given 
in the regular UG examinations during audit period, Audit observed that in 
2,069 cases, students failed due to non-awarding of eligible moderation and that 
these students had secured pass marks without moderation in all subjects except 
for one subject. Despite being eligible for moderation upto 15 per cent,  no 
moderation was granted to them and hence declared to have failed.  
On verifying the remarks column in UG tabulation database, Audit observed 
that out of 2 ,069 cases, in 902 cases, moderation was not given after updating 
marks obtained in revaluation, in 148 cases, moderation was not given after 
applying Grace marks for participating in Sports, Arts festival, NSS etc., in one 
case moderation was not given after combining from SDE CUCBCSS and in 64 
cases, the moderation mark was changed to zero with the remarks ‘Edited after 
Finalisation’. In the remaining 954 cases, Audit could not ascertain the reasons 
as there was no entry in the remarks column. 
 
69  Refers to a single subject 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
35 
Similarly, analysis of PG tabulation database on moderation given in regular PG 
examinations during the audit period, revealed that six students who had secured 
pass marks in all subjects except for one were not awarded the eligible 
moderation and hence de clared as failed. On verifying the remarks column in 
PG tabulation database, it was seen that in one case moderation was not given 
after applying Grace marks 70, and in five cases, the moderation mark was 
changed to zero with the remarks ‘Edited after Finalisation’. 
Government agreed (July 2025) to the audit findings and stated that instances 
of non -award of moderation have, in several cases, directly resulted in the 
failure of candidates in the examinations. Each case is currently being examined 
and the University is  considering long -term solutions to prevent such 
discrepancies in the future. 
2.9.4.2. Declaration of failed UG/PG students as passed on award of excess 
moderation marks  
During analysis of UG tabulation database on regular students for the period 
2019-24, it was noticed that 72 students passed the examination on account of 
receipt of ineligible moderation. 
On verifying the remarks column in the database, it was noticed that in 25 cases, 
excess moderation was given after applying revaluation marks, in 42 cases, after 
application of Grace Marks, in four cases , excess moderation was given with 
the remarks ‘Edited after Finali sation’, and in one case, there was no entry in 
the remarks column and hence Audit could not ascertain the reason. 
During the analysis of details in PG tabulation database on students who 
appeared for examination during 2019 -24, Audit observed that two candidates 
passed the examination on account of receipt of excess moderation. 
Government acknowledged (July 2025) that ambiguities and differences in 
interpretation regarding applicability of moderation had led to award of excess 
moderation marks in certain cases. All instances where moderation marks 
exceeded the prescribed limits were being examined. It was also stated that , to 
prevent recurrence, clear and stringent guidelines on moderation policy will be 
re-circulated to all the branches concerned. 
2.9.5. Students passing exam papers without securing the required 
minimum external marks 
As per the CBCSS UG Curriculum 2019 and B.Voc (Bachelor of Vocation) 
Curriculum 2021 Regulations, a student must secure an aggregate P grade 
(combining external and internal marks) in each course to pass and qualify for 
a degree. A minimum of 20 per cent  marks in external evaluation was 
mandatory to pass a course, and no minimum was prescribed for internal 
evaluation. However, for integrated programmes under CBCSS (2020 
admission onwards), a minimum of 30  per cent marks in external evaluation 
was required to pass a course. 
On an analysis of the UG tabulation database, it was observed that seven 
students as detailed in Table 2.7 passed the examination despite not securing 
the minimum external marks required.  
 
70  Grace marks for participating in Sports, Arts festival, NSS etc. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
36 
 
Table 2.7: Students who passed papers without securing minimum external 
marks  
Sl. 
No. 
Registration No.* 
Course 
Year of admission 
Name of the Paper 
(Paper code) 
External mark 
obtained 
Moderation 
awarded 
Total 
Minimum external 
mark required to 
pass 
Maximum 
External mark 
1 XXXXBCM111 B.Com Taxation 2019 
Corporate Taxation 
and Tax Planning  
(BTSE604) 
13 2 15 16 80 
2 XXXXBCM114 B.Com Taxation 2019 
Corporate Taxation 
and Tax Planning 
(BTSE604) 
13 2 15 16 80 
3 XXXXBVH006 
B.Voc-Tourism and 
Hospitality 
Management 
2021 Basic Skills in 
Arabic (CARA133) 13 2 15 16 80 
4 XXXXBVH007 
B.Voc-Tourism and 
Hospitality 
Management 
2021 Basic Skills in 
Arabic (CARA133) 14 1 15 16 80 
5 XXXXBCM055 B.Com  
Co-operation  2019 
Writing For 
Academic and 
Professional 
Success 
(CEGA236) 
14 1 15 16 80 
6 XXXXBPA044 
B.Voc-Professional 
Accounting and 
Taxation 
2021 
Malayala 
Bhashayum 
Sahithyavum I 
(CMAA135) 
15 0 15 16 80 
7 XXXXISY007 Integrated MA 
Sociology 2020 Applied Botany 
(IBCD524) 15 0 15 18 60 
* Original Registration number has been masked 
(Source: Data obtained from UG Tabulation database of affiliated colleges)  
Thus, the absence of a proper validation mechanism in the tabulation and result 
processing procedures resulted in students being declared as passed the 
examination, which was in violation of the academic regulation set by the 
University. Further, Audit noticed that the student mentioned at serial number 
one in the table above was awarded Degree certificate.  
Audit further noticed that a student who had secured only 44 marks71 out of 100 
and failed in the Internship and Project paper in the sixth semester of B.Voc 
Fashion Technology was awarded Degree certificate (April 2024) by the 
University.  
In response to audit observation on awarding of Degree certificate to the  
aforementioned student, Government stated (July 2025) that the incident 
occurred due to incorrect setting of pass minimum, which was attributed to a 
software error. Further, it was stated that corrective measures were being 
considered to address the issue without affecting the student. 
  
 
71  As per B.Voc . Regulations 2014, a minimum of 50 per cent  marks is required to pass the 
Project/Internship examination. 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
37 
2.9.6. Awarding internal/external marks beyond maximum permissible 
limit 
As per the UG Regulations (2014 and 2019) for the Choice -Based Credit and 
Semester System, a student’s final mark comprises of external marks from 
semester-end examination and internal marks. The evaluation scheme allocates 
80 per cent to external examination and 20 per cent to internal assessment. The 
Board of Studies sets the minimum and maximum internal/external marks in the 
syllabus, and the University conducts external examinations for all semesters. 
Internal marks are awarded based on attendance, assi gnments/seminars/viva 
voce (viva), tests, records, and lab involvement/records. External marks 
awarded should not be beyond the maximum permissible limit. 
On an analysis of the UG tabulation database, audit observed that for the period 
2019-24 in six instances, the final external marks awarded to the students 
exceeded the maximum permissible limit. Details are given in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Details of students who were awarded external marks in excess of 
maximum permissible limit  
Sl 
No. 
Programme 
Paper Name 
Registration 
Number 
Year of 
Examination  
Internal Mark 
received 
External Mark 
received 
Maximum 
External Mark 
Permissible 
Difference 
Total Mark 
received 
1 B.Sc Physics Mathematics- 3 XXXXSPH004 2020 13 61 60 1 74 
2 B.Sc Mathematics Problem Solving 
Using C XXXXSMT027 2020 14 61 60 1 75 
3 BA Economics Individual/Group 
Activity (Project) XXXXAECR34 2021 9 41 40 1 50 
4 B.Sc 
Biotechnology  
Environmental 
Biotechnology XXXXSBT046 2021 15 73 64 9 88 
5 B.Sc 
Biotechnology  
Physical and Applied 
Chemistry Practical XXXXSBT046 2021 15 69 64 5 84 
6 Bachelor of 
Social Work Project XXXXBSW024 2022 14 61 60 1 75 
 (Source: Data obtained from UG Tabulation database) 
Further, on scrutiny of UG Tabulation database, it was observed that during the 
period 2019 -24, internal marks awarded exceeded the maximum permissible 
limit in 22 instances (Appendix 2.10).  
In response, the Government stated (July 2025) that, in five instances, external 
marks exceeded the maximum permissible limit due to application of grace 
marks and in one case due to non -adjustment of marks on re -admission of the 
student from the old schem e to new scheme. In cases where internal marks 
exceeded the maximum, the discrepancy was attributed to deficiencies in the 
software functionality. It was also informed that corrective measures were being 
taken in all such cases and effective mechanism will be implemented and strict 
action will be initiated against those found responsible for such lapses. 
2.9.7. Awarding of maximum internal marks to students without 
sufficient attendance  
As per UG Regulations 2019, UG Regulations 2014 and Integrated Programmes 
(from 2020 admission onwards), internal assessment is based on a system, 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
38 
comprising written tests, assignments, seminars, viva, and attendance in theory 
courses. 
Components with percentage of marks of Internal Evaluation of theory courses 
under UG Regulations 2014, were attendance (25 per cent) , 
assignment/seminar/viva (25 per cent) and test paper (50 per cent). Attendance 
of each course was evaluated as given in Table 2.9. 
Table 2.9: Percentage of marks allotted as per the attendance  
Attendance (in per cent) Percentage of marks allotted against the 
component ‘attendance’  
Above 90 per cent attendance 100 per cent  
85 to 89 per cent 80 per cent 
80 to 84 per cent 60 per cent 
76 to 79 per cent 40 per cent 
75 per cent 20 per cent 
(Source: CUCBCSS UG Regulations 2014) 
Internal evaluation components for theory courses under UG Regulations 2019 
and Integrated Programmes included test paper (40  per cent), assignment (20  
per cent ), seminar (20  per cent ), and classroom participation based on 
attendance (20 per cent). The details of scheme for awarding internal marks 
based on classroom participation were as shown in Table 2.10. 
Table 2.10: Details of maximum and minimum internal marks 
Split up of marks for 
Classroom participation (CRP) 
Range of 
CRP Out of 4 
(Maximum Internal mark 
20) 
Out of 3 
(Maximum internal mark 
15) 
50 per cent ≤ CRP < 75 per cent 1 1 
75 per cent ≤ CRP < 85 per cent 2 2 
85 per cent and above 4 3 
(Source: UG Regulation s 2019 and Regulations for Integrated Programmes (CBCSS 2020 
admission onwards)) 
Attendance is maintained by the Department/College 72, and as per all the three 
Regulations, a student must have at least 75 per cent attendance per semester to 
appear for examinations.  
On verification of database, Audit observed 3,206 instances where students 
were awarded full internal marks in theory papers despite having shortage in 
attendance and having availed condonation. 
The Controller of Examination replied (20 March 2025) that even if a student 
has shortage in overall attendance, there was a chance for the student to obtain 
full internal marks in some subjects.  
Subsequent to the reply given by the Controller of Examination, Audit selected 
18 colleges and test checked the attendance records pertaining to courses in 
which the students were awarded maximum internal mark s and observed that 
64 per cent of the students73 were awarded full internal marks despite not having 
minimum required attendance. Details are given in Appendix 2.11.  
 
72  University may grant condonation for shortages in attendance. Students can avail condonation of 
shortage of attendance in a maximum of  four semesters  during the entire programme (Either four 
single condonations or one double condonation and two single cond onations during the entire 
programme) 
73  454 students out of 713 students in 18 colleges 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
39 
Government stated (July 2025) that instructions were issued to colleges to 
ensure that the internal marks are awarded in proportion to each student’s 
attendance status for individual subjects. It was also clarified that the 
University’s role was limited to issuing common guidelines, and that awarding 
of internal marks was under the purview of the respective colleges and it was 
practically not feasible for the University to examine each individual case. 
University cannot absolve from its responsibility of ensuring the correctness of 
internal marks awarded by the affiliated colleges and hence the contention of 
Government is not tenable. 
2.9.8. Revaluation of Papers- difference between original and revaluated 
marks 
Revaluation process allows students to request re -evaluation of their answer 
scripts, by paying the prescribed fee. On verifying the UG/PG tabulation 
database for the period 2019-24, it was observed that in UG programmes out of 
94,959 cases where students had applied for revaluation, in 77,665 (81.79 per 
cent) cases there was difference in marks after revaluation. Out of 77,665 cases 
in which there was difference in marks on account of revaluation, in 23,837 
answer scripts ( 30.69 per cent) the variation in marks was more than 10 per 
cent, as detailed in Appendix 2.12. 
In PG courses, 24.10 per cent of revaluated answer scripts had changes in marks 
(31,966 out of 1 ,32,651 answer scripts), with 44.61 per cent (14,260 answer 
scripts) varying by over 10 per cent . Five papers were not taken into 
consideration as first evaluation or revaluation marks were marked as ‘absent’.  
As per University order 74 (19 August 2016 ), revaluation marks are awarded 
without limit. If the increase is 30 per cent or more of the maximum marks, a 
second revaluation is conducted, and the final score is the average of both 
revaluations. As per University order75 (28 January 2019) valued answer scripts 
are to be disposed of after two weeks from the date of declaration of revaluation 
results, due to which physical copies were unavailable for scrutiny by Audit. 
Hence, Audit selected random samples of answer scripts of the recently 
conducted examination which were available with the University, to 
substantiate the findings Audit arrived at on the basis of data analysis. The 
details in this regard are given in Appendix 2.13. 
The high percentage of answer scripts that showed changes in marks after 
revaluation, along with the substantial discrepancies between the first and 
second evaluations, indicates a lack of consistency and reliability in the 
valuation process. 
Government stated (July 2025) that observations made by Audit have been 
taken seriously, and further measures will be taken by appropriate 
academic/administrative bodies of the University to strengthen the system. 
 
74  U.O. No. 456/2016/PB 
75  U.O. No. 67/2019/PB 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
40 
2.9.9. Delay in conduct of examinations and publication of results  
According to Clause 6.6 of UG Regulations 2019 of the University, the 
University shall prepare a uniform calendar for conduct of examinations and 
publication of results.  
On verifying the records furnished by Pareeksha Bhavan regarding details of 
the regular examinations conducted during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24, Audit 
observed that there was delay in the conduct of 229 UG examinations and 
publication of results. Conduct of 100 examinations was delayed by 60 days or 
more76, with maximum delay ranging upto 357 days and publication of results 
of 174 examinations were delayed by 60 days or more, with maximum delay 
ranging upto 718 days.  
On a cross verification of the details of 42 examinations 77 (Appendix 2.14) in 
the UG tabulation database, Audit observed delay ranging from 69 to 576 days 
in publishing results, causing hardships to 10,03,145 students who attended 
these examinations. 
Government replied (July 2025) that significant delays occurred in the conduct 
of examinations during the period 2020-23, primarily due to the disruptions and 
backlogs resulting from Covid-19 pandemic. Since then, sustained efforts were 
taken to normalise the examination schedule and is now adhering to the 
prescribed academic calendar. 
Audit acknowledges the progress made by the University in normalising the 
examination schedule. However, in 2023 -24 also , instances were noticed 
wherein the conduct of examination was delayed by 95 days and publication of 
results by 100 days. 
2.10. Infrastructure 
2.10.1. Functioning of Centre for Computer Science and Information 
Technologies and School of Management Studies without 
mandatory Infrastructure facilities  
AICTE Approval Process Handbook lays down the norms for essential and 
desirable requirements and standards regarding land, built -up area 
requirements, Smart Board, internet connection, LCD projectors in classrooms, 
etc., for technical institutions. Deficiencies observed in the infrastructure 
facilities across the three selected CCSITs and two Schools of Management 
Studies (SMS) were as follows: 
• Though internet connection was available in the computer laboratory, 
of the selected CCSITs, this facility was not available in the classrooms 
of two 78 CCSITs, and smart boards were not available in any of the 
three CCSITs. Grievance Redressal Committees and Committees for 
SC/STs were not established in CCSIT Manjeri and CCSIT 
Aranattukara.  
 
76   As an Examination Manual was not prepared by the University, Audit considered instances in which  
the delay was 60 days or more. 
77    B.Sc, BCA, BA 
78  CCSIT CU campus and CCSIT Manjeri 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
41 
• School of Management Studies, Vatakara, was functioning in rented 
building and had no strong rooms for keeping the question 
papers/answer sheets. Online grievance redressal mechanism, internal 
complaint committee and committee for SC/ST were not established in 
Vatakara and Palakkad SMSs. 
The functioning of CCSITs and SMSs without the mandatory facilities is a 
violation of AICTE guidelines and may adversely impact the academic progress 
of students. 
Government replied (July 2025) that necessary directions were issued to the 
centres to form Internal complaint committee, Grievance Redressal cell etc., and 
CCSITs have since been provided with computers and all basic equipment such 
as projectors, smart boards etc., and purchase proposal for improvin g the 
infrastructure of centres has been sanctioned by the University. However, the 
reply was silent regarding the non-availability of strong rooms. 
2.10.2. Inadequate infrastructural facilities in Departments of the 
University 
The inadequacies noticed in the infrastructural facilities during the joint 
physical inspections (May, June 2025) with the officials of the University , in 
the eight Departments selected by Audit, are detailed below: 
• Department of Chemistry  was facing shortage of space in respect of 
storing equipment in laboratories and in conducting classes for elective 
students. The sitting space allotted for Research Scholars was 
insufficient, and seminars were conducted in the sem inar hall of 
Department of Botany and in the seminar hall of Aryabatta/ C entral 
Sophisicated Instrumentation Facility.  
• In Department of Psychology , regular classes of PG Diploma in 
Rehabilitation Psychology were conducted in seminar hall as 
classroom space was not available. Four year UG programme was not 
started due to shortage of space. No action was taken by the 
Engineering wing of the University for rectifying the floor leakage, due 
to which rest room facility at the department was nonfunctional from 
2022. 
• Department of Education was facing difficulty in conducting lecture 
classes, practicals and examinations effectively as the existing 
classrooms were too small to accommodate the students enrolled for 
the courses. Though the department had applied for Integrated Teacher 
Education Programme in three streams 79 for the academic year 2026 -
27, sufficient number of rooms and laboratories as stipulated in NCTE 
regulations were not available. 
• Integrated PG courses (BA and MA Folklore) were not started due to 
non-availability of academic space.  
• Department of Statistics was facing shortage of classrooms for 
conducting Integrated PG programme. High end computers essential 
 
79  B.Sc.Ed, BA.Ed and B.Com.Ed 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
42 
for M.Sc and Ph.D students for effectively handling high dimensional 
data were not available.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the issue of inadequate class room facilities 
in the Departments of Chemistry and Psychology were expected to be resolved 
on completion of construction of a new academic block building under PM -
USHA80 scheme.  
However, the reply was silent regarding the issues observed in other 
departments. 
2.10.3. Inadequacies in the hostel facilities provided to students  
The University provided accommodation for students. The women’s hostel 
comprising five blocks with a total intake capacity of 1805, accommodates 1678 
inmates and men’s hostel comprising seven blocks with a total intake capacity 
of 579 accommodates 529 inmates (April 2025). 
Guidelines on Safety of Students on and off campuses under the Twelfth Plan 
of University Grants Commission for HEIs require that , any physical 
infrastructure housing students should be secured by a boundary wall, the entry 
points should be manned by security guards, CCTV cameras, identity 
verification mechanism etc. Further, HEIs were to install fire safety system 
including sprinkler systems or other fire extinguishing systems, fire detection 
devices etc.  
The deficiencies noticed in the accommodation provided to the students were 
(i) CCTV cameras were not installed at the entry points of the hostel and  
(ii) Fire detection devices, stand -alone smoke alarms, devices that alert the 
presence of fire etc., were not available in any of the blocks.  
The above deficiencies revealed that the safety of students as mandated by UGC 
guidelines were not addressed by the University. 
Government stated (July 2025) that necessary steps were being initiated to 
install fire detection devices and CCTV cameras in the hostels. 
2.10.4. Inadequate safety measures  and poor maintenance of laboratory 
equipment 
According to UGC Guidelines81 (January 2011), University shall make sure that 
students wear appropriate personal protection equipment , and are aware of the 
location and mode of use of all safety and emergency equipment. In addition to 
this, Guidelines on Safety of Students on and off Campuses of HEIs issued by 
UGC (July 2018), stipulat e that HEIs should install a fire safety system and 
undertake mock drills for fire situations at least once in a semester.  
Audit conducted joint physical inspection (September -October 2024) along 
with Heads of Departments (HoDs) and officials in charge of 15 laboratories82 
 
80    Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
81    UGC Guidelines for Universities, Research Institutes and Colleges for procurement, storage, usage 
and disposal of radioactive and other Hazardous Materials/Chemicals 
82  Seven from the Department of Physics and eight from the Department of Chemistry 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
43 
of two Departments. The issues observed in these laboratories, relating to 
maintenance of equipment and infrastructure were as follows: 
• Fire detection devices, stand -alone smoke alarm devices or  fire 
extinguishers had not been installed in any of the laboratories, instead, 
fire extinguishers were installed in the corridors.  
• Seven out of eight laboratories in the Department of Chemistry were 
not equipped with eye wash and safety shower. None of the 
laboratories were equipped with fire blankets and mercury spill 
kits.  The roof of Advanced materials research laboratory collapsed in 
August 2024 and the laboratory had been nonfunctional since 
then.  The hot air oven, Rudolph Automatic Polarimeter, Differential 
scanning Calorimeter and freezer were non -operational. Research 
scholars were conducting tests outside the University due to non -
availability of high-end equipment in the Chemistry laboratories.  
• Security/safety measures such as radiation detection instruments, 
screening facility at the entry and exit points, personal dosimeters for 
users, engagement of security personnel etc., were not available in the 
Radiation Physics laboratory, where nuclear substances/radioactive 
elements were kept. Experiments in Nuclear Physics were being 
conducted outside the University as the Particle Accelerator was not 
fully functional.  
Out of the 50 research scholars who responded to the Survey, 22 were from the 
Science stream and needed laboratory facilities for their research. Ten out of 22 
research scholars (45 per cent ) responded that laboratory tests /experiments 
were conducted outside the University due to unavailability/nonfunctioning of 
equipment in the University. Seven research scholars stated that the delay in 
getting the results from the outside laboratory/insti tution had affected their 
research work. 
Government stated (July 2025) that under PM-USHA project, it was decided to 
procure essential safety equipment for all the laboratories under Department of 
Chemistry. It was also informed that Hot air oven and Polarimeter had been 
repaired, additional equipment were acquired under DST -FIST83, PM-USHA, 
and that action was being taken to repair the ceiling of Advanced materials 
research laboratory. Further, the process of providing fire safety training, mock 
drills, installing safety signage, procurement of fire extinguishers etc., are in 
planning stage. 
2.10.5. Improper maintenance of equipment in Central Sophisticated 
Instrumentation Facility  
Central Sophisticated Instrumentation Facility (CSIF) of the University houses 
19 sophisticated instruments worth ₹10.58 crore used for material 
characterisation, different physical and chemical analyses, precision chemical 
analysis and computational analysis. According to the Stores Purchase Manual 
2013, issued by GoK, the Purchase department may enter into Annual 
Maintenance Contract (AMC) for proper maintenance and trouble -free service 
 
83  Department of Science and Technology - Fund for Improvement of S cience and Technology  
Infrastructure (FIST) 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
44 
of goods, especially for sophisticated equipment and machinery which are not 
otherwise covered by warranty.  
During Joint Physical Verification conducted (November 2024) along with the 
Director, CSIF, Audit observed that, of the 19 equipment maintained in CSIF, 
only four had valid AMC. AMC was not taken/renewed for 10 equipment worth 
₹6.88 crore after the warranty period, and five of these were non-functional. Of 
the remaining five equipment, whose AMC expired between February and 
September 2024, three were not working.  
As these advanced machines are essential for data analysis, simulations and 
testing across multiple disciplines, the malfunction had not only delayed 
research progress but also affected students and faculty who rely on these 
equipment for their academic work. 
Government stated (July 2025) that at present, out of the 19 instruments , 12 
were fully functional and one was irreparable. It was also informed that steps 
were being initiated to rectify the defects in the remaining six instruments and 
for executing AMC for those instruments which were not covered under AMC. 
The reply is silent about the reason for not renewing AMCs on time. 
2.10.6. Lack of facilities for differently abled persons  
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, aims to ensure that students 
with disabilities have equal access to educational opportunities, support 
services, and infrastructure in HEIs. 
Details obtained from two CCSITs 84, two SMSs 85 and three Teacher 
Education Centres86 functioning outside the University campus revealed that 
basic facilities like ramps/rails were not available in both SMSs, facilities of 
lifts were absent in the multi -storied buildings  of the seven institutions, and 
disabled friendly toilets were not available in one CCSIT 87 and two 
SMSs (Appendix 2.15).  
During joint inspection of 27 buildings (February 2025) of the selected nine 
Departments and one individual unit/one CCSIT/other facilities 88 within the 
University campus, Audit observed non -availability of functional lifts, ramps, 
tactile paths and disabled friendly toilets (Appendix 2.15). 
Government stated (July 2025) that as part of making the University buildings 
barrier free, facility of lifts and ramps, construction of tactile paths etc ., are 
being proposed to be installed in the buildings , subject to availability of fund. 
In respect of the Centres outside the campus, it was stated that necessary steps 
will be taken to provide ramps and rails in the buildings under construction and 
all possible measures were taken to rearrange the classes on the ground floor of 
the buildings. 
 
84  CCSIT Manjeri, CCSIT Aranattukara 
85  SMS Palakkad, SMS Vatakara 
86  CUTEC Manjeri, CUTEC Sulthan Bathery, CUTEC Calicut 
87  CCSIT Aranattukara 
88  Pareeksha Bhavan, two hostels  

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
45 
2.10.7. Non-reclamation of the University land and illegal subletting of 
land by Co-operative Societies 
The Syndicate constituted (April 2012) a committee under the convenorship of 
an Advocate Sri.P M Niyas, to inquire about the allocation of the land owned 
by the University to various agencies. The Committee submitted its report with 
recommendations on 26 July 2012, for review by the Syndicate. In this report, 
the Committee recommended to reclaim 105.7 cents of land held unauthorisedly 
by six co-operative societies and two Academic Chairs89  and to frame necessary 
Rules for allotment of land to societies. Though three sub -committees90 were 
constituted subsequently by the Syndicate for studying the report and  the first 
sub-committee submitted (April 2018) an interim report, no action was initiated 
by the University to reclaim the land. 
Audit observed that the University had allotted land/buildings to Co -operative 
societies of the employees of the University on the terms and conditions in the 
agreements that (i) The lessee shall not at any time carry on or permitted to be 
carried on upon the premises for any other purpose than for the purpose for 
which it is leased and (ii) The lessee shall not transfer or sublet the premises or 
the building to any other person without written consent from the lessor. 
Audit observed that the University had allotted/leased out land and buildings to 
18 agencies such as Co-operative Societies, banks, post-offices etc., and in eight 
cases, renewal of the agreement was not done on expiry of the lease period. 
Details are given in Appendix 2.16. Audit conducted joint site verifications 
(January 2025) with the officials of the University and observed that out of the 
eight societies functioning within the University, five had violated the terms of 
the lease agreement and were gai ning undue financial benefit through illegal 
sub-letting of University properties. The details are given in Appendix 2.17.  
Government replied (July 2025) that decision on the report submitted by Niyas 
committee was still pending and action will be taken upon receipt of the report 
from the current sub-committee. Further it was stated that the land was allotted 
to the societies in the initial phase of the University, considering the 
convenience of the university community. The societies have been asked to 
provide explanations on the issues pointed out by Audit. Steps have been 
initiated to revise the lease amount in a timely mann er. Necessary inspections 
will be conducted and clarification will be provided to Audit. 
It is a matter of concern that although a Report of the Committee recommending 
reclamation of 105.7 cents of land was available since 2012, the University was 
yet to take a decision (July 2025). Land and buildings were allotted to the 
societies for providing services to the employees of the University. Audit 
observed that by sub-letting the properties of the University to third parties, the 
Co-operative societies had violated the conditions stipulated in the lease 
agreements and gained undue benefits. 
 
 
89  Established by the University to create, promote and disseminate scientific knowledge and information 
to foster integrity and ensure advancement of society. 
90  In March 2018, May 2019 and August 2024. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
46 
2.10.7.1. Unauthorised possession of University land 
Excess Land Occupied by Academic Chairs 
The Building Committee at its meeting (February 2003) recommended 
that the area of land allotted to each Academic Chair 91 instituted in the 
University be limited to 20 cents, which was approved (June 2003) by the 
Syndicate.  
Audit conducted joint site inspection (January 2025) with the officials of 
Engineering wing of the University and took measurement of land allotted 
to the Chairs. It was observed that Chair for Islamic Studies and Research 
and EMS Chair for Marxian Studies  and Research were occupying 27.2 
cents and 53.4 cents of land respectively. 
Encroachment by Chelambra Grama Panchayat 
University Engineer conducted an inspection along with the Assistant 
Security Officer and submitted (02 March 2020) a report regarding the 
unauthorised construction of a road by Chelambra Grama Panchayat (GP) 
in the University land. The GP authorities claimed that the land was 
handed over to them by the University for construction of a road , years 
ago. The Registrar had sent letters92 to the Secretary of the GP requesting 
to produce the records relating to the handing over of the land to the GP 
by the University. Apart from this no other action or follow-up were seen 
taken by the University. 
Government stated (July 2025) that Academic Chairs are part of the University 
and governed by a body formed based on the order of the University. 
Considering the audit observation, the Engineering Division was directed to 
measure and demarcate the land all otted to the Chair for Islamic Studies and 
Research. If possession of land exceeded the allotment, action will be taken to 
reclaim the surplus land. In respect of EMS Chair for Marxian Studies and 
Research, it was informed that no specific land was allotte d/earmarked for the 
Chair and that permission was given  only to utilise the land where a building 
was constructed by the Chair utilising its own fund. As such, excess land will 
be reclaimed as and when it was found essential for the purpose of the 
University. Regarding encroachment by the GP, it was stated that the GP 
authorities failed to submit documents regarding the transfer of  University land, 
and that steps will be taken to clear the encroachment after verifying the asset 
register of the University. 
The reply provided in respect of EMS Chair for Marxian Studies and Research 
indicates lack of control on the part of University on its assets. Moreover, the 
response offered by the Government is not acceptable, as the University is 
obliged to adhere to its own orders concerning  the prescribed limits of land 
allotment to each Chair. 
 
91  Seven Chairs 
92  08 May 2020 and 14 August 2020 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
47 
2.10.8. Construction of buildings without obtaining permission from 
Regulatory Bodies 
According to Rule 4 of the Kerala Panchayat Building Rules (KPBR), 2019, no 
person shall develop, redevelop, or modify any land or building without 
obtaining a permit from the Secretary. 
During 2023, the University submitted93 application forms along with drawings 
for the regularisation of its 13 buildings located within the jurisdiction of two 
Grama Panchayats 94 (GP) to the Secretaries of the respective GPs. After 
examining the records, the Secretaries of the GPs directed the University to 
submit the approval from District Town Planner. Additionally, one GP 95 
directed the University to furnish a No Objection Certificate from Fire and 
Rescue Services Department.  
In light of the above, Audit conducted a verification to ascertain whether all 
structures constructed within the University campus were assigned with 
building numbers. It was observed that, out of a total of 169 buildings, 74 had 
not been assigned building  numbers, indicating that the buildings were 
constructed without permission of the LSGI which constitutes a violation of the 
KPBR and renders these buildings unauthorised. 
The University did not maintain a Register of buildings as stipulated in KPWD 
Manual, instead, only an asset register, as per Kerala Financial Code Form 23, 
was maintained. As the asset register maintained by the Engineering wing of the 
University did not include details regarding the year of construction of the 
buildings, Audit was unable  to determine since when these buildings were 
existing without the approval of the LSGIs. 
Government stated (July 2025) that the applications were rejected by GPs 
stating that under the provisions of KPBR, it is mandatory to submit a single 
application for the regularisation of all existing buildings on a plot. Since it was 
practically impossib le to consolidate the details of all the buildings in the 
campus into a single application, particularly since some smaller buildings are 
exempt from fire safety, an exemption from the above Rule of KPBR was sought 
(September 2024) from GoK. The applicatio n is presently under the 
consideration of Town Planning Department and if exempted, it would allow 
the University to submit separate applications for each building.  
In the absence of permits from LSGIs, there is no assurance that the building s  
constructed comply with the provisions of KPBR. 
2.10.9. Non-commissioning of lifts due to non -receipt of licence from 
Electrical Inspectorate  
According to Rule 3(1) of the Kerala Lifts and Escalators Rules, 2012, every 
owner of a place intending to erect a lift/escalator shall make an application to 
the Electrical Inspector of the Electrical Inspectorate. On receipt of an 
application, the Electrical Inspector shall conduct a scrutiny and either grant or 
refuse permission within one month.  
 
93  During the period 20 February 2023 to 11 April 2023 
94  Pallikkal and Thenhipalam  
95  Thenhipalam 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
48 
Administrative and financial sanctions were granted (February-March 2023) by 
the University to install six96 lifts at a total cost of ₹146.65 lakh. The tenders for 
supply, installation, testing and commissioning with AMC for six passenger lifts 
were invited separately and selection notices issued in December 202397.  
On joint physical verification (April 2025) conducted along with Assistant 
Engineer of the Electrical wing, Audit noticed that work relating to installation 
of lift in CEAM building had not commenced and in Mathematics block was in 
process. The remaining four lifts were not functional. In this regard Audit 
observed that, 
• The Electrical Inspectorate directed that the buildings be regularised 
from the local authority and the documents proving the same be 
submitted along with the completion report for obtaining the licence  
for the lift. As regularisation of building was insisted upon, two lifts 98 
could not be made operational. 
• In CHMK building and Senate building the installation of passenger 
lifts were completed, but were not operational owing to pending 
permission from the Electrical Inspectorate due to non-availability of 
approved building plans. 
• The lift installation work at CEAM had not commenced since  the 
contractor proposed modifications to the existing lift framework after 
the award of contract. The Engineering wing prepared an estimate 
amounting to ₹16.20 lakh based on these suggestions. As 
administrative /financial sanction for the civil works were  yet to be 
obtained (August 2024) from the Syndicate, the work was yet to 
commence. 
Thus, despite signing the agreement with contractors in January 2024 and 
prescribing the period of completion as three months, none of the six lifts could 
be made operational till date (July 2025). 
Government stated (July 2025) that as regularisation of the buildings in which 
the lifts were installed could not be received from the local bodies concerned, 
an application was submitted to the Chief Electrical Inspector seeking 
permission to make the lif ts functional. In respect of lift in CEAM building , it 
was informed that the estimate for the civil works was under the consideration 
of Works Committee and after approval of the estimate and completion of civil 
work, installation of lift will be completed.  
Non-availability of lifts in multi -storied buildings pose s additional challenges 
to the differently abled. 
2.10.10. Non-compliance to conditions of contract regarding Insurance 
Policies  
As per Clause 12 (Insurance) of the Standard Bid Document relating to the civil 
works, the contractor shall provide, in the joint names of the Employer 
 
96  in Pareeksha Bhavan, Humanities Block, New building for Mathematics, CHMK Library, CEAM 
building, Senate House 
97  M/s Escon Elevators Pvt. Ltd. (five) and M/s Infra Elevators Pvt. Ltd. (one) 
98  in Pareeksha Bhavan, Humanities Block 

 
 
Functioning of University of Calicut 
49 
(University) and the contractor, insurance covers in two parts (a) from the start 
date to the completion date and (b) for the Defect Liability period. 
The value of insurance shall generally be 0.5 per cent of the contract value 
subject to a minimum of ₹ two lakh and maximum of ₹ five lakh. In the event 
of failure to obtain the insurance by the contractor within 15 days of start date, 
0.2 per cent of the contract amount shall be deducted by the employer. 
The Engineering wing implemented 529 works during 2019-20 to 2023-24 with 
an aggregate estimate cost of ₹108.46 crore. On a test check of 57 works 
executed under the Engineering wing of the University, Audit observed that the 
insurance requirement specifie d in the letter of acceptance/contract was not 
enforced and an amount of ₹3.66 lakh99 was not deducted. 
Government replied (July 2025) that from 17 February 2025 onwards , the 
conditions for providing insurance by the contractor has been incorporated in 
the selection notice and the contractors have submitted insurance policy taken 
by them.  
The reply is silent about ₹3. 66 lakh which was not deducted from the 
contractors. 
2.10.11. Non-adherence to Quality Assurance and Quality Control in civil 
works 
According to Kerala Public Works Department (KPWD) Manual Revised 
Edition 2012, a three -tier100 quality control system is to be followed , in which 
first and second -tier tests have to be carried out during the work/construction 
and third tier (technical audit) after completion of construction. The work bill 
submitted for payment was to be accompanied by Quality Control (QC) test 
results.  
On a test check of 57 works undertaken by the Engineering wing of the 
University, Audit observed that in 24 works in which the estimated amount was 
more than ₹15 lakh , no comprehensive mandatory QC tests were conducted, 
and final payment w as released without ensuring the quality of 
construction/maintenance works.  
Audit also noticed that the University did not incorporate the list of QC tests 
and their frequency in the tender documents, as specified in Section 2103 of the 
PWD Manual.  
Government stated (July 2025) that performing second -tier quality monitoring 
by maintaining a separate QC cell similar to that in KPWD was not economical 
and was impossible with the existing staff strength. Provisions of KPWD 
Manual, KPWD QC Manual and KPWD QC Lab Manual cannot be followed 
as such in the University with limited number of technical employees and lesser 
volume of work. However, possibility of second-tier quality monitoring will be 
explored.  
 
99    0.2 per cent of the contract amount 
100  First-tier mandatory for all projects with estimated cost above ₹15 lakh was to be done by the 
Contractor at his own cost, second-tier on a random basis by the QC wing of Engineering Department, 
third tier (Technical Audit) for projects with estimated cost more than ₹five crore was to be conducted 
by an external agency/expert empanelled for the purpose within six months of completion of a project. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
50 
The explanation citing inadequate manpower as a reason for not conducting the 
required Quality Assurance checks on various works undertaken by the 
University Engineering Department is not justifiable. 
2.11. Recommendations 
• The University may ensure that defined timelines and milestones are 
fixed for achieving Strategic Plan of the University along with 
mechanism for monitoring the progress of achievement. 
• Guidelines issued by UGC /Regulatory bodies may be adhered to and 
amendments made may be placed before the immediate Syndicate 
meeting for timely incorporation into the University’s Regulations. 
Further, Government may prescribe a timeline for such 
incorporations.  
• In order to safeguard academic standards and protect students ’ 
interests, University may ensure that programmes offered are 
recognised by the UGC. 
• Government may ensure that the University’s accounts are duly 
prepared and submitted to the Kerala State Audit Department (KSAD) 
within the stipulated timeframe, and that the KSAD completes the 
audit in accordance with the prescribed schedule. 
• Government and the University may ensure strict compliance with the 
conditions prescribed for receiving funds from the UGC and other 
centrally sponsored schemes. Additionally, proper monitoring 
mechanisms should be in place to oversee the utilisation of th ese 
funds. 
• Government may , in consultation with the University ensure that 
services of adequate number of qualified faculties are available in its 
institutions. 
• University may consider implementing an objective and rigorous 
answer script evaluation system and hold evaluators accountable for 
laxity in valuation process and also incorporate adequate checks in the 
tabulation software to ensure that moderations are pr ovided to 
students uniformly as per regulations. 
• University may ensure that all institutions under its jurisdiction meet 
at least a minimum set of infrastructure standards, which must be 
outlined based on the current guidelines of the UGC and other 
relevant regulatory bodies. 
• University may formalise agreements with all parties to whom land 
and buildings were leased out. These agreements must include 
provisions for the periodic revision of rent or lease rates to ensure 
alignment with prevailing market conditions. 
 
 

 
 
 
  
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 

 
 
 
 

 
 51 
CHAPTER III 
DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATION 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
 
3.1. Introduction 
The Kerala State Co -operative Societies Act 1969 (KCS Act) was enacted on 
15 May 1969, with a view to providing for the orderly development of Co -
operative movement in the State, in accordance with the Directive Principles of 
State Policy enunciated in the  Constitution of India. The Act provided for the 
establishment, registration, operation, regulation, supervision and management 
of co-operative societies in Kerala. In exercise of the powers conferred under 
Section 109 of the KCS Act, the Government formulated the Kerala  
Co-operative Rules 1969 (KCS Rules) on 14 July 1969. 
The co-operative societies in the State were engaged in various promotional 
activities, particularly in agricultural credit, public distribution system, 
distribution of agricultural commodities, health, education 
including professional education, housing, agro processing, Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe (SC/ST) sector, women development etc., and served the 
people through diverse economic activities. The Department of Co -operation, 
Government of Kerala (Department) was responsible for the disbursement of 
assistance and loans to co -operative institutions for implementing various 
schemes, monitoring the utilisation of funds, recovery of principal/interest on 
loans etc. In addition to the above, the Department also discharged statutory 
functions like audit/inspection of co-operatives, providing assistance in the form 
of share, loan and subsidy, liquidation/winding up of non-functioning societies, 
dispute redressal, conduct of elections to the committee of a society etc. 
The status of co-operative societies in the State as on 31 March 2024 is depicted 
in Chart 3.1. 
Chart 3.1: Status of 16,39 3 co-operative societies  under the control of the 
Department in the State as on 31 March 2024 
 
 
12416, (76%)
3291, (20%)
686, (4%)
Functional Non-functional Under Liquidation

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
52 
The administrative control of these societies was vested with the Registrar of 
Co-operative Societies (RCS). Further, there were 6,911 co-operative societies 
regulated by other Departments which were under the administrative control of 
respective functional registrars 101. Audit functions of all the above societies 
were entrusted with the Director of Co-operative Audit (DCA), who reported to 
the RCS. 
The organisational set up of the functionaries under the Department is shown in 
Appendix 3.1.         
3.2. Audit Objectives, criteria, scope and methodology 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was conducted to assess 
whether; 
• the provisions of Co -operative Societies Act/Rules were adhered to in 
the regulation of co-operative societies; and 
• the accountability and monitoring mechanisms were in place and 
working effectively as envisaged in the Act. 
The audit observations were benchmarked against the criteria derived from the 
KCS Act and its amendments, KCS Rules and its amendments and various 
notifications and circulars issued by the Government and Department from time 
to time. 
The SSCA covered the period from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 and was conducted 
from 04 July 2024 to 28 February 2025.  Audit team visited the Office of the 
Department in Government Secretariat, offices of RCS and two functional 
registrars viz., Director of Coir Development and Director of Dairy 
Development as well as the district and taluk level institutions in four test 
checked districts, Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Thrissur and Kannur. The 
district and taluk level institutions were selected  using Simple Random 
Sampling without Replacement Method (Appendix 3.2). The extent of 
compliance with the provisions of the Act  in exercising administrative control 
over the societies, the functioning of co-operative audit102 mechanism, extent of 
utilisation of annual plan funds/G oI funds and lapses in monitoring were 
covered in Audit.  
Audit methodology included scrutiny of files/records and collecting response of 
auditee institutions to the audit enquiries issued. Audit also conducted joint 
physical verification of 72103 co-operative societies in the test checked districts 
along with departmental officials, to examine whether financial assistance 
provided by Government was utilised for the intended purposes.  
The Entry Conference of the SSCA was conducted on 03 July 2024 with the 
Secretary of the Department, in which the audit objectives, scope and criteria 
were discussed. The Exit conference of the SSCA was conducted with the 
Special Secretary of the Department on 23 July 2025, wherein the audit findings 
 
101  Director of Industries, Director of Handloom, Director of Coir Development, Director of Khadi and 
Village Industries, Director of Dairy Development, Director of Fisheries 
102  As the CA report includes reference to audit of Director of Co-operative Audit also, the term ‘Audit’ 
with ‘A’ in upper case, specifically refers to audit of Accountant General 
103  Thiruvananthapuram-16, Alappuzha-16, Thrissur-14, Kannur-26 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
53 
were discussed in detail. The reply of the Government has been obtained (July 
2025) and suitably included in the Report.  
3.3. Impediments to Audit and limitation of scope of audit due to non-
production of records and denial of access to database by the 
Department  
All through the course of the SSCA, Audit encountered persistent non -
production of essential records/ critical information by the au dited institutions 
at all levels. Audit was denied access to the dump database of the Integrated Co-
operative Database Management System (ICDMS), which was the online 
platform developed as part of the scheme for modernisation of the Department. 
The platfor m catered to the registration and amendment of bylaws of co -
operative societies, status of audit of co -operative societies a nd its follow -up, 
etc. Even though 345 Audit Requisitions/ enquiries were issued to the offices 
under RCS, only 104 were responded to . The response rate to the audit 
observations on the regulatory mechanism in the co-operative sector of the State 
stood at a meagre 30 per cent, with the remaining requisitions left unanswered, 
despite repeated reminders. 
The aforecited non-production of records by institutions was a violation of the 
provisions of Section 18(1) of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG)'s 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, which empowered the 
CAG to call for any accounts, books, papers and other documents which dealt 
with or formed the basis of transactions to which his duties in respect of audit 
extended, and to put questions or make observations, to the person in charge of 
the office for the preparation of any account or report. Section 18(2) of the above 
Act advocated that the person in charge of any office or department, the 
accounts of which have to be inspected and audited by the CAG, was to afford 
all facilities for such inspection and comply with requests for info rmation 
expeditiously, in complete form. 
The Department’s failure to comply with th e statutory obligation of furnishing 
above-mentioned records and denial of access to system resulted in limitation 
of scope with respect to verification of audit findings, assessment of statutory 
compliance, extent of  fund utilisation, systemic analysis and evaluation of 
follow-up actions.  
As Audit relies upon evidence in the form of data, information and documents 
to shape its findings and resultant conclusions, persistent reluctance of auditee 
in providing sufficient and appropriate evidence in support of compliance to the 
provisions in the Act/Rules and in furnishing response to audit observations on 
deviations noticed, raises concerns on the Department’s transparency and 
accountability mechanisms, besides carrying the risk of suppression of material 
facts by auditee. The matter was taken up with the Special Secretary and Chief 
Secretary vide DO letters dated 19 December 2024 and 22 January 2025 
respectively and was reiterated in the Exit conference held on 23 July 2025.  
Audit Findings 
3.4. Delay in registration of co-operative societies 
As per Section 6 of KCS Act, an application for the registration of a co-operative 
society was to be made to the Registrar along with the required information 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
54 
pertaining to the society. If the Registrar was satisfied that the application has 
complied with the provisions of the Act and Rules and all other requirements, 
he could register the society within a period of 90 days 104 from the date of 
receipt of the application.  
Section 7(2) of the Act stipulated that in case of refusal of an application, the 
Registrar was to communicate the order of refusal together with the reasons 
thereof, within seven days of receipt of the application. An application for 
registration of a society was to be disposed of by the Registrar within 90 days 
from the date of receipt of the application. 
Verification of details of registration in the test checked districts during  
2019-24 revealed that there was delay in registration as well as in 
returning/rejecting applications. District -wise details of processing of 
applications for registration of societies are given in Table 3.1.  
Table 3.1: District-wise details of registration of societies during 2019-24 
Particulars Thiruvanan-
thapuram Alappuzha Thrissur# Kannur Total 
No. of applications received 122 65 33 70 290 
No. of applications 
rejected/returned/pending 17 21 4 Nil 42 
No. of societies registered 105 44 29 70 248 
No. of societies registered after 90 days 79 31 13 26 149 
Average delay in registration (in days)  156 199 194 39 - 
# Date of receipt of application for registration in respect of 11 cases were not furnished.  
(Source: Details furnished by respective Joint Registrars) 
Audit observed that, 
• The registration w as provided after 90 days in respect of 149 (60 per 
cent) out of 248 societies with a delay ranging from 91 to 1007 days. 
• Audit verified 25 of these 149 registered cases, in which registration was 
granted after 90 days. The timelines prescribed in the Act/Rules were 
not adhered to in 15 105 cases due to the delay on the part of Joint 
Registrars (JR)/Assistant Registrars (AR) in processing of applications. 
• In nine106 out of 11 test checked cases of returning applications, delay 
ranging from 94 to 509 days was observed. 
Government stated in the Exit conference (July 2025) that the process of 
registration was carried out entirely through the ICDMS web application. 
However, t here were systemic problems in capturing data on account of 
improper Software Requirement Specification (SRS) resulting in incorrect data. 
It was also stated that development of new version of ICDMS Version 2.0 was 
in progress, and the registration process would be streamlined with no delay. 
Audit had verified the physical files of registration and observed the delay on 
the part of the ARs/JRs in processing applications. The extent of delay could 
have been avoided and timely processing of applications facilitated by the 
officials concerned. 
 
104  Reduced to 60 days vide KCS (Amendment) Act 2023 w.e.f April 2024 
105  JR, Thiruvananthapuram (7), JR, Alappuzha (5), JR, Kannur  (1), JR, Thrissur (2) 
106  JR, Thiruvananthapuram (2), JR, Alappuzha (7) 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
55 
3.5. Classification of societies 
Section 80(1) of the KCS Act, empowered the Government to classify the co -
operative societies according to their type and financial position. Rule 182(1) of 
the KCS Rules, 1969, prescribed detailed classification of societies 107 in the 
State with effect from 01 July 1974. The classification was to be revised once 
every three years, with effect from November 2014.  
Examinations for recruitment conducted without ascertaining current 
classification of societies 
Rule 188 of the KCS Rules stipulated every society to adopt the staff pattern 
indicated in Appendix III to the Rules, according to the type and class to which 
it belonged. The Co-operative Examination Board (Board) was responsible for 
conducting examinations to select eligible candidates for filling up of vacancies 
in the societies covered under Section 80B of the KCS Act.  According to Rule 
182 of the KCS Rules, such societies were to report the vacancies along with 
other details viz., latest classification , sanctioned strength as per the 
classification, post with number of vacancies etc., to the Board in the prescribed 
proforma.  
The RCS issued (April 2013) Guidelines amending conditions for classification 
of Primary Credit Co -operative Societies, Primary Agricultural Credit  
Co-operative Societies, Farmers’ Service Co -operative Banks, Employees 
Credit Co -operative Societies, Regional Banks and Rural Banks as various 
classes108, based on parameters such as share capital, deposits, loan arrears, 
profit, audit classification, loan recovery, etc. 
As a test check, Audit scrutinised the applications submitted to the Board by 12 
societies109 in Thiruvananthapuram during 2022 -23, for conducting 
examinations to fill up the posts of Junior Clerk and Systems Administrator.  
Since the RCS had not classified all the societies once in every three years as 
per instructions issued in April 2013, Audit collected the details of working 
capital, deposits, outstanding loan amount, classification by the DCA etc. , as 
stipulated in the proforma, from Audit Reports 110 of 12 societies sourced from 
Assistant Director’s(AD) office Thiruvananthapuram and assessed the current 
classification of these societies. 
The exercise revealed that, of the above 12 societies, the classes of four societies 
were to be downgraded and that of one society, be upgraded. There was no 
change in the classification of the remaining seven societies.  Audit compared 
the sanctioned strength reported by the societies with the strength as per norms, 
in the case of five societies with change in classification, as given in Table 3.2. 
 
107  as in Appendix III to the KCS Rules, which included the sanctioned list of staff to be employed in each 
class of society.  
108  Class I – Super Grade, Class I – Special Grade, Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, Class V, Class VI 
and Class VII 
109  Pappanamcode State Co -operative Bank ( SCB) (No. 1108), Madhavavilasom SCB (No. 1347), 
Anchuthengu SCB (3166), State Planning Board Staff CS (4352), Commercial Taxes Department Staff 
Housing CS (4385), Chembur SCB (T202), Nagaroor SCB (T219), Kerala University Employees CS 
(T233), Karavaram SCB (T324), Muttathara SCB (T413), Police CS (T696), Vettoor SCB (T728) 
110  pertaining to the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
56 
Table 3.2: Details of staff strength reported by societies in excess of strength as 
per norms 
Name of society 
Class 
reported by 
the society 
Sanctioned 
strength as per 
classification 
reported by 
society 
Classification 
worked out by 
Audit 
Sanctioned 
strength as 
per norms 
Karavaram SCB Class II 18 Class V 7 
Chembur SCB Class III 16 Class V 7 
Pappanamcode SCB Class II 18 Class V 7 
Kerala State Commercial Tax Department 
Staff Housing Co-operative Society Class I 26 Class III 16 
Police Co-operative Society Class I 26 Class I Special 
Grade 32 
(Source: Details furnished by the Board and data consolidated by Audit from the Audit Reports      
of AD, Thiruvananthapuram) 
Thus, the Examination Board accepted the last available classification of the 
society and not the one as on the date of application.  Hence, Audit could not 
ascertain whether the posts required to be filled in were in consonance with the 
staff pattern as per the latest classification.  Persistent excess/deficient staff 
strength in a society point to arbitrariness in complying with service conditions, 
which may adversely affect the overall functioning of societies. 
Government stated (July 2025) in the Exit conference that the proposal of RCS 
seeking revision in classification was pending with the Government. The RCS 
explained that a software, Co-operative Inspection Management Application 
(CIMA) was developed with effect from 01  March 2025, for monitoring the 
management of the societies including the classification, for the first time in the 
country. 
3.6. Functioning of Co-operative Vigilance 
3.6.1. Non-appointment of a Police officer as Co -operative Vigilance 
Officer 
Section 68A of KCS Act envisaged appointment of a Vigilance Officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Inspector General of Police with powers to inquire 
into and investigate the cases of misappropriation, corruption and any other 
major irregularity in the societies as may be referred to him by the RCS.  
Contrary to the above, Audit observed that, during the period April 2019 to July 
2024, Additional Registrar/JRs in the Office of the RCS were vested with 
additional charge of  Vigilance Officer, instead of a person holding the rank of 
Deputy Inspector General of Police. Government appointed a Superintendent of 
Police as Co -operative Vigilance Officer in August 2024.  As such, the 
Department was deprived of the technical competence of a police official as 
Vigilance Officer with powers to enquire and investigate cases of 
misappropriation, corruption and any other major irregularity in the societies, 
during the period.  
Government stated (July 2025) that the appointment of IPS officer of DIG rank 
was a difficult procedure due to dearth of personnel and that currently an IPS 
officer of SP rank was posted as Vigilance Officer based on Government policy 
decisions (August 2024). It was also stated that FIRs were being registered for 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
57 
complaints at field level itself and if police intervention was needed, the 
complaints were forwarded to the Vigilance Officer.  
Audit noted that the charge of Vigilance Officers being held by the ARs/JRs 
during the audit period was against the provisions of KCS Act.  As long as the 
extant rules have not allowed the appointment of an officer not below the rank 
of DIG of Police as Co -operative Vigilance Officer, the legality of inquiry 
reports submitted by officials other than the above was likely to be challenged 
in judicial forum. 
3.6.2. Delay in completion of inquiry on vigilance cases and lack of 
follow-up action on vigilance reports 
As per Rule 66A of KCS Rules, the Co -operative Vigilance Officer shall 
inquire, investigate and report to the Registrar on matters of corruption, 
misappropriation, fraud, manipulation, tampering or destruction of records, etc., 
as referred to him by the Registrar. The inquiry or investigation was to be 
ordinarily completed by the Vigilance Officer within a period of three months, 
which may be extended for a further period of three months by the Registrar, if 
satisfied by the interim report submitted by the Vigilance Officer.  
As per the Circular issued (May 2008) by RCS, the Vigilance section in RCS 
was to maintain a register in the prescribed format to monitor cases referred to 
the Co-operative Vigilance Officer and monitor the progress of each case every 
three months. 
During the period 2019 -24, the Co-operative Vigilance Officer submitted 247 
inquiry reports to the RCS of which remedial action was recommended in 185 
cases, including action under Indian Penal Code( IPC)/Code of Criminal 
Procedure (CrPC). One hundred and ninety five cases were submitted to RCS 
with a delay ranging from six months to more than five years.  
The Vigilance section under the RCS did not maintain registers to monitor the  
cases referred to the Vigilance Officer and progress of action on inquiry reports 
of the Vigilance Officer. Of the 185 reports in which action was recommended, 
143 reports were forwarded to various sections in the office of the RCS/JRs .  
Fifty seven of these reports were forwarded with a delay ranging from 31 to 690 
days.  Details with respect to forwarding of the remaining 42 reports were not 
available. Test check of 11 out of these 42 cases revealed that in 10 cases action 
under IPC/CrPC was recommended , indicating serious  offences like 
misappropriation, fraud, embezzlement etc. , which demanded expedient 
remedial action.   
Government acknowledged (July 2025) the delay in reporting the action taken 
on vigilance reports by administrative sections and conveyed that directions 
were circulated (December 2024) to review vigilance reports and maintain a 
register to monitor the cases referred to Co-operative Vigilance Officer.  
It was also stated that in 41 out of 185 vigilance reports, compliance reports 
were received from JRs and in the remaining cases, recommendations of 
Vigilance Officer were being acted upon by the JRs. The above fact was not 
acceptable, as the reply was silent on the 42 vigilance cases which were not seen 
forwarded to other sections for initiating action.  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
58 
3.7. Irregular grouping of societies as Dormant/Records Not Available 
and ineffective action on non-functioning societies 
During the course of Audit, it was observed that the co-operative societies were 
classified as ‘Dormant’111 or ‘RNA’112 and retained in the same status for more 
than 40 years. The KCS Act, 1969, and the Rules framed thereunder did not 
contain any definition/mention or explicit recognition of the above terms, nor 
prescribe any statutory procedure or course of action to be specifically taken in 
respect of such categories of societies.  
During the Exit conference (July 2025), Government agreed that usage of terms 
‘dormant’ and ‘RNA ’ was non -statutory and informed that administrative 
circulars have been issued, detailing procedures for reactivating or winding up 
such societies.  
3.7.1. Absence of follow-up action on ‘Dormant’ societies 
Section 71 of the KCS Act, laid down the provision for winding up of a society, 
after holding inquiry under Section 65 or conducting inspection under Section 
66 or on receipt of application requesting wind up from members of the society. 
The Circular issued (October 1972) by RCS reiterated that the existence of large 
number of bad and dormant societies would bring disrepute to the co-operative 
movement and that it was necessary to pursue vigorous action to revive or 
liquidate such societies.  
Verification of details of dormant societies in the test checked Taluks revealed 
that there were 336 dormant societies pending revival/liquidation as of March 
2024. The status of dormant societies was as given in Table 3.3.  
Table 3.3: Status of dormant societies as of March 2024 in test checked Taluks 
Name of Taluk 
No. of dormant 
societies pending 
liquidation 
No. of 
dormant 
societies whose 
period of 
dormancy was 
known  
Year from 
which period 
of dormancy 
started  
No. of dormant 
societies in which 
liquidation 
proposal was 
submitted to JR 
No. of 
societies in 
which no 
liquidation/ 
winding up 
action was 
initiated 
Nedumangad 104 104 2016 to 2022 16 88 
Neyyattinkara 43 4 1998 to 2018 4 39 
Chengannur 7 7 2008 to 2019 0 7 
Mavelikkara 20 20 1995 to 2021 0 20 
Kunnamkulam 18 18 1977 to 2018 0 18 
Mukundapuram 39 39 1977 to 2022 0 39 
Payyanur 53 53 2001 to 2019 3 50 
Taliparamba 52 17 1996 to 2023 11 41 
Total 336 262  34 302 
(Source: Information consolidated from data furnished by AR Offices)  
It was observed that, 
• In respect of 34 cases pertaining to four selected Taluks, even though 
liquidation proposal was submitted by the AR to the JR, no further action 
was initiated by the JR to revive/ liquidate and/or cancel the registration 
 
111  Societies which were not functional or not having any regular transactions as per the General Wing, 
Office of the RCS 
112  Records Not Available as per DCA 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
59 
of the societies. In the case of  302 societies lying dormant for over a 
total span of 46 years (1977 to 2023), no action has been initiated to 
revive/liquidate/cancel the registration of these societies.  The delay in 
initiating the liquidation procedures would lead to loss of records, 
difficulties in recouping the money due from societies etc., which would 
further undermine the liquidation process. 
• Out of 336 dormant societies, the date from which dormant was not 
available in 74 113 cases (22 per cent), which indicated lack of regular 
monitoring of the functioning of the societies by the RCS. 
Government stated (July 2025) that a comprehensive strategy for timely 
liquidation of societies was being carried out since September 2024 , which 
included systematic training of officers and fortnightly review. 
However, the reply was silent on reasons for non -submission of proposals for 
liquidation/revival.  
3.7.2. Absence of follow-up action on RNA societies 
Circulars issued by the Government in May 1974 and December 1975, in 
allegiance with Section 65 of KCS Act, imparted the right to issue summons to 
societies for production of records for Audit. If the societies did not produce 
records even after issue of summons under Section 65, the DCA was to initiate 
action to liquidate the societies and then transfer the file to the office of the 
Registrar for further action.  In case of societies for which records were not 
available (RNA), RCS could initiate steps under  Section 71(2) of the Act to 
wind up the societies. 
Verification of data on societies classified as RNA in the offices of the JD in the 
test checked districts revealed that there was a total of 3,355 114 such societies, 
awaiting necessary action of winding up. Age-wise data on ‘RNA societies’ as 
of March 2024 are shown in Chart 3.2. 
Chart 3.2: Status of ‘RNA societies’ as of March 2024 in selected districts 
* As the year from which RNA was not available, year of last audit was considered. 
(Source: Data furnished by JD Offices) 
 
113  Neyyattinkara (39), and Taliparamba (35) 
114  Thiruvananthapuram (1375), Alappuzha (682), Thrissur (755) and Kannur (543) 
      (1,477 societies under the Department of Co-operation and 1,878 societies under functional registrars) 
216
137
431
6063
141 159
319
96 82
176
401
81 98
155
209
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Less than five years Six to 10 years 11 to 20 years More than 20 years
No. of societies
District :
No. of RNA societies as on 31 March 2024
Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Thrissur* Kannur
Year from which RNA

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
60 
In Thiruvananthapuram, out of 1,375 RNA societies, there were 531 societies 
for which details of year of last audit/year from which RNA were not traceable. 
The JDs in Alappuzha, Thiruvananthapuram and Thrissur districts did not 
recommend to the JRs concerned to revive or wind up the RNA societies. Even 
though JD, Kannur had sent intimation to the respective JR for winding up these 
societies, no conclusive action was taken in this direction, and the societies 
continued to figure in the RNA list.  
The major reasons for delay in process of revival/liquidation were cited as non-
completion of audit, non-availability of status of accounts due to which liability 
could not be fixed, undue delay in completing inquiry/inspection under Sections 
65/66, etc. 
The absence of regular inspection of all societies by departmental officials (as 
mentioned in Paragraph No.3.19.1 of this Report) and non-submission of annual 
returns by the societies to RCS as mandated by Section 66C of the KCS Act, 
point to the absence of effective monitoring and regulation system in the 
Department.  
Government stated in the Exit conference (July 2025) that the liquidation of 
societies was a lengthy process and the Department was short of qualified staff 
to do this. Also, the Department was conducting training programmes like 
‘Mikavu’ for staff to enable faster liquidation process as well as fortnightly 
reviews. Justifying delay in liquidation process citing shortage of staff was not 
acceptable as impediments in liquidation process need to be addressed on 
priority. 
3.8. Lack of comprehensive  data on co -operative societies in 
Management Information System  
The Co -operative Audit Monitoring and Information System (CAMIS) 
launched in September 2021 served as the central digital platform for accessing 
audit related information on co -operative societies in Kerala. Currently, the 
CAMIS portal displays data pertai ning exclusively to those societies 
audited/auditable by the office of the DCA. The co-operative societies that have 
not been audited were not represented in the system, resulting in a significant 
gap in public access to comprehensive and updated data. In the case of societies 
whose last audit was conducted many years ago, CAMIS displayed data as on 
the date of last audit with no updates or remarks, thereby making the information 
outdated. Further, the portal did not provide insight into extent of delay in audit, 
current operational status of societies, irregularities in the functioning of the 
societies etc.  
Audit also observed variation in data uploaded in CAMIS with the number 
statement115 prepared by the Statistical wing in the office of the RCS. The total 
number of functional societies in the State as per the records of RCS as of March 
2024 differed116 from that shown in CAMIS. This was indicative of the absence 
of a reliable and comprehensive database of societies in the State.  
 
115  Type-wise and district-wise information of Co-operative societies in the State under the administrative 
control of the RCS. 
116  The number of functional Societies as per number statement of the RCS was 12,416, whereas it was 
displayed as 12,893 in CAMIS. 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
61 
Government stated in the Exit conference (July 2025) that attempts were 
underway to make the entire audit process online so that real time information 
on societies could be made available. It was also stated that they were working 
on a new version, CAMIS 2.0 to rectify the issues i n the old version of the 
software.  
3.9. Delayed action on Special Reports  
As per Section 64(10) of the KCS Act, 1969, if the result of audit held under 
Section 63 disclosed any serious defect in the working of a society, the DCA or 
the person authorised by him was to communicate the same forthwith to the 
RCS for immediate further action. In cases where irregularities of criminal 
nature were observed during the course of audit, DCA/ Joint Director (JD) was 
to initiate action to register the case, and the action taken along with the 
recommendation for any further action to be initi ated was to be communicated 
to the RCS/JR concerned, within seven days. These irregularities of serious 
nature which chiefly related to violation of CrPC/IPC Sections were 
communicated through Special reports.  
As per the information furnished by the selected offices of JDs in Audit wing, 
there was delay in forwarding Special reports to the respective offices of JRs in 
General wing, as detailed in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Details of delay in forwarding of Special reports from offices of JDs to 
offices of JRs  
District 
No. of Special reports 
received in the offices of 
JDs in 2019-24 
No. of Special reports 
forwarded to offices of 
JRs within one month 
No. of delayed cases 
(Range of Delay)  
Alappuzha 17 8 7* (1-10 months) 
Kannur 150 97 53 (1-10 months) 
Thiruvananthapuram 24 17 7 (1-21 months) 
Thrissur 147** 86 53 (1-22 months) 
Total 338 208 120 
* In two cases, the reports were not forwarded to the Office of the JR 
** Date of receipt/date of forwarding missing in eight cases  
(Source: Information furnished by Offices of JDs) 
Verification of the action taken on the Special reports received during the period 
2019-24 at the selected JRs’ Offices revealed the following: 
• Fifteen Special reports were forwarded to the JR’s office Alappuzha by 
JD concerned, for necessary action. In 11 of these reports, 
inquiry/inspection was continuing for a period ranging from 10 to 49 
months. In two cases, revenue recovery (RR) was pending since 202 0, 
due to non-submission of application by JR through RR portal.  
• The JD, Thiruvananthapuram forwarded 25 Special reports to the JR’s 
office. The details of action taken in these reports were not furnished by 
the JR’s office.  Verification of three Special report files 117 made 
available to Audit revealed delay in finalising the cases and absence of 
conclusive action to fix responsibility and/or remedy the loss.  
 
117  Files relating to T976 Ottoor SCB , T 1884 Adimalathura Rural Development CS Ltd . and T 1837 
Anchalikkonam Residence Welfare CS 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
62 
• Though JR , Kannur reported that action has been initiated on 153 
Special reports, details were not furnished. The RCS stated (July 2025) 
to Audit that of 147 Special reports received, enquiry under Section (u/s) 
65 was ordered in 48 cases, inspection u/s 66 was ordered in 30 cases 
and explanation sought in respect of 69 cases.  
• Of the 139 Special reports received by JR , Thrissur, inquiry/inspection 
was going on in 113 cases. Among these, the period of 
inquiry/inspection ranged from seven to 37 months in 75 cases. 
As the Special reports tend to highlight the frauds, misappropriations and other 
significant defects in the functioning of co-operative societies, delay in resorting 
to corrective actions would affect the financial stability of societies.  
Government stated in the Exit conference (July 2025) that specific interventions 
were being made through IT systems where registers are done away with and 
Special reports get forwarded to the next level automatically after a certain 
period.  
3.10. Lapses in conducting inquiry/inspections under Sections 65, 66 
and 68 of the Act 
In accordance with Section 65 of the KCS Act, an inquiry by the Registrar into 
the constitution, working and financial condition of the society, was to be 
completed within a period of six months.  Section 66(1) of the KCS Act 
empowered the Registrar to supervise the working of every society for issuing 
necessary directions to the society or its officers to take action as specified in 
the order within the time limit mentioned.  
If any defects are noticed on the basis of inquiry/inspection report u/s 65/66 
inquiry, then inquiry u/s 68(1) is carried out to fix the surcharge118. On the basis 
of 68(1) report, notice shall be issued to the parties and hearing conducted by 
the JR and if necessary, a surcharge order u/s 68(2) would be issued by the JR, 
providing the details of the case and the amount to be recovered from each party. 
Verification of inquiry/inspection cases initiated under Sections 65,  66 and 68 
in the offices of the JR in selected districts during the period 2019 -24 revealed 
that there was delay in completion of inquiry/inspection as detailed in  
Appendix 3.3. 
The following observations were made: 
• No inquiry or inspection registers were maintained in the selected 
AR/JR offices. In the absence of registers, Audit relied upon data 
furnished by the JRs, consolidated on the basis of available records/files. 
• Of the 300 inquiry/inspection cases initiated by Thiruvananthapuram, 
Alappuzha, Thrissur and Kannur JRs, surcharge order u/s 68(2) was 
issued and/or action completed only in respect of 54 cases. In respect of 
197 pending cases in four districts 119 involving a money value of 
₹343.47 crore (69 cases), no conclusive action has been taken to rectify 
 
118  Money, property, interest, cost or compensation to be repaid or restored from the party responsible for 
causing loss to the society. 
119  Thiruvananthapuram (55), Alappuzha (32), Thrissur (78), Kannur (32) 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
63 
the defects even after a period ranging from three months to over five 
years. 
• Even though orders to repay or restore the money/property were issued 
post inquiry under Section 68(2) in 31 cases, no follow-up actions were 
taken to ensure that the loss was made good. These cases were not 
included in  the list of inquiry/inspection cases , in the monthly DO 
Narrative to the higher authorities. This left the Department without any 
mechanism to watch the status of recovery of amount due in these cases.  
• Scrutiny of 41 120 inquiry/inspection files provided to Audit revealed a 
series of lapses, viz., repeated extension of inquiry/inspection period, 
extensions granted without submission of interim report 121, delay in 
initiating 68(1) inquiry, inquiry/inspection stopped without ascertaining 
the actual status of court cases, not finalising cases despite repeated 
hearing sessions held, no follow -up action initiated on order u/s 68(2), 
etc.  
Government replied (July 2025) that the Department has implemented  
Co-operative Inspection Management Application (CIMA) with effect from 
01 March 2025. All enquiries are assigned specific timelines and their progress 
can be monitored, thereby streamlining the completion of statutory inquiries and 
inspections without delay.  
The Department had not prioritised or prepared a road map to finalise such long 
pending cases. Timely completion of inquiries/inspections would have acted as 
a deterrent to malpractices, thereby facilitating effective functioning of 
societies. 
3.11. Delayed/non-submission of finalised accounts of societies for Audit 
Section 63(4) of the Act stipulated that it shall be the duty of the managing 
committee to cause to audit the accounts of every society at least once every 
year, within six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts 
relate. Further, Section 94(4) of the Act provides for imposing fine of ₹5000 on 
the society/member for failure to furnish any information required from him. 
As per the progress report of the test checked districts, 183 audits were pending 
in 100 societies122 as of March 2024. Along with the societies that were removed 
from the list of auditable societies as records were not available, a total of 3,455 
societies had failed to furnish the accounts on time as detailed in  
Table 3.5. 
 
  
 
120  Thiruvananthapuram (16), Alappuzha (8), Thrissur (4) and Kannur (13). 
121  Rule 66 (3) of KCS Rules stipulates that if the inquiry or inspection cannot be completed within the 
time specified, the person conducting the inquiry or inspection, shall submit an interim report stating 
the reasons for failure to complete the inquiry or inspection. 
122  excluding societies classed as RNA 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
64 
Table 3.5: Details of delayed/non-submission of accounts for audit 
District 
No. of audits 
completed as 
of  2023-24 
No. of 
audits 
pending as 
of March 
2024 
No. of societies 
in which Audit 
was pending 
Societies classified 
as RNA societies 
as of March 2024 
Total no. of 
societies against 
which fine to be 
imposed 
Thiruvananthapuram 1844 143 83 1375 1458 
Alappuzha 1277 17 10 682 692 
Thrissur 1256 23 7 755 762 
Kannur 1551 0 0 543 543 
Total 5928 183 100 3355 3455 
(Source: Information consolidated by Audit from the Progress reports and data furnished by  
JD offices) 
The RCS had failed to impose a fine amounting to  ₹1.73 crore123 against these 
societies which had delayed submission of accounts/not submitted the accounts. 
Government assured (July 2025) that the Department is implementing a 
Uniform software across Kerala , which will centralise financial data and 
streamline accounting processes for all co-operative societies, thereby 
eliminating the problem of delayed submission of accounts by societies.  
Delay in submission of Audit reports and issue of Audit certificates 
The RCS had issued (March 1975) circular insisting that, on completion of audit 
of a society, the auditor was to submit the report to the AD within 15 days in 
respect of single concurrent auditor 124, and within five days in respect of other 
auditors.  
• In JD office, Alappuzha and in four 125 AD offices, there was delay in 
furnishing of Audit reports by the Auditor to the respective offices. In 
3,964 instances of audit completed, 1,920 reports (48.44 per cent) were 
submitted after 15 days, with a delay ranging from 355 days to 977 days.  
• The JD, Thiruvananthapuram did not maintain a register to monitor the 
receipt of reports.  
• In the offices of JD/AD at Thrissur and Kannur, as the date of 
submission of the Audit report was recorded as the date of completion 
of audit in the Inward and Approval registers,  Audit could not ascertain 
the actual delay in submission of Audit report.  
• In 20 cases, the Audit reports were not submitted by the auditors to the 
AD’s office at Nedumangad on completion of audit. These reports were 
pending submission from 32 to 1370 days as of March 2024. 
Accepting the audit observation, Government stated in the Exit conference  
(July 2025) that the process can be streamlined only by opting for a complete 
online procedure. It was intimated that action is being taken in respect of 
officials who had failed to submit the Audit reports at AD, Nedumangad. 
According to paragraph 4B under Section 64 of KCS Act, the Director of Co -
operative Audit (DCA) was to issue an Audit certificate to the society concerned 
 
123  3455 x ₹5,000 
124 Auditor whose full service is availed by a society for the audit of its accounts is termed as a single 
concurrent auditor. 
125  Neyyattinkara, Nedumangad, Mavelikkara, Chengannur 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
65 
with a copy of Audit memorandum126 within three months from the date of 
receipt of the Audit report.  
• Of the 15,273 Audit certificates issued during 2019 -24, 7,172 
certificates (46.96 per cent) were issued after three months, with delay 
ranging from two to 22 months (Appendix 3.4).  
• In the eight test checked AD offices, though marked as issued in the 
approval registers, 2,487 certificates pertaining to the period 2018-19 to 
2022-23 were not seen forwarded to the respective societies. A total of 
342 major irregularities were included in these reports. 
Government replied (July 2025) that issues discussed above will be addressed 
through the implementation of Online Auditing System Software. The software 
will manage issuance, tracking  and monitoring of Audit certificates and Audit 
memoranda. 
3.12. Ineffective follow-up action on Audit certificates  
Sections 64(9) and 64(10) of the KCS Act stated that, if the result of the audit 
held under Section 63 of the Act disclosed any defects in the working of a 
society, the DCA may bring such defects to the notice of the society, and in case 
of serious defects, to the notice of the RCS, for immediate further action. As per 
Section 64(11) of the Act, the DCA was to direct the society or its officers to 
take action within the time specified and to rectify the defects disclosed in audit, 
under intimation to the RCS. Further, Section 64(12)(c) required the society to 
submit rectification reports on the defects mentioned in the Audit certificate, to 
the DCA and RCS within two months of receipt of the certificate. 
Instructions were circulated (July 1975) among the Registrars to open separate 
file and Register of summary of defects for recording details such as year of 
audit, name of auditor, date of receipt of summary of defects, file number, date 
of closure of file etc., and to verify the register regularly.  
During the test  check of 12 offices each of AD/JD and AR/JR in selected 
districts, Audit observed that: 
• No separate files and/or registers on the defects observed in audit were 
seen maintained, in the absence of which, regular  follow-up on the 
defects noticed in audit was not ensured by the General/administrative 
wing. 
• During the audit period, 12,786 out of the total 15,273 Audit certificates 
were issued to the societies in the test  checked offices. However, not 
even a single rectification report was seen forwarded by the societies 
concerned to the DCA and/or RCS.  
• No revenue recovery procedure was seen initiated by the DCA  for 
recovering from a society or its past/present/deceased member, any dues 
to the Government. 
The aforementioned laxity resulted in failure to initiate follow -up action on 
defects mentioned in Audit certificates as revealed in the following instances:  
 
126 The statement issued to the society after completion of audit, stating the important observations, 
summary of defects, details of receipts and expenditure, profit and loss statement, balance sheet etc. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
66 
• The Department sanctioned ₹five lakh during 2019 -20 to Ulloor SC 
Society for establishing a computer centre. The Society did not establish 
a computer centre and the above lapse was reported in the Audit 
Certificate for the year 2019 -20. The failure of Thir uvananthapuram 
JR/JD to initiate timely action on the report had resulted in suspected 
misappropriation of the entire amount.  Though action was 
recommended against the Governing body and Secretary through 
Section 65 inquiry report (December 2023) by the JR , the amount has 
not been transferred to the Government account till date.  
• An amount  of ₹ 20 lakh provided to Vithura SCB No. 1048 during   
2021-22 for starting a tourism facilitation centre was not utilised for the 
purpose. An amount of ₹ 17.95 lakh was diverted  for constructing 
retaining wall and compound wall. As the society was not able to furnish 
the utilisation certificate, Audit Report s of 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 
mentioned that the amount, along with the interest , was to be refunded 
to Government. However, no repayment has been effected till date.   
• An amount of ₹10 lakh was provided to Mavelikkara Taluk Yuva 
Printing and Publishing Co-operative Society in 2022-23 for setting up 
an Offset Printing unit. In the Audit Certificate for the year 2023 -24, it 
was mentioned that the society, being non-functional, has not initiated 
any steps to start the printing unit and that the amount along with interest 
at 18 per cent, was to be remitted back to Government. No follow -up 
action on the comment was seen pursued (October 2024). 
• As per the Audit certificate for 2019-20 of Pullukulangara SCB Ltd. No. 
2992, the members of the working committee had outstanding loans, 
which made them disqualified to hold the membership as per Rule 44 
(1)(c) of the KCS Rules. However, the irregularity persisted without 
corrective action and was seen recorded in the Au dit Certificate for the 
year 2022-23 also. 
• As per Annexure II of the number statement for the month of March 
2024 of AR, Kunnamkulam Taluk, the Priyadars hini Hospital Co -
operative Society Ltd. No. R 
756 was functional. 
However, during joint 
verification  (December 
2024), Audit noticed that 
apart from a shed erected at 
the site, no hospital building 
existed. The Audit 
certificates issued to the 
society for the year 2022 -23 
and 2023 -24 stated that the 
society did not furnish details 
of utilisation of ₹ 5.50 crore 
received from C onsumerfed 
in connection with transfer of 
the above property to the 
Figure 3.1: The shed at the site of 
Priyadarshini Hospital Co-operative 
Society Ltd. Photo taken by Audit party on 
04 December 2024 


 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
67 
society. The AR, Kunnamkulam did not initiate action to compute the 
assets of the society and prepare financial statements for ₹5.50 crore.  
• The JR Kannur accorded sanction ( January 2023) for release and 
utilisation of ₹10 lakh towards Peringome Area Yuvajana Co-operative 
Society Ltd. Kannur for starting an Event Management and Catering 
Unit. The Audit certificate for the year 2022 -23 mentioned that the 
society did not utilise the sanctioned amount fully. The society has not 
refunded the unutilised amount worth ₹8.95 lakh  yet to the Government 
(October 2024), which remained parked in its bank account.  
• The Thrissur District SC/ST Motor Transport Co-operative Society was 
registered (August 1984) with the objective of providing jobs to SC/ST 
youth by operating Bus Service and Goods Transport Service. The Audit 
Certificate issued to the society in 2015 -16 had mentioned that the 
society was not keeping records of Receipts/Expenditure, bills in respect 
of the procurement of spare parts and that there was no authenticity in 
the accounts maintained. As per the Audit certificate, the society  
incurred a loss of ₹318.94 lakh127. 
The Administrative Committee of the society filed a complaint (March 
2023) to the RCS and JR , Thrissur on occurrence of theft, misuse and 
misappropriation of assets in the society. As per the complaint, the buses 
purchased and operated by the society were either missing with no 
traceable records or left to rust in the open.  
As per the Inspection Report (September 2024) of enquiry initiated 
under Section 66 of the KCS Act, even though the society had availed 
financial assistance/loan amounting to ₹2.22 crore (1996 -2015) from 
GoK, Kerala State Federation of SC/ST Development Co -operatives 
Ltd. and Kerala State Development Corporation for SC/ST Ltd. the 
society failed to run the bus service.  The JPV conducted (November 
2024) by Audit at the site of the Garage workshop of the society 
confirmed the absence of remedial action. Ten out of 25 buses purchased 
were left abandoned in the society premises, covered with 
thicket/bushes. Of these, only six buses had registration numbers. 
Government replied  (July 2025)  that with the implementation of “Online 
Auditing System Software” the audit certificates would  be forwarded 
automatically and there would be real time visibility of the rectification status 
of defects pointed out in Audit.  
No specific reply was furnished with respect to the defects observed by Audit. 
3.13. Financial Management 
3.13.1. Trend in Receipt and Expenditure of Funds 
Funds for the Department of Co-operation and offices thereunder were provided 
in the budget under the Heads of Accounts 2425 and 4425 and through Central 
schemes. Budget allocation and expenditure of the Department of Co-operation 
during the audit period 2 019-24 indicated total receipt of ₹3602.80 crore and 
 
127  The net loss was inclusive of amounts of ₹62.63 lakh in respect of vehicles  and ₹160.56 lakh related 
to unrealised advances 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
68 
expenditure worth ₹2692.33 crore, as detailed in Table 3.6.  
Table 3.6: Details of receipt/allocation and expenditure of funds during 2019-24 
 (₹ in crore) 
Year 
State Grant 
National Co-operative 
Development Corporation 
assistance (NCDC)128 
NABARD assistance Total  
Receipt/ 
allocatio
n 
Total  
Expenditure Receipt/ 
Allocation Expenditure  
Receipt/ 
Allocation 
Expenditure Allocation Expenditure 
Plan Non 
Plan Plan Non 
Plan 
2019-20 177.35 359.10 90.33 249.71 70.31 45.88 18.31 18.31 625.07 404.23 
2020-21 542.13 348.11 514.10 285.06 113.62 109.77 23.63 23.63 1027.49 932.56 
2021-22 162.33 398.65 77.02 344.17 65.00 21.51 19.92 19.92 645.90 462.62 
2022-23  155.93 362.76 52.33 267.74 246.12 222.82 0.00 0.00 764.81 542.89 
2023-24 141.35 363.27 17.62 325.24 34.91 7.17 0.00 0.00 539.53 350.03 
 Total 1179.09 1831.89 751.40 1471.92 529.96 407.15 61.86 61.86 3602.80 2692.33 
(Source: Figures provided by RCS) 
The analysis of funds received and expenditure incurred during the period 2019-
20 to 2023-24 indicated that fund utilisation was at its peak during the C OVID 
year (2020-21), with utilisation of Plan funds and NCDC funds pegged at 94.83 
per cent  and 96.61 per cent  respectively. However, the utilisation of Plan 
allocations declined after 2020 -21, rose again in 2022 -23, and then dipped to 
12.47 per cent in 2023-24. A similar pattern was observed in NCDC allocations, 
where utilisation plummeted to 20.54 per cent in 2023-24. 
Government replied (July 2025) that , as additional amount was received from 
NCDC and State Plan fund, there was an abnormal hike in expenditure in  
2020-21. During the financial years 2022-23 and 2023-24, expenditure of State 
Plan fund declined due to limitation in budget allocation and pending ways and 
means clearance. In 2023-24, the percentage of expenditure of NCDC assistance 
was low due to shortage of eligible proposals and pending release orders from 
Government.  
3.13.2. Surrender of funds under Plan Schemes 
The Kerala Budget Manual set forth the need for Departments to ensure that the 
estimates are neither inflated nor underpi tched, but as accurate as practicable 
with provisions for all items that can be foreseen to maintain budgetary accuracy 
and fiscal discipline.  
A detailed scrutiny of the budget allocation and annual expenditure on Plan 
funds meant for implementation of various schemes and activities of the 
Department during the audit period revealed that funds were surrendered in  an 
average of 47 out of 55 Heads of accounts (Appendix 3.5).  
Government replied  (July 2025)  that during financial year s 2022-23 and  
2023-24, expenditure in State Plan declined due to limitation in budget 
allocation, pending ways and means clearance etc. 
3.14. Negligence in recovery of outstanding Government loan/shares 
from societies 
As per Section 42 of the KCS Act, the Government could subscribe directly to 
the share capital of a society with limited liability. The other forms of State aid 
 
128  The National Co -operative Development Corporation (NCDC) is a statutory Corporation under the 
Ministry of Co -operation. NCDC provides loans and grants  to State Governments for financing  
co-operative societies. 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
69 
to the societies included loans, advances, guarantees, subsidies etc., as permitted 
under Section 53 of the Act. Additionally, loan or share assistances were 
provided by NCDC, for the development of co -operative societies.  
Section 79(1) of the Act stipulated that all sums due to the Government from a 
society/officer/member, past or deceased, will have to be recovered on the basis 
of a certificate issued by the RCS or DCA, in the same manner as arrears of 
public revenue due o n land. The Department of Financ e had directed (March 
2018) the Head of the Office to identify the institutions that defaulted in 
repayment, so as to collect the pending amount along with interest.  
Audit observed that an amount of ₹1,173.29 crore was outstanding from the co-
operative societies in the State as on 31 March 2024, as shown in Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: State-wide details of shares and loans received and balance amount 
outstanding from societies 
(₹ in crore) 
Nature of 
assistance 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
Balance amount outstanding 
Principal Interest Penal 
interest Dividend Total 
NCDC Share 561.97 112.89 NA 5.12 0.19 118.20 
NCDC Loan 298.19 161.89 218.49 33.13 NA 413.51 
Government Share 410.62 136.00 NA 12.19 0.35 148.54 
Government Loan 433.95 108.84 370.61 13.59 NA 493.04 
Total 1704.73 519.62 589.10 64.03 0.54 1,173.29 
  NA : Not applicable 
(Source: Details furnished by RCS) 
In this regard, the following observations were made in Audit: 
• In the selected districts, financial assistances were sanctioned in 2230 
cases, of which no repayment of loan/share was made for ₹492.94 crore 
in 315 cases as given in Appendix 3.6.  
• Audit noticed that there was mismatch in details of outstanding loans and 
shares furnished by the offices of JRs in test checked districts with the 
data provided in the Half yearly report of the RCS as o f March 2024, as 
given in Appendix 3.7. As per the monthly progress report of outstanding 
loan, share, interest and penal interest furnished to Audit, JRs at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha and Thrissur had a total outstanding 
amount of ₹6.27 crore, ₹8.19 crore and ₹4.45 crore  respectively, as o f 
March 2024. R evenue recovery was seen initiated by JR , 
Thiruvananthapuram for ₹84.73 lakh, whereas JR , Alappuzha and JR, 
Thrissur did not furnish details of recovery.    
• In the case of JR, Kannur, an amount of ₹874.95 crore was outstanding as 
of March 2024.  The major chunk of outstanding dues related to Kerala 
State Co-operative Hospital Complex and Centre for Advanced Medical 
Service Ltd. 129 (₹213.19 crore), RUBCO 130 (₹524.77 crore), 
AGREENCO131 (₹35.51 crore), RAIDCO 132 (₹23.79 crore) and 
Thalassery Taluk Rubber and Agricultural Marketing Society (₹1.05 
crore), for which recovery action/ action on request for write-off of dues 
 
129  Pariyaram Medical College 
130  Kerala State Rubber Corporation Limited 
131  Kerala State Agro Co-operative Limited 
132  Regional Agro Industrial Development Co-operative of Kerala Limited 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
70 
were in progress. In the remaining cases, demand notices for ₹14.56 lakh 
were stated to have been issued through Revenue Recovery online portal. 
• An amount of ₹30 lakh was sanctioned to Kundukadu Co -operative 
Health Centre (Society) for purchase of modern medical equipment under 
the scheme ‘Assistance to Miscellaneous Co-operatives’. The JR, Thrissur 
directed133 the AR, Thalappilly Taluk, to obtain Utilisation Certificates 
from the society or to obtain reasons for non-submission. In response, AR 
reported (December 2017) that only ₹3.89 lakh out of the ₹30 lakh had 
been used for the sanctioned purpose and that the  remaining amount had 
been diverted for unauthorised purposes134. Consequently, the JR directed 
AR to initiate recovery of amount due to Government along with accrued 
interest. Audit observed that the AR, after a delay of more than four years, 
ordered (March 2023) for Revenue Recovery of ₹1 .06 crore135 from the 
society. Despite the JR instructing AR in December 2017 to initiate 
recovery of amount due to Government as ₹26.11 lakh of assistance 
received was diverted, no recovery was seen effected till date. 
• Kerala State Agro Co -operative Ltd . No.4437 (AGREENCO), Kannur 
received (2004-05) ₹14.57 crore136 as assistance from GoK for setting up 
an export oriented pineapple processing unit. Based on a Special Report 
of DCA which pointed out non-maintenance of vouchers and receipts by 
AGREENCO, the RCS ordered (January 2014) an Inspection under 
Section 66 of KCS Act, with direction to furnish the Inspection report 
within one month, which was also not received. 
The DCA’s report for the year 2013 -14 (last audit conducted till date) 
stated that an amount of ₹24.14 crore was transferred by AGREENCO to 
subsidiary companies which were created by AGREENCO without 
obtaining sanction of RCS.  AGREENCO also failed to execute any 
Agreement/Guarantee with these subsidiary companies, to ensure 
repayment of Government Loan/Grant/Subsidy. AGREENCO did not 
initiate any action against these subsidiaries for not remitting the 
Government dues even though the directors of AGREENCO we re also 
part of the Board of Directors of these subsidiary companies. 
JPV conducted by Audit at AGREENCO, Kannur on 29 October 2024 
revealed that the said society was not functioning, and the buildings and 
plant and machinery were idling at site, in a dilapidated condition. Thus, 
the lack of necessary action against the lapses of the soci ety resulted in 
non-utilisation/refund of the loan provided and idling of plant and 
machinery worth ₹6.61 crore137. 
Apathy on the part of officials to reclaim the amount due to Government with 
interest from societies, besides violating Section 79(1) of the Act, facilitates 
evasion of Revenue Recovery procedures by societies. 
 
133  through five consecutive correspondences issued between June 2016 and November 2017 
134  Payment of arrears of salary of doctors, repayment of erstwhile advances drawn, expenses for 
medicinal plant garden, repayment of loan and interest to District Co-operative bank, etc. 
135  including interest @12 per cent and penal interest @2.5 per cent and Audit fee of ₹5,720 
136  ₹9.72 crore was reimbursed by NCDC to GoK 
137  as stated in the status report dated 04 June 2011  
 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
71 
Government replied (July 2025) that issues stem med from difficulties in 
monitoring and reconciling demand collection and balance (DCB) precisely. In 
order to address the critical concerns, a DCB online platform will be launched 
to ensure transparency, showing outstanding demand to Government, real time 
status of repayment and defaults. This will significantly enhance the efficacy of 
the recovery mechanism for Government dues.  
However, no specific reply was furnished on the action initiated to recover the 
outstanding amount, in cases pointed out by Audit.  
3.15. Audit Fee and cost pending collection 
As per Section 64(6) of the KCS Act, the amount of fee or cost for audit of 
accounts of society was to be fixed by DCA and paid by the society concerned 
within 30 days of intimation thereof.  In case of non-payment within the period, 
it was to be recovered by RCS from the account maintained in the financing 
bank by the society.  
The total audit fees pending collection in the State as of March 2024 was ₹16 
crore, of which, ₹6.63 crore was pending for more than five years. In the test 
checked districts, an amount of ₹8.69 crore was pending in respect of audit fee 
and cost. 
Government stated (July 2025) that through the upcoming DCB online platform, 
recovery of audit fee dues will be resolved. The reply was silent on the action 
initiated by RCS to recover the long pending dues. 
3.16. Short remittance of contribution towards Co -operative Member 
Relief Fund and penal interest on defaulted amount 
On the basis of Section 56(1)(c) of KCS Act and Rule 53A of KCS Rules, the 
Co-operative Member Relief Fund, maintain ed and administered by the RCS 
was to be utilised for providing assistance to members of co-operative societies 
who were undergoing treatment for various ailments, partially or totally 
disabled due to accidents, dependants of the members who had died or were bed 
ridden due to accidents,  etc. A society was to transfer 10  per cent of the net 
profit annually, subject to a maximum of ₹ one lakh, to the Fund.  
In case of failure of remittance to the Fund, the Chief Executive of the society 
making such default would be liable to pay a penal interest at the rate of six per 
cent per annum on the default amount.  
As per the information furnished by the office of the RCS, against a total 
contribution of ₹68.22 crore due to Co -operative Member Relief Fund for the 
period 2019-20 to 2023 -24, ₹39.27 crore was seen remitted by the societies, 
which indicated that ₹35.44 crore138 was pending collection from societies.  
Government replied (July 2025) that orders have been issued, instructing Joint 
Director (Audit) to ensure collection of Member Relief Fund before issue of 
Audit certificates  and Joint Registrar  (General) to maintain registers for 
monitoring. 
 
138  ₹28.95 crore (pending contribution) + ₹6.49 crore (Penal Interest) 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
72 
3.17. Kerala Co-operative Professional Education Fund Scheme 
Section 56 of KCS Act and Rule 53 of KCS Rules envisaged the constitution of 
Professional Education Fund (Fund)  maintained by the RCS , through transfer 
of five per cent of net profit of societies to the Fund. The Fund was constituted 
with the objective of providing assistance for the promotion of professional 
education in the Co-operative Sector of the State of Kerala. 
On scrutiny of the files, registers and connected records of the Fund, the 
following observations were made: 
• In allegiance with Paragraph 7 of the Guidelines of Kerala Co-operative 
Professional Education Fund Scheme,  the societies were to remit the 
amount due to the Fund within a period of two months from the date of 
receipt of Audit Certificate.  Audit noticed that against ₹220.71 crore  
due, only ₹79.99 crore was collected, and an amount of ₹140.72 crore 
(63.76 per cent ) was pending realisation from societies as on March 
2024. 
• Audit of accounts of the Fund was to be conducted annually by the DCA 
free of cost, who was also required to submit reports consisting of 
Receipts and Disbursements account and Balance sheet duly certified, 
to the Registrar within five months from the end of every financial year. 
It was noticed that audit of accounts of the Fund has not been conducted 
till date, since its constitution in March 2016.  
• The RCS was to prepare an Annual report of the scheme and submit it 
along with the Annual Accounts statement, to the Government within 
six months from the end of every financial year.  However, no Annual 
report was furnished by RCS even after a lapse of eight years from the 
inception of the scheme. 
Government replied (July 2025) that orders were issued , instructing Joint 
Director (Audit) to ensure collection of Professional Education Fund before 
issue of Audit certificates. 
3.18. Irregularities in utilisation of Government assistance by societies 
as revealed in Joint Physical verifications 
As per Section 42 of KCS Act, the Government could subscribe directly to the 
share capital of a society with limited liability or hold more than one fifth of the 
total share capital of the society, as enabled by Section 22. Section 53 of the Act 
specified other forms of State aid to the societies including loans, advances, 
guarantees, subsidies etc. The society seeking financial assistance was to furnish 
documents such as Detailed Project Report (DPR), project feasibility report of 
Assistant Registrar, non -corruption certificate from Joint Registrar (General), 
last Audit Certificate, signed agreement etc. The funds provided were to be 
utilised only for implementing the approved projects, and the society was 
expected to adhere to the rules for financial assistance and the terms of 
agreement executed. 
Audit conducted Joint physical verification (JPV) along with departmental 
officials in 72 societies in the selected districts, to verify the extent of utilisation 
of Government assistance and observed irregularities in the form of diversion 
of funds, short/non-utilisation, delayed utilisation of funds, idling of assets etc., 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
73 
(Appendix 3.8). During the Exit conference (July 2025), Government 
acknowledged the audit findings and stated that a new system is being 
developed with the help of State Planning Board to create a template for 
standardising the projects. It was also stated that an experienced person will 
handhold the society to prepare the DPRs and project creche will be introduced 
to resolve the issue. 
3.19. Internal Control Mechanism 
3.19.1.  Non-conduct of regular inspection of societies  
The Joint Registrars (JRs) were to report to the RCS, the names of societies 
inspected, dates of inspection and dates of communication of defects in their 
monthly DO Narrative Reports. Rotation registers were to be maintained at 
district and taluk levels, containing details of inspections conducted and 
inspection of societies were to be completed at regular intervals of time as per 
targets set and responsibility was to be fixed for shortfall in inspections. 
Audit observed that:  
• Rotation registers were not maintained in the selected AR/JR Offices.  
• Surprise or detailed inspection of societies were not carried out by the 
JR and AR (SC/ST) 139 in JR office, Thiruvananthapuram during the 
period 2019-24. 
• In the AR offices of Thiruvananthapuram and AR/JR offices of 
Alappuzha, Thrissur and Kannur, no targets for inspection were seen 
fixed. The societies to be inspected were selected arbitrarily by the 
ARs/Inspectors concerned without prior approval of the JR /AR. There 
was no system in place to ensure that the inspection of all societies in 
the district/taluk were completed at regular intervals. 
• Scrutiny of DO Narratives in these districts revealed that no details other 
than the names of societies inspected by JRs/ARs/Inspectors were 
recorded, for information of higher authorities.  
As no separate targets were fixed by the AR/JR offices, Audit verified the 
number of actual inspections conducted by the offices of the JR against the 
targets mentioned in the Circular issued by RCS in August 1993, as detailed in 
Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Details of targets and achievements of inspections during 2021-24  
District140 
Joint Registrar Assistant Registrar (SC/ST) 
Detailed checks Surprise checks Detailed checks Surprise checks 
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved 
Alappuzha 36 22 72 43 72 32 108 49 
Thrissur 36 2 72 13 72 63 108 92 
Kannur 36 32 72 70 72 16 108 38 
(Source: Information consolidated by Audit from DO Narratives of JR offices) 
In order to ascertain the impact of inspections, the inspection reports in the 
office of JR, Alappuzha during the period 2023-24 were called for. Against 78 
 
139  The AR (SC/ST) oversees the functioning of the SC/ST societies under the JR office, conducts the 
inspection of SC/ST societies and assists in implementing the Government policies and schemes 
relating to SC/ST co-operatives. 
140  Except Thiruvananthapuram, where no inspections were conducted during the five year audit period 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
74 
inspections conducted by JR, Alappuzha in 2023-24, the office could produce 
only 28141 inspection reports. Verification of related files revealed that: 
• The letters intimating the defects noticed during inspections were 
communicated to the societies, with delays extending upto 123 days. In 
six cases, letters intimating defects were not dispatched to societies 
inspected.   
• Action taken reports on the inspection reports were not furnished by the 
societies and/or no details regarding the same were available with the 
JR.  
Failure in maintenance of rotation register and setting of targets for inspections, 
non-preparation of inspection reports and lapses in intimating results of  
inspections to the societies, defeat the purpose of conducting inspections. 
Verification of the DO Narratives of inspections conducted at Taluk level by 
the Assistant Registrars during the period 2019 -24 revealed that the inspection 
of societies was not carried out at regular intervals and that 354 societies142 were 
not inspected even once during the entire audit period of five years. ARs' office- 
wise data on inspection of societies which are functioning, are given  in  
Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Details of inspections conducted at Taluk level by the test checked 
offices of AR during the period 2019-24 
AR offices 
Number of societies  
No 
inspections 
conducted 
1 to 5 
inspections 
conducted 
6 to 20 
inspections 
conducted 
21 to 40 
inspections 
conducted 
Above 40 
inspections 
conducted 
Mavelikkara 59 20 42 17 4 
Chengannur 37 10 11 19 1 
Nedumangad 18 120 111 3 0 
Neyyattinkara 68 126 124 3 0 
Taliparamba 42 83 68 10 2 
Payyanur 62 60 56 8 2 
Kunnamkulam 19 24 29 8 0 
Mukundapuram 49 56 47 0 0 
Total 354 499 488 68 9 
(Source: Information consolidated by Audit from DO Narratives and information furnished by 
RCS and AR offices concerned) 
Interestingly, when significant number of institutions were left without 
inspection, Audit observed that more than 40 inspections were conducted in just 
four societies in Mavelikkara, one society in Chengannur and two societies each 
at Taliparamba and Payyanur. 
Government replied (July 2025) that an application named Co -operative 
Inspection Management Application  (CIMA) has been successfully 
implemented across the State since March 2025, with real time monitoring that 
ensures systematic and effective inspection processes.  
3.19.2. Arbitration and Execution cases 
Section 69(h) of KCS Act, 1969 mandated the disputes among members, past 
members, between the society or its committee etc. , to be referred to the Co -
operative Arbitration Court in the case of non-monetary disputes and to the RCS 
 
141  two inspections conducted by JR and 26 by AR SC/ST 
142  excluding dormant societies and societies under liquidation 

 
 
Regulation of Co-operative Societies in Kerala 
75 
in the case of monetary disputes. The RCS, with a view to execute the statutory 
responsibilities of arbitration, execution and liquidation with efficiency, 
directed (November 1991) the JRs to verify the cases pending for more than five 
years and initiate prompt action to settle these cases and report to the RCS.  
Details of  pending arbitration /execution cases in the selected districts as o f 
March 2024 are as mentioned in Table 3.10. 
Table 3.10: Details of pending Arbitration and Execution cases as of March 2024 
Particulars Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Thrissur Kannur 
Total no. of arbitration cases 5,954 2,377 8,083 7,251 
Amount involved (₹ in crore) 244.95 162.81 606.27 147.32 
No. of arbitration cases pending 
for more than five years 28 6 110 3 
Total no. of execution cases 27,963 7,552 46,500 16,439 
Amount involved (₹ in crore) 905.69 294.55 2,654.78 534.56 
No. of execution cases pending 
for more than five years 1,906 236 6,905 0 
(Source: Details furnished by JR offices) 
Even though the number/amount of arbitration/execution cases disposed were 
mentioned in the DO Narratives submitted to RCS, the action taken for 
disposing the long pending cases was not furnished.  
Government replied (July 2025) that in 2,22,103 arbitration cases involving 
₹8,488 crore and 86,622 execution cases involving ₹3,407 crore, recovery was 
effected during the period September 2024 to June 2025. However, the reply 
was silent on the long pending arbitration and execution cases mentioned in the 
paragraph. 
3.20. Conclusion  
Delay on the part of JR/AR in processing the applications resulted  in delay in 
providing registrations to societies in the selected districts. There was also delay 
in returning/rejecting the applications for registration of societies. The pattern 
of classification of societies according to the type and financial conditions was 
not revised regularly as envisaged in the statutes, rather , were done arbitrarily 
on the basis of requests from the societies. Audit observed that there was delay 
ranging from 31 to 690 days in 57 cases, in forwarding the Vigilance Inquiry 
Reports to sections concerned/JRs for further follow-up action. 
No action was seen initiated to revive/liquidate/cancel the registration  of 302 
societies lying dormant for over a total span of 46 years  in the selected districts. 
There was delay on the part of JRs in initiating action on Special  reports 
forwarded by the JDs, as well as in completion of inquiry/inspection under 
Sections 65, 66 and 68. Considerable delay was also noticed in forwarding the 
Audit certificate by the DCA to the respective societies after the receipt of Audit 
Reports.  
An amount of ₹1173.29 crore was outstanding as Government/NCDC loans and 
shares and their interest/dividend from the co-operative societies in the State as 
on 31 March 2024. An amount of ₹16 crore was pending collection in respect 
of audit fees from the societies. There was short collection of ₹35.44 crore in 
respect of Co -operative Member Relief Fund and ₹140.72 crore in respect of 
Kerala Co-operative Professional Education Fund Scheme. Lack of monitoring 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
76 
and oversight by the Department led to diversion of financial assistance, 
wasteful expenditure and idling of assets by the societies. The test checked 
offices of JR/AR were not maintaining rotation registers for regular monitoring 
of detailed and surprise inspections. There were more than 147 arbitration cases 
and 9,047 execution cases pending for more than five years in the test checked 
districts. 
3.21. Recommendations 
• The RCS may ensure that registration and returning/rejection of 
applications of societies are done in adherence to prescribed timelines. 
• Government/RCS may devise a system to revise the classification norms 
and classify societies every three years. It may be ensured that societies 
submit latest classification certified by the Registrar while applying for 
recruitment through the Co-operative Examination Board. 
• Government may ensure that the Department establishes a centralised 
and inclusive online platform that enables citizens to view the details of 
all registered co-operative societies, in the interest of improving public 
trust, accountability and accessibility. 
• The RCS may take steps to avoid delay in forwarding Special Reports 
and Vigilance Reports, and initiate timely action on these reports. The 
timelines prescribed for inquiries/inspections under Sections 65, 66 and 
68 should be strictly adhered to. 
• The RCS may review Audit Certificates/Memoranda issued by Director 
of Co-operative Audit including significant deficiencies in working of 
societies and ensure that the observations of DCA are acted upon by 
societies in a timely manner.  
• Government may consider introducing IT systems to enable conduct of 
audit and issue of Audit reports and Audit Memoranda and real time 
monitoring of the same.  
• Government/RCS may consider introducing MIS to track accounting of 
Government assistance and to ensure that the  societies repay their 
outstanding dues of Government/NCDC loans and shares within 
prescribed time limit.  
 

 
 
 
  
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
PARAGRAPHS 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 77 
CHAPTER IV 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
Misappropriation 
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
 
4.1. Suspected misappropriation of ₹1.05 lakh of Government money 
 
Violation of codal provisions and laxity on the part of the Head of the 
Office resulted in suspected misappropriation of ₹1.05 lakh as short 
remittances at the Office of the Assistant Executive Engineer, Harbour 
Engineering Sub Division, Thalai, Kannur District. 
Kerala Treasury Code (KTC) stipulates that a Government servant who 
receives any money on behalf of the Government shall give the payer a 
receipt in Form TR -5 and all monetary transactions should be entered in 
the Cash Book as soon as they occur and attested by the Head of the Office 
in token of check. Further, when Government money in the custody of a 
Government officer is paid into the Treasury or Bank 143, the Head of the 
Office should satisfy himself that the amounts have been actually credited 
into the Treasury or Bank before attesting entries in cashbook.  
Audit test checked (February 2024) the records of Harbour Engineering 
Sub Division, Thalai 144 as part of the local audit of the Office of the 
Executive Engineer, Harbour Engineering Division, Kannur 145 for the 
period 01 April 2018 to 31 December 2023.  
The Sub Division generated revenue from ground lease rent, room rent, 
sale of tender forms and collection of toll for entry of vehicles into the 
Harbour. The Senior Clerk/Clerk who was in charge of writing of cashbook 
was the custodian of TR-5 Receipt books. 
Audit observed that TR -5 receipts 146 were issued for revenue received in 
cash directly at the Sub Division and the collected revenue was remitted at 
Sub Treasury, Thalassery. The corresponding GST portion was deposited 
in the Current Account maintained at SBI, Thalassery in the name of 
Assistant Executive Engineer and subsequently paid to the GST head of 
account. 
Audit scrutinised the receipts and remittances of money at the Sub 
Division, Thalai and observed that there was short remittance to the tune 
of ₹1.05 lakh, to the Sub Treasury Thalassery/bank account. The details of 
short remittance were as given below: 
 
143  Kerala Financial Code requires that the daily collection of each officer should be remitted into the 
Treasury, the next working day or at least once in a week on the last working day. 
144  Under the Assistant Executive Engineer 
145  Kannur Division coming under the North Circle has three Sub Divisions, namely, Thalai, Mopla bay 
and Azheekkal. 
146  As the Government of Kerala introduced electronic TR -5 receipt system w.e.f . 01.07.2022 for 
collection of revenue, Sub Division started issuing electronic TR -5 receipts w .e.f. 12.07.2022. The 
GST portion was remitted directly to the GST head of account without routing through the bank 
account. 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
78 
• The total receipts under TR-5 amounted to ₹36.06 lakh which was 
inclusive of ₹4.62 lakh as GST. Of this, only ₹31.29 lakh was seen 
remitted to the treasury and ₹4.05 lakh, to the bank account as 
GST. This accounted for short remittance of ₹0.72 lakh. 
• An amount of ₹2550 received by the office for which TR -5 was 
issued, was shown as remitted to the treasury. However, scrutiny 
of treasury reconciliation statement revealed that only ₹550 was 
remitted to the treasury. Audit observed that the figure ‘2’ was 
fraudulently prefixed to 550, thereby making it ‘2550’, in the 
counterfoil of remittance challan. However the amount was 
retained as ‘Rupees five hundred and fifty’ in words. This was 
evidently a case of forgery of entries relating to remittance in the 
challan, to enable misappropriation of ₹2000. 
• The Sub division issued toll coupons147 worth ₹7.97 lakh, of which, 
toll coupons worth ₹1.78 lakh were used. However, only ₹1.45 lakh 
of the collected amount was remitted into the treasury. This 
resulted in short remittance of ₹0.33 lakh.  
Audit observed the following systemic deficiencies in management and 
accounting of Government moneys.  
• The office did not maintain cashbook and other registers in proper 
form. Only establishment -related expenditures such as salary, 
loans and advances, etc., were entered in the cashbook. Other cash 
receipts for which TR -5 receipts were issued were not entered in 
the cashbook. 
• TR-5 receipts were not issued for all moneys received. No TR -5 
receipts were issued for an amount of ₹24,479 received through 
sale of tender form. Similarly, TR -5 receipts were not seen issued 
to Kudumbashree members who deposited the moneys collected 
through issue of toll coupons at the Sub Division office. Of  the 
collected amount of ₹1.45 lakh, TR -5 receipts were issued for 
₹15,800 only. 
• Periodical reconciliation of the revenue realised and its remittance 
was not carried out by the Head of the Office to ensure proper 
collection, accounting and remittance of revenue. This allowed for 
falsification of remittance challan facilitating misappropriation of 
the amount as detailed above. 
• There were 61 shops/locker rooms under the jurisdiction of the 
Sub Division, which were rented out. However, the Sub Division 
did not maintain proper records or any Demand Collection and 
Balance statements to  keep track of revenue generated and 
revenue due, through room rent.  
• The receipt head of GST could not be accessed by Harbour 
Engineering Department in the electronic treasury portal, due to 
which, the office could not generate receipts for the GST collected. 
 
147  Toll for entry of vehicles into the Harbour was collected using Kudumbashree members by issuing toll 
coupons.  

 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
79 
The GST amount collected was recorded manually in the 
electronic TR-5 receipts. Non-issue of receipt for the GST amount 
carried the inherent risk of mishandling of collected amount by 
persons. 
Thus, violation of codal provisions and laxity on the part of the Head of the 
Office as revealed from scrutiny of test  checked records, resulted in short 
remittance of ₹1.05 lakh and suspected misappropriation of the amount at 
Sub Division Thalai. Considering the lack of proper maintenance of 
records and serious systemic deficiencies observed, a detailed inquiry into 
the financial transactions of the Sub Division needs to be carried out to 
bring out the total extent of loss, so as to fix responsibility for the financial 
indiscipline. 
Government stated in reply (September 2025) that an enquiry was 
conducted by the Chief Engineer, Harbour Engineering Department on the 
matter and charge memos issued to  Clerk and Senior Clerk.  Disciplinary 
action against the then Assistant Executive Engineer was under process in 
Government. The irregularities were formally reported (July 2025) to 
Police for initiating criminal proceedings and recovery of financial loss 
sustained by Government was in progress. 
Loss of assistance/revenue 
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
 
4.2. Loss due to failure in claiming eligible exemption from income tax 
 
Failure on the part of Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare Fund Board in 
claiming eligible income tax exemption and consequent deduction of tax 
at source on the interest income resulted in avoidable revenue loss of  
₹72.02 lakh. 
As per Section 10(46) of the Income Tax (IT) Act, 1961, any specified income 
arising to a body or authority or Board or Trust or Commission which has been 
established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or constituted by the 
Central or State Government, with the object of regulating or administering any 
activity for the benefit of the general public, not engaged in any commercial 
activity and notified by the Central Government in the official gazette, is 
exempted from income tax.  
The Kerala Fishermen ’s Welfare Fund Board (Board) is a non -profit 
autonomous body functioning under the Government of Kerala and carrying out 
welfare activities for the fishermen/ allied workers’ community solely sourced 
from Government grants and contribution/ fees etc148. The Board earns interest 
on fixed deposits from Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare Fund (KFWF) and Allied 
Workers Welfare Fund (AWWF) maintained in nationalised banks and carries 
out activities financed from these funds.  
Audit observed that the Board was eligible to be notified under Section 10(46) 
of the IT Act, 1961, for exemption from Income Tax. The Chartered 
 
148  collected as per Section 3(2) of the Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare Fund Act, 1985 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
80 
Accountants, while auditing the accounts of the Board for the year 2018-19, had 
opined that the Board should get a tax exemption certificate from the Income 
Tax Authorities, as the Board was a non-profit organisation under Government 
category, functioning for the welfare of fishermen and allied workers. However, 
the Board was yet to initiate the process of getting itself notified by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) for being exempt from Income Tax. The Board 
had also not obtained non -profit registration under Section 10(23C) (iv) of IT 
Act. Consequently, an amount of ₹72.02 lakh was deducted as tax at source 149 
by the banks from the interest earned on the fixed deposits during the period 
2018-19 to 2022 -23. The Board had also not filed Income Tax returns during 
the entire period. 
Audit observed that Section 27 of the Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare Fund Act 
required submission of annual accounts of the Board audited by a Chartered 
Accountant, to Government before the end of July every year. The Board, in 
order to claim tax exemption, ha d to submit annual audited report to CBDT 
every year. However, it was observed that during the period 2018 -19 to 2024-
25, audit of accounts was conducted only upt o 2021-22, that too with a delay 
ranging from 803 to 1063 days. Consequently, the Board was no t in a position 
to submit audited reports and thereby turn eligible for tax exemption.  
On pointing this out, Government acknowledged (August 2025) that the primary 
reason for non-filing of IT returns was the delay in completing statutory audits. 
Although audit for 2021-22 was completed and a draft report submitted by the 
Chartered Accountant, the report was not approved due to several discrepancies 
arising from errors in tally entries. Unless the tally accounts from 2012 to 2025 
are rectified and furnished to the auditors, the audit proceedings from 2021 
cannot be completed satisfactorily.  I t was further stated that, the Board had 
been advised to first obtain non-profit registration under Section 10(23C) of IT 
Act before applying for waiver of delay in filing returns and that action in this 
regard was underway.  
Thus, delay in rectifying errors in tally accounts and registration as non -profit 
organisation resulted in avoidable deduction of tax amounting ₹72.02 lakh to 
the Board, for the assessment years 2018-19 to 2022-23.  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
4.3. Loss of Government of India assistance of ₹6.85 crore 
 
Government of Kerala’s lack of timely action in releasing the 
Government of India (GoI) assistance to Government Medical College, 
Kozhikode led to a loss of ₹6.85 crore of GoI funds, thereby increasing 
the burden on the State exchequer.  This also led to blocking up of ₹1.37 
crore of GoI funds on inc omplete works of setting up of C ollege of 
Paramedical Education at Government Medical College, Kozhikode. 
Government of India (GoI) formulated150 a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) 
namely ‘Setting up of State Institutions of Paramedical Sciences in States and 
setting up of College of Paramedical Education’ with a view to provide one time 
 
149  at the rate of 10 per cent 
150  As part of Twelfth Five year plan (2012-17) 

 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
81 
institutional grant for supporting State Government Medical Colleges for 
conducting allied health (paramedical) courses. The one time grant was capped 
at ₹13.70 crore for each State and the centre and state share was to be in the 
ratio of 60:40151. 
Government of Kerala (GoK) submitted (November 2017) a proposal for setting 
up of College of Allied Health and Paramedical Institute at the Government 
Medical College, Kozhikode (GMCK) under the CSS. GoI approved the 
proposal of GoK and released (February 2018) an amount of ₹4.11 crore as first 
instalment. 
Comprehensive Administrative Sanction for the project was accorded (August 
2019) by GoK and an amount of ₹6.85 crore (₹4.11 crore as Central Share and 
₹2.74 crore as State share) was sanctioned (August 2019), with permission to 
deposit the amount in a bank account opened exclusively for the scheme.  
Audit observed that the Principal, GMCK submitted (October 2019) a bill for 
transfer of the amount to the bank account opened for the purpose. However, 
the same was rejected for lack of Ways and Means clearance152. It was seen that 
based on requests of the Director of Medical Education (DME) (January 2020) 
and the Principal, GMCK (February 2020), the Ways and Means clearance was 
granted (October 2020) and the fund was transfer credited to the dedicated bank 
account only in March 2021. 
Meanwhile, GoI had informed (June 2019 and October 2019) that the scheme 
would end on 31 March 2020 and called for submission of pending Utilisation 
Certificates (UC), along with physical status report and the proposal for next 
instalment immediately, for further release of funds. It was further informed that 
no funds will be released after 31 March 2020 and liabilities, if any , will have 
to be borne by the State.  
Audit observed that an amount of ₹1.37 crore was transferred to the Public 
Works Department (PWD) for starting the works in August 2021 and PWD 
requested (September 2021) that the balance amount available with the GMCK 
(₹5.48 crore) be transferred to PWD before inviting tenders for the work. As the 
GoI had already discontinued the scheme, it was decided (June 2022) to 
implement the project in a phased manner. The first phase was to be undertaken 
with the available funds and was to be initiated by November 2 022. Further, 
Audit noticed that PWD had incurred an expenditure of ₹0.60 crore on the work, 
as of November 2024. 
Though the Principal, GMCK made repeated requests153 for grant of permission 
for transfer of the remaining ₹5.48 crore to PWD to initiate the construction 
work, the same was not granted. Audit observed that as of April 2025, only pile 
capping works were done with regard to the setting up of College of Allied 
Health and Paramedical Institute at GMCK, under the CSS. 
 
151  ₹8.22 crore will be released by Central Gov ernment in two equal instalments of ₹4.11 crore each. 
Second instalment will be released, only after receipt of UC and progress report of first instalment. 
152  As a measure to manage liquidity of the State, payments from treasury have been regulated by the 
Government fixing Ways and Means limit from time to time. Any payment above the Ways and Means 
limit fixed by the Government requires Ways and Means clearance from Finance Department. 
153  Vide letters dated September 2021, April 2022, December 2023 and May 2024 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
82 
Meanwhile, GoI issued multiple letters 154 to GoK calling for the 
physical/financial progress report and UC for the scheme and directed that the 
unspent balance be remitted back. Accordingly, GoK refunded (April 2025) 
₹2.74 crore155 to GoI. 
GoK stated (September 2025) in reply that the delay in project implementation 
was due to procedural constraints. The GoK’s lack of timely action in releasing 
the GoI assistance to GMCK led to a loss of ₹6.85 crore156 in GoI funds thereby 
increasing the burden on the State exchequer and also blocking up of ₹1.37 crore 
of funds received from GoI. Additionally, approximately 500 157 paramedical 
students at GMCK were deprived of the benefits that would have accrued from 
the setting up of the college of Allied Health and Paramedical Institute. 
Wasteful expenditure 
SCHEDULED CASTES DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
4.4. Construction of building without ensuring transfer of ownership 
of land resulted in wasteful expenditure of ₹84.32 lakh 
 
An expenditure of ₹84.32 lakh incurred by the Scheduled Castes 
Development Department on the construction of a community hall at 
Pattuparambu Scheduled Caste Colony, Thykkattusserry Block, 
Alappuzha proved wasteful, as the construction was undertaken on a 
private land without ensuring the transfer of ownership of land to the 
Department. 
The Kerala Land Relinquishment Act, 1958 and Rules made thereunder make 
provision for the relinquishment of lands in the State of Kerala in favour of the 
Government. As per the Kerala Land Relinquishment Rules, 1958, every 
application for relinquishment of registered land should be given in writing and 
should specify the details of the land 158 and purposes for which the land is 
relinquished. Applications for relinquishment may be presented to the Revenue 
Divisional Officer (RDO) of the Division in which the land is situated. The RDO 
shall forward the application to the Tahsildar and the Tahsild ar shall direct the 
Village Officer (VO) to inspect the land. If the relinquishment of land is found 
valid after due process 159, the RDO shall pass an order of acceptance of the 
relinquishment. The Kerala Land Relinquishment Act, 1958 states that the RDO 
may, at any stage of the proceedings reject an application, if it is found that the 
title of the registered holder is defective. 
During the local audit (August 2023) of the Office of the District Scheduled 
Castes Development Officer (DSCDO), Alappuzha covering the period 
December 2021 to July 2023, it was observed that failure to abide by statutory 
 
154  Letters dated 14 August 2023, 19 September 2023, 09 November 2023, 28 December 2023, 26 April 
2024, 06 September 2024 and 28 February 2025 
155  ₹4.11 crore - ₹1.37 crore = ₹2.74 crore 
156  ₹8.22 crore - ₹1.37 crore = ₹6.85 crore 
157   As stated in the letter dated 21 December 2024 by the Principal, GMCK to the DME 
158  The name of the registered holder, the name of the village, survey number, the total extent of land, the 
area to be relinquished and the tax on such area. 
159  The VO shall report whether the land is free from encumbrances and submit the records. On receipt of 
the report from VO , the RDO shall issue a notice calling for objections to the relinquishment of the 
land and dispose of the same after having the objections duly enquired. 

 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
83 
requirements led to irregular acceptance of the land, resulting in legal ambiguity 
regarding the Government’s title over the property.  This resulted in idling of a 
building constructed in the above land, and consequent unfruitful expenditure  
of ₹84.32 lakh, as detailed below.  
Based on a proposal submitted (May 2018) by the Director, Scheduled Castes 
Development Department (SCDD), Government of Kerala (GoK) accorded 
(July 2018) administrative sanction for construction of a community hall at 
Pattuparambu Scheduled Caste (SC) Colo ny, Thykkattusserry Block, 
Alappuzha for a total cost of ₹97 lakh. The Assistant Executive Engineer, Local 
Self Government Department Sub Division, Thykkattusserry Block was 
designated as the implementing officer of the project. The construction of the 
building was completed in May 2022 and an amount of ₹84.32 lakh was 
transferred to the implementing officer for the work. Audit observed that the 
building has been idling since and not used for any purpose. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that 
the land selected by the DSCDO 
for construction of the building 
belonged to a private party160 and 
the land was yet to be acquired by 
the SCDD.  
Audit observed that the said land 
was selected and construction 
work commenced (February 
2019), based on a consent letter 
(February 2019) from the private 
party. It was seen that the 
DSCDO did not follow the due 
process as per the Kerala Land 
Relinquishment Rules, 1958 for 
getting the land relinquished by the private party in favour of Government and 
eventual transfer of ownership of land to the Department before commencement 
of construction work. Instead, the DSCDO forwarded the consent letter and 
property documents 161 to the VO, Arookkutty for transfer of ownership in 
September 2021.  
The VO informed (November 2021) that as a written complaint was received 
from the private party with regard to the transfer of the above land, follow -up 
action on the request of the DSCDO could be pursued only after the complaint 
was settled. Further, it was seen that the private party put forth (March 2022) 
conditional claims to agree to the transfer of land to SCDD, such as 50 per cent 
revenue sharing, transfer of land along with the building back to them after 20 
years, space for functioning of their off ice, complete managerial control of the 
community hall, etc. Disregarding the fact that the ownership of the land was 
vested with the private party and the same was not transferred to the 
 
160  The President, Treasurer and Secretary of Harijan Marana Fund, a fund started in 1978 with 
contributions from SC families in the locality of Pattuparambu SC colony for the benefit of its 
members. 
161  Possession certificate, Land tax receipt and location sketch 
Figure 4.1: Photo of the community hall building 
constructed at Pattuparambu SC Colony, 
Thykkattusserry Block, Alappuzha. Photo taken by 
Audit party on 05 June 2025 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
84 
Department, the construction of the structure of the building including tiling and 
electrical works were completed (December 2021). 
Audit observed that though several rounds of discussions were held in the 
presence of MP/MLA/Head of the Department, the issue of transfer of land 
could not be resolved. The status report on the project submitted (December 
2024) by the DSCDO to SCDD mentio ned that even if the conditional clauses 
of the private party were accepted, there were legal hurdles162 to the transfer of 
the land, as unless the question of rightful ownership of the land was settled, the 
possibility of utilising the building for the intended purpose continued to be 
remote. 
Thus, failure to apply the provisions of the Kerala Land Relinquishment Act, 
1958 and the associated Rules, along with the premature initiation of 
construction on private land by the DSCDO, led to a wasteful expenditure of 
₹84.32 lakh.  
GoK replied (September 2025) that directions have been issued to the Director, 
SCDD and the Block SCDO concerned to seek leave of the court to allow 
temporary use of the premises solely for the purposes of safeguarding the asset 
from damage and disuse, and for non -exclusive, public benefit use under 
custodial management, without granting title or rights to any group until the 
final adjudication of the suit. 
Given that the land has not been formally transferred to the Department and 
there is ambiguity regarding its ownership, the likelihood of the Department 
eventually acquiring ownership of the constructed asset appears remote. 
Providing undue benefit  
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT 
 
4.5. Undue benefit to contractors 
 
Incorrect deduction of amount for work not executed in the case of two 
works by Water Resources Department resulted in bestowal of undue 
benefit tantamount to ₹53.78 lakh to the contractors. 
The project ‘Comprehensive Water Supply Scheme to Perumatty, Pattancherry, 
Elappully, Nallepilly – Phase II’ executed as augmentation to Phase I of the 
project was formulated to provide drinking water to all wards  in Pattancherry 
and Perumatty Grama Panchayats in Palakkad district. The project was funded 
by Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board (KIIFB) and implemented by 
Kerala Water Authority (KWA) which acted as Special Purpose Vehicle163. 
Government of Kerala (GoK) accorded (June 2018) administrative sanction for 
the project for ₹25 crore and KIIFB accorded (November 2018) financial 
sanction to the tune of ₹25.99 crore. Technical sanction was issued (February 
2019) by Chief Engineer (Northern Region), KWA for ₹25.97 crore.  
 
162  Though the land was purchased in 1978 in the name of Harijan Marana Fund, the Fund was not legally 
registered as a Trust at th at time. Though the current office bearers of the Harijan Marana Fund 
registered the Trust in September 2023, there were no legal records to prove that the organisation 
registered now had any rights on the assets created by the erstwhile unregistered entity. 
163  vide G.O (Ms) No.444/2018/Fin. dated 26 November 2018  

 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
85 
The KWA invited tenders for two works relating to Phase II of the above 
project, Package I164 and Package II165, as lumpsum contracts in February 2019 
and August 2019 respectively. These works were inclusive of road restoration, 
which were to be executed in compliance with the guidelines issued (November 
2018)  by Government for KIIFB funded works, wherein the responsibility of 
execution of the work relating to road restoration shall be on the SPV concerned.  
The Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle, KWA Palakkad (SE) 
awarded the works, to two different contractors in July 2019 and February 2020, 
for ₹1409 lakh and ₹889 lakh respectively. Separate agreements were executed 
with the contractors for the a bove works which included road restoration 
charges as part of break up of payments.  
During the course of audit (May 2024) of the Office of the Executive Engineer 
(EE), Project Division, Chittur, Palakkad for the period 2019 -24, it was 
observed from records that the dates of completion of the works relating to 
Package I and Package II were 30 September 2021 and 31 May 2021 
respectively. As per the break up of payments of the works, the road restoration 
works constituted 1.97 per cent of agreed Probable Amount of Contract (PAC) 
in the case of Package I and 24 per cent, for Package II. However, on scrutiny 
of final bills related to both the works, Audit noticed that the percentage  of 
completion of the items related to road restoration for Package I and Package II 
was only zero and 17.647 respectively.  
Condition No 4.6 of Package I and Condition No 3 of the Package II in the 
General Conditions of Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) for the works stipulated 
that the quantity of work mentioned in NIT should be carried out fully. For 
incomplete or omitted work, a proportional amount for the quantity not carried 
out in each item shall be deducted from the contractor’s bill at either the rate 
approved in break up of payments or the estimate rate, whichever is higher. 
In violation of the above, the EE, while passing the final bills of both the works 
(February 2023), resorted to make deductions for incomplete works at the rates 
approved in break  up of payment s, despite the estimate rates being higher, as 
detailed in the Appendix 4.1 . The aforementioned deviations from contract 
stipulations resulted in bestowal of undue benefit tantamount to ₹53.78 lakh to 
the contractors. 
Based on the audit observation, the EE, Project Division, Chittur issued notices 
(September 2024) to both the contractors for the recovery of amount for non -
executed works. Subsequently, the contractors appealed to the Hon’ble High 
Court (September 2024) against the action of the Department in belatedly 
issuing recovery notice, over three years after the completion of work. The 
Court issued interim order staying the recovery in October 2024 and in August 
2025.  
The Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department, Government of 
Kerala informed Audit (December 2025) that counter affidavits in the respective 
 
164  KIIFB – 2017-18- Comprehensive WSS to Perumatty, Patt ancherry, Elappully and Nallep illy Gram 
panchayaths - Phase II - Package I  
165  KIIFB – 2017-18- Comprehensive Drinking Water Scheme to Perumatty, Pattancherry, Elappully and 
Nallepilly Panchayaths in Palakkad District – Phase II –Package II  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
86 
cases have been forwarded to the Standing counsel and are expected to be filed 
before the Honourable High Court. 
Thus, KWA, by not complying with the General conditions of NIT while 
deducting amount for work not executed, extended undue benefit amounting 
₹53.78 lakh to the contractors. Notice of recovery was issued belatedly, only 
after Audit pointed out the irregularity, which led to the contractors filing 
petitions, thereby staying the process of recovery. Timely deduction of amount 
from the final bills of contractors at higher estimate rates could have avoided 
litigations and consequent delay in recovery of excess amount. 
 
(PREETHI ABRAHAM) 
Thiruvananthapuram,               Accountant General 
The 21 January 2026     (Audit I), Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi,        (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The 27 January 2026 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
  
APPENDICES 

 
 
 

 
 87 
Appendices 
APPENDIC ES 
Appendix 1.1: 
Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports and paragraphs as 
on 31 October 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.1; page 3) 
 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of Department 
Number of outstanding 
Inspection 
Reports Paragraphs 
1.  Agriculture Development and Farmers’ Welfare 155 863 
2.  Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development 21 79 
3.  AYUSH 119 478 
4.  Backward Communities Development  20 67 
5.  Coastal Shipping and Inland Navigation  12 49 
6.  Co-operation 35 194 
7.  Election 7 22 
8.  Fisheries and Ports 96 458 
9.  Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 56 225 
10.  General Administration 14 69 
11.  General Education  220 1253 
12.  Health and Family Welfare 698 4199 
13.  Higher Education  289 1953 
14.  Home  272 1379 
15.  Housing 6 30 
16.  Information and Public Relations 6 29 
17.  Labour and Skills 89 440 
18.  Law 48 146 
19.  Local Self-Government 1937 8641 
20.  Minority Welfare Development 2 10 
21.  Parliamentary Affairs 2 06 
22.  Personnel and Administrative Reforms 6 37 
23.  Revenue  584 3678 
24.  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
Development 278 1263 
25.  Social Justice 83 398 
26.  Sports and Youth Affairs 19 120 
27.  Vigilance 12 38 
28.  Water Resources  159 666 
29.  Women and Child Development 49 161 
 Total 5294 26951 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
88 
Appendix 1.2: 
Details of Action Taken Notes pending as of October 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.3; page 3) 
Sl. 
No. Department 
Performance Audit 
Report on 
Preparedness and 
response to floods in 
Kerala 
2022 
PA on Pre and Post 
Matric Scholarship 
Schemes for SC,ST 
and Minority 
Students 
 
Total 
1.  Agriculture - 2 - 2 
2.  Consumer Affairs 
- 1 - 1 
3.  Food and Civil Supplies 
4.  Fisheries and Ports - 1 - 1 
5.  General Education - - 1 1 
6.  Labour and Skills - 1 - 1 
7.  Minority Welfare - - 4 4 
8.  Revenue 2 2 - 4 
9.  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes Development - - 26 26 
10.  Water Resources - 1 - 1 
Total 2 8 31 41 
 
  

 
 
Appendices 
89 
Appendix 1.3: 
Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending discussion by the Public 
Accounts Committee as of October 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5.4; page 3) 
Sl. 
No. Department 
Performance Audit 
Report on Preparedness 
and response to floods in 
Kerala 
2021 
Performance Audit 
Report on Functioning 
of the University of 
Kerala 
2022 
PA on Pre and Post 
Matric Scholarship 
Schemes for SC, ST and 
Minority Students 
Total 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1.  Agriculture - - - 2 - 2 
2.  Consumer Affairs  - - - 1 - 1 3.  Food and Civil Supplies 
4.  Fisheries and Ports - - - 1 - 1 
5.  General Education - - - - 1 1 
6.  Health and Family Welfare - 1 - - - 1 
7.  Higher Education - 1 41 - - 42 
8.  Labour and Skills - - - 1 - 1 
9.  Minority Welfare - - - - 4 4 
10.  Revenue  9 - - 2 - 11 
11.  
Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes 
Development 
- - - - 26 26 
12.  Water Resources 2 - - 1 - 3 
Total 11 2 41 8 31 93 
 
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
90 
Appendix 2.1: 
List of institutions covered in Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4; page 7) 
Eight out of 31 Teaching and Research Departments and One out of four 
Cost based departments were selected using Simple Random Sampling 
without Replacement (SRSWOR) based on number of seats and expenditure 
incurred. 
1. Department of Chemistry 
2. Department of Psychology 
3. Department of Physics 
4. Department of Education 
5. Department of Russian and Comparative studies 
6. Department of Statistics 
7. Department of Journalism and Mass communication 
8. Department of Folklore studies 
Cost based Department: Department of Environment 
Three out of 12 Centres for Computer Science and Information Technology 
were selected using Simple Random Sampling without replacement based on 
average number of seats. 
1. Computer Science and Information Technology, Aranattukara 
2. Computer Science and Information Technology, Manjeri 
3. Computer Science and Information Technology, CU Campus 
Three out of 11 Teacher Education Centres were selected using Simple 
Random Sampling based on expenditure incurred. 
1.  Calicut University Teacher Education Centre 
2. Teacher Education Centre, Manjeri 
3. Teacher Education Centre, Sulthan Bathery 
Two out of six School s of Management Studies were selected using Simple 
Random Sampling based on expenditure incurred. 
1.  School of Management Studies, Palakkad 
2.  School of Management Studies, Vatakara 
Three out of nine single units were selected using Simple Random Sampling. 
1.  Department of Life long learning and Extension 
2.  Pareeksha Bhavan  
3.  Central Sophisticated Instrumentation Facility 
• Survey of 1091  students166 (including research scholars and former 
students) and 118 faculties of the selected departments and centres of 
the University were conducted. 
• Based on the expenditure, 57 out of 529 works and 52 out of 716 
purchases were selected using Stratified Random Sampling from among 
the works/purchases during the audit period. 
   
 
166  Survey of students and faculties of eight selected departments and centres of the University 

 
 
Appendices 
91 
Appendix 2.2: 
Strategic Priorities and Goals set under Strategic Plan 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.1; page 7) 
Strategic Priority Strategic Goal 
1. Governance and 
management 
1.1 Review, update and establish a comprehensive set of  
academic and administrative policies, rules and regulations 
1.2 Establish distinct administrative machinery for the 
University departments and affiliated institutions 
2. Teaching and   
Learning 
2.1  Offer a high -quality learning environment that produces 
resilient, productive and confident graduates 
2.2   Create a “learning always” and “learning from everywhere” 
opportunity for all students 
3. Academic 
Research and 
Innovation 
3.1  Encourage, promote and sustain excellence in research 
3.2  Promote innovation and entrepreneurship 
4. Academic  
Support Services 
4.1  Ensure efficient academic support services and resources 
through appropriate empowerment 
5. Student Support 
Services 
5.1  Enhance student experience on the campus by ensuring an 
enabling environment 
6. Outreach and 
Community 
Engagement 
6.1 Creatively contribute to the overall development of the  
community 
6.2  Strengthen continuous learning processes and community 
outreach programmes 
7. Facilities, 
System and 
Infrastructure 
7.1   Ensure best of possible facilities, systems and infrastructure 
to the students and staff 
7.2  Provide state-of-the-art infrastructure and facilities for  the 
stakeholders 
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
92 
Appendix 2.3: 
Percentage of scores obtained by the University across NIRF Ranking 
Parameters 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.7; page 12) 
Parameter Sub Parameter 
Score obtained by the 
University 
Percentage of score obtained 
by the University 
2022 2023 2024 2022 2023 2024 
Teaching, 
Learning and 
Resources 
(TLR) 
Student Strength including 
Doctoral Students (SS) 9.02 10.04 10 45.10 50.20 50 
Faculty-student ratio with 
emphasis on permanent faculty 
(FSR) 
25 25 25 100 100 100 
Combined metric for Faculty 
with Ph.D. (or equivalent) and 
Experience (FQE) 
17.03 17.67 17.82 85.15 88.35 89.10 
Financial Resources and their 
Utilisation (FRU) 12.05 12.92 12.19 60.25 64.60 60.95 
Online Education (OE) 2 3.50 5.50 13.33 23.33 36.67 
Research and 
Professional 
Practice (RP)  
Combined metric for Publications 
(PU) 8.08 7.40 6.73 23.08 21.14 22.43 
Combined metric for Quality of 
Publications (QP) 8.97 8.64 7.01 25.62 24.68 23.36 
IPR and Patents: Published and 
Granted (IPR) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Footprint of Projects and 
Professional Practice (FPPP) 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.27 0.40 0.53 
Publication and Citations (SDG) - - 2.26 0.00 0.00 22.60 
Graduation 
Outcomes 
(GO) 
Metric for University 
Examinations (GUE) 46.40 47.35 53.66 77.33 78.92 89.43 
Metric for Number of Ph.D. 
Students Graduated (GPHD) 14.80 13.97 8.78 37.00 34.93 21.95 
Outreach and 
Inclusivity (OI) 
Percentage of Students from 
Other States/Countries (Region 
Diversity RD) 
0.31 0.44 0.42 1.03 1.47 1.40 
Percentage of Women (Women 
Diversity WD) 30 30 30 100 100 100 
Economically and Socially 
Challenged Students (ESCS) 8.24 6.96 6.89 41.20 34.80 34.45 
Facilities for Physically 
Challenged Students (PCS) 20 20 20 100 100 100 
Peer 
Perception 
Academic Peers and Employers 
(PR) 21.71 29.94 24.33 21.71 29.94 24.33 
  

 
 
Appendices 
93 
Appendix 2.4: 
Revision of Syllabus/Curriculum 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.2; page 13) 
Sl. 
No. Name of programme Year of last 
revision 
1.   BA LLB programme 2011 
2.   Bachelor of Physical education (B.PEd) integrated  2014 
3.   Bachelor of Physical education (B.PEd) two years 2014 
4.   Three-year LLB Unitary Programme 2015 
5.   Master of Law (LLM) 2015 
6.   B.Com LLB Programme 2018 
7.   All UG and PG programmes under faculty of Journalism  PG-2020 
UG- 2024 
8.   BA Multimedia  2024 
9.   All PG programmes in the teaching department under faculty of Journalism  2024 
10.   All B.Voc programmes  2021 
11.   All UG programmes under faculty of Humanities  2024 
12.   All PG programmes under teaching department under faculty of Humanities  2024 
13.   Integrated MA programme in Development Studies 2024 
14.   Integrated MA Political Science  2020 
15.   Integrated MA Sociology  2020 
16.   All B.Voc. programmes under Faculty of Humanities  2021 
17.   Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) 2021 
18.   Master of Education (M.Ed) 2022 
19.   All UG and PG programmes under faculty of Science  PG-2020 
UG-2024 
20.   All UG and PG Programmes in the teaching department under faculty of Science  2022 
21.   Integrated M.Sc Biology (affiliated colleges) 2023 
22.   Integrated M.Sc Bioscience  2024 
23.   Integrated Botany with computational Biology (affiliated colleges) 2023 
24.   Integrated M.Sc Statistics 2021 
25.   Integrated M.Sc Psychology  2021 
26.   Integrated M.Sc Geology  2023 
27.   Integrated M.Sc Physics 2024 
28.   Integrated M.Sc Chemistry  2022 
29.   B.Sc. Bio Chemistry  2024 
30.   All B.Voc. and M.Voc. programmes under faculty of Science  2021 
31.   Master of Law (LLM) affiliated colleges  2013 
32.   B.Tech  2024 
33.   B.Arch  2022 
34.   MCA 2020 
35.   All UG programmes under the faculty of Commerce and Management Studies  2024 
36.   All B.Voc. programmes under the faculty of Commerce and Management studies  2021 
37.   All UG and PG programmes under faculty of Language and Literature UG-2024 
PG-2020 
38.   All PG Programmes in the teaching department under faculty of Language and Literature  2024 
39.   Integrated MA Malayalam 2020 
40.   Integrated MA English and Media Studies  2020 
41.   All PG programmes in the teaching department under faculty of Fine Arts  2024 
42.   Bachelor of Theatre Arts (BTA) 2024 
43.   All UG and PG programmes under Faculty of Fine Arts except Bachelor of Fine Arts and 
Bachelor of Fine Arts in Art History and Visual Studies 
UG-2024 
PG-2020 
44.   Bachelor of Fine Arts and Bachelor of Fine Arts in Art History and Visual Studies 
(Faculty of Fine Arts) 2019 
45.   B.Des (Graphics and Communication Design)  2023 
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
94 
Appendix 2.5: 
Delay in preparation/submission/audit of annual accounts 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7.1; page 19) 
Year of account 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Period within which 
accounts to be prepared 
July 
2020 
July  
2021 
July  
2022 
July  
2023 
July  
2024 
Month in which accounts 
prepared and submitted to 
Syndicate 
December 
2020 
December 
2021 
December 
2022 
November 
2023 
November 
2024 
Month in which the 
accounts approved by the 
Syndicate 
December 
2020 
December 
2021 
December 
2022 
December 
2023 
December 
2024 
Delay in preparation of 
accounts (in months) 5 5 5 4 4 
Month in which accounts 
submitted to KSAD March 2021 March 
2022 
March 
2023 March 2024 February 
2025 
Delay in submission of 
accounts to KSAD (in 
months) 
8 8 8 8 7 
Month in which annual 
accounts submitted to 
Government 
July 
2021 April 2022 March 2023 March 2024 Not 
submitted 
Period within which audit of 
Accounts to be completed 
by KSAD (reckoned from 
the date of submission of 
accounts by the University) 
September 
2021 
September 
2022 
September 
2023 
September 
2024 
August 
2025 
Month in which audit of 
accounts completed/Audit 
report submitted by KSAD 
April 
2023 
January 
2024 
July 
2024 Not received Not received 
Delay (in months) 19 16 10 
5 months 
(upto 
February 
2025) 
- 
No. of months after which 
Audit Report was received 
by the University for 
rectification of defects 
(reckoned from the close of 
the particular financial year) 
37 34 28 - - 
  

 
 
Appendices 
95 
Appendix 2.6: 
Details of uneconomic institutions and intake of students in the institutions 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7.5; page 22) 
a)  Uneconomic Institutions 
Sl. 
No. Centre/Institution 
Financial performance (– Loss,+ Profit) Net Loss/ 
Profit 
during  
2019-24 
2019-20 2020-21 2022-23 2023-24 2023-24 
Continuous loss in all five years 
1 CCSIT Kuttipuram -8,04,917 -10,09,466 -8,47,761 -10,05,855 -14,44,760 -51,12,759 
2 CCSIT Manjeri -1,92,358 -8,21,198 -5,27,622 -9,42,887 -13,29,589 -38,13,654 
3 CCSIT Muttil -3,75,930 -17,22,323 -7,87,284 -11,05,981 -15,77,622 -55,69,140 
4 CCSIT Peramangalam -2,50,033 -6,24,535 -9,86,288 -4,96,130 -7,38,063 -30,95,049 
5 IET Kohinoor -32,86,699 -68,59,012 -1,97,95,622 -1,42,19,895 -1,90,55,299 -6,32,16,527 
6 CCSIT Pullut -5,86,816 -17,99,571 -4,42,575 -4,58,723 -17,36,603 -50,24,288 
 Total -8,58,31,417 
Continuous loss in last four years 
1 CCSIT Thalikulam  +4,56,140  -9,65,419    -8,96,202  -15,76,201 -10,52,163 -40,33,845 
2 Dept. of Law,  
CU Campus +680345 -17,395    -3,10,465  -1,88,182 -73,806 +90,497 
 Total -39,43,348 
Intermittent Profit/Loss during the five years 
1 CCSIT Pudukkad   -2,37,199  -5,47,723 -2,48,575 -78,124 +7,24,980 -3,86,641 
2 CPGSSW Sulthan 
Bathery +7,41,412 -2,15,065 +2,40,159 -3,01,166 -8,61,332 -3,95,992 
3 CU Regional Centre, 
Perambra No course No course + 18,52,027 -7,75,885 -16,32,842 -5,56,700 
4 CUTEC Chalakkudy +6,14,044 -6,97,376 -15,53,994 +8,14,793 -21,25,584 -29,48,117 
5 CUTEC Vatakara +2,78,790 -3,50,759 -6,38,753 +9,42,883 +11,56,789 +13,88,950 
6 SMS Vatakara +88,834 -9,15,735 -1,16,529 +4,86,287 -5,17,675 -9,74,818 
 Total -66,51,218 
 Grand Total -9,64,25,983 
b)  Details of intake of students to the courses conducted in uneconomic 
institutions 
Name of the Centre 
Intake capacity Actual intake 
Average 
intake 
(percentage) 
2019-20 
2020-21 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
2019-20 
2020-21 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
IET Kohinoor - ECE 60 60 60 60 60 33 31 16 19 21 24 (40) 
IET Kohinoor - EEE 60 60 60 60 60 28 21 17 10 12 18 (30) 
IET Kohinoor - IT 60 60 60 60 60 30 41 31 39 48 38 (63) 
IET Kohinoor - ME 60 60 60 60 60 44 26 23 10 8 22 (37) 
IET Kohinoor - PT 30 30 30 30 30 19 16 19 4 12 14 (47) 
CCSIT Muttil - MCA 30 30 30 30 Nil 10 3 13 5 0 6 (20) 
CCSIT Muttil – B.Sc IT -- -- 30 -- -- -- -- 3 -- -- 3 
CCSIT Kuttipuram 30 30 30 30 30 0 11 10 10 0 6 (20) 
CCSIT Manjeri – M.Sc 24 24 24 24 24 13 11 6 7 9 9 (38) 
CCSIT Manjeri – MCA 30 30 30 30 30 2 17 17 16 9 12 (40) 
CCSIT Manjeri – BCA -- -- -- 30 30 -- -- -- 17 8 13 (43) 
CCSIT Thalikulam- 
B.Sc Computer Science  30 30 30 30 30 8 15 22 17 16 16 (53) 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
96 
Name of the Centre 
Intake capacity Actual intake 
Average 
intake 
(percentage) 
2019-20 
2020-21 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
2019-20 
2020-21 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
CCSIT Thalikulam – MCA 30 30 30 30 30 18 9 8 7 11 11 (37) 
CCSIT Peramangalam-MCA, 
M.V oc. 30 30 30 30 30 0 12 13 22 22 14 (47) 
Department of Law 45 20 20 20 20 45 11 10 14 10 18 (72) 
CCSIT Pullut-MCA 30 30 30 30 30 0 4 23 14 8 10 (33) 
 
  

 
 
Appendices 
97 
Appendix 2.7: 
Teachers appointed without specific qualifications in CUTECs  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.8.2; pages 26) 
Name of the 
Institution 
Academic 
Year 
Total 
No. of 
teachers 
Total 
No. of 
contract 
teachers 
No. of 
teachers 
with only 
NET 
qualification 
No. of 
teachers 
with only 
Ph.D 
qualification 
No. of 
teachers 
with both 
Ph.D and 
NET 
qualification 
No. of 
Teachers 
without Ph.D 
or NET 
(Required 
Qualification) 
CUTEC,  
Sulthan Bathery 
2019-20 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2020-21 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2021-22 8 8 6 NIL 1 1 
2022-23 8 8 6 NIL 1 1 
2023-24 8 8 6 NIL 1 1 
CUTEC, 
Chakkittapara 
2019-20 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2020-21 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2021-22 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2022-23 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2023-24 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
CUTEC, 
Aranattukara 
2019-20 8 8 7 NIL 1 NIL 
2020-21 8 8 7 NIL 1 NIL 
2021-22 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2022-23 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2023-24 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
CUTEC, 
Valapad, 
Thrissur 
2019-20 8 8 5 NIL 1 2 
2020-21 8 8 5 NIL 1 2 
2021-22 8 8 5 NIL 1 2 
2022-23 8 8 6 1 1 NIL 
2023-24 8 8 6 1 1 NIL 
CUTEC, 
Malappuram 
2019-20 8 8 6 NIL NIL 2 
2020-21 8 8 6 NIL NIL 2 
2021-22 8 8 6 NIL NIL 2 
2022-23 8 8 6 NIL NIL 2 
2023-24 8 8 6 NIL NIL 2 
CUTEC, 
Kaniyambetta 
2019-20 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2020-21 8 8 7 NIL NIL 1 
2021-22 8 8 5 NIL 2 1 
2022-23 8 8 5 NIL 2 1 
2023-24 8 8 6 NIL 1 1 
CUTEC, 
Manjeri 
2019-20 8 8 8 NIL NIL NIL 
2020-21 8 8 8 NIL NIL NIL 
2021-22 8 8 7 NIL 1 NIL 
2022-23 8 8 7 NIL 1 NIL 
2023-24 8 8 7 NIL 1 NIL 
CUTEC, 
Palakkad 
2019-20 8 8 4 1 1 2 
2020-21 8 8 4 1 NIL 3 
2021-22 8 8 4 1 NIL 3 
2022-23 8 8 4 1 NIL 3 
2023-24 8 8 4 1 NIL 3 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
98 
Name of the 
Institution 
Academic 
Year 
Total 
No. of 
teachers 
Total 
No. of 
contract 
teachers 
No. of 
teachers 
with only 
NET 
qualification 
No. of 
teachers 
with only 
Ph.D 
qualification 
No. of 
teachers 
with both 
Ph.D and 
NET 
qualification 
No. of 
Teachers 
without Ph.D 
or NET 
(Required 
Qualification) 
CUTEC, 
Kallai 
2019-20 8 8 5 NIL 1 2 
2020-21 8 8 5 2 1 NIL 
2021-22 8 8 4 2 1 1 
2022-23 8 8 3 3 1 1 
2023-24 8 8 3 3 1 1 
CUTEC, 
Vatakara 
2019-20 8 8 4 1 1 2 
2020-21 8 8 4 1 1 2 
2021-22 8 8 5 NIL 1 2 
2022-23 8 8 4 NIL 2 2 
2023-24 8 8 4 NIL 2 2 
CUTEC, 
Chalakkudy 
2019-20 8 8 6 NIL 2 NIL 
2020-21 8 8 6 NIL 2 NIL 
2021-22 8 8 6 NIL 2 NIL 
2022-23 8 8 6 NIL 2 NIL 
2023-24 8 8 6 NIL 2 NIL 
Total   440    63 
 
 
   

 
 
Appendices 
99 
Appendix 2.8: 
Department-wise details of NCA vacancy 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.8.3; page 26) 
Sl No. Department Vacancy Category 
Assistant professor 
1. School of Drama 2 SC-1, PH-1 
2. Statistics 1 LC/AI 
3. Economics  1 OBC 
4. Arabic 1 SC 
5. Computer Science 1 SIUC Nadar 
6. Life Science 1 SCCC 
7. Botany 1 Dheevara 
8. Russian and Comparative 
studies 1 Hindu Nadar 
9. Journalism and Mass 
Communication 1 PH 
Total 10  
Associate Professor 
1.  Library Science 1 Ezhava/Thiyya/Billava (ETB) 
2.  Malayalam 1 SC 
3.  Education 1 LC/AI 
4.  Physics 3 OBC-1, SC-1, Muslim-1 
5.  Nano Science and Technology 1 SC 
6.  Journalism and Mass 
Communication  1 Viswakarma 
7.  History 1 LC/AI 
8.  Statistics 1 PH 
9.  Economics 1 PH 
 Total  11   
Professor 
1.  Zoology 1 SC 
2.  Physics 1 ETB 
3.  Economics 1 Viswakarma 
4.  Political Science 1 LC/AI 
Total 4   
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
100 
Appendix 2.9 
Details of promotions granted under CAS to Retired teachers 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.8.5; page 27) 
Sl No. 
Date of 
retirement 
Date of 
recommendation 
by the Selection 
Committee 
Date of approval 
of promotion by 
the Syndicate  
Date of effect of 
promotion to 
academic level 
14 
Pay in the lower 
post (₹131400- 
₹217100) 
Pay fixed in the 
higher post 
(₹144200- 
₹218200) 
Excess Pay and 
allowances 
disbursed (₹) 
1 31.05.2021 16.03.2022 11.10.2022 18.07.2018  143600  148500 156279 
2 30.04.2020 18.03.2022 11.10.2022 18.07.2018  187300  193800 100230 
3 31.05.2021 16.03.2022 13.04.2023 18.07.2018  176500  182700 194343 
4 31.05.2020 16.03.2022 11.10.2022 18.07.2018  181800  188200 105159 
5 30.04.2020 13.11.2023 17.10.2024 18.07.2018  147900  153000 0 
6 31.03.2019 16.02.2024 17.10.2024 18.07.2018  176500  182700 0 
7 31.03.2021 20.05.2022 11.10.2022 18.07.2018  161600  167200 163428 
8 31.03.2020 05.09.2022 14.02.2023 18.07.2018  192900  199600 95169 
9 31.03.2022 24.08.2022 14.02.2023 18.07.2018 Principal w.e.f 24.05.2018.   
Hence no pay fixation.  0 
10 31.05.2021 13.12.2021 14.02.2023 18.07.2018  171400  177400 189576 
11 31.05.2020 31.08.2022 21.07.2023 18.07.2018  171400  177400 99954 
12 31.05.2020 06.08.2022 14.02.2023 18.07.2018  181800  188200 0 
13 31.03.2020 07.06.2023 02.12.2023 18.07.2018  176500  182700 88224 
Total 1192362 
  

 
 
Appendices 
101 
Appendix 2.10: 
Instances where internal marks awarded exceeded the maximum permissible 
limit 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9.6; page 37) 
Sl. 
No. 
Programme 
Name 
Exam 
Year 
Seme
ster Paper Name Registration 
No. Exam Code Exam 
Type 
Paper 
Code 
Internal 
marks 
obtained 
Maxi
mum 
intern
al 
marks 
1 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG001 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
2 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG002 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
3 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG003 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
4 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG004 AT2042020 R SGGC203 19 15 
5 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG005 AT2042020 R SGGC203 19 15 
6 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG006 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
7 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG008 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
8 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG009 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
9 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG010 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
10 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG011 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
11 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG012 AT2042020 R SGGC203 17 15 
12 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG015 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
13 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG017 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
14 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG018 AT2042020 R SGGC203 17 15 
15 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG007 AT2042020 R SGGC203 18 15 
16 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG013 AT2042020 R SGGC203 17 15 
17 B.Sc 
Geography 2020 2 Soil Geography XXXXSGG016 AT2042020 R SGGC203 17 15 
18 B.Sc 
Geography 2021 3 Geography of 
Water Resource XXXXSGG003 AU3112021 R SGGC304 19 15 
19 B.Sc 
Psychology 2022 3 Psychological 
Statistics XXXXSPY041 AV3112022 S SPYC313 17 15 
20 
B.Sc 
Computer 
Science 
2023 4 Mathematics XXXXSCS041 AV4042023 S SMTC417 18 15 
21 
B.Sc 
Biotechnolog
y  
2022 2 Physical 
Chemistry XXXXSBT046 AV2042022 S SCHC201 18 16 
22 
B.Sc 
Computer 
Science  
2019 1 Electronic 
Devices XXXXSCS016 AT1112019 R SELC102 16 15 
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
102 
Appendix 2.11: 
Number of students who were awarded maximum internal marks in respective 
courses without having sufficient attendance  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9.7; page 38) 
Name of the college 
No. of students 
who availed 
condonation and 
received 
maximum internal 
marks 
No. of 
students 
whose 
attendance 
details were 
provided by 
college  
No. of students 
found to be 
ineligible for 
full internal 
marks (based 
on attendance 
details) 
Darul Uloom Arabic College 1 1 0 
Yuvakshetra Institute of Management 
Studies 3 3 3 
Tharananellur Arts and Science College 1 1 0 
E.M.E.A College of Arts and Science 92 89 35 
Malabar College of Advanced Studies 50 50 44 
Government Arts and Science College, 
Pathirippala 1 1 1 
C.M College of Arts and Science 27 27 26 
M.E.S Arts and Science College, 
Chathamangalam 93 0 0 
M.A.O College of Arts and Science, Elayur 21 21 14 
Zamorin’s Guruvayurappan College, 
Calicut 49 49 8 
W.M.O. Arts and Science College, Muttil 74 71 22 
Kadathanad Arts and Science College, 
Vatakara 43 41 34 
Naipunnya Institute of Management and 
Information Technology, Koratty 1 1 1 
National College of Arts and Science, 
Puliyavu 55 55 1 
Regional College of Science and 
Humanities, Kizhisseri 124 124 124 
College of Applied Sciences, Muthuvallur 2 2 2 
Ideal Arts and Science College, 
Cherpulassery 72 72 42 
Moulana College of Arts, Science and 
Commerce, Chennara 105 105 97 
Total 814 713 454 
  

 
 
Appendices 
103 
Appendix 2.12: 
Change in the examination results following revaluation  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9.8; page 39) 
UG Programmes 
Examination Year 
No. of papers for which 
students applied for 
revaluation 
No. of cases with a 
difference in marks 
after revaluation 
2019 16950 14202 
2020 20391 16580 
2021 12985 10611 
2022 15235 12828 
2023 17078 14051 
2024 12320 9393 
Total 94959 77665 
PG Programmes 
Examination Year 
No. of papers for which 
students applied for 
revaluation 
No. of cases with a 
difference in marks 
after revaluation 
2019 16093 3955 
2020 20226 4780 
2021 24335 5793 
2022 25141 6240 
2023 28832 7082 
2024 18024 4116 
Total 132651 31966 
  

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
104 
Appendix 2.13: 
Change in marks on revaluation of answer scripts 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9.8; page 39) 
UG Course 
Sl. 
No. Registration No. Paper 
Code Exam Code 
Evaluat-
ion 
Marks 
First 
Revaluation 
Marks 
Second 
Revaluatio
n Marks 
Marks 
awarded 
to student 
(out of 80 
marks) 
1. XXXXSMT005 CEGA272 AX2042024 3 51 17 34 
2. XXXXAECR04 CEGA439 AW4042024 7 65 12 39 
3. XXXXAECR46 CEGA421 AW4042024 13 0 - 0 
4. XXXXAHDR19 CEGA421 AW4042024 14 0 - 0 
5. XXXXSCS007 CEGA273 AX2042024 2 25 - 25 
6. XXXXSCF024 CEGA273 AX2042024 10 43 33 38 
7. XXXXSPH020 CHIA418 AW4042024 27 70 69 70 
8. XXXXCA038 CEGA272 AX2042024 14 53 47 50 
9. XXXXSFT046 SFTB407 AW4042024 12 42 33 38 
PG Course 
Sl. 
No. Registration No. Paper Code Evaluation 
Marks 
First 
Revaluation 
Marks 
Second 
Revaluation 
Marks 
Marks awarded to 
student (out of 144 
marks) 
1. XXXXMBA068 MBA407 55 93 - 93 
2. XXXXMBA166 MBA407 51 89 - 89 
3. XXXXMBA041 MBA409 22 64 - 64 
4. XXXXMBA098 MBA401 34 69 - 69 
5. XXXXMBA007 MBA401 50 82 - 82 
6. XXXXMBA021 MBA401 44 74 - 74 
7. XXXXMBA130 MBA403 32 66 - 66 
  

 
 
Appendices 
105 
Appendix 2.14: 
Details of delay in conduct of examination and publication of results  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9.9; page 40) 
Sl No. 
Year 
Name of 
examination  
Scheduled date of 
Commencement of 
Examination 
Actual date of 
Commencement of 
Examination 
Delay in 
commencement 
(days) 
Scheduled date of 
publication of 
result 
Actual date of 
publication of 
result 
Delay in 
publication of 
result (days) 
No. of students 
attended the 
examination 
B.Sc/BCA 
1.  2019-20 First Semester 
November 2019 27.11.2019 05.02.2020 70 03.03.2020 30.09.2021 576 31443 
2.  2019-20 Second Semester  
April 2020 08.05.2020 08.02.2021 276 14.08.2020 14.02.2022 549 27908 
3.  2020-21 Third Semester 
November 2020 16.11.2020 02.11.2021 351 05.02.2021 10.03.2022 398 23512 
4.  2019-20 Fourth Semester  
April 2020 01.04.2020 11.11.2020 224 18.07.2020 27.07.2021 374 23572 
5.  2020-21 First Semester 
November 2020 31.03.2021 16.12.2021 260 16.06.2021 22.06.2022 371 27174 
6.  2019-20 Third Semester 
November 2019 07.11.2019 27.11.2019 20 06.02.2020 01.01.2021 330 23721 
7.  2021-22 Second Semester  
April 2022 19.07.2022 26.07.2022 7 30.09.2022 25.07.2023 298 27910 
8.  2020-21 Fourth Semester  
April 2021 07.04.2021 05.10.2021 181 16.07.2021 05.04.2022 263 22653 
9.  2021-22 First Semester 
November 2021 16.03.2022 13.10.2022 211 10.06.2022 15.02.2023 250 27823 
10.  2020-21 Second Semester  
April 2021 20.10.2021 04.03.2022 135 29.01.2022 01.10.2022 245 28039 
11.  2022-23 First Semester 
November 2022 21.01.2023 16.03.2023 54 24.04.2023 15.11.2023 205 30466 
12.  2022-23 Third Semester 
November 2022 18.11.2022 16.01.2023 59 28.02.2023 13.09.2023 197 26615 
13.  2020-21 Fifth Semester 
November 2020 23.10.2020 15.03.2021 143 28.01.2021 12.08.2021 196 20955 
14.  2021-22 Third Semester 
November 2021 23.02.2022 12.05.2022 78 25.05.2022 05.12.2022 194 25174 
15.  2022-23 Second Semester  
April 2023 19.07.2023 05.09.2023 48 20.10.2023 07.03.2024 139 27591 
16.  2022-23 Fourth Semester  
April 2023 19.04.2023 31.05.2023 42 18.07.2023 01.12.2023 136 23093 
17.  2019-20 Fifth Semester 
November 2019 14.10.2019 13.11.2019 30 16.01.2020 29.05.2020 134 20402 
18.  2020-21 Sixth Semester  
April 2021 02.03.2021 29.04.2021 58 15.04.2021 27.08.2021 134 20577 
19.  2023-24 First Semester 
November 2023 30.11.2023 04.03.2024 95 31.01.2024 09.05.2024 99 29837 
20.  2022-23 Fifth Semester 
November 2022 19.10.2022 21.11.2022 33 25.01.2023 05.04.2023 70 22992 
21.  2019-20 Sixth Semester  
April 2020 03.03.2020 02.03.2020 No delay 30.04.2020 08.07.2020 69 20100 
          
          
          

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
106 
Sl No. 
Year 
Name of 
examination  
Scheduled date of 
Commencement of 
Examination 
Actual date of 
Commencement of 
Examination 
Delay in 
commencement 
(days) 
Scheduled date of 
publication of 
result 
Actual date of 
publication of 
result 
Delay in 
publication of 
result (days) 
No. of students 
attended the 
examination 
BA Branch 
22.  2019-20 First Semester 
November 2019 27.11.2019 05.02.2020 70 03.03.2020 30.09.2021 576 26944 
23.  2019-20 Second Semester  
April 2020 08.05.2020 08.02.2021 276 14.08.2020 14.02.2022 549 24808 
24.  2020-21 Third Semester 
November 2020 16.11.2020 08.11.2021 357 05.02.2021 09.03.2022 397 20663 
25.  2019-20 Fourth Semester  
April 2020 01.04.2020 11.11.2020 224 18.07.2020 27.07.2021 374 18388 
26.  2020-21 First Semester 
November 2020 31.03.2021 13.12.2021 257 16.06.2021 20.06.2022 369 25195 
27.  2019-20 Third Semester 
November 2019 07.11.2019 27.11.2019 20 06.02.2020 01.01.2021 330 18736 
28.  2021-22 Second Semester  
April 2022 19.07.2022 08.12.2022 142 30.09.2022 24.07.2023 297 26700 
29.  2020-21 Fourth Semester  
April 2021 07.04.2021 29.11.2021 236 16.07.2021 31.03.2022 258 20690 
30.  2021-22 First Semester 
November 2021 16.03.2022 13.10.2022 211 10.06.2022 15.02.2023 250 26389 
31.  2020-21 Second Semester  
April 2021 20.10.2021 04.03.2022 135 29.01.2022 30.09.2022 244 24748 
32.  2022-23 First Semester 
November 2022 24.01.2023 10.03.2023 45 24.04.2023 16.11.2023 206 29139 
33.  2022-23 Third Semester 
November 2022 18.11.2022 16.01.2023 59 28.02.2023 13.09.2023 197 24489 
34.  2020-21 Fifth Semester 
November 2020 23.10.2020 15.03.2021 143 28.01.2021 11.08.2021 195 16751 
35.  2021-22 Third Semester 
November 2021 23.02.2022 12.05.2022 61 25.05.2022 05.12.2022 194 21371 
36.  2022-23 Fourth Semester  
April 2023 19.04.2023 31.05.2023 42 18.07.2023 04.12.2023 139 22313 
37.  2022-23 Second Semester  
April 2023 19.07.2023 05.09.2023 48 20.10.2023 04.03.2024 136 27858 
38.  2019-20 Fifth Semester 
November 2019 14.10.2019 13.11.2019 30 16.01.2020 29.05.2020 134 15615 
39.  2020-21 Sixth Semester  
April 2021 02.03.2021 28.06.2021 118 15.04.2021 18.08.2021 125 15908 
40.  2023-24 First Semester 
November 2023 30.11.2023 04.03.2024 95 31.01.2024 10.05.2024 100 29349 
41.  2022-23 Fifth Semester 
November 2022 19.10.2022 21.11.2022 33 25.01.2023 05.04.2023 70 20664 
42.  2019-20 Sixth Semester  
April 2020 03.03.2020 02.03.2020 No delay 30.04.2020 08.07.2020 69 14870 
  

 
 
Appendices 
107 
Appendix 2.15: 
Details of facilities available for differently abled persons 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.10.6; page 44) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department/CCSIT/ 
SMS/ CUTEC/ other 
facilities 
Whether 
ramps/rails 
available 
Whether 
institution is 
functioning in 
the multi-storied 
building 
If yes, 
whether 
lift is 
available 
Disabled 
friendly 
toilet 
available 
1. SMS, Palakkad No Yes No No 
2. CUTEC, Manjeri Yes Yes No Yes 
3. CUTEC, Sulthan Bathery Yes Yes No Yes 
4. CUTEC, Calicut Yes Yes No Yes 
5. CCSIT, Manjeri Yes Yes No Yes 
6. CCSIT, Aranattukara Yes Yes No No 
7. SMS, Vatakara No Yes No No 
8. Department of Chemistry Yes Yes  No* No 
9. Department of Psychology Yes Yes No Yes 
10. Department of Physics Yes Yes  No* No 
11. Department of Education Yes Yes No No 
12. Department of Russian and 
Comparative studies Yes Yes Yes Yes 
13. Department of Statistics Yes Yes  No* No 
14. Department of Journalism 
and Mass Communication Yes Yes No Yes 
15. School of Folklore Studies Yes Yes  No* No 
16. Department of 
Environment Science Yes Yes No No 
17. Department of Lifelong 
Learning and Extension Yes No NA No 
18. CCSIT, Calicut University Yes Yes No No 
19. University administrative 
branch Yes Yes Yes No 
20. Computer Centre Yes No NA No 
21. Library Yes Yes  No* Yes 
22. Engineering wing  Yes No NA No 
23. Printing Press Yes No NA Yes 
24. Publication Division Yes Yes No No 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
108 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department/CCSIT/ 
SMS/ CUTEC/ other 
facilities 
Whether 
ramps/rails 
available 
Whether 
institution is 
functioning in 
the multi-storied 
building 
If yes, 
whether 
lift is 
available 
Disabled 
friendly 
toilet 
available 
25. Health Centre Yes No NA No 
26. Men’s Hostel Yes Yes No Yes 
27. Ladies Hostel Yes Yes No Yes 
28. Guest House No Yes Yes No 
29. Central Sophisticated 
Instrumentation Facility Yes Yes  No* No 
30. Pareeksha Bhavan (CE’s 
Office Building) Yes Yes  No* No 
31. Pareeksha Bhavan (Main 
building) Yes Yes Yes No 
32. Pareeksha Bhavan (SSH) Yes No NA Yes 
33. Pareeksha Bhavan (EOE 
B.Com Branch) No Yes No No 
34. Pareeksha Bhavan (PG, 
B.Tech Branch) No Yes No No 
• Tactile paths were not available in any of the  Departments/ CCSIT/ other 
facilities.  
• Integrated buildings for Science Departments connected using stairs had no 
ramps. 
• In the Department of Journalism and Mass Communication, office and the 
rooms were located at an elevated place and had no ramp constructed 
alongside the stairs.  
• The ramp outside the Computer Centre building was not connected to the main 
road. Furthermore, the Computer Centre, which was functioning at a lower 
level than other parts of the building, was connected to the rest of the building 
by stairs without any ramp. 
• In CE’s building (Pareeksha Bhavan) though a ramp was available, its entrance 
was located at the rear of the building, and the access route  to the ramp was 
not fully functional. 
* Lift recently installed but not functioning  

 
 
Appendices 
109 
Appendix 2.16: 
Details of properties let out by the University 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.10.7; page 45) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Agency 
Extent of 
Land/Building 
leased 
Date of 
agreement 
Period of 
lease/rent 
Period up to 
which rent 
received 
1.  State Bank of India  3650 Sq.ft 11.10.2021 31.12.2023 October 2024 
2.  BSNL Land with 
Building 23.01.1989 99 years  October 2024 
3.  Post Office  Building Data not 
furnished 
Data not 
furnished October 2024 
4.  Kudumbasree Mission 
Malappuram District 
Canteen 
Building  22.06.2022 21.06.2024 November 2024 
5.  Smt. Mini P.K, Pottasserry 
House, Thrissur  
Ladies Hostel 
Store  18.10.2023 17.10.2024 November 2024  
6.  
Sudeep P.K, 
Chemmalapparamba, 
Thenhipalam  
DPE 
refreshment 
centre  
06.03.2023 12.03.2024 November 2024  
7.  
CU Women’s  
Co-operative Society  
M 399 
10 Cents  03.10.2000 30 years  November 2024 
8.  CU Co-operative Credit 
Society M 266 10 Cents  07.05.1988 30 years  November 2024  
9.  CU Employees Welfare Co-
operative Society No. 453 10 Cents  21.12.2018 30 years  November 2024 
10.  CU Co-operative Society Ltd. 
No. M 24 10 Cents  22.10.1987 30 years  November 2024  
11.  Calicut University Central Co-
operative Society M 4347 10 Cents  07.05.2001 30 years  November 2024  
12.  CU Employees Housing Co-
operative Society No. M284 50 Cents  03.10.2000 30 years  November 2024 
13.  M/s KNR Constructions  2.5 Acres, 6.5 
Acres 23.06.2022 Data not 
furnished 
Data not 
furnished 
14.  
CU Women Welfare Co-
operative Society Ltd. No. M 
860 
Quarters No. H 
3B 31.03.2014  Five years  November 2024  
15.  Ration Shop Quarters No. H 
3A 06.05.2019 One year  November 2024 
16.  Shaini K Pallikkal  Guest House 
mess 02.09.2023 One year  November 2024  
17.  District Police Chief 
Malappuram  J1 Quarters Data not 
furnished 
Data not 
furnished 2017-18 
18.  District Police Chief 
Malappuram E Type Quarters  Data not 
furnished 
Data not 
furnished 2018-19 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
110 
Appendix 2.17: 
Details of properties sublet by Co-operative societies 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.10.7; page 45) 
Name of the Society  Remarks 
Calicut University Co-
Operative Society Ltd. 
No.M24 
The University allotted (October 1987) 10 cents of 
land to Calicut University Co -operative Society Ltd . 
No.M24 for 30 years at a monthly rent of ₹167 for 
construction of a building and the lease agreement was 
further extended for another 30 years in 2019, with no 
revision in monthly rent. During joint site inspection, 
Audit observed that six shops 167 were functioning in 
the building held by society and that, against the 10 
cents of land allotted to the society, it was occupying 
18 cents of land. In addition to the above 
establishments, the society sublet a food court to a 
third party in Pareeksha Bhavan campus at a monthly 
rent of ₹25,000. It was also observed that the  food 
court was functioning without obtaining mandatory 
licence from the Local body. 
Calicut University Vanitha 
Co-operative Society 
In October 2000, the University allocated 10 cents of 
land to the Calicut University Vanitha Co -operative 
Society for 30 years at an annual rent of ₹8,000, for the 
purpose of constructing a building for the society. 
During joint site inspection Audit obser ved that the 
society was operating a Cool bar within the society 
building and was collecting ₹1,101 per day  as rent 
from the shop. 
Calicut University Staff Co -
Operative Credit Society Ltd. 
No. M266 
Ten cents of land was allotted (May 1988) to Calicut 
University Staff Co-operative Credit Society Ltd. No. 
M266 for the construction of an office building for the 
society for a period of 30 years for a monthly rent of 
₹167 (₹2,004 annually). During  joint site inspection, 
Audit noticed that an ATM centre was functioning in 
the building and the society was collecting ₹5,000 per 
month as rent for the ATM. 
Calicut University 
Employees Welfare Co-
Operative Society M453 
During joint inspection, Audit observed that the 
Calicut University Employees Welfare Co -operative 
Society M453 was operating a Snack Bar within the 
Pareeksha Bhavan premises through a third party by 
collecting a monthly rent of ₹38,200. Licence from 
Local body was not obtained for the establishment.  
 
 
 
 
 
167  Coffee house, Milma booth, internet cafe and photostat centre, fish mart, supermarket, vegetable shop 
 

 
 
Appendices 
111 
Appendix 3.1 
Organisational Chart  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1; page 52) 
Secretary, Department of Co-operation, GoK 
Registrar of Co-operative Societies 
Director of Co-operative Audit 
 Deputy Inspector General, Vigilance 
Joint Registrar Vigilance 
SP Vigilance 
North Zone 
SP Vigilance 
South Zone 
SP Vigilance 
Central Zone 
Additional Director 
Additional Registrars 
(Credit/Planning/General/ 
Consumer) 
Joint Director 
Assistant Director
  
Assistant Director 
Auditors 
Joint Registrars 
Deputy Registrars 
Assistant Registrars – 
Planning and SC/ST 
Assistant Registrars 
Inspectors 
Taluk level 
District level 
State level 

 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
112 
Appendix 3.2 
Institutions selected for audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2; page 52) 
Registrar Offices in the selected districts 
District Offices at 
District Level Offices at Taluk level 
Alappuzha Joint Registrar  1. Assistant Registrar (Mavelikara) 
2. Assistant Registrar (Chengannur) 
Kannur Joint Registrar  1. Assistant Registrar (Payyanur) 
2. Assistant Registrar (Thaliparamba) 
Thiruvananthapuram Joint Registrar  1. Assistant Registrar (Nedumangad) 
2. Assistant Registrar (Neyyattinkara) 
Thrissur Joint Registrar  1. Assistant Registrar (Mukundapuram) 
2. Assistant Registrar (Kunnamkulam) 
Audit Offices in the selected districts 
District Offices at 
District Level Offices at Taluk level 
Alappuzha Joint Director 1. Assistant Director (Mavelikara) 
2. Assistant Director (Chengannur) 
Kannur Joint Director 1. Assistant Director (Kannur) 
2. Assistant Director (Thaliparamba) 
Thiruvananthapuram Joint Director 1. Assistant Director (Nedumangad) 
2. Assistant Director (Neyyattinkara) 
Thrissur Joint Director 1. Assistant Director (Mukundapuram) 
2. Assistant Director (Thalippilly) 
  

 
 
Appendices 
113 
Appendix 3.3 
Details of Inquiry/Inspections 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.10; page 62) 
(a): Details of status of inquiry/inspection under Sections 65 and 66 
 
Particulars Thiruvananthap
uram Alappuzha Thrissur Kannur 
No. of inquiries/inspection initiated u/s 65, 66 73 46 89 35 
No. of inquiry/inspection u/s 65, 66 completed 
within 6 months 27 19 32 23 
No. of inquiry/inspection u/s 65, 66 completed 
after 6 months 41 24 40 12 
No. of cases in which inquiry u/s 68 was initiated 
after 65, 66 (Time taken to initiate action u/s 68 
after submission of report u/s 65/66) 
37 (0 to 64 
months) 
16 (3 to 30 
months) 
40 
(0 to 30 
months) 
4 (0 to 13 
months) 
No. of cases pending action after receipt of report 
u/s 65/66  28 12 19 27 
No. of inquiry/inspection u/s 65, 66 pending for 
more than 6 months (Range of delay as of March 
2024) 
2 (6 to 23 
months) 
3 (8 to 44 
months) 
2 (7 to 23 
months) 0 
(Source: Information furnished by JR Offices) 
 
 
 (b): Details of status of inquiry under Section 68 
(Source: Information furnished by JR Offices) 
 
 
 
Particulars Thiruvananthap
uram Alappuzha Thrissur Kannur 
No. of inquiries initiated u/s 68 38 20 75 6 
No. of inquiries u/s 68 was completed and 68(2) 
order issued 11 3 16 1 
No. of cases in which action was pending after 
receipt of  report u/s 68 (1) 8 0 34 3 
No. of inquiries u/s 68 (1) pending for more than 
6 months (Range of delay as of March 2024) 
6 (6 to 25 
months) 
12 (8 to 38 
months) 0 (NA) 0 (NA) 
No. of cases pending finalisation (Maximum 
delay in months after initiation of 
inquiry/inspection u/s 65/66/68 as on 31 March 
2024) 
55 (70 months)  32 (54 
months) 
78 (53 
months) 32 (54 months) 

 
 114 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.4: 
Delay in receipt of Audit Reports and issue of Audit Certificates to the societies 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.11; page 65) 
Joint Director/  
Assistant Director 
Office 
No. of Audit 
certificates 
issued during 
2019-24  
No. of audit 
reports for which 
dates of 
completion of 
audit and receipt 
of Audit 
certificate was 
available 
No. of Audit 
reports 
submitted after 
15 days of 
completion of 
Audit 
(Upper limit of 
range of delay) 
No. of Audit 
certificates 
issued within 
three months 
from the receipt 
of report 
No. of Audit 
certificates 
issued after three  
months of 
receipt of report 
Maximum delay  
(in months) for 
issue of audit 
certificate 
JD, Thiruvananthapuram 515 NA NA 390 125 13 
AD, Neyyattinkara 3,616 2,144 1,221 
(396 days) 743 2,873 21 
AD, Nedumangad 1,245 781 449 
(977 days) 579 666 22 
JD, Alappuzha 285 258 205 
(505 days) 105 180 18 
AD, Mavelikkara 861 582 36 
(355 days) 545 316 15 
AD, Chengannur 408 199 9 
(371 days) 210 198 9 
JD, Thrissur 925 NA NA 650 275 12 
AD, Mukundapuram 1,480 NA NA 781 699 18 
AD, Thalappilly 922 NA NA 666 256 13 
JD, Kannur 570 NA NA 545 25 10 
AD, Kannur 2,400 NA NA 1,373 1,027 6 
AD, Thaliparamba 2,046 NA NA 1,514 532 2 
 Total 15,273 3,964 1,920 8,101 7,172  
(Source: Inward and Approval registers of AD/JD offices) 

 
 115 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.5: 
Details of year-wise surrender of funds 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.13.2; page 68) 
Year 
No. of 
heads of 
account 
Amount 
allotted 
(₹ in crore) 
Amount 
spent 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Amount 
surrendered 
(per cent of 
surrender) 
No. of 
Heads with 
Surrender 
No. of heads 
where entire 
amount 
surrendered 
Total amount 
of full 
surrender 
(per cent of 
amount 
surrendered) 
Reasons for Surrender 
2019-20 51 247.66 136.20 111.46 
(45.01) 47 6 24.22  
(21.73) 
• Pending ways and means clearance  
• Restriction of plan expenditure to 65 per cent 
• Non-issue of release order by Government 
2020-21 54 655.75 623.86 31.89  
(4.86) 32 2 0.15  
(0.47) 
• Lack of eligible proposals from districts 
(Member Relief Fund, Farmers’ Service 
Centre, etc.) 
• Non-issue of release order by Government 
2021-22 55 227.33 98.53 128.80 
(56.66) 48 6 33.24  
(25.81) 
• Lack of eligible proposals from districts 
• Non-issue of release order by Government 
• Orders of approval/release issued in fag end of 
the year 
2022-23 57 402.04 275.15 126.89 
(31.56) 55 8 68.46 
 (53.95) 
• Lack of ways and means clearance 
• Non-issue of release order 
• Treasury bill limit capped at 62 per cent of 
budget 
• Re-appropriation proposals not sanctioned 
2023-24 59 176.26 24.79 151.47 
(85.94) 54 29 53.14  
(35.08) 
• Non-utilisation of previous year’s funds 
• Non-issue of release order 
• Treasury bill limit capped at 65 per cent of 
budget 
• Re-appropriation proposals not sanctioned 
• Lack of administrative approval 
   (Source: Details furnished by RCS) 

` 
 116 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
 
Appendix 3.6: 
Details of outstanding loans and shares in selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.14; page 69) 
District Type 
No of financial 
assistances given 
to societies 
No of cases 
where no 
refund made 
Amount 
outstanding 
 (₹ in crore) 
Alappuzha 
Government loan 124 17 5.02 
Government share 344 70 0.85 
NCDC loan 18 1 0.00 
NCDC share 49 3 0.15 
Total 535 91 6.03 
Kannur 
Government loan 107 6 198.82 
Government Share 541 54 84.11 
NCDC loan 15 4 172.75 
NCDC share 44 4 25.80 
Total 707 68 481.49 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Government loan 84 22 0.85 
Government Share 282 59 0.99 
NCDC loan 55 31 0.24 
NCDC share 45 11 0.35 
Total 466 123 2.42 
Thrissur 
Government Loan 80 5 1.53 
Government Share 385 23 1.44 
NCDC loan 16 2 0.02 
NCDC share 41 3 0.02 
Total 522 33 3.00 
Grand Total 2230 315 492.94 
      (Source: Details furnished by RCS)

 
 117 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.7: 
Comparison of district-wise details of outstanding shares and loans in Monthly progress report of Joint Registrar with Half yearly 
statement of RCS as of March 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.14; page 69) 
(₹ in lakh) 
 
Outstanding loan/share 
  
Thiruvananthapuram Alappuzha Thrissur Kannur 
Outstanding 
shares/loans as in 
Difference 
Outstanding 
shares/loans as in 
Difference 
Outstanding 
shares/loans as in 
Difference 
Outstanding 
shares/loans as in 
Difference Monthly 
progress 
report of 
JR 
Half yearly 
statement 
of RCS 
Monthly 
progress 
report of 
JR 
Half yearly 
statement 
of RCS 
Monthly 
progress 
report of 
JR 
Half yearly 
statement 
of RCS 
Monthly 
progress 
report of 
JR 
Half yearly 
statement 
of RCS 
Outstanding loan Govt 69.47 80.88 11.41 440.16 424.21 -15.95 72.70 67.16 -5.54 24038.79 6575.21 -17463.58 
NCDC 54.83 45.49 -9.34 3.49 11.77 8.28 4.21 89.21 85.00 6180.40 6181.64 1.24 
Interest Govt 16.15 14.43 -1.72 119.32 126.52 7.20 67.71 78.08 10.37 34202.48 31892.20 -2310.28 
NCDC 21.67 7.10 -14.57 4.39 5.87 1.48 13.51 13.51 0.00 10855.23 10267.50 -587.73 
Penal Interest Govt 8.38 0.04 -8.34 42.05 43.42 1.37 13.77 18.10 4.33 606.27 272.19 -334.08 
NCDC 0.57 0.00 -0.57 0.20 0.57 0.37 0.65 0.70 0.05 1759.58 1561.16 -198.42 
Outstanding 
Share 
Govt 180.33 150.78 -29.55 155.00 177.67 22.67 229.52 447.00 217.48 5933.74 7372.24 1438.50 
NCDC 252.26 100.49 -151.77 20.70 22.43 1.73 1.56 1.65 0.09 2381.11 2387.52 6.41 
Penal Interest Govt 22.07 0.00 -22.07 31.29 31.29 0.00 41.12 15.47 -25.65 1248.41 1011.36 -237.05 
NCDC 0.16 0.00 -0.16 2.64 2.64 0.00 0.66 0.00 -0.66 289.00 289.00 0.00 
Dividend Govt 1.27 0.00 -1.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.32 1.32 
NCDC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
  

 
 118 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
 
Appendix 3.8: 
Irregularities in utilisation of Government assistance by societies as revealed in Joint Physical verifications 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.18; page 73) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of cooperative society 
and district 
Total project 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Year of 
release) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
unutilised/ 
diverted/idling 
(₹ in lakh)  
Purpose for which funds 
released Observations in JPV 
Diversion of fund 
1.  Tourfed, Thiruvananthapuram 100 
50 
(2020-21 & 
2021-22) 
38.72 
Infrastructure facilities to the 
existing Event Management work 
(₹75 lakh) setting up of Tourfed 
Hospitality Academy (₹25 lakh).  
Tourfed Hospitality Academy was not started. The amount 
received was utilised to repay the liabilities of the society such 
as GST, service tax, NCDC loans and shares. Out of the ₹50 
lakh received, only ₹1.13 lakh was utilised for the Event 
Management project and the balance amount of ₹10.15 lakh 
remained unutilised. 
2.  Kundukadu Co-operative 
Health Centre, Thalapilly NA 30 26 
For purchase of modern medical 
equipment under the scheme 
"Assistance to Miscellaneous Co-
operatives”. 
AR reported (December 2017) that only ₹3.89 lakh out of the 
₹30 lakh had been used for the sanctioned purpose and that the 
remaining amount had been diverted for unauthorised 
purposes. 
3.  Vithura SCB No. 1048, 
Thiruvananthapuram 98 20 
(2021-22) 20 
Tourism facilitation centre in 50 
cents of land. DPR envisaged 
refurbishing the existing building, 
setting up dormitory, food court, 
vehicle parking, children’s park 
etc. 
Tourism facilitation centre project not implemented and an 
amount of ₹17.95 lakh was expended for the construction of 
retaining and compound walls for the land. An artificial turf for 
games constructed in 15 cents of the land earmarked for 
Tourism facilitation centre. 
4.  
K-TRACK Youth Co-
Operative Society T-2284, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
135 10  
(2022-23) 10 
To set up an app -based business 
model to connect various service 
providers with the consumer. 
The project was not implemented and the society was not 
functioning. The cash balance as per passbook as on 19 July 
2023 was ₹2 ,000 only and details of utilisation were not 
furnished (November 2024). 
5.  Yuva Agro Marketing CS No. 
A 1245, Alappuzha 55.55 10  
(2022-23) 7 
To start a Copra Drying unit for 
the supply of copra to coconut oil 
producing mill units. 
The society had used a portion of the allocated fund for non - 
project expenses including office expenses (October 2023 and 
February 2024). It was observed that copra drying unit was not 
established and status of utilsation of fund was not furnished 
(November 2024).   

 
 
Appendices 
119 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of cooperative society 
and district 
Total project 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Year of 
release) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
unutilised/ 
diverted/idling 
(₹ in lakh)  
Purpose for which funds 
released Observations in JPV 
6.  Mavelikkara Block Vanitha 
CS No. A 912, Alappuzha 13 10  
(2019-20) 9.54 
To start a ready made garment 
unit and stitching centre. 
The DPR proposed for purchase 
of sewing machines, embroidery 
machines, tables for cutting and 
ironing, sewing materials, cloth 
materials for garment unit etc. , 
and to provide training classes. 
Two new sewing machines and a cutting machine were 
purchased for ₹46,000. However, readymade garment unit was 
not functioning and training classes were not provided as 
envisaged in the DPR (October 2024). On verification of 
accounts it was noticed that garments worth ₹5.28 lakh w ere 
purchased on 26 December 2021 and sold to a self help group 
on 30 December 2021 and the sales  were marked as loan of 
₹five lakh to another self help group thereby diverting the 
amount for other purpose.  
7.  
Kavalam Black Limeshell 
Industrial Co-operative society 
No. A886, Alappuzha 
NA 30  
(2020-21) 5.51 To establish lime shell processing 
unit. 
Society submitted a partial utilisation certificate of ₹6.96 lakh 
(2021-22) and stated that the project was not started due to 
public protest.   
No construction had begun on the site. Passbook showed a 
closing balance of ₹17.53 lakh (as on 24  March 2024) against 
a balance of ₹23.04 lakh resulting in a shortage of ₹5.51 lakh.  
8.  
Irinjalakuda Vanitha  
Co-operative Society 
No.R.983, Thrissur 
5 3  
(2019-20) 3 
For implementation of a Tailoring 
Unit and manufacture of 
Readymade Garments during the 
year 2019-20. 
There was only one sewing machine in the tailoring unit 
instead of 10 as envisaged in the Project (02 December 2024). 
There wasn’t any sign of readymade garment unit of Project 
costing ₹five lakh (equipment worth ₹ two lakh or cloth 
materials of ₹2.50 lakh as envisaged in the project report).  
9.  
Taliparamba Block SC/ST Co-
operative Society Ltd. 
No.C804, Thrissur 
NA 21  
(2018-19) 16 
To establish a coffee shop, ice 
cream parlour and a mini 
restaurant. 
 The café was not functioning, furniture and machinery in the 
shed were idling in the site and only ₹1.63 lakh was remaining 
in the bank account. (October 2024)  
10.  Manalur Co-operative 
Hospital, Thrissur NA 157.50  
(2017-21) 97.49 
To renovate a Medical Laboratory 
and to procure hospital equipment 
under the Development and 
Diversification Scheme.  
The medical laboratory building was not completed and 
equipment were not purchased by the Society (04 December 
2024). The AR Thrissur, reported (09 August 2023) that 31 
piles were constructed at an expense of ₹46.82 lakh by utilising 
the funds earmarked for the procurement of hospital 
equipment. It was also reported that as per the Passbook the 
cash balance of the Society stood at ₹13.19 lakh as on 17 July 
2023. 
11.  Ulloor SC society No. 635, 
Thiruvananthapuram 5 5  
(2019-20) 5 To establish a computer centre. 
Society did not establish a computer centre. The inquiry under 
section 65 also states recovery of amount from the Board 
members and Secretary.  
 Total amount diverted 346.5 238.26   

 
 120 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of cooperative society 
and district 
Total project 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Year of 
release) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
unutilised/ 
diverted/idling 
(₹ in lakh)  
Purpose for which funds 
released Observations in JPV 
 Non/short Utilisation of fund 
1 Kera Karshaka Yuva CS No. 
T 2285, Thiruvananthapuram NA 10  
(2022-23) 10 
For support of Yuva Co-operative 
societies for  production and 
marketing of coconut oil and 
other coconut products.  
The society was not functioning  and found closed. Also, no 
documents were made available regarding the functioning of 
the society and in support of the utilisation of the funds.  
2 Aruvikkara Farmers SCB Ltd. 
No. 603, Thiruvananthapuram 54.75 25  
(2021-22) 5.22 
For Project Farmers Service 
Centre that was to be used for 
development of training hall and 
office, training expenses, 
financial assistance to group 
members to develop production 
units. 
The Society furnished a utilisation certificate to Audit on 18  
November 2024 stating that an amount of ₹19,78,039 had been 
spent on building, furniture, loans etc., and an unspent balance 
of ₹5,21,961 was remaining in the bank account. 
3 
Mavelikkara Taluk Yuva 
Printing and Publishing Co-
operative Society Ltd. No. A 
1241, Alappuzha 
149.33 10  
(2022-23) 10 
For support of Yuva Co-operative 
societies for setting up of an 
Offset Printing unit. 
During the Joint Verification, the society remained closed and 
no documents were furnished for Audit. The project was not 
started and the status of funds provided was also not available. 
4 
Kainakary lime shell industrial 
Co-operative society No. 
2065, Alappuzha 
26 26  
(2017-18) 12 
To be used as working capital and 
interest free revolving fund to 
beneficiaries for purchase of boat 
and engine.  
Though the amount was available from 30 August 2017, the 
society utilized ₹14 lakh only (to 28 beneficiaries @ ₹50,000 
from 26 December 2017 to January 2023). However, 
utilization certificate was available neither with the Society nor 
with the Assistant Registrar’s office.  
5 Karthikappally Rural Welfare 
CS – A 1193, Alappuzha NA 1  
(2019-20) 1 
For collection of raw coconut, 
extracting coconut oil and 
delivering to houses. 
The amount was not utilised and coconut collection or 
extraction units were not setup. 
6 Pullukulangara SCB Ltd. No 
2992, Alappuzha 50 25  
(2022-23) 7 To establish a supermarket. 
An amount of ₹18 lakh has been expended for renovation of 
building and construction of racks as on date. However, the 
supermarket has not started functioning till date (October 
2024). 
7 
Peringome Area Yuvajana  
Co-operative Society Ltd. 
No.C 2143, Kannur 
15 10  
(2022-23) 8.50 
To start an event management and 
catering unit to promote young 
entrepreneurs and service 
providers. 
Out of ₹10 lakh only ₹1.50 lakh was utilised. Balance amount 
of ₹8.50 lakh was remaining in the bank account unutilised. It 
was noticed that the event management unit was closed and 
was not functioning. 

 
 
Appendices 
121 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of cooperative society 
and district 
Total project 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Year of 
release) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
unutilised/ 
diverted/idling 
(₹ in lakh)  
Purpose for which funds 
released Observations in JPV 
8 
Taliparamba Area Youth 
Welfare Co-operative Society 
C.2145, Kannur 
10 10  
(2022-23) 8.48 To start an Event management 
Service Unit. 
It was noticed that only an amount of ₹77,302 was utilized and 
the balance amount of ₹8,47,837 was remaining in the bank 
account unutilised. The event management unit building was 
closed and not functioning. 
9 
Irinjalakuda Vanitha  
Co-operative Society 
No.R.979, Thrissur 
12 10  
(2020-21) 10 To establish Day Care Centre. 
The Society was functioning in a two storied building, in which 
one room intended for kindergarten, where pictures of cartoon 
characters were painted on the wall but no activities had been 
commenced (December 2024). 
10 
Palayad Public Welfare  
Co-operative Society Ltd. No. 
1868, Kannur 
7.35 3  
(2022-23) 3 For revival of the Paper Bag unit. 
Utilisation certificate for ₹ three lakh was not available in the 
records of the Joint Registrar, Kannur. The paper bag unit was 
not established. 
 Total non/short utilisation amount 130 75.20   
Idling Assets 
1 Technopark hospital – No. 
2131, Thiruvananthapuram 75 75  
(2022-23) 25.08 
For purchasing Radiography (X -
ray) and Mammogram machines 
and laser printer for starting a 
Radiology Department. 
During JPV, it was observed that X -ray machine was idling 
due to lack of required power supply. The laser printer for the 
X-ray and Mammogram machines was purchased only on 13 
June 2024, due to which the mammogram machine has been 
kept idle till date. The warranty period of the machines had 
expired even before the machines were put to use. 
2 Puthupally SCB 2730, 
Alappuzha 13.79 10  
(2022-23) 10 
Project for Promotion of Grameen 
Markets / Vegetable Collection 
Centres (CITA) for construction 
of a 1500 kg capacity chilled 
warehouse, purchasing a vehicle 
for the procurement and sale of 
vegetables etc.  
It was observed that the chilled warehouse was lying unused 
since the project did not yield the intended result. 
3 
Thiruvananthapuram Jilla 
Adivasi Parambrya Chikilsa 
CS Ltd. No T 1297, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
13.60 11.56  
(2022-23) 5.65 
Project for the purchase of 
machines to start an ayurveda 
medicine production unit,  
employing medical practitioner, 
etc.  
The existing medicine shed was altered by increasing area and 
height by expending an amount of ₹9.45 lakh. The society had 
dropped the ayurveda medicine production unit project. The 
machines and utensils procured for the project was lying 
underutilized. 
4 Cherthala thekk SC SCS No A 
275, Alappuzha 4.50 4.50  
(2020-21) 4.5 
Project for (Assistance to 
Development of SC/ST  
Co-operatives) for starting a 
Computer Training Centre .  
The amount has been utilised for the purchase of 11 computers, 
two printers, etc., for the Computer Centre. On JPV it was 
observed that the computer centre has not yet been functioning 
for the past two years. 

 
 122 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the period ended March 2024 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of cooperative society 
and district 
Total project 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
(₹ in lakh) 
(Year of 
release) 
Amount of 
Government 
assistance 
unutilised/ 
diverted/idling 
(₹ in lakh)  
Purpose for which funds 
released Observations in JPV 
5 
Dharmadam Panchayath 
Vanitha Co-operative 
Society Ltd. No C 2070, 
Kannur 
3.50 2 
(2023-24) 2 To establish an Akshaya 
Kendram. 
On JPV (December 2024), Audit noticed that computer and 
printer worth ₹1.32 lakh were purchased (February 2024) and 
lying idle in the society. Society also rented a building to start 
Akshaya kendram, which was lying vacant and not 
functioning. 
6 
Irinjalakuda Vanitha Co-
operative Society No.R.979, 
Thrissur 
NA 5  
(2019-20) 5 
For implementation of a 
Manufacturing Unit of cotton 
School bags and office bags 
during the year 2019-20.  
During JPV (December 2024), Audit noticed that the bag 
manufacturing unit was not functioning. One room was 
converted into a bag manufacturing unit where five sewing 
machines were kept idle. 
7 
Iritty Block Vanitha Co-
operative Society Ltd. 
No1099, Kannur 
NA 3  
(2019-20) 3 As working Capital Grant to the 
society to start a beauty parlour.  
During JPV (December 2024), Audit noticed that  the Beauty 
Parlour with equipment were idling.  
8 
Mattannur Pattikajathi Service 
Co-operative Society C.870, 
Kannur 
5.50 5  
(2022-23) 5 
As building renovation grant for 
paper bag making unit, lamination 
and Screen printing unit for an 
existing Mini Offset Printing 
Press.  
During JPV (October 2024) Audit noticed a shed was 
constructed utilising an amount of ₹ five lakh and was lying 
idle.  
 Total idling asset 116.06 60.23  
 
 
 

 
 123 
Appendices 
Appendix 4.1: 
Details of Road Restoration Works not executed/completed 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.5; page 85) 
Item Details of CWSS  
Phase II - Package I 
Details of CWSS  
Phase II - Package II 
Agreed PAC (₹) 14,09,55,156 8,89,00,000 
Percentage of agreed PAC 1.97 24 
Amount as per breakup of payment (₹) 27,76,817 2,13,36,000 
Amount in estimate and in scope of work(₹) 57,88,417 2,93,18,170 
Work done as percentage of agreed PAC 0.00 17.647 
Amount paid for percentage of work done (₹) 0.00 1,56,88,183 
Amount to be deducted (₹) 57,88,417 77,60,764 
Amount deducted for non-executed portion as 
per break up (₹) 27,76,817 56,47,817 
Short deduction (₹) 30,11,600 21,12,947 
Excess payment  
(Short deduction + GST @ 12%, if paid) (₹) 30,11,600 23,66,500 
Total excess (₹) 53,78,101 

 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 
 
 
 
 
 
