 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 5 of 2025 

 
 

 
i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Preface  ix 
Executive Summary  xi 
Chapter-I 
Overview 
Introduction and legislative framework 1.1 1 
Background 1.1.1 1 
Legislative Framework 1.1.2 1 
Roles and Responsibilities 1.1.3 1 
Organisational Setup 1.1.4 4 
Audit Framework 1.2 4 
Objectives 1.2.1 4 
Audit Criteria 1.2.2 4 
Scope and Methodology 1.2.3 5 
Acknowledgement 1.3 5 
Chapter-II 
Planning 
Regional Plans and Development Plans 2.1 7 
Non-preparation of Regional Plans   2.1.1 7 
Delay in preparation of Development Plan 2.1.2 8 
Non-collection of relevant data for preparation 
of Development Plan 
2.1.3 10 
Erroneous reservation of land without 
requirement 
2.1.4 10 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Non-preparation of Zoning Plans 2.2 11 
Conclusion 2.3 12 
Recommendations 2.4 12 
Chapter-III 
Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
Introduction 3.1 15 
Implementation of development plans 3.2 15 
Unauthorised development in planning area 3.2.1 15 
No action on unauthorized commercial 
establishments 
3.2.2 16 
No action on an unauthorized fruit market 3.2.3 17 
No action on complaint cases 3.2.4 18 
Non-compliance of norms 3.3 19 
Irregular use of free space of Nala/River   3.3.1 19 
Non-imposing of condition for Environmental 
Clearance 
3.3.2 20 
Irregular issue of building permission without 
obtaining Grey Water Discharge Management 
Plan 
3.3.3 22 
Non imposing of condition to use fly ash based 
material 
3.3.4 23 
Irregular release of mortgaged plots   3.3.5 24 
Sanction of excess basement area 3.3.6 24 
Irregular diversion of land 3.3.7 25 

Table of contents 
 
iii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Non-collection of G oods and Services Tax on 
supervision fee by Municipal Corporation 
3.3.8 26 
Issues pertaining to collection of shelter fee by 
Municipal Corporations 
3.3.9 27 
Utilization of buildings without completion 
certificates 
3.4 28 
Deficiencies noticed during joint physical 
verification 
3.5 30 
Minimum Open Space not maintained 3.5.1 30 
Irregularities in basement 3.5.2 31 
Unauthorized construction of additional floors 
leading to increase in building height 
3.5.3 32 
Encroachment on Government land 3.5.4 32 
Excess ground coverage beyond the sanctioned 
limit 
3.5.5 34 
Non-maintenance of space between two 
residential Towers/blocks 
3.5.6 34 
Unauthorized change in approved layout 3.5.7 35 
Construction of excess built -up area than 
sanctioned 
3.5.8 36 
Unauthorised change in use of building 3.5.9 38 
Water Harvesting System not constructed 3.5.10 40 
Parking provisions not made as per norms 3.5.11 40 
Land for road widening not kept free 3.5.12 41 
Non-compliance of minimum community open 3.5.13 42 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
space/parks requirements 
Lesser width of main/approach/internal roads 3.5.14 43 
Prescribed distance from railway boundary not 
maintained 
3.5.15 44 
Non-construction of staircases of specified 
width 
3.5.16 45 
Other miscellaneous irregularities 3.6 45 
Irregularities noticed in physical verification of 
residential colonies 
3.6.1 45 
Irregularities noticed in physical verification of 
shopping malls 
3.6.2 46 
Irregularities noticed during joint physical 
verification of Hotel 
3.6.3 47 
Irregularities noticed in joint physical 
verification of colleges/schools 
3.6.4 47 
Operation of establishments without fire No 
Objection Certificate 
3.6.5 48 
Illegal construction of resorts 3.6.6 49 
Non/partial existence of park 3.6.7 50 
Conclusion 3.7 52 
Recommendations 3.8 53 
Chapter-IV 
Internal Control and Monitoring 
Introduction 4.1 55 
Shortfall in meetings of planning and 
supervision committee 
4.2 55 

Table of contents 
 
v 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Shortfall in achievement of proposed land use 4.2.1 56 
No mechanism to trace unauthorised 
development 
4.2.2 58 
No action on unauthorised colonies 4.3 59 
Shortage of manpower 4.4 61 
Conclusion 4.5 61 
Recommendations 4.6 62 
Chapter-V 
Conclusion and summary of recommendations 
Conclusion 5.1 63 
Summary of recommendations 5.2 63 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
vi 
 
LIST OF APPENDICES 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
1.1 Details of development permissions issued and selected 
for audit scrutiny 
67 
1.2 (1) Detail of building permissions issued and selected for 
audit scrutiny 
68 
1.2 (2) Detail of colony permissions issued and selected for 
audit scrutiny 
68 
2.1 Details of Regions of Madhya Pradesh 69 
3.1 Detail of development permissions issued by selected 
T&CP offices, and colony development permissions and 
building permissions issued by selected MCs during 
2018-23 
70 
3.2 Statement showing status of notices issued to owners and 
receipt of their response 
71 
3.3 Statement showing cases wherein JD, T&CP, Gwalior 
did not take appropriate action 
75 
3.4 Details of cases wherein Nala was not shown in the 
approved layout or conditions not imposed in 
development permission 
76 
3.5 Statement showing cases wherein distance from 
Nala/River was not maintained as noticed during Joint 
Physical Verification 
79 
3.6 Details of cases wherein applicant did not submit Grey 
Water Discharge Management Plan to MC 
81 
3.7 Statement showing violation of Minimum Open Space 
(MOS) 
83 
3.8 Statement showing irregular use of basement 85 
3.9 Statement showing construction of additional floors 86 
3.10 Statement showing excess ground coverage beyond the 
sanctioned limit 
87 
3.11 Statement showing deviation in construction against the 
approved layout of T&CP 
88 

Table of contents 
 
vii 
LIST OF APPENDICES 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
3.12 Statement showing rainwater harvesting system not 
constructed 
90 
3.13 Statement showing parking provisions not made as per 
norms 
91 
3.14 Statement showing non -compliance of minimum 
community open space requirement 
92 
3.15 Statement showing width of roads/ means of access not 
maintained 
93 
3.16 Statement showing staircase not constructed with 
specified width 
94 
4.1 Details of proposed land use in Development Plan and 
achievement thereagainst 
95 
4.2 Statement showing non -utilization of land (inconsistent 
land) for intended purpose 
96 
4.3 Statement showing details of 4 3 unauthorised colonies 
where no cognizance taken by the BMC 
98 
 

 
ix 
PREFACE 
This Report f or the year ended March 202 3 has been prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Madhya Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of India  for being laid 
before the Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of Performance Audit on " Management of Town 
and Country Planning " pertaining to Urban Development and Housing Department , 
Madhya Pradesh, covering the period from April 201 8 to March 2023. The Audit has been 
conducted under the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those which came to notice in the course o f  
test audit.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by  
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 

 
 
  

 
xi 
Executive Summary 
 
Why this Audit 
Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) established (1956)  the Directorate of Town and 
Country Planning (T&CP), Madhya Pradesh with the objective of developing cities in a 
planned and systematic manner. The functions and activities of Town and Country Planning 
(T&CP) are governed by Madhya Pradesh Nagar tatha Gram Nivesh  Adhiniyam, 1973  
(hereinafter referred to as the Adhiniyam), Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh 
Niyam, 1975, and Madhya Pradesh Bhumi Vikas Niyam, 2012 (MPBVN). Director, T&CP 
is responsible for preparation of Regional Plan and Development Plan and for review of 
Development Plans at regular intervals considering the population and, requirement of basic 
amenities and facilities. It also prepares pla ns for various cities of religious/tourist/  
historical/industrial importance. The Adhiniyam provides for planning, development, and 
use of land. Its provisions provide for preparation of development plans and zoning plans to 
ensure effective planning and execution of town and country planning schemes. The offices 
at the divisional level of the Directorate of Town and Country Planning were reorganised as 
District Offices. 
This audit has been conducted to assess the role of the Directorate of Town and Country 
Planning and selected Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in ensuring planned development under 
their jurisdiction. While  the preparation of development and regional plans is the sole 
responsibility of the Directorate of Town and Country Planning, zoning plans are prepared 
by the concerned ULBs. Town and Country Planning is a comprehensive system which is 
regulated by the Govern ment to guide the development and use of land, and to  ensure a 
balanced and sustainable urban-rural growth. This is achieved through concerted efforts of 
the government agencies and local bodies responsible for planning and implementation of 
such plans. 
Records for the period April 2018 to March 2023 of Director, T&CP and five district s 
(Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Ujjain)  offices of T&CP and Municipal Corporations  
(MCs) of these districts  were examined. Selected cases of development/ building/colony 
development permissions issued by  selected T&CP and MCs were scrutinized and joint 
physical verification with the MCs’ personnel was also conducted to check the compliance.  
What we found 
I.  PLANNING 
As per the provisions of the Adhiniyam, the Directorate, T&CP is responsible for preparation 
of regional plans indicating the manner to use land in the region, phasing of development, 
network of communications and transport etc. Further, the Urban and Regional Development 
Plans Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines of Government of India (GoI) 
provide that regional plans should be comprehensive and prepared at an appropriate scale to 
ensure the integration of urban nodes with the semi -urban and rural areas. GoMP divided  
(October 1973 and May 1999) the state into eight regions. However, Director, T&CP did not 
prepare regional plans, except for Bina Petrochemicals and Industrial Region, where draft 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
xii 
Regional Plan  was published in March 2012, but the final notification was pending 
(December 2024). GoMP could not publish Bhopal Development plan (as of February 
2025) resulting in prevalence of outdated Bhopal Development Plan 2005 in Bhopal . 
Audit also noticed non-collection of pertinent reports/ inputs from stakeholders by Joint 
Director, T&CP, Ujjain, Jabalpur, Indore and Gwalior for preparation of development plans.  
Audit noticed that the department erroneously reserved land on behalf of railways even 
though no such request had been received. Even after receipt of clarification from Railway, 
the department failed to de-reserve the land. Selected MCs did not prepare zoning plans for 
the development of infrastructure and amenities in local areas resulting in unauthorised 
colonies/slum areas were increasing in planning areas.  
II.  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACT/RULES AND PLAN 
In compliance to provisions of the Adhiniyam, district offices of T&CP issues development 
permissions comprising layout for development of colonies/commercial establishments etc. 
Thereafter, MCs issues colony development permission comprising details of 
internal/external facilities to be developed in the colony and building permissions 
comprising drawing of the building to be constructed.  
Audit noticed a lack of prompt and effective action in 126 reported cases of  unauthorized 
developments of marriage gardens in plann ing area, as well as in cases of unauthorised 
development of a wholesale fruit market in residential land and on complaint cases. Further 
scrutiny showed irregularities in use of free space of Nala/River in violation of MPBVN and 
encroachment of free space from Nala. MCs irregularly issued building permissions without 
obtaining grey water discharge management plan. Further, MCs irregularly released 
mortgaged plots of colony without ensuring completion of internal development work. Audit 
noticed irregular diversion of land by Sub -Divisional Officer, Revenue in violation of 
provisions of the Adhiniyam. MCs did not collect GST on supervision fee resulted in loss of 
revenue of `96.78 lakh. 
Audit noticed that Municipal Corporation authorities did not monitor the development 
activities/construction works of buildings after issue of colony development 
permissions/building permissions resulting in significant deviations by the applicants 
against approved layout. Between 2018 and 2021, 33,016 building permissions were issued 
but not ensured whether completion certificate was obtained by the concerned owners. The 
MCs did not have an integrated IT application to monitor the pendency status of Occupancy 
Certificates (OCs), along with the corresponding reasons for such pendency. Consequently, 
there was no established mechanism to verify the status of OCs prior to the issuance of new 
building permissions, thereby increasing the risk of non -compliance wi th applicable 
regulatory norms. 
During joint physical verification of 185 selected cases (142 buildings and 43 colonies) , it 
was noticed that in 50 instances (nearly 35 per cent of buildings), applicants of building 
permission did not leave minimum open space. Additionally, irregularities in construction/ 
use of basement area was observed in 14 instances, and in six instances , additional floors 
were constructed in violation of MPBVN. Audit also noticed three instances of 

Executive summary 
 
xiii 
encroachment on Government land, excess ground coverage beyond the sanctioned limit in 
11 instances, non -maintenance of gap between two residential towers/blocks. Audit also 
noticed discrepancies such as construction of excess built -up area than sanctioned in six 
instances, irregular change in use of buildings in nine instances, non-construction of water 
harvesting system in 41 instances, non-compliance of minimum community open space/park 
requirements in 13 instances  and lesser width of main/approach/internal roads in nine 
instances. Further, it was  noticed that one of the test checked colonisers , did n ot maintain 
required distance of 30m from railway boundary and constructed boundary wall, park, 
swimming pool etc., within 30m from railway boundary. 
We also noticed incomplete internal development works, construction of college building 
without obtaining development permission from T&CP, irregular issuance of development 
permission for IT park on application received for institutional purpose (School),  illegal 
construction of resort.  
III.  INTERNAL CONTROL AND MONITORING 
Town and Country Planning is a technical advisory body to Government for promotion of 
planned physical development of urban areas in the State.  
Audit noticed significant shortfall ranging between 88 and 96 per cent  in meetings of 
planning and supervision committee. There was significant shortfall of 44 per cent  in 
achievement of proposed land use. Audit noticed that roads, buildings, government quarters 
proposed in old development plans were being included in new development plans which 
indicates non-achievement of targets of previous development plans. The Department did 
not have its own mechanism to tr ace unauthorised development result ing in absence of  
preventive action on unauthorised land use. Audit noticed that Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore and 
Ujjain MCs though identified 1586 unauthorised colonies through survey but did not take 
effective action for removal of the unauthorised development /construction and filing 
complaints with the police authorities. Further, audit noticed acute shortage of manpower in 
selected T&CP district offices. All these reflect that Department of Town and Country 
Planning was largely non-functional. 
What we recommend 
Audit recommends that the Government should 
(1) prescribe a timeline of  suitable interval for preparation/updation  of Regional 
Plan/Development Plan/Zoning Plan as recommended in Urban Regional Development 
Plans Formulation and Implementation Guidelines, 2014 issued by GoI and 
immediately finalize and publish the Bhopal Development Plan.  
(2) fix responsibilities on concerned authorities/officials for delay in de-reservation of land, 
failure in removal of unauthorised development and  ensuring compliance of 
norms/conditions by the applicant/builders and non-reporting of cases of deviation. 
(3) collect fines from builders who have violated prescribed conditions/norms and take 
stringent action for future violations, if any.  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
xiv 
(4) prescribe rosters for inspection of development activities/buildings by T&CP/MC 
officials as well as use Geographical Information System (GIS) to identify deviations 
from Development Plan as well as permissions.  
(5) set a fixed timeline for inspecting unauthorized development s and take appropriate 
action.  
(6) develop an integrated IT Application to enhance transparency in the NOC application 
process, providing real-time updates on status of permissions from various agencies , 
along with reasons for withholding Occupancy Certificate and other permissions.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-I 
 
Overview 

 
 
  

 
1 
Chapter-I: Overview 
1.1 Introduction and legislative framework 
1.1.1 Background 
Town and Country Planning is a comprehensive system which is regulated by the 
Government to guide the development and use of land, and to ensure a balanced and 
sustainable urban-rural growth. This is achieved through concerted efforts of the government 
agencies and local bodies responsible for planning and implementation of such plans. 
This audit has been conducted to assess the role of the Directorate of Town and Country 
Planning and selected Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in ensuring planned development under 
their jurisdiction. While preparation of development and regional plans is the sole 
responsibility of the Directorate of Town and Country Planning, zoning plans are prepared 
by the concerned ULBs.  
1.1.2 Legislative Framework 
The Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) established the Directorate of Town and 
Country Planning (T&CP), Madhya Pradesh, in 1956, with the core objective of promoting 
planned and systematic urban development within the State. Further, the Madhya Pradesh 
Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as “the Adhiniyam”) was 
enacted in April 1973, which established the legislative framework for the planning, 
development, and use of land within the State. The Adhiniyam aims to:  
• Provide for orderly planning, development, and utilization of land.    
• Ensure proper preparation and effective execution of town planning schemes 
through the formulation of development plans and zoning plans.    
• Establish a Town and Country Planning Authority for the effective implementation 
of town and country development plans.    
• Enable the development and administration of special areas through Special Area 
Development Authorities.    
• Provide for the compulsory acquisition of land necessary for development plans.  
To further regulate town and country planning, GoMP also notified the Madhya Pradesh 
Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Niyam, 1975, and the Madhya Pradesh Bhumi Vikas Niyam, 
2012 (MPBVN).  
The Town and Country Planning (T&CP) department, operating under the aegis of the Urban 
Development and Housing Department of GoMP, is responsible for implementing the 
Adhiniyam’s provisions and the Directorate, Town and Country Planning, and the Municipal 
Corporations play vital roles in the management of town and country planning. 
1.1.3  Roles and Responsibilities 
To provide a clearer understanding of the responsibilities within the town and country 
planning framework, the key functions and roles are outlined below: 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
2 
Chart 1.1: Roles of various agencies in town and country planning 
 
1.1.3.1 Role of Director, Town and Country Planning 
 
•Municipal Bodies
•Development 
Authorities
•Directorate of Town and 
Country Planning
•Municipal Bodies
•Development Authorities
•Directorate of Town 
and Country 
Planning
•Department of Urban 
Development and Housing
•Directorate of Town and 
Country Planning
Identification 
and 
Notification
Planning
ImplementationRegulation
Preparation of Regional 
Development Plans
There are eight distinct 
planning regions in the 
State based on factors such 
as agricultral land, 
industries, mineral and 
forest resources
Director is tasked with 
preparing Regional 
Development Plans which 
specify how the land in 
the region should be used. 
development phases, 
communication and 
transport network and 
conservation, 
development of resources.
Preparation of 
Development Plan
Director is responsible 
for preparation of 
Development Plans 
(DPs) are prepared as 
outlined in the 
Adhiniyam. 
Development Plans 
are meant to indicate 
land use and its 
allocation for various 
activities.
Review, Evaluation, 
Modification and 
Approval of Development 
Plans
Director is responsible 
for the preparation 
and publication of 
DPs.
Any alteration in land 
use or land 
development after DP 
is operational requires 
Director's approval.

Chapter-I: Overview 
 
3 
Power to grant change in land use after DPs are operationalised 
Individuals or entities (excluding the Union Government, State Government, local 
authorities, or special authorities constituted under this Act) seeking to develop land must 
submit a written application to the Director. Upon receiving an application, the D irector, 
may: 
• Grant permission unconditionally.  
• Grant permission subject to conditions deemed necessary.  
• Refuse permission. 
Control of Unauthorized Development 
The Adhiniyam empowers the Director, T&CP, to impose penalties and take action to remove 
unauthorized development within the planning area. 
1.1.3.2  Role of Municipal Corporations (Urban Local Bodies) 
According to the MP Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, the Municipal Corporation 
Commissioner is authorized to: 
• Grant Registration Certificates for the development of colonies.    
• Prohibit the erection or re-erection of buildings.    
• Halt building work that has commenced or is being carried out unlawfully.    
• Order the removal or alteration of work that does not conform to bye-laws.    
Preparation of Zoning Plans:  The local authority (ULB) may, on its own motion, at any 
time after preparation of development plans or on the directives of the State Government, 
shall prepare a Zoning Plan. These plans, which require approval from the State 
Government, provide detailed land use specifications that elaborate on the broader land use 
designations outlined in the Development Plan. Zoning Plans also identify land liable for 
acquisition for public purposes by entities such as the Union Government, the State 
Government, and Town and Country Development Authorities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
4 
1.1.4 Organisational Setup 
 
1.2 Audit Framework 
1.2.1 Objectives 
Town and Country Planning is crucial for creating livable, sustainable and efficient 
communities by managing land use, ensuring access to services and promoting economic 
growth, while addressing environmental and social needs. 
Lack of town and country planning leads to chaotic urban growth, environmental 
degradation and societal problems  like traffic congestion, inadequate infrastructure and 
inequitable access to resources and opportunities. In view of the above, performance audit 
was conducted to assess whether: 
• the department designed the Regional Plans/Development Plans/Zoning Plans after 
incorporating inputs from the required parameters/criteria/surveys etc.? 
• the concerned/involved authorities complied with the provisions of Acts/Rules and 
plans? 
• the department had effective internal controls and monitoring mechanisms? 
1.2.2 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria have been derived from: 
• The Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973 (MPTCP Act). 
• The Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Niyam, 1975 (MPTCP Rules). 
• The Madhya Pradesh Bhumi Vikas Niyam, 2012 (MPBVN 2012). 
• The Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 (MPMC Act). 


Chapter-I: Overview 
 5 
• The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (MPLR Code).  
• Municipal Corporation (Recycled and Reuse of Grey Water in buildings) Model Bye 
laws, 2010 
• The MP Nagar Palika (Registration of Colonizer, Terms and Conditions) Rules, 1998 
• Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation 
(URDPFI) Guidelines, 2014 of Government of India (GoI). 
• National Building Code. 
• GoI's/GoMP's Notifications, Circulars and orders issued from time to time. 
1.2.3 Scope and Methodology 
The Audit was conducted at Directorate, T&CP and five (out of 33) district offices of T&CP 
and five (out of 16) Municipal Corporations (Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Ujjain)1 for 
the period 2018-23.  
Detailed scrutiny of 539 (out of 3,384) development permissions issued by T&CP offices of 
selected districts was carried out ( Appendix-1.1). Further, 407  (out of 1,722) building 
permissions and 149 (out of 573) colony development permissions issued by Municipal 
Corporations to the owner/developer/builder were also scrutinized by audit (Appendix-1.2).  
Audit methodology involved requisition of records , examination of data and records , issue 
of audit enquir ies and audit observations. Joint physical verification with the officials of 
Municipal Corporations was also conducted for on -the-spot verification of recorded 
permissions. The development authorities have also been assigned role of implementation 
of the provisions of the Adhiniyam and Rules. These are currently not being audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and therefore, have not be en covered in this 
assignment. 
An Entry Conference was held (June 2023) with Principal Secretary, Urban Development 
and Housing Department (UDHD), GoMP wherein audit objectives, scope and methodology 
was discussed. An Exit Conference  was held (February 2025) with Principal Secretary, 
Urban Development and Housing Department, GoMP to discuss the audit findings. During 
Exit Conference, Government furnished replies which have been suitably incorporated and 
rebutted, wherever required, in the report. 
1.3 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the State Government, Directorate, Town 
and Country Planning, five district offices of T&CP and Municipal Corporations (Bhopal, 
Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Ujjain) for conducting the Performance Audit. 
 
1   Units were selected on the basis of the population. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
 
Planning 

 
  

 
7 
Chapter II: Planning 
2.1 Regional Plans and Development Plans 
The URDPFI guidelines inter alia stipulate time frames for preparation of various plans as 
follows: 
Table 2.1: Planning System Framework as per URDPFI guidelines 
Type of Plan Scope and purpose of the plan Time Frame 
Regional Plan To identify the region and regional resources for 
development within which settlement (urban 
and rural) plan to be prepared and regulated by 
District Planning Committee. 
20 years 
Development Plan To prepare a comprehensive Development Plan 
for urban areas, Peri‐urban areas under control 
of Development authority/ Metropolitan 
Planning Committee. 
20-30 years  
(Review every 5 
years) 
Zoning Plan To detail the sub‐city land use plan and 
integration with urban infrastructure, mobility 
and services. 
5-20 years  
(Review every 5 
years) 
GoMP through notifications (October 1973  and May 199 9) divided the State into eight 
regions as detailed in Appendix 2.1. 
2.1.1 Non-preparation of Regional Plans   
Section 5 of the Adhiniyam provides for preparation of the Regional Plans (RP). Scrutiny 
of records of Director, T&CP showed that Director, T&CP did not prepare RPs for 
development of the regions as required under Section 5 of the Adhiniyam, except for Bina 
Petrochemicals and Industrial Region, where draft RP was published in March 2012, but the 
final notification was pending (December 2024). 
Thus, the Director, T&CP did not publish Regional Plans in compliance with the provisions 
of the Adhiniyam  which resulted in non -preparation of strategy by considering planned 
urban/rural development after analysing the land uses of the region, specifically  
eco-sensitive zones. This deprived the State of a proper plan for implementation of economic 
and social structural facilities, irrigation, drinking water, environment, transportation, etc. in 
line with the increasing population. Non -preparation of R egional Plans adversely affected 
the planning for conservation of  natural resources /biodiversity, control over unplanned 
development, planned use of land.  
During Exit Conference, the Government/Department accepted the fact and assured that it 
would seriously consider preparation of all Regional Plans in future. 
Government accepted the audit observation and assured corrective action in future.   
  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
8 
2.1.2  Delay in preparation of Development Plan  
The following chart shows the various stages in preparation of the development plans in 
Bhopal: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: Compiled from T&CP’s records) 
STAGES IN PREPARATION OF BHOPAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
NOV 1975 
GoMP notified the 1st Bhopal 
Development Plan 1991  
Ist PLAN 
JUN 1995 
GoMP notified the 2nd Bhopal 
Development Plan 2005. This Plan was 
to be in force till 2005. New DP was to 
be prepared thereafter.  
2nd PLAN 
FEB 2006 
Housing Department added 195 villages 
to the existing area of Bhopal DP 2005  
Director, T&CP published the 3rd draft 
Bhopal Development 2021.  
GoMP instructed T&CP to revise the draft 
DP based on population, transportation, 
development of central and state 
government institution, etc. and also decide 
on effective duration of the DP.  
 
Director, T&CP re-submitted the 3rd draft 
Bhopal Development Plan 2021 to 
GoMP.  
GoMP again instructed T&CP to prepare 
and re-submit the draft DP 2021 
Director, T&CP published the draft DP 
2031 instead of 2021  
Director, T&CP sent the draft DP 2031 to 
GoMP for approval.  
GoMP returned the draft DP to T&CP 
with instructions to prepare the Bhopal 
DP 2047.  
3rd PLAN-STAGE-I 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-II 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-III 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-IV 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-V 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-VI 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-VII 
 
3rd PLAN-STAGE-VIII 
 
AUG 2009 
APR 2010 
JUN 2011 
SEP 2011 
MAR 2020 
FEB 2021 
FEB 2024 

Chapter-II: Planning 
 
9 
It can be seen from the above chart that the GoMP  returned the draft Bhopal Development 
Plan 2031 in February 2024, after a lapse of 36 months . No further development was 
observed in the Directorate insofar as submission of the revised draft as per GoMP’s 
instructions was concerned (December 2025).  
Consequently, on account of delays in finalization of the new development plan(s) after the 
expiry of ‘in force’ DP of 2005, both at the Directorate and the Government level, the 
outdated Bhopal Development Plan 2005 continues to prevail.  
Audit noticed that no time frame was prescribed in the Adhiniyam for preparation and 
approval of the Development Plan. Thus, since 1975, only two B hopal Development Plans 
were approved by the Government, one each for 1991 and 2005. Thereafter, no new 
development plan for Bhopal was approved even after a lapse of 18 years. As a result, 
Bhopal Development Plan 2005 continued to be the benchmark which may not be relevant 
to cater to the present development needs.  We further noticed a 77 per cent  population 
increase in Bhopal Municipal Corporation area in comparison to 1991 population with 2011 
population and 175 per cent increase in unauthorised colonies in comparison to 2000 with 
2021. Information in respect of encroachments and land ceiling limits has not been furnished 
by Director, T&CP, Bhopal. In the absence of an updated DP for Bhopal post expiry of the 
2nd DP of 2005, the State Government has no model, basis or plan in place to prepare for the 
growth in population coupled with wanton develo pment and increase in unauthorised 
colonies, which needs a strategic vision as well as a resolute approach. 
During exit conference, t he Government stated (February 2025)  that the gap due to non -
approval of Development Plan of Bhopal by GoMP despite increase in area covered is filled 
through a Committee at the Government level, which considers extension of planning area, 
and a committee at district level to review the map and existing land use were constituted.  
The reply is not acceptable as even though the Committee considers expansion issues of 
planning area, the aspect of concerns/objections of the stakeholders do not get addressed. 
So, this exercise cannot substitute timely preparation of Development Plan.  Further, on 
enquiring reasons for non-finalization of Bhopal Development Plan 2021, Director , T&CP 
intimated that Government returned (September 2011 and February 2024) the draft Bhopal 
Development Plan, 2031 with remarks to prepare draft Bhopal Development Plan 2047 by 
December 2024 on the basis of projected requirements. The same remains to be published. 
Director prepared draft Bhopal Development Plan 2021 in August 2009 . However, the 
Bhopal Development Plan could not be published (February 2025) resulting in prevalence 
of outdated Bhopal Development Plan 2005.  
The return of draft development plans by GoMP on stated ground s like revisiting the draft 
Bhopal Development Plan 2021 considering the population and development of the State 
etc., (instructed in April 2010), prepar ing a new draft Bhopal Development Plan (returned 
in September 2011)  and prepar ing draft Bhopal Development Plan, 2047 (returned in 
February 2024) are not only arbitrary and vague, but it also allows enhanced discretion to 
Government to determine development processes and preferences through committee , 
effectively substituting development plans. Non-finalisation of the Bhopal DP for 20 years 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 10 
and regularising the extensions through an internal committee mechanism is fraught with 
risks and requires immediate correction. 
2.1.3 Non-collection of relevant data for preparation of Development Plan 
Scrutiny of records of preparation of development plans of selected districts 1 showed that 
T&CP Ujjain, Jabalpur, Indore and Gwalior had not obtained such pertinent reports (works 
to be done by the various departments for implementation of D evelopment Plan) from the 
Government Departments, local authorities and public institutions  during preparation of 
Development Plan . T&CP Bhopal had issued letter (June/July 2016 and June 2019) to 
various departments seeking data/records, but no reply was received from the concerned 
departments. Also, T&CP offices of the selected districts, except T&CP Bhopal, did not  
consider any draft five-year and annual development plan prepared by the Zila Yojna Samiti 
during preparation of D evelopment Plan . Thus, the department did not adhere  to the 
prescribed procedure for preparation of Development Plan. In absence of inputs from local 
authorities/departments, it could not have ensured that the activities planned in the 
Development Plan  were realistic and in conformity with the requirements of various 
departments/ authorities/institutions and activities envisaged in other plans. 
During exit conference, the Government stated (February 2025) that necessary data is 
obtained from various departments before preparing the Development Plans.  
Audit requested to provide copy of relevant records for verification by Audit. However, 
Government did not provide copy of records along with the reply for verification by 
Audit.  
2.1.4 Erroneous reservation of land without requirement 
Section 14 (d) of the Adhiniyam provides that the Director shall carry out such surveys, 
inspections and obtain such pertinent reports from Government departments, local 
authorities, and public institutions as may be necessary for preparation of the plans. Further, 
as per Sub Section 23(1) and 23 -A(1)(a) of the Adhiniyam, the Director may on his own 
motion or if so, required by the State Government shall undertake a review, modification 
and evaluation of the Development Plan.  
Section 35 states that on receipt of request from the appropriate authority for deletion of 
reservation of land, the Director or the State Government, if it is satisfied that the land is not 
required for the public purpose for which it is reserved in the draft Development Plan, may 
sanction the deletion of such reservation from the draft Development Plan. Thereafter, the 
land is deemed to be released from such reservation and shall become available to the owner 
for the purpose of development as otherwise pe rmissible in the case of adjacent land under 
the relevant plan. 
During scrutiny of records of Development Plan preparation at Joint Director, T&CP, Indore 
audit noticed that land of Khasra No. 5/3 and 49 in village Bhangarh, Tehsil Juni, district 
Indore, was reserved by the T&CP Department (January 2008) for transportation land use, 
to build Kumhedi Railway Station at Bhangarh village in Indore as per Indore Development 
 
1   Bhopal, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Indore and Ujjain 

Chapter-II: Planning 
 
11 
Plan 2021, effective from January 2008. We noticed that Deputy Chief Engineer (C) -IV, 
Western Railway, in response to a Right to Information application, stated (August 2019) 
that there was no proposal for Kumhedi Railway Station. In reference to the reply of railway, 
Joint Director, T&CP Indore intimated (September 2019 and October 2019) to the Director 
T&CP Bhopal that the railway has no proposal for Kumhedi Railway Station and suggested 
that the land of Khasra No. 5/3 and 49 may be de -reserved from transportation land use 
under Section 23-A(1)(a) of the Adhiniyam. Further, Deputy Chief Engineer(C) IV, Western 
Railway, Indore (MP) also clarified (September 2020 ) to Joint Director, T&CP Indore that 
there is no such proposal under consideration of the railway to build a new railway station 
named Kumhedi. 
However, the land continues to be reserved (December 2024) in spite of a pending 
application from landowners and judgement of the Madhya Pradesh Hon'ble High Court, 
Indore Bench (July 2022). Thus, it indicates that the department erroneously reserved the 
land on behalf of railways even though no such request had been received. Even after receipt 
of clarification from Railways that the land was not required, the department did not   
de-reserve the land. This resulted in unnecessary litigation  and land remaining unavailable 
for development.  
During Exit Conference, the Government admitted the facts and stated (February 2025) that, 
so far, the department has not been able to de-reserve the land, but necessary action will be 
taken in this regard.  
Non-disposal of representations  of the lan downers despite directions of the Hon'ble High 
Court in light of above facts as well as the reasoning on part of GoMP not to re-examine the 
issue on grounds of non -receipt of request from Railway authorities is irregular. Such 
instances of unnecessary activism may result in non-cooperation from landowners in future 
while development plans are chalked out, making implementation difficult. 
The Government/Department may investigate the reasons and fix responsibility for delays 
in de-reservation of land.   
2.2 Non-preparation of Zoning Plans 
As per Section 20 of the Adhiniyam, the local authority (Municipal Bodies) may, on its own 
motion, at any time after the publication of the development plan, or thereafter if so, required 
by the State Government shall, within six months of such requisition prepare a Zoning Plan. 
Further, Section 21 (1)(a) states that the zoning plan shall indicate the land liable for 
acquisition for various purposes and should clearly earmark areas for 
residential/commercial/industrial/ agricultural units and various public utilities, forests and 
other natural bodies and other matters relating to development of the planning area. Further, 
Section 23-A(1)(a) of the Adhiniyam provides that the State Government may, on its own 
motion or on the request of a Town and Country Development Authority, make modification 
in the development plan or zoning plan for any proposed project. 
Further, Urban and Regional Development Plan s Formulation and Implementation 
(URDPFI) Guidelines, 2014 (para 1.5.4) stipulates that local area plans are to be prepared 
to make provision for infrastructure and amenities to enhance the quality of living. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 12 
In response to audit enquiry,  Municipal Corporations  of the selected districts intimated 
(April/May/June 2024) that no zoning plans were prepared. Audit noticed from the current 
and previous Development Plans that increase in slum areas ranged between 27 per cent and 
121 per cent in three2 out of five selected districts. Further, in case of Bhopal and Jabalpur 
districts, although the area increase under slums was not available in the records, Audit 
noticed a 182 per cent increase in slum population in Bhopal (from 1.70 lakh in 2001 to  
4.80 lakh in 2011) while in Jabalpur district slum population remained constant at 2.50 lakh, 
as per Jabalpur Development Plan  2005 and Jabalpur Development Plan  2021, which 
indicates that the surveys carried out to prepare the Jabalpur Development Plan 2021 were 
unreliable. There were no reasons on record to explain as to how the slum population 
remained static in Jabalpur, despite significant increase in the other four districts. 
Thus, in absence of zoning plans for the development of infrastructure and amenities in local 
area, unauthorised colonies /slum areas were increasing in planning areas which resulted in 
haphazard development of residential areas. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government admitted the fact and stated 
that the process of preparing the zoning plan has now begun, and some districts are in 
the process of preparing their zoning plan. 
2.3 Conclusion 
The T&CP did not prepare Regional Plan as envisaged in the Act/rules. Development Plans 
were prepared without taking inputs from stakeholders. Selected Municipal Corporations 
did not prepare zoning plans for the development of infrastructure and amenities in local 
area resulting in increase in unauthorised colonies/slum areas in planning areas. Even though 
clear timelines and planning framework had been prescribed by the Ministry of Urban 
Development, GoI, for preparation of Regional, Development and Zon ing Plans, the 
T&CP/GoMP did not adhere to these guidelines. 
2.4 Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
• Government should prescribe a timeline of  suitable interval for preparation/  
updation of Regional Plan/Development Plan/Zoning Plan as recommended in 
Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation 
Guidelines, 2014 issued by the GoI (Paragraphs 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.2).  
• Early action should be taken for preparation of Bhopal Development Plan, aligned 
with the population and economic growth so that future growth can be effectively 
planned and managed (Paragraph 2.1.2) 
• The Government/Department may investigate the reasons and fix responsibility for 
delays in de-reservation of land (Paragraph 2.1.4).  
 
2   Gwalior - 62 per cent, Indore - 121 per cent and Ujjain - 27 per cent. 

Chapter-II: Planning 
 
13 
• The Department should ensure that surveys carried out for preparation of various 
plans (Regional/Development and Zoning) are accurate and reflect the on -ground 
realities (Paragraph 2.2). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Implementation of the 
Act/Rules and Plans  

 
  

 
15 
Chapter III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
3.1 Introduction 
As per Section 29 (1)  and 30  of the  Madhya Pradesh  Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh 
Adhiniyam,1973 any person intending to carry out any development on any land, shall make 
an application in writing to the Director for permission accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed. Director may grant the permission subject to such conditions as may be deemed 
necessary under the circumstances  or refuse the permission , under intimation to the 
applicant.  
After receipt of development permission from T&CP, the colonizer who wants to establish 
any colony and take up the development work, shall apply to the Competent Authority 
(Municipal Corporation) at least ninety days before the proposed date for starting the 
development work of the colony or sale of plots as provided in Rule 8 (1) of The MP Nagar 
Palika (Registration of Coloniser, Terms and Conditions) Rules, 1998  (hereinafter called 
the Coloniser Rules).  
Further, As per Rule 12 of MPBVN, no development, construction, alteration or demolition 
should be carried out  without obtaining permission from the authorities . Number of 
development permissions issued by selected T&CP offices, and colony development 
permissions and b uilding permissions issued by selected Municipal Corporations  (MC) 
during 2018-23 are shown in Appendix-3.1. 
Scrutiny of selected cases of development permission, building permissions and colony 
development permissions for residential colonies together with joint physical verification 
indicated the following: 
3.2 Implementation of development plans 
According to Section 36 and 37 of the Adhiniyam, no person shall commence, undertake, or 
carry out any work of development on any land without the required permission. Any 
contravention of development permission will be punishable  with a simple imprisonment 
for a term which may be extended to six months, or with fine which may be extended to two 
thousand rupees or with both, and in the case of a continuing offence with further fine which 
may extend to two hundred rupees for every d ay. The Director may serve  on the owner a 
notice for demolition or any alteration of unauthorized development with the assurance that 
the land is restored to its original state prior to the unauthorized development. Director may 
recover the amount of any expenses incurred by him in this behalf from the owner as arrears 
of land revenue. The Additional Director, T&CP, MP also issued (August 1976) directions 
for prosecution of defaulters which provides if compliance of notice was not ensured within 
the period specified in the notice.  
3.2.1 Unauthorised development in planning area 
During scrutiny of records of Bhopal Municipal Corporation, it was noticed that Revenue 
Department, GoMP reported to Bhopal Municipal Corporation (between February 2021 and 
March 2022) 126 cases of unauthorised development in 16 villages, contrary to land use, as 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 16 
specified in Bhopal Development Plan and without obtaining development permission. 
Audit noticed that JD, T&CP, Bhopal did not take any action to remove the unauthorized 
developments in compliance with the provisions of the Adhiniyam and departmental 
directions (August 1976). Case details are summarized in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Village-wise cases of unauthorized development 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Village No. of cases Sl. 
No. 
Name of Village No. of cases 
1 Gora 36 9 Barkhedi Kalan 13 
2 Khajuri Kalan 10 10 Koluya Kala 01 
3 Barkheda Pattani 09 11 KhejdaBaramad 08 
4 Bhaisakhedi 04 12 Narela Sekari 02 
5 Bairagarh kala 07 13 Nabibaag 01 
6 Palasi 08 14 Malikhedi 10 
7 Badbai 05 15 Senkra Kala 02 
8 Sevaniya Gond 04 16 Hatai Kheda 06 
Total 126 
Reasons for not carrying out regular inspection or taken action in these particular cases were 
not on record. The JD, T&CP, Bhopal did not ensure action on unauthorized developments 
in Bhopal Development Plan area according to provisions of the Adhiniyam and orders 
issued, resulted in unauthorized development contrary to the provisions of the Bhopal 
Development Plan. It was also observed that the Bhopal Municipal Corporation did not take 
action on unauthorized development despite all cases falling under Bhopal Municipal 
Corporation area. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government took note of the findings and 
assured that the matter will be looked into.  
3.2.2 No action on unauthorized commercial establishments  
Audit observed from the record of JD, T&CP Gwalior that at least 132 marriage gardens 
were operating in an unauthorized manner. Scrutiny of records indicated that JD, T&CP, 
Gwalior issued notices (March to July 2023) to the owners of these 132 marriage gardens 
under the provisions of Section 37 of the Adhiniyam directing them to remove the 
unauthorized constructions within 30 days. It was also informed through the notices that if 
the unauthorized construction was not removed within 30 days, action will be taken under 
Section 37(6) of the Adhiniyam. After issuance of the notices, development permissions 
were obtained by five marriage garden owners and notice of one marriage garden was closed 
without taking any further action. Further, in case of notices issued to the remaining 126 
owners, only 16 out of 126 owners of marriage gardens r esponded. Despite, non-receipt of 
reply from 110 marriage garden owners the JD, T&CP, Gwalior issued (April to July 2023), 
2nd notices only to 28 owners. The case wise status of notices issued, and receipt of reply are 
given in Appendix-3.2. Unauthorised construction of Marriage gardens are illustrated in  
Photographs-3.1 to 3.2 
  

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 17 
Photograph showing unauthorised construction of marriage garden without obtaining 
development/building permission 
 
 
Photo-3.1: Laxmi Vatika Marriage Garden, DD 
Nagar, Gwalior 
Photo-3.2: Indraprastha Marriage Garden, Gole Ka 
Mandir, Gwalior 
Further, the JD , T&CP, Gwalior neither initiated any action to remove the unauthorised 
development/construction, nor filed a complaint in the court as mentioned in the prosecution 
instructions issued (August 1976). This reflects negligence of the responsible authorities in 
taking action to remove the unauthorised development/construction. Further , it was 
observed that only 27 marriage gardens out of 126 had obtained fire No Objection Certificate 
from Gwalior Municipal Corporation. Thus, in remaining marriag e gardens the risk of fire 
hazard cannot be ruled out during events , which is a significant public risk as all these are 
places of public gathering.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government stated that on such issues coming 
to knowledge, notice is issued to the concerned and the matter is brought to the notice of the 
Municipal Corporation. Further action is to be taken by the municipal corporations. The last 
chapter of the Development Plan states that implementation and management of 
Development Plan lies with the Municipal Corporations and Development Authorities. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per Section 37 of the Adhiniyam, T&CP was 
responsible for taking action on unauthorised developments.  
3.2.3 No action on an unauthorized fruit market 
During scrutiny of records of JD, T&CP, Gwalior it was noticed that the Fruit Market 
Association of Gwalior applied (May 2001) for commercial-cum-residential layout approval 
to establish a wholesale fruit market on 12.42 hectares of land at Transport Nagar, Malanpur, 
Gwalior. Joint Director, T&CP, Gwalior informed the applicant to submit a revised layout 
in consonance with the provisions of Gwalior Development Plan 2005. In Gwalior 
Development Plan 2005, land use of the referred land was designated as residen tial while 
permission was sought for residential cum commercial purpose. However, the applicant did 
not submit the revised layout and the case was filed (August 2001). A notice was also issued 
(September 2000) to the applicant for removal of unauthorized development. The applicant 
filed a case in the first magistrate court against the notice which was dismissed (July 2003). 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 18 
Audit further noticed that after almost 20 years, Joint Director T&CP, Gwalior issued 
(September 2022 ) a notice to the applicant for removal of unauthorized development/ 
construction. During the hearing process, T&CP again asked (November 2022) Fruit Market 
Association to submit the layout for approval as per current development  plan so that the 
structures may be retained. The next hearing was held (February 2023) as the association 
had not submitted the application in the last three months. The association stated that its 
application of 2001 for layout approval was filed but not cancelled, hence, permission may 
be granted by reopening the filed case. T&CP Gwalior passed final order (March 2023) for 
removal of unauthorized development/ construction of the fruit market under the provisions 
of Section 37 (6) of the Adhiniyam. The association was given one-month time to restore the 
site to its condition prior to development/ construction  and the notice stated that i f the 
unauthorized development was not removed  within the specified period, the 
Government/municipal corporation would remove the unauthorized development, and the 
expenditure incurred would be recovered as arrears of land revenue under section 63(a) of 
the Adhiniyam. However, no further action was taken on unauthorized construction in 
wholesale fruit market as illustrated in Photographs-3.3 to 3.4. 
Photographs showing construction of commercial wholesale fruit mandi on residential land 
without obtaining development/building permission from T&CP/MC 
  
Photo-3.3: Construction of commercial shops in 
fruit Mandi Transport Nagar Gwalior. 
Photo-3.4 : Construction of commercial shops in 
fruit Mandi Transport Nagar Gwalior. 
Thus, the above unauthorized development/construction of fruit market had been in 
department’s cognizance since 2001 . However, the department did not take any action for 
removal of unauthorized development/ constructions which reflects the apathy of JD, T&CP, 
Gwalior as well as the municipal corporation in monitoring and taking action on 
unauthorized developments.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government took note of the findings and 
assured that the matter will be looked into.  
3.2.4 No action on complaint cases 
Scrutiny of complaint case files in office of the JD, T&CP, Gwalior showed that in six out 
of nine cases  of unauthorised development/construction, the construction activities were 
going on at the time of inspection by the authorities. Audit noticed  that in one case, 
commercial buildings was constructed against the permission issued for residential.  


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 19 
Audit further noticed that in four cases, the office issued (2019 -23) notices under Section 
37(1) of the Adhiniyam to remove the unauthorised development/construction within a 
month and restore the existing land into its original state. Audit noticed that Joint Director, 
T&CP, Gwalior sent (between September 2019 and February 2023) copy of its final orders 
to Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Gwalior for removal of unauthorised 
constructions. However, no action was taken by the municipal corporation in these cases. 
Further, no action was taken by the T&CP to file litigation against the defaulters as per the 
directions issued in 1976. Thus, Joint  Director, T&CP did not take action for removal of 
unauthorised development/ constructions or filing litigation against defaulters. Case -wise 
details are given in Appendix 3.3. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government took note of the findings and 
assured that the matter will be looked into.  
3.3 Non-compliance of norms 
3.3.1 Irregular use of free space of Nala/River   
As per GoMP order (September 2006),  main cause of water logging in cities is the 
encroachment of Nala or construction work carried out on Nala land or on both side s of 
Nala, legally or illegally. Also Rule 50 of MPBVN provides that no piece of land shall be 
used as a site for construction of building, if the site is within 9 m of the highest water level 
of a water body/water course and 15 m in case of river or as prescribed in the development 
plan. Therefore, as per above provisions to keep free space from the Nala on both sides 
should be ensured so that blockage of water flow in Nala could be avoided. Details of cases 
wherein either condition to keep space free from Nala was not imposed or Nala was not 
shown in the layout of T&CP development permissions are given in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Number of cases wherein selected T&CP offices did not impose condition to keep 
space free from Nala or Nala was not shown in approved layout 
Name of 
district 
Total 
case 
Condition 
applicable 
Condition 
imposed and 
Nala shown in 
layout 
Condition 
imposed while 
Nala not shown in 
layout 
Conditions not 
imposed while 
Nala shown in 
layout 
Bhopal 150 16 6 7 3 
Gwalior 128 24 4 20 0 
Indore 150 10 7 0 3 
Jabalpur 75 7 4 1 2 
Ujjain 36 3 2 1 0 
Total 539 60 23 29 8 
(Source- Development permission issued by T&CP) 
It is seen that in 23 cases (Category-I), the condition to keep a free space of 9/15 m from the 
bank of Nala/River was imposed and the same was reflected in approved layout also. In 29 
cases (Category-II), the condition was imposed, but the Nala was not reflected in the layout 
and in remaining eight cases (Category-III), the condition was not imposed, but Nala was 
shown in layout. Thus, possibility of non -compliance of norms of Rule 50 of MPBVN 
cannot be denied in above 37 cases.  Details are given in Appendix-3.4.  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 20 
During the joint physical verification of 185 selected cases, it was noticed that the condition 
to keep free space of 9 /15 m from Nala/River was applicable in 1 41 cases involving four 
cases of Category-I, three case of Category-II and seven2 cases of Category-III. However, 
the builder/colony developer did not maintain the required 9/15 m free space between the 
bank of Nala/River and building. This carries the risk of changing the natural flow of Nala 
causing it to overflow during rains and thereby causing water logging issues. Nala was either 
encroached upon or some construction work was done within the free space of 9 m. In three 
cases3, Nala was covered by laying Hume pipes , encroached upon and concreted, and the 
Nala land was being used for public utilities in the colony or other buildings. Details are 
shown in Appendix-3.5 and illustrated in Photograph-3.5 and 3.6. 
Photograph showing use of free space of Nala 
  
Photo-3.5: Ortho Hospital , Ujjain constructed  
hospital building  just at the bank of Nala without 
leaving any free space 
Photo-3.6: Mahendra Utsav Hotel , Bhopal 
constructed boundary wall just at the bank of Nala 
without leaving any free space 
During the Exit Conference (February 2025), while accepting the facts the Government 
stated that in the development permission, the condition of distance from the river/nala 
is imposed under the provisions of the development plan and MPBVN.  
3.3.2 Non-imposing of condition for Environmental Clearance 
As per Ministry of Environment and Forest (MOEF), New Delhi notification  
(14th September 2006) , all buildings and construction projects having built up area ≥  
20000 Sq.m and < 1,50,000 Sq.m, covering an area ≥ 50 hectare and also for built up area ≥ 
1,50,000 Sq.m for Township and Area Development Projects would require prior 
Environmental Clearance (EC) from MOEF or State Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA) before commencement of any construction work.  Applicants seeking 
EC are required to submit Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report which would 
consist of all details and comprehensive terms of Reference , addressing all relevant 
environmental concerns in respect of the project. 
 
1   Gwalior-3, Bhopal-8, Indore-1 and Ujjain-2 
2   Out of seven cases, in three cases neither condition  was imposed in development permission nor Nala 
was shown in approved layout. 
3   Sunrise Enclave, Gwalior; Mantra Infrastructure and Grace Garden, Bhopal  


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 21 
GoMP issued (October 2005) directions to all departments of GoMP including T&CP to 
obtain Environmental Clearance in cases of building and other construction projects having 
residence for 1000 or more persons, industrial townships, residential colonies etc. which are 
prone to environment pollution.  
A copy of the Environmental Clearance is required to be submitted by the project proponents 
to the Head of local bodies. Panchayats and Municipal Bodies who shall display the same 
for 30 days from the date of receipt on their website.  
Details of Environmental Clearance condition not imposed in T&CP development 
permissions are shown below in Table 3.3. 
Table-3.3: Details of cases wherein EC condition was not imposed  
Name of district Total selected case Condition applicable Condition not imposed 
Bhopal 150 26 4 
Gwalior 128 2 2 
Total 278 28 6 
(Source- Development permission issued by T&CP) 
During the scrutiny of 278 T&CP development permissions for audit period, it was noticed 
that the condition to obtain Environmental Clearance from MOEF/SEIAA was not imposed 
in six cases (having built -up area >20000 Sqm) out of 28 cases. In two 4 other selected 
districts, conditions were imposed in all the 27 test checked cases wherever applicable.   
Due to absence of condition  in the development permission , six builders/owners did not 
obtain EC, resulting in non- preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment. This carries 
risk of  environmental pollution such as air, water, and noise  as mitigating measures to 
elevate environmental issues were not prepared.  
Further scrutiny of records of Municipal Corporations, audit found that despite condition for 
Environmental Clearance in the development permissions in 49 cases, the builders/owners 
did not  submit5 Environmental Clearance or Environmental Impact Assessment to 
Municipal Corporation in all the 49 cases. Municipal Corporations did not take action on 
non-submission of Environmental Clearance in these cases.  
During joint physical verification it was found that  Keshar Mall of Keshar Infrastructures6 
at Gwalior, Garden City 7 at Gwalior, and Aditya World School8 at Gwalior did not obtain 
EC from MoEF/SEIAA despite having built up area 51354, 21894 and 2 1600 Sqm 
respectively.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government did not furnish reply.  
 
 
4  Jabalpur and Indore. Further, in Ujjain district EC condition was not applicable pertaining to lower area. 
5  Bhopal Municipal Corporation, Gwalior Municipal Corporation and Jabalpur Municipal Corporation 
confirmed non-submission of Environmental Clearance/EIA by the owners/builders. Indore Municipal 
Corporation furnished misleading reply. 
6  Building permission case No. PRM/0411/Z05/2018 dated 28.05.2018 
7  By GLR Estate Pvt. Ltd, Building permission case No. GWA/0101/1476/2020 
8  T&CP Development permission No. 432/24.02.14 & 430/13.12.14 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 22 
3.3.3 Irregular issue of building permission without obtaining Grey Water 
Discharge Management Plan 
As per Municipal Corporation (Recycled and Reuse of Grey water in buildings) Model Bye 
laws, 2010, every occupier/developer/builder for new/under redevelopment properties will 
submit application to the municipal corporation  with the details of proposed Discharge 
Management Plan 9 along with the application of building permission and permission to 
connect Grey Water Sewage (water from sinks, tubs, showers and washing) to  municipal 
corporation Sewage system along with the approval of M adhya Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board (MPPCB).  
It is applicable to all housing, commercial and any premises which fall in any one of the 
following categories (i) housing complexes having 100 or more tenements or (ii) three star 
or higher category hotels or (iii) all commercial establishments, hostels having built up area 
more than 2000 Sqm or more.  
Whoever contravenes any provisions of these byelaws is punishable with a fine  of  
₹ 5,000 and in case of a continuous breach, a further fine which may be extended up to one 
hundred rupees for every day after the first occasion in which the breach is proved, may be 
imposed. The applicants were to submit the Grey Water Discharge Management Plan along 
with the application for building permission. 
During scrutiny of 407 cases of building permissions in Municipal Corporations for audit 
period it was seen that condition to obtain grey water discharge management plan from the 
applicants was applicable in 40 10 cases. However, the applicants did not submit the grey 
water discharge management plan  to the concerned corporations  and neither did the 
corporations seek the plans from the applicants. Details are shown below in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Discharge management plan not submitted to Municipal Corporations 
Name of district Total 
selected 
cases 
Condition applicable for submission 
of discharge management plan 
Non-submission of discharge 
management plan 
Bhopal 127 14 14 
Gwalior 48 9 9 
Indore 118 10 10 
Jabalpur 57 3 3 
Ujjain 57 4 4 
Total 407 40 40 
(Source- Building permissions issued by Municipal Corporations) 
Due to non-submission of the grey water discharge management plan, all the 40 applicants 
were liable to be imposed and levied  with a penalty amounting to ₹ 22.45 lakh. This was 
not imposed by the Municipal Corporations  on the applicants. Details are shown in 
Appendix-3.6. Besides, in the absence of a proper grey water discharge plan in these cases, 
Audit cannot derive adequate assurance that the establishments had connected their  
discharge management systems to the city sewage system. In such a situation, the irregular 
 
9  A plan for the monitoring, programming and controlling of the effluent from the recycling water treatment 
plant and its discharge into the municipal sewage system. 
10  Housing complex- seven, Hospitals-two, Commercial establishments- 21, Educational institute-10 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 23 
dumping/release of grey water into the cities’ natural water/ground water systems cannot be 
ruled out, posing significant threat to the environment. 
Joint physical verification in five out of these cases , indicated that the owners, builders or 
developers had not developed the system to sep arate grey water from the sewer and g rey 
water was being mixed in the sewer line.  Thus, the same possibility ca nnot be ruled out in 
the other 35 cases as the concerned corporations did not carry out any checks.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government admitted the facts and stated that 
a condition requiring applicants to obtain gr ey water discharge management plan will be 
imposed.  
Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.3.4  Non imposing of condition to use fly ash based material 
As per Director, T&CP, order (July 2004) use of fly ash bricks condition must be inserted 
in building permissions situated within the range of 100 km of Thermal Power Plant and its 
compliance must be ensured. The range of 100 km was extended to 300 km vide Ministry 
of Environment and Forest notification (January 2016) . Further, Ministry of Environment 
and Forest issued directions vide Notification (November 2009)  for restricting the 
excavation of topsoil for manufacturing bricks and promoting the utilization of fly ash in 
manufacturing of building materials and in construction activity within the specified radius 
from coal or lignite based thermal power plants. It is also necessary to achieve the ultimate 
objective of conservation of topsoil and minimize environmental pollution caused due to fly 
ash.  
During scrutiny of 40711 cases of building permissions issued by the Municipal Corporations 
in selected districts12 for the period 2018-23, it was noticed that the Municipal Corporations 
did not insert the condition to use fly ash material in any of their building permissions, 
despite the Thermal Power Plants being situated within the range of 300 km of all the 
selected districts. District wise thermal power plants are mentioned as below in Table 3.5.  
Table 3.5: District wise thermal power plants 
District Name of thermal power plant Distance from district 
Bhopal Satpura Thermal Power plant, Sarni, Betul, M.P. 180 km from Bhopal 
Gwalior Parichha Thermal Power Plant, Jhansi, UP 120 km from Gwalior 
Indore Khargone Super Thermal Power Plant, Khargone 105 km from Indore 
Jabalpur Sanjay Gandhi Thermal Power Plant (Govt. sector), 
Amarkantak Thermal Power Plant (Govt. sector) 
162 km and 230 km from Jabalpur 
Ujjain Shree Singaji Thermal Power Plant, Khandwa 180 km from Ujjain 
(Source- Earth google maps) 
Promotion of fly ash usage could have ensured that the fly ash generated by thermal plants 
could have been kept in check through its usage, which, however, was not ensured by the 
concerned Municipal Corporations. 
 
11  Gwalior-48, Bhopal-127, Indore-118, Jabalpur-57 and Ujjain-57 
12  Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur and Ujjain 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 24 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government admitted the facts and stated that 
instructions had been issued recently in this regard. 
3.3.5  Irregular release of mortgaged plots   
As per Rule 12 (i)  of the MP Nagar Palika  (Registration of Colonizer, Terms and 
Conditions) Rules, 1998, 25 per cent of the plots or houses to be developed by the Colonizer 
(excluding the plots or houses reserved for Economically Weaker Section) shall have to be 
mortgaged with the concerned M unicipal Corporation  till the completion of internal 
development works of the colony. 
As per Rule 13, the coloniser must complete the internal development of the colony within 
three years from the date of issue of the development permission of the colony. If the 
coloniser does not complete the internal development works of the colony within the 
stipulated period, then the Competent Authority, after giving reasonable opportunity of 
being heard to the coloniser, shall get the internal development works completed, and the 
expenditure incurred thereon shall be recouped by selling the mortgaged plots. 
During scrutiny of records and joint physical verification (June 2024) of Blue Lotus Hills, 
Gwalior13 it was noticed that the developer did not complete internal development work such 
as Sewage Treatment Plant (STP), rainwater harvesting system, plantation, drainage for 
rainwater and development of all the 14 parks (June 2024) even after lapse of 14 years. This 
resulted in deprivation of basic facilities to the residents.  
Despite the absence of completion of  internal development work s of the colony by the 
coloniser within the specified time of three years. Gwalior Municipal Corporation did not 
initiate any proceedings/action to complete the remaining development works of the colony 
by selling the mortgaged plots .  On the contrary, Gwalior Municipal Corporation released 
(March 2013) the mortgaged plots back to the colonizers even though internal development 
work had not been completed.  This resulted in undue benefit to the developer. The status 
quo of development even after 14 years can be further attributed to poor oversight controls 
of the Municipal Corporation. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that the matter will be looked into.  
3.3.6 Sanction of excess basement area  
As per Rule 76 of MPBVN  basement shall not extend into the prescribed Minimum Open 
Space (MOS). Further, as per Rule 2(20) of MPBVN ground coverage is the area of the land 
covered by the plinth of the building at the ground floor level.  
During scrutiny of records of Gwalior Municipal Corporation, it was noticed that Gwalior 
Municipal Corporation  issued (February 2019) building permission to  Ms Gravity 
Infrastructures, Gwalior for the construction of a shopping  complex which provide d for 
ground coverage of 38 per cent of the land. As per T&CP and Gwalior Municipal 
Corporation approved layout/drawing, building was to be surrounded by 6m wide Minimum 
 
13  By Blue Lotus Developers, Gwalior, GMC Colony Development Permission No. 270 dated 04.06.2010  

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 25 
Open Space (MOS) from side 1, side 2 and rear and by 12m MOS at front. However, GMC 
irregularly sanctioned excess basement area in building permission to Gravity 
Infrastructures, Gwalior as detailed in Table 3.6: 
Table 3.6: Details of the sanction of excess basement area by Gwalior Municipal Corporation 
Item Sanctioned area as per 
GMC building 
permission 
Allotment allowed as per 
rules 
Excess  
Plot Area 7040 Sqm 7040 Sqm Nil 
Ground Coverage 
claimed 
32.93 per cent 32.93 per cent Nil 
Ground Coverage Area  
permitted 
2318.43 Sqm 32.93 per cent of 7040 
Sqm=2318.43 Sqm 
Nil 
Basement area 
Sanctioned 
6068.40 for 2 floors 
i.e.3034.20 Sqm for 1 floor 
4636.86 Sqm for 2 floors 
i.e. 2318.43 Sqm for one floor 
1431.54 Sqm 
for both floor 
(Source- Building permission case file of Gwalior Municipal Corporation) 
Further, in joint physical verification also excess construction of basement was found. The 
builder constructed the basement beneath the Side 1 MOS by 6 m, Side 2 MOS by 6 m, 
Front MOS by 9 m, Rear MOS by 6 m to obtain the required sanctioned basement area. 
Thus, due to irregular sanction of building permission by GMC, construction of excess 
basement was carried out by the applicant in violation of Rule 76 of MPBVN. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
It is recommended that responsibility may be fixed on the concerned officials of Gwalior 
Municipal Corporation for lapses resulting in sanctioning of excess basement area.  
3.3.7   Irregular diversion of land  
As per section 59(10) of Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code 1959, the landowner shall 
divert land for only purposes permissible under governing laws related to land use. No action 
of landowner or Sub-Divisional Officer for grant of permission to change land use contrary 
to the provisions of the applicable law shall be permitted. Section 16 and 26 of the Adhiniyam 
prohibit the change in land use as shown on the map of the Development Plan without 
obtaining written permission of the Director. No local authority or any other authori ty is 
competent to accord permission for a change in land use contrary to the land use identified 
in the Development Plan map. 
As per the orders issued (August 1976) by T&CP, MP, Bhopal, the Joint Director/ Deputy 
Director/ Assistant Director were authorized by the Director, T&CP for filing cases against 
defaulters for constructions/ change of land use other than that as indicated in existing land 
map/ Development Plans. 
During scrutiny of 535 cases of land diversion collected from Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO), 
Revenue of selected districts , it was noticed  that in 191 cases, SDO, Revenue irregularly 
changed the land use in contravention of T&CP Development Plan (land use) and provisions 
of the Adhiniyam during 2018-23. Summary is given in Table-3.7. 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 26 
Table 3.7: Details of online land diversion cases provided by SDO revenue 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of SDO Total cases14 Scrutinized 
cases 
Cases of 
irregular 
diversion 
Diverted land  
(sq. mt.) 
1. Bhopal Kolar 723 61 35 81748 
  Huzur 4132 76 73 548394 
2. Gwalior Jhansi Road 659 59 14 25372 
  Morar 1570 41 05 21220 
3. Indore Bicholi Hapsi 347 50 11 53630 
  Joni 744 50 18 34310 
4. Jabalpur Adhartal 1401 98 12 12008 
5. Ujjain Kothi Mahal 193 50 14 49760 
  Ujjain Nagar 238 50 09 96140 
 Total  10007 535 191 922582 
Thus, the SDO, Revenue permitted irregular diversion of 92.26 hectare land.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government  while accepting the facts stated 
that revenue authorities had to comply with land use prescribed, and that diversion had been 
carried out by the Department of Revenue against the development plan’s land use.  The 
department further agreed that the action of the SDO was beyond jurisdiction. 
3.3.8  Non–collection of G oods and Service s Tax on supervision fee by 
Municipal Corporation 
As per Rule 12 (ii)  of the M.P. Nagar Palika  (Registration of Coloniser, Terms and 
Conditions) Rules, 1998, the coloniser shall have to deposit an amount equal to two per cent 
of the estimated cost to be incurred on the internal development of the colony as supervision 
fee to the concerned municipality. Further, as per clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 7 
(Chapter 3) of the Madhya Pradesh Goods and Service s Tax Act, 2017 (MPGST Act) , the 
Central/ State Government, or a local authority, is liable to pay tax on the supply of services, 
except for the services notified as exempted or those notified as neither a supply of goods 
nor a supply of services. 
Scrutiny of 149 selected cases  of colony development permissions showed that selected 
municipal corporations15  did not charge 18 per cent Goods and Services Tax (GST) on the 
supervision fee in 122 cases 16 from the colonisers/developers . Audit further noticed that 
selected Municipal Corporations collected a supervision fee amounting to ₹ 537.69 lakh on 
internal development cost of the colonies from the colonisers during the audit period . 
Despite receiving supervision fee, Municipal Corporations did not collect GST amounting 
to ₹ 96.78 lakh (18 per cent of ₹ 537.69 lakh). This resulted in loss of revenue of ₹ 96.78 
lakh in the form of GST to the State as well as the Central Government.  
 
14  Audit sought details of diversion cases from SDO, Revenue of selected districts for 2018 -23. However, 
SDO, Revenue of selected districts provided details of 10,007 cases (details of cases received after start 
of online portal).  
15  except Bhopal Municipal Corporation 
16  Gwalior-11, Indore-63, Jabalpur-35, Ujjain-13. 27 cases were excluded as in 20 cases, Bhopal Municipal 
Corporation collected GST, Indore Municipal Corporation  did not provide records of five cases and in 
two cases, Jabalpur Municipal Corporation did not provide records. 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 27 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. 
3.3.9 Issues pertaining to collection of shelter fee by Municipal Corporations 
As per Rule 10 of the MP Nagar Palika (Registration of Coloniser, Terms and Conditions) 
Rules, 1998 as amended on 19.04.2012, in every residential plotted colony, the colonizer 
shall either develop 15 per cent of the total number of plots/constructed dwelling units for 
persons belonging to Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and Lower Income G roups 
(LIG) or deposit the shelter fee, which is 5 per cent of the cost of the total area of plots or 
the total constructed area. In addition, the colonizer shall also deposit an additional shelter 
fee at prescribed rate with the concerned municipality. Every municipality shall maintain a 
separate bank account for the deposited amount.  
3.3.9.1 Non-maintenance of separate bank account for accounting of shelter fee 
During scrutiny of the records of Municipal Corporations of the selected districts it was 
noticed that selected Municipal Corporations17  collected required fee/charges e.g. Colony 
Development Fee, Colony Supervision Fee, Shelter Fee, Additional Shelter Fee, Labour 
Cess Charges etc. from colonisers and deposited the same in bank account of Municipal 
Corporations instead of depositing the shelter fee in a separate bank account. Audit further, 
noticed that during 2018-23, colonizers deposited shelter fee of ₹ 259.17 crore as detailed in 
Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Details of Shelter Fee deposited by the colonizers during 2018-23. 
District Year Total  
(` in lakh) 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Bhopal 201.44 938.17 694.21 1079.00 1474.22 4387.04 
Gwalior 160.10 274.96 229.06 356.36 103.12 1123.60 
Indore 1347.11 1866.55 2122.34 4259.27 6710.75 16306.02 
Jabalpur 485.84 319.69 309.84 488.85 1209.18 2813.40 
Ujjain 301.93 244.40 197.13 314.01 229.58 1287.05 
Total 2496.42 3643.77 3552.58 6497.49 9726.85 25917.11 
(Source: Information collected from records of selected Municipal Corporations) 
Thus, the Municipal Corporations violated the MP Nagar Palika (Registration of Colonizer, 
Terms and Conditions) Rules, 1998 by not opening separate bank account for deposit of 
shelter fee. In the absence of a separate bank account, Audit is unable to derive assurance 
that the shelter fee which were collected are being utilized for the intended purposes. In 
response to an audit query ( July 2024 ) IMC replied that shelter fee collected was  being 
utilised for construction of dwelling units under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (PMAY) 
scheme. 
Since separate funds are provided for implementation of PMAY scheme, the utilization of 
shelter fee for the scheme was in contravention of the MP Nagar Palika (Registration of 
Colonizer, Terms & Conditions) Rules 1998  and resulted in diversion of funds. However, 
the actual expenditure met out of `259.17 crore collected by the municipal corporation 
 
17  except Indore Municipal Corporation as IMC maintained separate bank account for shelter fee. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 28 
cannot be authenticated, nor accounted for. In such a situation it cannot be understood as to 
how the department could ensure that the fees received were being utilized for the intended 
schemes.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government stated that the matter will be 
brought to the notice of the concerned municipal corporations.  
3.3.9.2 Absence of oversight controls over utilization of shelter fee 
Rule 10 (17) of the MP Nagar Palika (Registration of Colonizer, Terms & Conditions) Rules 
1998, as amended in April 2012 provides that the shelter fee may be made available without 
interest as loan to Local bodies/Madhya Pradesh Housing Board/Madhya Pradesh Slum 
Clearance Board/Development Authority. The said amount may be utilised as margin money 
to obtain loan from financial institutions for the construction of houses for EWS. It will also 
be utilized for providing the basic services like sewerage, drinking water, public toilets etc. 
in the old Jhuggi Basti area. 
On s crutiny of records of selected Municipal Corporations, it was noticed  that during  
2018-23, ₹ 259.17 crore was collected from colonizers as shelter fee. Audit observed that:-  
(1) The corporations did not maintain any separate cash book or account or accounts 
/register to record expenditure met out of shelter fee.  
(2) The department did not exercise any checks or make efforts to maintain the expenditure 
out of these funds. For instance, Indore Municipal Corporation utilized funds towards 
PMAY as claimed was diversion of funds, but no action was taken to rectify the same. 
In case of other’s records/details of expenditure incurred from collected shelter fee was 
not available. Municipal Corporations (Bhopal, Gwalior, Jabalpur and Ujjain) have not 
maintained separate account for shelter fee. Thus, in the four Municipal Corporations 
utilisation of collected shelter fee was inconsistent with the objectives of collection of 
shelter fee.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government agreed with the audit findings that in 
absence of accounting for shelter fee, the utilization as prescribed could not be ensured.   
3.4 Utilization of buildings without completion certificates 
As per Rule 33 of MPBVN every construction or work for which permission is required or 
issued shall be subject to inspection by the authority. Inspection, where required, shall be 
done within seven days following the receipt of notice from the owner. The final inspection 
of the completed work shall be done within 21 days following the receipt of notice from the 
owner. Rule 102 of MPBVN  states that every owner on completion of the building and 
before occupation of the building shall obtain a Completion Certificate (CC). As per Rule 7 
of MPBVN, the building officer s hall inspect the premises for which building permissions 
have been issued and ensure compliance with these rules. 
During scrutiny of records and information provided by the Municipal Corporations it was 
noticed that in three years  (during 2018 -21), 33,018 building permissions were issued. 
However, in none of the cases (except two cases in Ujjain Municipal Corporation  where 
completion certificates were issued) were the buildings inspected, or Completion 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 29 
Certificates issued. Details of total building permissions issued from 2018 to 2021 are shown 
below in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Details of total building permissions issued from 2018 to 2021 
(Source- District offices of Municipal Corporations) 
Further, it was observed that the Municipal Corporations lacked an integrated IT application 
to systematically monitor the pendency status of Occupancy Certificates (OCs), along with 
the underlying reasons for such delays. As a result, there was no mechanism to verify the 
status of OCs, thereby increasing the risk of non-compliance with related regulatory norms. 
Thus, due to n on-inspection of buildings during  construction and lack of integrated IT 
application, it was not ensured by the authorities that  buildings were constructed as per the 
approved drawing. During the joint physical verification of 155 buildings, audit noticed that 
buildings were occupied and were being utilized without obtaining CC/ Occupancy 
Certificate from Municipal Corporations . Further, Audit noticed  instances of  
non-compliance of norms such as construction as per approved design/drawing, plantation 
of required number of plants and building use etc. which was due to non-inspection. 
In such a scenario Audit is unable to derive adequate assurance that the norms have been 
followed before occupancy. Further, each of action on the building owners by municipal 
corporations indicates total apathy towards public health and safety and discretion of duty. 
The fact that many of these establishments are public focused such as schools and hospitals, 
safety is of paramount importance which has been forgone in all these cases by the 
authorities entrusted with the same.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government stated that completion certificates of 
buildings over 16 meters height have been issued in Indore district.  
Audit was unable to corroborate the reply which is in contradiction with the available 
records. In response to the previous queries the department/ municipal corporations did not 
provide any information while during exit conference their stand sharply differed. Further, 
the department was unable to provide any documentary proof in support of its replies during 
exit conference. 
It is recommended that the GoMP may investigate the entire process of issuing of building 
permission vis-a vis actual occupancy and completion certificates. Safety measures may be 
checked, and responsibilities may be fixed at all level within the department for discretion 
of duties and for abdication of responsibilities.  
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of district No. of building permissions issued during the year 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
1 Bhopal 1542 972 1808 4322 
2 Gwalior 738 488 944 2170 
3 Indore 5916 2579 4956 13451 
4 Jabalpur 2183 1613 2758 6554 
5 Ujjain 2452 2047 2022 6521 
 Total 12831 7699 12488 33018 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 30 
3.5 Deficiencies noticed during joint physical verification 
Audit conducted joint physical verification of selected 185 cases (142 18 buildings and 4319 
colonies) with Municipal Corporations  personnel to check the compliance of terms and 
conditions, MPBVN and drawing/layout of buildings by the owners/applicants. Audit 
noticed violations in 95 cases out of 185 cases (51 per cent) in selected districts. Category-
wise violation are given below:- 
3.5.1 Minimum Open Space not maintained 
As per Rule 55 (3) of MPBVN, the open space shall be separate or distinct for each building 
and where a building has two or more wings, each wing shall have separate or distinct open 
spaces for the purposes of light and ventilation of the wings. Rule 42(5) stipulates that the 
open spaces on all sides shall be hard enough to bear the weight of a fire engine (18 tonnes). 
The said open space shall be kept free of obstruction and shall be motorable.  
During the joint physical verification, non -maintenance of Minimum Open Space  (MOS) 
was found in 50 buildings20 (nearly 35 per cent of buildings), out of 142 buildings deviating 
from the conditions laid down in development/building permission. Case wise details are 
mentioned in Appendix-3.7 and illustrated in Photograph-3.7 and 3.8. 
Photograph showing buildings constructed by violating MOS norms 
  
Photo-3.7: AMI School Gwalior Chitrangada Raje 
Block Side 1 MOS (1m against the required 6m). 
Photo-3.8: BSSS College Bhopal having side2 MOS 
(2m against the required 6m).  
Thus, in above cases the absence of compliance of MOS norms carried risks associated with 
fire emergency measures. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. 
 
18  Bhopal 38, Gwalior 19, Indore 36, Jabalpur 25, Ujjain 24. 
19  Bhopal 5, Gwalior 4, Indore 17, Jabalpur 9, Ujjain 8. 
20  Gwalior-12, Bhopal-12, Indore-17, Ujjain-9. 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 31 
3.5.2 Irregularities in basement 
As per Rule 76 of MPBVN , basement shall not be used for habitable purposes except as 
mentioned in sub Rule 2(c). The basement shall not extend into prescribed MOS. Basements 
can only be used for storage of non -combustible articles, strong rooms, bank cellars, 
radiation rooms, air-conditioning equipment, and parking. 
During the joint physical verification, audit noticed irregularities in construction/ use of 
basement in 14 21 cases. Audit found that basement of Little Ang els High School, Gwalior 
and Shopping Complex (Gravity Infrastructures, Gwalior) were merged for wider use. The 
entry/ exit ramp towards Little Ang els High School side was not found constructed.  The 
building plan of the shopping complex  building shows that the basement was  to be 
constructed separately for this building. Audit noticed that in 10 building cases, basements 
were being used for the purposes other than car parking such as hotel kitchen, boarding 
school kitchen and classroom, marriage function, blood bank, medical shop etc. In four 22 
cases, no ramp was constructed, in two cases basements were constructed without 
permission ( Chopra Chest Hospital Gwalior and Balaji Hospital Ujjain). Bling Square 
Shopping Mall, Bhopal constructed basement of three floors against sanction of two floors. 
Narayana Builders (Orchid Tower), Gwalior constructed basement under the space 
earmarked for Guest House. Case wise details are mentioned in Appendix-3.8 and illustrated 
in Photograph-3.9 and 3.10 
Photograph showing irregular use of basements  
  
Photo-3.9: Sagar public school (Bhopal) using 
basement for kitchen 
Photo-3.10: Palak Palace Barat Ghar (Bhopal) using 
basement for marriage purpose 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter.  
 
21  Bhopal-6, Gwalior-5, Indore-2, Ujjain-1. 
22  Hotel Rajhans, Bhopal, Palak Marriage Garden, Bhopal, Chopra Chest Hospital, Gwalior and Shivhare 
Resort, Gwalior 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 32 
3.5.3 Unauthorized construction of additional  floors leading  to increase in 
building height 
As per Rule 65 of MPBVN , the maximum height of a building shall be determined by the 
provisions of Table no 4 & 5 of Rule 42, based on road width, plot area and frontage.   
During the joint physical verification, it was noticed that in six  cases23, the owners 
constructed building beyond the height sanctioned in the building/development permissions. 
Case wise details are mentioned in  Appendix-3.9 and illustrated in Photograph-3.11 and 
3.12. 
Photograph showing buildings constructed beyond the sanctioned height 
  
Photo-3.11: Palak Palace Barat Ghar (Bhopal) 
constructed G+2 against sanctioned G+1 
Photo-3.12: Naryana  builders (Orchid Tower) 
Gwalior constructed G+13 against sanctioned G+10 
Unauthorized increase in height allowed the owner to gain additional floor and additional 
Floor Area R atio (FAR) without paying the required fee s. The height of the building is 
determined by T&CP based on sanctioned FAR and Ground coverage. As per Rule 14(3), 
MPBVN once the layout is approved, the height of the building cannot be increased without 
approval on modifications from the authorities before start of construction works.  Thus, 
authorities of T&CP and Municipal Corporations did not ensure construction works as per 
development / building permissions issued. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter.  
3.5.4 Encroachment on Government land 
As per Rule 16 of MPBVN, every application for development/building permission shall be 
accompanied by documents proving ownership or legal right in relation to the land. This 
ensures that the development or construction work is initiated only on land where the owner 
has legal rights, not on the Government land.  
During joint physical verification, Audit noticed unauthorized encroachment on 
Government land as detailed below: -  
 
23  Bhopal-2, Gwalior-3, Ujjain-1. 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 33 
(1) Government land approx. 80 m long and 25 m wide (2000 Sqm) of Khasara No 18 was 
being used for the main access road to Nature Park colony of GLR Real Estate24, Dongarpur 
Gwalior. 
(2) Government land of  approx. 530 Sqm of Khasara No. 157 and 158 was being utilized 
for a colony garden in Achaleshwar Enclave of Vats Colonizer and Developers25, Gwalior. 
(3) A part of Government land of Khasara No.-36 of 0.4280 hectare was encroached upon 
in the garden by Imperial Golf Resort26, Gwalior as illustrated in Photograph-3.13. 
Photograph showing unauthorized encroachment in Government Land  
 
  
Photo-3.13: Encroachment of Govt land (Khasara No. 36) in Garden by Imperial Golf Resort Gwalior 
These instances indicat e that T&CP/ Municipal Corporations  did not monitor the 
development works after issuing development permission. Further, Municipal Corporations 
did not conduct physical verification during construction or on completion of work which 
resulted in unauthorised encroachment. 
 
24  Development permission No. GWLLP 5467/T&CP/2019/11.07.2019 
25  Development permission No. GWLLP 7356/T&CP/2020/24.02.2020 
26   Development permission No. GWLLP 8351/T&CP/2021/ 05.01.2022 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 34 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter.  
3.5.5 Excess ground coverage beyond the sanctioned limit 
As per Rule 2(20) of the MPBVN, ground coverage is defined as the area of the land covered 
by the plinth of the building at the ground floor level. This excluded the area of the plinth 
not covered by a roof at top.  
During the joint physical verification, it was noticed that ground coverage exceeded the 
sanctioned limit in 11 cases 27, upto 64 per cent. This was due to non-maintenance of MOS 
and construction work carried out in areas earmarked for open space areas. Case wise details 
are mentioned in Appendix- 3.10 and illustrated in Photograph-3.14 and 3.15. 
Exceeded Ground Coverage due to construction of building in the area marked  
for MOS or open space. 
  
Photo-3.14 Ground coverage 100 per cent  against  
36 per cent due to construction on rear, side 1 and 
front MOS in Saral Multi Speciality Hospital 
Gwalior. 
Photo-3.15 Ground coverage 100  per cent against 
50 per cent  by constructing building on Side 1, 
Front and Rear MOS in Hostel at Mahalaxmi Nagar 
Indore. 
Thus, building officers of Municipal Corporations did not ensure construction works as per 
building permissions issued. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), the Government did not furnish reply. 
3.5.6 Non-maintenance of space between two residential Towers/blocks 
As per Rule 42 of MPBVN, the minimum open space for the high-rise buildings having 
height up to 45 meters was required to maintain MOS 7.5 m on rear/ sides. Further,  the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Spartech Limited v. Emerald Court Owner Resident Welfare 
Association & Others case (Civil Appeal No. 5041 of 2021 arising out of SLP (C) No 11959 
of 2014) stated that “the rationale for the distance between building blocks is to ensure fire 
safety, evacuation, light and ventilation. It cannot be left to the builder to designate groups 
of buildings as one building block  since the purpose of maintaining the minimum distance 
would be seriously compromised”.  
 
27   Gwalior-4, Indore-6 and Ujjain-1 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 35 
During the joint physical verification, it was noticed that in two cases distance between two 
adjacent buildings/towers was less than the provisions specified. Details are as stated 
below:- 
(i) Orchid Tower28  
The height of Block A & Block B was 30 m & 38.5 m respectively. However, it was found 
during physical verification that gap between both the block s was only 7.5 m against 
required 15 m as per norms of MPBVN. Thus, the gap found between the two towers was 
short by 7.5 m as illustrated in Photograph-3.16. 
(ii) Virasha Colony29, Bhopal  
 Height of both towers was 30 m respectively and gap between them was only 7 m against 
required 15 m as per norms. The gap found between two towers in adjacent blocks was short 
by 8 m as illustrated in Photograph-3.17. 
Photograph showing less gap between two bocks/buildinngs  
  
Photo-3.16: Orchid Tower (Narayan Builders), Gwalior Photo-3.17: Virasha Colony, Bhopal  
Thus, authorities of concerned Municipal Corporations did not ensure adequate Minimum 
Open Space  in the buildings by maintaining the minimum gap between two adjacent 
blocks/towers.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.5.7 Unauthorized change in approved layout 
As per Section 26 of the Adhiniyam after the Development Plan comes into operation, no 
person shall change the use of any land or carry out any development work without obtaining 
the permission of the Director. Further, as per Rule 14(3) of MPBVN , the application for 
modifying a permission already granted under Section 30 of the Adhiniyam shall be 
submitted in a specified form (F orm-M). The Director shall examine the application and 
take a decision thereupon. The applicant must pay a permission fee equal to 50 per cent of 
the amount payable under Clause (a) of sub-Rule (3) of Rule 21 for modification.  
 
28   By Narayana Builders, Gwalior Municipal Corporation Case No. GWA/0101/982/2020/06.01.2021  
29   Bhopal Municipal Corporation sanction no. 948 dated 10.09.2020 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 36 
During joint physical verifica tion, it was noticed that in two 30 cases, Gwalior Municipal 
Corporation in deviation from T&CP approved layout sanctioned podium park in place of 
open space, w ithout obtaining approval of T&CP on modifications from the owner/ 
developer. Further, in 11 cases audit noticed that actual construction of buildings was not as 
per approved layout/drawings in building permission. Details are shown in Appendix 3.11 
and illustrated in Photograph-3.18 and 3.19. 
Photograph showing unauthorized change in layout/drawing of the building  
  
Photo-3.18: Construction of Podium Park  in 
place of open park  (as per approved layout) in 
Keshar Mall, Gwalior 
Photo-3.19: Construction of Circular Dome  at the 
corner of garden/lake in place of middle of Block A & 
D and Garden (as per approved layout ) in Imperial 
Golf Resort, Gwalior 
Thus, the authorities of Municipal Corporations  did not ensure constructions as per the 
approved development/ building permissions issued. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.5.8 Construction of excess built-up area than sanctioned 
As per Rule 2(30) of MPBVN, the built-up area shall mean the total area constructed on all 
floors, excluding the area under lift, ducts, escalator, fire  escapes, ramps, water tanks, 
balcony, parking area, porch, servant quarters, basement corridors, lobbies etc. The quantum 
of built -up area would be determined by Municipal Corporations  in their building 
permissions based on building height and ground coverage.  
During the joint physical verification, Audit noticed that in six cases, the build-up area were 
in excess of sanctioned area. Details of the cases are as below: - 
(a) As per the approved drawing issued to Keshar Mall31, Gwalior by Gwalior Municipal 
Corporation, four shops on the right side and five shops on the left side of the first and 
second floors of the buildings were sanctioned.  
It was found  that the owner merged all these shops and converted them into showrooms. 
The showroom on the left side was sold to Zudio, and the right side was sold to Shoppers 
 
30   Keshar Mall, Gwalior and Orchid Tower (Narayana Builders), Gwalior  
31  Gwalior Municipal Corporation building permission case No. PRM/0411/Z05/2018 dated 28.05.2018 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 37 
Stop. Consequently, a passageway of 2.3 m wide and 31.65 m & 41.32 m long respectively 
on each side was used within the showrooms area, resulting in an additional built-up area of 
167.83 Sqm each on first floor and second floor (Total area of 167.83*2=335.66 Sqm).  
(b) Gwalior Municipal Corporation  issued building permission to M/s Gravity 
Infrastructures Pvt. Ltd.32 for construction of a shopping mall. It was found that the area of 
100.6633 Sqm marked for kitchen on third floor was included in the Shop area. Further, on 
the Ground/First/Second floors a void area of 544.5034 Sqm was to be kept empty but was 
found to have been used for construction of  shops/showroom. Similarly, on the 3/4/5/6 
floors, a chowk of an area of 598.976 35 Sqm which was supposed to be kept open as a 
junction point for people has been allotted/used for shops.  
Further, on Ground Floor, lift and staircase were to be constructed beyond the line of 
showroom. However, Audit noticed that area of all showrooms was increased by taking area 
of lifts and staircase. This resulted in an extension of built-up area of 190.5036 Sqm.  
Thus, the built-up area of the shopping complex was increased by 1434.63 Sqm37 in violation 
of building permission issued. 
(c) In Pragati School38, Gwalior parking area (307 Sqm) at rear side of the building and 
6m wide rear MOS were included in the building by constructing rooms.  
(d)  In Garden City 39, Gwalior 1.5 m rear MOS area of EWS/LIG buildings was used 
for construction of rooms. Wide rooms were constructed in duplexes no 57 to 71 by using 
side 1 MOS of 6.1 m. The C-1 Commercial unit was constructed with a greater built-up area 
than sanctioned by including front MOS of 6 m, rear MOS of 9.06 m, side 1  MOS of 3.04 
m and Side 2 MOS of 6.02 m in commercial area as shown in Photograph-3.20. 
(e) In Imperial Golf Resort 40, Gwalior   a hall of 225 41 Sqm was built additionally to 
hang Chandeliers in C Block. A bar of 675 42 sq. m was built additionally on the roof of 
Multipurpose Hall. A room of 30 Sqm43 near the circular dome was built beyond the 
approved drawing/layout. A concrete and iron bar platform of size 75 44 Sqm was built 
 
32  Gwalior Municipal Corporation building permission case No. PRM/0158/214/2019 dated 26.02.2019 
33  2.3*8*4+3.3*4.1*2=100.66 Sqm 
34  9.8*18.52=181.49*3=544.50 Sqm 
35  9.8*15.28=149.74*4=598.976 Sqm 
36  Increase of length and width of each showroom (left side) by a minimum of 3.3*9.8m=32.34 Sqm for 
three showrooms = 32.34 Sqm*3 = 97.02; and similarly increase of length and width of each showroom 
(right side) by 4.1*7.6m=31.16 Sqm for three showrooms = 93.48 Sqm, total increase in built -up area 
190.50 Sqm. 
37  598.97+544.5+100.66+ 190.50=1434.63 Sqm 
38  Building permission case No. PMT/GWA/0101/565/2020/28.10.2020 
39  Building permission case No. GWA/0101/1182/2021/25.10.2021 
40  Building permission case No. GWA/0101/767/2022/26.07.2022 
41  15*15=225 Sqm 
42  45*15=675 Sqm 
43  10*3=30 Sqm 
44  15*5=75 Sqm 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 38 
behind the cottages. Thus, the built -up area was extended by 1005 45 Sqm in violation of 
permission. 
(f) In Shivhare Resort46, Gwalior   built-up area was increased by constructing a porch 
(veranda), reception hall, and restaurant on the area of MOS (front/rear/side1/side 2) as 
shown in Photograph-3.21. 
Photograph showing construction in MOS and parking  
  
Photo-3.20: Excess construction using Side-1 
MOS of 6.1 M in duplexes of no 57 to 71 in 
Garden city Gwalior. 
Photo-3.21: Excess construction of Porch on 
side 2 MOS; and Reception Hall on Front MOS 
in Shivhare Resort Gwalior. 
Thus, the Municipal Corporations  did not ensure construction of buildings as per the 
building permissions issued which resulted in the  irregular increase in  built-up area by 
constructing buildings/rooms in MOS, parking/open area etc.by the owners/ developers. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter.  
3.5.9   Unauthorised change in use of building  
Rule 14 of MPBVN  states that every person who intends to develop, erect or make 
alterations in any land or building shall apply to competent authority for building/ 
development permission. Rule 21  deals with the development/building permission fee  
prescribed for the specific land use. The development permission issued by T&CP/building 
permissions issued by Municipal Corporations for construction of buildings mention the 
purpose of use of the building.  
During joint physical verification, it was noticed that in nine cases, the buildings were being 
utilised for the purposes other than mentioned in T&CP development permission/Municipal 
Corporation's building permission s. Audit noticed  that buildings were being used for 
commercial/hospital/ marriage garden etc. against the permission for residential/hotel/resort 
etc. as detailed in Table 3.10. 
 
45  225+675+30+75=1005 Sqm 
46  Building permission case No. GWA/0101/460/2021/09.07.21 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 39 
Table 3.10: Details of usage of building as per building permission and actual use  
as seen during physical verification  
Sl. 
No. 
Building permission 
case No. 
Name of the Building Sanctioned use 
of the building 
(definition) 
Building being utilized 
1 496/04026/24.01.13 Orchid Tower (Narayana Builders) 
Gwalior 
Guest House47  Residential cum 
commercial Tower of 13 
storeys (Flats) 
2 GWA/010/650/2022 Chopra Chest Hospital Vijaya Nagar, 
Gwalior 
Residential  
 
Hospital 
 
3 GWA/0101/244/2020 Saral Mult i speciality Hospital, 
Basant Vihar, Gwalior 
Residential  
 
Hospital 
 
4 331/2014x3/3/16.05.24 KMJ Ansh Hospital, Vinay Nagar, 
Gwalior 
Residential  
 
Hospital 
 
5 GWA/0101/228/2020 Empire Resort, Turari, Gwalior Hotel48  Marriage Garden49  
6 BP not obtained50  7 Hills Resort, Gwalior Resort51  Marriage Garden  
7 1019/Z13/52/18-19 Hotel Derby Green, Bhopal Hotel Marriage Garden 
8 JAB/0427/1875/2021 Hotel 7 Vachan, Jabalpur School52 Hotel 
9 UMC/67/2015/03 Hotel Solitaire and Resort, Ujjain 
 
Hotel and Club 
house  
Marriage Garden  
Some cases are illustrated in Photograph-3.22 and 3.23. 
Photograph showing utilization of buildings for another purposes  
  
Photo-3.22: Hotel Derby Green, Bhopal converted open 
space of hotel in marriage garden. 
Photo-3.23: Hotel 7-Bachan, Jabalpur being operated in 
the building sanctioned for School 
Thus, use of these buildings by the owners for the purpose other than permitted in building 
permission indicates that no monitoring was being done by the Municipal Corporation  
authorities to ensure usage of buildings as per the building permissions. Change in scope of 
the properties after development and building permissions were  approved, indicates utter 
laxity of the concerned  departments, thereby allowing developers to change the intended 
output as per their whims without government oversight.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
 
47  Residential premises for short tenure 
48  Where facility of accommodation and food is available for at least 15 persons.  
49  A place where marriage ceremony organised with minimum land area of 10,000 Sq m and Maximum 
FAR=0.10. 
50  GWLLP080404096/03.05.24 is the development permission issued by T&CP Gwalior  
51  Place where recreation, entertainment, and accommodation facility provided . 
52  Where education is provided to students up to class 10/12. 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 40 
3.5.10  Water Harvesting System not constructed 
As per Rule 81 of MPBVN, rain/roof water harvesting method shall have to be provided on 
all types of buildings with a plot size larger than 140 Sqm to recharge ground water. Further, 
conditions of building permission s also provided for establishment of water harvesting 
facilities.  
During the joint physical verification, it was noticed that in 41 cases 53 out of 185 cases 
rainwater harvesting structure were not found constructed. Case wise details are mentioned 
in Appendix-3.12.  
Thus, the applicants of these buildings violated the condition by not constructing rainwater 
harvesting structure. Further, the  officials of Municipal Corporations also did not ensure  
construction of rainwater structures in compliance to the conditions of building permission 
through regular inspections.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.5.11 Parking provisions not made as per norms 
The norms for providing parking on the plot and in areas other than the plot shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of Rule 84 of MPBVN. Parking is the area, enclosed, covered 
or open, sufficient in size to park vehicles, together with a driveway connecting the parking 
spaces permitting entry and exit of the vehicles.  
During joint physical verification, Audit noticed  discrepancies in compliance to parking 
provisions in 2554 cases out of 142 cases. Audit noticed in 1355 cases that parking space was 
not kept as per approved layout of T&CP, and in six 56 cases parking space provided in 
basement was being used for other purposes such as kitchen etc., and  in six cases parking 
spaces provided were not as per approved layout of T&CP. Case wise details are mentioned 
in Appendix-3.13.  
Thus, applicants did not comply with parking provision as per the layout of T&CP/drawings. 
Further, Municipal Corporation officials also did no t ensure parking spaces as per norms  
through inspection which resulted in irregular use of parking spaces  or non-provision of 
parking space by the owners . Irregular use of parking space s leads to  traffic congestion 
caused due to parking of vehicles at roadside. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
 
 
53  Gwalior-14, Bhopal-16, Indore-4 and Ujjain-7. 
54  Bhopal-9, Gwalior-9, Indore-7. 
55  Gravity Mall, Pragati School, 7 Hills resort, Godown (262), Hotel Derby Green, Bling Square, BSSS 
College, Hall Mark School, Professional office (570), Industrial (1956), Hostel (2024), Resi+Comm 
(1962), Industrial (1314) 
56  Palak Barat Ghar, Hotel Rajhans, Sagar School, Bhopal Surgical Hospital, Noble Multispecialty Hospital, 
Nursing Home (487) 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 41 
3.5.12 Land for road widening not kept free  
During scrutiny of development permissions issued by T&CP it was noticed that in seven 
cases applicants were required to leave land for road widening as per approved layout . 
However, during physical verification , Audit noticed that the applicants did not leave free 
land for road widening as detailed in Table 3.11 and illustrated in Photographs-3.24 and 
3.25. 
Table 3.11: Details of land area not left free for futuristic road widening. 
Sl. 
No. 
Municipal 
Corporation 
case no 
T&CP  
permission no 
Building 
owner 
Road 
widening 
area to be 
left free 
(sq. m.) 
Audit remarks 
1 PRM/0411/Z05/2
018 dated 
28.05.2018 
272/03947/t&cp/201
2/ 27.01.2012 
M/s Keshar 
Infrastructure, 
Gwalior 
2215.13 Applicant covered the 
area with boundary 
wall. Area was being 
utilized as parking. 
2 GWA/0101/460/
2021/09.07.2021 
GWLLP 
7619/t&cp/2021/18.
02.2021 
Shivhare 
Resort Gram 
Turari, 
Gwalior 
468.56 Applicant constructed 
porch and reception 
hall along with 
boundary wall in the 
area. 
3 PRM/0158/Z14/2
019/26.02.2019 
GWLLP 
4866/t&cp/2018/02.
11.18 
Gravity 
Infrastructures, 
Gwalior 
530 Applicant constructed 
boundary wall to cover 
the area. 
4 GWA/0101/228/
2020/10.06.2020 
GWLLP 
5423/t&cp/2019/04.
04.2019 
Artimis 
Infrastructures, 
Gwalior 
811.12 Applicant constructed 
boundary wall with 
gate to cover the area. 
5 Not obtained57 GWLLP080424040
96/03.05.2024 
7 Hills resort, 
Gwalior 
275.7 Applicant developed a 
garden in the area.  
6 BHO/0269/032/2
020/20.01.2022 
BPLLP6720/LP95/2
9(3)/t&cp/2020 
Sunrise 
Heights, 
Bhopal 
1597.52 Applicant constructed a 
boundary wall to cover 
the area. 
7 930/16.04.2019 BPLLP5170/LP14/2
0(1)/t&cp/DO/2019/
02.02.2019 
Laisure Valley 
Apartment, 
Bhopal  
267.09 Applicant constructed a 
boundary wall to cover 
the area. 
      
Photograph showing non-surrender of road widening  
  
Photo-3.24: Artimis Infrastructures, Gwalior did 
not leave free space of 811 Sqm (between service 
road and boundary wall of The Empire Resort). 
Photo-3.25: Laisure Valley Apartment did not leave 
free land as approved in development permission. 
 
57  Gwalior Municipal Corporation did not issue building permission. 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 42 
Thus, the T&CP/Municipal Corporation officials did not ensure that land was left free by 
the developer/ owner for road widening as per development permission.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.5.13 Non-compliance of minimum community open space/parks requirements 
As per Rule 47 of MPBVN, the minimum community open space shall be 10 per cent of the 
area of approved layout. In any residential or commercial layout, open spaces shall be 
reserved for recreational purposes. As per GoMP order (June 2009), development work shall 
be considered completed only after development of parks, group of garden and plants, 
playing fields for kids, lighting, drinking water, sewerage, and roads.  
During s crutiny of colony development permission cases and further join t physical 
verification, it was noticed  that in seven58 cases parks were undeveloped/underdeveloped, 
in two59 case open space was being used for parking  vehicles and in four cases podium, 
room etc. were constructed instead of developing parks. Further, in Anni Vila Apartment, 
Bhopal, length of land for EWS /park was found short (7.3 m against 20.49 m). Case wise 
details are mentioned in Appendix-3.14 and illustrated in Photograph-3.26 and 3.27. 
Photograph showing non-development of the open spaces/parks 
  
Photo-3.26: Park 12 of Blue Lotus Hills Gwalior 
not developed by the coloniser 
Photo-3.27: Park 7 of Blue Lotus Hills Gwalior not 
developed by the coloniser 
Thus, T&CP/ Municipal Corporation  authorities did not ensure the availability of open 
spaces as per approved  layout/building permission resulting in non -development of open 
spaces, parks, gardens etc.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
 
58  Bhopal-2, Gwalior-4, Ujjain-1 
59  Aditya world school Gwalior, Virasha Colony, Bhopal 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 43 
3.5.14 Lesser width of main/approach/internal roads  
As per Rule 38 of MPBVN , no building shall be erected in a way that would deprive any 
other building of access. No development on plot or land shall be permitted unless it is 
accessible by a public street with a width not less than 7.5 m. The minimum required width 
for various lengths of means of access are given in Table -3 of the Rules. As per Rule 39, 
means of access shall be levelled, metalled, flagged, paved, sewered, drained, channelled, 
lighted, equipped with water supply lines and provided with trees for sh ade up to the 
satisfaction of the authority. It should be free from encroachments by any structure or fixture 
so as not to reduce its width. 
During s crutiny of selected cases of T&CPs/ Municipal Corporations  and joint physical 
verification, it was noticed that in nine60 cases the width of main/access/internal roads was 
not maintained by the applicants against the prescribed norms, shortfall ranged between half 
a meter to 21 meters. Case wise details are given in  Appendix-3.15 and illustrated in  
Photograph-3.28 and 3.29.  
Photograph showing less width of access road  
  
Photo-3.28: IOC Fuel Filling Station Nipania, Indore 
access road width was found 9m against 30m. 
Photo-3.29: Access Road to Mount Litera School 
Bhopal was found 5.4m against 12m. 
Thus, applicants did not maintain the width of main road/ access roads as per approved lay 
out/ building permission . Further, the T&CP/ Municipal Corporation  authorities did not  
ensure width of the road as per development/building permissions issued. 
3.5.15  Prescribed distance from railway boundary not maintained 
As per Bhupariman and Bandobast Department, GoMP order (February 1981) and letter of 
Western Central Railway Zone (May 2005) provided that as per Para 3728 (E) of Indian 
Railway Path Manual, no construction or development work is allowed within 30 m from 
the railway boundary. 
 
60   Bhopal-3, Gwalior-5 and Indore-1. Out of nine cases, there were two cases of access roads, six cases of 
main road and one case of internal road. 
Road 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 44 
During scrutiny of records of T&CP, Gwalior and joint physical verification of s elected 
cases, it was noticed that JD, T&CP did not show the railway boundary in layout and allowed 
construction of boundary wall, garden etc. within 30m from railway boundary. It was noticed 
during physical verification that Garden City 61, Gwalior constructed boundary wall within 
30m from railway boundary (only 9 m away from railway boundary). Further, swimming 
pool, fountain, electric transformer, park and road aside the park were also found constructed 
within the 30 m distance from the railway boundary as illustrated in Photograph-3.30 and 
3.31. 
Photograph showing construction within 30m from railway boundary  
  
Photo-3.30:  Group Housing (Garden City) in 
Gwalior constructed swimming pool, park etc. 
within the 30 m limit of railway boundary. 
Photo-3.31:  Group Housing (Garden City) in 
Gwalior constructed swimming pool, park etc. 
within the 30 m limit of railway boundary. 
It was observed from the development permission issued by T&CP that no condition was 
included for maintaining the prescribed minimum distance from railway boundary. Thus, 
JD, T&CP did not ensure compliance with the Government orders and permitted 
construction within the 30 m limit from railway boundary.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
 
 
 
61  Builder: GLR Real Estate Pvt Ltd Group Housing, Development permission No.  GWLLP/2142/2020 
dated 22 September 2020) 
Railway Line Railway Line 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 45 
3.5.16 Non-construction of staircases of specified width 
As per Rule 80 of MPBVN, the minimum clear width and maximum riser of staircases for 
building shall be maintained as per sub -Rule (2) to (4) to ensure easy passage for 
residents/customers. 
During joint physical verification of selected cases, it was noticed that  in 14 cases 62, the 
width of staircase was not a ccess per norms prescribed in MPBVN. Case wise details are 
mentioned in Appendix-3.16. 
Thus, Municipal Corporation authorities did not ensure required width of staircase through 
inspection of the building during construction. The narrow staircase causes difficulties in 
passage for residents/customers including threat in case of emergency.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.6  Other miscellaneous irregularities  
3.6.1 Irregularities noticed in physical verification of residential colonies 
(A) Non-construction of houses for Economically Weaker Sections/Low Income   
      Groups  
(i) As per condition 12 of Bhopal Municipal Corporation  colony development 
permission, E conomic Weaker Sections (E WS)/Low Income Group (L IG) 
houses were required to be constructed first followed by other buildings. During 
joint physical verification  of Saumya Homes Pvt. Ltd., it was noticed that the 
construction works of EWS/LIG houses by Saumya Homes Pvt. Ltd., MP Nagar 
Bhopal63 was not yet started, while the construction of other buildings had been 
completed.  
(ii) Further, As per condition 11 of Bhopal Municipal Corporation  colony 
development permission, the EWS/LIG block was required to be developed first. 
During joint physical verification  of Virasha Colony, it was noticed that 
construction work of the EWS/LIG block was not initiated yet, while the 
construction work of other buildings was at its completion stage. 
(B)  Irregularity noticed in Grace Garden64, Bhopal  
(i) S.S. Creations, Bhopal constructed a gate on main access road (width of 18 metre). In 
approved layout the 18-meter-wide road was marked as ' 18-meter-wide master plan road'. 
Since the road was approved by Bhopal Development Plan and was meant for free access of 
general public, construction of gate blocked the access of general public. 
(ii) As per Rule 12 (v) of The MP Nagar Palika (Registration of Coloniser, Terms and 
Conditions) Rules, 1998 the coloniser is required to complete the external development work 
(approach road, laying of electric lines, connecting of sewerage, laying of water supply lines 
 
62  Bhopal-2, Gwalior-5, Indore-4, Ujjain-3. 
63  Colony Development Permission No. 921 dated 21 December 2018 
64  S.S. Creations Bhopal (Colony development permission No.  967 dated 19  February 2021) 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 46 
to the proposed colony), if he had not paid the external development fee. During joint 
physical verification  of site audit found that the connection of electric lines, and 
water/sewerage lines to the colony were not completed (June 2024)  and the coloniser had 
not paid the external development fee to Bhopal Municipal Corporation.  
(C) Irregularity noticed in Orchard Majesty65, Bhopal  
(i) Rear MOS in all duplexes was found 1m against required 1.5 m. 
(ii) Adjoining Nala land area approx. 12*12 square feet (sq. ft.) was encroached 
unauthorisedly.  Further STP had been constructed on the park area.  
(D) Irregularity noticed in Blue Lotus Colony66, Gwalior  
During s crutiny of records and physical ver ification of the colony , Audit noticed  the 
following shortcomings: 
(i) Internal colony roads having width (6/7.5/12/18m) were found short by at least 1m  
in width. 
(ii) Approved layout of T&CP provided for additional space of 98.24 Sqm for septic 
tank and 134.35 Sqm for water supply. However, during physical verification, no such area 
was found reserved in the colony. Sump well and Over Head Tank (OHT) were constructed 
in Park-12 contrary to T&CP permission. 
(iii) A 6m wide road between N-2 Block and Park-12 was not found constructed. 
Thus, authorities of Municipal Corporation failed in supervising the internal development 
works of the colony which ensures availability of basic infrastructure/ amenities for use by 
the residents. 
3.6.2 Irregularities noticed in physical verification of shopping malls 
(A)  M/s Keshar Infrastructures67, Gwalior  
(i) In compliance with the T&CP approved layout, a 6m wide mixed -use block  
(pathway) was to be constructed at front of commercial cum residential blocks 1 and 2. This 
space was to be kept free from construction as part of front MOS. During joint physical 
verification, it was noticed that no such mix ed-use block was constructed. Instead, the 
applicant constructed a staircase to the ground/upper ground floor.  
(ii) An office and a restaurant was under construction on the roof of the basement ramp in 
violation of approved drawing/layout.  
(iii) As per the approved drawing of Gwalior Municipal Corporation , two 1.40 m wide 
escalators were to be installed for upward and downward movements. During joint physical 
verification , it was found that only the left side escalator (for upward movement only) was 
installed, while no escalator was found in right side for down movement. 
 
65  by Mantra Infrastructure Bhopal (Colony development permission No. 963/ 28.01.2021)  
66  Colony development permission No. 270/2010x3/3, dated 04.06.2010 
67  Case no. 5/17/0432/2018/Gwalior 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 47 
(B) M/s Gravity Infrastructures Pvt. Ltd.68, Gwalior  
(i) Passage between the shops, with a width of 10.0769 m was found to be covered by a 
roof in violation of Gwalior Municipal Corporation approved drawing.  
(ii) Gwalior Municipal Corporation  approved drawing  with six  shops/showrooms on 
each floor. However, Audit noticed that at the Ground floor, 17 shops/showroom (10 at the 
rear side and 7 at the front side) were constructed by way of partitions. 
(iii) Toilets on ground floor, as per approved drawing were to be built adjacent to the Lift 
area but were found constructed in open park area. Additionally, the toilets on the 1st, 2nd, 
3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th floors were relocated from the entry ramp side to other side. 
3.6.3 Irregularities noticed during joint physical verification of Hotel 
(A) Hotel at Samardha70, Bhopal  
During s crutiny of records and joint physical verification , it was noticed  that a passage  
measuring 0.8 m between two halls was found constructed against the approved 1.2m. 
Further, as per approved drawing, a staircase on the left side, a lift on the right side and 
toilets along with the staircase, with the remaining area open for lobby were t o be built. 
However, Audit noticed that both the lifts and the staircase were built on the right side and 
the size of toilets was increased by using the area designated for the staircase. 
3.6.4 Irregularities noticed in joint physical verification of colleges/schools 
During scrutiny of records and joint physical verification of colleges/schools the following 
irregularities were noticed: 
(A)  BSSS College71, Bhopal and AMI Shishu Mandir72 Gwalior were found operating 
without obtaining development permission from T&CP. 
(B) Pragati School73, Gwalior in violation of approved drawing of Gwalior Municipal 
Corporation, constructed a basketball court in place of swimming pool  as illustrated in 
Photograph-3.32.  Further, single rooms were constructed by merging three rooms provided 
in building plan at each floor in sun valley side on the first/second/third floors. 
(C)  Development permission74 for the land where Aditya World School, Gwalior was 
constructed was granted for IT Park. However, it was observed in the application received 
from the owner, he had applied for development permission of  educational land use only. 
Thus, grant of development permission of industrial land use on application received for  
educational purpose was not in order. Further, construction and  running of a school on 
development permission issued for industrial land use was also irregular. The case is 
illustrated in Photograph-3.33. 
 
68   Case no. 14/60/0094/2019/Gwl 
69   (2.41m+1.95m+0.78m+4.93m) 
70   Case no. 19/85/1157/2020/Bhopal 
71    Building Permission case No. BHO/0269/055/2021 
72    Building Permission case No. PMT/GWA/010/027/2020 dated 27.03.2020 
73    GWA/0101/918/2020 
74  T&CP Development permission No. 432/24.02.14 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 48 
Photograph showing construction in deviation of approved drawing 
  
Photo-3.32: Construction of Basketball Court in 
place of Swimming pool in Pragati School Gwalior. 
Photo-3.33: Construction of Aditya World School 
Gwalior in place of IT Park. 
We further noticed  that the school building was constructed in deviation from approved 
layout/ development permission issued by T&CP. Audit noticed that Sub-Engineer of T&CP 
intimated (August 2023)  to JD, T&CP about deviation in construction of building against 
approved layout.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.6.5 Operation of establishments without fire No Objection Certificate  
Resolution of Gwalior Municipal Corporation (309 dated 7 January 2013) provided revised 
fees for obtaining fire No Objection Certificate (NOC) for 35 types of establishments such 
as hotels, hospitals, cinema halls, high rise buildings etc.  
During scrutiny of records of nine building  permission cases (selected for  physical 
verification), it was noticed that five establishments which were required to obtain fire NOC 
in compliance with this resolution, were operational without obtaining fire NOC as detailed 
in Table 3.12. 
Table 3.12:  Details of establishments operating without obtaining fire NOC  
from Gwalior Municipal Corporation 
Year MC building 
permission Case No. 
Name of Building Location Building 
height/ bed 
2022-23 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101
/749/2022 
Chopra Chest 
Hospital 
Ward -58 Vijyanagar 15 bedded 
2014-15 331/2014X3/3 KMJ Hospital   Vinay Nagar Sector-1 50 bedded 
2020-21 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101
/416/2020 
Saral Multi 
Speciality Hospital 
Basant Vihar Ward-58  48 bedded 
2020-21 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101
/460/2021 
Shivhare resort/ 
Hotel 
Turari Jhansi Road Ward -
66 
12.5 m 
2024-25 Not issued 7-Hils Resort  Village Manpur, Khasra  
409, 411, 412/1 
12 m 
(Source: Data collected from Gwalior Municipal Corporation) 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 49 
On enquiring about issue of fire 'No objection Certificate', Bhopal Municipal Corporation , 
Ujjain Municipal Corporation and Jabalpur Municipal Corporation did not provide details of 
issuance of fire No objection Certificate and intimated that buildings would be inspected to 
check fire No objection Certificate. Further, Indore Municipal Corporation  issued fire No 
objection Certificate in six cases out of 35 cases and intimated that before the year 2020 fire 
NOC was being issued by Urban Development and Housing Department, Bhopal.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.6.6 Illegal construction of resorts 
Section 302 of Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 , empowered 
Commissioner to stop progress of building work commenced unlawfully or carried on. 
Section 307 empowered Municipal Corporations to act for removal or alteration of work not 
in conformity with byelaws or any scheme or any other requirements. 
Further, Section 16 of the Adhiniyam, 1973 states that no person shall institute or change the 
use of any land after publication of existing land use map under Section 15 of the Adhiniyam 
or carry out any development of land without the permission in writing of the Director. 
Section 36 of the Adhiniyam provides for penalty for unauthorised development. Section 37 
empowered T&CP for removal of an unauthorised development. 
During joint physical verification, it was noticed that resorts were running without obtaining 
permissions from the competent authority. Case wise details are given below- 
1. Bhopal Municipal Corporation  issued (June 2024) a license for marriage garden  
without ensuring development/building permission to AA Farms & Resort (Shambhala) on 
Khasra No. 643/1, Zone -1, Village Bhuri, Bhopal, for construction of a marriage garden. 
During physical verification of the site of AA Farms & Resort (Shambhala), it was observed 
that construction work of the building was under progress. However, construction of 
swimming pool, park, garden, roads, restaurant, and building was completed without 
obtaining building and development permissions from T&CP Bhopal and Bhopal Municipal 
Corporation. The resort was found to be well-furnished and operational with all facilities as 
shown in Photograph-3.34. 
2. During s crutiny o f records of T&CP , it was observed that a notice was issued   
(April 2024) to 7 Hills Resort, Gwalior under Section 36/37 of the Adhiniyam for removal 
of unauthorized development  by T&CP. Further, the applicant was permitted  (May 2024) 
for construction of resort/ guest house in accordance with the approved layou t with the 
condition to demolish the construction work prior to development permission and restore 
the land in its original state.  
However, during joint physical verification (June 2024) of 7 Hills Resort, Gwalior , it was 
observed that existing structures i.e. swimming pool, 12 rooms, restaurant, stage for  
marriage, toilets and office were not demolished in compliance of development permission 
as shown in Photograph-3.35. During joint physical verification t he resort was found in 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 50 
operation with its all -basic facilities without obtaining building permission from Gwalior 
Municipal Corporation.  
Photograph showing unauthorised development of resorts  
  
Photo-3.34: AA Farms & Resort ( Shambhala) 
Bhopal was constructed without obtaining building 
permission from Bhopal Municipal Corporation and 
development permission from T&CP. 
Photo-3.35: 7 Hills Resort Gwalior was constructed 
without obtaining building permission from Gwalior 
Municipal Corporation. 
On being pointed out, JD, T&CP, Bhopal accepted the fact of non-issuance of  development 
permission, while Bhopal Municipal Corporation accepted the audit observation and stated 
that Bhopal Municipal Corporation  did not issue building permission for construction of 
resort at Sambhala, Bhopal. In case of 7 Hills Resort Gwalior Municipal Corporation replied 
(June 2024) that the applicant had applied online for building permission, however building 
permission was yet to be issued. 
Thus, above  resorts were constructed and operating without obtaining required 
development/ building permissions from authorities which indicates poor monitoring by the 
authorities over development/ construction activities. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government  admitted the facts and stated that 
issuing a development permission for a pre-constructed structure is not appropriate. 
3.6.7 Non/partial existence of park 
T&CP granted development permission 75  to Blue Lotus Developers, Gwalior for 
development of a colony 76 on 1,80,090 Sqm land. Gwalior Municipal Corporation  issued 
colony development permission 77 to the developer. As per approved layout  by T&CP, the 
developer was to provide land area for 14 parks and other utilities. The approved layout 
provided for reservation of 18,009 Sqm (10 per cent of the total area) land for parks.  
 
75  183/3757/23.01.2010 
76  Blue Lotus Hills, opposite Sun Valley, Gwalior 
77  270/2010x3/3, dated 04.06.2010 


Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 51 
During scrutiny of development permission file and joint physical verification of Blue Lotus 
Hills, opposite Sun Valley, Gwalior following irregularities were noticed as detailed in the 
Table 3.13. 
Table 3.13: Details of park area reserved and actually allocated in Blue Lotus Hills, Gwalior 
Sl. 
No. 
Utility Location Area Reserved 
(Sqm) 
Actual Area 
found (Sqm) 
Audit remarks 
1 Park-
1/2/4/6 
Block 
B2/B1/C1& 
D1/H1, I1&J1 
33.02/1179.85 
/1599.58/4991.06 
0 Parks were not found. 
2 Park-9 Block G2 328.25 Approx. 80 Partially exist (only one side wall 
found). 
3 Park-
11 
Block N1 1027.19 Only two side 
walls found. 
Park was not found. 
4 Park-
12 
Block N2 1615.94 Approx. 700 
(on 
Government 
land)  
Partially exist (only 2 side walls 
were found. The park consists of 
land of Khasara No. 31  pertain to 
government land (as per MP Kisan 
App) 
5 Park-
13 
Block M3 & 
M4 
1120.00 Room of 8*8 
feet (on 
government 
land) 
Park was not found (only a room of 
size 8*8 Sq. feet was found at the 
government land of Khasara No. 
35). 
Further, as per layout, Parks 2, 4 & 6 were to be developed by the side of commercial block 
CM1 in semi-circular area. These were to be developed in the manner that residential blocks 
are followed by a road and subsequently parks close to the boundary wall of the colony.  
However, it was noticed that residential plots are followed by the boundary wall of the 
colony. No space for the parks (Park -2, 4 & 6) were provided between residential blocks 
and the boundary wall as shown in Photograph- 3.36 and 3.37.  
Photograph showing non-existence of parks as per approved layout. 
  
Photo-3.36: No park was found in existence on the 
area of 8142.49 Sq. m. for Park 2,  4 and 6 in Blue 
Lotus Hills Gwalior. 
Photo-3.37: A room of size 8*8 Sq. feet was found 
at the forest hill against the specified area of  
1120 Sqm for Park 13 in Blue Lotus Hills Gwalior. 
The authorities of T&CP/ Gwalior Municipal Corporation  did not ensure development of 
parks in the colony as per approved development permission through regular inspections. 


Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
 
 52 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings  
(as pointed out in paragraphs 3.6.1 to 3.6.7) and assured that it will look into the matter.  
Further development is awaited (March 2025). 
3.7 Conclusion 
Audit noticed lack of prompt and effective action on unauthorised development of marriage 
gardens in planned area, no action on wholesale fruit market unauthorisedly developed in 
residential land use and no action on complaint cases. 
During s crutiny of selected development permissions of T&CP, colony development 
permissions and building permissions  of selected Municipal Corporation  Offices, Audit 
noticed irregularities in use of free space of Nala River in violation of MPBVN and 
encroachment of Nala free space. Municipal Corporations  irregularly issued building 
permissions without obtaining grey water discharge management plan in violation of 
Municipal Corporation (Recycled and Reuse of Grey water in buildings) Model Bye laws, 
2010. Further , Municipal Corporations  irregularly released mortgaged plots of colony 
without ensuring completion of internal development work. Gwalior Municipal Corporation 
irregularly sanct ioned basement area in violation of MPBVN. Audit noticed  irregular 
diversion of land by Sub -Divisional Officer, Revenue in violation of provisions of the 
Adhiniyam.  
Audit noticed tha t Municipal Corporation authorities did not monitor  the development 
activities/construction works of buildings after issue of colony development 
permissions/building permissions resulting in significan t deviations by the applicants 
against approved layout. Between 2018 and 2021, 33,016 building permissions were issued 
but not ensured whether completion certificate was obtained by the concerned owners. The 
Municipal Corporations did not have an integrated IT application to monitor the penden cy 
status of Occupancy Certificates (OCs), along with the corresponding reasons for such 
pendency. Consequently, there was no established mechanism to verify the status of OCs 
prior to the issuance of new building permissions, thereby increasing the risk o f non -
compliance with applicable regulatory norms. 
During joint physical verification of 185 selected cases (142 buildings and 43 colonies) , it 
was noticed that in 50 instances  (nearly 35 per cent of buildings), applicants of building 
permission did not leave minimum open space. Additionally, irregularities in 
construction/use of  basement area was observed in 14 instances , and in six instances , 
additional floors were constructed in violation of MPBVN. Audit also noticed three 
instances of encroachment on Government land, excess ground coverage beyond the 
sanctioned limit in 11 instances , non -maintenance of gap between  two residential 
towers/blocks. Audit also noticed discrepancies such as construction of excess built-up area 
than sanctioned in six instances, irregular change in use of buildings in nine instances, non-
construction of water harvesting system in 41 instances , non -compliance of minimum 
community open space/park requirements in 13 instances  and lesser width of 
main/approach/internal roads in nine instances. Further, it was noticed that one of the test 

Chapter-III: Implementation of the Act/Rules and Plans 
 
 
 53 
checked colonisers, did not maintain required distance of 30m from railway boundary and 
constructed boundary wall, park, swimming pool etc., within 30m from railway boundary. 
We also noticed  incomplete internal development works, construction of college building 
without obtaining development permission from T&CP, irregular issuance of development 
permission for IT park on application received for institutional purpose (School) , illegal 
construction of resort.  
3.8 Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
➢ The Government/Department should investigate and fix responsibility on the 
concerned officials for: 
• not taking action on unauthorised commercial establishments (Paragraph s 
3.2.2 and 3.2.3) 
• not imposing conditions for environmental clearance on 
building/construction projects and for grey water discharge management 
plan (Paragraphs 3.3.2 and 3.3.3) 
• issuing building permissions but not ensuring whether completion certificate 
was obtained by the concerned owners (Paragraph 3.4) 
➢ Department should prescribe Standard Operating Procedure for inspection of 
development activities/buildings by both T&CP and ULBs to identify deviations from 
the Development Plan/permissions. (Paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3) 
➢ Department should ensure collection of fines from builders who have violated 
prescribed conditions/norms . Stringent action may be taken against unlawful 
construction as provided in the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
➢ Shelter fee should be immediately transferred to a designated account for the proper 
monitoring of the expenditure  and Municipal Corporations should be instructed to 
maintain separate bank account for shelter fee so that can be monitored. 
(Paragraphs 3.3.9.1 and 3.3.9.2) 
➢ Department should develop an integrated IT Application to enhance transparency in 
the NOC application process, providing real -time updates on status of permissions 
from various agencies, along with reasons for withholding Occupancy Certificate 
and other permissions. (Paragraph 3.4)  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Internal Control and 
Monitoring  

 
  

 
 
 
55 
Chapter IV: Internal Control and Monitoring 
4.1 Introduction 
Town and Country Planning is a technical advisory body to Government for promotion of 
planned physical development of urban areas in the state. Functions of Director, T&CP 
include preparation of development plans, design/approval of layout plans submitted by  
private individuals/organisations/govt. agencies.  
Scrutiny of records of Director, T&CP and JD, T&CP of selected districts showed following 
shortcomings: 
4.2 Shortfall in meetings of planning and supervision committee 
As per the orders issued by Director, T&CP (May 1998, for the implementation of approved 
Development Plans of the cities, a planning and supervision committee was to be constituted 
at district level. The Committee is required to conduct quarterly meetings to review the 
implementation status, supervision and progress of the works of the Development Plan. The 
Committee is to review the preparation and financial details of programme/ projects and the 
implementation of the same  on quarterly basis. The Committee is to  submit an Annual 
Development Report (ADR) to Director T&CP for approval and the Director will submit it 
to Government  after approval . Recommendations for the imp rovement of planning and 
implementation of the Development Plans in every aspect is required to be included in the 
ADR.  
GoMP directed (April 2010) that the Planning and Supervision Committee will conduct the 
meetings bi-annually. The head of T&CP district office would be the Member Secretary of 
the Committee. Also, the Committee was re -constituted1 with a Chairperson, 13 members 
and one member secretary. 
The Member Secretary  of the Committee is required to prioritize maintaining various 
components of development plan and submit these to Annual Planning Committee. 
Implementing agencies are to prepare their annual budget based on approved budget by the 
Committee.  
During scrutiny of records relating to planning and supervision committee meetings in office 
of the JD, T&CP of selected districts, it was noticed that there was a significant shortfall in 
 
1  Chairperson- Commissioner at the level of Divisional headquarter and Collector at level of District 
headquarter and others cities; Members - Member of parliament of concerned area, Chairperson of 
concerned development authority, chairperson of concerned Zila Panchayats, Mayor of co ncerned 
Municipal corporation, Member of legislative assembly of legislative area if falls under planning area, 
chairperson of concerned  Nagar Palika, Chairperson of concerned Nagar Panchayat, Dy. Director/ 
Executive Engineer of M.P. Housing development Board, Commissioner, Nagar Nigam/ Chief executive 
Officer, Nagar Palika/ Nagar Panchayat, superintendent engineer/ Executive engineer of PWD, 
Superintendent engineer/ Executive engineer of PHE, Superintendent engineer/ Executive engineer of 
MPEB, Chief Executive Officer of concerned authority or   development area 0f planning area and 
member secretary - Joint director/Dy. Directo r/Assistant Director of Town & Country Planning of 
concerned districts. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
 
 56 
meetings conducted against the prescribed number of meetings.  Details of meetings to be 
held and meetings actually conducted are detailed in Table: -4.1 
Table-4.1: Statement showing details of meetings of planning and supervision committee  
to be held and meetings actually held in selected districts 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
Development 
Plan 
Effective 
date of the 
development 
plan 
Meetings 
to be held 
up to April 
2010 
(Quarterly) 
Meetings 
to be 
held 
between 
April 
2010 and 
up to 
Mar.  
2023 (bi-
annually) 
Total 
Meetings 
to be 
held 
Meetings 
held 
Shortage 
of 
meetings 
(per 
cent) 
Date of 
Meetings 
held 
1 BDP 2005 09.06.1995 59 25 84 3 96 09.01.2006 
13.02.2018 
26.04.2018 
2 GDP 2021 12.09.2014 0 16 16 2 88 30.05.2018 
15.01.2021 
3 IDP 2021 01.01.2008 9 25 34 2 94 30.07.2018 
06.07.2021 
4 JDP 2021  01.10.2008 5 25 30 2 93 01.10.2008 
27.06.2009 
5 UDP 2021 16.06.2006 15 25 40 4 90 09.04.2008 
29.01.2009 
19.10.2010 
26.03.2012 
Total  88 116 204 13 94  
(Source: Records collected from T&CP offices of selected districts) 
It is evident from the above table that sporadic meetings were held. There was  a shortfall 
ranging between 88 and 96 per cent in conduct of meetings of the planning and supervision 
committee in the selected districts. The progress of the ADR was also not submitted by the 
district officers to Director T&CP and subsequently by the Director to the GoMP. Due to 
shortfall in meetings of planning and supervision committee, implementation status, 
supervision, and progress of  the works of the Development Plan co uld not be reviewed 
regularly which resulted in shortfall in achievement against  targeted land use as discussed 
in Paragraph-4.2.1.  
4.2.1 Shortfall in achievement of proposed land use  
As per URDPFI guidelines, 2014 the objective of Development Plan  is to provide further 
necessary details and intended actions in the form of strategies and physical proposals for 
various policies given in the perspective plan and regional plan. The approved Development 
Plan allows the local authority to implement development of the land area specified under 
the plan with the help of local area plans and projects.  Further, as per Development Plan 
document, the success depends on implementation of its proposals within a determined time 
frame and the availability of required resources. Establishment of a Planning and 
Supervision Committee is required to review and implement the plan after publication of 
final development plan. 
During scrutiny of development plans in selected T&CP offices, it was observed that due to 
absence of effective functioning of the  Planning and Supervision Committee, there was 

Chapter-IV: Internal Control and Monitoring 
 
 
 57 
shortfall in achievement against the targets  of earlier Development Plans (B hopal 
Development Plan 2005, Gwalior Development Plan 2021, Indore Development Plan 1991, 
Jabalpur Development Plan  2005 and U jjain Development Plan  2021). Further, selected 
districts notified new Development Plans ( draft Bhopal Development Plan  2031, Gwalior 
Development Plan 2035, Indore Development Plan 2021, Jabalpur Development Plan 2021 
and Ujjain Development Plan 2035). Proposed land use in development plans, achievement 
there against and shortfall percentage are detailed in Appendix-4.1 and summarized in 
Table-4.2.    
Table-4.2: Details of the shortage (+)/ excess (-) in the achievement of proposed land use 
(in percentage) 
Name of 
Development Plan 
Categorization of land use 
Residential 
(Per cent) 
Commercial 
(Per cent) 
Industrial 
(Per cent) 
PSP2 
(Per 
cent) 
Recreational 
(Per cent) 
Transport 
(Per cent) 
BDP 2005 & draft 
BDP 2031 
31 56 64 52 64 Could not be 
calculated3 
GDP 2021 & 2035 63 10 81 35 88 24 
IDP 1991 & 2021 8 12 44 23 80 35 
JDP 2005 & 2021 16 53 33 17 74 23 
UDP 2021 & 2035 49 31 38 (-)60 77 45 
It may be seen from the above table that there was a shortfall in the achievement of 
residential land use, ranging from eight to 63 per cent, commercial land use from 10 to  
56 per cent, industrial land use from 33 to 81 per cent, public and semi-public land use from 
17 to 52 per cent, re-creational land use from 64 to 88 per cent and land use for transportation 
from 23 to 45 per cent . The average shortfall of land use against proposed land use in 
Development Plans of selected distric ts was 44 per cent. Thus, due to lack of monitoring 
through planning and supervision committee on the schemes and projects mentioned in the 
Development Plans, the multidimensional developments of the cities could not be ensured.  
Further, audit noticed that: -  
• In Gwalior Development Plan 2005, 101 roads were proposed for widening. Out of 
which 84 roads were again proposed for widening in G walior Development Plan 2021 and 
Gwalior Development Plan 2035. 84 out of 101 roads were yet to be widened till April 2023 
(inception of Gwalior Development Plan 2035).  It was also noticed that during fifteen years 
(2008 to 2022) the vehicle growth was from 1,22,392 vehicles to 7,65,057 vehicles (525 per 
cent) in Gwalior district. Thus, road widening as per the requirement of v ehicular growth 
was not ensured and it resulted in congestion/ traffic jams in urban areas.   
• In Ujjain Development Plan 2021 (June 2006), 51 roads were proposed for widening. 
Against which 47 roads were again proposed for widening in Ujjain Development Plan 2035. 
These 47 roads were not widened during the period of U jjain Development Plan  2021. It 
 
2  Public semi-Public 
3  709.15 ha land was allotted for transportation land use in Bhopal Development Plan 2005. However, draft 
Bhopal Development Plan 2031  did not provide measurement of  land use d for development of 
transportation instead it mentioned number of roads developed. Therefore, the land use could not be 
calculated.  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
 
 58 
was also noticed that for fifteen years (2008 to 2022) the vehicle growth was from 71 ,974 
to 5,60,784 (679 per cent) in Ujjain district.  
• In B hopal Development Plan  2005 (June 1995), six roads 4 were proposed for 
widening. Due to non -widening, these roads were again proposed in draft Bhopal 
Development Plan 2031 (March 2020). 
• In G walior Development Plan  2021, new buildings/houses for Government 
employees were proposed to be developed on the vacant lands adjacent to the Government 
residences situated at Gandhi Marg, Racecourse Marg, Jhansi Marg , Padav Irrigation 
Colony, Agricultural Colony and Police Line. However, these were again proposed in 
Gwalior Development Plan 2035 reflecting that these colonies were not developed during 
the currency of the Gwalior Development Plan 2021.   
• Inconsistent lands 5 (land parcel not suitable to  surrounding locality) were to be 
shifted and the vacant land was to be developed as residential/parking/commercial 
areas/retail business etc. Inclusion of these activities from earlier Development Plans into 
current Development Plan  shows that these inconsistent lands were not shifted due to 
ineffective implementation of development plan in selected districts. Details are shown in 
Appendix 4.2. 
• Sub-urban Centres6 were developed on residential land in place of commercial land. 
• Transport Nagar of Bhopal was developed in Kokta in place of Bhauri, Manpur and 
Bhairopur. In Gwalior Bela Ki Bawadi , Underpass Jhansi Road and Bhind Marg were 
proposed for development of Transport Nagar. However, none of these  areas have been 
developed as Transport Nagar yet. In Gwalior district illegal industries were developed in 
Girwai and Shankarpur areas. Badagaon was identified as Public Semi-Public area in the 
development plan and has been illegally developed as residential and commercial areas.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government while admitting the facts, stated that 
the department was unable to hold regular meetings of the Planning and Supervision 
Committee. During the discussion, it was brought to the Government's notice that due to the 
ineffective functioning of planning and supervision committee , the department was unable  
to address the constraining factors in achieving the targets of DP.  
4.2.2 No mechanism to trace unauthorised development 
During scrutiny of records of Director T&CP and selected district offices of T&CP, it was 
observed that unauthorized development activities within the planning area were brought to 
notice of the authorities by the complainants. T&CP had not developed its own monitoring 
mechanism to detect unauthorized development s/ constructions without development 
permission in the planning area through field inspections or otherwise. Thus, in absence of 
regular inspections/ field visits, the authorities could not trace and check unauthorized 
 
4  Raisen Road, Vidisha Road, Kolar Road, Chiklod Road, Bilkisganj road, Berasia Road 
5  Bhopal- 6, Gwalior-7, Jabalpur- 14 and Ujjain- 7 
6  Bhopal-4 (Nevary, Misrod, BHEL, Kolar), Gwalior-4 (Gwalior, Morar, Thatipur, City Centre) 

Chapter-IV: Internal Control and Monitoring 
 
 
 59 
activities. This resulted in unauthorized development s in planning area  and has led to 
haphazard development of the city.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government stated that when a complaint is 
received regarding unauthorized development activities, necessary action is taken. However, 
no vigilance/ monitoring system is in place to trace and monitor unauthorised activities in 
the planning area. 
4.3 No action on unauthorised colonies  
According to Rule 22 of Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalika (Colony Development) Rules, 2021, 
the competent authority of Municipal Corporation  shall ensure that the unauthorized 
colonies are not developed in the municipal area. On receipt of any information regarding 
development of any unauthorized colony, notice shall be issued to the developer and the 
landowner to stop the development work within 15 days. In case of unsatisfactory reply/non-
compliance, a final notice shall be issued giving 15 days’ time for removal of 
development/construction along with the intimation to the concerned sub -registrar to ban 
registration of sale/agreement in the s aid colony. General public shall also be warned 
through publication of a warning in the local newspaper for non -indulgence in any 
sale/purchase of land/house in the said colony. Clear details of unauthorized colony and its 
location shall be described in th e public notice. If the development/construction was not 
removed within the prescribed period, the competent authority shall initiate action for 
removal of the said development/construction and shall also file complaint against the 
developer and landowner in the concerned police station for taking necessary penal action 
under the relevant provisions of the Act. 
Rule 23  ibid states that the compete nt authority shall provide civic  infrastructure in the 
unauthorized colonies that came into existence before December 2016. Unauthorized colony 
will not be eligible for provisions related to civic infrastructure, if developed on Government 
land or the land of Development Authority/Planning and Infrastructure Development Board, 
Urban Local Bodies or areas designated as roads, parks, playgrounds, areas of cu ltural 
heritage, areas of river/ drains, recreational areas and water bodies in the development plan 
or on land falling in restricted a reas along  State and National Highways or any other such 
prohibited area notified under any Central or State law.  
During scrutiny of records of selected Municipal Corporations7 the following irregularities 
were observed: 
(1) During scrutiny of records of Bhopal Municipal Corporation , it was noticed that 
during 2020-21 Revenue Department intimated Bhopal Municipal Corporation  about 255 
unauthorized colonies. However, action taken by Bhopal Municipal Corporation  on such 
colonies was not available on  record. It was found that, apart from this, Collector, Bhopal 
also sent detail of 43 unauthorised colonies to Bhopal Municipal Corporation   
during February 2021, March 2021, and March 2022, along with a note of request to act. 
 
7  T&CP Jabalpur did not provide information/record of unauthorized colony. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
 
 60 
Details are given in  Appendix-4.3. However, no cognizance of this information was taken 
by the Bhopal Municipal Corporation.  
On being pointed out, Bhopal Municipal Corporation  replied (June 2024) that the office 
issued a letter to all the sub -divisional officers to determine the unauthorized colonies and 
initiate process for regularization, in their jurisdiction within 15 days. Process of 
regularization will proceed as per the instructions of the Government. 
The reply is not acceptable as Bhopal Municipal Corporation  did not ensure action as per 
Rule 22 or 23 for removal of unauthorised development or providing civic infrastructure, as 
the case may be, in these colonies even after lapse of three years. 
(2) During s crutiny of records of Gwalior Municipal Corporation , Indore Municipal 
Corporation and Ujjain Municipal Corporation , it was noticed  that these Municipal 
Corporations identified 133 18 unauthorised colonies  through surveys as illustrated in  
Photograph-4.1 to 4.3. Audit noticed that Indore Municipal Corporation wrote a letter (June 
2018 to October 2022) to lodge FIR in 94 cases to police. However, FIR was lodged in 50 
cases. In remaining cases, records related to action taken by Gwalior Municipal Corporation, 
Indore Municipal Corporation  and Ujjain Municipal Corporation  against unauthorized 
colonies was not found in record. Jabalpur Municipal Corporation did not provide the details 
of unauthorised/ illegal colonies. 
Photograph showing unauthorised colonies in Gwalior 
  
Photo-4.1: Ekta Nagar Colony, Village- Kishan Bagh 
and Ghatampur, Gwalior (Survey No. 171/1(A), 10, 
04.06) Area- 2.4 Ha. 
Photo-4.2: Ullash Nagar Colony, Kishan Bagh, 
Gwalior (Survey No. 171/1(A) Area- 0.80 Ha 
 
Photo-4.3: Damodar Bagh, Gwalior (Survey No. 16, (min) Area- 0.418 ha. 
 
8    Gwalior Municipal Corporation - 578 colonies, Indore Municipal Corporation -636 colonies, Ujjain 
Municipal Corporation-117colonies. Out of 1331, Municipal Corporations made eligible 479 colonies for 
development of civic infrastructure and remaining 852 colonies were not eligible for civic infrastructure. 


Chapter-IV: Internal Control and Monitoring 
 
 
 61 
Thus, authorities of Municipal Corporations  did not take timely and effective action on 
unauthorised colonies.  
During Exit Conference (February 2025), t he Government took note of the findings and 
assured that it will look into the matter. 
4.4 Shortage of manpower 
Optimal manpower is essential to ensure proper ground survey, vetting, inspection and 
supervision of the Development Plan. During scrutiny of records of selected five T&CP 
offices, Audit noticed  shortage of manpower across all the positions as detailed in  
Table-4.3. 
Table 4.3: Showing sanctioned strength and person-in-position in selected districts 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of post Sanctioned 
posts 
Person in 
position 
Vacant 
posts 
Vacancy in 
percentage 
1 Dy. Director 4 1 3 75 
2 Asstt. Director 9 5 4 44 
3 Draftsman 32 10 22 69 
4 Tracer 20 1 19 95 
5 Sub. engineer 10 5 5 50 
6 Land surveyor 15 1 14 93 
7 Senior (Asstt. Research) 5 0 5 100 
(Source- District offices of T&CP) 
It is evident from the table above that there was an acute shortage of manpower across all 
the cadres, ranging between 44 and 100 per cent  for all technical posts . Government 
accorded (May 2023) financial approval  for direct recruitment on 151 posts including 45 
posts mentioned at Serial No. 1 to 3 in the Table 4.3 above. 
The shortages in availability of manpower  may have affected proper functioning of the 
Department of Town and Country Planning. 
During Exit Conference (February 2025), Government stated that some cadres like Senior 
Research Assistant/Research Assistant are dying cadres and hence no recruitment is 
necessary on such cadres. Approval of the recruitment rules of other cadres has been 
received from the Government and action is being tak en to fill the vacancies through 
Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission.  
4.5 Conclusion 
Scrutiny of records of Director, T&CP and JD, T&CP of selected districts showed 
significant shortfall in meetings ranging between 88 and 96 per cent, which resulted in lack 
of periodical review of the implementation status, supervision, and progress of the works of 
the Development Plan. Audit noticed average shortfall of 44 per cent in achievement of 
proposed land use by the JD, T&CP offices of selected districts. Audit noticed that roads, 
buildings, government quarters proposed in old devel opment plans were being included  in 
new developme nt plans which indicates  non-achievement of targets of previous 
development plans. The Department did not have its own mechanism to trace unauthorised 
development resulting in no preventive action on unauthorised land use. Audit noticed that 
Bhopal, Gwalior , Indore and Ujjain  Municipal Corporations though identified 1586 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning  
 
 
 62 
unauthorised colonies through survey but did not take effective action for removal of the 
unauthorised development/construction  and filing complaints with the police authorities. 
Further, audit noticed acute shortage of manpower in selected T&CP district offices. All 
these reflect that Department of Town and Country Planning was largely non-functional.  
4.6 Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
➢ Government should ensure regular meetings of planning and supervision committees 
to ensure effective implementation of development plans. (Paragraph 4.2) 
➢ Government should take prompt and stringent action on unauthorised colonies. Fix 
timelines for inspecting unauthorized developments and  to keep a watch over 
proliferation of such col onies so that early remedial actions can be taken against 
such developments.  Use of GIS technology can be considered to aid in 
tracing/detecting unauthorised developments (Paragraphs 4.2.2 and 4.3) 
➢ An internal audit wing may be constituted to internally review the functioning of the 
Department which will serve as an aid to the management in identifying 
shortcomings and for initiating early remedial actions.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-V 
 
Conclusion and 
summary of 
recommendations 

 
  

 
63 
Chapter-V: Conclusion and summary of recommendations 
 
5.1 Conclusion 
The Directorate of Town and Country Planning is a technical advisory body to Government 
of Madhya Pradesh for promotion of planned physical development of urban areas in the 
state. However, the performance of the T&CP department and its overall synergy with other 
agencies such as municipal corporations leave a lot to be desired. The desired department 
did not prepare Regional and Development Plans and permissions issued to applicants were 
never monitored resulting in violations with respect to the bye laws. There was manpower 
shortage, which reflected in its performance.  
In conclusion, it can be summarized that the Department of Town and Country Planning was 
largely non-functional and was performing its duties in a merely perfunctory manner, instead 
of the oversight/supervisory role it is tasked with.  
Municipal corporations , which aid the department of T&CP in achievement of several 
objectives intended to make town planning better, efficient, safe, aesthetic and lasting 
faltered on almost all of their stated tasks. Consequently, buildings were occupied even 
without completion certificates posing significant public safety and health concerns. There 
were cases of widespread deviations in construction and unauthorised development and 
proliferation of illegal colonies. Such unplanned development and growth pose significant 
challenges to the stated objectives of the Town and Country Planning Department and need 
to be tackled on urgent basis. 
The large-scale violation through absence of mechanism/processes and actions including 
those where deviations are identified/documented are recommended to be examined through 
investigative and vigilance mechanisms/authorities. Besides mechanism/processes a nd 
activities prescribed are required to be done. 
5.2 Summary of recommendations 
➢ Government should prescribe a timeline of suitable interval for preparation/  
updation of Regional Plan/Development Plan/Zoning Plan as recommended in 
Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation 
Guidelines, 2014 issued by the GoI (Paragraphs 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.2).  
➢ Early action should be taken for preparation of Bhopal Development Plan, aligned 
with the population and economic growth so that future growth can be effectively 
planned and managed (Paragraph 2.1.2) 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
64 
➢ The Government/Department may investigate the reasons and fix responsibility for 
delays in de-reservation of land (Paragraph 2.1.4).  
➢ The Department should ensure that surveys carried out for preparation of various 
plans (Regional/Development and Zoning) are accurate and reflect the on -ground 
realities (Paragraph 2.2). 
➢ The Government/Department should investigate and fix responsibility on the 
concerned officials for: 
• not taking action on unauthorised commercial establishments (Paragraphs 
3.2.2 and 3.2.3) 
• not imposing conditions for environmental clearance on 
building/construction projects and for grey water discharge management 
plan. (Paragraphs 3.3.2 and 3.3.3) 
• issuing building permissions but not ensuring whether completion certificate 
was obtained by the concerned owner. (Paragraph 3.4) 
➢ Department should prescribe Standard Operating Procedure for inspection of 
development activities/buildings by both T&CP and ULBs to identify deviations from 
the Development Plan/permissions. (Paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3) 
➢ Department should ensure collection of fines from builders who have violated 
prescribed conditions/norms. Stringent action may be taken against unlawful 
construction as provided in the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
➢ Shelter fee should be immediately transferred to a designated account for the proper 
monitoring of the expenditure and Municipal Corporations should be instructed to 
maintain separate bank account for shelter fee so that can be monitored. 
(Paragraphs 3.3.9.1 and 3.3.9.2) 
➢ Department should develop an integrated IT Application to enhance transparency in 
the NOC application process, providing real -time updates on status of permissions 
from various agencies, along with reasons for withholding Occupancy Certificate 
and other permissions (Paragraph 3.4).  
➢ Government should ensure regular meetings of planning and supervision committees 
to ensure effective implementation of development plans. (Paragraph 4.2) 
➢ Government should take prompt and stringent action on unauthorised colonies. Fix 
timelines for inspecting unauthorized developments and to keep a watch over 

Chapter-V: Conclusion and summary of recommendations 
 
65 
proliferation of such colonies so that  early remedial actions can be taken against 
such developments. Use of GIS technology can be considered to aid in 
tracing/detecting unauthorised developments (Paragraphs 4.2.2 and 4.3) 
➢ An internal audit wing may be constituted to internally review the functioning of the 
Department which will serve as an aid to the management in identifying 
shortcomings and for initiating early remedial actions.  
 
 
 
 
Gwalior 
 
(VISHAL BANSAL) 
The: 9 November 2025 Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
 Madhya Pradesh 
  
Countersigned 
New Delhi (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The: 12 November 2025 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 

 
 

Appendices 
 67 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 1.2.3, Page No. 5)  
Details of development permissions issued and selected for audit scrutiny 
Year Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Ujjain Total 
Development 
permissions 
issued 
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
Development 
permissions 
issued 
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
Development 
permissions 
issued  
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
Development 
permissions 
issued  
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
Development 
permissions 
issued  
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
Development 
permissions 
issued  
Selected 
for 
Audit 
scrutiny 
2018-19 160 31 61 15 300 30 74 18 29 7 624 101 
2019-20 203 30 89 23 432 30 70 18 35 9 829 110 
2020-21 200 29 113 29 324 30 61 15 27 7 725 110 
2021-22 132 30 90 23 356 30 68 17 25 6 671 106 
2022-23 165 30 147 38 165 30 29 7 29 7 535 112 
Total 860 150 500 128 1577 150 302 75 145 36 3384 539 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 68 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 1.2.3, Page No. 5)  
1. Details of building permissions issued and selected for audit scrutiny 
Year Bhopal  Gwalior  Indore  Jabalpur  Ujjain  Total 
(2018-22) 
Total 
Issued 
Consider
ed for 
Audit* 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Consid
ered for 
Audit* 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Considered 
for Audit* 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Consid
ered for 
Audit* 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Considere
d for 
Audit* 
Selecte
d for 
scrutin
y 
Total 
Issued 
Consid
ered for 
Audit* 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
2018-19 1542 125 31 738 12 3 5916 226 30 2183 49 12 2452 35 9 12831 447 85 
2019-20 972 117 30 488 15 4 2579 46 12 1613 38 10 2047 32 8 7699 248 64 
2020-21 1808 101 25 944 42 11 4956 90 23 2758 53 13 2022 61 15 12488 347 87 
2021-22 5693 70 17 1409 48 12 5400 94 24 2509 47 12 1834 46 11 16845 305 76 
2022-23 5448 95 24 1506 69 18 5757 114 29 2407 40 10 1689 57 14 16807 375 95 
Total 15463 508 127 5085 186 48 24608 570 118 11470 227 57 10044 231 57 66670 1722 407 
* Residential dwelling units and convenience or small shops were not considered either for audit scrutiny nor for joint physical verification as they pertain to small land 
area. 
2. Details of colony permissions issued and selected for audit scrutiny 
Year Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Ujjain Total 
(2018-22) 
Total 
Issued 
Considered 
for Audit 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Consider
ed for 
Audit 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Considere
d for 
Audit 
Selected 
for 
scrutiny 
Total 
Issued 
Considred 
for Audit  
Selecte
d for 
scrutin
y 
Total 
Issued 
Considere
d for 
Audit 
Selecte
d for 
scrutin
y 
Total 
Issued 
Consid
ered for 
Audit 
Selecte
d for 
scrutin
y 
2018-19 16 10 3 7 7 2 30 30 8 32 32 8 6 6 2 91 85 23 
2019-20 12 6 2 9 9 3 39 39 10 32 32 8 14 14 4 106 100 27 
2020-21 28 11 4 8 8 2 46 46 12 23 23 6 8 8 2 113 96 26 
2021-22 51 25 6 14 14 4 63 63 16 35 35 9 10 10 3 173 147 38 
2022-23 63 21 5 2 2 0 87 87 22 26 26 6 9 9 2 187 145 35 
Total 170 73* 20 40 40 11 265 265 68 148 148 37 47 47 13 670 573 149 
* Considered in audit colony having land area above one hectare.

Appendices 
 
69 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 2.1, Page No. 7) 
Details of Regions of Madhya Pradesh 
Sl. No. Name of Region Districts 
1 Gwalior Agro Region Bhind, Morena, Shivpuri and Datia 
2 Bhopal Capital Region Rajgarh, Shajapur, Sehore, Bhopal and Raisen 
3 Indore Agro Industries Region Mandsaur, Ratlam, Jhabua, Dhar, Indore, Dewas and 
Ujjain 
4 Narmada-Tapti Region Hoshangabad, Khandwa and Khargone 
5 Central Satpura Region of Forest and Mines Balaghat, Seoni, Chhindwara and Betul 
6 Jabalpur Forest Estate Region Jabalpur, Damoh, Narsinghpur and Mandla 
7 Bundelkhand Region Rewa, Satna, Panna, Chhatarpur and Tikamgarh 
8 Bina Petrochemicals and Industrial Region1 Sagar, Vidisha and Guna 
 (Source- MP gazette notification) 
  
 
1  GoMP notified (May 1999) Bina Petrochemical and Industrial Region by including areas of Guna, Sagar 
and Vidisha districts. 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
70 
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.1, Page No. 15) 
Details of development permissions issued by selected T&CP offices, and colony 
development permissions and building permissions issued by selected MCs 
during 2018-23 
I. Development permissions issued by selected T&CP offices during 2018-23 
Year Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Ujjain Total 
2018-19 160 61 300 74 29 624 
2019-20 203 89 432 70 35 829 
2020-21 200 113 324 61 27 725 
2021-22 132 90 356 68 25 671 
2022-23 165 147 165 29 29 535 
Total 860 500 1577 302 145 3384 
(Source- Data collected from T&CP offices of selected districts) 
II. Building permissions issued by the selected MCs during 2018 to 2023 
Year Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Ujjain Total 
2018-19 1542 738 5916 2183 2452 12831 
2019-20 972 488 2579 1613 2047 7699 
2020-21 1808 944 4956 2758 2022 12488 
2021-22 5693 1409 5400 2509 1834 16845 
2022-23 5448 1506 5757 2407 1689 16807 
Total 15463 5085 24608 11470 10044 66670 
(Source- Data collected from concerned MCs) 
 
III. Colony development permissions issued by the selected MCs during 2018 to 2023 
Year Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Ujjain Total 
2018-19 16 7 30 32 6 91 
2019-20 12 9 39 32 14 106 
2020-21 28 8 46 23 8 113 
2021-22 51 14 63 35 10 173 
2022-23 63 2 87 26 9 187 
Total 170 40 265 148 47 670 
   (Source- Data collected from concerned MCs) 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
71 
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.2.2, Page No. 16) 
Statement showing status of notices issued to owners and receipt of their response  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Marriage Garden 1st notice 
issued for 
removal of 
illegal 
construction 
on 
Owner's 
respond to 
notice 
(Yes/No) 
2nd notice issued 
for hearing on 
1 Patel Marriage Garden, Morar 20-03-23 No 31-05-23 
2 Golden Marriage Garden, Morar 20-03-23 No 31-05-23 
3 ShivamVatika, Morar 20-03-23 No 31-05-23 
4 Modern Home Comfirt Pvt.Ltd, Birla Nagar 20-03-23 Yes 06-04-23 
5 Gulmohar Marriage Garden, Pinto Park 20-03-23 No 31-05-23 
6 Shri Krishna Vatica, Morar 24-03-23 No 31-05-23 
7 Shri Narayan Vatika, Morar 24-03-23 Yes No 
8 Royal Avenue, Jaderuakala 24-03-23 No 02-06-23 
9 Royal Green Garden, Morar 24-03-23 Yes No 
10 Mangalam Garden, Thatipur 24-03-23 No 02-06-23 
11 Krishnayan Garden, Thatipur 24-03-23 No 02-06-23 
12 Sanskriti Garden, Mela Ground 24-03-23 No 02-06-23 
13 Sriji Garden, Pinto Park 24-03-23 No 02-06-23 
14 Sanmati Garden, Raj Payga road 24-03-23 No 12-06-23 
15 MaaVaishnoVatica, Pinto Park 24-03-23 No 12-06-23 
16 Sri Krishna Vatika, Pinto Park 29-03-23 No 12-06-23 
17 Mangal Vatika, Mela Ground 29-03-23 No 12-06-23 
18 Salimaar Garden, Mela Ground 29-03-23 No 12-06-23 
19 Sunsine Garden, City Center 29-03-23 No 12-06-23 
20 Kaka Garden, Guda -gudi Naka 29-03-23 Yes 12-06-23 
21 Om Shanti Vatika, Guda 29-03-23 No No 
22 Bandhan Garden, Guda 29-03-23 No No 
23 Moti Palace, Nadi Gate 29-03-23 No No 
24 RadheyVatika, Sainik Colony 29-03-23 No No 
25 Yashoda Vatika, Bhind Road 29-03-23 No No 
26 Ashirwad Marriage Garden, Morar 29-03-23 Yes 08-05-23 
27 Jagnnath Garden, Morar 29-03-23 Yes 08-05-23 
28 Madhuwan Garden, Morar 29-03-23 Yes No 
29 Dharmveer Omsai Vatika, Bhind road 29-03-23 No No 
30 Brij Vatika, Bhind road 29-03-23 No No 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
72 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Marriage Garden 1st notice 
issued for 
removal of 
illegal 
construction 
on 
Owner's 
respond to 
notice 
(Yes/No) 
2nd notice issued 
for hearing on 
31 Omsai Marriage Garden, Morar 29-03-23 Yes 08-05-23 
32 Madhurmilan Marriage Garden, Bahodapur 29-03-23 No No 
33 Suraj Sundram Garden, Bahodapur 29-03-23 No No 
34 Sanskar Vatika, Anand Nagar 29-03-23 No No 
35 Pushpa Vatika, Morar 29-03-23 No No 
36 Abhinandan Vatika, Bhind road 29-03-23 No No 
37 Welcome Marriage Garden, Bhind road 29-03-23 No No 
38 Kamleshwar Vivah Vatika, Morar 29-03-23 No No 
39 Sandhu Marriage Garden, Bhind road 29-03-23 No No 
40 Ramrati Garden, Koteshwar Road 29-03-23 No No 
41 Ram Vivah Vatika, Morar 29-03-23 Yes 04-07-23 
42 Khushal Vatika, Bhind Road 29-03-23 No No 
43 Mayur Marriage Garden, Hathikhana road 04-04-23 Yes 08-05-23 
44 R.R Garden, Jaderua 04-04-23 No No 
45 Toran Vatika, Chetakpuri 04-04-23 No No 
46 Gayatri Marriage Garden, Bhind Road 04-04-23 No No 
47 Laxmi Vatika, DD nagar 06-04-23 No No 
48 Sarkar Yadav community hall, Adityapuram 06-04-23 Yes No 
49 Prem Vatika, Hurawali 06-04-23 No No 
50 Sarkar Yadav community hall, Thatipur 06-04-23 No No 
51 Mohan Vatika, Thatipur 06-04-23 Yes 15-05-23 
52 Bhagwati Garden, Ghandi Road 06-04-23 No No 
53 Sitole Vatika Garden, Pinto Park 06-04-23 No No 
54 Dwarika rest house, Pinto Park 06-04-23 No No 
55 Pragati Garden, Sagartall Road 06-04-23 No No 
56 Muskan Vatika, Bahodapur 06-04-23 No No 
57 Balaji Vatika, Mehra Road 06-04-23 No No 
58 Shitla Garden, Thatipur 06-04-23 No No 
59 Kishanmangal Vatika, AB road 06-04-23 No No 
60 Geetanjali Garden, Veerpur 06-04-23 No No 
61 Muskaan Garden, Veerpur 06-04-23 No No 
62 Aditya Marriage Garden, Veerpur 06-04-23 No No 
63 Amar Marriage Garden, Veerpur 06-04-23 No No 
64 Madhuwan Garden, Purani Chhawani 06-04-23 No No 

Appendices 
 
73 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Marriage Garden 1st notice 
issued for 
removal of 
illegal 
construction 
on 
Owner's 
respond to 
notice 
(Yes/No) 
2nd notice issued 
for hearing on 
65 Yash Vatika, Purani Chhawani 06-04-23 No No 
66 J.M.D Garden, AB Road 13-04-23 No No 
67 Hansraj Palace Garden, Badagown 13-04-23 No No 
68 Ramshree Marriage Garden, Morar 13-04-23 No No 
69 Kushwah Marriage Garden, Gol Pahadia 13-04-23 No No 
70 Shiv Vatika, Sagartall Road 13-04-23 No No 
71 Kalimata Vivah garden, Koteshwar Road 13-04-23 Yes 04-07-23 
72 Laxmi vatika Barat ghar, Bahodapur 13-04-23 No No 
73 Ramrati Barat ghar, Chandra Nagar 13-04-23 No No 
74 Sanjog Garden, Bhind Road 13-04-23 No No 
75 Indraprath Garden, Gole ka Mandir 13-04-23 No No 
76 Milan Garden, Ramta Pura 13-04-23 No No 
77 Mangalam Marriage house, Tansen Road 13-04-23 No No 
78 Ashirwad Marriage house, Tansen Road 13-04-23 Yes 04-07-23 
79 Kushwah Marriage Garden, Tansen Road 17-04-23 No No 
80 Gargaj Vatika, Bahodapur 19-04-23 No No 
81 Raje Palace, Gole ka Mandir 19-04-23 No No 
82 Sahyog Garden, Ramtapura 19-04-23 No No 
83 Aaradhya Marriage Garden, Jaderua 19-04-23 No No 
84 Neteji Marriage Garden, Sikandar Kampu 19-04-23 No No 
85 Raj kishore Garden, Pinto Park 19-04-23 No No 
86 Vaishya Garden, Saket Nagar 28-04-23 No No 
87 Bajrang Garden, Shil Ngar 28-04-23 No No 
88 Agrawal Marriage Garden, Kila Gate 28-04-23 No No 
89 Bhagatji Garden, Ramtapura 28-04-23 No No 
90 GD Palace, Sabad Pratap Asharm 28-04-23 No No 
91 Bhawna Marriage Garden, Gandhi Nagar 28-04-23 No No 
92 Janakpuri Palace, Laskar 28-04-23 No No 
93 Ram Vatika, Sachin Tendulkar Marg 28-04-23 No No 
94 Sanskriti Garden, Sachin Tendulkar Marg 28-04-23 No No 
95 Neelshree Garden, Shivpuri link Road 28-04-23 No No 
96 Hardol Garden, Sachin Tendulkar Marg 28-04-23 Yes 25-05-23 
97 Krishna Marriage Garden, Moti Jheel 28-04-23 No No 
98 Patel Barat ghar, Jahangeer 28-04-23 No No 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
74 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Marriage Garden 1st notice 
issued for 
removal of 
illegal 
construction 
on 
Owner's 
respond to 
notice 
(Yes/No) 
2nd notice issued 
for hearing on 
99 Vaishno Marriage Garden, Sikandar kampoo 28-04-23 No No 
100 Dogar Marriage Garden, near Shamshan Ghat 28-04-23 No No 
101 Vivah Garden, Sikandar kampoo 28-04-23 No No 
102 Sri Baba Garden, Guda -Gudi Naka 28-04-23 No No 
103 Santosh Vatika, Samadhiya Colony 28-04-23 No No 
104 Sriram Vatika, Samadhiya Colony 28-04-23 No No 
105 Shanti Marriage Garden, Sikandar kampoo 03-05-23 No No 
106 Kushwah Marriage Garden, Sikandar kampoo 03-05-23 Yes 12-06-23 
107 Hareshive Marriage Garden, Lashkar 03-05-23 No No 
108 Shivshakti Garden, Guda 03-05-23 No No 
109 Tomar Garden, Char Sahar ka Naka 03-05-23 No No 
110 Sona Marriage Garden, Char Sahar ka Naka 03-05-23 No No 
111 Barat ghar, Sagartall Road 03-05-23 No No 
112 Nirmal Vatika, Koteshwar Mandir 03-05-23 No No 
113 Parmar Marriage Garden, Koteshwar Mandir 03-05-23 No No 
114 Ramvilash Vatika, Girwai 03-05-23 No No 
115 Aaradhna Benquet hall, Laxmiganj 03-05-23 No No 
116 Singhal Keters and tent house, Chatri Mandi 03-05-23 No No 
117 The Empower, Torari 03-05-23 No No 
118 Indralok Marriage Garden, Shitlamata Road 03-05-23 No No 
119 Raj Rajeshwari Garden, DD Nagar 03-05-23 No No 
120 Murli Marriage Garden, Tighra Road 03-05-23 No No 
121 Ajun Marriage Lodge, Girwai 03-05-23 No No 
122 Moon Palace, Lashkar 03-05-23 No No 
123 Avanti Vatika, Hazira 03-05-23 No No 
124 Senapati Garden, Morar 03-05-23 No No 
125 Sri Ram Vatika, Morar 03-05-23 No No 
126 Sri Ram Palace, Darjioli 03-05-23 No No 
 

Appendices 
 
75 
Appendix-3.3  
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.2.4, Page No. 19) 
Statement showing cases wherein JD, T&CP, Gwalior did not take appropriate action  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the case Location Notice of section 
37 (1) 
Final order Sec 
37(6) 
Letter to the Municipal 
Corporation 
Development 
permission 
Status during site inspection 
1 Oil factory 
operation 
Village-Barauya Survey 
no.75/2 
1901/15.12.2022 
126/27.01.2023 
07.02.2023 1905/15.12.22 
 
No Found operational 
2 Commercial 
construction 
against residential 
Bala bai ka bazar Ward -
43 
25.06.2019 
 
26.09.2019 3492/10.11.2020 
 
Residential Commercial construction against 
residential 
3 Construction of 
Commercial 
Complex 
Hari Shankar Puram plot 
No.7 and 8 
-- -- 1064/08.07.2019 No 100 per cent  commercial complex is 
being constructed by combining Plot 
no. 7 and 8. No MOS have been left 
and the balconies are also out on the 
road. Construction work of ( Basement 
+ two floor) is being done. 
4 Construction of 
Highrise building 
Mainawaligali in front of 
Bhero baba hanuman 
mandir 
-- -- 1447/27.09.2022 No Ground+ two floor Constructed of 
Highrise building 
5 Construction of 
Commercial 
Highrise building 
Inside of Mari  mata 
mandir Survey No-219 
-- -- 2050/15.11.2018 Not confirm 100 per cent  plot being constructed. 
No MOS has been left 
6 Construction of 
Shops 
Chambal colony Plot 
No.8 and 20 
-- -- 1838/22.11.2021 No Illegal construction of shops is being 
done on plot no.  8 and 20. 
7 Development of 8 
illegal colony 
Airforce station 
Maharajpura 
-- -- 66/12.01.2022 No Construction of WBM roads and 
illegal plotting and illegal 
development/construction of colonies 
are being done. 
8 Illegal Plotting, sell 
and construction 
Village-Mau Survey 
No.848 
1648/21.09.2021 
509/08.04.2022 
06.05.2022 06.05.2022 No Illegal plotting, selling and 
construction 
9 Illegal colonizing 
and selling of plots 
Village-Bikrampur 
Survey no-215 
1643/21.09.2021 
507/08.04.2022 
06.05.2022 06.05.2022 No Illegal colonizing and selling of plots 
 
  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
76 
Appendix-3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.3.1, Page No. 19) 
Details of cases wherein Nala was not shown in the approved layout or conditions not 
imposed in development permissions 
Sl. 
No
. 
District Year Development 
permission No. 
Premises Name Remark 
1 Bhopal 2018-19 BPLLP4501 College Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
2 Bhopal 2018-19 BPLLP4591 Commercial Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
3 Bhopal 2018-19 BPLLP5052 Residential For 
Employee 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
4 Bhopal 2018-19 BPLLP5096 Residence-cum-Work 
plot 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
5 Bhopal 2018-19 BPLLP5311 Residential Multi Unit 
Indore (12.5 Meter 
Height) 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
6 Bhopal 2019-20 BPLLP5577 Government office 
building 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
7 Bhopal 2019-20 BPLLP5679 Hotel_12 Meter 
Height 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
8 Bhopal 2021-22 BPLLP7983 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition was not imposed in 
development permission  while Nala 
was shown in layout. 
9 Bhopal 2021-22 BPLLP8426 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition was not imposed in 
development permission while Nala 
was shown in layout. 
10 Bhopal 2022-23 BPLLP02072273
7 
Plotted Housing Condition was not imposed in 
development permission while Nala 
was shown in layout. 
11 Gwalior 2018-19 GWLLP5428 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
(64 plots) 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
12 Gwalior 2019-20 GWLLP6081 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
13 Gwalior 2019-20 GWLLP5697 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
14 Gwalior 2020-21 GWLLP7588 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
15 Gwalior 2020-21 GWLLP7494 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 

Appendices 
 
77 
Sl. 
No
. 
District Year Development 
permission No. 
Premises Name Remark 
layout 
16 Gwalior 2020-21 GWLLP7214 Group housing Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
17 Gwalior 2020-21 GWLLP6902 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
18 Gwalior 2020-21 GWLLP6675 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
19 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP7939 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
20 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP8066 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
21 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP8175 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
22 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP8363 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
23 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP8374 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
24 Gwalior 2021-22 GWLLP8444 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
25 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP0102233
16 
Residential Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
26 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP1204222
17 
Residential  Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
27 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP2008220
05 
Residential Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
28 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP2501232
30 
Residential  Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
29 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP2506226
92 
Residential  Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
30 Gwalior 2022-23 GWLLP2802235
48 
Residential  Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
31 Indore 2018-19 INDLP0612 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition was not imposed in 
development permission  while Nala 
was shown in layout 
32 Indore 2018-19 INDLP4845 Residential Self Condition was not imposed in 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
78 
Sl. 
No
. 
District Year Development 
permission No. 
Premises Name Remark 
development permission  while Nala 
was shown in layout 
33 Indore 2019-20 INDLP5415 Residential Plot-
Plotted Housing 
Condition was not imposed in 
development permission  while Nala 
was shown in layout 
34 Ujjain 2020-21 PPU-22/20 Residential Colony Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
35 Jabalpur 2021-22 JBLLP7075 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition imposed in development 
permission while Nala not shown in 
layout 
36 Jabalpur 2019-20 JBLLP4950 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition not imposed in 
development permission  while Nala 
shown in lay-out. 
37 Jabalpur 2019-20 JBLLP7261 Residential Plot-
Plotted Development 
Condition not imposed in 
development permission  while Nala 
shown in lay-out. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
79 
Appendix-3.5 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.3.1, Page No. 20) 
Statement showing cases wherein distance from Nala/River was not maintained as 
noticed during Joint Physical Verification 
Sl. 
No. 
District Building permission 
case/colony 
development 
permission no. 
Name of 
building 
Colony/ 
building 
Nala/River 
1 Bhopal 17/75/428/2020 Sagar Public 
School 
Building No distance was left . Nala was 
covered with concrete. Its stream 
and natural flow ha d also been 
changed. 
2 Bhopal BMC/0747/Z19/W85/18-
19 
Higher 
secondary 
school (St 
Francis School) 
Building In compliance with  the T&CP, 
development permission condition 
3 m wide green belt was not found. 
However, as per MPBV N 2012, 
rule 50, distance from Nala should 
be left 9 m.  
3 Bhopal 13/52/1637 Hotel Mahendra 
Utsav 
Building Distance from Nala was 0m and 
constructed the boundary of hotel 
just at the bank of Nala. While it 
should be away at 9m. 
4 Bhopal 931 dated 27.05.2019 Aadarsh Giri 
Nirman Samiti 
Colony Distance from Nala was to be kept 
9 m. During physical verification, 
the Audit  found the boundary wall 
of the colony constructed only 3 m 
away from the Nala. 
5 Bhopal 967/19.02.21 S S Creations 
(Grace Garden) 
Colony Distance from Nala was 0m  against 
norms of 9 m . The colonizer 
constructed boundary  walls at the 
bank of Nala at the North /East side 
of the colony. Further,  Nala Land 
was encroached by constructing 
boundary walls on land of Nala. 
6 Bhopal 963/ 28.01.2021 Mantra 
Infrastructure 
Colony From the EWS block to west side , 
distance from Nala to Boundary of 
the colony ranged from 1 to 12 feet 
against norms of 30 feet (9m). 
A Nala (from Slum area) was 
passing through left side of colony 
road to Main entry gate and then 
dropped in openly behind the EWS 
block. Which was covered by the 
developer by laying Hume pipe and 
Concrete work and then the area of 
Nala was being u tilized as colony 
road. 9m free space  on both side s 
of the nal a was not left free as per 
the norms along with the Nala 
An area of approx. 12*12 Sq feet 
of Nala land was encroached 
adjoining STP against BMC layout 
by constructing concrete platform. 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
80 
Sl. 
No. 
District Building permission 
case/colony 
development 
permission no. 
Name of 
building 
Colony/ 
building 
Nala/River 
7 Bhopal BHO/0269/167/2021 Hospital (up to 
200 beds) 
Building Nala was found at the back corner 
of the site and the flow  of stream 
was stopped by CC wall. 
8 Bhopal BHO/0269/2185/2021 Shopping mall 
(Bling square) 
Building Nala was found at the back side of 
rear MOS (at a corner) just 3.5 m 
away against norms of 9 m. 
9 Gwalior 955/ 10.10.2019 Sunrise Enclave 
SADA Road 
Colony Nala land had been covered via 
Concrete and laying Hume Pipes. 
An area of Nala approx. 1 ,01,832 
sq. m was being utilized  for colony 
roads, garden etc . No space of 9 M 
on both side s of nal a was left free 
as per norms.  
10 Gwalior GWLLP08042404096 7 Hills Resort Building Nala shown in T&CP approved 
layout was not found at site due to 
construction of garden above nala 
land. No space of 9 M on both 
sides of nala was left free as per 
norms. 
11 Gwalior 068-sec-
16/t&cp/2014/430/ 
13.12.2014 
Aditya World 
School 
Building No free space of 15 m was found 
between the building  and river. 
Construction of plingth was just at 
the bank of river. 
12 Indore 1030/Colony Cell/2019 M/s Graphics 
Buildcon 
Pvt.Ltd 
Colony Nala was very close to the land of 
colony boundary. 
13 Ujjain 89/22.01.2021 Kala Janki Gold Colony Close to boundary wall 
14 Ujjain UJJ/0203/402/2021 Ortho Hospital Building Close to Nala.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
81 
Appendix -3.6 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.3.3, Page No. 22) 
Details of cases wherein applicant did not submit Grey Water Discharge Management Plan to MC 
Sl. 
No. 
Building permission Case No.  Building use Built up area 
(sq.m/ Units) 
Permission date Total days (up 
to March 2023 
Fix penalty 
(`) 
Penalty (per 
day ` 100) 
1 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/055/2021 Educational 22950.45 30-03-2021 731 5,000 73,100 
2 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/547/2020 Group housing 896 Units 17-10-2020 895 5,000 89,500 
3 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/160/2021 Hospital 5590.45 05-04-2021 725 5,000 72,500 
4 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/438/2020 ITI 145728.83 04-09-2020 938 5,000 93,800 
5 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/428/2020 Educational 21219.38 05-04-2021 725 5,000 72,500 
6 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/187/2022 Educational 5033.08 26-02-2022 398 5,000 39,800 
7 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/4659/2021 Residential 114 Units 24-12-2021 462 5,000 46,200 
8 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/3097/2021 Institutional 10668.43 01-10-2021 546 5,000 54,600 
9 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/4220/2021 Nursing home 2203.07 03-11-2021 513 5,000 51,300 
10 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/2178/2021 Residential 5987.10 29-10-2021 518 5,000 51,800 
11 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/1166/2022 Business 5475.69 08-07-2022 266 5,000 26,600 
12 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/6063/2022 Residential 136 Units 27-12-2022 94 5,000 9,400 
13 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/6773/2022 Institutional 8408.92 21-12-2022 100 5,000 10,000 
14 BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/3378/2022 Mercantile  8996.05 26-07-2022 248 5,000 24,800 
15 GWL/Z14W60/0094/2019/3x3 Commercial 11392.50 26-02-2019 1494 5,000 1,49,400 
16 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/926/2020 Institutional 22013.99 12-11-2020 869 5,000 86,900 
17 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/1476/2020 Residential 188 Units 25-10-2021 522 5,000 52,200 
18 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/065/2021 Institutional 3454.07 01-03-2021 760 5,000 76,000 
19 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/362/2021 Commercial 16860.66 26-09-2022 186 5,000 18,600 
20 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/026/2022 Educational 11140.56 12-02-2022 412 5,000 41,200 
21 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/1900/2021 Commercial 8717.17 17-11-2022 134 5,000 13,400 
22 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/908/2021 Institutional 4663.93 17-03-2022 379 5,000 37,900 
23 GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/1854/2022 Commercial 27196.46 23-12-2022 98 5,000 9,800 
24 IND/IND/IND/0152/1476/2020 Institutional 5445.75 10-02-2021 779 5,000 77,900 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
82 
Sl. 
No. 
Building permission Case No.  Building use Built up area 
(sq.m/ Units) 
Permission date Total days (up 
to March 2023 
Fix penalty 
(`) 
Penalty (per 
day ` 100) 
25 IND/IND/IND/0152/627/2020 Commercial 34701.02 03-07-2020 1001 5,000 1,00,100 
26 IND/IND/IND/0152/876/2020  School 6744.90 11-08-2020 962 5,000 96,200 
27 IND/IND/IND/0152/1841/2020 Institutional 23139.43 22-10-2020 890 5,000 89,000 
28 IND/IND/IND/0152/2556/2020 Assembly 4634.89 13-01-2021 807 5,000 80,700 
29 IND/IND/IND/0152/2013/2021 Commercial 5461.78 27-05-2022 308 5,000 30,800 
30 IND/IND/IND/0152/2143/2021 Assembly 4390.00 26-08-2021 582 5,000 58,200 
31 IND/IND/IND/0152/1311/2022 Residential 283 Units 21-09-2022 191 5,000 19,100 
32 IND/IND/IND/0152/2412/2022 Educational 24523.49 15-11-2022 136 5,000 13,600 
33 IND/IND/IND/0152/5869/2022 Educational 27207.49 04-02-2023 55 5,000 5,500 
34 JAB/JAB/JAB/0427/3043/2020 Commercial 5445.45 16-04-2021 714 5,000 71,400 
35 JAB/JAB/JAB/0427/240/2021 Business 8544.00 05-02-2021 784 5,000 78,400 
36 JAB/JAB/JAB/0427/1243/2022 Residential 22234.06 30-05-2022 305 5,000 30,500 
37 UJJ/UJJ/UJJ/0203/469/2020 Institutional 4465.42 08-07-2020 996 5,000 99,600 
38 UJJ/UJJ/UJJ/0203/1333/2020 Institutional 25857.93 03-12-2020 848 5,000 84,800 
39 UJJ/UJJ/UJJ/0203/089/2021 Educational 4182.01 26-03-2021 735 5,000 73,500 
40 UJJ/UJJ/UJJ/0203/561/2022 Educational 2538.26 22-04-2022 343 5,000 34,300  
Total 2,00,000 22,44,900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
83 
Appendix-3.7 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.1, Page No. 30) 
Statement showing violation of Minimum Open Space (MOS) 
Sl. No. District Colony/Building Permission Case no. Name of the building 
1 Bhopal 9/49/269/055/21 BSSS Institute of Advance Studies 
2 Bhopal BHO/0269/752/2020 dt 20.02.21 Anni Villa Apartment 
3 Bhopal BHO/0269/262/2021 dt 19.04.21 Godown 
4 Bhopal BMC/2048/Z02/W07/18-19 Laisure Valley apartment 
5 Bhopal BMC/1599/Z15/W62/18-19 Higher sec. school (St. Mont fort senior 
secondary school) 
6 Bhopal BMC/0747/Z19/W85/18-19 Higher secondary school (St Francis School) 
7 Bhopal 13/53/1281 Technical training centre JatKhedi 
8 Bhopal 19/85/9/2019 Fuel filling station 
9 Bhopal 19/85/1157/2020 Hotel at Samardha 
10 Bhopal BHO/0269/1886/2021 Bhopal surgical and Maternity hospitals(P) 
Ltd. 
11 Bhopal BHO/0269/333/2020 Shopping mall 
12 Bhopal BHO/0269/4220/2021 Hospital (Noble Multispecialty Hospital) 
13 Gwalior GWA/GWA/GWA/ 
0101/982/2020 
Residential (Narayan Builders) Mahal Gaon, 
Gwalior 
14 Gwalior GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/460/2021 Shivhare Resort Turari 
15 Gwalior GWA/0101/094/2019 Gravity Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. 
16 Gwalior GWA/0101/1476/2020 Garden city (GLR estate pvt. Ltd.) 
17 Gwalior GWA/0101/244/2020 Saral Multi Speciality Hospital (48 bedded) 
18 Gwalior GWA/0101/650/2022 Chopra Chest Hospital 
19 Gwalior 331/3/2014 KMJ  Ansh Hospital 
20 Gwalior 068/2014/432/13.12.2014 (T&CP) Aditya World School 
21 Gwalior GWA/0101/841/2022 Imperial Golf Resort 
22 Gwalior 432/069/sec.16/2014 (T&CP) AMI Shishu Mandir School 
23 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/2020 Pragati school 
24 Gwalior GWLLP08042404096 (T&CP) 7 Hills Resort 
25 Indore IMC/0276/Z07/W34/2009 Residential /Commercial 
26 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/361/2020 Institutional 
27 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/570/2021 Professional Office 
28 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1750/2020 Commercial Market 
29 Indore IMC/1956/Z16/W15/2019 Industrial 
30 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/2024/2021 Residential 
31 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/3042/2020 Local Shopping Centre 
32 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/280/2020 Secondary School 
33 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/539/2021 Hotel 
34 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/2143/2021 Super Market (Mall) 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
84 
Sl. No. District Colony/Building Permission Case no. Name of the building 
35 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1836/2020 Shopping Mall 
36 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/487/2019 Nursing Home 
37 Indore IMC/1962/Z08/W36/2018 Residential + Commercial 
38 Indore IMC/3352/Z08/W36/2018 Residential + Commercial 
39 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1070/2019 Nursery School 
40 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1340/2019 Industrial 
41 Indore 0915/BP/2013 Hotel 
42 Ujjain UJJ/203/089/2021 Divine Educational Society 
43 Ujjain UMC/118/2018/Z-4 Balaji Hospital 
44 Ujjain UJJ/0203/402/2021 Ortho Hospital 
45 Ujjain UMC/949/2018 Mahalaxmi Industry 
46 Ujjain UMC/2358/2018 Neelam Industries 
47 Ujjain UJJ/574/2021 AM Steel & Wooden Industries 
48 Ujjain UMC/1109/2018 Old Age Home 
49 Ujjain UMC/2059/2017 Catholic Diocese of Ujjain 
50 Ujjain UJJ/732/2021 Commercial Zone UMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
85 
Appendix-3.8 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.2, Page No. 31) 
Statement showing irregular use of basement 
Sl.
No. 
District Building 
permission Case 
no. 
Name of the 
building 
Basement 
1 Gwalior Z14W60/0094/20
19/3x3 
(Shopping mall) 
M/s Gravity 
Infrastructures 
pvt.  Ltd 
Basement of LAHS school (Existing school) and 
Shopping complex had been merged for wider use. 
As per T&CP approval it must be kept separately. 
Separate exit/entry ramp has not constructed. 
2 Gwalior GWA/0101/432/2
018 
Keshar 
Infrastructure 
At the roof of ramp to basement a restaurant was 
constructed which is not in the GMC drawing and 
will cause to increase in FAR/ground coverage. 
3 Gwalior GWA/0101/982/2
013 
Narayan Builder The basement was constructed under side 1 MOS/ 
rear MOS and middle road. 
The basement  was sanctioned only under the 
Residential Tower. However, the basement  had 
been constructed under the space sanctioned for 
building (Guest House). 
4 Gwalior GWA/GWA/GW
A/0101/460/2021 
Shivhare Resort 
Turari 
Used for storage and no ramp was constructed 
against parking with ramp 
5 Gwalior GWA/0101/652/2
022 
Chopra Chest 
Hospital 
Basement was constructed under plot 162 without 
sanction and being used for X- ray machine 
6 Bhopal BMC/1426/Z15/
W62/18-19 
Palak Barat Ghar The basement was  being utilized for  the kitchen 
and marriage Hall and no provision for parking. 
No ramp was found . only stairs and Lift for 
basement were constructed. 
7 Bhopal BMC/0601/Z19/
W85/19-20 
Rajhans Hotel Basement used as a Kitchen and no provision for 
parking. No ramp was constructed. O nly stairs for 
the basement were constructed. 
8 Bhopal BHO/0269/4220/2
021 
Hospital (Noble 
Multi speciality) 
Basement was being used as a blood bank against 
parking. 
9 Bhopal BHO/0269/1886/2
021 
Bhopal Surgical 
and maternity 
hospital (P) ltd. 
Basement had constructed one sided of side 1 
MOS and STP & fire system installed in basement. 
10 Bhopal BHO/0269/2185/2
021 
Shopping mall 
(Bling Square) 
Three floors beneath the ground floor whereas in 
sanction only two floors under the ground floor. 
11 Bhopal 17/75/428/2020 Sagar public 
school 
Basement was being used for Kitchen and partially 
for parking. 
12 Indore IND/IND/IND/01
52/280/2020 
Secondary 
School 
Kitchen was found running in Basement Area. 
13 Indore IND/IND/IND/01
52/487/2019 
Nursing Home Medical shop was found running in Basement 
Areas. 
14 Ujjain UMC/118/2018/Z
-4 
Balaji Hospital Basement constructed 58.56 sq.m against no 
provision of Basement 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
86 
Appendix-3.9 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.3, Page No. 32) 
Statement showing construction of additional floors 
Sl. 
No. 
 
District Building permission 
Case no. 
Name of building Colony/ 
building 
Height 
1 Gwalior GWA/0101/244/2020 Saral Multi 
speciality hospital 
Building G+3 against G+2 
2 Gwalior 331/2014x3/3/16.05.2014 KMJ Ansh hospital Building G+3 against G+2 
3 Gwalior GWA/0101/841/2022 Imperial Golf 
resort 
Building G+2 against G+1 in 
Block C (construction of 
BAR on terrace) 
4 Bhopal BMC/1426/Z15/W62/18-
19 
Palak Barat Ghar Building G+2 against G+1 
5 Bhopal BHO/0269/1886/2021 Bhopal Surgical & 
Maternity 
Hospital(P) Ltd. 
Building G+6 against G+5 
6 Ujjain UMC/118/2018/Z-4 Balaji Hospital Building G+4 (3 Rooms and 1 Hall 
constructed on 4th floor) 
against G+3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
87 
Appendix-3.10 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.5, Page No. 34) 
Statement showing excess ground coverage beyond the sanctioned limit 
Sl.
No.  
District Building permission 
Case no. 
Name of building Result of physical verification 
1 Gwalior GWA/0101/650/2022 Chopra chest hospital 
(15 beds) 
100 per cent was covered against 60 
per cent 
2 Gwalior GWA/0101/244/2020 Saral Mult speciality 
hospital (48 beds) 
100 per cent was covered against 36 
per cent. 
3 Gwalior 331/2014x3/3/16.05.2014 KMJ Ansh Hospital 
(50 beds) 
100 per cent was covered against 84 
per cent. 
4 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/2020 Pragati School Ground coverage is 25 per cent due 
to building construction on parking 
space/Rear MOS. 
5 Indore IMC/0276/Z07/W34/2019 Indore India Eye Care 
Clinic (Res./Com.) 
 85 per cent against 67 per cent (due 
to Constructed of 450 sqm against 
279.43 sq. m). 
6 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/361/
2020 
Hall Mark H.S. School 
(Institutional) 
45 per cent against 30 per cent (due 
to construction of 700 sq. m against 
590 sq. m). 
7 Indore IMC/1956/Z16/W15/2019 Industrial 100 per cent against 40 per cent 
8 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/2024
/2021 
Hostel (Residential) 100 per cent against 50 per cent 
9 Indore IMC/2129/Z09/W47/2018 Mahi E Art 
(Residential) 
100 per cent against 50 per cent 
     
10 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1340
/2019 
Industrial 100 per cent instead of 60 per cent 
11 Ujjain UJJ/0203/402/2021 Ortho Hospital Constructed area was 338 sq. m 
against 239.32 sq. m. As a result, 
ground coverage was increased. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
88 
Appendix 3.11 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.7, Page No. 36) 
Statement showing deviation in construction against the approved layout of T&CP  
Sl. 
No. 
Development 
permission 
No 
Name of 
the 
Building 
As per layout/ 
drawing 
Deviation found during Joint 
physical Verification 
Deviation 
by 
1 GWLLP 
7619/T&CP/2
021/18.02.20
21 
Shivhare 
Resort 
Construction on 
rectangular portion 
leaving MOS on all 
side. 
Construction on all the areas of 
MOS. At rear side 3 rooms per floor 
up to 3 storeyswere constructed. A 
swimming pool and a garden 
werealso  developed by purchasing 
other land (without permission). 
Owner 
2 BPLLP6084/
LP192/29(1)/
T&CP/DO/20
19 
VirashaNis
arg 
Side marked for open 
space (between back 
side block and middle 
block) 
That placewas being utilised for 
parking. 
Owner 
3 GWLLP0804
2404096/03.0
5.2024 
7 Hills 
Resort 
Parking within the 
premises 
Parking constructed by cutting and 
lowering of hills at the opposite of 
the site. 
Owner 
4 272/03947/T
&CP/2012/27
.01.2012 
Keshar 
Mall 
Open Park between 
commercial block 1 
and 2. 
Podium Park constructed at this 
place. Due to which area under 
Podium was being utilized for 
Office, DG set and other purposes 
resulted in increase in FAR area. 
GMC 
5 GWLLP4866/
T&CP/2018/0
2.11.2018 
Gravity 
Infrastruct
ures 
Open Park at the rear 
side 
Podium Park sanctioned by GMC at 
this place. 
GMC 
6 496/04026/ 
T&CP/2013/2
2.01.2013 
Narayan 
Builders 
Open Garden Podium Garden constructed at this 
place 
Owner 
Guest House Constructed 13 storey residential 
cum commercial tower and a 
basement. 
Owner 
7 GWLLP 
8351/ 
T&CP/2021/0
5.01.2022 
Imperial 
Golf 
Resort 
A circular dome/Hall 
was to be built 
between Block A and 
D,and Garden area. 
Circular domewas found constructed 
at the last corner of Garden along 
with the construction of 5 Canvas 
hut of 2*2 sqm and a store hall of 
10*3 sqm. A lake was also 
developed without any permission. 
Owner 
8 432/069-sec-
15/ 
T&CP/2014/2
4.02.14 Aditya 
World 
School 
 
Building was to be 
constructed in the U 
shape and Front area 
was to be kept open.  
Building wasconstructed in 4 blocks. 
Administration office block at the 
open (front space), and 3 blocks in 
curve shape of space. However, 
space at arms of U shape was kept 
open. 
Owner 
9 431/066-sec-
15/2014/24.0
2.14 
Access road at the 
inclination of 45 
degree with a circle 
shape in the middle 
and exit at 90 degrees. 
It was found at 90 degrees without 
circle shape in the middle. All the 
roads did not comply with T&CP 
layout. 
Owner 
10 183/03757/ 
T&CP/2009/2
3.01.2010 
Blue Lotus 
Hills 
Colony 
Separate others land 
in Block G. In Park-8 
Electric sub-station 
was to be built on half 
OHT and sump-well constructed in 
Park-12. Others land in Block G was 
included even after colony 
development permission. Electric 
Owner 

Appendices 
 
89 
Sl. 
No. 
Development 
permission 
No 
Name of 
the 
Building 
As per layout/ 
drawing 
Deviation found during Joint 
physical Verification 
Deviation 
by 
of the width. substation builds on full width in 
Park-8. 
11 UMC/0081/2
017/Zone-
5/W 33 
Shripal 
Education 
Society 
4 toilets were to be 
constructed. 
2 toilets and 2 small rooms were 
constructed.  
Owner 
Open Terrace on 1st 
Floor 
Hall was found constructed. 
12 UJJ/0203/089
/2021/Zone-
6/W 54 
Divine 
Educationa
l & Social 
Welfare 
Society 
Playground was to be 
surrounded by 
construction of 17 
rooms.  
10 rooms and 1 Principal Room were 
constructed in two rows of the back 
side. 
Owner 
3 Toilets were to be 
constructed. 
Twotoilets were found constructed 
13 UMC/118/20
18/Z-4 
Balaji 
Hospital 
No Basement Basement of area 58.56 sqm was 
constructed. 
Owner 
 
 
 
 
  

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
90 
Appendix-3.12 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.10, Page No. 40)  
Statement showing rainwater harvesting system not constructed 
Sl. 
No. 
District Building permission 
case/colony 
development 
permission No. 
Name of the building/builder Colony/buildi
ng 
Plot Size 
Area (Ha) 
1 Gwalior Z14W60/0094/2019/3x
3 
M/s Gravity Infrasructures pvt. Ltd 
Shopping Mall 
Building 0.7040 
2 Gwalior GWA/0101/982/2020 Narayan Builders Building 0.6414 
3 Gwalior 955/10.10.2019 Sunrise Enclave Colony 6.3640 
4 Gwalior GWA/0101/460/2021 Shivare Resort Turari Building 0.1780 
5 Gwalior GWA/0101/650/2022 Chopra Chest hospital Building 0.0074 
6 Gwalior GWA/0101/244/2022 Saral Mult Speciality hospital Building 0.0223 
7 Gwalior GWA/331/2014x3/3/16.
05.2014 
KMJ Ansh Hospital Building 0.0219 
8 Gwalior 432/2014 & 430/2014 Aditya world School Building 2.1600 
9 Gwalior GWA/0101/841/2022 Imperial Golf Resort Building 6.6560 
10 Gwalior GWA/0101/431/2020 AMI School Building 1.3700 
11 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/2020 Pragati School Building 0.4426 
12 Gwalior 270/2010/ 4.6.2010 Blue Lotus Developers Colony 18.009 
13 Gwalior GWLLP08042404096 7 Hills Resort Building 0.7865 
14 Gwalior 1066/27.11.2019 Nature Park Colony 6.7769 
15 Bhopal 14/60/752/2020 Ani Villa Building 0.2820 
16 Bhopal 948/10.09.20 Virasha Colony Colony 1.7550 
17 Bhopal 13/52/1019 Hotel Derby Green Building 0.5675 
18 Bhopal 19/85/893/2020 Mount LiteraSchool Building 0.4006 
19 Bhopal 9/49/55/2021 College BSSS Building 2.2950 
20 Bhopal 13/52/1637 Hotel Mahendra Utsav Building 0.4380 
21 Bhopal 9/45/951 Commercial Shop (Jai Bhole) Building 0.0510 
22 Bhopal 19/85/747 St. Francis School Building 1.7040 
23 Bhopal 921/21.12.2018 Soumya homes Pvt. Ltd. Colony 3.4180 
24 Bhopal 931/27/5/2019 Aadarsh Girah Nirman Colony 4.8890 
25 Bhopal 13/52/32/2020 Sunrise heights Building 0.5030 
26 Bhopal 16/72/423/2021 Marriage Garden manohoram Building 1.5170 
27 Bhopal 15/62/1599 St. Mont Font Sr. Secondary School Building 6.4400 
28 Bhopal 17/75/428/2020 Sagar Public School Building 1.7600 
29 Bhopal BHO/0269/333/2020 Shopping mall Building 0.0294 
30 Bhopal 967/19.02.21 S S Creations (Grace Garden) Colony 4.7030 
31 Indore 3526/Colony Cell/2019 Parul Developers Colony 3.5500 
32 Indore 899/Colony Cell/2019 Dinesh and Others Colony 2.1640 
33 Indore IMC/1962/Z08/W36/20
18 
Residential +Commercial Building 0.0139 
34 Indore IMC/3352/Z08/W36/20
18 
Residential +Commercial Building 0.0139 
35 Ujjain UJJ/0203/089/2021/Z-
6/W 54 
Divine Educational & Social Welfare 
Society 
School 0.4100 
36 Ujjain UMC/67/2015/03 Hotel Solitaire and Resort Hotel and 
Resort 
0.7100 
37 Ujjain UMC/617/22.07.2019 Kala Janki Residency Colony 1.6000 
38 Ujjain UMC/996/27.11.2019 Tirupati Realities Colony 2.7400 
39 Ujjain UMC/1043/11.12.2019 Mangal Dham Colony 2.3000 
40 Ujjain 89/22.01.2021 Kala Janki Gold Colony 1.2540 
41 Ujjain 149/26.02.2019 Giriraj Ratan Colony 8.633 

Appendices 
 
91 
Appendix-3.13 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.11, Page No. 40) 
Statement showing parking provisions not made as per norms 
Sl. No. District Building permission case No. Name of the building 
1 Gwalior Z14W60/0094/2019/3x3 (Shopping mall) M/s Gravity Infrastructures Pvt. 
Ltd 
2 Gwalior GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/460/2021 Shivhare Resort Turari 
3 Gwalior GWA/0101/982/2013 Narayan Builder 
4 Gwalior GWA/331/2014x3/3/16.05.2014 KMJ Ansh Hospital 
5 Gwalior GWA/0101/ 652/2022 Chopra Chest Hospital 
6 Gwalior 432/2014 & 430/2014 Aditya world School 
7 Gwalior GWA/0101/431/2020 AMI School 
8 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/2020 Pragati School 
9 Gwalior GWLLP08042404096 7 Hills Resort 
10 Bhopal BMC/1426/Z15/W62/18-19 Palak Barat Ghar 
11 Bhopal BMC/0601/Z19/W85/19-20 Rajhans Hotel 
12 Bhopal BHO/0269/262/2021 dt 19.04.21 Godown 
13 Bhopal 17/75/428/2020 Sagar Public School 
14 Bhopal BMC/1019/Z13/W52/18-19 Hotel (Derby Green) 
15 Bhopal BHO/0269/1886/2021 Bhopal Surgical and Maternity Hospital(P) Ltd. 
16 Bhopal BHO/0269/2185/2021 Shopping mall (Bling square) 
17 Bhopal BHO/0269/4220/2021 Noble Mutispaciality Hospital 
18 Bhopal 9/49/055/2021  College BSSS 
19 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/361/2020 Hall Mark H.S. School (Institutional) 
20 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/570/2021 Professional office 
21 Indore IMC/1956/Z16/W15/2019 Industrial 
22 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/2024/2021 Hostel (Residential) 
23 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/487/2019 Nursing Home 
24 Indore IMC/1962/Z08/W36/2018 Residential +Commercial 
25 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1340/2019 Industrial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 
92 
Appendix-3.14 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.13, Page No. 42) 
Statement showing non-compliance of minimum community open space requirement 
Sl.
No.  
District Colony 
development 
permission/ 
building 
permission Case 
No. 
Name of the 
building 
Colony/bui
lding 
Park/garden 
1 Bhopal 931 dated 
27.05.2019 
Aadarsh Girah 
Nirman Samiti 
Colony Not developed. 
2 Bhopal 967/19.02.21 S S Creations 
(Grace Garden) 
Colony Not developed 
3 Bhopal 948/10.09.20 Virasha Colony Colony 1.Constructed Podium in place of open 
space. Parks not developed. 
2.Space between the back block and the 
middle block was identified as open 
space. However, this space was being 
utilised for parking. 
4 Bhopal BHO/0269/752/
2020 
Anni Vila 
Apartment 
Group 
Housing 
Land for EWS and open space was 
found only 7.3 m in length against 
required 20.49 m. 
5 Bhopal BHO/0269/2185
/2021 
Shopping mall 
(Bling Square) 
Building Constructed podium at Front side in 
place of Middle  in vio lation of 
approved layout.  
6 Gwalior GWA/0101/432/
2018 
Keshar 
Infrastructure 
Building Constructed Podium in place of open 
park in violation of approved layout. 
7 Gwalior 1201/ 
30.07.2021 
Vats Colonizer 
and Developers 
(Achal Eshwar 
Enclave) 
Colony The park  was un -developed ( basic 
facilities like s itting bench, Jhoola for 
kids were not found). 
8 Gwalior 955/ 10.10.2019 Sunrise Enclave 
SADA Road 
Colony The park  was un -developed (basic 
facilities like sitting bench, Jhoola for 
kids were not found). 
9 Gwalior 432/2014 & 
430/2014 
Aditya world 
School 
Building The area  reserved for open space is 
being used for parking. 
10 Gwalior 1066/ 
27.11.2019 
Nature Park Colony The park  was undeveloped (Boundary 
wall of the parks and harvesting 
structures in each park  were not 
constructed).  
11 Gwalior 270/2010 dated 
4.6.2010 
Blue Lotus 
Developers 
Colony Out of 14 parks, no park was found and 
developed (basic facilities like sitting 
bench, Jhoola for kids, boundary wall, 
light and water facility were not found). 
12 Ujjain UMC/617/22.07.
2019 
Kala Janki 
Residency 
Colony The park was not developed. 
13 Ujjain UMC/452/04.05.
2018 
Indralay Highland Colony Constructed room in park. 
 
  

Appendices 
 
93 
Appendix-3.15 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.14, Page No. 43) 
Statement showing width of roads/ means of access not maintained  
Sl.
No. 
 
District Colony 
development 
permission/ 
building 
permission Case 
No. 
Name of building 
(Colony/Building) 
Type of 
road 
Road width against Sanction 
1 Bhopal BHO/0269/752/20
20 dt 20.02.21 
Anni Villa Apartment 
(Building) 
Internal 
road 
Width of colony road was 7m 
against norms of 7.5m. 
2 Bhopal BHO/BHO/BHO/0
269/893/2020 
Primary School 
(Mount Litera 
School) (Building) 
Access 
road 
Width of access road was found 
5.4m agains t norms of 12m i.e. 
short by 6.6 m. 
  3 Bhopal BMC/2048/Z02/W
07/18-19 
Laisure Valley 
Apartment (Building) 
Main road Width of access road was found 
8m against norms of 12 m from 
Leisure Villa side. 
4 Gwalior 432/2014 
&430/2014 
Aditya world School 
(Building) 
Access 
road 
Width of access road to building 
of permission no 432 was found 
5 m against 12m. 
5 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/20
20 
Pragati School 
(Building) 
Main road Present road was 12 m against 
30 m. 
6 Gwalior 270/2010 dated 
4.6.2010 
Blue Lotus 
Developers (Colony) 
Main road Present road was 12 m against 
30 m. 
7 Gwalior Z14W60/94/2019 Gravity 
Infrastructure’s 
(Shopping mall) 
Main road At present road width found 22m 
against 30m. 
8 Gwalior TNCP 
GWLLP08042404
096 dated 03 May 
2024 
7 Hills Resort 
(Resort) 
Main road Road width found 4m against 
12m. 
9 Indore IND/IND/IND/015
2/061/2021 
Fuel Filling Station 
(Building) 
Main road Width of main road was 9m 
against norms of 30m. 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
94 
Appendix-3.16 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.5.16, Page No. 45)  
Statement showing staircase not constructed with specified width 
Sl. 
No. 
District Colony development 
permission/building permission 
Case No. 
Name of building Colony/                     
building 
Staircase 
1 Gwalior Z14W60/0094/2019/3x3 (Shopping mall) M/s Gravity 
Infrastructures pvt. Ltd 
Building Width of Emergency staircase towards rear side was 1.2 m. against 
required 1.5 m 
2 Gwalior GWA/GWA/GWA/0101/460/2021 Shivhare Resort Turari Building Width of Emergency staircase was 1 m against required 1.5 m. 
Emergency staircase were built up upto second floor only not up to 
terrace. 
3 Gwalior GWA/0101/982/2020 Narayan Builder Building Width of middle staircase was 1.4m against 1.5m and in commercial 
complex was 1.3 m against 1.5m. 
4 Gwalior GWA/0101/244/2020 Saral Mult speciality hospital Building Width of staircase was 1.2 m against 1.5 m 
5 Gwalior GWA/0101/918/2020 Pragati School Building Width of all staircases was 1.3 m against 1.5 m 
6 Bhopal BHO/BHO/BHO/0269/032//2020 Sunrise Heights Building In Block A it was 3.5 feet i.e. short by 1.5 feet and in Block ‘B’ it 
was short by 2 inches against norms of 1.5m 
7 Bhopal 948/10.09.20 Virasha Colony Colony Width of staircase was 1.15 m against 1.5 m 
8 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/280/2020 Secondary School Building Staircase width was found 1.25m instead of 1.50 m 
9 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/487/2019 Nursing Home Building Staircase width was found 1.25m instead of 1.50 m. 
10 Indore IMC/1397/Z13/W78/2018 Corporate Commercial Building Staircase width was found 1.05m instead of 1.50 m. 
11 Indore IND/IND/IND/0152/1340/2019 Wooden Factory (Industrial) Building Staircase width was found 1.00 m instead of1.50 m. 
12 Ujjain UJJ/0203/089/2021/Z-6/W-54 Divine Educational & Social 
Welfare Society 
Building Width of staircase was 1.4 m against 1.5 m 
13 Ujjain UJJ/0203/1333/2020/Zone-4 Pushpa Mission Hospital Building Width of staircase was 1.2 m against 1.5 m 
14 Ujjain UMC/118/2018/Z-4 Balaji Hospital Building Width of staircase was 1.15 m against 1.5 m 
 
 

Appendices 
 
95 
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 4.2.1, Page No. 57) 
Details of proposed land use in Development Plan and achievement thereagainst 
Target and achievement set in Development Plan 
Name of 
Districts 
Residential (Ha) Commercial (Ha) Industrial (Ha) PSP (Ha) Recreational (Ha) Transport (Ha) 
Propo
sed 
Devel
oped 
% 
Shortfall 
Prop
osed 
Devel
oped 
% 
Shortfall 
Propo
sed 
Deve
loped 
% 
Shortfall 
Prop
osed 
Devel
oped 
% 
Shortfall 
(+)/ 
Excess (-) 
Prop
osed 
Deve
loped 
% 
Shortfall 
Prop
osed 
Develo
ped 
% 
Shortfall 
Bhopal 
Developmen
t Plan-2005 
& draft 
2031 
14799 10169.
15 
31 932 405.57 56 1031 372.46 64 3341.4
4 
1601 52 6225 2212.3
6 
64 709.15 could not 
be 
calculated 
could not be 
calculated 
Gwalior 
Developmen
t Plan-2021 
& 2035 
13122.6
9 
4887.9
8 
63 529.1
3 
477.21 10 1719. 12 335.18 81 2685.4 1748.3
4 
35 2128.2
7 
252. 
61 
88 2245.7
6 
1699.41 24 
Indore 
Developmen
t Plan-
1991&2021 
5060 4660 8 648 570 12 1498 843 44 1417 1096 23 1417 290 80 2105 1370 35 
Jabalpur 
Developmen
t Plan-2005 
&2021 
3807 3215 16 445 209 53 551 368 33 876 730 17 540 142 74 1107 852 23 
Ujjain 
Developmen
t Plan-2021 
& 2035 
4001 2049 49 272 189 31 512 320 38 536 857 -60 1032 241 77 1510 825 45 
Total 40789.69 24981.13  2826.13 1850.78  5311.12 2238.64  8855.84 6032.34  11342.27 3137.97  7676.91 4746.41  
Total proposed-76801.96 Ha, Total developed-42987.27 Ha, Percentage of developed with proposed land use-55.97 per cent 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 96 
Appendix-4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 4.2.1, Page No. 58)  
Statement showing non-utilization of land (inconsistent land) for intended purpose  
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of inconsist land Proposed in 
DP 
Use after vacant inconsist land 
1 Bhopal Saw machine, Hamidia road BDP 
2005&BDDP 
2031 
Transportation and commercial 
2 Bone Mill, Pulbogda Flatted factories and commercial 
3 Slaughterhouse, Jahangirabad Residential/PSP 
4 Glue factory, Pulbogda Flatted factories and commercial 
5 Bhopal oil Mill, Jahangirabad Flatted factories and commercial 
6 Stra product, Chhola road Commercial, residential/recreational 
7 Gwalior Govt. Press, Jiwaji Chowk GDP 
2021&2035 
Parking 
8 Central Jail Bahodapur Commercial and Parking 
9 Vehicle repair shop Jinsi Nala Commercial and Parking 
10 Wholesale/Dal Bazar, Jiwaji Ganj Commercial and Parking 
11 Scrap market, Daulat Ganj Commercial and Parking 
12 Saw/Dal/Bras Mill Commercial and Parking 
13 Fire, Crackers Bazar Daulat Ganj&Hujrat Commercial and Parking 
14 Ujjain Warehouse, Budbariahaat and other places UDP 
2021&2035 
Residential 
15 Stone market, Tilakmarg and other places Residential/Commercial 
16 Process of making porcelain, Malipura and 
other places 
Residential 
17 Animal slaughterhouse, Nagar kotmata 
Mandir and other places 
Residential 
18 Kanji house,Lakadganj and other places Residential 
19 Ghasmandi, Sakhipura Residential 
20 Pashuhaat, Kalidaas garden Mela area 
21 Jabalpur Jawaharganj Grain Mandi, Niwarganj road JDP 
2005&2021 
Grocery and Vegetable Market 
22 Wholesale Fruits and Vegitables and 
Warehouse, Old macharhigh road and other 
places 
Retail business 
23 Chaff warehouse, GhamapurKalari and 
Miloniganj 
Retail business 
24 Scrap market, Gurandi Retail business 
25 Bamboo market, Gurandi Retail business 
26 Karmshala, Madan mahal and other places Retail business 
27 Printing press and paper warehouse, Sarrafa 
and Ganjipura 
Retail business 
28 Oil & Pulses mills, Nayamohalla and other 
places  
Residential 
29 Bidi Factory, Dixitpura, Golbazar and 
Hanumantaal 
Residential 
30 Soap Stone Factory, Ghamapur, Rajnagar Residential 

Appendices 
 97 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of inconsist land Proposed in 
DP 
Use after vacant inconsist land 
31 Truck Stop, Old Mirjapur Road and other 
places 
Road 
32 M.P. State Transport Aagar, Ranitall and 
other places 
Service Idustry/PSP/Residetial 
33 Tin goods and furniture shops, Nayamohalla, 
Andherdev and Bhartipur 
Retail business 
34 Grain Godown related to wholesale trade, 
Jawaharganj and other places 
Retail business 
 

Report of the C&AG of India on Management of Town and Country Planning 
 98 
Appendix -4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 4.3, Page No. 60) 
Statement showing details of 43 unauthorised colonies where no cognizance taken by the BMC 
Sl. 
No. 
District Village Khasra no. Rakba 
(Ha.) 
Name of Colonizers/ Landowners Letter No. 
1 Bhopal Palasi 81/7 0.903 Veer Singh,Vishram Singh Collector482/02-03-21 
2 Bhopal Palasi 113/8 0.093 Indira Devi Collector482/02-03-21 
3 Bhopal Palasi 98/1,100/1,101/1 0.435 Mamta Saho Collector482/02-03-21 
4 Bhopal Kolua kalan 77/1 0.607 Tikaram/Kasiram Collector169/23-03-21 
5 Bhopal Khegda baramad 26 1.311 Nadir Baig/Sahiln Baig Collector169/23-03-21 
6 Bhopal Khegda baramad 206/2/1 0.981 Girja Bai Collector169/23-03-21 
7 Bhopal Khegda baramad 190/1/1/1 1.063 Gandalal Collector169/23-03-21 
8 Bhopal Khegda baramad 68,69 3.197 Chhaganlal Collector169/23-03-21 
9 Bhopal Khegda baramad 279/2/1 1.121 Arunkumar Pal Collector169/23-03-21 
10 Bhopal Navi Bagh 92/2/1,92/2/2,90 1.834 Umesh Tiwari, Sarjan Tiwari Collector169/23-03-21 
11 Bhopal Malikhedi 164/A 5.96 Mangilal Collector169/23-03-21 
12 Bhopal Malikhedi 139/1/2 0.45 Lalaram Collector169/23-03-21 
13 Bhopal Malikhedi 124/1/1/C 1.12 Kailash, Omprakash Collector169/23-03-21 
14 Bhopal Malikhedi 115/1/1-116/1-116/2-117 1.02 Tulsa Bai, Ram Singh Collector169/23-03-21 
15 Bhopal Semra kalan 2/2,3,4/2 0.283 Rohit Lodhi etc. Collector169/23-03-21 
16 Bhopal Semra kalan 122,128,123,276/1,24 0.87 Radhe Shyam Collector169/23-03-21 
17 Bhopal Badwai 428/1/2/2 0.4050 Manoj Kumar, Rakesh Kumar etc. Collector946/12-03-22 
18 Bhopal Badwai 428/1/2/5 0.1490 Gurnao Mangtani, Vikas Mangtani Collector946/12-03-22 
19 Bhopal Badwai 428/1/2/6 0.149 Subash Chandra Sharma, Susma Sharma Collector946/12-03-22 
20 Bhopal Badwai 428/1/2/7 0.149 Masroor Khan Collector946/12-03-22 
21 Bhopal Badwai 428/2/1/3/2 0.0692 Abdul Jaheer Baig Collector946/12-03-22 
22 Bhopal Bhaisa Khedi 3/1,4/1,5/1/1 4.451 Kanhiyalal Gyanchandani Collector334/18-02-21 

Appendices 
 99 
Sl. 
No. 
District Village Khasra no. Rakba 
(Ha.) 
Name of Colonizers/ Landowners Letter No. 
23 Bhopal Gora 240/2/1/B,241,242,244 etc 4.427 Jyoti Jain (Omsai developers) Collector359/19-02-21 
24 Bhopal Gora 222/1/1,287/222,223 1.227 Chaturi Bai Collector359/19-02-21 
25 Bhopal Gora 163/1/5,165/1,165/5 0.569 Uppma Srivastava Collector359/19-02-21 
26 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 180/11/1/2 0.079 S. Manjur Collector359/19-02-21 
27 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 186/J 2.832 S.N. Sahai Collector359/19-02-21 
28 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 462/3 0.093 Smt. Doli Collector359/19-02-21 
29 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 21/T/1/1/1 0.0742 Radhe Shyam Collector359/19-02-21 
30 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 29/14/1/1 0.0408 Manorma Singh Collector359/19-02-21 
31 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 460/24,901/458 0.101 Meena Gupta Collector359/19-02-21 
32 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 459/4/2 0.056 Doli Collector359/19-02-21 
33 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 186/N/1 0.506 Manojsingh Collector359/19-02-21 
34 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 769/3/1 0.769 Puranlal Collector359/19-02-21 
35 Bhopal Khajuri Kalan 769/4/2 0.02 Puranlal Collector359/19-02-21 
36 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 261 0.218 Daulatram Collector359/19-02-21 
37 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 269 0.125 Daulatram Collector359/19-02-21 
38 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 271/K,272/K etc. 2.412 Munna Bai Collector359/19-02-21 
39 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 324-325 1.509 Mohar Singh etc. Collector359/19-02-21 
40 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 442/D 0.205 Harsh Kesh Yadav Collector359/19-02-21 
41 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 442/N 0.282 Rajkumar Yadav Collector359/19-02-21 
42 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 442/T 0.15 Raviendra Pal Singh Collector359/19-02-21 
43 Bhopal BarkhedaPathani 442/F 0.15 Harigar Singh Collector359/19-02-21 
 
 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/madhya-pradesh/en