1 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Implementation of Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
in Kerala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No.7 of 2025 
(Performance Audit – Civil)


 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Implementation of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation 
and Urban Transformation in Kerala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No.7 of 2025 
(Performance Audit – Civil)

  
i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Paragraph  Description Page 
reference 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter I – Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Mission components 1 
1.3 Organisational set up 2 
1.4 Audit objectives 3 
1.5 Audit criteria 3 
1.6 Audit scope and methodology 4 
1.7 Sampling 4 
1.8 Acknowledgement 4 
1.9 Audit findings 4 
Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
2.1 Project planning 5 
Chapter III – Financial Management 
3.1 Project fund 20 
3.2 Administrative and office expenses 22 
3.3 Reform incentive 23 
3.4 Loss of Central assistance for the preparation of GIS 
based Master Plan, LAP and TPS 24 
3.5 Inadmissible payments 25 
3.6 Avoidable burden due to upfront release of loan 
assistance to ULBs 26 
Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
4.1 Execution of projects 30 
4.2 Physical and financial progress of projects 30 
4.3 Execution of water supply projects 31 
4.4 Status of achievement of Service Level Benchmarks 44 
4.5 Execution of sewerage facilities and septage 
management projects 48 
4.6 Status of universal coverage of sewerage and septage 
systems 56 
4.7 Operation and maintenance of treatment plants under 
water supply and sewerage sector 57 
4.8 Execution of projects under urban transport 59 
4.9 Execution of stormwater drains 64 
4.10 Execution of projects under green space and parks 69 
Chapter V – Project Monitoring 
5.1 Monitoring of projects 73 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
ii 
APPENDICES 
Appendix  Description Page 
1.1 Statement showing number of approved projects and number 
of projects selected by Audit 79 
2.1 Details of SAAP wise duration and funds 80 
2.2 Details of projects abandoned/cancelled/delayed due to 
absence of hindrance free land 81 
2.3 DPRs prepared by M/s Ram Biologicals under sewerage/ 
septage component  85 
2.4 DPRs prepared by KITCO under storm water drain, urban 
transport and green space and parks components  87 
3.1 Delay in release of funds by Government of Kerala  89 
4.1 Status of sewerage network  90 
4.2 Funds allocated and facilities created under urban transport   91 
4.3 Foot paths constructed without clearing obstacles 92 
4.4 Non-providing of facilities in parks 94 
5.1 Projects not appraised by SLTC 96 
 Glossary of abbreviations used in the Report 101 
 
 
  

 
iii 
PREFACE 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2023 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the State 
of Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India for being placed in 
the State Legislature. 
 
This Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Implementation 
of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation in Kerala’ covering 
the period 2015 -16 to 2022 -23. Instances relating to the period subsequent to 
2022-23 are also included wherever found necessary. 
 
The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

Executive Summary 
 
v 
 
 
  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
vi 
 
  

  
v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Why CAG did this audit 
Government of India launched Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) in June 2015 with the intention to provide basic 
services to households and build amenities in cities which would improve the 
quality of life for all, especially the poor and the disadvantaged. Government of 
India selected nine cities in Kerala (Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Kochi, 
Thrissur, Kozhikode and Kannur Corporations and Alappuzha, Guruvayur and 
Palakkad Municipalities) for the implementation of the scheme.  Th e period of 
AMRUT scheme was initially for five years from 2015-16 to 2019-20 and was 
then extended four times up to December 2024. Government of India released 
₹1161.17 crore as project fund during 2015 -2024. In addition to project fund, 
GoI released ₹103 crore towards administrative and office expenses, reform 
incentive, GIS based master plan and preparation of Local Area Plan/Town 
Planning Scheme. Performance Audit on Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala, 
covering the period from 2015 -16 to 2022-23, was undertaken to evaluate the 
extent of achievement of the objectives of the scheme by mission cities, through 
an analysis of the various stages of implementation namely, planning, financial 
management, execution and monitoring of projects.   
Major Audit Findings 
Audit noticed that though the primary purpose of the Mission was to achieve 
universal coverage in the water supply sector, State did not plan for achieving 
universal coverage. Delay in finalising agencies for project development and 
implementation resulted in delayed implementation and non -completion of 
projects especially water supply and sewerage sector projects, even after a lapse 
of nine years from commencement of the mission. In the absence of sufficient 
expertise, Kerala Water Authority (KWA) could not plan for adequate and 
timely implementation of sewerage/septage  sector projects. Preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports  (DPRs) by empanelled agencies without proper site 
investigation, public consultation etc ., resulted in extensive revision of 
estimates, cost overrun and abandoning  of 27 projects with project cost of 
₹233.55 crore. Audit noticed delays ranging from 43 days to 15 months (average 
5.9 months) in release of GoI funds by the State. Parking of funds with the 
implementing agency, KWA in violation of GoI instructions was also seen. 
None of the mission cities could achieve the objective of providing 135 lpcd 
drinking water to the households . Coverage of household water supply among 
the nine mission cities ranged from 9.39 per cent (Guruvayur Municipality) to 
89.16 per cent  (Kochi Corporation ). 100 MLD Water Treatment Plant 
constructed expending ₹40.62 crore at Vasoorichira in Kollam was idling due 
to non -completion of laying of raw water pumping main. Four Overhead 
Service Reservoirs constructed by KWA expending ₹ 31.51 crore in Kochi and 
Thrissur Corporations and Palakkad Municipality  remained idle due to non -
laying of pumping mains, distribution lines, leakage in distribution line, etc.  
Mission cities except Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kannur could not 
establish any sewage collection and treatment systems . Kochi and Kannur 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
vi 
Municipal corporations had a negligible coverage of three per cent and one per 
cent respectively. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, which treated 34 per cent 
of the sewage generated at the commencement of the scheme could not expand 
the coverage of sew age network. Failure of KWA/Kollam Corporation to 
establish network to bring sewage to the treatment plant under construction at 
Kureepuzha resulted in non-completion of the Plant and idling of the 
infrastructure created expending ₹ 16.84 crore.    
Reducing pollution by switching to public transport or constructing facilities for 
non-motorised transport was one of the objectives of AMRUT. Audit noticed 
that 47 per cent of footpaths test checked were constructed without clearing 
obstacles such as electric posts, stay wires, telecom boxes, etc. 37 per cent of 
foot paths test checked were not disabled friendly and 53 per cent foot paths test 
checked had no tactile pavement to facilitate visually challenged persons. 
Construction and maintenance of storm water drains was expected to reduce and 
ultimately eliminate, flooding in cities, thereby making cities resilient. Kochi 
Corporation utilised scheme funds of ₹45.43 crore without preparing a definite 
plan to prevent sewage mixing and flooding. Scheme funds were utilised for 
routine maintenance activities including desilting and root causes of flooding 
during rains remained unaddressed . Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
constructed a drain in Plavarcode -Ulloorkonam-Andoorpoika road without 
establishing connectivity to primary drain leading to flooding in the area.  
Under the Green Space and Parks component, mission cities constructed 30 new 
parks and 36 parks were renovated. Out of the 27 parks test checked, nine parks 
in five Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) were not opened to public. A n amount of 
₹27.92 lakh expended towards construction of musical fountain in Nehru Park, 
Thrissur Corporation  remained unfruitful as the fountain became non -
functional. Construction of park on the banks of Chilavannur lake by Kochi 
Corporation had to be abandoned due to lack of permission from Kerala Coastal 
Zone Management Authority, rendering expenditure of ₹28 .22 lakh incurred 
towards the project unfruitful.  
Though guidelines stipulated the  State Level Technical Committee  (SLTC) to 
ensure compliance of the DPR to the checklists issued by GoI, the SLTC did 
not ensure availability of land, clearance from other departments/agencies etc ., 
which resulted in delay in implementation and abandoning of the projects. 
Mission guidelines insisted on grant of Technical Sanction by SLTC. However, 
State Level High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC) allowed implementing 
agencies themselves to grant technical sanction for the p rojects. SLTC did not 
convene meetings for 29 months during the period September 2018 to January 
2021 and the technical parameters of 38 projects were not subjected to 
mandatory appraisal by the SLTC. 
What CAG recommends 
The following nine recommendations have been made in this report. 
• Government should ensure that adequate public consultation 
meetings are conducted and documented by ULBs  at the planning 
stage to enable them to make informed decisions. 
  (Recommendation 1) 

Executive Summary 
 
vii 
• Government should ensure that empanelment of agencies for the 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports is based on a thorough 
evaluation of previous projects executed by the agencies.  
(Recommendation 2) 
• Government should ensure that scheme funds are not diverted and do 
not remain parked with implementing agencies.  
(Recommendation 3) 
• Government should ensure that distribution networks are also planned 
and executed along with the construction of Water and Sewage 
Treatment Plants, so as to avoid idling of such plants. 
(Recommendation 4) 
• Government should ensure that KWA/ULBs  undertake adequate 
measures for operation and maintenance of the assets created to yield 
benefits on a long-term sustainable basis. 
(Recommendation 5) 
• Government should conduct a comprehensive study to analyse reasons 
for frequent flooding in Kochi Corporation and initiate appropriate 
rectification measures.   
(Recommendation 6) 
• Government should design a definite plan to complete all incomplete 
projects and ensure that benefits of the completed projects are 
provided to the public without delay. 
(Recommendation 7) 
• Government should design a definite plan and strive towards 
achievement of Service Level Benchmarks especially in Water Supply 
and Sewerage Sectors. 
(Recommendation 8) 
• Government should ensure that committees and bodies supervise and 
monitor the implementation of projects in  accordance with the terms 
of the responsibilities entrusted under AMRUT.  
(Recommendation 9) 
 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
x 
 
 

 
1 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Introduction 
Government of India (GoI), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA1), 
launched the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT) on 25 June 2015 with the aim to provide basic services to urban 
households and build amenities in cities which will improve the quality of life 
for all especially the poor and the disadvantaged.  
The purpose of AMRUT was to ensure that  
• every household has access to a tap with assured supply of drinking 
water and a sewerage connection;  
• increase the amenity value of cities by developing greenery and well -
maintained open spaces e.g. parks and  
• reduce pollution by switching to public transport or constructing 
facilities for non-motorized transport e.g. walking and cycling.  
MoHUA had selected nine cities in the State viz., Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, 
Kochi, Thrissur, Kozhikode and Kannur municipal corporations and 
Alappuzha, Guruvayur and Palakkad municipalities for the implementation of 
the scheme.  Fifty per cent of the total project cost as grant was the central share 
and the remaining project cost was to be met by the State and mission cities in 
the ratio 30:20. The period of AMRUT was initially for five years from the 
financial year 2015-16 to 2019-20 and was extended four times up to December 
2024. 
The thrust areas of the mission were 
• water supply, 
• sewerage facilities and septage management, 
• storm water drains to reduce flooding, 
• pedestrian, non-motorized and public transport facilities, parking 
spaces, and 
• enhancing amenity value of cities by creating and upgrading green 
space, parks and recreation centers, especially for children. 
The mission also aimed at improving governance through a set of reforms and 
capacity building. 
1.2 Mission components 
The components of AMRUT Mission are given in Chart 1.1.  
  
 
1  The Ministries of Urban Development (MoUD) and Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
(MoHUPA) were merged to form the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) with effect 
from 6 July 2017.  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
2 
Chart 1.1: Mission Components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: The Mission Guidelines) 
1.3 Organisational set up 
The scheme was implemented by GoI through MoHUA .  An Apex Committee 
chaired by the Secretary, MoHUA supervised the Mission at national level.  A 
State Level High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC) chaired by the State 
Chief Secretary steered the Mission Programme in the State. The State Mission 
Management Unit (SMMU) headed by State Mission Director was responsible 
for overall project implementation and monitoring in the State. The Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) were responsible for implementation of the Mission at city level.  
The mission management structure is depicted in Chart 1.2: 
  
Mission 
Components 
Water 
Supply 
Sewerage 
Urban 
Transport 
Capacity 
Building 
Storm 
Water 
Drainage 
Septage 
Green 
Space and 
Parks  
Reform 
Management 
and Support 

Chapter I – Introduction 
   
3 
Chart 1.2: Mission management structure 
(Source: The Mission Guidelines) 
1.4 Audit Objectives 
Objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether: 
➢ planning of projects for cities was effective in terms of assessment of 
requirement and scope of timely execution, 
➢ financial management, execution and monitoring of projects was 
efficient and effective, and 
➢ there was an adequate and effective system in place to ensure that the 
assets created were managed properly. 
1.5 Audit Criteria 
The Audit observations included in the Report were benchmarked against the 
criteria derived from: 
➢ AMRUT Guidelines issued by MoHUA. 
➢ Service Level Improvement Plans (SLIPs) and State Annual Action 
Plans (SAAP I, SAAP II and SAAP III), prepared for the years  
2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-2020. 
➢ Minutes of meetings of the State Level High Powered Steering 
Committee and State Level Technical Committee. 
➢ Kerala Public Works Department Manual, 2012.  
➢ AMRUT projects operational guidelines issued by Local Self 
Government Department (LSGD), Government of Kerala  
➢ MoHUA Notifications, Government Orders releasing Central and 
State shares for the Mission. 
➢ Indian Road Congress Guidelines, etc. 


Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
4 
1.6 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted from April 2023 to December 2023 
covering the period from 2015 -16 to 2022 -23. An entry conference with 
Additional Chief Secretary, Local Self Government Department was held on 27 
March 2023 in which audit objectives, cri teria, scope and methodology were 
discussed. Audit methodology included examination of records maintained in 
Local Self Government Department, State Mission Management Unit, City 
Mission Management Units, Kerala Water Authority and other offices involved 
in the implementation of project.  Audit also adopted Joint Physical Verification 
(JPV) of sites for substantiating the audit findings. Exit conference was 
conducted on 12 September 2024, wherein the audit findings were discussed in 
detail.  Remarks offered by Government on the audit findings have been suitably 
incorporated in this Report. 
1.7 Sampling 
All the nine mission cities in the State (Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, 
Alappuzha, Kochi, Thrissur, Guruvayur, Palakkad, Kozhikode, and Kannur) 
were selected for the Performance Audit. As part of implementation of 
AMRUT, Government of Kerala (GoK) had taken up 1095 projects up to 31 
March 2023 under the components water supply, sewerage, septage, stormwater 
drainage, urban transport and green space and parks.  Of these, audit grouped 
the projects into three categories such as completed projects, partially completed 
projects and abandoned/cancelled projects. Audit selected all the partially 
completed and abandoned/cancelled projects for detailed scrutiny.  Moreover, 
25 per cent of the completed projects in each sector in each ULB subject to a 
maximum of 10 projects and a minimum of two projects under each component 
of the mission were subjected to detailed scrutiny.  The number of projects taken 
up by nine mission cities and selected by audit for detailed scrutiny are detailed 
in Appendix 1.1. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Department of Local Self 
Government, State/City Mission Management Units and Kerala Water 
Authority in the conduct of the Performance Audit. 
1.9 Audit findings 
The audit findings are summarised under the following chapters: 
• Chapter II: Planning the Mission 
• Chapter III: Financial Management 
• Chapter IV: Project Implementation and 
• Chapter V: Project Monitoring. 
 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
   
15 
 
  
CHAPTER II 
 PLANNING THE MISSION 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
16 
  
 

 
5 
 
CHAPTER II 
PLANNING THE MISSION  
2.1 Project planning 
The mission guidelines envisaged assessment of service level gaps by the ULBs 
from the available data, in respect of the AMRUT components, as the first stage 
of planning process.  After assessing the gaps, Service Level Improvement Plans 
(SLIPs) were to be prepared by mission cities to bridge the gap.  At the State 
level, the SLIPs of all mission cities were to be aggregated into the State Annual 
Action Plan (SAAP).  State level High Powered Steering Committee ( SHPSC) 
approved the projects in the SAAP after the projects were technically appraised 
and sanctioned by the State Level Technical Committee (SLTC). SAAP was the 
State level service improvement plan indicating the year-wise improvements for 
components selected under the mission. 
The outcomes of mission components viz., water supply, sewerage, septage, 
storm water drainage, and green space and parks were evaluated as per the 
Service Level Benchmarks (SLBs) prescribed by MoHUA. 
A flow chart showing various stages of planning are given in Chart 2.1. 
 
  
Though primary objective of the mission was to ensure that every household 
has assured supply of drinking water and sewerage connection, State did not 
plan to achieve this objective . Number and scope of projects proposed by 
mission cities under water supply sector was curtailed by SHPSC to include 
projects under Storm Water Drainage and Urban Transport sectors. Delay in 
finalising agencies for project development and implementation resulted in 
delayed project implementation and non-completion of projects especially 
water supply and sewerage sector projects  even after lapse of nine years of 
commencement of the mission. Non-preparation of DPRs by Kerala Water 
Authority (KWA) for execution of water supply and sewerage sector projects 
resulted in change in design and estimates, cost escalation, reduction in scope 
of the work and delayed execution of projects. In the absence of sufficient 
expertise, KWA could not plan for adequate and timely implementation of 
sewerage/septage projects . Preparation of DPRs by empanelled agencies 
without proper site investigation and public consultation, resulted in 
abandoning of 27 projects with project cost of ₹233.55 crore.   

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
6 
Chart 2.1: Flow chart showing stages in planning of AMRUT projects  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: The Mission Guidelines) 
Guidelines also prescribed for engagement of Project Development and 
Management Consultants to ensure end -to-end support for project design, 
development, implementation and management. Deficiencies noticed in various 
stages of planning are detailed in succeeding paragraphs: 
2.1.1 Assessment of gaps by mission cities 
Assessment of actual service level gaps play an important role in the preparation 
of SLIPs and SAAPs and the successful implementation of the scheme. The 
mission guidelines envisaged the use of available data or Census 2011 data or 
data from the baseline s urvey done by MoUD (2012), for the assessment of 
service level gaps. The mission cities utilised available data for assessing gap in 
respect of AMRUT components.  
 
Implementation of projects  
Identification of service level gaps by ULBs 
 
Preparation of SLIP in consultation with citizens 
by ULBs 
 
Aggregation of SLIPs into SAAP by SHPSC  
Approval of SAAP by MoHUA  
Selection of agencies for preparation of detailed 
project reports/execution of projects  
 
Preparation of detailed project reports for 
individual projects in consultation with citizens 
Technical appraisal of projects by SLTC 
Approval of projects by SHPSC 
 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
7 
The targets for SLBs proposed by the Ministry under each component and the 
gaps identified by the mission cities are shown in Table 2.1: 
Table 2.1: Targets for Service Level Benchmarks and gaps identified by mission cities 
Component Service Level 
Benchmark 
Targets for SLB 
Gap in service delivery identified by mission cities 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Kollam 
Alappuzha 
Kochi 
Thrissur 
Guruvayur 
Palakkad 
Kozhikode 
Kannur 
Water 
Supply 
Household Coverage 
(In per cent) 100 22 60 39 11 40 91 38 55 57 
Quantum of water 
supplied (In lpcd2) 135 35 70 85 49 42 99 47 35 45 
Extent of Non -
Revenue Water 
(NRW) (In per cent) 
20 15 10 20 26.7 10 23 10 10 12 
Sewerage & 
Septage 
management  
 
Coverage of sew age 
network services (In 
per cent) 
100 63 100 100 97 100 90 100 100 100 
Efficiency in 
collection of sewage 
(In per cent) 
100 59 100 100 97 100 100 100 100 100 
Efficiency in 
treatment (In per 
cent) 
100 05 100 100 96 100 100 100 100 100 
Storm water 
drainage  
Coverage of storm 
water drainage 
network (In per cent) 
100 40 75 76 57 94 85 39 50 85 
Green space 
and parks  
Per Person 
availability of open 
space (In sqm) 
10-123 9 5.19 7 00 00 00 6.57 00 6.71 
(Source: SLIP and details collected from ULBs/KWA) 
Though mission cities had identified gaps across all the sectors, audit noticed 
shortcomings in planning and implementation of projects to address these gaps, 
resulting in inadequate resolution as detailed in subsequent paragraphs:   
2.1.2 Shortcomings in preparation of SLIP and SAAP 
Once the gap in service levels were assessed, the next step was to prepare 
projects/plans to bridge the gap. Guidelines envisaged the preparation of Service 
Level Improvement Plan (SLIP) by all AMRUT cities in respect of each of the 
AMRUT components. During the period 2015-16 to 2017-18, the mission cities 
had prepared three SLIPs proposing 527 projects for a total project cost of 
₹9860.48 crore under the five components.  
The SAAP was the state level service improvement plan indicating the year -
wise improvements in SLBs. At the State level, the SLIPs of all mission cities 
 
2 Litres per capita per day 
3  Based on Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation 
Guidelines, 2014 issued by MoUD. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
8 
were to be aggregated into SAAP. Preparation of SAAP prioritizing cities and 
projects based on available resources each year and forwarding the same for 
approval of MoHUA was vested with SHPSC. Details of SAAP wise duration 
and funds approved by MoHUA are given in Appendix 2.1.  MoHUA approved 
three SAAPs for the period 2015 -16, 2016-17 and 2017-20 consisting of 368 
projects for an amount of ₹2357.69 crore. Component-wise details of SLIP and 
SAAP are shown in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Details of SLIPs and SAAPs 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Components 
Proposed in SLIP Approved in SAAP 
Number of 
projects Amount Number of 
projects Amount 
1.  Water supply 107 2217.15 91 1066.92 
2.  Sewerage and Septage 78 4141.15 48 624.75 
3.  Storm water drainage 167 1976.87 100 382.29 
4.  Urban transport 70 1201.76 64 235.12 
5.  Green space and Parks 105 323.55 65 48.61 
 Total 527 9860.48 368 2357.69 
(Source: Data from SMMU) 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in the preparation of SLIPs and 
SAAPs: 
2.1.2.1 Failure to plan for achieving Universal coverage 
Primary purpose of the Mission was to achieve universal coverage in water 
supply and sewerage.  The AMRUT Guidelines stipulate that the  universal 
coverage was to start with water supply followed by sewerage. Both water 
supply and sewerage can be done together depending on availability of funds. 
On achieving the universal coverage State/ULBs could select other components 
for execution. Audit noticed that though ULBs had identified and included in 
SLIP, projects costing ₹2217.15 crore (107 projects) for addressing the gap in 
water supply, the SHPSC included only 91 projects in the SAAPs and curtailed 
the scope of the projects to ₹1066.92 crore  under the water supply sector.  No 
recorded reason was available for excluding/reducing the scope of the projects 
under the water supply component proposed by the mission cities though water 
supply was identified as first priority under AMRUT.      
Further, in the approved SAAP, the State targeted 81 per cent households for 
providing tapped water supply (instead of universal coverage) stating that 19 
per cent of households were reasonably managed by alternative sources like 
wells, tube wells, public taps, community water supply schemes, etc. Audit 
noticed that such an exclusion by the State was not based on any survey or 
realistic study and the SMMU did not produce any justification for the 
assumption that 19 per cent households had access to potable water from wells 
or other sources. A study conducted (August 2019) by Centre for Water 
Resources Development and Management (CWRDM), Kozhikode revealed that 
only 14 per cent of groundwater sources in Kochi Corporation met standards 
for drinking water. As such, the exclusion of 19 per cent of households from 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
9 
definition of universal coverage by the SHPSC was not only against the scheme 
guidelines, but also curtailed the right of the citizens to have access to clean and 
safe drinking water.  
Government stated (October 2024) that achieving 100 per cent coverage was a 
complex task due to diverse geographic, demographic and technical challenges 
present in certain areas in addition to financial constraints. Certain households, 
particularly those in remote or difficult -to-access areas, may face technical 
limitations in terms of network connectivity, requiring specialized planning and 
additional phases for their inclusion. Therefore, a realistic and feasible approach 
was adopted covering areas where immediate execution was technically and 
logistically possible. Though 100 per cent  coverage was not immediately 
planned, the overall long term goal remains to ensure that every household 
within the ULBs is provided access to a reliable and sustainable water supply.  
While Audit acknowledges the geographic, demographic and technical 
challenges faced in the implementation, the justification provided for not 
planning coverage of households in remote and unserved areas, due to logistical 
difficulties and opting to execute projects of relatively lower priority sectors, 
instead of targeted intervention for inaccessible areas, is not in alignment with 
the intended objectives of the scheme. 
2.1.2.2  Inclusion of projects without citizen consultation 
The AMRUT guidelines stipulate that selection  of projects and their 
prioritisation should be people-driven and achieved through citizen consultation 
meetings involving diverse people such as resident’s welfare associations, 
taxpayers associations, senior citizens, chamber of commerce and industries, 
slum dwellers associations groups , etc. During these consultations , details of 
best practices and appropriate smart solutions should also be shared with the 
citizens in order to enable them to make informed decision s and generate 
innovative solutions. However, six4 out of nine ULBs prepared SLIPs without 
conducting citizen consultation. Though the other three ULBs5 claimed to have 
conducted citizen consultation, no documents were available in these ULBs to 
support their claim.  Audit noticed that nine projects with total project cost of 
₹174.08 crore in five ULBs could not be executed due to public protest. Details 
of projects cancelled/delayed due to public protest are given in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Projects abandoned/delayed due to public protest 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project (Name of ULB 
and Component) Reason for public protest Present status Project 
cost 
1.  GV Raja Road, C Lane, 
Kannamthura Church Road, 
Shankhumukham Ward 
(Thiruvananthapuram, SWD) 
Lack of interest from the 
public 
Work cancelled 
0.45 
2.  Work 63 - 16th street to Girja 
Thodu 
(Thrissur, SWD) 
Due to the fear of reverse 
flow from the main drain to 
the proposed drain when 
Work cancelled 
0.79 
 
4  Thrissur, Kozhikode and Kannur Corporations and Alappuzha, Gurvayur and Palakkad 
Municipalities 
5  Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam and Kochi Corporations 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
10 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project (Name of ULB 
and Component) Reason for public protest Present status Project 
cost 
3.  Work 64- Main Street Road 
(Thrissur, SWD) 
the construction is 
completed, and the 
solutions suggested (to 
construct a sump) by the 
ULB Engineers were not 
acceptable to the public 
0.18 
4.  Construction of sewerage system 
in zone A-package A & B 
(Kozhikode, Sewerage/septage) 
Public protest against the 
construction of 
decentralised STPs at 
Avikkal and Kothi. 
Two projects 
cancelled from 
AMRUT 1.0 and 
carried over to 
AMRUT 2.0. 
140.0 
5.  Construction of 10LL OHSR at 
Chakkumkandam 
(Guruvayur, Water supply) 
Public protest against the 
land filling at the initially 
selected site at 
Chakkumkanadam as land 
was wetland  
Site change 
delayed the 
execution and 
resulted in revision 
of estimate and 
cost overrun. 
15.50 
6.  Construction of septage plant at 
Chakkumkandam 
(Guruvayur, Sewerage/septage) 
Public complained against 
the land filling of proposed 
site. 
Work was 
terminated by 
SHPSC. 
4.50 
7.  Decentralised Septage Treatment 
Plant at Vasoorichira 
(Kollam, Sewerage/septage) 
Public protested against 
decentralised STPs 
Work cancelled 
after preparation of 
DPRs 
12.66 
8.  Decentralised Septage Treatment 
Plant at Karikkuzhi ela 
(Kollam, Sewerage/septage) 
9.  Decentralised Septage Treatment 
Plant at Andamukkam 
(Kollam, Sewerage/septage) 
 Total   174.08 
(Source: Data collected from SMMU/CMMU) 
Government stated (October 2024) that citizen consultation meetings were held 
by the mission cities prior to preparation of SLIP.  However, documents in 
support of the citizen consultation meetings held prior to the preparation of SLIP 
were not furnished  (December 2024). Further, the six out of nine ULBs had 
replied that they prepared SLIPs without conducting citizen consultation. 
2.1.2.3 Non-identification of specific projects to address the gap 
Scrutiny of the SLIPs/SAAPs showed that instead of mentioning specific 
projects, ULBs proposed projects under generic names viz., ‘renovation of 
footpath’, ‘Construction of reservoirs’, ‘construction/rejuvenation of drain 
networks’, ‘rejuvenation of ponds’  etc, indicating that SLIPs/SAAPs were 
prepared without identifying specific projects to address the gap. Further, 
against 368 projects approved in three SAAPs, ULBs/KWA had taken up 1095 
projects for execution. Non -mapping of 1095 projects implemented wit h 368 
projects in the SAAPs indicate that specific project identification was done only 
after the SAAPs were approved. 
Government while acknowledging the importance of mapping of approved 
projects to their corresponding executed packages, stated (October 2024) that 
proactive steps have been taken to implement a comprehensive mapping system 
in the project monitoring softwar e used by KWA, which would ensure clear 
traceability and accountability for all projects. The mapping system would 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
11 
enhance project tracking, financial oversight and transparency, ensuring that 
every project component is mapped against its original approval for better 
monitoring and reporting. 
2.1.2.4 Non-inclusion of sufficient projects to address the gap  
In water supply sector, though Thiruvananthapuram , Kollam, Kozhikode and 
Kannur Corporations had identified gap of 310 km, 104 km, 351 km and 519 
km in distribution lines respectively, projects were not included in the SLIP to 
address the entire gap. As such, these ULBs could address only 12 per cent to 
32 per cent of gap in distribution lines.   
Audit noticed that Guruvayur municipality though constructed WTP, OHSRs 
and laid larger distribution lines, the municipality did not include projects for 
smaller distribution lines in SAAP, resulting in non -achievement of the 
objective of providing piped water to the residents  as detailed in Paragraph 
4.3.4.1.   
Though all the nine mission cities  had identified gaps in availability of treated 
water, necessitating construction of new water treatment plants (WTPs), only 
Kollam Corporation and Palakkad and Guruvayur Municipalities included 
projects to address the entire gap. Three ULBs 6 included projects to address 
only 43 to 76 per cent  of the gap. Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations and 
Alappuzha Municipality did not include any project in the SLIP/SAAP.  
In Storm Water drainage sector though nine ULBs had identified 148 locations 
prone to flooding due to sewage mixing and choking, ULBs barring Kollam and 
Kozhikode Corporations  and Palakkad Municipality did not  include projects 
that could address the gaps effectively.  
During exit conference (September 2024) Principal Secretary, Local Self 
Government Department ( LSGD) stated that specific projects were not 
identified under Storm Water drainage sector to address the gap due to the 
absence of drainage master plan in ULBs.   
2.1.2.5 Delay in finalising agencies for project development and 
implementation  
GoI launched AMRUT Scheme in June 2015 and the first SAAP for the year 
2015-16 was approved in November 2015 and first instalment of ₹57.6 0 crore 
was released in December 2015. The AMRUT mission had identified factors 
for the slow implementation of projects such as preparation of project design, 
delay in the process of tendering and its finalisation etc. To overcome these 
constraints, it was directed to avail the services of external entities called Project 
Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs). Th e scope of PDMC 
under the mission was divided into four broad components viz., Planning, 
Design, Supervision and Project Management. The PDMC was to identify 
projects based on SLIP framework and carry out required investigation, design, 
procurement, and implementation. PDMC was also to explore the possibility of 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) and for mid-course correction and engage with 
citizens to get feedback. Though expression of interest was invited by SMMU 
 
6 Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and Kannur Corporations 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
12 
in December 2015 to engage PDMC, shortlisting five agencies, the seventh 
SHPSC held during December 2016, decided to engage KWA for 
implementation of water supply schemes. As engagement of KWA for water 
supply schemes led to reduction in the scope of activ ities of PDMC it was 
decided to unbundle the functions of the PDMC and entrust project 
development, quality assurance and project monitoring to different agencies. 
Further, tenth and fourteenth SHPCs (July and December 2017) entrusted KWA 
with the implemen tation of sewerage/septage sector projects in 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam and Kochi municipal corporations. This delay in 
decision making led to delay  in signing of tripartite agreement (January 2018) 
with KWA for water supply and sewerage sector projects. Thus, delay in 
finalising agencies for the implementation of projects delayed the project 
implementation, especially water supply and sewerage sector projects. Most of 
the major projects like establishment of Water Treatment Plants, laying 
distribution lines, Sewerage Treatment Plants , etc. were tendered after 2018. 
This resulted in utilisation of only ₹12.09 crore until 2017 -18, against the 
availability of ₹356.27 crore , towards project fund and  consequent delay in 
receipt of subsequent instalments from GoI, cost escalation and non-completion 
of projects (March 2024) as detailed in Paragraphs 4.3 and 4.5. 
2.1.3 Preparation of Detailed Project Reports 
Paragraph 10.3 of the Mission guidelines envisaged the preparation of Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) and bid documents for projects in the approved SAAP.  
The DPRs should contain field/laboratory investigations, surveys, formulation 
of technical options, design, cost estimates, solutions to resettlement, 
environmental issues, finance plan including operation and maintenance 
strategy for the complete life cycle of the project , etc. The DPRs were to be 
technically and financially appraised by SLTC after ensu ring compliance with 
manuals and guidelines issued by MoUD.  ULBs were to ensure city level 
approval of DPRs.  
Seventh, tenth and fourteenth SHPSCs entrusted (December 2016, July and 
December 2017) Kerala Water Authority with the preparation of DPRs in 
respect of all water supply projects and sewerage/septage projects in 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam7 and Kochi8 municipal corporations. In respect of 
other sectors, ULBs engaged agencies empanelled by GoK for the preparation 
of DPRs. Audit noticed lapses such as implementation of projects without 
preparing DPRs by KWA, preparation of DPRs without conducting field 
investigations/without identifying suitable land, non -ensuring mandatory 
clearance from agencies, etc., as detailed in subsequent paragraphs: 
2.1.3.1 Implementation of water supply and sewerage sector projects by 
KWA without preparation of DPRs 
According to the Mission guidelines DPRs were to be prepared for all the 
projects in the approved SAAP. However, KWA prepared Detailed Engineering 
Reports (DERs) for the water supply and sewerage sector projects instead of 
DPRs. The DERs contained only des ign and detailed estimate of the projects. 
 
7 STP at Kureepuzha and associated components 
8 STP at Elamkulam  

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
13 
As such, aspects such as field investigations, surveys, formulation of technical 
options, environmental issues, O&M, availability of hindrance free land, 
mandatory permission/clearance to be obtained from departments/agencies etc., 
were not analysed before obtaining Technical Sanction. Though DPRs were to 
be technically and financially appraised by SLTC after ensuring compliance 
with manuals and guidelines issued by MoUD, SHPSC permitted (July 2017) 
KWA itself to accord technical sanction for the DERs of water supply projects. 
Audit observed that non -inclusion of aspects viz., ensuring availability of 
hindrance free land, clearances from various departments/agencies etc., resulted 
in change in design and estimates, cost escalation, reduction of scope of the 
work etc., thereby delaying the execution of projects as detailed in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Deficiencies noticed in implementation of water supply schemes by KWA 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project (Name 
of ULB) 
Estimated 
Project cost 
(₹ in crore) 
Deficiencies 
noticed Impact 
1.  Construction of 5 LL 
OHSR at Kuttanelloor 
(Thrissur) 2.03 
Land identified by 
KWA was 
unavailable. 
Change of site led to increase in 
project cost. Scope of the project 
was reduced to limit within the  
administrative sanction. Execution 
was delayed by 63 months . Project 
cost was increased to ₹2.50 crore. 
2.  Construction of 10 LL 
OHSR at 
Chakkumkandam 
(Guruvayur) 
15.50 
Site identified for 
the construction of 
10 LL OHSR was 
unsuitable (wet 
land). 
Change of site led to change in 
design and increase in project cost 
to ₹ 17.74 crore. Execution was 
delayed by 43 months. 
3.  Providing rider main, 
replacing AC pipelines 
and service connections 
(Palakkad) 54.33 
Detailed estimate 
was not prepared 
incorporating all 
factors viz., road 
restoration 
charges. 
Actual site measurements were 
prepared by LSGD Engineering 
wing and prepared detailed 
estimate. Project cost increased to 
₹85.15 crore. 
4.  Laying pumping main 
500 mm DI pipe from 
WTP at Maradu to pump 
house at Thammanam 
(Kochi) 
22.5 Permission from 
PWD, NHAI and 
Railway 
authorities was not 
ensured before 
commencement of 
work. 
Work could not be completed due to 
denial of permission by NHAI. The 
work was pre-closed in May 2022. 
5.  Laying 500  mm DI line 
from pump house at 
Thammanam to OHSR at 
Kadavanthara (Kochi) 
9.54 Permission from 
Railway was not 
obtained before 
awarding the work. 
The crossing of railway line was not 
completed (March 2024). 
(Source: Information collected from KWA) 
While acknowledging that preparation of DERs in place of DPRs  was not in 
strict alignment with AMRUT guidelines, Government stated (October 2024) 
that this approach was adopted by KWA to expedite project approvals and 
implementation, without compromising the project’s technical and financial 
integrity and no project outcomes were negatively impacted by using DERs. It 
was assured that KWA will take up the preparation of DPRs in future phases of 
the scheme. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as Audit noticed instances of cost 
escalation, indefinite delay in implementation/cancellation of projects, etc., due 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
14 
to reasons such as non -assessment of suitability of the site, non -availability of 
identified site, non -preparation of detailed estimate, not obtaining mandatory 
clearances from authorities like Railways, PWD, etc . as detailed in Table 2.4. 
These obstacles would have been mandatorily addressed in the DPR as DPR s 
deal with the entirety of the project s, not just its engineering and technical 
aspects. 
2.1.3.2 Entrustment of sewerage/septage projects to KWA without sufficient 
expertise 
In the fourth SHPSC meeting held on 11 August 2016, Principal Secretary, 
LSGD brought to the notice of the committee that the projects of earlier schemes 
implemented through KWA had failed miserably in achieving targeted output 
and timely completion and led to cost overrun and loss of funds. In reply to a 
query by the Principal Secretary, LSGD, the Technical Member, KWA, had 
stated that KWA did not have a dedicated team to develop, design an d 
implement sewerage projects. However, tenth and fourteenth SHPSC entrusted 
implementation of sewerage/septage management projects of 
Thiruvananthapuram9, Kollam10 and Kochi11 municipal corporations to KWA 
itself.  In the absence of sufficient expertise, KWA could not plan for adequate 
and timely implementation of sewerage/septage projects in these ULBs as 
detailed in Paragraph 4.5. Of the 132 sewerage/ septage management projects 
undertaken by KWA, one project was cancelled and of the remaining 131 
projects, KWA could complete only 100 projects 12 and expended only 73 per 
cent of the project cost (March 2024). Audit noticed that out of the 100 
completed works, only 1 6 works pertained to establishment of new sewerage 
network/construction of Sewage Treatment Plant and the remaining 84 projects 
pertained to rehabilitation of existing sewer network. As KWA could not so far 
establish connectivity with the STP for the new network laid, expansion of 
sewer network coverage as envisaged could not be achieved (July 2024). 
Further, construction of 5 MLD STP at Me dical College campus, 
Thiruvananthapuram by KWA without ascertaining the availability of minimum 
quantity of sewage to the plant resulted in malfunctioning of the plant as detailed 
in Paragraph 4.5.1.1. Audit noticed the following further deficiencies in the 
projects by KWA:  
• KWA did not  plan for laying sewer network for utilisation of STP 
constructed at Kureepuzha, Kollam, resulting in non-commissioning of 
the plant (October 2024) as detailed in Paragraph 4.5.2.   
• KWA had purchased (February 2015) 120 km of pipes for ₹28.69 crore 
for establishing sewer network and pumping mains in Kochi 
Corporation under Kerala Sustainable Urban Development Project 
(KSUDP). As this work was pre-closed (May 2016), 90 km pipes 
remained unutilised with KWA. However, utilisation of these pipes 
 
9  Of the 135 sewerage sector projects, six projects pertaining to procurement of 
sewage/septage transportation vehicles and equipment were undertaken by the ULB . 
10  Two (STP at Kureepuzha and associated components) of the five sewerage sector projects 
in Kollam. 
11  One project (STP at Elamkulam) out of four sewerage projects in Kochi.  
12  99 projects (97 projects for establishment of sewer network and two projects for construction 
of STP) in Thiruvananthapuram and one project in Kochi. 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
15 
were not envisaged by KWA while preparing projects for 
sewerage/water supply13 networks in ULBs.  
Audit observed that entrustment of sewerage/septage sector projects to KWA 
without sufficient expertise to plan and execute the projects resulted in non -
completion of projects, idling of the assets created and idling of 90 km pipes for 
the last eight years. 
Regarding idling of pipes purchased under the KSUDP, Government stated 
(October 2024) that pipes purchased would be effectively integrated into future 
projects, after conducting quality testing. The reply underscores the failure of 
KWA to plan the execution of sewerage sector projects effectively and the need 
to have engaged a competent agency as envisaged in the guidelines to execute 
sewerage sector projects.  
2.1.3.3 Deficiencies in preparation of DPRs by empanelled agencies 
In the absence of PDMC for project development, SHPSC directed (July 2017) 
ULBs to utilise the service of agencies empanelled by GoK for the preparation 
of DPRs for Sewerage sector projects. In respect of stormwater drainage, urban 
transport and green space and park sectors, SHPSC directed ULBs to engage 
either the agencies empanelled by GoK or select agencies through competitive 
bidding process. GoK had empanelled (October 2014 and February 2017) 53 
agencies for the preparation of DPRs of projects under various sectors. Mission 
cities selected nine agencies 14 by inviting tender, of which eight 15 were GoK 
empanelled agencies. Audit noticed several deficiencies in the preparation of 
DPRs by these agencies as detailed in subsequent paragraphs: 
(a) Preparation of DPRs without ensuring availability of hindrance free land  
Non/delayed availability of land and delay in obtaining clearances from other 
departments were identified by MoUD as key factors that delayed project 
implementation in earlier missions.  Hence, one of the conditions stipulated in 
AMRUT guidelines was that no projects should be included in AMRUT which 
do not have land available, and no project work order should be issued if all 
clearances from all the departments have not been received by that time. 
However, Audit noticed that availability of hindrance free land was not ensured 
by ULBs before inclusion of projects in the SAAP. The agencies entrusted with 
the preparation of DPRs were to conduct field visits to ascertain the availability 
of land, manner  of acquisition, requirement of permissions from 
departments/other agencies etc., and include in the DPRs. Audit noticed 
instances of identification of wrong site in the DPR, identification of private 
land for execution of project, incorrect assessment of work to be done, non -
obtaining mandatory clearance from department/institutions concerned, public 
protest, etc. This resulted in issuing work orders in respect of 37 projects with 
project cost of ₹272.50 crore without ensuring hindrance free land/without 
 
13  Of the 90 km pipes,13 km HDPE/DI pipes could be used for water supply projects also. 
14  Ram Biologicals, KITCO, GITPAC, Institute for Societal Advancement, KMRL, Suresh 
Babu and Partners Mumbai, Murali Associates, Structures India Limited and Salim Group 
of Engineers  
15  Ram Biologicals, KITCO, GITPAC, Institute for Societal Advancement, KMRL, Suresh  
Babu and Partners Mumbai, Structures India Limited and Salim Group of Engineers  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
16 
obtaining mandatory clearances.  Of the 37 projects, 27 projects with project 
cost of ₹233.55 crore were abandoned and 10 projects could not be completed 
(March 2024) as detailed in Appendix 2.2.     
(b) Poor performance of two empanelled agencies in the preparation of DPR 
The mission cities had empanelled M/s Ram Biologicals and M/s Kerala 
Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation Limited (KITCO) for the 
preparation of DPRs in respect of Sewerage, storm water drainage and urban 
transport components. Audit noticed several deficiencies such as preparation of 
unrealistic estimates, wrong site identification etc in the preparation of DPRs by 
these agencies resulting in cancellation/delay in execution of projects as detailed 
below: 
(i)  M/s. Ram Biologicals 
Seven16 ULBs selected M/s. Ram Biologicals for the preparation of DPRs for 
the projects under sewerage/septage component. The agency prepared DPRs for 
16 projects costing ₹280.39 crore and ₹2.67 crore was paid to the agency 
towards DPR charges. However, six projects c osting ₹222.64 crore were 
cancelled and three projects worth ₹11.56 crore were delayed for reasons such 
as lack of public consultation, preparation of estimate without proper site study, 
non-receipt of consent from various departments/agencies, not ensurin g 
suitability of the land identified, etc., as detailed in Appendix 2.3.  
Chief Secretary in a review meeting had directed (August 2022) the Mission 
Director to blacklist and disempanel agencies which were found incompetent to 
complete the projects assigned to them in a systematic, scientific and time bound 
manner. Considering t he faulty preparation of DPR without proper site 
investigation by M/s. Ram Biologicals,  in respect of construction of STPs at 
Kozhikode Corporation, which led to revision of estimate from ₹116.50 crore 
to ₹140 crore, Suchitwa Mission17 removed the firm from the list of empanelled 
agencies (August 2022). However, the agency was later re -empaneled 
(December 2022) as an approved agency on the basis of request from 
Kozhikode Corporation. Re-empanellment of an agency, which defaulted in the 
preparation of DPR, within a short period of time, was unjustified.   
(ii) M/s Kerala Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation 
Limited (KITCO)  
Seven ULBs18 engaged KITCO for preparation of DPRs under the components 
urban transport, storm water drainage and green space and p arks. KITCO 
prepared DPRs for 370 projects costing ₹ 282.53 crore 19 and ₹2.79 crore was 
paid to KITCO towards DPR charges. However, 16 projects costing ₹ 8.55 crore 
were cancelled and six projects costing ₹ 16.72 crore were delayed for reasons 
such as not ensuring hindrance free land, not including design, drawings in the 
DPR, non -receipt of consent from various departments/agencies, etc. , as 
 
16 Kollam, Alappuzha, Thrissur, Guruvayur, Palakkad, Kozhikode and Kannur  
17 Suchitwa Mission is the technical support group in waste management sector under LSGD  
18 Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Kochi, Thrissur, Kannur, Alappuzha and Palakkad  
19 Project cost of 166 projects in Alappuzha Municipality was not furnished 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
17 
detailed in Appendix 2.4 . In respect of projects executed, audit noticed that 
estimates prepared by KITCO had to be revised by Engineering wing of the 
ULBs after ascertaining field level requirements as detailed below:  
➢ Kollam Corporation had entrusted KITCO for the preparation of DPRs 
in respect of 40 projects with project cost ₹53.48 crore under the Storm 
Water Drain, Urban Transport and Green Space and Park sectors. As all 
the DPRs prepared by the agency except in one work was revised 
extensively and not found useful, the ULB directed (February 2020) 
KITCO to refund ₹ 34.50 lakh paid to the agency as consultancy charges, 
after deducting the charges of one work. However, KITCO has not 
responded to the direction even after four years (March 2024). 
➢ In Palakkad Municipality the DPRs prepared by the agency in respect of 
four projects (cost ₹12.25 crore) under Urban Transport sector had 
serious defects and were found, not fit to be presented for technical 
sanction. The municipality prepared estimates af resh for obtaining TS. 
While sanctioning revised estimate for the work ‘Construction of Bus 
Terminal yard near stadium bus stand’, GoK (January 2020) instructed 
Palakkad Municipality to recover an amount of ₹1.85 crore from KITCO 
as the defects and lack of  proper vision in the preparation of DPR 
resulted in cost escalation. Though the municipality had directed 
(August 2020) KITCO to refund the amount, KITCO has not responded 
yet (March 2024). 
➢ In respect of MLCP project in Thiruvananthapuram Municipal 
Corporation, there were wide variations in the estimates included in the 
DPR with respect to the site conditions. Audit noticed that estimate was 
revised from ₹5.64 crore to ₹6. 13 crore due to change in height of the 
parking bay, increase in foundation depth from 2 m to 3.5 m and increase 
in number of piles from 12 to 24 after confirmatory soil test. 
Audit noticed that though several instances of incompetency of these agencies 
had come to the notice of ULBs, no effective action was taken to recover the 
loss sustained by the ULBs or to dis-empanel these agencies. 
Government stated (April 2025) that deficiencies in the DPRs prepared by 
empanelled agencies were rectified by the Engineering wing of the ULB.  The 
reply substantiates the Audit finding. 
Recommendation 1: Government should ensure that adequate public 
consultation meetings are conducted and documented by ULBs at the 
planning stage to enable them to make informed decisions. 
Recommendation 2: Government should ensure that empanelment of 
agencies for the preparation of Detailed Project Reports is based on a 
thorough evaluation of previous projects executed by the agencies. 
 

Chapter II – Planning the Mission 
  
19 
 
CHAPTER III 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19 
CHAPTER III 
 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
According to the Mission guidelines, 50 per cent of the total project cost was 
the central share and the balance amount was to be met by the State and ULBs. 
Government of Kerala received ₹1161.17 crore20 towards central share for the 
implementation of AMRUT during the period 2015-16 to 2023-24. Apart from 
project fund, GoI released funds towards preparation of GIS based master Plan, 
preparation of Local Area Plan/Town Planning Scheme and Administrative and 
Office Expenses (A&OE). GoK  also received Reform Incentive funds for 
achieving the prescribed set of milestones.  
Funds received from Government of India for the scheme during mission period 
is detailed in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Fund released by GoI during 2015-2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Project fund 
received from 
GoI 
A&OE Reform 
Incentive 
GIS based 
Master Plan LAP/ TPS Grand 
Total 
1161.17 36.81 59.82 5.12 1.20 1264.12 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Guidelines of the scheme provide for matching contributions from State/ULB 
only towards the project fund and fund for other components were to be fully 
borne by Government of India. 
 
20 Includes ₹8.09 crore adjusted by GoI towards interest accrued on funds released  
The fund sharing pattern among Government of India, Government of Kerala 
and the mission cities was in the ratio 50:30:20. GoI had released ₹1161 .17 
crore as project fund during 2015 -2024. Apart from project fund, GoI 
released ₹102.95 crore towards administrative and office expenses, reform 
incentive, preparation of GIS based master plan and Local Area Plan/Town 
Planning Schemes.   
There was delay ranging from 43 days to 15 months in release of GoI funds 
by GoK to SMMU. The GoI released ₹1161.17 crore against which the State 
Government released only ₹691.85 crore in lieu of ₹696.70 crore, resulted in 
a short release of ₹4.85 crore. Due to slow pace in utilisation, State had not 
received GoI  funds during 2018 -19 and 2022 -23. Audit noticed rush of 
expenditure during the last quarter of 2023-24 to show mandatory utilisation 
for obtaining final instalment and parking of ₹204.47 crore with KWA in 
violation of the GoI instructions. Road restoratio n charges of ₹76. 07 lakh 
remitted by Kozhikode Corporation to PWD in respect of two works, which 
were subsequently cancelled due to public protest, were not refunded to the 
project fund.  SMMU retained reform incentive fund of ₹7.08 crore in 
contravention of the scheme guidelines and  scheme funds of ₹15.04 crore 
was expended towards inadmissible projects. Kollam Corporation alone 
published GIS based master plans as of March 2024. 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
20 
Audit analysis of receipt and utilisation of funds under all the sub -schemes are 
detailed in succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1 Project Fund 
GoI approved Central Assistance of ₹1161.17 crore i.e., 50 per cent of the total 
project cost for the implementation of the scheme in the State. Remaining 
project cost was to be shared in the ratio 30:20 between State Government and 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) respectively. Against the central assistance of 
₹1161.17 crore, projects for ₹2357.69 crore were approved in three SAAPs. 
Year-wise receipt and utilisation of funds as of 31 March 2024 are given in 
Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Year-wise receipt and utilisation of funds 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Fund released Total 
Fund 
available 
Expenditure Balance GoI State ULB* 
2015-16 0  57.60 0  0 57.60 0 57.60 
2016-17 57.60 77.28 85.21  0 220.09 0 220.09 
2017-18 220.09 97.36 36.40 2.42 356.27 12.09 344.18 
2018-19 344.18 0 40.07 84.37 468.62 421.87 46.75 
2019-20 46.75 200.23 86.53 63.09 396.60 315.46 81.14 
2020-21 81.14 401.85 127.76 72.06 682.81 360.29 322.52 
2021-22 322.52 119.62 119.77 44.79 606.70 223.96 382.74 
2022-23 382.74 0 71.77 51.59 506.10 257.96 248.14 
2023-24 248.14 207.23 021 63.00 518.37 315.01 203.36 
Total   1161.17 567.51 381.32 
 
1906.64   
*Amount contributed by ULBs at the time of making payments relating to projects 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
3.1.1 Delay in release of funds by GoK  
To ensure timely availability of funds with SMMU for implementation of the 
projects, GoI had stipulated that State Government shall release within seven 
days (this was changed to one month vide directions dated 28 February 2018) 
the central assistance received along with State share to the SMMU. However, 
there was delay ranging from 43 days to 15 months in release of GoI share along 
with State share to SMMU. Audit noticed that final instalment of GoI share 
amounting to ₹207.23 crore released to the State on 28 March 2024 was released 
to SMMU only on 25 June 2024. Details are shown in Appendix 3.1.  
During Exit Conference (September 2024) Principal Secretary, LSGD stated 
that there was delay in release of funds from Finance Department due to 
financial exigencies which occurred at that time. It was also stated that the 
department is trying to adhere to the GoI instructions. 
 
21 State share of ₹124.34 crore was released in June 2024 

Chapter III – Financial Management 
  
21 
3.1.1.1 Short release of State Government share  
Funds released by Government of India were to be transferred to the State/City 
Mission Management Unit(s) along with State/ULB share and the amount was 
to be kept in the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) Account maintained by SMMU. 
As the interest accrued on the deposits available in these bank accounts was 
treated as mission fund, GoI adjusted an amount of ₹8.09 crore interest accrued 
from the second and third instalment of central assistance released 22. Against 
the GoI release of ₹1161.17 crore (including adjusted interest portion of ₹8.09 
crore), State Government should have released state share of ₹ 696.70 crore. 
However, State Government released only ₹691.85 crore 23, resulting in a short 
release of ₹4.85 crore.   
3.1.1.2 Delay in release of central share due to slow pace in utilisation  
According to the scheme guidelines, the agreed GoI share would be released in 
three instalments of 20:40:40. Upon approval of the SAAP by the Apex 
Committee the first instalment (20 per cent) of the Central Assistance was to be 
released. The second and the third instalments of 40 per cent  each of the 
approved cost were to be released quarterly, after utilization of 75 per cent of 
the previously received instalments in each SAAP. Further, balance amount 
available with SNA Account should be less than 25 per c ent of the amount 
claimed.  
Audit noticed that after receipt of first instalment of the approved SAAPs (I, II 
and III) in December 2015 (₹ 57.60 crore), September 2016 (₹77.28 crore) and 
February 2018 (₹97.36 crore), timely receipt of second instalment from GoI was 
hindered due to under -utilisation of funds received. Audit noticed that as of 
March 2018 only 2.61 per cent (₹6.05 crore) of the central fund received could 
be utilised. Due to slow pace in utilisation, the State had not received GoI funds 
during 2018-19 and 2022-23. This further affected release of final instalment, 
which was released only towards the end of t he extended project period (28 
March 2024). Audit noticed that ULBs could utilise ₹1906.64 crore (March 
2024) from the available fund of ₹2110 crore 24 and ₹203.36 crore remained 
unutilised.  
3.1.1.3 Parking of funds with KWA 
To ensure effective cash management and transparency in public expenditure, 
GoI directed (March 2021) the State to open a SNA Account at the State level 
for utilization of funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. It was directed that 
drawal of funds from the SNA Account should be on real time basis as and when 
payments are to be made to beneficiaries, vendors; etc. 
On verification of the transactions in the SNA Account maintained for 
implementation of the scheme it was noticed that utili sation for the year  
2023-24 (up to December 2023) was ₹56 crore and ₹338.14 crore was available 
in the SNA account as of 31 December 2023. However, the outflow from the 
 
22 As per GoI orders dated 28 August 2019 (₹5.49 crore) and 18 September 2020 (₹2.6 crore) 
23 Includes State share of ₹124.34 crore released (25 June 2024) against the GoI share released 
on 28 March 2024   
24 ₹2110 crore = ₹1161.17 crore + ₹567.51 crore + ₹381.32 crore 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
22 
SNA account for the last three months of 2023-24 was ₹260.68 crore25, thereby 
reducing the SNA account balance to ₹77.46 crore. Rush of expenditure during 
the last quarter was analysed in audit and it was noticed that an amount of 
₹204.47 crore26 remained parked (March 2024) with KWA in violation of the 
GoI instructions.  
Audit noticed irregular release of ₹3.87 crore in February 2024 for meeting the 
expenditure relating to trial run and commissioning of WTP at Vasoorichira 
(₹2.19 crore) and STP at Kureepuzha (₹1.68 crore). WTP was expected to be 
commissioned only in December 2025 as work relating to raw water pumping 
to the WTP was blocked up due to non -availability of permission from NHAI. 
Further, the STP could not be made operational due to non-laying of sewer lines.   
Release of the amounts, which was due only after successful commissioning of 
the projects, in advance, was irregular and the amount would remain parked 
with KWA till commissioning of the plant. 
GoK in March 2024 sanctioned, on the recommendation of thirty fifth SHPSC, 
transfer of 41 projects in AMRUT 2.0 to AMRUT 1.0 and Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kollam and Kochi Corporations released advance of ₹20.80 crore to KWA 
towards 29 projects. Audit noticed that these projects were already commenced 
and first part bills were paid. As such there was no requirement of payment of 
advance to KWA towards these projects . Further, against the 20 per cent  
advance, stipulated in tripartite agreement, Secretary, Thiruvan anthapuram 
Corporation transferred 40 per cent of the project cost in advance in respect of 
16 projects.  
The above instances indicate that funds were parked with KWA only to show 
utilisation of the GoI funds and to obtain release of central share.  
Principal Secretary, Local Self Government Department ( LSGD) during exit 
conference (September 2024) stated that the amount was transferred to KWA 
so as not to lose final tranche of funds from GoI.  The reply is not tenable as 
parking of funds with implementing agencies is against financial principles and 
also defeated the very purpose of opening the SNA account. 
3.2 Administrative and Office Expenses 
Funds for making institutional arrangements that support Mission 
implementation form part of administrative and o ffice expenses. Ongoing 
Comprehensive Capacity Building Programme (CCBP), Independent Review 
and Monitoring Agencies (IRMA), etc., are also funded from this allotment. 
Audit scrutinised records relating to release of A&OE funds by GoI and 
subsequent release by S tate Government to SMMU. Details  of fund received 
and expenditure incurred are given in Table 3.3. 
 
25 Includes A&OE, GIS and reform incentive funds. 
26 Includes interest accrued ₹6.22 crore (not accounted for by SMMU towards the project) . 

Chapter III – Financial Management 
  
23 
Table 3.3: Administrative and office expenses - Funds released 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
GoI Fund  Amount released 
by GoK to SMMU Expenditure 
Due from GoI Amount 
released 
2015-16 2.25 2.25 2.25 1.08 
2016-17 10.30 5.15 5.15 1.03 
2017-18 - 0 0 8.39 
2018-19 15.49 15.49 15.49 9.14 
2019-20 18.62 9.31 9.31 5.08 
2020-21 - 0 0 4.79 
2021-22 18.45 4.61 4.61 4.66 
2022-23 - 0 0 2.08 
2023-24 - 0 0 0.02 
Total 65.11 36.81 36.81 36.27 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Of the ₹65.11 crore due from GoI, for meeting A&OE expenses, only  
₹36.81 crore was received. It was seen that there was delay ranging from 35 
days to 19 months in releasing A&OE funds to SMMU by State Government. 
Mission Director replied that delay in financial clearance by the State 
Government was the reason for the delayed release. 
Audit noticed that the amount expended include d an amount of ₹76.07 lakh 
deposited with PWD towards road restoration charges during October – 
December 2021 by Kozhikode corporation for laying sewer lines in connection 
with construction of STPs  at Kothi and Avikkal. Though the works were 
cancelled due to public protest, the road restoration charge remitted to PWD has 
not so far been claimed and remitted to project fund by the Corporation  
(November 2024). Corporation replied (December 2024) that road restoration 
charges remitted to PWD would be adjusted against the works to be executed 
under AMRUT 2.0. Audit also noticed that though an amount of ₹2.25 crore (at 
the rate of ₹25 lakh per ULB) was released t o SMMU for preparation of 
SLIP/capacity building of mission cities, SMMU did not transfer the amount to 
the mission cities. SMMU could expend only ₹63,000 for the purpose.  
Principal Secretary, LSGD during exit conference (September 2024) stated that 
funds were not transferred to ULBs for preparation of SLIP as there was no 
demand from ULBs.  However, Government assured to look into the possibility 
of transferring the assistance to ULBs. Reply is not tenable as funds specifically 
released by GoI towards preparation of SLIPs by the mission cities should have 
been transferred to the m, as mission cities were responsible for preparation of 
SLIPs. Further, GoI had stipulated for re lease of funds to ULBs within one 
month, which was also not adhered to. 
3.3 Reform Incentive 
One of the Mission objectives was to improve governance through a set of 
Reforms. During the Mission period, 11 Reforms were to be implemented. 
Incentive amount was released based on the performance of the ULB in the 
preceding year on achieving reforms stipulated in the guidelines. The details of 
fund received by the State and expenditure incurred are given in Table 3.4. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
24 
Table 3.4: Reform incentive – Funds received and released by the State 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
GoI Released GoK Released Amount 
released to 
ULBs 
Expenditure  
Amount released Amount released 
to SMMU 
2016-17 15.00 0 0 0 
2017-18 16.68 15.00 12.00 0 
2018-19 15.89 16.68 3.35 0 
2019-20 12.25 28.14 32.47 38.57 
2021-22 0 0 0 9.95 
2022-23 0 0 0 0 
2023-24 0 0 4.92 11.00 
Total 59.82 59.82 52.74 59.52 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
According to the mission guidelines , incentive award amount could only be 
used by mission cities on admissible components of AMRUT, including new 
projects. Though incentive could not be used as State share, ULBs could utilise 
the incentive amount towards project funding. However, ₹7.08 crore  out of 
₹59.82 crore was retained by SMMU (March 2024) in contravention of the 
scheme guidelines. Of the ₹7.08 crore retained by SMMU, an amount of ₹4.00 
crore was expended by SMMU towards inadmissible project viz., preparation 
of Nava Kerala Urban Policy.  
During exit conference Principal Secretary, LSGD (September 2024) stated that 
through Nava Kerala Urban Policy Government intended to frame policies on 
reforms on local bodies. The reply is not acceptable as the guidelines permit for 
utilisation of reform incentive fund only by the mission cities and did not permit 
utilisation of the fund for preparation of policy by Government. 
3.4 Loss of Central assistance for the preparation of GIS based 
Master Plan, LAP and TPS 
3.4.1 Preparation of GIS based Master Plan 
Formulation of GIS based master plans for mission cities was a sub scheme 
under AMRUT. The objective was to develop common digital geo -referenced 
base maps and land use maps using Geographical Information System (GIS) 
and Master Plan Formulation for the selected AMRUT Cities. For 
implementation of the sub -scheme in the mission cities ₹6.40 c rore was 
allocated by GoI. The fund was to be released in four instalments (20:40:20:20) 
and the State received ₹5.12 crore being the first three instalments. Chief, Town 
Planner, Thiruvananthapuram was responsible for preparation of the maps and 
GIS based master plan.  Funds received from GoI for GIS based master plan is 
detailed in Table 3.5. 

Chapter III – Financial Management 
  
25 
Table 3.5: Funds received from GoI for GIS based master plan. 
(₹ in crore) 
Year GoI release GoK release to SMMU Expenditure 
2017-18 1.16 1.16 0 
2018-19 0 0 0.79 
2019-20 2.31 2.31 2.45 
2020-21 0 0 0.15 
2021-22 1.65 1.65 0.79 
2022-23 0 0 0.43 
2023-24 0 0 0.31 
Total 5.12 5.12 4.92 
(Source: Details furnished by SMMU) 
As per the reform guidelines, the fourth (final) instalment of fund could be 
claimed after the submission of the final notification of the sanctioning of 
Master Plan for nine AMRUT cities and achieving utilisation of 75 per cent of 
the GoI fund. However, none of the ULBs  except Kollam Corporation could 
finalise the Master Plan (March 2024) which led to non -receipt of fourth 
instalment of ₹ 1.28 crore.  
3.4.2 Local Area Plan (LAP) and Town Planning Scheme (TPS) 
A pilot project on formulation of Local Area Plan (LAP) and Town Planning 
Scheme (TPS) was planned in 25 AMRUT cities in India and 
Thiruvananthapuram was the city selected under the scheme. The Local Area 
Plan aims for redevelopment of existing brown field  areas27 whereas Town 
Planning Scheme facilitates for planned expansion of green field areas28.  
Against ₹two crore sanctioned for implementation of the project ( ₹one crore 
each for LAP and TPS) State had received ₹1.2 crore (first two installments 29 
i.e. 60 per cent). Tamil Nadu Institute of Urban Studies (TNIUS) was identified 
by GoI for the preparation of LAP and TPS. The release of funds for the scheme 
was based on the achievement of milestones and not on utilisation of funds. As 
the milestone prescribed ‘framing of rules for land pooling’ could not be 
achieved, GoK lost ₹0.80 crore sanctioned for the scheme.  Though an amount 
of ₹0.65 crore was utilised, the objective remains unachieved (March 2024). 
3.5 Inadmissible payments  
Guidelines permit utilization of scheme funds towards implementation of 
project components only. However, audit noticed instances of utilizing mission 
funds for construction of building for KWA, settlement of liability of previous 
Schemes etc., in deviation from the guidelines.  Details are given in Table 3.6. 
 
27 Thampanoor, Palayam, Thycadu and Vazhuthacadu wards of Thiruvananthapruam 
Corporation 
28  Vizhinjam area of the Corporation 
29   In July 2019 and May 2022 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
26 
Table 3.6: Instances of inadmissible payments 
(Source: Information collected from SMMU/CMMU/KWA) 
Audit observed that project fund to the tune of ₹11.04 crore and reform 
incentive fund to the tune of ₹four crore have been diverted towards executing 
inadmissible projects. 
Agreeing to the Audit observation regarding construction of office buildings by 
KWA and incurring O&M cost from project fund , Principal Secretary, LSGD 
during exit conference (September 2024)  assured to obtain the  response of 
Water Resources Department. Further response has not been received (February 
2025). 
3.6 Avoidable burden due to upfront release of loan assistance to ULBs  
According to the guidelines, the mission cities should contribute 20 per cent of 
the project fund. As most of the mission cities do not have the financial capacity 
to meet the ULB share, tenth SHPSC meeting decided to release 15 per cent of 
ULB share of the project cost in respect of water supply and sewerage/septage 
management projects as loan by the State Government. The amount was to be 
recovered in equated instalments, over a period of 10 years from the 
Sl. 
No. 
Purpose for 
which amount 
diverted 
Name of ULB 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Type of 
fund Remarks 
1. 
Five office 
buildings for 
KWA 
Thiruvananthapuram 
and Kochi 
corporations and 
Palakkad 
Municipality 
2.48 Project 
Fund 
Construction of three Smart Offices 
and two office buildings. 
2. 
Settlement of 
court decree of 
KSUDP 
liability from 
AMRUT funds 
Kollam Corporation 0.73 Project 
Fund 
Municipal Corporation settled the 
dues payable to the contractor in 
connection with construction of 
underpass near Chinnakada 
(Kollam) under Kerala Sustainable 
Urban Development Project 
(KSUDP). 
3. 
Construction of 
synthetic turf in 
the playground 
at Chavakkad 
High School 
Guruvayur 
Municipality 0.62 Project 
fund 
Constructed synthetic turf, 
drainages, toilet block etc ., in the 
playground of the school. 
4. Nava Kerala 
Urban Policy SMMU 4.00 
Reform 
Incentive 
Fund 
Withdrawn (March 2024) from the 
SNA account and kept in a separate 
account of the Urban Director for 
preparation of Nava Kerala Urban 
Policy. 
5. 
Meeting O&M 
cost from the 
project fund 
Thiruvananthapuram 
and Kochi 
Corporations 
7.21 Project 
fund 
Guidelines prohibits drawing O&M 
cost from project funds. However, 
O&M cost was included in the 
project fund for purchase and 
installation of 53 flow meters, smart 
meters and 75 MLD WTP at 
Aruvikkara in Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation and STP at Elamkulam 
at Kochi Corporation. 
 Total  15.04   

Chapter III – Financial Management 
  
27 
Development fund of the ULBs concerned with interest at the rate 7.5 per cent. 
Accordingly, GoK released ₹254.36 crore to SMMU in two instalments during 
July and November 2018. The loan amount was distributed to the ULBs by 
SMMU in five instalments during 29 October 2018 to 15 December 2021. 
However, the amount was transferred to S NA account operated by SMMU in 
March 2022.  
Audit noticed that, of the ₹254.36 crore loan amount released, ₹217.83 crore 
(86 per cent ) could only be expended (March 2024) due to slow pace in 
implementation and cancellation of 17 projects under water supply and 
sewerage sectors, and ₹36.56 crore remained unutilised with SMMU. As the 
mission cities were to repay the amount with interest, Government should have 
released the amount based on the progress in expenditure achieved year after 
year. 
Recommendation 3: Government should ensure that scheme funds are not 
diverted and do not remain parked with implementing agencies. 
 

Chapter III – Financial Management 
  
27 
 
  
CHAPTER IV 
  PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
28 
 

 
29 
CHAPTER IV 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION  
 
The primary objective of the mission was to achieve universal coverage in 
water supply . However, none of the mission cities could achieve this 
objective (October 2024). Coverage of household water supply among the 
nine mission cities ranged from 9.39 per cent to 89.16 per cent. 100 MLD 
Water Treatment Plant constructed expending ₹40.62 crore at Vasoorichira 
in Kollam was idling due to non-completion of laying of raw water pumping 
main. Projects taken up by Kochi corporation to augment availability of 
treated water in the city re mained incomplete even after spending ₹20.44 
crore. Four Overhead Service Reservoirs constructed by KWA expending 
₹31.51 crore in three ULBs remain ed idle due to non -laying of pumping 
mains, distribution lines, leakage in distribution line, etc.  
Status of nine mission cities in the context of the sewerage system coverage 
was abysmal with six cities having no sewage collection and treatment 
systems and Kochi and Kannur Municipal corporations had a negligible 
coverage of three per cent  and one per cent  respectively. 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, which treat ed 34 per cent of the sewage 
generated could not expand coverage of sewer network, as KWA could not 
complete the work and establish connectivity with existing STP even after 
five years of commenc ement of the work. Failure of KWA/Kollam 
Corporation to establish network to bring sewage to the treatment plant under 
construction at Kureepuzha resulted in non -completion of the Plant and 
idling of the infrastructure created expending ₹ 16.84 crore.    
Under the Urban Transport component, 47 per cent of footpaths test checked 
were constructed without clearing obstacles such as electric posts, stay wires, 
telecom boxes, etc. 37 per cent of foot paths test checked were not disabled 
friendly and in 53 per cent foot paths test checked had no tactile pavement 
to facilitate visually challenged persons.    
Though the mission objective was to construct or maintain drains to prevent 
flooding, Kochi Corporation utilised scheme funds of ₹ 45.43 crore without 
preparing a definite plan to prevent sewage mixing and flooding. Scheme 
funds were utilised for routine maintenance activities including desilting and 
flooding continued to occur in the city. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
constructed a drai n in Plavarcode -Ulloorkonam-Andoorpoika road without 
establishing connectivity to primary drain leading to flooding in the area.  
Under the Green Space and Parks an amount of ₹27.92 lakh expended 
towards construction of musical fountain in Nehru Park  in Thrissur 
Corporation remained unfruitful as the fountain became non -functional. 
Construction of park on the banks of Chilavannur lake by Kochi Corporation 
had to be abandoned due to lack of permission from Kerala Coastal Zone 
Management Authority, rendering expenditure of ₹28 .22 lakh incurred 
towards the project unfruitful.  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
30 
4.1 Execution of projects  
The primary objective of AMRUT scheme was to cover all households with 
water supply and sewerage (including septage). On achieving the universal 
coverage, the State/ULBs were to decide on the next priority - to construct storm 
water drains or fund urban tr ansport depending on whether the local priority 
was to reduce frequent flooding or reduce vehicle induced pollution. However, 
instead of aiming to achieve universal coverage, GoK included projects in 
respect of all the five sectors in the SAAP and executed them. Component-wise 
projects proposed by ULBs and effectiveness in implementation are detailed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
4.2 Physical and Financial Progress of Projects  
GoK had taken up 1185 projects with a project cost of ₹2535.07 crore for 
implementation. As of March 2024, 939 projects were completed, 172 projects 
were ongoing and 74 projects were cancelled. An amount of ₹1906.98 crore was 
incurred so far towards the project (March 2024). Sector-wise status of projects 
sanctioned and expenditure incurred are given in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Component-wise physical and financial progress as on 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
(Source: Compiled from data furnished by SMMU) 
As seen from the table, even after a lapse of nine years of commencement of the 
project period, only 85 per cent of the projects could be completed.  Sewerage 
 
30  Includes 74 cancelled projects 
31  Project costs of cancelled projects are excluded as the savings out of cancelled projects were 
utilized either to sanction new projects or to meet project cost revisions in ongoing projects 
in the same or other sectors. 
32  Excluding 74 cancelled projects 
Sl. No. 
Component 
No. of projects 
sanctioned30 
Project Cost31 
No. of projects 
Completed 
Expenditure 
No of projects ongoing 
Expenditure 
No. of projects cancelled 
Project cost 
Total Expenditure 
Percentage of projects 
completed32 
Percentage of 
expenditure 
1.  Water 
Supply 221 1558.54 160 800.53 57 403.24 4 18.56 1203.77 74 77 
2.  Sewerage 
&Septage 165 381.39 101 148.46 51 99.99 13 256.94 248.45 66 65 
3.  Storm 
Water 
Drainage 
565 357.19 499 250.79 37 38.06 29 13.73 288.85 93 81 
4.  Urban 
Transport 147 189.46 107 96.80 21 30.95 19 29.76 127.75 84 67 
5.  Green 
Space and 
Parks 
87 48.49 72 35.78 6 2.38 9 4.52 38.16 92 79 
 Total 1185 2535.07 939 1332.36 172 574.62 74 323.51 1906.98 85 75 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
31 
and Septage sector saw most of the cancellations, wherein projects worth 41.13 
per cent  (₹256.94 crore) of SAAP  approved project cost for the sector was 
cancelled. Component wise status of achievement under AMRUT as of 31 
March 2024 is given in Table 4.2: 
Table 4.2: Component-wise status of achievement as of March 2024 
Sl. 
No. Component Status of achievement 
1. Water Supply 
5.37 per cent  households were provided with new 
water connections under AMRUT. Against the 
Mission target of 100 per cent prescribed in the SAAP, 
overall achievement remained at 69.06 per cent. 
2. Sewerage and Septage 
Only 0.13 per cent  households were provided with 
sewerage connections under AMRUT. Against  the 
Mission target of 100 per cent prescribed in the SAAP, 
overall achievement remained at 11.25 per cent. 
3. Storm Water Drainage 5.59 per cent of gap in drainage network was covered. 
4. Urban Transport 65 foot paths, 23 Foot Over Bridges and three Multi 
Level Car Parking facilities were constructed. 
5. Green Space and Parks 30 new parks were constructed and 36 parks were 
renovated. 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU/ULBs/KWA) 
Though Water Supply and Sewerage sectors were the prioritised sectors under 
the scheme, three mission cities 33 could not provide any new drinking water 
connection through the scheme so far. In other cities percentage of water 
connections provided under AMRUT ranged from 0.5 per cent to 15.43 per 
cent. In Sewerage and Septage sector none of the mission cities except Kannur 
and Thiruvananthapuram 34 could provide new sewerage/septage connection.  
Detailed analysis of reasons for low performance, delayed execution, 
cancellation etc., are detailed in succeeding paragraphs:  
4.3 Execution of Water Supply Projects  
The AMRUT mission gave paramount importance to achievement of universal 
coverage in supply of 135 lpcd water to all households. Construction of Water 
Treatment Plants and Service Reservoirs, laying of distribution lines, 
rejuvenation/replacement of old and dam aged pipelines, installation of 
flow/smart meters, etc., were the major projects taken up under the scheme. 
Mission cities had taken up 221 projects costing ₹1558.54 crore under the Water 
Supply Sector for execution, of which 160 projects were completed, 57 projects 
were in progress and four projects were cancelled. An amount of ₹1203.77 crore 
was incurred towards implementation of the projects (March 2024). Status of 
the projects sanctioned and executed are detailed in the Table 4.3. 
 
33 Kochi Corporation and Alappuzha and Guruvayur Municipalities  
34 New connection provided from already existed sewerage line  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
32 
Table 4.3: Projects sanctioned and executed under water supply sector  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. 
Name of ULB 
No. of projects 
sanctioned35 
Project Cost36 
No. of projects 
completed 
Expenditure 
No of projects 
ongoing 
Expenditure 
No. of projects 
cancelled 
Project Cost 
Total 
Expenditure 
Percentage of 
projects 
completed37 
Percentage of 
expenditure 
1.  Thiruvanan
-thapuram 57 122.85 45 85.48 12 4.70 Nil Nil 90.18 79 73 
2.  Kollam 19 169.12 14 28.54 4 46.72 1 1.04 75.26 78 45 
3.  Kochi 37 181.08 16 55.52 21 50.84 Nil Nil 106.36 43 59 
4.  Thrissur 29 219.32 20 107.90 8 87.11 1 17.00 195.01 71 89 
5.  Kozhikode 30 216.44 28 78.15 2 111.33 Nil Nil 189.48 93 88 
6.  Kannur 13 144.08 12 119.59 1 24.34 Nil Nil 143.93 92 99 
7.  Alappuzha 12 179.58 8 82.57 3 61.87 1 0.025 144.44 73 80 
8.  Guruvayur 12 170.74 6 121.30 5 13.14 1 0.50 134.44 55 79 
9.  Palakkad 12 155.33 11 121.48 1 3.19 Nil Nil 124.67 92 80 
 Total 221 1558.54 160 800.53 57 403.24 4 18.565 1203.77 74 77 
(Source: Compiled from data furnished by SMMU) 
Of the 221 projects, audit scrutinised 81 projects involving project cost of 
₹1006.85 crore in the nine mission cities and revealed deficiencies as detailed 
in subsequent paragraphs: 
4.3.1 Kollam Municipal Corporation  
In order to enhance coverage of piped water supply in the Corporation Area, 
KWA formulated a comprehensive scheme named Augmentation of Water 
Supply Scheme for Kollam consisting of construction of weir 38, intake well, 
Water Treatment Plant, OHSRs and laying distribution lines with funding from 
AMRUT and  Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board  (KIIFB). 
Construction of WTP at Vasoorichira, weir at Njankadavu and two distribution 
lines to OHSRs were planned under AMRUT scheme.  
4.3.1.1 Idling of WTP due to non-completion of raw water pumping main 
KWA commenced construction of 100 MLD Water Treatment Plant at 
Vasoorichira in January 2020 and work was completed39 in December 2023 by 
incurring an expenditure of ₹40.62 crore. However, the WTP could not be made 
operational so far, as KWA could not complete the laying of raw water pumping 
main40 to bring raw water from intake well to the WTP (March 2024). Audit 
noticed that the delay in completion of this work was due to the failure of KWA 
 
35 Includes cancelled projects 
36 Excluding project cost of cancelled projects 
37 Excluding cancelled projects 
38 A low dam built across a river to raise the level of water upstream or regulate its flow. 
39 Except construction of storm water drain to release washings 
40 To be executed through KIIFB funds at a cost of ₹145.52 crore and targeted to be completed 
by June 2020 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
33 
in conducting detailed survey to ensure availability of hindrance free land.  
KWA had initially planned to lay pipelines parallel to railway track for a length 
of 930 m by mistaking Railway Road for Perinad Panchayath Road. When 
permission of Railway was sought (July 2019), railway authorities informed 
(January 2020) KWA that pipelines could be laid only through casing pipes of 
1400 mm diameter (20 mm thickness) with provision of sluice valves at every 
100 m. As this recommendation was found to be technically not feasible, KWA 
identified alternate alignment41 through NH 183 (February 2020) and forwarded 
a proposal for permission of MoRTH for the new alignment (November 2020). 
As the proposal submitted by KWA was incomplete, as directed by MoRTH the 
proposal was resubmitted in July 2021. Meanwhile, the  road tarring works of 
the stretch of NH 183 was carried out by PWD (NH) in September 2021. As the 
defect liability period of the road existed till September 2024, MoRTH rejected 
(May 2022) the request of KWA. Audit noticed that though KWA was aware as 
early as in February 2020 that railway insisted for such s tipulation for laying 
pipeline in railway property and alternate alignment through NH was identified, 
KWA waited till November 2020 to seek the permission of MoRTH for 
alignment through NH 183. Further, MoRTH had accorded permission in 
December 2019 to cross the NH for a distance of 2480 m for another stretch of 
the same work42 and the work was executed during November 2020. Negligence 
on the part of KWA in conducting survey to ascertain ownership of the land 
before commencement of the work and lack of timely action to seek permission 
of MoRTH for the alternate route identified, resulted in non -completion of the 
work of laying pipeline to transport raw water from intake well to W TP and 
idling of the WTP constructed at a cost of ₹40.62 crore (March 2024). Thus, the 
objective of enhancing coverage of drinking water supply remained unachieved 
(October 2024). It is significant to note that in this instance, instead of DPR, a 
DER alone was prepared by KWA. 
Further, construction of weir at Njankadavu entrusted to Irrigation Department, 
to ensure adequate supply of water to intake well was also not executed (October 
2024). Audit noticed that after the award of work  (June 2020), the contractor 
reported change in the depth of the river specified in the estimate. The depth 
was measured up to nine meters in the centre portion of the river (where the 
weir was to be constructed), against four meters specified in the estimate. 
Consequent to this, design was to be changed and the contractor was unwilling 
to continue with the sanctioned rate. Though estimate was re-casted and the re-
tendering was done multiple times, work could not be awarded (December 
2023). Hence, GoK cancelled the work (March 2024) and directed KWA to take 
up the work under AMRUT 2.0. 
Thus, poor planning and execution of the project by KWA/Irrigation 
Department resulted in idle investment of ₹ 46.0943 crore and non-achievement 
of objective of the scheme. 
 
41 Elampalloor to Nanthirikkal 
42 Neerozhukku to Elampalloor 
43 Laying clear water pumping main from WTP to the existing OHSR at Vadakkevila  (December 2021, 
₹3.56 crore), Construction of intake well at Njankadavu (May 2020, ₹1.91 crore) and WTP at 
Vasoorichira (₹40.62 crore) 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
34 
Government stated (October 2024) that delay in completion of the pipeline 
happened due to uncertainty in ownership of road parallel to the railway line, 
non-feasibility of the proposal submitted by the railways, COVID 19 pandemic 
restrictions and delay on the part of NH-MoRTH in according timely permission 
to KWA. It was also stated that the matter has been taken up again for obtaining 
permission from NHAI.   
However, the fact remains that KWA did not ensure hindrance free land before 
commencement of the project. Further, KWA took eight months to approach 
MoRTH for seeking permission for alternate alignment and submitted proposal 
without necessary details such as checklist in complete form, undertakings in 
stamp paper, statutory clearances from KSEB, BSNL, etc. This resulted in non-
obtaining permission and indefinite delay in completion of the project.  
Regarding construction of weir, it was stated that the investigation, design, 
estimation and execution of the work was done by Irrigation department and 
role of KWA was limited to issuing Technical Sanction, tendering and arranging 
contract. The reply is not tenable  as KWA had accorded Technical Sanction , 
KWA cannot distance itself from the responsibility of incorrect estimate, which 
ultimately led to cancellation of the work. 
4.3.2 Kochi Municipal Corporation  
Kochi Corporation proposed 37 projects costing ₹181.08 crore to improve per 
capita distribution of drinking water in its jurisdiction. These projects included 
construction of seven OHSRs/GLSRs, laying pumping main/transmission 
pipelines, replacement of old and damaged pipelines and replacing 5,000 
damaged water supply connections. So far 16 projects (₹55.52 crore) have been 
completed and 21 projects were ongoing (March 2024). Audit noticed that even 
after utilizing ₹ 106.36 crore from AMRUT funds, no improvement could be 
achieved in the per capita distribution of water as detailed in  the following 
paragraphs: 
4.3.2.1 Idling Overhead Service Reservoirs (OHSRs) 
KWA included construction of two OHSRs viz., 40 LL44 OHSR at Kaloor and 
25 LL OHSR at Karuvelipady at a project cost of ₹35.92 crore with the objective 
to ensure equitable distribution of water to Kaloor and west Kochi area 
respectively. The 40 LL OHSR at Kaloor was intended to store water brought 
from the proposed WTP at Kalamassery 45. As the construction of 1 35 MLD 
WTP at Kalamassery was dropped due to non -availability of land, it was 
proposed to bring treated water from the transmission trunk (at Kaladarshana 
junction) of existing WTP at Aluva. However, the work of laying pipeline could 
not be awarded even after tendering multiple times. Hence, due to non -
availability of treated water,  the 40 LL OHSR constructed in May 2022,  after 
incurring expenditure of ₹ 15.32 crore, remained unutilised (October 2024).  
Further, 25 LL OHSR at Karuvelipady constructed in December 2022 at a cost 
of ₹8.7 9 crore could not be utilized since September 2023 due to non -
functioning of inlet/outlet valves and electric motor in the pump house. Thus, 
 
44 Lakh litres 
45 Not proposed under AMRUT 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
35 
two OHSRs constructed by spending ₹ 24.11 crore to ensure equitable 
distribution of water could not serve their objectives. 
Regarding idling of OHSR at Kaloor, Government stated (October 2024) that 
the estimate of the work for laying the inlet and outlet pipeline of the OHSR 
was recast and the work was tendered. It was also stated that on completion of 
this work 40 LL OHSR could be used for distribution and the work was expected 
to be completed by 31 December 2024.  
However, the fact remains that 40 LL OHSR constructed in May 2022 by 
spending ₹15.32 crore remained idle  for more than two years . Further, 
Government reply is silent on the idling of the 25 LL OHSR at Karuvelipady. 
4.3.2.2 Non-completion of projects to enhance availability of treated water 
in the Corporation area 
KWA, with the intention of bringing additional quantity of treated water (upto 
18 MLD) to Kochi City from the WTP at Maradu, included two projects under 
AMRUT, one for laying pumping main (500 mm DI pipe) for a length of  
5900 m from WTP at Maradu to pump house at Thammanam at a project cost 
of ₹22.50 crore and other for laying 500 mm DI pipeline from pump house at 
Thammanam to OHSR at Kadavanthra  at a project cost of ₹9.54 crore.  
However, both the projects remained incomplete and the objective remained un-
achieved as detailed below: 
(a) Laying pumping main from WTP at Maradu to pump house at 
Thammanam 
The proposed project was to replace the existing transmission line of 500 mm 
AC pipe with 500 mm DI pipe, utilised for transmitting treated water from 100 
MLD WTP at Maradu to Thammanam GLSR, for augmentation of water supply 
to Thammanam pump house at a project cost of ₹22.50 crore. The project 
involved laying of pipe for a length of 5850 m (3700  m through NH  and  
2150 m through PWD/LSGI/railway road) which required permission from 
PWD, NHAI and Railway authorities. Audit noticed that the work was awarded 
(June 2018) before obtaining the permission from the above authorities. Though 
NHAI denied permission (February 2018)  for laying pipe for a stretch of  
3700 m through NH, KWA executed (February 2020) the remaining pipe laying 
work through the PWD road (2524 m46) incurring expenditure of ₹11.39 crore.  
As the pipe laying work for 3700 m could not be undertaken the work was pre-
closed in May 2022 . Thus, the augmentation of water supply to Thammanam 
pump house could not materialise even after spending ₹11.39 crore.  
Government stated (October 2024) that as NHAI denied permission for laying 
pipes through NH for a length of 3700 m through the proposed open cut method 
and permitted pipe laying only through concrete duct, KWA recast alignment 
through municipal roads. However, there were no takers for the tender for laying 
pipeline through municipal roads. Hence, KWA again approached NHAI for 
permission for laying pipeline through NH 66. As NHAI has proposed road 
widening works from Edappally to Aroor, Government is expecting a positive 
response from NHAI.  
 
46 Initially proposed length was 1830 m. During execution length was changed to 2524 m 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
36 
However, the fact remains that no t obtaining mandatory permissions from 
authorities before commencement of work resulted in idling of the infrastructure 
created for the last four years and non-achievement of objective of providing 
additional quantity of water to Kochi city (October 2024). 
(b) Laying transmission line from Thammanam pump house to OHSR at 
Kadavanthra  
The objective of the project was to bring 17.30 MLD of treated water from 
Pump house at Thammanam to Kadavanthra OHSR by laying new 500 mm DI 
pipeline to augument water distribution i n Kochi Corporation area at a project 
cost of ₹9.54 crore. The work was commenced in June 2018 and the pipe laying 
work except the railway line crossing at Ponnurunni was completed by 
expending ₹9.05 crore. The crossing of railway line was arranged separately, 
but could not be completed (March 2024). The work at the railway line crossing, 
even if completed, the objective of carrying additional 17.30 MLD water for 
distribution would remain un -achieved due to non -completion of Maradu -
Thammanam pipe laying work  as mentioned in para graph above. Further, the 
OHSR at Kadvanthra to which treated water was proposed to be stored remained 
unutilised for the last 40 years due to non -availability of water with required 
pressure. Audit noticed that structural stability of the OHSR was not ensured by 
KWA before taking up the project. 
Government stated (October 2024) that pipe laying work would be completed 
by October 2024. As the existing OHSR was nearly 40 years old, KWA  has 
approached Cochin University of Science and Technology Engineering College 
for determining structural stability of the tank.  
Government reply confirms the negligence in planning on the part of KWA, 
which resulted in indefinite delay in completion of the project. 
4.3.3 Thrissur Municipal Corporation  
At the beginning of AMRUT scheme, Thrissur Corporation was having 33.70 
MLD of treated water, supplied to 60.48 per cent households with per capita 
supply of 93 lpcd. To achieve universal coverage, the requirement of 26.3 MLD 
of treated water was assessed. To overcome this deficiency, Corporation 
proposed 29 projects costing ₹219.32 crore consisting of (i) construction of 20 
MLD water treatment plant at Peechi (ii) construction of two OHSRs at 
Kuttanellur and Ollur and (iii) laying of 117 km of distribution lines and 
providing service connections. Of the 29 projects, 20 projects were  completed, 
eight projects were ongoing and one project was cancelled.  An amount of 
₹195.01 crore has been  incurred for the project so far ( March 2024). 
Observations on completed/ongoing projects are detailed in the following 
paragraphs: 
4.3.3.1 Non-improvement of water supply in the Corporation 
At the beginning of the AMRUT scheme, KWA was providing 33.70 MLD 
treated water to Thrissur Municipal Corporation from various WTPs available 
in the district (14.5 MLD and 35.5 MLD at Peechi and 1.5 MLD at Mulayam 
and 18 MLD at Arattupuzha). To augment availability of treated water, the 
Corporation proposed (SAAP 2016-17) construction of 20 MLD WTP at Peechi 
at an estimated cost of ₹13.17 crore. Construction of the 20 MLD WTP was 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
37 
completed (March 2021) incurring an expenditure of ₹10.10 crore. However, 
the old WTP of 14.5 MLD at Peechi was decommissioned (April 2021) by 
KWA shortly after the commencement of new WTP.  Audit noticed that even 
though new WTP of higher capacity was constructed, there was no 
improvement i n total water made available to the city and total quantity of 
treated water made available to the Corporation remained at 33.70 MLD.   
Government stated (October 2024) that before the implementation of AMRUT, 
the production was 70 MLD and supply to the corporation was 33.7 MLD. After 
implementation of AMRUT 1.0, the production was enhanced to 75.5 MLD and 
supply to the corporation was enhanced to 44 MLD.  The reply is not tenable as 
the details furnished by KWA  and ULB (February 2025) indicate that water 
supplied to the Corporation remained unchanged even after commissioning of 
20 MLD WTP. 
4.3.3.2 Reduction in scope of work due to change in site and idling of OHSR   
Construction of five LL OHSR and five LL Sump in Government College, 
Kuttanellur was approved in SAAP 2017-18 with a project cost of ₹2.03 crore 
(DSR 2016) with an objective to provide drinking water to residents in 
Kuttanellur division of Thrissur Corporation and technical sanction for the 
project was obtained in February 2018. Audit noticed that, based on the request 
from the Principal of the College (January 2018) initially identified site was 
changed to another site in the college campus. However, without conducting 
soil study to assess the foundation requirements of the new site, KWA awarded 
the work (December 2018). Soil study conducted (February 2019) by the 
contractor necessitated change in structural design as the raft foundation 
included in the estimate was found not suitable for the new site and requirement 
of pile foundation for the OHSR was assessed.  As the pile foundation was not 
included in the scope of work, it was agreed that pile foundation would be 
executed by KWA, by awarding the work separately. Though tenders were 
invited for executing the pile foundation, there were no takers. Hence the 
original contract was terminated (November 2021) and the estimate was revised 
(February 2022) to ₹2.50 crore (DSR 2018) and construction of 5 LL Sump was 
excluded from the scope to limit the estimate amount within the Administrative 
Sanction. The  work was then rearranged (April 2022) through another 
contractor and was completed in March 2024 incurring an expenditure of ₹2.18 
crore. However, during J oint Physical Verification (February 2025) audit 
noticed that distribution of water was not commenced even after 11 months of 
construction of the OHSR. KWA replied (February 2025) that scour line 
extension and isolating of pipelines around Kuttanellur OHSR were to be 
carried out for proper functioning of the OHSR. It was also stated that  
permission of PWD was not obtained for some isolation works and pipe laying 
work and hence the work could not be tendered.  
Audit observed that awarding the work without conducting site study resulted 
in delay in completion of the project and reduced water storage capacity  as 
against envisaged. Further, the OHSR  constructed remained idle resulting in 
non-achievement of objective of providing drinking water to the residents of 
Kuttanellur division even after spending ₹2.18 crore. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
38 
Government stated (April 2025) that variations in dimensions occurred due to 
change in site.  However, the reply is silent on non-conducting soil study on the 
new site. 
4.3.3.3 Replacement of faulty meters and providing new connections 
Thrissur Corporation had included in the SAAP 2015 -16, a project for survey 
and replacement of faulty water meters and pipelines and providing new water 
connections in old municipal area of Thrissur Corporation, where distribution 
of drinking water is managed by ULB, at a cost of ₹ three crore. The aim of the 
project was to mitigate drinking water losses in distribution systems of Thrissur 
Corporation area. S cope of the work included survey to identify and replace 
faulty meters with new ones and providing 5 00 new service connections at a 
cost of ₹62 lakh and the work was entrusted to KWA (February 2017). Though 
1114 faulty mete rs were identified through the survey, due to hike in cost of 
water meters,  replacement of faulty mete rs was restricted to 754. KWA 
provided 500 new connections and replaced only 454 faulty meters  as rest of 
the consumers replaced their faulty meters themselves and an amount of ₹71.09 
lakh was paid to KWA. Audit noticed that Corporation made payment to KWA 
without obtaining details of the consumers where new connections/replacement 
of faulty meters were carried out. In the absence of details of consumers, ULB 
was unable to identify the consumers for billing purposes and the billing was 
pending since the completion of the work in December 2021 , resulting in non-
realisation of revenue by the Corporation for more than two years (May 2024). 
As consumer details were not available, KWA in May 2024 requested the 
Corporation to form a joint inspection team to identify the consumers. 
Audit observed that negligence on the part of the Corporation in obtaining 
details of work carried out by KWA, before making payment, resulted in non-
realisation of revenue even after spending ₹71.09 lakh by the Corporation for 
replacing faulty meters and for providing new connections.  
Government stated (April 2025) that updated information on replacement of 
faulty meters would be obtained from KWA and action will be taken to ensure 
collection of arrears. 
4.3.4 Guruvayur Municipality  
At the beginning of AMRUT scheme  (2015-16), Guruvayur Municipality was 
having 7.84 MLD of treated water, supplied to 1,624 households (9.39 per cent) 
out of 17,297 households with per capita supply of 36 lpcd. To achieve universal 
coverage (22.27 MLD), the requirement of 14.43 MLD of treated water was 
assessed. To overcome this deficiency, Municipality proposed 12 projects 
costing ₹170.74 crore having various components viz. , (i) construction of 15 
MLD WTP at Kottapady and intake well at Illikkal at Karuvan nur river (ii) 
laying 40 km raw water pumping main from intake well to WTP (iii) 
construction of 10 LL OHSR and (iv) laying distribution networks in three 
zones. Audit scrutiny revealed the following:  
4.3.4.1 Non-laying distribution lines for supply of water to households 
KWA completed the construction of 15 MLD WTP at Kottapadi ( January 
2021), 10 LL OHSR  at Guruvayur (August 2023), raw water pumping main  
from WTP to OHSR (December 2023) and laying distribution networks in two 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
39 
zones47 expending an amount of ₹ 134.44 crore. However, the Municipality 
could not provide water to any new beneficiary through the scheme (March 
2024) as the distribution lines laid were of 600 mm to 160 mm diameter and 
only passes through main PWD/municipal roads and the Municipality did not 
propose project for laying smaller distribution lines, from the main distribution 
line, for supplying water to households.  As a result, even after the expiry of one 
year of completion of the work and spending ₹ 134.44 crore, the intended 
objective remains un-achieved (March 2024).   
Government stated (October 2024) that though entire network was designed by 
KWA, proposal was cut short because of paucity of funds under AMRUT and 
project for providing service connections was included under AMRUT 2.0. 
Reply is not tenable  as paucity of funds occurred due to the decision taken at 
the State level to curtail the scope of projects under the water supply sector and 
to allocate funds for l ower priority sectors. Further, t he reply confirms the 
failure of SHPSC/ SLTC/ULB/KWA to plan proper impleme ntation of the 
scheme, which resulted in non-achievement of objective of providing drinking 
water to the residents even after spending ₹134.44 crore. 
4.3.5 Kannur Municipal Corporation  
At the beginning of AMRUT scheme, Kannur Corporation was having 21.90 
MLD of treated water, supplied to 43 per cent of households with per capita 
supply of 90 lpcd. To achieve universal coverage, requirement of 23 MLD 
treated water was assessed. To enhance availability of treated water, the 
Corporation proposed 13 projects viz., project for augmentation of capacity of 
WTP at Chavasseriparamba from 30 MLD to 40 MLD (₹7.80 crore),  
construction of two OHSRs  at Pallikkunnu and Thottada (₹7.45 crore)  and 
laying distribution lines in four zones and providing service connections to 
households (₹128.83 crore).  
KWA completed the augmentation work by constructing 10 MLD WTP in May 
2019 by incurring expenditure  of ₹7. 80 crore. However, the benefit of 
augmentation of capacity of the WTP was not realised as KWA did not include 
installation of new motor pumps for pumping raw water to the new WTP in the 
estimate, and the existing motor pumps were not having sufficient capacity to 
pump augmented quantity of raw water. Non-installation of motor pump 
resulted in non-augmentation of availability of treated water from the plant for 
the last four years.  It was seen that KWA proposed the installation of new motor 
pumps for the WTP  in the second phase of AMRUT 2.0 . Audit observed that 
negligence on the part of  KWA to include provision for installation of motor 
pumps to bring raw water to the plant, in the estimate, resulted in non -
achievement of the objective even after expending ₹7.80 crore (March 2024).   
Further, n on-installation of the motor pumps, an essential component to 
augment the supply of water, even five years after the construction of WTP, is 
indicative of the gross negligence on the part of KWA , especially when piped 
water supply remained inaccessible to 50 per cent  of households in the 
Corporation.  
 
47 Guruvayur and Pookode zones 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
40 
Government while agreeing to the audit finding stated (April 2025) that 
installation of new pump sets were essential to meet the current requirements of 
the ULB and proposal for installation of new pump sets were included in 
AMRUT 2.0. 
4.3.6 Palakkad Municipality  
At the beginning of AMRUT scheme, Palakkad Municipality was having 23.5 
MLD of treated water, supplied to 62 per cent of households with per capita 
supply of 88 lpcd. To achieve universal coverage, requirement of 21.5 MLD of 
treated water was assessed. To overcome this deficiency as well as to achieve 
universal coverage , projects shown in Table 4. 4 were approved under three 
SAAPs. 
Table 4.4: Water supply projects of Palakkad municipality 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Project Name Number of 
projects Estimated cost Expenditure as on 
31 March 2024 
1. Construction of 45 MLD 
water treatment plant 1 22.26 17.43 
2. Construction of OHSRs 3 17.00 15.36 
3. Laying distribution pipelines 3 77.07 72.77 
 Total 7 116.33 105.56 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Construction work of 45 MLD WTP and three OHSRs to facilitate storage of 
treated water were completed by June 2022. Audit noticed that even after 
spending ₹105.56 crore under the scheme, municipality could provide new 
water connection to only six per cent of the households i.e. 2466 households 
(March 2024). Deficiencies noticed in the implementation of projects are 
detailed in succeeding paragraphs: 
4.3.6.1 Idling of OHSR at Moothanthara 
Construction of 23.5 LL OHSR at Moothanthara  and laying of distribution 
network was proposed by the Municipality to facilitate distribution of treated 
water to Moothanthara zone and the work was completed in May 2022 incurring 
expenditure of ₹ 30.14 crore48. However, OHSR constructed (May 2022) at 
Moothanthara and the distribution lines laid could not be utilized due to leakage 
in the distribution line to Vennakkara area. While charging the line, leakage was 
noticed at three metre depth from the road surface in the middle of a busy market 
having heavy vehicular traffic. Though contractor was directed to rectify the 
leakage, due to the site conditions contractor did not carry out the rectification 
works. However, no action was taken by the KWA against the contractor so far 
(March 2024). Thus, even after spending  ₹30.14 crore, the objective of 
providing water to Moothanthara zone remains unachieved (October 2024).  
Government stated (April 2025) that when the load was applied to the existing 
AC distribution lines, the increased pressure caused all the existing AC pipes to 
crack. As a result KWA has temporarily kept the OHSR idle till the replacement 
of old AC pipes. 
 
48 ₹24.92 crore for laying distribution network and ₹5.22 crore for construction of OHSR 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
41 
4.3.6.2 Under performance of 45 MLD WTP at Palakkad  
Palakkad Municipality formulated (SAAP  2016-17) a project for construction 
of 45 MLD WTP at Malampuzha and the plant was commissioned in May 2022 
by incurring an expenditure of ₹17.43 crore. However, Audit noticed that during 
September 2022 to November 2023, the monthly average quantity of tre ated 
water produced from the WTP ranged from 8.4 MLD to 44.5 MLD. It was also 
noticed that treated water above 35 MLD was received only for 43 days. 
According to KWA, reason for this reduction in the quantity of treated water 
was due to defect in the graded filter media which resulted in frequent choking 
and backwash of the filter beds. Audit noticed that, during trial run, though the 
issue of frequent choking of filter beds was noticed, no action was taken by 
KWA to rectify the defect and the contractor was paid the entire contract amount 
including the performance guarantee. A comparison of turbidity and backwash 
data of the 45 MLD WTP with other two existing WTPs which drew water from 
the same source revealed that even for the same level of turbidity, numb er of 
backwashes required in the 45 MLD WTP was twice tha t of  the other two 
WTPs. This indicated that the filter beds in the 45 MLD WTP were frequently 
choking and required more number of backwash which resulted in the under 
performance of the WTP. Audit noticed that the terms and conditions of the 
agreement mandated that the treatment process should be efficient and 
economical and the plant should be designed to treat raw water with turbidity 
up to 500 NTU. However, the filter beds got choked requiring backwashes even 
at a turbidity of th ree NTU. Thus, the failure of KWA to initiate timely action 
to rectify the defect of the plant resulted in under performance of the treatment 
plant.   
GoK stated (October 2024) that filter beds of 45 MLD WTP were not faulty and 
it was the algae content in the raw water during the summer months (February 
to July) that caused choking of the filter beds. It was also replied that clear water 
production envisaged upto the year 2035 was only 39.95 MLD and production 
of 43.08 MLD was assessed by 2050.  
The reply is not tenable as analysis of the turbidity and backwash data during 
May and June 2024 indicates that rate of back washes in filter beds of 45 MLD 
WTP was in the range 1.33 -2.17 per day while backwashes required in other 
WTPs, which used the same raw water, was in the range 0.33-0.83. Further, the 
requirement of 45 MLD  treated water, as of 2021, was projected in the SLIP , 
and the municipality had decided to construct an exclusive WTP for it and 
allocate treated water from the existing treatment plants to the nearby 
panchayats. 
4.3.7 Installation of Flowmeters  
Real time monitoring of water flow in the entire water supply system would 
ensure an efficient water supply system for the city and enable the water 
supplying agency to undertake regular monitoring of data like hours of 
pumping, pressure and flow of water in the distribution system. Further, 
installation of flowmeters at the entry and exit of overhead and underground 
reservoirs in the distribution network would help in real time monitoring of 
water supplied in the system as well as timely identification of leakages. Rightly 
identifying the need for monitoring of water supplied into the distribution 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
42 
system, sixth SHPSC held on 26 August 2016 made it mandatory for ULBs to 
install bulk meters at the distribution points. However, Audit noticed that project 
for installation of bulk/flow meters at locations other than OHSRs was taken up 
only by Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation.  
Audit observed the following deficiencies in the installation/functioning of 
flowmeters in the mission cities. 
• Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation formulated a project for 
installing 53 flow meters under the AMRUT scheme and work was 
awarded (July 2019) to M/s Friends Engineering Corporation, Mumbai 
for installing the same at the quoted rate of ₹six crore. The  contract was 
completed (April 2022) after installation of 43 flow meters and the 
contractor was paid ₹4.80 crore. Audit noticed that remaining 10 flow 
meters were not installed due to lack of permission to shut down water 
supply by Crisis Management Group chaired by Chief Engineer, KWA.  
• Alappuzha Municipality - Audit verified (September 2024) installation 
of flow meters in four newly constructed OHSR and observed that two 
of the flow meters were not functioning. Flow meter at Kommadi was 
not working as power connection was not provided and flow meter at 
Thathampally was in damaged condition. 
• In Kochi Corporation , Audit verified (November 2023) flow meters 
installed in OHSRs at Karuvelipadi and Pachalam  and observed that 
both the flow meters installed were not working. KWA replied (January 
2024) that as the flow meters were under the maintenance period, the 
contractor was directed to rectify the defects. However , the contractor 
did not rectify the defects in the flow meters so far (May 2024).  
• Kannur Corporation - Audit noticed (January 2024) that all the three 
flow meters installed (January 2019) in the newly constructed 24 LL 
OHSR at Pallikkunnu in Kannur Corporation were not working.  KWA 
replied (February 2024) that two flow meters were damaged in lightning 
and third flow met er was damaged during transmission main 
replacement work. However, KWA has not rectified the defects so far 
(October 2024). 
Audit observed that non -installation of flow mete rs and non -ensuring proper 
functioning of the flow meters installed was indicative of the negligence on the 
part of KWA in ensuring efficient supply of water to the mission cities.  
Government stated (April 2025) that KWA has been directed to address the 
issue urgently. 
4.3.8 Installation of Smart Meters at Thiruvananthapuram  
Kerala Water Authority proposed a project for installation of smart meters for 
bulk consumers having consumption over 500 KL/month in 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, at a cost of ₹1.27 crore. The objective of the 
project was to increase revenue by providing accurate bills on time, as the smart 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
43 
meters would have automatic reading facility with GSM/GPRS interface with 
billing software of the KWA. 
The work for installation of smart meters was awarded (July 2018) to a  
Contractor, M/s Base Electronics and Systems, Chennai at their quoted rate of 
₹91.24 lakh.  As per the agreement, the contractor was required to install 394 
smart meters and develop an Application Programming Interface (API) to link 
the smart meter with the e-Abacus software (billing software) of KWA to enable 
real time recording of the water usage in the KWA billing system. Though, the 
contractor installed 381 smart meters (October 2021), he did not provide the 
API to KWA. As such , the objective of installing smart meters remained 
unachieved and ₹31.69 lakh paid to the contractor remained unfruitful.  
Government stated (October 2024) that as the contractor failed to develop the 
necessary software, installed meters functioned as mechanical meters. Due to 
continued non-responsiveness from the contractor, the contract was terminated 
in September 2024 with plans to complete the remaining work at the risk and 
cost of the contractor.  However, the fact remains that objective of real time 
monitoring of water usage remained unachieved even after lapse of three years 
of installation of smart meters and incurring expenditure of ₹31.69 lakh. 
4.3.9 Unfruitful expenditure on upgradation of existing SCADA 
systems  
According to Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organisation (CPHEEO) O&M Manual, the inspection, monitoring and control 
of operation and maintenance of water utility can be automated through 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA 49) system. It consists of 
four components viz; (a) Field instruments, sensors and actuators (b) Remote 
stations (c) Communication network and (d) Central monitoring station.  
In Kozhikode Municipal Corporation, 54 MLD WTP at Mavoor had a SCADA 
system installed during December 2017 through JICA project, which could 
acquire only data, and valves and pumps were to be controlled manually. KWA 
proposed (SAAP 2016-17) a project for strengthening of infrastructure facilities 
in the 54 MLD WTP for ₹2.70 crore, which included upgradation of 
Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) SCADA for ₹29.64 lakh to facilitate 
operation of control valves and pumps automatically. The work included 
erection of electric actuators to the existing 450 mm delivery valves to the clear 
water pumping station along with PLC SCADA, fixing electro -magnetic flow 
meters with liquid emitting diode (LED)/liquid crystal display (LCD) unit, and 
coupling of flow meter with data acquisition software having provision for 
wireless transfer through GSM.  
The work was awarded (December 2018) to Sri. David Mangan for ₹2.06 crore 
with period of completion of six months. Audit noticed that though electric 
actuators and electromagnetic flow meters required for the functioning of 
SCADA was installed, the contractor could not install the PLC -SCADA as the 
system already installed in WTP using 2G SIMs was not compatible with the 
newly proposed system due to connectivity issues.  KWA, therefore, exempted 
(July 2021) the contractor from the pending work of PLC SCADA. The 
 
49 SCADA is a computer control system used to monitor and control plant processes.  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
44 
contractor was paid ₹1.92 crore (July 2021), which included an amount of 
₹17.81 lakh  incurred towards installation of electric actuators and 
electromagnetic flow meters required for functioning of SCADA. Audit noticed 
that SCADA system that existed in the WTP had became non-functional since 
September 2020 . Audit observed that KWA executed the project without 
ascertaining the compatibility of the old system with the proposed new system. 
As the SCADA system was not installed the amount of ₹17.81 lakh incurred for 
the installation of electric actuators and electromagnetic flow meters remained 
unfruitful.   
Government stated (April 2025) that a new SCADA project valued at ₹1.07 
crore is being implemented. 
The reply substantiates the audit observation that KWA had executed the 
upgradation without ascertaining feasibility. 
4.4 Status of achievement of Service Level Benchmarks 
The focus of AMRUT was to achieve service level benchmarks such as 
universal coverage in water supply and sewerage in five years (2015-16 to 2019-
20). However, even after spending ₹1203.77 crore in water supply sector, none 
of the mission cities could either achieve the objective of universal coverage or 
bring in considerable improvement in the service levels that existed at the 
beginning of the mission. Status of achievement of service level benchmarks in 
respect of water supply sector by the mission cities is given in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Achievements of Service Level Benchmarks by mission cities under water supply  
Service Level Benchmarks 
Mission Cities 
Thiruvanant-
hapuram  
Kollam 
Alappuzha 
Kochi 
Thrissur 
Guruvayur 
Palakkad 
Kozhikode 
Kannur 
Household 
Coverage  
(In percentage) 
Target:100 per cent 
Pre- AMRUT 77.7 40.3 61 89.2 60.5 9.4 61.7 45 42.3 
Post AMRUT 78.2 55. 5 61 89.2 65.8 9.4 67.3 60.4 49.3 
Achievement 0.5 15.2 Nil Nil 5.3 Nil 5.6 15.4 7 
Quantum of water 
supplied 
 (In lpcd50) 
Target:135 lpcd 
Pre- AMRUT 100 65 50 86 93 36 88 100 90 
Post AMRUT 113.4 61.0 76.5 Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 51 
60.6 115.6 87.3 70.6 
Achievement 13.4 Nil 26.5 24.6 27.6 Nil Nil 
Extent of Non-
Revenue Water 
(NRW)  
(In per cent) 
Target:20 per cent  
Pre- AMRUT 35 30 40 46.7 30 43 30 30 32 
Post AMRUT 
 Data not available 
28.952 
51.153 70 40.8 30.6 51.9 
Achievement --54 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
(Source: Data furnished by ULBs and KWA) 
 
50  Litre per capita per day 
51  Pre-AMRUT data pertains to entire Municipal Corporation. However, post AMRUT data 
pertains to the area where KWA was providing water supply. Hence not comparable. 
52   In municipal area where KWA was providing water supply 
53  In municipal area where ULB was providing water supply 
54  Could not be assessed as post AMRUT data could not be compared with pre -AMRUT data 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
45 
4.4.1 Coverage of water supply connections  
One of the primary aims of the scheme was to achieve universal coverage in 
supply of drinking water to all households in the nine mission cities. Status of 
household connections for providing drinking water and the increase in number 
of household connectio ns since inception of the scheme is given in the  
Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Status of households with tap connection 
Sl. No. 
Name of ULB 
Total number of 
households as per SLIP 
Households with water 
tap connection 
Percentage of house-holds 
with water connection 
(Pre-AMRUT) 
Length of distribution 
line to be laid to bridge 
the gap (Km) 
Length of distri-bution 
line laid (Km) 
No. of Water connections 
provided in AMRUT 
Percentage of Households 
with water connections- 
(Post AMRUT) 
Percentage of increase in 
household connections 
1.  Thiruvanan-
thapuram 2,46,803 1,91,845 77.73 310 37.79 1,206 78.22 0.49 
2.  Kollam 98,367 39,662 40.32 104 17.6 14,973 55.54 15.22 
3.  Kochi 1,51,412 1,35,000 89.16 0 0 0 89.16 Nil 
4.  Thrissur 78,336 47,378 60.48 117 105.3 4,206 65.85 5.37 
5.  Kozhikode 1,23,776 55,690 44.99 351 112.74 19,100 60.42 15.43 
6.  Kannur 61,883 26,186 42.32 519 68.3 4,344 49.34 7.02 
7.  Alappuzha 39,894 24,318 60.96 0 0 0 60.96 Nil 
8.  Guruvayur 17,297 1,624 9.39 172 110.14 0 9.39 Nil 
9.  Palakkad 44,000 27,152 61.71 110 141 2466 67.31 5.60 
 Total 8,61,768 5,48,855 63.69 1683 592.87 46,295 69.06 5.37 
(Source: Data furnished by ULBs and KWA) 
Coverage of household water supply among the nine mission cities ranged from 
9.39 per cent  to 89.16 per cent  at the commencement of the scheme. Audit 
noticed that the number of household connections increased only by 0. 49 per 
cent to 15.43 per cent in six ULBs leaving a significant overall gap of 30.94 per 
cent.  Kochi Corporation and Alappuzha and Guruvayur municipalities  could 
not improve the coverage in supply of water. Audit noticed that importance 
given to rejuvenation of old distribution lines rather than expansion of 
distribution networks to uncovered areas resulted in non -achievement of 
significant coverage. Status of coverage of water supply before and after 
AMRUT is depicted in Chart 4.1 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
46 
 
(Source: Data furnished by ULBs and KWA) 
4.4.2 Per Capita Supply of Water  
As per the SLB indicator, 135 litre per capita per day (lpcd ) drinking water 
should be provided to households. The details of achievement with respect to 
per capita supply of water is given in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7:  Achievement in per capita supply of water 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
LPCD 
before 
AMRUT 
Gap 
identified in 
treated water 
quantity 
Capacity 
of WTPs 
taken up 
Capacity 
of WTPs 
executed 
LPCD after 
AMRUT 
(claimed by 
ULBs) 
LPCD after 
AMRUT as 
assessed by 
audit55 
1.  Thiruvanan-
thapuram 100 105 75 75 277 113.44 
2.  Kollam 65 44.5 100 Nil56 50 61.03 
3.  Alappuzha 50 15.9 Nil Nil 120 76.45 
4.  Kochi 86 204 Nil Nil NA -- 57 
5.  Thrissur 93 26.3 20 20 70 58.42 
6.  Kozhikode 100 12.0 Nil Nil NA 87.27 
7.  Kannur 90 23 10 10 NA 70.57 
8.  Guruvayur 36 14.43 15 15 70 60.63 
9.  Palakkad 88 21.5 45 45 70 115.56 
(Source: Data furnished by ULBs and KWA) 
Out of nine ULBs, three58 ULBs claimed to have improved the per capita water 
supply after the scheme. However, audit found inconsistencies in the claims by 
different ULBs as detailed below: 
• There was no system/mechanism to measure quantity of water supplied 
to the mission cities as the treatment plants in a district cater to the needs 
of people in nearby panchayaths and other municipalities in addition to 
 
55  Based on e-abacus data of January/February 2024 
56  Though construction of 100 MLD WTP was completed, due to non -laying of raw water 
pumping main, WTP remains non-operational  
57  e-abacus data not furnished 
58  Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha and Guruvayur 
77.7
40.3
89.2
60.5
45
42.3
61
9.4
61.7
78.2
55.5
89.2
65.8
60.4
49.3
61
9.4
67.3
0
20
40
60
80
100
Coverage (In per cent)
Mission Cities
Chart 4.1: Coverage in household water connections before and 
after AMRUT under Water Supply sector 
Coverage before AMRUT Coverage after AMRUT

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
47 
the mission cities. KWA had not installed bulk meters to measure the 
quantity of water supplied to the mission cities. 
• The universal provision of individual household tap connection being a 
necessary precondition to achieve 135 lpcd, none of the ULBs in the 
State achieved the SLB target as they could not  ensure universal 
coverage in water supply connections. 
Thus, the mission cities have not so far achieved the SLB  target of universal 
coverage in household water connections and per capita supply of water.  
4.4.3 Extent of Non-Revenue Water (NRW) 
The term Non-revenue water denotes the quantity of water produced/supplied 
which does not earn any revenue. This is computed as the difference between 
the total water produced (ex-treatment plant) and the total water sold expressed 
as a percentage of the total water produced. Reducing NRW to 20 per cent was 
one of the Service Level Benchmarks to be achieved under the scheme. NRW 
has a significant impact on water availability, power consumption and cost 
recovery in a city. Reduction of NRW to acceptable stan dards is also vital for 
the financial sustainability of water supply services. The key to formulating an 
effective NRW reduction strategy is to develop a better understanding of the 
causes for NRW and its components. Components of NRW are given in Chart 
4.2 below: 
Chart 4.2: Components of NRW 
Non-
Revenue 
Water 
Unbilled 
authorized 
consumption 
Unbilled metered consumption 
Unbilled un-metered consumption 
Apparent losses Unauthorised consumption 
Metering inaccuracy 
Real losses 
Leakages during transmission and distribution 
up to point of customer metering  
Leakages and overflows at Utility’s storage tank 
   (Source: NRW Manual issued by MoUD) 
According to NRW manual issued by MoUD,  NRW should be established 
through a Water Audit. Further, NRW reduction plan should involve network 
mapping, leakage mapping, establishment of metered areas, leakage detection 
and SCADA. Audit noticed that KWA has not so far conducted water audit to 
analyse the extent of NRW in the mission cities. As such the extent of NRW 
declared in the SLIP has no authenticity. Audit assessed59 the extent of NRW in 
five mission cities and found that NRW was much higher than that claimed by 
these ULBs.  
Extent of NRW before and after AMRUT in the five AMRUT cities is given in 
Table 4.8.  
 
 
 
 
59  Based on total quantity of water claimed to have supplied by KWA and e -Abacus data on 
consumption 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
48 
Table 4.8: Extent of NRW before and after AMRUT 
(In per cent) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the ULB Extent of NRW before 
AMRUT as per SLIP 
Extent of NRW after AMRUT 
assessed by Audit 
1.  Thrissur 30 28.85 60 
2.  Kozhikode 30 30.63 
3.  Kannur 32 51.93 
4.  Guruvayur 43 70.00 
5.  Palakkad 30 40.76 61 
(Source: Data furnished by ULBs and KWA) 
Audit estimated that the current level of NRW in five mission cities has resulted 
in a financial loss of ₹3.33 lakh62 per day (at the rate of ₹14.41 per kilo litre) to 
KWA. 
Government stated (October 2024) that Audit derived the NRW figures from 
the total production capacity of water treatment plant serving in the city.  As the 
water treatment facility supplies water to neighbouring panchayats also, the total 
production was not billed entirely to urban consumers. Hence, NRW calculation 
showed inflated figures. It was also stated that effective measures such as 
installation of flow meters for accurate measurement and billing and active leak 
detection were being implemented in a phased manner to enhance wat er 
management system.     
The reply is not acceptable as NRW figures were not calculated based on 
production capacity of the WTP, rather the calculation was based on the total 
quantity of water claimed to have been supplied to ULB by KWA and on the 
data collected from e-abacus billing system of KWA. Further, the calculation of 
NRW was confirmed by KWA.   
4.5 Execution of Sewerage facilities and septage management projects  
Sewage treatment (domestic waste water treatment or  municipal wastewater  
treatment) is a process used to remove contaminants from wastewater and 
convert it into an effluent that can be returned to the water cycle. According to 
CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment, about 80 per cent of 
water consumed is turned into wastewater. Reuse of treated sewage water 
decreases the demand from aquatic sources like rivers, ponds, lakes as well as 
groundwater sources and less consumption of raw water help s in conserving 
natural water resources. 
The AMRUT scheme was intended to provide basic services by creating 
infrastructure that had a direct impact on the real needs of people by providing 
sewerage connections to all households under sewerage and septage 
management component. This included, decentralised, networked underground 
sewerage system, rehabilitation of old sewerage system and treatment plants, 
recycling and reuse of treated water, faecal sludge management, mechanical and 
biological cleaning of sewers and septic tanks and recovery of operatio nal cost 
 
60  Old municipal area not considered 
61  As KWA did not furnish the quantity of water distributed through 1331 public taps, same 
was not considered. 
62   NRW of 23126 kilo litre per day x ₹14.41 per kilo litre (lowest rate charged by KWA)  

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
49 
in full. Status of projects proposed and executed by the mission cities are 
detailed in the Table 4.9. 
Table 4.9: ULB-wise details of sewerage/septage management projects 
implemented 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. 
ULB 
No. of projects 
sanctioned63 
Project cost64  
No. of projects 
completed 
Expenditure 
No. of projects 
ongoing 
Expenditure 
No. of projects  
cancelled 
Project cost 
Total 
Expenditure  
Percentage of 
expenditure 
Percentage of 
completion 
1.  Thiruvanan-
thapuram 
135 226.0 99 107.44 35 53.05 1 4.80 160.49 71 74 
2.  Kollam 5 31.91 Nil Nil 2 16.84 3 12.66 16.84 53 Nil 
3.  Kochi 4 35.18 1 14.66 1 8.96 2 29.06 23.62 67 50 
4.  Thrissur 4 8.36 Nil65 Nil 3 2.74 1 53.40 2.74 33 Nil 
5.  Kozhikode 4 21.53 Nil Nil 2 15.41 2 140.00 15.41 72 Nil 
6.  Kannur 3 49.06 1 26.36 2 0.80 Nil Nil 27.16 55 33 
7.  Alappuzha 5 4.99 Nil Nil 4 2.19 1 0.44 2.19 44 Nil 
8.  Guruvayur 2 0.50 Nil Nil 1 0.00 1 4.50 0.00 Nil Nil 
9.  Palakkad 3 3.86 Nil Nil 1 0.00 2 12.08 0.00 Nil Nil 
 Total 165 381.39 101 148.46 51 99.99 13 256.94 248.45 65 66 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Against 165 projects sanctioned, 101 projects with project cost of ₹182.48 crore 
were completed 66 and 51 projects with project cost of ₹198.91 crore were 
ongoing as of March 2024. An amount of ₹248.45 crore was incurred towards 
implementation of projects (March 2024). Against the SAAP approved project 
cost of ₹624.75 crore under this sector, 13 projects with project cost of ₹256.94 
crore (41.13 per cent) were cancelled. Audit noticed that percentage of projects 
completed under sewerage/septage sector was only 66 per cent , while the 
percentage of completion in sectors such as storm water drainage and urban 
transport were 93 and 84 per cent respectively.  This indicates that the thrust 
was given by ULBs for the implementation of projects under Storm water 
drainage and Urban Transport rather than Sewerage and Septage sector though 
sewerage/septage sector w as prioritised next to drinking water supply under 
AMRUT.  
Audit scrutinised 58 projects67 and noticed various deficiencies such as, taking 
up projects without ensuring the suitability of land, non-ensuring of hindrance 
free land, delay in completion, time and cost overrun etc.,  as detailed in  the 
succeeding paragraphs.   
4.5.1 Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation  
Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation has a sewage treatment plant with 
107 MLD capacity at Muttathara (Commissioned in 2013) and 37 per cent of 
households were covered by piped sewerage system, leaving a gap of network 
coverage to 63 per cent of households (1,55,486). Due to non -availability of 
 
63 Including cancelled projects 
64 Excluding project cost of cancelled projects 
65 One project in Thrissur completed in February 2024 but final bill yet to be settled.  
66 99 projects in Thiruvananthapuram  
67 Completed - 10, cancelled - 13 and ongoing projects - 35 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
50 
sewer network in more than fifty per cent  of the wards in the municipal 
corporation the inflow to the plant was only 44 MLD.  
In order to widen sewer networks to four blocks (L, K J and I) of the Corporation 
and rejuvenation of the existing networks, KWA had taken up 127 projects with 
project cost of ₹ 201.23 crore of which 32 projects were related to establishment 
of new sewer network and pump houses and 95 projects for rejuvenation of 
existing old and damaged lines. Eighty eight per cent  of projects for 
rejuvenation of existing sewer lines were completed and in respect of 
establishment of new sewer network, only 41 per cent  of w orks could be 
completed (March 2024). Establishment of new sewer network included 
construction of four pump houses, eight wells, four grit chambers and laying of 
13.07 km trunk main and pumping main of length 13.44 km.  Diagram depicting 
the sewerage networks taken up in Thiruvananthapuram municipal corporation 
is shown in Figure 4.1.  
Figure 4.1: Sewerage networks taken up in Thiruvananthapuram municipal 
corporation 
(Source: Based on the data furnished by KWA/ULB) 
Audit noticed that even after lapse of five years since commencement, the work 
remained incomplete and against envisaged length of 26.51  km sewer lines, 
length of 20.03  km could only be completed so far (March 2024) due to the 
reasons detailed in Table 4.10.  
 
 
 


Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
51 
Table 4.10: Status of implementation of new sewerage network in 
Thiruvananthapuram and bottlenecks identified 
Sl. 
No Details of work Remarks 
1.  Edathara pumping 
station to 
Muttathara STP 
• The laying of Pumping main in Karali Lane (1.608 km) connecting 
the final stretch to Muttathara STP could not be awarded (March 
2024) due to public protest  
• Pumping main from the final converging point i.e . Edathara 
Pumphouse was not connected to Muttathara STP due to non -
execution of NH crossing work resulting in a gap of 2.114 km. 
Audit noticed that contract  with M/s Mary Matha was terminated 
(April 2022) based on the request of the contractor without 
invoking risk and cost clause stating that NH crossing permission 
was obtained only in April 2021 and his contract period came to an 
end in March 2021. However, audi t noticed that NH crossing 
permission, subject to remittance of licence fee was communicated 
to KWA as early as in October 2020. Audit observed that by 
allowing the contractor to leave without executing the work, KWA 
did not act in the best of interest of the scheme.  Though the work 
was retendered after splitting into six works, none of the works 
except supply of pipes could be completed (March 2024). 
2.  Akkulam to 
Edathara pumping 
station 
• Non-acquisition of private land and non-obtaining permission from 
Irrigation department for crossing Amayizhanchan thodu, trunk 
main from Pulayanarkotta stilling chamber remains unconnected to 
Edathara pumping station.  
3.  Kulathoor to 
Karimanal pumping 
station 
• Trunk main from Arasumoodu stilling chamber was not connected 
to the Grit chamber at Karimanal  due to non -obtaining of 
permission from Irrigation department for laying pipe across the 
Thettiyar thodu. As such the Kulathoor pumping station remained 
unconnected to Karimanal pumping station. 
4.  Construction of 
Wells and Grit 
chambers 
• Pumping station at Edathara remained incomplete as the 
construction of grit chamber and well could not be completed due 
to the presence of hard and slushy soil at the site, which indicated 
deficiencies in the soil test conducted. 
• Construction of well at Karimanal pumping station remained 
incomplete with well plugging and finishing works pending. 
• Akkulam pumping station (95 per cent  complete) - Finishing 
works, electrification, etc remained incomplete. Grit Chamber at 
Akkulam remained incomplete with installation of mechanical 
screen pending. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
52 
Sl. 
No Details of work Remarks 
5.  Laying of sewer 
transmission main 
to Kulathoor  
• The work of laying trunk main intended to convey sewage from 
Kazhakoottam area to Kulathoor  pumping station could not be 
executed due to non -receipt of NHAI permission and hence 
transferred to AMRUT 2.0.  
(Source: Based on information collected from KWA/ULB) 
Connectivity of pumping/trunk mains at different stretches and laying trunk 
mains were not possible due to the above -mentioned reasons and as such the 
intended objective remained un-achieved (March 2024).   
Government stated (October 2024) that the delay in completing the project was 
due to factors such as technical challenges, contractor issues and local 
resistance.  It was also stated that a significant delay occurred in laying pumping 
main from Edathara to Muttathara due to  public protest in Karali area as 
residents demanded sewerage facilities in that area before allowing line 
installation.  A separate project report for providing sewer facilities to the Karali 
area has been prepared  and t he work would be expedited and completed.   
However, the fact remains that the STP at Muttathara remained underutilised 
with 59 per cent of its capacity, even after a lapse of 10 years of construction.   
4.5.1.1 Construction of five MLD Sewage Treatment Plant at Medical College, 
Thiruvanathapuram – Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 14.65 crore 
Construction of five MLD Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) inside Medical 
College campus at Thiruvananthapuram at a project cost of ₹19.16 crore was 
approved (SAAP 2016 -17 and 2017 -18) with the objective to establish a 
separate STP for Thiruvananthapuram Medica l college campus (four hospitals  
and quarters) and Chest Disease Hospital, Pulayanarkotta. The sewage 
generated from these premises (3.2 MLD 68) was being collected in two 
collection wells within the Medical College campus and then pumped into the 
main sewer line and discharged to the sewage treatment plant at Muttathara.  As 
damaged collection wells and breakdown of pumps resulted in overflowing  of 
the sewage to the nearby canal thereby contaminating the environment, it was 
proposed to construct a separate STP for the campus and seventh SHPSC 
meeting held in December 2016 approved the construction of the plant.  The 
work was commenced in March 2019 and was completed in January 2022 
incurring an expenditure of ₹14.65 crore.  
Audit noticed that the STP was not functioning properly (February 2024) as 
sufficient quantity of sewage was not reaching plant, and the outflow was let off 
to the nearby drain. Kerala State Pollution Control Board ( KSPCB), after 
conducting analysis of the samples at inlet, outlet and unauthorised discharge 
point to nearby drain, informed (December 2023) that there was presence of 
total coliform and faecal coliform in excess of the authorised quantity, which 
was contaminating the nearby drain. Executive Eng ineer, KWA had reported 
(November 2023) that as the sewage reaching the plant was below the required 
capacity, retention time of sewage was increased and the sewage became septic 
 
68  Estimated by KWA based on the quantity of water supplied to the campus (80 per cent of 
four MLD) 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
53 
resulting in malfunctioning of the plant. Further, non-generation of sludge in the 
plant was also an indication of the malfunctioning of the plant. During Joint 
Physical Verification Audit noticed that one of the Moving Bed Biofilm Reactor 
(MBBRs) with a capacity of 2.5 MLD capacity was idling as less than 1.5 MLD 
of sewage was reaching the STP. Audit noticed that super speciality block of 
Medical College Hospital and Chest Disease Hospital, Pulayanarkotta was not 
connected to the STP as gravity flow was no t possible from these premises. 
Audit observed that construction of STP at Medical College without ensuring 
the availability of minimum quantity of sewage to the plant resulted in failure 
of the plant and rendered the expenditure of ₹14.65 crore incurred t owards 
construction unfruitful.  
Government stated (October 2024) that rectification measures were carried out 
in the plant and effluent quality complied with the discharge standards. Reply 
is not tenable as the effluent quality analysis conducted by KSPCB in November 
2024 indicates that discharge parameters do not conform to the standards and 
there was presence of coliform and faecal coliform in excess quantities in the 
water discharged. Further, the Hospital has not renewed the consent to operate 
(January 2025).  
4.5.2 Kollam Municipal Corporation  
Kollam Corporation had no sewerage collection and treatment systems in the 
municipal area. As per the assessment made in the SLIP, Kollam Municipal 
Corporation required 508 km sewer network to connect 98,367 households in 
the entire municipal corporation area. Hence, ULB/KWA proposed projects for 
establishment of a Sewage Treatment Plant at Kureepuzha, three decentralized 
STPs69 and laying balance sewer networks and pumping stations laid under 
KSUDP.  
The proposed STP at Kureepuzha was having a capacity of 12 MLD and could 
be operated with a minimum sewage quantity of six MLD. The work was 
awarded to a contractor in April 2020 for an amount of ₹25.97 crore. However, 
the work was commenced only in October 2021 as there was dispute in the 
ownership of the land. As of January 2024, 92 per cent of the work of the STP 
was completed incurring expenditure of ₹16.84 crore. Pending works included 
completion of administrative building, installation of three electromechanical 
units and electrical work. However, the work remained stalled at 92 per cent 
during the last one year as sewer network to bring sewage from the households 
to the STP was not constructed (January 2025) and installation of machinery 
would leave it idle with risk of damage to the parts. Audit noticed that though 
line laying works in Zone III was in progress, it was six kilometres away and 
had no connectivity to the STP.  Further, the project for extension of sewer 
network laid under KSUDP for establishing connectivity to the STP could not 
be awarded (October 2024). As such, failure of the Corporation to establish 
network to bring sewage to the plant resulted in idling of the infrastructure 
created and non-achievement of objective even after expending ₹16.84 crore.    
Government stated (October 2024) that implementation of sewerage scheme for 
Kollam Municipal Corporation was taken up under KSUDP scheme. This 
 
69 Vasoorichira, Andamukkam, Karikuzhi Ela 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
54 
included projects for laying sewer networks in Zone I and construction of STP 
at Kureepuzha. As STP could not be constructed due to public protest, project 
for laying sewer lines was foreclosed in August 2020. Though the project was 
again taken up under AMRUT, there were no takers for the project for laying 
sewer networks. Difficult nature of work like high depth excavation, laying 
pipes along narrow roads with heavy vehicular traffic, loose nature of soil, high 
water table etc., were identified as reasons for non-participation. As AMRUT 
came to an end, SHPSC decided (August 2024) to shift the project to AMRUT 
2.0. However, Government’s reply is silent about any effective action taken to 
address the local challenges and arrange works  for establishment of sewe r 
network.  
4.5.3 Kochi Municipal Corporation 
At the beginning of the scheme Kochi Municipal Corporation had only three 
per cent coverage of sewerage network within its jurisdiction with the 4.5 MLD 
STP at Elamkulam commissioned in 1956. As part of the AMRUT scheme, 
three projects for implementation of decentralized sewerage treatment system 
with 50 km network (Division 15, 16 and 17) and a project for rejuvenation of 
existing STP at Elamkulam was approved in SAAP (2015-16 and 2016-17) at a 
total project cost of ₹64.24 crore. However, due to public pro test two projects 
for construction of decentralised STP were cancelled 70. The work for 
construction of decentralised sewerage treatment system in Division 16 with 
project cost of ₹18.66 crore, though awarded in December 2020 , only 45 per 
cent of the work completed (November 2024). The proposal for rejuvenation of 
4.5 MLD sewage treatment plant at Elamkulam at a project cost of ₹16.52 crore 
was turned down by sixth SLTC (February 2017) and suggested to construct a 
new STP having capacity of five MLD without adding any new network. 
Though construction of the treatment plant was  completed in May 2022, 
incurring expenditure of ₹12.06 crore,  plant could be commissioned only in 
October 2024 due to defects in the grit removal mechanism, blockage in MBBR, 
non-implementation of sludge treatment system , etc. However, due to non -
expansion of sewer network in Kochi Municipal Corporation, coverage remains 
the same even after completion of the project period and incurring expenditure 
of ₹23.62 crore.  
Government stated (April 2025) that a functional network was not established 
under AMRUT 1.0. It was proposed to establish network under AMRUT 2.0 
and Rebuild Kerala initiative. 
4.5.4 Thrissur Municipal Corporation  
Thrissur Municipal Corporation had no existing capacity to treat sewage or 
septage and the ULB had taken up three projects for construction of STP viz, (i) 
Construction of 2.5 MLD decentralised sewerage scheme for Thrissur 
municipal corporation (ii) Construction of 360 KLD Sewerage Treatment Plant 
at General Hospital and (iii) Construction of 100 KLD Septage Treatment Plant 
at Ramavarmapuram.   
Of the three projects, construction of 2.5 MLD plant at Vanchikulam could not 
be initiated as the land selected was wetland and permission for conversion of 
 
70  Implementation of decentralized sewerage treatment system for Division 15 and 17  

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
55 
wetland was not granted by Government. For the other two projects viz., 
Construction of 360 KLD Sewage Treatment Plant at General Hospital and 
Construction of 100 KLD Septage Treatment Plant at Ramavarmapuram, M/s 
Green Eco Water Systems, Hyderabad was selected (December 2019) for 
implementing the projects. As the contractor did not commence the work in 
respect of 360 KLD STP and did not execute agreement in respect of 100 KLD 
STP, the works were terminated at the risk and cost of the contractor and the 
firm was blacklisted (January 2022) by the Corporation. Audit noticed delay of 
one to two years in terminating the contracts by the Corporation and this resulted 
in delay in re -tendering the works. Though construction of STP at General 
Hospital was completed (February 2024), work relating to construction of STP 
at Ramavarmapuram could not be commenced due to public protest (December 
2024). As such, the objective of providing sewerage/septage treatment facility 
to the residents of the Corporation could not be achieved even after completion 
of the project period (December 2024).  
Government stated (April 2025) that availability of alternate land for the 
decentralised sewerage scheme was being examined. 
4.5.5 Kannur Municipal Corporation  
Kannur Municipal Corporation had taken up three projects viz., one for 
providing decentralised sewerage network with three MLD STP at 
Padannappalam to cover 14 wards of the Corporation (old Kannur municipal 
area), one MLD Septage treatment plant at Chelora and providing house 
connections in old Kannur area  at a total cost of ₹49.06 crore. As the land for 
the three MLD STP was not available in the corporation area, DPR was prepared 
(2018) for one MLD STP to cover two wards (1500 connections) of Kanathur 
and Thalikkavu and 100 KLD septage plant at Chelora. Construction of one 
MLD STP  at Padannappalam  was completed in December 2023 incurring 
₹26.36 crore. However, project for establishing household connections was 
awarded only in June 2024 and 870 domestic and 36 commercial connections 
could be provided (December 2024). Though work for construction of 100 KLD 
septage plant at Chelora was awarded in November 2019, only 60 per cent of 
the civil work was completed (December 2024). As such, coverage of sewer 
network remained at 1.4 per cent at the end of the project period (December 
2024). 
4.5.6 Alappuzha municipality  
Alappuzha municipality had no sewage treatment plant in the city and had no 
systematic and organized method to collect and treat waste from septic tanks. 
The city was facing many challenges in the initiatives to expand sewerage 
network, including narrow st reet width, flat terrain, and high -water table. 
Sewage generation from 39,894 households was estimated to be 22 MLD. As 
decentralized sewage/septage treatment system was considered viable solution 
for the city, four STP projects were approved in SAAP viz., construction of 50 
KLD STP at Thottumudi Colony (2017-18), construction of 15 KLD STP at 
Sadabdi Mandiram (2016 -17), construction of 240 KLD STP at General 
Hospital (2015-16) and purchase of two mobile septage treatment units (2017-
18) at a total cost of ₹6.79 crore. Municipality completed the construction of 
240 KLD STP at General Hospital in February 2024 , incurring expenditure of 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
56 
₹2.19 crore 71 and purchased one mobile septage treatment unit during 
November 2024. However, the project for construction of STP  at Sadabdi 
Mandiram was cancelled (March 2023) as a project for construction of an STP 
covering Shadabdi Mandiaram area was proposed in AMRUT 2.0. Further, 
construction of STP at Thottumudi Colony was cancelled (March 2024) from 
AMRUT and proposed in AMRUT 2.0,  as the works were unlikely to be 
commenced by 31 March 2024. As such, sewage treatment facility for the 
residents of the municipality was limited to one mobile septage treatment unit 
at the end of the project period (December 2024).  
4.5.7 Non-installation of Online Continuous Monitoring System 
(OCMS) in STPs  
Government of India directions (July 2020) stipulate real time monitoring of 
parameters of treated water by installing Online Continuous Monitoring System 
(OCMS) in the STP. However, Audit noticed that none of the estimates prepared 
by the mission cities for construction of Sewerage/Septage treatment plants 
included provision for installation of OCMS and in none of the STPs OCMS 
was installed.  
Government stated (April 2025) that OCMS was not included in the original 
scope of work and will be established using available resources/savings. 
4.6 Status of Universal Coverage of Sewerage and Septage Systems 
The AMRUT mission aimed to achieve universal coverage of water supply 
followed by universal coverage of sewerage and septage treatment. Mission 
cities had identified a gap of 4764 km of sewerage pipeline network and a gap 
of 300 MLD in treatment capacity. At the commencement of AMRUT Scheme, 
only Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi corporations had facility for treatment of 
sewage. Against the total quantity of 382.90 MLD72 sewage generated in these 
cities only 49 MLD ( 13 per cent) was getting treated. During AMRUT period 
only Kannur Municipal Corporation constructed STP (one MLD) for treatment 
of sewage generated in households while Thiruvananthapuram (5 MLD), 
Alappuzha (240 KLD), Thrissur (360 KLD) and Kozhikode (2 MLD) 
constructed STPs in hospitals. Thus, a gainst the gap of 300 MLD treatment 
capacity assessed, mission cities could register only 13.7 MLD increase up to 
March 2024.  Further, mission cities could enhance their sewage treatment 
capacity by only six per cent.  
4.6.1 Coverage of sewer network in mission cities 
Audit noticed that coverage of sewer network could not be improved in any of 
the mission cities except in Kannur as given in Appendix 4.1. However, Kannur 
Municipal Corporation could only establish sewerage network in 1.4 per cent 
of households (December 2024). Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation, 
which was treating 34 per cent of the sewage generated at the commencement 
of the AMRUT scheme could not expand its coverage of sewer network as 
KWA could not complete the work and establish connectivity with existing STP 
even after five years of commencement of the work.  Failure of KW A/Kollam 
Municipal Corporation to establish network to bring sewage to the STP 
 
71  Expenditure incurred upto March 2024  
72  80 per cent of quantity of water supplied by KWA  

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
57 
constructed at Kureepuzha resulted in idling of the STP constructed expending 
₹ 16.84 crore. Thus, at the closure of AMRUT scheme, the status of nine mission 
cities in Kerala regarding the sewerage system coverage was abysmal with six 
cities having no sewage collection and treatment systems for households and 
Kochi and Kannur Municipal corporations had a negligible coverage of three  
per cent and one per cent respectively. Thiruvananthapuram was the only city 
in the State which treated at least 34 per cent of the sewage generated. Further, 
only 0.13 per cent households were provided with sewerage connections under 
AMRUT. Against target of 100 per cent, overall achievement remained at 11.25 
per cent (December 2024).  
Recycling of water for beneficial purposes and reuse of wastewater was one of 
the components of sewerage sector and the benchmark was that at least 20 per 
cent of the wastewater generated in ULBs should be recycled and used for non-
potable uses as per the norms prescribed. However, none of the mission cities 
have established a system for recycling/reuse of treated water except usage of a 
portion of treated water for gardening. 
Recommendation 4: Government should ensure that distribution networks 
are also planned and executed along with the construction of Water and 
Sewage Treatment Plants, so as to avoid idling of such plants. 
4.7 Operation and Maintenance of treatment plants under Water 
Supply and Sewerage Sector 
The AMRUT guidelines stipulate d that projects proposed in SAAP should 
include Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for at least five years to be funded 
by way of levy of user charges or other revenue streams. However, for the 
purpose of calculation of the project cost, the O&M cost should be excluded and 
the State/ULBs should fund the O&M through an appropriate cost r ecovery 
mechanism to make them self -reliant and cost -effective. The guidelines also 
stipulated that the tender should include O&M for five years ba sed on user 
charges. However, Audit noticed that O&M agreement was not executed in 
respect of five water supply/sewerage projects even after completion of the 
projects. Details are given in Table 4.11. 
Table. 4.11: Details of O&M in water supply and Sewage treatment plants 
Sl. 
No. ULB 
Total number 
of projects 
which require 
O&M 
Number of 
projects in 
which O&M 
was included 
in the tender 
Number of 
projects in which 
O&M clause 
included in the 
agreement 
Number of 
projects 
completed 
No. of 
projects 
in DLP 
1.  Thiruvanan-
thapuram 
2 2 2 2 0 
2.  Kollam 2 2 2 1 0 
3.  Alappuzha 1 1 1 1 1 
4.  Kochi 1 1 1 1 1 
5.  Thrissur 2 Nil Nil 2 1 
6.  Guruvayur 1 Nil Nil 1 0 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
58 
Sl. 
No. ULB 
Total number 
of projects 
which require 
O&M 
Number of 
projects in 
which O&M 
was included 
in the tender 
Number of 
projects in which 
O&M clause 
included in the 
agreement 
Number of 
projects 
completed 
No. of 
projects 
in DLP 
7.  Palakkad 1 Nil Nil 1 0 
8.  Kozhikode 1 Nil Nil Nil 0 
9.  Kannur 3 Nil Nil 2 1 
 Total 14 6 6 11 4 
(Source: Data furnished by KWA/ULB) 
Even though SAAP insisted that O & M period should be calculated as five 
years outside the Defect Liability Period  (DLP), in two projects ULBs /KWA 
included O&M for five years including one -year DLP, which not only 
effectively shortened the O&M period by one year but also gave undue 
advantage to the contractor. Though the mission guidelines prohibited 
utilisation of project fund for meeting O&M cost and State/ULBs were to fund 
the O&M through an appropriate cost recovery mechanism, 
Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi Corporations met O&M charges of ₹7.21 crore 
from project fund. 
Regarding non-inclusion of O&M in the tender/agreement, ULBs replied that 
all projects had DLP s. After the DLP, ULB/KWA took over the O&M 
responsibilities and managed internally and hence O&M was not included in the 
contract. The reply is not tenable as the guidelines stipulates for inclusion of 
O&M for five years  based on user charges  in the tender itself so as to ensure  
proper maintenance by ULBs. 
4.7.1 Undue benefit to the contractor 
In order to augment drinking water supply to Thiruvananthapuram city, a 
project for construction of 75 MLD water treatment plant at Aruvikkara was 
approved (SAAP 2016 -17) with a project cost of ₹70 crore and Technical 
Sanction for the project was accorded (December 2017) for ₹ 68 crore. The 
work was tendered (lump sum contract) for ₹62.89 crore, which included O&M 
for five years. The work was awarded (June 2018) for ₹56.29 crore (10.5 per 
cent below the tendered PAC) and the construction was completed (Febr uary 
2021) incurring an expenditure of ₹57.01 crore. Audit noticed that of the 
tendered PAC of ₹62.89 crore, an amount of ₹6.17 crore was earmarked for 
operation and maintenance of the plant for a period of five years, after trial run 
and commissioning. As the accepted PAC was 10.5 per cent below the tendered 
PAC, the admissible amount to the contractor towards O&M cost for 
maintaining the WTP for five years was ₹5.52 crore. However, after awarding 
the work, KWA prepared payment schedule by sharing (pro-rata share) the cost 
of O&M among all the items of works to be executed. Inclusion of O&M along 
with items of work resulted in payment of O&M of ₹4.95 crore (one per cent 
i.e. ₹0.57 crore was retained from the bills towards maintenance) along with all 
part payments. Audit observed that payment of the O&M charges, to be paid in 
five years after successful commissioning of the project, along with part bills 
resulted in undue advantage to the contractor.   
Recommendation 5: Government should ensure that KWA/ULBs undertake 
adequate measures for operation and maintenance of the assets created to 
yield benefits on a long-term sustainable basis. 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
59 
4.8 Execution of Projects under Urban Transport  
Reducing pollution by switching to public transport or constructing facilities for 
non-motorised transport was one of the objectives of AMRUT. ULBs 
implemented various projects like construction of walkways, foot overbridges 
(FoB), bicycle tracks, multi -level car parking (MLCP), etc., under urban 
transport component. Fund allocation and facilities created are shown in 
Appendix 4.2. Out of 147 projects taken up, 107 projects were completed  and 
21 projects were ongoing and 19 projects were cancelled (March 2024).  Against 
₹189.46 crore allocated towards the projects, ₹127.75 crore was expended. 
Construction of 65 footpaths, 2 3 foot overbridges/subway and three MLCPs 
were the major activities carried out under the component. Reduced expenditure 
was on account of non -execution of MLCP projects in two 73 mission cities, 
abandoning walkway and cycle track in Kochi and foot paths in different 
mission cities due to lack of permission. 
Adherence to the guidelines of Indian Road Congress in the construction of 
footpaths and walkways were verified by Audit and observations in this regard 
are summarised below: 
4.8.1 Construction and maintenance of foot paths  
Pedestrian footpaths are defined as any area primarily used by ‘all’ pedestrians. 
They can be adjacent to roadways, or away from the road. Footpaths should be 
regarded as a transportation system which is connected and continuous, just like 
roadways and rai lways. To be effective, the sidewalks should be provided on 
both sides of the road and above the level of the carriageway separated by kerbs. 
However, Audit noticed instances where foot paths were constructed without 
clearing obstacles such as electric pos t, telephone post, transformers, 
constructing walkway at the same level of carriage way, no t constructing 
disabled friendly footpaths etc., as detailed in succeeding paragraphs: 
4.8.1.1 Construction of foot paths without clearing the obstacles 
The Indian Road Congress (IRC) guidelines for Pedestrian Facilities, 2012 
stipulates that the walking zone should be clear from all obstructions – both 
horizontally and vertically (width -1.8 m x height-2.2 m) and no utility ducts, 
utility poles, electric, water or telecom boxes, trees, signage or any kind of 
obstruction should be placed within the walking zone. However, while 
constructing the footpath, mission cities ignored this requirement and footpaths 
were constructed without removing these obstacles or  without ensuring 
additional spaces in these areas to facilitate the pedestrians. During Joint 
Physical Verification (JPV) of 19 foot paths  in seven ULBs 74, it was noticed 
that electric posts, stay wires, telecom boxes, trees, traffic signages, etc., posed 
serious threat to the pedestrians in nine footpaths (47 per cent) in five ULBs75, 
as shown in Figure 4.2.  
 
73  Thiruvananthapuram and Kollam  
74  Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Kochi and Thrissur corporations and Alappuzha, Guruvayur, 
Palakkad municipalities 
75 Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam  and Kochi corporations and Alappuzha  and Palakkad 
municipalities 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
60 
  
 
Audit also noticed instances of construction of foot path without kerbs and 
guard rail by two ULBs 76 (five footpaths). Details are given in Appendix 4.3. 
Instances of encroachment of footpath by shop keepers and construction of 
waste management facilities in the foot paths by ULBs themselves  were also 
noticed during JPV, as shown in Figure 4.3, Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5. 
 
76  Kochi Corporation and Alappuzha Municipality 
Figure 4.2: Sign board, flag post and tree in AR Camp-Memu Shed footpath at Kollam Corporation 
 
Figure 4.3: Foot path in the same height and vehicle parked throughout the foot path 
at Market Road in Kollam Corporation 
Figure 4.5: Aerobic compost unit in 
footpath constructed at Thathampally 
ward in Alappuzha 
Figure 4.4: Melamuri Kalmandapam 
footpath, Palakkad encroached by shop 
owners 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
61 
Non-construction of kerb and guard rail has resulted in utilisation of foot path 
for parking vehicles by public , defeating the purpose for which it was 
constructed. 
Government stated (April 2025) that ULBs were directed to clear the obstacles. 
4.8.1.2 Non-construction of disabled friendly footpaths 
According to IRC guidelines footpaths should be at least 1800 mm wide to 
accommodate wheelchair users and persons with vision impairments assisted 
by a sighted person or guide dog. If existing paths are less than 1800 mm wide, 
provision of passing places, 1800 mm wide and 2500 mm long, should be made 
at a reasonable frequency, depending on intensity of use. During JPV, Audit 
noticed that in seven cases (37 per cent of the test checked cases) in four ULBs77 
the minimum width of 1800 mm was not ensured. Further, tactile pavement to 
facilitate visually impaired personnel was absent in 10 foot paths (53 per cent) 
in four ULBs78.   
Principal Secretary, Local Self Government Department (LSGD) during exit 
conference (September 2024) stated that GoK at present insists on the 
construction of disabled friendly footpaths. 
4.8.1.3 Unfruitful expenditure in abandoning construction 
Kochi Corporation entrusted (January 2018) M/s Kochi Metro Rail Limited  
(KMRL), the work of construction of Sarovaram walkway along with cycle 
track across Chilavannur lake (adjacent to Elamkulam Metro Station in 
Sahodaran Ayyappan Road to Subash Chandra Bose Road) at a project cost of 
₹9.31 crore under Urban Transport component.  As the construction was in the 
vicinity of Chilavannur lake, permission of Kerala Coastal Zone Management  
Authority (KCZMA) was mandatory. However, before obtaining the clearance 
from KCZMA, KMRL commenced the  construction (January 2019) and the 
project was halted due to public protest. As KCZMA denied (January 2020) 
permission for the construction, the project was abandoned after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹0.95 crore. SHPSC in July 2022 cancelled the project from the 
AMRUT scheme and directed Kochi Municipal Corporation to bear the 
expenditure. As no further progress was achieved in this matter, the amount met 
from AMRUT remained unfruitful.  
Government stated (April 2025) that KMRL has been directed to refund the 
amount. 
4.8.2 Foot overbridges  
One of the primary purposes of pedestrian foot overbridges is to facilitate and 
encourage walking whilst ensuring safety for all road users. These bridges 
should be designed by considering the pedestrian flows and movements and 
encourage people to consider walking as an accepted mode of transport. As per 
the SLIPs, locations requiring foot overbridges for pedestrians to cross the roads 
were identified by only two mission cities 79. Five80 out of nine mission cities 
 
77  Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, and Kochi Corporations and Alappuzha municipality  
78  Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, and Kochi Corporations and Alappuzha municipality  
79  Kozhikode Corporation and Palakkad Municipality 
80  Kollam, Thrissur, Kozhikode Corporations and Alappuzha and Palakkad municipalities 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
62 
utilised mission funds for constructing 23 foot overbridges/subways during the 
mission period, which were scrutinised by Audit. Audit observations in this 
regard are summarised in subsequent paragraphs: 
4.8.2.1 Non-adherence to IRC guidelines 
According to the IRC guidelines for pedestrian facilities, ramp/lift is mandatory 
in foot overbridges to facilitate the use of FOBs by persons with disabilities. 
However, 89 per cent (eight out of nine) FOBs81 constructed by four 82 ULBs 
did not have this facility. Audit conducted a JPV along with ULB officials to 
ascertain the number of persons using the FOBs to cross the roads and the details 
are given in the Table 4.12. 
Table 4.12: Results of survey regarding use of foot overbridge 
Sl. 
No. 
Name and location 
of the foot 
overbridge 
Date of 
verification 
Number of 
persons crossed 
the road in one 
hour 
Number of persons 
used foot overbridge 
to cross the roads in 
one hour 
Percentage 
of 
pedestrians 
using FoB 
1. North Stand, 
Thrissur 
22 June 2024 73 27 37 
2. Victoria College 
junction, Palakkad 
11 July 2023 432 22 5 
3. St. Joseph High 
School junction, 
Kollam 
20 July 2023 393 123 31 
4. High School 
junction, Kollam 
21 July 2023 413 77 19 
5 New Bus stand, 
Kozhikode 
28 December 
2023 
1257 1257 100 
(Source: Joint Physical Verification conducted by Audit along with ULB officials)  
Except in FOB constructed by Kozhikode Corporation, majority of pedestrians 
did not opt for the foot overbridges in other locations. Audit noticed that main 
reason for usage of FOB in Kozhikode bus stand was availability of 
lift/escalators and placing barricades to prevent the pedestrian crossing through 
road as compared to other FoBs where these facilities were not provided. 
 
81  13 Foot overbridges at Alappuzha were not considered as they were used for crossing the 
canal. 
82  Kollam, Thrissur, Kozhikode Corporations and Palakkad municipality 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
63 
4.8.2.2 Irregular construction of foot overbridges obstructing footpaths 
As part of the scheme three foot overbridges were constructed in Kollam (i) St. 
Joseph junction, (ii) Chemmamukku and (iii) High school junction. During JPV, 
Audit noticed that all the three-foot overbridges were constructed blocking the 
existing footpath on both sides of the road forcing the pedestrians to use the 
carriageway. Images of foot overbridges are shown as Figure 4.7 and Figure 
4.8. 
Figure 4.7: Foot overbridge constructed on 
footpath at Chemmamukku in Kollam  
Figure 4.8: Foot overbridge constructed on 
footpath at High school junction, Kollam  
Kollam Corporation replied that locations of FOBs were selected considering 
the presence of educational and other public and private institutions and because 
of limitation of space , maximum available space was used for construction. 
Reply is not tenable as  construction of FOBs obstructing foot paths not only 
Best practice noticed  
Kozhikode municipal corporation constructed a FOB at New Bus Stand, 
Kozhikode and all the facilities including lift and escalator were provided. Audit 
observed (December 2023) that the number of persons using the FOB in one 
hour to cross the road was 1257 people (273 by Lift, 144 by Stairs and 840 by 
Escalator). Nobody could cross the road without using the FOB as there were 
barricades to prevent the pedestrian crossing through the road. The FOB was 
particularly successful because of the right location and provision of lift and 
escalator. 
 
 
Figure 4.6: Foot overbridge at New Bus Stand, Kozhikode constructed by Kozhikode municipal 
corporation 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
64 
violated IRC guidelines but also forced the pedestrians using foot paths to use 
carriageway exposing them to the risk of road accidents. 
4.9 Execution of Stormwater drains  
Construction and maintenance of storm water drains was expected to reduce and 
ultimately eliminate flooding in cities, thereby making cities resilient.  ULBs 
were to identify flood prone areas and propose projects to run off rainwater to 
avoid flooding. The incidence of mixing grey water with rainwater was also to 
be eliminated as part of the scheme. Nine mission cities  had taken  up 565 
projects with estimated cost of ₹ 357.19 crore and executed 499 projects by 
incurring an expenditure of ₹288.85 crore as detailed in Table 4.13. 
Table 4.13: Projects sanctioned and executed under stormwater drains 
(₹ in crore) 
ULB 
No. of 
projects 
sanctioned83 
Project 
Cost 
No. of 
projects 
completed 
No. of 
projects 
on going 
No. of 
projects 
cancelled 
Total 
Expend
-iture 
Percentage 
of projects 
completed 
Percentage 
of 
expenditure 
Thiruvanan-
thapuram 124 51.99 106 11 7 37.85 91 73 
Kollam 21 28.59 20 0 1 20.86 100 73 
Kochi 49 53.86 48 1 0 45.43 98 84 
Thrissur 76 29.93 67 0 9 28.94 100 97 
Kozhikode 16 49.93 9 7 0 31.32 56 63 
Kannur 12 39.35 11 1 0 36.41 92 93 
Alappuzha 168 54.14 146 14 8 44.63 91 82 
Guruvayur 12 13.85 11 1 0 13.18 92 95 
Palakkad 87 35.55 81 2 4 30.23 98 85 
Total 565 357.19 499 37 29 288.85 93 81 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Audit selected 128 projects 84 for detailed scrutiny and audit observations are 
detailed in the following paragraphs: 
4.9.1  Lack of connectivity leading to flooding  
Thiruvananthapuram Municipal Corporation constructed (February 2020) 0.40 
km stormwater drain incurring expenditure of ₹55.19 lakh at Plavarcode -
Ulloorkonam-Andoorpoika road in Chanthavila ward. As per the original 
proposal the drain was to be connected to a primary drain (Thettyar thodu) to 
run off the rainwater in that area. However, due to the presence of private land 
the alignment was changed and the drain was connected to an existing 
secondary drain which did not have connectivity to the primary drain. Changed 
drain connectivity during execution and absence of connectivity to Thettyar 
thodu led to flooding in that area.  As such , the construction of the drain failed 
to achieve its objective.  
The Corporation replied (January 2024) that while preparing DER of the 
project, the ward councillor had confirmed the availability of land for 
connecting the new drain to Thettyar thodu.  However, the land owner refused 
 
83  Including cancelled projects 
84  64 completed, 35 ongoing and 29 cancelled projects 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
65 
to give consent to pass the drain through his land during execution. Reply 
indicates that availability of hindrance free land was not ensured before 
formulation and execution of the project.  
4.9.2 Utilization of scheme funds for desilting and other routine 
activities in Kochi Corporation 
According to the scheme guidelines, implementation of projects for 
construction and maintenance of storm water drains should be with the objective 
to reduce and ultimately eliminate flooding in cities, thereby making cities 
resilient. As the focus of the mission was creation of urban infrastructure that 
has a direct link to provision of better services to people, mission guidelines 
prohibited utilisation of scheme funds towards regular Operation and 
Maintenance activities. Under the Stormwater drain compone nt, Kochi 
Corporation undertook 49 works with project cost of ₹53.86 crore, of which 48 
works were completed incurring expenditure of ₹34.15 crore. Audit test 
checked nine works with project cost of ₹28.18 crore 85 and observed the 
following: 
• Though, Mission Director, AMRUT had explicitly objected to the use 
of AMRUT funds for routine activities, Kochi Corporation utilised 
AMRUT funds for  routine maintenance activities . Audit noticed that 
except two works 86 with project cost of ₹1.44 crore other projects 
primarily focused on routine activities viz., desilting/removal of water 
weeds, sidewall strengthening, fencing, etc. Of ₹21.47 crore spent on 
nine projects, ₹20.22 crore was spent on maintenance activities, which 
include an amount of ₹4.67 crore spent exclusively for desilting. 
Mission funds were spent for regular maintenance activities, despite 
spending own funds amounting to ₹32.75 crore and ₹27.93 crore 
respectively during 2019-20 and 2020-21 for the repair and maintenance 
of drains. 
• Though five of the nine works with project cost of ₹ 24.26 crore were 
taken up to prevent choking/sewage mixing and flooding, Audit during 
JPV (October 2023) noticed that despite spending ₹18.06 crore, flooding 
and sewage mixing continued to exist in these drains.  
 
85  Eight works have been completed incurring expenditure of ₹10.19 crore and one work still 
ongoing 
86 Construction of drain along St.Vincent road and construction of drain along Kaloor 
Kathrukadavu road 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
66 
  
• Though the project ‘Construction of RCC drain, laying covering slab to 
drains of Stadium Link Road’ with a project cost of ₹1.98 crore was 
taken up to prevent flooding/water logging in the Stadium link road, the 
project failed to achieve its objective due to failure of the Corporation in 
evicting encroachments/acquiring private land to ensure connectivity of 
the existing secondary drain to primary drain.   
• Flood mitigation report published (2021) by the Kerala Irrigation 
Department also revealed that underlying issues contributing to flooding 
in Corporation area remained unresolved. Audit noticed that the issue of 
persistent discharge of untreated sewage int o the canals, identified in 
both the 2016 SCMS Water Institute report and the 2021 Irrigation 
Department report, was not effectively addressed, highlight ing the 
failure to tackle the root causes of flooding.   
• Though Corporation had identified a gap of 110 km in coverage of drain 
network at the beginning of the scheme, only 1.38 km drain length was 
constructed, despite spending ₹45.43 crore under this sector.  
• Kochi Corporation undertook these projects without conducting a 
comprehensive scientific study to identify reasons for flooding and gaps 
in drainage infrastructure. Despite the requirement to prepare SLIPs 
based on accurate and data -driven assessments, the Corporation did not 
possess a drainage master plan or a drainage map of its primary and 
secondary drainage networks. In the absence of drainage master plan, the 
DPRs were prepared for addressing maintenance requirements including 
desilting, which was a regular activity undertaken by Kochi Corporation.  
Figure 4.9: Sewerage pipes opened to 
Adimuri Thodu 
Figure 4.10: Water pipe and other utilities 
in Adimuri Thodu 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
67 
  
Thus, Kochi Municipal Corporation’s approach to mitigate urban flooding 
under the AMRUT scheme was flawed due to the absence of a scientific study 
and proper planning. The preparation of SLIPs without a drainage map led to 
the implementation of routine, non -permissible works that failed to provide a 
permanent solution to the city’s flooding problems. This irregular use of 
AMRUT funds for routine activities, in addition to spending from own funds 
for such purposes, not only violated the scheme guidelines but als o failed to 
address the root causes of flooding, despite  spending ₹45.43 crore mission 
funds.  
Government stated (April 2025) that Kochi Corporation primarily focused on 
canal rejuvenation works and extension of existing drains. It was also stated that 
the Corporation has not yet commenced the preparation of a drainage master 
plan.  The reply substantiates the Audit finding. 
Recommendation 6: Government should conduct a comprehensive study to 
analyse reasons for frequent flooding in Kochi Corporation and initiate 
appropriate rectification measures. 
4.9.3 Failure in arranging land leading to non-achievement of objectives  
Kozhikode Municipal Corporation proposed (SAAP 2017 -18) construction of 
‘YMRC-Millath Colony drain’ with project cost of ₹10.67 crore which include 
reconstruction of existing secondary drain (YMRC -Millath Colony drain) that 
connects to a primary drain (NKKR Canal) and side wall construction of the 
primary drain. The primary objective of construction of ‘YMRC-Millath 
Colony drain’ (1000 m) was to increase the width of the drain from 40 cm to 
1.5m to mitigate flooding on both sides of the drain.   DPR prepare d for the 
project mentioned that the existing secondary drain passed through a private 
land and the land should be acquired to execute the work. However, without 
acquiring the private land, Corporation awarded the work in September 2018 
and the drain was c onstructed up to the private land. As a result, end portion 
(200 m) of existing drain which connects the secondary drain to the primary 
drain could not be reconstructed. During site verification, Audit found that the 
width of the drain reduced from 1.5 m to 40 cm on reaching the private land as 
shown in Figure 4.13 and was obstructing the free flow of storm water and 
Figure 4.11: Lack of vertical clearance in 
Rameswaram canal 
Figure 4.12: Canal filled with water weeds 
in TP canal 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
68 
resulted in flooding in the surrounding area. As such the objective of mitigating 
flooding remains un-achieved.   
 
 
Figure 4.13: New drain constructed and the end portion of drain passing through 
private land 
4.9.4 Status of achievement of Service Level Benchmarks  
According to the Service Level Benchmarks issued by MoHUA, the coverage 
of stormwater drain network shall be 100 per cent (length equal to that of road 
network), incidence of sewage mixing with stormwater shall be zero and 
incidence of water logging shall be zero. Audit noticed that though the mission 
cities had identified flooding and choking/sewage mixing points, except 
Palakkad municipality other ULBs did not address the gap effectively. As such 
choking/sewage mixing continued to exist even after spendin g substantial 
amount from the scheme. Details are given in Table 4.14. 
Table 4.14: Status of coverage of stormwater drain network and choking/ 
sewage mixing points  
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
ULB 
Coverage of storm water drain network Water logging points due to 
sewage mixing/choking 
Gap identified 
in SLIP (pre 
AMRUT) (km) 
Length of 
new drain 
constructed 
(km) 
Gap remaining 
unaddressed 
(Post 
AMRUT) 
(km) 
Percentage 
of Gap 
covered 
under 
AMRUT 
Number 
of points 
identified 
in SLIP 
Number 
of points 
addressed 
Number of 
points 
remained 
unaddresse
d 
1.  Thiruvanan
-thapuram 88.30 31.55 56.75 35.73 12 9 3 
2.  Kollam  386 15.43 370.57 3.99 16 3 13 
3.  Kochi 110 1.38 108.62 1.25 31 12 19 
4.  Thrissur 9 6.42 2.58 71.33 21 15 6 
5.  Kozhikode 100 4.98 95.02 4.98 8 4 4 
6.  Kannur 503 0 503 0 11 2 9 
7.  Alappuzha 22 4.95 17.05 22.50 18 17 1 
8.  Guruvayur 100 9.69 90.31 9.69 14 12 2 
9.  Palakkad 163 8.5 154.5 5.21 17 17 0 
 Total 1481.30 82.9 1398.40 5.59 148 91 57 
 (Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Regarding coverage of  stormwater drain network, only Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation could considerably improve the status with 35.7 per cent increase 
in drain length. However, 94 per cent of the gap in total drain network coverage 


Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
69 
identified by these mission cities remained unaddressed even after eight years 
of commencement of the scheme (March 2024).  
4.10 Execution of projects under Green space and parks  
Population growth and high densities in urban areas have an adverse impact on 
natural and environmental resources. As part of ensuring greening in urban 
areas, MoUD fixed a benchmark of 10 -12 sqm per person for achievement by 
each Urban Local Body of the Country.  The AMRUT scheme has green space 
and parks as one of the components to enhance the amenity value of cities by 
creating and upgrading green space, parks and recreation centres, especially for 
children, senior citizen and differently abled.  
As per the scheme guidelines each mission city could spend a maximum amount 
of 2.5 per cent of the SAAP approved amount for establishment of green space 
and parks under this component. ULB -wise details of parks 
constructed/renovated are given in the Table 4.15. 
Table 4.15: ULB-wise details of projects under green space and parks 
(₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No. ULB 
No. of 
projects 
sanctioned87 
Project 
cost 
No. of 
projects 
completed 
No. of 
projects 
on going 
No. of 
projects 
cancelled 
Total 
expen-
diture 
Percentage 
of projects 
completed88 
1.  Thiruvanan
-thapuram 5 6.52 4 1 0 5.30 80 
2.  Kollam 11 3.41 7 0 4 3.10 100 
3.  Kochi 6 5.8 5 0 1 3.93 100 
4.  Thrissur 11 4.81 10 1 0 4.49 91 
5.  Kozhikode 8 4.92 8 0 0 3.82 100 
6.  Kannur 8 4.8 7 0 1 4.45 100 
7.  Alappuzha 10 4.38 8 0 2 3.41 100 
8.  Guruvayur 6 6.47 5 1 0 3.82 83 
9.  Palakkad 22 7.38 18 3 1 5.84 86 
 Total  87 48.49 72 6 9 38.16 92 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
Mission cities had allocated ₹48.49 crore and utilised ₹38.16 crore (79 per cent) 
towards construction89 of 30 new parks and renovation 90 of 36 existing parks. 
Audit test checked 27 parks of which 13 were newly constructed. The  audit 
observations are detailed in the subsequent paragraphs: 
  
 
87  Including cancelled projects 
88  Excluding cancelled projects 
89  Kozhikode Corporation did not construct any new park 
90  Alappuzha Municipality did not renovate any park 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
70 
4.10.1 Parks not opened to public after construction/renovation 
Out of the 27 parks test checked, nine parks in five ULBs91 were not opened to 
public, after completion of the construction/renovation by spending ₹4.93 crore. 
During JPV, Audit noticed that five parks in three ULBs92, which were not open 
to public, were in dilapidated condition and surroundings were covered with 
overgrown weeds. No specific reasons were furnished by the mission cities for 
keeping the parks closed. Details are given in Appendix 4.4. Though guidelines 
stipulated for construction of child friendly facilities, 14 parks in five ULBs 93 
either did not install playing equipment for children or did not maintain the 
equipment installed. Images of two parks are shown in Figure 4.14 and Figure 
4.15. 
  
Though the guidelines insisted on establishing a system for maintenance with 
local residents’ participation, mission cities did not make any efforts in this 
regard or make own arrangements towards upkeep and maintenance of the parks 
except for two parks in Kochi Corporation and one in Alappuzha Municipality.  
Principal Secretary, LSGD during exit conference (September 2024) directed 
SMMU to follow up with respective ULBs and to take immediate action to open 
the parks to the public. Regarding non -maintenance of parks by the mission 
cities, Principal Secretary assured to issue directions to follow the good practice 
done by other mission cities. 
 
 
91  Kollam, Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations and Alappuzha and Palakkad Municipalities  
92  Kozhikode Corporation and Alappuzha and Palakkad Municipalities  
93  Kollam, Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations and Alappuzha and Palakkad Municipalities  
Figure 4.15: Nila Nagar park, Palakkad 
Figure 4.14: St. John’s park, Kochi 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
71 
4.10.2 Unfruitful expenditure on installation of musical fountain in 
Nehru Park 
Thrissur Municipal Corporation ha d proposed in SAAP 2017-18 a project for  
rejuvenation of Nehru Park at a cost of  ₹0.80 crore.  This included installation 
of a musical fountain at an estimate of ₹40.44 lakh. The work of installation of 
musical fountain was awarded (July 2019) to M/s  Aquatic Engineering 
for ₹32.23 lakh. The work was completed in November 2020 and an amount of 
₹27.92 lakh was paid to the contractor. However, the musical fountain became 
non-functional after one month. Even though several requests were made by the 
Corporation, the contractor did not rectify the complaint. Corporation Council 
decided (June 2022) to terminate the contract at risk and cost of the contractor 
and forfeit the SD of ₹ 1,61,200 and an amount of  ₹10.11 lakh due to the 
contractor towards the final bill was forfeited and credited to the account of the 
Corporation (March 2023). Audit noticed that, th ough the contract was 
terminated, the Corporation had not entrusted any agency with rectification of 
the defects in the musical fountain (December 2024). As such, the expenditure 
of ₹27.92 lakh incurred  towards construction of the fountain remained 
unfruitful.  
4.10.3 Unfruitful expenditure in construction of park 
Kochi Corporation entrusted (January 2018) construction of a new park at 
Vyttila on the banks of Chilavannur lake, which was approved in the SAAP 
2017-18, to M/s Kochi Metro Rail Limited (KMRL) at a project cost of ₹1.27 
crore. As the construction of the park was on the banks of Chilavannur lake, 
permission of Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority was mandatory. 
However, before obtaining the clearance from KCZMA, KMRL commenced 
the construction (November 2018) and the project was halted due to public 
Best practices - two parks in Kochi and one park in Alappuzha 
In Kochi, residents’ association took responsibility for upkeep of the parks at 
Mythri Nagar and at Kudumbi Colony and Alappuzha municipality made 
arrangements for upkeep of the park at Valiyachudukadu. 
  
 
Figure 4.16: Mythri Nagar Park in Kochi 
maintained by Mythri Nagar residents 
 
 
Figure 4.17: Kudumbi Colony Park 
maintained by Jawahar Nagar residents  
 
 


Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
72 
protest and non -obtaining permission from KCZMA. Hence, the project was 
abandoned (March 2021) after incurring an expenditure of ₹28.22 lakh. Audit 
observed that execution of the project without getting mandatory clearance from 
Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority resulted in unfruitful expenditure 
of ₹28.22 lakh.  
Corporation replied (January 2025) that they will carry out the park project, and 
the expended amount from AMRUT will be adjusted in ULB share.  However, 
the reply is silent about obtaining clearance from KCZMA. 
Recommendation 7: Government should design a definite plan to complete all 
incomplete projects and ensure that benefits of the completed projects are 
provided to the public without delay. 
Recommendation 8: Government should design a definite plan and strive 
towards achievement of Service Level Benchmarks especially in Water Supply 
and Sewerage Sectors. 
 

Chapter IV – Project Implementation 
 
35 
 
 
  
CHAPTER V 
PROJECT MONITORING 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
36 
 
 

 
73 
CHAPTER V 
PROJECT MONITORING 
 
5.1 Monitoring of Projects  
Paragraph 14 of AMRUT guidelines stipulate that the Mission was to be 
monitored in real time at the State and the ULB level. Moreover, information 
and data should be shared with citizens in the public domain and third -party 
monitoring and review encouraged. Monitoring envisaged in the Mission 
guidelines are detailed in the Chart 5.1. 
Chart 5.1: Monitoring activities at various levels 
(Source: The Mission Guidelines) 
Audit noticed deficiencies in the monitoring of the Mission at various levels as 
detailed below. 
5.1.1 Shortages in convening of State level High Powered Steering 
Committee (SHPSC) 
SHPSC was the body which steer ed the Mission Programme in its entirety by 
identifying the gaps in infrastructure based on SLBs, preparing SAAPs as 
prescribed in the guidelines, approving the projects after technical appraisal by 
Laxity in convening the SHPSC meetings resulted in poor monitoring and 
delayed execution of projects.  Lack of coordination between various 
departments of the State Government resulted in delay in obtaining 
NOCs/permissions from departments, abandoning of projects after 
preparations of DPRs, etc.  Even though 13 Quarterly Progress Reports 
(QPRs) were submitted by Independent Review and Monitoring Agency 
during 2019 -23, only three QPRs were discussed by the SHPSC and no 
reports were discussed by SLTC. SLTC di d not convene meetings for 29 
months during the period from September 2018 to January 2021 and the 
technical parameters of the 38 projects approved during the period were not 
subjected to mandatory appraisal by the SLTC. 
 
State Level 
The SHPSC/SLTC would undertake detailed 
scrutiny of the projects at the proposal stage 
and monitoring during the execution 
District Level 
District Level Review and Monitoring 
Committee (DLRMC) will monitor and review 
the implementation of AMRUT projects 
ULB Level 
ULBs were to closely monitor the projects 
through their elected representatives and ULB 
bodies and through citizens’ feedback 
To submit the Quarterly Progress Reports to 
the ULB and the SLTC , based on which the 
corrective measures were to be adopted 
Independent 
Review and 
Monitoring Agency 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
74 
the SLTC, planning the fund flow and monitoring the implementation of the 
Mission. 
Being such an important body to plan, implement and monitor the projects, 
Audit noticed that though six to seven meetings were conducted by the SHPSC 
in the planning phase annually, only two to four meetings were conducted 
during the implementation phase of the Mission. The number of SHPSC 
meetings convened in the project period is detailed in the Chart 5.2  shown 
below: 
 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
The SHPSC was convened only eight times during the period 2019 -2021 in 
which the execution of majority of the projects took place. The laxity in 
convening the SHPSC meetings resulted in poor monitoring of the projects , 
which caused delay in execution and non-completion of projects even after nine 
years of commencement of the scheme (December 2024).  
Government stated (April 2025) that SHPSC  was convened based on the 
requirement and request of the mission cities. The reply is not tenable as the 
SHPSC was entrusted with monitoring the progress of implementation of 
scheme, monitor outcome and O&M arrangements of projects sanctioned and 
completed, bring about inter -organisational co -ordination, etc, and therefore , 
convening SHPSC periodically was an essential requirement. 
5.1.1.1 Non-engagement of Project Development and Management Consultants 
To overcome the constrains faced by States/ULBs in timely implementation of 
the projects, the mission guidelines envisaged engag ement of the services of 
external entities called Project Development and Management Consultants 
(PDMCs). The scope of PDMC under the mission was divided into four broad 
components namely Planning, Design, Supervision and Project Management. 
Though Expression of interest was invited (December 2015) at the Mission level 
and five agencies were shortlisted, the decision of SHPSC to engage KWA for 
water supply schemes led to reduction in the scope of activities of PDMC and 
consequent change in the contract amount. As change in scope after selection 
necessitated re -tendering, seventh SHPSC (December 2016) decided to 
unbundle the functions of the PDMC and decided to entrust project 
development, quality assurance and project monitoring to different agencies as 
detailed in Paragraph 2.1.2.5. Audit noticed that absence of an agency to 
identify the bottlenecks, undertake mid -course correction and monitor the 
scheme implementation has delayed the implementation of the scheme in the 
State. 
5.1.1.2 Lack of coordination between various departments  
Even though the SHPSC consisted of Chief Secretary as the Chairman and 
Principal Secretaries of various departments as members, the committee did not 
1
6 7 6
2
4
2 3 3
0
5
10
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Number of meetings Year
Chart 5.2: Number of SHPSC meetings 

Chapter V – Project Monitoring 
75 
ensure effective coordination among various departments of the State 
Government which resulted in delay in executing tripartite agreement between 
KWA and ULBs, delay in obtaining NOCs/permissions from various 
departments, abandoning of projects after approval in SAAP etc., as mentioned 
in Paragraph 2.1.3, which led to tardy implementation of projects.  
5.1.2 State Level Technical Committee (SLTC)  
According to the guidelines, the SLTC was to carry out the technical and 
financial appraisal of the DPR and approve the technical parameters such as 
scope, objectives and final deliverables of the projects. For this purpose, the 
SLTC should take into consideration manuals, guidelines and advisories issued 
by MoUD in the relevant sector and ensure compliance in the DPR. The SLTC 
should also approve the tenders, analyse the project fund request and take 
corrective action on the reports of IRMA. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in monitoring of projects by SLTC. 
➢ SLTC in its first meeting held on 28  January 2016, decided that the 
Technical Sanctions of the projects proposed under AMRUT may be issued 
by the implementing agencies as per the prevailing rules of the respective 
departments. The third SHPSC held on 04 July 2016 decided to freeze the 
decision of the  first SLTC and decided to constitute a Technical Expert 
Committee (TEC) with a set of independent sectoral experts for according 
Technical Sanction for AMRUT projects. Subsequently, in the fifth  SLTC 
held on 24 January 2017, it was decided to constitute technical committees 
for two regions viz. North and South. This decision was again modified by 
the tenth SHPSC held on 14 July 2017 which permitted the implementing 
agencies to grant technical sanction for the projects except in the case of 
sewerage projects undertaken other than by KWA. Audit observed that this 
decision diluted the terms of the mission guidelines, as estimates in DPRs 
technically appraised by SLTC were modified during execution requiring 
revision of Technical Sanction.    
➢ On review of Agenda and minutes of SLTC meetings convened during the 
project period, Audit noticed that since no SLTC meeting was convened for 
29 months during the period from September 2018 to January 2021, the 
technical parameters of the 38 projects were not subjected to mandatory 
appraisal by the SLTC. Details of new projects and projects with revised 
estimates which were not technically appraised by SLTC are shown in 
Appendix 5.1.  
The number of SLTC meetings convened during project period is detailed in the 
Chart 5.3. 
 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
0
4
12
3
0 0
3 4 3
0
5
10
15
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Number of meetings 
Year
Chart 5.3: Number of SLTC meetings 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
76 
➢ According to the guidelines, it was the duty of SLTC to ensure compliance 
of the DPRs  to the manuals, guidelines and advisories issued by MoUD 
and approve the DPRs. Even though guidelines stipulated the SLTC to 
ensure compliance of the DPR to the checklists issued by MoUD for 
Sewerage and Septage Treatment, Water Supply and Storm Water 
Drainage components, it was observed that the SLTC did not ensure 
availability of land, clearance from other departments/agencies etc ., as 
prescribed in the checklist which resulted in delay in implementation and 
abandoning of the projects as mentioned in Paragraph 2.1.3.  
Government stated (April 2025) that SLTC was convened based on the 
requirement and request of the mission cities.  The reply is not tenable as Audit 
noticed that in the absence of periodical meetings, 38 projects were not subjected 
to mandatory technical appraisal by SLTC. 
5.1.3 Delay in convening AMRUT Core Committee 
The Mission Director, AMRUT, instructed (December 2015) the Secretaries of  
the mission cities to set up a Core Committee with Deputy Mayor/ Vice 
Chairman of the ULB as Chairman, Secretary/Additional Secretary as convenor 
and Executive Engineer/Ass istant Engineer, Urban Infrastructure Expert, etc ., 
as members to identify and overcome the bottlenecks and to ensure proper 
utilization of Government funds for AMRUT projects. A close monitoring of 
the timelines and progress of the projects was also  the duty of the Core 
Committee. 
Audit noticed that though the Core Committee was constituted in December 
2015 by Kochi Corporation, the committee met only six times during the period 
2015-16 to 2020-21. Thereafter the committee never met. 
In Palakkad Municipality though Core Committee was constituted in December 
2015, the initial meeting of the committee was convened only in January 2021. 
Hence, the very purpose of constituting the Core Committee and its involvement 
in the initial stages in  identification and prioritization of projects for inclusion 
in SLIPs and scrutiny of DPRs did not take place resulting in approval of 
defective DPRs, delay in completion of projects, cancellation of various 
projects, etc. 
5.1.4 Independent Review and Monitoring Agency (IRMA)  
Paragraph 14.1 (vii) of the guidelines stipulated for quarterly external 
monitoring of the projects by an Independent Review and Monitoring Agency 
(IRMA). The IRMA was to submit the quarterly report to the ULB/parastatal 
and the SLTC. The comments of the ULB and th e SLTC were to be examined 
by the SHPSC and action taken.  
The MoHUA had selected ( April 2018) M/s Water and Power Consultancy 
Services (WAPCOS) Gurugram, Haryana as IRMA for Kerala and agreement 
was executed with the agency by the SMMU in January 2019 for three years 
which was extended up to February 2023. The agency had to review the projects 
in their pre- construction, during construction and post- construction phases and 
offer observations through quarterly progress reports. Based on the report of the 
agency, SMMU would submit an Action Taken Report to the IRMA . The 
agency had submitted 13 Quarterly Progress Reports during their tenure and an 
amount of ₹1.54 crore was paid to them.   

Chapter V – Project Monitoring 
77 
Audit noticed that since SMMU had not engaged the IRMA in time the activities 
relating to the review of projects in their pre -construction period were not 
carried out.  
SHPSC was responsible for looking into the complaints of poor quality, lack of 
supervision and other violations and monitoring the quality of work and reports 
of appraisal by third party assessors and take action at their end. SHPSC was 
also required to examine the comments of ULB/SLTC on IRMA reports and 
take appropriate action. Even though 13 Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) 
were submitted by IRMA during 2019-23, only three94 QPRs were discussed by 
the SHPSC and corrective actions suggested. None of the IRMA reports were 
considered by SLTC though guidelines entrusted SLTC with the responsibility 
to take corrective action on IRMA reports. Audit observed that lapse on the part 
of SHPSC and SLTC in discussing and taking corrective measures to the 
observations in IRMA reports defeated the very objective of engaging IRMA.  
Recommendation 9: Government should ensure that committees and bodies 
supervise and monitor the implementation of projects in accordance with the 
terms of the responsibilities entrusted under AMRUT. 
              (PREETHI ABRAHAM) 
Thiruvananthapuram,     Accountant General 
The 01 December 2025       (Audit I), Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi,   (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The 03 December 2025 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
94  First QPR in August 2019, Second QPR in December 2019 and third QPR in Marc h 2020 


A 
83 
 
APPENDICES  
APPENDICES 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
84 
 

Appendices 
79 
Appendix 1.1 
Statement showing number of approved projects and number of projects 
selected by Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7, Page 4) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Approved projects 
(as of March 2023) Completed projects 
Projects selected by audit for detailed 
scrutiny 
Completed 
projects 
Partially 
completed, 
abandoned/ 
cancelled projects 
Number Amount Number Amount Number Amount Number Amount 
1.  Thiruvananth
apuram 
278 366.89 244 243.99 35 174.28 33 122.20 
2.  Kollam 68 329.30 46 67.81 19 41.72 21 167.88 
3.  Kochi 99 274.35 85 131.38 28 74.78 14 157.78 
4.  Thrissur 148 344.56 102 129.98 21 38.40 46 223.62 
5.  Kozhikode 52 421.29 46 142.14 13 53.80 06 284.73 
6.  Kannur  40 232.76 24 128.11 09 45.05 15 103.89 
7.  Alappuzha 220 227.14 179 136.54 33 98.52 38 88.18 
8.  Guruvayur 35 233.06 20 90.22 08 63.99 14 142.17 
9.  Palakkad 155 228.53 130 192.58 24 62.36 25 36.88 
 Total  1095 2657.88 876 1262.75 190 652.90 212 1327.33 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
80 
Appendix 2.1 
Details of SAAP wise duration and funds 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.2, Page 8) 
(₹ in crore) 
Details of 
SAAP 
Duration 
of SAAP 
Water 
Supply Sewerage 
Storm 
Water 
Drainage 
Urban 
Transport 
Green 
Space 
and  
Parks 
Total 
amount 
SAAP I 2015-16 235.76 171.79 105.79 61.19 13.46 587.99 
SAAP II 2016-17 354.81 216.65 120.35 88.79 15.46 796.06 
SAAP III 2017-20 476.35 236.31 156.15 85.14 19.69 973.64 
Total 1066.92 624.75 382.29 235.12 48.61 2357.69 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
 
  

Appendices 
81 
Appendix 2.2 
Details of projects abandoned/cancelled/delayed due to absence of 
hindrance free land 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.3.3, Page 16) 
 
a) Abandoned projects  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Name of 
agency who 
prepared DPR 
Project 
cost 
DPR 
cost 
(DPR 
cost 
paid) 
Remarks 
 Sewerage 
1.  
Decentralized STP at 
Vasoorichira, Karikuzhi 
and Andamukkam 
(Kollam) 
Ram Biologicals 1266 20.39 
(16.31) 
The project was abandoned due to 
public protest. 
2.  
Construction of 2.5 
MLD STP at Thrissur  
(Thrissur) 
Ram Biologicals 5340 
 
120.15 
(60.07) 
As the proposed site was wetland, the 
proposal for conversion of the land 
was rejected by  Government. There 
was no mention in the DPR regarding 
the non-suitability of the site. 
3.  
STPs at Kothi and 
Avikkal  
(Kozhikode) 
Ram Biologicals 14000 
 
170.09 
(85.04) 
The land identified required clearances 
from Kerala Coastal Zone 
Management Authority, Pollution 
Control Board and PWD. Clearances 
were not obtained. Meanwhile public 
protest arose and work was abandoned. 
4.  
Construction of STP at 
Guruvayur municipality 
(Guruvayur)  
Ram Biologicals 450 
 
9.90 
(5.63) 
As the proposed site was wetland, 
Agriculture department rejected the 
application for conversion of the land. 
There was no mention in the DPR 
regarding the non -suitability of the 
site. 
5.  
Construction of 270 
KLD sewerage 
treatment plant at 
District Hospital 
(Palakkad) 
Ram Biologicals 288 
 
5.18 
(@) 
As the site mentioned in the DPR  was 
not in conformity with the actual site 
condition, resulting in extensive 
revision of the estimate and contractor 
discontinued the work.  
6.  
800 KLD Sewage 
treatment plant and 
sewerage network at 
Sundaram Colony 
(Palakkad) 
 
Ram Biologicals 920 
 
16.56 
(@) 
As per letter dated 31 May 2021 of the 
KSPCB addressed to the Secretary, 
Palakkad Municipality, the proposed 
site shall have 30m distance from the 
nearest residential area and other 
buildings on all sides. This condition 
could not be satisfied. 
 Total  22264 342.27 
(167.05)  
 Strom Water Drain 
7.  
Storm water drain-Rajiv 
Gandhi Colony 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
KITCO 15 @ Connectivity of drain not planned.  
8.  
Storm water drain-
Balan Nagar Road 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
KITCO 80 
 
@ Connectivity of drain not planned. 
9.  
Storm water drain-
Pozhikkara Near Boat 
Club 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
KITCO 21 @ Connectivity of drain not planned. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
82 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Name of 
agency who 
prepared DPR 
Project 
cost 
DPR 
cost 
(DPR 
cost 
paid) 
Remarks 
10.  
Storm water drain-
Vayal Varambu Road 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
KITCO 29 @ Connectivity of drain not planned. 
11.  
Chunkam-West fort and 
‘Kuttanellur 
Government College- 
Shiva Temple 
(Thrissur)  
KITCO 120 @ 
The drain construction works were 
cancelled due to lack of permission 
from PWD (PWD had proposed road 
widening).  
12.  
Construction of two 
new drains (Chirakkad- 
Aiswarya Nagar drain)  
(Palakkad) 
Institute for 
Societal 
Advancement 
(ISA) 
51 @ 
Project could not be carried out as the 
stretch of 100m of proposed drain was 
passing through a private land. 
13.  
Mythri Nagar- Haritha 
Nagar - KSRTC Link 
Road drain 
(Palakkad) 
Institute for 
Societal 
Advancement 
(ISA) 
26 @ 
Project could not be carried out as the 
small portion of the proposed drain 
was passing through a private land. 
14.  
Construction work of 
Parakunnam- Narikuthi 
drain 
(Palakkad)  
Institute for 
Societal 
Advancement 
(ISA) 
50 @ 
The work could not be taken up due to 
lack of permission from railway 
authorities.  Permission required from 
Railway for construction on the 
proposed site was not envisaged in the 
DPR. 
 Total  392 @  
 Urban Transport 
15.  
Construction of foot 
overbridge at 
Kadappakada (Kollam) 
KITCO 70 0.98 
(0.49) 
The proposed location did not have 
enough space for constructing FOB as 
designed in the DPR, hence project 
dropped. 
16.  
Construction of foot 
overbridge at SN 
College Junction  
(Kollam)  
KITCO 77 0.90 
(0.45) 
The proposed site was very close (7m) 
to railway track and hence permission 
was denied by Railway.  
17.  
Nirmala college to 
Aranattukara,  
(Thrissur) 
KITCO 100 @ 
All the projects were cancelled as the 
permission was denied by PWD due to 
proposed road widening. 
18.  Powerhouse-Viyyur Jail 
front Road (Thrissur) KITCO 55 @ 
19.  
Viyyur Companippadi-
Viyyur Bridge 
(Thrissur)  
KITCO 20 @ 
20.  
Pattalakkinar -
Alumveettuvazhi 
(Thrissur)   
KITCO 58 @ 
21.  Ollur Church-Convent 
Road (Thrissur) KITCO 25 @ Non-availability of required width to 
proposed footpath. 
22.  
Construction of 
Riverside walkway 
along Kalpathy 
riverbank Part I  
(Palakkad) 
KITCO 55 0.34 
(@) 
As private land has to  be acquired for 
the construction of the walkway (210 
m) the project was abandoned. DPR 
did not envisage acquisition of private 
land. 
 Total  460 2.22 
(0.94)  

Appendices 
83 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Name of 
agency who 
prepared DPR 
Project 
cost 
DPR 
cost 
(DPR 
cost 
paid) 
Remarks 
 Green space and parks 
23.  Construction of Thanni 
park (Kollam) KITCO 17 0.22 
(0.11) Construction of both the parks were 
cancelled as the land identified was 
puramboke (in the possession of 
PWD) and PWD denied permission. 24.  
Construction of 
Thoppilkadav park  
(Kollam) 
KITCO 56 0.72 
(0.36) 
25.  
Construction of 
Thirumullavaram 
ozhukkuthod  (Kollam) 
KITCO 57 0.74 
(0.37) 
The proposed location was the 
seashore and location was found 
unsuitable for construction of park. 
26.  A R Menon Park 
(Palakkad)  Structures India 41 @ 
As proposed site did not get clearance 
from Archaeological Survey of India  
(ASI), Council decided to cancel the 
project. DPR did not envisage 
obtaining mandatory permissions from 
ASI. 
27.  
Development of new 
park at Payyambalam 
near cremation centre 
(Kannur) 
Sureshbabu and 
Associates 68 0.97 
(@) 
Project was cancelled due to non -
receipt of permission from KCZMA. 
DPR did not envisage obtaining 
mandatory permissions from KCZMA. 
 Total  239 2.65 
(0.84)  
 Grand total  23355 347.14 
(168.83)  
@Figures not available 
 
b) Projects delayed 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Name of 
agency who 
prepared 
DPR 
Project 
cost 
DPR cost  
(DPR cost 
paid) 
Expen-
diture Remarks 
 Sewerage 
1.  
Construction of 
100 KLD STP at 
Ramavarmapuram 
(Thrissur) 
 
Ram 
Biologicals 350 6.97 
(3.93) Nil 
Delay in getting permission from 
Irrigation department for the 
construction of a bridge   across the 
canal to bring septage carrying 
vehicles, led to delay in 
construction of STP for the last six 
years. DPR did not envisage 
obtaining mandatory permissions 
from Irrigation department. 
2.  100 KLD STP at 
Chelora (Kannur) 
Ram 
Biologicals 420 6.20 
(4.96) 80 
The site identified for the project 
was a dumping yard and the DPR  
did not mention about the disposal 
of legacy waste available there. 
Consequently, the contractor 
backed out from the work due to 
change in scope and cost 
escalation.  
Another DPR was prepared with 
change in technology as the 
technology already suggested was 
not found suitable by the technical 
committee on 17 October 2022. 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
84 
3.  
100 KLD septage 
treatment plant, 
Yakkara 
(Palakkad Medical 
College campus) 
(Palakkad) 
Ram 
Biologicals 386 5.40 
(@) 
 
Nil 
After the award of the work, due to 
protest by parent teacher 
association and other litigations, 
site was changed. This delayed the 
commencement of work and the 
contractor withdrew from the work. 
 Total  1156 18.57 
(8.89) 80  
 Storm water drain 
4.  
Drain construction 
work in 
Sakthikulangara 
(Kollam)  
KITCO 71 0.92 
@ 70 
Work partially completed as the 
balance land belongs to private 
party. 
5.  
Construction of 
drains in 
Vadakkevila-
Eravipuram area 
(Kollam) 
KITCO 178 2.32 
(1.16) 169 
Work was partially completed as 
the site condition varied from the 
DPR prepared. 
6.  
YMRC- Millath 
Colony drain 
(Kozhikode)  
Institute for 
Societal 
Advancement 
1067 7.25 
(6.52) 525 
As per the DPR, coconut piling was 
proposed for construction of 10 m 
(pile length). But during execution 
the requirement of coconut piling 
was assessed for 27,543 m. 
Consequently, work was partially 
completed by reducing the scope 
(from two km to 700 m) and restrict 
the work, within administrative 
sanction. 
 Total  1316 10.49 
(7.68) 764  
 Urban Transport 
7.  
Yard at stadium 
bus terminal  
(Palakkad) 
KITCO 185 1.85 
(@) 12 
Defects and lack of proper vision in 
the preparation of DPR resulted in 
change in structural design from 
isolated footings to pile foundation.  
8.  
Providing 
pedestrian 
network and 
bicycle tracks on 
both sides of 
college road (100 
ft road) 
(Palakkad) 
KITCO 730 7.38 
(@) 572  
Non preparation of design, 
drawings and estimates resulted in 
delay in execution of projects and 
preparation of detailed estimates by 
the LSGD Engineering wing of 
ULB. 
9.  
Victoria College 
to Anjuvilakku 
pedestrian 
network  
(Palakkad) 
KITCO 248 2.53 
(@) 180 
10.  
Melamuri-
Kalmandapam 
Foot path 
(Palakkad) 
KITCO 260 2.77 
(@) 96 Estimate was prepared without 
adhering to MoRTH specifications.  
 Total  1423 14.53 
(@) 860  
 Grand total  3895 43.59 
(16.57) 1704  
@cost not available 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs)  

Appendices 
85 
Appendix 2.3 
DPRs prepared by M/s Ram Biologicals under sewerage/septage component  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.3.3, Page 16) 
 
a) Cancelled projects  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) Project cost 
DPR cost  
(DPR cost 
paid) 
Remarks 
1.  
Decentralized STP 
at Vasoorichira, 
Karikuzhi and 
Andamukkam 
(Kollam) 
1266 20.39 
(16.31) The project was abandoned due to public protest. 
2.  
Construction of 2.5 
MLD STP at 
Thrissur  
(Thrissur) 
5340 
 
120.15 
(60.07) 
As the proposed site was wetland, the proposal for 
conversion of the land was  rejected by  
Government. There was no mention in the DPR 
regarding the non-suitability of the site. 
3.  
STPs at Kothi and 
Avikkal  
(Kozhikode) 
14000 
 
170.09 
(85.04) 
The land identified required clearances from 
Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority, 
Pollution Control Board and PWD. Clearances 
were not obtained. Meanwhile public protest arose 
and work was abandoned. 
4.  
Construction of 
STP at Guruvayur 
municipality 
(Guruvayur)  
450 
 
9.90 
(5.63) 
As the proposed site was wetland, Agriculture 
department rejected the application for conversion 
of the land. There was no mention in the DPR 
regarding the non-suitability of the site. 
5.  
Construction of 270 
KLD sewerage 
treatment plant at 
District Hospital 
(Palakkad) 
288 
 
5.18 
(@) 
As the site mentioned in the DPR  was not in 
conformity with the actual site condition, resulting 
in extensive revision of the estimate and contractor 
discontinued the work.  
6.  
800 KLD Sewage 
treatment plant & 
sewerage network 
at Sundaram 
Colony 
(Palakkad) 
 
920 
 
16.56 
(@) 
As per letter dated 31  May 2021 of the KSPCB 
addressed to the Secretary, Palakkad Municipality, 
the proposed site shall have 30m distance from the 
nearest residential area and other buildings on all 
sides. This condition could not be satisfied. 
 Total 22264 342.27 
(167.05)  
@Cost not available 
 
b) Delayed projects  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Project 
cost 
DPR cost  
(DPR cost 
paid) 
Expen-
diture Remarks 
7.  
Construction of 100 
KLD STP at 
Ramavarmapuram 
(Thrissur) 
 
350 6.97 
(3.93) Nil 
Delay in getting permission from Irrigation 
department for the construction of a bridge   
across the canal to bring septage carrying 
vehicles, led to delay in construction of 
STP for the last six years. DPR did not 
envisage obtaining mandatory permissions 
from Irrigation department. 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
86 
8.  100 KLD STP at 
Chelora (Kannur) 420 6.20 
(4.96) 80 
The site identified for the project was a 
dumping yard and the DPR did not mention 
the disposal of legacy waste available there. 
Consequently, the contractor backed out 
from the work due to change in scope and 
cost escalation.  
Another DPR was prepared with change in 
technology as the technology already 
suggested was not found suitable by the 
technical committee on 17 October 2022. 
9.  
100 KLD septage 
treatment plant, 
Yakkara (Palakkad 
Medical College 
campus) 
(Palakkad) 
386 5.40 
(@) 
 
Nil 
After the award of the work, due to protest 
by parent teacher association  and other 
litigations, site was changed. This delayed 
the commencement of work and the 
contractor withdrew from the work. 
 Total 1156 18.57 
(8.89) 80  
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
87 
Appendix 2.4 
DPRs prepared by KITCO under storm water drain, urban transport and green 
space and parks components  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.3.3, Page 17) 
 
a) Cancelled projects  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Project 
cost 
DPR cost 
(DPR cost 
paid) 
Remarks 
 Strom Water Drain 
1.  
Storm water drain-Rajiv Gandhi 
Colony 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
15 @ Connectivity of drain not planned.  
2.  
Storm water drain-Balan Nagar 
Road 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
80 
 
@ Connectivity of drain not planned.  
3.  
Storm water drain-Pozhikkara 
Near Boat Club 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
21 @ Connectivity of drain not planned.  
4.  
Storm water drain-Vayal Varambu 
Road 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
29 @ Connectivity of drain not planned.  
5.  
Chunkam-West fort and 
‘Kuttanellur Government College- 
Shiva Temple 
(Thrissur)  
120 @ 
The drain construction works were 
cancelled due to lack of permission from 
PWD (PWD had proposed road widening).  
 Total 265 @  
 Urban Transport 
6.  Construction of foot overbridge at 
Kadappakada (Kollam) 70 0.98 
(0.49) 
The proposed location did not have enough 
space for constructing FOB as designed in 
the DPR, hence project dropped. 
7.  Construction foot overbridge at 
SN College Junction  (Kollam)  77 0.90 
(0.45) 
The proposed site was very close (7  m) to 
railway track and hence permission was 
denied by Railway.  
8.  Nirmala college to Aranattukara,  
(Thrissur) 100 @ 
All the projects were cancelled as the 
permission was denied by PWD due to 
proposed road widening. 
9.  Powerhouse-Viyyur Jail front 
Road (Thrissur) 55 @ 
10.  Viyyur Companippadi-Viyyur 
Bridge (Thrissur)  20 @ 
11.  Pattalakkinar-Alumveettuvazhi 
(Thrissur)   58 @ 
12.  Ollur Church-Convent Road 
(Thrissur) 25 @ Non-availability of required width to 
proposed footpath. 
13.  
Construction of Riverside 
walkway along Kalpathy 
riverbank Part I  
(Palakkad) 
55 0.34 
(@) 
As private land has to be acquired for the 
construction of the walkway (210 m) the 
project was abandoned. DPR did not 
envisage acquisition of private land. 
 Total 460 2.22 
(0.94)  
 Green space and parks 
14.  Construction of Thanni park 
(Kollam) 17 0.22 
(0.11) 
Construction of both the parks were 
cancelled as the land identified was 
puramboke (in the possession of PWD) and 
PWD denied permission. 15.  Construction of Thoppilkadav 
park  (Kollam) 56 0.72 
(0.36) 

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT in Kerala’ 
 
88 
16.  Construction of Thirumullavaram 
ozhukkuthod  (Kollam) 57 0.74 
(0.37) 
The proposed location was the seashore and 
location was found unsuitable for 
construction of park. 
 Total 130 1.68 
(0.84)  
 Grand total 855 3.90 
(1.78)  
@ Cost not available 
 
b) Delayed projects  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project 
(Name of ULB) 
Project 
cost 
DPR cost  
(DPR cost 
paid) 
Expen-
diture Remarks 
 Storm water drain 
17.  Drain construction work in 
Sakthikulangara (Kollam)  71 0.92 
(@) 70 
Work partially completed as the 
balance land belongs to private 
party. 
18.  
Construction of drains in 
Vadakkevila-Eravipuram area 
(Kollam) 
178 2.32 
(1.16) 169 
Work was partially completed as 
the site condition varied from the 
DPR prepared.  
 Total 249 3.24 
(1.16) 239  
 Urban Transport 
19.  Yard at stadium bus terminal  
(Palakkad) 185 1.85 
(@) 12 
Defects and lack of proper vis ion 
in the preparation of DPR resulted 
in change in structural design 
from isolated footings to pile 
foundation.  
20.  
Providing pedestrian network and 
bicycle tracks on both sides of 
college road (100 ft road) 
(Palakkad) 
730 7.38 
(@) 572 
 
Non preparation of design, 
drawings and estimates resulted in 
delay in execution of projects and 
preparation of detailed estimates 
by the LSGD Engineering wing of 
ULB. 
21.  Victoria College to Anjuvilakku 
pedestrian network  (Palakkad) 248 2.53 
(@) 180 
22.  
Melamuri-Kalmandapam Foot 
path 
(Palakkad) 
260 2.77 
(@) 96 
Estimate was prepared without 
adhering to MoRTH 
specifications.  
 Total 1423 14.53 
(@) 860  
 Grand total 1672 17.77 
(1.16) 1099  
@Cost not available 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
 
  

Appendices 
89 
Appendix 3.1 
Delay in release of funds by Government of Kerala  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.1, Page 20) 
(₹ in crore) 
Fund released by GoI Fund released by GoK 
Delay 
between95 
Delay in 
release 
of funds 
(In 
days) 
Date of 
release Amount 
Date of 
order by 
GoK 
Central 
share 
State 
share 
Date of receipt of 
funds in SMMU 
A B C D E F G H (F-A) 
16 
December 
2015 57.60 26 July 
2016 17.20 10.32 29 August 2016 
23 December 
2015 and  
31 March 
2017 
465 
28 
September 
2016 
77.28 27 March 
2017 116.62 70.61 31 March 2017 
05 October 
2016 and  
25 July 2017 294 
  07 July 
2017 1.07 0 25 July 2017 
Total 134.88  134.89 80.93    
28 February 
2018 
97.36 28 March 
2018 58.53 32.48 31 March 2018 
30 March 
2018 and  
23 August 
2018 
147 
28 August 
2019 200.23 10 July 
2018 38.83 25.89 23 August 2018 27 September 
2019 and  
08 November 
2019 43 0 15 July 
2019 95.24 0 30 July 2019 
0 14 October 
2019 99.50 116.84 08 November 
2019 
Total 297.59  292.10 175.21    
18 
September 
2020 200.93 20 October 
2020 199.63 119.78 03 December 
2020 
18 October 
2020 and  
03 December 
2020 
47 
09 February 
2021 
200.92 
06 
September 
2021 
199.62 119.77 05 October 2021 
11 March 
2021 and  
05 October 
2021 
209 
21 
December 
2021 
119.62 10 March 
2022 119.62 71.77 28 June 2022 
20 January 
2022 and 28 
June 2022 
160 
28 March 
2024 207.23 03 June 
2024 207.23 124.34 25 June 2024 
27 April 2024 
and  
25 June 2024 
60 
Total 728.70  726.10 435.66    
Grand total 1161.17  1153.0996 691.8    
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU) 
 
 
95 State Government should release central assistance along with State share within seven days (this was 
changed to one month vide directions dated 28 February 2018) 
96 Difference of ₹8.09 crore was adjusted by GoI towards interest accrued on funds already released.  

90 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
90 
 
Appendix 4.1 
Status of sewerage network  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.6.1, Page 56) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
Total 
number 
of 
househol
ds as per 
SLIP 
New 
Connect
ions in 
AMRUT 
Total 
sewer
age 
conne
ctions 
Cover
age 
(Per 
cent) 
Gap in 
sewer 
network 
identified 
(Km) 
Length 
of sewer 
network 
laid 
(Km) 
Gap in 
sewage 
treatme
nt 
capacity 
(MLD) 
Capacity 
of STPs 
before 
AMRUT 
Capacity 
of STPs 
planned 
(MLD) 
STPs 
executed 
(MLD) 
STP 
capacity 
after 
AMRUT 
(MLD) 
Waste 
water 
generated 
(MLD) 
1 Thiruvanan
thapuram 2,46,803 213 91530 37.09 1694 0 5 107 5 5* 107 130 
2 Kollam 98,367 0 0 0 442 0 50 0 12 0 0 11.90 
3 Kochi 1,51,412 0 4500 2.97 810 5 96.5 4.5 5 5 5 169.25 
4 Thrissur 78,336 0 0 0 75 0 10 0 2.96 0.36* 0 5.95** 
5 Kozhikode 1,23,776 0 0 0 550 0 61.5 0 16.1 2.1* 0 31.86 
6 Kannur 61,883 870 870 1.40 580.6 11.52 32 0 1.1 1 1 9.70 
7 Alappuzha 39,894 0 0 0 370 0 22 0 0.3 0.24* 0 8.98 
8 Guruvayur 17,297 0 75 0.43 242.8 0 8.2 0 0.1 0 097 1.04 
9 Palakkad 44,000 0 0 0 ---98 0 15 0 1.17 0 0 14.22 
 Total  8,61,768 1083 96975 11.25 4764.40 16.52 300.2 111.5 43.73 13.70 113.00 382.90 
*STPs constructed in various Hospitals 
** In zones where water is supplied by KWA 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
 
 
97 Household connections are not provided though 3MLD STP commissioned in 2021 (not implemented under AMRUT) 
98 Not mentioned in SLIP 

Appendices 
91 
 
Appendix 4.2 
Funds allocated and facilities created under urban transport   
(Reference: Paragraph 4.8, Page 59) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Number 
of 
projects 
taken 
up 
Project 
cost 
 
Expendi
ture 
 
Number of facilities created 
Footpaths/ 
walkway 
FoBs, 
Subway MLCP Others* 
1.  Thiruvanan
thapuram 
4 30.53 6.70 1 0 1 0 
2.  Kollam 13 11 6.17 4 3 0 1 
3.  Alappuzha 35 9.21 5.73 14 13# 0 0 
4.  Kochi 21 21.88 14.98 19 0 0 0 
5.  Thrissur 32 21.01 18.25 16 199 0 3 
6.  Guruvayur 3 36.57 30.66 0 0 2 0 
7.  Palakkad 32 31.16 22.25 8 5 0 11 
8.  Kozhikode 1 11.35 10.86 0 1 0 0 
9.  Kannur 6 16.75 12.15 3 0 0 1 
 Total 147 189.46 127.75 65 23 3 16 
*Parking area, bus shelters, bus terminals, cycle track, etc 
#FOBs constructed at Alappuzha were of the nature of pedestrian bridges across the canals  
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
99 Constructed subway at MO Road 

 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
92 
Appendix 4.3 
Foot paths constructed without clearing obstacles 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.8.1.1, Page 60) 
 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Foot path constructed 
(Name of the ULB) 
Date of 
completion 
Expen
diture  Deficiencies noticed 
1.  
Vazhuthacaud- Forest 
office lane-DPI 
(Thiruvananthapuram) 
30 August 
2017 0.08 
• The pathway had obstacles like telephone 
post, electric post, flag post, etc.  
• A width of 1800mm was not ensured. 
• Tactile pavement to help visually 
challenged people was not done.  
• Periodical maintenance was absent. 
2.  
Construction and 
Renovation of footpath 
and supporting 
structures phase II-
Four roads 
(Kollam) 
15 
November 
2021 
1.74 • The pathway had obstacles like 
telephone post, electric post, flag post, 
etc.  
• A width of 1800mm was not ensured. 
• Tactile pavement to help visually 
challenged people was not done. 
• Periodical maintenance was absent. 3.  
Construction and 
Renovation of footpath 
and supporting 
structures phase IV-
three roads 
(Kollam) 
10 July 2021 0.08 
4.  
Pedestrian network at 
Thathampally ward 
(Alappuzha) 
13 August 
2020 0.92 
• No tactile pavement.  
• The footpath was constructed at the same 
level of road and did not have mandatory 
width. 
• No handrail separation from road. 
Obstacles like KSEB transformers, 
electric post, trees, etc. were seen.  
• Vehicles were seen parked in footpath. 
5.  
Pedestrian network at 
Chungam Ward 
(Alappuzha) 
23 February 
2021 0.54 
• IRC standard was not followed in width 
and tactile pavement.  
• This pathway was constructed between 
banks of backwater and private. 
properties. 
• Vehicle traffic was seen along the 
pathway and hence it was not 
constructed exclusively for pedestrians.  
• No handrail separation from road. 
6.  
Alappuzha 
Municipality pedestrian 
network 
(Alappuzha) 
28 
December 
2020 
0.27 
• IRC standard was not followed in width 
and tactile pavement.  
• The footpath was constructed at the same 
level of road.  
• No handrail separation and safety of 
pedestrians not seen ensured.  
• Waste deposits were seen in many places 
and vehicle parking was noticed. 

Appendices 
93 
7.  
Pedestrian network at 
AN Puram 
(Alappuzha) 
21 August 
2019 0.17 
• IRC standard was not followed in width 
and tactile pavement.  
• The footpath was constructed at the same 
level of road.  
• No handrail separation and safety of 
pedestrians not seen ensured. 
• Obstacles like KSEB transformers, 
electric post, trees, etc. were seen. 
8.  
Pedestrian network at 
Gurumandiram 
junction 
(Alappuzha) 
21 October 
2021 0.21 • 700 m length of tiling was done on both 
sides of PWD road. 
9.  
Walkway along the 
Panorama Road on 
both side of canal 
(Kochi) 
24 July 2020 0.83 
• The walkway was not constructed 
exclusively for pedestrians, vehicle 
movement along the walkway was there. 
• Tactile pavement as stipulated in the IRC 
standards not adopted. 
10.  
Walkway along 
Karanakodam thodu 
(Kochi) 
31 May 
2021 1.04 
• The walkway had width as per IRC 
standards, but obstacles like trees, 
electric post, etc were seen.  
• No hand railings.  
• Poor maintenance was visible. 
11.  
Walkway/footpath 
along both sides of 
Chambakkara canal 
(Kochi) 
31 October 
2020 0.62 
• Width as per IRC standards was not 
available.  
• Electric posts were seen on the pathway.  
• No tactile pavement helping visually 
challenged people was used. 
12.  
Walkway from JLN 
stadium along stadium 
link road 
(Kochi) 
31 May 
2021 1.11 • Though the walkway was as per IRC 
standards, poor maintenance was visible. 
13.  
Footpath from GCDA 
junction to Kendriya 
Vidyalaya and market 
road 
(Kochi) 
31October 
2020 0.67 
• A portion of the walkway did not have 
tactile pavement. 
• Obstacles like electric post, trees, 
hoardings, etc posing threat to 
pedestrians. 
14.  
Kalmandapam 
Melamurry foot path 
(Palakkad) 
Work not 
completed 0.96 • Obstacles and encroachments by shop 
owners. 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
  

 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
94 
Appendix 4.4 
Non-providing of facilities in parks 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.10.1, Page 70) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project 
(Name of ULB) 
Expendi
ture 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Date of 
completion 
Whether 
child friendly 
equipment 
installed/ 
properly 
maintained 
Whether 
park 
opened to 
public 
Remarks 
1.  
Improvement of TK 
Divakaran Park and Nehru 
Park - Phase 1 and II 
(Kollam)  
0.67 
30 
November 
2019 
X X Nil 
2.  
Development of Existing 
Parks and Construction of 
New Parks - Phase I- 
Asraamom Park  
(Kollam) 
0.97 
07 
November 
2019 
X X Nil 
3.  
Improvement of Parks-
phase II -T.M Varghese 
Park (Kollam) 
0.57 
07 
November 
2019 
X ✓ Nil 
4.  Renovation of St. John Park 
(Kochi) 0.32 31 July 
2018 X X Nil 
5.  
Vypin Jetty Green Space 
Development  
(Kochi) 
0.61 
30 
September 
2020 
X ✓ Nil 
6.  
Development of Park in 
railway station ward at 
Alappuzha beach  
(Alappuzha) 
0.64 
30 
December 
2023 
✓ X 
Non-maintenance and 
waste dumped inside 
the park. 
7.  
Development of Chathanadu 
Park - Phase II  
(Alappuzha) 
0.68 
31 
December 
2023 
X X Under construction 
8.  
Development of Children's 
park in Chathanadu, Phase I 
(Alappuzha) 
0.22 
26 
February 
2021 
X ✓ 
Overgrown grass and 
weeds, dirty 
surroundings, play 
equipment installed 
were in damaged 
condition. 
9.  
Development of Green 
Space and Park in 
Valiyachudukadu 
(Alappuzha) 
1.23 
30 
December 
2023 
X ✓ 
 Nil 
10.  
Development of Recreation 
facilities and Park in 
General Hospital  
(Alappuzha) 
0.07 
19 
November 
2018 
X ✓ 
 
Building inside the park 
was in dilapidated 
condition. 
11.  
Renovation and 
Development of park in 
Town square  
(Alappuzha) 
0.57 27 March 
2023 X ✓ 
 
Overgrown grass and 
non-maintenance. 

Appendices 
95 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project 
(Name of ULB) 
Expendi
ture 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Date of 
completion 
Whether 
child friendly 
equipment 
installed/ 
properly 
maintained 
Whether 
park 
opened to 
public 
Remarks 
12.  
Development of 
Eravathkunnu V K 
Krishnamenon 
Smruthivanam   
(Kozhikode) 
1.00 28 May 
2021 X X 
The park was poorly 
maintained, waste 
generated in the park 
was seen dumped in the 
walkways.  Children 
play equipment was 
seen abandoned without 
proper maintenance. 
13.  
Gandhi Nagar- 
Chakkanthara  
(Palakkad) 
0.20 10 May 
2020 X X 
The park was poorly 
maintained.  Children 
playing equipment were 
covered with thick 
bushes and creepers. 
14.  Venkiteshwara Garden 
(Palakkad)  0.22 10 March 
2023 X X 
Children play 
equipment were 
covered with thick grass 
and plants. Poorly 
maintained. 
15.  Nila Nagar Park  
(Palakkad) 0.23 
04 
February 
2022 
X X 
The park was poorly 
maintained.  Garden 
waste was seen dumped 
inside the park. 
Children playing 
equipment were 
covered with thick 
bushes and creepers. 
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
  

 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
96 
Appendix 5.1 
Projects not appraised by SLTC 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2, Page 75) 
 
a) New projects   
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of project  (Name of ULB) Sector 
Administrative 
sanction 
SHPSC 
held on 
Date Amount  
1 
10 KLD Mobile Septage treatment plant – two numbers - for 
Alappuzha Municipality  (Alappuzha)  
Sewerage 
and Septage   
30 
March 
2019 
0.80 
27 
February 
2019 
2 
15 KLD Sewerage treatment plant at Shathabdi Mandiram in 
Alissery Ward  (Alappuzha)  
Sewerage 
and Septage   
30 
March 
2019 
0.30 
27 
February 
2019 
 Total   1.10  
 
b) Projects with revised estimates  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project  (Name of 
ULB) 
Original 
Administrative 
Sanction 
SHPSC 
held on 
Revised 
Administrative 
Sanction 
Excess 
amount 
Date Amount  Date Amount  
 Water Supply 
1.  
Augmentation of water supply 
scheme to Kollam (2015-16, 
2016-17 and 2017-18) (Kollam) 
28 
September 
2017 
78.35 25 October 
2019 
03 
January 
2020 
92.08 13.73 
2.  
Replacement of 100mm AC pipe 
by laying rider line of 160mm 
PVC along both side of Pandit 
Karuppan Road (4400m)    
(Kochi)  
15 August 
2017 1.61 25 October 
2019 
04 
January 
2020 
1.75 0.14 
3.  
Laying of 450mm DI K9 Pipe 
from North end of Aroor 
Edakochi Bridge to KWA Tank 
site (1050m)   (Kochi)  
15 August 
2017 1.52 25 October 
2019 
04 
January 
2020 
1.67 0.15 
4.  
Laying Rider main from 
Kathrikkadavu to Elamkulam, 
Chettichira, Ponnurunni areas and 
distribution line in 
Chakkarapparambu, 
Chalikkavattom areas (5800m)  
(Kochi) 
01 January 
2018 3.25 25 October 
2019 
04 
January 
2020 
3.65 0.40 
5.  
Laying 500 mm DI pipe from 
Thamanam Pump house to 
Kadavanthara OHSR  (Kochi)  
02 
November 
2017 
7.65 25 October 
2019 
04 
January 
2020 
7.76 0.11 
6.  
Rehabilitation of existing old 
pipes, valves and interconnections 
with existing lines Phase II  
(Kozhikode)  
02 
November 
2017 
14.63 04 February 
2020 
12 May 
2020 15.50 0.87 
7.  
Water Sector Works-Laying 
distribution network for 
improvement of coverage in 
Guruvayur & Pookkode Zone in 
Guruvayur Municipality 
(Guruvayur)  
28 
September 
2017 
13.72 
 
04 February 
2020 
25 May 
2020 16.67 2.95 

Appendices 
97 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project  (Name of 
ULB) 
Original 
Administrative 
Sanction 
SHPSC 
held on 
Revised 
Administrative 
Sanction 
Excess 
amount 
Date Amount  Date Amount  
8.  
Construction of 10 LL OHSR & 
pumping main to  Guruvayur 
Municipality (Guruvayur) 
28 
September 
2017 
15.5 
 
04 February 
2020 
25 May 
2020 17.74 2.24 
9.  
Water Supply System to 
Guruvayur Municipality Package 
(Guruvayur)  
28 
September 
2017 
77.18 04 February 
2020 
25 May 
2020 81.34 4.16 
10.  
WSS to Guruvayur Municipality 
in Thrissur District balance 
distribution network in Guruvayur 
Municipality  
(Guruvayur)  
23 
December 
2017 
19.68 
 
04 February 
2020 
25 May 
2020 23.00 3.32 
11.  
Laying distribution networks in 
Thykkad Zone Guruvayur 
Municipality (Guruvayur) 
22 
February 
2018 
10.00 
 
04 February 
2020 
25 May 
2020 12.13 2.13 
12.  
Augmentation of WSS to 
Palakkad Municipality  
(Palakkad)  
24 May 
2018 54.33 25 October 
2019 
03 
January 
2020 
85.16 30.83 
 Sewerage and Septage 
13.  
Supplying and erection of pump 
set, transformer and electrical 
accessories in Block L Edathara 
Pumping Station 
(Thiuruvananthapuram)  
02 
November 
2017 
1.80 27 February 
2019 
30 March 
2019 4.00 2.20 
14.  
De-centralised sewage and 
septage treatment plants and 
associated sewerage networks for 
Zone A in Kozhikode - 
Corporation  
(Kozhikode) 
22 
February 
2018 
 
106.69 27 February 
2019 
30 March 
2019 116.50 9.81 
15.  Rejuvenation of STP at Kochi 
 (Kochi)  
01 January 
2018 13.70 25 October 
2019 
25 
January 
2020 
16.52 2.82 
16.  
Sewage Treatment Plant at 
Kureepuzha  
(Kollam)  
22 
February 
2018 
30.00 04 February 
2020 
17 June 
2020 31.92 1.92 
17.  
15 KLD STP at Shathabdi 
Mandiram in Alissery Ward  
(Alappuzha) 
30 March 
2019 0.30 25 October 
2019 
31 
January 
2020 
0.44 0.14 
 Storm Water Drain 
18.  
Construction of Storm Water 
Drainage at various Municipal 
Corporation roads Phase II - 
Thangassery Area” (Kollam) 
02 
November 
2017 
2.631 
15 
September 
2020 
15 
October 
2020 
3.203 0.57 
 Urban Transport 
19.  GB Road Escalator 
(Palakkad)  
22 
February 
2018 
3.545 
17 
December 
2020 
28 
January 
2021 
5.70 2.16 
20.  
Bus Terminal Yard near Stadium 
Bus Stand  
(Palakkad) 
27 
September 
2017 
3.18 25 October 
2019 
03 
January 
2020 
5.03 1.85 
21.  FoB across Muthalapozhi 
(Alappuzha) 
13 
November 
2017 
0.22 25 October 
2019 
31 
January 
2020 
0.35 0.13 

 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
98 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project  (Name of 
ULB) 
Original 
Administrative 
Sanction 
SHPSC 
held on 
Revised 
Administrative 
Sanction 
Excess 
amount 
Date Amount  Date Amount  
22.  
MLCP in Kollam Corporation 
(Kollam) 
 
23 
December 
2017 
10.40 04 February 
2020 
18 June 
2020 10.91 0.51 
 Green Space and Parks 
23.  Veliyilkulangara Park  
(Kollam) 
22 
February 
2018 
0.28 
15 
September 
2020 
15 
October 
2020 
0.30 0.02 
24.  
Rejuvenation of Nehru Park in 
Thrissur Corporation Phase I  
(Thrissur)  
23 
February 
2017 
0.91 25 October 
2019 
04 
January 
2020 
1.32 0.41 
25.  Rejuvenation of Kottamaithanam 
Park Phase I  (Palakkad) 
26 March 
2016 1.04 25 October 
2019 
03 
January 
2020 
2.66 1.62 
 Total  472.12   557.30 85.19 
c) Tender excess  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project 
(Name of ULB) 
Tendered 
PAC* 
Lowest 
quote 
received  
Tender excess SHPSC 
held on 
Date of 
Governmen
t Order  Per-
centage Amount  
 Sewerage and Septage  
1 Rehabilitation and up-
gradation of existing sewer 
network at Manjalikulam 
branch road, Ootukuzhy, 
Vanrose Junction branch road  
(Thiruvananthapuram) 
 
0.276 
 
 
0.365 
 
 
32.25 
 
0.089 
15 
September 
2020 
16 October 
2020 
2 Inter connection of sewer 
networks from trunk main 
manholes of both sides of the 
road from Arasumoodu  
(Thiruvananthapuram) 
0.503 
 
0.639 
 
 
27 
 
0.136 
15 
September 
2020 
15 October 
2020 
3 Providing new network in the 
missing areas of core city" 
(Thiruvananthapuram) 
 
0.509 
 
 
0.713 
 
 
40 
 
0.204 
15 
September 
2020 
15 October 
2020 
4 "Laying 700 mm dia RCC NP3 
Pipe Sewer Trunk Main -l from 
Murinjapalam Kannamoola” 
(Thiruvananthapuram) 
 
0.78 
 
 
1.09 
 
 
40 
 
0.31 
15 
September 
2020 
16 October 
2020 
5 TSS - Urgent laying of 300 mm 
dia HDPE pipe and 
construction of new Manholes 
at Chengalloor and Vattavila of 
Punnakkamugal ward 
(Thiruvananthapuram)  
 
0.67 
 
 
0.97 
 
 
45 
 
0.30 
15 
September 
2020 
16 October 
2020 
6 Decentralised Sewerage 
System for Division 15 (Kochi) 
42.94 55.23 
36.64 
 
12.29 
17 
December 
2020 
18 January 
2021 
7 Decentralised Sewerage 
System for Division 16 (Kochi) 25.95 
8 Decentralised Sewerage 
System for Division 17 (Kochi) 25.92 

Appendices 
99 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project 
(Name of ULB) 
Tendered 
PAC* 
Lowest 
quote 
received  
Tender excess SHPSC 
held on 
Date of 
Governmen
t Order  Per-
centage Amount  
9 Decentralised Network with 
STP in Old Kannur Municipal 
area (Kannur) 
16.398 19.665 
 
19.92 
 
3.267 
17 
December 
2020 
19 January 
2021 
10 Sewage Treatment Plants at 
Karukodi and Sundaram 
Colony 
(Palakkad) 
7.425 8.80 
 
18.51 
 
1.375 
17 
December 
2020 
25 January 
2021 
11 Rejuvenation of Elamkulam 
STP at Kochi 
(Kochi)  
11.63 14.45 24.24 2.82 
25 
October 
2019 
25 January 
2020 
 Total  81.131 101.922  20.791   
*PAC    - Probable Amount of Contract  
(Source: Data furnished by SMMU and ULBs) 
 

Glossary 
101 
Glossary 
Glossary of abbreviations used in the Report  
Sl. 
No Abbreviation Full form 
1.  A&OE Administrative and Office Expenses 
2.  AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
3.  API Application Programming Interface 
4.  CCBP Comprehensive Capacity Building Programme 
5.  CMMU City Mission Management Units 
6.  CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation 
7.  CWRDM Centre for Water Resources Development and Management 
8.  DER Detailed Engineering Report 
9.  DI Ductile Iron  
10.  DLP Defect Liability Period  
11.  DLRMC District Level Review and Monitoring Committee 
12.  DPR Detailed Project Report 
13.  FOB Foot Over Bridge 
14.  GIS Geographical Information System 
15.  GITPAC Great India Tourism Planners and Consultants 
16.  GLSR Ground Level Storage Reservoir 
17.  GoI Government of India 
18.  GoK Government of Kerala 
19.  GSM/GPRS Global System Mobile Communication/General Packet Radio Service 
20.  HDPE/DI High density polyethylene/Ductile Iron 
21.  IRC Indian Road Congress 
22.  IRMA Independent Review and Monitoring Agency 
23.  ISA Institute for Societal Advancement 
24.  JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
25.  JPV Joint Physical Verification 
26.  KCZMA  Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority 
27.  KIIFB Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board 
28.  KITCO Kerala Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation 
29.  KL Kilo Litres 
30.  KLD Kilo Litres per Day 
31.  KMRL Kochi Metro Rail Limited 
32.  KSEB Kerala State Electricity Board 
33.  KSPCB Kerala State Pollution Control Board 
34.  KSUDP Kerala Sustainable Urban Development Project 
35.  KWA Kerala Water Authority 
36.  LAP Local Area Plan 
37.  LL Lakh Litres 
38.  LPCD Litres Per Capita Per Day 
39.  LSGD Local Self Government Department 

 
Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of AMRUT’ in Kerala 
 
102 
Sl. 
No Abbreviation Full form 
40.  MBBR Moving Bed Biofilm Reactor 
41.  MLCP Multi-Level Car Parking 
42.  MLD Million Litres per Day 
43.  MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
44.  MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
45.  MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
46.  NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
47.  NRW Non-Revenue Water 
48.  NTU Nephelometric Turbidity Unit 
49.  O&M Operations and Maintenance 
50.  OCMS Online Continuous Monitoring System 
51.  OHSR Overhead Service Reservoir  
52.  PAC Probable Amount of Contract 
53.  PDMC Project Development and Management Consultant 
54.  PLC Programmable Logic Controller 
55.  PPP Public Private Partnership 
56.  PVC Poly Vinyl Chloride 
57.  PWD Public Works Department 
58.  QPR Quarterly Progress Reports 
59.  RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete 
60.  SAAP State Annual Action Plan 
61.  SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
62.  SHPSC State level High Powered Steering Committee 
63.  SLB Service Level Benchmark 
64.  SLIP Service Level Improvement Plan 
65.  SLTC State Level Technical Committee 
66.  SMMU State Mission Management Unit 
67.  SNA Single Nodal Agency 
68.  STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
69.  SWD Storm Water Drainage 
70.  TEC Technical Expert Committee 
71.  TNIUS Tamil Nadu Institute of Urban Studies 
72.  TPS Town Planning Scheme 
73.  TS Technical Sanction  
74.  ULB Urban Local Body 
75.  WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services 
76.  WTP Water Treatment Plant 
  

Glossary 
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 
 
