Performance Audit Report on 
Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
 
 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Industries and Commerce (Mines) Department  
Report No. 1 of 2025 


 
i 
 
Content Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
Introduction to mineral resources 1.1 1 
Framework for Governance and Management of mineral 
resources 1.2 2 
Mining Process 1.3 3 
Role of Departments involved in mining of minerals 1.4 3 
Organisational Set up 1.5 4 
Trend of Revenue receipts 1.6 5 
Audit Objectives 1.7 6 
Audit Criteria 1.8 6 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.9 6 
Compliance to recommendations  of Public Accounts 
Committee 1.10 8 
Audit Constraints 1.11 8 
Acknowledgement 1.12 8 
Chapter II 
Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
Exploration of minerals 2.1 9 
Formulation of State Mineral Policy 2.1.1 10 
Approval of mining plans with incorrect mining resources or 
reserves 2.1.2 11 
Mechanism for collection remittance and utilisation  of 
exploration funds 2.1.3 13 
Granting of mining leases 2.2 15 
Lack of data and absence of effective mechanism for granting 
of leases 2.2.1 16 
Existence of inoperative leases 2.3 19 
Lack of consistency in data related to inoperative leases 2.3.1 19 
Ineffective system of processing of termination of inoperative 
leases 2.3.2 20 
Renewal of leases 2.4 20 
Lack of data and absence of effective mechanism for 
processing the renewal applications 2.4.1 21 
Table of Contents 

 
ii 
Content Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Continuation of ineligible major mineral mining leases 2.4.2 22 
Non-registration of lease deeds 2.4.3 26 
Chapter III 
Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
Process and system for removal of minerals 3.1 28 
Implementation of e-permit system 3.1.1 28 
Lacunae in e-permit system 3.1.2 29 
Non-adherence to Supreme Court directions 3.1.3 31 
Utilisation of minerals for government works 3.1.4 33 
Short levy of penalty due to incorrect adoption of rate 3.1.5 36 
Non-assessement of DMF and MERIT 3.1.6 36 
Levy of penalty for unauthorised extraction 3.1.7 37 
Other sources of revenues 3.2 38 
Maintenance of records of Mineral Revenue Assessment and 
Demand Collection Balances 3.2.1 38 
Short levy of dead rent and interest 3.2.2 39 
Short collection and non-forfeiture of security deposit 3.2.3 41 
Determination of annual compensation for leases granted  3.2.4 42 
Chapter IV 
Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity 
Conduct of inspection of mining leases and minerals 4.1 46 
Conduct of inspections by the Department 4.1.1 46 
Functioning of District and State level task force 4.1.2 46 
Non-compliance to directions of regulatory agencies 4.1.3 47 
Revision of penalties without proper justification 4.2 49 
Strengthening of Department functioning through 
technological interventions 4.3 50 
Availability of manpower 4.3.1 51 
Technological interventions for prevention of illegal mining 
activities 4.3.2 51 
Case Study 4.4 55 
Estimation of limestone extracted from the leases in sampled 
mandals  4.4.1 57 
Appendices 61-76 
Glossary 77-78 

 
iii 
 
Appendix 
Number Subject Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
I Consideration of other possible mineral reserves 
against the UNFC guidelines 2.1.2 61 
II Statement showing the calculation of quantity as per 
mining plan 2.1.2 61 
III (A) Statement showing short collection of M ineral 
Exploration Research and Innovation Trust Fund 2.1.3 (a) 62 
III (B) 
Non collection of Mineral Exploration Research 
and Innovation Trust  Fund from A ndhra Pradesh 
Mineral Development Corporation  
2.1.3 (b) 62 
IV 
Statement showing the receipt s and expenditure 
under Mineral Exploration Research and Innovation 
Trust Fund  
2.1.3 (c) 62 
V Statement showing various e nvironmental 
clearance granting authority 2.2 63 
VI (A) Statement showing the information on Mineral 
Concession Application for grant of lease 2.2.1 (a) 63 
VI (B) Statement showing year wise analysis of pendency 
of Mineral Concession Application 2.2.1 (a) (i) 63 
VI (C) 
Statement showing status of issue of Letter of 
Intent/Environmental Clearances granted by 
DDMG and DMG 
2.2.1 (a) 
(iv) 64 
VII Statement showing the inaction in lapsing of 
inoperative leases 2.3.2 64 
VIII Statement showing the information regarding 
renewal of applications 2.4.1 (a) 64 
IX Statement showing ineligible leases 2.4.2 65 
X (A) Statement showing details of non -registration of 
lease deeds for major mineral mining leases 2.4.3 65 
X (B) Statement showing details of non -registration of 
lease deeds for minor mineral mining leases 2.4.3 66 
XI Statement showing short levy of seigniorage fee and 
associated revenue  3.1.2 (b) 66 
XII (A) Statement showing non-collection of NMET fund 3.1.2 (c) 66 
XII (B) Statement showing non-collection of MERIT fund 3.1.2 (c) 67 
XIII (A) Removal of minerals without having environmental 
clearance for lease area less than five hectares  3.1.3 (a) 67 
XIII (B) Removal of minerals without having environmental 
clearance for lease area more than five hectares  3.1.3 (a) 67 
XIV 
Loss of revenue due to excavation of mineral in 
excess of permitted quantity mentioned in 
environmental clearance 
3.1.3 (b) 68 
XV Statement showing non levy of DMF and MERIT 
on government works 3.1.4 (b) 68 
XVI (A) Statement showing short levy of seigniorage fee and 
penalty due to incorrect adoption of rate  3.1.5 68 
Appendices 

 
iv 
Appendix 
Number Subject Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
XVI (B) 
Short levy of DMF, MERIT and consideration 
amount due to  short levy of seigniorage fee on 
penalty of LSS Black mineral 
3.1.5 69 
XVII Statement showing non-levy of DMF and MERIT 3.1.6 69 
XVIII (A) Non levy of DMF and MERIT on seigniorage fee 
due to incorrect application of rule 3.1.7 (a) 70 
XVIII (B) Short levy of penalty due to incorrect adoption of 
rate and rule 3.1.7 (b) 70 
XVIII (C) Short levy of DMF and MERIT on penalty due to 
incorrect adoption of rate and rule 3.1.7 (b) 70 
XIX Statement showing loss of revenue due to treating 
white shale as major mineral 3.2.2 (a) 71 
XX Statement showing short levy of dead rent in respect 
of major mineral 3.2.2 (b) 71 
XXI Statement showing short collection of security 
deposit 3.2.3 (a) 71 
XXII Statement showing non -forfeiture of security 
deposit 3.2.3 (b) 72 
XXIII Statement showing extent of land on which annual 
compensation fee not levied 3.2.4 72 
XXIV Statement showing inspections conducted by the 
Mines and Geology Department 4.1.1 72 
XXV 
Statement showing continuance of leases after 
recommendation for  termination order by Indian 
Bureau of Mines 
4.1.3 (a) 73 
XXVI Statement showing issue of permits in violation to 
DGMS stop orders 4.1.3 (b) 74 
XXVII Statement showing revision of penalty orders issued 
by Government without justification 4.2 74 
XXVIII Action taken on triggers by ADMG Kurnool 4.3.2 (c) 75 
XXIX (A) Statement showing variation in the extracted 
quantity  4.4.1 (a) 75 
XXIX (B) Calculation of penalty based on the findings made 
by IISc Bengaluru 4.4.1 (a) 76 
 

 
v 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared for  
submission to the Governor of Andhra Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of India 
for the year ended 31 March 2022. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the results  of 
Performance Audit on ‘Functioning of Mines and Geology Department’, covering the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice in the course 
of test audit  for the period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 as well as those which came to notice in 
earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; matters relating to 
the period subsequent to 2021-22 have also been included, wherever necessary. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity  with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co -operation received from  Industries and Commerce 
(Mines) Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh at each stage of audit process. 
Preface 

Executive Summary 
 
vii 
 
Minerals are valuable natural resources being finite and non -renewable. Their exploitation 
is guided by long term national goals, perspectives and global economic scenario. Minerals 
are one of the main sources of revenue and major contributor for economic growth of the 
State Government. The State of Andhra Pradesh is well known globally for variety of rocks, 
industrial minerals and popularly called Ratna-Garbha.  
In the State, the Mines and Geology Department is entrusted with both promotional and 
regulatory functions for overall development of mining sector and collection of mineral 
revenue to the State Exchequer. The Department oversees the functions of vigilance and 
monitoring of minerals production, survey and demarcation of areas, mineral revenue 
collection, mineral investigation and exploration and dissemination of mineral information. 
The Performance Audit of Functioning of Mines and Geology Department was carried out 
to asses s the effectiveness in accounting of mineral revenue and overall development of 
mining sector in the State. The audit objectives included systems and procedures for 
utilisation of funds meant for exploration activities and granting / renewal of mining leases; 
mechanism to ensure extraction of mineral within the approved limits and management of 
associated revenues; mechanism for prevention/ detection of unauthorised mining activities. 
The scope of audit included Industries and Commerce Department (Mines), Director, Mines 
and Geology and other subunits of four districts (Krishna, Kurnool, Kadapa and 
Visakhapatnam) related to mining activities . Necessary inputs were obtained from Indian 
Bureau of Mines (IBM), Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), State Environment 
Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA), Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board connected 
with mining activities. Consultancy services were availed from Indian Institute of Science  
(IISc), Bengaluru for scrutiny of limestone leases in the selected mandals  (Kolimigundla in 
Kurnool District and Jaggaiahpet in Krishna District). 
The major findings of the Performance Audit are presented below: 
A. Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
State Mineral Policy (SMP) in line with National Mineral Policy bringing out a roadmap 
with better regulations for mining activities and sustainable mining practices was yet to be 
formulated. Absence of SMP deprives the Sta te from identifying and utilising mineral 
resources optimally and in an effective manner.  It is recommended that the State 
Government should formulate the State Mining Policy with better regulations for 
achieving optimum utilisation of mineral wealth and for ensuring  sustainable mining 
practices.  
Mining Plans were approved without duly considering the United Nations Framework 
Classification guidelines for arriving at mineral reserves, which inflated the mineral reserves 
and life of mining leases. Deficient scrutiny of mining plans submitted by prospective miners 
and ineffective coordination between Departments involved in approval of mining plans  
resulted in overestimation of mining life . It is recommended that  Government sh ould 
Executive Summary 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
viii 
ensure that the mining plans are approved after evaluation by competent authority at all 
levels, to avoid inflated figures of mineral reserves projected by the prospective miners.  
The mineral exploration fund did not receive the designated revenue and the funds at disposal 
were not utilised to the extent available for exploration of minerals. It is recommended that 
effective mechanism needs to be evolved for proper levy, collection, remittance of two per 
cent of seigniorage fee to designated fund of MERIT and to optimise the utilisation of 
funds for exploration of minerals. 
The system of receiving mineral concession application for mining lease to granting of lease 
was not transparent, as large number of applications received were not disposed of in time 
with necessary clearances  and were pending for approval at various stages/  levels. The 
related vital records/ data were also not maintained. There was lack of coordination between 
different levels of approvals, as reconciliation of data on mineral concession application 
received and approved was not done at any level. The State Coordination cum Empowered 
Committee specially constituted by Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) to monitor and 
minimise delay in processing and granting of mining lease was non -functional. It is 
recommended that  the State Coordination cum Empowered Committee may be made 
functional to monitor and coordinate between various Departments for timely processing 
of mineral concession applications to avoid delay in granting of lease.  
There was lack of consistency in maintenance of data on inoperative leases. Prompt and 
timely action was not initiated on inoperative leases. The inaction on the part of Department 
resulted in idling of mining leases without being allotted to prospective miners for generation 
of revenue. There were instances of l eases not being renewed within the stipulated time 
which allowed miners to hold leases illegally for extraction of minerals beyond lease period. 
Thus, the system of renewal and monitoring of inoperative mining leases at the Mines & 
Geology Department was ineffective. It is recommended that the State Government should 
ensure that the Mines and Geology Department periodically reviews and renews the leases 
within the lease period and resume s inoperative mining areas to avoid unauthorised 
mining activity beyond the lease period.  
The lease deed must be executed within the stipulated period from the date of grant/renewal 
of lease for minerals . However, m ining lease deeds were not executed and registered for 
some of the leases  which led to loss of revenue to Exchequer towards stamp duty and 
registration fees under  Indian Registration and Stamp Act . It is recommended that 
Government should ensure that all the mining lease deeds are executed and registered 
under the Stamp Act to avoid loss of revenue to Exchequer.  
B. Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court held that minerals excavated without or in excess of  quantity 
mentioned in Environment Clearance (EC) were illegal and cost of illegal quantity was to 
be recovered. The Department did not comply with the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
and allowed the lessees to excavate minerals without EC and also in excess of permissible 
quantity. The cost of illegal excavated quantity was not recovered from the lessees.  It is 
recommended that Government should develop an effective technology to prevent excess 
excavation of mineral over the approved limit, in compliance to the directions of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court to prevent illegal mining.  

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
The extraction of minerals required for government works by Engineering or other 
Departments were allowed without the requirement of clearance certificate from the Mines 
& Geology Department as per age old prevailing orders. As a result, the Department was not 
aware of the nature and quantity of mineral excavated , the amount of seigniorage fee to be 
received from the other user Departments and this also provided scope for illegal excavation 
of minerals . It is recommended that Government may revise the previous orders for 
removal of minerals , without clearance certificate for minerals utilised in government 
works, to avoid any kind of illegal excavation and to account for the minerals with definite 
revenue realisation. 
Mineral Revenue Assessment (MRAs) and Demand Collection Balances (DCBs), the critical 
records to assess the types of minerals, quantities removed, revenues realised and pendency 
were not prepared regularly either manually or on online mode. There were instances of non-
levy of dead rent at the enhanced rate, short collection or non-forfeiture of security deposit, 
incorrect mineral classification of minor mineral as major mineral result ing in loss of 
revenue to the Department. It is recommended that Government may devise online systems 
or strengthen the existing Online Mineral e-Permit System to generate MRAs, DCBs and 
demand notices automatically , without human intervention and to ensure that the 
associated revenues as prescribed in the Acts & Rules are levied and collected 
appropriately to prevent any kind of loss to the Exchequer.  
C. Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity 
Required number of inspections of mining lease areas were not conducted covering all the 
existing leases in a year to identify lapses, if any. The District Level Task Force constituted 
for effective vigilance to curb illegal mining and transportation of minerals was non -
functional and State Level Task Force was not established. Action on the part of the 
Department, on the recommendations made by IBM/ DGMS for termination of leases which 
violated the laid down rules and instead allowed illegal mining , was not forthcoming. It is 
recommended that the inspection of mining leases may be given utmost priority by making 
the district/state level task force functional , for effective vigilance to curb illegal mining 
and transport ation of mineral. Recommendations made by IBM/DGMS are to be 
implemented efficiently to enforce immediate action on illegal mining activities. 
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) survey was not completed  for 57 per cent 
major mineral  mining leases and 66 per cent  minor mineral mining leases. Out of the 
registered vehicles, 38 per cent of the vehicles were not enabled with installation of Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and 40 per cent of permits were issued to the vehicles not enabled 
with GPS during the period of audit . There was i nstallation of meagre number of Closed -
Circuit (CC) Cameras and all of them were non-functional, in the entire State. This clearly 
affected the Department’s efforts in curbing illegal mining activities. It is recommended that 
Government shall ensure that DGPS survey of all mining leases is completed, all vehicles 
involved in transportation of mineral are registered and equipped with GPS  and CC 
cameras are installed in all the designated places for effective monitoring and prevention 
of illegal mining. 
In the case study of 11 limestone leases of the two selected mandals, the extracted quantity 
quantified by Technical Consultant IISc was varying (15 to 91 per cent) with that of the 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
x 
recorded extracted quantity of the Department . In respect of five leases, the recorded 
extracted quantity by Department was more than the quantity estimated by IISc  and for 
remaining six cases, the recorded extracted quantity was less than the quantity estimated by 
IISc. Thus, there was excess extraction of minerals  in six cases than permitted and also 
excess recording of minerals than actually extracted. The IISc noticed huge dumps of mine 
spoils without any protection measures across the study sites.  The environmental 
management was absent in most mines, and afforestation activities were observed to be poor 
across the sites. It is recommended that the Government must encourage use of advanced 
technology such as remote sensing technology to assess actual quantity of minerals 
extracted to facilitate detection of any kind of illegal mining activities.  
 

 
 
Introduction 
Chapter I 
Pages 1 - 8 

 
 


Chapter I - Introduction 
1 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
1.1 Introduction to mineral resources 
Minerals are broadly classified in two categories, i.e., major and minor minerals. Minor 
minerals means1 building stone, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used 
for prescribed purposes, and any other mineral which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a minor mineral. Major minerals include 
all minerals other than minor minerals.  
The State of Andhra Pradesh has abundant major minerals viz, Limestone, Iron ore, Ilmenite 
and minor minerals viz, granite, road metal, barytes. State’s varied geology has a rich and 
wide variety of minerals suitable for various mineral specific industries. The State is treasure 
house for 48 minerals  and more specifically for Gold, Diamond, Bauxite, Beach Sand, 
Limestone, Coal, Dolomite, Quartz, Feldspar, Iron Ore, Granite and other building materials 
etc. The geographical distribution of main minerals in t he State has been depicted in  
Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Mineral map of Andhra Pradesh 
 
Source: District wise mineral opportunities in Andhra Pradesh taken from Department’s website  
Andhra Pradesh is very rich in different types of minerals and the estimated quantities of 
important minor and major minerals available (as of 31 March 202 1) in the State when 
compared to Nation as a whole is as detailed in Table 1.1. 
 
1 as defined in Section 3(e) of Mines and Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
2 
Table 1.1: Mineral profile of Andhra Pradesh 
(Quantity in Million Ton) 
Sl. 
No. 
Type of 
mineral 
Mineral Estimated quantity 
in India 
Estimated 
quantity in 
Andhra Pradesh 
Share of Andhra 
Pradesh  
(in percentage) 
1. Minor Road metal* 981.11 181.44 18.49 
2. Barytes 49.47  42.60  86.11 
3. Dolomite 2,393.15  38.96  1.63 
4. Major Limestone 87,388.75  831.23  0.95 
5. Iron Ore 6,835.70  22.11  0.32 
6. Manganese 112.49  2.41  2.14 
Source:  As per the information submitted by Mines & Geology Department, GoAP for compilation of Natural 
Resource Accounting (NRA) for the year 2020-2021. 
Note: The NRA report for the year 2021-22 is yet to be published. * quantity in cum 
There was huge variation in estimated quantity of limestone as per data submitted by Mines 
& Geology Department for compilation of Natural Resource Accounting and data (as of 
March 2020) published by Indian Bureau of Mines  for Indian Minerals Year Book (MYB) 
2022. The estimated quantity of limestone as per MYB 2022 was 2,27,589.26 Million Ton 
and 29,838.82 Million Ton for the Nation and Andhra Pradesh respectively. The variation 
in figures of limestone needs to be investigated and reconciled. 
Further, the State reserve mineral map available in the public domain was last updated in 
2014 which raises concerns for adequacy for planning current and future exploration and 
mining activities. 
1.2 Framework for Governance and Management of mineral resources 
The term ‘mining’ is broadly used to denote the extraction of minerals while for the minor 
minerals ‘quarrying’ is specifically used to indicate the extraction. Management of mineral 
resources is the responsibility of both Government of India (GoI) and State Government in 
terms of items listed under Union and State List2 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
of India. Consequently, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 
(MMDR Act) was enacted which gives Union the power  (Section 2 of MMDR Act) to 
regulate mineral development for all minerals except minor minerals for which power was 
vested to the State Government (Section 15(1) of MMDR Act 1957). 
The MMDR Act lays down the legal framework for regulation on mines and  development 
of all minerals other than petroleum and natural gas. The Act was amended (January 2015) 
by GoI by Ordinance, 2015. Subsequently, the Mineral Conservation and Development 
Rules (MCDR), 2017, Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015, Mineral Concession Rules 2016 etc., 
were also framed in line with various Acts and National Mineral Policy.  
The MMDR Amendment Act 2015, brought the following major initiatives: 
• Granting of mineral concessions shall be through auction 3 for major minerals to ensure 
transparency. 
 
2 Union list: Serial Number 54 and State list: Serial Number 23 
3 section 10 B and 11 of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 


Chapter I - Introduction 
 
3 
• Establishment of District Mineral Foundation4 (DMF) for the welfare of mining affected 
areas by using contributions from the mining activities.  
• Establishment of National Mineral Exploration Trust5 (NMET) for regional and detailed 
mineral exploration in the country.  
As per the provisions of MMDR Act, 1957, GoAP formulated Andhra Pradesh Minor 
Mineral Concession (APMMC) Rules, 1966 as amended from time to time. 
1.3 Mining Process 
Mining/ quarrying of mineral includes the complete process of identification of mineral 
deposit to reclamation of mining site. The mining process is broa dly divided into four     
stages as detailed below: 
Exploration 
The mineral deposit needed to be 
located/searched is known as prospecting. 
After identification, exploration activity 
would be taken up to assess the quality, 
extent, formation, location, and economic 
value of the deposit. 
Development 
The work of preparation to access the 
mineral deposit for extraction. It involves 
clearances for the land and Environmental 
Clearance and approval of Mining plan6, 
consent for operation etc., from various 
Departments. 
Closure or Reclamation 
It allows productive and sustainable after -
use of Mine site to protect public health and 
safety, encourage environmental 
sustainability to minimise adverse socio -
economic impacts.   Mine closure plan 
(progressive and final) is to be submitted as 
a prerequisite during the approval of the 
mining plan. 
Extraction 
Mining or quarrying of mineral deposits 
from beneath the surface of the earth.   The 
extraction process needs to be sustainable 
and mindful so that the larger part of 
society is benefited. 
1.4 Role of Departments involved in mining of minerals 
The Mines & Geology Department is entrusted with both promotional and regulatory 
functions for overall development of mining sector and collection of mineral revenue to the 
State Exchequer. The Directorate of Mines and Geology oversee the functions of approval 
of mine plans for minor minerals, vigilance and monitoring of minerals production, survey 
and demarcation of areas, mineral revenue collection, mineral investigation and exploration 
and dissemination of mineral information. 
 
4 section 9 (B) of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 
5 section 9(C) of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 
6 the mining plan is the plan of the lease hold area showing the nature and extent of the mineral body, spot 
or spots for mining operations, details of the geology including mineral resources and reserves of the area, 
details of proposed exploration program, method of excavation, handling of waste and mineral rejects, use 
of mineral and beneficiation of minerals, a tentative scheme of mining from year to year for five years, etc. 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
4 
The Revenue and Forest Department  issues No Objection Certificate 7 (NOC) for the land 
leases meant for mining activity depending upon the jurisdiction. Andhra Pradesh Pollution 
Control Board (APPCB) issues Consent For Establishment (CFE) and Consent For 
Operation (CFO) of mines. State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) is the 
Environmental Clearance granting authority for mining lease of minor minerals and Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for major minerals. Indian Bureau of Mines 
(IBM) approves mining plan for major minerals.  
1.5 Organisational Set up 
The organisational set-up of the Mines & Geology Department is as shown in Chart 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Showing the organogram of Mines & Geology Department 
Source: As per Department website 
At the Government level, the Principal Secretary is the Head of the Department and at the 
Directorate level, the Director, Mines and Geology (DMG) is responsible for administration 
and implementation of the related Mining Acts and Rules.  
At the District level, the Deputy Director of Mines and Geology ( DDMG) is the district 
administrator and member convenor to District Mineral Foundation (DMF). The DDMG 
approves mining plans and processes Minor Mineral Concession Applications 8 and is the 
authority for approval of Mineral Revenue Assessments of the leases falling within the 
district. 
Assistant Director, Mines and Geology ( ADMG) is in -charge of the unit office, submits 
proposal in respect of prospecting license, mining/quarry lease applications, inspection of 
areas applied for mining leases and inspection of Mineral Based Industries. Prevention of 
smuggling and illegal extraction, and transportation of minerals is one of the responsibilities 
of ADMG. Other responsibilities are finalisation of assessment, collection of Mineral 
Revenue (Royalties, Seigniorage fee, etc.) and other demands a nd pursuing collection of 
arrears.  
 
7 G.O.Ms.No.163, Industries & Commerce (Mines-II) Department, dated 16.11.2017 
8 other than Granite, Marble, Ordinary Sand and Mineral Dealer Licenses within the District  
Principal Secretary to Government (Mines)
Director of Mines & Geology
Additional /Joint Director
Administrative
Four Deputy Directors
Thirteen Assistant Directors 
Functional
Thirteen Deputy Directors
Twenty Two Assistant 
Directors
Vigilance
Thirteen Assistant Directors 
(District Vigilance Squads)


Chapter I - Introduction 

5 
Assistant Director (AD) Vigilance shall work under the supervision of Joint Director of 
Mines and Geology (JDMG) and is in -charge of the Regional Vigilance Squad having  
jurisdiction of two or three districts. The AD (Vigilance) inspects the illegal mining areas 
and seizes vehicles during the checking of mineral traffic. 
1.6 Trend of Revenue receipts 
The budget estimates and actual revenue receipts from the minerals under “Major Head - 
0853 non-ferrous mining and metallurgical industries” and revenue receipts as per Mines & 
Geology Department during the period 2017-22 was as shown in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Details of budget estimates, actual revenue receipts and receipts as per 
Mines & Geology Department 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Budget 
Estimate 
Actual 
Revenue 
Receipt as 
per State 
Finance 
Accounts  
Difference Percentage  
of shortfall  
Revenue 
receipt as 
per 
Department 
Difference of 
Receipts as per 
Department 
and State 
Finance 
Account 
(A) (B) (C)=(A)-(B) (D)=(C)/(A)X100 (E) (F)=(E)-(B) 
2017-18 2,200.00 2,156.36 43.64 2 2,147.48 (-) 8.88 
2018-19 2,500.00 2,210.53 289.47 12 2,463.48 252.95 
2019-20 3,950.00 1,897.12 2,052.88 52 2,072.07 174.95 
2020-21 3,550.00 2,256.36 1,293.64 36 2,029.84 (-) 226.52 
2021-22 3,550.00 2,983.00 567.00 16 2,764.23 (-) 218.77 
Total 15,750.00 11,503.37 4,246.63  11,477.10 (-) 26.27 
Source: Details furnished by the Department and State Finance Account 
There was a significant shortfall in realisation of revenue which ranged between two to 52 
per cent of the budgeted estimates . The short realisation  of revenue when compared to 
estimated budget was more during 2019 -20, though there was increase in revenue from 
₹2,156.36 crore in 2017-18 to ₹2,983.00 crore in 2021-22.  
Further, as per data furnished by the Mines & Geology Department, the actual revenue 
realised under major and minor minerals for the period 2017-22 was as shown in Chart 1.2. 
Chart 1.2: Major and minor mineral receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Details furnished by the Department 
The revenue realised from minor minerals was on increasing trend when compared to major 
minerals, whereas there was drastic decrease during the period 2019-22 when compared with 
2018-19. This was due to slowdown of activities amid global pandemic, as there was 
2,147 2,463
2,072 2,030
2,764
1,100 1,349 1,389 1,397
1,966
1,047 1,114
683 633 798
0
1000
2000
3000
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
TOTAL DEPARTMENTAL RECEIPTS MINOR MINERAL REVENUE MAJOR MINERAL REVENUE

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
6 
sluggishness in cement industries which are major consumers of limestone. Thus, less 
consumption of limestone is one of the reasons for decrease in revenue under major minerals. 
1.7 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
➢ Effective systems and procedures were in place for utilisation of funds meant for 
exploration activities and granting/ renewal of mining leases. 
➢ Effective mechanisms were in place to ensure extraction of mineral was within the 
approved limits and associated revenues were properly assessed, collected, and deposited. 
➢ Effective mechanisms were in place for prevention, detection of unauthorised mining 
activities and powers vested with the Department were effectively enforced as deterrent 
for minimising the same. 
1.8 Audit Criteria 
The Performance Audit (PA) drew audit criteria from the following Acts/ Rules: 
➢ Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 amended from time to 
time; 
➢ Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydrocarbons Energy Minerals) Concession Rules, 
1960 and 2016; 
➢ Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1966 as amended from time to time; 
➢ Environment Impact Assessment Notification 2006;  
➢ Andhra Pradesh District Mineral Foundation Rules, 2016, Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015 
and Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Auction (APMMA), Rules 2022; 
➢ Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 and 2017; 
➢ Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999; 
➢ Manual of Mines and Geology Department, Andhra Pradesh, 1983; 
➢ National Mineral Exploration Trust Rules, 2015; 
➢ Mineral Exploration, Research, and Innovation Trust, Rules 2016; 
➢ National Mineral Policy, 2019; 
➢ Mineral (Evidence and Content) Rules, 2015; 
➢ Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961; 
➢ Government Orders, Circulars issued by Government and various judgements; 
➢ Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)  Manual for Inspection of Mines, 2017 , Notes on illegal 
mining issued by IBM; 
➢ United Nations Framework Classification Guidelines, 2009. 
1.9 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit was taken up during June 2022 to January 2023 covering the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22 with focus on the objectives mentioned above. 

Chapter I - Introduction 
 
7 
Two (Krishna and Kurnool) out of 13 districts 9 (DDMGs) were selected based on the areas 
having more number of limestone leases, and completion of Differential Global Positioning 
System (DGPS)10 survey. Two more districts (Kadapa and Visakhapatnam) were selected 
using random sampling method. Thus overall, four11 out of 13 DDMGs and eight12 out of 22 
ADMGs were covered during the present audit. Limestone being the highest revenue 
contributor of ₹1,780.88 crore (95 per cent) of total revenue (royalty) of ₹1,868.22 crore 
under major minerals during 2017 -22 was selected for detailed scrutiny. Further, the audit 
of offices of the Principal Secretary, Industries and Commerce (Mines) Department, 
Director, Mines and Geology and other entities related to mining activities viz., Indian 
Bureau of Mines (IBM), Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), State Environment 
Impact Assessment Authority ( SEIAA) and Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
(APPCB) were also covered. 
The audit included scrutiny of records/  files on mining leases to review the monitoring of 
mining activities and compliance of the statutes. Audit also visited and obtained inputs from 
agencies/ entities connected with mining activities and the inputs obtained were suitably 
incorporated in the report wherever necessary.  
Audit engaged the Energy and Wetlands Research Group, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), 
Bangalore as Consultant to study the volume of Limestone mineral extracted from the 
mining leases using remote sensing technology from a technical perspective. The st udy 
covered areas in two mandals viz., Jaggaiahpet and Kolimigundla under the jurisdiction of 
two ADMGs (Nandigama and Banaganapalle), covering an average extent of each limestone 
lease of 180.85 hectares.  The Department has communicated its concern over the fact that 
the study by the Consultant IISc Bangalore has been relied upon for auditing and that the 
assessment made by IISc was approximate and hence could not provide the accurate quantity 
of mineral extracted and the method was not practical. Audit’s  response is that the Remote 
sensing studies by technical experts, are reliable as a constructive tool, for assessing illegal 
mining situation. In this instance, the exercise has been useful in estimating the Limestone 
mineral extracted for the purpose of examining whether the quantity of mineral extracted 
was approximately as per the Mining Plan and  facilitating detection of illegal mining 
activities.  
The objectives, scope and methodology of audit were discussed at the level of Government 
in an Entry Conference held in June 2022.  Exit Conference with the Government was held 
in March 2024 wherein, the major audit findings were discussed. The written replies of the 
Government and the responses given during the Exit Conference have been considered 
appropriately while finalising this Report. 
  
 
9 in the erstwhile district setup of Andhra Pradesh 
10 it is an enhancement to the global positioning system that provides improved location accuracy. It uses a 
network of fixed, ground -based reference stations to broadcast the difference between the positions 
indicated by the global positioning system satellite and the known fixed positions  
11   Kadapa, Krishna, Kurnool and Visakhapatnam 
12  ADMG Kurnool & Banaganapalle, ADMG Kadapa & Yerraguntla, ADMG Vijayawada & Nandigama and 
ADMG Visakhapatnam & Anakapalli 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
8 
1.10 Compliance to recommendations of Public Accounts Committee 
A Standalone Performance Audit (PA) on Functioning of the Directorate of Mines & 
Geology was conducted covering the period 2006 -07 to 2011 -12. The Audit Report 13 
included audit findings mainly on Administration and Management of Mineral Concessions, 
issues relating to environment and internal control, human resources, and other issues. The 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) examined the report in 2015 & 2016. The PAC offered 
(February 2016) certain recommendations which include viz., (i) the applications/mineral 
concessions cannot be kept pending for more than 30 days, (ii) a system be developed to 
ensure that mining leases are granted only after approval of the mining plans and the mining 
activities take place as per approved minin g plans, (iii) the Government may consider the 
issue of se eking separate reports, for specific purpose, from the revenue authorities while 
issuing, renewing, and re -granting different mineral concessions duly stating the duration 
for which the mineral concessions are to be granted, (iv) provisions may be made for regular 
review of inoperative leases at fixed intervals for determining the leases to prevent blockage 
of mining areas. 
In this regard, the Assistant Director (Administration) of Mines and Geology replied that all 
the recommendations of PAC were complied with. 
However, the current audit revealed that the irregularities noticed earlier were still persisting. 
Thus, the Government/Department have taken ineffective punitive/corrective action on the 
recommendations made by PAC. 
1.11 Audit Constraints 
The Department did not provide basic records, statistical data on mineral-wise royalty and 
seigniorage fee earned, status of Mineral Concession Application, renewal of application at 
various stage of approval, dispatch of non -working leases, levy of penalty and number of 
triggers received for illegal mining.  There was inconsistency in data furnished to audit on 
different occasions at various levels. 
Due to non-availability of basic records and statistical data, the effectiveness of systematic 
plan in the Department could not be ascertained. The observations were made to the extent 
of records made available to Audit. 
1.12 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation of the Department in the production of the available 
data/records and the information required for the purpose of this Performance Audit. Audit 
also acknowledges technical inputs/ support extended by the Energy and Wetlands Research 
Group, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru. Audit has relied, inter alia , upon the 
Consultant’s study for observations relating to estimating the volume of Limestone mineral 
extracted from the mining leases in two mandals, included in this Report.  
 
 
13 C&AG’s Report (Revenue Sector) No. 2 of 2014 and laid on the table of the House on 06.09.2014  


 
 
 
Exploration of Minerals  
and Granting of Mining Leases 
Chapter II 
Pages 9 - 26 


 
 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
9 
Chapter II 
Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For conservation and development of minerals, it is necessary to carry out exploration of 
minerals which includes detailed investigations to collect precise information regarding any 
mineral available in or under any land, by the Central Government, State Government, 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) or any authorised agency. The GSI, Mines & Geology 
Department of the State, Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation  and private 
companies are involved in the exploration activities. 
As per Section 10(B)(3) of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Act 2015, in areas where the existence of mineral contents of any notified mineral is 
established in the manner prescribed by the Central Government, the State Government shall 
notify such areas for grant of mining leases for such notified mineral. Accordingly, the 
mining lease shall be granted by the State Government, within the parameters as may be 
prescribed by Central Government.  
2.1 Exploration of minerals 
The Minerals (Evidence and Content) Rules, 2015 prescribe various stages of exploration 
activities. The exploration for any mineral deposit involves four stages namely, 
Reconnaissance Survey (G4), Preliminary Exploration (G3), General Exploration (G2) and 
Detailed Exploration (G1) reflecting the degree of geological assurance.   
The Mines & Geology Department had taken up major mineral exploration activities in 
respect of 17 blocks during the period of audit by utilising the exploration fund of  
State Mineral Policy for optimum utilisation of mineral wealth and sustainable 
development of mining sector was yet to be  formulated.  Mining plans were 
approved without duly adhering to the provisions of United Nations Framework 
Classification guidelines which resulted in adoption of incorrect estimated 
quantities and subsequently led to overestimation of mining life. Funds created 
specifically for exploration of minerals did not receive the designated revenue 
and available funds were not utilised optimally. V ital records and data on 
applications re ceived for mining lease, timely disposal of applications with 
necessary clearances, applications pending for want of clearances, surrender or 
determining of leases, inoperative leases , were not maintained properly. The 
State Coordination cum Empowered Committee constituted to monitor and 
minimise delay in processing and granting of mining lease was non- functional. 
Action for closure of identified inoperative leases was not taken and 
unauthorised possession of leased land with lease holders was allowed. Leases 
were not renewed within the stipulated time which allowed unauthorised 
extraction of minerals. Some of the mining lease deeds were neither execute d 
nor registered, thereby causing loss of revenue towards stamp duty to 
Exchequer. Thus, the Mines and Geology Department lacked effective system 
of processing, granting, renewal and monitoring of mining leases. 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
10 
₹14.88 crore14. However, the exploration activities for minor minerals was not taken up by 
the Department. 
Section 3.1 of National Mineral Policy 15 (NMP) 2019, states that core function of State in 
mining would be facilitation and regulation of exploration and mining activities, making 
provision for development of infrastructure and tax collection. An Annual Business Plan/  
Road map for the development of mineral sector shall be brought out by the respective States. 
Mineral (Evidence and Content) Rules 2015 and State Government orders 16 (April 2016) 
acts as guidance for  the exploration activities of major and minor minerals respectively . 
However, both these rules direct that estimation of Reserve and Resources should be done 
as per United Nations Framework Classification (UNFC) guidelines17, 2009. 
2.1.1 Formulation of State Mineral Policy 
National Mineral Policy18 (NMP) 2019 was formulated with the objective to have a more 
effective, meaningful and implementable policy that brings in further transparency, better 
regulation and enforcement, balanced social and economic growth as well as sustainable 
mining practices. 
The NMP spelt that regional and detailed exploration are to be carried out using state-of-the-
art technologies. Extraction of mineral resources are to be taken up to meet  the needs of 
domestic industry for the present and future. An adequate, effective legal and institutional 
framework promoting zero -waste mining with  commitment to prevent sub -optimal and 
unscientific mining was to be framed. Mining shall be undertaken within the parameters  of 
a comprehensive Sustainable Development Framework to ensure environmental, economic, 
and social considerations. Mine decommissioning and land reclamation are to be an integral 
part of mine development process and consistent approaches are to be adopted for efficient 
and effective mine reclamation and rehabilitation. Research and development in the mineral 
sector shall cover geological survey, exploration, mining, beneficiation, concentration of 
minerals to development of materials. 
The NMP also emphasised that the core functions of State Government in mining would be 
facilitation and regulation of exploration, and mining activities, and to bring out an Annual 
Business Plan/Road map for the development of mineral sector. Grant of clearances for 
commencement of mining operations shall be streamlined , facilitated through an on -line 
public portal. Mineral bearing area/zone shall be earmarked as Mining Land in the land 
record by the States.  
Audit noticed that in line with NMP, the Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) had not 
formulated (except sand and manufacturing sand (M-sand) policy 2016) any Mineral Policy 
for exploration, extraction and reclamation of mining leases for minor minerals. Further, 
GoAP had not brought out the Annual Business Plan/Roadmap for development of mineral 
 
14   MERIT and NMET funds are meant for regional and detailed exploration of the minerals and assessment 
of mineral reserves.  MERIT fund of ₹8.42 cr ore for 10 blocks and NMET fund of ₹6.46 crore for seven 
blocks 
15 initially framed in 2008 and subsequently amended in 2019 
16 G.O.Ms.No.56, Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 30.04.2016 
17 UNFC guidelines provide a three-dimensional system which provide estimation for total mineral resources 
and mineable reserves 
18 National Mineral Policy was initially formulated in 2008 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
11 
sector as envisaged in NMP. Formulation of Mineral Policy becomes even more important 
after declaration (in 2015) of 31 major minerals as minor minerals by GoI. 
Further, Audit noticed that States like Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh  and Rajasthan have 
already formulated (between 2008 and 2015) State specific Mineral Policy to ensure 
scientific, systematic and sustainable development of mineral resources in their respective 
States. 
The Director, Mines and Geology  (DMG) accepted the audit observation and replied that 
State Mineral Policy was not formulated. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that for major mineral s 
auction process have been adopted and whereas for minor minerals there was no exploration 
activities involved as Geologist conduct field survey and furnish data related to availability 
of minerals in the mines. It was further stated that the State does not have Mineral Policy 
and is studying other States Mineral Policies as well for drawing a Policy for the State.  
Absence of State Mineral Policy deprives the State from identifying and utilising mineral 
wealth/resources optimally in an effective manner. A mineral policy is a road map to explore, 
extract, and to create opportunities for mining activities and to have sustainable development 
of the mining sector and the State as a whole.  
Recommendation 2.1: The State Government should formulate the State Mining Policy 
with better regulations for achieving optimum utilisation of mineral wealth and for 
ensuring sustainable mining practices. 
2.1.2 Approval of mining plans with incorrect mining resources or reserves 
As per UNFC guidelines, mineral resources in an area are classified as Proved, Probable19 
and other possible resources. The Proved and Probable is the economically mineable part of 
a mineral resource termed as mineral reserve  as per UNFC . Only Proved and Probable 
resources should be considered while  approving the mining plan. The details of resources  
shall be prepared  and submitted in Form T 20 which shall be scrutinised and approved by 
Deputy Director, Mines and Geology (DDMG) . Mineral reserve estimation has to be done 
in accordance with UNFC guidelines.  
Audit noticed that while approving mining plan for minor minerals, two DDMGs (Kurnool 
and Kadapa) without verifying the contents of mining plan submitted by the prospective 
miners had also considered other possible resources in addition to P roved and Probable in 
respect of seven out of 80 test -checked cases (as detailed in Appendix I). Considering the 
reserves other than proved and probable in the mining plan provides wrong estimation of the 
mineable quantities, annual production quantity and mining life  rather than the actual. The 
total min eable quantity should have been shown as 86.15 lakh cum  (in respect of seven 
 
19 the minerals of grade 111 are termed as the “Proved Reserve”, which is the economic viable part of the 
reserve with higher mining confidence based on feasibility study. The grades 121 and 122 termed as 
“Probable Reserves”, which represent the economic viable part of the reserve with high and moderate levels 
of mineral confidence respectively based on the prefeasibility study, other Possible resources are an 
estimate of the amount of mineral that may be available for extraction in an area 
20 Form T consists of the mechanism derived by GoAP to prepare the mining plan following UNFC guidelines 
for estimation of reserve and resources, feasibility report along with the financial analysis as per economic 
viability of the deposit 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
12 
cases), however, in mining plan the mineable quantity was shown as 98.37 lakh cum due to 
incorrect consideration of other possible resources. 
Thus, DDMGs have incorrectly approved the mining plans which result ed in incorrect 
exhibition of mineable quantity and provided scope for excess removal of minerals. 
A detailed check of two mining plans revealed lapses on the part of DDMG in approving the 
mining plan without verifying the quantity of minerals projected by the prospective miner. 
 
Case Study 1 
(a)  One prospective miner21 under the jurisdiction of DDMG Kurnool recorded the total 
mineral reserve of the quarry as 23,530 cum 22 which included the reserve of 5,761 
cum other than proved and probable. As per UNFC guidelines the estimated reserve 
should have been taken as 16,370 cum (22,131 cum 23 - 5,761 cum) excluding other 
possible resources. Based on the projected annual production of 1,200 cum per year, 
the mining life was calculated as 18.44 years (22,131/1,200). Considering the reserve 
other than proved and probable, the mining life should have been 13.64 years  
(16,370/1200). Thus, the mining life of the quarry was escalated by 4.80 years, 
thereby the quarry site would be unnecessarily under the custody of miner for  
additional 4.80 years. 
(b) The DDMG is the authority to scrutinise and verify the mining plan for minor 
minerals. SEIAA being the granting authority of Environmental Clearance (EC) has 
to verify the correctness of the information produced by the prospective miner. 
A prospective miner 24 under the jurisdiction of DDMG, Visakhapatnam adopted 
incorrect reserve quantity of 8,99,031 cum instead of estimated quantity (as per form 
T) of 2,99,264 cum. The projected annual production was 53,825 cum  per year and 
the mining life was estimated as 17 years (8,99,031/53,825) instead of 5.55 years 
(2,99,264/53,825). Thereby the mining life was inflated  by 11.50 years (as detailed 
in Appendix II ). Thus, DDMG, without scrutiny, approved the mining plan with 
inflated mineral reserve and increased mining life by 11.50 years. 
The miner, while applying for EC with SEIAA, submitted the mineral reserve as 
5,71,695 cum instead of 2,99,264 cum , annual production as 57,015 cum per year 
instead of 53,825 cum per year and mining life of 10 years instead of 5.55 years. 
Thus, the information submitted to SEIAA was different from the  approved mining 
plan. SEIAA 25  approved EC for the figures mentioned by the miner without 
considering the figures mentioned in the approved mining plan. 
The DDMG accepted the audit observation and replied that the subject matter would 
be examined. 
 
21 M/s Imperial Granites Private Limited  
22 Proved: 12,008 cum; Probable: 5,761 cum; Other than proved and probable: 5,761  cum 
23 excluding buffer zone quantity of 1,399 cum i.e., 22,131 cum = 23,530 cum - 1,399 cum 
24 M/s Trendset Rocks for Road Metal & Building Stone 
25 the lessee should submit the application after grant of EC by SEIAA along with the copy of the Mining 
Plan 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
13 
The above case studies show  that the mining plans were approved without detailed and 
proper scrutiny of data/ information submitted by the prospective miners. Further, there was 
ineffective coordination between the Departments involved in the process for approving of 
mining plans and granting EC. 
The Government replied (January 2024) that instructions26 were issued to all DDMGs in the 
State to scrutinise the mining plans strictly in accordance with UNFC guidelines while 
approving the same. 
Recommendation 2.2 : The State  Government should ensure that mining plans are 
approved with proper evaluation by competent authority at all levels , to avoid inflated 
figures of mineral reserves projected by the prospective miners. 
2.1.3 Mechanism for collection remittance and utilisation of exploration funds 
National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET) 27  and Mineral Exploration, Research and 
Innovation Trust28 (MERIT) are two funds created by GoI and GoAP for major and minor 
minerals respectively. The objective of the two funds is to carry out regional & detailed 
scientific mineral exploration, research & innovation activities  and sustainable mining 
development by adoption of advanced scientific and technological practices  in the mining 
sector.  
(a) Levy, collection and remittance of royalty to MERIT fund 
As per GoAP orders issued (January 2016), two per cent of Seigniorage Fee29 (SF) shall be 
collected from minor mineral mining lease holders and remitted to MERIT fund to meet the 
expenditure for exploration activities of both major and minor minerals. 
Despite request made by Audit to furnish information on Seigniorage Fee (SF) collected on 
minor minerals and remittance of two per cent of SF to MERIT Fund, DMG did not furnish 
the relevant records showing SF earned during audit period.  However, statistical data on 
year-wise collection of two per cent of MERIT fund was provided.  Due to non-production 
of records, Audit could not verify the correctness of SF earned on minor minerals and 
subsequent collection of MERIT. 
In the absence of required documents and information, Audit considered the Finance 
Accounts of GoAP to arrive at the collection for MERIT. As per Finance Accounts, the total 
SF collection was ₹6,367.87 crore during the period 2017 -22 and two per cent of SF to be 
collected for MERIT was ₹127.37 crore. However, as per the information furnished by the 
Department, only ₹82.31 crore was shown as amount credited to MERIT Fund. Thus, there 
was a short collection and remittance of ₹45.06 crore (₹127.37 crore  - ₹82.31 crore) to 
MERIT Fund (as detailed in Appendix III (A)). 
The Government replied (January 2024) that an amount of ₹40.46 crore was collected from 
other Departments through challans during the period  2017-18 to 2021 -22. It was further 
stated that the levy and collection of MERIT shall take place only whenever the mineral 
 
26  office Memo. No. 19100/IAR/2023, dated 09.01.2024 
27 inserted (March 2015) by Ministry of Mines under MMDR Amendment Act, 2015   
28 Rule 5 of G.O. Ms. No. 18 Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 13.01.2016 
29 seigniorage fee is a charge by the owner (State Government) of the mineral in consideration of exploitation 
of mineral resource by the lessee 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
14 
quantity is removed and dispatched from the quarry. Therefore, the dead rent amount lapsed 
on account of non-dispatch of minerals, would not attract levy of MERIT. 
However, Government did not furnish supporting documents for SF collected through 
challans. Further, the reply of the Government does not quantify the amount of dead rent 
which lapsed on account of non-dispatch of the mineral.  
(b) Collection of royalty from Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation 
As per Para 5(iii) and 6 of GoAP  orders issued (January 2016), Andhra Pradesh Mineral 
Development Corporation (APMDC) shall deposit (from 2016 onwards) 10 per cent30 of its 
sales turnover to MERIT fund in addition to two per cent on Seigniorage Fee (SF). 
Scrutiny of records of DMG revealed that 10 per cent sales turnover from APMDC was not 
received towards MERIT since 2016.  DMG requested (September 2019) APMDC for 
payment of contribution towards MERIT. In reply, APMDC requested (November 2019) the 
Secretary (Mines) to exempt from payment, as APMDC was contributing two per cent of SF 
and its financial position was very precarious.  
However, no decision had  been taken by the Government on the request of APMDC till  
March 2022. The inaction of the Government resulted in non -collection of MERIT fund 
amounting to ₹476.55 crore (10 per cent of sales turnover of ₹4,765.47 crore) during 2016-
22 as detailed in Appendix III (B).  
The Government accepted the audit observation and replied (January 2024) that the matter 
is being pursued with APMDC for payment of 10 per cent of the sales turnover 
Thus, overall ₹521.6131 crore was pending to be credited to MERIT Fund. 
(c) Utilisation of MERIT fund  
The Mines & Geology Department has a dedicated exploration wing known as MERIT wing 
responsible for overseeing exploration activities. GoI provides 50 per cent of the cost of  
exploration towards major minerals and balance cost is borne by GoAP out of MERIT fund 
in addition to minor mineral exploration.  
Audit noticed that n o expenditure was incurred towards exploration activities for minor 
minerals during the period 2017 -22 out of MERIT fund, despite the Department having a 
dedicated exploration wing. Out of the total receipts of ₹82.31 crore in MERIT fund, ₹8.43 
crore was spent on exploration activities for major minerals and ₹2.56 crore towards 
administrative expenses during 2017-22 with balance funds of  ₹73.91 crore (inclusive of 
opening balance of ₹2.59 crore) lying in MERIT Fund (as detailed in Appendix IV). 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that exploration activities 
are being carried out for major minerals, mainly on manganese. For minor minerals, it was 
replied that no exploration activities are being taken up and Government is disseminating 
other States Policy on exploration of minor minerals. 
Thus, the Department did not focus on utilisation of revenue reali sed towards exploration 
activity of minor minerals and a very meagre amount  was spent on exploration of major 
minerals. Further, due to non -receipt of SF amount of ₹521.6 1 crore, mineral exploration 
 
30 para 5(iii) and 6 of G.O.Ms.No.18, Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 13.01.2016 
31 ₹476.55 crore + ₹45.06 crore 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
15 
activities could not be taken up to that extent. The objective of establishing MERIT had not 
been fulfilled. 
Recommendation 2.3:  An effective mechanism needs to be evolved for proper levy, 
collection, remittance of two per cent of seigniorage fee to designated fund of MERIT and 
to optimise the utilisation of funds for exploration of minerals. 
2.2 Granting of mining leases 
The mining lease is granted (Rule 10(1) to (3)) by GoAP for both major and minor minerals. 
For major minerals, the granting of mining leases  is done through  auction process since 
2015. In case of minor minerals, the granting of lease was done based on the application 
received till March 2022 i.e., prior to introduction of Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Auction 
(APMMA) Rules, 2022. The process for granting mining leases is as detailed below.  
Sl. 
No. 
Type of 
Mineral 
Procedure to be followed for mining leases 
1. Major 
minerals 
The State Government issues a Letter of Intent (LoI)32 for mining lease to 
the preferred bidder after complying with various terms and conditions 
mentioned in the Notice Inviting Tenders issued by DMG. 
Lessee shall obtain approval of mining plan from IBM and Environmental 
Clearances (EC) from MoEF&CC / SEIAA / DEIAA and CFE (Consent 
For Establishment) from APPCB.  
The ADMG shall execute lease deed after approval of mining lease by 
State Government. 
2. Minor 
minerals  
(Prior to 
introduction 
of APMMA 
Rules, 2022) 
On receipt of a valid application for grant of lease, ADMG shall send a 
copy of the plan along with details of the area applied for, to the Tahsildar 
concerned for issue of No Objection Certificate (NOC).  
The Tahsildar concerned shall send report to ADMG within a period of 
20 days from the date of receipt. If no report is received from the Tahsildar 
within the time limit, the matter shall be referred to the Joint Collector, 
who in turn shall provide NOC for the area within next 10 days.  
The ADMG shall submit report along with recommendations of the 
Tahsildar to DMG/DDMG concerned within 15 days from the date of 
receipt of report from the Tahsildar. 
The DMG/DDMG shall either issue  LoI or make recommendations to 
Government depending upon the delegation of powers within the period 
of 30 days. 
Consequent to the introduction of APMMA Rules 2022, all the previous 
applications for grant of quarry leases in government lands where LoI was 
not issued would become ineligible and the granting of the minor mineral 
mining lease would be through Auction. 
 
32 letter issued by the Department to the applicant as acceptance of Mineral Concession Application, for 
granting of the mining lease, subject to submission of documents and fulfillment of conditions mentioned 
therein 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
16 
On receipt of LoI, the applicant has to approach respective Departments and submit the 
approved statutory documents 33 within the prescribed time frame 34. The Mining Plan  and 
ECs are to be obtained from concerned authorities (as detailed in Appendix V).  
Consequent to the submission of the statutory documents within the specified time frame, 
the grant order is issued by the Government/  Department. The lease comes into force from 
the date of the execution of lease deed. 
2.2.1 Lack of data and absence of effective mechanism for granting of leases 
As per GoAP orders issued (November 2017) on expeditious disposal of Mineral Concession 
Applications (MCAs), ADMG is responsible for getting required clearances , execution of 
lease deeds and collection of statutory levies for minor minerals on receipt of grant orders 
from lease granting authority. The DDMG is responsible for issue of LoIs  for minor 
minerals, except 31 minor minerals in addition to Marble and Granite and approval of mining 
plans on receipt of applications from ADMG. The DMG is responsible for issue of LoIs for 
31 minor minerals in addition to Marble and Granite on receipt of applications from ADMG 
with instructions to submit statutory documents and issue of grant order for lease. 
(a) Effectiveness in maintenance of data on approval and grant of lease 
To ascertain the effectiveness for systems/ process in place from the receipt of applications 
to granting of leases, the required data was called from the respective sampled offices for 
the period  2017-22. However, the test -checked offices (except for DDMG, Kadapa and 
Vijayawada) did not have complete information on receipt of application to granting of 
leases (as detailed in Appendix VI (A)). 
Audit noticed the following lapses: 
(i) Letter of Intent (LoI) to the lessees should be issued within 75 days 35 from the date 
of receipt of Mineral Concession Applications (MCAs). 
During 2017-22, in four36 out of eight ADMGs, 976 MCAs were pending for want of No 
Objection Certificate ( NOC) from the Revenue Department. Further,  ADMGs did not 
forward 372 MCAs to obtain LoI from lease granting authorities (DDMGs/DMG) despite 
receipt of NOC. The respective ADMGs did not take any action/ did not pursue for disposal 
of pending MCAs  with respective authorities . Due to inaction of ADMGs, MCAs were 
pending for a period ranging between one to 10 years (as detailed in Appendix VI (B)). Out 
of total 1 ,348 MCAs  (976 + 372) , 294 MCAs were pending for more than five years.  
However, the Department did not furnish reasons for delay in processing of MCAs and also 
did not record any reasons in the concerned MCA files. 
(ii) As per GoAP orders issued (November 2017) on expeditious disposal of MCAs, 
DDMGs shall inspect the ADMG  offices quarterly to ensure that the directions of the 
Government for timely disposal of applications, are compiled with and the proposals are 
processed in accordance with the rules and regulations. The pendency in disposal of MCAs 
 
33 mining plan prepared by a Recognised Qualified Person, Environmental Clearance issued by SEIAA and 
Consent For Establishment issued by APPCB 
34 within one year for proposed lease area upto 25.00 Hectares and within two years  for proposed lease area 
above 25.00 Hectares or within such other period not exceeding one year as may be allowed by DMG  
35 20 days (Tahsildar) + 10 days (Joint Collector) + 15 days (ADMG) + 30 days (DMG/DDMG)  
36 Banaganaplle, Kadapa, Kurnool and Yerraguntla 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
17 
at ADMG level shows that DDMGs are not effectively inspecting the offices of ADMGs in 
their jurisdiction to ascertain the status of pending MCAs and reasons for delay in disposal 
of MCAs. 
(iii) The ADMGs were monitoring MCAs through excel data which lacked information 
regarding date of forwarding of MCA for NOC  to Revenue Department and to DDMGs / 
DMG for granting approval for  lease. In the absence of complete information , delay at 
various stages37 could not be established and verified. 
(iv) The DDMG Kurnool did not provide any information. In DDMG Kadapa  (370 
MCAs) and Vijayawada (107 MCAs), out of 477 MCAs received from ADMGs, lease was 
granted only in respect of 112 leases and other MCAs were pending for want of EC, approval 
of mining plan by granting authorities, etc. In DDMG Visakhapatnam, out of 101 MCAs 
issued with L oI, lease was granted for only 37 MCAs and status of other MCAs was not 
available with DDMG (as detailed in Appendix VI (C)). 
(v) The DMG maintained only the individual files  of MCAs received for approval . 
However, DMG did not have the consolidated data /information on number of MCAs 
received (from ADMG/DDMG) , L oIs issued, approval of mining plans , submission of 
documents such as EC, pollution clearance certificates , etc., and whether the MCAs were  
processed within the stipulated timeframe or not. 
The Government accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and statements of instruction 
were issued to process the application in time . Government replied that due to lack of 
sufficient manpower, the statistical information was not readily available at the time of 
Audit. However, instructions were issued to the staff in DMG office to maintain the 
information up to date and produce at the time of Audit. 
Thus, it is evident that there was lack of coordination between various levels of approvals 
and the system of granting of lease was non-transparent. Lack of data on status of MCAs at 
DMG level, deprives the Department in analysing the problems in early clearance of MCAs 
for grant of lease. This also indicates an ineffective system of data management and control 
over it. 
(b) Non-functioning of State Coordination cum Empowered Committee  
Government of Andhra Pradesh constituted ( December 2009) State Coordination cum 
Empowered Committee (SCEC) under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to 
Government along with Principal Secretaries of concerned Departments38 as member of the 
committee. The objectives of the SCEC were: 
• Coordinate with Revenue Department for managing the land for purposes of 
concession. 
• Ensure clearances/  NOCs/ approvals from Forest, Environment and other 
Departments in a streamlined way. 
• Monitor process of approval of concessions and compliance with concession 
conditions. 
 
37 receipt of application, pending for NOC, forwarding to granting authority, granting of lease, execution of 
lease deeds, etc. 
38 Forest, Revenue, Information Technology and Communication, Industries and Commerce  


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
18 
• Ensure building up of a computerised data base, effectively integrated with other 
State level databases. 
Audit noticed that despite the constitution of SCEC, no meetings were conducted during the 
period of audit. 
The DMG replied that SCEC meetings were not conducted as there was no need for the 
Committee with the introduction of auction system from March 2022 for minor minerals. 
The reply is not acceptable, as SCEC is responsible for monitoring and coordination between 
various Departments for quick and transparent approval of mining leases. The ineffective 
functioning of SCEC is one of the reasons for the delay in processing of MCAs and granting 
of leases.  
It is evident f rom above that despite having a clear roadmap, well established systems and 
availability of inter-departmental committee, Mines & Geology Department could not ensure 
speedy and effective clearance of M CAs and granting of leases, thereby impacting mineral 
exploration and utilisation of mineral resources . One case has been highlighted as a case 
study below: 
Case Study 2 
In ADMG Kadapa, an applicant39 applied (December 2014) for grant of quarry lease for 
removal of colour granite in an extent of 4.615 Hectare. The ADMG recommended (May 
2015) for grant of lease to DMG. The DMG issued LoI (May 2015)  with a condition to 
submit statutory documents. Accordingly, the applicant submitted (January 2016) 
approved mining plan, Consent For Establishment (CFE), Consent For Operation (CFO) 
and EC. The DMG granted (April 2016) lease for colour granite to the lessee  and lease 
deed was executed (June 2016). Permits were issued for removal of colour granite.  
Audit noticed that though LoI and the mining plan issued by DMG was for quarry of 
colour granite mineral, CFE, EC  and CFO obtained from APPCB and SEIAA was for 
black granite mineral. Thus, DMG without verifying the contents of the application , 
approved the lease which resulted in mismatch in the mineral to be quarried. 
Further, there was rate variation in seigniorage fee between colour and black granite based 
on their quality and types. The seigniorage fee of Black Granite varies between ₹3,000 to 
₹2,350 per cum when compared to colour granite between ₹2,350 to ₹2,000 per cum of 
similar quality. 
The ADMG Kadapa attributed (December 2022) the same to typographical mistake. DMG 
replied that the environmental authorities would be requested to issue rectified EC, CFE 
and CFO.  
From the records made available, Audit could not ascertain whether the mineral being 
extracted is colour or black granite to assess the revenue loss to the Exchequer. 
It is evident from the above that mining leases were granted by the concerned approving 
agencies without verifying MCAs in detail, which may lead to loss of revenue to the 
Exchequer. 
 
39  M/s CTP Granite & Exports 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
19 
During Exit Conference, t he Government  stated (March 2024) that earlier there was a 
committee, however,  after introduction of auction process this committee has become 
obsolete. However, this aspect would be looked into. 
Recommendation 2.4: The State Coordination cum Empowered Committee may be made 
functional to monitor and coordinate between various Departments for timely processing 
of mineral concession applications to avoid delay in granting of lease.  
2.3 Existence of inoperative leases  
As per Rule 20 of Mineral (Other than Atomic and Hydro carbon Energy Minerals) 
Concession Rules (MCR) 2016 and Rule 17 of Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Concession 
(APMMC) Rules 1966, mining operations should not be discontinued continuously for more 
than specific time period 40. The ADMG shall inspect the lease  premises and send the 
proposal to lease granting authority 41 for lapsing of a mining lease. The lease granting 
authority should act on the lapse d mining proposal received and record through an order 
issued by the State Government or Department and shall also communicate to the lessee. 
The lessee may apply to the Government or Department, explaining the reasons for  
non-lapsing of lease at least three months (major minerals) or thirty days (for minor minerals) 
before the expiry of such period. Provided where the lessee has failed to make the application 
within the time stipulated above, the lease shall lapse on expiry of the period of two years or 
six months. The role of all the offices in determination and surrender of mining leases is as 
below: 
Name of 
the Office 
Major Mineral Minor Mineral 
ADMG 
Initiate and forward the proposals to DMG after inspection and survey. 
Ensure whether the lessee has cleared all the dues payable to the Government under 
the lease upto the date of application. 
DDMG No role of DDMG Issue orders for minerals other than Marble, 
Granite and 31 minerals. 
DMG 
Forwards the proposals along 
with recommendations to the 
Government for orders. 
Issue orders for Marble, Granite and 31 minerals. 
2.3.1 Lack of consistency in data related to inoperative leases 
To ascertain the effectiveness of systems/ process in place for the cancellation, lapsing of 
the mining leases, the required data for the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 was verified (refer to 
Table 3.2). The number of non-working leases as of December 2021 was 268 for major 
minerals and 2,805 for minor minerals, however, the same was reduced to 42 and 1 ,495 by 
the end of September 2022 respectively. The reasons for sudden decrease in number of leases 
on two different dates was not on record. Further, the action taken on lapsed leases either to 
renew or terminate duly collecting the revenue in arrears, if any, was not on record. 
 
40 discontinued for a continuous period of two years (in case of major minerals  leases, 31 notified minor 
minerals, granite and marble) or six months (other minor mineral respectively) 
41 Government in case of major minerals, DMG in case of 31 listed minor minerals along with granite and 
marble, DDMG in case of other minor minerals 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
20 
Further, most of the ADMGs (five 42 out of eight sampled ADMGs) either did not maintain 
any information or provided nil information in this regard. Hence, the correctness of the data 
on lapsed mining leases could not be verified. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that difference in figure 
may be due to Court cases or lease may not be feasible for mining. However, Government 
have been conducting special drive regarding inoperative leases and a monthly review 
meeting is being conducted in respect of inoperative lease. The leases which are not working 
for longer period are being issued notices to go for auction process. 
However, the details of special drives conducted or minutes of the monthly review meeting 
conducted in respect of inoperative lease s were not furnished to audit to verify the reasons 
for abrupt decrease in number of leases . The absence of data at various levels indicates an 
ineffective system of data management and control over it. 
2.3.2 Ineffective system of processing of termination of inoperative leases 
The ADMG, Yerraguntla had forwarded (between August to December 2020) proposal for 
termination/ lapsing of three minor mineral mining leases to DMG as the leases were 
inoperative. Five ADMGs 43  have forwarded (during 2012 to 2021) the proposals for 
termination/ lapsing of 5 0 major mineral mining leases to DMG  as the leases were 
inoperative.  
Audit noticed that no action has been initiated by DMG on the proposals to lapse inoperative 
leases submitted by ADMGs ( as detailed in Appendix VII). Some of the major mineral 
mining leases were inoperative since 2004. Further, DMG did not have the consolidated data 
on lapsing/ termination of lease  proposals received from ADMGs or the proposals sent to 
the Government recommending for lapsing of inoperative leases. 
The Government accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and stated that the delay was 
caused due to non-initiation of action against non-working leases, due to lack of procedure 
and also due to lock down in COVID-19 pandemic.  
This shows an ineffective system of coordination between different authorities, monitoring 
and processing of termination of inoperative leases which resulted in keeping the leases idle 
without operation. Had timely decision been taken for termination of inoperative leases, the 
leased areas could have been brought to auction system (after introduction of new Auction 
Rules, 2022 in respect of minor minerals ) in respect of both major and minor minerals  for 
augmenting the revenue.   
2.4 Renewal of leases 
The renewal process for major and minor minerals leases shall be in accordance with 
Minerals (other than Atomic and Hydrocarbon Energy Minerals) Concession Rules (MCR) 
1960 & 2016 and A ndhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Concession (APMMC) Rules, 1966 & 
2022 as shown in Chart 2.1. 
 
42 Anakapalli, Kadapa, Kurnool, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam 
43 Anakapalli, Banganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool and Yerraguntla 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
21 
Chart 2.1: Showing the procedure for renewal of major/minor mineral mining leases 
RENEWAL PROCESS 
MAJOR MINOR 
Application shall be made to the State 
Government at least prior to 12 months 
before the expiry of the lease (MCR 
1960). 
The application for renewal should be made 
to DMG at least 12 months prior to expiry of 
lease for Marble, Granite and 31 minor 
minerals. In respect of remaining minor 
minerals to DDMG at  least 90 days prior to 
expiry of lease for renewal. 
If the renewal application is not disposed 
by the State Government, the period of the 
lease shall be deemed extended by further 
period till order is passed (MCR 1960). 
If the renewal application is not disposed by 
DDMG /DMG, the period of the lease shall 
be deemed extended by further period till 
order is passed (APMMC Rules). 
The clause of renewal of the leases was 
omitted from the Act after the amendment 
to the Act in 2016 (MCR 2016). 
The provisions of the renewal are still in 
force after the introduction of Andhra 
Pradesh Minor Mineral Auction Rules 2022. 
The leases have to go through auction 
after expiry of the lease period (MMDR 
Amendment Act 2015). 
 
2.4.1 Lack of data and absence of effective mechanism for processing the 
renewal applications  
(a) As per APMMC Rules, 1966, the renewal application received from the lessee prior 
to 12 months of the expiry of lease should be disposed of before expiry of the lease period. 
The DMG shall grant renewal for a period not exceeding 20 years subject to adherence to 
and non-violation of rules during the period of occupation by the lessee. 
To ascertain the effectiveness of systems/  process in place for disposal of renewal 
application (in case of minor minerals), the required data 44 was called for  in respective 
selected ADMGs/DDMGs and DMG for the period 2017-22. 
Audit noticed that  only ADMG Yerraguntla had maintained complete information on 
renewal of leases and other45 ADMGs did not maintain the data. The ADMG Vijayawada 
maintained partial data on renewal of leases. In Yerraguntla, only four out of 44 applications 
received were granted renewal, 19 were rejected and 21 were still pending  for approval. In 
Vijayawada, only 10 out of 46 applications were granted renewal. Similarly, in DDMGs, 31 
out of 135 applications were granted renewal with 47 applications pending for approval (as 
detailed in Appendix VIII). The reasons for pendency and delay in approval of renewal were 
not on record. 
The DMG did not maintain information about the status of renewal of applications for the 
entire State, instead at the instance of audit , the DMG requested the unit offices  to furnish 
the required information. 
In the absence of data availability, effectiveness of the system in place regarding processing 
of renewal of applications could not be ascertained. Audit could not quantify the number of 
 
44  number of applications received, renewal granted, application rejected and application pending 
45   Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool, Nandigama and Visakhapatnam 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
22 
leases rejected, and quantity of minerals extracted till rejection as the lease is deemed to be 
continued till final decision is made on the renewal application.  
(b) The Rules related to the disposal of the renewal application contradict their own 
provisions as the renewal applications are to be disposed of by the Department before the 
expiry of lease period and there is also a provision that the leases shall be deemed to be 
continued till disposal of the application. The rules and regulations framed should bring 
better control in functioning of a system.  
However, from the above it is seen that the rule of deemed continuation till disposal , is 
promoting inefficiencies in renewal of applications , allowing the Department to delay the 
disposal of renewal of applications and authorising the extraction  of minerals which 
otherwise were ineligible for extraction as the same was rejected on a later date as discussed 
in case study No. 4 under paragraph No.3.1.4(a). 
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that after introduction of 
auction policy (March 2022) all the leases w ould be treated as deemed renewal. 
Subsequently, if the lessee goes for renewal, then the lessee has to pay 10 times of dead rent 
and only on payment of dead rent, the renewal of lease would be allowed.  
2.4.2 Continuation of ineligible major mineral mining leases 
For major mineral  mining leases, GoI amended (Amendment Act, 2015) the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation), Act 1957 in January 2015. As per section 8(A), all 
mining leases shall be granted for a period of 50 years on and from the date of 
commencement of the Amended Act  2015. All mining leases granted before the 
commencement of Amendment Act, 2015 shall be deemed to have been granted for a period 
of 50 years. On the expiry of the lease period, the lease shall be put up for auction as per the 
procedure specified in this Act. 
Further, under section 10(A)(2)(c) where the Central Government has communicated 
previous approval for grant of a mining lease, or if an LoI has been issued by the State 
Government to grant a mining lease, before the commencement of Amendment Act, 2015, 
the mining lease shall be granted subject to fulfilment of the conditions of the previous 
approval or of LoI within a period of two years from the date of commencement of the 
Amendment Act 2015. 
Audit noticed that in four ADMGs 46, 14 leases (as detailed in Appendix IX) whose lease 
period expired during July 1987 to August 2014  were neither  cancelled nor renewed/ 
processed for allotment through auction as per the provisions of Amendment Act, 2015. 
Further, LoI was also not issued for these leases by State Government prior to January 2015. 
However, these were shown under the possession of the lessees in contravention to the Act 
provisions. Further, 12 out of 14 leases had expired between July 1987 and June 2007 and 
for the other two leases, neither were renewal applications received nor was LoI issued.  
In this regard, Audit scrutinised three cases and observations are enumerated as under. 
 
 
 
46 Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool and Yerraguntla 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
23 
Case Study 3 
(a)  A mining lease was granted (December 1982) to a lessee47 for extraction of multiple 
minerals48 over an extent of 1,000 acres of government land for a period of 20 years 
(till December 2002). Meanwhile, 130 acres of land was terminated (June 2001) from 
lessee for allotment of said land to Telugu Ganga Canal Project (TGCP).  Due to 
construction of TGCP, the lessee could not utilise even the balance extent of land  
during April 1998 to March 2002 . The State Government issued (February 2003) 
orders and extended the lease for the balance land of 870 acres for four years upto 
December 2006. 
Before expiry of extended lease period, the lessee filed (November 2005) renewal 
application with ADMG Kadapa. The ADMG communicated (March 2006) to DMG 
for grant of renewal  as the lessee had submitted the  mining plan for the period  
2006-07 to 2010-11 approved by IBM.  The details of grant of renewal of lease by 
DMG were not on record. The ADMG requested (May 2010) the lessee to erect the 
boundary pillars around the leased area. The lessee submitted (June 2010) that 
boundaries cannot be fixed without resurvey of land by the Revenue Department, as 
Telugu Ganga Canal is passing in the entire area. 
The District Collector, Kadapa informed (January 2014) that the Divisional Forest 
Officer, Proddatur has submitted (January 2014) a detailed report to the District 
Collector and requested for cancellation of mining lease as the area falls in Reserve 
Forest area of "Sri Lankamalleswara  Wildlife Sanctuary, Proddatur Range". 
However, final action taken in this regard was also not on record. 
Subsequently, GoI has issued (March 2015) Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulations) Amendment Act 2015. As per Section 8(3) of the Act 2015, all the 
mining leases granted prior to commencement of Act 2015, shall be deemed to have 
been granted for a period of 50 years. Accordingly, ADMG recommended (July 
2015) DMG for deemed extension of lease up to December 2032 (from 1982). The 
details of extension granted were not on record. 
Meanwhile, the lessee approached (April 2015) IBM for approval of mining plan . 
The IBM rejected (August 2015) the mining plan on the grounds of non-demarcation 
of the lease  area, anomaly in exploration and stated that working of lease without 
approved mining plan accounts for violation of Rule 13(1) of MCDR, 1988.  
The issue of permits was blocked as the lessee did not pay mineral revenue (dead 
rent, surface rent, cess on surface rent and interest) of ₹41.30 lakh for the year 2015-
16. As of March 2017, the arrears of mineral revenue increased to ₹44.78 lakh. 
 
47 V. Surya Prakash 
48 china clay, white clay, limestone, black marble, white shale and yellow ochre in the Survey Number 569 
of Pullur Village, Khajipeta Mandal, Kadapa District 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
24 
Finally, re-survey of leased area was completed in March 2018 and the mining lease 
area of 870 acres was demarcated. Meanwhile, the lessee expired (September 2018) 
and consequently, ADMG declared (December 2018) the successor 49 of earlier 
lessee as lessee of the mining lease. The ADMG belatedly recommended ( January 
2019) DMG to consider first renewal of mining lease for a further period of 20 years 
from December 2006 for an extent of 870 acres based on the revised sketch/  survey 
and to consider for extension of lease period upto 50 years from the date of initial 
grant of lease in the name of the successor lessee. 
The ADMG after conduct (July 2021) of inspection of the site, noticed violations 50 
and breaches committed by the lessee , and has sent (August 2021) a proposal to 
DMG for cancellation/lapse of the mining lease as the lessee has not paid the advance 
dead rent for the year 2021-22 and outstanding mineral revenue arrears accumulated 
to ₹1.09 crore as of March 2021. 
Audit noticed that:  
• As per Rule 22(4) of MCR, 1960, the State Government shall take decision 
to grant precise area for precise purpose and communicate such decision to the 
applicant. On receipt of the communication from the State Government of the precise 
area to be granted, the applicant shall submit a mining plan within a period of six 
months, or such other period as may be allowed by the State Government. 
However, the Department despite knowing the fact that the extent of land measuring 
130 acres was transferred (in June 2001) for TGCP, did not resurvey and demarcate 
the balance extent of land measuring 870 acres in favour of the lessee and did not 
enter into supplementary lease deed. The renewal application submitted (November 
2005) by the lessee was not renewed and  the Department allowed the lessee for 
extraction of minerals during December 2006 to September 2012. 
• Despite rejection (August 2015) of mining plan by IBM, on the grounds of 
non-demarcation of the lease area, the Department did not initiate any action to either 
demarcate the lease area or to terminate the lease.  
• The entire mineral bearing area was kept idle without operating the mine and 
was blocked, thereby  causing loss of revenue to the State Government. Despite 
violation committed by lessee and non -payment of arrears pending since 2015, the 
mining lease was not cancelled as of January 2024 . The details of outstanding 
revenue realised were not on record. 
• In 2018, ADMG sent proposals for cancellation of lease due to non-payment 
of arrears and subsequently, in 2019, recommended for deemed extension in favour 
of successor of the lessee. In 2021, ADMG sent proposals to DMG for termination 
of lease due to breaches51 noticed.  
 
49 V. Jaswanth (S/o V. Surya Prakash) being successor to late Sri V. Surya Prakash 
50 the lessee has not conducted mining operations since April 2015 i.e., more than six years and the lessee has 
not obtained dispatch permits since May 2015 
51 not operating for more than six years, not obtaining the dispatch permit since 2015, not having EC, CFE, 
CFO and pending arrears, etc. 


Chapter II – Exploration of minerals and granting of mining leases 
 
25 
Different course of proposals made at different times shows lack of commitment on 
the part of Department to settle the issue of demarcation of leased area and either to 
continue with the lease or to terminate. This caused idling of land without generating 
revenue. 
(b) A lease was granted (June 1987) to a miner 52 for an extent of 7.45 hectares over a 
period of 20 years (upto June 2007 ) for mining lease. Subsequently, the lessee 
applied (August 2006) for renewal of the lease for a further period of 20 years after 
the stipulated date . The ADMG submitted (June 2008) rejection proposals for 
renewal of lease to DMG. Action taken by DMG was not on record. Further, ADMG 
submitted (October 2012) the lapse proposals to DMG , as the lessee was not 
operating the mining lease since November 2004. Further, ADMG proposed 
(November 2018) not to consider for deemed extension of the lease 53. However, no 
action had been taken by DMG on the proposals as of March 2022. 
(c) A miner54 was granted (May 1978) a mining lease for limestone over an extent of 
20.785 hectares for a period of 20 years (upto  April 1998). The lessee filed 
application for renewal of lease (February 1997). The action taken by the Department 
in this regard was not on record. As the le ssee had stopped operation since 2000 , 
ADMG had sent proposals belatedly in August 2012  for lapse of lease with effect 
from November 2002 to DMG.  However, no action was taken by D MG.  Further, 
ADMG proposed (April 2018) not to consider for deemed extension as lease was not 
in operation, not having mining plan, EC and dues were payable to the Government.  
However, no action had been taken by the Department yet. 
Audit noticed that in both the cases (b) and (c) though ADMG had sent proposals for 
rejection of renewal application, DMG had not taken action to lapse the leases. 
In the above cases, instead of lapsing the lease and proceeding for auction as per amended 
Act 2015, the Department allowed the ineligible lessees to continue the possession of mining 
areas. This inaction of the Department not only resulted in preventing the Department to 
proceed for auction of the said premises but also resulted in loss of revenue. 
The Government replied (January 2024) that lease period in respect of eight leases55 had 
been extended as per Government order (January 2023)56 for 50 years under section 8(A)(5) 
of MMDR Act, 2015. In respect of remaining leases, Government replied that action is yet 
to be taken as per rules.  
However, Government did not furnish copies of orders issued for renewal of leases. Further, 
it was evident that the ineligible leases continued without any proper action.  
Recommendation 2.5: The State Government should ensure that the Mines and Geology 
Department periodically reviews and renews the leases within the lease period and 
resumes inoperative mining areas to avoid unauthorised mining activity beyond the lease 
period. 
 
52 Smt. V. Krishna Veni for limestone (Survey Number 545/4) of Velpula Village, Vemula Mandal  
53 as the lease was not in operation, not having mining plan, EC and dues payable to the Government  
54 Sri S. A. Saleem (Sy. No. 279/1, 284 & 292/B) of Velpula Village, Vemula Manda l 
55  M/s Panyam Cements & Minerals Industries Limited and V. Surya Prakash 
56  G.O.Ms.No.5, Industries and Commerce Department (M.III), dated 25.01.2023 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
26 
2.4.3 Non-registration of lease deeds 
Section 8A (5) of MMDR Act 2015, stipulates that where mineral is used for captive purpose, 
period of lease shall be extended and be deemed to have been extended up to a period ending 
March, 2030 with effect from the date of expiry of the period of renewal last made or till the 
completion of renewal period, if any, or a period of 50 years from the date of grant of such 
lease, whichever is later. The GoAP amended57 (March 2022) the Rule 4 of APMMC Rules 
1966 mandating the extension of all existing minor mineral mining leases up to 31 March 
2023. 
As per Rule 7(13) of MCR 2016, the date of commencement of a mining lease shall be from 
the date of registration of mining lease deed. The lease deed must be executed within 30 
days from the date of grant/renewal of lease for major minerals, 60 days in respect of Granite, 
Marble and 31 minerals and 90 days for other minor minerals. Further, as per Section 17 of 
Indian Registration Act, 1908, any lease beyond the period of one year shall compulsorily 
be registered. Stamp duty at the prescribed rates 58, depending upon the period of the lease, 
must be collected on leases, as mentioned in the Indian Stamp Act59. 
Audit noticed that during 2017-18:  
• In four out of eight sampled ADMGs, for 31 out of 148 limestone (major mineral) 
leases, the lease deeds were not executed and registered under Registration Act (as detailed 
in Appendix X (A) ). This resulted in loss of revenue of ₹16.2 5 crore to the Exchequer 
towards stamp duty and registration fee.  
• In two out of eight sampled ADMGs, for 37 out of 503 minor mineral mining leases, 
the lease deeds were not executed and registered under Registration Act (as detailed in  
Appendix X (B)). This resulted in loss of revenue of ₹32.95 lakh to the Exchequer towards 
stamp duty and registration fee. 
The concerned ADMGs ( Kadapa, Kurnool, and Banaganapalle) replied that lease deed 
would be executed after receipt of the orders from the higher authorities. 
• The DMG did not have the information of number of leases for which deeds have 
been executed/not executed in the State. During the Exit Conference, the Government stated 
(March 2024) that the issue would be examined. 
Thus, non-registration of lease agreement not only postponed the accrual of revenue to the 
State Exchequer but would also allow the lessees to violate contractual obligations. Further, 
non-maintenance of data at DMG office showed that the monitoring mechanism in the 
Department is ineffective. 
Recommendation 2.6 : The State Government should ensure that all the mining lease 
deeds are executed and registered under the Stamp Act to avoid loss of revenue to 
Exchequer. 
 
57   G.O.Ms.No.13, Industries and Commerce Department (M.III), dated 14.03.2022 
58 for lease period exceeding five years and up to 10 years: two per cent on Average Annual Rent (AAR), for 
lease period exceeding 10 years and up to 20 years: six per cent on AAR, for lease period exceeding 20 
years and up to 30 years: 15 per cent on AAR and for lease period exceeding 30 years: three per cent of the 
Market value. Registration fee is 0.1 per cent of AAR 
59 article 31 of Schedule I-A to Indian Stamp Act, 1899 


 
 
Removal of Minerals and  
Realisation of Associated Revenues 
Chapter III 
Pages 27 - 43 

 
 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
27 
Chapter III 
 Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The lessee commences removal of minerals from the mines after obtaining necessary 
statutory clearances, approval of mining plan and grant of lease by the competent authority. 
The annual quantity fixed in the mining plan is the maximum permitted quantity of the 
mineral that can be extracted and transported from the mines.  
Initially, the lessees have to  pay a security deposit at the time of registration of lease deed . 
Dead Rent60 for the first year shall be paid by the lessee at the time of execution of lease 
deed and in advance for the subsequent lease years. After extraction of minerals and while 
obtaining permit61, the lessees have to pay seigniorage fee/ royalty, exploration fund (NMET 
and MERIT) , amount towards District Mineral Foundatio n 62 (DMF), Consideration 63 
amount, etc., on the quantity and type of mineral proposed for removal in the permit. 
The role of the Mines & Geology Department and other regulatory authorities for the grant 
of permits for removal of minerals, collection of revenues and inspection of mining leases is 
as shown in Chart 3.1.  
 
60 dead rent is the minimum amount to be paid for the lease at the specified rates for different minerals 
61 the permission taken by the lessee for dispatch of mineral is known as permits 
62 the amendment in 2015 to MMDR Act  brought the provision for establishment of District Mineral 
Foundation for the welfare of mining affected areas by using contributions from the mining activities  
63 levied (from June 2021) as per G.O Ms.No.42 at the time of issuing permit for minor minerals to mitigate 
the impact of disaster and epidemic by providing rehabilitation/ employment, health infrastructures , etc. 
Contrary to  the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Department 
allowed excavation of minerals without and in excess of quantity mentioned in 
environmental clearance . Minerals required for government works were 
extracted without required clearance certificate from the Mines and Geology  
Department. As a result, the quantum of seigniorage fee to be received from user 
Departments is not known and provides scope for illegal excavation of minerals. 
Mineral Revenue Assessments and D emand Collection Balance, the crit ical 
records to assess the types of minerals, quantities removed, revenues realised and 
pendency were not prepared regularly either manually or digitally . There was 
delay in implementation of levy of annual compensation fee, non /short levy and 
collection of dead rent at the enhanced rate. The minor mineral was treated as 
major mineral despite clarification given by Indian Bureau of Mines resulting in 
loss of revenue. The very objective of collection of security deposit and financial 
assurance is to act as deterrent, in case of breaches of contractual obligations and 
non-fulfilment of the mine closure plan . However, there was short collection or 
non-forfeiture of security deposit.  
 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
28 
Chart 3.1: Showing the role of Mines & Geology Department in removal of minerals 
 
3.1 Process and system for removal of minerals  
As per Rule 34 of APMMC Rules 1966, t he lessee needs to obtain permit from ADMG 
before removal of minerals from the granted lease area and after payment of the statutory 
levies. The application for the permit should contain information related to lease, type of 
mineral, extracted quantity, transportation of minerals, payment particulars and purpose64 of 
extraction. Upto November 2014, these permits were issued through manual process. 
In order to streamline the system, to make the process of issuing permits time efficient and 
to decrease the manual interventions in issuing the permits, GoAP launched ( December 
2014) Online Mineral e-Permit System (OMEPS) or e-permit system. OMEPS enables the 
lease/stake holders to take the permission for dispatch of mineral from their leased areas to 
stocks points or end user in Online mode. 
3.1.1 Implementation of e-permit system 
In e-permit system, details of the leases are compiled and uploaded by the Department and 
the lessees are provided with login credentials for application of permits. The levies to be 
paid are generated automatically for online payment by the lessee,  after validation of the 
details filled. The permits are generated by the system automatically for despatching/  
transportation of the mineral. 
Audit noticed that: 
 
64 own consumption or for sale. In case of sale, the name and address of the purchaser should be furnished  
Approval for 
removing the 
mineral
• The ADMG should verify the application for permit for
removal of minerals from the leased area.
Revenue realised 
during issuing of 
permits
• The ADMG shall ensure revenue collection such as
Seigniorage Fee/Royalty, Exploration fund receipts, DMF
receipts, etc., at the time of issuing permits on the quantity
and type of mineral propsed for removal specified in the
permits.
Other Receipts
• The ADMG shall see that other receipts such as dead rent,
security deposit, etc., are paid by the miners prior to
commencement of lease.
Inspections, 
penalty and 
revision
• Inspection of mine and minerals shall be carried out by the
Mines & Geology Department and other empowered
agencies such as Indian Bureau of Mines, Director General
of Mines Safety.
• Penalty to be imposed on the defaulters.
• The aggrieved party can approach State Government on the
decisions of the Department.


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
29 
➢ The Department allowed permits in two modes i.e., auto e -permit and normal  
e-permit. In auto e -permit, where the lessees have all statutory clearances , requisite 
information and receipt of payments, permits were generated automatically to despatch the 
minerals from the lease area. However, where there was no internet connectivity and leases 
where SEIAA clarified that EC for the leases is not required,  normal e-permit system i.e., 
manual intervention was followed. In these cases, the lessees can approach ADMGs for issue 
of normal e-permits. 
➢ For minerals used in government works, the e-permit system was not followed, and 
the contractors engaged by Works/Engineering Departments were allowed to lift the mineral 
through manual procedure as was being followed since March 1999 ( detailed procedure 
discussed in paragraph 3.1.4). 
➢ Though the re was increase in issue of auto e -permits compared to normal  
e-permits during 2017-22, still normal e-permits were continued as detailed in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Details of revenue realisation by both modes of e-permits 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Number of e-permits Revenue realised from Total 
Revenue 
realised 
Auto Normal Total Auto  
e-permit 
Normal  
e-permit 
Permits for 
Government 
works 
2017-18 3,368 31,661 35,029 314 621 454 1,389 
2018-19 8,889 29,722 38,611 576 457 483 1,516 
2019-20 24,823 20,945 45,768 804 250 422 1,476 
2020-21 33,238 12,713 45,951 866 188 340 1,394 
2021-22 40,157 10,499 50,656 990 166 432 1,588 
Total 1,10,475 1,05,540 2,16,015 3,550 1,682 2,131 7,363 
Source: Online mineral e-permit system (https://www.mines.ap.gov.in/permit/) 
It can be seen from the above table that there was an increasing trend in revenue generation 
through auto e -permit system. This is a progressive step towards improving transparency 
and accountability in granting of permits.  
Thus, despite lapse of more than eight years from the date of introduction of e -permits, the 
Department did not take steps to minimise the issue of normal e-permits to have transparency 
in issue of permits, revenue collection and avoid any kind of manual intervention. 
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that without EC, the 
Department cannot issue permit as stated in the departmental manual. However, Government 
assured that the details mentioned in the audit observation would be verified and a detailed 
reply would be furnished. 
3.1.2 Lacunae in e-permit system 
The Online Mineral e -Permit System (OMEPS)  facilitates the lessees to apply and obtain 
permits remotely as and when required on payment of all the statutory levies electronically 
and further allows the Department to deposit revenues to various heads . The system 
calculates revenues based on specific rates fixed by the Government from time to time. 
However, Audit noticed some deficiencies in OMEPS as detailed below. 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
30 
(a) Discrepancies in data 
The OMEPS portal depicts the list of leases on any given day  and is updated by the 
authorised officials of DMG office. 
The status of leases in the entire State  on different dates of visit by Audit Team (as of 30 
December 2021 and 27 September 2022) to DMG Office revealed variation in data 
maintained manually and in OMEPS as shown in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Showing the details of mining leases in the State 
Date Source Major Mineral Mining 
Leases 
Minor Mineral Mining 
Leases 
Total 
leases 
Working Non-
working 
Total Working Non-
working 
Total 
30 
December 
2021 
DMG 166 268 434 2,791 2,805 5,596 6,030 
OMEPS 
portal 131 51 182 2,096 1,136 3,232 3,414 
Difference 35 217 252 695 1,669 2,364 2,616 
27 
September 
2022 
DMG 132 42 174 2,795 1,495 4,290 4,464 
OMEPS 
portal 143 40 183 2,260 1,225 3,485 3,668 
Difference (-)11 2 (-)9 535 270 805 796 
Source: Information provided by the Department and OMEPS portal of Mines and Geology Department 
The above table indicates the inconsistencies of data between the manual records and 
OMEPS portal being maintained by DMG. This also indicates that the Department has no 
system to correctly ascertain basic details of number of working/non-working mining leases 
to assess the revenue realised and to be realised. 
The response of the Government is awaited. 
(b) Short collection of revenue due to non-adoption of higher value  
As per Government orders 65, Seigniorage Fee (SF) for the Limestone Slab Black (minor 
mineral) applicable during the audit period (2017-22) is as detailed below: 
From To Rate applicable (whichever is higher) 
03.11.2016 10.02.2020 ₹five per Sq. m or ₹100 per Metric Tonne (MT) 
11.02.2020 31.03.2022 ₹six per Sq. m or ₹110 per MT 
The Government order stipulate d that t he higher rate between the two measuring units  
(Sq. m or MT) should be adopted for calculation of SF. 
Scrutiny of records of ADMG Banaganapalle, revealed that for conversion of Sq.m to MT, 
ADMG had adopted a conversion factor of one MT equal to 14 Sq.m. Further, scrutiny of 
Mineral Revenue Assessment (MRA) of nine lessees revealed that the e-permit system was 
not programmed with the facility to convert one unit to another. As a result, the value of the 
mineral in auto e -permit system was arrived at,  without adopting higher of the two rates , 
based on the rates of measurement units provided by the lessee.  
 
65 G.O. Ms. No. 100 Industries and Commerce Department (M.I),  dated 31.10.2015, G.O . Ms. No. 156, 
Industries and Commerce Department (M.II),  dated 03.11.2016, and G.O.Ms.No.11 Industries and 
Commerce Department (M.II), dated 11.02.2020   


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
31 
Audit calculated SF and noticed that there was short levy of SF of  ₹80.25 lakh  due to  
non-adoption of higher rate using conversion factor (One MT = 14 Sq. m) during 2017-22. 
Consequently, DMF (10 per cent of SF66) and MERIT (two per cent of SF) were also short 
levied by ₹eight lakh and ₹1.60 lakh respectively (as detailed in Appendix XI). 
The ADMG replied (December 2022) that MRAs would be revised and the amount would 
be collected.  
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that the Department had 
taken initiatives to get the accuracy of minerals removed, however, there was resistance from 
the lease holders. As a result, the Department was unable to measure the minerals removed/ 
dispatched. However, MRAs would be verified and detailed reply would be furnished. 
Thus, lack of required provisions in auto e-permit software resulted in a short levy of SF and 
associated revenues. 
(c) Provision for auto deduction of amount towards exploration funds 
Scrutiny of e-permit system or OM EPS revealed that for some of the minerals though 
royalty/SF were collected through online  system, there was no provision for levy and 
collection of the corresponding NMET67/MERIT while issuing permits. The non-provision 
of NMET/MERIT in e -permit system resulted in non-deduction of NMET (₹61 lakh) and 
MERIT (₹0.59 lakh) receipts of ₹62.08 lakh (as detailed in Appendix XII (A) & (B)) for the 
period 2017-22. 
Automatic non-deduction of NMET and MERIT, while issuing permits is a serious lapse in 
the design of e-permit system.  
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that NMET and MERIT 
were collected manually, however, now a provision has been inserted in the online portal to 
collect NMET/MERIT in e-permit system.  
However, Government did not furnish any convincing document to show that NMET and 
MERIT were collected manually and also proof that a provision has been made in the online 
portal for levy and collection of NMET and MERIT.  
3.1.3 Non-adherence to Supreme Court directions 
In compliance to Hon’ble Supreme Court of India order s (February 2012), the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests (MoEF), GoI  informed (May 2012) all State Governments that all 
leases, irrespective of the size of the leases and nature of mineral henceforth would require 
prior Environment C learance (EC). For minor minerals with lease area less than five 
hectares, the respective State Environment Impact Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs) would 
issue EC as notified by MoEF. The same was again reiterated in January 2016 by MoEF.  
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India held 68 (August 2017) that extraction of mineral over 
and above what is permissible under the mining plan or under the  EC undoubtedly attracts 
the provisions of penalties  (Section 12 (5) of MMDR Act).  Further, penalty under the 
 
66   G.O. Ms. No. 157, Ind & Com.(M-II) Dept, dated 03.11.2016  
67   GoI Notification vide GSR 632(E) dated 14.8.2015, levied at two per cent of royalty collected on major 
minerals 
68 common cause vs the Union of India vide W.P.(Civil) No. 114/2014 dated 02.08.2017 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
32 
provisions is applicable when any person raises, without any lawful authority, any mineral 
from any land. In that event, the State Government is entitled to recover from such person 
the mineral so raised or where the mineral has already been disposed of, the price thereof as 
compensation. 
(a) Removal of mineral without Environmental clearance 
As per the direction (February 2012/August 2017) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court , 
irrespective of size of the mining lease area, the quarrying /extraction of mineral is permitted 
only if prior EC has been obtained from the concerned authority and drawal of quantity in 
excess of permissible quantity as mentioned in mining plan is not allowed. The non -
compliance shall be treated as illegal and penalty as per the provisions of the Act  is to be 
levied. 
Scrutiny of records of Mines & Geology Department revealed that the mining leases were 
categorised as leases of less than five hectares and more than five hectares.  
Audit noticed that in contravention to the Hon’ble Supreme Court directions, three 69 
ADMGs, allowed 55 lessees having lease area less than five hectares to remove minerals 
without obtaining ECs during the audit period . Similarly, seven ADMGs 70, allowed 104 
lessees having lease area of more than five hectares to remove minerals without having ECs 
during 2017-22. The removal of minerals without obtaining ECs should have been treated 
as illegal. 
However, the Department had not treated the removal of mineral without EC as illegal and 
had not recovered the cost of the mineral which resulted in  non-levy of penalty 71  of 
₹19.74 crore in case of three minor minerals for area less than five hectares (as detailed in 
Appendix XIII(A)) and ₹229.47 crore in case of eight minerals for area more than five 
hectares (as detailed in Appendix XIII(B)). The Department should fix responsibility on the 
concerned officials for allowing removal of minerals by lessees without obtaining EC. 
In response to Audit observation, SEIAA replied (April 2023) that the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court orders are valid for all leases operated irrespective of the extent of the lease or the 
lease granted before specific date. The reply of SEIAA is commensurate with the observation 
made by Audit. 
During Exit Conference, t he Government stated (March 2024) that due to  
miscommunication between SEIAA and the Depar tment, penalty was not being imposed . 
The Government stated that all such issues would be reviewed and detailed reply would be 
furnished. 
 
 
69 Banaganapalle, Kurnool and Nandigama 
70 Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Nandigama, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla  
71  penalty at the rate of the prevalent rule i.e., five times of the normal seigniorage fee. Normal seigniorage 
fee at the time of the audit was taken for the calculation 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
33 
(b) Removal of mineral more than the quantity permitted 
Audit noticed that during 2017-22 in three ADMGs72, four lessees have excavated minerals 
(Road metal and Gravel:  1,70,722 cum and Yellow Ochre:  30,350 MT) in excess of the 
quantity mentioned (Road metal and Gravel: 66,087 cum and Yellow Ochre: 19,950 MT) in 
EC. The excess quantity removed should have been treated as illegal as per the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court orders. As such, the lessee should be penalised for the excess quantity 
excavated. The cost of minerals that has to be recovered from the lessee as penalty amounts 
to ₹4.94 crore (as detailed in Appendix XIV). The Department should fix r esponsibility on 
the concerned officials for allowing removal of minerals by lessees in excess of permitted 
quantity. 
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that due to remote location of 
lessee and lack of internet connection , removal of minerals more than quantity permitted 
occurred and due to lack of infrastructure , exception to the lessee s are given . However, 
Government stated that a detailed reply would be furnished. 
Allowing the lessees to extract minerals in excess of the quantity mentioned in EC shows 
lack of monitoring mechanism on the part of the Department. 
3.1.4 Utilisation of minerals for government works 
For minerals to be used in government works, the procedure detailed (March 1999) 73 by 
GoAP is being followed. As per the laid procedure, the contractors engaged by Works/ 
Engineering Departments can lift the mineral without the production of clearance certificate 
from the Mines & Geology Department. Further, SF is deducted by the concerned 
Works/Engineering Department from the bills of the contractor for the minerals used in the 
works and subsequently, remitted to DMG account.  
(a) Absence of monitoring mechanism for minerals consumed in government 
works 
Audit noticed that the procedure followed for removal of minerals used in government works 
was in contravention to the procedure mentioned in rule 10(3)(b) of APMMC Rules, 1966. 
The rules stipulate that a statutory levy (Seigniorage Fee, Dead Rent, etc.) shall be paid by  
lessee before the mineral is removed from the leased area along with permit. 
Due to the procedure of lifting of the mineral without permits/clearance certificate being 
followed for minerals used in government works, ADMGs were unaware of the nature and 
quantity of minerals utilised in government works along with SF to be received against the 
amount received.  
The ADMG Kadapa and Yerraguntla replied (December 2022) that SF is being deducted by 
the consuming Departments from the work bills of the contractors and credited to the Mines 
& Geology Head of Accounts . The DMG stated that there is provision to deduct SF by the 
concerned Engineering Departments from the running account bills of the concerned works. 
In the absence of information on nature and quantity of minerals removed/used, the revenue 
realised from the Engineering Departments (Water Resource Department, Roads & 
 
72 Anakapalli, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla 
73  G.O. Ms. No. 23, I&CAG (PW: COD) Department, dated 05.03.1999 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
34 
Buildings, etc.) could not be ascertained. Hence, the revenues receivable for minerals utilised 
for government works cannot be ascertained. 
Further, A udit noticed that  in case of permit system, revenues are realised prior to  
extraction/transportation of minerals. However, in respect of government works, revenues 
were realised after consumption of minerals which de fers the revenue receipts of the 
Department. There was no mechanism in place to inspect extraction and subsequent 
transportation of minerals from lease are a to work spot to prevent any instances of mis -
utilisation/illegal utilisation of minerals, if any.  
The absence of monitoring mechanism is encouraging the possibilities of illegal mining 
activities and the Department is not in a position to ascertain the legality of minerals 
extracted without permits, as is evident from the case study made in this regard. 
Case Study 4 
In ADMG Kadapa , a lease was granted 74 (March 2009)  for a period of 10 years for 
quarrying road metal and building stone in seven acres of land. Prior to termination of 
lease period (March 2019), the lessee applied (January 2019) for renewal of lease within 
the prescribed time.  Accordingly, inspection of the leased area was conducted (June 2019) 
by the Mines & Geology Department. During inspection , the Department measured the 
pits and noticed that the extracted quantity (65,329.99 cum) from the lease area was more 
than the quantity allowed in permit (20,642.00 cum) obtained by the lessee during the 
same period.  
The lessee replied that the excess quantity of road metal of 44,687.9 9 cum was supplied 
to various contractors for use in government works. The Department enquired (July 2019 
and June 2022) the concerned Engineering Departments to confirm the genuineness of the 
material used in the government works. However, there was no response from the 
Engineering Departments.  
Pending receipt of response from Engineering Departments, the Department issued (July 
2019) LoI to the lessee and granted (January 2021) renewal of lease  (effective from May 
2019) for another 15 years . Further, in the absence of the report related to the mineral 
utilised from the Engineering Departments, ADMG issued (December 2021)  demand 
notice for payment of penalty of ₹2.94 crore towards SF together with five times of 
penalty, DMF, MERIT and consideration amount  for the excess dispatched quantity of 
road metal. Subsequently, the renewal of lease granted (February 2022) was cancelled as 
the lessee failed to execute the quarry lease deed within the stipulated period. 
The action taken against the lessee by the Department for collection of SF, penalty, etc., 
as mentioned in demand notice was not on record. 
Thus, due to lack of mechanism for monitoring minerals removed and utilised in 
government works, the Department failed to identify the excess/unauthorised extraction 
of mineral over the permitted limit and lost the opportunity to curb revenue loss . Such 
incidents also give an opportunity to lessees to extract excess minerals over the permitted 
limit by stating that the excess mineral was removed for government works. 
 
74 in Survey Number 1596 of Gopagudipalli village, Ramapuram mandal 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
35 
During Exit Conference, the Government accepted (March 2024) that this was the earlier 
practice, as per the orders issued in March 1999. It was further stated that Inter-departmental 
committee has since been constituted to look after mineral consumed in other Departments. 
The Department is also developing a portal that would sort out all these issues. The software 
to be developed would contain details of minerals consumed in other Departments. 
(b) Non-realisation of DMF and MERIT for minerals consumed in government 
works 
As per DMF Rules (GoAP orders issued in March 2016) , all lease holders of major/minor 
minerals shall, in addition to royalty/SF pay to the respective DMF, an amount equivalent to 
30 per cent of royalty/SF, if the lease has not been granted through auction. If the lease has 
been granted through auction,  10 per cent of royalty/SF would be levied . As per MERIT 
Rules, all lessees of minor minerals shall pay two per cent of SF at the time of removal of 
minerals for all permits issued from 2016 onwards.  The rules do not provide any specific 
exemptions for levy and collection of DMF and MERIT for government works. 
Audit noticed that: 
➢ DMF and MERIT at prescribed percentages were not levied and collected from the 
contractors of government works by the concerned Engineering75 Departments. As a result, 
there was non-levy and collection of DMF of ₹639.30 crore 76 and MERIT of ₹42.62 crore 
during 2017-22 (as detailed in Appendix XV).  
➢ In other States 77  of the country, DMF was levied and collected for minerals 
consumed in government works without any specific exemption. 
Thus, there was a loss of ₹681.92 crore due to non-levy of DMF and MERIT on the minerals 
used in government works. 
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that after introduction of 
DMF and MERIT, initially DMF and MERIT were collected from the private party , 
however, not from other Government Department. The Government also stated that now, a 
portal is developed to estimate minerals consumed in other government works and integrated 
with government portal to streamline the process. 
Recommendation 3.1: The State Government may revise the previous orders for removal 
of minerals, without clearance certificate for minerals utilised in government works, to 
avoid any kind of illegal excavation and to account for the minerals with definite revenue 
realisation. 
 
75 Water Resources Department, Roads & Building Department, APIIC, Polavaram Irrigation Project, etc. 
76 Seigniorage Fee realised during 2017-22 under government works was ₹2,131 crore 
77 Kerala, Karnataka, Telangana, Odisha, Maharashtra, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Goa 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
36 
3.1.5 Short levy of penalty due to incorrect adoption of rate  
In case of minor mineral mining leases (provisions as stipulated in Rule 26 of APMMC 
Rules, 1966), if any person carries out quarrying operations or transports minor minerals 
without any lawful authority, the penalty shall be levied at 10 times of SF along with normal 
SF (as amended by Government order July 2020).  
Audit noticed that in ADMG Banaganapalle, penalty was imposed (January-March 2022) on 
10 lessees for extracting and transporting minerals without permits. However, it was noticed 
that the penalty was incorrectly calculated based on the quantity measured in Sq.m instead 
of MT being higher of the two measuring units (refer paragraph 3.1.2 (b)). The rate of SF 
leviable for the minor mineral (LSS Black)78 was ₹six per Sq.m or ₹110 per MT, whichever 
is higher. The non-compliance of stipulated rule to levy the higher rate resulted in short levy 
of penalty by ₹4.43 crore as detailed in Appendix XVI (A).  
Consequently, the short collection of SF in the form of penalty also resulted in short levy of 
DMF and MERIT of ₹three lakh and ₹0.60 lakh respectively. Further, consideration 
amount 79 was also not levied for the penalties amounted t o ₹1.27 crore as detailed in  
Appendix XVI (B). The adoption of incorrect rate resulted in a total non-levy of ₹5.73 crore80 
of penalty. 
The Government accepted (January 202 4) the audit observation and demand notices in 
respect of 10 defaulters were issued. 
3.1.6 Non-assessment of DMF and MERIT 
Government introduced DMF Rules 81 in 2016 wherein it was mentioned that an amount at 
the rate of 30 per cent of SF/Royalty was to be levied and collected for the mineral extracted 
from the leases granted without auction and at 10 per cent for the leases granted through 
auction towards DMF. Further, DMF rates for granites were fixed at 12.5 per cent of SF 
during audit period82 and MERIT has to be levied at two per cent on SF.   
Audit noticed that in four ADMGs83 in 71 penalty cases (for different minerals) for various 
offences, the normal SF and penalty were levied and collected at applicable rates. However, 
the corresponding DMF and MERIT, which are charged on the normal SF, were not levied 
(as detailed in the Appendix XVII). The non-levy of DMF and MERIT amounts to ₹86.13 
lakh and ₹6.05 lakh respectively.  
In addition to above, Audit noticed that the Department did not maintain the data related to 
total penalty levied mineral -wise and year wise, the place of the occurrence of the 
unauthorised activity, head of account to which the SF collected in respect of penalties was 
accounted for. In the absence of above information, the genuineness of collections and 
deposit of mineral revenue could not be ascertained. 
 
78 G.O. Ms. No. 11, Industries and Commerce Department (M-II), dated 11.02.2020 
79 it’s a levy at 50 per cent of SF for granite and 100 per cent of SF for remaining minor minerals as per orders 
effective from June 2021 
80 (₹4.43+₹1.27+₹0.006+₹0.03) crore  
81 G.O.Ms.No.36, Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 14.03.2016 
82 G.O. Ms. No. 30, Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 16.02.2017 
83 Kurnool, Kadapa, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
37 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that in this regard fresh 
circulars would be issued to assess the DMF and MERIT. 
3.1.7 Levy of penalty for unauthorised extraction 
As per Rule 26 (1) & (2) of APMMC Rules, 1966, if any person carries on quarrying 
operations or transports minor minerals in contravention of these rules, he shall be liable to 
pay as penalty, such enhanced seigniorage fee together with assessments as may be imposed 
by an Officer nominated by the Director of Mines and Geology (DMG). Such minerals may 
be seized by an Officer nominated by the DMG in this behalf in addition to the imposition 
of the penalty. 
(a) Incorrect adoption of rule 
As per amended Government order issued in March 2016,  the person shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend 
to ₹five lakh along with double the market value of the mineral or both.  
Audit noticed that in ADMG Banaganapalle, in two cases84, where minerals were transported 
(February 2020), penalty (refer Para 4.2 where penalty was waived in one of the case ) was 
not levied as per the said provisions. Though prescribed rule was mentioned in the demand 
notices, double the market value was not levied and instead only the market value was levied 
which resulted in short levy of penalty85 of ₹1.94 crore as detailed in Table 3.3 below. 
Table 3.3: Showing the short levy of penalty 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the 
ADMG 
Quantity 
(in Sq. m) 
Penalty Short levy#  
To be 
levied* 
Levied with fine without fine 
Banaganapalle 5,10,830 4.39 2.45 1.99 1.94 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
*Two times the Market Value of ₹43 per Sq. m 
# Fine amount up to ₹five lakh which may be levied at the discretion of levying authority. 
Consequently, the short levy of penalty also led to non-levy of DMF and MERIT of ₹2.61 
lakh and ₹0.51 lakh respectively on the normal SF as detailed in Appendix XVIII (A). 
During the Exit Conference, the Government accepted (March 2024) the audit observation 
and stated that difference of amount would be collected, and instruction would be issued to 
the concerned ADMGs. 
(b) Incorrect adoption of rate and rule 
As per amended Government order issued in July 2020, the person shall be liable to pay 10 
times of normal Seigniorage Fee (SF) as penalty in addition to the normal SF along with 
DMF and MERIT on the assessed quantities. 
Audit noticed that in ADMG Banaganapalle, demand notices were issued (October 2020) to 
five persons for quarrying the minor mineral (LSS Black) from the lease premises of another 
lessee. As unathorised persons were quarrying in the leased areas, penalty at 10 times of SF 
 
84 Sri Gowra Babu and Sri Mohammad Gous alias Syma 
85 calculated considering the minimum penalty i.e. leaving the amount of ₹five lakh  


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
38 
should have been levied.  However, ADMG levied penalty at five times of SF which resulted 
in short levy of penalty. 
Further, SF should have been levied in MT or Sq.m whichever is higher. However, ADMG 
has not converted the unit of measurement of mineral to higher value of SF instead levied in 
Sq. m which resulted in short levy of penalty of ₹9.22 crore (as detailed in the Appendix 
XVIII(B)). Consequently, the corresponding DMF and MERIT, which are charged on 
normal SF were short levied by ₹13.71 lakh and ₹2.74 lakh respectively (as detailed in 
Appendix XVIII(C)).  
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that the concerned 
ADMGs would be instructed to take necessary action. 
3.2 Other sources of revenues 
Apart from the Royalty/SF, levied and collected at the time of issue of permits, the 
Department shall also collect security deposits and other revenues 86 from the mining lease 
holders. The m ineral revenue is to be assessed through Mineral Revenue Assessment 87 
(MRA) for every financial year by ADMG con cerned, in respect of both major and minor 
minerals dispatched or consumed by different lessees in the district.  MRA contains the 
demand, collection, balances of revenue duly considering the arrears along with the quantity 
of mineral permitted to be extracted for the year. 
3.2.1 Maintenance of records of Mineral Revenue Assessment and D emand 
Collection Balances 
As per circular issued (March 2020) by Mines & Geology Department and Mines Manual, 
ADMG shall prepare and submit  MRA pertaining to both major and minor minerals to 
concerned DDMG along with a copy of the preceding year’s approved MRA. The MRAs 
shall be prepared to verify the individual lessee accounts and to ascertain the levies and 
collection of revenues from the lessee.  The DDMGs or DMG after scrutiny shall approve 
the MRAs 88. A copy of the Mineral Dues Clearance Certificates shall be sent to the 
concerned ADMG for report on the status of the mineral revenue dues pertain ing to 
existing/expired/cancelled leases/ pending court/vigilance cases, etc., along with copies of 
approved MRAs for preceding four years by DDMG/DMG.  
After MRAs are finalised by ADMGs, the assessments would be entered in a register called 
Demand Collection and Balances (DCB89), which exhibits the details in respect of all MRAs 
under each ADMG.  The DCB statements shall be forwarded to DMG by 15 th April of 
subsequent year giving analysis of arrears pending recovery. 
Audit noticed that MRAs and DCBs were not prepared regularly in all the eight sampled 
ADMGs. Due to irregular preparation of MRAs and DCBs, Audit could not verify whether 
MDCC were prepared and returns submitted to DMG as per the laid down procedures. 
 
86 Dead rent, Annual compensation fee, Financial Assurance, Interest on belated payments , application fee 
for various permits and licenses, Surface rent, cess on Surface rent, penalties , etc. 
87 as per the paragraph 16.8 of Mines Manual read with Circular Memo No. 1290/MR/2020 dated 13.03.2020 
88 DDMG, if the demand of Royalty/  Seigniorage Fee is within the limit of ₹50 lakh and DMG for above  
₹50 lakh 
89 as per Para 16.10 of the Mines Manual of the Department 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
39 
Scrutiny of DCB registers in selected offices revealed  significant discrepancies in carrying 
forward of closing balance of previous year as the opening balance of current year.  With 
such discrepancies, the authenticity and genuineness of DCB registers could not be 
ascertained. 
The Government accepted (January 2024) the audit observation and stated that instructions 
have been issued to all the District offices to complete the preparation of MRAs and finalise 
the DCBs. Further, the Government replied that DCBs would be revised for the period 2018-
19 to 2022-23 to avoid any lapses. 
Thus, MRAs and DCBs were not prepared regularly either manually or generated through 
OMEPS portal.  
3.2.2 Short levy of dead rent and interest 
As per section 10 of APMMC Rule 1966, when a quarry lease is granted, the SF or dead rent 
whichever is higher shall be a charge on all minor minerals dispatched or consumed from 
the lease area at specified rates for different minerals. Dead rent for the first year shall be 
paid by the lessee at the time of execution of lease deed and in advance for the subsequent 
lease years. The dead rent is collected to ensure that even if there is no extraction of minerals 
from the lease area, a minimum revenue is ascertained. The SF leviable during the permits 
get adjusted with the dead rent already paid by the lessee. 
(a)  Loss of revenue due to misclassification of white shale  
Government of India (GoI) notified90 (February 2015) 31 major minerals as minor minerals, 
which includes ‘White Shale’. Accordingly, GoAP fixed dead rent (November 2015) for the 
said minerals91 at ₹15,000 per hectare  per annum up to 10  February 2020 and revised the 
rate to ₹65,000 per hectare per annum from 11 February 2020 onwards.  
Scrutiny of records of ADMG Yerraguntla revealed that a lessee92 was holding two mining 
leases93 in an extent of 83.79 hectares for a period of 20 years (from 2003 to 2023). The 
minerals excavated include White Shale along with associated minor minerals. The ADMG 
instead of classifying W hite Shale as minor mineral, treated it as major mineral. The 
misclassification of mineral resulted in short levy of dead rent of ₹1.13 crore (as detailed in 
Appendix XIX) during the period 2016-22. 
Audit noticed that GoAP belatedly requested (June 2022) GoI  for clarification regarding 
classification of white shale as major or minor mineral. The GoI clarified 94 (August 2022) 
to treat it as minor mineral only. 
The Government replied (January 2024) that based  on the clarification given by Central 
Government (August  2022), the State Government declared 95 (February 2023) the white 
shale and white clay as minor minerals and fixed the SF  as ₹180 per ton and dead rent at 
 
90  Gazette No. S.O. 423(E) dated 10th February 2015 
91  except mica, barytes, laterite, agate, diaspore and corundum 
92 M/s Mangalore Mineral Traders 
93 one lease for an extent of 40.469 hectares in Survey No. 730, Mangapatnam village, and another lease for 
an extent of 43.320 hectares in Survey No.425, Chinthakunta village, Muddanur Mandal from 08.04.2003 
to 07.04.2023 
94 letter No. 16/60/2022-mines VI, dated 26.08.2022 
95 G.O. Ms. No. 6, dated 10.02.2023 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
40 
₹20,000 per hectare per annum.  During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 
2024) that demand notices would be issued to the concerned lessee for realisation of short 
revenue. 
Thus, incorrect classification of White Shale as major mineral for the period 2016-2022 
resulted in loss of revenue of ₹1.13 crore , which otherwise would have accrued to the 
Government. 
(b) Non levy of dead rent at enhanced rates for major minerals 
As per MMDR Act, 2015, rates of dead rent  for Iron ore and Limestone from September 
2019 were fixed as detailed below:   
(in ₹ per Hectare per annum) 
Name of 
Mineral 
Rate of Dead Rent 
 From 4th year of lease # 5th and 6th year of lease 7th year of lease 
Limestone 800 2,000 4,000 
Iron Ore 1,600 4,000 8,000 
# Dead rent is applicable for the leases granted other than auction route which came into effect from January 
2015. All the major mineral mining leases were granted through auction from January 2015. Above dead rent 
rates were applicable from 2019 in respect of leases granted prior to 2015 which would have completed three 
years. 
Audit noticed that in three ADMGs 96, for 10 leases granted during the period July 1972 to 
January 2012, the dead rent was not levied at enhanced rates during 2019-20 and 2020-21 in 
respect of the two major minerals viz., Limestone and Iron Ore.  The non-levy of enhanced 
rates resulted in short levy of dead rent of ₹28.17 lakh (as detailed in the Appendix XX). 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that GoI had kept the issue 
in abeyance, however, demand would be raised. 
(c) Short levy of dead rent in respect of minor minerals 
The GoAP amended97 (February 2020) Rule 10 of the APMMC Rules, 1966 and enhanced 
the rate of dead rent for all minor minerals.    
Scrutiny of lease deeds and challans in ADMG, Kurnool and Anakapalli revealed that the 
dead rent was not levied at enhanced rates at the time of execution of lease deeds. The total 
short levy of dead rent amounted to ₹9.22 lakh for the year 2020-21 as detailed in Table 3.4 
below. 
Table 3.4: Statement showing short levy of dead rent for minor minerals 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
office 
Name of 
the 
Mineral 
Lease 
execution 
date 
Extent  
(in 
Hectare) 
Dead 
Rent per 
Hectare 
(in ₹) 
Dead rent 
to be 
levied/ 
collected 
Dead Rent 
levied 
/collected 
Short 
levy/ 
collection 
Kurnool98 
Dolomite 30.07.2021 73.11 20,000 14.62  10.97 3.65 
Road 
Metal 24.02.2020 3.93 65,000 2.55 1.96 0.59 
 
96 Banaganapalle: two leases, Kadapa: six leases and Yerraguntla: two leases 
97 G.O.Ms.No. 11 Industries and Commerce (M-II) Department, dated 11.02.2020 
98 Sri Balaji Works, Sri K.E. Prathap 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
41 
Anakapalli99 Color 
granite 11.09.2015 13.58 1,30, 000 17.65 12.67 4.98 
Total 9.22 
Source: Information collected from the Department 
The ADMG, Kurnool replied (December 2022) that dead rent at enhanced rates would be 
collected. The ADMG, Anakapalli replied that the matter would be examined. The DMG 
replied that instructions would be issued to all unit offices to rectify such lapses.  
(d) Short levy of interest 
As per rule 49 of M ineral Concession Rules 2016, the State Government may without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in the Act and Rules made thereunder charge simple 
interest on belated payments at the rate of 24 per cent per annum on any rent, royalty, or fee 
from the 60th day of the expiry of the date fixed by the Government for payment of such 
royalty, rent and fee. 
Audit noticed that in two ADMGs (Banaganapalle and Yerraguntla), the interest was short 
levied by ₹1.21 crore in respect of two lessees 100 for delayed remittance of dead rent as 
detailed in the Table 3.5. 
Table 3. 5: Statement showing short levy of interest for belated payment of various 
charges 
(₹ in crore) 
ADMG offices Year Opening 
Balance of 
the 
arrears of 
Dead Rent 
Collections Closing 
Balance of 
the arrears 
of Dead 
Rent 
Interest 
leviable 
at 24 per 
cent 
Interest 
levied 
Short 
levy of 
interest 
Banaganapalle 2017-18 6.18 NIL 6.18 1.48 0.71 0.78 
Yerraguntla 2020-21 2.19 NIL 2.19 0.52 0.09 0.43 
Total 8.37 - 8.37 2.00 0.80 1.21 
Source: Information furnished by ADMGs 
The Government replied (January 2024) that as o f May 2020, one of the firm s101 had 
outstanding dues of ₹41.60 crore. The firm had remitted only ₹0.17 crore and had become 
sick (filed application before National Company Law Tribunal in December 2018). Another 
lease holder102 in DDMG, Yerraguntala had paid the Dead Rent arrears in different spells. 
The MRAs have been revised for the lease holder and accordingly the interest was charged 
based on payment made by the lease holder. Hence, there is no short levy of interest.  
The reply is not acceptable, as no arrears were collected by the Department during the entire 
year and hence interest at 24 per cent was to be levied and collected.  
3.2.3 Short collection and non-forfeiture of security deposit 
As per Rule 14 of APMMC Rules, 1966, before the deed is executed, an applicant for a 
quarry lease shall deposit a sum equivalent to one year dead rent as Security deposit, for the 
due observance of terms and conditions of the lease.  As per Rule 12 (5)(h)(xii) of A ndhra 
Pradesh Minor Mineral Concession Rules 1966, if the lessee or the bidder makes default in 
 
99 M/s Tulip Granite Private Limited 
100 M/s Panyam Cement India Ltd in ADMG Banaganapalle and M/s India cement in ADMG Yerraguntala 
101  M/s India Cements 
102  M/s Panyam Cement India Limited 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
42 
payment of any money due under the rules within the stipulated period or neglects to furnish 
security deposit or to execute the lease deed when required, DDMG may pass an order 
forfeiting all sums paid and cancel the quarry lease. 
(a) Short collection of Security Deposit 
The Industries and Commerce Department issued (February 2022) a gazette 103 notification 
and enhanced the existing security deposit of one time of dead rent to three times of dead 
rent. This was made applicable to all the new and existing lessees. The differential amount 
was to be collected from the existing lease holders within three months from the date of 
notification.   
Audit noticed that in seven ADMGs104, the differential amount of security deposit was not 
collected at enhanced rate in respect of 224 leases , resulting in short collection of  
₹17.88 crore (as detailed in Appendix XXI).  
Four ADMGs105 replied (August/ December 2022) that differential amount towards security 
deposit would be collected. The ADMG Vijayawada replied that all the lessees shall deposit 
the differential security deposit. The remaining two ADMGs  (Anakapalli and 
Visakhapatnam) replied (August 2022) that matter would be examined. DMG replied that 
all the unit offices were instructed to rectify such lapses pointed out by Audit.  
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that there is a Court stay order 
on collection of Security Deposit. 
The reply is not acceptable, as the respective ADMGs have accepted the audit observation 
and promised to recover the due amount and had not mentioned about any Court orders on 
the issue. Further, the Government did not furnish the details of stay order given by Court. 
(b) Non-forfeiture of Security Deposit 
Audit noticed that in six106 ADMGs, the security deposit  amount of ₹19.21 lakh received 
from 44 leases which lapsed between November 2006 to March 2022 was not forfeited for 
the breaches107 by the lessee (as detailed in the Appendix XXII). 
The Government accepted (January 2024) the audit observations and submitted that due to 
administrative reasons there was a delay in forfeiture of security deposit  and instructions 
have been issued to forfeit the Security Deposit in respect of leases determined/expired. 
3.2.4 Determination of annual compensation for leases granted 
As per section 52 of Mineral Concession Rules, 2016  (effective from March 2016) , the 
holder of a mineral concession shall be liable to pay annual compensation to the owner (State 
Government) of the land towards surface rights , as may be determined by an officer 
appointed by the State Government by notification in this regard. The annual compensation 
shall be payable on or before such date as may be specified by the State Government. 
 
103 G.O.Ms.No.8, Industries and Commerce Department (M-III) dated 16.02.2022 
104 Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla  
105 Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool and Yerraguntla 
106 Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kurnool, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla  
107  Stopping of mining operations for more than two years, non erection of boundary pillars, having mineral 
dues, non-submission of accounts, EC, CFE & CFO, etc. 


Chapter III – Removal of minerals and realisation of associated revenues 
 
43 
Audit noticed that despite a lapse of seven years from the inception of rules, the State 
Government did not appoint Officer to determine annual compensation . During the audit 
period, annual compensation was not determined in respect of 144 major mineral mining 
leases measuring an extent of 7,649 hectares (as detailed in Appendix XXIII). Due to non-
fixation of annual compensation by the State Government, the loss of revenue in the form of 
annual compensation could not be estimated. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government accepted (March 2024) that the Department is 
collecting royalty and surface rent but not annual compensation fee.  However, the 
Government stated that a detailed reply would be furnished. 
Thus, despite there being a provision in the rules framed  for levy of annual compensation , 
the State Government did not  appoint an officer to determine the quantum of annual 
compensation to be levied for the surface rights given to the holder of mineral concessions. 
Thereby the State Government lost an opportunity to realise legitimate revenue. 
Recommendation 3.2: The State Government may devise online systems or strengthen the 
existing Online Mineral e-Permit System to generate MRAs, DCBs  and demand notices 
automatically, without human intervention and to ensure that the associated revenues as 
prescribed in the Acts & Rules are levied and collected appropriately to prevent any kind 
of loss to the Exchequer. 
 
 

 
 
Prevention and Detection  
of  
Unauthorised Mining Activity 
Chapter  IV 
Pages 45 -59 

 
 
 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
45 
Chapter IV 
 Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957, empowers State 
Government to make rules by notification for preventing illegal mining, transportation, and 
storage of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith. Such rules provide for 
establishment of check -posts for checking minerals under transit, establishment of  
weighbridges to measure quantity of minerals transported. The Act provides for inspection, 
checking and search of minerals at the place of excavation or storage or during transit. 
Inspections related to mining activities are being conducted by various agencies for 
compliance with the permit system, labour norms and environmental protection.  The 
agencies involved in inspection are Mines & Geology Department, Indian Bureau of Mines, 
Directorate General of Mines Safety and Environment agencies108. 
  
 
108 MoEF & CC, SEIAA and Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
There was shortfall in inspection of mines/leases by A ssistant Director of  
Mines and Geology (ADMG) and there was no monitoring mechanism to 
watch receipt of tour diaries by D irector, Mines and Geology (DMG) and 
submission of review report on inspection of mines to Government. The 
State Level Task Force was not established. The District Level Task Force 
meant for effective vigilance to curb illegal mining and transportation of 
minerals was non -functional. The Department is yet to take  action on the 
recommendations of Indian Bureau of Mines/Directorate General of Mines 
Safety for termination / suspension  of leases . Government has waived off 
penalty (in some cases seigniorage fee also) imposed /proposed by ADMG 
and approved by DMG  without proper justification.  Differential Global 
Positioning System s urvey of 40 per cent of the leases in the State was not 
completed. Many of the registered vehicles involved in transport of minerals 
were not enabled with installation of Global Positioning System ( GPS) and 
permits were issued to the vehicles not enabled with GPS. Installation of 
meagre number of Closed  Circuit Cameras and all of them being non -
functional, non -installation of weighbridges to measure quantum of 
minerals transported in the entire State clearly showed ineffective efforts on 
the part of Department to curb/prevent illegal mining activities.  The 
extracted quantity quantified by Technical Consultant IISc was varying 
with that of the recorded extracted quantity of the Department and 
environmental management was absent in most mines  in the selected two 
mandals. 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
46 
4.1 Conduct of inspections of mining leases and minerals 
As per Section 24 of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957, for the 
purpose of ascertaining the position of the working, actual or prospective, of any mine or 
abandoned mine or for any other purpose connected with this Act or the rules m ade 
thereunder, any person authorised by the Central or a State Government in this behalf, by 
general order, may enter and inspect any mine , survey and take measurements in any such 
mine, weigh, measure or take measurements of the stocks of minerals lying at any mine. 
4.1.1 Conduct of inspections by the Department 
As per clause 8.5 of Departmental M anual, 1983, the inspection of all the mines/quarries 
(both working and non-working) located in the jurisdiction of Mines & Geology Department 
should be covered over a period of one year  without leaving any mine/quarry uninspected. 
Further, as per clause 8.7 and 8.8, tour diaries of the inspecting officers (ADMG/ DDMG/ 
AD (Vigilance)) for the inspections conducted during a month shall be consolidated and a 
review report shall be submitted to DMG by 10 th of subsequent month for approval . On 
approval, the same shall be submitted to the Government by 15th of subsequent month. The 
tour diaries should contain the abstract for each month together with detailed reports in 
respect of working and non-working mines inspected. 
Audit noticed that in five out of eight ADMGs109 there was shortfall in inspection of the 
mines/leases during 2017-22. Out of 8,939 inspections to be conducted during 2017-22, only 
5,953 were conducted. Thus, there was overall shortfall of 3 3 per cent  in inspection as 
detailed in Appendix XXIV. Two ADMGs (Kadapa and Nandigama) did not furnish the data. 
In respect of ADMG Vijayawada, the number of inspections conducted were more than the 
number of leases.  
The Government replied (January 2024) that shortfall of inspection during the year 2020-21 
and 2021 -22 was due to pandemic of COVID -19. The Government replied that the 
Departmental manual was revised and further instructions were issued (February 2019).  
The Government did not furnish the reasons for non -conduct of inspections for the period  
2017-20. 
Thus, it is evident that periodic inspection of mines/quarries was not done though prescribed 
in departmental manual. 
4.1.2 Functioning of District and State level task force 
The GoAP ordered110 (March 2006) to constitute a State Level Task Force ( SLTF) and 
District Level Task Force (DLTF) for effective vigilance with a view to curb illegal ‘mining 
and transportation’ of minerals in the State. A periodical meeting, once in quarter and month 
were to be conducted for SLTF and DLTF respectively. 
The objectives for constitution of DLTF were to collect and review the information related 
to the illegal mining within their jurisdiction and to communicate the action taken to the 
Chairman 111  of SLTF.  The SLTF is to be constituted to review the action taken by 
DDMGs/ADMGs/Forest officials for checking the illegal mining activities , to coordinate 
 
109 Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kurnool, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla 
110 G.O.Ms.No.69, Industries and Commerce Department, dated 08.03.2006 
111 Secretary to Government and District Collector were the Chairman for SLTF and DLTF respectively  


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
47 
and discuss the pending issues with members112. The action taken and recommendations of 
SLTF are to be communicated to the Central Government on a quarterly basis. 
Audit noticed that though the State Government had issued orders for constituting SLTF, the 
same was not constituted even after a lapse of 17 years . The DLTF was mostly non -
functional in test-checked districts. Non-functionality of DLTF highlights the inaction of the 
Department to utilise the existing provisions to curb and prevent illegal mining activities. 
In DDMG, Kurnool DLTF meeting was conducted only once in August 2018 and in DDMG, 
Kadapa no meetings were conducted. DMG replied (June 2022) that SLTF did not exist  in 
the State. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that there is district level 
task force which is working in the State . However, the Government stated that a detailed 
reply would be furnished. 
The reply is not acceptable, as DLTF in test -checked districts was mostly non -functional 
during the audit period. 
In the absence of SLTF and mere existence of DLTF without functionality , clearance of 
pending issues, coordination between other Departments to curb illegal mining activities, 
adherence to directions issued by other Departments would not be ensured.  
4.1.3 Non-compliance to directions of regulatory agencies  
The other regulatory agencies include Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), which inspects major 
mineral mining leases and Directorate General of Mines and Safety (DGMS) which monitors 
compliance of labour norms and safety issues in the mining lease s of  major and minor 
minerals. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climat e Change (MoEF&CC) and its 
subordinate offices (SEIAA) inspect the leases for compliance of the conditions mentioned 
in EC and other pollution related clearances. The power to inspect the mines related to 
compliance with the terms and conditions of Environmental clearances granted by SEIAA 
and DEIAA is vested with State Pollution Control Board (from November 2018). 
(a) Continuation of leases despite termination orders by Indian Bureau of Mines 
Section 24 of Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1957  empowers IBM 
for entry and inspection  of any mine for  the purpose of ascertaining the position of the 
working, actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine . The Act allows IBM to 
survey and take measurements in any such mine , weigh, measure or take measurements of 
the stocks of minerals lying at any mine.  
As per IBM Manual for Inspection of Mines, 2017, IBM conducts inspection  of major 
mineral mining leases for compliance of rules and adherence of the conditions mentioned in 
the mining plan or any other conditions imposed.  The IBM informs the nature of violation 
and recommends to the State Government for levy of penalty or termination of lease after 
following the due procedure of serving notices to the lessee.  The State Government should 
take proper action on the recommendations of IBM.  
 
112 the members of the task forces  are the officers from Government, Mines & Geology Department, Forest 
and Police Department, APPCB, DGMS, IBM. DMG and DDMG are the member secretary/convenors for 
SLTF and DLTF respectively 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
48 
Scrutiny of information obtained (October 2022) from Regional Office, I BM, Hyderabad, 
revealed that IBM had recommended termination of 196 leases in the entire State. However, 
Audit noticed that 13 leases (as detailed in the Appendix XXV), were still shown as leases 
in force as per the list of leases (September 2022)  displayed in OMEPS portal provided by 
the Mines & Geology Department.  
The Government replied (January 2024) that in one case113, lease was already deleted from 
OMEPS portal whereas in another case114, government has terminated the mining lease. In 
the remaining cases, termination of mining leases is still pending. 
Further, a detailed scrutiny of the above 13 leases revealed that permits were given in four 
out of 13 leases though recom mended (between October 2013 and October 2021) for 
termination by IBM as shown in Table 4.1 below. 
Table 4.1: Details of permits given to leases despite recommended for termination 
Sl. 
No. 
Lessee ID Lessee 
Name 
Details of IBM 
Recommendation  
Latest Permit details 
Permit 
number 
Approved 
Quantity 
(in cum) 
Created 
Date 
1. 722030291 B. Sarada Recommended for 
termination on  
14.10.2013 
PR07220302
910005 
900 9/13/2019  
11:55:25 AM 
2. 912870514 M/s. Dugar 
Insulation 
Private 
Limited 
Recommended for 
termination on 
 07.06.2019  
PR09128705
140014 
900 8/29/2022  
5:07:24 PM 
3. 1212070095 Sai Balaji 
Minerals 
PR12120700
950084 
500 1/26/2022  
12:18:17 PM 
4. 1312060109 M/s Shiva 
Lakshmi 
Minerals 
PR13120601
090034 
2000 12/14/2021  
2:04:09 PM 
Source: Information furnished by IBM 
The Government accepted (January 2024)  audit observation and stated that issuance of 
permits before dropping the action by the DM G would not be repeated in future. It was 
further stated that necessary instructions would be issued to all District Offices in this regard.  
(b) Issue of permits despite stop orders given by Directorate General of Mines Safety 
As per Regulation 34 of Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961, no mine shall be opened, 
work or re-opened unless a Manager115 of the mine is appointed. 
Cross verification of information obtained from DGMS with records of DMG revealed that 
stop orders for 11 mining leases were issued by DGMS Bellary region for not appointing 
Managers for the mining leases (as detailed in Appendix XXVI). However, the Department 
allowed mining operations for the 11 miners. 
The DGMS stated (December 2022) that the recommendations for stop order were forwarded 
directly to DMG. The DMG further stated that all ADMG s were instructed to furnish 
information related to violations identified by DGMS. 
 
113  Sri K. Anjaneyulu 
114  Sri Mohammed Hussain 
115 being a person duly appointed and having such qualifications as are required by these regulations  


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
49 
The Government replied (January 2024)  that ADMG, Chitto or and Palamaner u did not 
receive any communication from DGMS, B ellary region. Further, ADMG Chittoor and 
Palamaneru comes under the territory of DGMS, Chennai and not under the territory of  
Bellary region. Due to non-receipt of DGMS stoppage order, stop order was not issued. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable, as the DMG has received the  stop orders 
directly from DGMS and had communicated to all ADMGs to furnish information related to 
violations identified by DGMS. 
(c) Non-furnishing of consolidated returns  
As per Rule 59 of MCR, 2016, a consolidated annual return of all mineral concessions 
granted or renewed under the Act and Rules made thereunder shall be furnished by State 
Government within two months of such grant or renewal to IBM and to DGMS not later than 
the 30th day of June following the year to which the return relates. The DGMS role is to look 
after the safety norms of employees/workers working in all the mines. 
Audit noticed that consolidated returns of all the mineral concessions granted or renewed 
during the period of audit were not communicated to DGMS.  
The DMG accepted the audit observation and replied that the information would be obtained 
from the concerned ADMGs.   
The response from the Government is awaited. 
This shows non -compliance of provisions  by DMG. In the absence of communication of 
leases granted or renewed by the State Government, DGMS would not be in a position to 
analyse and inspect the mining leases for compliance with the safety norms. 
Recommendation 4.1 : It is recommended that the inspection of mining leases may be  
given utmost priority by making the district/state level task force functional , for effective 
vigilance to curb illegal mining and transport ation of mineral. Recommendations made 
by IBM/DGMS are to be implemented efficiently to enforce immediate action on illegal 
mining activities. 
4.2 Revision of penalties without proper justification  
The Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in its judgments116 (2015) clearly stated that the 
revisionary power vested with the Government through any rule should be exercised 
reasonably so as to stand the test of judicial scrutiny. The reasons recorded would alone 
disclose the justifiability of the exercise of such power, as application of mind by the 
authority at that time can only be revealed when the order records reason.  
Audit noticed that in seven out of eight sampled ADMG s 117 , penalty amount of  
₹84.18 crore was reduced by the Government to ₹9.85 crore in 31 cases, thereby reducing 
penalty by 88.30 per cent (as detailed in the Appendix XXVII) without any recorded reason 
or justification. Responsibility needs to be fixed for reducing the penalty without recording 
reasons or justification. 
 
116 Writ Petition No. 40621 of 2015   
117 Anakapalli, Banaganapalle, Kadapa, Kurnool, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Yerraguntla.  ADMG 
Nandigama did not furnish the information 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
50 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that resurveys are 
conducted to assess the correctness before waiver of amounts. 
The Reply is not acceptable, as in the documents produced to audit where revision orders 
were passed by Government, no reasons or justification was recorded. Audit scrutinised two 
such cases and found that the revision orders passed were not justifiable.  Further, 
Government did not provide the information related to speaking orders or resurvey reports 
for the revision cases. 
Case Study 5 
In the case of a miner118, the vigilance wing recommended the Department to recover the 
seigniorage fee, penalty and fine of ₹26.34 crore for illegal mining/transportation of 
54,655 MT of Barytes from mining lease area of APMDC, under Rule 26(1) of APMMC 
Rules, 1966. Accordingly, ADMG issued (October 2019) demand notice for payment of 
the said amount. The lessee applied for revision and the revisioning authority i.e., 
Government allowed (December 2020) the application and set aside the demand notice 
without recording justification. 
In ADMG Kadapa, in case of a miner 119, the Vigilance wing inspected (July 2018) the 
unit in Chakrayapet and found stock of 8,485 cum of road metal at the premises. The unit 
did not produce proof of payment of seigniorage fee along with dealer’s licence.  Hence, 
the vigilance wing requested AD MG to recover an amount of ₹37.86 lakh towards 
seigniorage fee, penalty along with additional penalty of ₹10,000 for not having the 
licence. The ADMG accordingly issued (March 2019) notice for payment of ₹37.86 lakh.  
The miner belatedly obtained dealer license in August 2018 and quarry lease in April 2019 
i.e., after the date of inspection by the vigilance wing and applied (April 2019) for revision 
application with the Government. The revisioning authority allowed (July 2019) the 
revision application and set aside the demand notice without any recorded reasons. 
It is evident from the above that the Government not only waived the penalty imposed by 
the Department but also the entire seigniorage fee without any justification, thereby 
causing loss of revenue. Further, creation of such precedence could lead to demand s for 
similar unjustifiable revisions of penalty in future. 
4.3 Strengthening of Department functioning through technological 
interventions 
Technology plays a vital role in the development of any sector. In the mining sector, 
technological interventions are of paramount importance from exploration of minerals to 
removal of minerals, timely accounting of revenue, real-time monitoring on vehicle movement 
and to curb any kind of illegal mining. 
Over a period of time, the mining activities have drastically increased, and the availability 
of sufficient manpower along with technological interventions plays an important role in 
delivering of mining activities in an efficient and effective manner.  
 
118 M/s Pragathi Minerals 
119 M/s Shirdi Sai Crushers 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
51 
4.3.1 Availability of manpower 
In the M ines & Geology Department, the officials at various levels are entrusted with 
designated jobs viz., administrative work, granting of mining leases, approving mining plans, 
carry out inspections, issue show cause notices, issue demand notices etc., and coordinate 
with other Departments for speedy disposal of MCAs and to curb illegal mining activities.   
Audit noticed that in the district offices , 104 posts  (24 per cent) were vacant out of 421 
sanctioned posts and 99 posts (53 per cent) were vacant out of 187 sanctioned posts in the 
office of DMG. In district and DMG offices, no person for the post of Assistant Director 
(Mines), Assistant Director (Survey), Assistant Chemist was appointed and there was 
shortfall (26 per cent) in the post of Royalty Inspector. In addition to this, in DMG office, 
no person for the post of Assistant Mines Officer was appointed.  
The DMG replied that the Department had submitted (December 2017) the proposals to the 
Government for sanction of 131 additional posts in various cadres, however, no orders have 
been received from the Government. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that the issue is under 
consideration and would be sorted out. 
Thus, the Department was working with lower strength of manpower despite the fact that it 
was given the responsibility of regulating mining activity.  The proposals for sanction of 
posts were still pending with the Government for more than six years. 
In view of insufficient manpower , implementation of technology is vital. Day -to-day 
administrative work including flow of information should be computeri sed to the extent 
possible, so that the MRAs, DCBs and other important registers are generated seamlessly 
with least or no manual intervention.  
4.3.2 Technological interventions for prevention of illegal mining activities 
Mining activities can be monitored using modern technologies. This may include 
development of Mining Surveillance System (MSS), use of Geographic Information System 
(GIS), use of Differential Global Positioning System  (DGPS) survey, Vehicle Tracking 
Monitoring System (VTMS), installation of Closed-Circuit (CC) cameras, etc. The status of 
implementation of technological interventions in the State are discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
(a) Conduct of Differential Global Positioning System survey 
As per Mineral Auction Rules 2015, the State Governments shall identify and demarcate the 
area where a mining lease is proposed to be granted through auction by using DGPS and 
classify the same into forests land, land owned or not owned by the State Government. The 
DGPS is essential for preparation of mining plan, scheme of mining, etc. It also helps in 
knowing the correct location of lease boundary pillars and identifying whether the min ing 
activity is within or beyond the lease boundary. 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
52 
The IBM instructed (April 2010) to use DGPS survey to prepare the Geo-referenced mining 
lease map that can be imported into any Global Information System120 database and enable 
the user/Department to analyse real time data through remote sensing, drone technology, etc. 
For major minerals, GoAP instructed (June 2017) to complete DGPS survey for existing 
mining leases at the earliest. Further, GoAP amended (March 2018)  APMMC Rules and 
specified that DGPS is mandatory for survey and demarcation  of areas granted for minor 
mineral mining leases. 
Scrutiny of information furnished by the Department on the status of completion of DGPS 
survey of the leases in the State revealed that as of September 2022, out of total 174 leases 
of major minerals, DGPS survey was completed for 100 leases (57 per cent) while in respect 
of minor minerals, DGPS survey was completed for 2,836 leases (66 per cent) out of 4,290. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that more than 80 per cent 
of leases have been covered under DGPS survey and geo -tagging are also done. The 
information regarding DGPS survey and geo-tagging made would be furnished to audit. 
The reply is not acceptable, as the Government did not furnish the details of DGPS survey 
completed along with geo-tagging made. 
The shortfall in completion of DGPS survey for both major and minor mineral mining leases 
shows that the Department lagged behind in fulfillment of the objectives of DGPS survey.   
Non-completion of DGPS survey w ould be the key bottleneck for auctioning of minor 
mineral mining leases and hence auctioning policy of minor minerals may not be fruitful. 
Further, completion of DGPS survey is the basis for generation of automatic triggers through 
remote sensing, drone technology, etc. 
(b) Implementation of Vehicle Tracking Monitoring System 
The GoAP issued (November 2017) guidelines on  implementation of Vehicle Tracking 
Monitoring System (VTMS) in the State which stipulate that all mineral carrying vehicles 
are to be registered with the Mines & Geology Department. Owners of mineral carrying 
vehicles are to be directed to design, develop, install and maintain a GPS based VTMS for 
mineral carrying vehicles . Further, VTMS has to be integrated with the existing e -permit 
system of the Department to ensure that e -permits are issued only to GPS enabled vehicles 
which are registered with the Department. 
Further, Government directed (November 2017) the Department to take all necessary 
required steps121 to make it mandatory to register all mineral carrying vehicles on the website 
of the Department with installed GPS within 120 days from the date of issue of the 
notification, to curb the illegal mining, storage and transportation of minerals. 
The VTMS was launched (August 2018) by the Department and as of September 2022, 1.03 
lakh vehicles were registered with the Department for transportation of minerals. However, 
only 0.64 lakh (62 per cent) vehicles were equipped with GPS during the period  2018-22. 
Further, out of 66.83 lakh permits issued between August 2018 and March 2022, 27.30 lakh 
 
120 GIS is a software tool that allows users to create interactive queries, analyse the spatial information, edit 
data, maps, and present the results of all these operations. GIS technology is a tool to combine various maps 
and remote sensing information to generate various models, which are used in real time environment 
121 as per G.O.Ms.No.149, Industries and Commerce Department (M.II), dated 01.11.2017 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
53 
(40 per cent) permits were issued to vehicles not equipped with GPS. 
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that due to lack of funds 
the Department is unable to implement the Vehicle Tracking Monitoring System completely. 
(c) Review of Triggers received from Indian Bureau of Mines 
The Ministry of Mines, through Indian Bureau of Mines, has developed 122 (October 2016) 
the Mining Surveillance System (MSS), a satellite-based monitoring system123 to use space 
technology for curbing illegal mining activity. The MSS is a satellite -based monitoring 
system which aims to establish a regime of responsive mineral administration, through 
public participation, by curbing instances of illegal mining activity. The MSS is a transparent 
& bias-free system, having a quick response time and capability of effective follow-up. The 
deterrence effect of ‘Eyes watching from the Sky’ has been extremely fruitful in facilitating 
all State Governments in curbing instances of ill egal mining. The MSS checks a region of 
500 m around th e existing mining lease boundary to search for any unusual activity. Any 
discrepancy, if found is flagged-off as a Trigger. A mobile app has also been developed and 
launched to facilitate detection of illegal mining. All State Governments have been advised 
to implement the MSS for minor minerals within their States. 
The triggers generated in respect of a State by IBM are forwarded to the DMG who in turn 
forwards them to the concerned ADMGs under whose jurisdiction the location of the trigger 
falls. The ADMGs after inspection of the location submits the action taken report to IBM 
through DMG.  
Audit noticed that only ADMG Kurnool had the data regarding the number of triggers 
received during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, locations inspected, and cases of illegal mining 
noticed. Out of 24 triggers received, after inspection three 124 cases of unauthori sed/illegal 
mining were noticed (as detailed in Appendix XXVIII). ADMG has issued demand notices 
to the concerned for payment of SF/penalties. The other ADMGs did not maintain the data. 
Further, verification of trigger information  furnished by DMG and IBM revealed the 
following mismatches as detailed in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Showing mismatch between number of triggers received and action taken 
Year Information given by IBM Information given by Department 
Number of 
triggers 
detected 
Number 
of trigger information sent 
to the State Department 
Number of 
triggers received 
Number of 
illegal mining 
identified 
2017-18 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2018-19 8 8 20 Nil 
2019-20 Nil Nil 15 Nil 
2020-21 Nil Nil NIL 2 
2021-22 28 28 Nil Nil 
Total 36 36 35 2 
Source: Information furnished by Department and IBM 
Audit observed that the data was not matching in any of the years during 2018 -22, which 
shows lack of coordination between these agencies. As per IBM, action taken reports on 30 
 
122 as per clause 7 of note on illegal mining issued by IBM 
123 in coordination with Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo -informatics, Gandhinagar 
and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
124 Trigger No.: APR (02-2020), APR (06-2020), and APR (11-2020) 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
54 
out of 36 triggers were received and as per DMG, action taken reports on 35 triggers were 
forwarded to IBM.   
The IBM replied  (November 2022) that the triggers are generated by MSS which were 
directly forwarded to the State Government.  The IBM further stated that action taken report 
was received in respect of 30 triggers only.   
As such, there was no reconciliation mechanism between the agencies to ensure that triggers 
identified were inspected promptly and suitable action taken to curb the illegal mining 
pointed out by IBM. 
During Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that action taken reports are 
being submitted on the triggers noticed and wherever illegal mining is noticed , stringent 
action is being taken.  
(d) Installation of Closed-Circuit cameras and Weighbridges 
The Government 125 instructed (February 2016) Commercial Tax Department to establish 
integrated check posts in the State of Andhra Pradesh for effective monitoring of vehicular 
movement along with installation/  establishment of Closed Circuit ( CC) Cameras, 
Weighbridges on priority basis in a phased manner.  
The very objective of the installation of CC Cameras and weighbridges at appropriate places 
was to monitor the vehicular movements on a real time basis to curb illegal mining activities. 
(i) Regarding functioning of CC camaras, the Department informed that it was proposed 
to install CC cameras at ten check-posts126. As a part of pilot project, six127 check posts were 
proposed for installation of CC cameras. However, CC cameras were installed at only four 
check posts128 and the same were non-functional (destroyed by miscreants) as on the date of 
audit. Further, the agency deployed for the installation of CC cameras was not able to work 
after the warranty period due to repeated incidents.  
Thus, CC cameras installed even at very limited locations were non-functional and this mode 
of technology to have a real time check on illegal mining did not materialise.  
(ii) The permits issued to transport minerals by each vehicle should mention the weight 
of the mineral lifted/transported.  During inspection, the Department should ensure 
volume/weight of mineral carrying vehicles as per permits.   
To assess the installation and functioning of weighbridges , Audit requested to furnish 
information on installed location and serviceability of weighbridges.  
The DMG replied (October 2022)  that the Weighbridge Empanelment application for 
installation of weighbridges was developed, however, it was stopped as agencies did not 
come forward for registration.  
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that initially CC cameras 
were installed,  however, due to resistance from the villagers  the same could not be 
materialised. The Government further stated that n ow the Department is using bio-metric 
 
125 memo No. 685/14. II (2)/2015 dated 01.02.2016 from the Ind & Com (M II) Department 
126 Itchapuram, Kodikonda, Naraharipeta, Nagalapuram,  Palamaneru, Pondugala,  Tadukupeta, Tana , 
Tungbhadra Bridge and Tada  
127 Betamcherla, Bugga, Dhone, Ibrahimpatnam, Piduguralla and Tada 
128 Betamcherla, Bugga, Ibrahimpatnam and Tada 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
55 
system. Further, a volumetric  system of measurement is being followed which doesn’t 
require weighbridges. 
The reply of the Government that volumetric system of measurement is being followed is 
not acceptable as royalty is paid based on the weightage in respect of many minerals 
(Example: Limestone). In the absence of weighbridges, the effectiveness of inspections 
conducted by Inspecting authorities to ensure the correctness of quantities of the minerals 
transported cannot be guaranteed.  The non -establishment of weighbridges shows the 
lackadaisical attitude of Department towards establishment of reliable methods to curb any 
kind of illegal mining.   
Thus, in  spite of shortfall in manpower required for  continuous physical monitoring of 
minerals removed, the Department did not complete DGPS survey for both major and minor 
minerals, did not enforce for GPS based VTMS  for mineral carrying vehicles. Further, CC 
cameras installed in limited locations  were non-functional, thereby preventing a check on  
illegal mining.  
This shows that the Department has not utilised the available technological interventions for 
monitoring mining activities in the State. As such, the monitoring mechanism put in place 
by the Mines & Geology Department was inadequate.  
Recommendation 4.2: The State Government shall ensure that DGPS survey of all mining 
leases is completed, all vehicles involved in transportation of mineral are registered and 
equipped with GPS and CC cameras are installed in all the designated places for effective 
monitoring and prevention of illegal mining. 
4.4 Case Study 
As a part of the Performance Audit, Audit collaborated with technical team from the Indian 
Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, and engaged (April 2022)  them as a Technical 
Consultant for estimating the volume of Limestone mineral extracted from the mining leases 
in two mandals viz., Jaggaiahpet and Kolimigundla using remote sensing technology  under 
the jurisdiction of two ADMGs (Nandigama and Banaganapalle). Detailed field 
investigation has been carried out across the mining sites along with the officials of Mines 
& Geology Department and Revenue Officers. Selection of limestone was based on  the 
following criteria:  
Basis for selection of limestone for study 
Mineral and its 
economic importance 
Limestone contributed the highest revenues in respect of major 
minerals.  Limestone contributed  revenue to a tune of  
₹1,780.89 crore (95.3 0 per cent ) against the total major 
mineral revenue of ₹1,868.22 crore during the period of audit.    
Average extent of mine Limestone leases have huge extent .  The average extent of 
each limestone lease is 180.85 hectares.   
Relative Completion of 
DGPS survey  
The DGPS survey in respect of limestone leases was 
completed up to 72 per cent. 

Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
56 
(a) Objective of case study  
The objectives of the endeavor were to ascertain the following: 
➢ Land cover dynamics: Spatio -temporal changes 129  in land cover (using remote 
sensing data on temporal scale) and Patch dynamics130 of land cover.  
➢ Mapping of quarry pits (spatial extent and location) in the said Mandals. 
➢ Overlay of authorised quarrying data with mapped details to (i) assess the extent of 
quarrying operations vis-a-vis approved Quarry Plan, (ii) identify unauthorised 
quarry locations. 
➢ Assessment of threats due to escalating anthropogenic131 activities in the vicinity.  
➢ Adequacy of Environmental safeguards measures undertaken by quarry leaseholders. 
(b) Criteria for field investigation  
Field investigations were carried out using precision GPS 132  (pre-calibrated) and 
Clinometer133. The remote sensing data of the respective study areas were procured from 
National Remote Sensing Centre  (NRSC), Hyderabad. The data was used to assist the 
interpretation of different land use 
types from remote sensing data. 
Topographic maps provided 
ground control points to rectify 
remotely sensed data. Survey of 
India (S oI) topo sheets (1:50000 
and 1:250000 scales) were 
digitised to identify various land 
cover types. Pre -calibrated GPS 
(Global Positioning System -
Garmin GPS unit) was used for 
field measurements. Ground 
control points were used to 
geometrically correct the remote 
sensing data and verify the 
classified land use information.  
Field investigation further 
provided valuable inputs such as 
other dumps, extractable 
quantities, dips, quality of 
 
129  Spatio-temporal, or spatial temporal, is  used in data analysis when data is collected across both space and 
time. It describes a phenomenon in a certain location and time 
130  patch dynamics, in ecology, a theoretical approach positing that the structure, function, and dynamics of an 
ecological system can be understood and predicted from an analysis of its smaller interactive spatial 
components (patches) 
131  Scientists use the word “anthropogenic” in referring to  environmental change caused or influenced by 
people, either directly or indirectly 
132 GPS is used to locate the position and to map the spatial extent of a mine 
133 a clinometer is used to measure the relative heights concerning a fixed station (base station) and involves 
measuring angles across various depths, which helps in generating the elevation profile (contours) of the 
extracted region. 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  
 
57 
limestone, and depth of pit and bed. The compiled information aided in developing a contour 
profile of a mine. 
(c) Quantification of extracted volume of limestone 
Volume of limestone extracted was quantified considering (i ) inter contours volume 
computed and aggregated to get the total volume and (ii) considering difference of current 
terrain (Digital Elevation Mode) generated based on contours of field measurements) with 
the original terrain (based on contours of topographic map). The total quantity of mined 
material was computed considering mine volume and density (2600 kg/cum). Computed 
quantity at each location of  quarry pits was compared to the quantity reported by the 
respective firm /agency.  
4.4.1 Estimation of limestone extracted from the leases in sampled mandals 
Quantification of limestone 
extracted at select mines of 
sampled mandals w as carried out 
using temporal high resolution 
spatial data (Google earth), and 
latest (May 2022) remote sensing 
data 134  and S oI Topographic 
sheets. The Technical Consultant 
(IISc Bengaluru) identified that in 
Jaggaiahpet135 and Kolimagundala 
Mandal, actual extraction and 
reported has a deviation up to 10 
per cent . Technical Consultant 
suggested the deviation of the 
extracted quantity estimated by 
them as plus or minus five per 
cent.  
Audit noticed from the report 
submitted by Technical Consultant 
that: 
(a) The extract ed quantity quantified by Technical Consultant was varying from the 
extracted quantity mentioned by the Department (excluding the margin of five per cent) in 
11 limestone leases in both the mandals as detailed in the Appendix XXIX (A). In respect of 
six cases, the extracted quantity estimated as per IIS c was more (11.31 crore MT) than the 
quantity shown/recorded as extracted (11.06 crore MT) by the Department.  As such, there 
was excess extraction of minerals of 25.73 lakh MT. This may indicate suspected excess 
extraction. 
For any such cases, as per Rule 21(5) of MMDR Act, 1957 , the State Government may 
recover penalty from such person for the mineral so raised, or, where such mineral has 
 
134 Sentinel 2A/B, acquired by the European Space Agency 
135 other than Ramco Cements at Survey number 367/P in Budawada 


Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
58 
already been disposed of, the price thereof, and may also recover from such person, rent, 
royalty or tax, as the case may be. 
In accordance with the rules mentioned above, Audit calculated the penalty on the 
differential excess extracted quantity in the above-mentioned six leases which amounts to  
₹104.98 crore. Similarly, the royalty on the mineral amounts to ₹20.58 crore. Further, DMF 
and NMET worked out to ₹6.18 crore and ₹0.41 crore respectively ( as detailed in  
Appendix XXIX(B)). 
(b) Huge dumps of overburden 136 also known as mine spoil, were observed across the 
study sites, noticing absence of any protection measures. This drastically disturbed the 
system, was highly prone to erosion and could cause contamination of adjoining streams, 
rivers, and agricultural lands with substances that can leach out through rainwater. 
Environmental management was absent in most mines, and afforestation activities were 
observed to be poor across the sites . The agencies have poorly maintained the topsoil 
collected.  
The IISc recommended to enrich the t opsoil with organic matter to improve soil fertility.  
Regulatory agencies should ensure that post -production mine decommissioning and land 
reclamation activities are as per the proposal . Proper measures are to be implemented for 
storing overburden across the sites. 
The DMG replied (June 2023) that the assessment made by IIS c was approximate and the 
same could not provide the accurate quantity of mineral extracted and hence the method was 
not practical. Further, the Department replied that as per the amendments to Rule 34(A) of 
MCDR 2017, drone survey of major mineral mining leases was implemented, and the lessee 
should conduct (April or May) the drone survey and submit the survey report to IBM on or 
before 1st July every year and the drone survey was preferable. The Department also stated 
that in respect of four137 cases the variation between the actual and the estimated extraction 
by the audit was 1.10 per cent only.  
Further the Department contested  (July 2023) that the method employed by Technical 
Consultant for estimation of the volume extracted is not prescribed in the rules and the action 
recommended may not be initiated.  
During the Exit Conference, the Government stated (March 2024) that the findings and the 
methodology adopted by the Consultant (IISc) would be verified and a detailed reply would 
be furnished for the variation in data. 
Audit’s response is that the Remote sensing studies by technical experts, are reliable as a 
constructive tool, for assessing illegal mining situations. In this instance, the exercise has 
been useful in estimating the Limestone mineral extracted for the purpose of examining 
whether the quantity of mineral extracted was approximately as per the Mining Plan and 
facilitated detection of illegal mining activities. Further, the Department has not shown any 
data to contradict the finding of Technical Consultant and neither commented upon the 
details of the method employed nor furnished reasons as to how the same was not correct to 
 
136 overburden is physically, nutritionally, and microbiologically an impoverished habitat  
137 sl.no 2,4,5 and 6 in the Appendix XXIX (B) 


Chapter IV –Prevention and detection of unauthorised mining activity  

59 
ascertain the volume. Further, the Department is silent regarding the shortfall noticed by the 
Technical Consultant at mine site.  
The objective of the audit through this case study was to show that the technology can be 
very helpful in detecting the extract ed quantity from the mining leases and the prevention, 
detection and inspections can be made hassle free.  
Recommendation 4.3: The State Government must encourage use of advanced technology 
such as r emote sensing technology to assess actual quantity of minerals extracted to 
facilitate detection of any kind of illegal mining activities and Regulatory agencies should 
ensure that post-production mine decommissioning and land reclamation activities are as 
per the mining plan. 
 
 
 
 
(SARAT CHATURVEDI) 
Vijayawada          Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
The                  Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The             Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
The 03 May 2025
The 07 May 2025

 
 
Appendices and Glossary 
 
Pages 61 - 78 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
61 
Appendix I 
(Paragraph 2.1.2 and Page No. 11) 
Consideration of other possible mineral reserves against the UNFC guidelines 
Sl. 
No. 
DDMG 
Office 
Name of 
the lessee 
Extent 
(in 
Hectares) 
Proved 
( in cum) 
Probable 
(in cum) 
Total 
reserve 
(E+F) 
(in cum) 
Other 
than 
Proved 
and 
Probable 
(in cum) 
Quantity of 
mineral 
shown in 
Mining 
Plan 
(in cum) 
A B C D E F G H I= G+H 
1. Kurnool G.Natarajan 1.00 4,410 4,191 8,601 4,191 12,792 
2. 
M/s 
Imperial 
Granites 
Private 
Limited 
2.00 12,008 5,761 17,769 5,761 23,530 
3. 
M/s CTP 
Granites & 
Exports 
4.60 12,89,964 2,75,112 15,65,076 2,97,748 18,62,824 
4. Kadapa M/s Galaxy 
Enterprises 5.00 1,64,801 32,620 1,97,421 32,620 2,30,041 
5. Abbireddyg
ari Suvarna 4.90 17,00,340 2,91,930 19,92,270 2,91,930 22,84,200 
6. M/s Haroon 
Granites 5.00 21,03,732 2,92,896 23,96,628 2,92,896 26,89,524 
7. M/s Haroon 
Granites 5.00 21,39,324 2,97,616 24,36,940 2,97,616 27,34,556 
Total 27.50 74,14,579 12,00,126 86,14,705 12,22,762 98,37,467 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix II 
(Paragraph 2.1.2 and Page No. 12) 
 Statement showing the calculation of quantity as per mining plan 
Sl. 
No. 
Resources and reserves Quantity (in cum) 
As approved To be adopted 
Mining plan approved by DDMG 
A Geological Resources 4,82,095 4,82,095 
B Reserve Blocked under Buffer Zone 70,634 70,634 
C Reserve Blocked under Safety Slopes 1,12,197 1,12,197 
D Total reserve Blocked (B+C) 1,82,831 1,82,831 
E Reserve Available for quarrying (A-D) 2,99,264 2,99,264 
F Reserve taken for calculation of Mining life 8,99,031 2,99,264 
G Estimated Annual production 53,825 53,825 
H Estimated Mining Life (F/G) 17 Years ~ 5.5Years 
Environmental Clearance approved by SEIAA 
K Reserve taken (in cum) 5,71,695 2,99,264 
L Annual production (in cum per year) 57,015 53,825 
M Mining Life  10 Years ~ 5.5Years 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
  

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
62 
Appendix III (A) 
(Paragraph 2.1.3 (a) and Page No. 13) 
Statement showing short collection of Mineral Exploration Research and Innovation 
Trust Fund 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Seigniorage Fee collections MERIT 
Departmental Figure Finance 
Accounts 
To be 
Collected 
(Cx2/100) 
Collected Short 
collection 
(D-E) 
A B C D E F 
2017-18 582.77 1,135.84 22.72 20.02 2.70 
2018-19 614.53 1,180.00 23.60 12.79 10.81 
2019-20 693.93 1,116.82 22.34 16.19 6.16 
2020-21 712.63 1,277.87 25.56 15.90 9.67 
2021-22 741.96  1,657.34 33.15 17.41 15.74 
Total 3,345.82 6,367.87 127.37 82.31 45.06 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix III (B) 
(Paragraph 2.1.3 (b) and Page No. 14) 
Non collection of Mineral Exploration Research and Innovation Trust Fund from 
Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Sales turnover MERIT to be collected 
(10 per cent of sales turnover) 
2016-17 565.80 56.58 
2017-18 675.18 67.52 
2018-19 765.14 76.51 
2019-20 1,124.46 112.45 
2020-21 781.92 78.19 
2021-22 852.97 85.30 
Total 4,765.47 476.55 
Source: Information related to Sales turnover collected from APMDC 
Appendix IV 
(Paragraph 2.1.3 (c) and Page No. 14) 
Statement showing the receipts and expenditure under Mineral Exploration Research 
and Innovation Trust Fund  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Receipt Administrative 
expenditure 
Exploration   
Expenditure 
Total 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance 
Major Minor 
2017-18 2.59 20.02 0.94 0.20 -- 1.14 21.47 
2018-19 21.47 12.79 0.41 0.32 -- 0.73 33.53 
2019-20 33.53 16.19 0.39 0.70 -- 1.09 48.63 
2020-21 48.63 15.90 0.36 -- -- 0.36 64.17 
2021-22 64.17 17.41 0.46 7.21 -- 7.67 73.91 
Total  82.31 2.56 8.43 -- 10.99 -- 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
  

Appendices and Glossary 
 
63 
Appendix V  
(Paragraph 2.2 and Page No. 16) 
Statement showing various environmental clearance granting authority 
Area of Lease 
 (in Hectare) 
Category of Project Authority to grant 
Environmental Clearance 
0 – 5 ‘B2’ DEIAA 
> 5 and < 25 ‘B2’ SEIAA 
≥ 25 and < 50 ‘B1’ SEIAA 
≥ 50 ‘A’ MoEF&CC 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix VI (A) 
(Paragraph 2.2.1 (a) and Page No. 16) 
Statement showing the information on Mineral Concession Application for grant of 
lease 
Name of the Office MCAs 
received 
MCAs 
pending for 
want of 
NOC 
MCAs 
Pending  
inspite of 
having NOC 
Number of lease deeds 
executed for MCAs 
received during the 
period of audit 
ADMG Kurnool NP 99 96 NP 
ADMG 
Banaganapalle NP 524 114 NP 
ADMG Kadapa NP 262 123 NP 
ADMG Yerraguntla NP 91 39 NP 
ADMG Vijayawada NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Nandigama NP NP NP NP 
ADMG  
Visakhapatnam NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Anakapalli NP NP NP NP 
DDMG Kurnool NP NP NP NP 
DDMG Kadapa 370 110 76 68 
DDMG Vijayawada 107 106 104 63 
DDMG  
Visakhapatnam NP 101 37 37 
DMG NP NP NP NP 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
NP – Not Provided/Produced 
Appendix VI (B) 
(Paragraph 2.2.1 (a) (i) and Page No. 16)  
Statement showing year wise analysis of pendency of Mineral Concession Application 
Duration of 
Pendency 
Number of MCAs pending with 
Revenue authorities for want of 
NOC 
Number of MCAs pending with 
ADMG even after receiving NOC 
from Revenue authorities 
Government 
land  
Patta land Government land  Patta Land 
> 10 Years 26 -- 23 2 
> 5 Years 164 9 64 6 
1-5 Year 569 29 230 16 
Between one 
month to one Year 157 22 25 6 
Total 916 60 342 30 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
64 
Appendix VI (C) 
(Paragraph 2.2.1 (a) (iv) and Page No. 17)  
Statement showing status of issue of Letter of Intent/Environmental Clearances 
granted by DDMG and DMG  
Name of the 
Office 
Number 
of leases 
for 
which 
MCAs 
received 
Number 
of LoI 
issued 
Mining 
plan 
approved 
and 
submitted 
Environment 
Clearance 
submitted 
Pollution 
certificates 
submitted 
Number 
of leases 
granted 
DDMG 
Kurnool NP NP NP NP NP NP 
DDMG Kadapa 370 110 76 68 68 68 
DDMG 
Vijayawada 107 106 104 63 57 44 
DDMG 
Viskhapatnam NP 101 37 37 37 37 
DMG NP NP NP NP NP NP 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department; NP-Not Produced 
Appendix VII 
(Paragraph 2.3.2 and Page No. 20)  
Statement showing the inaction in lapsing of inoperative leases 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Forwarded to DMG Proposals 
forwarded during 
the period 
Number of 
proposals 
Total 
Major Minor 
Kadapa 10 --- 2012-2016 1 10 2017-2022 9 
Yerraguntla 9 3 2017-2022 12 12 
Anakapalli 
9 --- 
2007- 2011 5 
9 2012-2016 3 
2017-2022 1 
Banaganapalle 3 --- 2017-2022 3 3 
Kurnool 19 --- 2012-2016 1 19 2017-2022 18 
Total 50 3  53 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department  
 
Appendix VIII 
(Paragraph 2.4.1 (a) and Page No. 21)  
Statement showing the information regarding renewal of applications 
Name of the Office Number of 
applications 
received for 
renewal 
Number of 
renewals 
granted 
Number of 
applications 
rejected 
Number of 
applications 
pending 
ADMG Kurnool NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Banaganapalle NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Kadapa NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Yerraguntla 44 4 19 21 
ADMG Vijayawada 46 10 NP NP 
ADMG Nandigama NP NP NP NP 
ADMG Visakhapatnam NP NP NP NP 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
65 
ADMG Anakapalli NP NP NP NP 
DDMG Kurnool 51 8 14 6 
DDMG Kadapa 33 3 17 13 
DDMG Vijayawada 36 5 3 28 
DDMG Viskhapatnam 15 15 0 0 
Total 225 45 53 68 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
NP-Not Produced 
Appendix IX 
(Paragraph 2.4.2 and Page No. 22)  
Statement showing ineligible leases 
Sl.  
No. 
Lease ID Number Lease period upto  Extent of lease 
(in Hectares) 
1. 1322671167 27.07.1987 15.292 
2. 1322721168 21.07.1992 13.743 
3. 1322721171 21.07.1992 9.526 
4. 1322721170 21.07.1992 25.880 
5. 1322741173 08.02.1994 31.627 
6. 1322741172 29.05.1994 42.720 
7. 1322741169 18.10.1994 44.549 
8. 1122780175 30.04.1998 20.777 
9. 1312920031 16.09.2002 7.490 
10. 1322851166 04.11.2005 17.693 
11. 112820090 12.12.2006 352.080 
12. 1122870174 10.06.2007 7.450 
13.  Not Available 28.07.2014 4.490 
14. 1312940049 02.08.2014 2.190 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix X (A) 
(Paragraph 2.4.3 and Page No. 26)  
Statement showing details of non-registration of lease deeds for major mineral 
mining leases 
(₹ in crore) 
ADMG Office Total 
number 
of 
leases 
Total 
number of 
lease files 
scrutinised  
Number of 
leases for 
which 
lease deed 
was not 
executed 
Amount 
of Stamp 
duty to be 
collected 
Registration 
fee to be 
collected 
Total 
loss of 
revenue 
Banaganapalle 50 40 11 6.59 0.05 6.64 
Kurnool 67 40 08 3.66 0.02 3.68 
Nandigama 12 12 04 1.81 0.05 1.86 
Yerraguntla 19 14 08 3.98 0.09 4.07 
Total 148 106 31 16.04 0.21 16.25 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
  

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
66 
Appendix X (B) 
(Paragraph 2.4.3 and Page No. 26)  
Statement showing details of non-registration of lease deeds for minor mineral 
mining leases 
(Amount in ₹) 
ADMG Office Total 
number of 
minor 
mineral 
mining 
leases 
Number of 
leases for 
which lease 
deed not 
executed 
Amount 
of Stamp 
duty to 
be 
collected 
Registration 
fee to be 
collected 
Total loss 
of revenue 
Anakapalli 406 26 29,32,449 2,23,346 31,55,795 
Yerraguntla 97 11 1,17,866 21,694 1,39,560 
Total 503 37 30,50,315 2,45,040 32,95,355 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XI 
(Paragraph 3.1.2 (b) and Page No. 31)  
Statement showing short levy of seigniorage fee and associated revenue 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Despatch 
(in Sq. 
m) 
Conversion 
to Metric 
Ton 
Seigniorage 
fee (SF) to 
be levied  
Seigniorage 
fee levied  
Short 
levy of 
SF 
Short 
levy of 
DMF 
(10 per 
cent of 
SF) 
Short 
levy of 
MERIT 
Total 
Short 
levy 
2017-18 7,14,070 51,005 51,00,500 35,70,350 15,30,150 1,53,015 30,603 17,13,768 
2018-19 11,63,800 83,129 83,12,857 58,19,000 24,93,857 2,49,386 49,877 27,93,120 
2019-20 11,85,500 84,679 85,00,357 60,18,500 24,81,857 2,48,186 49,637 27,79,680 
2020-21 7,30,440 52,174 57,39,171 43,82,640 13,56,531 1,35,653 27,131 15,19,315 
2021-22 87,500 6,250 6,87,500 5,25,000 1,62,500 16,250 3,250 1,82,000 
Total 38,81,310 2,77,237 2,83,40,385 2,03,15,490 80,24,895 8,02,490 1,60,498 89,87,883 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Note: Leases given on auction basis 
Appendix XII (A) 
(Paragraph 3.1.2 (c) and Page No. 31)  
Statement showing non-collection of NMET fund 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Mineral Royalty 
collected  
NMET  
To be collected Collected Short collection 
1. Garnet (Abrasive) 8.64 0.17 0 0.17 
2. Ilmenite 12.30 0.25 0 0.25 
3. Rutile 2.70 0.05 0 0.05 
4. Sillimanite 5.09 0.10 0 0.10 
5. Zircon 2.02 0.04 0 0.04 
Total 30.75 0.61 0 0.61 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
  

Appendices and Glossary 
 
67 
Appendix XII (B) 
(Paragraph 3.1.2 (c) and Page No. 31) 
Statement showing non-collection of MERIT fund 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
Mineral 
Seigniorage fee MERIT to be 
Collected 
MERIT collected Short 
collection 
River Sand 29.70 0.59 0 0.59 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XIII (A) 
(Paragraph 3.1.3 (a) and Page No. 32)  
Removal of minerals without having environmental clearance for lease area less than 
five hectares  
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Name of the 
Mineral 
Despatched Quantity  
(cum /Sqm)# 
Cost of Mineral to be 
recovered* 
Banaganapalle LSS (Black) 20,48,610.00 6,14,58,300 
Road Metal 3,942.00 17,73,900 
Kurnool Black Granite 1,734.60 2,99,21,850 
Nandigama Road Metal 2,31,730.00 10,42,78,500 
Grand Total 22,86,016.60 19,74,32,550 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
# LSS Black in Sq. m, Road Metal in cum and Black Granite in cum 
* LSS Black at 30 per Sq. m, Black granite at ₹17,250 per cum and Road Metal at ₹450 per cum 
Appendix XIII(B) 
(Paragraph 3.1.3 (a) and Page No. 32)  
Removal of minerals without having environmental clearance for lease area more 
than five hectares  
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Name of the Mineral Despatched 
Quantity 
(Cum/MT/Sq.m) 
Cost of mineral to 
be recovered 
Anakapalli Building Stone 200 90,000 
Gravel 54,000 1,21,50,000 
Road metal 10,66,163 47,97,73,350 
Road Metal & Building Stone 11,53,200 51,89,40,000 
Banaganapalle LSS (Black) 18,32,700 5,49,81,000 
Road metal 1,56,698 7,05,14,100 
Kadapa Road metal 14,950 67,27,500 
Nandigama Gravel 39,791 89,52,975 
Road metal 14,15,731 63,70,78,950 
Vijayawada Gravel 11,640 26,19,000 
Vishakapatnam Apatite and Vermiculite 120 2,64,000 
Colour Granite 20,927 36,09,90,750 
Gravel 12,300 27,67,500 
Road metal 16,200 72,90,000 
Yerraguntla Dolomite 2,63,250 13,16,25,000 
 
 
Total 229,47,64,125 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
# Vermiculate in MT, LSS Black in Sq. m and others in cum 
* Building stone, road metal at ₹450 per cum, Gravel at ₹225 per cum, LSS Black at ₹30 per Sq. m, colour 
granite at ₹17,250 per cum and Apatite and Vermiculite at ₹2,200 per MT 

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
68 
Appendix XIV 
(Paragraph 3.1.3 (b) and Page No. 33)  
Loss of revenue due to excavation of mineral in excess of permitted quantity 
mentioned in environmental clearance 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Name of the 
Mineral 
Quantity 
permitted to 
be extracted 
as mentioned 
in EC 
(cum/MT)# 
Quantity 
actually 
extracted 
(cum/MT)# 
Difference 
(cum/MT)# 
Cost of the 
mineral to be 
recovered* 
Anakapalli Road Metal  64,105 1,65,200 1,01,095 4,54,92,750 
Gravel NIL 1,650 1,650 3,71,250 
Yerraguntla Yellow Ochre 19,950 30,350 10,400 31,20,000 
Visakhapatnam Gravel 1,982  3,922 1,940 4,36,500 
Total    4,94,20,500 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
# Yellow Ochre in Metric Ton, Road Metal and Gravel in cum 
* Yellow Ochre at ₹300 per MT, Gravel at ₹225 per cum and Road Metal at ₹450 per cum 
Appendix XV 
(Paragraph 3.1.4 (b) and Page No. 35)  
Statement showing non levy of DMF and MERIT on government works 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Receipts from 
government works 
(Other Departmental 
Receipts) 
DMF 
(at 30 per 
cent of 
Receipts) 
MERIT 
(at two per 
cent of 
Receipts) 
Total of DMF and 
MERIT 
2017-18 454 136.20 9.08 145.28 
2018-19 483 144.90 9.66 154.56 
2019-20 422 126.60 8.44 135.04 
2020-21 340 102.00 6.80 108.80 
2021-22 432 129.60 8.64 138.24 
Total 2,131 639.30 42.62 681.92 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XVI (A) 
(Paragraph 3.1.5 and Page No. 36) 
Statement showing short levy of seigniorage fee and penalty due to incorrect adoption 
of rate 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Quantity 
(in MT) 
Quantity 
estimated 
in square 
metre (1 
MT = 14 
Sq.m) 
Seigniorage fee as per Penalty 
Sq.m 
(₹6) 
MT 
(₹110) 
To be levied 
(as per MT) 
Levied  
(as per 
Sq.m) 
Short levied 
A B C = (B) x 14 D = (C) x ₹6 E= (B) x ₹110 F = (E) x 10 + (E) G H = (F) – (G) 
1. 34,608 4,84,514 29,07,084 38,06,880 4,18,75,680 3,19,77,924 98,97,756 
2. 22,260 3,11,640 18,69,840 24,48,600 2,69,34,600 2,05,68,240 63,66,360 
3. 20,446 2,86,247 17,17,464 22,49,060 2,47,39,660 1,88,92,104 58,47,556 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
69 
4. 22,232 3,11,245 18,67,488 24,45,520 2,69,00,720 93,37,350 1,75,63,370 
5. 5,850 81,900 4,91,400 6,43,500 70,78,500 54,05,400 16,73,100 
6. 3,069 42,966 2,57,796 3,37,590 37,13,490 28,35,756 8,77,734 
7. 3,050 42,700 2,56,200 3,35,500 36,90,500 28,18,200 8,72,300 
8. 1,750 24,500 1,47,000 1,92,500 21,17,500 16,17,000 5,00,500 
9. 1,300 18,200 1,09,200 1,43,000 15,73,000 12,01,200 3,71,800 
10. 1,160 16,240 97,440 1,27,600 14,03,600 10,71,840 3,31,760 
Total 1,15,725 16,20,152 97,20,912 1,27,29,750 14,00,27,250 9,57,25,014 4,43,02,236 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XVI (B) 
(Paragraph 3.1.5 and Page No. 36) 
Short levy of DMF, MERIT and consideration amount due to short levy of seigniorage 
fee on penalty of LSS Black mineral 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
lessee 
(Sri/Smt.) 
SF 
Calculated 
SF to be 
calculated 
DMF to 
be 
levied 
DMF 
levied 
Short 
Levy of 
DMF 
MERIT 
to be 
levied 
MERIT 
Levied 
Short 
Levy of 
MERIT 
Consideration 
amount not 
levied (100 
per cent of 
SF) 
1. A Chandra 
Mohan 29,07,084 38,06,880 3,80,688 2,90,708 89,980 76,137 58,142 17,995 38,06,880 
2. G Srinivasulu 18,69,840 24,48,600 2,44,860 1,86,984 57,876 48,972 37,397 11,575 24,48,600 
3. D Dastagiri 17,17,482 22,49,060 2,24,906 1,71,748 53,158 44,981 34,350 10,631 22,49,060 
4. K Shiva Nagi 
Reddy  18,67,488 24,45,520 2,44,552 1,86,749 57,803 48,910 37,349 11,561 24,45,520 
5. Apathi Bhaskar 
Naidu 4,91,400 6,43,500 64,350 49,140 15,210 12,870 9,828 3,042 6,43,500 
6. G Mallikarjuna 
Reddy 2,57,796 3,37,590 33,759 25,780 7,979 6,752 5,156 1,596 3,37,590 
7. 
Apathi 
Rajasimha 
Naidu 
2,56,200 3,35,500 33,550 25,620 7,930 6,710 5,124 1,586 3,35,500 
8. Vadla 
Subramanyam 1,47,000 1,92,500 19,250 14,700 4,550 3,850 2,940 910 1,92,500 
9. Vunnam 
Purushotham 1,09,200 1,43,000 14,300 10,920 3,380 2,860 2,184 676 1,43,000 
10. K Naga 
Subbarayudu 97,440 1,27,600 12,760 9,744 3,016 2,552 1,949 603 1,27,600 
Total  1,27,29,750   3,00,882   60,175 1,27,29,750 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Note: Leases given on auction basis and for SF calculated/to be calculated, Refer Appendix XVI (A)  
 
 
Appendix XVII 
(Paragraph 3.1.6 and Page No. 36) 
Statement showing non-levy of DMF and MERIT 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the 
ADMG office 
Number 
of cases 
Seigniorage 
Fee 
collected  
DMF  MERIT   
To be levied Levied Non-levy To be 
levied 
Levied Non-levy 
Yerraguntla 30 1,55,34,009  44,75,703 0  44,75,703  3,10,680 0  3,10,680 
Kadapa 27 51,82,935 15,54,881 0 15,54,881 1,03,659 0 1,03,659 
Kurnool 6 53,13,420 13,09,442 0 13,09,442 1,06,268 0 1,06,268 

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
70 
Vishakapatnam 8 42,42,447 12,72,734 0 12,72,734 84,849 0 84,849 
Grand Total 71  3,02,72,811  86,12,760 0  86,12,760  6,05,456 0  6,05,456 
Source: Data furnished by the Department  
DMF to be levied: Granite - 12.5 per cent at Yerraguntla and all other minerals - 30 per cent  
Appendix XVIII (A) 
(Paragraph 3.1.7 (a) and Page No. 37) 
Non-levy of DMF and MERIT on seigniorage fee due to incorrect application of rule 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the lessee 
(Sri/Smt) 
Name of the 
Mineral and 
Quantity  
Seigniorage 
Fee 
Non-levy of DMF MERIT 
 
To be 
levied Levied Non-
levy 
To be 
levied Levied Non- 
levy 
1. Gowra 
Babu 
LSS 
Black 
(Sq.m) 
5,10,290 25,51,450 2,55,145 0 2,55,145 51,029 0 51,029 
2. Mohammad 
Gouse 
Rehmatti 
(Cum) 540 18,900 5,670 0 5,670 378 0 378 
 Total  5,10,830 25,70,350 2,60,815 0 2,60,815 51,407 0 51,407 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Note: Seigniorage fee for LSS Black calculated at ₹five per sq.m and Rehmatti at ₹35 per cum.   
Appendix XVIII (B) 
(Paragraph 3.1.7 (b) and Page No. 38) 
Short levy of penalty due to incorrect adoption of rate and rule 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the lessee Quantity in Seigniorage Fee as per Penalty 
Sq m  MT*  Sq. m 
(₹6) 
MT 
(₹110) 
To be levied # Levied ** Short levied 
S ROSAMMA 6,99,300 49,950.00 41,95,800 54,94,500 6,04,39,500 2,09,79,000 3,94,60,500 
O BALI REDDY 7,69,125 54,937.50 46,14,750 60,43,125 6,64,74,375 2,76,88,500 3,87,85,875 
O BALI REDDY 1,47,000 10,500.00 8,82,000 11,55,000 1,27,05,000 52,92,000 74,13,000 
B C KULLAYAPPA 1,26,000 9,000.00 7,56,000 9,90,000 1,08,90,000 45,36,000 63,54,000 
V LAKSHMAMMA 3780 270.00 22,680 29,700 3,26,700 1,36,260 1,90,440 
Total 17,45,205 1,24,657.50 1,04,71,230 1,37,12,325 15,08,35,575 5,86,31,760 9,22,03,815 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
*Conversion factor of One MT= 14 Sq.m 
# ₹110 per MT+10 times of Seigniorage Fee 
** ₹6 per Sq.m + five times of Seigniorage Fee 
Appendix XVIII (C) 
(Paragraph 3.1.7 (b) and Page No. 38) 
Short levy of DMF and MERIT on penalty due to incorrect adoption of rate and rule 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the lessee Seigniorage Fee  DMF MERIT 
Levied 
(₹110 per MT) 
To be 
levied 
Levied Short 
levy 
To be 
levied  
Levied Short 
levy 
S ROSAMMA 54,94,500 5,49,450 0 5,49,450 1,09,890 0 109,890 
O BALI REDDY 60,43,125 6,04,313 0 6,04,313 1,20,863 0 120,863 
O BALI REDDY 11,55,000 1,15,500 0 1,15,500 23,100 0 23,100 
B C KULLAYAPPA 9,90,000 99,000 0 99,000 19,800 0 19,800 
V LAKSHMAMMA 29,700 2,970 0 2,970 594 0 594 
Total    13,71,233     2,74,247 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
71 
Appendix XIX 
(Paragraph 3.2.2 (a) and Page No. 39)  
Statement showing loss of revenue due to treating white shale as major mineral 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Dead rent to be levied* Dead rent levied Short levy of dead rent 
Lease 1 (Extent 43.32 hectares) 
2016-17 6,49,800 86,640 5,63,160 
2017-18 6,49,800 86,640 5,63,160 
2018-19 6,49,800 86,640 5,63,160 
2019-20 6,49, 800 1,36,825 5,12,975 
2020-21 28,15,800 1,73,280 26,42,520 
2021-22 28,15,800 MRA not prepared NA 
Total 48,44,975 
Lease 2 (Extent 40.469 hectares) 
2016-17 6,07,035 80,939 5,26,096 
2017-18 6,07,035 80,939 5,26,096 
2019-20 6,07,035 1,27,822 4,79,213 
2020-21 26,30,485 1,61,878 24,68,607 
2021-22 26,30,485 1,61,878 24,68,607 
Total 64,68,619 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
*at ₹15,000 per hectare upto 2020-21 and at ₹65,000 per hectare from 2020-21 onwards 
Appendix XX 
(Paragraph 3.2.2 (b) and Page No. 40)  
Statement showing short levy of dead rent in respect of major mineral 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Name of the 
Mineral 
Area in 
Hectares 
Dead Rent 
(per 
Hectare) 
Dead Rent to 
be levied 
Dead Rent actually 
levied by the 
Department 
Short Levy 
Kadapa Iron 665.328 8,000 53,22,624 26,61,312 26,61,312 
Yerraguntla Iron 21.853 8,000 1,74,824 87,412 87,412 
Limestone 9.510 4,000 38,040 15,112 22,928 
Banaganapalle Limestone 19.052# 3500* 66,682 21,349 45,333 
 Total   56,02,170 27,85,185 28,16,985 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
# 9.526 (2019-20) + 9.526 (2020-21) = 19.052 
* for 2019-20 & 2020-21, Dead rent taken as 3,000 and 4,000 respectively. Hence, average figure of 3,500 taken as Dead 
Rent  
Appendix XXI 
(Paragraph 3.2.3 (a) and Page No. 42)  
Statement showing short collection of security deposit 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the ADMG 
Office 
Number of 
cases 
Security deposit to 
be collected at 
enhanced rate 
Security deposit 
collected as per 
old rates 
Short collection 
of Security 
deposit 
Vishakapatnam 58 11,41,53,795 2,72,57,634 8,68,96,161 
Anakapalli 53 6,07,82,007 1,67,23,870 4,40,58,137 
Banaganapalle 44 2,35,66,218 46,61,954 1,89,04,264 
Vijayawada 38 1,40,89,803 28,85,665 1,12,04,138 
Kurnool 20 1,77,81,579 47,95,030 1,29,86,549 
Kadapa 6 54,51,300 14,72,200 39,79,100 
Yerraguntla 5 10,33,656 2,42,980 7,90,676 
Grand Total 224 23,68,58,358 5,80,39,333 17,88,19,025 
Source: As computed by the Department  

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
72 
Appendix XXII 
(Paragraph 3.2.3 (b) and Page No. 42) 
Statement showing non-forfeiture of security deposit 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of the ADMG 
Office 
Number of leases for which Security 
Deposit not forfeited 
Security Deposit not 
forfeited 
Vishakapatnam 13 5,20,300 
Anakapalli 12 4,70,000 
Vijayawada 7 3,22,600 
Kurnool 6 4,30,500 
Banaganapalle 3 1,32,900 
Yerraguntla 3 45,000 
Grand Total 44 19,21,300 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XXIII 
(Paragraph 3.2.4 and Page No. 43)  
Statement showing extent of land on which annual compensation fee not levied 
Sl. No. Name of the ADMG 
Office 
Number of leases  Extent of land  
(in hectare) 
1. Kurnool 63 1,483.50  
2. Banaganapalle 30 3,786.19  
3. Yerraguntla 17  299.36  
4. Anakapalli 13 124.60  
5. Kadapa 13 1,364.55  
6. Nandigama 6 573.08  
7. Vishakapatnam 2 17.74  
Total 144 7,649.02  
  Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XXIV 
(Paragraph 4.1.1 and Page No. 46)  
Statement showing inspections conducted by the Mines & Geology Department 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ADMG Office 
Year Number of 
leases in the 
corresponding 
period 
Number of 
leases for 
which 
inspection 
was 
conducted 
Shortfall 
in 
inspections 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
1. Yerraguntla 2017-18 186 92 94 51 
2. 2018-19 175 84 91 52 
3. 2019-20 175 87 88 50 
4. 2020-21 132 97 35 27 
5. 2021-22 126 32 94 75 
6. Kurnool 2017-18 679 831 (-) 152 -- 
7. 2018-19 722 61 661 92 
8. 2019-20 612 99 513 84 
9. 2020-21 606 90 516 85 
10. 2021-22 608 25 583 96 
11. Banaganapalle 2017-18 485 350 135 28 
12. 2018-19 498 366 132 27 
13. 2019-20 518 315 203 39 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
73 
14. 2020-21 530 300 230 43 
15. 2021-22 541 100 441 82 
16. Kadapa 2017-22 NP NP NA NA 
17. Nandigama 2017-22 NP NP NA NA 
18. Visakhapatnam 2017-18 165 156 9 5 
19. 2018-19 167 160 7 4 
20. 2019-20 160 168 (-) 8 -- 
21. 2020-21 163 158 5 3 
22. 2021-22 121 132 (-) 11 -- 
23. Anakapalli 2017-18 357 658 (-) 301 -- 
24. 2018-19 347 719 (-) 372 -- 
25. 2019-20 385 151 234 61 
26. 2020-21 NP NP NA NA 
27. 2021-22 NP NP NA NA 
28. Vijayawada 2017-18 139 194 (-) 55 -- 
29. 2018-19 NP -- -- -- 
30. 2019-20 135 175 (-) 40 -- 
31. 2020-21 99 172 (-) 73 -- 
32. 2021-22 108 181 (-) 73 -- 
   8,939 5,953 2,986  
Source: Compiled based on the Information furnished by the Department  
NP:Not produced, NA: Not available 
Appendix XXV 
(Paragraph 4.1.3 (a) and Page No. 48) 
Statement showing continuance of leases after recommendation for termination order 
by Indian Bureau of Mines 
SL. 
No. 
Name of the 
Office 
Primary 
Mineral 
Lease Id Name of the Lessee Date of  
recommendation 
for termination/ 
discontinuance 
1. Dachepalli Limestone 722020294 Katteboina Anjaneyulu 14.10.2013 
2. Dachepalli Limestone 722030291 B.Sarada W/O Late B. 
Amaralingeswara Rao 
14.10.2013 
3. Markapur Iron Ore 822100029 UBR Minerals; 
Mgp.P.Udaya Bhaskar 
24.09.2018 
4. Anantapuramu Iron Ore 1212070095 Sai Balaji Minerals 07.06.2019 
5. Kurnool Iron Ore 1312080118 Buggana Sanjeeva Reddy 07.06.2019 
6. Nandigama Limestone 622100003 Hemadri Cements 
Limited 
07.06.2019 
7. Kurnool Limestone 1312060109 Siva Lakshmi Minerals 07.06.2019 
8. Kurnool Limestone 1312070706 N.Kavita Rani (N S 
Ramagiri Murthy) 
07.06.2019 
9. SPSR Nellore Vermiculite 912870514 Dugar Insulations India 
(P) Ltd 
07.06.2019 
10. Banaganapalle Limestone 1322071225 Kamal Mineral Company 15.07.2020 
11. Banaganapalle Limestone 1322081227 Dalmia Cement (Bharat) 
Limited  
15.07.2020 
12. Kurnool Limestone 1312980268 S.Mohammed Hussain 13.10.2021 
13. Vizianagaram Manganese 
Ore 
212070030 M.K. Mining Corporation 
(A.S.V. Prasad) 
13.10.2021 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
74 
Appendix XXVI 
(Paragraph 4.1.3 (b) and Page No. 48) 
Statement showing issue of permits in violation to DGMS stop orders 
Sl.  
No. 
Lessee id DGMS 
Recommended 
for suspension 
in the year 
Latest Permit Details 
Permit number Approved 
Quantity 
(in Cum) 
Issue date and time 
1. 1011080622 2018-19 PR10110806220023 2,000.000 22.09.2022 3:58:01 PM 
2. 1021040133 2018-19 PR10210401330070 45.530 09.10.2022 09:03 
3. 1021070002 2018-19 PR10210700020067 105.295 29.07.2022 7:47:59 PM 
4. 1021120142 2018-19 PR10211201420094 264.853 06.05.2022 00:12 
5. 1021140125 2018-19 PR10211401250230 50.234 09.12.2022 16:27 
6. 1021150298 2018-19 PR10211502980177 26.768 27.09.2022 5:23:40 PM 
7. 1021160522 2018-19 PR10211605220011 332.451 28.03.2021 1:04:51 PM 
8. 1021160523 2018-19 PR10211605230021 47.586 16.08.2021 10:11:12 AM 
9. 1021160524 2018-19 PR10211605240003 97.482 02.09.2022 10:55 
10. 1021200596 2021-22 PR10212005960019 120.914 14.09.2022 10:40:38 AM 
11. 1021180555 2021-22 PR10211805550166 31.213 20.09.2022 4:22:40 PM 
Source: Compiled based on data furnished by the Department 
Appendix XXVII 
(Paragraph 4.2 and Page No. 49) 
Statement showing revision of penalty orders issued by Government without 
justification 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ADMG office 
Number 
of cases 
Original 
Penalty 
levied  
Revised 
Penalty 
amount  
Difference between 
original penalty and 
revised  
1. Kadapa 4 34,86,76,791 82,75,443 34,04,01,348 
2. Yerraguntla 9 25,55,10,442 1,24,19,480 24,30,90,962 
3. Kurnool 6 7,77,29,959 2,20,12,529 5,57,17,430 
4. Visakhapatnam 4 8,70,50,833 4,84,84,741 3,85,66,092 
5. Anakapalli 4 4,00,04,823 16,56,718 3,83,48,105 
6. Banaganapalle 3 3,03,28,320 41,95,680 2,61,32,640 
7. Vijayawada 1 25,38,086 14,17,024 11,21,062 
Total 31 84,18,39,254 9,84,61,615 74,33,77,639 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
75 
Appendix XXVIII 
(Paragraph 4.3.2 (c) and Page No. 53) 
Action taken on triggers by ADMG Kurnool 
Trigger No Date of issue of 
Show Cause 
notice/Demand 
notice 
Action taken 
APR (02-2020) 25.08.2021 (SCN) The office has issued demand notice vide letter No. 
2399/M-SU.S/2021 dated 18.10.2022 
APR (06-2020) 20.07.2020 
(Demand Notice) 
The lessee has gone for revision under Rule 35A of 
APMMC and the Government has reduced the penalty in 
December 2020 and the complete amount is not paid for 
which the office had intimated the lessee. 
APR (11-2020) 25.08.2021 (SCN) The office has issued demand notice vide letter No. 
.2399/M-SU.S/2021 dated 18.10.2022 
Source: Information furnished by ADMG Kurnool 
Appendix XXIX (A) 
(Paragraph 4.4.1 (a) and Page No. 57) 
Statement showing variation in the extracted quantity 
Sl. 
No. 
District ADMG office Name of the 
Lessee 
Extent 
(in 
Hects) 
Extracted quantity (in MT) Deviation 
percentage Calculated 
with Scientific 
Methods  
With five per 
cent variation 
(+) or (-) 
As provided 
by the 
Department  
1. 
Krishna Nandigama 
M/s. Ramco 
Cements 
Limited 
124.330 0 0 4,099.00 Can not be 
calculated 
2. 160.000         37,115.00          38,970.75        4,31,513.00  91 
3. M/s 
Hemadri 
Cements 
Limited 
38.445    18,90,799.00     17,96,259.05      17,62,420.00  (-)2 
4. 
38.690    49,30,962.00     46,84,413.90      45,19,542.00  (-)4 
5. M/s. 
Kakatiya 
Cement 
Sugar & 
Industries 
Limited 
121.460 1,19,79,248.00  1,13,80,285.60   1,11,69,122.00  (-)2 
6. M/s. The 
KCP 
Limited 
368.350 2,25,17,225.00  2,13,91,363.75   2,10,73,597.00  (-)2 
7. M/s. 
Ultratech 
Cements 
Limited 
629.220 3,23,88,675.00  3,07,69,241.25   2,94,24,721.00  (-)5 
8. 
Kurnool Banaganapalle 
M/s. The 
Ramco 
Cements 
Limited 
491.550         20,919.60          21,965.58           60,592.82  64 
9. 
255.000      2,27,640.14       2,39,022.15        2,82,094.57  15 
10. M/s. 
UltraTech 
Cements 
Limited 
844.939 4,53,92,815.00  4,31,23,174.25   4,26,22,309.00  (-)1 
11. 
395.150      1,52,009.00       1,59,609.45        3,36,646.00  53 
Source: Compiled based on the data furnished by IISc and Department  
 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
76 
Appendix XXIX (B) 
(Paragraph 4.4.1 (a) and Page No. 58) 
Calculation of penalty based on the findings made by IISc Bengaluru 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee 
Extracted Quantity 
(in MT) 
Minimum 
difference 
Penalty 
(Difference x 
Market Value) 
Royalty 
(₹80 per MT) 
DMF (30 
per cent of 
Royalty) 
NMET (two 
per cent of 
Royalty) 
Total 
By IISc. #Variation of 
five per cent 
As per 
Department 
D-E F x ₹408 F x ₹80 H x 0.3  H x 0.02 G+H+I+J 
A B C D E F G H I J K 
1. M/s Hemadri 
Cements 
Limited 
18,90,799 17,96,259 17,62,420 33,839 1,38,06,312 27,07,120 8,12,136 54,142 1,73,79,710 
2. 49,30,962 46,84,414 45,19,542 1,64,872 6,72,67,776 1,31,89,760 39,56,928 2,63,795 8,46,78,259 
3. 
M/s.Kakatiya 
Cement Sugar 
& Industries 
Limited 
1,19,79,248 1,13,80,286 1,11,69,122 2,11,164 8,61,54,912 1,68,93,120 50,67,936 3,37,862 10,84,53,830 
4. M/s.The KCP 
Limited 2,25,17,225 2,13,91,364 2,10,73,597 3,17,767 12,96,48,936 2,54,21,360 76,26,408 5,08,427 16,32,05,131 
5. 
M/s.Ultratech 
Cements 
Limited 
3,23,88,675 3,07,69,241 2,94,24,721 13,44,520 54,85,64,160 10,75,61,600 3,22,68,480 21,51,232 69,05,45,472 
6. 
M/ UltraTech 
Cements 
Limited  
4,53,92,815 4,31,23,174 4,26,22,309 5,00,865 20,43,52,920 4,00,69,200 1,20,20,760 8,01,384 25,72,44,264 
Total  11,31,44,738 11,05,71,711 25,73,027 104,97,95,016 20,58,42,160 6,17,52,648 41,16,842 132,15,06,666 
Source: Compiled based on the data furnished by IISc and Department 
# Difference was calculated by decreasing the extracted quantity arrived by IISc by five percent (as error) and with the departmental value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices and Glossary 
 
77 
 
 
Acronym Full Form 
AD Assistant Director 
ADMG Assistant Director Mines and Geology 
APMDC Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation 
APMMA Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Auction 
APMMC  Andhra Pradesh Minor Mineral Concession  
APPCB Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
CC Closed-Circuit 
CFE Consent For Establishment 
CFO Consent for Operation 
DCB Demand Collection Balance 
DDMG Deputy Director of Mines and Geology 
DEIAA District Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
DGMS Directorate General of Mines and Safety 
DGPS Differential Global Positioning System 
DLTF District Level Task Force 
DMF District Mineral Foundation 
DMG Director Mines and Geology 
EC Environmental Clearance 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GoAP Government of Andhra Pradesh 
GoI Government of India  
GPS Global Positioning System 
GSI Geological Survey of India 
IBM Indian Bureau of Mines 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
JDMG Joint Director of Mines and Geology 
LoI Letter of Intent 
MCA Mineral Concession Applications  
MCR Mineral Concession Rules 
MCDR Mineral Conservation and Development Rules 
MERIT Mineral Exploration Research and Innovation Trust 
MMDR Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
MoEF Ministry of Environment & Forest 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change 
MRA Mineral Revenue Assessment 
MSS Mining Surveillance System 
MT Metric Tonne  
NMET National Mineral Exploration Trust 
NMP National Mineral Policy 
NRA Natural Resource Accounting 
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre 
Glossary 

Draft Performance Audit Report on Functioning of Mines and Geology Department 
 
78 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
OMEPS Online Mineral e-Permit System 
PA Performance Audit 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
SCEC State Coordination cum Empowered Committee 
SEIAA State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
SF Seigniorage Fee 
SLTF State Level Task Force 
SoI Survey of India 
Sq m Square Meter 
TGCP Telugu Ganga Canal Project  
UNFC United Nations Framework Classification 
VTMS Vehicle Tracking Monitoring System 
 

 
http://www.cag.gov.in/ag/andhra-pradesh 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 