 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Implementation of the Namami Gange  
Programme by Uttarakhand  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttarakhand 
Report No. 2 of 2025 

 
 

i 
Table of Contents 
 
Particulars Page No.  
Preface v 
Executive Summary vii 
Para No. Chapter-1: Introduction Page No.  
1.1 Ganga: The Holy River 1 
1.2 Threats to sanctity of Ganga 1 
1.3 Conservation of River Ganga: Early Initiatives 2 
1.4 Current efforts for conservation of Ganga: Nama mi Gange 3 
1.5 State level administrative set-up of Namami Gan ge 3 
1.6 Why Audit chose the topic again? 4 
1.7 Audit Objectives 5 
1.8 Audit Scope, Methodology and Sample 5 
1.9 Audit Criteria 5 
1.10 Acknowledgement 6 
Para No. Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment 
Infrastructure  Page No.  
2.1 Augmentation of sewerage infrastructure 7 
2.2 Network of STPs in Ganga front towns 7 
2.3 Planning for augmentation of sewerage infrastru cture 8 
2.3.1 Lack of State/District level river basin mana gement plan 8 
2.3.2 Local public not involved in planning 8 
2.3.3 No financial contribution by State Government in 
augmentation of sewage facilities for Ganga Rejuvenation 9 
2.3.4 Construction of ‘Symbolic’ STPs not connected with 
households 10 
2.3.5 Partial household sewage connectivity 12 
2.3.6 Unsuccessful planning for co-treatment 12 
2.3.7 Insufficient projection of treatment capacity  13 
2.3.8 Excess capacity and low intake of sewage 15 
2.3.9 Lack of STP in Ganga front town 17 
2.4 Operation and Maintenance of STPs 17 
2.4.1 Discharge of untreated sewage into Ganga 18 
2.4.2 Willfully discharging of untreated sewage into Gang a by 
O&M contractor 18 
2.4.3 Drains discharging into Ganga not tapped 19 
2.4.4 Operation of STPs without renewing authorization an d 
consent from the Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board  19 
2.4.5 Eighteen STPs not taken over by maintenance agency due to 
operational and safety related issues 20 
2.5 Management and reuse of sludge 20 
2.5.1 Utilization of sludge as organic fertilizers 20 
2.5.2 Improper storage of sludge 21 
2.5.3 Non-operation of sludge management plant 22 
2.5.4 Reuse of treated water 23 
2.6 Safety Audit 24 
2.7 Recommendations 25 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
ii 
Para No. 
Chapter-3: Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga: Solid 
Waste Management, Forestry Interventions and Ghats & 
Crematoria 
Page No.  
3.1 Auxiliary initiatives for cleaning Ganga 27 
3.2 Ghats and Crematoria 27 
3.2.1 Unutilised crematoria due to construction without demand and 
need analysis 27 
3.3 Forestry interventions for River Ganga 29 
3.3.1 Meagre progress of forestry interventions 29 
3.4 Solid Waste Management 30 
3.4.1 Lack of authorization for processing and disposal o f solid 
waste 31 
3.4.2 Ground report of Solid Waste Management 32 
3.5 Recommendations 34 
Para No. Chapter -4: Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga  Page No.  
4.1 Significant indicators of cleanliness of river water 35 
4.2 Ganga water quality monitoring network 36 
4.3 Ganga water quality during audit period 36 
4.4 Quality monitoring of treated effluent of STPs 37 
4.4.1 Obsolete monitoring of treated discharge of S TPs by UKPCB 37 
4.4.2 Poor quality treatment of sewage by STPs 38 
4.4.3 Non-accreditation of UKPCB laboratories 39 
4.4.4 UKPCB testing was not reliable 39 
4.5 Online continuous effluent monitoring system 40  
4.6 Recommendations 41 
Para No. Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of 
Works Page No.  
5.1 Availability and Utilisation of funds 43 
5.1.1 Parking of fund by Implementing Agencies 43 
5.2 Issues related to Tertiary Treatment Process 44  
5.2.1 Establishment of Secondary Treatment STPs under the  name 
of Tertiary Treatment Plants 45 
5.2.2 Upgradation of STPs to Tertiary Treatment Pla nts  46 
5.3 Non-operation of master control station 46 
5.4 Commencement of work before obtaining technical app roval 
from competent authority 47 
5.5 Excess expenditure on project preparation and super vision 
charges 47 
5.6 Short recovery of Liquidated damages 48 
5.7 Lack of insurance cover for work under Namami G ange 49 
5.8 Bank guarantee not renewed 49 
5.9 Additional performance security not deposited 5 0 
5.10 Irregular expenditure from Namami Gange Funds 51 
5.11 Royalty and amount for District Mineral Fund n ot deducted 51 
5.12 Labour cess not deducted 52 
5.13 Recommendation 53 

Table of Contents 
iii 
Appendix 
No. Title of Appendix Page No.  
2.1 Details of lack of sewage connectivity in seven Gan ga Front 
Towns 55 
2.2 List of the STPs operating without Consent to O perate (CTO) 56 
2.3 List of 18 STPs not taken over by maintenance agenc y due to 
operational and safety related issues 57 
4.1 Water quality criteria according to CPCB 59 
5.1 Commencement of work before obtaining technical app roval 
from competent authority 60 
5.2 Short recovery of Liquidated damage for delay in execution of 
works related to sewage projects 61 
Glossary  63 
 

v 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended  
31 March 2023 has been prepared for submission to t he Governor of the State of 
Uttarakhand under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of the 
Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand’, covering the period 2018-23. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation receiv ed from Government of 
Uttarakhand at each stage of the audit process. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
  

 
vii 
Executive Summary 
 
 
About this Report 
Rapidly increasing population, rising standards of living and exponential growth of 
industrialisation and urbanisation have exposed the river Ganga to pollution. 
Government intervention for conserving sanctity of Ganga is four decades old. With 
the objective of controlling the pollution in the r iver Ganga, the Government of India 
launched Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-I in 1985 to  intercept, divert and treat 
wastewater generated in 25 class-I towns 
1 (cities with population over 1,00,000) in 
three states: Uttar Pradesh (including Uttarakhand then), Bihar and West Bengal. 
GAP Phase-II was initiated in 1993 and was later ex panded to include some of its 
tributaries (Yamuna, Damodar and Gomati etc. ) also. Core schemes of GAP were 
related to Interception & Diversion and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs).  
The primary focus of GAP was on urban wastewater, b ut it suffered from various 
shortcomings of planning and implementation. Comptr oller & Auditor General of 
India has covered the issue of Ganga rejuvenation t hrough three previous Audit 
Reports (Report No. 5A of 2000, 01 of 2018 and 39 o f 2017) which highlighted many 
issues viz  Short achievement of primary target of sewage trea tment, Shortfall/delays 
in creation of sewage treatment assets, Faulty desi gns, Idling of expensive equipment, 
poor maintenance of sewage infrastructure (Review o f the Ganga Action Plan, Report 
No. 5A of 2000, Union Government, Scientific Depart ments), lack of adequate 
capacity to treat sewage, underutilization of STPs,  nallas remaining untapped, 
Municipal garbage remaining dumped on the slopes, n on-approval of full plan size by 
National Mission for Clean Ganga, and Lack of river  basin management plan, etc . 
(All India Performance Audit of ‘Rejuvenation of Ri ver Ganga’, Report No. 39 of 
2017, Union Government-Ministry of Water Resources,  River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation and Performance Audit of ‘Rejuve nation of River Ganga’, 
Report No. 1 of 2018, Government of Uttarakhand-Department of Drinking Water). 
Establishment of National Ganga River Basin Authori ty (2009) was another step 
forward in the direction of cleaning Ganga. Namami Gange was launched as an 
integrated Ganga conservation mission in the year 2014.  
The Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of Namami Gange Programme by 
Uttarakhand’ has been carried out during 2023-24, c overing the period 2018-23. An 
attempt has been made in this Report to assess the implementation of this programme 
at ground level. 
Why did we take up this audit again? 
River Ganga is inseparably associated with ethos an d livelihood of crores of people. 
Hence, prevention, control and abatement of pollution in river Ganga is a high priority 
focus area. Over the past four decades, successive governments have made efforts to 
clean the Ganga, sometimes, under judicial interven tion. However, the problem of 
pollution still persists. 
                                                           
1 Six in Uttar Pradesh, four in Bihar and 15 in West  Bengal. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
viii 
In this context, Audit has tried to evaluate effect iveness of Namami Gange 
interventions taken up during 2018-23 for preventin g, controlling and abating 
pollution in river Ganga so that it can be rejuvena ted to its pristine condition. This 
report aims to evaluate, inform, clarify, and disse minate the current achievements of 
Namami Gange programme in the State. Performance Au dit was conducted with the 
following Audit Objectives: 
 Whether Namami Gange infrastructure was adequately planned and 
performing efficiently to prevent, control and abate pollution in river Ganga;   
 Whether projects were implemented in an economic, e fficient and effective 
manner;  
 Whether estimation, availability and utilization of  funds was adequate and 
reliable; and  
 Whether monitoring and evaluation mechanism was wor king effectively for 
realization of the outcomes of projects under Namami Gange. 
What has been covered in this audit? 
During current Audit, a result-oriented approach ha s been adopted which assesses 
whether the programme interventions are performing as planned/intended. The 
performance audit has covered 23 of 42 projects car ried out during 2018-23 and 
operation and maintenance of earlier assets created  under the programme. During 
evaluation of selected projects, records of State M ission for Clean Ganga, 
implementing agencies (Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam, Ir rigation Department and Forest 
Department) and maintenance agencies (Uttarakhand J al Sansthan, Irrigation and 
Forest Department etc .) were examined. 
Endeavour of this audit is to make Government aware  of performance of Namami 
Gange interventions and to help make required cours e corrections so that programme 
objectives can be fulfilled in a timebound and more effective manner.   
Main Audit Conclusions 
Audit found that there is a scope for improvement i n planning and implementation of 
Namami Gange programme as highlighted below: 
Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
State Ganga Committee and State Mission for Clean G anga did not plan and 
implement sewage treatment infrastructure in collab oration with local communities. 
State Government did not contribute in improving th e sewerage facilities in Ganga 
Front Towns from its own resources. As a result, ma ny STPs either remain 
unconnected to household sewer network or are only partially connected. Moreover, 
the existing STPs lack sufficient treatment capacit y, resulting in significant discharge 
of untreated sewage into the Ganga. Uttarakhand Jal  Sansthan declined to take over 
18 STPs due to deficiencies in their construction a nd operation. Proper management 
of sewage sludge was also neglected. Furthermore, t he State Ganga Committee did 

Executive Summary 
ix 
not conduct timely safety audits of STPs, resulting  in avoidable loss of human lives 
and Namami Gange assets. 
Recommendations 
1.  The State Government may undertake a comprehensive safety audit of Sewage 
Treatment Plants to identify and address any potent ial risks, ensuring that 
deficiencies are corrected before transferring them to maintenance agencies. 
2.  The State Government may explore the possible avenu es of financing sewer 
networking works and ensure laying of adequate hous e sewerage networks 
connecting Sewage Treatment Plants with unconnected households. 
3.  Sufficient co-treatment facilities may be planned a nd provided to ensure safe 
disposal of septage in Ganga Front Towns without sewerage network.  
4.  The details of each household and commercial establ ishment, availability of 
sewer lines in the area, and status of connectivity  of households with available 
sewer lines may also be considered by implementing agencies while projecting 
treatment of proposed Sewage Treatment Plants.  
5.  Responsibility may be fixed for: (i) projection of low capacity of Sewage 
Treatment Plants leading to discharge of untreated sewage into river; and (ii) 
not ascertaining calorific value of sludge before e xecuting project of Sludge 
Management Plant.   
Chapter-3: Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga : Solid Waste Management 
and Forestry Interventions and Ghat & Crematoria 
Due to insufficient public awareness through Inform ation, Education, and 
Communication activities, the crematoria constructe d by State Mission for Clean 
Ganga in various locations remained largely unutili zed. The progress of forestry 
interventions was minimal, with only 16 per cent  of the planned expenditure 
implemented. Solid waste management in Ganga Towns suffered from inadequate 
management practices, as garbage was primarily dump ed on river slopes or disposed 
of through burning instead of proper processing whi ch led to it flowing back into the 
river. 
Recommendations 
1.  Initiatives to enhance public awareness about the u se of crematoria may be 
made more effective through Information, Education,  and Communication 
activities. 
2.  Efficient processing and disposal of solid waste ma y be ensured by all the 
Urban Local Bodies and regulatory authorization for  the same obtained 
promptly from Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board. 
Chapter-4: Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga 
Audit found that quality of treatment of sewage by STPs was poor. Most of the STPs 
did not comply with norms of National Green Tribuna l or Government of India. The 
water quality up to Devprayag was A category. In Rishikesh, the water quality of river 
Ganga remained in B category from 2019 to 2023, wit h the exception of COVID-19 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
x 
period (2020 & 2021), when it improved to A categor y. The river water quality in 
Haridwar remained consistently in B category throug hout the audit period. 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board was not able to  get National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories accr editation for its laboratory which 
monitors water quality of river Ganga and effluents  discharged from STPs. The 
monitoring of the online continuous effluent monito ring system was inadequate for 
several reasons like manual data entry of parameter s is permitted on the Ganga 
Tarang Portal, which raises concerns about data acc uracy. Additionally, the Ganga 
Tarang Portal is not accessible to the public, limiting transparency. 
Recommendations 
1.  National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibr ation Laboratories 
accreditation for all its laboratories may be ensur ed by Uttarakhand Pollution 
Control Board. 
2.  Shortcomings noticed in Ganga Tarang portal i.e. on line continuous effluent 
monitoring system for Sewage Treatment Plants may be rectified. 
3.  The issue of Sewage Treatment Plants doing poor qua lity treatment of water 
may be taken up by the Department with the respecti ve monitoring agencies & 
contractors to ensure that Sewage Treatment Plants meet all designated criteria 
for treated effluent . 
Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works  
Audit noticed that during the tendering process, th e implementing agency relaxed the 
stringent tertiary treatment standards, established  by IIT, Roorkee i.e.  faecal coliform 
of zero MPN per 100 ml was relaxed to 100 MPN per 1 00 ml, desirable limit as per 
norms of National Green Tribunal. Accordingly, the contracts were awarded for 
construction/upgradation of STPs based on the relax ed standards. There were also 
instances of inadequate recovery of liquidated dama ges, diversion of funds,  
non-renewal of bank guarantees, and non-deduction of royalty and labour cess etc . 
Recommendation  
The State Government may review the instances of no n-compliance as highlighted 
in this chapter and initiate appropriate remedial action. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-1 
Introduction 
  

1 
DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION DEPARTMENT 
 
Chapter-1 
 
Introduction 
1.1 Ganga: The Holy River 
River Ganga has a very special place in collective consciousness of the people of India. 
It has provided material, spiritual, religious and cultural sustenance to millions of 
people since time immemorial. 
River Ganga originates as 
Bhagirathi from the Gangotri 
glacier at Gomukh in 
Uttarakhand and joins its 
tributary Alaknanda in 
Devprayag to become Ganga. 
Most of the religious and tourist 
destinations in Garhwal region of 
Uttarakhand are alongside Ganga 
or its tributaries (Figure 1.1) . 
Sixteen main towns of Garhwal 
region of Uttarakhand i.e.  Ganga 
Front Towns 
1 are located on the 
banks of Ganga or its tributaries. 
Although it covers only 294 kms 
from Gomukh to Haridwar in 
Uttarakhand of its course of over 
2,525 kms. Municipal sewage 
and solid waste generated from 
these towns pose a grave threat to the sanctity of Ganga at the place of its origin itself. 
This has necessitated Government intervention for c onserving the sanctity of river 
Ganga in Uttarakhand. 
1.2 Threats to sanctity of Ganga 
Rapidly increasing population, rising standards of living and exponential growth of 
industrialisation and urbanisation have exposed water resources, in general, and rivers, 
in particular, to various forms of degradation. The  mighty Ganga is no exception. 
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), a society constituted under the provisions 
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and respo nsible for implementation of the 
Namami Gange programme, has classified major pollut ers of Ganga water into two 
categories, namely: i) Point sources –These are organized sources of pollution where 
                                                           
1 Gangotri and Uttarkashi-located on the banks of Bh agirathi; Kirtinagar, Srinagar, Rudraprayag, 
Gaucher, Karnprayag, Nandprayag, Chamoli-Gopeshwar,  Joshimath and Badrinath-located on the 
banks of Alaknanda; and Haridwar, Rishikesh, Muni ki Reti, Tapovan and Devprayag-located on the 
banks of Ganga. 
Figure-1.1: The Ganga and its tributaries 
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/social-science/which-
is-the-largest-drainage-system-in-india/ 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
2 
the pollution load can be measured, e.g.  surface drains carrying municipal sewage or 
industrial effluents, sewage pumping stations and s ewerage systems, trade effluents 
from industries, etc.  ii)  Non-point sources– These are non-measurable sources of 
pollution such as run-off from agricultural fields carrying chemicals and fertilizers,  
run-off from solid waste dumps and areas used for o pen defecation, dumping of  
un-burnt/ half-burnt dead bodies and animal carcasses, dhobi ghats, cattle wallowing, etc.  
1.3 Conservation of River Ganga: Early Initiatives 
Government intervention for conserving sanctity of Ganga is four decades old. With 
the objective of controlling the pollution in the r iver Ganga, the Government of India 
(GoI) launched Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-I in 1985 to intercept, divert and treat 
wastewater generated in 25 class-I towns 
2 (cities with population over 1,00,000) in 
three states: Uttar Pradesh (including Uttarakhand then), Bihar and West Bengal. GAP 
Phase-II was initiated in 1993 and was later expanded to include some of its tributaries 
(Yamuna, Damodar and Gomati etc. ) also. Core schemes of GAP were related to 
Interception & Diversion and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) which were designed to 
tackle pollution from point 3 sources. Non-core schemes comprised low-cost sanitation 
schemes, river front development, crematoria etc.  and tackled non-measurable pollution 
from non-point 4 sources, such as dumping of solid waste and open defecation, dumping 
of unburnt/ half-burnt dead bodies etc . Milestones achieved in GAP-I (as on 
31 March 2000) and GAP-II (as on 31 March 2014) are as follows in Table-1.1 below: 
Table-1.1: Details of milestones achieved in GAP-I and GAP-II  
Programme No. of Projects 
Sanctioned 
No. of Projects 
Completed 
Funds Released by 
GoI ( ₹ in crore) 
Expenditure Incurred 
by States ( ₹ in crore) 
GAP-I 261 260 451.70 433.30 
GAP-II 314 264 522.10 505.31 
The primary focus of GAP was on urban wastewater, a nd it suffered from various 
shortcomings of planning and implementation as highlighted in past audit reports of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) as detailed in Table-1.2 below: 
Table-1.2: Details of past audit reports of C&AG 
Name of Audit Report Audit Period Main Findings 
Review of the Ganga Action 
Plan (Report No. 5A of 2000, 
Union Government, Scientific 
Departments) 
1993-2000 
Short achievement (39 per cent ) of primary 
target of sewage treatment, shortfall/delays 
in creation of sewage treatment assets, 
non-uniformity in determination of sewage 
characteristics, cost escalations in sanctioned 
works, faulty designs in Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs), lack of necessary spade work, 
bad contract management, idling of expensive 
equipment and in general poor maintenance.  
                                                           
2 Six in Uttar Pradesh, four in Bihar and 15 in West  Bengal. 
3 Organized sources of pollution where the pollution  load can be measured, e.g.  surface drains carrying 
municipal sewage or industrial effluents, sewage pu mping stations and sewerage systems, trade 
effluents from industries, etc. 
4 Non-measurable sources of pollution such as run-of f from agricultural fields carrying chemicals and 
fertilizers, run-off from solid waste dumps and areas used for open defecation, dumping of un-burnt/ 
half-burnt dead bodies and animal carcasses, dhobi ghats, cattle wallowing, etc . 

Chapter-1: Introduction 
3 
Name of Audit Report Audit Period Main Findings 
All India Performance Audit of 
‘Rejuvenation of River Ganga’ 
(Report No. 39 of 2017, Union 
Government- Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation) 
2014-17 
Lack of river basin management plan, delays in 
approval of DPRs, non-identification of river 
conservation zones, delayed execution of 
projects, poor utilization of rural sanitation 
funds, shortfall in manpower and poor 
monitoring of the projects.   
Performance Audit of 
‘Rejuvenation of River Ganga’ 
(Report No. 1 of 2018, 
Government of Uttarakhand- 
Department of Drinking Water) 
2013-17 
Non-approval of full plan size by NMCG 
(Annual Plan of Operation for Forestry 
Interventions for Ganga was a meagre 
4.66 per cent  of the area planned for the year 
2016-17 in the Detailed Project Report), funds 
remaining unspent, municipal garbage 
remaining dumped on the slopes, 
underutilization of STPs, nallas remaining 
untapped, lack of adequate capacity to treat 
sewage and non-establishment of sufficient 
number of water quality monitoring stations.   
In June 2014, the Government of India launched Namami Gange program with a budget 
outlay of ₹ 20,000 crore for a period up to 31 March 2021. 
1.4 Current efforts for conservation of Ganga: Nama mi Gange 
Namami Gange is an umbrella program aimed at integr ating previous and currently 
ongoing initiatives. The major activities carried o ut under Namami Gange are 
rehabilitation of existing STPs, creation of new ST Ps, development of ghats and 
crematoria, solid waste management, afforestation a nd biodiversity conservation etc . 
During 2014-23, a total of ₹ 14,260 crore has been released by NMCG to State 
Governments (out of which ₹ 1,149 crore was released to Uttarakhand), State Mi ssion 
for Clean Ganga (SMCG) and other agencies for implementation of projects related to 
Ganga rejuvenation. 
Considering the need and spread of the Programme, G overnment of India has 
further approved Namami Gange Mission-II with a budgetary outlay of 
₹ 22,500 crore 
till 2026 interalia  including projects for existing liabilities ( ₹ 11,225 crore) and new 
projects/interventions ( ₹ 11,275 crore). 
1.5 State level administrative set-up of Namami Gan ge 
Current structures for Governance of Ganga cleaning  activities are established by the 
River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016 and 
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. State level implementation 
framework for preventing, controlling and abatement  of environmental pollution in 
River Ganga involves seven stakeholders shown in Table-1.3 below: 
Table-1.3: Planning and Implementation Framework of Namami Gange Programme  
Stakeholder Main Responsibilities Reports to 
State Ganga 
Committee through 
SMCG 
Coordination and implementation of the conservation  
activities relating to River Ganga including augmen tation 
of sewerage infrastructure, catchment area treatmen t, 
creating public awareness at the State level, regul ation of 
activities aimed at the prevention, control and abatement of 
pollution in the River Ganga to maintain its water quality 
NMCG 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
4 
Stakeholder Main Responsibilities Reports to 
and implementation of the river basin management pl an. 
State Ganga Committee acts through its executive wi ng 
SMCG. 
District Ganga 
Committees 
Identifying activities which may be threats in the area of 
specified District abutting the River Ganga and mak ing a 
plan for remedial action and take remedial action in respect 
thereof.  
State Ganga 
Committee 
Uttarakhand 
Pollution Control 
Board (UKPCB) 
UKPCB is an independent body functioning under 
provisions of Section 4 of the Water (Prevention an d 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. It monitors water quality 
of River Ganga and quality of effluents being disch arged 
from STPs constructed under Namami Gange. 
Central 
Pollution 
Control Board 
 
Urban Local 
Bodies 
Responsible for preventing pollution from Solid Was te 
Management and safe disposal of corpses in their 
jurisdiction. State 
Government 
Village Panchayats Responsible for preventing pollution into river Gan ga 
and/or its tributaries in their jurisdiction.  
Implementing 
Agencies 
Uttarakhand Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas Evam Nirman Nigam 
(popularly known as Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam) is the sole 
implementing agency for construction of sewerage 
infrastructure in Ganga Front Towns through its fiv e 
dedicated field divisions functioning under one 
Superintending Engineer designated as General Manag er- 
Ganga. The Irrigation Department is an implementing  
agency for the construction of bathing ghats and 
crematorium. The Forest Department is responsible f or 
implementing forestry-related interventions.  
SMCG and State 
Government 
Maintenance 
Agencies 
Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan is the sole maintenance ag ency 
for sewerage infrastructure and Forest Department f or 
forestry related interventions. Bathing ghats and crematoria 
are maintained by concerned local bodies.  
SMCG and State 
Government 
1.6 Why Audit chose the topic again? 
Since last four decades, successive governments hav e made efforts to clean Ganga, 
sometimes, under judicial intervention. However, the problem of pollution still persists. 
Since our last performance audit in 2017-18, Audit has noticed deficiencies in planning, 
implementation and operation & maintenance (O&M)of program activities. As a result, 
the State Government missed the main milestone of preventing untreated sewage from 
falling into Ganga. Besides, main audit recommendat ions like scientific disposal of 
municipal garbage, capacity upgradation of STPs and tapping of all identified nallas in 
Ganga Front Towns  etc . were not implemented by the Government. Still, th ere were 
STPs which were not connected to any households. Th ere were various O&M related 
problems in STPs. New STPs were proposed soon after  commissioning of planned 
STPs. Eighteen out of 44 completed STPs could not b e handed over to maintenance 
agency due to various deficiencies. Single project relating to forestry intervention 
(plantation) for River Ganga has achieved little physical target (16 per cent ). The water 
quality monitoring laboratory of UKPCB still does n ot have National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories accr editation. In view of the above 
problems, Audit selected the issue for Performance Audit. 

Chapter-1: Introduction 
5 
1.7 Audit Objectives 
Performance Audit seeks to examine: 
 Whether Namami Gange infrastructure was adequately planned and performing 
efficiently to prevent, control and abate pollution in river Ganga;   
 Whether projects were implemented in an economic, e fficient and effective 
manner;  
 Whether estimation, availability and utilization of  funds was adequate and 
reliable; and 
 Whether monitoring and evaluation mechanism was wor king effectively for 
realization of the outcomes of projects under Namami Gange. 
1.8 Audit Scope, Methodology and Sample 
A Performance Audit covering 
the period  from 2018-2019 to 2022-23 was carried out 
during July-December 2023. Audit Universe contained a total of 42 projects related to 
river Ganga in Uttarakhand (25 of sewage management, 15 of river front development 
and ghats cleaning, one of afforestation and one of tackling industrial pollution) which 
were completed, ongoing or under tendering stage du ring the audit period in Ganga 
Front Towns. Audit examined 23 out of 42 projects i n detail (50  per cent  of projects 
from each category subject to the condition that at  least one project was selected from 
each category). Audit selected projects, taking expenditure incurred during 2018-23 as 
size measure, by Probability Proportional to Size w ith Replacement method using 
random number table of National Sample Survey Organ ization. Besides, O&M of 
earlier completed assets in selected implementing agencies was also evaluated. During 
evaluation of 23 selected projects, Audit examined records of SMCG, implementing 
agencies (Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam, Irrigation Depa rtment, Forest Department and 
Urban Local Bodies etc .) and maintenance agencies (Uttarakhand Jal Sansth an and 
Forest Department etc .). 
The audit methodology was mainly consisted of docum ent analysis, responses to 
questionnaires, examination of reports and records at various levels and field visits to 
the project sites in selected cases. Audit Scope an d Methodology were discussed with 
Secretary, Drinking Water and Sanitation in an entry conference (04 August 2023). The 
State Government had furnished its detailed replies on 18 May 2024 to the Draft Report 
before exit conference, which was conducted with Se cretary, Drinking Water & 
Sanitation along with officers from SMCG and Drinki ng Water Department on  
21 May 2024 wherein the audit findings and recommendations were discussed. Replies 
of the Government/Department have been suitably included in the Report. 
1.9 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria adopted for achieving the audit objectives were derived from the 
following sources: 
 River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and Managemen t) Authorities Order, 
2016; 
 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
6 
 Environment Protection Act, 1986; 
 Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems, 2013; 
 Relevant orders of NGT/High Courts and Supreme Court; and 
 General Financial Rules and Uttarakhand Procurement Rules 2017. 
1.10 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by SMCG, District Ganga Committees, 
Urban Local Bodies, implementing and maintenance agencies (Uttarakhand Jal Nigam, 
Irrigation Department and Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan) during the audit. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-2 
Shortcomings in Sewage  
Treatment Infrastructure 
 
 
  

7 
Chapter-2 
 
Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
 
State Ganga Committee and State Mission for Clean G anga (SMCG) did not plan 
and implement sewage treatment infrastructure in co llaboration with local 
communities. State Government did not contribute in  improving the sewerage 
facilities in Ganga Front Towns from its own resour ces. As a result, many Sewage 
Treatment Plants (STPs) either remain unconnected t o household sewer network or 
are only partially connected. Moreover, the existin g STPs lack sufficient treatment 
capacity, resulting in significant discharge of unt reated sewage into the Ganga. 
Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan (UJS) declined to take over 18 STPs due to deficiencies in 
their construction and operation. Proper management  of sewage sludge was also 
neglected. Furthermore, the State Ganga Committee d id not conduct timely safety 
audits of STPs, resulting in avoidable loss of human lives and Namami Gange assets.  
2.1 Augmentation of sewerage infrastructure 
Prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution in River Ganga and its 
tributaries is the prime objective of Namami Gange programme. The programme aims 
to rejuvenate the river Ganga to its natural and pristine condition. Untreated municipal 
sewage is considered to be the major source of poll ution of rivers. Out of the total 
measurable pollution in the rivers from various poi nt sources, around 75 per cent  is 
accounted for by municipal sewage from towns locate d along the banks of rivers. To 
tackle this menace of pollution from municipal sewage, State Ganga Committees have 
been entrusted by the Government of India (GoI), through River Ganga (Rejuvenation, 
Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016,  with the duty of augmenting 
sewerage infrastructure. In Uttarakhand, 78 per cent 
1 of the Namami Gange expenditure 
during 2018-23 was on augmentation of sewerage infrastructure.  
2.2 Network of STPs in Ganga front towns 
Number and capacity of STPs, constructed under Nama mi Gange/erstwhile Ganga 
Action Plan projects, as of May 2024 in 16 Ganga Fr ont Towns is provided in  
Table-2.1  below: 
Table-2.1: Details of STPs 
Sl. No.  Name of Town Total number of STPs Total Treating Capacity in 
million liters per day (MLD) 
1 Badrinath 03 1.270 
2 Chamoli- Gopeshwar 05 4.370 
3 Devprayag 03 1.625 
4 Gangotri 01 1.000 
5 Haridwar 05 145.000 
6 Joshimath 02 3.780 
7 Karnaprayag 05 0.350 
8 Kirtinagar 02 0.060 
9 Nandprayag 02 0.150 
10 Rishikesh  03 34.000 
                                                           
1 (Expenditure on sewage infrastructure:  ₹ 680.79 crore) *100/(total expenditure: ₹ 873.17 crore). 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
8 
Sl. No.  Name of Town Total number of STPs Total Treating Capacity in 
million liters per day (MLD) 
11 Tapovan 01 3.5 
12 Muni ki Reti 01 7.5 
13 Rudraprayag 06 0.525 
14 Srinagar 02 4.500 
15 Srikot 02 0.125 
16 Uttarkashi 01 2.000 
 Total 44 209.755 
Source: Information collected from SMCG and implementing agencies. 
2.3 Planning for augmentation of sewerage infrastru cture 
Audit noticed following shortcomings in planning fo r augmentation of sewerage 
infrastructure in the State: 
2.3.1  Lack of State/District level river basin management plan 
In 2011, erstwhile State River Conservation Authori ty (predecessor of State Ganga 
Committee) had set a target that no untreated urban  wastewater and industrial effluent 
would be allowed to flow into River Ganga by year 2020. SMCG had to prepare a State 
River Basin Management Plan to achieve this target.  Besides, District Ganga Plans 
were to be prepared for rejuvenation and protection  of River Ganga and its tributaries 
in each village and town of specified District abutting River Ganga and its tributaries.  
Audit noticed that SMCG had not prepared state leve l river basin management plan 
even after 13 years of its establishment. Despite c lear provisions in  National Mission 
for Clean Ganga (NMCG) Authority Order (2016), District Ganga Committees (DGCs) 
also did not prepare district level river basin man agement plans in any of the districts 
through which Ganga and its tributaries flow (Uttarkashi, Tehri, Chamoli, Rudraprayag, 
Pauri, Dehradun and Haridwar).  
The impact of lack of well-defined plans can be see n in fragmented addressing of 
sewerage problems in Ganga Front Towns, as infrastr ucture to treat sewage could not 
develop parallelly and STPs were built but not connected to households, as highlighted 
in succeeding Paragraph 2.3.4 and  2.3.5. Besides, the target of preventing all untreated 
wastewater from falling into River Ganga by the year 2020 could also not be achieved 
in absence of concrete planning ( Paragraph 2.4.1 ). 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that comprehensive district Ganga plan had 
been prepared for district Udham Singh Nagar only.  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact tha t Udham Singh Nagar district does 
not have any Ganga Front Town in it. Hence, preparing District Ganga Plan in Udham 
Singh Nagar will have no direct impact on Ganga water quality. 
2.3.2  Local public not involved in planning 
One of the major themes of Namami Gange Programme i s implementation of the 
concept of Jan Ganga which strives to engage commun ity through various activities. 
Hence, it was pertinent to engage local population in planning of Namami Gange 
infrastructure for its sustainability and maintenance. 
Audit noticed that State Ganga Committee, SMCG and implementing agencies did not 
involve the local public in planning Namami Gange i nfrastructure. Their needs for 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
9 
sewerage facilities were not heeded by local implem enting agencies ( Paragraph 2.3.6 
and Social Audit). There were instances when local concerns were met only after public 
raised the issue of their need through various stat e authorities, central level ministers 
and NMCG. For example, an eight MLD STP in Muni Ki Reti (Rishikesh) was 
sanctioned after Chairman of Nagar Palika Rishikesh  raised the issue of low capacity 
of existing STP with a Central Minister. Similarly,  a 1.50 MLD STP at Neelkanth 
Mahadev Temple was sanctioned after local trade unions, temple management and local 
MLA pursued the issue of lack of STP facility with Central Minister, State Ganga 
Committee, Executing Agency etc . Findings of social audit commissioned by SMCG 
revealed that people were dissatisfied with sewerag e facilities created under Namami 
Gange because SMCG had not involved local public in  planning and implementation 
and created improper infrastructure. 
Audit noticed that planning of sewerage and other N amami Gange infrastructure 
without involving local public and without assessin g local needs resulted in 
construction of symbolic sewerage infrastructure ( Paragraph 2.3.4) and/non-utilization 
of created infrastructure ( Paragraph 3.2.1 ).  
Audit noticed that planning of Namami Gange infrastructure was based on top-down 
approach. For example, 21 STPs 2, for treating sewage drains, were constructed in 
compliance of National Green Tribunal (NGT) order d ated 10 December 2015.  
Co-treatment sewerage treatment plants were also pl anned on the basis of same 
judgement. Hence, the major planning was based on N GT orders and did not keep 
the need of the local public (sewerage facilities i.e.  connecting household sewage 
with STPs) in perspective. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that local residents were consulted during 
ground survey for identification of drains, but the  consultations were not documented. 
It added that 8.00 MLD STP in Rishikesh and 1.50 ML D STP in Neelkanth were 
proposed as per demand of local residents. 
The reply is not acceptable because social audit 
3 commissioned by SMCG itself found 
that local people were neither consulted nor their needs assessed as mentioned in 
paragraph. Besides, 8.00 MLD STP in Rishikesh and 1.50 MLD STP in Neelkanth were 
proposed only after NMCG/GoI intervention. 
2.3.3 No financial contribution by State Government  in augmentation of  sewage 
facilities for Ganga Rejuvenation 
Sanitation is a subject of State List of seventh sc hedule of the Constitution of India. 
Hence, providing adequate sanitation and sewerage facilities in all towns of Uttarakhand 
(be it Ganga Front Towns or others) is the responsi bility of State Government, even if 
there are no centrally sponsored programme, like Namami Gange, in existence.  
                                                           
2 Nandprayag- two STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017), Karnaprayag- five STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017), 
Rudraprayag- six STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017), Kirtinagar- two STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017), 
Chamoli- one STP (Sanctioned in March 2017), Srinagar- one STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017), Srikot- 
two STPs (Sanctioned in March 2019) and Joshimath- two STPs (Sanctioned in March 2017). 
3 Conducted by Garhwal University, Srinagar, Pauri i n year 2022-23. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
10  
During audit, it was noticed that the State Governm ent did not allocate funds for 
enhancing supplemental sewerage facilities in Ganga  Front Towns. During 2018-23, 
State Government spent an amount of ₹ 55.08 crore on creating sanitation infrastructure 
under State Sector Scheme for Sewage Development. H owever, no amount was spent 
in Ganga Front Towns.  
Audit noticed that state Government did not constru ct a single STP or other sanitation 
infrastructure in any of the 16 Ganga Front Towns u sing its own resources. It did not 
provide funds for connecting houses with STPs which were constructed from Namami 
Gange funds (Case study of Paragraph 2.3.4 ). 
During exit conference (May 2024), Secretary stated that State Government had limited 
financial resources to fulfil its mandate of provid ing sewage facilities to people 
irrespective of Namami Gange. With these resources, State Government has prioritized/ 
sanctioned household sewer network in some cities. Currently externally aided KfW 
4 
(a German Development Bank) project in Haridwar and  Rishikesh are underway that 
aims at 100 per cent  coverage of households in these two main Ganga Fro nt Towns. 
Hence, State Government is moving forward to provid e universal sewage facilities in 
the State.   
The fact remains that KfW funded project has only recently commenced and is limited 
to Rishikesh and Haridwar. Other Ganga Front Towns still lack adequate sewerage 
facilities. 
2.3.4 Construction of ‘Symbolic’ STPs not connected  with households 
As per mandate of NMCG, only ‘Interception & Diversion (I&D) and STP’ works are 
planned and funded under Namami Gange Programme. I& D works are designed for 
intercepting drains and diverting them to STP throu gh sewer lines. An I&D network 
does not include ‘house sewer connections and sewer  network’ which link household 
to sewer connecting chambers of I&D network. State Government was required to 
undertake ‘house sewer connections and sewer networ k’ through its own resources to 
fully utilize the STP network. 
Audit noticed that sewage treatment projects under Namami Gange were not planned 
in a comprehensive manner. State Ganga Committee di d not ensure that all three 
components of sewage treatment-STPs, I&D facilities and house sewer connections and 
sewer network, were planned and implemented simulta neously. Instead, the focus of 
planning was limited to providing I&D and STP facilities in Ganga Front Towns. 
In the above circumstances, the audit noticed that 21 STPs 
5 built in seven towns were 
not connected to any households, rendering them sym bolic in nature. Joint inspection 
of STPs and scrutiny of records showed that these S TPs were treating only grey water 
(typically generated in kitchens and flowing through roadside drains), rather than actual 
sewage. The details are in Appendix-2.1 . 
                                                           
4 Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau.  
5 Nandprayag- two STPs, Karnaprayag- five STPs, Rudr aprayag- six STPs,  Kirtinagar- two STPs, 
Chamoli- one STP,  Srinagar and Srikot- three STPs  and Joshimath- two STPs. 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
11  
Further,  most of these 21 STPs cannot handle additional sewa ge volumes due to their 
small size (6.04 MLD in total). New STPs will need to be constructed when sewer 
networks are laid for household connections in futu re. This approach is evident in 
Joshimath, where three additional STPs are proposed alongside the sewer network and 
house sewer connections. 
Case Study: Sewage Facilities in Joshimath 
In 2010, the GoI sanctioned an I&D scheme to lay 27.67 km of sewer lines at a cost 
of ₹ 9.61 crore in Joshimath. The scheme included nalla  tapping but did not provide 
for STP construction. After facing significant dela ys, the scheme was closed in 
March 2017 after exhausting ₹ 9.57 crore, with only 14.64 km of sewer lines laid . 
Local residents requested house sewer connections t o these lines, but this was not 
possible as the scheme did not include provisions for house connections and STPs. 
Again, in March 2017, SMCG got sanctioned from GoI an ‘I&D scheme with STP’ 
at a cost of ₹ 48.43 crore for Joshimath. This time, the scheme included two STPs: a 
1.08 MLD STP at Pokhari and a 2.70 MLD STP at Marwari. However, it still did not 
include house sewer connections. The construction of these two STPs was completed 
in November 2019 and March 2023, respectively, after spending ₹ 33.16 crore. Now, 
two STPs are functional, nallas are intercepted and  diverted to STPs but no house 
was connected to these STPs due to lack of house sewer connections. NMCG did not 
provide funds for it because it was not within thei r mandate. State Government also 
refused to sanction funds for house sewer connections. 
Thus, the infrastructure developed in schemes of 2010 and 2017 with expenditure of 
₹ 42.73 crore 6 did not include sewage connection to any household . After incidents 
of sinking of land in Joshimath gained limelight an d such sinking was attributed to 
lack of proper sewage system in the town, SMCG subm itted (January 2023) a fresh 
preliminary proposal to NMCG for laying of sewer ne twork and providing house 
connections at a cost of ₹ 202 crore as per instructions given by NMCG team during 
their visit (January 2023) to Joshimath.  
During exit conference (May 2024), Secretary accept ed that lack of sewerage 
facilities might be one of the reasons for Joshimath incidence. He also informed that 
a separate Detailed Project Report (DPR) for provid ing full coverage of sewer 
connections in Joshimath was under process and fund s would be provided by GoI 
under disaster relief package.  
During exit conference (May 2024), Secretary inform ed that Namami Gange was 
essentially a drain catching project wherein drains  were intercepted and diverted to 
STPs (I&D with STPs) so that no untreated sewage wa s discharged to 
Ganga/tributaries. Provision of simultaneous household connections was not there and 
Namami Gange has been executed as originally conceived.  
                                                           
6 Expenditure against sanction of year 2010: ₹ 9.57 crore + Expenditure against sanction of year 2017: 
₹ 33.16 crore. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
12  
The reply is not acceptable because the Director Ge neral (NMCG), during the fifth 
meeting of the Executive Council of NMCG in August 2017, underscored the urgent 
need to resolve the house connection issue. He emph asized that without household 
connectivity, the STPs could not deliver desired re sults, rendering the investment of 
public funds wasteful.  
2.3.5 Partial household sewage connectivity 
In five big Ganga Front Towns, sewer connectivity w as limited to only a fraction of 
households, except in Haridwar where a bigger population was connected to the STPs. 
The details of these five towns are given in Table-2.2 below: 
Table-2.2: Details of partial household sewage connectivity in five Ganga Front Towns  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Town 
Number 
of STPs 
Total 
Treating 
Capacity 
in MLD 
Total no. of 
Households 
Total No. 
of Sewer 
connections 
(Per cent)  
Reason of partial 
connectivity 
1 Chamoli-
Gopeshwar 04* 4.32 5,510 354  
(06.42) Lack of sewer lines 
2 Haridwar 05 145 68,802 47,728 
(69.37) 
Lack of sewer lines 
and deficient treatment 
capacity in STPs 
3 
Rishikesh 
including 
Tapovan and 
Muni Ki Reti 
05 45 34,756 9,966  
(28.67) 
Lack of sewer lines 
and deficient treatment 
capacity in STPs 
4 Srinagar  01 3.50 6,523 797  
(12.22) Lack of sewer lines 
5 Uttarkashi 
(Gyansu) 01 2.00 6,089 572  
(9.39) Lack of sewer lines 
Total 16 199.82 1,21,680 59,417  
*One STP of 0.05 MLD capacity (near old suspension bridge, Chamoli) has been excluded because it 
treated only grey water. 
Source: Information provided by Directorate of Urban Development, Uttarakhand. Data of Haridwar 
households has been adopted from the reply of the State Government.  
Partial household connectivity with STPs was a major hindrance in Ganga cleanliness. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that sewer network and house connections 
work was under construction in Haridwar and Rishike sh town under KfW loan. 
Besides, DPR for sewer network in Srinagar and Utta rkashi town was also under 
preparation.  
In comparison to instances of nil/poor connectivity  of Namami Gange STPs (as 
elaborated in Paragraph 2.3.4 and 2.3.5), Audit noticed that five MLD STP constructed 
by Tehri Hydroelectric Development Corporation (THD C) in New Tehri had very 
impressive household connectivity. This STP of five MLD was commissioned in 2006. 
It has a sewer network length of 32 km and currently connects 83 per cent of  households 
(3,754 out of 4,543 households) in Tehri. It presen ts a better model where networking 
was provided during construction of STP and it make s the STP effective and relevant 
even after 17 years of its construction.   
2.3.6 Unsuccessful planning for co-treatment 
State Ganga Committee repeatedly stresses that unconnected households use soak pits 
and septic tanks as sanitation facility. These on-s ite sanitation systems require regular 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
13  
emptying into STPs for appropriate treatment and co nsequential release. Uttarakhand 
Government issued (22 May 2017) ‘Protocol for Septa ge Management’ in pursuance 
of NGT directions on the matter. 
Paragraph 5.4.1 of the Protocol provides that de-sludging/emptying of septic tanks will 
be done once every two or three years, or when the tank becomes two third full. Further, 
paragraph 5.4.3 requires that septage shall be treated in any existing STP within 25 km 
distance.  
Since normal sewer lines and STPs are not designed to treat septage from soak pits and 
malfunction if septage is included in STPs, SMCG decided (11 November 2019) to set 
up special co-treatment facilities for treatment of  septage combined with the existing 
STPs of Ganga Front Towns. It instructed Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam (UJN) to prepare 
and submit DPRs for co-treatment facility. NMCG pro vided administrative approval 
and expenditure sanction (16 June 2022) for 
₹ 8.60 crore for a project ‘Co-treatment of 
septage at existing STPs of Haridwar, Rishikesh, Srinagar and Devprayag’. The period 
of completion of the project was fixed at 12 months. 
Audit noticed that the UJN could not succeed in set ting up any co-treatment plant in 
the State and the whole exercise was limited to level of bidding only. Thus, on one hand 
there was no co-treatment facility available in the  state, and on the other maintenance 
agencies did not allow treatment of septage into existing STPs.   
Hence, in absence of proper co-treatment facilities  and lack of other options for safe 
treatment and disposal of septage, the large quanti ty of septage generated in 
unconnected households poses a substantial risk of hazardous disposal and of polluting 
the river system. 
During exit conference (May 2024), Secretary, Drink ing Water stated that it was not 
contested that people get their soak pits emptied in open due to lack of sewage coverage 
of households in STPs. He also informed that bidders were now responding to tendering 
process of co-treatment facilities. Furthermore, co -treatment facilities had now been 
made an integral part of all future STPs to be established under AMRUT scheme.  
2.3.7 Insufficient projection of treatment capacity  
Paragraph 2.2 of Central Public Health and Environm ental Engineering Organization 
(CPHEEO) Manual on  Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems highlights ne ed for 
capacity to treat sewage in short, medium and long term. This requires projection of 
treatment capacity of STPs keeping in view population forecast using most appropriate 
method and the density and distribution of such pop ulation in several areas, zones or 
districts. Floating population should also be consi dered which includes number of 
persons visiting the project area for tourism, pilg rimage or for working. The numbers 
should be decided in consultation with the tourism departments and specified for water 
supply and sewerage (Paragraph 2.6.2 of the Manual). 
Audit noticed that implementing agency (UJN) did no t possess basic database 
containing the details of each household and commercial establishment, availability of 
sewer lines in the area, status of connectivity of households and establishments with 
available sewer lines. Due to this, sufficient capa city of STPs to be built was not 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
14  
correctly projected by the implementing agency. Due  to this reason, constructed STPs 
achieved their full capacity in two-three years of their construction as observed in 
following cases: 
Case No. 1: Low Capacity of 68 MLD STP Haridwar 
In 2014, implementing agency 
7 proposed a new STP in Jagjeetpur with a capacity o f 
40 MLD. This proposal was based on the fact that 85 MLD of sewage was reaching to 
Jagjeetpur against the existing total treatment cap acity of 45 MLD 8 of available two 
STPs. In 2016, the proposed capacity was enhanced r andomly by 10 MLD. 
Subsequently, an additional 18 MLD was also added t o the proposed capacity, as the 
existing 18 MLD STP, which was commissioned in 1989  was planned to be scrapped. 
As a result, the total proposed capacity of the new  STP was revised to 68 MLD 
(40 MLD + 10 MLD + 18 MLD). This revised capacity w as projected to be sufficient 
for the sewage load expected by the year 2028. 
However, Audit found that the 68 MLD STP was curren tly having sewage load more 
than its capacity. In March 2023, the STP was treat ing daily inlet of 71 MLD sewage 
at an average. The maximum inlet received in a day was 84 MLD. Hence, the 
established capacity was exhausted in 2023 itself i.e.  five years before the schedule of 
2028. Though, 18 MLD STP which was planned to be scrapped was still getting sewage 
of 19-20 MLD per day. 
During exit conference (May 2024), General Manager,  Construction Circle (Ganga) 
stated that it was essentially an I&D project which  was planned for treating drain 
discharge only. Secretary, Drinking Water assured t hat project funded by KfW in 
Haridwar was based on actual household survey and i t would be able to serve all 
households and floating and camping population. 
The reply is not acceptable as the reply highlights  a flaw in fundamental planning of 
assessing the sewage load. Although the STP was app roved under I&D project with a 
planned capacity of 68 MLD to meet projected sewage  load by 2028, it was already 
overloaded by 2023, treating up to 84 MLD in a day. The KfW project is future-oriented 
and does not address the issue of existing overload.  
Case No. 2: Low Capacity of 7.50 MLD STP Dhalwala, Rishikesh 
In 2013, NMCG approved the construction of a 7.50 MLD STP in Dhalwala, Rishikesh. 
However, the project was cancelled in 2016. Subsequ ently, during 2016-17, another 
STP of the same capacity was proposed in the DPR projecting that 7.50 MLD of sewage 
would be generated by 2018. NMCG sanctioned this pr oposal in March 2017, with a 
scheduled completion date of August 2019 as per the  agreement. However, the 
projected sewage generation (7.50 MLD in 2018) exce eded the STP's capacity of 
7.50 MLD by the time STP was completed (2019), lead ing to immediate overflow 
issues. Therefore, the STP was facing problem of overflowing since the beginning. 
                                                           
7 Project Manager (PM), Construction & Maintenance Unit (Civil), UJN Ganga Haridwar. 
8 18 MLD STP + 27 MLD STP. 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
15  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that, durin g rainy season, the quantum of 
Dhalwala nalla  exceeds capacity of STP, and excess flow over the capacity of STP is 
directly discharged into the river.  
The reply is not acceptable as the audit noticed that discharge of untreated sewage was 
not limited to rainy season only and the issue was observed multiple times 
(January 2023, February 2023 and March 2023, etc. ) and covered in local print media. 
Case No. 3: Low Capacity of five MLD STP Chorpani, Rishikesh 
In 2016-17, a STP with a capacity of five MLD was proposed for the Chorpani area in 
Rishikesh, based on an estimate that five MLD of sewage would be generated by 2028. 
The same was sanctioned by NMCG in March 2017. The STP was commissioned in 
November 2020. However, the capacity of STP proved insufficient after it began 
receiving sewage in excess of its full capacity. Du e to rising demand from public and 
efforts of elected representatives up to NMCG level, a new STP of eight MLD capacity 
was sanctioned by the NMCG (06 September 2022). Meanwhile, the operator continued 
discharging excess sewage into river without treatment. 
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) team also found 17 MLD sewage coming 
to the 5.0 MLD STP on their visit to site on 20 Jun e 2023. In response, the contractor 
responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of STP stated (letter dated 
28 June 2023) that he was treating sewage as per the capacity of the plant and claimed 
that he was bypassing the excess sewage as per inst ructions of UJN i.e.  the 
implementing agency. 
In addition to the specific instances mentioned, th e audit also observed instances of 
untreated sewage being discharged into the Ganga an d its tributaries. Many of these 
cases stemmed from the inadequate treatment capacit y of STPs, as detailed in 
Paragraph 2.4.1 . 
As the SMCG reviews all DPRs before forwarding them to the NMCG for approval, it 
bears responsibility for these shortcomings. The responsibility should be fixed against the 
officials of SMCG, who are responsible for preparation/submission of DPRs to NMCG.  
The State Government accepted (May 2024) that flow received at STP was much more 
than its treatment design capacity and another eigh t MLD STP was being constructed 
in the area.  
2.3.8 Excess capacity and low intake of sewage 
(i) Excess projection of treatment capacity 
Availability of surplus capacity to treat sewage ma y be considered as a sign of STPs 
being future ready. However, in the case of 1.40 ML D STP Devprayag, Audit noticed 
that proposed STP operates at only three-four per cent  of its capacity due to insufficient 
sewage input.  
The 1.40 MLD STP in Devprayag was originally constructed (March 2016) at a cost of 
₹ 3.66 crore to serve the entire town, which is divi ded into three zones. However, the 
implementing agency, UJN, built two separate STPs 9 to cater to two of these zones, 
                                                           
9 75 KLD for Shanti Bazar and 150 KLD for Sangam Baz ar. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
16  
leaving the mentioned STP to handle sewage treatmen t for only one zone. Currently, 
this STP receives sewage from 70 households and nin e commercial establishments 
within its designated zone. However, this amount is inadequate to provide the minimum 
quantity of sewage or greywater required for effect ive treatment. The STP currently 
operates at only three - four per cent  of its capacity due to insufficient sewage input. 
Under these circumstances, the Audit observed that there is room for improvement in 
the quality of sewage treatment. During joint physical inspections, Audit noted visibly 
dirty and foul-smelling water at the outlets of STPs, as in pictures below: 
  
Photo 2.1 and 2.2: Visibly dirty and smelly water discharged from the outlet of the STP in Ganga  
This observation was further substantiated by testing reports from the CPCB on treated 
effluent, which revealed non-compliance with norms for parameters such as 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Total Suspended So lid (TSS) and Faecal 
Coliform (FC) during quarterly tests 10 . 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that capaci ty of the STP was proposed to 
serve the needs of the local residents as well as an extra 7,000 National Hydro-electric 
Power Corporation personnel who were likely to be e mployed by THDC. Those 
personnel were to live in Devprayag. Subsequently, the dam was not constructed and 
personnel were not shifted to Devprayag. 
The reply is not acceptable because THDC manages its own sewage disposal, as evident 
from construction of five MLD STP in Tehri by THDC (As mentioned in box of 
Paragraph 2.3.5). Furthermore, THDC related claim of Department was not supported 
by any documentary evidence.  
(ii) Vanishing of Incoming Sewage 
In Joshimath, a STP with daily treatment capacity o f 1.08 MLD sewage was 
commissioned in September 2019. However, during physical inspection, audit noticed 
that discharge of the nalla  (for which the STP was constructed) had diverted somewhere 
                                                           
10   conducted between August to November 2023 and Apr il to July 2023. 


Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
17  
else (perhaps gone underground) resulting in nominal receipt of sewage. STP operator 
told that the STP received approximately 0.2-millio n-liter sewage/grey water per 
month. Audit confirmed that during whole month of O ctober 2023, the STP had 
received total sewage of less than one million liters. Such little intake of sewage in the 
STP adversely affected various instruments of the STP. The operator had to decant the 
STP at least two times a month to keep the STP mach inery running. Hence, the whole 
objective of constructing the STP could not be achieved. 
Although flow of drain could be retrieved by repairing the broken sewer line, Audit noticed 
that no such effort was made by either construction agency or maintenance agency to detect 
where the discharge had disappeared and there was no possibility to tap household sewer 
connections without construction of any new networking scheme. Hence, the working of 
STP was ineffective and it could become useless for future purpose. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that a comp rehensive project for sewerage 
network in Joshimath town was proposed based on Pos t Disaster Need Assessment 
Report and the DPR of the project was under preparation.  
The Government reply implies that there was no chan ce of recovering lapsed sewage 
flow until new works in proposed DPR, which was und er preparation, were 
implemented. 
2.3.9 Lack of STP in Ganga front town 
Gauchar is a Ganga Front Town with 3,930 households. However, there was no STP in 
Gauchar and people used soak pits for managing sewage. During physical inspections, 
Audit was informed that there was high need of STP in Gauchar in view of very high 
population growth and migration into Gauchar. It was also informed that provisions of 
septage management 
11  required cleaning of every soak pit in three years  and disposal 
of that septage into proper STP. However, Audit noticed that no STP was planned and 
constructed in Gauchar. 
When this issue was pointed out by audit, the Imple menting Agency stated that as per 
NMCG norms, only nalla  tapping (I&D with STP) is done under Namami Gange project. 
Since there was no nalla  falling into the river, the proposal for an STP was not made. 
This situation highlights the complete dependence o f sewage treatment systems in 
Ganga Front Towns on funding from the Namami Gange initiative. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that a faecal sludge treatment plant had been 
proposed in December 2023 under Swachchh Bharat Mission programme 2.0. 
2.4 Operation and Maintenance of STPs 
Proper O&M of STPs is the most significant aspect o f efforts for treating municipal 
sewage and cleaning Ganga. Audit noticed various sh ortcomings in this function as 
detailed below: 
                                                           
11  Paragraph 5.4.1 of Septage Management Protocol. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
18  
2.4.1 Discharge of untreated sewage into Ganga 
Audit carried out joint physical inspections of 37 Namami Gange STPs. During these 
inspections, Audit noticed that 12 STPs (32 per cent ) were discharging untreated 
sewage into Ganga and its tributaries because of in sufficient treating capacity and 
ineffective tapping of drains/ nallas. The details of such STPs, as noticed during 
physical inspection, are given in Table-2.3 below:  
Table-2.3: Details of discharge of untreated sewage into Ganga in 12 STPs  
Name of STP Year of 
Installation Capacity Reason of Discharging 
Untreated Sewage into Ganga 
STP Chandreshwar Nagar/ 
Dhalwala Rishikesh September 2020 7.50 
MLD 
Insufficient treating capacity of 
STP 
STP Kirti Nagar January 2019 10 KLD Insufficient treating capacity of 
STP 
STP Belni Road, 
Rudraprayag November 2020 50 KLD Destruction of nalla  Tapping in 
Rains 
STP Near SBI, Rudraprayag May 2019 100 KLD Breaking  of nalla  Tapping 
STP Near bus stand, 
Rudraprayag May 2019 75 KLD Insufficient treating capacity of 
STP/ Receipt of extra grey water 
STP Near Steel Bridge 
Rudraprayag September 2019 125 KLD Insufficient treating capacity of 
STP 
STP, Srikot  February 2021 75 KLD Insufficient treating capacity of 
STP 
STP, Pokhari Bend, 
Gopeshwar August 2020 1.25 
MLD 
Complete destruction of nalla  
tapping of Papadiyana nalla  during 
rains which was not repaired by 
O&M agency 
STP (Near old bridge), 
Karnaprayag May 2019 100 KLD Non- tapping of grey water from 
nearby households 
STP (Ward No. 1 and 3), 
Karnaprayag April 2019 100 KLD Leakage from nalla  Tapping 
STP (Near BRO/New 
Bridge), Karnaprayag November 2020 50 KLD Leakage from nalla  Tapping 
STP (near police chowki), 
Karnaprayag  April 2019 50 KLD Choking of nalla  tapping 
Source: Physical inspection notes.  
In Exit conference (May 2024), the Secretary, Drinking Water assured that sufficiency 
of treatment capacity of STPs, particularly in hill areas, would be ascertained.  
The Government should fulfill its assurance of asce rtaining sufficiency of treatment 
capacity without any delay and fix responsibility o f implementing agencies for 
proposing STPs with low capacity leading to discharge of untreated sewage into Ganga 
and tributaries.   
2.4.2 Willfully discharging of untreated sewage int o Ganga by O&M contractor 
Section 24 of ‘The Water (Prevention and Control of  Pollution) Act, 1974’ prohibits 
use of stream or well for disposal of polluting mat ter like sewer etc . Further, as per 
Section 43, whoever contravenes the provisions of section 24 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months, but which 
may extend to six years and with fine. 
Operation & Maintenance of two projects at Rishikesh viz  3.0 MLD STP, Swargashram 
and 3.5 MLD STP, Tapovan is being carried out by Ex ecutive Engineer, 
UJS, Ganga, 
Haridwar. The contractor responsible for maintenanc e of STPs was found to be 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
19  
emptying sewage from collection tank of both the ST Ps directly into Ganga without 
any treatment which was noticed by Junior Engineer during a surprise inspection of 
both the STPs on 9 February 2023. Junior Engineer a nd Assistant Engineer both 
recommended legal action against the contractor. 
The contractor accepted (10 April 2023) his fault a nd in his defiance stated that the 
equipment installed in both the STPs were old and d efective since the time he had 
assumed the charge. These challenges were communica ted earlier to the maintenance 
agency many times. He also requested to replace the  defective and old equipment 
installed in STPs, but the maintenance agency never  replaced defective equipment for 
smooth working of STPs. Hence, the Department equal ly bears responsibility for not 
taking timely corrective action for replacement/maintenance.  
Further, Audit noticed that the department did not pursue any legal action against either 
the contractor or the responsible officer. Instead, the Superintending Engineer ordered 
only withholding a part of its payment from O&M bills which could be released later. 
During exit conference (May 2024), the Secretary, D rinking Water assured that the 
Government would fix responsibility for such crime. 
2.4.3 Drains discharging into Ganga not tapped 
Implementing agency 
12 , constructed six STPs for tapping of eight drains sanctioned in 
Rudraprayag. NMCG sanction for the same was provide d in March 2017. However, 
these STPs did not cover all drains and five other drains discharging into Ganga were 
left. Executive Officer, Nagar Palika Parishad, Rud raprayag requested (11 Dec 2020 
and 30 Dec 2020) to District Magistrate, Rudrapraya g and District Ganga Committee, 
Rudraprayag, with copy to implementing agency, to tap the leftover drains which were 
flowing directly into the river. These drains serve  as the carrier of both sewage and 
solid waste generated from the town, which finally discharged into 
Alaknanda/Mandakini and ultimately polluted River Ganga. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that implem enting agency forwarded 
(February 2021) the case for tapping of above drain s to District Ganga Committee, 
Rudraprayag for onward submission to SMCG for allotment of funds but the funds were 
not released yet. 
Government reply is not acceptable because implemen ting agency could not 
incorporate tapping proposals of all drains when NMCG was approving. 
2.4.4 Operation of STPs without renewing authorizat ion and consent from the  
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board 
Provisions of various Acts and Rules 13  require STPs to obtain Consolidated Consent 
and Authorization (CCA) from State Pollution Contro l Board for operation. The same 
is renewed from time to time. 
                                                           
12   PM, Construction and Maintenance Division, Ganga,  UJN, Srinagar. 
13   Section-25 of the Water (Prevention and Control o f Pollution) Act, 1974, Section-21 of the Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and  Rule 3(c) & 5(5) of the Hazardous Waste 
(Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008 framed under the Environment 
Protection Act, 1986. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
20  
Audit noticed that eight of 44 Namami Gange STPs we re running their operations 
without renewing CCA from the Uttarakhand Pollution  Control Board (UKPCB) for 
more than four years as of May 2024 (as detailed in Appendix-2.2). It was in violation 
of above provisions and involved the risk of pollut ing environment due to the absence 
of any checks in their operations. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that the process of renewal of authorization 
was in progress by coordinating with UKPCB.  
2.4.5 Eighteen STPs not taken over by maintenance a gency due to operational 
and safety related issues 
In Uttarakhand, UJN constructs sewerage projects and hands over these systems to UJS , 
which is the maintenance agency for such assets. A Government order issued in March 
2016 reaffirms this directive, specifying that all completed sewerage and water supply 
schemes must be transferred to UJS  within the same financial year of their completion. 
This ensures smooth operations and effective management of these crucial services. 
Audit noticed that 18 out of 44 STPs have not been taken over by the maintenance agency 
UJS  citing construction, operational and safety related deficiencies like overflow of sewage, 
non-compliance with effluent parameters, unsafe con struction etc.  (as detailed in 
Appendix-2.3 ). Handover was pending for up to five years. 
In absence of handover, a single office 14  was carrying out O&M of these STPs which 
are spread up to distance of 320 km from Haridwar. This office has time and again 
expressed its inability to manage the O&M of these STPs. Although the matter 
pertained to the Namami Gange STPs, SMCG played no role in sorting out the issue. 
Not transferring of such a large number of STPs poi nts to large scale deficiencies in 
O&M and construction of facilities. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that steps were being taken to address the 
defects identified in the 18 STPs mentioned above. They assured that the process of 
transferring these STPs to the maintenance agency was already underway. 
2.5 Management and reuse of sludge  
Sewage sludge is a semi-solid or solid waste material that is removed from the sewage 
during the treatment process at STPs. It contains a  variety of contaminants, including 
heavy metals, pathogens, organic compounds, and micro plastics. Therefore, it must be 
treated and disposed of safely to prevent any negative impacts on human health and the 
environment.  
2.5.1 Utilization of sludge as organic fertilizers 
Sewage sludge in Uttarakhand is freely distributed to farmers for use in agriculture 
purposes.  However, in 13 
th  meeting of Supervisory Committee (28 January 2022) , 
General Manager, Construction Circle (Ganga) highli ghted that the sludge generated 
from the STPs cannot be regarded as ready to use as  manure. It was scientifically 
suggested to undergo further processing of the slud ge through composting to enhance 
its organic properties for application as manure. The same fact was also highlighted in 
                                                           
14  PM, Mechanical, Construction and Maintenance Unit,  Ganga, UJN, Haridwar. 

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
21  
a research paper (Waste to Wealth: Value Addition &  Scientific Validation- A 
Comprehensive Report for Sludge Management in India). The research paper noted that 
use of untreated sludge as fertilizer on agricultur al soil had been shown to increase 
heavy metal concentrations for areas around Jagjeet pur STP (Haridwar) where sludge 
from the STP had been used for soil fertilization ( Kumar et al ., 2022; Pathak et al ., 
2011; Kumar et al ., 2018).  
Audit compared parameters of heavy metals available  in raw sludge (as noted in the 
research paper) with standards of city compost (as mentioned in Schedule-IV of 
Fertilizers Control Order (FCO), 1985) and found th at raw sludge was not usable for 
agriculture purposes. Details are given in Table-2.4 below: 
Table-2.4: Details of heavy metals available in raw sludge 
Heavy 
Metal 
Maximum limit as in FCO, 1985 
(mg/ Kg) 
Quantity available in raw sludge of Jagjeetpur 
(mg/ Kg) 
Arsenic 10 8.11 
Cadmium 05 18.51 
Chromium 50 77 
Copper 300 433 
Mercury 0.15 0.69 
Nickel 50 76 
Lead 100 97 
Zinc 1,000 2,730.12 
Above data shows that untreated sludge from STPs in  Haridwar was not usable in 
agriculture in light of high quantity of heavy metals. 
However, Audit noticed that 64,292  cubic meters  sludge was produced 15  in three 
STPs of Haridwar (27 & 18 MLD Jagjeetpur and 18 MLD  Sarai) of which 
51,071 cubic meters  was distributed to farmers. This practice, which ma y harm soil 
characteristics, was practised in Uttarakhand STPs despite the relevant authorities 
acknowledging inherent risks. 
State Government submitted (May 2024) testing repor ts of sludge issued by a private 
laboratory which found parameters of sludge sample to be fit for use as manure for 
agricultural purposes. Furthermore, in exit confere nce (May 2024), the General 
Manager, Construction Circle (Ganga) accepted that the sludge had not undergone 
treatment and mentioned that a pilot project for it s treatment was currently in the 
planning stages. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department has a lready acknowledged unsuitability 
of untreated sludge as manure and findings of above  mentioned independent research 
papers. Besides, planning of a project for treating sludge is another evidence of the fact 
that raw sludge should not be used as manure.    
2.5.2 Improper storage of sludge 
Paragraph 6.11.2.2 of Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems (issued by 
CPHEEO) provides for use of concrete slabs or other  impervious slabs for long term 
storage of dried sludge. Besides, it is also needed  to determine whether the storage 
facility should be open or covered.  
                                                           
15  20 March 2018 to 30 June 2023. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
22  
Audit noticed that large amount of sludge was store d in open kachcha  ground in 
Haridwar (Sarai ground and Jagjeetpur). However, sl udge stored in open ground was 
prone to get wet and flow to the Ganga during rainy season. Besides, old sludge turned 
into heaps of soil and its ingredients were prone t o seep into ground water and river 
water. 
  
Photo 2.3: Heaps of sludge thrown in 14 MLD 
Sarai STP 
(Date: 27 September 2023) 
Photo 2.4: Old sludge turned into soil along 
with fresh sludge (Sarai)  
  
Photo 2.5: Dried sludge heaped in open for 
farmers (Jagjeetpur)  
(Date: 15 September 2023) 
Photo 2.6: Wet sludge spread on open road 
(Jagjeetpur)  
(Date: 15 September 2023) 
Thus, storage of sludge was not as per norms and co uld pollute ground and surface 
water. 
During exit conference (May 2024), Secretary, Drink ing Water instructed General 
Manager, Construction Circle (Ganga) to ensure that  sludge was not washed out to 
Ganga/tributaries due to lack of boundary wall etc . 
2.5.3 Non-operation of sludge management plant 
Sludge is also seen as a resource, in terms of gene ration of energy and production of 
bio-manures out of it. In view of this, NMCG is cur rently focusing on reuse of sludge 
and related bio-products under Namami Gange-II programme. 
In line of this, GoI accorded (October 2020) admini strative approval and expenditure 
sanction of 
₹ 8.67 crore for construction of a sludge management  plant (SMP) in 


Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
23  
Rishikesh. Audit noticed that General Manager, Cons truction Circle (Ganga) selected 
Thermal Stabilization and Volume Reduction of Sludg e technique for the sludge 
management plant. In this technique, calorific valu e of sludge is utilized to reduce the 
volume of sludge by 90 per cent  and ash is produced which can be used for making 
paver tiles.  
Sludge with calorific value of 4,000 calorie per gram ( cal/g)  produced sufficient heat for 
drying sludge and reducing volume. If calorific value of sludge was less, additional fuel 
in the form of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) was re quired for running the plant. 
However, neither General Manager, Construction Circle (Ganga) nor his subordinate i.e.  
Project Manager (PM), E&M, UJN Ganga, Haridwar or contractor assessed the calorific 
value of sludge produced in STPs and accepted the technology for adoption. Even IIT, 
Roorkee, that vetted technology, did not highlight the need of testing calorific value of 
sludge. 
The calorific value of sludge was later found as 2, 469 cal/g  which required additional 
fuel in the form of LPG which was unviable for economic reasons. Due to this reason, 
the contractor did not run the plant even after com missioning (October 2022) and 
receiving full payment of 
₹ 4.93 crore for construction (construction cost ₹ 4.40 crore 
plus 12 per cent GST). Hence, the objective of constructing SMP rema ins unfulfilled 
despite an expenditure of ₹ 4.93 crore. 
The State Government accepted (May 2024) the above facts and stated that the plant 
was not being operated due to contractual dispute r egarding who would bear the cost 
of additional fuel in the form of LPG and the matter was being sorted out in consultation 
with NMCG. During the exit conference (May 2024), S ecretary, Drinking Water 
assured the audit that he would look into the matter. 
2.5.4 Reuse of treated water 
NGT has issued instructions from time to time for reuse of treated water. Chief Secretary 
of Uttarakhand filed a compliance affidavit (31 Dec 2020). He affirmed, with regard to 
compliance in relation to para 28 (ii) (b) of NGT d irections dated 18 Dec 2019, that 
proposal for reuse of treated water of Sarai STP (H aridwar) and Lakkarghat STP 
(Rishikesh) was submitted to SMCG ( vide  letter dated 07 July 2020 from Chief Engineer, 
Planning Section of Irrigation Department) and furt her to NMCG for sanctioning 
(estimated costs were 
₹ 9.91 crore and ₹ 6.53 crore respectively). However, NMCG, vide  
its letter 12 Oct 2020, rejected the proposals stating that construction of irrigation canal 
did not come under purview of NMCG. Accordingly, during the Supervisory Committee 
meeting dated 25 Nov 2020, the Irrigation Department was directed to make its own plan 
for reuse of wastewater through Scheme of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development. However, Audit noticed that there was no progress in this direction and 
facility to reuse treated water was limited to only  three STPs of Jagjeetpur out of total 
44 Namami Gange STPs. Besides, there was no progres s on reuse of treated water of 
Sarai STPs (two STPs with cumulative capacity of 32  MLD in Sarai, Haridwar) and 
26 MLD STP at Lakkarghat in Rishikesh, as contained in Chief Secretary’s affidavit. It 
led to fall of treated water of the three STPs directly into Ganga.  

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
24  
The State Government accepted (May 2024) that treat ed water was being used for 
purpose of irrigation from three STPs in Jagjeetpur  only. It also stated that reuse of 
treated effluent was not feasible in hill areas. 
Reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that all these three STPs were fully in plains 
and there was no progress on reuse of treated water  at these two places despite Chief 
Secretary’s commitment before NGT. 
2.6 Safety Audit 
A safety audit is a systematic review to analyze the risks and hazards in the workplace 
and evaluate the effectiveness and reliability of t he safety procedures set up in the 
organization. Point no. 9 and 27 of ‘River Ganga (R ejuvenation, Protection and 
Management) Authorities Order, 2016’ clearly provid e that State Ganga Committee 
and DGCs are responsible for Ganga Safety Audit. In  the meeting (May 2022) of 
Supervisory Committee (constituted under orders of NGT), Executive Director- 
Technical (NMCG) opined that a safety audit of all the STPs created under Namami 
Gange was needed to be carried out as a preventive measure for their smooth operation, 
protection works and other arrangements. Chairman o f the supervisory committee 
issued instructions for the same and it was conveye d (July 2022) to all the concerned 
by Program Director, SMCG that the report of Safety Audit was to be submitted within 
45 days. 
Audit noticed that Ganga Safety Audit or safety aud it of the STP projects constructed 
under program was never conducted. DGCs and State G anga Committee did not take 
any action in this regard. In the absence of such audit, Audit noticed that two accidents 
happened which caused loss of property in one case and loss of lives in other case, as 
detailed below: 
Case 1: Loss of property/STP due to landslide 
A 75 KLD STP (near Anoop Negi School in Rudraprayag ) was constructed 
(April 2019) on slope of Alaknanda 
River. It was on a very steep slope and the 
STP was damaged due to land slide 
during rains in September 2021. Hence, 
the STP built at a cost of 
₹ 0.88 crore was 
damaged beyond repair. Its machinery 
(DG set and other equipment of STP) had 
to be dismantled and shifted to a safe 
place. Now, the Department has proposed 
to shift STP to another location. If safety 
audit was conducted, loss of this asset 
could have been avoided. 
During joint inspections, Audit noticed that 17 
16  of total 44 STPs were at risk of 
physical damage due to being on steep slope/riverbed. 
                                                           
16  All six STPs in Rudraprayag, all five STPs in Karn aprayag, two STPs in Kirtinagar, two STPs in 
Devprayag and two STPs in Nandprayag. 
Photo-2.7: Loss of STP near Anoop Singh Negi School due 
to landslide  

Chapter-2: Shortcomings in Sewage Treatment Infrastructure 
25  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that slope stability safety audit of the sites 
of 26 STPs was being carried out by IIT, Roorkee. The inspection by IIT, Roorkee was 
expected to be completed by the end of May 2024. 
The reply is not acceptable because actions were in itiated by the State Ganga 
Committee and DGCs nearly two years after the Chair man of Supervisory Committee 
issued orders for safety audits. Regular safety aud it could prevent any loss to these 
assets and resulting loss of human lives. 
Case 2: Loss of Human Lives (Electrocution of 28 pe ople in Chamoli STP) 
In a grave mishap in 50 KLD STP Chamoli (constructed in September 2019), 28 people 
were electrocuted on 18 July (one dead) and 19 July  2023 (15 dead and 12 injured). 
The STP was constructed by PM, Construction & Maint enance Unit, Ganga, UJN, 
Gopeshwar 17  and handed over to UJS , Gopeshwar in June 2021. This STP was one 
amongst the 22-steel structure STPs 18  built by implementing agency UJN. These STPs 
are highly unsafe to electrical hazards due to havi ng steel body structure. After the 
mishap of electrocution at Chamoli, Office of the D irector Electrical safety, Haldwani 
investigated the incident and departmental action w as initiated against the contractor 
responsible for O&M of the STP. The investigation r evealed that there were many 
defects in the electrical installation of the plant  such as non-functionality of safety 
devices installed in various circuits as per safety and power supply measures, earthing 
not as per electrical provisions, unsafe joints in incoming cables, temporary wiring etc ., 
which could have been revealed, if safety audit had been conducted.  
After this accident, Department conducted an ‘elect rical safety inspection’ of STPs. 
However, the report of this inspection was not provided to the test checked maintenance 
agencies or Audit. Hence, issues/checklist examined in this electrical safety audit could 
not be ascertained in audit. Besides, comprehensive  safety audit of STPs covering all 
aspects was still pending. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that electrical safety inspection of all STPs 
with electro-coagulation technology was conducted a fter the above accident. During 
exit conference (May 2024), the Secretary, Drinking  Water also assured that report of 
electrical safety audit would be shared with audit, which however has not been received 
till date (August 2024).  
2.7 Recommendations 
1.  The State Government may undertake a comprehensive safety audit of Sewage 
Treatment Plants to identify and address any potent ial risks, ensuring that 
deficiencies are corrected before transferring them to maintenance agencies. 
2.  The State Government may explore the possible avenu es of financing sewer 
networking works and ensure laying of adequate hous e sewerage networks 
connecting Sewage Treatment Plants with unconnected households. 
                                                           
17  PM (Construction & Maintenance Unit) Ganga, UJN, G opeshwar. 
18  Six STPs in Rudraprayag, five STPs in Karnaprayag,  two STPs in Kirtinagar, two STPs in 
Devprayag, two STPs in Nandprayag and five STPs in Chamoli. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
26  
3.  Sufficient co-treatment facilities may be planned a nd provided to ensure safe 
disposal of septage in Ganga Front Towns without sewerage network.  
4.  The details of each household and commercial establ ishment, availability of 
sewer lines in the area, and status of connectivity  of households with available 
sewer lines may also be considered by implementing agencies while projecting 
treatment of proposed sewage treatment plants.  
5.  Responsibility may be fixed for: (i) projection of low capacity of Sewage 
Treatment Plants leading to discharge of untreated sewage into river; and (ii) 
not ascertaining calorific value of sludge before e xecuting project of Sludge 
Management Plant.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-3 
Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga: 
Solid Waste Management, Forestry 
Interventions and Ghats & Crematoria 
 
  

27  
Chapter-3 
 
Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga: Solid Waste Management, Forestry 
Interventions and Ghats & Crematoria 
Due to insufficient public awareness through Inform ation, Education and 
Communication activities, the crematoria constructe d by State Mission for Clean 
Ganga (SMCG) in various locations remained largely unutilized. The progress of 
forestry interventions was minimal, with only 16 per cent  of the planned expenditure 
implemented. Solid Waste Management (SWM) in Ganga Towns suffered from 
inadequate management practices, as garbage was primarily dumped on river slopes or 
disposed of through burning instead of proper proce ssing which led to it flowing back 
into the river. 
3.1 Auxiliary initiatives for cleaning Ganga 
Apart from establishing Sewage Treatment Plants for  treating municipal sewage, 
several auxiliary initiatives have been undertaken to mitigate river pollution. These 
include facilitating proper SWM in Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), constructing ghats and 
crematoria, and implementing forestry interventions along the Ganga and its tributaries. 
These supplementary efforts contribute indirectly to reducing pollution in the Ganga. 
3.2 Ghats and Crematoria 
Bathing ghats and crematoria act as an interface between humans and river. Since ages, 
riverbanks have been used for offering prayers and cremation of deceased. 
Development of ghats and crematoria promotes cleanl iness of river edges and better 
infrastructure for social & cultural activities. It  also helps prevent disposal of unburnt 
bodies into river Ganga and helps promote ‘People River connect’. 
In Uttarakhand, National Mission for Clean Ganga (N MCG) has sanctioned 31 ghats 
and 28 crematoria at a cost of 
₹ 328.59 crore. Audit examined 11 ghats and 
15 crematoria with combined expenditure of ₹ 88.62 crore. Following shortcomings 
were noticed during Audit:  
3.2.1 Unutilised crematoria due to construction wit hout demand and need 
analysis  
Demand of local public for a project/service is the  foremost criteria for expenditure of 
public money. Local demand ensures full utilization  of assets created as well as 
maintenance of these assets by local people. NMCG found (August 2017) that in many 
cases, ghats and crematoria were either not need ba sed or over designed. Hence, it 
instructed SMCG Uttarakhand that while taking up th ese works, the following points 
were necessarily adhered to: 
 the ghat and crematoria development activities should be taken up considering the 
requirements of local people and in consultation with local bodies.  
 Before commencement of works, SMCG Uttarakhand to c onsult local bodies and 
work out proper arrangement for future operation and maintenance (O&M). 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
28  
 A resolution from the ULB for undertaking O&M beyon d project support period 
should be obtained before commencement of works apa rt from obtaining all the 
necessary no objection certificate and clearance.  
Despite clear instructions from NMCG, crematoria were constructed without assessing 
public demand or considering the cultural preferenc es of the local population. As a 
result, during joint inspections of 11 crematoria, it was observed that these facilities 
were neither utilized by local people nor maintained by the local bodies to whom they 
were transferred.  
Status of constructed crematoria are provided in the Table-3.1  below: 
Table-3.1: Status of crematoria as per joint physical inspection 
Sl. 
No. Place 
Whether 
demand 
made by 
local public 
Whether 
Used or 
Not 
If unused, where 
pyres are burnt 
Whether 
maintained 
or not 
Date of 
Completion 
1. Cremation Ghat, 
Chamoli No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained May 2019 
2. Cremation Ghat, 
Nandprayag No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
January 
2019 
3. Cremation Ghat, 
Karnaprayag No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
March  
2019 
4. Crematoria-2, Pokhari 
Bridge, Karnaprayag No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
March  
2019 
5. Gholtir Crematorium, 
Rudraprayag No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
March  
2019 
6. Koteshwar 
Crematorium, Tehri No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
November 
2018 
7. Gauchar Crematorium No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
March  
2019 
8. Kedar Crematorium, 
Uttarkashi No Used 
very less 
Some pyres are 
burnt in riverbed 
and some in 
crematorium 
Not 
maintained 
February 
2019 
9. Heena Crematorium, 
Uttarkashi No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
February 
2019 
10. Dunda Crematorium, 
Uttarkashi No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
December 
2018 
11. Umarkot Cremation 
Ghat, Karnaprayag No Not used Pyres are burnt in 
riverbed 
Not 
maintained 
January 
2019 
Following pictures also confirm above facts: 
  
Photo 3.1: Unmaintained and damaged 
crematorium no. 2, Karnaprayag  
(Date: 13 Dec 2023)  
Photo 3.2: Unused and unmaintained 
crematorium, Gauchar  
 


Chapter-3: Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga 
29  
Photo 3.3: Remnants of a pyre in Riverbed in Gauchar  
The State Government acknowledged (May 2024) the ab ove facts and stated that the 
public was being sensitized by concerned ULBs throu gh Information, Education and 
Communication activities (May 2024) to use availabl e crematoria and abandon the 
practice of burning pyres on riverbeds. 
3.3 Forestry interventions for River Ganga 
Forestry Interventions for Ganga is a sub part of N amami Gange Programme with the 
objective of sustainable forest management for the benefit of the Ganga River basin. 
Forest Research Institute, Dehradun has prepared th e Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for the interventions (mainly plantations) needed t o be carried out under entire 
catchment of river Ganga. The scheme was to be comp leted during 2016-17 to          
2020-21. 
During audit of Project Management Unit-Forestry In terventions for GANGA, Forest 
Department Uttarakhand, Audit noticed following iss ue in implementation of the 
scheme: 
3.3.1 Meagre progress of forestry interventions 
Audit noticed that the approved DPR had planned exp enditure of 
₹ 885.91 crore for 
plantation in 54,855.43 hectare 1(Hec) in Uttarakhand during scheme period of 2016-17 
to 2020-21. However, Project Management Unit, Fores try Interventions for Ganga 
Uttarakhand, in consultation with NMCG, proposed very little amounts in Annual Plan 
of Operations (APOs) each year. This limited expend iture under the scheme to only 
16 per cent  of originally planned financial targets as detailed in the Table-3.2 below: 
                                                           
1 Estimated area as per DPR: Natural Landscape (30,3 02.50 Hec) +Agriculture Landscape (15,180.00 
Hec) + Urban Landscape (1,406.08 Hec) + Conservation Intervention (7,966.85 Hec). 


Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
30  
Table-3.2: Details of achievement against target as per approved DPR 
(All amounts in crore ₹) 
Year 
Planned 
Expenditure as 
per DPR 
APO submitted 
and approved 
Expenditure 
incurred 
Percentage of 
expenditure vis-à-vis  
planned expenditure 
2016-17 358.91 15.93 15.80 4.40 
2017-18 162.57 19.57 19.03 11.71 
2018-19 223.97 31.77 30.56 13.64 
2019-20 58.70 19.19 16.28 27.73 
2020-21 81.76 39.36 36.65 44.83 
2021-22 - 26.39 18.38 - 
2022-23 - 16.92 7.57 - 
Total 885.91 169.13 144.27 16.28 
Source: Project Management Unit, Forestry Intervent ions for Ganga, Forest Department 
Uttarakhand. 
Due to APOs and financial progress being meagre in comparison to the planned 
expenditure, physical targets were affected very badly. Physical progress under natural 
landscape (the main component of scheme), agricultu ral landscape, urban landscape 
and conservation interventions could be achieved on ly 34 per cent 2, 9 per cent 3, 
6 per cent 4 and 14 per cent 5 of planned targets. The scheme could not rise up to  
expectations of planning done by Forest Research Institute and approved by NMCG. 
The State Government accepted (May 2024) that the t otal funds released by NMCG 
were far below the targets in the DPR. However, it stated that additional plantation had 
been planned under CAMPA and other forestry schemes. 
The reply is not acceptable as plantations under CA MPA and other forestry schemes 
have distinct objectives, whereas plantations plann ed under forestry interventions had 
specific features tailored for Ganga rejuvenation. Therefore, the shortfall in forestry 
interventions for Ganga cannot be compensated for by other plantation initiatives. 
3.4 Solid Waste Management 
Solid waste is swept into water bodies such as the Ganga and her tributaries, either 
purposely by people or by heavy rains during the monsoon season. In the waters, large 
amounts of biodegradable waste may take a lot of oxygen from the water to decompose, 
leading to illness and death of fish and other aquatic creatures, such as the endangered 
Gangetic dolphin. Non-biodegradable materials float  through the rivers, create blocks 
in the free flow of the water and slowly release th eir harmful chemicals into the water 
itself. Aquatic creatures often mistakenly eat thes e materials and die. Hence, 
management of solid wastes is very important to tac kle the problem of pollution of 
Ganga. State Ganga Committee monitors status of SWM in its meetings. 
SWM Rules, 2016 delineate all arrangements regardin g proper management of solid 
waste in ULBs and census towns. Provisions of Rule 16 of the said Rules makes State 
                                                           
2 Natural Landscape: Covered Area:(10,416.70 Hec)/Es timated area as per DPR:(30,302.50 Hec). 
3 Agriculture Landscape: Covered Area:(1,412.84 Hec) /Estimated area as per DPR:(15,180.00 Hec). 
4 Urban Landscape: Covered Area:(90.60 Hec)/Estimate d area as per DPR:(1,406.08 Hec). 
5 Conservation Intervention: Covered Area:(1,128.00 Hec)/Estimated area as per DPR:(7,966.85 Hec). 

Chapter-3: Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga 
31  
Pollution Control Board (SPCB) responsible for enfo rcing these rules through local 
bodies. 
Audit noticed various shortcomings in management of  solid waste as highlighted 
below: 
3.4.1 Lack of authorization for processing and disp osal of solid waste 
Rule 15 of the SWM Rules, 2016 provides that the lo cal authorities and Panchayats 
shall seek authorisation 6 from the SPCB for setting up waste processing, tre atment or 
disposal facility, if the volume of waste is exceeding five metric tons per day including 
sanitary landfills. Rule 16 enjoins the SPCB to gra nt authorization within a period of 
60 days of application stipulating compliance crite ria and environmental standards as 
specified in Schedules I and II of the Rules including other conditions. 
During scrutiny of records of Uttarakhand Pollution  Control Board (UKPCB), audit 
noticed that there were 102 ULBs in the State durin g 2022-23. Out of these, 44 ULBs 
were producing 5 tons per day or more amount of solid waste. However, none of them 
were able to get authorization from UKPCB for facilities of processing and disposal of 
solid waste. Year wise position, since SWM Rules, 2016 coming into effect, is given in 
Table-3.3 below: 
Table-3.3: Status of authorization from UKPCB for facilities of processing and  
disposal of solid waste 
Year No. of authorization applications received No. of authorizations granted 
2017-18 06 0 
2018-19 24 0 
2019-20 18 0 
2020-21 08 0 
2021-22 20 0 
2022-23 02 0 
Source: Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board.  
UKPCB stated that the proposals were not found fit for granting authorisations. It 
indicates that management of solid waste was not as  per norms established by SWM 
Rules, 2016. Audit also noticed that State Ganga Co mmittee never enquired about 
status of authorizations of solid waste disposal facilities despite the fact that they could 
potentially increase pollution in the river. 
The State Government accepted (May 2024) the facts and stated that directions were 
issued to all ULBs in January 2024 by the Directora te of Urban Development 
Department regarding the authorization of waste processing and disposal facilities.  
The reply is not acceptable because waste processin g and disposal facilities continued 
to operate without proper authorization, even seven  years after the rules were 
implemented, the UKPCB did not fulfill its obligation of ensuring compliance with the 
SWM Rules. 
                                                           
6 Authorisation means the permission given by the SP CB to the operator of a facility or urban local 
authority, or any other agency responsible for processing and disposal of solid waste. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
32  
3.4.2 Ground report of Solid Waste Management 
To assess actual position of SWM in Ganga Front Towns, Audit jointly inspected SWM 
facilities/dumping grounds in 10 hill towns 
7.  
Audit observed that solid waste was being indiscrim inately dumped on river slopes or 
disposed of by burning. As a result, all the solid waste either ended up as ashes or was 
at risk of being washed into the river during rainf all. The following pictures serve as 
evidence of this issue: 
Photo-3.4: Garbage dumped on slope of 
Alaknanda and being dumped over legacy 
waste and burnt - Joshimath  
Photo-3.5: Garbage dumped on slope of 
Balkhila Gadera of Alaknanda and burnt- 
Chamoli  
 
Photo-3.6: Garbage dumped on slope of 
Alaknanda in Nandprayag  
Photo-3.7: Garbage was regularly burnt in 
Nandprayag dumping ground 
 
                                                           
7 Joshimath, Gopeshwar-Chamoli, Karnaprayag, Nandpra yag, Rudraprayag,  Srinagar,  Tehri,  Gauchar, 
Uttarkashi  and Devprayag.   


Chapter-3: Auxiliary Initiatives for Cleaning Ganga 
33  
Photo-3.8: Dumping ground in Karnaprayag 
on bank of Alaknanda (Date:13 Dec 2023)
  
Photo-3.9: Huge dump of garbage on bank of  
Alaknanda in Srinagar (Date: 5 Nov 2023)  
Photo-3.10: Huge dump of garbage on slope of Alaknanda in Rudraprayag  
 
The position, as depicted in above pictures of six towns, was also found in Tehri, 
Gauchar and Uttarkashi. Devprayag was an exception where solid waste processing 
facility was located away from river in Kirtinagar. 
Therefore, it is evident that most of the solid was te dumping grounds in Ganga towns 
were situated at inappropriate locations, often nea r riverbanks. This increased the 
likelihood of garbage being washed into the river during rainy seasons. Burning of solid 
waste was also a common practice at these sites. Despite the formulation of SWM Rules 
seven years ago, the system of SWM remained inadequate. The State Ganga Committee 
and respective District Ganga Committees did not ad dress the dismal state of solid 
waste disposal arrangements.   
The State Government accepted (May 2024) the facts and confirmed that directives had 
been issued to all ULBs to prevent fire incidents a t legacy waste dumps and manage 
solid waste effectively. Furthermore, the governmen t has taken action, such as 
imposing financial penalties, against municipal staff to enforce compliance. 


Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
34  
3.5 Recommendations 
1.  Initiatives to enhance public awareness about the use of crematoria may be made 
more effective through Information, Education and Communication activities. 
2.  Efficient processing and disposal of solid waste may be ensured by all the Urban 
Local Bodies and regulatory authorization for the same obtained promptly from 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-4 
Water Quality Monitoring of  
River Ganga 
 
  

35  
Chapter-4 
 
Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga 
 
Audit found that quality of treatment of sewage by Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) 
was poor. Most of the STPs did not comply with norm s of National Green Tribunal 
(NGT) or Government of India (GoI). The water quali ty up to Devprayag was A 
category. In Rishikesh, the water quality of river Ganga remained in B category from 
2019 to 2023, with the exception of COVID-19 period  (2020 & 2021), when it 
improved to A category. The river water quality in Haridwar remained consistently 
in B category throughout the audit period. Uttarakh and Pollution Control Board 
(UKPCB) was not able to get National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation for i ts laboratory which monitors 
water quality of river Ganga and effluents discharged from STPs. The monitoring of 
the online continuous effluent monitoring system was inadequate for several reasons 
like- manual data entry of parameters is permitted on the Ganga Tarang Portal, which 
raises concerns about data accuracy. Additionally, the Ganga Tarang Portal is not 
accessible to the public, limiting transparency.  
4.1 Significant indicators of cleanliness of river water  
Quality of river water is measured by the parameter s of Total Coliforms, Faecal 
Coliforms, pH, Dissolved Oxygen, Biochemical Oxygen  Demand, Chemical Oxygen 
Demand, Total Suspended Solids and Total Dissolved Solids. A brief description of 
these parameters is provided in Table-4.1  below: 
Table-4.1: Description of water quality parameters  
Parameter Description 
Total Coliforms 
Total Coliforms counts give a general indication of  the sanitary 
condition of a water supply and it includes bacteria that are found in 
the soil, in water that has been influenced by surf ace water, and in 
human or animal waste. 
Faecal Coliforms 
Faecal Coliforms are the group of the total colifor ms that are 
considered to be present specifically in the gut an d faeces of warm-
blooded animals. 
pH 
pH is a figure between 0 and 14 defining how acidic or basic a body 
of water is. The lower the number, the more acidic the water is. The 
higher the number, the more basic it is. 
Dissolved Oxygen Dissolved Oxygen (DO) is the amount of oxygen that is present in 
water. 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) is the amount of di ssolved 
oxygen needed by bacteria in decomposing the biodeg radable 
organic wastes present in water. 
Chemical Oxygen Demand 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) measures the amount of  oxygen 
required to oxidise organic (biodegradable and non- biodegradable) 
and oxidizable inorganic compounds in a water sample. 
Total Suspended Solids Total Suspended Solids (TSS) refer to waterborne pa rticles that 
exceed two microns in size. 
Total Dissolved Solids Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) refer to any particle that is smaller than 
two microns. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
36  
4.2 Ganga water quality monitoring network  
UKPCB monitors the water quality of river Ganga and  its tributaries through its eight 
monitoring locations (Vishnuprayag, Nandprayag, Kar nprayag, Rudraprayag, 
Uttarkashi, Devprayag, Rishikesh and Haridwar) with  33 sampling points. This 
monitoring is currently carried out under a Namami Gange project named 
‘Strengthening of Laboratories’. Audit utilized data of UKPCB to analyse water quality 
parameters of river Ganga.  
4.3 Ganga water quality during audit period 
Pollution in river water can generally be gauged through the fact whether it is fit for use 
in a specific purpose or not. Central Pollution Con trol Board (CPCB)  has  classified 
river water quality into five categories as detailed in Appendix-4.1 . 
Audit examined data of above eight monitoring locations with respect to eight sampling 
points 
1 for four parameters (TC, pH, DO and BOD) relevant for Class A, B and C of 
water i.e.  potability of water. The results are shown in Table-4.2  below: 
Table-4.2: Ganga Water quality during audit period 
Place (downstream) Category of Water Quality of Ganga 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Vishnuprayag Not measured A  A  
Nandprayag Not measured A  A 
Karnaprayag Not measured A A 
Rudraprayag A A A A A A 
Uttarkashi Not measured A A 
Devprayag A A A A A A 
Lakkarghat Rishikesh Data not 
available B A A B B 
Haridwar- Har Ki Pauri B B B B B B 
A category - Drinking Water Source without conventional treatmen t but after disinfection,  
B category -  Outdoor bathing (Organised), C category  - Drinking water source after conventional 
treatment and disinfection, D category -  Propagation of Wildlife and Fisheries, and  
E category- Irrigation, Industrial Cooling, Controlled Waste Disposal.   
Source: Data provided by UKPCB. 
The details indicate that the water quality up to D evprayag is of A category. In 
Rishikesh, the water quality of river Gange remained in B category from 2019 to 2023, 
with the exception of COVID-19 period (2020 & 2021) , when it improved to A 
category. The river water quality in Haridwar remai ned consistently in B category 
throughout the audit period. 
The audit also compared 10-year data of total colif orm at Har-ki-Pauri, Haridwar, and 
Devprayag. It shows that the level of total colifor m increased 32 times (as of 
October 2023) between Devprayag and Haridwar (a distance of 93 km), as depicted in  
Chart-4.1  below: 
                                                           
1 Downstream of above seven monitoring locations and  Har Ki Pauri at Haridwar. 

Chapter-4: Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga 
37  
Chart-4.1: Comparison of Total Coliform data over the last 10 years at Haridwar and Devprayag 
 
4.4 Quality monitoring of treated effluent of STPs  
The CPCB monitors the quality of sewage treatment i n STPs on a quarterly basis. It 
compares the tested parameters of treated sewage against two standards: those notified 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), GoI and 
those set by the NGT. Additionally, the UKPCB monitors the quality of STP discharge 
according to MoEF&CC norms on a monthly basis. 
A comparative summary of both the norms is given in Table-4.3  below: 
Table-4.3: Norms of Treated Discharge of STPs as per MoEF&CC and NGT 
Parameter  Limit/ range set by MoEF&CC  Limit/ range set by NGT 
pH 6.5-9.0 5.5-9.0 
BOD 30mg/l <10mg/l  
TSS <100mg/l < 20mg/l  
Faecal coliform  <1000MPN/100ml desirable <100MPN/100ml  
permissible < 230 MPN/100 ml  
COD 
Not notified 
< 50mg/l 
Nitrogen-Total < 10 mg/l 
Phosphorous-Total < 1.0 mg/l 
Audit noticed following shortcomings in the monitoring of STP effluent discharge: 
4.4.1 Obsolete monitoring of treated discharge of S TPs by UKPCB 
Audit found that UKPCB completely overlooked norms set by NGT and evaluated the 
discharge quality of STPs vis-à-vis  norms of MoEF&CC which were not accepted by 
the NGT. Besides, the parameters of COD, Nitrogen-Total and Phosphorous-Total were 
not even measured. Hence, monitoring of discharge o f STPs by UKPCB was obsolete 
in view of NGT norms. 
The Government has stated (May 2024) that the stand ards of MoEF&CC are still 
applicable to the STPs because MoEF&CC had preferre d (December 2020) to appeal 
before Supreme Court. Procurement for instruments t o measure Total Nitrogen and 
Phosphorus has been initiated after approval from t he competent authority for which 
tendering process will be initiated and measurement of COD has been started from the 
month of April 2024.  
26 
34 
85.45 92.22 
80 
60 
90 
63 
79 
130 
0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 4
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
Oct-14 Oct-15 Oct-16 Oct-17 Oct-18 Oct-19 Oct-20 Oct-21 Oct -22 Oct-23 
Total Coliform at Har-Ki-Pauri, Haridwar Total Coliform at Sangam, Devprayag 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
38  
The Government reply is not acceptable because NGT is a statutory body empowered 
to pass orders and judgements under the NGT Act, 2010. Its decisions are binding and 
compulsorily enforceable. Even CPCB, the controllin g body of UKPCB, evaluated 
STPs on both norms i.e.  NGT norms as well as MoEF&CC norms. Besides, all n ew 
STPs in Uttarakhand are constructed in compliance o f norms set by NGT. Hence, 
overlooking NGT norms during evaluation of performance of STPs was not proper.   
4.4.2 Poor quality treatment of sewage by STPs  
CPCB conducts testing of treated effluents of STPs on quarterly basis. Its testing reports 
revealed substandard treatment of sewage and non-compliance of norms in most of the 
44 STPs. Summary of the latest available quarterly testing reports from CPCB and 
UKPCB for these 44 STPs located in Ganga front towns is detailed in Table-4.4  below: 
Table-4.4 : Compliance Status of STPs according to MoEF&CC and NGT 
Period STPs 
inspected  
Complying 
with NGT 
Norms 
Not complying  
with NGT 
Norms 
Complying 
with 
MoEF&CC 
Norms 
Not complying 
with 
MoEF&CC 
Norms 
Jan-March 2023 44 2  05 3  35 12  28 
April-July 2023 44 4  05 5  35 09  31 
Aug-Nov 2023 44 6  03 7  36 06  33 
Source: CPCB quarterly reports of Uttarakhand.  
As evident from the above table, the majority of in spected STPs did not comply with 
NGT norms as well as standards set by MoEF&CC. The level of non-compliance 
persisted throughout three quarters and was acute a s depicted in Table-4.5 (A)  and  
4.5 (B)  below: 
Table-4.5 (A): Details of Non-Compliant STPs according to MoEF&CC 
Parameter and norm Range of non-compliance (Number of STPs) 
Jan-March 2023 April-July 2023 Aug-Nov 2023 
BOD < 30mg/l 42-1237 (06) 37-1237 (09)  43–702 (10) 
TSS < 100mg/l 113-909 (03) 113-909 (04) 129–354 (02) 
COD not mentioned  Not notified Not notified Not notified 
Faecal coliform: <1000 MPN/ 
100 ml 1700-24 X 10 
11  (28) 2000-13 X 
10 11 (31) 
14x10 2-17 X 10 8 
(31) 
                                                           
2 Four STPs were Non-Operational during inspection b y CPCB: i) Old Suspension bridge STP, 
Gopeshwar Chamoli, ii) Forest nalla STP, Nandprayag, iii) STP Anoop Negi Memorial Scho ol, 
Rudraprayag and iv) Tekla Biodigester STP, Uttarkashi. 
3 i) Chamoli Ghat STP, ii) Pokhari Bend STP Chamoli,  Pokhari iii) Pokhari 1.08 STP Joshimath,  
iv) Ward 1&3 STP-05 Karnaprayag and v) one MLD STP near ITI Srinagar. 
4 Four STPs were Non-Operational during inspection b y CPCB: i) Old Suspension bridge STP, 
Gopeshwar Chamoli, ii) Forest nalla  STP, Nandprayag, iii) STP Anoop Negi Memorial Scho ol, 
Rudraprayag and iv) Tekla Biodigester STP, Uttarkashi. 
5 i) Chamoli Ghat STP, ii) Pokhari Bend STP Chamoli,  Pokhari, iii) STP Joshimath, iv) Ward 1&3 
STP Karnaprayag and v) one MLD STP Srinagar.  
6 Five STPs were non-Operational during inspection b y CPCB: i) Badrinath 0.01 MLD STP, Badrinath 
ii) Old Suspension Bridge STP, Gopeshwar Chamoli ii i) Sangam nalla  STP, Nandprayag iv) BRO 
Bridge STP 04 Karnaprayag and v) Tekla STP Uttarkashi. 
7 i) Badrinath 1.0 MLD, Badrinath ii) Pokhari Bend S TP, Chamoli-Gopeshwar iii) Marwari STP, 
Joshimath. 

Chapter-4: Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga 
39  
Table-4.5 (B): Details of Non-Compliant STPs according to NGT Norms 
Parameter and norm Range of non-compliance (Number of STPs) 
Jan-March 2023 April-July 2023 Aug-Nov 2023 
BOD <10mg/l 11-1237 (20) 11-1237 (18) 12–702 (23) 
TSS< 20mg/l 21-909 (15) 21-909 (21) 23–354 (14) 
COD< 50mg/l 52-1803 (20) 52-1803 (17) 52–1157 (23)  
Faecal coliform: desirable<100MPN/ 
100ml permissible< 230 MPN/100 ml 450-24 X 10 
11  (31) 450 -13 X 10 11 (34) 680-17 X 10 8 (32)  
In the exit conference (May 2024), the Secretary in structed all officials involved to 
ensure that STPs meet all designated criteria for treated effluent set by MoEF&CC. 
4.4.3 Non-accreditation of UKPCB laboratories  
The UKPCB operates three laboratories: the Central Laboratory in Dehradun, the 
Regional Laboratory in Roorkee, and the Regional La boratory in Kashipur. In June 
2018, the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) s anctioned a project for 
‘Strengthening of Laboratories of UKPCB’ at an esti mated cost of 
₹ 16.21 crore. The 
duration of the project was set for five years from  the date of the sanction order. The 
laboratories were required to achieve NABL  accreditation within a specified timeframe 
to ensure the quality assessment and control of the monitored data. NABL accreditation 
enhances confidence in the testing and calibration reports issued by the laboratories, 
emphasizing accuracy and reliability. 
Examination of UKPCB records revealed that it utilized only 
₹ 5.55 crore (34 per cent  
of the sanctioned amount by NMCG) over the five-yea r period for operating its 
laboratories. Despite being a regulatory body, UKPC B did not apply for NABL 
accreditation for its laboratories during the proje ct period. After the expiration of the 
original project period, UKPCB applied for NABL acc reditation for its Central 
Laboratory in September 2023, but it had not yet be en awarded. In the absence of the 
required accreditation, the results of testing conducted by UKPCB lacked the reliability 
that an accredited laboratory could ensure. 
The Government replied (May 2024) that NABL accreditation for central laboratory of 
UKPCB was currently underway, with the final assessment scheduled for June 2024.  
Reply confirms that UKPCB could not obtain NABL accreditation in scheduled target 
time for all its laboratories, even after six years of sanction. 
4.4.4 UKPCB testing was not reliable 
Audit observed significant discrepancies between th e test results from the UKPCB 
laboratory and those from the CPCB laboratory. This  discrepancy was evident in the 
testing results of the 68 mld STP at Jagjeetpur, Ha ridwar (the largest STP in the state) 
conducted in March 2023, May 2023, and October 2023 . During these periods, both 
CPCB and UKPCB tested the treated effluent from the 68 mld STP, and the results are 
shown in Table-4.6 below: 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
40  
Table-4.6: Test results for 68 MLD STP according to UKPCB and CPCB 
Parameter 
UKPCB  
March 
2023  
CPCB  
March  
2023  
UKPCB  
May 
2023  
CPCB 
May 
2023  
UKPCB  
October 
2023  
CPCB  
October  
2023  
BOD  10  03  6.4  8  9.6  4  
TSS 08  below detection 
limit  07  25  10  below detection 
limit  
Faecal 
coliform  58  14 X 10 3  58  17 X 10 3  170  39 X 10 3  
From above table, we can see that test results of a ll parameters (BOD, TSS and faecal 
coliform) were different in UKPCB and CPCB testing.  Similar discrepancies were 
observed in the test results for other STPs as well. 
In the exit conference (May 2024), UKPCB official stated that variations in the results 
of samples of treated effluents tested by UKPCB and CPCB might be due to differences 
in sampling methods and the timing of sample collection. 
The reply is not acceptable because, although STP discharge results can vary daily, the 
significant discrepancies between the results from the CPCB laboratory and those from 
the UKPCB laboratory raise questions on efficacy of UKPCB testing.   
4.5 Online continuous effluent monitoring system 
Ganga Tarang web portal has been deployed by NMCG a s an Online Continuous 
Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS) which records pa rameters of treated sewage 
being discharged from STPs. State Mission for Clean  Ganga (SMCG) and 
implementing agencies utilize it for monitoring and manual data entry respectively.  
Audit noticed following shortcomings in functioning of that portal: 
 Manual data entry of parameters is also allowed in Ganga Tarang Portal. 
However, there was no system through which SMCG cou ld check authenticity 
of such manual data entry by STP operators ;  
 Ganga Tarang is not open for access to general public. It requires departmental 
ID/password and does not show any data without ID/password. Hence, it could 
not achieve the objective of connecting common peop le with the affairs of 
Ganga cleanliness through STPs ; 
 During audit of selected O&M agencies and physical inspection of STPs, 
records of calibration of OCEMS components were not  provided to Audit. At 
SMCG too, there was no record containing details of  such calibration. Hence, 
calibration of OCEMS components was not ensured.  
Thus, OCEMS was not functioning in a proper manner.  Audit noticed that the State 
Government/SMCG did not take any initiative with NMCG to get the portal developed 
in such a way which could have enabled the respecti ve authority to verify the 
authenticity of the manual data entered by the STP operators which was a critical gap 
that needed to be addressed.  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that as per  recommendations of Audit, 
SMCG, Uttarakhand could seek approval of NMCG to offer the access to Ganga Tarang 
portal to general public. Regarding manual data ent ry, it was stated that manual data 
entry was allowed to integrate offline STPs (which do not have OCEMS), so that data 
of general parameters of these STPs could be fed into Ganga Tarang portal. 

Chapter-4: Water Quality Monitoring of River Ganga 
41  
4.6 Recommendations 
1.  National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibr ation Laboratories 
accreditation for all its laboratories may be ensur ed by Uttarakhand Pollution 
Control Board.  
2.  Shortcomings noticed in Ganga Tarang portal i.e. on line continuous effluent 
monitoring system for Sewage Treatment Plants may be rectified. 
3.  The issue of Sewage Treatment Plants doing poor qua lity treatment of water 
may be taken up by the Department with the respecti ve monitoring agencies & 
contractors to ensure that sewage treatment plants meet all designated criteria 
for treated effluent . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-5 
Financial Management &  
Procurement of Works  

43  
Chapter-5 
 
Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
Audit noticed that during the tendering process, th e implementing agency relaxed the 
stringent tertiary treatment standards, established  by IIT, Roorkee i.e.  faecal coliform 
of zero MPN per 100 ml was relaxed to 100 MPN per 1 00 ml, desirable limit as per 
norms of National Green Tribunal (NGT). Accordingly, the contracts were awarded for 
construction/upgradation of Sewage Treatment Plants  (STPs) based on the relaxed 
standards. There were also instances of inadequate recovery of liquidated damages, 
diversion of funds, non-renewal of bank guarantees, and non-deduction of royalty and 
labour cess etc .  
5.1 Availability and Utilisation of funds 
Namami Gange is a 100 per cent  centrally funded scheme. The National Mission for 
Clean Ganga (NMCG), a society constituted under the  provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and responsible for implemen tation of the Namami Gange 
programme, releases funds to the State Mission for Clean Ganga (SMCG) on a lump 
sum basis for the projects 
1 approved by it. For earlier projects related to National Ganga 
River Basin Authority State share includes establis hment cost (in a 70:30 sharing 
pattern) as well as land cost released by State Govt. For forestry interventions, funds are 
provided to Forest Department. During the period fr om 2018-19 to 2022-23, the status 
of availability and utilisation of funds under vari ous components is given in Table-5.1  
below:  
Table-5.1: Availability and Utilisation of funds 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
balance 
Funds received during the year 
Total 
funds 
available  
Funds 
utilized  
Funds 
returned 
to 
NMCG 
Unspent 
balance Central 
share 
State 
Share for 
establishment 
cost 
Interest 
and 
others 
Total 
1 2 3 4 5 6=3+4+5  7=2+6 8 9 10=7-(8+9) 
2018-19  79.46 320.57  5.50  1.90  327.97  407.43  378.06  0.13  29.24  
2019-20  29.24 104.31  0.30  0.97  105.58  134.82  108.35  0.12  26.35  
2020-21  26.35 126.83  1.27  1.39  129.49  155.84  133.51  0.32  22.01  
2021-22  22.01 153.16  0.62  2.21  155.99 178.00 158.81 5.50  13.69  
2022-23  13.69 90.00  5.25  0.95  96.20 109.89 94.44  15.27  0.18 
Total  794.87  12.94  7.42  815.23  985.98  873.17  21.34   
Source: SMCG, Project Management Unit and PD, Forestry Interventions for Ganga Namami Gange. 
Audit noticed following shortcomings in management of Namami Gange funds: 
5.1.1 Parking of fund by Implementing Agencies 
As per Rule 230 (8) of General Financial Rules 2017 , all interests, or other earnings 
against Grants in aid or advances (other than reimb ursement) released to any Grantee 
                                                           
1 Projects related to Interception & Diversion and c onstruction of STPs and River Front Development 
(Construction of Bathing Ghat and Crematoria). 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
44  
institution should be mandatorily remitted to the C onsolidated Funds of India (CFI) 
immediately after finalization of the accounts. NMC G requested (December 2020, 
January 2021 and April 2022) SMCG to surrender the bank interest amount to NMCG 
at the earliest for deposit into the CFI. SMCG issued (February 2020, August 2021 and 
November 2021) instructions to all Implementing Agencies (IAs) that once projects are 
completed and handed over to maintenance agencies, unspent bank balances along with 
interest lying in their bank accounts were to be su rrendered to SMCG for onward 
surrender to NMCG for deposit into the CFI. 
Audit noticed that IAs did not surrender unspent ba lance of 
₹ 1.92 crore 2 and bank 
interest amounting to ₹ 0.59 crore 3 to SMCG and parked the same in division’s bank 
account. It was in violation of above mentioned rules.  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that it had instructed all agencies to promptly 
return any unused funds, including accrued bank int erest. Upon receipt of these funds 
from the respective executing agencies, the same would be surrendered to NMCG. 
5.2 Issues related to Tertiary Treatment Process 
Tertiary treatment of wastewater is the third stage  (after secondary treatment) of the 
wastewater treatment and is also known as an advanc ed treatment 
4. As per the 
conditions outlined in the Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction 
(AA&ES) provided by NMCG for tertiary treatment projects: 
1.  The bid document must be technology neutral. Bidder s should have the 
flexibility to choose any suitable technology, prov ided it achieves the desired 
treatment outcomes. 
2.  All conditions recommended by the Appraisal Agency (IIT , Roorkee) in their 
appraisal report must be adhered to by the State Government and Pey Jal Nigam. 
The outcome parameters of water quality of tertiary  treated effluent were set by 
IIT, Roorkee during appraisal of project Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).  
                                                           
2 PM, UJN , Ganga Rishikesh: ` 0.39 crore; PM, UJN , Ganga Srinagar: ` 0.09 crore; EE, ID, Haridwar: 
` 0.05 crore; EE, ID, New Tehri: ` 0.02 crore; EE, ID, Srinagar: ` 0.02 crore; EE, ID, Uttarkashi: 
` 0.96 crore and UPDCC: ` 0.39 crore (Total: ` 1.92 crore). 
3 PM (Mech) , UJN , Ganga Haridwar: ` 0.07 crore; PM, UJN, Ganga, Haridwar: ` 0.03 crore; PM, 
UJN, Ganga, Srinagar: ` 0.03 crore; PM, UJN, Ganga, Gopeshwar: ` 0.06 crore; EE, MD, UJS, 
Ganga, Haridwar:  ` 0.08 crore; EE, MD, UJS, Devprayag: ` 0.01 crore;  EE, MD, UJS, Rudraprayag: 
` 0.0005 crore; EE, MD, UJS, Pauri: ` 0.004 crore;  EE, MD, UJS, Karnaprayag: ` 0.0009 crore; EE, 
MD, UJS, Gopeshwar: ` 0.01 crore; EE, ID, Haridwar: ` 0.02 crore; EE, ID, Srinagar: ` 0.11 crore; 
UPDCC: ` 0.03 crore and UKPCB: ` 0.13 crore (Total: ` 0.59 crore). 
4 Tertiary treatment includes processes like filtrati on, ion exchange, activated carbon absorption, 
electro dialysis, nitrification, and denitrification.  

Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
45  
In Haridwar, two STPs (68 MLD STP Jagjeetpur and 14 MLD STP Sarai) were planned 
to be established as tertiary treatment STPs. Besid es, two more STPs (27 MLD 
Jagjeetpur and 18 MLD Sarai) have been upgraded to tertiary treatment level by 
installing additional equipment/plant. The details of these STPs are given in Table-5.2  
below: 
Table-5.2: Details of STPs planned for Tertiary Treatment Plant 
Place Capacity Commissioning Year  Treatment Status 
 Jagjeetpur 
27 MLD 2009 Upgraded to Tertiary Treatment Plant (TTP)in 
2017 
68 MLD 2020 Approved for establishment as TTP, currently 
operates with secondary treatment 
 Sarai 14 MLD 2020 Approved for establishment as TTP, currently 
operates with secondary treatment 
18 MLD 2014 Upgraded to TTP in 2017 
Audit noticed following irregularities regarding es tablishment and upgradation of 
tertiary treatment STPs. 
5.2.1 Establishment of Secondary Treatment STPs und er the name of Tertiary 
Treatment Plants 
In 2016, the implementation agency Uttarakhand Jal Nigam 5 (UJN) prepared a proposal 
to establish a 68 MLD STP in Jagjeetpur and a 14 MLD STP in Sarai, both with tertiary 
treatment standards. The project's DPRs were vetted  by IIT, Roorkee (November and 
December 2016). IIT, Roorkee established stringent norms for tertiary treatment, 
including a faecal coliform standard of zero MPN per 100 ml, which was 230 MPN per 
100 ml in the DPRs, permissible limit as per norms of NGT. The DPRs with stringent 
norms, were subsequently approved by NMCG in March 2017.  
Audit noticed that during the tendering process, th e implementing agency relaxed the 
tertiary treatment standards, for instance, the fae cal coliform requirement was relaxed 
to 100 MPN per 100 ml, desirable limit as per norms of NGT. Accordingly, the contract 
was awarded (October 2017) for construction of two STPs based on the relaxed norms 
of 100 MPN per 100 ml.   
It was further noticed during audit that current performance of these STPs falls short of 
even the relaxed secondary treatment norms specifie d in the agreement, as given in 
Table-5.3  below: 
Table-5.3: Performance of STPs  
Parameter 
Tertiary 
Treatment 
Norm as per IIT 
Secondary Treatment 
Norms (Agreement 
with Contractor) 
Performance of 
68 MLD STP 
Performance of 
14 MLD STP 
TSS 5 mg/L ≤10 mg/L 25 14 
Faecal 
Coliform 0 MPN/ 100 ML ≤100 MPN/ 100 ML 17 X 10 
3 22 X 10 3 
Note: Performance of STPs has been taken from CPCB testing report April- July 2023. 
                                                           
5 PM , Construction and Maintenance Division , UJN , Ganga , Haridwar. 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
46  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that both t he STPs were constructed for 
achieving the treatment standards as specified in DPR and as per NGT norms. 
The reply is not acceptable because the faecal coli form standard of Zero MPN per 
100 ml, as specified by IIT, Roorkee was not follow ed during construction of these 
STPs. 
5.2.2 Upgradation of STPs to Tertiary Treatment Pla nts  
The implementation agency Uttarakhand Jal Nigam submitted a proposal in May 2016 
for upgradation of existing 27 MLD STP (Jagjeetpur)  and 18 MLD STP (Sarai) to 
Tertiary Treatment Plants. The project's DPR, vetted by IIT, Roorkee, (November 2016) 
set stringent norms for tertiary treatment, includi ng a faecal coliform standard of zero 
MPN per 100 ml, which was 100 MPN per 100 ml in the  DPRs, desirable limit as per 
norms of NGT. The DPRs with stringent norms were subsequently approved by NMCG 
in March 2017.  
Audit noticed that during the tendering process, th e implementing agency continued 
with the faecal coliform norm of 100 MPN per 100 ml  and accordingly awarded the 
contract (October 2017) for upgradation of two STPs.  
Further, in its proposal, the implementation agency had cited Nilothi STP in Delhi as a 
model for upgrading the STPs in Haridwar to tertiar y treatment. The Nilothi STP 
operates on tertiary treatment and was found to achieve a faecal coliform level of zero 
MPN per 100 ml during NGT inspection. Despite this,  the stringent tertiary norms set 
by IIT, Roorkee were disregarded and relaxed during the tendering stage.  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that perfor mance was relaxed in the bid 
document as per then prevailing NGT norms.  
The reply is not acceptable because the faecal coli form standard of zero MPN 
per 100 ml, as specified by IIT, Roorkee was not followed during upgradation of these 
STPs. 
5.3 Non-operation of master control station 
A Master Control Station (MCS) was built for real-time monitoring of the 18 Sewerage 
Pumping Station in Haridwar at a cost of 
₹ 0.40 crore by Project Manager, UJN, 
Haridwar and handed over to Uttarakhand Jal Sanathan (UJS), Haridwar. During audit, 
it was found that the MCS was not operational since January 2022. Executive Engineer 
(UJS-Ganga), Haridwar informed that it was not operated due to insufficient manpower 
and paucity of funds. Hence, due to non-operation o f MCS, all 18 Sewerage Pumping 
Stations in Haridwar remained unmonitored by technology in this period.  
The State Government accepted the above facts (May 2024) and stated that MCS was 
not running due to shortage of skilled software engineer. Now trained person has been 
deployed and MCS system is operational and all Sewe rage Pumping Station are being 
monitored by MCS. 

Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
47  
5.4 Commencement of work before obtaining technical  approval from 
competent authority 
Para 318 of Financial Handbook V olume VI explicitly provides for obtaining technical 
sanction from competent authority before work is commenced. 
Audit noticed that ghat/crematoria development works were executed by six Irrigation 
divisions 6 under Namami Gange program during the audit period. Out of six divisions, 
four divisions commenced the Construction works bef ore getting technical sanction 
from competent authority (as detailed in Appendix-5.1). 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that due to importance and urgency of work 
and upcoming monsoon, tenders of some works were in vited, and work was started in 
the anticipation of the technical sanction from the competent authority. It further added 
that technical sanction was obtained from the competent authority at initial stage of the 
works.  
The reply is not acceptable due to the significant delay in obtaining technical sanction 
for all works, which extended from one month to eight months. Moreover, compliance 
with the applicable rules regarding technical sanction was also neglected. 
5.5 Excess expenditure on project preparation and s upervision charges 
The extent guidelines for Namami Gange Programme pr ovide that a maximum of 
four per cent  of basic capital cost as per AA&ES is admissible t owards each DPR 
preparation and project supervision. If the agreeme nt cost is lower than the AA&ES 
cost, the four per cent  limit will be applicable on the agreement cost. Expenses on each 
project preparation and project supervision will be limited to the four per cent  of lower 
of AA&ES/agreement cost. 
Audit noticed that three Project Managers of Peyjal Nigam (Ganga divisions) incurred 
expenditure of 
₹ 1.83 crore ( ₹ 1.05 crore 7 on project preparation and ₹ 0.78 crore 8 on 
supervision charges) in excess of above ceiling fro m project funds which was in 
violation of instructions of the NMCG. This excess expenditure was due to all actual 
expenditure on project preparation and supervision charges being borne on project 
funds. Details of excess expenditure are given in Table-5.4 below: 
Table-5.4: Excess expenditure on project preparation and supervision charges 
(₹ in lakh) 
Imple-
menting 
Agency 
Project 
Sanctioned 
capital 
cost 
Agreed 
capital 
cost 
As per 
provision 
Actual 
expenditure 
Excess 
expenditure 
PP@4%  PS @4%  PP PS PP PS 
UJN , 
Haridwar 
14 MLD STP Sarai 2,315.42 4,140.00 92.62 92.62 128. 86 151.45  36.24  58.83  
68 MLD STP 
Jagjeetpur 10,209.42 9,930.00 397.20 397.20 444.63 - 47.43 
 - 
Total 83.67  58.83  
                                                           
6  EE, ID, Haridwar, Rudraprayag, Tehri, Tharali, Sr inagar and Uttarkashi. 
7 Project preparation [PM , UJN , Haridwar: ` 0.84 crore { ` 0.36 crore +  ` 0.48 crore} + PM , UJN , 
Srinagar: ` 0.15 crore and PM , UJN , Chamoli: ` 0.06 crore] (Total: ` 1.05 crore).   
8 Project supervision (PM , UJN , Haridwar: ` 0.59 crore + PM , UJN , Chamoli: ` 0.19 crore) (Total: 
` 0.78 crore). 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
48  
Imple-
menting 
Agency 
Project 
Sanctioned 
capital 
cost 
Agreed 
capital 
cost 
As per 
provision 
Actual 
expenditure 
Excess 
expenditure 
PP@4%  PS @4%  PP PS PP PS 
UJN , 
Srinagar 
3.5 MLD STP 
upgradation 
Srinagar 
405.28 350.00 14.00 14.00 27.02 - 13.02 
 - 
I&D with six STPs 
Rudraprayag 727.31 629.30 25.17 25.17 26.62 - 1.45 - 
I&D with two 
STPs Srikot 395.83 317.50 12.70 12.70 13.45 - 0.75 - 
Total  15.22   
UJN ,  
Gopeshwar  
I&D with two 
STPs Badrinath 934.73 654.88 26.20 26.20 32.06 29.67 
 5.86 3.47 
I&D with two 
STPs Joshimath 3,706.76 2,921.03 116.84 116.84 93.47 129.96 
 - 13.12  
I&D with five 
STPs Chamoli 2,912.11 2,710.80 108.43 108.43 108.43 
 111.19  - 2.76 
Total  5.86 19.35  
Grand Total 104.75  78.18  
PP or PS @ four per cent of (capital cost as per sanction or as per agreement whichever is less).  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that expenditure on project preparation and 
supervision charges was as per actual expenses.  
The reply is not acceptable as they overlooked the condition of limiting the expenses to 
the lower of AA&ES/agreement cost.  
5.6 Short recovery of Liquidated damages 
In compliance of Rule 43 of Uttarakhand Procurement Rules, 2017, specific provision 
is included in every contract for liquidated damages to be imposed upon the contractor 
for delay in completion of work. As per agreements, 0.50 per cent  of the contract price 
per week was to be recovered from contractors as li quidated damage for delay in 
completion of works subject to maximum ceiling of 10 per cent  of the contract price. 
Audit noticed following instances where liquidated damage was imposed less on 
discretionary basis: 
Contractors did not complete three works related to  sewage projects in three IAs 
9 in 
due time. The works were completed late by 530 to 1,216 days. Divisions imposed only 
₹ 0.89 crore against required liquidated damages of ₹ 20.59 crore. Thus, Department 
short recovered liquidated damages of ₹ 19.70 crore on agreed contract value of 
₹ 205.88 crore (as detailed in Appendix-5.2).  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that due to Covid-19 pandemic, land sliding 
and excess rainfall, schemes could not be completed within stipulated time.  
The State Government's reply is not acceptable, as all construction activities related to 
‘Namami Gange’ projects were officially permitted during the Covid-19 period and thus 
the pandemic does not justify the delay. Moreover, payment to contractors without 
                                                           
9 PM, UJN , Ganga Rishikesh, Srinagar and Gopeshwar. 

Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
49  
imposing liquidated damages for delays due to monso on and intermittent rainfall was 
unjustified, as such seasonal conditions are alread y accounted for in the project 
timelines, as per various government orders. Contra ctors are required to plan and 
mobilize resources to complete works on time despit e seasonal hindrances. 
Additionally, the cited reasons land sliding and ex cess rainfall do not justify delays of 
530 to 1,216 days. Hence, liquidated damages should have been recovered as per rules.   
5.7 Lack of insurance cover for work under Namami G ange 
Uttarakhand is a hilly state with severe rainfalls damaging numerous infrastructure 
projects/assets every year. Natural disaster during construction period of a project can 
unexpectedly raise cost of project. To ward off suc h unexpected cost escalation, 
government has included compulsory option of insura nce in general conditions of 
contract and special condition of contract. The contractor at his own cost shall provide 
insurance cover. If the contractor does not provide  the required insurance policies and 
certificates within stipulated time, the employer m ay affect the insurance and recover 
the premium from the contractor. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that contractors under  three IAs did not buy/renew 
insurance cover for works under nine agreements
10 . The cost of these agreement was 
₹ 239.01 crore. It was not only against the general conditions of contract provisions but 
also exposed the schemes towards the risk of being affected by natural disasters and 
resulting in cost escalation on this count. The exa mple of property loss, in the case of 
damage to STP near Anoop Negi School in Rudraprayag and loss of human lives in the 
case of electrocution in the Chamoli STP (Case 1 and 2 of para 2.6 of Chapter 2)  
highlight the need for having proper insurance of projects. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that as per  conditions of contract bond, the 
insurance to be provided by contractor should be va lid up to the end date of defect 
liability period.  
The reply is not acceptable because all the agreeme nts had been executed with the 
operation and maintenance (O&M) for 15 years. O&M p eriod of all these STPs are 
running, and defect liability period is also still going on. So, work of O&M should also 
be insured.   
5.8 Bank guarantee not renewed 
As per general conditions of contract, the performance security shall be provided to the 
employer no later than the date specified in the letter of acceptance and shall be issued 
in an amount and form by a bank or surety acceptable to the employer and denominated 
                                                           
10  UJN , Rishikesh : (1) 18/GM/2017-18 ( ₹ 4.12 crore), (2) 20/GM/2017-18( ₹ 67.02 crore),  
(3) 01/GM/2021-22 ( ₹ 6.38 crore); UJN , Gopeshwar: (4) 01/GM/2016-17 ( ₹ 1.40 crore),  
(5) 14/GM/2017-18 ( ₹ 10.48 crore); UJN , Srinagar: (6) 10/GM/2017-18( ₹ 3.77 crore),  
(7) 02/GM/2019-20 ( ₹ 6.70 crore); UJN , Gopeshwar/Srinagar: (8) 15/GM/2017-18 ( ₹ 69.03 crore),  
(9) 19/GM/2017-18 ( ₹ 70.11 crore) (Total: ₹ 239.01 crore). 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
50  
in Indian Rupees. The performance security shall be valid until a date 60 days from the 
date of expiry of defects liability period. Further , as per para-52.2, the performance 
security shall be released to the contractor after the completion of defects liability 
period and also when the Engineer has certified that all defects notified by the engineer 
to the contractor before the end of the period have been corrected. 
Further as per contract data, the defects liability  period is 12 months from the date of 
certification of completion of the whole work. 
During scrutiny of records of IAs, it was seen that  the bank guarantees of three 
agreements amounting to 
₹ 2.18 crore 11  submitted for performance security had been 
expired and were not renewed by the contractors. Since O&M of these agreements are 
in running, IAs should take fresh/validated bank guarantee from the contractors. 
The State Government accepted (May 2024) the fact and stated that contractors (related 
to UJS/UJN, Gopeshwar) had been asked for submissio n of renewed bank guarantee. 
In the meantime, executing agency has withheld the payments of O&M till submission 
of bank guarantee. Hence, fresh bank guarantee was awaited. In case of agreement 
related to Haridwar, it was informed that bank guar antee was renewed (in February 
2024) up to October 2030. 
5.9 Additional performance security not deposited  
Uttarakhand Government has fixed (January 2013) add itional performance security 
12  
for accepting the tender at the rate lower than the departmental rate in the construction 
works. 
Audit noticed that General Manager (GM), Ganga ente red (September 2017 and 
May 2018) into two agreements 
13  with contractors for construction of STPs. Agreement 
No.02/GM/2018-19 was executed at 7.05 per cent  below of estimated cost whereas 
agreement No.11/GM/2017-18 was executed at 10.13 per cent  below. As per above 
government order, amount of ₹ 4.76 crore 14  and ₹ 3.10 crore 15  should have been taken 
as additional performance security from respective contractors but it was not taken. 
Details are given in Table-5.5 below: 
 
                                                           
11  01/GM/2018-19 (UJS Gopeshwar): ` 0.03 crore, 14/GM/2017-18 (UJN/UJS , Gopeshwar): 
` 0.39 crore and 17/GM/2017-18 (UJS Haridwar): ` 1.76 crore (Total: ` 2.18 crore)  
12  The amount of additional performance security shal l be worked out as follows:  
(i)  upto five  per cent  below the estimated cost: No additional performance security and  
(ii)  from five per cent  below to 15 per cent  below the estimated cost: an additional performanc e 
security of 0.5 per cent of the estimated cost for every one per cent  below the estimated cost. 
13  (1) Agreement No.-02/GM/2018-19 contract amount- ` 126.37 crore of UJN , Rishikesh (estimated 
cost: ` 135.96 crore) (2) Agreement No.-11/GM/2017-18 contr act amount- ` 55.78 crore of UJN , 
Haridwar (estimated cost: ` 62.07 crore). 
14  Agreement No.-02/GM/2018-19 estimated cost - ` 135.96 crore ( ` 135.96 crore X 0.50 per cent  X 
7 = ₹ 4.76 crore). 
15  Agreement No.-11/GM/2017-18 estimated cost - ` 62.07 crore ( ` 62.07 crore X 0.50 per cent  X 10 
= ₹ 3.10 crore).  

Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
51  
Table-5.5: Non deposit of additional performance security by contractors  
Sl. 
No Agreement No. Estimated Cost 
(₹ in crore) 
Rate of agreement 
(in  per cent ) 
Add. Performance 
security ( ₹ in crore) 
01 02/GM/2018-19 135.96 7.05 below 4.76 
02 11/GM/2017-18 62.07 10.13 below 3.10 
   Total 7.86 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that depart ment did not foresee any risk in 
execution of works and did not ask for additional performance guarantee.  
The reply is not accepted as GM, Ganga overlooked p rovisions of financial rules in 
providing relaxation to the contractors.  
5.10 Irregular expenditure from Namami Gange Funds  
Standards of financial propriety (Rule 21 of Genera l Financial Rules) stipulate that 
every officer is expected to exercise the same vigi lance in respect of expenditure 
incurred from public moneys as a person of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect 
of expenditure of his own money. The expenditure should not be prima facie more than 
the occasion demands. Hence, any procurement of wor ks should invariably follow 
principles of economy.  
In 2016, SMCG submitted a DPR for upgradation of 27 MLD STP Jagjeetpur to tertiary 
treatment level to NMCG. An item ‘Rehabilitation of  Existing Digester and Sludge 
Drying Bed’ with capital cost of 
₹ one crore was also included in the DPR.  
Scrutiny of records of Project Manager, Constructio n and Maintenance Unit (Ganga), 
UJN , Haridwar revealed that the digester item was neith er related to the 27 MLD STP 
nor had anything to do with the tertiary treatment process, for which DPR was 
submitted. The digestor was instead a part of 18 MLD STP Jagjeetpur and was intended 
for production of biogas. Hence proposing expenditure on this item for upgradation of 
27 MLD STP Jagjeetpur to tertiary treatment was irregular.  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that sludge  generated in both the STPs  
(18 MLD and 27 MLD STP) was being treated together at sludge units. All the sludge 
from 18 MLD and 27 MLD was being pumped into digest ers and then sent to sludge 
drying beds. Hence, digester and sludge drying units are integral part of both 18 MLD 
STP and 27 MLD STP.  
The reply is not acceptable because digestor was no t used for treating sludge but for 
producing biogas which was not a tertiary treatment  process. Hence, charging 
expenditure for digestor and sludge drying beds fro m tertiary treatment plants was 
irregular.  
5.11 Royalty and amount for District Mineral Fund n ot deducted 
As per Uttarakhand Sub-Minerals (Avoidance) (Amendm ent) Rules 2016, mandatory 
contribution in District Mineral Fund (DMF) will be payable for extraction of minerals 
at the rate fixed from time to time. Further, as pe r Rule-10 of Uttarakhand District 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
52  
Mineral Foundation Rule 2017, an additional amount equal to 25  per cent  of royalty 
shall be deposited in the DMF. 
During scrutiny of vouchers
16  of forestry interventions for Ganga, it was notice d that 
royalty and DMF amounts were not deducted by divisions from contractor bills despite 
the fact that boulder and bajri  were used during construction works. Further, the 
consumption statement of sub-minerals and Form-J/MM-11 was not enclosed with the 
bills/vouchers. 
The State Government replied (May 2024) that works were executed by contractors in 
which minerals such as sand and gravel were not used by six IAs 
 17 .  
The reply is not acceptable as it was noticed during scrutiny of vouchers that sand and 
gravel were used in the construction of walls, chec k dams, etc . Hence, non-deduction 
of royalty as well as DMF from the contractor’s bil ls was irregular, and the divisions 
provided undue benefits to the contractors. 
5.12 Labour cess not deducted 
As per provisions of Uttarakhand Building and Other  Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service ) Rules, 2005, establishments 
which had employed on any day of the preceding 12 m onths, 10 or more building 
workers in any building or other construction work are required to pay labour cess at 
the rate not exceeding two per cent  and not less than one per cent  of the total cost of 
construction incurred by an employer. 
During scrutiny of voucher of eight implementing of fices, it was noticed that labour 
cess was not deducted by divisions from contractor bills, and they made a payment of 
₹ 59.45 crore 18  against the bills submitted by contractors without  deducting the labour 
cess of ₹ 0.59 crore.  
The State Government replied (May 2024) that deduction of labour cess was not made 
due to the non-provision of labour cess in the scheduled rates of the seven divisions 19 .  
The reply is not acceptable as non-deduction of labour cess by the implementing offices 
was an undue favour to the contractor and violated provisions for labour welfare. 
                                                           
16  (1) Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Soil Conserva tion, Lansdowne (Pauri) (2) DFO, Tehri Dam-I, 
New Tehri (3) DFO, Forest Division, New Tehri (4) DFO, Rajaji Tiger Reserve, Dehradun (5) DFO, 
Forest Division, Mussoorie (6) DFO, Forest Division, Haridwar. 
17   Royalty challans have been deposited by three div isions (DFO, Rajaji Tiger Reserve, Dehradun, 
DFO, Forest Division, Rudraprayag and DFO, Forest Division, Haridwar). 
18  (1) Alaknanda Soil Conservation Forest Division, G opeshwar - ` 3.35 crore (2) Civil and Soyam 
Forest Division, Pauri-` 8.20 crore (3) Rudraprayag Forest Division - ` 6.59 crore (4) Tehri Dam I-
` 15.71 crore (5) Tehri Forest Division - ₹ 12.70 crore (6) SC Division, Lansdowne - ` 8.20 crore 
(7) Gangotri National Park, Uttarkashi - ` 1.54 crore (8) DFO, Mussoorie - ` 3.16 crore  
(Total: ` 59.45 crore). 
19  Deduction has been reported by one division  (Alaknanda Soil Conservation Forest Division, 
Gopeshwar).  

Chapter-5: Financial Management & Procurement of Works 
53
5.13 Recommendation 
The State Government may review the instances of non-compliance as highlighted in 
this chapter and initiate appropriate remedial action. 
Dehradun 
The 25 June 2025 
(SANJEEV KUMAR) 
Accountant General (Audit) 
Uttarakhand 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 01 July 2025 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
  

55  
Appendix -2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.4; Page 10) 
Details of lack of sewage connectivity in seven Ganga Front Towns  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Town 
STPs not 
connected to 
households 
Details of Projects in these towns 
1 Joshimath 02 (3.78 MLD)  
Only I&D project sanctioned (March 2010) without any STP 
at a cost of ₹ 9.61 crore. Work closed in March 2017 after 
spending ₹ 9.57 crore. 
Another I&D with STP project sanctioned (March 2017 ) at 
a cost of ₹ 48.43 crore ( ₹ 62.40 crore revised in 
August 2021). Construction work completed in 2022. No 
household sewer connections are available in any ST P due 
to lack of sewer network. STPs treat only grey wate r of five 
drains. 
2 Nandprayag 02 (0.15 MLD) 
Only I&D with STP project sanctioned (March 2017) a t a 
cost of ₹ 6.46 crore ( ₹ 6.51crore revised in January 2021). 
No household sewer connections are available in any  of the 
two STPs due to lack of sewer network. STPs treat only grey 
water of three drains.  
3 Karnaprayag 05 (0.35 MLD) 
One I&D project and one STP (1.40 MLD) project 
sanctioned simultaneously (December 2008 & July 2009) at 
a total cost of ₹ 8.81 crore. Only partial I&D work got done 
worth 0.95 crore and both the projects abandoned. 
Another I&D with five STPs project sanctioned 
(March 2017) at a cost of ₹ 12.09 crore (₹ 12.01 crore revised 
in September 2021). No household sewer connections are 
available in any of the five STPs due to lack of se wer 
network. STPs treat only grey water of seven drains. 
4 Rudraprayag 06 (0.525 MLD) 
One I&D with one STP (three MLD) project sanctioned  
(September 2009) at a cost of ₹ 12.62 crore (I & D work: 
₹ 7.92 crore and STP: ₹ 4.70 crore). Only partial I&D work 
got done worth ₹ 0.71 crore and project abandoned. Work 
related to STP could not be started and abandoned. 
Another I&D with six STPs project sanctioned (March 2017) 
at a cost of ₹ 13.15 crore. No household sewer connections 
are available in any of the six STPs due to lack of  sewer 
network. STPs treat only grey water of eight drains. 
5 Kirtinagar 02 (0.060 MLD) 
Only I&D with two STPs project sanctioned (March 20 17) 
at a cost of ₹ 4.23 crore. No household sewer connections 
are available in any of the two STPs. Both the STPs  treat 
only grey water from drains. 
6 
Chamoli 
(Near Old 
Suspension 
Bridge) 
01 (0.05 MLD) 
This STP was part of an I&D with STP project sancti oned 
(March 2017) at a cost of ₹ 61.83 crore (₹ 64.34 crore revised 
in October 2022). No household sewer connections ar e 
available in this STP. It treats only grey water fr om one 
drain. 
7 
Srinagar  
(01 MLD 
STP) + Srikot 
(2 STPs) 
03 (1.125 MLD) 
Srinagar: Only I&D with STP of one MLD project 
sanctioned (March 2017) at a cost of ₹ 22.51crore. No 
household sewer connections are available in this STP. They 
treat only grey water from 10 drains. 
Srikot: Only I&D with two STPs of 75 KLD & 50 KLD 
project sanctioned (March 2019) at a cost of ₹ 7.86 crore. No 
household sewer connections are available in these two 
STPs. They treat only grey water from two drains. 
Total 21 (6.04 MLD)  
Source: Minutes of Joint Physical Inspections of STPs and PM, UJN, Ganga, Srinagar and Gopeshwar.  

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
56  
 
Appendix -2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.4; Page 20) 
 
List of the STPs operating without Consent to Operate (CTO) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the STPs operating without CTO Validity to operate of STPs 
1 0.050 MLD STP Near old Suspension Bridge Chamoli 31-03-2021 
2 1.190 MLD STP at Vivekanand Colony, Gopeshwar 31- 03-2020 
3 1.120 MLD STP at Baitarani Gopeshwar 31-03-2020 
4 0.050 MLD STP at Sangam Road Nandprayag 31-03-202 1 
5 0.050 MLD STP Near Police Chowki Karnaprayag 31-0 3-2021 
6 0.010 MLD STP, Near Temple Kirtinagar Returned fo r non-compliance 
7 2.0 MLD STP at Gyansu Uttarkashi Returned for non -compliance 
8 1.0 MLD STP at Gangotri Uttarkashi  31-03-2021 
Source: Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board Dehradun. 
  

Appendices 
57  
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.5; Page 20) 
 
List of 18 STPs not taken over by maintenance agency due to operational and  
safety related issues 
Sl. 
No. Town 
Programme 
under which 
constructed 
Name of STP 
with capacity 
Completed 
year 
Deficiencies/Reasons for 
not being taken over of 
STPs 
1 Srinagar Ganga Action 
Plan 
3.50 MLD 
Srinagar 
May 
2019 
Various deficiencies (like no 
arrangement of disposal of 
sludge, damaged boundary 
wall, sample reports of 
effluent in inlet and outlet 
are not as per prescribed 
standard) in STP affect its 
functioning and have 
stopped UJS from taking 
over of STP despite repeated 
requests of UJN. 
2 
Devprayag 
NGRBA 0.075 MLD Shan ti 
Bazar 
July 
2018 
Leakage in various main 
holes and sewage directly 
flowing in river/overflow/ 
toilet in both the STPs are 
damaged. These 
deficiencies in STPs affect 
their functioning and have 
stopped UJS from taking 
over of these STPs despite 
repeated requests of UJN. 
3 NGRBA 0.150 MLD 
Sangam Bazar 
July 
2018 
4 
Haridwar 
Namami Gange 68 MLD 
Jagjeetpur 
June  
2020 
Both STPs will be run by 
UJN up to completion of 
capex as per instruction of 
NMCG. 
5 Namami Gange 14 MLD Sarai June  
2020 
6 
Rishikesh 
Namami Gange 5 MLD Chorpani September  
2020 
In both the STPs sewage 
coming in excess of their 
treatment capacity which 
affect their functioning and 
have stopped UJS from 
taking over of these STPs 
despite repeated requests of 
UJN. 
7 Namami Gange 
7.5 MLD 
Chandreshwar 
Nagar 
Muni-ki-Reti 
Dhalwala 
September  
2020 
8 Namami Gange 26 MLD 
Lakkarghat 
September  
2020 
Under process as per PM, 
E&M Division Haridwar. 
9 
Srikot 
Namami Gange 0.050 MLD 
Srikot 
February  
2021 
No joint inspection of both 
the STPs is carried out by 
UJN and UJS. 
10 Namami Gange 0.075 MLD 
Srikot 
February  
2021 
11 
Rudraprayag  
Namami Gange  0.100 MLD Near 
Rudra complex 
March  
2019 
Damaged drains, no 
arrangement of water 
connection and toilet, 
nonfunctional of filter press 
and drain feed pump, no 
protection wall, no 
arrangement of sludge 
dumping. 
12 Namami Gange  0.075 MLD Near 
Bus Stand 
May  
2019 
13 Namami Gange  0.100 MLD  
STP 4 
May  
2019 
14 Namami Gange  
0.050 MLD STP 
6 Near Belni 
Road 
November  
2020 

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
58  
Sl. 
No. Town 
Programme 
under which 
constructed 
Name of STP 
with capacity 
Completed 
year 
Deficiencies/Reasons for 
not being taken over of 
STPs 
15 
Karnprayag 
Namami Gange  
0.100 MLD STP 
2 Near Purana 
Pul 
May  
2019 
Non-functional filter feed 
pump, sludge feed pump, 
grey water of drains directly 
flowing into Pinder River 
without treatment, tapped 
dry drain in one STP near 
purana bridge. 
16 Namami Gange  0.050 MLD STP 
4 Near Naya Pul 
November  
2020 
17 Namami Gange  
0.100 MLD STP 
5 Near Ward No. 
1 & 3 
March 
2019 
18 Joshimath Namami Gange 2.70 MLD STP 2 
Marwari 
March  
2023 
Due to various deficiencies 
in STP noticed during 
physical inspection in 
May 2023 viz  Back flow 
from grit chamber, no 
flowmeter on inlet and 
outlet, leakage from 
weepholes, no arrangement 
for sludge disposal. UJS not 
ready for taking over this 
STP before rectification of 
these deficiencies by UJN. 
Source: Information collected from Implementing age ncies, PM, Mechanical Division Ganga, GM, UJN, 
Namami Gange and UJS divisions.  
  

Appendices 
59  
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3; Page 36) 
Water quality criteria according to CPCB 
Water Quality Criteria Class of Water Designated-Best-Use 
• Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml 
shall be 50 or less 
• pH between 6.5 and 8.5 
• Dissolved Oxygen 6 mg/l or more 
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand 5 days 20 0 C 
2 mg/l or less 
A Drinking Water Source without 
conventional treatment but after 
disinfection 
• Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml 
shall be 500 or less  
• pH between 6.5 and 8.5  
• Dissolved Oxygen 5 mg/l or more 
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand 5 days 20 0 C 
3 mg/l or less 
B Outdoor bathing (Organised) 
• Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml 
shall be 5000 or less  
• pH between 6 to 9  
• Dissolved Oxygen 4 mg/l or more 
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand 5 days 20 0 C 
3 mg/l or less 
C Drinking water source after 
conventional treatment and 
disinfection  
• pH between 6.5 to 8.5  
• Dissolved Oxygen 4 mg/l or more 
• Free Ammonia (as N) 1.2 mg/l or less 
D Propagation of Wildlife and 
Fisheries 
• pH between 6.0 to 8.5 
• Electrical Conductivity at 25 0 C micro 
mhos/cm Max.2250 
• Sodium absorption Ratio Max. 26 
• Boron Max. 2 mg/l 
E Irrigation, Industrial Cooling, 
Controlled Waste Disposal 
Not Meeting A, B, C, D & E Criteria Below-E Use not specified 
 
  

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
60  
Appendix-5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4; Page 47) 
Commencement of work before obtaining technical approval from competent authority 
 
Sl. 
No. Division Work executed Agreement No. DoS as per 
agreement 
Date of technical 
sanction 
1 EE, ID, 
Rudraprayag 
Koteshwar Mahadev 
Bathing Ghat (B G) 02/SE/2017-18 17.11.2017 28.02.2018 
Gholtir 
Cremation Ghat (CG) 
2 EE, ID, 
Tharali 
Gaucher C G 
01/SE/2017-18 17.11.2017 28.02.2018 Karnprayag C G 
Karnprayag B G/C G 
3 EE, ID, 
Srinagar 
Umarkot C G 
01/SE/2017-18 17.11.2017 28.02.2018 Nandprayag B G 
Nandprayag C G 
Chamoli C G 02/SE/2017-18 17.11.2017 
4 EE, ID, 
Uttarkashi 
Kedar (B G)/ (C G) 02/SE/2017-18 04.12.2017 28.08.2 018 
Manikarnika B G 04/SE/2017-18 04.12.2017 17.01.2018  
Jad Bharat B G 03/SE/2017-18 04.12.2017 19.01.2018  
Heena B G/C G 05/SE/2017-18 12.12.2017 28.08.2018 
Nageshwar B G 06/SE/2017-18 22.12.2017 28.08.2018 
Dunda C G 01/SE/2017-18 04.12.2017 28.08.2018 
 
  

Appendices 
61  
Appendix-5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.6; Page 48) 
Short recovery of Liquidated damage for delay in execution of works related to sewage projects 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Division Bond No. Contract 
value 
Schedule 
Date of Start  
Schedule 
Date of 
Completion 
Actual 
Date of 
Completion 
Delay 
(in 
days) 
LD 
should 
be 
imposed  
LD 
Imposed  
Short 
recovery 
of LD 
1 UJN, Ganga, 
Gopeshwar 14/GM/2017-18 
 10.48 20.11.2017 19.05.2019 31.10.2020 530 1.05 0.0 9 0.96 
2 
UJN, Ganga, 
Gopeshwar/ 
Srinagar 
15/GM/2017-18 
 69.03 20.11.2017 19.02.2019 31.05.2021 830 6.90 0.8 0 6.10 
3 UJN, Ganga, 
Rishikesh 02/GM/2018-19 
 126.37 31.05.2018 30.11.2019 31.03.2023 1,216 12.64  0.002 12.64 
  Total 205.88    530 to 
1,216 20.59 0.89 19.70 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 

63 
Glossary  
 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Expanded Form 
1.  AA&ES Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanct ion  
2.  AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation 
3.  APOs Annual Plan of Operations 
4.  BG Bathing Ghat (Appendix 5.1) 
5.  BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand  
6.  BRO Border Roads Organisation 
7.  CG Cremation Ghat (Appendix 5.1) 
8.  C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
9.  cal/g Calories per gram  
10.  CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority 
11.  CCA Consolidated Consent and Authorization  
12.  CFI Consolidated Funds of India  
13.  COD Chemical Oxygen Demand  
14.  CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
15.  CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering  
Organization  
16.  CTO Consent to operate  
17.  DFO Divisional Forest Officer 
18.  DGCs District Ganga Committees  
19.  DM District Magistrate 
20.  DMF District Mineral Fund 
21.  DO Dissolved Oxygen  
22.  DPR Detailed Project Report 
23.  EE ID Executive Engineer Irrigation Division 
24.  EE MD UJS Executive Engineer Maintenance Division Uttarakhand  
Jal Sansthan 
25.  E&M Electrical & Mechanical 
26.  FC Faecal Coliform  
27.  FCO Fertilizers Control Order 
28.  GAP Ganga Action Plan 
29.  GM General Manager 
30.  GoI Government of India 
31.  GST Goods and Services Tax 
32.  Hec Hectare  
33.  ID Irrigation Division 
34.  I&D Interception & Diversion 
35.  IAs Implementing Agencies 
36.  IIT Indian Institutes of Technology 
37.  ITI Industrial Training Institute 
38.  KfW Kreditanstalt-für-Wiederaufbau  

Report on Implementation of the Namami Gange Programme by Uttarakhand 
64 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Expanded Form 
(A German Development Bank ) 
39.  KLD Kiloliter per day 
40.  LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas  
41.  MCS Master Control Station  
42.  mg/kg Milligrams per kilogram 
43.  mg/l Milligram per liter  
44.  ML Milliliter  
45.  MLA Member of Legislative Assembly 
46.  MLD Million liters per day  
47.  MoEF & CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Clima te Change  
48.  MPN Most Probable Number 
49.  NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories 
50.  NGRBA National Ganga River Basin Authority  
51.  NGT National Green Tribunal 
52.  NMCG National Mission for Clean Ganga 
53.  O&M Operation and Maintenance  
54.  OCEMS Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring System  
55.  pH Potential of Hydrogen 
56.  PM (Mech) 
UJN 
Project Manager (Mechanical) Uttarakhand Peyjal 
Nigam 
57.  PM UJN Project Manager Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam 
58.  PP Project Preparation 
59.  PS Project Supervision 
60.  SMCG State Mission for Clean Ganga 
61.  SPCB State Pollution Control Board  
62.  SMP Sludge Management Plant 
63.  STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
64.  SWM Solid Waste Management 
65.  TDS Total Dissolved Solids  
66.  THDC Tehri Hydroelectric Development Corporation  
67.  TSS Total Suspended Solid 
68.  TTPs Tertiary Treatment Plants  
69.  UJN Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam 
70.  UJS Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan  
71.  UKPCB Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board  
72.  ULBs Urban local bodies  
73.  UPDCC Uttarakhand Project Development and Construction 
Corporation Ltd. 
 