 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in 
Dehradun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttarakhand 
Report No. 5 of 2025 

 
 

i 
Table of Contents 
Chapter No. Particulars Page No. 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v 
1 Introduction 1 
2 Project Management and Execution 7 
3 Contract Management 33 
4 Financial Irregularities 51 
5 Governance Framework  57 
Appendices 
Appendix No. Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
1.1 Details of Projects as on 31 March 2023 1.7 67 
2.1 Project wise detail of Smart components 2.3 70 
2.2 Total expenditure incurred on DICCC 
project 2.4.1 73 
2.3 
Cost estimate for dismantling and  
re-installation of IT Equipment at 16 
traffic junctions of Smart Road  
2.4.1.7 74 
2.4 Average occupancy in e -buses on each 
trip during the month of July 2023 2.4.4 75 
2.5 Details of unused material under Smart 
Road Project 2.4.5.2 75 
3.1 Details of overhead hindrances in the 
alignment of Smart Road 3.2.1 76 
3.2 Details of imposition of penalty 3.3 76 
3.3 Details of cost escalation under Smart 
Road Project 3.5 77 
4.1 Details of release of Central share and 
matching share of State 4.1 82 
4.2 Details of interest on mobilisation 
advance 4.5 83 
Glossary 85 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2023 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the State of 
Uttarakhand under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India  for being laid before 
the State Legislature.  
The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on “Implementation of 
Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun”, covering the period 2017-18 to 2022-23.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the course 
of audit for the period 2017 -18 to 2022-23; but could not be reported in the previous 
Audit Reports . The matters relating to the period subsequent to 2022 -23 have also 
been included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
Audit acknowledge s the co -operation received from Government of Uttarakhand at 
each stage of the audit process.      

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 

 

v 
Executive Summary 
 
About this Report 
Government of India launched Smart Cities Mission (SCM) on 25 June 2015 with the 
objective to promote cities that provide core infrastructure, decent quality of life to its 
citizens, clean and sustainable environment, and application of ‘Smart Solutions’. The 
Mission envisioned developing 100 cities in the country as Model Areas based on an 
area development plan selected through a city challenge process. These cities were 
selected in four rounds and Dehradun City was selected (June 2017) in the third round. 
In Uttarakhand, Dehradun was the only city selected under the Mission. Dehradun 
Smart City Limited (DSCL) was incorporated (September 2017) as a Special Purpose 
Vehicle under the Companies Act, 2013, for implementation of the SCM in Dehradun.  
Why did we take up this Audit? 
SCM is a centrally sponsored scheme for infrastructure up -gradation and smart 
applications. Initially, the SCM was to be completed by June 2023, but it was extended 
till June 2024. The budget provision under SCM for Dehradun was ` 1,000 crore in 
equal sharing pattern. An expenditure of ` 634.11 crore was incurred during the period 
2016-17 to 2022-23 against the funds of ` 737.50 crore released during the said period. 
The ‘Performance Audit of Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun’ has 
been carried out during 2023 -24, covering the period 201 8-23. An attempt has been 
made in this Report to assess the implementation of the SCM at the ground level.  
During current audit, a result -oriented approach has been adopted which assesses 
whether the programme interventions are performing as planned/intended. The 
performance audit has covered all 22 projects implemented during 201 8-23. During 
evaluation of the projects, the records of Dehradun Smart City Limited, implementing 
agencies (PIU -PWD, PWD, Uttarakhand Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas evam Nirmaan 
Nigam and Irrigation Department) were examined. 
Findings of this audit are expected to help make Government aware of performance of 
Smart Cities Mission and make the required course corrections , so that programme 
objectives can be fulfilled in a time bound and more effective manner. 
Main Audit Conclusions 
Audit found that there is scope for improvement in implementation of SCM and 
Operation & Maintenance of the created infrastructure in terms of long -term 
sustainability as highlighted below: 
• Numerous ‘Smart Solutions’ as outlined in the Detailed Project Report were dropped 
during execution or remained non -functional due to inadequate planning and 
implementation. A biometric and sensor based Solid Waste Management (SWM) 
module developed (March 2022) under e-Governance Solutions of Doon Integrated 
Command and Control Centre project to monitor the entire waste collection process 
on real-time basis, remained unutilised till February 2025, rendering expenditure of 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun 
vi 
` 4.55 crore unfruitful . The non -operation of e -rickshaws procured at the cost of 
` 0.90 crore under the Smart Waste Vehicles project for almost two years highlights 
the lack of consistent and proactive management by DSCL. 
‘Smart Solutions’ viz. interactive boards, computer lab, projectors, e -content, 
CCTVs, Biometric attendance installed in three Government Schools in Dehradun 
at the cost of ` 5.91 crore under the Smart Schools project remained non-functional 
due to inability of the Schools to afford huge electricity bills for their operation. 
Projects like the Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre and the e -bus 
initiative also face sustainability concerns due to the absence of viable revenue 
generation models ( e.g. commercial advertisements, smart Wi -Fi, royalt y from  
e-Governance applications, and data monetisation).  
Instances of wasteful expenditure of ` 2.62 crore on environmental sensors  and  
` 3.24 crore on Multi Utility Duct were also observed . The smart solution like 
uniform cross section of carriageway and dedicated pedestrian pathway, under the 
Smart Road project, were deficiently executed.   
Certain positive outcomes such as improved traffic management, handling of public 
safety and security incidents, support to city administration, rec eiving an award by 
DSCL under the Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre project, and 
successful implementation of initiatives in the water supply sector, particularly 
SCADA1 were also observed. Overall, the intended objectives of SCM - to provide 
core infrastructure, give a decent quality of life to its citizens and application of 
‘Smart’ Solutions have been partially achieved.  However, some ‘Smart Solutions’ 
have been implemented and are currently operational. 
• The payment structure of Dehradun Smart City Limited for the Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) lacked milestone -based payment, leading to payments despite 
incomplete projects; PMC ’s manpower deployment deviated from contract terms, 
resulting in unverified payments and inadmissible payment, undermining financial 
integrity.  
Irregularities of ` 5.19 crore in PMC payments  for remuneration claims and 
implementation of ‘City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and Sustain project’ , 
including procurement violations and reimbursement without documentation, 
indicate laxity in scrutiny and contract adherence.  
DSCL could not provide hindrance-free work front to the implementing agencies 
which led to significant delay, ranging from 19 months to 38 months, in completion 
of the eight projects as well as non-adjustment of advances. DSCL did not take action 
for adjustment of advances , and impose penalties amounting to ` 1.41 crore  for 
project delays effectively. In cases where penalties were imposed, these were either 
insufficient or not fully enforced, resulting in undue benefit to the contractors. DSCL 
failed to recover unutilised amount of ` 19.06 crore from the implementing agency. 
 
1 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  (SCADA) is software which can be interfaced to 
Programmable Logic Controller/Intelligent remote terminal unit  through suitable communication to 
read and present the information in graphical, animated form or make customised reports and control 
various functions of the system remotely at a Control Station. 

Executive Summary 
vii 
Besides, issues related to cost escalation  of ` 10.34 crore  and execution of work  
costing ` 2.93 crore without inviting tenders were also observed.  
• Instances of financial mismanagement such as loss of interest  of ` 6.20 crore and 
non-recovery of interest amounting to ` 0.81 crore on mobilisation advance were 
noticed.   
• Despite representatives from all the key line departments in State Level High 
Powered Steering Committee and  constitution of inter-departmental coordination 
task force, the issue of lack of coordination among various line departments during 
implementation of projects could not be resolved. As a result, most of the projects 
were delayed due to want of encumbrance free projects sites. The idea of establishing 
Special Purpose Vehicle in the spirit of guidelines was ineffective due to no t 
appointing full time Chief Executive Officer, Additional Chief Executive officer and 
Finance Controller in DSCL. Instances of lack of quality control is sues were also 
noticed during implementation of the projects.  
What do we recommend?  
1. The State Government should address operational shortcomings and ensure the 
functioning of non -operational infrastructure developed under the Smart Cities 
Mission. 
2. The State Government should adopt strategies to increase revenue and ensure the 
sustainable operation of infrastructure developed under the Smart Cities Mission 
to minimise the gap between actual and projected revenue. 
3. Responsibility should be fixed for unplanned and inefficient use of public funds 
leading to duplication and infructuous expenditure. 
4. The State Government should ensure that payment terms linked with measurable 
project deliverables are incorporated in the future contracts. 
5. Accountability should be fixed for irregularities in payments to PMC, including 
unverified payment, inadmissible payments, wasteful expenditure, procurement 
violations, and failure to adhere to contractual provisions.  
6. The State Government should ensure that the ongoing projects are completed 
expeditiously in coordination with the line departments and implementing 
agencies. 
7. The State Government should ensure prompt recovery of the unutilised amounts 
pending with the implementing agencies. 
8. The State Government should ensure prompt recovery against overpayment and fix 
accountability.  
9. The State Government should explicitly include the provision for interest rate to 
be charged on Mobilisation Advance, in the Procurement Rules. 
10. The State Government should ensure that the key posts in the sensitive wings of 
DSCL like procurement and finance are filled from the government officials on 
deputation basis instead of contractual staff.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun 
viii 
11. The State Government should take concrete action against the concerned officials 
and contractors responsible for substandard quality of works during execution of 
projects. 
12. The State Government should strengthen the internal control mechanism to ensure 
compliance with laws, regulations and policies.   
Management's response to Audit Recommendations 
Based on the audit findings, the audit team highlighted the key areas for improvement 
and made 12 specific recommendations as mentioned above. These recommendations 
are intended to address various operational issues and enhance aspects such as 
compliance, efficiency, and overall effectiveness within the organisation. 
During the exit conference, the management reviewed each of the 12 recommendations, 
agreed with all of them, and assured the audit that these recommendations would be 
implemented in the future. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-1 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1 
Chapter - 1 
 
Introduction 
This Chapter provides an introduction on Smart Cities Mission, Smart Solutions’ and 
features of Smart City, process of selection of Smart Cities, framework for 
implementation of Smart Cities Mission and organisational setup of Dehradun Smart 
City Limited. The Chapter also covers the Audit objectives, Audit criteria, Audit scope 
and the methodology adopted for the Performance Audit along with the structure of 
the Report. 
Government of India (GoI) launched (25 June 2015) the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) 
with the objective of promoting cities that provide core infrastructure, a decent quality 
of life to their citizens and a clean and sustainable environment through the application 
of ‘Smart Solutions’. 
SCM is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) which provides for a financial support of 
` 500 crore by the Centre for each selected city with an equal share by the State/ Urban 
Local Bodies (ULB). However, from May 2022, the funding pattern was changed to 
90:10 for eight North Eastern States and three Himalayan States1. 
1.1 Smart Solutions and Features of Smart City 
Paragraph 2.5 of the SCM guidelines provides the following illustrative list of ‘Smart 
Solutions’. However, this list was not exhaustive, and cities were free to incorporate 
additional applications.  
 
 
1 Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand. 


Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
2 
Features of Smart City include promoting mixed land use in area-based developments, 
housing and inclusiveness, creating walkable localities, preserving and developing 
open spaces, promoting a variety of transport options, making governance citizen 
friendly and cost effective, giving an identity to the city and applying ‘Smart Solutions’ 
to infrastructure and services in area-based developments. 
1.2 The Process of Selection of Smart Cities 
As per paragraph 9 of the SCM guidelines, each aspiring city competes for selection as 
a Smart City in the process called as ‘City Challenge’. The selection process consists 
of two Stages: Stage-I involves shortlisting of the cities by the States on the basis of the 
defined criteria viz. existing service level, institutional systems/ capacities, self -
financing and past track record and reform. Stage-II is the Challenge round, where the 
final selection of a Smart City takes place. In Stage -II, Smart City Proposal (SCP) 
containing the vision, plan for mobilisation of resources and the intended outcomes in 
terms of infrastructure up -gradation and smart appl ications was to be prepared by the 
cities for evaluation by a committee involving a panel of national and international 
expert, organisations and institution at Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) level. Different steps involved in the selection of Smart Cities are given 
below: 
 


Chapter - 1: Introduction 
3 
1.3 Framework for Implementation of SCM in Uttarakhand 
The SCM envisioned developing 100 cities in the country as replicable model based on 
area-based development and pan city initiatives with ‘Smart Solutions’, selected 
through a ‘City Challenge Process’. These cities were selected in four rounds during 
the period from January 2016 to June 2018. The implementation of the SCM at the city 
level required establishment of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV).  In Uttarakhand, 
Dehradun was the only city selected in the third round on 23 June 2017 under the SCM.  
The SCM was implemented by the Urban Development Department (UDD) of the 
Government of Uttarakhand (GoU), headed by the Principal Secretary/Secretary, who 
was also nominated as the State Mission Director, Smart City. Under the UDD, 
Dehradun Smart City Limited (DSCL) was established as an SPV on 15 September 
2017, under the Companies Act, 2013, to implement the SCM in Dehradun. The GoU 
also established (July 2015) two committees , the High-Powered Steering Committee 
(HPSC) and the Inter-Department Coordination Task Force, to implement and monitor 
the SCM as per the directions given by GoI and GoU from time to time. DSCL also 
established (November 2018) a Smart City Advisory Forum to advise and enable 
collaboration among various stakeholders2.  
1.4 Organisational set-up of DSCL 
The Divisional Commissioner of the Garhwal was nominated (August 2017) as the 
Chairman of DSCL. Apart from the Chairman, five other members were also nominated 
in August 2017 as Directors. The Chairman is assisted by the Chief Executive officer 
(CEO), Addi tional Chief Executive officer, Finance Controller, Assistant General 
Manager (Audit), Chief General Manager (Technical) and other various officers. 
Presently, there are 10 Directors in the Board of DSCL. The organi sational set up of 
top management of DSCL is illustrated in Chart-1.1 below: 
Chart-1.1: Organisational setup of DSCL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 District Collector, MP, MLA, Mayor, CEO of SPV, local youths, technical experts, and at least one 
member from associations/societies. 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer  
Chairman 
Board of Directors  
Additional Chief Executive Officer 
 
Finance Controller 
Assistant General Manager (Audit) 
Chief General Manager (Technical) 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
4 
DSCL executed projects through various implementing agencies and government 
departments, including Bridge & Roof Company (India) Limited 3, Central Public 
Works Department, Public Works Department, the Irrigation Department, Uttarakhand 
Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas evam Nirman Nigam and Nagar Nigam Dehradun.  
1.5 Audit objectives 
The main objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether: 
1. The planning for the implementation of the SCM was adequate and effective and 
was aimed at achieving the objectives of the SCM; 
2. Funds were released by the State Government to DSCL within the stipulated 
timeframe and mobili sation of balance funds by DSCL was efficient and in 
consideration with the objectives of the SCM; 
3. The projects were implemented economically, efficiently, and effectively by the 
DSCL in accordance with the SCPs; and 
4. The mechanism in place for monitoring the implementation and outcomes of the 
SCM was adequate and effective.  
1.6 Audit criteria  
The main sources of audit criteria were the following: 
➢ Smart Cities Mission Guidelines issued by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA), GoI in June 2015; 
➢ Advisories issued by MoHUA; 
➢ Sanctions and Release orders of MoHUA and Government of Uttarakhand (GoU); 
➢ Minutes of State Level High Powered Steering Committee meetings, Board 
Meetings and Smart City Advisory Forum meetings, and Annual Accounts; 
➢ Tender documents and terms and conditions of contract agreements executed for 
works and the applicable rules and orders; General Financial Rules, 2017; 
➢ Uttarakhand Procurement Rules, 2017 and Budget Manual-2012; and  
➢ Notifications, circulars and orders issued by the GoI/ GoU from time to time. 
1.7 Audit scope and methodology  
The performance audit was carried out from July 2023 to December 2023, covering the 
period of execution of SCM projects from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, to ascertain the 
economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the implementation of the SCM in Dehradun. 
Records related to all 22 projects, as detailed in Appendix-1.1, implemented under the 
SCM, were examined at the DSCL and implementing agencies 4 (IAs) level. Joint 
physical inspection of ongoing and completed projects was also carried out to assess 
the impact and actual achievement of the projects. Audit observations are based on data 
and evidence gathered from the audited entity. Additionally, photographs taken during 
 
3 A Public Sector Enterprise under Ministry of Heavy Industries, GoI.  
4 Public Works Department, Irrigation Department  and Uttarakhand Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas Evam 
Nirman Nigam. 

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
5 
the physical inspection of the projects by the Audit with the representatives of the 
respective IAs, also form the basis of audit observations. The draft Performance Audit 
Report was issued to the Government and the Management on 11 April 2024 and reply 
of the Government was received on 30 May 2024. 
1.8 Entry and Exit Conference 
Before commencement of the Audit, the audit objectives, criteria, audit scope and 
methodology and timeframe of the Performance Audit were discussed (25 July 2023) 
with the Management of DSCL in an Entry Conference 5. The Exit Conference was 
conducted on 21 June 2024 and the audit findings were discussed with the Additional 
Secretary, Urban Development Department, GoU, CEO, DSCL and other departmental 
heads/representatives of the IAs. The replies/views of the Governme nt have suitably 
been incorporated in the Report at the appropriate places. 
1.9 Acknowledgement  
Audit is thankful for the co -operation and support extended by CEO, DSCL and 
Officers-in-charge of IAs in providing records, information and clarifications from time 
to time for the smooth conduct of audit. However, the records mentioned in subsequent 
paragraph were not provided to the audit. 
1.10 Constraints/Limitations 
Despite repeated request and intervention of the Chief Secretary, GoU, DSCL did not 
furnish the records 6 pertaining to the preparation of both the original and the revised 
SCP to the audit. As a result, the audit was unable to review records relating to the 
activities such as consultations with city residents/other stakeholders, process for 
selection of projects and proposals for financing them within the SCP. 
1.11 Structure of the report 
The Performance Audit Report has been structured into  five chapters, as outlined 
below: 
• Chapter-1 : Introduction 
• Chapter-2 : Project Management and Execution  
• Chapter-3 : Contract Management 
• Chapter-4 : Financial Irregularities 
• Chapter-5 : Governance Framework 
 
5 No representative of GoU participated in the Entry Conference. 
6 (i) Documents pertaining to citizen consultations conducted prior to the preparation of the SCP. 
(ii) Details of the procedure followed to select the consultant for prepar ation of  the SCP  
(iii) Records relating to the evaluation/assessment undertaken to identify the area for project 
implementation. (iv) Criteria adopted for selection of each project under the SCM (v) Copies of both 
the original and the revised SCP submitted to MoHUA. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-2 
Project Management and Execution 
 
 
 

 

7 
Chapter - 2 
 
Project Management and Execution 
 
This Chapter highlights audit findings on the achievement of Smart Cities Mission 
(SCM). Numerous ‘Smart Solutions’ outlined in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
were dropped during execution or remained non -functional due to inadequate 
planning and implementation, while some of them have been implemented and are 
currently operational. However, certain projects such as Doon Integrated 
Command and Control Centre an d e -bus initiatives encountered sustainability 
issues due to lack of viable revenue generation models. Instances of wasteful 
expenditure of ` 6.17 crore were also observed. There was successful execution of 
some projects, particularly in the field of water  supply like SCADA. Overall, the 
intended objectives of SCM - to provide core infrastructure, give a decent quality 
of life to its citizens and application of ‘Smart Solutions’ have been partially 
achieved. Besides, this Chapter also includes case studies and good practices 
relating to certain projects executed under SCM. 
The objective of SCM was to promote cities that provide core infrastructure and give a 
decent quality of life to their citizens, a clean and sustainable environment and 
application of ‘Smart Solutions’.  The focus was on sustainable and inclusive 
development and the idea was to look at compact areas, create a replicable model which 
would act like a light house to other aspiring cities.  The SCM was planned to be 
executed through two approaches: Area -Based Development (ABD) and a Pan -city 
initiatives. ABD approach envisioned to transform existing areas by retrofitting and 
redeveloping into better planned ones, thereby improving livability of the existing area. 
Pan-city development envisaged application of selected ‘Smart Solutions’ 1 to the 
existing city-wide infrastructure. The ABD area, as outlined in the SCP of Dehradun, 
encompasses 875 acres of the core old city area  of Dehradun as depicted in map  
(Picture-2.1) below: 
 
 
Picture-2.1: ABD Area 
 
1 Application of ‘Smart Solutions’ will enable cities to use technology, information and data to improve 
infrastructure and services. 


Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
8 
DSCL ha d identified (September 2018) 33 Projects valuing ` 1,359.80 crore for 
implementation under the revised Smart City Proposal (SCP) . However, total 
22 projects2 valuing ` 1,021.54 crore3 have been implemented under SCM . Out of 
total 22 projects implemented under SCM in Dehradun; 14  projects were executed 
under Area-based development while remaining eight projects were executed under Pan 
city initiatives. 
2.1 Status of Projects under SCM  
Out of 22 projects, eight projects were under progress and 14 had been completed till 
March 2023 as summarised in Table-2.1 below and detailed in Appendix-1.1. 
Table-2.1: Status of projects as on 31st March 2023 
Sl.  
No. Name of Project 
Sanctioned 
financial outlay 
(` in crore) 
Status Location 
1 Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre  307.83 Completed  
PAN City 
2 City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and 
Sustain  58.50 Under progress 
3 Smart Water Management (SCADA) 53.40 Completed  
4 Electric Buses 41.56 Completed  
5 Smart Waste Vehicle 21.28 Completed  
6 Water ATM 1.98 Completed  
7 Smart toilet 1.73 Completed  
8 Monumental Flag 0.10 Completed  
9 Smart Poles  -- Under progress 
10 Integrated Office Complex Green Building 204.46 Under progress 
ABD Area 
11 Smart Roads  190.54 Under progress 
12 Water supply Augmentation and Smart Meters 32.59 Under progress 
13 Integrated Sewerage Work 28.41 Under progress 
14 Rejuvenation of Parade Ground 20.87 Completed 
15 Integrated Drainage Work 16.27 Under progress 
16 Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 13.10 Completed  
17 Modern Doon Library 12.33 Completed  
18 Smart School 6.05 Completed  
19 Façade rejuvenation of Paltan Bazar 4.79 Under progress 
20 Citizen Engagement/ Outreach Project 1.00 Completed  
21 Creche Building 0.90 Completed  
22 Digitisation of Collectorate and CDO Office 0.61 Completed  
The projects were evaluated in terms of the planning and execution of the proposed 
smart features and their functionality as well as sustainability, operation & maintenance 
and utilisation. The audit findings are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.2 Review of selection of projects under SCM 
The cities under SCM were to be selected through a ‘City Challenge Process’ which 
included evaluation of SCP prepared by each city depicting the vision, plans for 
mobilisation of resources and the intended outcomes in terms of infrastructure  
up-gradation and smart applications  in the city. The SCM guidelines emphasised that 
even though a particular model is not being prescribed, it is expected that the SCPs will 
include a large number of infrastructure services and ‘Smart Solutions’.  
 
2 Rest 11 projects valuing ` 182.53 crore were implemented by State agencies funded by their own 
resources. 
3 Including the CITIIS project costing ` 58.50 crore selected in February 2019. 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
9 
The original SCP of Dehradun was prepared by the Mussoorie Dehradun Development 
Authority (MDDA). After approval of this SCP (June 2017) by MoHUA, GoI , DSCL 
came into existence as an SPV in September 2017  and it submitted a revised SCP 
(September 2018) to GoI.  
The documents relating to the original SCP which led to selection of Dehradun under 
SCM and the revised SCP sent by DSCL later to GoI were not provided to Audit , as 
detailed in paragraph 1.10 of Chapter-1. In absence of relevant documents, audit could 
not comment on the rationale of selection of the SCM projects.    
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government acknowledged the issue 
of non-production of records relating to preparation of both the original and the revised 
SCP to audit and explained that the SCP was prepared by the MDDA with the help of 
a c onsultant Price Water House Coopers Limited. After various amendments and 
approval from the Nagar Nigam Board, Dehradun (NND), the SCP was forwarded to 
MoHUA. The Government also assured that DSCL would provide the records to the 
audit after obtaining them either from MDDA, NND or MoHUA.  However, no status 
thereof was intimated to the audit so far (October 2024). 
2.2.1 Non-implementation of the selected project 
As per Paragraph 6.2 of the SCM Guidelines, assured electricity supply with at least  
10 per cent of the Smart City’s energy requirement coming from solar  was one of the 
essential features to be implemented under the SCM.  Scrutiny of the records revealed 
that a project “Solar Energy Solution,” amounting to ` 10.00 crore, was included in the 
revised SCP.  However, this project was not implemented by DSCL despite a clear 
provision in the SCM guidelines.  
The Government replied (30 May 2024)  that the "Solar Rooftop on Government 
Buildings" project is being carried out by the “Uttarakhand Renewable Energy 
Development Agency” (UREDA) using its own resources. However, no detail/evidence 
was provided by DSCL to the audit regarding smart city energy requirement and 
coverage of Government buildings under the project. Further, information obtained 
from UREDA revealed that, under the "Solar Rooftop on Government Buildings" 
scheme, a total solar plant capacity of only 91 kilowatts was installed on 10 Government 
buildings in Dehradun between 2018 -19 and 2022-23, which was not covering even 
0.02 per cent against the envisaged minimum 10 per cent of city’s energy requirement.  
2.2.2 Implementation of projects beyond the SCP 
As per paragraph 6.1 of SCM Guidelines, cities were required to prepare their  
SCP containing the vision, plan for mobilisation of resources and the intended outcomes 
in terms of infrastructure up -gradation and smart applications.  However, it was 
observed that two projects - Digitisation of the Collectorate Office and Tehsil Office 
and Monumental Flag were not included in the revised SCP  but were executed at the 
cost of ` 56.29 lakh and ` 9.28 lakh respectively under the SCM. Both the projects were 
funded by DSCL from the project fund of SCM. The project Digitisation of Collectorate 
Office and Tehsil Office (Sadar) aimed at procuring computers, printers, and scanners 
for implementation of e-office in the Collectorate and Tehsil offices. Under the project 
Monumental Flag, a 30.5 meter high National Flag at Dila Ram Chowk was installed. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
10 
No reply was furnished by the Government. However, the Management replied 
(November 2023) that Digitisation of the Collectorate Office was included in the SCP 
dated 08 September 2018 while Monumental Flag project was approved (13 July 2020) 
in the 14th Board meeting of DSCL.  
The reply is not acceptable as the mentioned projects were not included in the revised 
SCP. Further, there was no specific approval of the Board for the project Monumental 
Flag. 
2.3 Review of Implementation of ‘Smart Solutions’  
As per the SCM guidelines, the purpose of the SCM is to drive economic growth and 
improve the quality of life of people by enabling local area development and harnessing 
technology, specially technology that leads to smart outcomes.  Application of ‘Smart 
Solutions’ will involve the use of technology, information, and data to make 
infrastructure and services better.  
Some of the examples of ‘Smart Solutions’ mentioned in the said guidelines includes 
e-Governance and Citizen Services, Waste Management, Water Management, Energy 
Management and Urban Mobility as detailed in paragraph 1.1 of Chapter - 1. 
DSCL executed 22 projects under the SCM, of which, 15 projects envisaged ‘Smart 
Solutions’/proposed facilities viz. Smart traffic sensors, Environmental sensors,  
eco-friendly energy for transport, CCTV cameras, etc. under the respective projects as 
detailed in Appendix-2.1. Audit observed that during implementation of projects, 
numerous facilities proposed in the DPRs of projects like Smart Road, Pedestrianisation 
of Paltan Bazar, Smart Poles and Smart Toilet etc., for execution, were 
dropped/modified on the approval of Board of DSCL/High Powered Steering 
Committee (HPSC) and those installed could not be made fully functional4, as detailed 
in Appendix-2.1 and discussed in succeeding paragraph 2.4 and case studies under 
paragraph 2.5.  
Further, as outlined in the SCM guidelines, the project "Integrated Drainage Work" had 
provisions for incorporating ‘Smart Solutions’ such as wastewater recycling and storm 
water reuse . However, no such provision was made in the DPR , and rather than 
implementing these innovative solutions, the focus was solely on construction of new 
drains. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the facts and 
stated that heavy traffic and space constraints at the selected sites made it impractical 
to carry out the planned work. Regarding non -functioning of the aforesaid executed 
Smart Features, it was stated that DSCL is coordinating with the concerned authorities 
to ensure that the Smart Features become operational.  
The reply is not acceptable as these issues should have been considered and sorted out 
at the planning stage. Further, the Government should strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the Smart Features are operational with emphasis on their 
operation and maintenance. 
 
4 Red Light Violation Detection, Automatic Number Plate Reader, Smart traffic sensors, Speed 
Violation Detection, Variable Message Display, Emergency Call Box, Public Announcement System, 
Environmental sensors, RFID tags/system, Sensor based Taps, auto flus h urinals system, interactive 
boards, computer lab, projectors, e-Content, CCTVs and Biometric for attendance. 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
11 
2.4 Project Wise Analysis 
Under the SCM, DSCL executed 22 projects 5 in ABD area and Pan city. The detailed 
analysis of 13 projects is discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.4.1 Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre 
Integrated Command and Control Centres reduce the complexity of dealing with multiple 
technology systems/applications by integrating them into a common platform to leverage 
real-time intelligence for making informed decisions.  The key objective of Doon 
Integrated Command and Control Centre (DICCC) project was to establish a 
collaborative framework where input from different functional departments such as 
Transport, Fire, Police, Meteorology etc. can be assimilated and analysed on a single 
platform; consequently, resulting in aggregated city level information. Further this 
aggregate city level information can be converted to actionable intelligence, which would 
be propagated to relevant stakeholders and citizens in a coordinated and collaborated 
manner.  
To establish DICCC and other Integrated ‘Smart Solutions’, DSCL entered 
(22 July 2019) into an agreement with Master System Integrator6 (MSI) at a total cost of 
` 294.43 crore7 with a scheduled date of completion (21 May 2020). An expenditure of 
` 258.46 crore, including CAPEX of ` 223.12 crore, as detailed in Appendix-2.2 was 
incurred on DICCC project till the date of audit (December 2023) after de-scoping works 
costing ` 4.05 crore (CAPEX) and ` 7.21 crore (OPEX). DICCC became operational 
from 15 March 2022  comprising Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  
enabled systems8 having several end devices such as Variable Message Sign Boards, 
Emergency Call Box, cameras, sensors, traffic signal controllers etc. Shortcomings 
noticed in implementation of DICCC project are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.4.1.1 Low operational availability of end devices 
Clause 50.4 of the Service Level Agreement 9 provides that minimum uptime for field 
infrastructure like Public Address System-Loudspeakers, Environmental Sensors, Smart 
traffic detectors (Sensors and Controllers), CCTV and Other Equipment should be  
97 per cent measured on monthly basis. 
For functioning of DICCC, several end devices such as Public Address System -
Loudspeakers, Environmental Sensors, Smart traffic detectors (Sensors and Controllers), 
CCTV etc. were installed. Operational availability of these end devices mainly depended 
upon network connectivity and power. During joint physical inspection of DICCC project 
conducted (07 November 2023) by the audit with the representative of DSCL , audit 
noticed low availability of operational end devices as shown in Table-2.2 below: 
 
5 The 13 projects include detailed analysis of ten projects, case studies related to two projects discussed 
in paragraph 2.5, good practices related to one project (SCADA) described in paragraph  2.6. No 
significant findings were observed in the remaining nine projects. 
6 M/s Hewlett Packard Enterprise India Pvt. Ltd. (HPE). 
7 CAPEX: ` 227.90 crore and OPEX: ` 66.53 crore (for 60 months from the date of Final Go Live). 
8 Adaptive Traffic Control System (ATCS), Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS), 
Surveillance System, Public Address System, Solid Waste Management etc. 
9 Forming part of contract with the MSI. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
12 
Table-2.2: Operational availability of end devices 
Sl. 
No. Name of end device 
No. of 
devices 
installed 
Operational Status Operational 
availability of 
end devices in 
per cent 
Active Inactive 
1  Traffic lights 49 36 13 73 
2  Surveillance Cameras 517 505 12 98 
3  Red Light Violation Detection (RLVD) 105 56 49 53 
4  Automatic Number Plate Reader (ANPR) 29 20 09 69 
5  Smart traffic sensors (A & B) 76 21 55 28 
6  Speed Violation Detection (SVD) 04 02 02 50 
7  Variable Message Display (VMD) boards 50 27 23 54 
8  Emergency Call Box (ECB) 107 60 47 56 
9  Public Address System (PAS) 24 17 07 71 
10  Environmental sensors 50 27 23 54 
The operational availability of Surveillance Cameras was 98 per cent, however, the 
operational availability of other end devices ranged from 28 to 73 per cent as against 
minimum availability of 97 per cent.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Management accepted the Audit 
observation and stated that operational availability of end devices was low due to 
unforeseen dismantling of end devices at various places. DSCL is expediting the 
process to get the end devices reinstalled at the earliest. 
2.4.1.2 Non-functional Solid Waste Management Module  
As per clause 4.15.1 of the contract with the MSI, NND was responsible for collection, 
segregation, transportation, dumping and processing of the city waste from door to 
door. There were several problems in the existing solid waste collection process such 
as lack of information about collection time and area; lack of proper system for 
monitoring, tracking collection & transportation vehicles etc. 
To overcome these problems, DSCL developed (March 2022) through the MSI a 
biometric and sensor based Solid Waste Management (SWM) module  under  
e-Governance Solutions of DICCC project to monitor the entire waste collection 
process on real -time basis. It had various Smart Features like a Global Positioning 
System (GPS), Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tag/ Quick Response (QR) code 
etc. For this, various latest ICT components10 were installed at the cost of ` 4.55 crore 
after de-scoping the works costing ` 1.59 crore. 
During scrutiny of records, audit noticed that the module was made Go -live on  
15 March 2022. However, various reports 11 available in e -Governance Solutions, as 
provided to audit, revealed that NND did not utilise the SWM module since its Go-live. 
DSCL sent (April 2022 and December 2022) several letters to NND for effective 
utilisation of SWM module but the module  could not be utilised till February 2025. 
Thus, the objective to provide a transparent and comprehensive mechanism to monitor 
and manage the SWM process was not achieved and  the expenditure of ` 4.55 crore 
remained unfruitful. 
 
10 RFID Reader (with controller), QR code, RFID tags, Bin level sensors, GPS, Biometric face 
recognition device, mobiles and Weigh Bridge Controller. 
11 MIS Reports, like Door -to-Door Vehicle details, House Hold Bin Collection Report, Vehicle Trip 
Report, Door to Door Waste Collection History Report, Weight Report, etc. 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
13 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the Audit 
observation and assured that further correspondence would be made with NND to 
utilise the SWM Module. If any modification is proposed by NND, the same will be 
implemented and module will be handed over to NND. 
The reply is not acceptable as despite existence of HPSC and Inter-Departmental Task 
Force, the DSCL and the Government could not ensure utilisation of module and the 
objective to provide a transparent and comprehensive mechanism to monitor and 
manage the SWM process could not be achieved.  
2.4.1.3 Disaster Recovery site not setup 
As per the Disaster Recovery Best Practices version 1.0 issued by Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology, GoI,  adoption of Disaster recovery setup is 
important for all Departments to maintain availability of Government operations and 
resiliency of data/applications . Disaster Recovery aims at protecting the departments 
from the effects of significant catastrophic events12. It allows the department to quickly 
resume mission-critical functions after a disaster.  
Considering the State Data Centre Policy that there should be a common Disaster 
Recovery site for all the applications of the State of Uttarakhand,  DSCL Board 
(March 2021) decided to set up the Disaster Recovery Site at Information Technology 
Development Agency (ITDA), GoU for which, DSCL was not required to pay any 
amount to the ITDA.  However, in a meeting (August 2021) of ITDA, it was decided 
that DSCL shall pay ` 57.22 lakhs (including O&M) per annum to ITDA.  
Audit noticed that DSCL authorities gave sign  off for final Go -live of DICCC on 
15 March 2022 without ensuring setting up of disaster recovery site on its own or 
through ITDA. It is pertinent to mention that the DICCC, ITDA and State Data Centre 
are in the same building and in the region vulnerable to disasters  (Seismic zone IV ). 
Recently, flash flood like situation was created in the area of DICCC due to cloudburst 
on 25 August 2021 and 08 August 2023.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the audit 
observation and stated that disaster recovery site set up was in process by ITDA for 
which a server had been shifted to Bengaluru. 
The reply is not acceptable as the server had been relocated to Bengaluru to provide 
services related to the Uniform Civil Code. Thus, in absence of Disaster Recovery site, 
critical operations of DICCC remained at risk. 
2.4.1.4 Security Audit not conducted 
As per para 7.7 & 7.7.1 of Guidelines for Indian Government Websites (January 2009), 
web application security is of paramount concern to owners as well as consumers of the 
website. Guideline provides that each website/application must undergo a security audit 
from empanelled agencies and clear the same, prior to hosting and after addition of new 
 
12 Human error, fire or explosions, power outage, epidemic/accidents, unexpected system updates & 
patches as given in Disaster Recovery Best Practices Version 1.0 issued by Ministry of Electronics 
& Information Tech., GoI. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
14 
modules. Further, Website Security Guidelines Version 1.0 issued ( November 2017) 
by NIC-CERT provides that the security audit should be done every six months or as 
and when any changes are done to the source code. 
Audit noticed that security audit of 14 applications integrated with DICCC was conducted 
by the Third -Party Auditor 13 engaged by DSCL through contract (08  January 2021) 
between June 2021 and January 2022 i.e., during implementation phase of DICCC project 
as it was mandatory for final go live. There was no provision in the contract with Third-
Party Auditor for subsequent security audit of applications. The security audit certificates 
of these applications expired on 09 February 2023. Despite change in version of five 
applications14 and expiry of security audit certificates, security audit of these applications 
was not conducted since 10 February 2023. This oversight coupled with non-compliance 
of the aforesaid security guidelines poses a significant risk, as web application security is 
crucial for both the website owners and the consumers. Without regular security audits, 
there is a possibility that t he integrity, confidentiality, and availability of the data and 
services provided through these applications are compromised, potentially leading to data 
breaches, unauthorised access, and other serious security incidents. Thus, it was 
imperative to priori tise and conduct timely security audits to ensure the ongoing 
protection of these critical applications. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the Audit 
observation and stated that security audit of DICCC application was being conducted 
by the Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification Directorate Team and would 
be completed soon.  
2.4.1.5 Lack of revenue generation model in DICCC 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, GoI, issued a guidance note in June 2021  
stipulating the identification and implementation of a revenue generation/monetisation 
strategy for various IT infrastructure based on feasibility and viability to ensure the 
long-term sustainability of the DICCC infrastructure.  
Audit noticed that despite recommendations of MSI on revenue generation through 
commercial advertisement, smart Wi-Fi, royalty from e-Governance applications, data 
monetisation etc., DSCL did not formulate or implement any revenue generation model 
even after lapse of two years since Go-Live of DICCC. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the facts and 
stated that various options of revenue generation for sustainability of DICCC project 
would be explored. It was also informed that DSCL had initiated a proposal for revenue 
sharing of amount collected through challans by traffic police department using 
Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) application of DICCC project. 
The reply is not acceptable as even after more than two years since Go-Live of DICCC, 
DSCL neither made any sincere efforts to prepare its own revenue generation model 
 
13 M/s Bharat Electronics Limited. 
14 (i) Adaptive Traffic Control System (Version TIS 3.2.4.2), (ii) E -Gov. Citizen Portal Application 
(Version 2.0), (iii) Traffic Monitoring System Application (Version 4.2.0), (iv) Traffic Enforcement 
System Application (Version 15.0.0) and (v) Automatic Num ber Plate Reader Application (Version 
9.5.0). 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
15 
nor did it adopt the revenue generation model suggested by MSI. Thus, in absence of 
revenue generation model, DSCL was fully dependent on grants received from 
Central/State Government. 
2.4.1.6 Unfruitful expenditure of ` 2.62 crore on environmental sensors  
Audit noticed that despite availability of three Air Quality Monitoring Stations  
(AQMS) and one Continuous Air Quality Monitoring Station (CAQMS) operational in 
the city under Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board (UKPCB), as per the approved DPR 
(December 2018 ), DSCL procured ( January 2020 ) and installed (November 2020) , 
50 environmental sensors at the cost of ` 2.37 crore during implementation phase of 
DICCC project without consulting UKPCB . The sensors did not comply with the 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards 15 notified ( November 2009) by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) as these environmental sensors were not capable of 
measuring six16 out of twelve parameters, which was also highlighted by UKPCB in its 
letter dated 10 October 2020. Thus, the Air Quality Index displayed on Variable 
Message Display (VMD) boards in the city was not calculated based on data captured 
through these sensors, instead, the same were being provided by UKPCB. After go live, 
DSCL also incurred an expenditure of ` 24.76 lakhs (up to December 2023)  on 
operation and maintenance of these sensors. 
Thus, expenditure of ` 2.62 crore incurred on installation of environmental sensors 
despite availability of operational AQMS and CAQMS of UKPCB remained unfruitful. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the audit 
observation and stated that DSCL in consultation with Uttarakhand Pollution Control 
Board, will try to shift and utilise the environmental sensors at other locations. 
The reply is not tenable as environmental sensors installed by the DSCL were capturing 
only 06 out of 12 prescribed parameters as also pointed out by UKPCB. Hence, change 
of locations will not serve the purpose. 
2.4.1.7 Creation of liability of ` 70.29 lakh due to non-synchronisation of projects  
Under DICCC project of SCM, various IT equipment and VMD were installed at traffic 
junction, bus shelter, miscellaneous location by Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE, 
India). Audit scrutiny of records revealed that after completion (March 2022) of DICCC 
project, construction activities were also taken up by PWD divisions from their own 
funds as well as by DSCL under SCM at various traffic junction, bus shelter, 
miscellaneous location. Therefore, the VMDs and other IT equipment installed under 
DICCC project were dismantled. Further, it was found that HPE (India) had submitted 
(November 2023) a cost reimbursement of ` 0.12 crore for dismantling and an estimate 
of ` 1.91 crore for re-installation of IT equipment.  
 
15 Sulphur Dioxide (SO 2), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO 2), Particulate Matter (PM 10), Particulate Matter 
(PM 2.5), Ozone (O3), Lead (Pb), Carbon Monoxide (CO), Ammonia (NH3), Benzene (C6H6), Benzo 
(a) Pyrene (BaP), Arsenic (As) and Nickel (Ni). 
16 Lead (Pb), Ammonia (NH3), Benzene (C6H6), Benzo (a), Pyrene (BaP), Arsenic (As) and Nickel (Ni). 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
16 
Audit scrutiny also revealed that the cost estimate amounting to ` 70.29 lakh as detailed 
in Appendix-2.3, pertained to dismantling and re -installation of IT equipment at 
16 traffic junctions lying in the alignment of Smart Road project. Thus,  
non-synchronisation of projects to be executed under SCM, lack of planning, lack of 
coordination and delay in execution of Smart Road project resulted in creation of an 
extra financial liability of ` 70.29 lakh.  
Government replied (30 May 2024) that the activities of dismantling and reinstallation 
were undertaken in response to the requirement of Smart Road project, which 
necessitated the temporary removal of the IT equipment installed at the intersections 
along the road alignment. The cost reimbursement and estimates submitted by HPE 
(India) reflects the necessary expenditures incurred due to these projects’ dependencies 
and requirements. 
The reply is not acceptable as both the projects i.e., DICCC and Smart Road were under 
SCM, therefore, synchronisation should have been made by the DSCL to avoid 
financial liability of ` 70.29 lakh. In addition, it also affected the functionality of 
installed IT equipment as detailed in Paragraph 2.4.1.1 above. 
2.4.2 Smart Poles on PPP mode 
DSCL planned project “Smart 
Poles” (as shown in Picture-2.2 
alongside) in the revised SCP to 
provide multiple services  e.g., Wi-
Fi, Warm LED Luminaries, CCTV  
camera, Telecom Services  and 
environmental monitoring sensors  
through Smart Poles in the city. For 
the above purpose, DSCL entered 
into an agreement (January 2020) 
on PPP/BOT mode with a 
Concessionaire17 for supply, 
installation and maintenance of 130 
Smart Poles with approximately 
100 km Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) 
during the implementation period of 
12 months from the date of contract. 
Installation of Smart Poles also 
constituted source of revenue generation of ` 55.40 lakh per year (to be escalated by 
five per cent from the second year onward). 
Audit found that the work could not be completed even after the lapse  of almost three 
years from the scheduled date of implementation i.e., January 2021. Out of 130 smart 
poles and 100 km OFC, only 27 Smart Poles  and 70 km OFC  respectively, were 
installed/laid till October 2023.  
 
17 M/s Indus Tower limited. 
Picture-2.2: Smart Poles 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
17 
The main reason for the non-installation of Smart Poles was DSCL's failure to provide 
the required sites. According to the agreement, DSCL was obligated to provide the sites 
for Smart Poles within 15 days of signing of the agreement.  However, by July 2021, 
DSCL had provided only 23 sites for pole installation . Over the next two years, up to 
October 2023, DSCL managed to provide only four additional sites for the Smart Poles.  
Regarding Smart Features, audit noticed that most of the Smart Features were not 
present in the Smart poles installed  as detailed in Appendix-2.1. Upon joint physical 
inspection of six poles conducted (14 November 2023) by Audit with the representative 
of DSCL, it was noticed that only four poles were providing telecom services  which 
entailed revenue generation of ` 32.21 lakh18 up to July 2023. Remaining two poles19 
were not providing any services, despite being installed for two years as the necessary 
equipment20 had not been mounted on them.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), while accepting the audit observation, the 
Government stated that the installation sites proposed by the Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) lacked the necessary NOCs from the respective line departments. 
DSCL is now proposing to foreclose the contract. Regarding non-installation of Smart 
Features, no specific reply was furnished by the Government, however, the 
Management of the DSCL stated (De cember 2023) that the  locations identified  for 
poles were not suitable for Smart Features utilization point of view and two un-operated 
Smart Poles installed were planned to operate with pure fiber media. Fiber 
laying/connectivity was pending due to permission issue from the respective line 
departments. 
The reply is not acceptable as these issues should have been considered and sorted out 
at the planning stage. Further, the statement of the DSCL to foreclose the contract will 
defeat the benefits envisaged under SCM. 
2.4.3 Integrated Office Complex Green Building 
Paragraph 37 of Uttarakhand Budget Manual provides that the estimates should be 
prepared with reasonable accuracy. The scrutiny related to the prescribed formalities 
like technical specification, costing, cost benefit analysis, survey of location and 
availability of land should be ensured. 
The revised SCP submitted by the DSCL under the SCM  included the construction of 
the "Integrated Office Complex Green Building" (Green Building) to centralise district-
level offices for enhanced citizen convenience . The building, initially planned with 
seven floors along with a spacious basement, aimed to accommodate various 
administrative departments of the District.  
The project “Green building”,  was approved (July 2019) by the HPSC at the cost of 
` 204.46 crore 21. The “Green building”, proposed on land 22 owned by Uttarakhand 
 
18 ` 32.21 lakh = `13.09 lakh + ` 13.75 lakh + ` 2.75 lakh + ` 2.62 lakh. 
19 Near SP, Traffic Office (Near Doon Hospital) and Rajpur Road, Near Scholars Home School.  
20 Wi-fi Aps, Smart Warm LED light, CCTV, Environmental Sensors and Digital Billboard.  
21 ` 204.46 crore = ` 184.46 crore (For construction of Building) + ` 20.00 crore (Paid to UTC for 
utility shifting), out of which, ` 19.60 crore was refunded to DSCL in October 2020. 
22 In the existing workshop area of UTC on Hardwar Road. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
18 
Transport Corporation (UTC) , was to be constructed by the implementing agency 
CPWD in terms of MoU executed (October 2019)  with the scheduled date of 
completion December 2021.   
Audit observed that, despite directions of the GoU, the proposed site could not be 
transferred to DSCL due to legal obstacles. In a meeting of HPSC (November 2020), it 
was decided to construct the Green Building at the existing Collectorate Campus . 
However, this site proved to be unfeasible due to practical issues in relocating the 
existing offices. Subsequently, in August 2022, it was decided to purchase the same site 
as previously planned, from the UTC for the Green Building. Finally, the GoU provided 
land to UTC in exchange for the proposed site and the land was transferred 
(December 2022) to Urban Development Department (UDD).  Thereafter, the project 
could only commence in March 2024  with the revised scope of nine floors and two 
basements (costing ` 216.91 crore) approved (November 2023) in the Board meeting 
of DSCL. Up to September 2024, the physical and financial progress was 10 per cent 
and ` 10.63 crore respectively. This indicates that DSCL/HPSC lacked a strategic plan 
for the project, as it was unable to secure land from another department, nor did it 
evaluate the risk management associated with the capital project. 
Thus, due to non -adherence to the budget manual regarding assurance of land before 
the proposal of the project, the construction work of the Green Building could 
commence only after four years from the approval, which also delayed the intended 
convenience to the public.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government informed that it had now 
been decided (February 2024) to construct the Green Building with six floors and two 
basements, at the revised cost of ` 206.00 crore, and the work has been commenced 
accordingly. 
The reply of the Government itself indicates violation of the aforesaid provision of the 
State Budget Manual, which, in turn resulted in additional cost of ` 21.54 crore23 and 
inordinate delay in construction of Green Building.  
2.4.4 Electric buses  
Project “Electric Bus” ( costing ` 41.56 crore)  was approved (June 2019)  with an 
objective to introduce a new public transport system to minimize pollution and give 
fillip to the overall programme of using eco -friendly energy for transport . DSCL 
entered (04 March 2020) into an agreement with a firm 24 for “Supply, Operation and 
Maintenance of 30 air-conditioned fully built pure e -buses”. DPR forecasted a loss of 
` 36.99 crore above the income from fare box and advertisement revenue over the seven 
years (2019-20 to 2026-27). The fleet of e-buses could be made operational on all the 
designated routes during February 2021 to December 2022. Till March 2023, total loss 
incurred amounted to ` 11.26 crore25.  
 
23 ` 21.54 crore = ` 206.00 crore (final cost of the project) - ` 184.46 crore  (initial sanctioned cost 
excluding cost of utility shifting of UTC). 
24 M/s EVEY Trans (UKS) Private Limited, Hyderabad. 
25 ` 11.26 crore= ` 14.62 crore (operational expenditure)  – ` 3.36 crore (Receipt from March 2021 to 
March 2023). 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
19 
Audit observed that:  
➢ Due to higher fare charges and lower service frequency compared to other modes 
of transport operating on the same routes, the occupancy of e-buses remained low, 
resulting in DSCL earning only ` 1.29 lakh from e -bus operations against the 
anticipated daily revenue of ` 3.93 lakh.  
➢ The commercial operation of the e -bus was started from February 2021, but the 
Board of DSCL did not take any cognizance of the low occupancy in the e -buses 
till audit (October 2023). After being pointed out by the audit, the Board of DSCL 
decided (November 2023) to reduce the minimum fare for the ISBT -Airport route 
from ` 100.00 to ` 10.00. 
➢ The DSCL had not carried out any analysis of revenue received as it failed to 
provide the details of monthly revenue generated for each route for the period from 
February 2021 to June 2023. Audit analysis of the revenue for the month of 
July 2023 revealed that the average occupancy of e -buses ranged from 03 to 
13 passengers per trip, as outlined in the Appendix-2.4. The issue of low occupancy 
in e -buses was further confirmed during joint physical inspection conducted 
(17 November 2023) by audit with representative of DSCL, where passenger count 
ranged from 03 to 12 per bus. The lowest occupancy, with only three passengers, 
was observed on the ISBT -Airport route as shown in the Pictures-2.3 and  
2.4 below: 
  
Pictures-2.3 and 2.4: Lowest occupancies, with only three passengers as observed on the ISBT-Airport route 
➢ The projected additional income from advertisements on the buses from 2021 -22 
to 2022 -23 of operation was ` 1.01 crore. However, DSCL did not adopt any 
strategies to generate this additional revenue. 
Thus, DSCL proceeded with the project without devising any remedial action plan such 
as exploring the strategies for generating additional revenue from advertisements, 
review of fare and routes, and frequency of buses to mitigate the loss. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), while accepting the audit observation, the 
Government stated that plans for revenue generation, such as advertisements, would be 
implemented soon. It was also informed that buses had been reallocated to different 
routes to increase occupancy . However, no supporting documents were provided to 
audit, in this regard. 


Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
20 
2.4.5 Smart Road Project  
Smart Road was conceived as a combination of appropriate road infrastructure and 
supporting IT components that would assist all road users including vehicle users, 
pedestrians, cyclists, and differently abled persons to move comfortably.  
 
Picture-2.5: Four major routes as depicted in map 
Under the project, four major routes with a total length of 8.1 km as depicted in the map 
above (Picture-2.5) and detailed in Table-2.3 below within the ABD area of Dehradun 
city were selected for the implementation of road infrastructure works integrated with 
Smart Road components. These routes encircle the city's core area, where mostly, the 
commercial activities are prominent. 
Table-2.3: Details of the selected routes with their length 
Sl. No. Name of Road From To Length (in km) 
1  E. C. Road  Bahl Chowk Aaraghar Chowk 2.9 
2  Haridwar Road  Prince Chowk Aaraghar Chowk 1.5 
3  Rajpur Road  Clock tower Dilaram Chowk 1.8 
4  Chakrata Road  Clock tower Kisan Nagar Chowk 1.9 
Total Length 8.1 
The estimated cost for the project as approved (March 2019) was ` 190.54 crore which 
was further revised (November 2020) to ` 206.88 crore due to inclusion of centage of 
` 12.79 crore and utility shifting of ` 2.00 crore besides increase in Multi Utility Ducts26 
(MUD) cost by ` 1.55 crore.  
 
26 A Multi -Utility Duct (MUD), also known as a utility tunnel or common duct, is  an underground 
structure that houses multiple utility services, such as electricity, water, telecom, sewage, and gas 
lines, in a single conduit. 


Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
21 
Audit noticed the following shortcomings in the execution of the aforesaid projects  as 
discussed below: 
2.4.5.1 Non-execution of Smart Features  
The scope of works in Smart Road project included up -gradation of the road through 
strengthening of the pavement, provision of drains, MUD, sewerage work, underground 
water supply lines, pedestrian friendly foot paths and crossings, organised parking and 
introduction of technological elements that would provide a safe and comfortable space 
for users of the road.  
It was observed that ‘Smart Solutions’ as envisaged in the DPR were either partially 
executed (Uniform cross section of carriageway and dedicated pedestrian pathway) or 
not executed (Electric vehicles charging stations, pedestrian crossing in tabletop type, 
smart LED lighting with sensors and designated parking lots with sensors) except MUD 
which consisted of undergrounding of overhead electric lines. The status of execution 
of Smart Features of Smart Road under the project is given in Appendix-2.1. 
Thus, due to elimination of ‘Smart Solutions’ from the scope of work, the emphasis 
shifted from ‘Smart Solutions’ to only civil infrastructure work and there were no 
substantial changes indicative of smartness as was the objective of SCM. 
Further, during joint physical inspection conducted (23 November 2023) by audit with 
the representatives of PWD,  it was noticed that dedicated pedestrian pathways being 
constructed under the project were asymmetrical i.e., level and width of the pathways 
varied at different places. Encroachments, trees, electrical equipment, and other 
obstructions were also observed on the constructed pedestrian pathways. 
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that no new land acquisition has been undertaken 
for the project and all the work carried out within the Right of Way with retrofitting 
measures. Further, during the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government, while 
accepting the facts, stated that heavy traffic and space constraints at the selected sites 
made it impractical to carry out the planned work.  
The reply is not acceptable as these issues should have been considered and sorted out at 
the planning stage.  
2.4.5.2 Wasteful expenditure of ` 3.24 crore on Multi Utility Duct  
Audit noticed that post termination (September 2022) of the MoU with Bridge & Roof 
(India) Limited (B&R) due to extremely slow progress of work, a collective assessment 
of work done was conducted (April 2023) involving DSCL, B&R, and the Contractor. 
The assessment disclosed (02 May 2023)  that B&R had executed (July  2019 to 
September 2022) works valuing at ` 53.57 crore only (21.51 per cent) out of total cost 
of ` 248.99 crore27 of three projects, that also included unused materials like cable tray, 
precast MUD, paver block material etc., amounting to ` 3.58 crore  as detailed in 
Appendix-2.5. 
The unused materials were subsequently transferred to PIU -PWD. Among the 
transferred materials, there were 787 precast MUD units . However, PIU-PWD only 
utilised 51 units,  opting for duct bank alternatives for the remainder due to  
non-feasibility of the pre -cast MUD.  Consequently, a wasteful expenditure of  
` 3.24 crore was incurred on 736 MUD units as detailed in Appendix-2.5. 
 
27 Smart Road ; ` 203.23 crore ; Integrated Sewerage work ; ` 28.41 crore  and Integrated Drainage ; 
` 17.35 crore.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
22 
The Government, while accepting the audit observation, stated (30 May 2024) that the 
presence of underground utilities of different departments along the routes of the Smart 
Road posed challenges for installing the MUD. Therefore, the duct bank work was 
undertaken after obtaining approval of the appropriate authority . Further, during the 
Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government also stated that all territorial divisions 
of PWD within the district have been informed that they can obtain pre-cast MUD units 
from PIU-PWD, if needed.  
The Government's response is not acceptable, as the issues related to the presence of 
underground utilities of various departments along the Smart Road routes should have 
been addressed during the planning stage. Accordingly, provisions for the duct bank 
should have been included in the DPR. 
2.4.6 Pedestrianization of Paltan Bazaar 
Paltan Bazaar is the oldest and most famous market place of Dehradun . The 
Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar project, with a sanctioned (July 2019) cost of 
` 13.10 crore, aimed at enhancing a 1.2 km stretch from Clock Tower ( Ghanta Ghar) 
to Darshani Gate.  Within this, 476 meters were designated for development as a 
pedestrian walkway with a road section of 2.5 -meter pedestrian on both the sides and  
five-meter central spine for golf cart and limited time vehicular movement. The central 
five-meter carriageway is designed for restricted vehicular movement, with interlocked 
paver block surface. The footpath of average 2.5 -meter width on both the sides 
maintains the same level with the road surface. 
To achieve the objective of the project, many ‘Smart features’ such as benches, E-cart 
with charging station, modular FRP toilets, installation of retractable hydraulic bollards 
to restrict the entry of motor vehicles etc. were envisaged (June 2019) in the DPR as 
detailed in Appendix-2.1.  
It was observed that none of the ‘Smart Solution’ were executed except installation of 
MUD. It was also observed that other ‘Smart Solutions’ viz. e -cart, kiosk garden, 
hydraulic bollards etc., were de -scoped on the approval (April 2022) of the Board of 
DSCL as the feasibility of these items ceased to exist in the current situation due to non-
availability of space. Thus, due to de -scoping of ‘Smart Solutions’ from the scope of 
work, the objectives of Smart Cities as envisaged under the SCM were defeated as focus 
was shifted to infrastructure work as can be seen in  Pictures-2.6 (Before) and  
2.7 (After) below:  
Before After 
 
Picture: 2.6 
 
Picture: 2.7 
 


Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
23 
The Government accepted the audit observation and stated (30 May 2024)  that the 
decision to prioritise core civil infrastructure over Smart Features was made in response 
to site conditions and space constraints, with specific approval of the Board. 
2.4.7 Rejuvenation of Parade Ground 
The Parade Ground has an approximate area of 25 acres, out of which, area of  
10.5 acres was to be developed under SCM with the sanctioned (16 July 2019) cost of 
` 20.87 crore. The core objective of the project was to transform fragmented spaces 
into a pedestrian and dynamic transformational zone. The work was scheduled to be 
completed by 30 October 2020. Till the date of audit (October 2023), the work was 
under progress with an expenditure of ` 14.95 crore 28. The shortcomings noticed in 
execution of the said project are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.4.7.1 Lack of proper maintenance  
The expenditure of ` 14.95 crore incurred on the rejuvenation of Parade Ground also 
included an amount of ` 18.04 lakh 
on providing and fixing of MDPE 
pipes for gardening and sprinkler. 
It was observed that the grass laid 
on the Parade Ground during 
project execution was damaged. 
This also found place in print 
media (15 February 2024). This 
indicates that the grass laid on the 
Parade Ground was not being 
maintained properly.   
The Government stated  
(30 May 2024) that presently, the 
Parade Ground is in good 
condition, and efforts are 
underway to ensure proper 
Operations & Maintenance 
(O&M) to maintain its upkeep 
effectively. Further, during the 
Exit Conference  (21 June 2024), 
the Government stated that the 
project would be handed over to 
the MDDA for operation and maintenance. The fact remains that the project was not 
handed over to the MDDA as of June 2024. 
 
28 ` 14.95 crore = ` 11.40 crore (work by the contractor before termination of the agreement in February 
2023) + ` 3.08 crore (cost of work done by PIU -PWD till November 2023)  + ` 0.47 crore (cost of 
road work done before PM visit). 
 


Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
24 
2.4.7.2 Wasteful expenditure on construction of a VIP Stage 
The DPR of the project ‘Rejuvenation of Parade Ground’ costing ` 20.87 crore also 
incorporated the construction of a VIP stage for Republic Day events and for dignitaries 
addressing large rallies or gatherings. 
Audit noticed that the construction work of the VIP stage was completed 
(February 2021) at a cost of ` 31.30 lakh by the contractor as envisaged in the DPR. 
However, a new VIP stage was later constructed (25 July 2023)  at the cost of 
` 84.11 lakh. This new VIP stage was opposite to the stage constructed earlier, as can 
be seen in the Picture-2.8 below, as the previous stage did not give a macro view of the 
overall parade, and various senior administrative officials of GoU ha d expressed their 
dissatisfaction while receiving the Guard of Honor.  
 
Picture-2.8: View of two VIP stages constructed  in the Parade Ground 
The Government replied (30 May 2024) that the construction of new stage was deemed 
necessary after it was observed that the original stage did not adequately meet the 
requirements for hosting dignitaries and addressing large gatherings, especially during 
significant events such as Republic Day. Further, during the Exit Conference 
(21 June 2024), the Government also stated that the smaller stage is used for small 
functions, while the larger stage is utilised for significant events such as Republic Day, 
Independence Day and Dussehra celebrations.   
The Government’s reply indicates a lack of foresight in designing the first stage to meet 
the requirements for large-scale events. Efficient planning should have anticipated the 
need for a stage capable of serving both small and major functions. The construction of 
a second stage appears to be a corrective measure for an oversight in the initial planning, 
leading to avoidable duplication of infrastructure and inefficient use of public funds. 
2.4.8 City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and Sustain  
DSCL submitted the proposal titled ‘Child Friendly City' for the City Investments to 
Innovate, Integrate and Sustain (CITTIS) challenge organised by the MoHUA, GoI,  
and Agence Francaise de Development (AFD), also known as the French Development 
Agency, with an aim to foster sustainable, innovative, and participatory approaches to  
build projects within the SCM. Through a competitive challenge, MoHUA selected  
12 proposals across four broad themes: sustainable mobility, public open spaces,  
e-Governance and ICT and social and organi sational innovation for low -income 
settlements.  


Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
25 
Initially, the project was not part of the revised SCP. However, Dehradun was selected 
(February 2019) for implementation of CITIIS project through an All -India Challenge 
among the selected Smart Cities . The project proposed to refocus towards specific 
interventions around schools. It included interventions regarding traffic calming 
measures29 and facilities like CCTV camera, parking zone, bollards and foot paths.  A 
total of 106 schools 30 and colleges in Dehradun city were included in the program in 
two phases, with a total sanctioned cost of ` 58.50 crore. The status of Smart Features 
under the project is detailed in Appendix-2.1. 
During the joint physical inspection 
conducted (23 November 2023) by 
audit with the representatives of 
PWD, it was found that the work was 
under progress.  However, following 
deficiencies were noticed in the 
ongoing works: 
➢ Footpaths were not obstacle -free, 
as they contained electric 
equipment installed along them, 
which posed a potential hazard to 
the pedestrians. 
➢ Instead of construction of 
footpaths on the roads, only 
bituminous work was carried out  
at some places  (as shown in first  
Picture-2.9). 
➢ As per norms, the minimum width 
of the pedestrian path should have 
been 1.8 meters. During joint 
physical inspection (23 November 2023),  it was found that the width of the 
constructed footpaths on many roads was less than 1.5 meters, despite that, the 
minimum width in the drawing was kept at 1.5 meters  (as shown in second  
Picture-2.10). 
The Government acknowledged the facts and explained (30 May 2024) that due to site 
conditions and non -availability of space, the proposed features could not be 
implemented.  
2.4.9 Smart Toilet 
To meet the sanitation and cleanliness requirement at public places in Dehradun, DSCL 
took up Smart Public toilet project  with a total sanctioned (November 2018) project 
cost of ` 1.73 crore. The construction of the toilets was to be completed by 
06 September 2019.  
 
29 Installation of the speed tables/humps and rumble strips. 
30 Phase-1: 34 and Phase-2: 72. 
Picture-2.9 
Picture-2.10 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
26 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that DSCL entered (07 March 2019) into an agreement 
with a firm31 for Design, Construction and Installation of seven Smart Toilets including 
O&M for five years at a cost of ` 1.81 crore from the date of completion of project i.e., 
06 September 2019. 
As per the DPR, DSCL's PMC team conducted thorough site reconnaissance following 
the detailed analysis and engaging with the local public to finali se scope, design, and 
selected seven locations32. However, the construction/installation work of all the smart 
toilets was finally completed on 03 September 2022 after a lapse of three years . The 
inordinate delay was attributed to DSCL, as it could not provide an encumbrance free 
site for four smart toilets to the contractor till the scheduled date of the completion and 
subsequent changes in location, and delay in obtaining NOC of the four alte rnative 
sites33.  Further, Smart Features as envisaged in the DPR/Contract were not fully 
executed as detailed in Appendix-2.1. 
Audit conducted (25 November 2023) joint physical inspection with the representative 
of DSCL in respect of five toilets and observed that all the toilets were in operation 
with proper cleanliness and availability of staff. However, auto flushes urinal system 
was not functioning in three34 smart toilets and water tap sensors were also not working 
in two35 smart toilets.   
The Government accepted (30 May 2024) the audit observation. It also stated that 
maintenance issues related to tap or flushing systems are addressed on regular basis. 
Presently, all units are clean and working properly. 
2.4.10 Water Supply Augmentation and Smart Water Metering 
To prevent misutilisation of water in absence of metered connections, a project “Water 
supply augmentation and supply, installation, commissioning of Smart Water Meters”  
was taken up (16 December 2019)  in Zone-4b of water supply area under SCM at the 
contract cost of ` 36.40 crore. Under the project, Automatic Meter Reading (AMR) 
enabled water meters were to be installed to facilitate quick & accurate collection of 
consumer’s consumption data and generation of bills without manual interference & 
errors. The objective was to not only boost Jal Sansthan’s revenue but also to reduce 
water misutilisation.  
The work on this project was scheduled to be completed by 16 December 2020,  
however, the work was under progress and an expenditure of ` 29.54 crore was incurred 
till the date of audit (October 2023). Against the provision of 6492 AMR meters, only 
4,260 AMR meters were commissioned but their digital mapping was yet to be 
completed (March 2024). This indicates that 2,232 AMR meters were not installed even 
after a lapse of three years from the scheduled date of completion. Audit carried out 
 
31 M/s Shri Ram Institute of Rural Development, Shahdara, Delhi. 
32 Parade Ground, Inside Gandhi Park Rajpur road, Collectorate, MDDA Colony Kanwali Road, Doon 
hospital, Railway Station and Sachivalaya. 
33 Sabji Mandi (09 July 2020) , ISBT (January 2021) , Old Tahsil (03 August 2021)  and Parade  
Ground-2 (05 February 2022). 
34 Doon Hospital, Tahseel and Ketchuery. 
35 Parade Ground-2 and Doon Hospital. 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
27 
(15 March 2024) a joint physical inspection with the representative of DSCL, of a few 
selected households and interacted with the residents wherein it was conveyed that the 
project had fulfilled their long-awaited demand for a regular water supply. So far, they 
have not received water bills from the concerned authority based on the newly installed 
Smart Meter. 
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that the metered billing would commence after 
the proper handover of the project to Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan (UJS) which is the nodal 
agency for water distribution and collection of revenue. The fact remains that while about 
one third AMR meters were still pending for installation, even those installed were not 
digitally mapped leading to non-billing and realisation of water charges timely.  
2.5 Case studies 
Case studies related to two projects are discussed below: 
Case Study-1: Non-functional ‘Smart Solutions’ in Smart Schools 
DSCL implemented ‘Smart School Project’ in three government schools 36 within the 
ABD zone of Dehradun. Under this project, three schools were to be equipped with 
smart facilities like interactive boards, computer lab, projectors, e -content, CCTVs, 
Biometric attendance. The project was completed on 01 November 2020 at the cost of 
` 5.91 crore. 
Audit noticed that none of the facilities installed in the three schools under the SCM 
were operational at the time of joint physical inspection conducted (12 December 2023) 
with the representative of DSCL . The primary reason for their non -functionality was 
the inability of the schools to afford huge electricity bills, due to financial constraints.  
Throughout the O&M period i.e., November 2020 to November 2023, DSCL paid the 
electricity charges; however, upon the conclusion of this period, no arrangements were 
made to ensure the continuity of operations of the installed facilities. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government stated that the process of 
transferring the Smart School Project to the Education Department was under way. The 
fact remains that the project was not handed over to the Education Department after the 
expiry of the O&M period due to which, the installed facilities remained unoperational 
as of June 2024. 
Case Study 2: Non-functional Smart Waste Vehicles 
A provision of ` 13 crore was incorporated in the revised SCP for Smart Bins and Smart 
Waste Vehicle (SWV) . Accordingly, NND submitted 37 its request to DSCL for 
providing SWV and Smart Bins to be used for collection of door-to-door waste, stating 
that the above vehicles/equipment may be either procured by DSCL or funds to be 
provided to NND.  
 
36 Government Girls Inter College, Rajpur road; Government Inter College, Khurbura and Government 
Girls Junior High School, Khurbura, Dehradun. 
37 October 2021 (20 e -Rickshaw and 20 Hooper/Tipper)  and October 2022 (75 Hooper/Tipper, four 
Refuse Compactor, one Tata 407 Truck, one JCB and 50 Compactor bins) . 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
28 
Accordingly, DSCL procured and supplied (June 2022)  51 SWVs and sanitation 
equipment, costing ` 5.60 crore to NND and also provided ` 7.14 crore38 to NND for 
procurement of another 100 SWVs . Similarly, DSCL also supplied (May 2021) one  
Sewer cum Jetting Machine costing ` 63.98 lakh to UJS . Besides, it also released 
(March 2023) ` 1.98 crore to UJS for procurement of two machines39 . 
Audit observed that out of 51 SWVs supplied by DSCL to NND, 20 were electric 
cart/rickshaw, costing ` 89.86 lakh . During joint physical inspection conducted 
(30 November 2023) by audit with the representative of NND , it was found that all  
e-carts were lying idle. The agencies hired by NND for door-to-door waste collection, 
informed that the e-rickshaws had been out of operation  since September 2022 due to 
high battery charging costs and the low capacity of the bins. 
 
Picture-2.11: Parking of M/s Econ Waste Management Solution Pvt. Ltd. at Sahastradhara Road  
behind Hotel Down Town 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the audit 
observation, stating that DSCL is coordinating with NND to ensure operationali sation 
of e-rickshaws.  
The fact remains that the action was being initiated by the Management only after the 
issue was flagged by audit. Further, the non -operation of e -rickshaws for almost two 
years reflects the slackness of consistent and proactive management of DSCL as well 
as NND to manage assets worth ` 89.86 lakh created under the SCM.  
2.6 Review of sustainability of projects 
Self-sustained projects are not reliant on external funding or support, giving them the 
freedom to operate according to their own needs and goals. By securing their own 
funding or generating income, these projects ensure that they can continue operating 
without depending on outside donations or grants. Since they manage their own 
resources, stakeholders are often more interested in the project's success and take 
greater responsibility for its outcomes. The matter related to the sustainability of the 
project is discussed below: 
 
38 ` 7.14 crore = ` 4.60 crore (January 2023) + ` 2.54 crore (May 2023).  
39 Jetting Garbing and Rodding Machine and Super Sucker Machine with dump tank.  


Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
29 
2.6.1 Revenue generating projects 
Paragraph 10.1 of the SCM guidelines provides that the States shall ensure that a 
dedicated and substantial revenue stream is made available to the SPV to make it  
self-sustainable and evolve its own creditworthiness for raising additional resources 
from the market. 
Audit found that, out of 22 projects, only four were revenue generating. The details of 
their revenue realisation are given in Table-2.4 below: 
Table-2.4: Details of revenue realised up to March 2023 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of project Revenue calculation 
period from 
Revenue to be 
realised  
Actual Revenue 
realised 
1 Electric Bus February 2021 29.62 3.36 
2 Smart Poles December 2020 1.46 0.32 
3 Water ATM September 2021  0.12 0.09 
4 Smart Water 
Management (SCADA)40 
Scheduled date of 
completion (September 
2021) 
5.30 0.00 
Total 36.50 3.77 
However, the revenue being realised (10.32 per cent) was very less  in comparison to 
the revenue of ` 36.50 crore projected in the contract documents, especially in case of  
e-bus as discussed in the preceding Paragraph 2.4.4. The reasons for lesser revenue 
generation were attributed to extremely low occupancy in e -buses, unavailability of 
required sites for the installation of Smart Poles and Water ATM and delay in 
implementation of SCADA project.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Government stated (30 May 2024) that new 
revenue generation opportunities would be explored, besides enhancing operational 
efficiency and fostering partnership to ensure the long-term sustainability of Smart City 
initiatives in Dehradun. 
2.7 Good practices 
Good practices were observed under the following projects: 
2.7.1 Smart Water Management  
To cater the issue related to water loss, erratic distribution of water from storage 
reservoirs and inefficient electric motors, pumping machinery and other equipment, the 
project “Smart Water Management (SCADA)”  costing ` 53.40 crore was sanctioned 
(16 July 2019)  under SCM. Under the project, the automation of Tube Wells (TWs), 
Overhead Tanks (OHTs) and Booster Pumping Stations (BPS) connected to SCADA41 
was intended to optimise the water supply in Dehradun. The plan involved full 
automation of 198 TWs and 72 OHTs, which would facilitate quantitative and 
qualitative monitoring, all integrated with SCADA for the efficient management. 
 
40 Anticipated saving under the Project Smart Water Management. 
41 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
30 
According to the tripartite agreement (September 2020) among DSCL, contractor42 and 
UJS, the contractor was obligated to achieve a mandatory 10 per cent of compulsory 
saving in present energy consumption cost on all TWs and BPS, which was to be 
determined as per the baseline data and also to be shared with DSCL and 25  per cent 
of any additional saving in energy consumption cost which would be achieved over the 
above mentioned 10 per cent compulsory saving. 
Audit observed that DSCL opted for the ESCO model 43 for implementing the project  
and signed the above tripartite agreement valued at ` 25.07 crore, which also included 
Operation & Maintenance for 10 years.  Under this agreement, the contractor covered 
the cost of the energy -efficient pumping electrical machinery . Consequently, DSCL 
saved ` 28.33 crore44 on the project cost.  
Further, it was observed that the project became operational (May 2023) after a delay 
of 19  months from the scheduled time, i.e. 17 September 2021  and from then until 
December 2023, DSCL effected savings of ` 11.97 crore45 through lower consumption 
of energy. According to the contract, this amount was to be shared 46 between DSCL 
(` 5.96 crore) and contractor ( ` 6.01 crore) . However, the funds against the above 
savings were yet to be released by the GoU.   
2.7.2 Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre 
Certain positive outcomes and good practices noticed in DICCC project are as below: 
1. Traffic Management : ITMS was operational from 09 November 2020. Traffic 
police issued 1,73,618 traffic challans during 2020 -21 to November 2023 against 
violations detected using ITMS application and collected revenue of ` 5.05 crore. 
2. Public safety & security incidents: Based on footage of surveillance cameras installed 
throughout the city, DICCC provided 748 leads to the Police Department, which helped 
the police to ensure public safety. Few resolved cases include finding out a missing 
child based on leads provided by DICCC team, real time reporting of accident caught 
on camera leading to arrival of ambulance and police on accident site.  
3. Assistance to city administration: DICCC helped city administration during dengue 
outbreak (September-October 2023) in the city ensuring timely availability of blood 
and platelets to the patients. A dedicated helpdesk with a toll-free helpline number 
was also set-up for dengue control. 
 
42 M/s GCKC Project & Work Pvt. Ltd. 
43 In Energy Saved sharing model (ESCO), contractor is responsible for all the activities and has to 
quote price of service, considering the ‘Compulsory Saving’, and over and above this the ‘Additional 
Expected Saving’ in the energy bill. 
44 Sanctioned cost ` 53.40 crore – Contract value ` 25.07 crore. 
45 ` 11.97 crore = ` 39.62 crore (Electricity bill if Smart Water Management project not implemented) 
- ` 27.65 crore (Electricity bill after implementation of Smart Water Management project ). 
46 DSCL share was 10 per cent of ` 39.62 crore (electricity bill if Smart Water Management project not 
implemented) i.e. ` 3.96 crore, and 25 per cent of remaining savings of ` 8.01 crore (` 11.97 crore - 
` 3.96 crore) i.e. ` 2.0 crore. Contractor share was ` 6.01 crore ( ` 11.97 crore – DSCL share  
` 5.96 crore). 

Chapter - 2: Project Management and Execution 
31 
4. Award for good works : During COVID -19 pandemic, a war room was set -up in 
DICCC, through which, various citizen centric services such as GIS tracker, 24x7 
dedicated helpline, state level e-pass etc. were provided to assist police and citizens. 
For this, DSCL bagged an award at EXPO-6 Smart City India Award-2021 among 
100 smart cities. 
2.8 Recommendations  
1. The State Government should address operational shortcomings and ensure the 
functioning of non-operational infrastructure developed under the Smart Cities 
Mission. 
2. The State Government should adopt strategies to increase revenue and ensure the 
sustainable operation of infrastructure developed under the Smart Cities Mission 
to minimise the gap between actual and projected revenue. 
3. Responsibility should be fixed for unplanned and inefficient use of public funds 
leading to duplication and infructuous expenditure. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-3 
Contract Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 

33 
Chapter - 3 
 
Contract Management 
 
Dehradun Smart City Limited (DSCL) faced several issues in its contract with the 
Project Management Consultant (PMC). The payment structure didn’t include 
milestone-based payments, leading to funds being released even when projects 
were incomplete. The PMC also did not deploy manpower as p er the contract, 
raising concerns about improper payments and financial integrity. There were 
irregularities such as unverified payments, inadmissible payment, wasteful 
expenditure, procurement violations and reimbursements made to the PMC 
without proper d ocumentation, indicating weak oversight and contract 
enforcement. 
DSCL also failed to provide a clear, obstruction -free work environment for the 
implementing agencies, causing significant project delays and leaving advances 
unadjusted. Besides, DSCL was ineffective in enforcing penalties for delays.  The 
penalties impose d, were either too lenient or not fully enforced, giving undue 
advantages to the contractors. The Chapter also covers  the issues related to cost 
escalation and execution of work without inviting tenders. 
 
3.1 Project Management Consultant 
As per Para 10.6 of the SCM Guidelines, the SPV may appoint Project Management 
Consultants (PMC) for end -to-end services. Accordingly, DSCL initially engaged  
(June 2018) a PMC at the contracted value of ` 17.62 crore for planning, designing, 
developing, managing, implementing, and monitoring of the projects costing 
` 1200 crore to be implemented under the SCM for a  period of three years 1. In the 
interregnum, DSCL also allocated (September 2019) the CITIIS project work to the 
PMC at a cost of ` 2.74 crore. Further, due to completion of tenure of this PMC, DSCL 
had to engage (September 2021) another PMC for an additional two years2 to complete 
the remaining work.  
Audit found the following deficiencies in utilisation of services and payment  made to 
the first PMC: 
3.1.1 Faulty Payment Model 
The contract outlined two distinct payment components: Time -based and Lump sum. 
Each component was further sub divided into two sub -components: remuneration and 
reimbursement, with specific payment criteria for both as detailed below: 
➢ Time-based components: This component consisted of two sub -components 
remuneration and reimbursement. Payment of the remuneration was based on 
 
1 15 June 2018 to 14 June 2021 (extended up to 15 August 2021). 
2 15 September 2021 to 14 September 2023 (extended up to 15 November 2023). 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
34 
the actual deployment of man-days, as per the approved time sheets by DSCL, 
in accordance with the professional fees as per contract whereas the 
reimbursable expenses3 were to be paid based on an actual basis. 
➢ Lump sum component: This component also consisted of two sub-component, 
remuneration and reimbursement. However, the payment was to be made on a  
pro-rata basis, contingent upon the achievement of specified deliverables4. 
Audit observed that upon completion of the tenure of the  first PMC, DSCL disbursed 
the full contractual amount e.g., ` 17.62 crore to it, while only four projects 5 costing 
` 18.79 crore were completed till August 2021. The progress of 15 projects ranged from 
7 to 92 per cent and the remaining two6 projects had not commenced till June 2021.  
For execution and supervision of ongoing/remaining projects, DSCL engaged a new 
PMC (September 2021) at cost of ` 14.35 crore (excluding GST) for the  next two 
years7. Audit observed that DSCL failed to learn from the  previous experiences, 
neglecting to tie payment to the progress of work, opting instead for the previous 
payment model. As a result, an amount of ` 11.20 crore was disbursed to this PMC by 
June 2023, with a remaining claim of ` 1.33 crore pending for the subsequent period. 
Satisfactory progress in the execution of projects could not be achieved till the end of 
the contract period (September 2023). Out of 18 projects (including CITIIS), 
12 projects costing ` 463.58 crore were completed and six 8 costing ` 498.18 crore  
(50 per cent  of SCP) were still in progress  which ranged from two per cent to  
75 per cent.  This indicated that the payment model was not linked to the milestone and 
works valuing ` 498.18 crore were being executed without PMC despite total contract 
payment of ` 28.82 crore9 made to them for a period of five years.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government acknowledged the 
concerns and explained that, based on the prevailing practice, the contract was 
structured on a Remuneration & Reimbursement basis. The Chief Executive Officer 
(CEO) further added that the progress of the projects was impacted by various 
challenges including complexities of coordinating with multiple line departments, 
execution of work in brownfield area, site issues and contract issues. Further, the CEO 
assured that,  in future contr acts, the supervision component of the contract will be 
linked to progress of the project.  
The reply is not acceptable as the mentioned challenges should have been anticipated 
and addressed during the planning phase. Effective contract management should 
include provisions for mitigating such challenges rather than attributing them as 
 
3 All assignment-related costs such as travel, translation, report printing, secretarial expenses, subject 
to the specified maximum limits in the Contract. 
4 Submission of situation analysis report for sub -modules, feasibility study report, detailed project 
report and bid documents and its acceptance & approval by the DSCL. 
5 Smart Toilet: ₹ 1.81 crore; Smart Waste Vehicle: ₹  16.32 crore; Monumental Flag: ₹  0.10 crore and 
Digitization of Collectorate and CDO office: ₹ 0.56 crore. 
6 Green Building & Façade Projects. 
7 15 September 2021 to 14 September 2023 (extended up to 15 November 2023). 
8 Green Building, Smart Road, Sewerage work, Drainage work, CITIIS and Smart Pole in PPP Mode . 
9 ₹ 28.82 crore = ₹ 17.62 crore + ₹ 11.20 crore. 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
35 
unforeseeable or citing these as reasons for delays. Further, the fact remains that the 
payment model was faulty as it was not linked with the milestones of the projects. 
3.1.2 Irregularities in payments to the first PMC 
Audit noticed the following instances of mismanagement related to deployment of 
manpower by the first PMC: 
3.1.2.1 Irregular Payment  
According to the contract with the PMC, the deployment of manpower for Project 
Implementation & Supervision support was scheduled to commence after the selection 
of the implementing agency for the first project (February 2019). However, audit 
noticed that the PMC claimed remuneration of ` 1.27 crore for this activity from the 
onset of the contract in June 2018 up to February 2019. Consequently, payment made 
to the PMC for deployment of manpower prior to selection of Implementing Agency 
(IA) was in violation  of the contract provisions and it also contravened financial 
propriety standards. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), it was replied that the contract included a 
staffing schedule designed for the entire 36 -month tenure, indicating the engagement 
of PMC from the commencement of the contract. Accordingly, manpower was 
deployed and payments were made.  
The reply is not acceptable because the staffing schedule mentioned in the contract 
clearly stated that the deployment of manpower for Project Implementation & 
Supervision support was to commence only after the selection of the IA of the first 
project.  
3.1.2.2 Deployment of ineligible IT Expert 
Clause-3.6 and 4.3 of the contract provided that the PMC shall obtain the employer’s 
prior approval before making any change or addition to the personnel listed in the 
contract. It also specified that the IT expert must hold B.Tech. qualification in 
Information Technology/Computer Science and a minimum experience of 12 years in 
GoI/ State Government/ PSU with respect to e-Governance, IT based Smart Solutions, 
Business Process Re -engineering projects with at least two works of more than 
` 20 crore each. 
Audit observed that for replacement of existing IT Expert, the Curriculum Vitae (CV) 
of an IT Expert was submitted (25 October 2018) for approval of the CEO, but the same 
was rejected (14 November 2018) on the grounds that the qualification and the 
experience of the said IT expert were not as per the provisions of the contract. However, 
upon submission (12 December 2018) of a representation by the PMC, DSCL later 
accorded (May 2019) post-facto approval for deployment of the same IT Expert, using 
the same do cuments and records that had previously led to the rejection, and made 
payment of ` 35.84 lakh (excluding GST) to the PMC against the remuneration for nine 
months 10. 
 
10 15 October 2018 to 15 July 2019. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
36 
The Government replied (30 May 2024) that the engagement of the IT expert was 
approved by CEO, DSCL, the competent authority of the Smart City, after due 
consideration of the submitted CV.  
The reply is not acceptable as the then CEO also expressed (March 2019) dissatisfaction 
with the IT expert's performance citing an unsatisfactory Reference for Proposal  
proposed for the IT project, which contributed to project delays. The payment made to 
PMC as remuneration for the IT expert was, therefore, unjustified.  
3.1.2.3 Unverified Payment   
Following instances of unverified payment were observed during audit: 
1. Scrutiny of records revealed that DSCL disbursed payment of ` 32.50 lakh to the 
PMC against a supplementary bill for the month of March 2021. The supplementary 
bill was associated with the remuneration claim of eleven ‘Key Experts and Support 
Staff’ for the period from November 2020 to March 2021. It was observed that the 
payment of supplementary claim was not justified as the concerned personnel were 
not present as per the attendance records during the specified claim made earlier in 
the respective months. However, these personnel were shown to be present later in 
the respective months as per the above supplementary claim. Further, CEO, DSCL 
had also observed (December 2020) that many of the key personnel were not being 
mobilised by PMC since long. Notably,  there was no record or note on file 
explaining the rationale behind the payment of the supplementary bill.  
2. Further, scrutiny of voucher for the month of August 2018 revealed that 
remuneration of ` 1.50 lakh was paid to an Environment Expert, whereas the said 
Expert was not present during that month as per the attendance records. 
Thus, the claims made by the PMC was not scrutinised with due diligence by the 
concerned authorities of DSCL. Consequently, payment of ` 34.00 lakh to the PMC 
was made on the basis of unverified claim.  
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that in the supplementary bill for March 2021 
disbursement were made to 11 key experts and support staff on the approval of the 
Board (26 June 2021). The attendance records of these personnel were not documented 
in the register for the months following the expiration of the man-month.  In respect of 
payment to the Environment Expert, DSCL accepted that the presence was not 
documented in the manual register, however, payment was allowed based on 
computerised records.  
The reply is not acceptable, as payments were released without verification of actual 
presence and no documentary evidence was furnished to Audit to establish the 
genuineness of the claim. Audit observed that the man -days of eight out of the 11 key 
experts/support staff were still available and had not been exhausted. Hence, the 
contention that attendance was not recorded due to expiry of man -month is factually 
incorrect. Additionally, if the man-days had actually been exhausted, the attendance of 
the above staff should not have been recorded in April and May 2021; however, entries 
were found in the manual attendance register. Further, continuance of remaining three 
staff should have been based on prior approval, as required in the contract. 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
37 
3.1.2.4 Inadmissible Payment 
The DSCL handed over (July 2019 to October 2019) three projects 11 costing 
` 407.33 crore to other IAs12 for execution. Audit observed that the DSCL had made an 
inadmissible payment of ` 28.82 lakh 13 to the PMC for bid process management 14 
though the same was carried out by the concerned IAs themselves. It was also observed 
that the above claim made in the bill of December 2019 was earlier withheld on the 
same ground, but later, it was re -submitted in the bill of January 2020, which was 
released (February 2020) by DSCL.  
During Exit Conference (21 June 2024), it was replied that IAs followed their own 
departmental processes for contract management. However, the PMC provided 
extended support to the IAs by supplying the Bill of Quantities (BoQ) and offered 
assistance as needed. Throughout the project execution phase, the PMC also provided 
overarching supervision and monitoring.  
The reply is not acceptable as the payment to PMC was admissible for complete bid 
process management from bid invitation to bid evaluation and selection of the 
contractor. Since the IAs followed their own departmental processes for contract 
management, no payment was admissible for bid process management. Besides, 
separate payments were made to the PMC for DPR including BoQ, supervision, and 
monitoring tasks. 
3.1.2.5 Reimbursement without invoice and documents 
According to Rule 3 (13) (3) of Uttarakhand Procurement Rules 2017, the standards of 
financial propriety stipulate that every government servant shall exercise the same 
vigilance in respect of expenditure incurred form public money as a person of ordinary 
prudence would exercise in respect of the expenditure of his own money. Further, as 
per the provision of the contract, the reimbursement should be on actual basis. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that there was a provision of ` 48 lakh15 in the contract 
with PMC for reimbursable expenses towards local transport. Further, it was also 
provided in the contract that the copy of the Registration Certificate (RC) of the hired 
vehicle and the logbook containing journey details for reimbursable expenses for local 
transport shall be submitted by the PMC. Audit scrutiny revealed that DSCL had 
reimbursed the claim of ` 45.60 lakh16 to the PMC for 76 vehicle months during the 
period June 2018 to August 2021 without any invoice of actual expenditure incurred by 
PMC. Scrutiny of the vouchers related to payment of ` 45.60 lakh also revealed the 
following irregularities: 
a. ` 7.80 lakh was paid by DSCL for 13 vehicle months without copy of RC of the 
hired vehicle, and of the logbook containing journey details.   
 
11 Smart Road (₹ 190.54 crore in July 2019), Green Building (₹ 204.46 crore in October 2019) and 
Modern Doon Library (₹ 12.33 crore in September 2019).  
12 Implementing Agencies for project Smart Road, Green Building and Modern Doon Library were M/s 
B& R (India) Limited, CPWD and UJN respectively.   
13 ₹ 28.82 lakh = ₹ 407.33 crore/₹ 1200 crore x ₹ 2.056 crore x 35 per cent + GST @ 18 per cent. 
14 Preparation of Bid documents and award of contract. 
15 ₹ 60,000 per month (excluding GST) for 80 months. 
16 At maximum rate of ₹ 60,000/month/vehicle for 76 months. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
38 
b. Payment for the claim of an amount of ` 4.20 lakh for the period from July 2018 
to January 2019 was made for private vehicles. 
It is evident from the above that the claims were not scrutinized with due diligence by 
the concerned/competent authorities of the DSCL. Consequently, an irregular payment 
of ` 45.60 lakh was made to PMC. 
During Exit Conference (21 June 2024), while accepting the audit contention, it was 
stated that DSCL would seek clarification from the consultant, if the consultant failed 
to provide a satisfactory justification, the amount would be recovered from the 
consultant. 
3.1.2.6 Irregularities in CITIIS project  
The City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and Sustain (CITIIS) project was 
introduced at a later stage (February 2019) under SCM.  DSCL allocated 
(September 2019) the work of DPR preparation and supervision for CITIIS project  to 
the PMC at a cost of ` 2.74 crore through an amendment to the initial contract, despite 
the fact that the work of DPR for the Gandhi Road containing the same component was 
already prepared by this PMC.  Following financial irregularities were noticed under 
the project:  
a) Undue benefit to the PMC 
Audit scrutiny showed that even though DSCL issued several letters and termination 
notice (June 2019) to the PMC due to its unsatisfactory performance, the work of DPR 
preparation and supervision for CITIIS project was entrusted (September 2019) to the 
same PMC without adhering to the tendering process 17 outlined in the Uttarakhand 
Procurement Rules, 2017. DSCL exclusively solicited a proposal from the same PMC 
and awarded the work through a contract amendment. On comparing the costs of DPR 
preparation and supervision for the CITIIS project with those of earlier projects of 
SCM, it was observed that the work was awarded to the PMC at significantly higher 
rates (3 to 12 times higher) than the rates quoted under the original contract, as detailed 
in the Table-3.1 below: 
Table-3.1-: Comparison of rates of CITIIS project with Smart City projects 
Particulars Rates under 
CITIIS project 
Rates under 
original PMC contract 
Considering DPR Preparation Cost 
Cost of Project (A) ` 58.00 crore ` 1,200.00 crore 
DPR Preparation Cost (B) ` 1.18 crore  ` 2.056 crore  
Average Cost of preparation of DPR 
costing ` one crore. (B/A) ` 2.03 lakh   ` 0.17 lakh 
Comparison of average cost of CITIIS 
project with SCM projects 
11.94 times = 
` 2.03 (average cost of CITIIS)/ ` 0.17  
(Average cost of SCM) 
Considering Overall Cost 
Cost of Project-(C)  ` 58.00 crore ` 1,200.00 crore 
Design, Development, Management and 
implementation cost- (D) ` 2.74 crore ` 17.62 crore 
 
17 Works/services valuing ₹ 50.00 lakh were to be executed through two bid system.  

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
39 
Particulars Rates under 
CITIIS project 
Rates under 
original PMC contract 
Average Cost of Design, Development, 
Management and Implementation of 
work costing ` one crore. (D/C) 
` 4.72 lakh ` 1.46 lakh 
Comparison of average cost of CITIIS 
project with SCM projects 
3.23 times = 
` 4.72 lakh (average cost of CITIIS)/ ` 1.46 lakh 
(Average cost of SCM) 
Audit scrutiny also revealed that the DPR prepared by the PMC for the CITIIS project, 
was approved (November 2021) by the HPSC for ₹  58.50 crore. Thus, entrustment of 
CITIIS project to the PMC without adhering to the tendering process was in violation 
of the Procurement Rules, which also led to undue benefit of ₹ 1.09 crore18 on account 
of higher rates.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government replied that, to ensure 
continuity and efficiency in the project execution, the project was awarded to the same 
PMC through contract negotiation. Regarding higher rates, it was replied that CITIIS 
project involved higher level of intricacy and innovation, justifying higher rates for 
services for DPR preparation and project management.  
The reply is not justified as the scope of work under CITIIS project included routine 
work like MUD, drains and water supply work, traffic calming measures etc. which 
were similar to those executed under Smart Road and other Project s of SCM and did 
not involve any high level of intricacy and innovation.  
b) Wasteful expenditure   
The PMC had prepared (March 2021) the DPR in two parts, one of which pertained to 
the construction of Gandhi Road, costing at ₹  39.31 crore and the other part related to 
child friendly intervention costing ₹ 13.24 crore along with ₹ 5.95 crore for O&M and 
overhead charges. Audit noticed that Gandhi Road project was dropped  
(December 2022) due to its alignment overlapping with the proposed metro route. 
Notably, the alignment issue had already been brought to the notice of the DSCL by 
Uttarakhand Metro Rail Corporation in December 2018. Despite this, a wasteful 
expenditure of ₹ 79.80 lakh19 was incurred in preparation of the DPR. 
No specific reply was furnished by the Government. 
c) Reimbursement without invoice and documents 
DSCL allocated ₹ 1.18 crore 20 for remuneration and reimbursement expenses in the 
contract for DPR preparation of the CITIIS project. The contract amendment signed 
(September 2019) for the CITIIS project lacked a breakdown specifying the activities 
covered, rate and allocation of months, for the reimbursement component, though there 
were defined criteria/items for payment against the reimbursement component in the 
original contract.  
 
18 ` 1.09 crore = [` 2.03 - ` 0.1712 (as calculated in Table-3.1)] x ` 58.50 crore.  
19 ` 79.80 lakh = Average Cost of preparation of DPR costing  ` 1.0 crore i.e. ` 2.03 lakh x Total cost 
of DPR i.e. ` 39.31 crore. 
20 Remuneration: ` 82.73 lakh for 24 Man -month (Key Expert: 19 + Non -Key Expert: 5) & 
Reimbursement ` 35.00 lakh. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
40 
No documentation was found on records indicating the methodology used to calculate 
the expenses associated with reimbursement components. Instead, a lump -sum 
provision of ₹  35.00 lakh was incorporated in the contract without any payment 
conditions. Scrutiny of the voucher revealed that the entire payment of ₹  35.00 lakh 
(excluding GST) was made (January 2022) to PMC under the reimbursement head 
without any supporting documents. Thus, lump sum payment of ₹ 35.00 lakh to PMC 
by the DSCL was without due diligence and hence unjustified.  
The Government replied (30 May 2024) that the lump-sum provision was structured to 
provide flexibility in managing expense associated with the project’s unique 
requirements, ensuring timely progress and quality deliverables. The payment to the 
PMC was made in accordance with the provision outlined in the contract and with due 
diligence.  
The reply is not acceptable because, similar to the original contract, defined 
criteria/items should have been part of the contract amendment. Further, reimbursement 
should have been on actual basis supported by the documentary evidence.   
d) Irregular Payment  
i) As per Rule 3 (13) (3) of Uttarakhand Procurement Rules, 2017, the standards of 
financial propriety stipulate that every government servant shall exercise the same 
vigilance in respect of expenditure incurred form public moneys as a person of 
ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of the expenditure of his own money. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that an amount ₹ 21.80 lakh was reimbursed (June 2021) to the 
PMC for work (Tactical Urbanism Exercise) carried out under CITIIS programme. 
Further, scrutiny of the voucher revealed that the invoices, submitted by the PMC in 
support of the claim did not bear the names of either the PMC or DSCL 21. 
Consequently, the above payment made to the PMC was irregular.  
The Government replied (30 May 2024) that the work was further assigned by the PMC 
to other company (Athena Informatics India Ltd) which had sub-contracted the task to 
yet another company (Big Daddy Co). Accordingly, the payment to the PMC was made 
after considering the bill raised by these companies to PMC.  
The reply is not justified as the bills from the company engaged by the PMC, were 
submitted (July 2021) to it after DSCL had already made the payment to the PMC  
(June 2021).  
ii) According to the contract with the second PMC, the deployment of manpower for 
Project Implementation & Supervision was scheduled to commence after the 
selection of the implementing agency. PIU -PWD was selected (October 2022) as 
the implementing agency for the CITIIS project. Hence, payment to the PMC on 
account of remuneration for deployment of Implementation & Supervision staff 
under this project should have commenced only after selection of IA.  
 
21 Instead, the invoice was issued by the Big Daddy Co. in favour of Athena Informatics India Limited, 
Vasant Vihar, Dehradun (GSTIN-05AAICA6830B1Z4). 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
41 
Audit scrutiny revealed that DSCL had disbursed ₹ 65.40 lakh to the second PMC22 for 
CITIIS project 23 from September 2021 to September 2022 even before selection of  
PIU-PWD as IA in October 2022. Thus, the payment of ₹ 65.40 lakh made to the PMC 
was in violation of the provisions of the contract causing avoidable financial burden to 
the DSCL to the same extent. 
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that deploying staff for preparation of the DPR 
for CITIIS fell well within the scope of work stipulated in the contract. Although the 
renovation of Gandhi Road was removed, and 72 new schools were incorporated into 
the DPR, both tasks were effectively managed by the second PMC. 
The reply is not acceptable as the DPR was already prepared by the first PMC. Further, 
the cost of additional resources deployed in CITIIS DPR preparation for 72 schools, as 
intimated by the second PMC, amounted to only ₹ 21.80 lakh.   
3.1.3 Lack of action against the PMC 
Audit scrutiny revealed  that the first PMC did not  adopt a professional approach 
towards the work of Smart City from the very beginning. Several projects under DSCL 
were facing issues of delayed submission of the design and drawings, unavailability of 
IT expert & support staff for supervision etc., which ultimately resulted in delay in the 
execution of the projects. It was also noticed that the performance of the PMC in 
supervision and monitoring of quality of works executed by the contractor was 
unsatisfactory. 
DSCL issued (June 2019) notice of termination, wherein it was stated that “the PMC 
is incompetent for the implementation and the supervision of the project and the 
quality of the DPR is also not up to the expectation of the DSCL, PMC is submitting 
the DPR just for the formality”. Despite this, DSCL did not terminate the contract with 
the PMC, however, it assigned another work of CITIIS project valuing ₹ 58.50 crore to 
the same PMC in September 2019. 
Audit found that apart from issuing routine warning/show cause notices and termination 
notice (June 2019 & January 2021) to the PMC, DSCL had neither initiated any action 
nor had it imposed any penalty on the PMC for delay and bad quality works. Further, it 
was observed that the issues relating to the unsatisfactory performance and bad quality 
of work done by the PMC were in notice of the DSCL (September 2018), however, at 
the verge of completion of the contract period (June 2021), the matter of poor 
performance of the PMC was brought to the notice of Board (17 th Board meeting held 
on 24 March 2021). The Board ordered to take appropriate action and impose penalty 
as per the conditions of the contract owing to the unsatisfactory performance of the 
PMC and the CEO was authorized to take appropriate action, which may  include 
termination of the contract. However, no action was initiated against the PMC despite 
order of the Board. 
 
22 M/s TATA Consulting Engineers Limited. 
23 GoU established (October  2022) PIU -PWD as the implementing agency for CITIIS project.  
A contract for execution of CITIIS works was executed in February 2023 by the PIU -PWD. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
42 
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that the PMC’s performance was evaluated 
based on various factors including adherence to the contractual obligations, and 
appropriate actions were taken as necessary. Besides, no further extension was granted 
to the PMC due to performance issues. During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the 
Government also added that blacklisting would be initiated against the PMC.  
The reply is not acceptable as no action was taken against the PMC as per the 
contractual provisions and the order of the Board.  Moreover, despite poor performance, 
another work of CITIIS project was awarded to it during the term of the contract.  
3.2 Arbitrary selection of B&R (CPSU) as an implementing agency 
During a meeting (March 2019) chaired by the Chief Secretary, GoU, it was decided 
that engaging a Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) would be better to execute 
the work related to roads, sewer line, drinking water line, drainage, and MUD, as these 
works had not been comprehensively undertaken by any department of Government of 
Uttarakhand. Accordingly, DSCL had sought (April 2019) proposals from all the eight 
CPSUs empanelled as executing agencies in Uttarakhand. In response, five CPSUs 
showed (May 20 19) their interest while one CPSU (NBCC) expressed its regret as 
detailed in Table-3.2 below: 
Table-3.2: List of empanelled CPSUs in Uttarakhand 
Sl. No. Name of the CPSU Experience 
1 
National Projects 
Construction Corporation 
Limited 
Under M/o Jal Shakti 
Township and Buildings, Public Health Engineering and 
Environmental Projects, Surface Transport Projects, Dams / 
Weirs, Barrages, Canals, Industrial Structure, Hydroelectric 
Projects, Thermal Power Projects, Chimney / Transmission 
Projects, Project Management Consultancy, 
2 
Bridge & Roof Company 
Ltd. Under M/o Heavy 
Industries 
• Rich experience of 100 years in the field of construction like 
Piling and Foundation, Housing projects, Hospital building, 
Institutional building, Office complex, High rise buildings and 
Structure, Auditoriums, Airport terminal buildings, Roads and 
Highways and all other types of civil works in Infrastructure 
and Industry sector.  
3 
Engineering Projects (India) 
Ltd.  
Under M/o Heavy Industries 
EPI has the rare distinction of having worked for almost 
all Power utilities and Steel Plants both in the Public Sector as 
well as in the Private Sectors. 
4 WAPCOS Ltd.  
Under M/o Jal Shakti 
Engaged in engineering consultancy services and construction 
in the fields of water, power and infrastructure sectors for 
businesses and communities in India and overseas. 
5 
Central Public Works 
Department Under 
M/o Housing and Urban  
Affairs 
CPWD had submitted its profile only which does not include 
the details of similar work experience. Hence, not considered.  
6 NBCC Under M/o Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
It had carried out multiple projects in Uttarakhand including 
Himalayan Cultural Centre, Kaulagarh, Dehradun. 
Source: Official website of the concerned company. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that:  
i. No objective scoring criteria/parameters for the selection among the five CPSUs 
was proposed by DSCL. Instead, CPSUs were subjectively assessed stating that 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
43 
“from the technical evaluation, it seems that three empanelled agencies namely 
WAPCOS, NPCC and B&R having the relevant experience of the smart road in 
major counts”.  Accordingly, out of the above three CPSUs, Bridge & Roof (India) 
Limited (B&R) was nominated (June 2019) by the Government as the executing 
agency for the implementation of project – Smart Road. However, no criteria/  
parameter was found on records for nomination of B&R among the three CPSUs. 
Further, for “Drainage work” and “Sewerage work” separate nomination was made 
(November 2019) in favour of B&R in the similar manner. 
ii. Further scrutiny revealed that B&R had no registration under GST in Uttarakhand 
as on the date of nomination (19 June 2019), whereas the other two CPSUs has 
already been registered 24 in Uttarakhand at the time of nomination of the B&R as 
implementing agency. It was observed that B&R got registration under GST in 
Uttarakhand on 01 January 2021, which indicates that B&R had no working 
experience in Uttarakhand as of the date of nomination.  
iii. Scrutiny revealed that DSCL signed three MoU with B&R for implementation of 
three projects as detailed in the Table-3.3 below: 
Table-3.3: Details of MoU signed with B&R 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Work Date of MOU Scheduled date 
of completion Amount 
1 
Construction of Smart Road including 
multi utility duct, sewerage, drainage  
and water supply etc.  
12 July 2019 01 July 2021 203.23 
2 Drainage work  (Part-II) connecting 
drains up to Outfall points including. 
10 December 
2019 
01 December 
2020 17.35 
3 
Sewerage work  (Part-II) Main sewer 
network of ABD area with connectivity 
up to existing Outfall.   
10 December 
2019 
01 December 
2020 30.30 
As per the MoU, the work (Smart Road) was scheduled to be completed by, 
01 July 2021. However, by the end of the extended time period (April 2022 25) B&R 
could complete only 30 per cent of the physical work of Smart Road and Sewerage 
work and the Drainage work could not be commenced. As a result, the MoU with B&R 
was terminated by the Government in September 2022. Further, for execution of the 
leftover work, the GoU nominated PWD and est ablished (October 2022) a separate 
Project Implementing Unit (PIU -PWD) for Smart Road work (₹  138.06 crore) and 
assigned (October - November 2022) the Drainage (₹ 9.84 crore) and Sewerage work 
(₹ 16.00 crore) to Irrigation Department, Uttarakhand and UJN r espectively. Audit 
scrutiny showed that though the works had not been completed by April 2024 even after 
lapse of seven to nine months from the scheduled date of completion 26, all the three 
projects were in an advanced stage27 of construction.  
 
24 NPCC: 29 October 2018 and WAPCOS: 07 July 2017. 
25 Extension up to April 2022 was provided on the approval of the Board of DSCL due to COVID -19 
pandemic impact. 
26 Smart Road:16 August 2023; Drainage work: 30 June 2023 and Sewerage work: 01 June 2023.  
27 Smart Road (98 per cent); Drainage work (95 per cent); and Sewerage work (60 per cent). 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
44 
Thus, the nomination of B&R as implementing agencies was, prima facie, unjustified. 
The said company was specialised in the industrial work and accordingly was under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Heavy Industries, GoI. Secondly, there was a 
dedicated Public Works Department for Road & Bridge works, Irrigatio n Department 
for Drainage work and State PSU (UJN) for Sewerage work and Water Supply Works. 
In fact, the State’s own agencies carried out all the works for which they were initially 
found unsuitable by the senior functionaries of the Government. Besides, the GoU 
agencies (Uttarakhand Urban Sector Development Agency and Irrigation Department) 
already had experience in executing sewerage and drainage related works under 
externally aided projects and State funded projects.  
The Government accepted (30 May 2024) the fact and replied that B&R was 
subjectively assessed as having relevant experience in road projects. Further, no 
objective scoring criteria was adopted as the decision to nominate B&R was based on 
technical evaluation indicating their suitability for the project. It was clarified that the 
process for selection of the executive agency (B&R) adhered to the guidelines and 
directives set by the GoU.  
The reply is not acceptable because the top authorities of the State overlooked the 
working capabilities of their own esteemed organizations which had extensive 
experience in the relevant field. Further, the work left unfinished by B&R was being 
done by the Government agencies of Uttarakhand, which was in the advanced stages of 
progress28 as of 30 April 2024. Further, the Guidelines issued by Central Vigilance 
Commission provides that the award of contacts/procurements/projects on nomination 
basis without adequate justification amounts to a restrictive practice eliminating 
competition, fairness and equity.   
3.2.1 Not providing hindrance-free work front 
The site for the work to be carried out under the MoU with B&R was situated in a 
brownfield area, specifically in busy commercial hubs, where numerous utilities 
belonging to various departments were present. Audit observed the following instances 
of unavailability of hindrance-free work front. 
i) B&R repeatedly informed DSCL through various letters that DSCL had not 
provided a hindrance free work front and had not submitted drawings and designs 
on time. In response, DSCL consistently stated that, according to the MoU, B&R 
was responsible for removi ng hindrances and providing drawings and designs. 
Despite this disagreement, neither DSCL nor B&R brought the matter before the 
Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC) as specified in the MoU. 
The Government did not furnish any specific reply, however, the Management stated 
(December 2023) that, as per the MoU, B&R was responsible for addressing hindrances 
and handling drawing-related matters. DSCL also attempted to address the hindrance 
by coordinating with the line departments. Further, it was also stated that B&R had 
demanded new rates instead of taking the matter to DRC.  
 
28 60 per cent to 98 per cent. 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
45 
The reply is not acceptable as MoU did not include any specific provisions regarding 
the responsibility for hindrance removal. Moreover, B&R had consistently raised 
concerns about hindrance removal and drawing-related matters. Further, while the B&R 
conveyed (June 2022) the request of the contractor for introduction of a Price Variation 
Clause, the termination process of the MoU was already underway. During this period, 
DSCL had also not taken any steps to address the matter with DRC. 
ii) Four roads earmarked for the implementation of the Smart Road project were 
located in the busy commercial hub of the city, where there were many hindrances 
in alignment. Despite being aware of the project's complexity and technical 
challenges, DSCL failed to identify these hindrances during planning stage or 
devise a concrete plan for shifting the utilities or removing obstacles 29. B&R 
submitted a list of overhead hindrances, as detailed in Appendix-3.1, to DSCL in 
December 2019, January 2020, October 2020 and July 2021. DSCL, lacking in 
ownership of any assets, forwarded these concerns to the respective line 
departments from time to time. However, the necessary action was not taken by the 
concerned department. This not only indicates lack of effective planning on the part 
of DSCL but also shows lack of coordination with the concerned line departments. 
Government accepted (30 May 2024) the fact, and replied that identification and 
mitigation of hindrances, particularity in busy commercial hubs, are crucial for the 
successful implementation of infrastructure projects like Smart Road. It further added 
that certain challenges were encountered in addressing hindrances related to utilities, 
hoardings, poles, trees and other obstacles during the planning and execution phase of 
the project. However, DSCL actively engaged with the line departments through joint 
site visits and made correspondence to facilitate the necessary utility shifting.  
The reply is not acceptable because DSCL should have identified these hindrances 
during the planning stage and developed a concrete plan for shifting utilities or 
removing obstacles rather than making a lump-sum provision of ₹ 2.00 crore for utility 
shifting. Furthermore, despite the participation of Heads of Departments and 
representatives from various line departments 30 in the HPSC/Board of DSCL, the site 
issues could not be resolved. 
3.2.2 Non-refund of unutilised funds  
Against the three MoU, an amount of ₹ 76.84 crore, as detailed in Table-3.4 below, 
was released as advance to B&R for implementation of three projects.  
Table-3.4: Details of funds released to B&R 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of the Work Date of release of fund Amount  
1 Smart Road work 23.10.2019 20.00 
2 Drainage work  16.09.2020 1.63 
 
29 Obstacles refers to transformers, electric poles, bus stand, police booth, trees, dustbins, hoardings and 
encroachment etc.  
30 HPSC: UDD, Planning Department, PWD, Peyjal Department, Energy Department and Mayor, 
Nagar Nigam, Board of DSCL, MDDA, UDD, Nagar Nigam, Energy Department, Jal Sansthan and 
PWD. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
46 
Sl. No. Name of the Work Date of release of fund Amount  
3 Sewerage work 16.09.2020 2.84 
4 Smart Road work 29.09.2020 30.00 
5 Smart Road work 10.09.2021 20.00 
Total 74.47 
Centage Charge 13.10.2021 2.37 
Grand Total 76.84 
As per joint measurement ,31 the implementing agency (B&R) had executed  the work 
costing ₹ 57.78 crore (including GST and centage charges) till the date of termination 
(14 September 2022) of the MoU. Audit noticed that the unutilised amount of 
₹ 19.06 crore32 lying with B&R had not been remitted to DSCL. B&R cited various 
reasons like pending recovery of mobilization advance (₹  7.02 crore) and contractors 
claim (₹  33.33 crore) for losses incurred due to termination of contract. It further 
clarified that the co ntractor has initiated arbitration against the IA  i.e., B&R and the 
refund is contingent upon settlement of claim with the contractor. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the fact and 
stated that they pursued (March 2024) the matter with B&R to adjust and return the 
unutilised amount. It was further explained that since the contractor has initiated 
arbitration to settle a claim of ₹  33.33 crore against B&R; B&R has indicated that the 
unutilised amount will be returned after the arbitration is settled. Additionally, in the 
28th Board of Directors meeting (19 June 2024), it was decided that DSCL would 
arrange a  meeting between DSCL, B&R, and the contractor, to be headed by the 
Chairman, DSCL (Divisional Commissioner, Garhwal) to settle the case. The fact 
remains that refund of ₹ 19.06 crore from B&R was pending as of November 2024. 
3.3 Non-imposition of penalty for delay in execution of projects 
Audit noticed instances of delays ranging from 19 months to 38 months with reference 
to the MoUs executed with IAs in execution of eight projects as detailed in  
Appendix-3.2. In one out of eight instances i.e., Smart Road, there was cost escalation 
as detailed in paragraph 3.5 below. Despite the provision of penalties in the respective 
contracts, no penalty was imposed by DSCL in case of Smart Road as it failed to 
provide hindrance free work front to B&R. Further, in case of Rejuvenation of Parade 
Ground, partial penalty was imp osed as discussed in the succeeding paragraph 3.3.1.  
Similarly, in case of Pedestrianisation of Paltan Baza ar, penalty was imposed but 
partially recovered as discussed below in paragraph 3.3.2.  
3.3.1 Non-imposition of penalty in case of Rejuvenation of Parade Ground 
Clause 56.1 of the General Condition of Contract, in conjunction with Particular 
Condition of Contract 58.1, stipulates that if the contract is terminated due to a 
fundamental breach by the contractor, the employer shall recover 20 per cent of the 
value of the work that remains incomplete. 
 
31 Representatives of DSCL, B&R, PMC and Contractor of B&R.  
32 ₹ 19.06 crore = ₹ 76.84 crore - ₹ 57.78 crore. 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
47 
DSCL entered into an agreement (30 October 2019) with a contractor 33 for 
₹ 18.92 crore (excluding GST) for Rejuvenation of Parade Ground.  The work was 
scheduled to be completed by 30 October 2020. Due to slow progress of the work even 
after granting time extension, the Board of DSCL decided (July 2022) to terminate the 
contract. For delay in execution of work liquidated damages of ₹ 1.90 crore (10 per cent 
of contract value) was recovered from the contractor.  
Further, the balance work (₹ 5.99 crore34) was transferred (January 2023) to PIU-PWD 
and letter of termination was issued (February 2023) to the contractor. The work was 
under progress as of October, 2023. 
Audit scrutiny showed that the work amounting to ₹ 11.87 crore35 (excluding GST) was 
executed against the agreement cost till the date of termination (February 2023) of the 
contract. Resultantly, the work amounting to ₹ 7.05 crore36 was left incomplete by the 
contractor. As per the aforesaid provision of the contract, the contractor was liable to 
pay penalty of ₹  1.41 crore37, but the DSCL had not imposed any penalty on the 
contractor for the leftover work.  
The Government replied (30 May 2024) that the matter had been discussed with the 
legal expert to evaluate the available options and identify the most appropriate course 
of action. If it is determined that the recovery of penalties for the incomplete work i s 
justified under the contract terms, DSCL will proceed accordingly. 
The reply is not acceptable as the DSCL should have imposed and recovered penalty 
as per the provisions of the contract. 
3.3.2 Non-imposition of penalty in case of Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 
According to Clause 47.1 of the General Condition of Contract, in conjunction with 
Particular Condition 47.1, the contractor shall be liable to pay liquidated damages to 
the employer at a rate of 0.5 per cent of the final contract value per week for any delay 
in completion beyond the intended completion date, subject to maximum of 10 per cent 
of the final contract price.  
DSCL entered into an agreement (10 December 2019) with a contractor 38 for 
₹ 12.33 crore (excluding GST) for Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar. Due to change in 
the scope of work, the contract was concluded (May 2023) with an expenditure of 
₹ 5.95 crore. As per the terms of the contract, the project was initially scheduled to be 
completed by 10 December 2020. Due to the contractor's inability to meet the deadline, 
DSCL granted (October 2020) the first extension for one year without imposing any 
penalty and granted (September 2022) the second extension of one year (until 
 
33 Ch. Sandeep Contractor & Suppliers in JV with M/S Ajay Kumar Contractor.  
34 Excluding O&M cost of ₹ 1.07 crore proposed to handed over to MDDA and works valuing 
₹ 0.47 crore earlier executed by PWD. 
35 ₹ 11.40 crore by Ch. Sandeep Contractor & Suppliers in JV with M/S Ajay Kumar Contractor and 
₹ 0.47 crore earlier executed by PWD. 
36 ₹ 7.05 crore = ₹ 18.92 crore - ₹ 11.87 crore 
37 ₹ 1.41 crore = ₹ 7.05 crore (cost of remaining work) x 20 per cent.  
38 Ch. Sandeep Contractor & Suppliers in JV with M/S Ajay Kumar Contractor.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
48 
10 December 2022) with a penalty of 0.5 per cent  of final contract value i.e., 
₹ 5.95 crore in contravention to the provisions of the contract which provides for levy 
of 0.5  per cent penalty per week subject to maximum of 10  per cent of the final  
contract value. 
It was noticed that DSCL imposed and recovered penalty of ₹ 3.84 lakh only, whereas 
a penalty of ₹  59.50 lakh 39 was leviable on the contractor as per the terms of the 
contract. Thus, by applying a reduced penalty to the contractor, an undue benefit of 
₹ 55.66 lakh40 was conferred upon the contractor. 
The Government stated (30 May 2024) that the contractor completed the work before  
10 December 2022 (date up to which time extension given),  so under the direction of 
the Board, the indicative penalty was imposed for a week only.  
The reply is not acceptable because, according to the records, the work was not 
completed till 10 December 2022 as many letters were written to the contractor after 
the aforesaid date to complete the work. Further, DSCL should have imposed the 
penalty as p er the terms and conditions of the contract and in accordance with the 
Board's decision instead of imposing an indicative penalty. 
3.4 Execution of work costing ₹ 2.93 crore without inviting tender 
Rule 3 (2) of the Uttarakhand Procurement Rules, 2017 stipulates that all procurements 
shall be made through tenders, unless exempted under these rules or specific orders. 
Further, Rule 136 (1) (vi) of the GFR 2017 provides that “No work shall be commenced, 
or liability incurred in connection with it until tenders are invited and processed in 
accordance with rules”. 
Scrutiny of the records of the project “Rejuvenation of Parade Ground” revealed that 
balance works costing ₹ 5.99 crore under the project were transferred (08 January 2023) 
to PIU-PWD by DSCL. It was observed that the PIU had incurred an expenditure of 
₹ 2.93 crore 41 on execution of seven works, as detailed in Table-3.5 below, without 
following the tendering process as envisaged in the Procurement Rules and GFR.  
Further scrutiny revealed that five out of these seven works were executed on selection 
basis after inviting quotation s and the remaining two works were executed as extra 
items under the contract bond of another works (CITIIS and VIP stage).  
Table-3.5: Details of works executed without calling tenders 
Sl. No. Name of work Contract no. 
& Date 
Expenditure 
(₹) 
1 Providing & fixing of  sliding gate towards VIP parking 
and Granite work on outer boundary wall 
C.B. No. 11 
dated:03.07.2023 22,75,639 
2 
Providing & fixing of Bollards on boundary wall of 
Parade ground and fixing of railing towards Pant Road & 
Convent Road 
C.B. No. 12 
dated:03.7.2023 22,07,282 
 
39 ₹ 59.50 lakh = ₹ 5.95 crore x 52-week x 0.5 per cent per week (capped at 10 per cent of the value of 
work done i.e., ₹ 5.95 crore). 
40 ₹ 55.66 lakh= ₹ 59.50 lakh - ₹ 3.84 lakh (already recovered). 
41 Expenditure incurred during August 2023 to October 2023. 

Chapter - 3: Contract Management 
49 
Sl. No. Name of work Contract no. 
& Date 
Expenditure 
(₹) 
3 
Construction works of gate towards sports complex, 
parking and Pant Road and laying of HDPE pipe at Parade 
ground. 
C.B. No. 13 
dated:06.07.2023 16,15,692 
4 Facade work from Survey chowk to Doon club & in Kids 
zone 
C.B. No. 16 
dated:03.08.2023 20,92,756 
5 
Interlocking, CC pavement & iron grating work on Kanak 
Picture Palace Road and supply of JCB and tractor trolley 
for cleaning of debris from Sports complex.  
C.B. No. 17 
dated:03.08.2023 9,46,500 
Total-A 91,37,869 
6 Road works executed as an extra item under the project CITIIS 1,36,02,773 
7 Works related to fencing and railing executed as an extra item under the work 
VIP stage.  65,78,143 
Total-B 2,01,80,916 
Grand Total (A+B) 2,93,18,785 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government stated that due to time 
constraints, the work was carried out through selection bond by PIU -PWD in 
accordance with Departmental Rules & Regulations, as it needed to be completed 
before Independence Day (15 August 2023). 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as only 51 per cent42 of the work has 
been executed till date of audit (November 2023) without following the Procurement 
Rules. Further, after handing over of the balance work to the PIU -PWD in January 
2023, it executed contract bond on selection basis after a period of six to seven months. 
This itself indicates that time constraint, as indicated in reply, is not justified. 
3.5 Cost escalation of ₹ 10.34 crore in Smart Road project 
DSCL entered (12 July 2019) into an MoU of ₹  203.23 crore43 with B&R 
(Implementing Agency) for execution of works under Smart Road project. As per the 
MoU, the work was to be started from 01 October 2019 and scheduled to be completed 
by 01 July 2021.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed that DSCL failed to provide the hindrance -free work 
front and drawings for the execution of works under the projects to the Implementing 
Agency (IA). Later, DSCL terminated (14 September 2022) the MoU with the IA due 
to slow progress of work and nominated (September 2022) PWD as IA for the leftover 
works. IA had executed the works 44 amounting to ₹  57.78 crore only till the date of 
termination of the MoU and DSCL entered into a fresh MoU (17 November 2022) at 
the sanctioned cost of ₹ 138.06 crore with PWD for the left over works after de-scoping 
and changing nature of works costing ₹  33.19 crore under the project. On comparison 
of rates approved in old DPR and the rates in new DPR/ approved cost for the common 
items, it was revealed that the cost of the major items of the project increased by 
₹ 10.34 crore due to price escalation as detailed in Appendix-3.3.   
 
42 51 per cent = Value of work done ₹3.08 crore / ` 5.99 crore (cost of work) *100. 
43 Including centage charges and other charges. 
44 Project Smart roads and Project Integrated Sewerage.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
50 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government justified cost escalation 
by stating that the cost of the balance work was ₹  160.62 crore (including price 
escalation clause of the contract with B&R), whereas the balance work was awarded to 
PIU- PWD at the cost of ₹ 138.00 crore. 
The reply of the Government itself confirms the audit observation indicating  
de-scoping/change in nature of works costing ₹ 33.19 crore out of the balance work of 
₹ 160.62 crore, prior to transferring the works to the PIU -PWD at the cost of 
₹ 138.00 crore. Further, audit calculated the cost escalation only for the items common 
in both the DPRs/approved cost.  
3.6 Recommendations 
1. The State Government should ensure that payment terms linked with 
measurable project deliverables are incorporated in the future contracts. 
2. Accountability should be fixed for irregularities in payments to PMC, 
including unverified payment, inadmissible payments, wasteful expenditure, 
procurement violations, and failure to adhere to contractual provisions.  
3. The State Government should ensure that the ongoing projects are completed 
expeditiously in coordination with the line departments and implementing 
agencies. 
4. The State Government should ensure prompt recovery of the unutilised 
amounts pending with the implementing agencies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-4 
Financial Irregularities 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
Chapter - 4 
 
Financial Irregularities 
 
This Chapter contains audit findings related to financial irregularities such as 
overpayment, irregular expenditure from SCM fund, loss of interest  and short 
recovery of interest on mobilisation advance. 
Smart City Mission is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme , under which the Centre has to 
provide maximum of ₹ 500 crore for each city and an equal share has to be contributed 
by the State/Urban Local Bodies (ULB) for meeting expenditure on Project and 
Administration & Office Expenses (A&OE). The position of the funds released to 
DSCL and the utilisation by it up to March 2023 is detailed in Table-4.1 below: 
Table-4.1: Details of funds received and expenditure incurred up to March 2023  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Year Funds released by 
GoI to GoU 
Funds released to DSCL 
Expenditure Central 
Share State Share Total 
1 2015-16 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2 2016-17 0.00 2.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 
3 2017-18 18.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 
4 2018-19 40.00 54.00 53.00 107.00 9.68 
5 2019-20 136.00 109.00 74.00 183.00 140.84 
6 2020-21 51.50 82.50 5.00 87.50 129.66 
7 2021-22 0.00 0.00 115.00 115.00 148.86 
8 2022-23 147.00 144.50 95.50 240.00 203.07 
Total 394.50 392.001 345.502 737.50 634.11 
Source: Data provided by DSCL. 
As is evident from the above table, the GoI had released ₹ 394.50 crore to the GoU up 
to March 2023 against which GoU released ₹  392.00 crore as Central share to DSCL. 
The GoU had also released ₹  345.50 crore as State matching share to DSCL up to 
March 2023. Against the total released funds of ₹  737.50 crore (project fund 
₹ 696.50 crore and A&OE fund ₹  41.00 crore), DSCL had incurred an expenditure of 
₹ 634.11 crore (project fund ₹ 591.38 crore and A&OE fund ₹ 42.73 crore3). 
The Audit findings relating to the financial irregularities are discussed below: 
4.1 Delay in release of funds 
As per the sanction orders of MoHUA, State Government should transfer the Central 
share of fund along with its matching share to the bank account of Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) within seven days of receipt.   
Audit observed that in contravention to the Ministry’s orders, there was inordinate delay 
ranging from 16 days to 363 days in release of Central share of fund by GoU to the SPV 
and GoU also released its matching share with the delay ranging from 16 days to  
1,254 days as detailed in Appendix-4.1. 
 
1 ₹ 2.50 crore of Central Share was released in May 2023 by the State. 
2 Balance amount of ₹ 49.00 crore of State share was released in May 2023.  
3 An amount of ₹ 3.00 crore was transferred from Project fund in March 2022 to meet the A&OE 
expenditure. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
52 
Audit also noticed a decreasing trend of delay in release of funds as shown in  
Chart-4.1 and Chart-4.2 below. This trend coincided with the operation of Single 
Nodal Account (SNA4) system by GoI in March 2021. 
Chart-4.1: 
Trend of release of Centre share by the State 
Chart-4.2: 
Trend of release of State share 
  
4.2 Over payment of ₹ 34.70 lakh in Modern Doon Library project 
An MoU of ₹  13.25 crore was signed (September 2019) between DSCL and an 
Implementing Agency5 for the construction of Modern Doon Library and procurement 
of the supporting items6.   
Audit scrutiny revealed that during the execution of the work, 64 items worth 
₹ 2.76 crore were sanctioned as extra items. The rates of 46 items7, out of these 64 items 
were inclusive of GST. Despite the inclusion of GST, a payment of ₹ 19.82 lakh as GST 
(18 per cent) was made to the contractor for these 46 items. Consequently, GST was 
paid twice on these items and thus, an excess payment of ₹ 19.82 lakh was made to the 
contractor. 
Further, 40 desktops valuing ₹ 26.20 lakh were also approved as extra items at higher 
rates, whereas the items with the same specifications were already included in the scope 
of the contract. As a result, an excess payment of ₹  14.88 lakh was made to the 
contractor as detailed in Table-4.2 below: 
Table-4.2: Details of excess payment  
(Amount in ₹) 
Item As included in 
original Contract 
Permitted as extra 
item and paid 
Difference of 
rate 
No of 
item Amount 
1 2 3 4 (3-2) 5 6 (5 x 4) 
Computers 33,964.29 65,500 31,535.71 40 12,61,428.40 
GST (18 per cent) 2,27,057.11 
Grand Total 14,88,485.51 
Thus, undue benefit of ₹ 34.70 lakh8 was extended to the contractor. 
 
4 Opened by DSCL in April 2022.  
5 Project Manager (Khel), Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam, Dehradun. 
6 Furniture, Computer, CCTV and other IT equipment. 
7 19 items worth ₹ 1.79 crore were based on DSR 2018, 27 items worth ₹  60.58 lakh were on market 
rates. 
8 ₹ 34.70 lakh = ₹ 19.82 lakh+ ₹ 14.88 lakh. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17
Delay in release (in days)
Instalment number
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17
Delay in release (in days)
Instalment number 

Chapter - 4: Financial Irregularities 
53 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), while accepting the Audit observation, it 
was stated that the amount of GST had been recovered from the contractor and on the 
issue of excess payment for desktops to the contractor, it was assured that the excess 
payment would be recovered from the contractor.   
4.3 Irregular expenditure from SCM Fund  
The SCM was planned to be executed through two approaches: Area -Based 
Development (ABD) and a Pan -city initiatives. As per Para graph 10.3 of the SCM 
Guidelines, funds provided by the GoI in the SCM to the SPV will be in the form of 
tied grant and kept in a separate Grant Fund. These funds will be utilised only for the 
purposes for which the grants have been given and subject to the conditions laid down 
by the MoHUA. Further, as per sanction orders of the MoHUA, the money will be 
utilised strictly in accordance with the SCM Guidelines and for the purpose for which 
it has been sanctioned.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that, four roads 9 selected for Smart Road Project (SRP) 
were in the periphery of ABD area. The scope of works in SRP included up -gradation 
of the road through strengthening of the pavement, provision of drains, multi utility 
duct (MUD), sewerage work, underground water sup ply lines etc. as discussed in 
paragraph 2.4.5 of Chapter - 2. Audit observed that, out of the above four roads, the 
work on Chakrata Road10 (total length 1.9 km) also included a 950-meter stretch located 
outside the ABD area. DSCL incurred an expenditure of ₹ 19.47 crore11 from the SCM 
funds on execution of works beyond the ABD area, which was in violation of the 
provisions of the SCM Guidelines. 
On being pointed out by Audit, the Government accepted (May 2024) the fact and stated 
that it was strategically done to encompass the VVIP area of Yamuna Colony which 
witnesses continuous movement of VIPs and heavy tourist tra ffic. However, the fact 
remains that, in violation of the SCM Guidelines, an irregular expenditure of 
₹ 19.47 crore was incurred from the Smart City fund which was a tied grant.  
4.4 Loss of interest  
The implementation of the SCM at the city level was to be done by a SPV to be 
incorporated as a limited company under the Companies Act, 2013. DSCL was 
incorporated (15 September 2017) as a limited company under the Companies Act, 
2013. To protect the best  financial interest, DSCL was required to exercise financial 
prudence while making decisions and adhering to the existing Rules & Regulations.  
Scrutiny of the records of the DSCL revealed that the DSCL had operated two current 
accounts at HDFC bank for project fund and A&OE fund during the period 2017-18 to 
2020-21. The Statutory Auditors in their Report on financial statements of DSCL for 
the year ended on 31 March 2019, had pointed out that a significant amount of funds 
 
9 Haridwar Road, EC Road, Rajpur Road and Chakrata Road. 
10 From Ghanta Ghar to Kishan Nagar Chowk. The said route can be divided into two parts [from 
Ghanta Ghar  to Bindal Bridge (950 meters) and from Bindal Bridge to Kishan Nagar Chowk 
(950 meters)]. 
11 ₹ 19.47 crore = [Chakrata Road: ₹ 13.78 crore (On pro-rata basis) + ₹ 5.69 crore (shifting of retaining 
wall of Doon School)]. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
54 
remained idle in both the current accounts and suggested that these idle funds may be 
invested prudently to earn interest income in interest -bearing securities payable on 
demand. Further scrutiny showed that DSCL formulated (October 2020), three years 
after its inception, a policy for investment of the unutilised funds in a term/fixed deposit 
in a bank for a period in which maximum interest may accrue. DSCL closed12 both the 
accounts and opened new accounts 13 at a different bank to generate interest on the 
unutilised funds.  
Consequently, the three -year delay caused these unutilised funds to remain in a  
non-interest-bearing bank account, resulting in potential loss of interest of 
₹ 6.20 crore14  to GoI/GoU as detailed in the Table-4.3 given below: 
Table-4.3: Details of interest 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. No. Account Number 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
1 50200027724411 0.50 83.43 6.17 3.74 93.84 
2 50200032926554 0.00 62.54 220.85 242.80 526.19 
Total 0.50 145.97 227.02 246.54 620.03 
The Government, while accepting the audit observation, stated (30 May 2024) that the 
current accounts were opened after obtaining approval of the Board of DSCL. It further 
clarified that all SNA accounts have now been converted to savings accounts. 
The fact remains that the GoI/GoU suffered losses of interest due to delay in exercising 
financial prudence. 
4.5 Short recovery of interest on mobilisation advance 
Central Vigilance Commission  guidelines 2007 provides that the amount of 
Mobilisation Advance (MA), interest to be charged, if any; its recovery schedule and 
any other relevant detail should be explicitly stipulated in the tendered documents 
upfront. Rule 53  (2) of Uttarakhand Procurement Rules 2017 also provides that the 
advances shall be subject to payment of interest, till the amount is deducted or adjusted. 
A bank guarantee or adjustment of advance should be taken to secure the repayment or 
adjustment of a dvance. Further, as per S ection 32.5 of Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD) Manual, MA limited to 10 per cent  of tendered amount at  
10 per cent simple interest can be sanctioned to the contractors on specific request as 
per terms of the contract and such advance should be released in not less than two 
instalments. 
DSCL released (16 January 2020) an amount of ₹  3.64 crore as MA to the contractor. 
Audit noticed that there was no provision in the contract for the rate of interest to be 
charged on MA. However, in the absence of rate of interest to be charged on MA, a 
lump sum amount of ₹  10.00 lakh was recovered (March 2021) as interest on MA till 
 
12 HDFC Bank accounts 50200027724411 and 50200032926554 were closed on 14 January 2021 and 
12 November 2020, respectively. 
13 Mostly savings bank accounts. 
14 Calculated @ three per cent. 

Chapter - 4: Financial Irregularities 
55 
the date of audit (October 2023). Considering the interest rate as provided in the CPWD 
manual, interest to be charged from the contractor was worked out to ₹  91.12 lakh by 
audit, as detailed in Appendix-4.2.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), it was informed that in the 28 th Board of 
Directors meeting (19 June 2024) of DSCL, the interest rate on MA had been decided 
at the rate of 10 per cent and steps will be taken to recover the interest on MA. The fact 
remains that interest on MA was recovered short by ₹ 81.12 lakh as of June 2024. 
4.6 Recommendations 
1. The State Government should ensure prompt recovery against overpayment and 
fix accountability.  
2. The State Government should explicitly include the provision for interest rate to 
be charged on Mobilisation Advance, in the Procurement Rules. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-5 
Governance Framework 

 

57 
Chapter - 5 
 
Governance Framework  
 
This Chapter presents audit findings highlighting the lack of coordination among 
departments during the implementation of the Smart Cities Mission (SCM), despite 
the presence of representatives from all key line departments in the State Level 
High Powered Steering Committee and Inter -departmental Coordination Task 
Force. The establishment of a Special Purpose Vehicle, as envisaged in the SCM 
Guidelines, proved ineffective due to the absence of full-time appointments for the 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Additional Chief Executive Officer  (ACEO), and 
Finance Controller (FC). The Chapter also discusses instances of quality control 
issues. 
A well-defined Monitoring and Internal Control Mechanism in SCM implementation 
provides a reasonable assurance that necessary rules and regulations are followed; 
resources are used in a planned manner and are protected from mismanagement in order 
to achieve the intended objectives of the SCM. The implementation of projects under 
the SCM was examined in the light of existing supervision, monitoring, and internal 
control mechanisms and in terms of the guidelines of the SCM. The audit findings are 
discussed below: 
5.1 Role of designated committees 
 
5.1.1 High Powered Steering Committee 
Paragraph 13.2 of the SCM Guidelines stipulated for appointment of a State Level High 
Powered Steering Committee (HPSC) chaired by the Chief Secretary, which would 
steer the Mission Programme in its entirety. The HPSC will have representatives of 
State Government departments. T he Mayor and Municipal Commissioner of the  
ULB relating to the Smart City would be represented in the HPSC. The key 
responsibilities of the HPSC were as below:  
i. To provide guidance to the Mission and provide State level platform for exchange 
of ideas pertaining to development of Smart Cities.  
ii. To oversee the process of first stage intra -State competition on the basis of Stage-1 
criteria. 
iii. To review the Smart City Proposals ( SCPs) and send them to the Mo HUA for 
participation in the Challenge. 
In the state of Uttarakhand, HPSC was formed in July 2015 which was further 
reconstituted in July 2017 with the directions that it will comply with the guidelines 
issued by the GoI from time to time. The HPSC held total 17 meetings from July 2017 
to March 2023. During these meetings, HPSC accorded approval for selection of PMC, 
extra works, de-scoping of works etc., DPRs of the projects, and reviewed the progress 
of the projects.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
58 
Audit observed that despite the representative from all the key line departments1, HPSC 
could not resolve issues of lack of coordination among various line departments during 
implementation of the projects as discussed in Paragraphs 2.4.1.2, 2.4.1.5, 2.4.2, 2.4.3, 
2.5 and 3.2.1  (ii). Consequently, most of the projects were not completed within the 
stipulated time frame as discussed in Paragraph 3.3. Eight projects2 were still under 
progress (as on March 2023) due to delay in availability of hindrance free projects sites 
and termination of the existing contracts and execution of new contracts.  
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government stated that the issues 
primarily stemmed from a lack of coordination at lower levels rather than higher levels. 
The reply itself indicates inability of the Government to address the issues of lack o f 
coordination. 
5.1.2 Inter-departmental Task Force 
As per Para 9.1.1 (short listing of cities by States) of SCM guidelines, an  
Inter-departmental Task Force (IDTF) as elaborated in Annexure -3, was to be 
constituted in order to make city smart as per directions/ guidelines issued by GoI/ State 
Government with respect to SCM. 
Audit observed that an IDTF 3 was constituted (July 2015) by the GoU for 
implementation and monitoring. However, the order did not specify the roles and 
responsibilities of the IDTF. Further, during the meetings with the different line 
departments, issues related to the maintenance of  Smart Roads, implementation of 
projects and progress of projects under SCM were discussed. However, issues related 
to coordination between the various line departments such as providing hindrance free 
site for Smart Road project, Green Building project, Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 
project, Sewerage project were not discussed with the line departments. Consequently, 
the formation of ITDF appeared to be a mere formality, as there was no clear vision for 
facilitating coordination between departments to  ensure smooth project execution. 
Several instances of lack of coordination among the line departments and DSCL along 
with delays and disputes over responsibilities were noticed during audit as detailed in 
the case study below and Paragraph 2.4.1.2, 2.4.1.6, 2.4.2, 2.4.3, 2.5 and 3.2.1  (ii). 
These challenges have affected the implementation of projects and inordinate delay in 
completion of project as well as damage to the completed work. One specific instance 
as discussed in the following case study also indicated lack of coordination among the 
line departments.   
 
1 UDD, PWD, Finance, Planning Department, Drinking Water Department, Power Department, Medical, 
Health & Family Welfare Department and Municipal Commissioner, Nagar Nigam Dehradun. 
2 Green Building, Intergraded Sewerage, Integrated Drainage, Smart Roads, CITIIS, Façade, Water 
Augmentation and Smart Meter and Smart Pole. 
3 Vice-Chairman MDDA (Nodal Officer Smart City) as Chairman , DM Dehradun, DFO Dehradun, SSP 
Dehradun, Municipal Commissioner, Nagar Nigam Dehradun, Chief Town & Country Planning, CMO 
Dehradun, Chief Education Officer Dehradun, Superintending Engineer PWD, GM Uttarakhand Power 
Corporation, Superintending Engineer Irrigation Department, Superintending Engineer Uttarakhand Peyjal 
Nigam, GM Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan, Chief Environment Officer Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board, 
Executive Engineer Directorate UDD (Members).  

Chapter - 5: Governance Framework 
59 
Case Study 1: Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 
The pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar project, with a cost of ` 13.10 crore, aimed at 
developing a 1.2 km stretch from Clock Tower to Darshani Gate. DSCL involved 
multiple Implementing Agencies (IAs) for execution of works in a stretch of 1.2 km, as 
depicted in Table-5.1 below:   
Table-5.1: Details of different IAs 
Name of Works 
Section-A 
Clock Tower to Kotwali 
Section-B 
Kotwali to Darshani Gate 
Particulars of Works IA Particulars of Works IA 
Road Work Interlocking Road DSCL  Black top road PWD 
Drain Work Construction of drain  DSCL Renovation of drain DSCL 
Multi Utility Duct Laying of MUD DSCL ➢ HDPE Conduit Work 
➢ Communication line 
UPCL 
DSCL 
Footpath Work Construction of 
footpath PWD Construction of footpath DSCL 
Electrical work  
➢ Shifting of 
Electrical line into 
MUD, Installation 
of RMU/Feeder 
pillar, Connection 
to consumers 
➢ Installation of Pole 
UPCL  
 
 
 
 
 
DSCL 
➢ Shifting of Electrical line into 
HDPE Conduit, Installation 
of RMU/Feeder pillar, 
Connection to consumers 
➢ Installation of Pole 
➢ Chamber work for electric 
wire 
UPCL 
 
 
 
DSCL 
PWD 
Water Supply 
Work  Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan. 
Sewerage Work  Bridge & Roof India Limited. 
Remaining drainage work on the patches where UPCL electric poles are not dismantled –PWD 
Audit scrutiny revealed several issues stemming from poor coordination between line 
departments and DSCL. These included the installation of footpath tiles before 
underground electrical cables, necessitating their removal for cable -laying; the 
electricity department’s failure to remove electric poles obstructing drain construction 
until work completion; a nearly two -year delay in finalising space for compact  
sub-station installation; disputes over right -of-way for compact sub-station and rising 
main unit installation; and the construction of some electrical and sewer chambers 
above road level, posing risks to pedestrians. UPCL also faced deficiencies in cabling 
work within the MUD. These issues, compounded by delays and disputes over 
responsibilities, resulted in significant project delays and public inconvenience due to 
poor coordination among implementing agencies and line departments. 
5.2 Role of Special Purpose Vehicle 
As per the provision of Para 10.1 of SCM guidelines, for implementation of the Mission 
at the City level, an SPV4 (Special Purpose Vehicle) was to be established. The role of 
SPV was to plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, manage, operate, 
monitor and evaluate the Smart City Development Projects . As per the approved 
 
4 SPV headed by full time CEO and having nominees of Central Government, State Government and 
ULB on its Board. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
60 
manpower structure of DSCL, only top three posts i.e. CEO, ACEO and Finance 
Officer/ Finance Controller (FC) were to be filled from the IAS cadre, IAS/Sr. PCS 
cadre, and State Finance Services (SFS) cadre respectively. The remaining posts were 
intended to be filled on a contractual or deputation basis.  In this regard, the following 
shortcomings were noticed: 
5.2.1 Non-appointment of a full time CEO 
As per Para 10.1 read with Annexure 5 (point 3.3) of the SCM Guidelines, the SPV was 
to be headed by a full -time CEO for a fixed term of three years.  Further, the advisory 
issued (October 2018) by MoHUA, provides that the organisations having a full time 
CEO facilitates quick decision making and better results in terms of frequent board 
meetings and faster rate of project implementation in general. On the contra ry, a  
part-time CEO may not be in a position to give complete attention due to other pressing 
concerns at hand. 
Audit observed that, since inception of DSCL, the charge of CEO of DSCL was 
assigned to District Magistrate, Dehradun as an additional charge. Further, audit noticed 
that within a period of almost six years, seven District Magistrates held the charge of 
CEO as detailed in Table-5.2 below:  
Table-5.2: Details of officers who held the charge of CEO 
Sl. No. Name of the Officers Tenure Duration of charge 
(in months) From To 
1 Sh. Dilip Jawalkar, IAS 10.08.2017 25.07.2018 11 
2 Sh. Shailesh Baghuli, IAS 26.07.2018 13.02.2019 07 
3 Dr. Ashish Kumar Srivastav, IAS 13.02.2019 08.06.2020 15 
4 Sh. Ranvir Singh Chauhan, IAS 08.06.2020 20.08.2020 2 ½ 
5 Dr. Ashish Kumar Srivastav, IAS 20.08.2020 02.08.2021 12 
6 Dr. R. Rajesh Kumar, IAS 02.08.2021 11.07.2022 11 
7 Smt. Sonika, IAS 11.07.2022 03.09.2024 26 
It is evident from the table that since the establishment of the DSCL, the CEO was 
neither appointed on a full -time basis nor for the fixed tenure of three years. Audit 
observed that projects implementation suffered from number of deficiencies as outlined 
in paragraph 3.1.2.1, 3.1.2.2, 3.1.2.3, 3.1.2.4, 3.1.2.5, 3.1.2.6, 3.1.3, 3.2.1, 3.3 and 3.5. 
Similarly, Audit observed that the appointments of other key functionaries i.e., ACEO 
and FC were also on short-term basis as detailed in Table-5.3 below: 
Table-5.3: Details of officers posted in DSCL 
Sl. No. Designation Name of the Officers Tenure 
From To 
1 
Additional 
Chief 
Executive 
officer 
Dr. Ashish Kumar Srivastav, IAS 12.12.2017 13.02.2019 
Sh. Abhishek Ruhela, IAS 09.03.2019 22.11.2019 
Sh. Ashish Bhatgain, PCS 26.12.2019 31.07.2020 
Sh. Girish Chand Gunwant, PCS 11.09.2020 16.09.2021 
Sh. Krishn Kumar Mishra, PCS 16.09.2021 01.09.2022 
Sh. Shyam Singh Rana, PCS 01.09.2022 21.11.2023 
Sh. Tirathpal Singh, PCS 13.12.2023 Till Date 
2 Finance 
Controller 
Sh. Ganga Prasad, SFS 10.08.2017 10.08.2020 
Sh. Dinesh Chand Lohani, SFS 10.08.2020 18.09.2020 
Sh. Abhishek Kumar Anand, PCS 19.09.2020 30.06.2022 
Dr. Tanzeem Ali, PCS 15.07.2022 Till Date 

Chapter - 5: Governance Framework 
61 
It is evident from the table that none of the officers were appointed for a fixed term and 
the posts of ACEO and FC were held by the officers from their respective cadres as an 
additional charge. In addition, other key posts 5 of sensitive wings like finance and 
procurement were filled on a contractual basis. 
Thus, the idea of establishing SPV in the spirit of Guidelines was ineffective as SCM 
suffered from various project management deficiencies like planning, coordination, 
dispute resolution, monitoring, remedial actions on the reported issues etc.  
In reply, the Government accepted (30 May 2024) the audit observation acknowledging 
the importance of full -time appointments for effective decision making and project 
execution. The Government further stated that steps would be taken to ensure 
compliance with the guidelines. 
The fact remains that not appointing of a full -time CEO was against the provision of 
SCM Guidelines. Since the initiation of the SCM, no officer in the top three positions 
had been appointed on a full-time basis. Furthermore, most of the projects could not be 
completed within the scheduled timeframe. This indicates lack of seriousness in 
implementation of the SCM projects as envisaged in the SCM Guidelines issued by the 
GoI. 
5.3 Quality Control 
It is the primary responsibility of PMC and DSCL to ensure that quality work is done 
by the contractor. Third-Party Agencies (TPAs) were also appointed from time to time 
by the GoU for quality control of the works under the SCM projects.  
Audit examination of records revealed instances of substandard works during project 
implementation, which were highlighted through multiple channels including TPAs, 
media reports, citizen complaints, inspections conducted by higher authorities, and 
physical verifications done by Audit, as discussed in Case Study-2 and paragraph 5.3.1 
below: 
Case Study - 2: Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 
The project “Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar”, with a cost of ` 13.10 crore, aimed 
at developing a 1.2 km stretch from Clock Tower to Darshani Gate, of which 476 
meters was intended to be developed as a pedestrian walkway to provide obstruction 
free, safe, comfortable and continuous walking zone for pedestrians. The q uality of 
the work carried out by contractor was deemed substandard, as highlighted in media 
reports and complaints filed by the residents. Specifically, instances of deteriorating 
and broken tiles were observed in numerous locations. 
DSCL conveyed identified quality issues such  as damage and depressions in the 
paver block tiles and manhole chambers not aligned with the road surface to the 
contractor through several letters, urging necessary improvements. The contractor 
explained (February 2023) that without hydraulic bollards, vehicular movement was 
 
5 AGM (Finance), AGM (Procurement & Contract Management), etc. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
62 
not adequately restricted, leading to the degradation and breakage of tiles. This matter 
was also in the knowledge of DSCL. Further, the traders from Paltan Bazaar, 
Dehradun lodged 
(September 2022) a 
complaint with the 
Prime Minister 
Office regarding the 
inferior quality of the 
work. An ensuing 
inquiry conducted 
(August 2023) by a 
joint investigation 
committee as per the 
direction of the 
District Magistrate, 
Dehradun revealed 
various deficiencies 
in the execution of 
the project. During a 
joint physical 
inspection conducted 
(23 December 2023), 
by audit with 
representative of the 
DSCL, audit also 
noted the same visual 
deficiencies such as undulations, depressions, broken tiles, manhole chamber above 
the road level and broken edges of manhole chambers  as highlighted earlier by the 
joint investigating committee.  
The Government furnished no specific reply, however, Management stated that 
(January 2024) PMC had recommended (October  2023) deduction of ` 15.45 lakh 
from the bills of the contractor, which would be recovered from the withheld amount 
of the contractor. 
 
5.3.1 Smart Road 
Following quality control issues were observed under the project:  
i) Certain irregularities in execution of ‘Smart Road Project’ were pointed out by 
TPA6. On failure by the B&R to rectify these deficiencies, the Planning Department, 
Government of Uttarakhand, directed (June 2022) for recovery of ` 55.59 lakh from 
 
6 M/s. Quality Austria Central Asia (Pvt.) Ltd. 


Chapter - 5: Governance Framework 
63 
B&R on account of substandard work done by the contractor. Audit found that 
DSCL had neither made this recovery nor had it incorporated in the details of joint 
measurement prepared (May 2023) for adjustment of the above amount from B&R. 
ii) DSCL also pointed out (November 2023) faulty sewer work done by B&R, as the 
B&R had replaced the pipes without properly restoring the manhole. This resulted 
in choked household connections and overflows in the sewer chambers and DSCL 
had to undertake additional work to resolve the issue through the UJS at the cost of 
` 53.50 lakh. Therefore, a deduction of ` 53.50 lakh was incorporated in the details 
of joint measurement to compensate the above expenditure. B&R, however, did not 
agree to the above deduction. Consequently, DSCL issued (November 2023) a letter 
to B&R, holding them fully accountable for the extra work carried out by the UJS. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government stated that the matter 
would be addressed with B&R during the final settlement of MoU.  
The fact remains that an amount of ` 1.09 crore was pending for recovery from B&R 
as of June 2024. 
5.4 Internal Control  
Internal control systems are critical frameworks within organizations, designed to 
safeguard assets, ensure the accuracy and reliability of financial information, promote 
operational efficiency, and ensure compliance with laws, regulations, and policies. 
When these systems are weak or inadequately implemented, they expose the 
organisation to significant risks. Audit highlighted the following instances of weak 
internal controls within DSCL, indicating systemic deficiencies in governance, 
oversight, and operational practices:  
• Irregular payment: Payments made without proper authorisation or adherence to 
the established financial protocols reflect a lack of stringent checks and balances, 
increasing the risk of misappropriation as discussed in  Paragraph 3.1.2.1 and 
3.1.2.6 (d). 
• Deployment of ineligible IT experts:  Employing personnel who do not meet the 
requisite qualifications compromises the quality and effectiveness of IT services as 
discussed in Paragraph 3.1.2.2. 
• Unverified payments : Instances of unverified transactions point to gaps in the 
verification processes and a lack of rigorous monitoring mechanisms as discussed 
in Paragraph 3.1.2.3. 
• Inadmissible payments : Payments made for ineligible expenses or against 
unauthorised claims reflect poor compliance with organizational policies and 
guidelines as discussed in Paragraph 3.1.2.4. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
64 
• Reimbursement without supporting documents : Approving reimbursements 
without proper invoices or documentation indicates inadequate review procedures 
and opens the door to the financial irregularities as discussed in Paragraph 3.1.2.5 
and 3.1.2.6 (c). 
• Undue benefits to PMC : Providing unwarranted advantages to PMC signals 
potential conflicts of interest, mismanagement of contracts, or lack of contractual 
oversight as discussed in Paragraph 3.1.2.6 (a) and 3.1.3. 
• Unfruitful/Wasteful Expenditure : Inefficient use of resources or spending on 
unproductive activities indicates a lack of proper planning, monitoring, and cost 
control measures as discussed in Paragraph 2.4.1.6, 2.4.5.2, 2.4.7.2 and 3.1.2.6 (b). 
• Failure to impose penalties for delays: Not enforcing penalties for delayed project 
completion undermines accountability, encourages non -performance, and could 
delay critical public benefits intended from such projects. The instances of  
non-imposition of penalty for delay in execution of projects are discussed in   
Paragraph 3.3. 
• Deployment of manpower on Contract in key posts : Placing contractual or 
deputed staff in key positions may result in inefficiencies or conflicts of interest, 
especially if these individuals lack the authority, expertise, or long -term 
commitment to the organisation. The Audit observation is discussed in  
Paragraph 5.2.1. 
These findings highlight a weak internal control mechanism within DSCL, reflecting 
the need for a comprehensive overhaul of its governance and operational frameworks. 
5.5 Non-production of records 
Effective record keeping contributes to organisational efficiency, accountability, and 
compliance. Non -production of records severely limits the exercise of CAG’s 
constitutional mandate and may result in lack of accountability by State Government 
functionaries. Despite the repeated requests, DSCL failed to furnish the basic records 
pertaining to the preparation of SCP to the Audit. Consequently, Audit was unable to 
examine records related to the activities such as consultation held with city residents 
and other stakeholders, project selection criteria, and proposal for financing the projects 
under the SCP. 
During the Exit Conference (21 June 2024), the Government accepted the facts and 
assured that DSCL would provide the records to the Audit after obtaining them either 
from MDDA, the Municipal Corporation, or MoHUA. However, no records were 
provided to the Audit. Further, no status thereof was also intimated to the audit so far 
(October 2024). 

Chapter - 5: Governance Framework 
65 
5.6 Recommendations 
1. The State Government should ensure that the key posts in the sensitive wings of
DSCL like procurement and finance are filled from the government officials on
deputation basis instead of contractual staff.
2. The State Government should take concrete action against the concerned officials
and contractors responsible for substandard quality of works during execution of
projects.
3. The State Government should strengthen the internal control mechanism to
ensure compliance with laws, regulations and policies.
Dehradun 
The 07 November 2025
(SANJEEV KUMAR) 
Accountant General (Audit), 
Uttarakhand 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 12 November 2025
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 

 

67 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.7 & 2.1; Page-04 & 08) 
Details of Projects as on 31 March 2023 
Sl. No. Name of Project Envisaged objectives Area Date of 
Sanction 
Sanctioned 
financial 
outlay  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
Implementing 
Agency 
Date of 
contract/ 
MoU 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual 
Date of 
completion 
Expenditure 
as March 
2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Status/Date of 
Hand over 
1 
Doon Integrated 
Command and 
Control Centre 
(DICCC) including 
Bandwidth for 
DICCC Project 
To establish a collaborative 
framework where input from 
different functional departments such 
as Transport, Police, Meteorology, 
Traffic etc. can be assimilated and 
analysed on a single platform. 
Pan City 08.03.2019 307.83 DSCL 22.07.2019 21.05.2020 15.03.2022 302.68 No 
2 
Integrated Office 
Complex Green 
Building 
To centralize district-level offices for 
enhanced citizen convenience. 
ABD 
area 16.07.2019 204.46 CPWD 01.10.2019 01.11.2021 Under 
progress 18.85 No 
3 Smart Roads  
Smart Road was conceived as a 
combination of appropriate road 
infrastructure and supporting IT 
components that would assist all road 
users including vehicle users, 
pedestrians, cyclists, and differently 
abled persons to move comfortably. 
ABD 
area 08.03.2019 190.54 B&R and 
PWD 12.07.2019 01.07.2021 Under 
progress 119.29 No 
4 
City Investments to 
Innovate, Integrate 
and Sustain (CITIIS) 
The project proposes to refocus 
towards specific interventions 
around schools. 
Pan City 18.06.2022 58.50 PWD November 
2022 
August 
2023 
Under 
progress 1.16 No 
5 Electric Buses 
To introduce a new public transport 
system to minimize pollution and 
give fillip to the overall program of 
using eco -friendly energy for 
transport. 
Pan City 24.06.2019 41.56 DSCL 04.03.2020 03.09.2020 04.12.2022 41.57 No 
6 
Water supply 
Augmentation and 
Smart Meters 
To replace and reorganize the water 
supply pipelines and install smart 
meters in Zone -4B of the ABD area 
to prevent water misuse. 
ABD 
area 16.07.2019 32.59 DSCL 16.12.2019 16.12.2020 Under 
progress 24.25 No 
7 Integrated Sewerage 
Work 
To replace the main sewer network 
that had outlived its design period, 
including connectivity up to the 
outfall point. 
ABD 
area 26.09.2019 28.41 B&R and UJN 10.12.2019 01.12.2020 Under 
progress 9.14 No 
8 
Smart Water 
Management 
(SCADA) 
To cater the issue related to water 
loss, erratic distribution of water 
from storage reservoirs and 
inefficient electric motors, pumping 
machinery and other equipment. 
Pan City 16.07.2019 53.40 DSCL 18.09.2020 17.09.2021 31.03.2023 19.13 No 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
68 
Sl. No. Name of Project Envisaged objectives Area Date of 
Sanction 
Sanctioned 
financial 
outlay  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
Implementing 
Agency 
Date of 
contract/ 
MoU 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual 
Date of 
completion 
Expenditure 
as March 
2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Status/Date of 
Hand over 
9 Smart Waste Vehicle 
Procurement of Smart Waste 
Vehicles and Smart Bins for 
collection of door-to-door waste. 
Pan City 24.06.2019 21.28 NND & UJS - -  12.82 Yes 
May 2023 
10 Rejuvenation of 
Parade Ground 
To transform fragmented spaces into 
a pedestrian and dynamic 
transformational Zone. 
ABD 
area 16.07.2019 20.87 DSCL and 
PWD 30.10.2019 30.10.2020 07.02.2023 9.73 No 
11 Integrated Drainage 
Work 
To ensure systematic and integrated 
drainage system and avoid flooding 
in ABD area. 
ABD 
area 26.09.2019 16.27 
B&R and 
Irrigation 
Department 
10.12.2019 01.12.2020 Under 
progress 8.82 No 
12 Pedestrianisation of 
Paltan Bazaar 
To enhance a 1.2 km, stretch from 
Clock Tower (Ghanta Ghar) to 
Darshani Gate. Within this, 476 
meters were designated for 
development as a pedestrian 
walkway with a road section of 2.5m 
pedestrian on both sides and 5m 
central spine for golf cart and limited 
time vehicular movement. The 
central 5m carriageway is designed 
for restricted vehicular movement, 
with interlocked paver block surface. 
The footpath of ave rage 2.5m width 
on both sides maintains the same 
level with the road surface. 
ABD 
area 16.07.2019 13.10 DSCL 10.12.2019 10.12.2020 10.12.2022 7.09 No 
13 Modern Doon Library 
To enrich the learning outcomes of 
students/users through diverse 
techniques i.e., use e -content & 
interactive techniques etc. 
ABD 
area 01.10.2019 12.33 UPN 20.09.2019 15.03.2021 31.01.2023 5.75 Yes 
January 2023 
14 Smart School 
To provide schools with smart 
facilities like Virtual Classes / 
Learning Management System, 
Digital content /e-library etc. 
ABD 
area 08.03.2019 6.05 DSCL 30.05.2019 29.02.2020 01.11.2020 5.91 No 
15 Façade rejuvenation 
of Platan Bazar 
To give a symmetrical look by 
regularizing the building façade and 
proper signage system based on local 
design elements. 
ABD 
area 15.06.2022 4.79 DSCL 14.11.2022 13.05.2023 Under 
Progress 1.35 No 
16 Water ATM  
To provide safe and potable drinking 
water in adequate quantity and within 
minimum distance to all at all time 
and to bring about an improvement in 
the general quality of life in the ABD 
area. 
Pan City 19.11.2018 1.98 DSCL 20.02.2019 19.08.2019 23.09.2021 -- No 

Appendices 
69 
Sl. No. Name of Project Envisaged objectives Area Date of 
Sanction 
Sanctioned 
financial 
outlay  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
Implementing 
Agency 
Date of 
contract/ 
MoU 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual 
Date of 
completion 
Expenditure 
as March 
2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Status/Date of 
Hand over 
17 Smart Toilet 
To meet the sanitation and 
cleanliness requirement at public 
places in Dehradun. 
Pan City 19.11.2018 1.73 DSCL 07.03.2019 06.09.2019 03.09.2022 1.74 No 
18 Creche Building 
To address children's rights to 
nutrition, health, care, learning, play, 
and protection while parents are 
engaged, and to instil confidence in 
mothers about their children's safety 
and well-being. 
ABD 
area 16.07.2019 0.90 PWD 22.07.2021 23.04.2022 04.01.2023 0.88 Yes 
January 2023 
19 
Digitization of 
Collectorate and 
CDO Office 
To procure computers, printers, and 
scanners for implementation of e -
office in the Collectorate and Tehsil 
offices. 
ABD 
area 08.09.2020 0.61 Collectorate 21.09.2020 21.10.2020 26.10.2020 0.56 Yes 
20 Monumental Flag To foster a sense of national pride, 
unity, and patriotism among citizens. 
ABD 
area 13.07.2020 0.10 DSCL 19.05.2020 19.08.2020 19.12.2020 0.09 No 
21 Smart Poles on PPP 1 
mode 
To provide multiple services in the 
city e.g., Wi-Fi, Smart Warm LED 
luminaries, CCTV camera, Telecom 
Services and environmental sensors 
through Smart Poles. 
Pan City 19.08.2019 Not 
Applicable PPP 14.01.2020 13.01.2021 Under 
progress 
Not 
Applicable No 
22 Citizen Engagement/ 
Outreach Project 
To provide Citizen engagement in 
Dehradun through virtual interaction, 
dialogues and discussion. 
ABD 
area 13.07.2020 1.00 DSCL - - - 0.58 - 
 
  
 
1 The project was planned to be executed as PPP project; hence, no cost was sanctioned for it.  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
70 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.3, 2.4.2, 2.4.5.1, 2.4.6, 2.4.8, 2.4.9; Page 10, 17, 21, 22, 25, 26) 
Project wise detail of Smart components 
Sl. No. Name of Project Proposed components under the project Status of execution as of December 2023 Remarks 
1 Doon Integrated Command and 
Control Centre 
Traffic lights Installed 
Operational availability 
of end devices (except 
surveillance cameras) 
ranged from 28 to  
73 per cent 
Surveillance Cameras Installed 
Red Light Violation Detection Installed 
Automatic Number Plate Reader Installed 
Smart traffic sensors (A & B) Installed 
Speed Violation Detection (SVD) Installed 
Variable Message Display boards Installed 
Emergency Call Box (ECB) Installed 
Public Announcement System Installed 
Environmental sensors Installed 
2 Electric Bus Eco-friendly energy for transport Enabled Functional 
3 Rejuvenation of Parade Ground Rainwater harvesting Executed Functional 
4 Smart Water Management 
(SCADA) 
Flow Meter Installed Functional 
Pressure Transmitters Installed Functional 
Automated Chlorinators Installed Functional 
Valve Actuators Installed Functional 
Quality Monitors Installed Functional 
Level Sensors Installed Functional 
5 Water ATM  Coin Operated Water Dispensing System Executed Functional 
6 Smart Waste Vehicle 
Sewer cum Jetting Machine Executed Functional 
Jetting Garbing and Rodding Machine Executed Functional 
Super Sucker Machine with dump tank Executed Functional 
Drain Cleaning Machine, Executed Functional 
Road Sweeping Machine Executed Functional 
e-carts Executed Non-functional 
7 Modern Doon Library 
e-content Not Installed  
Intelligence Door Not Installed  
Wi-fi Installed Functional 
CCTV Installed Functional 
RFID tags/system Installed Partially functional 
Anti-theft check Installed Functional 
Computer Installed Functional 
Smart screen Installed Functional 

Appendices 
71 
Sl. No. Name of Project Proposed components under the project Status of execution as of December 2023 Remarks 
Bio-Metric Attendance System Installed Non-functional for want 
of license key 
8 Smart toilet 
Sensor based Taps Executed Partially functional 
Auto flush urinals system Executed Partially functional 
LED indications Not- executed  
Voice Guidance Not- executed  
Display boards Not- executed  
GPRS Connectivity Not- executed  
Electrical Inverter Not- executed  
Roof top solar Not- executed  
9 
Water supply Augmentation 
and Smart Meters 
Replacement of Rising Mains & Distribution Mains 
and installation of Tube-well Executed  
Installation of Smart Meter Partially Installed Work under progress 
10 Smart Poles on PPP mode 
Wi-fi Not Installed 
 
Warm LED Street light Not Installed 
IP based PTZ Camera (CCTV) Not Installed 
Environmental Monitoring Censors Not Installed 
Digital Billboard Not Installed 
Telecom services Partially 
11 Smart School 
Interactive boards Installed 
Non-functional due to 
lack of funds and other 
required facilities 
Computer lab Installed 
Projectors Installed 
e-Content Installed 
CCTVs Installed 
Biometric Attendance Installed 
12 Smart Roads 
Uniform cross section of Carriageway Deficiently executed  
Dedicated pedestrian pathway Deficiently executed  
Electric vehicles charging stations Not executed  
Pedestrian crossing in tabletop type crossing Not executed  
Smart LED lighting with sensors Not executed  
Designated parking lots with sensors Not executed  
Smart Bus Stop Completed  
Multi utility Duct/Duct Bank Completed  
13 City Investments to Innovate, 
Integrate and Sustain (CITIIS) 
CCTV camera 
Under progress Work under progress Demarcated School bus/Van Parking 
Bollards 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
72 
Sl. No. Name of Project Proposed components under the project Status of execution as of December 2023 Remarks 
Speed calming measures 
Pathway and pavements 
14 Pedestrianisation of Paltan 
Bazaar 
Multi utility Duct Executed  
2.5-meter pedestrian on both sides and 5 -meter 
central spine for golf cart and limited time vehicular 
movement 
Not Executed as per provision  
Retractable hydraulic bollards Not Installed  
Benches Not Installed  
E-Cart with charging stations Not executed  
Kiosk garden Not executed  
Horticulture work Not executed  
Modular FRP Toilets Not executed  
CCTV cameras Not Installed  
Smart poles Not Installed  
15 Integrated Office Complex 
Green Building Environmentally sustainable building Work under progress  
16 Digitization of Collectorate and 
CDO Office 
Computer Installed  
Printer Installed  
Scanner Installed  
17 Façade rejuvenation of Platan 
Bazar 
Regularisation of Buildings Façade and proper 
Signage System based on local design elements. Executed  
18 Integrated Drainage Work Establishment of Systematic and Integrated 
Drainage System Under progress  
19 Integrated Sewerage Work 
Replacement of Main Sewer Network and 
Connectivity up to the outfall point situated outside 
the ABD area 
Under progress  
20 Citizen Engagement/ Outreach 
Project 
Citizen engagement in Dehradun through virtual 
interaction, dialogues and discussion Carried out  
21 Creche Building 
Activity cum Lunch/Meal Area Provided  
Play Area Provided  
Study Room Provided  
Sleeping Room Provided  
Day-care/Creche office Provided  
Kitchen Provided  
22 Monumental Flag Installation of 30.5-meter-tall Monumental National 
Flag Installed  

Appendices 
73 
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.4.1; Page 11) 
Total expenditure incurred on DICCC project 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Description 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 (Upto 12/2023) Total Amount 
1 CAPEX (M/s HPE) 62.96 81.30 76.66 0.00 2.20 223.12 
2 OPEX (M/s HPE) 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.56 10.11 14.67 
Total 62.96 81.30 76.66 4.56 12.31 237.79 
Other expenses related to DICCC project 
3 M/s HPE Manpower-DICCC 0.00 0.00 0.34 0.00 0.00 0.34 
4 Electricity 0.00 0.23 0.36 0.66 0.28 1.53 
5 Telephone 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.06 
6 Bandwidth (BSNL) 0.00 0.00 5.62 8.28 2.86 16.76 
7 Third Party Auditor (M/s Bharat 
Electronics) 0.00 0.00 1.73 0.00 0.23 1.96 
8 Zebra Crossing Line 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.02 
Total 0.00 0.24 8.06 8.98 3.39 20.67 
Grand Total 62.96 81.54 84.72 13.54 15.70 258.46 
Source: Information provided by DSCL. 
  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
74 
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.4.1.7; Page 16) 
Cost estimate for dismantling and re-installation of IT Equipment at 16 traffic junctions of Smart Road  
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. No. Locations Estimation for Removal Estimation for 
Re-installation 
1  Survey Chowk  97,687 13,85,750 
2  Nanys Bakery 33,375 6,39,625 
3  Dwarika Chowk 29,500 6,90,375 
4  Yamuna Colony 11,875 4,28,125 
5  Bahal Chowk 0 4,45,125 
6  Araghar Chowk 33,812 8,41,875 
7  Globe Chowk 0 3,33,375 
8  Near CMI Chowk 42,125 6,70,187 
9  Race Course Chowk 20,000 2,10,500 
10  City Heart Centre, EC Road 40,250 3,01,000 
11  Dilaram Chowk 10,875 1,89,437 
12  Chakrata Road Tagore Villa 18,750 66,375 
13  Mohini Road Cut EC Road   19,000 68,125 
14   Bindal Chowk 0 1,97,375 
15  Kishan Nagar Chowk 0 84,375 
16  Clock Tower 0 1,20,250 
Total 3,57,249 66,71,874 
Grand Total 70,29,123 
  

Appendices 
75 
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.4.4; Page 19) 
Average occupancy in e-buses on each trip during the month of July 2023 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of Route Number of Trip Fare Revenue earned during 
the month 
Revenue earned 
each day 
Revenue earned in 
each trip 
Occupancy in each 
trip (Number of 
passenger) 
A B C D E=D/31 F=E/B G=F/C 
ISBT-Airport 38 200 6,37,325 20,558.87 541.02 2.71 (3) 
ISBT-Rajpur 68 302 8,42,085 27,164.03 399.47 13.32 (13) 
ISBT-Sahstradhara 46 353 6,39,430 20,626.77 448.41 12.81 (13) 
ISBT-Raipur Maldevta 49 504 9,27,510 29,919.68 610.61 12.21 (12) 
ISBT-Sahaspur (Langha Road) 46 50 9,39,705 30,313.06 658.98 13.18 (13) 
 
Appendix-2.5 
(Reference: Paragraph -2.4.5.2; Page 21) 
Details of unused material under Smart Road Project 
Sl. No. Items Handed over to PIU, PWD Utilized Quantity Balance Quantity 
Quantity Cost (in ₹) Quantity Cost (in ₹) Quantity Cost (in ₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4/3*5) 7(3-5) 8(4/3*7) 
1 Manhole Section 91 45,09,581 4 1,98,223 87 43,11,358 
2 1 M Load bearing Section 111 38,94,818 27 9,47,388 84 29,47,430 
3 1.60 M Non load bearing Section 585 2,60,49,545 20 8,90,583 565 2,51,58,962 
Total cost of remaining items 3,24,17,750 
 
  
 
2 Fare is based on the operative km 13 to km 17. 
3 Fare is based on the operative km 17 to km 21. 
4 Fare is based on the operative km 30 to km 35. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
76 
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.2.1; Page 45) 
Details of overhead hindrances in the alignment of Smart Road 
Sl. No. Hindrances Name of line 
Departments 
Number of Utilities 
Rajpur Road Chakrata Road EC Road Haridwar Road 
1  Electric Pole UPCL 84 138 191 63 
2  Hoarding & Bus Shelter Nagar Nigam 30 39 14 0 
3  Trees Forest 44 27 30 15 
4  Transformer UPCL 25 16 20 10 
Total 183 220 255 88 
 
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.3; Page 46) 
Details of imposition of penalty  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of Project Time Overrun as on December, 2023 
(months) 
Provision of 
penalty Status of penalty imposed 
1 Smart Road 30 Yes Not imposed as DSCL failed to provide 
hindrance free work front to B&R. 
2 CITIIS 21 Yes Not imposed 
3 Electric buses 26 Yes Not imposed 
4 Water Supply Augmentation and Smart Metering  36 Yes Not imposed 
5 Rejuvenation of Parade Ground 38 Yes Partially imposed5 
6 Modern Doon Library 19 Yes Imposed but not recovered  
7 Pedestrianisation of Paltan Bazaar 24 Yes Imposed but partially recovered  
8 Water ATM  24 Yes Not imposed 
 
  
 
5 A penalty was imposed for the delay in executing the work only; however, the penalty for the value of the incomplete work was  not enforced, as detailed in Case  
Study-1. 

Appendices 
77 
Appendix-3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.5; Page 49) 
Details of cost escalation under Smart Road Project 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No Description of Work / Item(s) Units 
Quantity as 
per old DPR 
for all four 
roads6 
Unit rate 
as per old 
DPR 
Unit rate 
as per 
new DPR 
Difference 
in rates 
Quantity 
as per new 
DPR for all 
four roads 
Cost 
escalation 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7=6-5 8 9=8 x 7 
Footpath & KC Drain 
1 
Plain cement concrete 1:3:6 nominal mix in foundation with 
crushed stone aggregate 40 mm nominal size mechanically 
mixed, placed in foundation and compacted by vibration 
including curing for 14 days. 
Cum 41.00 4,109.50 5,036.70 927.20 2,722.67 25,24,459.62 
2 
Providing and laying tactile tile (for vision impaired persons as 
per standards) of size 300 x 300 x 9.8 mm having with water 
absorption less than 0.5% and conforming to IS:15622 of 
approved make in all colours and shades in for outdoor floors 
such as footpath, court yard, multi modals location etc., laid on 
20mm thick base of cement mortar 1:4 (1 cement: 4 coarse sand) 
in all shapes & patterns including grouting 
Sqm 12,073.00 1,450.45 1,933.75 483.30 4,042.20 19,53,595.26 
Pavement Work  
3 
Providing, laying, spreading and compacting graded stone 
aggregate to wet mix macadam specification including 
premixing the Material with water at OMC in mechanical mix 
plant carriage of mixed Material by tipper to site, laying in 
uniform layers with paver  in sub- base / base course on well -
prepared surface and compacting with vibratory roller to achieve 
the desired density. 
Cum 10,522.00 2,593.10 3,203.10 610.00 9,036.90 55,12,509.00 
4 Providing and applying primer coat with bitumen emulsion on 
prepared surface of granular Base including clearing of road Sqm 1,03,944.00 22.80 32.30 9.50 71,460.85 6,78,878.08 
 
6  Rajpur Road, Haridwar Road, EC Road and Chakrata Road. 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
78 
Sl. 
No Description of Work / Item(s) Units 
Quantity as 
per old DPR 
for all four 
roads6 
Unit rate 
as per old 
DPR 
Unit rate 
as per 
new DPR 
Difference 
in rates 
Quantity 
as per new 
DPR for all 
four roads 
Cost 
escalation 
surface and spraying primer at the rate of 0.60 kg/sqm using 
mechanical means. 
5 
Providing and laying dense bituminous macadam with 100 -120 
TPH batch type HMP producing an average output of 75 tonnes  
per hour using crushed aggregates of specified grading, 
premixed with bituminous binder @ 4.0 to 4.5% by weight of 
total mix  of mix and filler, transporting the hot mix to work site, 
laying with a hydrostatic paver  finisher with sensor control to 
the re quired grade, level and alignment, rolling with smooth 
wheeled, vibratory and tandem rollers to achieve the desired 
compaction as per MoRTH  specification clause No. 507 
complete in all respects. Grading I (40 mm nominal size) 
Cum 10,395.00 7,241.20 9,688.50 2,447.30 7,789.55 1,90,63,365.72 
6 
Providing and applying tack coat with bitumen emulsion using 
emulsion pressure distributor at the rate of 0.20 kg per sqm on 
the prepared bituminous/granular surface cleaned with 
mechanical broom. 
Sqm 1,31,576.00 8.00 10.70 2.70 2,41,050.98 6,50,837.65 
7 
Providing and laying bituminous concrete with 100 -120 TPH 
batch type hot mix plant producing an average output of 
75 tonnes per hour using crushed aggregates of specified 
grading, premixed with bituminous binder @ 5.4 to 5.6 per cent 
of mix and filler, transporting the hot mix to work site, laying 
with a hydrostatic paver finisher with sensor control to the 
required grade, level and alignment, rolling with smooth 
wheeled, vibratory  and tandem rollers to achieve the desired 
compaction as per MORTH specifica tion  clause No. 509 
complete in all respects. Grading-II 
Cum 4,747.00 8,283.40 11,254.90 2,971.50 5,350.08 1,58,97,762.72 
Junction Improvement, Road Painting & Road Signages   
8 
Providing and laying 25 mm thick mastic asphalt wearing course 
with paving grade bitumen meeting the requirements given in 
table 500 -29, prepared by using mastic cooker and laid to 
required level and slope after cleaning the surface, including 
Sqm 37,109.00 501.30 688.00 186.70 20,850.00 38,92,695.00 

Appendices 
79 
Sl. 
No Description of Work / Item(s) Units 
Quantity as 
per old DPR 
for all four 
roads6 
Unit rate 
as per old 
DPR 
Unit rate 
as per 
new DPR 
Difference 
in rates 
Quantity 
as per new 
DPR for all 
four roads 
Cost 
escalation 
providing antiskid surface with bitumen precoated fine -grained 
hard stone chipping of 13.2 mm nominal size at the rate of 0.005 
cum per 10 sqm and at an approximate spacing of 10 cm centre 
to centre in both directions, pressed into surface when the 
temperature of surfaces not less than 1000 C, protruding 1 mm 
to 4 mm over mastic surface, all complete as per clause 515. 
9 Truss and vertical Support Tonne 20.00 80,163.70 96,819.20 16,655.50 144.00 23,98,392.00 
10 Providing and fixing of Standard Metal Delineator. Nos. 13,965.00 512.90 1,225.20 712.30 1,200.00 8,54,760.00 
Electrical Work  
11 
External Lighting Feeder Pillar: Design, manufacture, supplying, 
fixing, testing & commissioning of outdoor wall/ floor mounted 
cubicle type CCMS feeder pillar of suitable size (not less than 
600Wx1200Hx450D-CCMS) fabricated from 2.0 mm (14 SWG) 
hot dip galvanized GI sheet steel with canopy on top, double door 
with locking arrangement (IP -54), powder coated with epoxy 
paint of approved shade, duly fixed on  MS angle 50 x 6 frame 
with 900  long legs, out  of which 450  duly grouted in cement 
concrete+B17 1:2:4 (1 cement: 2 sand: 4 stone aggregate 20mm) 
and having following equipment/ accessories mounted inside the 
cubical panel i/c connection, inter connection with aluminum 
thimbles, earthing with two nos. earth studs etc complete as reqd. 
Job   1,20,000 1,43,016.30 23,016.30 12.00 2,76,195.60 
12 
Supplying and laying of following size DWC HDPE pipe ISI 
marked along with all accessories like socket, bend, couplers etc. 
conforming to IS 14930, Part II complete with fitting and cutting, 
jointing etc. Direct in ground (75 cm below ground level) 
including excavation and refilling the trench but excluding sand 
cushioning and protective covering etc., complete as required. 63 
mm dia (OD-63 mm & ID-51 mm nominal). 
Meter 5,750.00 135.00 209.00 74.00 14,251.00 10,54,574.00 
Water Supply Work  
13 D.I. pipe conforming to IS:8329/2000 Providing of all materials, 
carting from site store to site of work, lowering into trenches with        

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
80 
Sl. 
No Description of Work / Item(s) Units 
Quantity as 
per old DPR 
for all four 
roads6 
Unit rate 
as per old 
DPR 
Unit rate 
as per 
new DPR 
Difference 
in rates 
Quantity 
as per new 
DPR for all 
four roads 
Cost 
escalation 
true to alignment, Laying & Jointing of full -length S&S 
Centrifugally Cast (Spun) Ductile Iron Pipes including supply of 
'EPDM' rubber gaskets conforming to IS:5382-1985 with testing 
of pipe line complete. D.I. Pipe S&S K-7: 
100 mm dia pipe Meter 3,597.00 900.00 1,150.00 250.00 1,827.00 4,56,750.00 
150 mm dia pipe. Meter 1,065.00 1,270.00 1,620.00 350.00 969.00 3,39,150.00 
250 mm dia pipe Meter 307.00 2,170.00 2,630.00 460.00 276.00 1,26,960.00 
14 Providing and laying D.I. specials of class K -12 suitable for 
push-on jointing as per IS: 9523-2001, Up to 600 mm dia. 
Per 
Qtl. 71.11 14,040.00 22,620.00 8,580.00 170.34 14,61,517.20 
15 
Supply, fixing and installation of multijet AMR domestic water 
meters pre -equipped with RF based automated meter reading 
facility, with nuts, bolts and necessary accessories confirming to 
IS 779:1994 / other ISO 4064 standard with 5 years warranty. 
DN 15mm as per technical specification. 
Nos. 828.00 5,800.00 7,200.00 1,400.00 630.00 8,82,000.00 
16 
Supply of all labour, material required for restoring of existing 
house connection which might be damage during excavation and 
also shifting all existing connection to new water supply system 
from existing water supply system complete as per unit estimate 
and directed by Engineer in -charge.  15 mm size water 
connections. 
Nos. 828.00 2,501.95 3,153.20 651.25 630.00 4,10,287.50 
Drainage Work   
17 
Filling available excavated earth (excluding rock) in trenches, 
plinth, sides of foundations etc. in layers not exceeding 20cm in 
depth, consolidating each deposited layer by ramming and 
watering, lead up to 50 m and lift up to 1.5 m. 
Cum 13,519.00 125.25 219.65 94.40 6,146.40 5,80,220.16 
18 Removal of earth By Mechanical Transport including loading, 
unloading and stacking up to 10 km Distance. Cum 25,624.00 203.42 277.83 74.41 12,804.80 9,52,805.17 
19 Plain cement concrete (PCC Grade M15) in open foundation 
completes as per drawing and technical specifications. Cum 4,239.00 4,754.00 5,788.30 1,034.30 1,505.01 15,56,631.84 
20 Providing and laying in position machine batched and machine 
mixed design mix M -25 grade cement concrete for reinforced Cum 7,360.32 6,515.95 7,997.30 1,481.35 6,193.65 91,74,963.43 

Appendices 
81 
Sl. 
No Description of Work / Item(s) Units 
Quantity as 
per old DPR 
for all four 
roads6 
Unit rate 
as per old 
DPR 
Unit rate 
as per 
new DPR 
Difference 
in rates 
Quantity 
as per new 
DPR for all 
four roads 
Cost 
escalation 
cement concrete work, using cement content as per approved 
design mix, including pumping of concrete to site of laying but 
excluding the cost of centring, shuttering, finishing and 
reinforcement, including admixtures in recommended 
proportions as per IS: 9 103 to accelerate, retard setting of 
concrete, improve workability without impairing strength and 
durability as per direction of Engineer-in-charge. 
21 
Supplying, fitting and placing un -coated HYSD bar 
reinforcement in foundation complete as per drawing and 
technical specifications. 
Tonne 1,918.00 60,763.80 84,702.50 23,938.70 708.86 1,69,69,186.88 
 Total       8,76,68,496.81 
 Add 18% GST       1,57,80,329.43 
 Grand Total       10,34,48,826.24 
 
  

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
82 
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1; Page 51) 
Details of release of Central share and matching share of State 
(` in crore) 
Date of release of 
Central Share to 
State 
Amount 
released by 
Centre 
Date of Release of 
Central Share by 
State to SPV 
Amount of 
Central share 
released by State 
to SPV 
Delay in release 
of Central 
Share (in days) 
Date(s) of release of 
matching share to 
SPV by State 
Amount (s) of State 
matching share 
released to SPV 
Delay in release 
of State 
matching share 
01.09.2015 2.00 17.05.2016 0.67 252 13.02.2019 2.00 1254 
- - 23.05.2016 1.33 258 - - - 
30.03.2018 18.00 18.05.2018 18.00 42 19.03.2018 3.00 Paid in advance 
11.06.2018 15.00 66 
27.06.2018 2.00 13.02.2019 2.00 224 28.03.2019 2.00 267 
20.08.2018 34.00 13.02.2019 34.00 170 28.03.2019 34.00 213 
21.12.2018 4.00 21.05.2019 4.00 144 01.10.2019 4.00 277 
31.07.2019 70.00 16.10.2019 70.00 70 11.12.2019 70.00 126 
03.10.2019 66.00 11.02.2020 35.00 124 12.04.2021 66.00 550 07.10.2020 31.00 363 
19.10.2020 5.00 11.11.2020 5.00 16 08.10.2020 3.00 Paid in advance 
11.11.2020 2.00 16 
29.10.2020 46.50 04.02.2021 46.50 91 12.04.2021 12.75 158 
14.10.2021 33.75 343 
27.06.2022 46.50 25.07.2022 46.50 21 06.12.2022 46.50 155 
30.06.2022 2.50 25.07.2022 2.50 18 30.09.2021 2.50 Paid in advance 
08.12.2022 49.00 17.01.2023 49.00 33 17.01.2023 46.00 33 
20.03.2023 3.00 95 
17.02.2023 49.00 16.03.2023 46.50 20 17.05.2023 46.50 82 
15.05.2023 2.50 80 15.05.2023 2.50 80 
 
  

Appendices 
83 
Appendix-4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.5; Page 55) 
Details of interest on mobilisation advance 
(Amount in ₹) 
Date Mobilisation Advance paid Mobilisation Advance recovered Balance Days Amount of Interest  
16.01.2020 3,64,00,000 0 3,64,00,000 265 26,42,739.73 
07.10.2020  69,83,724 2,94,16,276 169 13,62,013.88 
25.03.2021  18,41,088 2,75,75,188 114 8,61,252.45 
17.07.2021  27,61,658 2,48,13,530 241 16,38,372.80 
15.03.2022  21,26,385 2,26,87,145 367 22,81,145.81 
17.03.2023  1,42,31,158 84,55,987 69 1,59,852.90 
25.05.2023  12,18,821 72,37,166 84 1,66,553.96 
17.08.2023  45,86,370 26,50,796 - - 
Total 3,37,49,204  91,11,931.53 
Recovered 10,00,000.00 
Balance to be recovered 81,11.931.53 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

85 
Glossary 
 
 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Expanded Form 
1.  A&OE Administration & Office Expenses 
2.  ABD Area Based Development  
3.  ACEO Assistant Chief Executive Officer 
4.  AGM Assistant General Manager 
5.  AQMS Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
6.  AMR Automatic Meter Reading 
7.  B&R Bridge & Roof Company India Limited 
8.  BoQ Bill of Quantities 
9.  BPS Booster Pumping Station 
10.  CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
11.  CAPEX  Capital Expenditure 
12.  CAQMS Continuous Air Quality Monitoring Station 
13.  CCTV Closed Circuit Tele Vision 
14.  CDO Chief Development Officer 
15.  CEO Chief Executive Officer 
16.  CITIIS City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and Sustain 
17.  CPSU Central Public Sector Undertaking 
18.  CPWD Central Public Works Department 
19.  CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
20.  CV Curriculum Vitae 
21.  DICCC Doon Integrated Command and Control Centre  
22.  DPR Detailed Project Report 
23.  DRC Dispute Resolution Committee 
24.  DSCL Dehradun Smart City limited 
25.  FC Finance Controller  
26.  GFR General Financial Rules 
27.  GM General Manager 
28.  GoI Government of India 
29.  GoU Government of Uttarakhand 
30.  GPS Global Positioning System 
31.  Green Building Integrated Office Complex Green Building 
32.  GST Goods and Services Tax 
33.  HPE Hewlett Packard Enterprise India Private Limited 
34.  HPSC High Power Steering Committee  
35.  IA Implementing Agency 
36.  IAS Indian Administrative Service 
37.  ICT Information and Communication Technology  
38.  IDTF Inter-departmental Task Force 
39.  ISBT Inter-State Bus Terminal 
40.  ITDA Information Technology Development Agency 
41.  ITMS Intelligent Traffic Management System 
42.  MA Mobilisation Advance  
43.  MDDA Mussoorie Dehradun Development Authority  
44.  MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
45.  MoU Memorandum of Understanding 

Report on Implementation of Smart Cities Mission in Dehradun  
86 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Expanded Form 
46.  MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
47.  MSI Master System Integrator 
48.  MUD Multi Utility Duck 
49.  NND Nagar Nigam Dehradun 
50.  NOC No Objection Certificate  
51.  NPCC National Projects Construction Corporation Limited 
52.  O&M Operation & Maintenance  
53.  OPEX Operational Expenditure 
54.  OFC Optical Fiber Cable 
55.  OHT Overhead Tank  
56.  PCS Provincial Civil Services  
57.  PIU Project Implementing Unit 
58.  PMC Project Management Consultant 
59.  PPP Public Private Partnership  
60.  PWD Public Works Department. Uttarakhand 
61.  QR Quick Response 
62.  RC Registration Certificate 
63.  RFID Radio Frequency Identification  
64.  SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
65.  SCP Smart City Proposal 
66.  SCM Smart Cities Mission 
67.  SFS State Finance Services 
68.  SG State Government 
69.  SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
70.  SNA Single Nodal Account 
71.  SWM  Solid Waste Management  
72.  SWV Smart Waste Vehicle 
73.  TPA Third-Party Agency 
74.  TW Tube well 
75.  UDD Urban Development Department  
76.  UJN Uttarakhand Jal Nigam 
77.  UJS Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan 
78.  UKPCB Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board  
79.  ULB Urban Local Body 
80.  UPCL Uttarakhand Power Corporation Limited 
81.  UREDA Uttarakhand Renewable Energy Development Agency 
82.  UTC Uttarakhand Transport Corporation 
83.  VMD Variable Message Display 
 