 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No. 12 of 2025 
(Performance Audit – Civil) 

i 
Table of Contents 
Particulars Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
Jal Jeevan Mission - A profile 1.1 01 
Organisation structure 1.2 02 
Audit objectives 1.3 02 
Audit criteria 1.4 02 
Audit scope and methodologies 1.5 03 
Acknowledgement 1.6 04 
Structure of the report 1.7 04 
Chapter  II 
Institutional Framework, Planning and Capacity Building 
Institutional framework under Jal Jeevan Mission 2.1 05 
Implementation Support Agencies 2.2 11 
Capacity building 2.3 12 
Chapter III 
Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
Coverage of FHTCs 3.1 15 
Village wise coverage 3.2 16 
Har Ghar Jal status 3.3 17 
Identification of the projects 3.4 19 
Tendering process 3.5 21 
Turnaround time for vetting of designs 3.6 23 
Contract management 3.7 24 
Status of projects in the test-checked districts 3.8 27 
Execution of Multi Village Schemes 3.9 32 
Non-compliance to prescribed design 3.10 39 
Implementation of 100 days scheme 3.11 40 
Chapter IV 
Financial Management 
Financial position of JJM 4.1 43 
Chapter V 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
Water quality testing 5.1 51 
Status of accreditation and availability of equipment 5.2 55 
Inadequate remedial action 5.3 56 
Non-establishment of desalination plants in coastal 
regions 
5.4 56 
Independent audit approach for water quality testing 5.5 57 
Non-utilisation of water supplied under JJM for 
drinking purpose 
5.6 58 
Chapter VI 
Post Operational Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Types of water sources in the State 6.1 61 
Water audit and water security 6.2 62 
Inadequate sustainability measures 6.3 62 

ii 
Absence of detailed Operation and Maintenance policy 6.4 64 
Post implementation service delivery 6.5 65 
Monitoring and Evaluation 6.6 70 
Findings of Joint Physical Inspections 6.7 74 
Chapter VII 
Outputs and Outcomes 
Sustainable Development Goal-6 7.1 75 
Outcomes of the mission across sectors 7.2 76 
Appendices 81 
Glossary 88 
 
 
 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
number 
Details Page 
number 
1.1 Details of sampled units 81 
3.1 Details of mismatch in reporting 82 
3.2 Excess expenditure due to non-compliance to prescribed 
design 
84 
5.1 Details of availability of equipment in test checked 
laboratories  
85 
5.2 Details of water quality parameters 86 
6.1 Details of IoT implementation 87 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the year ended 31 March 2024 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Karnataka under Article 151 (2) 
of the Constitution to be tabled in the State Legislature. 
The Report contains the results of Performance Audit on 
‘Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission’ covering the period 
2019-24. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which came 
to notice in the course of the performance audit conducted 
during June 2024 to December 2024. Matters relating to the 
periods outside the audit period have also been reported in 
places where they were found necessary.  
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 

EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY


Executive Summary 
v 
Executive Summary 
Why did CAG do this audit? 
The Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India conducted th e 
Performance Audit (PA) to assess the implementation and effecti veness of the 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) in Karnataka.  The PA aimed to evaluate whether the 
mission has met its objectives of providing safe and adequate d rinking water 
through Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) to every r ural 
household by 2024. The prescribed service level for an FHTC is a minimum of 
55 litres per capita per day (LPCD) of drinking water and meeting the prescribed 
quality standards (as per Bureau of Indian Standards IS: 10500) on regular basis. 
Scope of the PA 
The PA focused on planning and implementation of the mission th rough 
stipulated institutional framework, financial management, water  quality and 
sustainability aspects for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24.  A to tal of seven 
districts were selected from am ong the least, average and best performer 
categories.  Two taluks in each district, two Gram Panchayats ( GPs) in each 
taluk and one village in each GP were selected randomly. Benefi ciary survey 
and Focused Group Discussion also formed part of the methodology for this PA. 
Audit findings 
Planning and Institutional Framework 
The functioning of the mandated institutions/authorities were f ound to be 
deficient.  The Village, District and State Water and Sanitation Committees did 
not meet regularly as required. The JJM’s Operational guideline s stipulate the 
preparation of Village Action Pl ans (V APs) through community participation. 
This includes the preparation of  baseline data, water source ma pping, 
convergence activities, sustainability measures etc. There were omissions of 
crucial elements like source sustainability, financial sustaina bility provisions 
such as collection of user charges, data on groundwater and con vergence with 
other schemes.  In 14 V APs, the lessons learnt from past implementation such 
a s  p r e p a r a t i o n  o f  O & M  p l a n ,  i d e n t i f y i n g  i s s u e s  f o r  d e l a y s ,  p r e ventive 
maintenance etc., were not included. This shows deficiencies in the constitution 
and functioning of the Village Water and Sanitation Committees (VWSCs). 
The District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) is responsible  for overall 
implementation of JJM at the district level.  Its functions inv olve ensuring 
preparation of V AP after taking stock of each village for FHTCs , approval of 
V APs, finalisation of District Action Plan (DAP) etc.  It convenes monthly 
meetings to consider and accord administrative approval of the in-village water 
supply schemes, plan protection and preservation of village wat er resources, 
greywater management etc.  
Audit noticed that none of the districts had conducted the mandated 12 meetings 
during the years 2019-20 and 2023-24.  While 13 districts inclu ding four 
 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
vi 
sampled districts had not conducted any meeting during 2023-24, 17 districts 
including three sampled districts had conducted between one to six meetings 
and one district between seven to eleven meetings.  Non conducting of regular
meetings indicates poor monitoring at the district level.    
The Apex Committee which had a multi department involvement was not 
represented at times by the heads of the departments such as Primary Education, 
Health, Finance, Planning etc.  This led to absence of integration with other 
programmes focussing on water conservation, grey water management etc., 
under the mission. The Apex Committee was responsible for coordination 
among various departments and other agencies for convergence.  The 
operational guidelines indicate various Central Government schemes that can 
be converged under JJM viz., grey water management under Swachh Bharat 
Mission Grameen (SBMG), provision of drinking water supply in schools under 
Samagra Shiksha, Watershed management/artificial recharge, creation  / 
augmentation of water bodies under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
etc.  It was seen that the  State Water Sanitation Mission  had not devised any 
policy framework for integration.  Integration with other programmes focussing 
on water conservation, grey water management etc., were not take n up under 
JJM.  Only 13 out of the 28 test -checked villages incorporated partial 
convergence strategies in their V APs. Field visits showed that none of these 13 
villages had actually taken up any activity under convergence.  Non-
convergence with other schemes could lead to missed opportunities for 
infrastructure and resource optimization and weak sustainability of water supply 
systems. 
Engagement of Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs) was inadequate as 
was the deployment of trained personnel for Operation and Maintenance 
activities. 
Implementation of the Mission 
Though the initial mission period ended on 31 March 2024, the State was yet to 
provide Functional House Tap Connections to 24.52 lakh households (34 per 
cent) as of November 2024 out of the targeted 72.14 lakh households.  This was 
due to delays in tendering, entrustment of multiple works to contractors,  
entrustment of works before ensuring availability of land, executions hampered 
by delays in obtaining land clearances and providing approvals for structural 
and hydraulic designs, deficient preparation of DPRs etc.  There were instances 
of works being dropped citing reasons of lesser number of households in the 
habitations and augmentation works exceeding ₹1.50 lakh.  Five villages were 
incorrectly declared Har Ghar Jal com pliant and 21 villages were reported as 
100 per cent FHTC done though works were yet to be completed. 
The work of providing FHTCs to 435 households in Inchur Habitation of Inchur 
Gram Panchayat was entrusted (October 2023) to a contractor for ₹146.64 lakh 
to be completed by July 2024. The work could not be commenced as land for 
construction of OHT was not handed over to the contractor.  The department , 
after incurring an expenditure of ₹60.41 lakh (May 2024), towards construction 
of open well and laying of pipes, had to abandon the work midway.  Hence, the 
objective of providing water supply of 435 households remained unachieved.  

Executive Summary 
vii 
The work of providing FHTCs to 239 households in Dharmapur village of 
Hokarna B Gram Panchayat was entrusted (18 April 2022) to a contractor for 
₹51.86 lakh with the scheduled completion period of four months. During JPV, 
it was seen that the work was yet to commence even after lapse of two years . 
The HDPE pipes procured for the work was kept alongside of the road.  The 
department had not taken any action to terminate the contract and get the same 
executed by a different contractor resulting in not achievin g the objective of 
providing drinking water to 239 households.   
Financial management 
The State received only ₹11,189 crore against the allocation of ₹24,819.48 crore 
(45 per cent) from the Centre mainly due to its inability to utilise the already 
released funds.  The poor fund utilisation under support activities was on 
account of reduced engagement of Implementation Support Agencies. Fund 
utilisation under water quality monitoring and surveillance declined from 50 per 
cent in 2019 -20 to two per cent in 2023 -24.  The non -utilisation resulted in 
infrastructural gaps in terms of shortage of laboratories for water testing, 
shortage of equipment etc.  The mission emphasized on community 
involvement and community contribution.  However, the community 
contributions in the State was negligible with only ₹22.57 crore collected out of 
the expected ₹1,594.90 crore. 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
Testing was deficient at all levels – GP, taluk, district and State. 533 villages in 
the State did not have women trained in Field Test Kits.  Retesting of 
contaminated samples were taken up only during 2023 -24 and it was only 18 
per cent. Of the 31 district level and 48 taluk level laboratories in the State, none 
of them were equipped to test for Arsenic.  Only 17 district level and 4 taluk 
level laboratories were equipped to conduct tests for microbiological parameters 
(total coliform and E.coli).  The department failed to get a single sample tested 
from the designated State Referral laboratory during the period 2019 -20 to 
2023-24. The turnaround time for laboratory testing ranged from nine to 106 
days as against 24 -48 hours. The remedial action initiated for the sources that 
tested positive for contamination was inadequate.  Independent testing by audit 
with the cooperation of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Laboratories 
showed that water quality met the required standard in only two of the 28 test -
checked villages. 
Post Operation Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
The State was heavily reliant on groundwater sources for water supply posing 
the risk of unsustainability in the long run.   The department’s efforts to include 
sustainable measures such as recharge of ground water through conservation 
and reuse of water resources, grey water management etc., was inadequate.  The 
State brought out the Operation and Maintenance policy only in September 
2024 and hence it’s effectiveness could not be ascertained.  Grievance redressals 
took high resolution time and complaints were closed without indicating the 
nature of action taken.  Monitoring systems such as Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition (SCADA) were either non -functional or underutilized, asset 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
viii 
geo-tagging was incomplete, and mandated social audits were missing. 
Evaluation reports by third -party agencies and State Quality Monitors lacked 
depth, and independent performance assessments were delayed.   
Outputs and outcomes 
The State’s performance under SDG -6 ‘Clean Water and Sanitation for all’ 
witnessed fluctuations during the period 2018-19 to 2023-24.  Audit attempted 
to measure the four key outcomes envisaged under the mission through 
collection of data from multiple sources.  Analysis showed that implementation 
of JJM helped reduce the dropout rates among upper primary school going girls 
and eased the  burden for women.  However, its impact on employment and 
public health remains limited. 
Conclusion 
The Performance Audit highlights gaps in planning, execution, financial 
management, water quality assurance, post-implementation sustainability, and
achieveme
nt of intended outcomes. While the State made progress in expanding 
access to household tap connections and aligning with SDG-6 objectives, Audit 
noticed systemic deficiencies in institutional arrangements, inadequate 
convergence with other schemes, delayed tendering, underperformance of 
support agencies, ineffective water quality monitoring, and weak grievance
redressal 
mechanisms. Root cause analysis of system deficiencies identified 
non-compliance with guidelines, fragmented planning, poor deployment of 
trained personnel, poor financial controls, and insufficient community
engagement. 
Recommendations 
The report contains the following recommendations which are intend to help 
the State Government improve the implementation of the mission.  
❖ The State Government should direct that the committees formed to 
oversee the implementation of JJM , prepare and implement the 
convergence plans with other schemes specifying the timelines and 
measurable outcomes for optimal resource utilisation. 
❖ The State Government should ensure that sufficient number of 
Implementation Support Agencies are engaged and their performance 
monitored to ensure that adequate number of persons are trained and 
deployed. 
❖ The State Government should award works only after ensuring 
availability of land to avoid delays in completion of works. 
❖ The State Government should ensure that works are awarded to 
contractors after considering their available tender capacity. 
❖ The State should direct the department to ensure that the funds released 
for JJM are fully utilised under all components and pursue with the GoI 
to get unreleased funds.   

Executive Summary 
ix 
❖ The State Government should prioritise  water quality testing at all 
levels to ensure that water of mandated quality is supplied to all 
citizens, the turnaround time for laboratory testing be strictly adhered 
to and remedial action taken for contaminated samples to prevent 
outbreak of water borne diseases. 
❖ The State Government should ensure that recharge structures and grey 
water management activities are taken up in all villages to ensure 
continuous water supply of required quantity and quality. 
❖ The State Government should ensure that the data uploaded in the 
online portal is subject to different levels of verification to prevent 
incorrect reporting.

CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION 

1 
1.1 Jal Jeevan Mission – A Profile 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), a demand driven and community centric scheme 
launched (August 2019) by Government of India (GoI), adopts piped water 
supply as the only means of potable water delivery in rural areas. It aimed to 
provide piped water supply to each of the 19.25 crore rural households of the 
country through Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) by the end of 
2024. A Functional Household Tap Connection has three definite 
characteristics: 
• Water supply in adequate quantity i.e., at least 55 litres per capita per
day (lpcd)
• Water supply of prescribed quality i.e., BIS:10500 standard and
• Long term continuous supply
Under this scheme, rural communities are responsible for maintaining water 
supply infrastructure, and women and weaker sections are actively involved in 
management and water quality surveillance using Field Test Kits (FTKs). The 
components of JJM are indicated in Chart 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Components of Jal Jeevan Mission 
Source: JJM Brochure 


Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
2 
1.2 Organisation structure 
The organisational structure for the implementation of JJM in Karnataka 
involves several levels of governance, ensuring a coordinated approach from 
the state level down to the village level. The Commissioner, Rural Drinking 
Water and Sanitation department (department) is responsible for effective 
implementation of JJM. Chart 1.2 depicts the organisation structure. 
Chart 1.2: Organisation structure of JJM in Karnataka 
Source: JJM Brochure 
1.3 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit (PA) aims to ascertain whether 
➢ there exist institutional frameworks for proper planning and 
implementation of the scheme; 
➢ the financial resources have been utilised for the intended purposes; 
➢ water supplied is constantly monitored for its quality; 
➢ post operational management of the scheme is in place; and 
➢ programme objectives (output and outcomes) have been achieved as 
envisaged. 
1.4 Audit criteria 
The following sources formed the basis for audit criteria: 
✓ Operational guidelines for implementation of JJM 
✓ Margadarshika for Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Village Water and 
Sanitation Committee (VWSC)  
✓ Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Framework 
✓ Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act and Rules 
✓ State Government orders and guidelines issued from time to time 
 tate  ater an   anitation
Mission     M  
  ea e      C    ovt an 
 evelopment Commissioner
 Mission  irector  C        
 tate level
1. Committees under SWSM
(a) Apex Committee
(b)  xecutive Committee
2. State Level Scheme
Sanctioning Committee 
Technical Committee for JJM
 ram  ancha at
 istrict  ater an   anitation
Mission     M  
  ea e     Chief   ecutive Officer
 Mem er  ecretar            
 oK
Finali e District Action Plan
Responsible for overall
implementation
 illage  ater an   anitation
Committee     C  
  ecretar   ancha at  evelopment
Officer
  ea e      resi ent   resi ent is
mem er of    
Finalise Village Action Plan
 nsures FHTC to every
existing HH
 istrict level
Implementation Support Agencies (ISA)
Finali e State Action Plan
(SAP) and Annual Action
Plan (AAP)
                                                    
                                                          

Chapter-I
3 
1.5 Audit scope and methodology 
The PA covered the JJM implementation period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. Audit 
involved scrutiny of records and documents in selected GPs/VWSC, Project 
Implementing Units, selected District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) 
and State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) besides interaction with 
beneficiaries (focused group discussions in villages and survey of beneficiaries) 
and undertaking joint physical inspections. Audit also analysed the data relating 
to grievance redressal, e-procurement, dropout rates of upper primary school 
girls, water borne diseases etc., received from different sources.  
Audit adopted stratified random sampling method for selection of units using 
Interaction Data  xtraction and Analysis (ID A) software. The districts were 
categorised into three performance levels based on tap connection achievements 
as of April 2024 and seven  districts (23 per cent) were selected for audit as 
indicated in Ta le 1.1. 
Ta le 1.1:  election of  istricts 
Strata No. of Districts Number selected Per cent 
Least Performer 05 02 40 
Average 
Performer 09 02 22 
Best Performer 17 03 18 
Source: IMIS 
In each district, two taluks (14) and in each taluk, two GPs (28) and in each GP, 
one village (28 villages) were selected randomly. The villages were selected 
based on the reported achievements in providing FHTCs. Audit, however, 
noticed that in four1 of these villages, the declared 100 per cent completion of 
FHTCs was found to be overstated as discussed in Para 3.2. These villages were 
therefore required to be replaced. Beneficiary survey covering 560 individuals 
selected randomly , 2 3 Focused Group Discussions  (FGDs)2 and survey of 
members of 28 VWSC s prioritising women  formed part of the audit 
methodology. The details of districts, taluks, GPs and villages selected are 
detailed in Appendix 1.1. 
An entry conference was held on 27 June 2024 with the Additional Chief 
Secretary to Government, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj department 
wherein the objectives, sampling and methodology were explained. The report 
was sent to the State Government on 28 February 2025. The State Government 
furnished the replies to Audit in April/May 2025.  The replies have been 
incorporated and suitably rebutted where required.   
The Audit team developed 12 toolkits for collection of information from the 
sampled units and for conducting beneficiary/VWSC member survey and Focus 
Group Discussions. Further, Audit sought the assistance of the Karnataka State 
Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) for quality testing of water samples collected 
by Audit teams from multiple points.  
1  Aikur, Arabikothanur, Darasaguppe and Kirangoor. 
2  One FGD in each selected village.  FGDs in five villages (Bilhar, Hadigere, K Hosahalli, 
Kadwad and Kodihalli) could not be undertaken due to non-cooperation by the stakeholders. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
4 
1.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by  all the institutions test -
checked under the Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation department in the 
smooth conduct of audit and the officers/officials of KSPCB for water quality 
testing. 
1.7 Structure of the Report 
The Audit findings noticed during the PA have been categorised into six 
chapters as below: 
Chapter II – Institutional Framework, Planning and Capacity Building 
Chapter III– Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
Chapter IV – Financial Management 
Chapter V– Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
Chapter VI– Post Operational Management, Monitoring and  valuation 
Chapter VII– Outputs and Outcomes 

CHAPTER-II
INSTITUTIONAL 
FRAMEWORK, PLANNING 
AND CAPACITY BUILDING

 
5 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Institutional framework under Jal Jeevan Mission 
The institutional framework of the JJM is vital for its effective planning, 
implementation, and sustainability. By integrating state, district and village-level 
stakeholders, it ensures coordinated efforts to provide FHTCs to rural 
households. JJM follows a hierarchical planning approach as shown in Chart 
2.1. 
Chart 2.1: Hierarchy of Action plans 
 
Source: Information furnished by department 
This chapter focuses on the existence of planning and institutional 
mechanism existing within the State for implementation of JJM. The 
implementation was hindered by the absence of non-
preparation/deficiencies in the preparation of Village Action Plans, not 
holding the mandated meetings at the district and state levels and 
absence/inadequacy of convergence measures. Deployment of 
Implementation Supporting Agencies was inadequate and impacted 
capacity building measures.  

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
6 
2.1.1 F                            s/V               d            
C         
Paras 3.5 and 5.4 of JJM’s operation guidelines provide for empowering the GPs 
to manage in-village water supply systems as the GPs have a constitutional 
mandate to manage drinking water.  It further stresses the need to have 
community participation, ownership and contribution in all decisions pertaining 
to water supply systems. The willingness of community, reflected through Gram 
Sabha resolution and community contribution will be the foremost criterion for 
planning of water supply systems in villages. The State Government and its 
departments are to play a true role of facilitator.  
The GP/VWSC shall function as a legal entity as envisaged in the 73 rd 
Constitutional Amendment. The Gram Sabha shall decide whether the GP or the 
VWSC will carry out the responsibilities of water supply management in the 
village. The GP/VWSC among other functions shall ensure the preparation of 
Village Action Plan (VAP) for the water supply scheme, provide FHTC to every 
existing rural household, mobilise and motivate the community to contribute 
either in cash/kind or labour etc. Further the GPs/VWSCs shall hold periodic 
meetings at least four times in a year and maintain minutes/record of the same.  
In this regard, Audit noticed the following: 
➢ 898 villages in the State had not constituted the VWSCs.  
➢ Five out of 28 test checked villages3 delayed forming VWSCs or failed 
to reconstitute them promptly.  
➢ While 16 of the test-checked villages adopted resolutions to take up JJM, 
eight4 did not adopt and four villages5 did not report such resolutions.  
➢ In seven6 villages, the baseline survey was not conducted to assess the 
number of FHTCs existing and the quantity and quality of water 
supplied before implementing JJM. 
➢ The number of test-checked villages which conducted the mandated four 
meetings in a year ranged from  ero (2019-20) to nine (2022-23). 
The non-constitution of VWSCs and where constituted, their failure to conduct 
the mandated meetings and pass resolutions is an indicator of their poor 
involvement in carrying out the various activities such as preparation of VAPs, 
community involvement etc., enlisted under the guidelines for implementation 
of JJM. 
Out of the FGD respondents 27 per cent reported non-involvement and 32 per 
cent reported partial involvement in community planning. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that during the start of JJM, VSWCs 
were constituted in all the villages. However, after reconciliation of the villages 
in the State during 2024, out of the total 26,591 villages, 25,553 villages have 
reconstituted VWSCs and after thorough follow-up, the State had constituted 
VWSCs in all the balance villages. It further stated that VWSCs were formed 
in the five villages and resolutions adopted in the 12 villages pointed out by 
3  Anoor, Doddaganjur, Haradanahalli, Mudnal and Rajnal. 
4  Basavathanpura, Bilhar, Hadigere, Kodihalli, Kuthanahalli, Nelahalli, Thiruganahalli and 
Tholasikambri. 
5  Akkunji, Arga, Halageri and Kadwad. 
6   Arga, DN Doddi, Hulakoti, Hunjunkere, Kadwad, Tholasikombri and Tumkur. 

Chapter-II
7 
Audit. It also stated that baseline household details for the seven districts were 
collected from the respective Panchayat Development Officers and data ground 
truthing was done during DPR survey. With regard to the observation on the 
meetings, it stated that the department had issued circulars and closely monitors 
the regular meetings of VWSCs and its functions as per the guidelines. 
The Government’s reply confirms that many VWSCs were reconstituted only 
in 2024, well after the launch of JJM —validating Audit’s concern of delayed 
grassroots institutional involvement. No supporting documents (resolutions, 
meeting records, constitution dates) were provided to substantiate full 
compliance. The claim of regular meetings is unverified as Audit found most 
villages did not hold even the mandated four annual meetings. The lack of 
documentation also resulted in absence of institutional memory of community 
involvement and learning. 
2.1.2            s                   V       A          s 
The guidelines stipulate the preparation of VAPs through community 
participation. This includes the preparation of baseline data, water source 
mapping, convergence activities, sustainability measures etc. 
If community participation is inadequate, the VAPs may not reflect the true 
needs and priorities of the village, resulting in gaps in implementation of the 
water infrastructure. Hence, the VAP shall be approved in the Gram Sabha when 
80 per cent of the village community present in the meeting agree to the 
prepared plan. Para 3.6 of the guidelines specifies the various elements that 
should form part of the VAP.   
Audit noticed that out of 26,432 villages, 346 villages in the State had not 
prepared VAPs. This includes two test-checked villages (Basavanthapura and 
Bilhar). In Bilhar village, even the VWSC was not constituted. The deficiencies 
noticed in the preparation of the VAPs in the test-checked villages and the likely 
impact in implementation are shown in Ta le 2.1. 
Ta le 2.1:  eficiencies notice  in preparation of    s 
 eficienc   Impact 
Only four out of 26 VAPs reviewed were 
in the prescribed format as per guidelines. 
Lack of standardi ed planning leads to 
incomplete or unstructured implementation of 
water supply schemes.  
18 villages did not secure community 
contributions before initiating water 
supply schemes. 
• 15 per cent of surveyed beneficiaries
reported no community involvement in
JJM planning, while only five per cent
recorded satisfactory participation.
Non-compliance with JJM guidelines, 
financial burden on government funds, and 
reduced community ownership of water 
projects. 
Weak community engagement leads to poor 
awareness, lack of responsibility, and possible 
resistance to JJM initiative. 
16 villages failed to submit their VAPs to 
the District Water Supply Mission for 
further action. 
Possible non-inclusion in the District Action 
Plans. Delayed approvals and fund 
allocations, resulting in slow implementation. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
8 
 eficienc   Impact 
Only two and 10 villages prepared social 
maps and resource maps. 
Lack of critical mapping tools results in 
ineffective resource utili ation, improper 
planning, and inefficient project execution. 
18 villages reported that their VAPs were 
not integrated with the Gram Panchayat 
(GP) Development Plans. 
Non-alignment with local governance 
priorities could lead to duplication of efforts, 
fund misallocation, and lack of coordination 
with other developmental activities. 
Source: Audit analysis 
Apart from the above,  the VAPs omitted crucial elements like source 
sustainability, financial sustainability provisions such as collection of user 
charges, data on groundwater, convergence with other schemes etc.  In 14 VAPs, 
the lessons learnt from past implementation such as preparation of O&M plan, 
identifying issues for delays, preventive maintenance etc., were not included. 
The non-preparation of VAPs and shortcomings in the prepared VAPs reflects 
on the deficiencies in the constitution and functioning of the VWSCs.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that VWSC has been constituted in 
Bilhar village and both Basavanthapura and Bilhar villages have prepa red 
VAPs. It further stated that source sustainability of the schemes taken up in the 
villages was ensured through District Source Finding Committee and financial 
sustainability of the scheme was addressed in the District Action Plan. The reply 
is not acceptable as the VAPs of the test-checked districts did not contain these 
parameters and the reply also does not address the audit issues relating to non-
submission of VAPs to DWSM, non-preparation of VAPs as per prescribed 
format etc. 
2.1.3 F                s              d            M ss    
The District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) is responsible for overall 
implementation of JJM at the district level. The functions of DWSM among 
other things involve ensuring preparation of VAP after taking stock of each 
village for FHTCs, approve VAPs, finalise District Action Plan (DAP) etc. The 
DWSM shall convene monthly meetings to consider and accord administrative 
approval of the in -village water supply schemes, plan protection and 
preservation of village water resources, greywater management etc.  
Audit noticed that none of the districts had conducted the mandated 12 meetings 
during the years 2019-20 and 2023-24. While 13 districts including four7 
sampled districts had not conducted any meeting during 2023-24, 17 districts 
including three8 sampled districts had conducted between one to six meetings 
and one district between seven to eleven meetings. Non conducting of regular 
meetings indicates poor monitoring at the district level.   
The State Government stated (May 2025) that DWSMs were formed as per the 
JJM guidelines and the department had issued circulars to districts on 
reconstitution and activation of DWSM. However, it did not furnish reply to the 
7  Chikkaballapura, Gadag, Uttara Kannada and Yadgir. 
8  Bidar, Kolar and Mandya. 

Chapter-II 
9 
audit observation on non-conducting the mandated meetings during the period 
2019-20 to 2023-24. 
2.1.4 F                                d            M ss    
In accordance with Para 5.2 of the guidelines, SWSM, a state level institution 
headed by Chief Secretary with Principal Secretary/Secretary in -charge of 
PH D/ RWS Department as Mission Director is the organisation responsible 
for implementation of JJM in the state. The SWSM w ould have an Apex 
Committee and an  xecutive Committee. 
• The Apex Committee would be headed by the Chief Secretary of the State
with Secretaries in-charge of PH /Rural Water Supply, Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj, Primary  ducation, Health, Finance, Planning,
Information and Public Relations and a Government of India representative
as members. The Apex Committee shall provide policy guidance, be
responsible for the overall planning, strategi ing and implementation of JJM
in the State and be responsible for finalisation of State Action Plan to provide
FHTC to every rural household by 2024 among other things. The Apex
Committee shall meet at least twice a year and if possible, quarterly.
Audit noticed that during the year 2023-24, the Apex Committee had not met
even once. In the meetings conducted, necessary participation of the
department heads was missing and there was no formal mechanism such as
documented action taken reports, timelines for implementation, review of
previous decisions etc. These deficiencies indicate the lack of continuous
monitoring and resultant delays in completion of the projects.
Though the State was required to complete the works under JJM by 15 March
2024 for in-village works and 31 March 2024 for Multi Village Scheme
(MVS), the progress of the works was slow and six of the in-village works
for which Detailed Project Reports were prepared were yet to be tendered as
indicated in Para 3.4.
• The  xecutive Committee functioning under SWSM on the other hand shall
be responsible for creation of DWSMs, regular monitoring of physical and
financial performance and management of water supply projects, ensure UCs
and audited statements are submitted to GoI on time, take up evaluation
studies, impact assessment studies etc.
Audit noticed that the functioning of the  xecutive Committee was also
deficient as it failed to ensure submission of UCs and audited financial
statements on time which resulted in short receipt of Central assistance as
discussed in Para 4.1.1 of this report.
The State Government furnished (May 2025) the dates of both the Apex 
Committee meetings and  xecutive Committee meetings and stated  the 
meetings were conducted regularly and action taken against the decisions of the 
meetings were rigorously followed in the subsequent meetings. Audit noticed 
from the data that the Apex Committee had not conducted any meeting during 
2023-24. Further as per the records available with Audit, there were no 
documented action taken reports, timelines for implementation etc. Though the 
Apex Committee included Secretaries from different departments, it was seen 
that these departments were not adequately represented during the meetings. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
10 
2.1.5 C           w          s     s 
The Apex Committee was responsible for coordination among various 
departments and other agencies for convergence. Para 6.3 of the guidelines 
indicates various Central Government schemes and the components under the 
schemes that can be converged under JJM such as Grey water management 
under Swachh Bharat Mission Grameen (SBMG), provision of drinking water 
supply in schools under Samagra Shiksha, Watershed management/artificial 
recharge, creation/augmentation of water bodies under Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana etc.  
Audit noticed the SWSM had not devised any policy framework for integration. 
Review of the minutes of the Apex Committee showed that integration with 
other programmes focussing on water conservation, grey water management 
etc., were not taken up under JJM. Only 13 out of the 28 test-checked villages 
incorporated partial convergence strategies in their VAPs as shown in Ta le 2.2. 
Ta le 2.2.: Convergence planne  in selecte  villages 
Sl no Name of Scheme No. of villages 
planned 
1 Swachh Bharat Mission- Grameen (SBM-G) 10 
2 MGNREGS 07 
3 Watershed Development Component of PMKSY 04 
4 Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies 03 
5 Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 01 
6 Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 02 
7 Compensatory Afforestation fund Management and 
Planning Authority (CAMPA) 00 
8 Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Kendra 01 
9 Samagra Shiksha 00 
10 Aspirational District Programme 00 
11 District Mineral Development Fund (DMDF) 00 
12 MPLAD 03 
13 MLALAD 03 
14 Grants under Article 275(1) of the constitution/ Tribal 
Sub Scheme 00 
15 National Rural Livelihood Mission/ State Rural 
Livelihood Mission 00 
Source: VAPs of the villages 
Audit noticed during field visits that none of these 13 villages had actually taken 
up any activity under convergence. Non-convergence with other schemes could 
lead to missed opportunities for infrastructure and resource optimi ation and 
weak sustainability of water supply systems. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that convergence activities were 
implemented with SBM-G, MGNR GS etc., and the expenditure were booked 
under their respective heads. It further stated that the future Apex Committee 
meetings would address convergence planning more effectively. The reply is 
not tenable in the absence of any supporting evidence as Audit noticed during 
field visits that convergence activities were not carried out in any of the test-
checked villages. Further the earlier Apex Committee had not deliberated on the 
convergence issues.  

Chapter-II 
11 
2.2 Implementation Support Agencies 
Para 5.5 of the guidelines spells out the functions to be carried out by 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs). The functions of the ISA broadly 
comprise handholding the GP/VWSC, mobilisation of community contribution, 
building capacities of functionaries, building awareness on rainwater harvesting 
and artificial recharge, acting as a coordination platform between DWSM and 
VWSC etc. 
ISAs comprise of Self-Help Groups, Non -Government Organisations, 
Community Based Organisations, Voluntary Organisations etc. The SWSM is 
vested with the responsibility of identification and empanelment of ISAs and 
the DWSM to facilitate deployment of ISAs from the empanelled list. As per 
the guidelines, each ISA is responsible for the entire project cycle of maximum 
18 months in 40-60 villages at a time. Depending on the requirement in the 
district and based on the performance of ISA, next set of 40-60 villages would 
be given to them after four to six months or engage another ISA. In a district 
there could be many ISAs depending on the need of work to be done and 
requirement of handholding. 
The State had initially empanelled ISAs for 31 districts during 2020-21 and 
Implementation Support Resource Agencies (ISRAs) for 28 districts during 
2022-23. The responsibilities of ISA and ISRA is shown in Chart 2.2. 
Chart 2.2.:  uties an  responsi ilities of I  s an  I   s 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
Audit noticed that ISAs were not identified for three districts in 2021-22, eight 
districts in 2022-23, 18 districts in 2023 -24 and 19 districts in 2024 -25. 
Similarly, ISRAs were not identified for three districts in 2022-23, six in 2023-
24 and 28 in 2024-25. Currently, there are only 11 ISAs and six ISRAs engaged 
under JJM in the State.  
        d      1: T                    s    d d                   s 
     d        s                         JJM            d               
               s w         s     s s                      s   d 
   s   b          s               s           s     . 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
12 
The department provided to Audit the data on the performance of ISAs for the 
period 2020-21 to 2022-23 and the data of ISRA for the year 2023-24. The ISA 
performance in the test-checked districts declined from 103 per cent in 2021-22 
to 59 per cent in 2022-23. As per the data made available to Audit, no support 
activities were taken up in Bidar district during 2022-23, it was negligible (12 
per cent) in Uttara Kannada district and was less than 50 per cent in Gadag 
district despite having identified ISAs.  vidently, the performance of ISAs in 
these districts was poor. The overall target achievement by ISRA during 2023-
24 in the selected districts was only 22 per cent. It was 21, 26 and 33 per cent 
for Aadhar collection, greywater and rainwater management and FTK training 
respectively. The support activities were thus inadequate and impacted the 
mission’s ability to provide necessary capacity building as discussed in the 
subsequent paragraph and community engagement towards water conservation 
and grey water management. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the appointment of ISAs for the 
financial year 2024-25 has been completed in 20 districts and the tendering 
process is underway in the remaining districts. The reply clearly highlights the 
delay in appointing ISAs and also does not address the audit findings regarding 
non-engagement of ISAs/ISRAs during the earlier years, poor performance 
metrics etc. 
2.3 Capacity building 
Paras 3.5 and 9.2 of the guidelines identifies the need for village level skilled 
human resources such as masons, plumbers, electricians, pump operators etc., 
for construction and O&M.  Audit noticed that in majority of the test-checked 
villages, no one was trained as provided in Ta le 2.3 below.  ven where the 
persons were trained, the actual deployment of these trained personnel was low 
across masons and plumbers during the audit period. 
Ta le 2.3:  eplo ment of traine  personnel in test checke  villages 
Details Masons Plumbers Electricians Pump 
operators 
No. of villages where no 
person is trained 23 20 21 12 
No. of villages with at least 
one person trained 05 08 07 16 
No. of villages with at least 
one trained person deployed 01 05 07 15 
No. of villages where no 
skilled person deployed 27 23 21 13 
Source: Information furnished by the department and JPV 
Further, eight villages9 did not have trained personnel in any category indicating 
a gap between training initiatives and workforce requirement. Although three10 
villages had the highest number of pump operators, the concentration of trained 
personnel in a single category suggests imbalance. While the training imparted 
9  Chowdadenahalli, D N Doddi, Hadigere, Kamadenahalli, Kodihalli, Kulthanahally, 
Nellahalli and Thippenahalli. 
10  Asundi (3), Hebbal (3) and Hulakoti (5). 

Chapter-II 
13 
across essential trades was inadequate, the transition from skill building to 
actual deployment was incomplete. The absence of trained/skilled manpower 
affects the smooth functioning of the water supply systems and can lead to 
improper maintenance and operational hurdles as discussed in Chapter VI and 
consequent higher maintenance expenditure. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that as per the instructions issued by 
Ministry of Jal Shakti and the Ministry of Skill Development and 
 mpowerment, it intends to appoint two women members in each GP in the 
state and provide them with Nal Jal Mitra training. Accordingly, about 11,900 
women trainees have been identified and so far, 1,572 women have been 
imparted Nal Jal Mitra training. The trained women will carry out plumbing, 
electric, pipeline repairs etc. in their respective villages under the jurisdiction of 
the GP. Further steps are being taken to provide skill development to all the 
remaining Nal Jal Mitra trainees by the end of the year 2025-26 from the ITI 
and GTTC institutions of the  ntrepreneurship and Livelihood Department. 
Audit appreciates the steps taken by the Government to provide skill 
development for women which is still in the early stages. The reply however 
does not address the issue of non-deployment of trained personnel affecting 
maintenance of the water supply systems.  
        d      2: T                    s    d   s        
s             b  s    I As           d   d                  
        d      s          d q        b        s  s           d   d 
d      d.

CHAPTER-III 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
JAL JEEV AN MISSION 

 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The JJM is a time-bound mission mode programme to ensure every rural 
household has a FHTC. The water supply infrastructure under JJM falls under 
two categories – creation of in-village infrastructure including source 
development/strengthening/augmentation and greywater management; and 
infrastructure for bulk transfer of water, treatment and distribution systems. 
These include retrofitting of ongoing schemes taken up under erstwhile National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) for last mile connectivity, 
retrofitting of completed rural water supply schemes to make it JJM compliant, 
Single Village Schemes (SVS), Multi Village Schemes (MVS) and mini solar 
power based piped water supply in isolated/tribal hamlets. 
3.1 Coverage of FHTCs 
Out of a total of 1.01 crore households, the department identified 72.07 lakh 
households as requiring FHTCs at the beginning of August 2019. The status of 
implementation as of November 2024 is shown in Chart 3.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter deals with the identification and execution of works 
required for the achievement of the objectives of the mission. As of 
November 2024, only 47.62 lakh (66 per cent) FHTCs were provided 
against the target of 72.14 lakh. Villages were prematurely declared as 
Har Ghar Jal compliant. Tenders were invited / approved after the 
stipulated deadlines. Contract management was deficient. The 
execution of works suffered from delays due to multiple factors such as 
non-availability land, delayed design approval etc. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
16 
Chart 3.1:  tatus of F TCs 
Source: IMIS data 
As can be seen from the Chart, out of 72.14 lakh HHs targeted for FHTC 
connections, FHTCs were provided to 47.62 lakh (66 per cent) HHs as of 
November 2024. 
3.1.1 V        s    FHTCs 
As per the minutes of 11th SLSSC Meeting, there was significant variation in 
the number of FHTCs initially planned and actually required. The FHTCs 
required increased by 6,09,125 costing ₹3,156.62 crore.  The Committee 
approved the variation proposal received for ₹2,541.04 crore (5,58,379 FHTCs) 
based on the recommendations received from the DWSM Committees. The 
balance proposal was kept pending awaiting DWSM recommendations. The 
Committee directed the department to submit a detailed proposal and seek 
funding from GoI for the additional cost and in anticipation of the approval from 
GoI, the excess amount would be borne by the State for continuity in execution 
of the works. The increase in the number of FHTCs can be attributed to the 
absence of baseline survey and deficiencies in planning at the ground level.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department has forwarded the 
proposal for variation in cost under JJM to Finance Department for onward 
submission to Government of India and the variation in FHTCs are attributed to 
the increase in the households during the mission period.  
3.2 Village-wise coverage 
The status of villages covered under JJM as per the analysis of the JJM data 
made available to audit is shown in Ta le 3.1. 
10130702
2451220
296697
176888
7205897
7214098
6354607
4761766
0
2000000
4000000
6000000
8000000
10000000
12000000
Total
Total No of HHs as on
15/08/2019
No. of HHs with
FHTCs as on
15/08/2019
No. of HHs with private
FHTCs
No. of HHs planned
from schemes other
than JJM
No. of HHs required to
be provided with
FHTCs under JJM
No. of HHs for which
scheme is approved
under JJM

Chapter-III
17 
Ta le 3.1:  tatus of villages covere  un er F TC. 
Metric Overall 
State 
Selected villages 
Status as 
per IMIS 
Status as 
per field 
visits 
Total Villages as per Census 2011 27,397 
Total Villages with JJM implementation 26,592 28 28 
Villages with 100 per cent FHTC 11,930 22 21 
Villages with ≥ 90 per cent to < 100 per cent 
FHTC 
4,564 03 07 
Villages with ≥ 80 per cent to < 90 per cent 
FHTC 
2,069 02 
Villages with ≥ 70 per cent to < 80 per cent 
FHTC 
1,540 00 
Villages with ≥ 50 per cent to < 70 per cent 
FHTC 
2,287 00 
Villages with ≥ 20 per cent to < 50 per cent 
FHTC 
2,072 00 
Villages with ≥ 5 per cent to < 20 per cent 
FHTC 
793 01 
Villages with > 0 per cent to < 5 per cent 
FHTC  
345 00 
Villages with 0 per cent FHTC 992 00 
Source: IMIS 
Out of the 22 villages reported as 100 per cent FHTC covered, field audit visits 
showed that in one village (Hebbal), works were yet to be completed.  
Further, as mentioned in Para 1.5 of this Report, Audit had to replace four 
villages that were initially selected. These four villages were officially reported 
as fully covered. However, verification on the ground indicated that the works 
had not been completed as claimed. In these cases, either the tap connections 
were not installed, or the necessary infrastructure was not functional, leading to 
inaccurate reporting of achievements. 
Audit also obtained the status of implementation of JJM works in the GPs 
selected for test check and noticed that 26 out of 181 villages (other than test-
checked villages) in these GPs had reported achievement of 100 per cent FHTC 
or Har Ghar Jal reported or Har Ghar Jal Certified. However, as per the data 
furnished to Audit and on ground verification, the households in these villages 
were not receiving water through JJM. The details are given in  ppen i  3.1. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that households in the villages were 
provided with tap connections and the related works were either completed and 
commissioned or efforts are on to complete the same. The reply, however, does 
not address the core issue of incorrect reporting of achievements even before 
the actual completion of the works. 
3.3 Har Ghar Jal status 
The declaration of  ar  har Jal  100          F TC coverage  under JJM 
ensures that every rural household has access to safe and adequate drinking 
water through FHTC. Karnataka ranked 14th in terms of Har Ghar Jal villages 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
18 
reported and 12th in terms of Har Ghar Jal villages certified. The status of 
achievement of the State as per the data on Har Ghal Jal initiative as of 
November 2024 is shown in Ta le 3.2. 
Ta le 3.2:  ar  har Jal status 
31  istricts 234 Blocks 5 990  ancha ats 26 457  illages 
Reported Certified Reported Certified Reported Certified Reported Certified 
00 
(00) 
00 
(00) 
05 
(02) 
01 
(00) 
878 
(15) 
428 
(07) 
6,754 
(26) 
4,649 
(18) 
Status in 28 test-checked villages 04 07 
Source: IMIS, JJM State of Karnataka ; (Figures in parentheses indicate percentage) 
3.3.1              d    FHTCs    477    s    ds    H bb     b          
H bb           
Audit noticed during field visits that in Hebbal village of Shirahatti taluk of 
Gadag district which was Har Ghar Jal ‘reported’, the works were actually not 
completed as detailed below: 
The work estimated to cost ₹168.25 lakh was entrusted (15 June 2021) to a 
contractor for ₹148.04 lakh with stipulation to complete the work by 14 
November 2021. The work included laying of HDP  pipeline of 8,102m length 
and providing 477 new FHTCs as per the Bill of Quantities (BOQ).  
Subsequently a variation proposal for execution of additional quantities which 
included HDP  pipeline length of 3,115m, additional 80 FHTCs etc., was 
prepared stating that 80 households, certain habitations and extension area were 
not included at the time of preparation of DPRs.  
As per the progress report as of 31 July 2024, the work of 980m pipeline and 50 
FHTCs were yet to be completed. However, the department had indicated 
Hebbal village as Har Ghar Jal ‘reported’ in Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS) which means that all the households in this village 
were provided with FHTCs and receiving water supply. Audit noticed from the 
joint physical inspection (August 2024) that the construction of Over Head Tank 
(OHT) remained incomplete (  hi it 3.1). 
  hi it 3.1 – Un er construction O T 


Chapter-III 
19 
The incomplete implementation of the work resulted in non-utilisation of the 
infrastructure created and non-supply of water to the 477 households.  
Audit was also in receipt of a certificate signed (02 August 2024) by the 
President, Vice President, Panchayat Development Officer and other members 
of the GP stating that the contractor has not carried out the work of connecting 
the taps with the pipeline and quality of work carried out was not satisfactory. 
Furthermore, the incorrect reporting that the work was completed renders the 
reporting mechanism unreliable. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that as of 08 April 2025, the 
construction of  levated Level Storage Reservoir ( LSR) was completed, the 
work of 200m pipeline and 20 FHTCs were yet to be completed and the village 
would be certified in IMIS only after completion of the work and conducting 
the trial run. The reply confirmed the audit observation on incorrect reporting 
by the department. 
3.4 Identification of projects 
As per the data furnished by the department for in-village infrastructure and 
MVS, the SLSSC had approved (January 2023) a total of 42,719 works (42,559 
in-village and 160 MVS works). The department took up the execution of these 
works in batches. The batch-wise status of in-village infrastructure works and 
MVS works is shown in Ta les 3.3 an  3.4. 
Ta le 3.3: Batch wise status of in village infrastructure works 
Batch 
No. 
Targete  
works 
 orks with 
   s finalise  
 orks 
ten ere  
 orks 
commence  
 orks 
Complete  
Batch 1 10,355 9,930 9,930 9,929 9,381 
Batch 2 6,598 6,013 6,011 5,983 4,278 
Batch 3 10,801 10,524 10,520 10,353 5,004 
Batch 4 14,805 12,645 12,645 11,896 2,863 
Total 42 559 39 112 39 106 38 161 21 526 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
Ta le 3.4: Batch wise status of M   works 
Batch No. No. of works 
taken up 
No of works with zero 
progress 
No of works 
complete  
Batch 1 28 02 01 
Batch 2 87 26 00 
Batch 3 08 02 00 
Batch 4 10 06 00 
Total 133 36 01 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
3.4.1 N        d          s       -        w     s      
Para 3.5 of the Guidelines provides the strategy to be adopted for effective 
implementation of JJM. As per 3.5 (xxviii), while deciding in-village water 
supply system, three options with possible least cost water supply system shall 
be presented before the GPs/VWSCs by the department with complete techno-
economic and socio-economic analysis. While deciding the system and its 
location etc., emphasis on low O&M cost and capacity of local community to 
operate and maintain the same will be considered.  

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
20 
Audit observed no evidence of these options being presented or community 
consultations being conducted as required in any of the test checked villages. 
The lack of inclusive and participatory consultation undermined the ability to 
tailor water supply systems to the specific needs and capabilities of the 
communities. This oversight can lead to the risk of dissatisfaction among users, 
poor maintenance, and eventual failure of th e systems and defeating the 
objective of the mission. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that VAPs are placed before the Gram 
Sabha and the department engineers have placed the details of the proposed 
schemes with alternative options.  The reply cannot be accepted as no 
authenticated records such as Gram Sabha resolutions, signed minutes, or 
documented evaluations comparing the alternatives in terms of cost -
effectiveness and utilisation of existing infrastructure as mandated under JJM 
guidelines were furnished to Audit. 
3.4.2       d w   s  
As per the 11th SLSSC meeting (November 2023) proceedings, 1,005 in-village 
infrastructure works were merged and 2,513 works were dropped. The details 
of dropped works in the test-checked districts as shown in Ta le 3.5. 
Ta le 3.5:  etails of  roppe  works in the test checke   istricts 
 istrict  
Num er of 
works 
 roppe  
Cost of works 
 ₹ in crore   easons as furnishe     the  istrict 
Bidar 13 1.05 No reply furnished 
Chikkaballapura 55 12.98 • Due to lesser number of households
• Augmentation exceeding ₹1.50 lakh
Kolar 103 23.58 
• Due to lesser number of houses
• Households are below 20 and population is less
than 100
• Habitation/village does not exist
• Augmentation exceeding ₹1.50 lakh
• DPR Cost exceeding AAP cost
• Habitation belongs to Town Panchayat
Gadag 06 4.59 
Five habitations were coming under submerged 
area and one habitation belongs to Town 
Panchayat. 
Uttara Kannada 783 66.48 
• Per FHTC cost exceeding ₹1 lakh
• Availability of private sources
• Presence of existing sources with sufficient
availability of water
Yadgir 03 0.40 
Karadkal camp village is located at Krishna 
Bhagya Jala Nigam Limited campus. Contractor 
not allowed to commence the work by the 
landowner. Hence the village is dropped. 
The village Ramachandra Nayak Tanda of 
Kanekollur GP comes with the same name in 
Gundgurthi GP. As the work in Gundgurthi GP is 
under progress, Kanekollur GP work is dropped. 
Source: SLSSC meeting and information furnished by the districts 
It can be seen from the replies that identification of habitations/villages for 
providing FHTCs were not undertaken with a proper survey. Dropping of works 
due to lesser number of households was against the very spirit and objective of 

Chapter-III 
21 
JJM and Har Ghar Jal and the guidelines did not provide for any exemption to 
not provide water supply to habitations with lesser number of households.  The 
action taken to provide water supply to the households dropped under JJM was 
not made available to Audit.  
The State Government reiterated (May 2025) the reply furnished by the districts 
and did not furnish specific reply/assurance on alternative coverage for these 
habitations.  
3.5 Tendering process 
Para 7.5.2 of the guidelines prescribes the timelines to be adopted for 
completion of new schemes proposed to be taken up under JJM. The maximum 
time allowed for completion of in-village and MVS is 18 and 36 months 
respectively. To align with these timelines, no contracts were to be awarded for 
schemes requiring up to 
• three years to complete after March 2021 and
• two years to complete after March 2022.
The department invited tenders for execution of the projects through the e-
procurement portal of the State. During the period 27 August 2019 to 30 July 
2024, 37,685 tenders valuing approximately ₹39,883 crores were published, 
finalised or awarded as shown in Chart 3.2. 
Chart 3.2:  tatus of ten ers 
Source: E-procurement portal 
As can be seen from the above, 21,460 tenders (57 per cent) valuing ₹30,305 
crores (76 per cent) were issued after the deadline of 31 March 2022. As per the 
State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) proceedings (November 
2024), the State was granted extension for awarding the works under JJM till 
15 March 2024 for in-village works and until 31 March 2024 for awarding 
MVS.  Audit noticed that 33 tenders valuing ₹251.75 crores were 
published/awarded after 31 March 2024 creating uncertainty of getting funds 
from the centre for these works.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the administrative approvals for 
the 33 tenders awarded after 31 March 2024 were accorded well within the 
stipulated timelines. However, the delay in awarding tenders occurred primarily 
due to procedural challenges such as non-participation of bidders and the need 
to recall tenders multiple times to ensure fair competition and adherence to 
2,858
4,144
6,945
2,278
9,836
10,649
975
₹484 
₹1,468 
₹5,845 
₹1,781 
₹22,882 
₹7,364 
₹59 
2019 2020 2021 F R O M  
0 1 . 0 1 . 2 2  
T O  
3 1 . 0 3 . 2 2
F R O M  
0 1 . 0 4 . 2 2  
T O  
3 1 . 1 2 . 2 2
2023 2 0 2 4  ( U P  
T O  
3 0 / 0 7 / 2 4 )
Number of Tenders Issued Value of Tenders (₹ Crores)

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
22 
procurement norms. These delays were beyond the department’s control but 
were managed within the framework of transparency and compliance.  
Audit noticed that only 13 of the 33 tenders were recalled and 11 of these were 
finalised in the second call, one in the third call and one in the fifth call and the 
reply stands unjustified. Further, the reply is silent on whether, due to delayed 
tendering, these works would be eligible for Central share of funding. 
3.5.1 T                    s           d  s 
As per Rule 22 of the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Rules, 
2000 (Rules), the evaluation of tenders and award of contract shall be 
completed, as far as possible, within the period for which the tenders are held 
valid. The Tender Accepting Authority (TAA) shall seek extension of the 
validity of tenders from the tenderers for the completion of evaluation, if it is 
not completed within the validity period of tender and in case the evaluation of 
tenders and award of contract is not completed within the extended period, all 
the tenders shall be deemed to have become invalid and fresh tenders may be 
called for. 
The department had not made available to Audit the data on the validity period 
of the tenders. However, as per Clause 12 of the model tender document (K/W-
4) stipulated by the Government of Karnataka for works, the tenders shall
remain valid for a period not less than ninety days after the deadline date for 
tender submission. Audit analysis of the data made available showed that 30 per 
cent of the tenders were finalised after 90 days from the last date of receipt of 
bids as shown in Ta le 3.6. 
Ta le 3.6: Timelines showing the finalisation of ten ers 
No. of  a s No. of 
ten ers 
finalise  
 Overall 
        
of 
ten ers 
No. of ten ers 
finalise  
  ample  
 istricts 
        
of 
ten ers 
Within 7 632 02 114 02 
8-30 7,151 19 1,334 18 
31-45 6,392 17 1,213 16 
46-90 12,599 33 2,444 33 
91-180 7,929 21 1,738 23 
181-365 2,994 08 530 07 
More than 365 501 01 103 01 
Total 38 198 7 476 
Source: E-procurement portal 
Further for 33 tenders, the date of finalisation of tenders was shown as NULL 
and blank. The delay in finalising the tenders results in delayed entrustment and 
execution of the works and could impact the receipt of central assistance to the 
State as discussed in Para 4.1.1.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the time taken for finalisation of 
tenders was extended in certain cases due to the nature and requirements of 
specific projects and extensions of bid validity were duly sought from the 
participating bidders, in compliance  with Rule 22 of the Karnataka 
Transparency in Public Procurement Rules, 2000. It further stated that for MVS 

Chapter-III 
23 
undertaken on DBOT model, the bid validity period of 180 days was sought at 
the time of tender invitation. 
The reply is not tenable as the extent of cases where tenders were finalised 
beyond 90 days was 21 per cent and majority of the tenders related to in-village 
schemes. 
3.5.2    d               s              s 
The execution of the major works involves acquisition of land that belongs to 
other Government agencies/departments. Audit analysis of the information 
furnished by the department showed that 170 applications were pending 
clearance from Forest department, Railways, NHAI etc., as shown in Chart 3.3. 
Chart 3.3:  tatus of applications pen ing clearance 
Source: Analysis of information furnished by the department 
Audit noticed that applications were pending clearances up to two years. The 
delays in clearances impact on the timely completion of projects and could 
result in increased costs. 
The Government stated (May 2025) that the recommendation is duly noted. 
3.6 Turnaround time for vetting of designs 
The department empaneled certain institutions for vetting and approving the 
structural hydrological designs under MVS projects. However, no specific time 
period was prescribed for giving approval. Analysis of the data showed that in 
10 cases, approval was given after more than six months. The delays in approval 
have a recurring effect on the timely execution of these works and achieving the 
objective of providing drinking water to the beneficiaries. 
47
40 44
59
4240 36 39
45
37
From Railways From NHAI From
Highways(other
than NHAI)
From Forest Dept. From
Others(Revenue
and Private etc.)
Projects needed clearance No. MVS projects awaiting clearance(as on 13/11/2024)
        d      3: T                    s    d  w  d w   s      
        s            b            d        d d    s                  w   s.

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
24 
C s  s  d 
The work of providing water supply to Kohinoor and other 47 habitations of 
Basavakalyan Taluk in Bidar district was entrusted (January 2023) to a 
contractor for ₹71.23 crore.  The work which included construction of Water 
Treatment Plant (WTP), Zonal Balancing Tanks (ZBT), jack well among other 
components was to be completed by April 2024.  JPV (September 2024) of the 
work showed the following:  
(i) ZBT-1 was under construction and design for ZBT-2 was yet to be approved. 
(ii) Jack well was under construction - design approval received in August 2024. 
(iii) WTP was yet to be taken up - design approval received in August 2024. 
(iv) Four out of seven OHTs were completed. 
(v) Pipeline work completed was 61 per cent. 
It can be seen that in the instant case, there was delay in according approval 
for the designs which resulted in delay in taking up the construction works . 
Though the contractor sought extension of time, it was yet to be approved by the 
department. 
The Government has not furnished any reply. 
3.7 Contract management 
3.7.1 Id                w   s     ss         s 
Project tracking in the B15 format within the JJM IMIS portal uses a different 
unique identifier than the one used in the Karnataka e-procurement portal for 
tendering denying the end-to-end data. The absence of a common identifier 
complicates tracking a single project from tender initiation to final completion. 
The B15 format, used by the Department for monitoring the progress of various 
works under JJM, did not include contract and tender details for the contractor’s 
name or unique identification number. This omission makes it difficult to link 
specific contractors to their projects and assess their performance across 
multiple works. Without contractor identifiers, it was challenging to aggregate 
and analyse data on contractor performance or identify patte rns of non -
compliance, delays, or quality issues associated with specific contractors. This 
restricted the department’s ability to make informed decisions about contractor 
reliability and accountability.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that t he department is actively 
addressing the issues related to project tracking and contractor identification 
and as part of this initiative, the Contract Management Module developed by 
the e-Procurement Cell is being implemented. It further stated that this module 
is designed as an end -to-end solution for contract management, enabling 
seamless integration of tendering, contractor details, and project progress 
tracking and implementation of this module has been mandated (March 2025) 
for all projects.  

Chapter-III 
25 
3.7.2        b dd      d      s                 b      w   s      s      
           
Data analysis of the in-village works showed that out of 38,231 works finalised, 
9,342 works (24 per cent) were awarded through single bidder participation in 
the very first instance, even though the department had in other instances 
resorted to retendering multiple times. The receipt of single bids in the very first 
instance indicates a lack of competitiveness and single bids can be awarded only 
after receipt of the approval of the competent authority with detailed 
justification as per the CVC guidelines. 
Further, many works were awarded to a single contractor without adequately 
assessing their capacity to execute multiple projects. The e-procurement system 
lacks necessary safeguards to cap contractor eligibility when cumulative 
contract values exceed their capacity. Ta le 3.7 shows the number of works 
entrusted to a single contractor. 
Ta le 3.7: Contractors with multiple works 
Bi  er’s log in 
I  
No. of contracts 
won 
No. of single  i  
contracts won 
         of 
single  i s 
S42250 210 108 51 
S18394 190 100 53 
S14816 183 123 67 
S60494 157 61 39 
S85458 132 50 38 
S112998 127 96 76 
S128572 111 53 48 
S109165 111 68 61 
S10744 110 25 23 
S148976 99 85 86 
Source: E-procurement portal 
Interestingly, it can be seen that six out of the top 10 contractors who were 
entrusted with multiple works were the single bidders for more than 50 per cent 
of the works.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that since JJM was being 
implemented in mission mode and as the duration for completion of the project 
was limited, the department with intention to expedite the implementation 
accepted single bid duly following the direction of Finance Department.  
The instructions of the Finance department stipulated that that in case of single 
bid tenders, the first option for the Tender Inviting Authority (TIA) is to recall 
the tender and in exceptional cases the TIA can negotiate with the bidders 
through e-procurement portal if the tender premium is above five per cent. Audit 
noticed that out of the 9,342 cases, there were 791 instances where the tender 
premium was above five per cent. The reply is not acceptable as citing mission 
mode cannot be treated as exception for all the 791 cases wherein the tender 
premium ranged from five per cent to as high as 61 per cent. 
        d      4: T                    s    d   s         w   s 
     w  d d              s          s d                  b      d   
        . 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
26 
3.7.3 L                      s     -                   
Audit noticed that the e-procurement portal lacked the features for ensuring 
transparency, prevention of fraud, and proper monitoring in the allocation of 
contracts as shown in Ta le 3.8. 
Ta le 3.8: Lack of features an  their impact 
Features Impact 
Data on reasons for tender rejection: 
The reason for rejecting a particular 
tender is not mentioned in the portal. 
Reduces the Departments’ ability to track 
and analyse the reasons for rejection of a 
tender. 
Reduces accountability in the decision -
making process and reduces transparency. 
Lack of IP tracking for vendor 
authentication: The e -procurement 
portal does not record the IP addresses 
of vendors during submission of 
tenders. 
The absence of IP tracking hampers the 
ability to verify vendor identities and 
detect potentially fraudulent or malicious 
activities on the platform such as cartel 
formation etc. 
Inadequate vendor profile 
management: Vendor profiles on the e-
procurement portal are incomplete and 
lack critical information such as 
historical performance data, 
compliance records, and financial 
capacity assessments. 
Makes monitoring difficult as tender 
accepting authority lacks data to measure 
the performances of a particular vendor 
beyond his jurisdiction. 
Absence of over-allocation alerts for 
contractors: An alert system to notify 
authorities when a contractor is 
awarded more projects than the 
specified operational limits. 
There is no mechanism to compile all the 
awarded and ongoing works of a vendor 
across Karnataka. Without over-allocation 
alerts, there is a higher likelihood that 
contractors may overcommit, leading to 
delays, substandard work quality, or even 
project abandonment. 
Source: Audit analysis of e-procurement portal 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the details of bidder rejections 
are duly recorded in the proceedings of the Tender Scrutiny Committee, which 
forms the basis for decision-making during the tender evaluation process and 
these proceedings are available in the tender-specific documentation. The reply 
reiterates the fact that the physical files need to be referred to ascertain the 
reasons for rejection of a particular contractor which would be a cumbersome 
process.  
As regards IP tracking, vendor profiles and alert system for over allocation, the 
State Government stated that the matter would be referred to e-governance, as 
suggested by Audit. 
3.7.4 T                   s     JJM w   s 
Audit noticed non -compliance with the mandatory execution of tripartite 
agreements as per the guidelines, which are essential for ensuring 
accountability, transparency, and effective coordination among stakeholders. 
Across selected districts, these agreements meant to formali e roles and 
responsibilities among the DWSM, GPs/VWSCs and executing agencies, and 
also ISAs, which are crucial for technical support and capacity-building, were 
not implemented as required under Sub-Para 3.5, Chapter 3 – xxxviii (e) of the 

Chapter-III 
27 
guidelines. The absence of such agreements weakens the implementation 
framework, reducing the likelihood of achieving objectives like community 
engagement and sustainable water management are critical for proper planning 
and oversight. Their absence compro mises the accountability framework, 
increasing risks of mismanagement, delays in execution, and lack of ownership 
by local communities, all of which threaten the long-term sustainability of water 
supply schemes. 
The absence of tripartite agreements contributed to project delays and 
coordination failures, hampering timely execution and affecting work quality. 
Disputes between executing agencies and GPs have further stalled progress in 
several instances, while authorities in some areas failed to provide explanations 
for the non-execution of mandated agreements.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that tripartite agreement is not 
feasible in the State since in-village infrastructure works taken up under JJM 
will be implemented by RDWSD as per the approved VAP by VWSC and upon 
completion will be handed over to the respective VWSC for operation and 
maintenance. Bulk water supply schemes are implemented by RDWSD along 
with O&M through contractors onboarded through tendering process.  
The reply is not tenable as tripartite agreements can be entered by RDWSD with 
VWSCs and the executing agencies as mandated to ensure local engagement for 
successful and sustainable implementation. 
3.8 Status of projects in the test-checked districts 
The batch-wise status of in-village infrastructure works in the test-checked 
districts is shown in Charts 3.4  a  to    . 
Chart 3.4: Batch wise status of works in test checke   istricts 
Chart 3.4 a  – Batch I Chart 3.4    –Batch II
135
6
336
698
261
131
135
6
336
698
261
131
135
6
336
698
261
131
134
2
329
542
256
121
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
No. of DPRs prepared No. of Tendered works
No. of Commenced works No. of completed works
212
64
347
248
202
212
64
347
248
202
212
44
347
247
201
168
21
233
217
130
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
No. of DPRs prepared No. of Tendered works
No. of commenced works No. of completed works

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
28 
Chart 3.4 c  – Batch III Chart 3.4    –Batch I 
Source: information furnished by department 
It can be seen from the above charts that- 
❖ Batch I works were almost completed in all the test-checked districts 
except Mandya and Chikkaballapura in comparison with the works 
commenced. 
❖  xcept in Chikkaballapura district, all the works tendered under Batch 
II commenced. However, some of the works were yet to be completed. 
❖ In respect of Batch III works, except in Kolar and Mandya districts, 
almost all tendered works had commenced. 
❖ Under Batch IV works, significant number of works though tendered 
were yet to commence in Chikkaballapura, Kolar and Uttara Kannada 
districts. 
The reasons for not commencing the works were not forthcoming from the 
records made available to Audit.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that in Chikkaballapura district, there 
was shortage of skilled labour for constructions of Over Head Tanks, some of 
the contractors take multiple works which causes delay, non-receipt of test 
reports in time etc. It further stated that action would be taken to commence the 
balance works in all the test-checked districts. The reply acknowledges the fact 
that entrustment of multiple works to single contractor results in delays in taking 
up /completing the works.  
Audit observations on the in-village works taken up in the 28 test-checked 
villages and GPs are discussed below: 
3.8.1              d    FHTCs    1 284    s    ds    H         b       
   H                   d         
The work estimated to cost ₹4.32 crore was entrusted (16 July 2021) to a 
contractor for ₹4.53 crore with stipulation to complete the work by 15 December 
2021. The work was completed by the contractor in November 2022 with a 
delay of 11 months. The BOQ for the work provided for laying of pipeline for 
a total length of 8,104m and interconnection of OHT and pumping main. 
However, the length of pipelines laid under the scheme was 31,580m (an excess 
of 390 per cent). This led to increase in the cost of work to ₹7.09 crore indicating 
217
1504
1530
422
21
217
1504
1530
422
21
217
1179
680
384
21
91
84
0
163
9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
No. of DPRs prepared No. of tendered works
No. of commenced works No. of completed works
303
66
284
868
34
341
303
66
284
868
34
341
303
65
198
836
34
337
185
16
24
382
26
218
0
200
400
600
800
1000
No. of DPRs prepared No. of tendered works
No. of commenced works No. of completed works

Chapter-III 
29 
a cost overrun of ₹2.56 crore (the increase in cost is only on account of the 
increase in the length of the pipeline).  
Audit noticed that the excess quantity of the work was executed without prior 
approval/sanction and inspection by the Superintending  ngineer (S ). Joint 
inspection showed that in few of the roads in Hulakoti village, the pipelines 
were laid and water connections provided despite existence of regular water 
lines and in few of the roads, the pipelines were laid on both the sides. This 
resulted in avoidable excess expenditure on the scheme. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the Variation Committee had 
initially inspected (May 2022), the concerned S  had inspected (November 
2022) the works and the division submitted the variation proposal to S  in 
March 2023. It further stated that the existing pipeline network in the village 
was laid approximately 20-25 years ago and sufficient distribution of water was 
not properly achieved as mentioned by GP and local leaders and GP insisted for 
replacement of entire pipeline network. The pipes were laid on both sides of the 
road to avoid unnecessary damage to the newly laid cement concrete roads. 
The reply is not acceptable as the need for replacement of the entire pipeline 
network was not mentioned either in the VAP or the DPR and the exercise of 
variation proposal was taken up after six months of the stipulated date of 
completion. It can also be seen that the S  inspected the work after it was 
completed though the inspection was to have been carried out before 
commencement of the additional work. The justification for laying pipeline on 
both sides of the road lacks basis in the absence of any cost benefit analysis and 
deviates from JJM norms that mandate a central or single-side alignment for 
cost and maintenance efficiency. 
3.8.2              d    FHTC's    265    s    ds    H          b       
   H        V          dd             U           d  d s      b 
               d              
The work estimated to cost ₹74 lakh was entrusted (March 2022) to a contractor 
for ₹64.25 lakh and the work was completed (June 2022) after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹32.92 lakh.  As per the SOP issued (May 2021) by the 
department, the quality of the pipes used on the scheme should invariably be 
tested by Central Institute for Petrochemicals  ngineering and Technology 
(CIP T), prior to the execution of work.  
Audit noticed that as against the targeted 265 households, FHTCs were provided 
to only 143 households and as against the proposed distribution pipeline for a 
length of 11,438m the work executed was only for a length of 2,719m (23 per 
cent). However, the third-party inspection report on the scheme (August 2022) 
indicated the pipeline having been laid for 3,852m. Further, the pipes were 
tested for quality only during February 2023, six months after the work was 
handed over (22 August 2022) to the GP. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the VAP (February 2021 ) 
mentioned there are serious leakages in the existing pipeline network and a 
new pipeline network is to be laid and therefore total pipeline of 11,438m was
considered in t
he project. However, the villagers during a meeting held (March 
2022) refused replacement of all old pipelines and stated that parts of existing 
pipeline are in good condition and can continue to be used. The villagers asked 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
30 
for new pipelines/replacement only in the areas where necessary and areas with 
heavy leakages and therefore only 2,719m of pipeline was executed. It further 
stated that the third-party inspection report had erroneously mentioned the 
execution of pipeline as 3,852m. As regards the delay in testing of pipes, the 
Government stated that the area was affected by drought and there was an 
emergency for replacing the pipes. Though CIP T officials were called upon to 
collect the pipe samples for testing, there was poor response and because of the 
villagers’ demand a pipe test report from AIPS third party was obtained (May 
2022) and the laying of pipeline was done. However, a detailed report from 
CIP T was later obtained and was submitted along with the final bill dated 
05.07.2023. 
It is evident from the reply that the preparation of DPR was a mere formality 
done without reference to the factual data on the existing households and 
availability of water. The third-party inspection also appears to have been 
carried out without actually inspecting the work. The fact also remains that 
around 50 per cent of the village population were yet to be provided with safe 
drinking water under the scheme.  
3.8.3              d    FHTCs    173    s    ds     N   dd    b        
    N   dd             M     T     b                 d              
The work was entrusted (August 2023) to a contractor at an agreed rate of 
₹55.31 lakh with stipulation to complete the work by December 2023. As of 
August 2024, the work was still under progress with a total expenditure of 
₹58.22 lakh. Audit noticed that out of the proposed 173 households, eight 
houses were not provided with the intended safe drinking water as these houses 
were situated in an elevated place much above the Full Storage level of the 
existing OHT. 
The State Government did not furnish specific reply to the audit observation on 
not providing water to eight houses located at an elevated place. 
3.8.4              d    FHTCs    605    s    ds    B                 
B                   T     
The work estimated to cost ₹2.72 crore was awarded (August 2021) to a 
contractor for ₹2.51 crore with with a stipulation to complete the work within 
90 days. The work was reported to be completed and was handed over to GP, 
Bilhar on 15 March 2023 at a cost of ₹2.39 crore (March 2024).  
Verification of records and JPV of the scheme (August 2024) disclosed that the 
WSS under JJM remained defunct since inception as discussed below: 
➢ The pumping motor at the intake point (cost - ₹1.23 lakh) was merely 
placed on the floor without any concrete support and proper covering 
and was found to be defunct. Further, the electric starter provided near 
the jack well was also not in working condition (  hi it 3.2 . 

Chapter-III 
31 
  hi it 3.2 –  efunct pumping motor an  electric starter 
➢ Though a  LSR11 of 1.50 lakh litres capacity was constructed under 
JJM, the same had not been put to use as it was irregularly constructed 
on a private land along with associated structures like sedimentation 
tank, storage tank, filters, pump house etc. The  LSR of the scheme 
remained idle also due to the fact that the provision for discharge of 
wastewater after filtration was not provided and wastewater was let into 
adjacent private lands, leading to objections from those landowners. 
➢ The households of Bilhar village had already been provided with tap 
connections under two other water supply schemes (PWS and MVS) and 
were, hence, not keen to obtain FHTCs under JJM.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that provision was not made in the 
estimate for pumping motor platform at intake point and for discharge of 
wastewater after filtration and it is now taken up in the additional work slip 
estimate for which approval is awaited. It further stated that a private person 
had given the land as charity to the GP for construction of OHT and temporary 
arrangements were being made for disposal of wastewater. 
The reply is silent on the audit observation regarding the villagers not keen to 
obtain FHTCs under JJM. This suggests that assets created under JJM remained 
unutilised. 
3.8.5              d    FHTCs    377    s    ds             b          
                  B d         
The work executed at an agreed cost of ₹123.7 lakh was handed over to the GP, 
Aliamber on 12 March 2024. The sources of water for the village were 
borewells and an open well. The village was declared Har Ghar Jal compliant 
on 12 March 2024. 
The joint physical inspection (6 September 2024) showed that the borewells 
drilled under JJM were not put to use and were yet to be connected to the main 
pipeline. No electrification was done to one borewell. It was also noticed that 
three households were not provided with tap connections under JJM and these 
households were obtaining water from a public cistern located far from their 
homes. Thus, the claim of the department that the village had achieved Har Ghar 
Jal status was incorrect. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the borewell drilled under JJM 
were connected to the main pipeline and electrification to the borewell were 
11  levated Level Storage Reservoir. 


Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
32 
done and water also flowing through the new connection pipelines.  It further 
stated that all the households including the three households were also obtaining 
water under JJM. The claim of the Government needs verification. 
3.8.6              d    FHTCs    435    s    ds    I      H b        
   I                      B      T      B d     s       
The work entrusted (October 2023) to a contractor for ₹146.64 lakh was to be 
completed by July 2024. The work comprised construction of OHT of 50KL 
capacity among other components. Review of the files showed that land for 
construction of OHT was not handed over to the contractor. Consequently, the 
contractor was unable to commence the work. The department had incurred an 
expenditure of ₹60.41 lakh as of May 2024 towards construction of open well 
and laying of pipes. The work stands abandoned midway (  hi it 3.3) and the 
objective of providing water supply of 435 households remained unachieved. 
  hi it 3.3:  ork a an one  mi wa  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the reply was awaited from the 
respective district.  
3.8.7              d    FHTCs    239    s    ds                     
   H       B               
The work was entrusted (18 April 2022) to a contractor for ₹51.86 lakh with 
stipulation to complete the work within four months (including monsoon) from 
the date of agreement (13 April 2022). Audit noticed during JPV that the work 
was yet to commence even after lapse of two years and the HDP  pipes 
procured for the work was kept alongside of the road. The department had not 
taken any action to terminate the contract and get the same executed by a 
different contractor resulting in not achieving the objective  of providing 
drinking water to 239 households. Thus, despite entering into a contract, the 
work has not commenced. There is a probability of the cost escalating if a new 
contract is entered into or the original contractor executes the work. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the reply was awaited from the 
respective district. 
3.9 Execution of Multi-village schemes 
As against 133 MVS works taken up, only one work was completed (Table 3.4). 
Audit analysed the status of the remaining 132 MVS works that were under 
progress as of 23 September 2024. Analysis showed that the stipulated date of 


Chapter-III 
33 
completion was over in respect of 66 works, of which 1012 works pertained to 
the test-checked districts. Further, out of the total 36 works which showed no 
physical progress, 18 works were entrusted between November 2022 and March 
2024. Five of these works were related to three13 test-checked districts.  
The implementation of the MVS in the State was delayed owing to multiple 
factors such as delay in finalisation of tenders, delay in obtaining clearances for 
land, absence of dependable source etc., as discussed below: 
3.9.1 T                   s         w   s 
Analysis showed that the time taken for issue of work order from the date of 
SLSSC approval including tender invitation, scrutiny and finalisation ranged 
from six months to 43 months. This includes five works in Mandya district (22-
38 months), five works in Uttara Kannada district (20-35 months), four works 
in Chikkaballapura district (10-21 months), eight works in Bidar district (10-29 
months) and one work in Yadgir district (17 months). No MVS works were 
taken in Gadag and Kolar districts. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the delays were on account of 
non-participation of bidders, delays in administrative approval etc. 
3.9.2 I                 MV  s     s 
Review of the progress of implementation of MVS works showed that the works 
were delayed owing to issues in land availability, delay in obtaining clearances 
from various authorities, delay in approval of DPRs by the department, delay in 
obtaining approvals for hydraulic designs and drawings etc. The status of works 
in the test-checked districts is discussed below: 
Bi ar  istrict 
There were eight MVS works under progress in Bidar district of which six14 
works pertained to the test-checked taluks of Bhalki and Bidar. Review of the 
progress of implementation of five MVS works taken up in Bhalki taluk of Bidar 
district at a total tendered cost of ₹187.19 crore showed that two works were 
taken up (January and December 2023) under Design Build Own and Transfer 
(DBOT). Both the works under DBOT15 were taken up without ensuring the 
complete availability of land and forest clearances was still awaited. In respect 
of MVS to Malchapur and other 54 habitations, the DPR was still to be approved 
as of 29 August 2024, though the stipulated date of completion of work was 28 
November 2024. 
In respect of the balance three works16, though the stipulated date of completion 
of the works (30 July 2024) was over, the works were yet to commence as the 
revised DPR was still to be approved for two works and the third work had 
12  Bidar (5), Chikkaballapura (3) and Uttara Kannada (2). 
13  Chikkaballapura (1), Mandya (3) and Uttara Kannada (1). 
14  The work order for MVS to Bagdal and other 104 habitations in Bidar taluk was issued in 
November 2024 and hence was not taken up for review. 
15  MVS to Bhalki town and other 60 enroute habitations of Bhalki Taluk  and MVS to 
Malchapur and other 54 Habitations of Bhalki Taluk. 
16  MVS to Wanjarkhed and Other 5 Habitations in Bhalki Taluk; MVS to Mehkar and Other 4 
Habitations in Bhalki Taluk and MVS to Alwai and Other 2 Habitations in Bhalki Taluk. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
34 
issues with land availability for Water Treatment Plant and Master Balancing 
Reservoir. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that all the land issues have presently 
been sorted out and works were under progress. The reply is silent on the 
approval of the DPRs in respect of two works because of which the works were 
yet to commence and also does not address the core audit observation on taking 
up of works without ensuring the complete availability of the required land. 
Chikka allapura  istrict 
There were four MVS works under progress in Chikkaballapura district. Review 
of the progress of these works showed that the works tendered at a total cost of 
₹91.51 crore and supposed to be completed by October 202117, November 
202318 and January 202419 were still in progress.  In respect of two works, the 
jack well design and WTP drawings were yet to be approved by the Chief 
 ngineer and in one work, there was a delay in approval of hydraulic design of 
tank. The approval was obtained on 27 November 2024 ten months after the 
stipulated date of completion. In respect of the work, which was to be completed 
by October 2021, the connection from Jakalamodagu pipeline was pending from 
the City Municipal Council (CMC), Chikkaballapura. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that notices were issued to the 
contractors for the delays in design approvals. In respect of the work - WSS to 
Mylapanahally village and other four habitation in Chikkaballapura Taluk from 
Jakalamodagu main pipeline, it stated that the delays were due to getting 
permission from CMC and Agriculture Produce Market Committee market for 
laying pipeline and getting permission for tapping from the Jakkalamodagu 
main water supply which is supplying water to Chikkaballapura town. It is 
evident from the reply that necessary approvals were not obtained from the 
authorities concerned before identifying the source and taking up the work. 
Thus, the delays in getting necessary approvals from various authorities resulted 
in non-completion of the works.  
Man  a  istrict 
a   orks taken up un er JJM 
Review of the progress of implementation of MVS works showed that a total of 
seven MVS works were taken up in Mandya district of which five were under 
under DBOT – two20 in Mandya and Maddur taluk, one21 in Srirangapatna taluk, 
17  WSS to Mylapanahally village and other 4 habitation in Chikkaballapur a Taluk from 
Jakalamodagu main pipeline. 
18  WSS to Mandikal and other 13 habitations from Yadralahalli lake and WSS to Hampasandra 
village and other 27 habitations from Amani Byrasagara Tank in Gudibande Taluk. 
19  WSS to Manchenahalli and other 60 habitations from Dandiaganahalli. 
20  MVS to Mandya and Maddur Taluk on Left side of NH-239 habitations under Jaladhare 
Scheme 2 and MVS to Mandya and Maddur Taluk on Right side of NH-166 habitations 
under Jaladhare Scheme 4. 
21  MVS to 56 habitations on left side of cauvery river in Srirangapatna taluk under Jaldhare 
Scheme 3. 

Chapter-III 
35 
one22 in Malavalli Taluk and one 23 covering KR Pet, Pandavapura and 
Nagamangala taluks (discussed in detail under Sub-Para (c)).  
In respect of the MVS works under Jaladhare Scheme 2 and Scheme 4, the DPR 
was still to be approved as of 24 March 2025, though the stipulated date of 
completion of work was 24 April 2025. In respect of the MVS work under 
Scheme 5, the work was yet to start, though the DPR was approved on 
01.03.2025. In respect of the MVS work under Scheme 3, the approval of the
DPR, hydraulic
 design, drawings took nearly a year and the land for the 
construction of WTP and ZBT was handed over only after 7 months and 10 
months from the issuance of the work order. In respect of the two WSS works 
(WSS to Gamanahalli and other 13 villages of Srirangapatna taluk and WSS to 
Mahadevapura, Chikkankanahalli, K. Shettahalli and other 16 villages of 
Srirangapatna taluk), the works were delayed due to the delay caused in 
obtaining approval for forest land for the Master Balancing Tank (MBT), Zonal 
Balancing Tank, and Pure Water Rising Main. The total tendered cost of DBOT 
works was ₹731.58 crore and for the other two MVS works, it was ₹36.62 crore. 
The State Government accepted (May 2025) the audit observation and stated 
that the DPRs in respect of Jaladhare Scheme 2 and Scheme 4 have been 
received from Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad (March 2025) and they 
have been submitted to the Chief  ngineer for approval and were yet to be 
approved. It further stated that under DBOT projects, it was the responsibility 
of tender awardee to get DPR, hydraulic design and all drawings approved from 
the competent authority and also to procure land in co-ordination with the 
department officials concerned and hence there would be no cost overrun.  
The reply is not acceptable as procurement of land by the contractor/agency 
would involve more time and this would significantly delay the completion of 
the project.  
    orks taken up un er N     an  su sume  un er JJM 
Chapter 4 of the guidelines stipulate that ongoing programmes under erstwhile 
NRDWP would be subsumed into JJM. Further as per Chapter 6, the JJM would 
include retrofitting of ongoing schemes taken up under NRDWP for the last 
mile connectivity. Review of four24 works taken up under NRDWP in Mandya 
district and later subsumed under JJM showed that works scheduled for 
completion between March 2020 and November 2022 remained incomplete 
even as of March 2025. The tendered cost of these works was ₹126.93 crore. 
The reasons for the delay were due to (i) delay caused for approval of water 
allotment from Water Resources Development Organisation, (ii) delay in 
allotment of forest land for the construction of MBT, (iii) delay in approval for 
the construction of jack w ell from Kere Samrakshana Pradhikara and CNNL, 
(iv) Non-availability of land for the construction of WTP, (v) change in location 
of jack well and intake well, (vi) delay in approval of designs and drawings etc. 
22  MVS to 151 habitations in Malavalli Taluk under Jaldhare Scheme-5. 
23  MVS to for providing drinking water supply to 797 habitations in KR Pet, Pandavapura and 
Nagamangala Taluks. 
24  WSS to Koppa and other 49 villages of Maddur taluk; WSS to Besagarahalli and other 37  
villages of Maddur taluk; WSS to Navile, Thoreshettihalli and other 53 villages of Maddur  
taluk and WSS to Kirugavalu and other 46 villages of Malavalli taluk. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
36 
Thus, entrustment of works without ensuring the availability of land violated 
the provisions of Section 135 of KPWD Code which stipulates that works shall 
not be taken up without ensuring the availability of land. The delays in obtaining 
clearances from various authorities, approving DPRs/hydraulic designs and 
drawings etc., resulted in delays in completion of the projects. The delays in 
execution of works while resulting in time over run could also result in cost over 
runs besides delaying water supply to the intended beneficiaries. 
The State Government, while accepting (May 2025) the audit observations 
furnished the latest progress of the above works wherein in it was stated the 
pending schemes are likely to be completed by the end of June 2025. 
c  M   for provi ing  rinking water suppl  to 797 ha itations in K  
 et   an avapura an  Nagamangala Taluks in Man  a  istrict. 
The MVS work tendered at a cost of ₹701 crore aimed to provide potable water 
to K.R. Pet, Pandavapura and Nagamangala Taluks, as well as Bellur-Pattana 
Panchayat, Nagamangala Town, BG Nagar, and five residential schools in K.R. 
Pet Taluk. Review of the work showed that the project encountered significant 
delays across multiple stages of implementation resulting in the project still 
remaining incomplete. The timeline of key events and approvals related to the 
scheme were as shown in below:  
Project Sanction Report (PSR) Work Order 09/01/2020 
PSR submission 21/09/2020 
PSR approval 06/10/2020 
SLSSC Approval 10/03/2021 
Administrative sanction 03/06/2021 
Tender publication 31/05/2022 
Letter of Acceptance 05/11/2022 
Work order issued 23/01/2023 
Due date for completion 22/01/2025 
Detailed Survey Report (DSR) submission date 06/04/2023 
DSR approved date 27/09/2023 
Civil Designs approval 24/01/2024 
Though the contract period was to end by January 2025, the physical and 
financial progress as at the end of January 2025 was 47 and 32 per cent 
respectively. The reasons for the delays are discussed below: 
 i   evision of      
The Project Sanction Report, a crucial planning document, was initially 
prepared for 85 lpcd. With the implementation of JJM, the per capita demand 
was revised to 55 lpcd. This required a supplementary agreement, which was 
executed only on 8 July 2020, increasing the cost of PSR preparation by ₹17.85 
lakh. The delayed revision of the PSR led to misaligned cost estimates and 
hampered early-stage approvals, which had a cascading impact on the project 
timelines. 

Chapter-III 
37 
 ii   ela s in ten ering/approvals 
As can be seen from the above, half of the project period was consumed just for 
the approval processes starting from publishing the tender to according approval 
for civil designs. 
 iii  Lan  acquisition  ela  for  ater Treatment  lant 
The department had requested (February 2023) the land for construction of 
WTP but obtained the clearance only during May 2024. The delay was due to 
the land ownership claims by the Forest department. The construction of WTP 
was yet to commence as of March 2025. 
 iv  Lan  acquisition for Maser Balancing Tanks an  Zonal Balancing 
Tanks 
Out of the 26 Government land requests from April 2023 and July 2023, four 
land requests remained unresolved. Delays in land approval ranged from 254 to 
704 days causing major bottlenecks in implementation of the project. Similarly, 
five forest land acquisition requests remained pending for ZBTs. 
 v  Forest clearance  ela s for pipeline an  infrastructure 
Five hectares of forest land was earmarked for civil structures and pipeline 
installations. Though the contractor had applied for clearance on 02 June 2023  
clearances remained pending as of January 2025 . Lack of expeditious 
processing of forest clearances impacted the pipeline laying work significantly. 
 vi   ela s in qualit  assurance plan approvals 
Audit noticed that the time taken for Quality Assurance Plan (QAP) approvals 
by the department for essential pipeline materials ranged from 46 to 75 days. 
The delays in QAP approval have a cascading effect on the procurement and 
subsequent execution since the contractor can proceed with manufacturing 
clearance only after QAP approval.  
 vii   ight of  a  clearances for  istri ution network 
Para 135 of Karnataka Public Works Departmental code specifies that all the 
works shall be commenced only after handing over the site free of 
encumbrances. Pipeline laying requires right of way clearances along National 
Highways (NH), State Highways (SH) and railway crossings. Audit noticed 
delays ranging from 16 months to 20 months in obtaining clearances. Further, 
clearance from NH was pending since May 2023 for two instances as of January 
2025. 
It is, therefore, evident from the above that the implementation of the project 
had obstacles at different stages and the failure of the department to ensure early 
clearances resulted in the project not being completed within the stipulated 
timelines and ultimately delaying the delivery of water supply to the intended 
beneficiaries. Further delays also carry the risk of cost overruns in execution of 
the project. 
The State Government accepted (May 2025) the audit findings and furnished a 
detailed reply for each of the audit observations pointed out in respect of the 
above work wherein it stated that the reasons for delay in execution of the works 
were beyond the control of the department. The reply is not acceptable as it was 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
38 
necessary for the department to ensure that land required for the project was 
available before taking up the project. It can also be seen from the reply that 
there were lapses/delays at various stages of the project such as preparation of 
DSR, obtaining approvals from various authorities both for structural designs 
and quality of pipe etc. Further, land for four ZBTs was yet to be acquired.  
   Non availa ilit  of  epen a le source of water for M    cheme 
The department took up the MVS work of providing safe drinking water at 40 
lpcd to habitations of K Bellur and 33 other villages in Maddur taluk of Mandya 
district with Shimsa river as the source of water. Audit noticed that the DPR 
lacked a comprehensive assessment of water availability throughout the year . 
No seasonal discharge calculations  or hydrogeological assessments were 
provided to verify if the source could sustain continuous supply. Additionally, 
the water discharge test results were missing, making it impossible to determine 
whether the current water flow was adequate to support the projected demand. 
The scheme relied on seepage from the Visvesvaraya Canal’s distribution 
channels to sustain the Shimsha River’s water levels, but this was unreliable and 
raises doubt on the feasibility of the project. Due to the non-availability of water 
in the backwaters of Iggaluru barrage, the water could not reach the project 
intake point, making the scheme non-operational. The department had incurred 
an expenditure of ₹6.15 crore on the scheme so far. 
Scrutiny of the records further showed that the project was yet to be completed 
and the trial run was conducted only for 10 out of the 33 intended villages. JPV 
conducted in October 2020 revealed that the water supply scheme was not in 
operation due to non-availability of sufficient water from the source and the 
slow sand filters were filled with grass vegetations. 
The department stated (September 2022) that the project had been taken up 
under JJM Phase-II and an additional 15 lpcd (totaling 55 lpcd) of water would 
be provided through the Cauvery river. However, no supporting documentation 
was provided to confirm the actual implementation of this augmentation . The 
department subsequently stated (December 2024) that only additional 15 lpcd 
will be covered under JJM while the existing 40 lpcd will be covered from the 
infrastructure created under this project. It also stated that sufficient water was 
available to operate the scheme. However, the project is still not completed and 
commissioned. 
Audit noticed that the department failed to submit a revised DPR to align the 
project with JJM compliance requirements. The project did not include SCADA 
monitoring, which was a mandatory requirement under JJM. 
The joint physical inspection conducted by Audit with the department staff in 
March 2025 showed that augmentation work was not taken up till date resulting 
in the project remaining incomplete even after a lapse of 15 years. Currently, all 
33 villages continue to rely solely on borewell water, rendering the scheme a 
non-starter. The slow sand filters of the treatment plant were overgrown with 
vegetation, further indicating poor maintenance and complete non-utilization of 
existing infrastructure (Exhibit 3.4). 

Chapter-III 
39 
  hi it 3.4    tatus as of 21 March 2025 
Thus, the amount of ₹6.15 crore already spent on the project did not translate 
into actual benefits for the intended beneficiaries, as the infrastructure remains 
incomplete and non -functional. This reflects on the poor planning, resource 
mismanagement, and ineffective execution, leading to wastage of public funds. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the project was likely to be 
operational by end of March 2025 and all the villages were sure of getting pure 
drinking water.  The reply is not tenable since audit noticed during JPV 
conducted on 21 March 2025 that augmentation work was yet to be taken up. 
Out of FGD respondents five per cent reported disruptions in MVS schemes 
affecting their access to water. 
3.10 Non-compliance to prescribed design 
The audit of JJM implementation in various villages of Gadag district revealed 
deviations from Bureau of Indian Standard No. 7634 (Part 2): 2012, which 
governs the excavation of trenches for laying HDP  pipes. As per the standard, 
the trench width for HDP  pipes with diameters ranging from 20 to 110 mm 
should be calculated as 300 mm, ensuring a 150 mm side clearance on either 
side of the pipe. 
However, verification of estimations, running bills, and measurement books 
showed that the department did not adhere to these specified trench widths in 
the selected villages of Gadag district where the HDP  pipes used were of 
diameters ranging from 63 to 90 mm. The department had provided for 600 mm 
breadth instead of 300 mm as prescribed by the IS code. This led to inflated 
estimations for road cutting and road restoration, resulting in an excess 
expenditure of ₹76.05 lakh as shown in  ppen i  3.2. The inflated breadth also 
impacted the rates of various related items, such as earthwork excavation and 
refilling of trenches, further contributing to the excess costs. The calculations 
presented are illustrative but highlight the potential for similar issues across 
other projects within the district. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply was awaited from the 
respective district.  


Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
40 
3.11 Implementation of 100 days scheme 
Government of India launched (October 2020) the JJM 100 days scheme to 
ensure the provision of piped water supply in Anganwadis, Schools, 
Ashramashalas, and other public institutions, including Gram Panchayat 
buildings, community centres, wellness centres, and health centres.  Under this 
initiative, safe and adequate water for drinking, handwashing, kitchen use, and 
toilets was to be made available by 31 March 2021. 
The department stipulated a maximum grant of ₹20,000 per school and ₹15,000 
per Anganwadi for implementation of this initiative. Any additional financial 
requirement was to be met through converging funds from GP grants, 15 th 
Finance Commission grants, MP/MLA LADS funds, and KMERC funds.  The 
status of the implementation in the State under 100 days scheme as of November 
2024 is shown in Table 3.9. 
Ta le 3.9:  tatus of implementation of 100  a s scheme 
Institution Total 
targeted 
Yet to  e provi e  
 rinking 
water tap 
connection 
 unning 
water in 
toilets 
 an  
washing 
facilit   
Anganwadis 53,700 479 9,753 7,592 
Schools 53,568 7,611 12,208 11,171 
Ashramashalas and other 
public institutions 12,726 690 (with tap connection) 
Source: IMIS formats F26 and F27 
It can be seen that as of November 2024, as many as 9,753 anganwadis and 
12,208 schools were yet to be provided with running water in toilets indicating 
that the department failed to meet its own targets even after three and half years 
of completion of the stipulated timelines. Field audit inspections (July-August 
2024) showed that in four test-checked GPs, out of the funds (₹4.7 lakh) 
transferred (October 2020 – March 2021) to the respective GPs, ₹1.85 lakh was 
diverted for the GP’s own activities and ₹2.36 lakh remained unutilised for the 
purpose for which it was released. The number of anganwadis and schools 
where works were not taken up in these four GPs are shown in Ta le 3.10. 
Ta le 3.10:  etails of anganwa i an  school works not taken up 
Name of the    
No. of anganwa is No. of schools 
  isting  Not taken up   isting  Not taken up 
Anoor 11 07 11 00 
Arabikothanur 14 06 17 07 
Doddaganjur 08 04 10 04 
Marjenahalli 10 08 10 06 
Source: Field audit inspections 

Chapter-III 
41 
Audit observed that though the works were not taken up, they were reported as 
completed. This incorrect reporting raises doubt about data integrity and lack of 
accountability within the department besides highlighting the failure to monitor 
the progress of the works. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department was insisting the 
Panchayat Development Officers and concerned GPs to complete the work and 
following it up until completion of the work. The reply is not tenable as it does 
not address the core issue of diversion of funds and highlights the lack of 
effective monitoring in ensuring the utilisation of fund for the intended 
purposes.

CHAPTER-IV 
 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Financial position of JJM 
The financial assistance for JJM is through central and state grants in the ratio 
of 50:50. The details of grants received and expenditure incurred during the 
period 2019-20 to 2023-24 is shown in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Expenditure details for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
        (₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Opening 
Balance* 
Central 
Grant 
State 
Grant 
Net 
Interest# 
Central 
Expenditure 
State 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance* 
Percentage 
Utilization 
2019-20 53.81 546.06 333.01 14.26 491.01 298.64 157.49 83 
2020-21 157.49 446.36 566.17 8.21 349.62 431.40 397.21 66 
2021-22 397.21 2,504.40 3,355.44 4.74 1,510.86 1,520.55 3,230.38 48 
2022-23 3,230.38 2,725.93 4,917.78 86.64 3,102.62 3,331.73 4,526.38 59 
2023-24 4,526.38 4,966.62 6,309.73 0 5,563.37 6,728.68 3,510.68 78 
Total 
 
11,189.37 15,482.13 113.85 11,017.48 12,311.00 
 
87 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
* The opening and closing balances include both central and state funds.  
# Net interest = Interest earned – Interest remitted to GoI and GoK. 
4.1.1 Short receipt of central assistance 
In accordance with Para 7.8.1 of the Operational Guidelines, the Central 
Government will release funds to the States in two instalments (each instalment 
in two tranches). The release of second instalment was subject to assessment of 
financial progress based on submission of Provisional Utilisation Certificate 
(UC) for the current year, Report of the AG for the year preceding the previous 
year/Audited Statement of Accounts from CAG empanelled CA of the previous 
year and Final Central and State UC for the previous year. 
 
 
 
This chapter deals with the availability and utilisation of funds for the 
implementation of the mission. The State had not drawn the complete 
central allocation of funds since 2020-21. The utilisation of funds for 
execution of works, support activities and water quality management was 
very poor. Interest earnings were misallocated resulting in excess 
remittance to the Centre. The State failed to mobilise the required 
community contribution. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
44 
a  Non receipt of central assistance 
Audit noticed that the State had not received ₹13,630.11 crore towards central 
assistance during the period 2020-21 to 2023-24 even though it was allocated 
as indicated in Ta le 4.2. 
Ta le 4.2: Non receipt of central assistance 
(₹ in crore) 
Year  llocation   elease  Balance 
2019-20 546.06 546.06 0.00 
2020-21 1,189.40 446.36 743.04 
2021-22 5,008.80 2,504.40 2,504.40 
2022-23 5,451.85 2,725.93 2,725.92 
2023-24 12,623.37 4,966.62 7,656.75 
Total 24 819.48 11 189.37 13 630.11 
Source: IMIS 
The State received central assistance ranging from 38 to 50 per cent of the 
allocation during the period 2020-21 to 2023-24. The non-receipt of balance 
assistance is attributable to the fact that the State failed to utilise the available 
funds as shown in Ta le 4.1 above and there were delays ranging from three to 
nine months in submission of the UCs and audited accounts by the State 
Government.  
The non-utilisation of funds impacted the State’s performance under JJM as it 
failed to achieve the targets for FHTCs. The underperformance rendered the 
State ineligible for performance based additional funds and a missed 
opportunity to access supplementary financial resources.   As per the data 
furnished in response to the Lok Sabha unstarred question, the State was ranked 
at 20th position and had drawn 45 per cent of the allocated funds. Three States 
had utilised funds more than the allocation indicating that they were given 
additional funds. 
The State Government accepted (May 2025) that the department could not claim 
central assistance against the allocation and also the additional funds as the 
targeted works could not be completed within the stipulated time. The reply 
attributed the slow progress of JJM works to delays in tendering and approvals 
of competent authority. 
   Non receipt of share of ten er premium 
The GoI vide its directions (June 2022) stipulated that for works awarded prior 
to 21 June 2022, the State would bear the entire tender premium and for schemes 
awarded after 21 June 2022, the tender premium would be shared between the 
Centre and the State in the ratio 50:50. In this regard, GoI through IMIS had 
provisioned entry of corrected cost (estimated cost of scheme approved in 
SLSSC) and discovered cost (cost discovered through open, transparent and 
competitive bidding process as per prevailing rules). Accordingly, as per the 
proceedings of the 7th Apex Committee meeting proceedings, the State was to 
bear the premium of ₹562.81 crore for works awarded prior to 21 June 2022 and 
the premium of ₹555.33 crore for works awarded after 21 June 2022 was to be 
shared equally between the Centre and the State. 
Audit noticed that the Apex Committee had directed (March 2023) the 
department to bring to the notice of the Finance department the premium burden 

Chapter-IV
45 
of ₹562.81 crore. However, it was seen that the claim was yet to be received. 
The State was yet to receive the Central share of the premium for works awarded 
after 21 June 2022 as there were delays in communicating the same to GoI. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that as per the decision of the Apex 
committee the tender premium to be borne by the State is brought to the notice 
of the Finance department. As regards the central share of the premium, it stated 
that the central share received by the State was inclusive of the tender premium. 
Audit noticed that the release orders did not specifically indicate the release of 
difference of tender premium. 
4.1.2 U    s            d     s                s 
As per the funding pattern of JJM up to 5 per cent of the allocation to the State 
shall be utilised for support activities. As against the total fund of ₹770.04 crore 
available for support activities during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, the 
department had utilised ₹473.19 crore. The utilisation which was 100 per cent
during 2020-21 and 2021-22 
declined to 88 per cent in 2022-23 and further to 
41 per cent in 2023-24. The underutilisation of funds can be attributed to 
reduction in engagement of ISAs and ISRAs as discussed in Para 2.2. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department would ensure that 
the funds released for JJM are utilised under all components and will pursue 
with the Government of India for release of balance funds. 
4.1.3 U d        s            ds     QMI           s 
Para 10.2 of the guidelines stipulate the funding for Water Quality Monitoring 
and Surveillance (WQMS) activities. Up to two per cent of the allocation to the 
State can be utilised for carrying out WQMS activities. The fund was to be 
utilised for setting up new district/sub divisional laboratories, upgrading the 
existing water quality testing laboratories which inter alia include procurement 
of equipment, instruments, chemicals/reagents etc., procurement of FTKs, 
expenses incurred for National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories (NABL) accreditation process etc.  
The utilisation of funds for WQMS activities declined from 50 per cent in 2019-
20 to two per cent in 2023-24 as shown in Ta le 4.3. 
Ta le 4.3:  llocation an  e pen iture for  QM  activities 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial Year  QM   Fun s   ercentage 
Utilization  llocation    pen iture  
2019-20 17.58 8.72 50 
2020-21 35.11 11.52 33 
2021-22 117.32 17.57 15 
2022-23 207.39 20.48 10 
2023-24 225.52 4.55 02 
Source: Data provided by department 
It can be seen that despite allocation of funds, a large portion remained unspent, 
the impact thereon being shortfall in laboratories for water testing, non-
availability of testing for arsenic, bacteriological parameters etc., absence of 
mobile testing units as discussed earlier and non-accreditation of all the existing 
laboratories with NABL, shortage of equipment in laboratories, non -

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
46 
establishment of desalination plants etc., as discussed below. The State, thus, 
failed to address the infrastructural gaps existing under WQMS. 
        d      5: T         s    d d          d               s             
   ds      s d     JJM                s d   d                s   d    s   
w          I                   s d    ds. 
The Government accepted the recommendation. 
4.1.4 A            d                    s  
Para 7.9 of the operational guidelines stipulate that SWSM shall open a Single 
Nodal Account (SNA) in any scheduled commercial bank. The releases by the 
GoI to the State Government shall be made to their State treasuries from where 
States shall transfer the fund to the SNA of SWSM within 15 days along with 
the corresponding matching State share. The money accruing as interest shall 
be credited to the same account and reflected in the UC of the relevant year. The 
expenditure out of the interest amount shall be made on items of work as 
permitted in the guidelines.  
4.1.4.1   cess repa ment of interest to the centre 
The Ministry of Jal Shakti, GoI issued (April 2023) instructions that the interest 
earned out of the funds received in SNA shall be apportioned between the 
Central and the State as per the approved funding pattern of JJM and shall be 
deposited in the respective consolidated funds. 
(a) Audit noticed that the department had earned an interest of ₹136.48 crore for 
the year 2023-24 and had remitted ₹115.76 crore equally between the centre 
and the state during the year 2023-24 though the contribution of the state was 
significantly higher than the central share in 2023-24 as shown in Table 4.1. 
This resulted in excess remittance of interest of ₹41.75 crore to GoI as shown 
in Ta le 4.4. 
Ta le 4.4:   cess interest remitte  to the Centre 
(₹ in crore) 
Opening 
Balance 
Closing 
Balance 
Average 
Balance 
Proportion Interest as 
per 
proportion 
Actual 
Interest 
Remitted 
Difference 
Centre 858.39 261.62 560.005 0.139 16.13 57.88 41.75 
State 3667.95 3248.81 3458.38 0.861 99.63 57.88 -41.75 
Source: Bank pass sheets and UCs 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department would ascertain 
the actual amount of excess interest repaid to the Central Government for the 
year 2023-24, and the necessary initiations would be taken to adjust/ to get the 
said amount from GoI.  
(b)  In further deviation from the guidelines, SWSM opened another account in 
the same bank for remittance of interest earned in SNA to Government. 
The State Government stated that the department had opened a separate bank 
account (Holding account) for transaction of interest earned and remittances 
thereof in accordance with guidelines as issued by GoI.  The reply is not 
acceptable as the holding account was prescribed for the purpose of holding 
taxes/duties/levies/municipal charges etc., and not for interest remittances. 

Chapter-IV  
47 
4.1.5 I  d  ss b    x   s s 
In accordance with Para 7.10 of the guidelines, the State Government/SWSM 
shall finance the expenses which are not eligible to be funded under JJM such 
as cost escalation, and other programme expenses which are inadmissible under 
JJM, from its own resources. Audit noticed that ₹4,403.23 crore was reflected 
as inadmissible in IMIS portal and hence has not been considered as expenditure 
under JJM. Consequently, the inadmissible cost needs to be borne by the State 
Government. The inadmissible expenses25 included costs on account of land 
(₹276.21 crore), costs apportioned to infrastructure provisioned for water 
supply to urban households in the schemes covering both rural and urban 
households (₹2397.75 crore), costs towards O&M (₹232.70 crore), costs 
incurred for construction/renovation/ repairs of building, office building, 
extension of building, residential building, vehicle (₹25.51 crore), etc. The 
expenses incurred from out of JJM funds for buildings and vehicle resulted in 
diversion of funds.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that any inadmissible cost is to be 
borne out of the State fund and hence there is no diversion of funds. The reply 
is not acceptable as there was no provision under the scheme to incur 
expenditure towards creation of office infrastructure. 
4.1.6 C               b      
Para 6.1.2 of the guidelines stipulates the mandatory contribution for in-village 
infrastructure at five per cent of the capital cost in cash/kind/labour in hilly
and forested areas and villages having more than 50 per cent SC/ST 
population and 10 per cent of the capital cost in other villages. The GPs were 
entrusted with the responsibility of collecting the contributions. As per Para 
7.11 of the guidelines, the contribution made in kind/labour shall be computed 
and the cash equivalent of the same along with the cash contribution shall be 
entered and maintained in a separate register by the GP.  
Further, GoI clarified (July 2022) that in case no community contribution is 
collected for any reason, the liabilities for payment to agencies/vendors, to the 
extent these would have been settled through the funds available through 
community contribution, shall have to be met by State Government from their 
own resources. 
The community contribution collected was ₹22.57 crore against the estimated 
contribution of ₹1,594.90 crore for in -village infrastructure. Community 
contribution was collected in only four of the 28 test checked villages.  ven the 
contribution collected in these four villages was much less than that prescribed 
in the guidelines.  Audit noticed that contributions including cash, kind and 
labour were not adequately recorded and maintained in separate registers 
resulting in improper documentation.  
The non-collection of community contribution thus, creates additional financial 
burden on the State Government finances. This also reflects on the failure of the 
ISAs to help the GP/VWSC in mobilisation of community contribution. It was 
observed that many works though physically completed were reflected as 
financially incomplete due to non-receipt of the community contribution.  
25  Works valuing more than ₹5 crore has been considered. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
48 
Out of the beneficiaries surveyed 32 per cent  were aware of the community 
contribution and 25 per cent of the beneficiaries expressed interest in giving 
community contributions. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that in response of the department’s 
request for release of grant for payment of community contribution to the 
contractors, the Government of Karnataka has agreed in principle to release the 
grant subject to collection of community contribution by the GPs from out of 
the water charges collected and deduction from out of the finance commission 
grants. The Government reply confirms the audit observation that community 
contribution was not collected upfront. 
4.1.7 A                       b   s                s 
Para 7.12 of the guidelines encourage the States to mobilise contributions from 
elected representatives, various organisations, institutions under Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) arm and philanthropic organi ations to reduce 
dependency on state and central funds.  
Audit noticed that the department/SWSM had neither made attempts to engage 
institutions with CSR initiatives, elected representatives, philanthropic 
organi ations nor had explored the possibility of adopting innovative financing 
mechanisms.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department was getting some 
grants from the elected representatives for drinking water works in the division 
offices. While no evidence was furnished to Audit, the reply does not address 
whether the works taken up through these grants were integrated into JJM or 
were carried out independently. 
4.1.8 N  -             w  ds I            d 
Para 7.13 of the guidelines provide for setting up incentive fund from out of the 
fund available with the State under JJM (Centre and State matching share) in 
the prevailing funding pattern. The GPs/VWSCs are eligible to receive the 
incentive when the scheme has been successfully managed for a year ensuring 
that every rural household covered under the scheme receives water in adequate 
quantity of prescribed quality on regular basis and water tariff for O&M has 
been regularly collected.  
The incentive shall be 10 per cent of the in-village infrastructure cost distributed 
in a phased manner over a period of five years. The incentive fund will serve as 
a revolving fund for meeting any urgent repair costs of in-village infrastructure 
which might disrupt water supply and the s ame will be replenished by 
community.  
Audit observed that the department/SWSM had not provided any allocation 
towards the incentive fund. The non-compliance to the guidelines resulted in 
the better performing GPs/VWSCs not being incentivised, which could impact 
the sustainability of the water supply systems in the long run.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the reply would be submitted 
later. 

Chapter-IV  
49 
4.1.9 Abs        F  x     d 
Para 7.14 provides for setting aside five per cent of the annual allocation under 
JJM towards Flexi fund to take care of unforeseen challenges / issues arising 
out of natural calamities and internal disturbances. The fund may be used by the 
State at the end of the financial year, if remained unutili ed. Further, States may 
also plan innovation under JJM as part of Annual Action Plan. 
The State had not established the Flexi fund. The absence of flexi fund from out 
of the annual allocation (including the central and state share in a financial year) 
could impact the state’s financial resources at times of adverse effects caused 
by natural calamities besides curtailing the opportunity to the State to explore 
and implement innovative solutions aimed at enhancing water efficiency and 
optimi ing resource utili ation. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that it has been releasing a separate 
grant for the works which are affected by the natural calamities, as and when 
circumstances warranted and the grant would be utilised for the specific works 
for which it was released.  
The reliance on separate state grants for emergencies does not substitute the 
mandatory requirement of creating a dedicated JJM Flexi Fund.  The reply 
reflects the gap in financial preparedness and scheme innovation planning.  

CHAPTER-V 
WATER QUALITY MONITORING 
AND SURVEILLANCE 

51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In accordance with Para 4.5 of the guidelines, water quality monitoring involves 
testing of water samples collected from water sources by the department in 
water quality testing laboratories. Surveillance is undertaken by community 
using Field Test Kits (FTKs), sanitary inspection etc. Under JJM, water samples 
will also be collected from FHTCs.   
5.1 Water Quality testing 
The JJM operational guidelines mandates the quality of the water supplied to 
conform to Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS): 10500. Para 10.1 of the guidelines 
specifies the broad guidelines for undertaking testing of sources/samples at 
different levels. The prescribed Water Quality Surveillance Framework is 
depicted in Chart 5.1. 
Chart 5.1: Water Quality Surveillance Framework 
 
Source: Para 10.1 of JJM Guidelines  
WATER QUALITY MONITORING AND 
SURVEILLANCE 
This chapter looks into the mission’s objective of providing safe drinking 
water to the targeted households. The State’s infrastructure in terms of 
the number of laboratories and to undertake the required number of tests 
fell short both in terms of availability and capacity at all levels. The focus 
on training women to conduct water sample testing using Field test kits 
was inadequate. All the water sources were not subjected to water testing 
and retesting of contaminated samples was largely absent. Turnround 
time for laboratory testing was high. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
52 
5.1.1 I  d q       s                
Para 5.4 of the guidelines stipulate that the GP/VWSC should ensure water 
quality testing using FTKs, periodic testing at laboratories and disseminate the 
same among the community. The GP/VWSC may engage a dedicated person to 
ensure water quality test using FTKs or can engage/train rural 
youth/students/women to carry out these activities. Chapter 10 stipulates the 
GP/VWSC to identify, train and appoint five women from local community to 
conduct water quality tests using FTKs/bacteriological vials and report the 
results. Para 10.1 mandates that GP/VWSC should ensure to test 100 per cent 
drinking water sources including private sources under its jurisdiction using 
FTKs.  
Analysis of the State level data showed that 
• FTK tests were not undertaken in all the villages during the period 2021-
22 to 2023-24. The extent of villages tested during 2021-22, 2022-23
and 2023-24 was 37, 93 and 83 per cent respectively as shown in Ta le
5.1. 
Ta le 5.1:  etails of villages an  samples teste   uring the perio  from 
2021 22 to 2023 24. 
Year Total 
villages 
Villages 
tested 
Percentage 
tested 
No. of 
samples 
tested 
No. of 
samples found 
contaminated 
Percentage of 
samples 
contaminated 
No. of 
samples 
retested 
2021-22 28,335 10,430 37 1,42,838 4,540 3.0 0 
2022-23 26,106 24,388 93 6,01,437 7,909 1.3 0 
2023-24 26,106 21,770 83 2,15,742 3,078 1.4 559 
Source: Information furnished by the department and audit analysis. 
• 533 villages in the State did not have women trained in using FTKs. In
10 of the 28 sampled villages, the required number women were not
trained in the use of FTKs.
• Analysis of the number of samples tested showed a significant increase
during 2022-23 (6.01 lakh) when compared to 2021-22 (1.43 lakh) but
decreased during 2023-24 (2.16 lakh) as shown in the above table.
• It can also be seen from the table that only 18 per cent of contaminated
samples were retested during 2023 -24, though the JJM guidelines
(introductory Para (i) under Chapter 10) prescribed retesting of all the
contaminated samples. Retesting was not carried out during 2021-22 and
2022-23. In the seven selected districts, 910 samples were found
contaminated during 2023-24 and 549 (60  per cent ) of them were
retested.
• Audit noticed during field visits that the testing was inadequate in 12 out
of 28 sampled villages.
• Only 13 villages had recorded the water test results in the VAPs. Non-
inclusion of water results in VAPs carried the risk of not addressing the
contaminations if any.
The State Government stated (May 2025) that in Chikkaballapura district, 
action is being taken to implement strict testing schedule and ensure adherence 

Chapter-V
53 
and analysis of the samples tested showed a significant increase in the financial 
year. In Mandya district, FTK tests could not be conducted during 2021-22 and 
2022-23 because of pandemic situation and during 2023-24, 22,000 FTK tests 
were conducted. If any contamination was found alternative remedial measures 
were suggested and if there were no alternatives, RO plants were suggested to 
be installed at GP level. No reply was furnished for the other test-checked 
districts. Further, the reply does not address the audit observations regarding 
inadequate testing, retesting of samples, recording of water test results etc. 
5.1.2 I  d q       s             /d s           s 
In accordance with Para 10.1 of the Operational Guidelines, t he Sub-
divisional/block level laboratory will test 100 per cent water sources under its 
jurisdiction - once for chemical parameters and twice for bacteriological 
parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year, covering all sources of a block for 
at least 1326 basic water quality parameters.  ach district lab will test 250 water 
sources/samples per month (i.e., 3,000 in a year as per the target of roster 
available on Department/ National Mission IMIS) covering all sources 
randomly spread geographically including the positively tested samples referred 
to by the subdivision/block laboratory/mobile laboratory for 13 basic water 
quality parameters.  
There are 31 district level and 48 taluk level laboratories in the State. The 
department also utilises the service of four private laboratories for testing 
biological parameters and one laboratory operated by the KSPCB. Of the 13 
basic parameters, none of the laboratories were equipped to test for Arsenic. As 
a result, no water samples were tested for arsenic content. Only 17 district level 
and 4 taluk level laboratories were equipped to conduct tests for microbiological 
parameters (total coliform and  .Coli). 
There are a total of 2,94,756 Piped Water Supply (PWS) sources and 1,32,177 
PWS having FHTC sources across the State.  As per the Water Quality 
Monitoring Information System (WQMIS) data, 71 per cent (93,221) of the 
FHTC sources remained untested during the year 2023-24. The data for the 
years 2021-22 and 2022-23 were not updated in WQMIS. Further as per the 
WQMIS data, 636 habitations were identified as water quality affected (413 for 
fluoride, 142 – nitrate, 63 – iron, 17 – salinity and one – heavy metals) on or 
after 1 April 2019. 
Audit noticed that the laboratories in the sampled districts had not conducted 
testing of all sources within the district. Only 42 per cent of the water sources 
in sampled districts were tested for chemical parameters and the testing was 
inconsistent across districts as shown in Ta le 5.2.  
26  pH, Turbidity, Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), Total Hardness, Total Alkalinity, Chloride, 
Sulphate, Iron, Nitrate, Fluoride, Arsenic, Total Coliform Bacteria and  .Coli. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
54 
Ta le 5.2:  tatement showing the status of water sources teste  in 
sample   istricts 
 istrict  Num er of la s in 
the  istrict 
No. of 
 ources in 
the 
 istrict* 
 ources teste 
for chemical 
parameters 
        
sources 
teste  
 istrict  Taluk 
Bidar 01 02 6,498 4,025 62 
Chikkaballapura 01 02 11,449 3,870 34 
Gadag 01 00 5,538 1,852 33 
Kolar 01 02 13,447 2,277 17 
Mandya 01 02 11,379 5,429 48 
Uttara Kannada 01 03 6,284 4,993 79 
Yadgir 01 01 7,537 3,627 48 
Total 07 12 62 132 26 073 42 
Source: Information furnished by the department. 
* FHTC sources
All the sampled districts had one district laboratory for testing samples. Analysis 
of the data on samples tested showed that except for Yadgir district lab, none of 
the other district labs had conducted the mandatory 250 tests per month. 
Further of the 19 labs (7+12) in the sampled districts, only seven labs (5+2) had 
the facilities to test for microbiological parameters.  The facility to test 
microbiological parameters were provided to the district labs  of 
Chikkaballapura (01 August 2023) and Kolar (28 August 2023). Analysis of the 
data showed that only seven and 11 per cent of the sources were subjected to 
pre and post monsoon testing respectively. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that it had achieved the annual targets 
for testing of samples for chemical parameters and the annual target for 
bacteriological tests could not be achieved as only 10 microbiology laboratories 
were functioning and the remaining were under establishment. The reply is not 
satisfactory as it does not address the major issue of the coverage of all water 
sources for both chemical and microbiological parameters testing. 
5.1.3 I  d q       s        s     s               
The State laboratory will test at least five per cent of the total drinking water 
samples across all district level laboratories with random and uniform 
geographical spread including positively tested samples referred by district/ 
sub-division / block/ mobile lab. The department had not established a State 
level laboratory for water testing.  However, it signed (April 2019) a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the KSPCB designating the 
laboratory under the control of KSPCB as the State Referral laboratory. The 
MoU provided for testing 100 water samples per year. This arrangement was 
grossly inadequate considering the mandate of the State laboratory to undertake 
water testing for 4,650 27 samples per year. 
Audit noticed that the department failed to use the services of KSPCB 
laboratory because of which the number of samples tested by the State Referral 
27  Total samples = 31 districts labs * 3000 samples= 93,000 samples. 
five per cent of 93,000 samples = 4,650 samples. 

Chapter-V 
55 
laboratory was  ero during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24. Though the four 
private laboratories were classified as State level laboratories, the department 
utilised their services only for microbiological testing. Thus, the department at 
the State level failed to complement the district and taluk level efforts reflecting 
on the least priority accorded for water quality testing. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) action is being taken to submit the 
samples to KSPCB for cross verification of the contaminated samples. It further 
stated that the renewal of MoU with KSPCB is under process for testing 500 
samples. However, the fact remains the samples now proposed for testing 
constitute only 11 per cent of the number of tests mandated as per Para 10.1 (iii) 
of the JJM Operational Guidelines. 
5.1.4 Abs          b    w       s       b        s 
The Operation Guidelines provide the State Government to put into operation 
mobile water quality testing laboratories to the extent possible. Audit noticed 
that the mobile water testing units which are essential for testing in remote and 
disaster-prone areas, were absent in all the sampled districts.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that empanelment of mobile testing 
laboratories is under progress thus validating the audit observation. 
5.1.5         d          d            s     
Turnaround time for laboratory testing is the period from when the sample(s) is 
received at the laboratory to the time when reports are finali ed, verified, and 
released. The WQMS framework recommended that the turnaround time for 
testing the chemical parameters should not exceed more than 24 hours, whereas 
for testing the b acteriological parameters, the turnaround time should not 
exceed beyond 48 hours28. 
Audit noticed that all the 79 laboratories in the State did not adhere to the 
turnaround time. The turnaround time ranged between nine to 75 days. In 
respect of the sampled laboratories, it was nine to 59 days, the turnaround time 
being more in Uttara Kannada district. Audit also noticed that the average 
turnaround time in respect of the four private empanelled laboratories was much 
longer, the time ranging from 71 days to 106 days. 
The State Government reiterated (May 2025) the turnaround time required for 
testing for both chemical and bacteriological parameters but did not furnish the 
reasons for inordinate delay in testing the samples. 
5.2 Status of accreditation and availability of equipment 
In the State, 10 out of the 79 laboratories were not NABL accredited. Audit 
noticed that none of the seven sampled district laboratories had all the critical 
equipment such as colour comparator, TDS meter and Ion Meter needed to carry 
out the tests for chemical parameters. The status of availability of equipment in 
the test-checked district laboratories in given in  ppen i  5.1. 
28  https://jaljeevanmission.gov.in/sites/default/files/guideline/WQMS-Framework.pdf - Para 
6.8. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
56 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that all the sampled district 
laboratories had the facilities for testing. However, specific reply to the audit 
observation on the absence of equipment required for testing was not furnished. 
5.3 Inadequate remedial action 
Para 10 of the guidelines stipulates the remedial action to be taken once the 
samples are found contaminated during testing. Chart 5.2 shows the status of 
remedial action taken in respect of the samples found contaminated. 
Chart 5.2:  tatus of reme ial action taken for contaminate  samples 
Source: IMIS 
Testing was carried out for only 29 per cent of the sources, of which 11 per cent 
was found to be contaminated. However, remedial action was not taken for 52 
per cent of the samples found contaminated. This indicates that water quality 
monitoring and management were not addressed adequately by the department. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that for the financial year 2024-25, 
remedial measures were taken for 16,670 samples out of the 18,888 samples 
found contaminated and for the balance 952 samples remedial measures were 
yet to be taken. The reply thus validates the audit observation on inadequate 
remedial action. 
5.4 Non-establishment of desalination plants in coastal regions 
Para 8.3.4 of the guidelines provide for establishment of desalination plants in 
selected coastal regions to address the challenges posed by saline groundwater 
and ensure the availability of potable water. Audit noticed that no functional 
desalination plants were established in the test-checked coastal district of Uttara 
Kannada. The absence of desalination plant could have impacted on the water 
        d      6: T                    s    d         s  w    
q         s                 s      s         w           d   d q        s 
s      d            z  s               d            b          s     b 
s         d    d      d     d                                d s     s 
              b        w     b     d s  s s. 

Chapter-V 
57 
quality as all the eight samples collected from the district were not within the 
permissible limits as shown in Chart 5.3.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the audit observation was noted 
and action would be taken to establish desalination plants in the coastal regions. 
5.5 Independent Audit approach for water quality testing 
Considering the deficiencies in WQMS as discussed in the preceding 
paragraphs, Audit undertook the task of collecting water samples from various 
sources and getting the same tested from the laboratories of KSPCB by 
involving the district and taluk level staff of the department. The guidelines 
classify the quality of water into three broad categories based on water quality 
test results as acceptable29, permissible30, and not permissible31. The list of basic 
water quality parameters as prescribed in the Operational Guidelines 
(Annexure-XI) is given as  ppen i  5.2. 
Audit collected samples from various sources such as FHTCs, water source, 
open well, Overhead tank etc., in the 28 test-checked villages. As per the test 
results declared by KPSCB, the samples of only one village were acceptable, in 
two villages it was permissible and the remaining 25 villages it was not 
permissible as shown in Chart 5.3.  
Chart 5.3:  tatus of samples 
Source: KSPCB test results   
Green – acceptable; yellow – permissible; red – not permissible and white – not tested. 
It can be seen from the above Chart that except for two samples in 
Tholasikambri and K Hosahalli, all the other samples tested for presence of total 
29  values more than those mentioned under ‘Acceptable’ render the water not suitable. 
30   if the value exceeds the limits indicated under ‘permissible limit in the absence of alternate 
source’, the sources will have to be rejected. 
31 (IS 10500 2012 Drinking Water — Specification _ Second Revision, Gr 6)  
https://www.bis.gov.in/other/DrinWatIS10500.pdf. 


Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
58 
coliform. The samples from villages in Gadag and Uttara Kannada districts 
could not be tested for   coli as the nearest KSPCB laboratory did not have the 
testing facilities for   coli. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that remedial action is being taken in 
respect of those samples which are classified as not permissible by providing 
water through Water Purification Plants, periodic testing of samples, directing 
the GPs to ensure chlorination of OHTS and WTPs etc. It further stated that 
remedial measures and quality assurance would be ensured by the department 
in consultation with all the authorities concerned. 
5.5.1 C             d          s  ss   
Audit further noticed that in five villages, though the samples selected from 
source/water purification plant tested negative for both total coliform and  . 
coli, all the samples from FHTCs tested positive for total coliform and two 
samples tested positive for   coli indicating contamination of the water during 
distribution. The details are indicated in Ta le 5.3. 
Ta le 5.3:  tatus of micro ial contamination  uring transmission 
 istrict      ource/   F TC  
Coliform   coli Coliform   coli 
Bidar Rajnal X X ✓ X 
Chikkaballapura Thippenahalli X X ✓ ✓
Kolar Chowdadenahalli ✓/ X X/ X ✓ ✓
Kolar Kamadenahalli X X ✓ X 
Mandya Hunjanakere X X ✓ X 
Source: Test results of KPSCB 
Contamination during transmission highlights deficiencies in water treatment, 
storage, poor maintenance of water pipelines etc. The supply of contaminated 
water, thus, defeated the objective of JJM to supply safe drinking water. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that corrective action was taken 
through chlorination in Chikkaballapura district. It accepted the contamination 
during transmission in Mandya district and stated that the department would 
initiate appropriate action to ensure supply of safe drinking water. In respect of 
Bidar district, it stated that the testing of source and delivery points was done 
earlier by the department and found that there was no contamination during 
transmission. The reply was, however, not substantiated with the necessary test 
results. No reply was furnished in respect of Kolar district. 
5.6 Non-utilisation of water supplied under JJM for drinking purpose 
The work of providing FHTCs to 240 households in Basavanthapura village by 
augmentation of MVS Scheme in Shahpur Taluk of Yadgir district estimated to 
cost ₹108 lakh was entrusted (May 2021) to a contractor for an amount of 
₹83.62 lakh. The work on completion was handed over to the GP on 19 July 
2023. The department declared the village as ‘Har Ghar Jal’ compliant on the 
same day. The source of water for this village was an open-well constructed at 
a cost of ₹22.35 lakh. Audit noticed during joint inspection that the open well 
was not protected and the water in the open well was dirty. There was drain 

Chapter-V 
59 
within 20 metres of the open well and significant drainage water from the entire 
village was flowing near the catchment area of the open well.  
Audit was also in receipt of a certificate signed (05 August 2024) by the PDO 
and other members of Aikur GP, stating that the drain was constructed during 
2023-24 and was not existing when the open well was constructed. They further 
stated that the water from the open well was not being used for drinking 
purposes but was being used only for other purposes. The villagers were using 
the water from the RO plant located near Maramma devi temple for drinking 
purposes.  ven during the Focus Group Discussion, the participants present 
stated that the water supplied under JJM was not fit for drinking purposes and 
was being used for washing clothes, bathing and other purposes. 
Audit analysed the water samples obtained (08 August 2024) from the source, 
one FHTC and Water Purification Plant in the village and noticed that the 
samples were categori ed under non-permissible limits as shown in Chart 5.3. 
 vidently, the very objective of providing drinking water of good quality was 
defeated in this instance. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that there was no existing drain at the 
time of construction of open well and the drain was constructed by another 
department near to the catchment area of the open well after six months of 
handing over the work It further stated that the PDO was directed to divert the 
drain far away from the open well catchment area and presently the quality of 
water is potable in the village. Audit noticed from the test results enclosed (9 
August 2024) that the samples were not tested for bacteriological parameters 
such as Total coliform and  coli and the samples tested by Audit during the 
same period had tested positive for both these parameters. 

CHAPTER-VI 
POST OPERATIONAL 
MANAGEMENT, MONITORING 
AND EVALUATION

61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability is central to JJM as spelt out in the guidelines and the mission 
aims to ensure long term functionality of water supply systems and reliable 
delivery of safe drinking water to rural households. The mission focuses on 
resilient infrastructure, water conservation and community involvement for 
effective resource management. The JJM operational guidelines thrust the need 
for monitoring at all levels for successful implementation of the scheme and 
sustainability of the projects.  
6.1 Types of water sources in the State 
The sources for water supply under JJM are either surface based or groundwater. 
A breakdown of the schemes by source type showed that majority of the 
schemes relied on groundwater indicating that a significant number of rural 
households depend on borewells for their drinking water needs. The number of 
schemes by source in the State is shown in Chart 6.1. 
Chart 6.1: Implementation of schemes in the State - source wise  
Source: Information furnished by the department 
58,216, 
88%
4,205, 6%
2,743, 4% 967, 2% 21, 0% 192, 0%
 Ground Water Based
Surface Water Based
Ground and Surface Water
Combined
Bulk Water Based
Other Sources (Rainwater/
Traditional)
Information not available
POST OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT, 
MONITORING AND EV ALUATION 
This chapter focuses on the sustainability of water infrastructure and 
resource management through compliance to the post implementation 
measures, monitoring and evaluation of the mission. The State at 
present relies heavily on ground water sources for water supply.  Most 
villages lacked key sustainability measures like greywater reuse and 
recharge structures, and the O&M framework was absent for a major 
part of the mission period and was hindered with poor community 
engagement. Grievance redressal mechanism was deficient and 
monitoring systems both technological and physical were either absent 
or lacked rigour. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
62 
It can be seen that 21 schemes were dependent on other sources and 192 
schemes (2432 schemes in the test-checked districts) did not have an identified 
source of water supply which carry the risk of implementation of FHTCs. As 
per the Central Ground Water Board report (2024), 45 taluks in the State were 
over exploited, 15 were in a critical state and 33 were semi-critical. The over 
reliance on groundwater and absence of a reliable source makes the piped water 
supply systems unsustainable in the long run and risks the supply of providing 
safe and mandated 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd) to the rural households.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that roughly 40,000 in -village 
schemes were approved in SLSSC compared to 160 bulk water supply schemes 
but when it comes to coverage of villages under surface water, it is about 68 per 
cent showing a marginalised shift from ground water to surface water. The fact 
that 32 per cent of the villages are still to be covered under MVS indicates the 
dependence on ground water and the reply does not address the core issue of 
long-term sustainability of water sources and the alternative measures to prevent 
overdependence on ground water. 
6.2 Water audit and water security 
Para 8.7 of the guidelines provide for taking up regular water audits of identified 
systems to improve the efficiency of water supply systems through 
identification of water losses (both real and apparent33) and preparation of water 
budget of the village by assessing the total available water from all sources (both 
ground and surface) to ensure that the investments made under JJM lasts on long 
term basis. The guidelines also provide for preparation of district annual water 
budget by DWSM and State annual water budget by SWSM to ensure long term 
drinking water security. 
Audit noticed that the department had not conducted any water audits and water 
budgets were not prepared in the selected districts both at village and district 
levels.  ven the SWSM failed to prepare the State annual water budget. The 
implementation of JJM in the State thus, carried the risk of improper allocation 
of available resources and their sustainability, wastage of water remaining 
undetected etc.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that all the schemes planned under 
JJM have a sustainable source and desired quantity of water is assured to all the 
schemes. The reply is not specific to the audit observations on non-preparation 
of water budgets and not conducting water audits. 
6.3 Inadequate sustainable measures 
Given the fact that majority of the schemes are over reliant on groundwater for 
water supply, it was important for the SWSM/department to provide for 
measures such as recharge of ground water through conservation and reuse of 
water resources, rainwater har vesting, surface water source augmentation 
32  14 – Uttara Kannada, 8 – Chikkaballapura and 2 – Mandya. 
33  Real loss includes water lost through leakages in the distribution systems, service 
connections and storage tanks (including overflow).  Apparent loss includes meter and 
recorded inaccuracies and unauthorised water uses such as theft and unauthorised 
connections. 

Chapter-VI
63 
through restoration/rejuvenation of water bodies, artificial recharge, grey water 
management etc., for long term sustainability. Audit noticed that the plan 
documents did not incorporate these sustainability measures adequately as 
discussed below: 
6.3.1 L       w              s        s 
Recharge structures were absent in 23 of the 28 test-checked villages. The 
village water supply schemes did not prioritise inclusion of recharge structures 
in their plans. The initiatives for rejuvenating existing water bodies, which 
includes desilting and habitat restoration efforts were planned only in four 
villages. This could be attributed to the absence of convergence with other 
schemes. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the reply would be submitted 
later. 
6.3.2      w               
Para 6.3 of the guidelines identified grey water management as a key component 
under JJM and must be included in the VAPs. This includes collecting, treating, 
and reusing grey water for agriculture or other non-potable purposes. Grey 
water management was to be taken up through convergence with SBM(G) to 
ensure the sustainability and to reduce the health ha ards due to improper 
discharge of grey water. 
Audit noticed that 23 of the test-checked villages had not incorporated grey 
water management in their action plans. While one village (Halageri) had a 
designated site for grey water management, four villages planned for waste 
stabilisation ponds. The absence of waste/grey water management could result 
in contamination of local water bodies and soil and compromise the 
sustainability of water resources and eventually water security as greywater 
reuse for non-potable purposes would reduce freshwater demand and enhance 
conservation.   
The State Government stated (May 2025) that all the villages have prepared 
DPR and approved by the competent authority for taking up grey water 
management in the action plan of SBM (G). At present grey water management 
works have been completed in all respects in 6,045 villages and the works are 
in different stages of progress in the remaining villages and would be completed 
soon. 
The reply cannot be accepted in the absence of any supporting evidence as Audit 
noticed during field visits that convergence activities were not carried out in any 
of the test-checked villages. 
The Government accepted the recommendation. 
        d      7: T                   s    d   s                 
s        s   d     w                        s                     
       s      s             s w     s           q    d q          d 
q      . 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
64 
6.4 Absence of detailed Operation and Maintenance policy 
The SWOT34 analysis for JJM identifies poor attention on Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) of completed schemes as one of the major weaknesses. 
The JJM guidelines provide for preparation of comprehensive O&M plans at all 
levels of implementation. The Apex Committee is responsible for developing 
O&M strategy and monthly tariff/user charges for ensuring financial 
sustainability of the system/scheme and to firm up the policy on O&M accounts. 
The GPs are responsible for fixing and collection of O&M costs/water tariff. 
The State was, therefore, required to bring in an O&M policy covering the above 
aspects and clearly demarcating the roles and responsibilities at all levels of 
implementation. 
Audit noticed that there was no comprehensive O&M policy in the State during 
the audit period 2019-20 to 2023-24. The State Cabinet approved the O&M 
policy for rural drinking water supply schemes on 17 September 2024 and 
formalised (09 October 2024) through a Government order.  
Only three out of the 28 test -checked villages had executed Annual 
Maintenance contract for repairs and O&M. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the Karnataka O&M policy was 
fully aligned with the components mentioned by Audit regarding the policy 
aspects. It further stated that a joint circular was issued on 30 November 2024 
by the Additional Chief Secretaries of RDPR and RDWSD directing all district 
Chief  xecutive Officers (C Os) to facilitate the policy’s adoption at the GP 
level through appropriate resolutions in the Gram Sabha meetings. Another 
circular was issued (February 2025) along with the policy adoption format for 
GPs to all C Os and   s to ensure streamlined implementation at GP level. 
It is evident from the reply that the O&M policy which was brought out recently 
was yet to be adopted by all the GPs.  
6.4.1 L                  w   s    
The SWOT analysis also identifies lack of community ownership/participatory 
approach as another of the weakness. Despite the thrust to involve community 
participation in planning, implementation, management, O&M of in-village 
water supply systems including drinking water sources, Audit noticed lack of 
ownership which resulted in removal of taps, broken meters, water wastage etc., 
as shown in   hi it 6.1. 
  hi it 6.1: Broken meters an  water wastage 
Broken meter Tap removed – water wastage 
34  Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threat. 


Chapter-VI 
65 
Audit also noticed that the department failed to create necessary awareness 
about the importance of community contributions/collection of user charges. 
Without proper sensiti ation, rural communities view these contributions and 
charges as unnecessary burdens rather than essential components of a self-
sustaining water supply system. The status of community contribution has 
already been discussed in Para 4.1.5 of this report. Only 11 of the sampled 
villages had collected user charges. A few illustrations of non-collection of user 
charges in the test checked villages even though the rates were fixed are given 
in Ta le 6.1. 
Ta le 6.1:  etails of non collection of user charges 
Name of the 
village     emarks  
Tholasikambri Haradanahalli 
Though water supply scheme was commissioned 
and handed over to the GP on 14.03.2024, no user 
charges were collected. Audit noticed that the GP 
incurred ₹8.69 lakh was incurred in 2023-24 on 
maintenance from out of its own revenue. 
Rajnal Aliamber 
The water supply scheme was handed over to GP 
on 12.03.2024. However, no user charges were 
collected. 
Source: Information furnished by GPs 
Audit noticed that water meters were installed under both the projects to 
measure individual household consumption. However, instead of collecting 
charges based on the actual usage, a flat fee of ₹50/month (Tholasikambri) and 
₹500/year (Rajnal) was prescribed, but in practice, no user charges were actually 
collected. This methodology of fixing flat rates rendered the water meters 
redundant and the expenditure incurred for installation wasteful besides not 
serving the objective of proportional cost recovery. 
The State Government did not furnish any reply. 
6.4.2 N  -                  s   b d      ds 
Audit noticed that only a few test-checked villages maintained the basic records 
such as the stock register (nine villages), register of repairs (one village) and 
water quality register (seven villages). Failure to maintain the basic records 
reflects on the gaps in O&M practices across the villages.  
The State Government did not furnish any reply. 
6.5 Post implementation service delivery 
The post implementation service delivery comprises of ensuring that the water 
is supplied at the prescribed quantity and quality and for the prescribed duration, 
grievance redressal mechanism, O&M, periodic monitoring etc. 
6.5.1 Q          d q          w     s      d 
The primary objective of JJM comprised of providing continuous supply of 
minimum 55 lpcd of potable water to every rural household. Chapter 8 of the 
guidelines suggests technological solutions such as use of Internet of Things 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
66 
(IoT)35 to address the challenges in supply of drinking water and Para 11.1.1 of 
the guidelines reiterate that sensor -based water supply measurement for 
periodicity of supply, quality and quantity is to be employed. Audit noticed that 
none of the test-checked villages had installed flow sensors, pressure sensors, 
water quality sensors and there was no mechanism to measure the quantity of 
water supplied. Non-installation of sensors not only affects the early detection 
and remedial action but also results in the absence of centralised and continuous 
monitoring. The IoT tools, the purpose and the locations to be installed are 
shown in  ppen i  6.1. Moreover, in the absence of the sustainable water 
sources (as discussed in Para 6.1) and the quality of water supplied not meeting 
the required standards in many instances (Chapter V), the objective of providing 
continuous water supply of prescribed quality and quantity for the rural 
population seems a distant achievement.  
Only three per cent of the beneficiaries surveyed stated that there were getting 
24 hours water supply. While 68 per cent of the FGD respondents reported 
improved access and availability to water after implementation of JJM, five 
per cent had reported short supply during summer months. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply would be furnished later. 
6.5.2             d  ss   M      s 
Complaints, when dealing with service delivery, are inevitable. Resolution of 
these complaints and concerns through grievance redressal process is therefore 
very crucial. A robust public grievance redressal is an important function of any 
transparent and efficient service oriented organisation. This provides a bridge 
for citi ens to engage with the organisation, voice their concerns, and provide 
feedback on its functioning and various aspects of service delivery. However, 
resource constraints can make it difficult to resolve grievances timely. Hence, it 
is very much necessary for an organisation to define the stages involved in 
addressing grievances, who will manage them and setting clear timelines for 
each step of the grievance redressal process.  
The department developed (2020) its own portal ‘Parihara’ to address public 
grievance redressal. The portal offered multiple channels for grievance 
redressal, including a dedicated helpline (9480985555), email, social media, 
and website. The portal was decommissioned in March 2024 with the 
integration of all gr ievance helplines under the Rural Development and 
Panchayat Raj Department.  
The department furnished to Audit the complete data relating to grievance 
redressal for the audit period only during January 2025. A total of 7,566 
complaints pertaining to JJM were registered in the portal as of March 2024. 
Audit noticed that the grievance redressal mechanism was well defined.  
However, analysis of the data revealed the following: 
➢  igh resolution time 
The complaints registered mainly related to volumetric water supply, O&M, 
water quality etc. The department had resolved 7,219 complaints – 58 per cent 
within 30 days, 15 per cent between 31 to 60 days, 8 per cent between 61 to 
35  Sensor based monitoring system will ascertain the supply of water in villages/ habitations 
with respect to periodicity, quantity and quality. 

Chapter-VI 
67 
90 days and 19 per cent after 90 days. The average resolution time taken was 
56 days. The category wise resolution time is shown in Ta le 6.2. 
Ta le 6.2: Categor  wise resolution time 
Time 
period in 
days 
Total Volumetric 
Water 
Supply 
Improper / 
Poor 
Infrastructure 
Works 
O&M Pipeline 
& 
Leakage 
Water 
Quality 
Others 
Within 15 3,054 2,125 122 327 151 328 1 
16 to 30 1,136 759 59 108 71 139 0 
31 to 60 1,103 721 55 126 63 138 0 
61 to 90 568 377 39 65 31 56 0 
91 to 180 784 530 59 79 36 80 0 
180 to 
365 
450 296 25 54 29 46 0 
>1 year 124 92 0 12 8 12 0 
Total 7,219 4,900 359 771 389 799 1 
Source: Analysis of Parihara data 
Further analysis of the resolution delays of more than a year showed that the 
highest delays were reported in Raichur (22 per cent), Vijayapura (19 per 
cent) and Chikkodi (15 per cent). 
The major complaint categories were water not available (23 per cent), 
inadequate supply (seven per cent), poor water quality (six per cent) etc. 
The resolutions included repairs/maintenance (36 per cent), alternate water 
sources (22 per cent), tanker supply (11 per cent) etc. Audit noticed that in 
23 per cent of the cases, the complaints were treated as resolved with 
resolution days ranging from 367 to 847 days and without indicating the 
nature of action taken to close the same. This included resolution of 
complaints related to no tap water connection (847 days) and no drinking 
water facility in school (834 days) in Chikkodi. 
➢ Closure of complaints 
A detailed analysis of the complaints relating to test -checked districts 
showed a recurring pattern where complaints were closed on a particular 
day or during a particular period irrespective of when the complaints were 
registered as shown in Charts 6.2  a  and    . Further analysis for the other 
districts also showed a similar pattern - Charts 6.2  c  an     . 
Chart 6.2: Tren  anal sis for closure of complaints 
Chart 6.2 a Chart 6.2   


Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
68 
Chart 6.2 c Chart 6.2   
Source: Analysis of Parihara data 
➢  scalation matri  for complaint re ressal 
The mission guidelines provide for creation of a grievance redressal 
mechanism. Accordingly, the escalation matrix for complaint redressal has been 
developed by the State which defines clear timelines for grievance resolution 
ensuring accountability and efficiency across all administrative levels. Ta le 
6.3 shows the different escalation levels, the authority and the status of 
complaints. 
Ta le 6.3:  ccounta ilit  matri  for complaint re ressal 
 scalation 
Level 
Officer/ 
 uthorit  
Num er of 
 a s 
Num er 
receive 
Num er 
solve 
Num er 
pen ing 
Level 1 A / J  0-2 704 704 0 
Level 2 A  2-7 1,077 1,077 0 
Level 3   - RWS 7-15 1,474 1,273 201 
Level 4 S - RWS 15-30 1,160 1,136 24 
Level 5 C O and C 
RWS 
30-60 1,132 1,103 29 
Level 6 Commissioner 
RDWSD 
> 60 2,019 1,926 93 
Total 7 566 7 219 347 
Source: Analysis of Parihara portal data 
As can be seen, 347 complaints (including reopening of closed cases) 
remained unresolved which includes 201 that were escalated to    on 
priority for resolution. Complaints registered in February 2022 concerning 
SVS and MVS in Tumakuru district were reopened and continue to remain 
pending, with delays surpassing two years as of March 2024. Further 232 
(66 per cent) of the unresolved complaints related to Volumetric Water 
supply and 65 relate to infrastructure issues. Reopening of closed 
complaints indicate ineffective grievance redressal – issues were either not 
resolved properly or were recurring due to poor service quality. 
➢  valuation of reme ial measures in          
The effectiveness of Parihara complaint redressal mechanism, as reflected 
in the data from October 2023 to March 2024, is concerning. With an 
average score of 2.78 on a scale of 1-5, the outcome of the complaint 
resolution process appears to be suboptimal. As many as 53 per cent of the 
beneficiaries gave the lowest rating of 1, signalling greater dissatisfaction. 
This suggests that the measures are either insufficient or ineffective, 


Chapter-VI 
69 
requiring immediate review and enhancement to ensure better resolutions 
and restore beneficiary trust. 
➢  wareness of the grievance re ressal mechanism 
The results of the survey conducted by Audit (July to September 2024) 
showed that 96 per cent of the beneficiaries were unaware of the existence 
of Parihara portal for grievance redressal mechanism indicating that the 
citi en outreach was inadequate. Audit noticed that the grievance data was 
not published in IMIS. 
➢ Training an  capacit   uil ing 
Audit noticed that the grassroots-level workforce, including VWSC 
members, local operators, and field staff were not adequately trained on the 
grievance redressal mechanism. Field staff lacked awareness of escalation 
procedures, complaint tracking systems, and follow-up protocols, resulting 
in unresolved or prematurely closed cases. 
➢ Complaints relating to test checke   istricts 
The category-wise number of complaints received in the test -checked 
districts as of March 2024 is shown in Ta le 6.4. 
Ta le 6.4: Categor  wise num er of complaints in test checke   istricts 
Total Volumetric 
Water 
Supply 
Improper/Poor 
Infrastructure 
Works 
O&M Pipeline 
& 
Leakage 
Water 
Quality 
Others 
1,505 1,012 95 146 74 177 01 
Source: Analysis of Parihara data 
Audit noticed from the JPV (July to September 2024) in the selected villages 
that O&M issues were a major cause of concern. There were 49 cases of 
broken pipes/repair of pipes, 22 cases of maintenance and repairs of valves, 
10 cases of 
damages due to power fluctuations, three cases of pump failures 
etc.  
The State Government stated (May 2025) that Parihara portal was temporarily 
deactivated in March 2024 due to its integration with the Panchamitra-an 
integrated helpline. It further stated that all pending grievances were later 
resolved, nodal officers were appointed in each district/division to monitor and 
validate the effectiveness and timeliness of complaint resolutions and escalation 
mechanism reinforced. Further awareness campaigns and training programmes 
were initiated and RDWSD is setting up an Integrated IMIS system where 
grievance data would be reflected. 
The reply highlights the measures now being put in place but does not address 
the audit observations on high resolution time, closure of complaints during a 
particular period etc. Further, the data furnished along with the reply on 
complaint resolution in Panchamitra during the months of January to March 
2025, shows complaints yet to be resolved which reiterates the audit 
observations of high-resolution time taken for addressing the grievances. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
70 
6.6 Monitoring and Evaluation 
6.6.1 I        d M          I             s   
In accordance with Para 11.1.1, a dedicated Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS) is designed to capture every FHTC. The IMIS shall 
include 
✓ Provision for uploading VAPs, DAPs and SAPs 
✓ Monitoring of constitution of VWSCs, bank account opening, 
community contribution etc. 
✓ Monitoring ISAs performance in allotted villages 
✓ Monitoring physical and financial progress of all schemes 
✓ Monitoring of water quality laboratories and surveillance by 
communities using FTKs 
✓ Monitoring of change management activities and 
✓ Monitoring of support activities etc. 
Further a digital district inventory of drinking water assets would be created for 
better management of schemes and monitoring them.  very MVS network 
system shall be monitored through Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) systems at the State level to ensure its proper functioning. 
Audit noticed that the State had uploaded information on to the IMIS.  
Verification of the IMIS data with the physical records/data furnished by the 
department showed mismatch as detailed below raising concerns on the 
correctness of the reporting by the department on the online portal. 
1. As per IMIS (B15 format) of November 2024, out of 39,693 works
 excluding Anganwadi and schools) only 4,506 works are shown as 
physically completed. However, as per the data submitted by the 
department, more than 21,526 in-village infra works are completed.  
2. Format PM 2 (program monitoring in terms of FHTC) data reflects the
data of July 2023 which indicates the delay in updating data.
3. VAPs, DAPs and State Action Plans are not available on IMIS.
4. Many Anganwadi/School works were marked improperly as
infrastructure works and vice versa in IMIS (Format B15).
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the department is developing a 
state-owned Management Information system where in the details from existing 
applications will be integrated through APIs and the details of VAPs, DAPs, 
SAPs, VWSCs, bank account, community contribution and other required 
details on O&M are intended to be monitored. It further stated that efforts
were being made by the 
department for ground truthing of the data in IMIS 
with physical as per site through periodical meetings and inspections and the 
erroneous data is being corrected in data dump exercise by GoI. 
        d      8: T                    s    d   s             d    
     d d                       s s b        d              s                 
                              . 

Chapter-VI 
71 
6.6.2 I                        s    C         d      A q  s      s s   
SCADA systems provide real time monitoring and control of water supply 
infrastructure, are instrumental in managing water flow rates, pressure, tank 
levels, and quality indicators. However, their implementation within JJM in the 
State is limited.  ven within MVS, deployment of SCADA was uneven. Of the 
seven districts audited, only Gadag had operational SCADA systems and this 
was not adequately utilised as discussed below: 
➢ Audit of SCADA systems for water supply schemes under Design, 
Build, Operate and Transfer (DBOT) Packages I and II in Gadag district 
showed consistent shortfalls in daily water supply compared to projected 
demand across villages. Analysis of data for 13 villages under selected 
GPs for the year 2021 -23 highlighted gaps in supply vis-à-vis the 
demand in eight villages as shown in Ta le 6.5. 
Ta le 6.5:  tatus of water suppl  in selecte  villages of  a ag  istrict 
Source: Information furnished by the department 
➢ Unauthorised tapping of water supply in locations like Gadag Zoo and 
Teachers colony resulted in unaccounted water supply. 
➢ Pipeline damage in Kakkur resulted in unaccounted water loss. 
➢ 16 villages of Batch I and II experienced  ero water supply days. 
Audit analysis of SCADA data revealed that OHT in one village (Kalasapura) 
was receiving water from both DBOT and SVS sources, leading to unregulated 
mixing of treated bulk water with borewell groundwater. This mixing raises 
concerns about water quality, pressure inconsistencies, and the effectiveness of 
treatment processes, as groun dwater and treated bulk water have different 
treatment needs and quality parameters. There was no systematic tracking of 
how much of the supplied water was from DBOT and how muc h from SVS, 
making quality control and accountability difficult. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply would be furnished later. 
Name of the 
village 
 eman  
in 
kilolitres 
2021  ail  
average 
suppl 
2022  ail  
average 
suppl 
2023  ail  
average 
suppl 
 till June 
Asundi 304.70 134.20 192.47 283.90 
Malasamudra 321.75 105.95 121.07 127.01 
Hulakoti 685.85 832.26 551.24 448.82 
Chawadal 94.325 112.68 134.33 105.17 
Hebbal 175.73 122.62 121.10 97.62 
Kallaganur 42.63 15.54 14.72 60.51 
Kanakawad 88.00 19.00 4.77 52.31 
Tolali 76.45 0.00 0.00 51.35 
Bavanur 83.33 38.68 64.89 77.97 
Machenahalli 210.38 178.70 158.03 162.94 
Navebavanur 43.45 31.34 75.37 76.89 
Tegginabavanur 55.83 99.06 100.09 108.69 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
72 
6.6.3    -            ss  s 
Para 11.1.3 of the guidelines stipulate the States to geo-tag all the assets of water 
supply schemes.  very infrastructure asset either new or otherwise will be geo-
tagged including washing and bathing places, greywater collection and 
treatment plants, source sustainability structures, etc. The department was 
responsible for geo-tagging of assets. The status of geo-tagging in the State is 
given in Ta le 6.6. 
Ta le 6.6:  tatus of geo tagging of water assets in the  tate  Novem er 2024  
 sset T pe Total  ssets  eo  Tagge Untagge  assets 
Water Sources 78,518 70,837 7,681 (10) 
PWS Schemes 66,318 52,665 13,653 (21) 
Information Boards 66,318 56,684 9,634 (15) 
Storage Structures 1,19,285 12,878 1,06,407 (89) 
Source: IMIS data (Figures in parentheses indicate percentage) 
It can be seen that large number of storage structures were yet to be geo-tagged 
in the State. The absence of geo-tagging renders it difficult to monitor the assets 
created under the schemes.  
The State Government did not furnish any reply but furnished only the updated 
status of geo-tagging as of April 2025 wherein 85 per cent of the storage 
structures and 12 per cent of the information bords were yet to be geo-tagged. 
6.6.4 Abs               A d  
The operational guidelines stipulate that the GP/VWSC undertake social audit 
of JJM. Social Audit is a process in which, details of resource, both financial 
and nonfinancial, used by public agencies for development initiatives are shared 
with the people, often through a public platform. Social Audits allow people to 
enforce accountability and transparency, providing the ultimate users an 
opportunity to scrutini e development initiatives.  Audit noticed that no social 
audit of the implementation of the JJM was taken up till now. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that Directorate of Social Audit under 
RDPR has been requested (February 2025) to conduct social audit and further 
coordination meeting with Director of Social Audit was held during April 2025. 
6.6.5 E                   Q       M      s 
The RDWS&D department invited (January 2022 and June 2022) applications 
from eligible candidates36 for empanelment as State Quality Monitors (SQMs) 
for monitoring the in-village works of JJM across the State. The SQMs were 
required to visit the assigned districts and submit a report in the prescribed 
format after conducting necessary survey and tests as per the guidelines. 
The department engaged 40 SQMs for monitoring the JJM works in the State. 
The SQMs had inspected 6,290 works during the period March 2022 to March 
2024 and had rated 2,541 works as Satisfactory Requiring Improvement and 
36 Retired persons not below the level of  xecutive  ngineer or equivalent from 
Government/Public Sector Undertakings; Retired or serving faculty members of 
Government  ngineering colleges/IITs/N ITs/Government Research Institutes who have 
worked /consulted in the field of drinking water supply schemes. 

Chapter-VI 
73 
207 works as Unsatisfactory. Thus, 44 per cent of the inspected works required 
corrective actions.  
Audit noticed that the extent of inspections carried out by SQMs were 
inadequate and there was no framework to evaluate the SQMs performance. 
Analysis of the SQM documentation showed inconsistency in conducting 
inspections and documentation. The reports did not contain the comprehensive 
assessments carried out, details of verification of technical specifications, 
quality of materials and construction etc. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply would be furnished later. 
6.6.6 T   d       q         s        
The Rural Development and Panchayat Raj department engaged Ms Bureau 
Veritas Ltd., for quality inspection. The agency carried out field verification in 
1,500 villages across the State, with at least five villages randomly selected from 
each taluk focussing on the quality of works, physical and dimensional 
verification, non-destructive testing and quality of water supplied. The findings 
in respect of FHTCs revealed non -compliance with approved technical 
specifications, improper pipeline installation depths, use of unapproved 
materials for taps and pipes etc. Observations relating to water quality included 
bacterial contamination such as total coliform and  .Coli. Other issues noticed 
were inadequate water pressure and flow rates, deficiencies in road restoration, 
incomplete or poorly executed repairs, contamination risks from FHTCs placed 
near open drains, missing components, leakages in pipelines etc. Action taken 
on the findings by the department was not made available to Audit. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that the compliance reports received 
from the divisions detailing the corrective actions are being compiled and 
reviewed to ensure that all issues raised in the report have been adequately 
addressed. 
6.6.7 T   d-        s       s 
The work orders issued for execution of works provide for third party 
inspections. Audit observed from the analysis of all third-party inspection 
reports in the selected villages that third party inspections were routine in nature 
and lacked detailed assessments. These audits involved certifying contractor 
bills and works without providing a critical evaluation of the quality and 
quantity of completed work. There was little evidence of verification against 
benchmarks, particularly regarding the durability of materials, accuracy in 
execution, and compliance with approved project plans.  The third-party 
inspections, thus, undermined the objective of quality assurance.  
The State Government reiterated (May 2025) the works to be carried out by the 
third-party agencies but did not reply to the audit observations on performance 
of these agencies. 
6.6.8 I d    d               
The department entrusted (July 2022) the evaluation of the implementation of 
JJM to Karnataka  valuation Authority (K A). K A was yet to submit its report 
although more than two years have passed since the entrustment. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply would be furnished later. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
74 
6.7 Findings of the Joint physical inspections 
Audit undertook joint physical inspections in the test-checked villages. The 
findings noticed are outlined in Ta le 6.7. 
Ta le 6.7: Joint inspection fin ings in test checke  villages 
Issue identified Number of Villages 
Overhead Tank (OHT) Issues 21 
- Structural damages, cracks, leakage 12 
- No water level scale, no flow meter, no sensors 16 
- OHT not fenced or protected 09 
- OHTs not considered in DPR despite being used 03 
Distribution Network Issues 14 
- Leakage in distribution pipelines 07 
- Pipelines laid along drains/sewage lines 04 
- Pipeline layout not matching with DPR 03 
Household Connection Issues 18 
- Dry connections (no water supply) 07 
- Unauthorized bypassing of meters 05 
- Missing or broken taps 06 
- Meters installed but not functional 04 
Water Source Protection & Treatment Issues 10 
- No water treatment facility 08 
- Water source unprotected 05 
- Green-coloured or visibly contaminated water 02 
Monitoring & Measurement Issues 15 
- No bulk flow meters installed 02 
- No flow meters for monitoring usage 09 
- No functional sensors in key infrastructure 12 
 Source: Joint inspection findings 
The findings mainly relate to deficiencies in infrastructure, water distribution, 
household connections and monitoring across the villages. Structural damages 
to OHTs, pipeline leakages, dry and non-functional tap connections and absence 
of essential monitoring mechanisms undermine the scheme’s efficiency and 
sustainability. Inadequate water treatment facilities and unprotected sources 
highlight the inadequacy of water quality and long-term resource management. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that reply would be furnished later. 

CHAPTER-VII 
OUTPUTS AND OUTCOMES

75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1 Sustainable Development Goal – 6 
The 2030 agenda of the United Nations is comprised of 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and associated 169 targets. The SDGs are a 
comprehensive list of global goals integrating social, economic and 
environmental dimensions of development.  
India is committed to implementing SDGs. At the national level, NITI Aayog 
provides leadership, and the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation developed a National Indicator Framework for measuring goal 
attainment. 
SDG 6 on “Clean Water and Sanitation for all” aims to ensure availability and 
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. It has eight targets (six 
outcome targets and two means to achieving targets), the progress of which is 
monitored through 11 indicators.  
The State’s performance under this SDG witnessed fluctuations as reflected in 
the scores and ranks from 2018 to 2023-24. The State’s score improved steadily 
from 62 in 2018 to 90 in 2023-24, indicating progress in implementing measures 
under SDG-6. The overall score of India during 2023-24 was 89. However, its 
rank dropped from 9 in 2019-20 to 15 in 2020-21 and increased to 12 in 2023-
24, highlighting relatively better performance by other States during that period 
as shown in Chart 7.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUTPUTS AND OUTCOMES 
This chapter attempts to assess the JJM implementation with reference 
to the envisaged outcomes. The State’s performance under SDG-6 
fluctuated reflecting inconsistent progress. JJM implementation had a 
positive impact on dropout rates of upper primary school girls and 
reduced burden on women. While the impact on rural employment was 
found minimal, it remained inconclusive on health-related outcomes. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
76 
Chart 7.1:  erformance of the  tate un er     – 6. 
Source: NITI Aayog 
The improvement in 2019-20 suggests progressive implementation of water and 
sanitation initiatives during this period. The further rise in 2023 -24 reflects 
sustained efforts to expand access to clean water, improve sanitation 
infrastructure, and address water quality issues.  Despite these improvements, 
rank fluctuations indicate challenges.  Karnataka’s rank improved in 2019-20, 
showcasing a strong alignment with SDG -6 targets. However, the decline in 
2020-21 suggests a slower pace of progress compared to other states, potentially 
due to delays in infrastructure maintenance or policy implementation gaps. The 
recovery in 2023-24 indicates renewed focus and effective strategies to address 
the gaps. 
The State Government stated (May 2025) that with the implementation of JJM 
and O&M policy now in place, it expects a sustainable supply of safe and clean 
drinking water. 
7.2 Outcomes of the mission across sectors 
In accordance with Chapter 12 of the guidelines, JJM also strives to achieve 
four key measurable outcomes such as improved health conditions of rural 
communities; reduction in drudgery faced by women and girls and 
empowerment of women; reduced school dropout rates of upper primary level 
girls; and increase in employment opportunities for rural communities.  
Measuring these specific outcomes poses a challenge, as these outcomes are 
also influenced by various government programmes and interventions.  
Initiatives such as health schemes, educational support programs, women 
empowerment policies and employment generation schemes contribute to 
overlapping impacts, making it difficult to isolate JJM's influence.  
Audit, however, attempted to gather data from multiple sources (viz.,  ducation 
Department, Health Department etc.) analyse trends and collate relevant 
information for an in-depth analysis. The findings and insights from this 
analysis are detailed below: 
7.2.1   d   d d                        s          s 
Audit collected the data on dropout rate of upper primary school girls from the 
 ducation Department. The average reduction in dropout rates was plotted 
against FHTC coverage in the respective blocks as shown in Chart 7.2. 
62
88 85
90
13
9
15
12
8
10
12
14
1650
60
70
80
90
100
2018 2019-20 2020-21 2023-24
SDG-6 Rank
SDG-6 Score
Period
KA Performance on SDG-6
Score Rank

Chapter-VII
77 
Chart 7.2:  verage re uction in  ropout rate. 
Source: information furnished by Department of Education 
The analysis indicated a reduction in the average dropout rate of upper primary 
school girls. While this positive outcome cannot be attributed solely to a single 
factor, the implementation of JJM-through improved household water access 
could be considered one of the contributing factors, as it reduced the time and 
burden on girls for water collection, thereby supporting their continued 
education. 
7.2.2   d   d d  d        w     
Implementation of JJM has contributed to alleviating the hardships faced by 
women and girls in many households through providing accessible water supply 
as per the findings of the beneficiary survey conducted by Audit. Analysis of 
the composition of VWSC in 26 villages showed that  
➢ 55 per cent of the total members were women.  
➢ In 11 out of the 26 villages, the Chairperson of VWSC was a woman. 
Further, of the 544 respondents surveyed, 203 reported reductions in hardships, 
a clear indicator of mission’s success in improving water accessibility. While 45 
stated that they did not experience significant changes, 83 of them were unsure 
of any improvements. In 209 cases, the respondents had stated it was not 
applicable, either due to pre-existing access to water supply or other factors such 
as incomplete works etc. The findings are indicated in Chart 7.3. 
Chart 7.3:  e uction in har ships of women 
Source: Beneficiary survey findings 
Of the 203 who reported improvements, 131 highlighted savings in time and 
labour, which allowed them to redirect their time towards domestic activities, 
self-care, or economic opportunities, contributing to an overall improvement in 
quality of life. Seventy-one of them stated that it has increased safety by 
reducing the exposure to risks like crime or wild animals during long water-
fetching journeys.   
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
20-29% 30-39% 40-49% 50-59% 60-69% 70-79% 80-89% 90-99% 100%
Reduction in drop out rate
FHTC Coverage
83
45
71
1
131203
Unsure No Numerous benefits
Reduction in diseases Saving time and labor

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission  
78 
7.2.3 I     s                         s                     s 
The findings of the survey showed the impact of JJM on employment 
opportunities was limited. Of the 544 surveyed, only 28 reported increased 
employment opportunities, 216 stated no significant changes and 273 were
unsure of any impact (Chart 7.4). The balance 27 beneficiaries stated that they 
had not received water under JJM and hence were unable to provide any 
feedback on employment-related outcomes. 
Chart 7.4: Impact on emplo ment opportunities 
Source: Beneficiary survey findings 
The employment opportunities reported were diverse - 19 beneficiaries stated 
that they were able to enhance their existing work, six reported an increase in 
animal husbandry activities, one stated an increase in farming income and one 
started a new shop. 
7.2.4   d   d w    b     d s  s s   d                         s 
The health-related outcomes of JJM remain inconclusive due to relatively short 
period of implementation of the mission and uncertainty among the 
beneficiaries surveyed. Only 4 of the 544 surveyed reported reduction in water 
borne diseases. While 69 explicitly stated no reduction, 443 of them were 
unsure, indicating a possible lack of awareness. Audit noticed that only three 
(Hokrana B, Lanjewada and Rajnal) out of the 28 sampled villages had 
documented waterborne disease prevalent in their VAPs.  
Audit sought for the data on water-borne diseases from the Health department 
and compared the data of 2019 with that of 2024 i.e. pre JJM and post JJM. 
Analysis of the data showed the following: 
➢ 10 districts reported reduction and 18 districts reported increase in acute 
diarrheal diseases. 
➢ In three districts (Bengaluru Rural, Kodagu and Kolar), no acute 
diarrheal diseases were reported prior to JJM or after implementation 
of JJM. 
➢ Of the six selected districts excluding Kolar, only Chikkaballapura 
showed reduction in acute diarrheal diseases. Four of the districts that 
had not reported any acute diarrheal diseases in 2019 reported 
significant number of cases in 2024. 
The increase in number of cases can be attributed to supply of water that did not 
meet the prescribed BIS standards under JJM as discussed in Chapter V.  
Unsure,271
No,216
1
1
19
6
Yes,27
Employment Opportunities
Unsure
No
Increase in Farming
Started a new job/shop etc.
Enhancement in old
employment/shop

16-02-2026
24-02-2026


APPENDICES


Appendices 
81 
 ppen i  1.1 
 etails of sample  units 
  ef:  aragraph 1.5   age 3  
 istrict  Taluk  illage  
Bidar 
Bhalki Ladha 
Lanjwada 
Bidar Hokrana (B) 
Rajnal 
Chikkaballapura 
Chikkaballapura Kuthanahally    
Thippenahally 
Chintamani Hadigere 
Kodihalli 
Gadag 
Gadag Asundi 
Hulakoti 
Shirahatti Hebbal  
Machenahalli 
Kolar 
Kolar Chowdadenhalli    
Kamadenahalli 
Malur D.N.Doddi 
Nellahalli 
Mandya 
Nagamangala Thirugana Halli 
Tholasi Kombri 
Srirangapatna Hunjanakere 
Kadathanalu 
Uttar Kannada 
Karwar Arga 
Kadwad 
Siddapur Akkunji 
Halgeri 
Yadgir 
Wadagera K. Hossahalli 
Tumkur 
Yadgir Basavanthpur 
Bilhar 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
82 
 ppen i  3.1 
 etails of mismatch in reporting 
  ef:  aragraph 3.2   age 17  
 l. 
No.     illage name  ousehol s  No. of house 
connections 
 illage status 
as per IMI  
 tatus as 
per  u it 
1 Thippenahalli Kanajenahalli 242 242 Har ghar jal 
reported 
Not 
completed 
2 Anur Dhoddabommanahalli 274 274 100 per cent 
FHTC done Not Started 
3 Anur Hosur 72 72 100 per cent 
FHTC done Not Started 
4 Anur Panasachaudana 
hally 156 156 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
5 Anur Vishwanathapura 36 36 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
6 Arabi 
Kothanur Arabi Kothanur 402 402 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
7 Doddaganjur Dhoddanetha 24 24 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
8 Doddaganjur Siddimata 114 114 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
9 Hokrana B Dharmapur 221 221 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Work not 
started 
10 Hebbal Kallaganur 155 155 Har ghar jal 
reported 
Not 
completed 
11 Banahalli Kanagala 131 131 100 per cent 
FHTC done Not Started 
12 Banahalli Kshethranahalli 78 78 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
13 Banahalli Yaluvahalli 124 124 100 per cent 
FHTC done Not started 
14 Darasaguppe Darasaguppe 488 488 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
15 Darasaguppe Doddegowdana 
koppalu 95 95 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
16 Darasaguppe Rampura 227 227 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
17 Tadagavadi Alagud 344 344 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
18 Tadagavadi Chikka Horohalli 173 173 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
19 Tadagavadi Garakahalli 76 76 Har ghar jal 
reported 
Not 
completed 

Appendices 
83 
20 Tadagavadi Mallenahalli 76 76 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
21 Tadagavadi Tadagawadi 783 783 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
22 Kavanchoor Nejjur 421 421 Har ghar jal 
reported 
Partially 
completed 
23 Aikur Aikur 590 590 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
24 Aikur Munmutagi 260 260 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
25 Kalasapura Pandurangapura 800 800 Har Ghar 
Certified 
Not 
completed 
26 Kirangoor Kirangoor 1936 1936 100 per cent 
FHTC done 
Not 
completed 
Source: IMIS and JPV 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
84 
 ppen i  3.2 
  cess e pen iture  ue to non compliance to prescri e   esign 
  ef:  aragraph 3.10   age 39  
Item no in 
6th 
an  final 
 ill 
Item name Quote  rate 
 in ₹  Quantit  
Brea th 
taken in MB 
 in meter 
Brea th 
taken in 
estimates 
 in meter 
 ipe size 
 iameter 
 in mm 
 ipe size 
 iameter 
 in meter 
Ma . size 
of 
 rea th 
taken as 
per 
stan ar s 
 in meter 
Calculate 
quantit  
 ase  on new 
wi th 
 rea th 
  /e*i  in 
cum 
Calculate 
savings 
   j  *c 
 ₹ in lakh  
a   c   e f g h i j k 
Providing 786 FHTCs to Asundi Habitation 
1 Road cutting 1169.94 1022.40 0.60 0.60 63 to 90 0.063 to 
0.09 0.3 511.2 5.98 
10 OPC M20 cc laying 6025.29 982.01 0.60 0.60 63 to 90 0.063 to 
0.09 0.3 491.05 29.58 
44 Road cutting 1169.94 45 0.60 0.60 90 0.09 0.3 22.5 0.26 
49 OPC M20 cc laying 6025.29 45 0.60 0.60 90 0.09 0.3 22.5 1.36 
Providing 748 FHTCs To Mallasamudra Habitation 
1 Road cutting 1191.24 619.66 0.55 0.55 63 0.063 0.3 338.00 3.36 
15 OPC M20 cc laying 6135 619.66 0.55 0.55 63 0.063 0.3 338.00 17.28 
Providing 1,984s FHTC To Beladhadi, Kalasapura, Chincholi Habitation 
5 Road cutting 1193.29 577.58 0.65 0.65 63 to 90 0.063 to 
0.09 
0.3 266.58 3.72 
13 OPC M10 cc laying 5970.77 110.37 0.65 0.65 63 to 90 0.063 to 
0.09 
0.3 50.94 3.55 
14 OPC M20 cc laying 6145.56 331.11 0.65 0.65 63 to 90 0.063 to 
0.09 
0.3 152.82 10.96 
76.05 
Source: Information furnished by the department 

Appendices 
85 
 ppen i  5.1 
 etails of availa ilit  of equipment in test checke  la oratories 
  ef:  aragraph 5.2   age 55  
 l. 
No 
 quipment 
Name Bi ar Chikka 
 allapur  a ag  Kolar Man  a Uttara 
Kanna a Ya gir 
1 pH Meter Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
2 Balance Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
3 Colour 
Comparator Yes Yes No No No No Yes 
4 TDS Meter Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No 
5 Turbidity Meter Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6 Refrigerator Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
7 Wet and Dry 
Thermometer Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
8 Thermometer 
(1° C -100° C) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
9 Spectrophotome
ter Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
10 Ion Meter No Yes No No No No No 
11 Biosafety 
cabinet No Yes No Yes No No No 
12 Incubator 
(35° C to 37° C) No Yes No Yes No No No 
13 Incubator 
(44° C to 45° C) No Yes No Yes No No No 
14 Water Bath 
(44° C to 45° C) No Yes No Yes No No No 
15 Autoclave for 
sterili ation No Yes No Yes No No No 
16 Autoclave for 
disposal No Yes No Yes No No No 
17 Colony Counter No Yes No Yes No No No 
18 
Membrane 
filtration 
Assembly with 
vacuum pump 
No 
MPN 
method 
used 
No Yes No No No 
19 
Balance 
(Separate from 
Chemical 
division 
Balance) 
No Yes No Yes No No No 
20 
Refrigerator 
(Separate from 
Chemical 
division 
Refrigerator) 
No Yes No Yes No No No 
Source: Information furnished by the department 

Performance Audit on Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
86 
 ppen i  5.2 
 etails of water qualit  parameters 
  ef:  aragraph 5.5   age 57  
Sl. No. Characteristic Unit 
Requirement 
(Acceptable 
Limit) 
Permissible Limit       
(in the absence of 
alternate source) 
1 pH value 6.5-8.5 No relaxation 
2 Total dissolved solids Milligram/litre 500 2000 
3 Turbidity NTU 1 5 
4 Chloride Milligram/litre 250 1000 
5 Total Alkalinity Milligram/litre 200 600 
6 Total Hardness Milligram/litre 200 600 
7 Sulphate Milligram/litre 200 400 
8 Iron Milligram/litre 1 No relaxation 
9 Total Arsenic Milligram/litre 0.01 No relaxation 
10 Fluoride Milligram/litre 1 1.5 
11 Nitrate Milligram/litre 45 No relaxation 
12 Total Coliform Bacteria Shall not be detectable in any 100 ml sample 
13 
E.Coli or 
Thermotolerant 
Coliform Bacteria 
Shall not be detectable in any 100 ml sample 
Source: JJM Operational Guidelines, Annexure XI

Appendices 
87 
 ppen i  6.1 
 etails of IoT implementation 
  ef:  aragraph 6.5.1   age 66  
IoT Tool  urpose Locations to  e installe 
Flow Sensors Measure water flow rates to 
monitor distribution and detect 
leaks 
Pipelines, pumping 
stations, treatment plants 
Pressure Sensors Monitor water pressure to prevent 
pipe bursts and ensure even 
distribution 
Distribution mains, 
reservoirs, pipelines 
Water Quality 
Sensors 
Track water quality parameters 
like pH, turbidity, chlorine, and 
dissolved oxygen 
Treatment plants, 
reservoirs, distribution 
network 
Level Sensors Monitor water levels to prevent 
overflows and ensure adequate 
reserves 
Storage tanks, reservoirs, 
sumps 
Smart Water Meters Measure household water usage in 
real-time to promote conservation 
and monitor consumption 
Residential, commercial, 
and industrial connections 
Turbidity Sensors Detect particulate matter in water 
to identify contamination and 
maintain clarity 
Treatment plants, 
reservoirs, network points 
Chlorine Residual 
Sensors 
Measure residual chlorine to 
ensure adequate disinfection 
without excessive chlorination 
Post-treatment points, key 
distribution points 
Temperature 
Sensors 
Monitor water temperature, which 
can influence chemical reactions 
and water quality 
Treatment facilities, 
pipelines 
pH Sensors Monitor acidity/alkalinity of water 
to maintain safe and palatable 
levels 
Treatment plants, 
distribution lines 
Humidity Sensors 
( quipment 
Monitoring) 
Protect sensitive equipment from 
moisture, enhancing lifespan and 
reducing maintenance costs 
Pumping stations, control 
rooms 
Leak Detection 
Sensors 
Identify leaks in real -time to 
minimi e water loss and reduce 
maintenance costs 
Pipelines, pumping 
stations 
Data Analytics and 
Dashboard Systems 
Aggregate and visuali e sensor 
data to aid in decision-making and 
reporting 
Central monitoring offices 
Source: JJM Operational Guidelines

Glossary of Abbreviations 
88 
 lossar  of    reviations 
   reviation  Full Form 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CAA Constitutional Amendment Act 
CFC Central Finance Commission 
CGWD Central Ground Water Division 
CGWP Central Ground Water Board 
CIP T  Central Institute of Petrochemicals  ngineering & 
Technology 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DAP District Action Plan 
DMA District Metering Area 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DBOT Design Build Operate Transfer 
DWSM District Water and Sanitation Mission 
 LSR   levated Level Surface Reservoir 
FGD Focussed Group Discussions 
FHTC Functional Household Tap Connection 
FTK Field Testing Kits 
GP Gram Panchayat 
GPDP Gram Panchayat Development Plan 
IMIS Integrated Management Information System 
ISA Implementation Support Agency 
ISRA Implementation Support Resource Agencies 
JJM Jal Jeevan Mission 
KPR Act Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act 
KSPCB Karnataka State Pollution & Control Board 
MVS Multi Village Scheme 
NRDWP National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
OHT Overhead Tanks 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
PRI Panchayat Raj Institution 
RWS Rural Water Supply 
SBM Swachh Bharat Mission 
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
SFC State Finance Commission 
SLSSC State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
SVS Single Village Scheme 
SWSM State Water and Sanitation Mission 
TP Taluk Panchayat 
VAP Village Action Plan 
VWSC Village Water Sanitation Committee 
WPP Water Purification Plant 
WTP Water Treatment Plant 
WQMS Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
ZBT Zonal Balancing Tanks 
ZP Zilla Panchayat 

Glossary of terms 
89 
 lossar  of Terms 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS): The national standards body of India, 
responsible for setting quality standards for 
various products, including drinking water. 
Constitutional Amendment Act An act that amends the Constitution of India, 
such as the 73rd CAA, which gave 
constitutional status to Panchayat Raj 
Institutions. 
Central Finance Commission A constitutional body that determines the 
financial relations between the central 
government and individual state governments 
in India. 
Central Ground Water Board A national organi ation under the Ministry of 
Water Resources, responsible for the 
development and management of groundwater 
resources in India. 
Corporate Social Responsibility A self-regulating business model that helps a 
company be socially accountable to itself, its 
stakeholders, and the public. 
District Metering Area A defined area of a water distribution network 
that is monitored and managed to reduce water 
loss and ensure efficient water supply. 
Detailed Project Report A comprehensive document that provides 
detailed information about a project, including 
its feasibility, planning, design, and 
implementation. 
Functional Household Tap 
Connection 
An individual household tap connection that 
provides safe and adequate drinking water on a 
regular basis. 
Field Testing Kits Portable kits used for testing the quality of 
water in the field, particularly for parameters 
like bacterial contamination and chemical 
pollutants. 
Gram Panchayat The village-level administrative body in India 
responsible for local governance. 
Gram Panchayat Development 
Plan  
A comprehensive plan prepared by a Gram 
Panchayat for the development of the village, 
integrating various sectoral plans and 
resources. 
Integrated Management 
Information System 
A system that integrates data collection, 
processing, and analysis to support decision-
making and management in organi ations. 
Implementation Support Agency Agencies that support the implementation of 
development projects by providing technical 
assistance, capacity building, and monitoring 
support. 
Jal Jeevan Mission A flagship program of the Government of India 
aimed at providing safe and adequate drinking 
water through individual household tap 
connections by 2024. 
Karnataka Gram Swaraj and 
Panchayat Raj Act  
A state legislation enacted to provide a uniform 
three-tier system of Panchayat Raj Institutions 
in Karnataka. 

Glossary of terms 
90 
Multi Village Scheme A water supply scheme designed to serve 
multiple villages. 
Operation and Maintenance Activities required to ensure that water supply 
infrastructure operates efficiently and 
effectively over its intended lifespan. 
Panchayat Raj Institution Local self -government institutions in rural 
India, established as per the 73rd 
Constitutional Amendment Act. 
Rural Water Supply Programs and activities aimed at providing 
safe and adequate drinking water to rural areas. 
Swachh Bharat Mission A national campaign initiated by the 
Government of India to clean the streets, roads, 
and infrastructure of India's cities and rural 
areas. 
Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition  
A control system architecture comprising 
computers, networked data communications, 
and graphical user interfaces for high -level 
process supervisory management. 
State Finance Commission A commission constituted by each state 
government in India to review the financial 
position of Panchayats and municipal bodies 
and recommend measures to improve their 
financial status. 
Single Village Scheme A water supply scheme designed to serve a 
single village. 
Taluk Panchayat The intermediate-level administrative body in 
India's three -tier Panchayati Raj system, 
responsible for governance at the block level. 
Village Action Plan A detailed plan prepared at the village level 
outlining the activities and resources required 
for implementing development projects, 
including water supply schemes. 
Water Purification Plant A facility designed to remove contaminants 
from raw water to produce safe and potable 
drinking water. 
Zilla Panchayat The district -level administrative body in 
India's three -tier Panchayati Raj system, 
responsible for governance at the district level. 