 
Performance Audit Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Children in Need of Care and Protection 
for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Report No. 1 of the year 2023 

Table of Contents 
 
Chapter 
number 
Description Page 
No. 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v 
1 Introduction 1 
2 Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Sch eme 5 
3 Working of Child Welfare Committees 13 
4 Working of Child Care Institutions 17 
5 Monitoring 32 
6 Rehabilitation of children  38 
Annexures 
Number  Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
No. 
I Structure of District Child Protection Unit Intro duction  45 
II List of selected Child Care Institutions  Introd uction  46 
III Formation of District Child Protection 
Units 
2.1.1.4 47 
IV Status of staff in four selected District 
Child Protection Units  
2.1.1.4 48 
V Details of Central and State Share 2.2.1 49 
VI Shortage of staff in selected Child Care 
Institutions 
4.2.1 50 
VII Clothing and Bedding 4.2.4 51 
Glossary 53 
 

iii 
PREFACE  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Lieutenant Governor of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi under Section 48 of the Governme nt of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 for being laid before the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
Children are the most vulnerable section in the soc iety as they are in need of 
care by adults for their well-being and overall development.  Children in Need 
of Care and Protection are those without homes, fou nd begging, street 
children, mentally or physically challenged, orphan s, trafficked or sexually 
exploited, drug/substance abusers, and other such c ases. The National Policy 
for Children, 2013 provides that the State Governme nt commits to taking 
special protection measures to secure the rights an d entitlements of children. 
In order to ensure protection and promotion of child rights, the Government of 
India (GoI) enacted various laws.  GoI also introdu ced the Integrated Child 
Protection Scheme in 2009 which was revised in 2014.  
This Report has pointed out several shortcomings in  the efforts made by the 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi towards providing care and 
protection to the children in need, especially dela ys in creation of institutions 
for this purpose and other measures for welfare of children such as release of 
funds to Child Care Institutions, declaring childre n free for adoption etc.  
Child Care Institutions suffered from shortage of s taff, deficient physical 
infrastructure and inadequate medical facilities. T he Government also did not 
implement Sponsorship Scheme and Foster Care Scheme  aimed at providing 
financial support for children in need of caring to  parents and encouraging 
individuals to become foster parents to such children.   
 

v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Considering the social importance and sensitivity t owards wellbeing of 
children, the present Performance Audit was taken u p with the objective of 
assessing whether  Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) 
has taken adequate measures to secure the rights and entitlements of children in 
need of special protection as per Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act, 
2015; Model Rules, 2016 and revised Integrated Chil d Protection Scheme 
(ICPS), 2014.  The performance audit covers a period of three years from 2018-19 
to 2020-2021. Audit test checked the records of Dep artment of Women and 
Child Development (DWCD), Delhi State Child Protect ion Society (DSCPS), 
State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA), Child Welfare Committees (CWCs), 
District Child Protection units (DCPUs) and Child Care Institutions (CCIs).    
Main Audit Conclusions    
• GNCTD’s efforts towards providing care and protecti on to children in 
need through Integrated Child Protection Scheme wer e deficient and 
slow in most areas.  No survey was conducted by GNCTD to assess and 
identify the number of children in need of care suc h as those without 
homes, found begging, street children, mentally or physically 
challenged, orphans, trafficked or sexually exploited, etc.  In the absence 
of data relating to Children in need of care and pr otection in Delhi, no 
concrete plan could be formulated nor adequate reso urces allocated, by 
GNCTD and their efforts were limited to providing c are to only those 
vulnerable children brought to it by concerned citi zens, police, NGOs 
etc.  DSCPS, which is the apex body for implementat ion of Integrated 
Child Protection Scheme, failed to provide the nece ssary impetus and 
leadership as its Governing Body and Executive Comm ittee were 
dysfunctional. There were delays in creation of ins titutions viz.  State 
Adoption Resource Agency, Child Welfare Committees and District 
Child Protection Units by Department of Women and C hild 
Development, GNCTD for implementation of the Integr ated Child 
Protection Scheme.   
• During 2018-19 to 2020-21, unspent balances in budg et were noticed 
due to not executing children care activities such as conducting surveys, 
improving habitable condition of GNCTD run child ca re institutions, 
etc.  GNCTD failed to provide timely financial supp ort to NGO run 
Child Care Institutions with delays in release of f unds.  GNCTD also 
failed to avail increased Central share in grants f or implementation of 
Integrated Child Protection Scheme. 
• Child Welfare Committees (CWCs), responsible for en suring care, 
protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restorati on of children in need, 
did not ensure follow up of progress of children pr oduced before them 
after issuing orders with regard to their care and protection. Child 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023 
vi 
Welfare Committees were not uploading its orders on  the designated 
portal for promoting transparency and accountability.  They also did not 
upload photographs of recovered children on Facial Recognition System 
so as to match against the details of missing child ren indicating lack of 
concern towards reducing the trauma of separation f or parents and 
children.   
• Child Care Institutions (CCIs) were functioning wit hout registration, 
there were undue delays in registration and renewal  of CCIs by Delhi 
State Child Protection Society and in taking action against unregistered 
CCIs, as such allowing them to function without requisite facilities and 
exposing children to unfit conditions.  There was huge shortage of staff 
(up to 76 per cent ) especially in the important posts of Probation 
Officer/Child Welfare Officer, Counsellor and Educa tors in 
Government run Child Care Institutions which severe ly compromised 
their ability in providing quality care to the chil dren. Child care 
institutions also suffered from inadequate infrastr ucture facilities, 
insufficient nutrition, clothing, bedding and toile tries provided to 
children, inadequate medical facilities and significant absence of formal 
education to children, with only 54 per  cent  receiving formal education.  
Similar deficiencies were also observed in After Ca re Homes, where 
care is provided to children who must leave CCIs on  attaining 18 years 
of age for two more years to facilitate their re-in tegration into the 
society. 
• Monitoring of implementation of the scheme for chil d protection was 
deficient in many respects.  District Child Protect ion Units were to 
organize quarterly meetings at district level with stakeholders such as 
Superintendents of Homes, NGOs, etc. and representatives from Health, 
and Labour Departments and Police to review the pro gress of child 
protection activities but such meetings were either  not conducted or 
conducted with time lag.  They also did not conduct inspections of Child 
Care Institutions as required and where inspections  were conducted, 
there was no follow up to ensure that deficiencies pointed out were 
addressed.  Delhi State Child Protection Society (DSCPS) was required 
to furnish Quarterly Progress Reports to Ministry o f Women and Child 
Development, GoI. Audit noted that no such Quarterly Progress Reports 
were submitted by the society. In the absence of re gular meeting and 
inspections, effective implementation of ICPS was compromised.  
• Apart from institutional care through CCIs, rehabil itation of children 
was to be carried out though non-institutional care  by putting these 
children under adoption, foster care and sponsorship. There were delays 
at various stages of adoption such as uploading Chi ld Study Reports, 
Medical Examination Reports, and Certificates decla ring children free 

Executive Summary 
vii 
for adoption by Specialised Adoption Agencies (SAAs ). Besides, there 
were months of delay in filing of adoption petitions before the courts as 
also in uploading Home Study Reports of Prospective Adoptive Parents. 
Delays in declaring children free for adoption redu ced their chances of 
getting adopted. Post-adoption follow up was not done in most cases by 
SAAs due to which there was lack of assurance that adopted children 
were being taken care of.  GNCTD did not implement ‘Sponsorship’ and 
‘Foster Care’ Schemes due to which the growth and d evelopment of 
children in family environment could not be achieve d, especially in 
cases where the families/relatives and other individuals were desirous of 
helping the children but were unable to do so due to financial constraints. 
Thus Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) did not take 
adequate measures to secure the rights and entitlem ents of children in need of 
special protection as per Juvenile Justice (Care an d Protection) Act, 2015; 
Model Rules, 2016 and revised Integrated Child Protection Scheme, 2014. 
What do we recommend? 
1.  Conduct regular meetings to review, improve and mon itor the 
institutions implementing child protection schemes and ensure their 
follow-up. Responsibility of defaulters should be fixed. 
2.  Adequate staff with requisite training in District Child Protection Units 
should be ensured to improve their services towards  vulnerable 
children. 
3.  Conduct Surveys to identify the Children in Need of  Care and 
Protection within a fixed timeline and maintain dis trict wise database 
of such children. 
4.  Release funds to CCIs and other institutions at the  beginning of the 
financial year so as to enable them to function properly. 
5.  Child Welfare Committees may ensure uploading photo graphs of 
children brought before them in Facial Recognition Software so as to 
match with the details of missing children. 
6.  Complete the process of registration/renewal of CCI s within the 
prescribed period as per JJ Act, 2015. 
7.  Provide adequate staff at CCIs and impart them trai ning so that they 
may can effectively discharge their responsibilities towards childcare. 
8.  Ensure availability of minimum standards of care in  terms of physical 
infrastructure, clothing and bedding, nutrition and diet and education in 
all child care institutions and also ensure adequate security arrangement 
in them. 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023 
viii 
9.  For centralized coordination, complete data may be uploaded in Track 
Child Portal in a time bound manner. 
10.  District Child Protection Units should conduct regu lar monitoring and 
inspection of Child Care Institutions. 
11.  Specialized Adoption Agencies may timely upload nec essary 
information including Study Reports of prospective parents and details 
of children for adoption in the relevant Web Portal  and file adoption 
petitions before the Court without delay. Responsib ilities for delays 
should be fixed. 
12.  Effective, efficient and timely implementation of Sponsorship Scheme 
and the scheme of Foster Care needs to be ensured. Follow-up of 
adopted children as per fixed time lines needs to be scrupulously done. 
 
 

1 
Chapter 1 
 
Introduction 
Children are the most vulnerable section in the soc iety as they are in need of 
care by adults for their well-being and overall dev elopment.  Dependence on 
adults creates challenges for children during their  fight against abuse at home 
and outside. Children in Need of Care and Protectio n (CNCP) are those who 
are without homes, found begging, street children, mentally or physically 
challenged, orphans, trafficked or sexually exploit ed, drug/substance abusers 
and other such cases. ‘Children in conflict with la w’ refers to children who 
come into the contact with the Justice System as be ing suspected/accused of 
committing an offence. 
The National Policy for Children, 2013 provides tha t the State Government 
commits to taking special protection measures to se cure the rights and 
entitlements of children in need of special protect ion. In order to ensure 
protection and promotion of child rights, the Government of India (GoI) enacted 
various laws, viz. Protection of Child and Sexual o ffence Act, 2012; Adoption 
regulations, 2017; Child Labour Act, 1986; Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 
2006; Immoral Traffic Act, 1987; Right to Free and Elementary Education Act, 
2009 and Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, (JJ Act) 2000 
(amended as JJ Act, 2015 which came into force with  effect from January 
2016).  GoI also made JJ Model Rules, 2016 to implement the JJ Act, 2015. For 
the purpose of building a protective environment fo r children in difficult 
circumstances, as well as other vulnerable children , GoI introduced the 
Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) in 2009 ( revised in 2014), through 
Government-Civil Society Partnership.  The scheme intended to safeguard both 
‘Children in need of care and protection’ and ‘Children in conflict with law’. 
As per Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed (Ma rch 2010) between 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD) , GoI and 
Department of Women and Child Development (DWCD), G overnment of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) for imp lementation of ICPS, 
DWCD, GNCTD was the nodal department in Delhi.  DWCD is responsible for 
guaranteeing quality standards of care and protection for CNCP.  
ICPS provides for setting up of two State level del ivery structures viz. State 
Child Protection Society (SCPS) and State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA) 
in every State/UT as the fundamental unit for the implementation of the scheme. 
The structure of State Child Protection Society (SC PS) and State Adoption 
Resource Agency (SARA) is given in Figure 1.1 . 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
2 
 
Figure 1.1: State Child Protection Society (SCPS) and State Adoption 
Resource Agency (SARA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICPS envisages setting up a District Child Protecti on Unit (DCPU) in each 
district as a fundamental unit for the implementati on of the scheme. The 
structure of District Child Protection Units (DCPUs) is given in Annexure I.  
The activities for providing these services to CNCP  are executed through 
different institutions, both at State and District levels, functions 1 of which are 
as given below: 
 
  
                                                 
1 As envisaged in ICPS Guidelines, JJ Act, and JJ Mo del Rules. 
Secretary DWCD 
Director – Child 
Protection  
State Child Protection 
Society (SCPS) 
State Adoption Resource 
Agency (SARA) 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
3 
Functions of various Institutions under ICPS 
 
  
DCPUs 
District Child Protection Units (11) 
To identify families at risk and children 
in need of care and protection, creation 
of district specific database of children 
in vulnerable condition, identification 
and support to voluntary organizations, 
implementation of sponsorship, foster 
care, adoption and after care 
programame. 
Headed by District Child Protection 
Officers   
CWCs 
Child Welfare Committees (10) 
To take cognizance of and receive 
children produced before it, 
conducting an inquiry on all issues 
relating to and affecting the safety 
and well-being of the children, 
ensuring care, protection and 
appropriate rehabilitation, or 
restoration of children in need of 
care and protection to their parents, 
etc. 
Headed by Chairperson, CWC  
DSCPS 
Delhi State Child Protection Society 
(One) 
Responsible for effective 
implementation of child protection 
legislations, setting up of District Child 
Protection Units, State Adoption 
Resource Agency, Child Welfare 
Committees, Child Care Institutions, 
etc., Ensuring proper fund flow and its 
utilization. 
Headed by Minister, WCD, GNCTD 
SARA 
State Adoption Resource Agency  
(One) 
To coordinate, monitor the work relating 
to adoption of children, which includes 
inspection and monitoring of adoption 
programmes, enforcing standards and 
measures for the adoption of orphan, 
abandoned and surrendered children. 
Headed by Secretary DWCD  
DWCD 
Department of Women and Child Development 
DM 
CCIs 
Child Care Institutions (96) 
The children in need of care and protection who are not placed with families for any reason may be 
placed in Child Care Institution 
Headed by Officer-in-Charge (Superintendent) 
Children Home 
(76) 
Open Shelters 
(09) 
Specialized Adoption 
Agencies 
(09)  
After Care Homes 
(02) 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
4 
Audit Objectives, Scope, Coverage and Methodology 
The Audit objectives were to see whether the Govern ment extended effective 
care, support and rehabilitation services to Childr en in Need of Care and 
protection and whether the Child Care Institutions were functioning efficiently 
and a robust oversight mechanism was in place. This  audit covered the steps 
taken by GNCTD for the welfare of the CNCP in Delhi  but does not cover 
‘children in conflict with law’.  
Audit scrutinized the records of three years from A pril 2018 to March 2021 of 
DWCD and test checked some other institutions which were providing services 
to the Children in Need of Care and Protection in D elhi.  The institutions 
selected were - 
• Delhi State Child Protection Society (DSCPS) and Sp ecialized 
Adoption Resource Agency (SARA) 
• Four 
2 out of 11 District Child Protection Units (DCPUs) 
• Four 3 out of 10 Child Welfare Committees (CWCs)  
• Fifteen Child Care Institutions (out of 44 run by the Government and 
aided Non-Governmental Organisations) comprising ni ne Children 
Homes, two Open Shelters, two Specialised Adoption Agencies and 
two After Care Homes as detailed in Annexure II . 
Exit conference was held with the Special Secretary -cum-Director (WCD), 
GNCTD on 20 December 2021 to discuss the audit find ings. Replies received 
from the Government have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
  
                                                 
2 DCPU-I (Central), DCPU-II (North East & Shahdara),  DCPU-III (South), and DCPU-V 
(North)  
3  CWC-II (South), Lajpat Nagar, CWC-III (Central), Kingsway Camp, CWC-V (North East 
and Shahdara), Dilshad Garden and CWC-X (North), Alipur  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
5 
Chapter 2 
 
Implementation of Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
GNCTD’s efforts towards providing care and protecti on to children in 
need were deficient and slow in most areas.  There were delays in creation 
of institutions viz.  SARA, CWCs and DCPUs for impl ementation of the 
Scheme.  DSCPS, which was the apex body for implementation of ICPS, 
failed to provide the necessary impetus and leaders hip as its Governing 
Body and Executive Committee were dysfunctional.  There was no effort 
on the part of the Government to assess or identify  the number of 
children in need of care through surveys etc.  In t he absence of data 
relating to CNCP in Delhi, GNCTD was not in a position to plan for care 
and allocation of adequate resources for the same.  Financial 
management was also deficient with the expenditure falling much below 
the budget allocation indicating unrealistic budgeting.  The Government 
failed to provide timely financial support to NGO r un CCIs with delays 
in release of funds.  GNCTD also failed to avail in creased Central share 
in grants for implementation of ICPS. 
The basic objective of ICPS was to provide care and  protection to all Children 
in Need of Care and Protection and its guidelines r equire every state/UT to set 
up a State Child Protection Society (SCPS) for impl ementing the scheme.  As 
per the MoU, while Secretary, DWCD, GNCTD dealing w ith Child 
Protection/Welfare matters is the nodal officer for effective implementation and 
monitoring of ICPS, the MoWCD has to provide funds to DWCD for 
implementation of ICPS and set up a Central Project  Support Unit (CPSU) at 
Delhi and State Project Support Unit (SPSUs) in the state.  
The CPSU and SPSU were to function as “Mission Directorates” headed by the 
Mission Director. The State Government was to assess the requirements of child 
protection services in the State under ICPS and acc ordingly make timely 
budgetary provisions in the State Budget.  At the t ime of making a request for 
release of instalments, it has to furnish Utilisation Certificate of the total amount 
i.e., Central and State shares of the previous inst alment and has to certify its 
“State Matching Share”.   
DWCD was to implement all the existing projects/pro grammes that have been 
brought under ICPS namely (i) Integrated Programme for street children; 
(ii) Programme for Juvenile Justice; and (iii) Sche me of assistance to Homes 
for children (Shishu Greh) to promote in-country ad option as per the ICPS 
norms.   

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
6 
2.1 Planning 
 
2.1.1 Setting up of support structure – DSCPS/SARA/ CWC/DCPUs for 
rehabilitation/restoration, adoption, and re-integration of children 
in need of care and protection.   
DWCD was to develop an implementation Schedule to e nsure setting up of 
DSCPS and SARA at State level and Juvenile Justice Boards, CWCs and 
Special Juvenile Police Units in each District with in three months of signing 
the MoU.  DWCD was also to set up District Child Pr otection Societies, 
Specialised Adoption Agencies in each District and an Adoption Coordinating 
Agency within six months.   
2.1.1.1 Delhi State Child Protection Society (DSCPS ) 
As per MoU (March 2010) between the Central and Del hi Government, Delhi 
SCPS was constituted in August 2010 as a society registered under the Societies 
Act, for the specific purpose of implementation of ICPS in Delhi to facilitate 
and operate in an additional managerial and technical capacity to DWCD.  The 
DSCPS is headed by the Minister, WCD as its Chairperson and had 16 members 
who were mostly senior officers from the Government  with one member from 
a Non-Governmental Organisation.  
As per clause 3.4 of the MoU, while the State was primarily responsible for the 
effective implementation, DSCPS was its implementing arm. 
The Aims and Objectives of DSCPS included (a) estab lishing services for 
emergency outreach, institutional care, family and community based care, 
counselling and support services for children in ne ed; (b) put in place and 
strengthen necessary structures and mechanisms for effective implementation 
of ICPS at district levels; (c) build capacities of  all functionaries at all levels; 
(d) sensitise and train members of allied systems s uch as local bodies, police, 
judiciary etc. to undertake responsibilities under ICPS; (e) create mechanism 
for Child Protection Data Management System and Child Tracking System for 
implementation and monitoring of child protection s ervices etc.  It discharges 
various functions and exercises powers in accordance with its Memorandum of 
Association and Rules and Regulations.  DSCPS funct ions through the 
Governing Body (GB), Executive Committee (EC). 
Governing body of DSCPS - Audit noted that Governing Body of DSCPS had 
met only once (July 2019) during the period of three years 2018-21. In the lone 
meeting conducted, the only item in the agenda, apart from routine matters, was 
implementation of sponsorship scheme for which it w as decided to submit the 
draft SOP to the Deputy Chief Minister. There was n o further follow up. Thus 
issues relating to Annual Budget, Annual Action Pla n, financial position and 
matters relating to recruitment/appointment of expe rts and administrative/ 
technical staff could neither be discussed nor any necessary direction on the 
issues be sought.   

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
7 
Thus, in the absence of regular meetings of the Gov erning Body, 
implementation of ICPS lacked the necessary directi ons and impetus from the 
Government.   
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that meetings of Governing Body 
could not be held due to pandemic Covid-19.  The reply is not acceptable as the 
meetings of Governing Body were not conducted as re quired even before 
Covid-19. 
Executive Committee of DSCPS:  The Executive Committee (EC) of DSCPS 
is responsible for acting and doing all deeds on be half of the Governing Body 
and for taking all decisions and exercising all pow ers vested in the Governing 
Body except those specifically excluded by the Governing Body.  Chairman of 
EC spearheads the effective implementation of ICPS and all other child 
protection policies and programmes in the State by facilitating formulation of 
the State Child Protection Policy and State Plan of  Action for Children.  For 
discharging its functions, the EC was required to m eet at least once in three 
months.  In spite of having such huge responsibilit ies, the EC met only once 
(December 2018), during the period of three years f rom 2018-19 to 2020-21, 
vis-à-vis a minimum of 12 quarterly meetings prescr ibed.  Absence of 
Periodical Meetings of the Governing Body and Executive Committee indicate 
that DSCPS, which is the apex institution for implementing ICPS was not doing 
its job meticulously and left the implementation of  the scheme rudderless. 
Lapses in the functioning of DSCPS can be seen in t he observations discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs 
Recommendation no. 1: Conduct regular meetings to r eview, improve and 
monitor the institutions implementing child protect ion schemes and ensure 
their follow-up. Responsibility of defaulters should be fixed. 
2.1.1.2 State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA) 
As per the MoU (March 2010), SARA was to be constit uted within three 
months of signing the MoU, i.e., by June 2010.   However, it was observed that 
SARA was constituted in September 2011, i.e. after a delay of 14 months. Even 
after delayed constitution of SARA, its Governing B ody was constituted only 
in June 2018.  The role of the Governing Body of SA RA was to meet at least 
once in every quarter to review the progress of ado ption work and address the 
operational as well as logistic issues and bottlenecks in the adoption process or 
systems in the State. 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that there was no provision of SARA under the 
JJ Act, 2000 and it was constituted in September 2011 as per ICP Scheme.  The 
reply is not acceptable as the MoU signed in March 2010 between MoWCD, 
GoI and GNCTD required SARA to be constituted within three months.   

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
8 
2.1.1.3 Child Welfare Committees  
As per the MoU of March 2010 between the Central an d Delhi Government, 
CWCs in each District were to be constituted by the  Delhi Government within 
three months, i.e., by June 2010.  However, two out  of 10 CWCs, CWC-IX 
Gole Market and CWC-X Alipur, were constituted with delays of more than six 
years 
4. 
2.1.1.4 District Child Protection Units (DCPUs)  
The MoU (March 2010) between the Centre and Delhi G overnment stipulated 
constitution of DCPUs within six months. DWCD, GNCT D was responsible 
for timely constitution of these institutions.  Aud it observed that all the 11 
DCPUs in the districts (including one at DWCD headquarters) were constituted 
after delays ranging up to six years as detailed in Annexure III .  
Delay in constitution of DCPUs, which are the Distr ict-level institutions for 
providing child care services working at ground lev el to deliver necessary 
services to children in need, indicated lack of int ent and insensitivity of the 
Government towards the needs of children. 
DWCD replied (December 2021) that establishment of DCPUs is a gradual 
process involving multiple authorities and complian ces.  After ensuring 
minimum wages to the staff, DCPUs were set up in al l 11 districts and 
recruitment process for staff to fill vacant posts is under process.  The reasons 
given for delay are all administrative in nature and should have been addressed 
in time. 
Shortage of Staff :  DCPUs functions under the administrative control  and 
overall supervision of the District Magistrate of the District concerned and each 
DCPU is headed by a District Child Protection Offic er.  In each DCPU, 12 
officials are required for its smooth functioning w hich can be increased to 15 
with three more Outreach Workers. The ICPS Guidelin es provides that the 
Social Worker is responsible for coordinating field  level activities in their 
respective cluster.  Outreach Workers assist their respective Protection Officers 
in carrying out their roles and responsibilities.  
Audit observed staff shortage ranging from 16 per cent to 63 per cent , 
especially in the key posts of Social Worker and Ou treach Worker, in the four 
test-checked DCPUs.  The status of availability of staff in all four DCPUs is 
given in Annexure IV. The Staff shortage in DCPUs could potentially aff ect 
their performance in identification of vulnerable c hildren and various services 
DCPUs are required to provide and may have contributed to the deficiencies in 
functioning of DCPUs which are pointed in the preceding paragraphs. 
                                                 
4  CWC-IX Gole Market and CWC-X Alipur were constitu ted on September 2017 and 
January 2018 respectively.  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
9 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that adve rtisements inviting 
applications for the vacant posts in DCPUs have bee n published in July 2021 
and candidates have been shortlisted. 
Recommendation no. 2: Adequate staff with requisite  training in District 
Child Protection Units should be ensured to improve  their services towards 
vulnerable children. 
2.1.2 Identification of Children in Need of Care an d Protection  
Success of child protection activities depend on proper identification of children 
in difficult circumstances.  Para 2.1(iii) and (iv)  of Chapter 3 of Revised ICPS 
Guidelines, 2014 stipulates that DCPU shall be responsible for identification of 
children in need of care and protection and create District specific database of 
such children. Audit examination, however, revealed negligence on the part of 
the DCPUs in identification of children in need of care and protection. 
The following deficiencies were noticed:  
• In all four test-checked DCPUs, District-wise datab ase of CNCP was 
not available.  
• GNCTD was not proactive in identifying children in need and depended 
primarily on other institutions/individuals such as  Delhi Police, Social 
Workers, Voluntary/Non-Governmental Organisations e tc. for 
identifying such children and bringing them under t he care of 
Government. 
• One of the test checked DCPU (Central) stated (June  2021) that due to 
unavailability of funds and less manpower, they did not identify families 
at risk.  
Thus, the basic activity of identification of vulne rable children/preparation of 
Database which was required to be done by the test checked DCPUs under the 
overall supervision of the DWCD was not done. In th e absence of information 
regarding children in need, any policy planning or implementation for 
protection of children was bound to be defective.   
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that a Su rvey was conducted in 
2018 and 73,128 children were identified as vulnera ble street children.  It was 
further stated that the Data of street children has  been shared with DCPUs in 
December 2021.   
The reply is misleading as no Survey Report was mad e available during field 
audit nor annexed with reply.  
It was also observed that o verall, only 3401 5 
children were cared for in the Child Care Instituti ons in Delhi, vis-à-vis as per 
their own estimate of more than 73,000 destitute ch ildren living in abject 
misery. 
                                                 
5 As of March 2021 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
10 
Recommendation no. 3: Conduct Surveys to identify the Children in Need of 
Care and Protection within a fixed timeline and mai ntain district wise 
database of such children. 
2.2 Financial arrangement 
ICPS is a Centrally Sponsored programme and is to b e implemented through 
the State Governments or UT Administrations with bu lk financial assistance 
from the Central Government. The Scheme is implemented with the following 
cost sharing ratios between Centre/States/NGOs as given in Table 2.1 . 
Table 2.1: Cost sharing ratios between Centre/States/NGOs  
Sl. 
No. 
Component Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
NGO 
Share 
i. All structural components of State Project 
Support Unit, State Child Protection Society, 
State Adoption Resource Agency and District 
Child Protection Units 
75% 25% --- 
ii. Regulatory bodies provided for under JJ  Act 35 % 65% --- 
iii. All Homes/ Specialised Adoption Agency 
(SAA) run by Government 
75% 25% --- 
iv. All Homes/SAA run by NGOs 75% 15% 10% 
v. Open shelters run by NGO participation 90% --- 1 0% 
Details of budget (both GoI and GNCTD shares) under  ICPS during the years 
2018-19 to 2020-21, expenditure incurred there-against and unspent balance are 
as given in Table 2.2.  
Table 2.2:  Funds released to DSCPS and expenditure incurred  
(`` `` in lakh) 
Year Budget Total 
  
Expenditure Total 
  
Unspent 
balance 
Total 
  
Central 
Share* 
State 
Share 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
2018-19  1063.7 688.91 1752.61 849.99 509.05 1359.04  213.71 179.86 393.57 
2019-20  1104.44 722.14 1826.58 717.64 407.98 1125.62  386.80 314.16 700.96 
2020-21  964.47 648.83 1613.30 726.87 425.14 1152.01  237.60 223.69 461.29 
Total 3132.61 2059.88 5192.49 2294.50 1342.17 3636.67        
*Grant in aid received from GoI 
The total budget and expenditure on ICPS during the  years from 2018-19 to 
2020-21 was ` 5192.49 lakh and ` 3636.67 lakh respectively and the unspent 
balance at the end of these financial years were 22 to 38 per cent of the budget. 
Unspent balances in budget were due to not executing child care activities such 
as conducting surveys, improving living condition o f GNCTD run child care 
institutions, etc. as discussed in Para 4.2 – Functioning of GNCTD run CCIs.  
Other deficiencies observed in financial management are as under: 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
11 
2.2.1 Increase in Central share of GiA not claimed 
Revised Guidelines of ICPS, 2014 increased the cost  share of Centre in ICPS 
as shown in Table-2.1 .  Audit, however, observed that DSCPS continued 
sending proposals to GoI as per the old sharing rat io (Central/State/NGOs 
shares - 60:30:10) and GoI sanctioned funds according to old sharing ratio. Due 
to not-adopting the revised sharing ratio between C entre: States/NGOs, 
GNCTD received less share of 
` 839.50 lakh ( ` 294.53 lakh + ` 290.66 lakh + 
` 254.31 lakh) during 2018-21 as details shown in the Annexure V . 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that ther e has been no ambiguity 
as the proposal sent to GOI was as per the revised guidelines of SCPS 2014 and 
accordingly DWCD has received the GIA.  The content ion of DWCD is not 
correct as audit observed that proposals were sent as per old formula. 
2.2.2 Delay in release of funds to CCIs 
GoI releases funds to DWCD, GNCTD in two instalments every financial year 
on the basis of budget proposals sent by DWCD.  As per Rule 230 (11) of GFR, 
2017 budget proposals for allocation of funds for a financial year are to be sent 
to GoI by September of the previous year.  However,  DWCD did not send the 
proposals to GoI in time and proposals for 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 were 
sent in July 2018, June 2019 and December 2020 respectively i.e., three to nine 
months after the financial year had begun rather than six months before its start.   
There was delay in release of funds by DWCD to inst itutions engaged in 
providing care to children in need.  Funds for the year 2018-19 were released 
to DCPUs/CCIs in next financial year, one instalment in April 2019 and another 
in December 2019.  In 2019-20, funds were released in February and March 
2020 whereas in 2020-21, funds were released in Feb ruary and May 2021.  
There was no reason on record for the delay in releasing funds. 
Audit observed that delay in release of funds had a n adverse impact on the 
functioning of various institutions such as delay i n payment of salary to staff, 
etc.  Such delays are also detrimental to the morale of the staff running various 
institutions apart from compromising with the quality and timeliness of services 
provided including providing adequate food to children.  The delay in releasing 
funds contributed to unspent balances lying with DS CPS, CWCs, SARA, 
DCPUs and Government CCIs.  The unspent balances ly ing with these 
institutions ranged between 20 to 100 per cent of the funds released. 
Voluntary organisations involved in providing care for children are trying to fill 
the gap between the requirement and availability of  infrastructure for care of 
children in need which is essentially the responsib ility of the Government.  
Delay in release of funds to CCIs reflect on the attitude of the Government that 
running these institutions is the responsibility of voluntary organisations which 
does not bode well for the children in need. 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
12 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that prop osals had been sent by 
them to the Ministry of Women and Child Development  (MoWCD), GoI well 
before the meeting of Project Approval Board (PAB) and there has been no 
delay on their part as the sanction depends only on  the decision of PAB and 
sanctions received from MoWCD.  Reply is not correct as Rule 230(11) of GFR 
requires DWCD, GNCTD to send the proposal for alloc ation of fund for 
financial year by September of previous year. The delay in sending of proposals 
to MoWCD, GoI, resulted in further delay in release  of funds to 
CCIs/DCPUs/CWCs. 
Recommendation no. 4: Release funds to CCIs and oth er institutions at the 
beginning of the financial year so as to enable them to function properly.   
2.2.3 Release of grants to ineligible CCIs by DSCPS  
Delhi State Child Protection Society (DSCPS) provid es grants-in-aid (GiA) to 
NGOs for running Child Care Institutions (CCIs). As  per the grant conditions, 
State Government reserves the right to terminate th e GiA if terms and 
conditions of the sanction is violated. The NGO would refund the amount under 
such eventuality. Grantee institutions are also req uired to submit certified 
copies of Audited Accounts and Utilisation Certific ates for the financial year 
concerned to DSCPS.  
DSCPS withheld 25 per  cent  Grant-in-Aid to 13 grantee CCIs for 2018-19, 
owing to non-submission of Audit Report for the yea r 2017-18. Subsequently, 
eight of these 13 grantees submitted Audited Accoun ts to DSCPS.  However, 
DSCPS released grants to all the 13 grantees even t hough the remaining five 
grantees did not submit the Audited Annual Accounts.  Grants released to these 
five grantees amounted to 
` 22.77 lakh. 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that SCPS received the requisite documents 
from the NGOs concerned including Audited Accounts and Utilization 
Certificates. Due to delay in audit, grant was released later considering the best 
interests of children placed in the said CCI and 25  per cent of total grant was 
withheld.   
The reply is not acceptable as it a fact that grant s were released to these five 
CCIs before Audit Reports were submitted, which was the requirement.  
  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
13 
Chapter 3 
 
Working of Child Welfare Committees 
CWCs did not ensure follow up of progress of childr en produced before 
them after issuing orders with regard to their care  and protection nor 
uploaded the orders on the designated portal for promoting transparency 
and accountability.  They also did not upload photo graphs of recovered 
children on Facial Recognition System so as to matc h against the details 
of missing children indicating lack of concern towa rds reducing the 
trauma of separation for parents and children.   
The prime function of Child Welfare Committee (CWC) shall be ensuring care, 
protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restorati on of children in need, based 
on the child’s individual care plan, and passing necessary directions to parents, 
guardians, fit persons, children’s homes or fit facilities in this regard.   
Whenever a child in need of care and protection is found, he/she is to be 
produced before the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) b y police/DCPU/social 
worker/voluntary/non-governmental organization and any public servant, etc., 
within 24 hours of the child being found. 
Functions of CWCs inter alia include: 
• taking cognizance of and receiving the children produced before it; 
•  conducting inquiries on all issues relating to and  affecting the safety 
and well-being of the children under JJ Act; 
• conducting inquiries for declaring fit persons for the care of children in 
need of care and protection, ensuring care, protect ion, appropriate 
rehabilitation or restoration of these children; 
• issuing necessary directions to parents or guardian s or fit persons or 
children’s homes or fit facility in this regard; 
• declaration of orphaned, abandoned and surrendered child as legally 
free for adoption after due inquiry, etc. 
CWC is required to hold an inquiry and pass orders to send the child to his/her 
parents, guardians, fit person or Child Care Institution (CCI). Any child leaving 
a Children Home on completion of eighteen years of age may be placed in an 
After Care Home till the age of 21 years. 
 Audit assessed the functioning of four test-checke d CWCs and observed the 
following lapses/inadequacies in their functioning: 
3.1 Follow up of progress of children not done  by CWC 
As per Rule 19(18) of JJ Model Rules, 2016, while f inally disposing off the 
case, the CWC shall give a date for follow-up of th e child not later than one 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
14 
month from the date of disposal of the case and thereafter once every month for 
the period of first six months and thereafter every three months for a minimum 
of one year or till such time as the CWC deems fit.  
Audit noted in one test checked CWC no follow up wa s carried out by the 
CCI/DCPU concerned as mentioned in the order and ch ildren were not 
produced to CWC on next date of hearing. However, t he CWC did not pursue 
the matter.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the progress of the child is 
reviewed in the meetings of the Management Committe e as per provisions 
under the JJ Model Rules, 2016.  Periodical Review of individual cases is also 
done by the respective Child Welfare Committee and directions as considered 
necessary are passed for their well-being with requ ired interventions i.e., 
restoration, rehabilitation, transfer of custody or allowing the child to continue 
in the CCI as the case may be. However, no documentary evidence in this regard 
was provided. 
3.2 Delay in taking action by CWCs to use Facial Re cognition Software   
Separation of a child from family is traumatic for both the child and the family. 
Based on a petition regarding a missing child, Hon’ ble High Court, Delhi 
expressed grave concern and observed that out of a total number of 19,916 cases 
of missing children from January 2016 to December 2018, only 14,756 children 
have been traced and reunited with their family mem bers whereas, 5,160 
children were yet to be traced.  A meeting was held  (28 March 2019) amongst 
various stakeholders on the directions (22 January 2019) of the  Hon’ble High 
Court, Delhi, wherein it was decided that CWC was t o upload photographs of 
the recovered children on the Facial Recognition Software (FRS) so as to match 
the details of missing child. However, only CWC-II, Lajpat Nagar and CWC-X, 
Alipur uploaded 56 and 12 photos respectively in FR S and the details and 
photographs of the children produced before other C WCs were not uploaded 
and checked against records of missing children during 2018-19 to 2020-21.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that FRS is being maintained by 
Delhi Police and details of Chairpersons/Members of CWCs are being provided 
for creating user ID and Password.  However, the reply does not provide reasons 
for the delay in taking action to use FRS for ident ifying missing children from 
amongst the children produced before the CWCs.   
Recommendation no. 5: Child Welfare Committees may ensure uploading 
photographs of children brought before them in Facial Recognition Software 
so as to match with the details of missing children. 
3.3 Failure to upload orders of CWC 
As per Sub Rule 19 (21) of the JJ Model Rules, 2016, all orders passed by CWC 
in respect of a child is required to be uploaded on  a designated portal with due 
regard to the confidentiality and privacy of child.   As child care is an issue of 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
15 
social importance placing information on the portal promoted transparency and 
accountability for information in public domain is open to scrutiny by any 
person.  Audit observed that no such report was uploaded on the portal. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that all the CWCs have been 
provided Tabs for quick access to available portals and Apps. Further, DWCD 
jointly with DCPCR has entered into an agreement wi th NICSI in December 
2021 for developing a Juvenile Justice MIS to track  and monitor progress of 
each child brought before the CWCs and placed in th e CCls which will enable 
maintenance of transparency and privacy and at the same time facilitate follow 
up with appropriate interventions.  The fact remain s that orders of CWCs are 
not placed in public domain as required. 
3.4 Training to staff of CWCs 
Rule 89 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 stipulates mandator y training to the staff of 
CWC (for period of minimum 15 days), within a perio d of sixty days from the 
date of appointment.  
Audit noted that requisite mandatory training was n ot imparted to staff during 
the years from 2018-19 to 2020-21. In the absence o f any formal training, the 
staff of CWC were ill equipped in terms of statutor y responsibilities and 
specific jobs requirements. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that Chai rperson and Members 
appointed in the Child Welfare Committee are given mandatory training in 
phased manner so as to ensure that the functioning of the Committee is not 
interrupted.  Details of trainings given to CWC Members from January 2021 to 
October 2021 was also given. However, as per inform ation provided to Audit 
by test checked CWCs, the staff were not provided mandatory training.  
3.5 Waiting room not provided to children and famil ies 
As per ICPS Guidelines for setting up of CWCs, a wa iting room was to be 
provided to children and families.  It was observed  that waiting room was 
available only in two out of four selected CWCs, vi z. CWC –III, Kingsway 
Camp and CWC-V, Dilshad Garden. 
Thus, CWCs, which have a big role to play in care and protection of children in 
difficult conditions, were not functioning in a way  that inspires confidence in 
their competence and intent. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that all the CWCs have adequate 
space earmarked as waiting area for children, famil ies and visitors and are 
properly maintained.  However, the reply is not in consonance with the 
information provided by two out of four selected CW Cs which had confirmed 
that there was no separate waiting room in the rema ining two selected CWCs 
viz CWC-II (South) and CWC-X (North). 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
16 
3.6 Counsellor services not provided to CWC 
Guidelines of ICPS provide that the Children’s Home  where the CWC is 
holding its proceedings shall provide support of Co unsellor to the CWC on 
those days when the sitting is taking place.  Such Counsellor may help the CWC 
in deciding the best course of action for the child  considering the mental and 
emotional status of the child.  Audit observed that two 
6 out of four CWCs were 
not provided with the service of counsellors thereb y depriving the children of 
professional assessment with regard to his/her needs.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that counsellors from DSLSA and 
DCPU staff are already posted in every CWC. However , no supporting 
documents were produced to audit. Reply is not acce ptable as CWC had 
confirmed unavailability of counsellors.  
  
                                                 
6 CWC- II (South), Lajpat Nagar and CWC-III (Central ), Kingsway Camp. 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
17 
Chapter 4 
 
Working of Child Care Institutions 
 
CCIs were functioning without registration, there were also undue delays 
in Registration and Renewal of CCIs by DSCPS and in  taking action 
against unregistered CCIs, as such allowing them to  function without 
requisite facilities.  There was huge shortage of staff in Government run 
CCIs ranging up to 76 per cent which severely compromised their ability 
in providing quality care to the children.  The CCI s suffered from 
inadequate infrastructure facilities, insufficient nutrition, clothing, 
bedding and toiletries provided to children, inadequate medical facilities 
and significant absence of formal education to children, with only 54 per 
cent receiving formal education.  Similar deficiencies were also observed 
in After Care Homes, where care is provided to children who must leave 
CCIs on attaining 18 years of age for two more year s to facilitate their 
re-integration into the society. 
4.1 Registration of CCIs 
Section 41 of JJ Act, 2015 provides that all institutions, whether run by a State 
Government or by Voluntary or Non-Governmental Organisations for housing 
children in need of care and protection or children  in conflict with law, shall, 
be registered under this Act, in such manner as may  be prescribed, within a 
period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act. The 
institutions having valid registration under the JJ  Act, 2000 on the date of 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been registered under this 
Act. 
Section 42 provides that any person, or persons, in -charge of an institution 
housing children in need of care and protection and  children in conflict with 
law, who fails to comply with the provisions of sub -section (1) of section 41, 
of JJ Act, 2015 shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one 
year or a fine of not less than one lakh rupees or both. 
DSCPS was responsible to ensure that all such insti tutions were registered as 
per provisions of Section 41 of Juvenile Justice (J J) Act, 2015. This was 
necessary to ensure that these institutions have th e infrastructure, manpower 
and other resources to take care of the children entrusted to them at the desired 
standards.   
As of March 2021, there were 77 CCIs, out of which only 68 CCIs had valid 
registrations. During security of records of select ed CCIs, Audit observed the 
following issues: 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
18 
4.1.1 Failure to take Action against delay in apply ing for registration/ 
renewal by CCIs 
As per Rule 21(8 and 9) of JJ Model Rules, 2016, all institutions shall be bound 
to seek renewal of registration three months prior to the expiry of the period of 
registration and in case of their failure to seek r enewal of registration, such 
institution shall cease to be a registered institution and shall be managed by the 
State Government or the children placed therein sha ll be transferred to some 
other institution by the order of the Juvenile Justice Board or the CWC. In this 
regard, Audit noted that 14 CCIs, out of 16 test ch ecked, applied for 
registration/ renewal after due date with delay of 18-120 days, however, no 
action was taken against these NGOs as per above provisions of JJ Model Rules, 
2016 by DWCD.  
4.1.2 Delay in processing applications for registra tion/renewal of CCIs 
by DWCD 
Rule 21(10) of Juvenile Justice Model Rules, 2016 stipulates that an application 
for renewal of registration of an institution shall  be disposed off within sixty 
days from the date of receipt of application. Rule 21(4) ibid also stipulates that 
the State Government, may not grant provisional reg istration where adequate 
facilities do not exist in the institution applying  for registration and shall issue 
an order before the expiry of one month from the da te of receipt of the 
application that the institution is not entitled fo r even provisional registration. 
Audit test checked registration applications of CCI s run by NGOs which 
revealed that applications of registration/renewal were disposed off by DWCD 
after delays ranging from 121 to 840 days against the stipulated period of sixty 
days from the date of receipt of application.  
The delays were due to many reasons including admin istrative reasons like 
incomplete proposals, incomplete Inspection Reports , unavailability of 
recommendations of the Inspection Committee and lac k of clarity about 
delegation of power of registration, etc.  
In spite of not having a valid registration, these CCIs were functioning and the 
Government was also sending children in need to these CCIs.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that there was ambiguity regarding 
registration as Section 41 of the JJ Act, 2015 prov ides the registration 
certificates to be issued by the State Government w hile Section 106 provides 
that the matter of registration of CCIs shall be ta ken up by the SCPS.  After 
amendment of GNCTD Act, and notification of compete nt authorities, all 
proposals are now being referred to the Honourable Lieutenant Governor for 
his assent for registration and renewal of registra tion of the CCIs.  The fact 
remains that registration/renewal was not done.   
Specific cases of delay in registration of CCI and working of unregistered CCI 
noticed are given below:   

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
19 
An NGO applied for fresh registration on 18 June 2019, after more than four 
years of expiry of its registration.  After inspect ion (October 2019), CWC 
and DCPU recommended for rejection of the application due to unhygienic 
living conditions. However, DSCPS was yet to issue an order of rejection 
(as of August 2021). This entails the risk that NGO may have been running 
the CCI despite having unhygienic accommodation. 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that placement of child ren was stopped by 
CWCs and no child was placed or residing at this pl ace since 2016. 
However, DWCD had not rejected the application for registration/renewal 
even after two years. 
DCPU-III (South) identified (November 2015) an unre gistered CCI 7, 
wherein 18 children were residing. The CCI was dire cted (May 2016) to 
produce these children to the CWC concerned. Howeve r, only six children 
were brought before CWC, and they were allowed to stay in CCI till further 
orders. Finally, DSCPS rejected (May 2019) the regi stration application of 
the CCI in May 2019, i.e., after more than three years of identification of the 
CCI.  Moreover, due to delayed decision by DSCPS, the children continued 
to stay in the CCI which was ineligible for registration. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that plac ement of children in 
the CCI was stopped but the organisation approached  Honourable High 
Court and filed a Petition which is still pending f or decision. The fact, 
however, remains that DWCD rejected the registration application only after 
more than three years of identifying the CCI. 
Thus DWCD did not take timely action in rejection o f registration application 
which were to be disposed off within one month from  the date of receipt of 
application. This allowed ineligible NGOs to continue functioning despite lack 
of appropriate conditions.  
Recommendation no. 6: Complete the process of registration/renewal of CCIs 
within the prescribed period as per JJ Act, 2015. 
4.1.3 Delay by DSCPS in notification of registratio n of Government run 
CCIs 
As per the JJ Act, 2015, DSCPS was required to regi ster /renew Government 
CCIs within a period of six months from January 2016, but DSCPS had issued 
notification of registration of 26 government CCIs only on 13 October 2020 
i.e., after delay of 51 months.   
 
                                                 
7 Prayas Children Home for Boys, Mehrauli 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
20 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the provision of Section 41(1) 
of JJ Act, 2015 stipulated that the institutions having valid registration under JJ 
Act, 2000 on the date of commencement of Act of 2015 shall be deemed to have 
been registered under this Act and all the Governme nt run CCIs were having 
valid registration at the time of introduction of JJ Act, 2015.  However, the reply 
is silent regarding delay in renewal of registration of CCIs which was to be done 
within six months of the JJ Act, 2015 coming into effect. 
Delay in registration/renewal of registration of CCIs and delay in taking action 
against CCIs not having adequate facilities/hospita ble conditions indicates 
insensitivity of DSCPS towards providing basic services to children in need as 
it allowed such institutions to function without ne cessary requirement, and 
exposed the children to unfit conditions.  
4.2 Functioning of CCIs – Children Homes and Open S helters 
JJ Model Rules, 2016 prescribes minimum standards f or various services and 
facilities to be provided to children staying in Ch ildren Homes and Open 
Shelters.  Audit observations related to the 11 tes t-checked CCIs on the basis 
of joint physical verifications and examination of records are discussed below:  
4.2.1 Shortage of staff in CCIs 
The Superintendent of CCI is an important functiona ry in its day-to-day 
running. He is responsible for (i) planning, implementation and coordination of 
all institutional activities (ii) ensuring that the  children are provided with 
prescribed quality and quantity of food, educationa l and vocational training in 
accordance with the aptitude and need of the children, etc.  Audit observed that 
Superintendents of three 
8 Government CCIs were holding additional charges of 
two to four other CCIs. Giving responsibility of ru nning multiple CCIs to a 
single person does not hold good for smooth and pro per functioning of these 
CCIs.   
The status of shortage of staff in 10 
9 out of 11 Children Home and Open Shelters 
run by Government and NGOs is given in Annexure VI . 
Data showed that three CCIs run by Government viz C HG-I, Nirmal Chhaya 
(14/25), CHG-II, Nirmal Chhaya (10/25) and VCH-I, Lajpat Nagar (06/25) and 
three CCIs run by NGOs viz Apna Ghar, Paharganj (13 /25), SPID, 
Shraddhanand Marg (16/25) and Asra SBT, Najafgarh ( 15/25) ran with 
substantial staff shortage vis-à-vis  sanctioned strength.  
 
                                                 
8 CHG-I,II,III & IV and Foster Care Adoption Agency,  Nirmal Chhaya Complex, Hari 
Nagar; CHB-I & II and After Care Home, Alipur; and VCH-I,II & III, Lajpat Nagar 
9 CHG-IV, Nirmal Chhaya did not furnish the status o f the staff 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
21 
Huge shortage of staff upto 76 per cent  in Government run CCIs indicates low 
priority given by the Government to care and protection of children in need. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that Rule 26(1) of JJ Model Rules, 
2016 provides that the personnel strength of a CCI shall be determined 
according to the duty, posts, hours of duty and category of children that the staff 
is meant to cater to. The staffing pattern for an i nstitution with a capacity of 
100 children is suggested/indicative. The staff posted in the CCIs are adequate 
in terms of the category of children and capacity of the CCls.  
The reply is not acceptable as the staff are not po sted as per prescribed norms 
of JJ Act, 2015 and ICPS guidelines. 
4.2.2 Deficient physical infrastructure 
Rule 29 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 prescribes the mini mum standards of care to 
be provided by the CCI to the children in terms of physical infrastructure.  The 
suggested norms for building or accommodation in ea ch institution with 
50 children are as under: 
(i) 2 Dormitories-each 1000 Sq.ft. for 25 children (ii) 2 Class rooms -300 Sq.ft. 
for 25 children (iii) Sickroom/First aid room - 75 Sq.ft. for 10 children 
(iv) Kitchen 250 Sq. ft. (v) Dining hall - 800 Sq. ft. (vi) Store - 250 Sq.ft. 
(vii) Recreation room - 300 Sq.ft. (viii) Library -  500 Sq.ft. (ix) 5 Bathroom - 
25 Sq.ft. each (x) 8 Toilets - 25 Sq. ft.. (xi) Cou nselling and Guidance room - 
120 Sq.ft. (xii) Workshop - 1125 Sq. ft. for 15 chi ldren (xiii) Play ground - 
Sufficient area according to total number. 
The status of CCIs (both Government and NGO run) wi th respect to basic 
infrastructure is indicated in Table 4.1 . 
  

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
22 
Table 4.1:  Availability of Infrastructure in CCIs 
Name of 
CCI 
CCIs run by Government CCIs run by NGOs 
CHB-I, (Phulwari) Alipur 
(SS- 200 Children)  
CHB-II (Ashiyana) Alipur 
(SS-  100 Children) 
CHG-I, Nirmal Chhaya 
(SS-  100 Children) 
CHG-II, Nirmal Chhaya 
(SS-  100 Children) 
CHG-IV, Nirmal Chhaya 
(SS-  20 Children) 
VCH-I, Lajpart Nagar 
(SS – 70 Children) 
Prayas NGO, Jahangir puri 
(SS- 100 Children) 
DMRC, SBT Tishazari 
(SS- 1 20 Children) 
Apna Ghar Open shelter, 
Paharganj 
(SS-  25 Children) 
SPID, shradhdhanand 
marg 
(SS- 25 Children) 
Aasra,SBT Najafgarh 
(SS- 50 Children) 
Dormitory  Adequate  Adequate Less Less Less Less Adequate Less Adequate  Less Less 
Classroom Less Less Adequate  Adequate Adequate Not 
available  Less Less Less Less Less 
Workshop Not 
available  
Not 
available Less Less Adequate Less Less Less Not 
available  
Not 
available  Less 
Toilets Adequate  Adequate Less Less Adequate Less Adequate Less Less  Less Less 
Bathroom Adequate  Adequate Less Less Adequate Adequate  Adequate Less Less Less Less 
Library Less Less Less Less Adequate Less Less Less Not 
available  Less Less 
Playground  Adequate  Adequate Adequate  Adequate Adequate Adequate  Adequate Adequate Not 
available  
Not 
available  
Not 
available  
Sickroom Less Less Less Less Adequate Less Less Less Less Not 
available  Less 
Dining hall  Less Less Less Less Adequate Adequate  Less Less Not 
available  
Not 
available  Less 
Kitchen Less Less Adequate  Adequate Adequate Adequate  Less Less Not 
available  Less Less 
Store Less Less Less Less Adequate Adequate  Adequate Less Less Less Less 
Recreation Less Less Adequate  Adequate Adequate Adequate  Less Adequate Not 
available  Less Adequate  
counselling 
room Less Less Adequate 
 Adequate Adequate Less Less Less Less Less Less 
The above table shows that basic infrastructure fac ilities i.e Dormitory, 
Classroom, Workshop, Library, Sickroom, Dining hall  and Store did not meet 
the requisite specifications or number in most Government and NGO run CCIs. 
Several infrastructural deficiencies were observed in Government run CCIs as 
indicated below:-  
 Dormitories, Dining hall and store : All test checked six CCIs had 
dormitories, dining hall and store but four CCIs di d not meet the requisite 
specification.  
 Workshop, Library and Sick room:  Five CCIs did not meet the requisite 
specification.  
 Classroom, counselling room and toilets :  three CCIs did not meet the 
requisite specification.  
Apart from the inadequacy of infrastructural facili ties, Audit observed poor 
condition of available facilities in a few CCIs dur ing Joint Physical 
Verification. Severity of infrastructural deficiencies evident from the following 
pictures indicated lack of proper maintenance for a  long period and neglect on 
the part of the authorities responsible for making these CCIs habitable. 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
23 
Illustrative cases are discussed below: 
• In CHB-I, Audit observed cracks in ceiling, seepage  in walls, broken and 
dirty toilets, lack of sufficient safe drinking wat er and usage of dormitory 
to store obsolete and dismantled items.  
  
Picture 1: Plaster on ceiling falling in 
Dormitory, CHB-I 
Picture 2: Broken commode in toilets of CHB-I 
• In DMRC children Home, Tis Hazari, toilets were found to be in unhygienic 
condition as the cistern was not functioning.  
  
Picture 3: Seepage on Kitchen Walls in  
CHB-I 
Picture 4: Broken cistern in toilets of  
DMRC  CCI 
 
• During joint inspection of Apna Ghar Open Shelter, Audit observed that 
only five benches (with total seating capacity of 10 children) were available 
for 28 children. As a result, children were forced to study while sitting on 
the floor of dormitory. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that physical infrastructure in CCls 
are required as envisaged under Rule 29 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 and the norms 
provided under sub rule (6) are suggested/ indicati ve as the same is applicable 
for the CCIs with accommodation capacity of 50 children. All the Government 
CCIs have adequate physical infrastructure and more  spacious than what is 


Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
24 
envisaged under the said Rule.  It was further stated that since the maintenance 
of the building is undertaken by the PWD, sometimes  renovations/repair takes 
considerable longer time but children are accommodated properly in alternative 
facilities within the complex.  Reply is not acceptable as above table shows that 
most of test checked CCIs run by Government and NGO s did not meet the 
requisite specifications.  Further, the severity of  infrastructural deficiencies 
indicate lack of proper maintenance for a long period. 
4.2.3 Insufficient nutrition provided to children 
Rule 33 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 specified the stand ards relating to nutrition 
and diet scales for compliance by the CCIs. Out of 11 test checked, only six 
Homes/Shelters, maintained records regarding nutrit ion provided to the 
children.  
These six Homes/Shelters 
10  either did not provide requisite items 
(chicken/eggs, curd/butter milk, paneer, cereals, dal/rajma/chana, etc.) at all or 
provided in less than prescribed quantity. 
In the absence of the records/register of dietary i tems in rest of the five test 
checked Homes/Shelters, Audit could not ascertain w hether prescribed 
quantities of all dietary items were provided or not.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that all the Government run CCls 
follow the norms provided under the JJ Model Rules,  2016. However, CHB-I 
and CHB-II, Alipur accepted the audit findings and replied that the quantity of 
items would be consumed as per prescribed norms and  noted it for future 
compliance. The reply of DWCD is not tenable as the quantity of dietary items 
consumed showed that items were not provided as per  prescribed norms and 
auditee units also accepted the audit facts. Further, DWCD is silent on CCIs run 
by NGOs in its reply.  
4.2.4 Insufficient provision for Clothing, bedding and toiletries 
Rule 30 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 specified the essen tial items of clothing, 
bedding and toiletries for compliance by the CCIs. Out of 11 test checked 
Homes/Shelters, nine provided the relevant records for the period of 2018-21 
to Audit.  
In these nine Homes/Shelters, essential items (such  as Cotton Durry, Pillow, 
Pillow covers, Mosquito net, mattress, cotton bed s heet, cotton blanket/khes, 
cotton filled quilt, towels, shirts, pants, night w ear, shorts, undergarments, 
slippers, shoes, handkerchiefs, socks, etc.) were either not provided or provided 
in insufficient quantity to children (Details in Annexure VII ). 
                                                 
10   Four  CCIs run by Government viz CHG-I & CHG-II, Nirmal Chhaya, CHB-I & CHB-II, 
Alipur and two CCIs run by NGOs viz SBT Asra, Najaf grah and Prayas CHB,  Jahangir 
Puri 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
25 
Regarding provisions for toiletry items, in four 11  Homes/Shelters, essential 
items like hair oil, toilet soap, toothbrush, tooth  paste, comb, shampoo, hair 
clips, moisturizer, etc. were either not provided o r provided in less quantity 
against the prescribed standards. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the CCls are being monitored 
directly by the DCPU, District Inspection Committee s and Delhi Commission 
for Protection of Child Rights and all the Governme nt run institutions follow 
the prescribed norms and the NGOs who flagged resou rce constraints were 
provided necessary assistance by way of supply of m aterials through Delhi 
Child Welfare Fund or voluntary donations.  However, it was observed in audit 
that quantity of clothing and bedding items consume d showed that these were 
not provided as per prescribed norms and audit findings were accepted by CHB-
I and CHB-II, Alipur in its reply.   
4.2.5 Inadequate medical facilities for children 
Rule 34 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 inter alia specifies medical services/facilities 
to be provided at CCIs. The status of availability of these services/facilities are 
shown below: 
Sl. No. Requirement Actual position 
1. A nurse or a para medic shall be 
available round the clock in all 
Child Care Institutions.  
In 10 out of 11 test-checked Homes/Shelters, 
nurse was available for only 8-hours duty. In 
the remaining one (Aasra Children Home) 
nurse was not available. 
2. Maintain medical records of 
each child on the basis of 
monthly medical check-up and 
provide necessary medical 
facilities.  
Records of monthly medical check-up not 
maintained in two viz CHB-I and CHB-II, 
Alipur out of 11 test-checked homes/shelters. 
3. Facilities for quarterly medical 
check-ups including dental 
check-up, eye testing and 
screening for skin problems and 
for treatment of children. 
Facilities for quarterly medical check-ups 
including dental check-up, eye testing and 
screening for skin problems and for treatment 
of children was not available in 7 out 11 test 
check viz  CHB-I and CHB-II, Alipur, VCH-
I Lajpat Nagar, CHG-II, Nirmal Chhaya, 
SBT-DMRC Tishazari, Prayas Children home 
for Boys Jahangir Puri and Apna Ghar Open 
shelter Paharganj. 
4. Every institution should make 
necessary arrangements for the 
immunization of children. 
No arrangements made for immunisation in 
two CCIs, viz Children Home for Boys -I, 
Alipur and Children Home for Boys – II, 
Alipur, out of eight test-checked 
homes/shelters. 
During Joint Physical Verifications, Audit observed  that one child in CHB-I 
had developed white patches all over his body. Medi cal records of the child 
                                                 
11  CHG-I, Nirmal Chhaya; Prayas NGO,  Jahangir Puri; DMRC, Tishazari; Apna Ghar Open 
shelter, Paharganj; Aasra, SBT Najafgarh, Asra SBT Najafgarh 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
26 
revealed that he was examined by a part-time doctor  in Home since July 2019 
but was never referred to specialist doctors for proper treatment.  
Thus, CCIs were not providing medical facilities to  children to the extent 
required under JJ Model Rules, 2016. 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that all the Government run CCIs have doctors 
appointed to visit and attend the children on regul ar basis and the institutions 
are in tie up with nearby hospitals for referral and specialized medical services.  
DWCD did not give specific reply on absence of nurse or para medic, medical 
records and immunization and was silent on CCIs run  by NGOs. Further, 
supporting documents were not provided along with reply.  
4.2.6 Significant absence of formal education to ch ildren 
Rule 36 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 provides that every  institution shall provide 
education to all children both inside the instituti on or outside as per 
requirement. 
Audit observed that only 54 per cent  of the children in these Homes/Centres 
were provided formal education. Overall, while 18 out of 542 children were not 
provided any education, be it formal or non-formal, 219 children were provided 
only non-formal education.  Vocational training was provided to 11 children. 
 
Education facilitates children to become self-sufficient and helps them integrate 
in society.  Absence of formal education to a large  number of children 
compromised the standard of care being given to them. 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
100%%
81% 
69% 
8% 10% 
0% 
46% 47% 47% 
83% 85% 
0%%
3% 31% 
92% 90% 
100% 
54% 53% 
41% 
17% 
0% 
16%%
0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 
0% 
0% 
15% 
Formal Education Non-Formal Education No Education 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
27 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that form al schooling becomes 
possible only if the child is placed for long term care for which admission is 
facilitated with nearby schools. Further, DWCD has engaged guest teachers in 
all the Government run CCls to ensure that children  get opportunity to attend 
in-house classes and continue schooling. However, Audit found that the post of 
educator/ tutor was vacant in all these CCIs and no  supporting documents for 
engagement of guest teachers in CCIs run by the Gov ernment was provided 
along with replies.  Fact remained that significant percentage (46 per cent) were 
not enrolled in any formal education in test checked CCIs.  
4.2.7 Deficient security mechanism 
Rule 67 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 inter alia stipulates that adequate number of 
scanners and metal detectors may be provided in eve ry Child Care Institution. 
Further, CCTV Cameras and enough wire fencing/bound ary walls should be 
provided in all the CCIs to stop children from running away and to prevent entry 
of prohibited items in CCIs. 
During Joint Physical Verifications of 11 test-chec ked Children Homes/Open 
Shelters, it was observed that none of these institutions had scanners and metal 
detectors installed.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that scan ners and metal detectors 
are advisable in institutions for children in conflict with law and not required in 
other CCIs.  The reply is factually incorrect as JJ  Model Rules, 2016 provide 
that scanners and metal detectors may be provided in every CCI. 
Further, CHB-II, Alipur and Prayas Children for Boy s, Jahangir Puri lacked 
proper boundary wall/grills from all sides. In Apna  Ghar Open Shelter, CWC 
had observed (January 2021) unavailability of CCTV cameras and inadequate 
wire fencing on terrace.  
Risk of children running away from Children’s Homes /Open Shelters remains 
high. During April 2018 to March 2021, 36 children ran away from five CCIs 
12  
out of which only 13 were traced and brought back.   
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that all the CCIs have CCTVs 
installed for better surveillance. However, DWCD di d not provide supporting 
documents in this regard and was silent on lack of boundary wall/grills whereas 
the Superintendent of Apna Ghar Open Shelter stated  (July 2021) that CCTV 
Camera would be installed and fencing work would be  started as soon as 
possible.  The Superintendent (CHB-II, Alipur) also stated (June 2021) that the 
boundary wall would be repaired at the earliest.   
                                                 
12  Children Home for Boys-I, Alipur; VCH-I, Lajpat Na gar, SBT-DMRC, Tishazari, Prayas 
Children home for Boys,  Jahangir Puri, Apna Ghar O pen Shelter, Paharganj, Aasra, SBT 
Najafgrah 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
28 
Once a child is brought under the care of Governmen t, he/she becomes 
responsibility of the Government.  In the absence of adequate security at CCIs, 
their protection is being compromised.  Further, th e issue of children running 
away from CCIs indicates that the children were not  happy with life in these 
CCIs. 
4.2.8 Unauthorised absence of children 
Rule 69 (k(2)) of JJ Model Rules, 2016 inter alia stipulates, in the event of a 
child leaving Child Care Institution, this may be brought to the notice of police 
and the detailed report to be sent to CWC by the In-charge of Home.  
During scrutiny of records of selected Open Shelter, Shraddhanand Marg, Audit 
observed that 35 children were absent from Open Shelter since November 2017, 
without permission of CWC.  Audit noted that intima tion was given to CWC-
IX, Gole Market by the Shelter that these children were taken away by their 
mothers but prior permission was not taken from the  CWC. Though four 
children came back during March-June 2021, 31 children were yet to come back 
as of July 2021.   
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the institution SPID, 
Shraddhanand Marg, facilitates the children of women staying in brothels at the 
GB Road. It is an open shelter where children can walk in as per their will and 
also leave without restrictions.  
The contention of DWCD is not correct as the childr en were placed in the 
Shelter by CWCs and therefore, prior permission should have been taken from 
CWC for releasing the children from the Shelter. 
4.2.9 Improper documentation of details of children  
Rule 77 of JJ Model Rules, 2016 stipulates that Children Homes/Open Shelters 
should maintain records, indicating the dates of ad mission, discharge and 
rehabilitation, photograph of child etc. 
Audit observed that four Children Homes/Open Shelters 
13  were not maintaining 
Master Registers properly as photographs of some ch ildren were not affixed, 
date of admission and restoration were not mentione d and address was not 
recorded. Further, no address was recorded in respe ct of children restored to 
parents/relatives in the Master Register. 
In its reply, DWCD (December 2021) accepted the obs ervation for future 
compliance. However, this being a serious lapse, re sponsibility needs to be 
fixed. 
                                                 
13  Apna Ghar Open shelter, Paharganj; CHG-I, Nirmal C hhaya, Jail Road; Children Home 
for Boys-I, Alipur and Children Home for Boys-II, Alipur. 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
29 
4.3 Functioning of CCIs –After Care Homes (ACHs) 
Rule 25 of the JJ Model Rules, 2016 provides that t he State Government shall 
prepare a programme for children who must leave CCI s on attaining 18 years 
of age by providing for their education, giving the m employable skills and 
placement as well as providing them places for stay  to facilitate their re-
integration into the society. Any child who leaves a CCI may be provided after 
care till the age of 21 years on the orders of the CWC or Juvenile Justice Board 
or the Children’s Court and in exceptional circumst ances, for two more years 
on completing 21 years of age.  
In NCT of Delhi, there are two ACHs (ACH for Boys, Alipur and ACH for 
Women, Nirmal Chhaya) to provide above facilities to 100 inmates each. Audit 
examined the records and conducted Joint Physical Verifications of both ACHs 
and observed the following: 
4.3.1 Shortage of Staff 
These ACHs suffered from shortage of manpower as, a gainst requirements of 
11 and 15 officials in ACH, Alipur and Nirmal Chhaya respectively, only three 
officials were posted in each of these ACHs, and th at too with additional 
charges of CCIs. There were sanctioned posts of Ins tructors and Chowkidars 
for ACH, Alipur but there were  vacant posts of Car etaker, Chowkidar, Craft 
Instructor and Teacher in ACH, Nirmal Chhaya.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that there are no prescribed norms 
for staffing pattern in ACHs.  Fact remains that AC Hs were suffering from 
shortage of staff against strength sanctioned by Government. 
4.3.2 Deficient physical infrastructure  
Building of ACH, Alipur was declared damaged and da ngerous by PWD and 
the ACH was functioning in the premises of CHB-II, Alipur. As a result, 
necessary infrastructure facilities such as separat e dormitories, toilets, 
bathrooms, dining room, office room, library room, sick room, etc., were not 
available for ACH.    
ACH, Nirmal Chhaya was not equipped with necessary infrastructure facilities 
such as dining room, counsellor room, library room, sick room, etc., separately 
and it has been functioning in the common premises of Bal Niketan and Balika 
Greh with inadequate space.   
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that there are no prescribed norms 
for physical infrastructure in ACHs.  Reply is not acceptable as Rule 25 of JJ 
Model Rules, 2016 specially enjoins the State Gover nment for providing 
appropriate facilities in ACH to facilitate the sta y of children who leave CCIs 
on attaining the age of 18 years. 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
30 
4.3.3 Inadequate dietary nutrition   
ACH, Alipur was following dietary norms prescribed in JJ Model Rule, 2016. 
Audit noted that milk, chicken, and butter milk/curd, Sooji and Ragi were never 
provided during the period of audit and most of the other items of diet/nutrition 
such as dal, rajmaa, milk, curd, poha, etc., were d istributed in less quantities 
than prescribed. ACH, Nirmal Chhaya was providing d ietary norms as per old 
manual 14 . Due to this, the inmates were not provided some e ssential items i.e., 
milk, paneer, egg, chicken etc. or getting dietary items i.e., atta/rice, dal, etc. in 
less quantity than those prescribed.  
DWCD did not offer any specific comment.  
4.3.4 Inadequate provision for clothing and bedding  
Audit noted that ACH, Alipur followed norms of JJ Model Rules, 2016 whereas 
ACH, Nirmal Chhaya provided clothing, bedding and t oiletries items as per 
norms under old manual. 
Audit observed that clothing and bedding items were  either not provided at all 
or provided in less quantity vis-à-vis prescribed l evels. In ACH, Nirmal 
Chhaya, the inmates were not provided essential ite ms i.e Mattress, Pillow, 
Cotton filled quilt, Mosquito net, Salwar Kameez an d Nightwear or were 
getting items of clothing, bedding and toiletry in less quantity/scale as per 
prescribed standards under Rule 30 of Model JJ Rule s, 2016. Further, Audit 
found that essential items such as blankets, scarf/ chunni, half sleeve sweater 
were never provided and some articles i.e chappals,  handkerchief, and canvas 
were issued in short quantities, even as per the old manual.  
DWCD did not offer any specific comment 
4.3.5 Children in ACHs not provided with funds for essential expenses 
As per Rule 25(6) of JJ Model Rules, 2016 children placed in After Care 
Programme shall be provided funds by the State Government for their essential 
expenses. Audit observed that none of the inmates was provided funds.  
DWCD did not furnish specific reply, however, it was stated that they provided 
ample opportunities for their education, skill deve lopment, training and also 
facilitates for employment during their stay.  
Thus, a systematic and regulated transition of children (discharged from CCIs) 
from an institution-based life to mainstream society for social reintegration was 
not ensured due to absence of effective implementat ion of After Care 
Programme. It is the responsibility of DWCD to ensu re adequate facilities 
provided in the ACH as per prescribed norms of ICPS guidelines and JJ Model 
Rules, 2016. 
                                                 
14   Manual for Functionaries of Institutions and Serv ice, 1989 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
31 
Recommendation no. 7: Provide adequate staff at CCI s and impart them 
training so that they can effectively discharge the ir responsibilities towards 
childcare. 
Recommendation no. 8: Ensure availability of minimum standards of care in 
terms of physical infrastructure, clothing and bedding, nutrition and diet and 
education in all child care institutions and also e nsure adequate security 
arrangement in them. 
  

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
32 
Chapter 5 
 
Monitoring 
 
Monitoring of implementation of the Scheme was defi cient in many 
respects.  DCPUs were to organize quarterly meetings with stakeholders 
to review the progress of child protection activiti es but such meetings 
were either not conducted or conducted with time la g.  DCPUs also did 
not conduct inspections of CCIs as required and where inspections were 
conducted, there was no follow up to ensure that deficiencies pointed out 
were addressed.  No Progress Reports with regard to  implementation of 
the Scheme were submitted to the Government by DSCP S as required 
under the ICPS guidelines. In the absence of regula r monitoring and 
inspection effective implementation of ICPS was compromised. 
5.1 Progress reports not submitted to Government of  India by DSCPS 
As per the Chapter 4 of ICPS Guidelines, DSCPS was required to furnish 
Quarterly Progress Reports to Ministry of Women and  Child Development 
(MoWCD), Government of India (GoI). Supreme Court had also directed (April 
2015) that MoWCD should impress upon all States to submit Quarterly 
Progress Reports through online mechanism.  
Audit, however, observed that DSCPS neither prepared nor submitted Progress 
Reports to MoWCD since September 2017.  It shows lack of proper monitoring 
and supervision in implementation of the ICPS.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that quarterly Monitoring Reports 
were regularly submitted to MoWCD through online po rtal which is under 
upgradation and status in this regard is still awai ted from GoI. Reply is not 
acceptable as records made available to audit revea led that no such Progress 
Report was submitted to MoWCD. No documentary evidence was furnished in 
support of their reply.  
5.2 Deficinet monitoring by District Child Protecti on Units 
ICPS prescribes setting up of DCPUs as fundamental units for implementation 
of ICPS at District level. DCPUs were made responsi ble for all activities in 
relation to providing care to children in their res pective Districts such as 
identification of children in need, creation of Dis trict specific data base of 
children in vulnerable condition, effective impleme ntation of child protection 
legislations, ensuring an individual care plan for each child in need of care, 
identification of and support to voluntary organisa tions, etc.  In effect, while 
CWC is the authority to decide upon the course of a ction in each case of 
children produced before it, DCPUs make arrangements for care and protection 
of children at ground level.   
 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
33 
Even after their constitution, functioning of DCPUs  left much to be desired as 
audit observed deficiencies in various aspects of implementation of ICPS such 
as identification of children in need, conducting meetings with stakeholders etc. 
as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.2.1 Quarterly meetings with stakeholders not cond ucted 
ICPS Guidelines stipulates that DCPU has to organize quarterly meetings with 
all stakeholders at district level which includes S uperintendents of Homes, 
NGOs, etc. and representatives from Health, Labour and Police Departments to 
review the progress and achievement of child protection activities. It is the duty 
of DCPUs to circulate the minutes of the meetings t o the stakeholders 
concerned. 
Out of the four test-checked DCPUs, two 
15  DCPUs had not conducted any 
meeting whereas DCPU-VI, North and DCPU-I, Central had conducted three 
and one meeting against the prescribed 12 meetings during 2018-21. Moreover, 
no member from Health, Labour or Police Departments attended these quarterly 
meetings and minutes of the meeting were not circul ated to any of the 
departments/units etc.  DCPU-I stated that due to overburden, the minutes were 
not circulated. 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that notice for meeting at West and South West 
Districts has been issued in December 2021.  Furthe r, DCPU now functions 
under the supervision of the District Magistrates (DMs) and DMs are expected 
to review/conduct meeting with the stakeholders.  T he reply indicates that 
meetings were not being conducted as required. 
Regular interaction with stakeholders was necessary  to resolve various 
difficulties faced by them and ensure that all the services envisaged under the 
scheme are provided to the children in need.  In the absence of regular meetings 
and proper follow up on decisions taken, DCPU was not in a position to ensure 
effective implementation of the Scheme.  
5.2.2 Inspections of CCIs not conducted 
As per ICPS guidelines, DCPU shall coordinate and supervise implementation 
of the ICPS at District level including monitoring and supervision of all 
institutions/agencies/ projects/programs/NGOs and shall report to SCPS at the 
State level. 
Test check of Inspection Reports of CCIs by DCPU-II  (North-East and 
Shahdara) revealed common deficiencies such as toil et flush not working, 
pending repairs of washrooms and toilets, seepage i n dormitory etc. Similarly, 
in CCIs inspected by DCPU-I (Central) also, there w ere some common 
deficiencies such as unavailability of counseling r ooms, shortage of beds, 
unavailability of part-time doctors, unavailability  of sick rooms, etc. The 
                                                 
15  DCPU-II (North East and Shahdara) and DCPU-III (La jpat Nagar) 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
34 
DCPUs were required to follow up compliance of thes e shortcomings, but 
Compliance Report of these Inspection Reports were not found in the records.   
This clearly shows that DCPUs, even when they visited the CCIs, did not follow 
up, to check the compliance of issues pointed out during inspections.  
No specific reply was furnished by the Department in this regard.  
Further, as per para 2.1(xv) of ICPS Guidelines, DC PU should conduct visits 
of all institutions/agencies for supervision and to ascertain that proper facilities 
are being provided.  The status of Inspections conducted in the four test-checked 
CCIs by DCPUs is given in Table 5.1 . 
Table 5.1: Number of inspections conducted by DCPU 
DCPU Number of  CCIs 
under jurisdiction 
of DCPU 
Number of inspections 
conducted 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
North  08 05 00 06 
South 20 36 54 36 
Central  08 01 01 05 
North-East and Shahdara  03 03 00 03 
It can be seen from above table that DCPUs North and Central did not cover all 
CCIs under them even once in a year. DCPUs, North-East and Shahdara did not 
carry out any inspection in 2019-20. Inspection by DCPU, Central was 
particularly deficient. It indicates poor monitoring of CCIs by DCPUs.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that Insp ections of CCIs are 
conducted on a regular basis and meetings of the Ma nagement Committees 
headed by DCPO are held on a monthly basis for mana gement of institutions 
and to monitor the progress of every child. The rep ly is not tenable as the 
Inspections of CCIs were not being conducted by the selected DCPUs. 
5.2.3 Children’s identity indicators on all-India w eb portal not ensured 
Ministry of Women and Child Development, GoI had se tup the ‘TrackChild’ 
Web Portal for tracking missing children and for th eir ultimate repatriation to 
rehabilitation.  Information about children is to b e entered by the ICPS 
functionaries on this portal for enabling centralised coordination. As mentioned 
in the order issued in September 2019 by DWCD, DCPU  is responsible for 
monitoring the web portal and has to facilitate the CWC and CCIs in registering 
/uploading/updating the details of children on the portal from time to time. 
It was observed that only 17 out of 44 CCIs under the four test-checked DCPUs 
were uploading details on the Web Portal as given in Table 5.2 . 
  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
35 
Table 5.2:  Number of CCIs which are uploading information of children 
on web portal  
Test-checked DCPU Number of CCIs No. of CCIs uploading details  
on Web- portal 
North 8 1 (for remaining CCIs the data 
is at other district’s portal) 
South 20 14 
Central 8 0 
North-East and Shahdara 8 2 
Total 44 17 
Moreover none of the four test-checked CWCs uploade d information of 
children 16 sent to CCI by CWC during the period 2018-19 to 202 0-21. Two 
CWCs did not even have an active password available to access the portal.  
Position of admission and uploading the details of children on portal in respect 
of test-checked Children Homes, Open Shelters and S pecialised Agencies is 
given in Table 5.3 . 
Table 5.3:  Status of uploading of details of children on web portal 
Sl. No.  Name Deficiency noticed 
Children Homes 
1.   CHB-I, Alipur Details of 16 out of 616 children uploa ded. 
2.   CHB-II, Alipur Details of 41 out of 133 children uplo aded. 
3.   CHG-I, Nirmal Chhaya Children’s details not uploaded . 
4.   CHG-II, Nirmal Chhaya Information not provided to Au dit 
5.   CHG-IV, Nirmal Chhaya Information not provided to Aud it 
6.   VCH-I, Lajpat Nagar Information not provided to Audi t 
7.   Prayas CHB,  Jahangir Puri Details of 50 out of 455 children uploaded 
8.   CHB, DMRC Tis Hazari Details of 230 out of 523 childre n uploaded 
9.   SBT Aasra CHB Najafgarh Children’s photos not uploade d on portal 
Open Shelters 
10.   Apna Ghar SBT ID not issued to CCI by DCPU 
11.   SPID Shraddhanand Marg ID not issued to CCI by DCPU 
Specialised Adoption Agencies 
12.   SAA Nirmal Chhaya Complex Information uploaded  
13.   Welfare Home for Children, Sarita Vihar Information uploaded  
Even though majority of the CCIs were not uploading  information of children 
staying there or produced before them, no action wa s taken by the respective 
DCPU in this regard. DCPUs did not even provide access to the Web Portal to 
two Open Shelters. 
This compromised the ability of the Government to track missing children, their 
recovery and rehabilitation, thereby prolonging the  suffering of affected 
children and their parents. 
                                                 
16  5769 children were sent to CCIs by three CWCs. Inf ormation not provided by remaining 
one CWC 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
36 
DWCD stated (December 2021) that the National Web P ortal “TrackChild” is 
based on the provisions of earlier Act, of 2000 and  therefore DCPUs 
encountered difficulties in uploading the informati on. However,  on  another 
portal created by National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) 
namely Bal Swaraj, DCPUs  have  been uploading the desired details and 
particulars of children on a regular basis. Reply is not acceptable as DWCD was 
required to  upload  the details of children on Web Portal “TrackChild” under the 
provisions of ICPS guidelines and JJ Model Rules, 2 016. Further, DWCD did 
not furnish supporting documents in respect of uploading the details of children 
on NCPCR portal.  
Recommendation no. 9: For centralized coordination,  complete data may be 
uploaded in Track Child Portal in a time bound manner. 
5.3 Review of CWCs not conducted 
As Section 27 (8) of JJ Act, 2015, the District Magistrate (DM) shall conduct a 
Quarterly Review of the functioning of CWC. Audit o bserved that against the 
required 48 Quarterly Reviews for four CWCs during 2018 to 2021, only one 
Quarterly Review was done (CWC-II, Lajpat Nagar) .  In the absence of 
quarterly reviews by the District Magistrates (DMs) functioning of CWCs was 
not being monitored/watched properly as per JJ Act, 2015. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that CWCs  have been advised to 
submit self-appraisal reports to the DM concerned. 
5.4 Lack of supervision by Superintendents of CCIs 
ICPS Guidelines required the Superintendents of CCI s to either reside within 
the institution or in quarters in the premises to supervise the overall care of the 
children. Further, Rule 61(2) of JJ Model Rules, 2016 stipulates that the Person-
in-charge shall stay within the premises to be read ily available as and when 
required by the children or the staff and in case where an accommodation is not 
available in the premises, he shall stay at a place in close proximity to the Child 
Care Institution till such time such accommodation is made available within the 
premises of the Child Care Institution.  
During field visits of the test-checked nine Childr en Homes and two Open 
Shelters, Audit found that Superintendents were not  residing within the 
institution or in quarters in the premises except two CCIs 
17  which is in violation 
the provisions of the Act. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that inst itutions run 24x7 and an 
officer of supervisory level is mandatorily deploye d at all the time to manage 
the functioning of the CCIs. Reply is not tenable a s Superintendents were not 
residing in the selected CCIs and no supporting doc uments were produced to 
audit regarding deployment of Supervisory level officers. Besides, it was found 
                                                 
17  Prayas Children Home for Boys, Jahangir Puri and S PID, Shraddhanand Marg 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
37 
that Persons-in-charge of one CCI was also given ch arge of other CCIs as 
commented in para 3.2.1 of Chapter 3 of this Report. 
In the absence of regular monitoring and inspection  of Child Care Institutions 
by District Child Protection Unit, effective implementation of Integrated Child 
Protection Scheme was compromised.  
Recommendation no. 10: District Child Protection Un its should conduct 
regular monitoring and inspection of Child Care Institutions.   
  

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
38 
Chapter 6 
 
Rehabilitation of children 
There were delays in uploading Child Study Reports,  Medical 
Examination Reports, and Certificates declaring chi ldren free for 
adoption by Specialised Adoption Agencies (SAAs). B esides, there were 
months of delay in filing of adoption petitions bef ore courts as also in 
uploading Home Study Reports of Prospective Adoptive Parents. Delays 
in declaring children free for adoption reduced the ir chances of getting 
adopted. Post-adoption follow up was not done in mo st cases by SAAs 
due to which there was a lack of assurance that ado pted children were 
being taken care of.  The Government also did not i mplement 
‘Sponsorship’ and ‘Foster Care’ Schemes due to whic h the growth and 
development of children in family environment could  not be achieved, 
especially in cases where the families/relatives an d other individuals are 
desirous of helping the children but are unable to do so due to financial 
constraints. 
The most desirable situation for a child is to be w ith his/her parents where the 
child feels safe and cared for.  Therefore, it is i mperative for the Government 
to make all possible efforts to keep the child with  his/her family and only in 
circumstances where this is not in the best interests of the child or not possible, 
other options such as placing them in CCIs or for a doption etc. should be 
considered. 
Rehabilitation of children is carried out through I nstitutional care and family 
based Non-Institutional care i.e., Adoption, Foster Care and Sponsorship.  Out 
of these, the best scenario for children orphaned a nd abandoned/surrendered 
would be their getting adopted as, through adoption , the child legally acquires 
a new set of parents with all rights, privileges an d responsibilities that are 
attached to this relationship.   Section 56 of JJ Act, 2015 stipulates that, adoption 
shall be resorted to for ensuring right to family f or orphans and for abandoned 
and surrendered children.  
ICPS Guidelines provide for the constitution of Sta te Adoption Resource 
Agency (SARA) in every State/UT, to coordinate, mon itor and develop the 
work of adoption, liaison with DCPU at District lev el and to provide technical 
support to CWC in carrying out adoption.   
Specialised Adoption Agency (SAA) is a Childcare In stitution for housing 
orphans, abandoned and surrendered children, placed  there by orders of the 
CWC, for the purpose of adoption. The process of ad option is as given in 
Figure 6.1. 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
39 
Figure 6.1: Process of adoption 
JJ Act, 2015 stipulates that the State Government s hall recognise one or more 
institutions or organisations in each district as S AA. Audit observed that no 
SAA was recognized in two 18  out of the 10 districts. Thus, there was no 
dedicated mechanism to facilitate adoption of orpha n, abandoned and 
surrendered children in these two districts.  
In the remaining eight districts, there were total 9 SAAs, out of which one 
19  is 
run by the Government, three 20  by NGOs aided by Government, and the 
remaining five are run by NGOs on their own. Out of the four SAAs either run 
by the Government directly or through aided NGOs, audit examined the records 
and conducted Joint Physical Verification of two SAAs.  
As already mentioned in the paragraph relating to d elay in declaring children 
free for adoption by CWCs, a delay in this process leads to prolonging the stay 
of children in the CCIs apart from decreasing the p ossibility of a child getting 
adopted.  Therefore, in order to provide the childr en the best possible care, 
Government needs to streamline the adoption process  so as to avoid delays in 
the process.  However, from the records of two SAAs examined, Audit observed 
delays at various stages, as described in the following paragraphs: 
6.1 Delays in uploading the Certificate issued by C WC declaring the 
child free for adoption 
Regulation 29 (1) (d) of Adoption Regulations, 2017  stipulates that SAA shall 
upload the Certificate, issued by the Child Welfare  Committee, declaring the 
child legally free for adoption in Child Adoption R esource Information and 
                                                 
18  East District and North-East District. 
19  Foster Care & Adoption Service Centre (SAA) Jail R oad, New Delhi. 
20  Matri Chhaya, Paharganj; Welfare Home for Children , Sarita Vihar; and Asharan 
Orphanage, Peeragarhi. 
Registration of Prospective 
adoptive parents (PAPs) 
Process of matching child by SAAs, and 
Adoption Order by Court 
Home Study Report of 
Prospective Parents 
Child Study Report and 
Medical Examination 
Report prepared by SAA  
Child produced before CWC, which 
declares Child free for adoption 
Post-adoption follow-up 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
40 
Guidance System (CARINGS) within 48 hours from the receipt of such 
Certificate. Audit noticed that SAA, Foster Care and Adoption Service Centre, 
Nirmal Chhaya Complex, uploaded certificates declar ing the children legally 
free for adoption in respect of six out of 14 child ren after delays ranging from 
14 to 88 days and in two cases, with delays of 496 and 625 days. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that dela y in uploading the 
Certificate issued by CWC is due to delay in public ation of advertisements of 
orphan, abandoned and missing children etc. Reply i s not acceptable as these 
activities are done before issuing the Certificate declaring the child free for 
adoption by CWC. 
6.2 Delays in uploading Child Study Report and Medi cal Examination 
Reports 
Regulation 7 (18) of  the Adoption Regulations, 201 7 stipulates that  Child 
Study Report (CSR) and Medical Examination Report ( MER) of the 
surrendered child shall be prepared and posted by t he SAA in CARINGS, 
within ten days from the date the child is declared  legally free for adoption by 
CWC. Audit observed that CSR and MER of five children were uploaded after 
delays ranging from 23 to 195 days and in two cases , after 396 and 813 days 
and for 10 children, they were not uploaded at all. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the CSR and MER is prepared 
by the SAA officials in consultation with various other authorities including the 
Doctor, which takes time in its preparation. No specific reply was furnished by 
DWCD in cases pointed out by Audit. Fact remains th at there were delays in 
uploading reports and there were also cases where t hese were not uploaded at 
all.  Further, the specified time of 10 days in Regulations would have been laid 
after taking the routine factors in mind.  
6.3 Delays in uploading the Home Study Report of Pr ospective 
Adoptive Parents 
Regulation 9 (10) of the Adoption Regulations, 2017  stipulates that Home 
Study Reports (HSRs) of the Prospective Adoptive Pa rents (PAPs) should be 
completed within 30 days from the date of submissio n of documents in 
CARINGS. Audit noticed that in 12 cases, the HSR of 20 (out of 96) PAPs were 
conducted by SAA, Sarita Vihar with delays ranging from 29 to 99 days and 
with delays ranging from 100 to 196 days in eight cases. Similarly, in 27 cases, 
HSR of 40 PAPs (out of 79) were conducted by Nirmal  Chhaya with delays 
ranging from 16 to 87 days and with delays ranging from 115 to 202 days in 
13 cases. The fee was also not collected from PAPs as prescribed by Central 
Adoption Resource Authority causing loss to Governm ent exchequer 
amounting to ` 4.74 lakh.  
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that due to the Pandemic and even 
at present, the PAPs are not willing for physical visits at their place of residence, 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
41 
or do not make themselves available at the time of visit. It was further stated 
that virtual verification has to be carried out twi ce or thrice before finally 
uploading the HSR on the CARINGS Portal.  The SAA a t Nirmal Chhaya is a 
Government run institution wherein, HSR fees are not taken from PAPs. 
The reply is not acceptable as delays in uploading reports pointed out by audit 
pertain to the period prior to the Pandemic.  Furth er, the fee is to be collected 
from all the PAPs as per provisions of JJ Act and Adoption Regulations. 
6.4 Delays in filing Adoption Petition before Court  
Regulation 12(1) of Adoption Regulation, 2017 stipu lates that SAA shall file 
Adoption Petition before the Court within 10 workin g days from the date of 
acceptance of the child by the adoptive parents.  
Audit noticed that in 14 out of 24 test checked cases (58 per cent) , SAA, Sarita 
Vihar filed adoption petitions before the Court aft er delays ranging from 32 to 
92 days. In respect of SAA Nirmal Chhaya, three 
21  out of 14 children were 
reserved by PAPs, however, the SSA had not filed Adoption Petition in respect 
of these children despite their acceptance by PAPs,  the oldest case being of 
November 2019. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that thou gh the documents were 
ready, application could not be filed in the respec tive Adoption Court as the 
functioning of Courts were suspended during the relevant period due to Covid-19 
lockdown. The reply is not acceptable as nine cases  pertained to periods 
(between September 2017 and November 2019) prior to Covid-19 lockdown.  
Recommendation no. 11: Specialized Adoption Agencie s may timely upload 
necessary information including Study Reports of pr ospective parents and 
details of children for adoption in the relevant We b Portal and file adoption 
petitions before the Court without delay. Responsibilities for delays should be 
fixed. 
6.5 Delays in preparation of Post-Adoption Follow-u p Report 
Regulation 13 (1) of Adoption Regulations, 2017 stipulates that the SAA which 
has prepared the Home Study Report, shall prepare the Post-Adoption Follow-up 
Report on six monthly basis for two years from the date of Pre-Adoption Foster 
Placement with the Prospective Adoptive Parents, an d upload the same in 
CARINGS along with photographs of the child. Furthe r, Regulation 29(6)(C) 
(vii) also provides that  every SAA shall keep Post-Placement Progress Reports 
in the case file of each child.  
Audit noticed that 150 follow-ups for 59 children were to be conducted between 
January 2013 and July 2021 by the SAA, Nirmal Chhaya, however, no follow-
up was conducted in respect of 44 children. In resp ect of the remaining 15 
children, only 19 out of 57 six monthly Post Adopti on Follow-up were 
conducted. Further, Follow-up Reports were also not kept in the respective case 
                                                 
21   Date of acceptance are 22.11.2019, 27.08.2020 and  27.01.2021 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
42 
files. In the absence of follow up, SSA could not be certain if the children were 
being adequately taken care of and not being mistreated by the adoptive parents. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that due to Covid-19 lockdown 
and restricted movement, physical visits for follow up could not be undertaken, 
however, follow up was ensured through telephonic contacts. 
Reply is not acceptable as Post Adoption Follow-up was not conducted even in 
44 cases pertaining to the period prior to December 2019.   
6.6 Delay in declaring children legally free for Ad option 
Rule 6 of the Adoption Regulations, 2017 stipulates  the procedure relating to 
adoption of children which includes advertisement i n national newspapers, to 
ascertain whether the child is abandoned, orphan or missing and to obtain report 
from local police regarding non-traceability of bio logical parents or legal 
guardians etc. Adoption Regulations, 2017, also provide that  CWC is required 
to declare an abandoned or orphan child as legally free for adoption after expiry 
of two or four months from the date of production o f the child before CWC in 
case of a child up to two or above two years of age respectively. Audit observed 
that during the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21, 36 22  children were declared 
legally free for adoption after considerable delays  ranging from three to 64 
months.  Delay in declaring children free for adopt ion deprived them a chance 
to become a part of a family with parental care apart from prolonging their stay 
in CCIs.  Further, the possibility of a child getti ng adopted may decrease with 
increase in age which is all the more reason for av oiding delays in declaring 
them free for adoption. 
In its reply, DWCD stated (December 2021) that the process for declaring a 
child legally free for the purpose of adoption requ ires compliances from 
different stakeholders i.e. District Child Protecti on Unit for Case history and 
Social Investigation, Medical Officer/ Board for ag e determination which 
causes delays.  It was further stated that the proc ess has been streamlined now 
and children are being declared legally free on time.  
6.7 Schemes for ‘Sponsorship’ and ‘Foster Care’ 
As per Rule 24 of JJ Model Rules, 2016, the State G overnment shall prepare a 
Sponsorship Programme.  “Sponsorship” means provisi on of supplementary 
support, financial or otherwise, to the families to meet the medical, educational 
and developmental needs of the child. Sponsorship P rogramme was to be 
implemented by DCPU which was to provide a panel of  persons or 
organizations interested in sponsoring a child.  Th e scheme was yet to be 
implemented by GNCTD.   
Further, as per Rule 23 of JJ Model Rules, 2016, the children in need of care and 
protection may be placed in Foster Care, and the DCPU shall be the nodal authority 
for implementing the Foster Care Programme in a District.  “Foster Care” means 
                                                 
22  CWC-II, Lajpat Nagar (15) and CWC-V, Dilshad Garde n (21) 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection”  
43 
placement of a child, by the Committee for the purpose of alternate care in the 
domestic environment of a family, other than the child’s biological family.  Audit 
observed that DWCD did not implement the Foster Care Scheme either.  
Due to not implementing these Schemes, the growth and development of the 
child in a family environment could not be achieved, especially in cases where 
the families/relatives and other individuals are desirous of helping the children 
but are unable to do so due to financial constraints. Implementing these schemes 
efficiently would also have facilitated de-institutionalization of children from 
CCIs through rehabilitative measures.  
In its reply (December 2021), DWCD accepted the audit contention and stated 
that the SOPs and guidelines have been issued in June 2021 and uploaded on 
the website along-with advertisements seeking applications for recognition of 
Fit Person/ Foster Parents and Fit facilities/Group Foster Care. 
Recommendation no. 12: Effective, efficient and timely implementation of 
Sponsorship Scheme and the scheme of Foster Care needs to be ensured. 
Follow-up of adopted children as per fixed time lines needs to be scrupulously 
done. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Date
d:      
(AMAN DEEP CHATHA) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Delhi 
 
 
 
 
Coun
tersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Date
d:      
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection” 
45 
Annexures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection” 
45 
Annexure I 
(Referred to in Chapter 1-Introduction) 
Structure of District Child Protection Unit (DCPU) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Protection Officer-Non-
Institutional Care 
Social Worker 
Outreach Worker 
Community Volunteers 
Legal cum Probation Officer 
Assistant cum Data Entry 
Operator 
Accountant 
District Child Protection Officer 
Protection Officer-Institutional 
Care 
Counselor 
Social Worker 
Outreach Worker  
Community Volunteers 
District Magistrate/Collector 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
46 
Annexure II  
(Referred to in Chapter 1-Introduction) 
List of selected CCIs  
Sl.No. Name Run by 
Children Homes 
1.   Children Home for Boys-I, (CHB-I, Alipur) Governme nt 
2.   Children Home for Boys-II, (CHB-II, Alipur) Govern ment 
3.   Children Home for Girls-I (CHG-I, Nirmal Chhaya Co mplex) Government 
4.   Children Home for Girls-II(CHG-II, NirmalChhaya Co mplex) Government 
5.   Children Home for Girls-IV (CHG-IV, Nirmal Chhaya 
Complex) 
Government 
6.   Village Cottage Home-I (VCH-I, Lajpat Nagar) Gover nment 
7.   Prayas Children Home for Boys (Prayas CHB, Jahangi rpuri ) NGO 
8.   Children Home for Boys, DMRC Tis Hazari (CHB DMRC 
Tis Hazari)  
NGO 
9.   Saalam Baalak Trust Aasra Children Home for Boys ( SBT 
Aasra CHB, Najafgarh) 
NGO 
Open Shelters 
10.   Apna Ghar  Saalam Baalak Trust (Apna Ghar SBT, 
Paharhganj) 
NGO 
11.   Society for Participatory Integrated Development ( SPID, 
Shraddhanand Marg) 
NGO 
Specialised Adoption Agencies 
12.   Foster Care & Adoption Service Agency (Foster care  Home 
Services) (SAA Nirmal Chhaya Complex) 
Government 
13.   Welfare Home for Children, Sarita Vihar (SAA, Sari ta Vihar) NGO 
After Care Homes 
14.   After Care Home for Boys, (ACH, Alipur) Government  
15.   After Care Home for Girls,  Nirmal Chhaya Complex (ACH, 
Nirmal Chhaya) 
Government 
 
  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection” 
47 
Annexure III 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.1.4) 
Formation of DCPUs 
Name of the Unit Date upto which 
to be setup 
Actual date of setup Delay in 
months 
DCPU-I, Central 
16-09-2010 
31-08-2012 23 
DCPU-II, North East 31-08-2012 23 
DCPU-III, South 31-08-2012 23 
DCPU-IV, West 31-08-2012 23 
DCPU-V, North 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-VI, North West 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-VII, East 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-VIII, South East 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-IX, South West 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-X, HQ. 01-07-2017 81 
DCPU-XI, New Delhi 01-07-2017 81 
 
 

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
48 
Annexure IV 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.1.4) 
Status of staff in four selected DCPUs 
Name of post 
  
DCPU-I, SewaKutir DCPU-II, Dilshad Garden DCPU-III, Lajpat Nagar DCPU-VI, Alipur 
Sanctioned 
post 
Present 
Position 
Vacant 
posts 
Sanctioned 
post 
Present 
Position 
Vacant 
posts 
Sanctioned 
post 
Present 
Position 
Vacant 
posts 
Sanctioned 
post 
Present 
Position 
Vacant 
posts 
DCPO 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Protection Officer 
(Institutional Care 1   1 1 1 0 
3   3 1 1 0 
Protection Officer 
(Non-Institutional 
Care) 
1 1 0 1 1 0 
3 1 2 1 1 0 
Legal Probationary 
Officer 1 1 0 1 1 0 3   3 1 1 0 
Accountant 1   1 1 1 0 1   1 1 1 0 
Counsellor 1   1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Social Worker 2 3 -1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 
Data Analyst 1 1 0 1 0 1 1   1 1 0 1 
Assistant cum Data 
Entry Operator 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Outreach Worker 2 2 0 2 1 1 3 2 1 3 1 2 
Any Other Post                          
Total Post  12 10 2 12 9 3 19 7 12 13 9 4 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection” 
49 
Annexure V 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.1) 
Details of Central and State Share 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No.  Component 
Sharing Ratio  2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
NGO Share  GIA 
Sanctioned 
for the 
Period 
2018-19 
Central 
Share as 
per 
revised 
norms 
State 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
NGOs 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
GIA 
Sanctioned 
for the 
Period 
2019-20 
Central 
Share as 
per 
revised 
norms 
State 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
NGOs 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
GIA 
Sanctioned 
for the 
Period 
2020-21 
Central 
Share as 
per 
revised 
norms 
State 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
NGOs 
Share 
as per 
revised 
norms  
i. 
All structural 
components of 
SPSU, SPCS, 
SARA and 
DCPUs 
75% 25% --- 
516.2 387.15 129.05 Nil 500.44 375.33 125.11 Nil 50 1.96 376.47 125.49 Nil 
ii 
Regulatory 
bodies provided 
for under JJ  Act 
35% 65% --- 
109.68 38.39 71.29 Nil 139.2 48.72 90.48 Nil 139.2 48.72 90.48 Nil 
iii 
All Homes/ 
Specialised 
Adoption Agency 
(SAA) run by 
Government 
75% 25% --- 
533.45 400.09 133.36 Nil 537.58 403.19 134.40 Nil 5 02.59 376.94 125.65 Nil 
iv. All Homes/SAA 
run by NGOs 
75% 15% 10% 404.5 303.38 60.68 40.45 543.31 407.48 81.50 54.33 352.74 264.555 52.911 35.27 
v. 
Open shelters 
run by NGO 
participation 
90% --- 10% 
254.71 229.24 Nil 25.471 178.20 160.38 Nil 17.82 16 8.99 152.091 Nil 16.90 
GIA Share works out as per Revised ICPS  1818.54 1358.24 394.38 65.921 1898.73 1395.1 431.48  72.15 1665.48 1218.78 394.53 52.17 
Actual GIA Share as per sanctioned  ---  1063.7 688.91 ---  ---  1104.44 722.14 ---  -- -  964.47 648.83 ---  
Difference between Actual and revised share  ---  294.53 294.53 ---  --- 290.66 290.66 ---  ---  254.31 254.31 ---  
Proposal of GiA  sent to GoI by State Govt.  2461.00 1445.34 890.42 
 
125.24 1960.98 1141.79 746.11 73.08 1824.66 1060.00  702.65 62.01 
 
  

Report No. 1 of the year 2023  
50 
Annexure VI 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.1) 
Shortage of staff in selected CCIs 
 * Superintendent of these CCIs were holding additional charges of other CCIs also  
  
Name of the Post CCIs run by Govt CCIs run by NGOs 
CHB-I, 
(Phulwari) 
Alipur 
CHB-II 
(Ashiyana) 
Alipur 
CHG-I, 
Nirmal 
Chhaya 
CHG-II, 
Nirmal 
Chhaya 
VCH-I, 
Lajpat 
Nagar 
Prayas 
NGO, 
Jahangirp 
uri 
DMRC, 
SBT 
Tishazari 
ApnaGhar 
Open shelter, 
Paharganj 
(Open 
Shelter) 
SPID, 
Shradhana 
ndmarg 
(Open 
Shelter) 
Aasra, 
SBT 
Najafgarh 
SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS SS AS 
Person-in-charge 
(Superintendent) 
1 1* 1* 1 1 1* 1 1* 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Probation Officer/Child Welfare 
Officer/Case Workers (NGOs)  
5 3 2 2 3 2 3 1 3 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 1 
Counselor/ Psychologists/mental 
health expert 
0 1 0 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 
House Mother/ House Father 3 2 3 2 4 1 4 2 4 2 4 4 4 4 4 3 4 1 4 2 
Educator/ Tutor 1 0 1 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 1 2 0 2 1  2 1 
Medical Officer (Physician) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  1 1 1 0 1 2 1 1 
Para-medical staff/ Staff 
Nurse/Nursing Orderly 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 
Store Keeper cum Accountant 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Art & Craft & activity teacher 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 
PT Instructor-cum-Yoga trainer 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 2 1 1 
Cook 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 1 
Helper 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 0 2 1 
House keeper 0 7 0 7 2 2 2 0 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 0 2 1 
Driver 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 0 1 1 
Gardener 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 
Total 20 19 17 18 25 14 25 10 25 6 25 22 25 22 25 13 25 16 25 15 
Surplus / Shortage  -1 +1 -11 -15 -19 -03 -03 -12 - 09 -10 

Performance Audit on “Children in Need of Care and Protection” 
51 
Annexure VII 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.4) 
Clothing and Bedding  
Items CHB I 
Alipur 
CHB II 
Alipur 
CHG I 
Nirmal Chhaya 
CHG II Nirmal 
Chhaya 
CHG IV 
Nirmal Chhaya 
Prayas NGO DMRC SBT 
NGO 
ApnaGhar 
Open Shelter 
Asara SBT, 
Najafgarh 
  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Mattress Never provided Provided sufficient Never p rovided Never provided Never provided Less provided  Less provided Less provided Less provided 
Cotton Durry Less provided Never provided less prov ided Never provided Never provided Never provided L ess provided Less provided Less provided 
Cotton bed sheets Less provided Less provided less provided less provided less provided Less provided Less provided Less provided Less provided 
Pillow Less provided Less provided less provided le ss provided Never provided Never provided Less prov ided Less provided Less provided 
Pillow cover Less provided Less provided less provi ded Never provided Never provided Never provided Le ss provided Less provided Never provided 
Cotton 
blanket/Khes 
Less provided Less provided less provided less prov ided Never provided  Less provided Less provided Le ss provided Less provided 
Cotton filled quilt Never provided Never provided N ever provided Never provided Never provided Less pr ovided Less provided Less provided Never provided 
Mosquito net Less provided Less provided Never prov ided less provided Never provided Never provided Ne ver provided Never provided Never provided 
Towels Less provided Less provided less provided le ss provided less provided Less provided Less provid ed Less provided Less provided 
Shirts/salwar suit Less provided Provided sufficien t provided 
sufficient 
provided 
sufficient 
less provided Less provided Provided 
sufficient 
Less provided Less provided 
Pants Provided 
sufficient 
Less provided NA NA NA Less provided Less provided Less provided Less provided 
Night 
wear/Kurtapyjama 
Never provided Never provided less provided less pr ovided less provided Less provided Less provided Ne ver provided Less provided 
Shorts Never provided Less provided NA NA NA Less p rovided Less provided Less provided Less provided 
Undergarments Less provided Provided sufficient les s provided less provided less provided Less provide d Less provided Less provided Less provided 
Slippers Less provided Less provided less provided less provided Never provided Less provided Provided  
sufficient 
Less provided Less provided 
Sports shoes Less provided Less provided less provi ded less provided less provided Less provided Provi ded 
sufficient 
Less provided Less provided 
School shoes Less provided Never provided Never pro vided       Provided 
sufficient 
Less provided Less provided 
Handkercheifs Less provided Less provided less prov ided less provided Never provided Less provided Les s provided Less provided Never provided 
Socks Less provided Less provided less provided les s provided less provided Less provided Less provide d Less provided Less provided 
*Note: One CCI (Spid Open shelter) has not maintained the above data. 
 

53  
Glossary of Abbreviations 
ACH After Care Home 
CARINGS Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System 
CCI Child Care Institution 
CNCP Children in Need of Care and Protection 
CPSU Central Project Support Unit 
CSR Child Study Report 
CWC Child Welfare Committee 
DCPO District Child Protection Officer 
DCPU District Child Protection Unit 
DM District Magistrate  
DSCPS Delhi State Child Protection Society  
DSLSA Delhi State Legal Services Authority 
DWCD Department of Women and Child Development 
EC Executive Committee 
FRS Facial Recognition Software 
GB Governing Body 
GiA Grants-in-Aid 
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
HSR Home Study Report 
ICPS Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
JJ Act Juvenile Justice Act 
MER Medical Examination Report 
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
PAB Project Approval Board 
PAP Prospective Adoptive Parents 
SAA Specilised Adoption Agency 
SARA State Adoption Resource Agency 
SCPS State Child Protection Society  
SPSU State Project Support Unit 
 