 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
for the year ended 31 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
(Performance Audit - Civil) 


 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
for the year ended 31 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Report No. 4 of 2025 
 

 

Table of Contents  
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter 1:   
Introduction 
Organisational structure 1.1 1 
Audit Objectives 1.2 1 
Audit Criteria 1.3 2 
Audit Scope and methodology 1.4 2 
Acknowledgement 1.5 3 
Audit Findings 1.6 3 
Chapter 2:   
Administrative and Academic Issues 
Administrative Planning and Oversight by DHE and 
DTTE 2.1 6 
Administrative Issues at Universities 2.2 13 
Academic Issues at the Universities 2.3 17 
Research and Development, Patents, Consultancy and 
Collaboration with other HEIs 2.4 20 
Placement of Students and Start-up Activities 2.5 28 
Chapter 3:   
Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process  
Accreditation of Universities 3.1 31 
Process of Affiliation of Institutions to GGSIPU 3.2 33 
Process gaps 3.3 40 
Oversight of affiliated institutions by GGSIPU 3.4 43 
Chapter 4:   
Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure 
facilities 
Financial Management 4.1 48 
Human Resource Management 4.2 55 
Infrastructure facilities  and irregularities in works 
contracts 4.3 60 
Chapter 5:   
Internal control 
Absence of institutional bodies/internal committees 5.1 67 
Mechanism for quality assurance 5.2 69 
Management Information System and office 
automation 5.3 71 
Amendments in Ordinances/Statutes not notified by 
the University 5.4 73 
Physical verification of stock not conducted 5.5 73 

ii 
Annexures 
Number Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph Page No. 
1.1 List of selected Universities and 
affiliated colleges of GGSIPU 
1.4 77 
2.1 List of University Schools of Studies 
(USS) and Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
of GGSIPU 
Chapter II 
(Introduction) 
78 
2.2 List of Academic Departments and 
University Schools of DTU 
Chapter II 
(Introduction) 
79 
2.3 Details of Programmes of the University 
Schools of GGSIPU with low 
admissions against the sanctioned intake 
during 2018-23 
2.2.2.1(i) 80 
2.4 Programmes run in University schools 
of GGSIPU with delay in syllabus 
revision 
2.3.1 81 
2.5 Programmes run in affiliated colleges of 
GGSIPU with no syllabus revision for 
last 3 years 
2.3.1 82 
2.6 List of programmes of University 
Departments of DTU for which syllabus 
was not revised 
2.3.1 83 
2.7 Details of programmes of DPSRU with 
delay in syllabus revision 
2.3.1 84 
3.1 Details of 6 affiliated colleges of 
GGSIPU having less than 1.5 acre of 
land 
3.2.2 (i) (d) 85 
3.2 Details of affiliated colleges having less 
than 1.5 acre of land 
3.2.2 (i) (d) 86 
4.1 Details of persons in position in crucial 
administrative posts of the University 
during 2018-23 
4.2.3 87 
4.2 Year-wise details of the posts not 
sanctioned but filled on outsource basis 
4.2.4 (ii) 89 
4.3 Deficiencies noticed during the joint 
physical inspections 
4.3.5 90 
5.1 Discrepancies noticed in constitution 
and functioning of BSS of GGSIPU 
during 2018-23 
5.1.1 (i) 98 
 Glossary  103-104 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Preface 

iii 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Lieutenant Governor of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi under Section 48 of the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 for being laid before the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
The report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Functioning of 
Universities of Government of NCT of Delhi’ covering the period from April 
2018 to March 2023. The Audit has been conducted under the Comptroller 
and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those which came to notice in the 
course of test audit. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Executive Summary 

 
v 
Executive Summary 
Universities are pivotal in ensuring access to higher education and provide strong 
foundations for research and innovations. In Delhi, Higher Education Department 
(HED), Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) through 
Directorate of Higher Education (DHE) and Training and Technical Education 
Department (TTED), GNCTD through the Directorate of Training and Technical 
Education (DTTE) administer technical and non-technical higher education and 
formulate policies for the universities to implement. They also provide 
grants-in-aid to the universities functioning under them. 
There are eleven universities under the jurisdiction of the GNCTD, out of which 
we selected three Universities viz., Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University 
(GGSIPU) which is an affiliating body, Delhi Technological University (DTU) 
and Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences & Research University (DPSRU) for detailed 
audit covering the period from April 2018 to March 2023. DTU and DPSRU are 
primarily technical institutions, while GGSIPU offers a broader range of general 
courses. The academic activities of these Universities are governed by the 
Guidelines, Regulations and Circulars issued by the University Grants 
Commission (UGC), the All-India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and 
other regulatory bodies in the higher/technical education sector.   
Why was this audit undertaken? 
 
This Performance Audit (PA) on Functioning of Universities under Government 
of NCT of Delhi was taken up on the request of Department of Higher Education 
(DHE) and Department of Training and Technical Education (DTTE) under the 
Government of NCT of Delhi.  
The main objectives of the audit were to ascertain whether: (i) the GNCTD and 
the selected Universities planned and executed their academic functions 
effectively to ensure quality education; (ii)  creation and development of human 
resources and infrastructure facilities were adequate and as per norms;  (iii) the 
financial management of the selected Universities was efficient and effective; and 
(iv) the internal control mechanism was adequate and effective. 
 
What we found?  
We noted several issues in the field of Academic and Administrative matters, 
Accreditation of U niversities and the Affiliation Process , Human Resource 
Management, Infrastructure facilities , Financial Management and Internal 
controls. 
Both DHE and DTTE had Citizens Charters and vision/mission statements. As 
per these documents, DHE was to promote the cause of higher education and to 
prepare comprehensive policy for higher education whereas DTTE was to provide 
trained technical manpower for the technological up -gradation of industrial 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
vi 
production, services, productivity and innovation. Audit observed that neither 
DHE nor DTTE had formulated comprehensive policies to fulfil their 
visions/missions. Thus, there was an absence of systematic and well -defined 
policies to promote higher and technical education in Delhi. 
Audit noticed delay in revision of policy guidelines and constitution of Admission 
Regulatory Committee (ARC) and State Fee Regulat ory Committee by the 
GNCTD. Policy guidelines were effective till the year 2018 -19. But these were 
not revised till 2022 -23. Admission Regulatory Committee  was formed with 
delay of 16 years, in April 2023. 
There were no long term or short term plans in the sampled Universities for 
achieving the goals stated in their respective vision documents.  DTU, however, 
prepared its first vision document called ‘Strategic Plan 2019 -30’ in 2019, it 
contained only long -term goals to be achieved by 2030 and there were no 
medium-term or annual plans aimed at achieving the objectives of the Strategic 
Plan. We also noticed that the three sampled Universities and affiliated colleges 
functioned for three to six years without mandatory NAAC/NBA accreditation as 
required under UGC and AICTE Regulations.  GGSIPU lacked both NAAC and 
NBA accreditation from 2018 to 2023. DTU functioned without NAAC 
accreditation between 2015 and 2019, and without NBA accreditation from 2018 
to 2023. DPSRU did not have either NAAC or NBA accreditation for the period 
of 2020 to 2023. 
The process of affiliation through Joint Assessment Committee (JAC) inspection 
mechanism to ensure availability of required physical and academic infrastructure 
in affiliated colleges was found inadequate, as there were cases of favourable 
grading by JAC, non-compliance of recommendations of JAC reports, inadequate 
student-teacher ratio , appointment of faculty with lower than prescribed 
qualification and absence of facility for persons with disabilities in sampled 
affiliated colleges. There were also delays at every stage of the annual affiliation 
process.  
Audit noted that all the three Universities suffered from shortage of classrooms, 
inadequate infrastructure, non -utilisation of available infrastructure and 
equipment etc. Deficit in seating capacity against enrolled students was 
26 per cent at Dwarka Campus of GGSIPU , 41 per cent at Rohini Campus of 
DTU and 59 per cent at DPSRU. DPSRU had seating capacity of only 1,157 for 
enrolled 2,800 students. This would have adversely affected quality of education. 
Delays in remittance of funds, instituting scheme for financial ass istance to 
meritorious students and  release of scholarship and avoidable tax liability of 
₹ 25.59 crore under Delhi Higher Education Scholarship Fund (DHESF) and 
Delhi Knowledge Development Foundation (DKDF) were also noted.  
 

Executive Summary 
vii 
There was acute shortage of teaching staff during 2018 -23 ranging from 
38.77 per cent to 44.84 per cent in GGSIPU, 21.77 per cent to 54.43 per cent in 
DPSRU and 55 per cent  to 60 per cent  in DTU. Three -fourth posts of the 
Professors and Associate Professors in DTU remained vacant during the audit 
period 2018 -23.  Similar shortages were also observed in non -teaching and 
technical staff in these Universities. 
Crucial administrative posts like Registrar, Controller of Finance, Controller of 
Examination in GGSIPU and those of Vice Chancellor, Pro -Vice Chancellor, 
Registrar, Controller of Finance in DTU were held either as additional charge or 
officiating basis by retired Government servants hired as consultants in the 
absence of regular incumbents . We also observed delay in recruitment, 
recruitment without sanctioned posts and engagement of ineligible persons. 
The Board of Management of GGSIPU approved (August 2021) creation of 144 
teaching posts and 168 non-teaching posts and filling up 50 per cent total teaching 
posts in first two years i.e. 2021-23.  Despite the shortage of staff faced by them, 
the University made recruitment to only 32 posts of Assistance Professors in 
October 2022 and took no action for recruitment to the remaining sanctioned 
posts as of December 2023. Further, DTU could recruit o nly 51 Assistant 
Professors against 167 vacancies in various d isciplines advertised in July 2019 
whereas no recruitment was made against another 87 vacancies of Assistant 
Professors advertised in the same month.  In fact, the recruitment process took 
16 months to complete (November 2020) against the time of six months 
prescribed by UGC.  DTU also did not take any action for recruitment of 
Professors and Associate Professors despite facing severe shortage in these cadres 
as of March 2023.   
UGC recommended (January 2017) that the curricula of all academic departments 
in universities should be reviewed and revised at least once every three years 
focusing on skill sets to make the students employable. Audit observed that out 
of 62 programs in the U niversity Schools of GGSIPU, syllabi of six curricula 
were not revised in the last three to five years, and three curricula in the last five to 
11 years. Similarly, the syllabus of 51 out of total 109 programs (i.e. 47 per cent 
of the courses) offered by a ffiliated colleges of the University were not revised 
by the Board of Schools of Studies of GGSIPU.  
As per guidelines for Student s’ Entitlement issued by UGC, “t he students are 
entitled to timely conduct of examination and declaration of results as specified 
in the academic calendar in the Prospectus”. Audit observed that GGSIPU did not 
have any specific schedule for declaration of results  and during 2018 -22 (for 
which information was provided by the University), GGSIPU declared results of 
368 examinations out of which results of 199 examinations i.e. 54 percent of the 
results were declared with delays. In three cases in 2019 -20, the delay was up to 
eight months. Similarly, in DPSRU, no timelines were fixed for the declaration 
of results.  The number of days taken for declaration of results ranged beyond 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
viii 
200 days during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20, although it significantly reduced to 
34 days in 2022-23.    
In compliance of the UGC guidelines of March 2022 for the establishment of 
“Research and Development Cell” in Higher E ducation Institutions (HEIs) for 
promoting quality research, aligned with the provisions of NEP -2020, the 
GGSIPU renamed its Directorate of Research and Consultancy (DRC) as 
“Research and Development Cell” (RDC) and constituted (November 2022) four 
committees/Council to strengthen the existing research activities across various 
departments and faculties. Audit noted that the Research Council did not hold any 
meeting, and the Product Development, Monitoring and Commercialization 
Committees held only one meeting in November 2022.  None of the four 
committees/Council submitted any research activity reports to the Vice 
Chancellor. 
Government of India launched (October 2013) Rashtriya Uchchtar Shiksha 
Abhiyan (RUSA), a centrally sponsored scheme, for improving access, equity and 
quality in higher education. The Scheme was to be implemented with equal 
contribution from the Centre and the State.  Audit observed that DHE, GNCTD 
received funds of ₹ 3.04 crore (₹  1.52 crore from GoI in September 2015 and 
₹1.52 crore from GNCTD in April 2016) for the same. However, the Scheme was 
not implemented and the funds were lying unutilized with DHE as of March 2024 
as the required Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Government 
of India and GNCTD was not signed. 
DHE also launched a scheme named “Delhi Higher Education & Skill 
Development Guarantee Scheme” in 2015-16 to provide a guarantee to banks for 
loans taken by students of Delhi for pursuing higher education in Delhi. Audit 
noticed that the number of applicants and beneficiaries consistently decreased 
during 2017-23 and it stood at nine in 2021 -22 and only two in 2022 -23. There 
was nothing on record to show that DHE reviewed the Scheme to ascertain the 
reasons for the decline so as to increase its reach amongst the students and fructify 
the purpose of the scheme.  
In March 2008, DTTE established the Delhi Knowledge Development 
Foundation (DKDF) as a society to work as a think tank dedicated to knowledge, 
to capture and disseminate new approaches for governance of higher and 
technical education. DKDF  released grants amounting to ₹ 43.76 crore to six 
Universities during 2020 -22 for the execution of eight projects relating to the 
creation of a Centre of Excellence. However, it was observed that the Universities 
had neither submitted the progress of the projects nor Utilisation Certificate. 
On the directions (May 2021) of the Deputy Chief Minister, GGSIPU designed 
(June 2021) a two -week New Certificate Training Course for preparing 5000 
Health Assistants given the COVID -19 pandemic and proposed utilization of 
₹ 5 crore lying with the GGSIPU for remittance to DHEAT. As of October 2023, 

Executive Summary 
ix 
GGSIPU had made a  payment of ₹ 2.44 crore for the certificate course, leaving 
an unspent balance of ₹ 2.56 crore with GGSIPU. Thus, Utilization of funds, 
meant for financial assistance to meritorious students from weaker sections of 
society, for the other purpose i.e. conducting the above course was irregular.  
Audit noticed under-utilisation of the intake capacity of students in all the three 
universities selected for detailed audit. In GGSIPU, the under -utilisation of 
available seats ranged from 14 to 32 percent during 2018 -23. The unfilled seats 
especially in 10 programs were significant and ranged up to 100 per cent. Two 
Institutions affiliated to GGSIPU surrendered (January 2023) their affiliation with 
the University and opted for affiliation with another University, as student intake 
in the B. Tech and B. Arch programs run by them had been decreasing every year. 
In DTU, vacant seats in UG programs ranged from eight to 10 per cent during 
2018-23 and in PG programs ranged from 17 to 32 per cent.  In DPSRU, the 
overall percentage of vacant seats during 2018-23 ranged from 11 to 24 per cent 
whereas in nine programs of the University Schools , the vacancy percentage 
ranged from 42 per cent to 100 per cent. 
Audit examined financial aspects of the selected three Universities and found that 
investment of Contributory Provident Funds by G GSIPU was not in accordance 
with the pattern of investment specified by the Government, with delay in 
investment of surplus funds leading to loss of potential interest. Most of the 
sampled self-financed colleges have not implemented the recommendations of 
7th Central Pay Commission.   
We noticed that the Internal Quality Assurance Cells of sampled Universities did 
not meet at prescribed intervals and conduct of Academic and Administrative 
Audits and their follow up, to identify and address weaknesses in various 
processes and procedures, was inadequate. 
 
What we recommend? 
The Government may: 
• formulate comprehensive policies on higher and technical education in  
Delhi, aligned with the vision of the government. 
The Universities may: 
•  prepare long-term and annual plans to achieve the objectives stated in 
their vision documents and review them periodically to assess the level of 
achievement. 
• fix timelines for obtaining NAAC/NBA accreditation for the programs 
under them, strengthen the mechanism for granting affiliation and fix 
timeline for notification of fees. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
x 
• undertake regular revision of the syllabi to align with new 
developments/industry needs and timely declaration of results/award of 
degrees. 
• formulate road map for instituting consultancy/research projects aligned 
with the requirements of the society and industries. 
• complete recruitment process of teaching, non -teaching, technical and 
administrative staff in a time bound manner by filling up critical post 
identified on priority.   
• fix points of responsibility for coordination & monitoring in creation of 
infrastructure, such as classrooms and hostels for students, and timely 
utilization of assets created.  
• conduct Academic and Administrative Audits regularly to mitigate 
weaknesses in various processes and procedures. 
                                             
******* 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 1 
Introduction 

1 
Chapter 1 
 
Introduction 
In Delhi, higher education is administered by the Higher Education Department 
(HED) through Directorate of Higher Education (DHE) and technical education by 
the Training and Technical Education Department (TTED) through the Directorate 
of Training and Technical Education (DTTE).   While DHE is responsible for 
promoting higher education through formulating and implementing a 
comprehensive policy for higher education and opening new colleges in Delhi, 
DTTE was set up to promote world class technical and vocational education, 
industry relevant research and development etc.  They also provide grants-in-aid to 
the universities functioning under them.  Out of total 11 Universities of Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi ( GNCTD) existing as of March 2023, five 
Universities1 offer General/Non-technical courses function under DHE and t he 
remaining six Universities2 offer technical courses function under DTTE.  Out of 
these, two universities viz. Delhi Sports University and Delhi Teachers’ University 
were yet to start their academic activities as of December 2023.  Guru Gobind Singh 
Indraprastha University (GGSIPU) has been entrusted with the function of granting 
affiliation to colleges imparting higher education as well as technical education. 
1.1 Organisational structure 
The DHE  and the DTTE are both  headed by Director s who function under the 
overall supervision of the Secretary ( HED/TTED).  The Director of Higher 
Education is assisted by Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Deputy Controller 
of Accounts, Administrative Officers and Statistical officers , whereas the Director 
of Training and Technical Education is assisted by the Additional Director, 
Controller of the Board of Technical Education, Joint Director, Dy. Directors, 
Registrar, Deputy Controller of Accounts and System Analyst .  The Lieutenant 
Governor of the NCT of Delhi is the Chancellor of all universities.  Administration 
of the universities is vested with the Vice -Chancellors concerned, assisted by the 
Registrar and heads of various Academic and Non -Academic departments of the 
University. 
1.2 Audit Objectives 
The main objectives of the performance audit were to ascertain whether: 
• The Government and the selected Universities planned and executed their 
academic functions effectively to ensure quality education; 
 
1  Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University (GGSIPU), Ambedkar University Delhi (AUD), 
National Law University (NLU), Delhi Sports University (DSU) and Delhi Teachers’ University 
(DTeU) 
2  Delhi Technological University (DTU), Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women 
(IGDTUW), Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi (IIITD), Netaji Subhas 
University of Technology (NSUT), Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research Uni versity 
(DPSRU) and Delhi Skill and Entrepreneurship University (DSEU) 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
2 
• The financial management of the selected Universities was efficient and 
effective;  
• creation and development of human resources and infrastructure facilities 
were adequate and as per norms; and 
• The internal control mechanism was adequate and effective. 
1.3 Audit Criteria 
The performance of the Government and selected Universities in respect of the 
above objectives was benchmarked against the following audit criteria: 
• The Universities’ Acts and Statutes & Ordinances made thereunder; 
• Delhi Professional Colleges and Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee, 
Regulation of admission, Fixation of non -exploitative fee and other 
measures to ensure quality and excellence) Act and Rules 2007 
• Guidelines and Regulations issued by various regulatory authorities like 
University Grants Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE), National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC), National Board of Accreditation (NBA), Bar Council of India and 
Pharmacy Council of India (PCI); 
• National Education Policy, 2020; 
• Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995; 
• Orders/Policy guidelines issued by the DHE and DTTE; 
• General Financial Rules and Orders issued by the Finance Department, 
GNCTD; 
• Central Public Works Department (CPWD) Manual. 
1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit on “Functioning of Universities of GNCTD” covered the 
period from April 2018 to March 2023.  The audit was conducted through scrutiny 
of records of DHE and DTTE , three3 Universities selected on a judgmental basis 
and 14 affiliated colleges of GGSIPU selected through statistical random selection 
using IDEA software (Annexure 1.1).   
An Entry Conference was held with the  Secretary and Director, Higher Education 
and Training & Technical Education Departments, GNCTD and the Registrars of 
DTU and DPSRU and representatives of GGSIPU on 9 May 2023 wherein the  
scope, objectives, criteria and methodology of audit including selection of samples 
were discussed.  The exit conference was held with Secretary and Director, Higher 
Education and Training & Technical Education Departments, GNCTD and the 
 
3  1. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University  2. Delhi Technological University  and 3. Delhi 
Pharmaceutical Sciences & Research University. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
3 
Registrars of DTU and DPSRU and Vice Chancellor of GGSIPU on 10 March 2025 
to discuss audit findings and recommendations.  The views expressed by the 
Departments in the exit conference and replies subsequently received have been 
incorporated suitably in the report. 
1.5 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Directorate of Higher 
Education, Directorate of Training and Technical  Education and by the three 
selected Universities in conducting the Performance Audit. 
1.6 Audit Findings 
The audit findings are grouped under the following chapters: 
Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues  
Chapter 3:  Accreditation of Universities and the Affiliation Process 
Chapter 4: Financial Management, Human Resource Management and           
Infrastructure facilities  
Chapter 5: Internal control  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 2 
Administrative and 
Academic Issues 

5 
Chapter 2  
 
Administrative and Academic Issues 
 
• Absence of systematic and well -defined policies to promote higher and 
technical education in Delhi. 
• Arrears in laying of Annual Reports and audited Annual Accounts in 
respect of eight Universities in the Legislative Assembly. 
• Failure of DHE and DTTE to avail funds from the Government of India 
for improving financing of higher and technical education facilities in 
Delhi. 
• Deficiencies in the management of Delhi Higher E ducation Scholarship 
Fund (DHESF) and Delhi Knowledge Development Foundation (DKDF) 
such as delay in remittance of funds, delay in instituting scheme for 
financial assistance to meritorious students, delay in release of 
scholarship and avoidable tax liability of ₹ 25.59 crore due to 
sub-optimal utilisation of receipts into these Funds. 
• Non-functional Planning Boards in the sampled Universities, responsible 
for preparation of long -term and short-term plans and reviewing them 
periodically 
• Non revision of syllabi of courses regularly  by the selected Universities 
and their affiliated colleges as per new development/industry needs. Also 
delays in declaration of results of various examinations and issuing 
degrees to students. 
Three Universities viz . Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University (GGSIPU), 
Delhi Technological University (DTU) and Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences & 
Research University (DPSRU)  were selected on a  judgmental basis for a  detailed 
audit. All three universities were established through Acts of the Delhi Legislature 
viz GGSIPU in July 1998, DTU in July 2009 and DPSRU in 20081. The academic 
activities of these Universities are governed by the Guidelines, Regulations  and 
Circulars issued by the University Grants Commission (UGC), the All -India 
Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and other regulatory bodies in the 
higher/technical education sector.   
The organizational setup of the sampled universities is as given in Chart 2.1. 
 
1  It was functioning as Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research (DIPSAR)  till 
August 2015. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
6 
 
Chart 2.1: Organisational setup of Universities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GGSIPU functions under the administrative control of DHE . The university has  
14 University Schools of Studies (USS) , two University Centres (UC)  
(Annexure 2.1) with a strength of more than 5,600 students. 
DTU functions under the administrative control of DTTE.  The University has 
14 Academic Departments and two University Schools (Annexure 2.2) for teaching 
and research, with a strength of about 15,000 students.   
DPSRU, functioning under DTTE, has one constituent college i.e. Delhi Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Science and Research (DIPSAR), three internal schools2 and the 
Academy of Sports Sciences and Research Management (ASSRM).  For the 
Academic Session 2022 -23, the  University had a strength of  2800 students/  
scholars. 
2.1 Administrative Planning and Oversight by DHE and DTTE 
DHE was set up in 1997 to promote higher education and prepare a comprehensive 
policy for Higher Education, opening new colleges in various localities of Delhi, 
releasing grants-in-aid to colleges, etc. As stated on DHE’s website, its vision is to 
ensure that no student of Delhi leaves the city to pursue higher education in other 
states due to the non-availability of seats in the preferred course in Delhi.  Similarly, 
DTTE was set up to promote World -class technical and vocational education, 
industry-relevant Research & Development, nurture innovative skills and creative 
abilities of students and faculty, etc. The vision of DTTE is to become the global 
leader in Higher, Technical  and Vocational Education by promoting all the 
universities and institutes to be premier multi-disciplinary educational institutions.   
 
2  School of Pharmaceutical Science (SPS), School of Physiotherapy (SPH) and School of Allied 
Health Sciences and Management (SAHSM) 
Lieutenant Governor 
as Chancellor   
Vice-chancellor 
Deans/Directors/ 
HoDs of School/ 
Academic Department   
Registrar Controller/ 
Assistant Controller 
of Examination  
Controller 
of Finance 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
7 
Year-wise details of the expenditure of DHE and DTTE against the allocated budget 
during the years 2018-23 were as given in Chart 2.2 and Chart 2.3 respectively. 
 
 
 
 
Source: Annual reconciliation statements of DHE and DTTE 
A major portion of the expenditure of DHE was on Grant-in-aid t o Universities 
(26 per cent) and to the degree colleges a ffiliated with Delhi University 
(71 per cent).  In the case of DTTE, Grant-in-aid to Universities constitut ed 
67 per cent of the expenditure and expendit ure on Industrial Training Inst itutes, 
Polytechnics and World Class Skill Centres constituted 28 per cent.  The manifold 
increase in expenditure of DTTE in 2021-22 coincided with the e stablishment of 
Delhi Skill and Entrepreneurship University and the increase in expenditure on the 
construction of World Class Skill Centres. 
355 369 379
506 528
346 363 328
474 500
9 6
51
32
28
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Chart 2.2: Budget estimates, expenditure and savings of 
DHE 
(₹ in crore)
Budget Estimate Actual Expenditure Savings
196 181 169
1163
521
178 160 124
851
44519 21 45
312
76
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Chart 2.3: Budget estimates, expenditure and savings of 
DTTE 
(₹ in crore)
Budget Estimate Actual Expenditure Savings

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
8 
2.1.1 Planning and legislative follow-up 
Issues noticed in the Audit regarding the planning and governance of Higher and 
Technical Education in the GNCTD are detailed in the following paragraphs: 
(i) Absence of comprehensive policies at the Government level 
Both DHE and DTTE had Citizens Charters and vision/mission statements. As per 
these documents, DHE was to promote the cause of higher education and to prepare 
comprehensive policy for higher education whereas DTTE was to provide trained 
technical manpower for the technological up -gradation of industrial production, 
services, productivity and innovation. Audit observed that neither DHE nor DTTE 
had formulated comprehensive policies to fulfil their visions/missions. Thus, there 
was a n absence of system atic and well -defined policies to promote higher and 
technical education in Delhi. 
In the exit conference , held on 10 March 2025, the Secretary (HED/TTED) 
acknowledged the absence of systematic and well -defined policies to promote 
higher and technical education in Delhi. She assured that an effort will be made to 
lay down a concrete policy. 
(ii) Arrears in laying of annual reports and annual audited accounts before 
the Legislative Assembly  
As per the provisions of the Acts under which the Universities were established, 
Annual Reports and audited Annual accounts of 10 Universities (National Law 
University had no such requirement), as submitted to the Chancellor, were to be 
submitted to the Government for laying before the Legislative Assembly of Delhi, 
by the administrative department concerned.   
The University-wise status of laying of Annual Report and Annual accounts by 
DHE/DTTE before the Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi in respect of eight3 
functional Universities was as in Table 2.1. 
 
3  Two Universities (Delhi Sports University and Delhi Teachers’ University) were yet to start 
functioning and in case of National Law University, the Act does not require laying of Annual 
Accounts/Reports before the Legislature. 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
9 
Table 2.1: University-wise status of laying of annual report and annual 
audited accounts 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the University Year up to which 
Annual Report has 
been laid before the 
State Legislature 
Year up to which Annual 
Accounts with audited 
report have been laid 
before the State 
Legislature 
1. Guru Gobind Singh University 2021-22 2020-21 
2. Ambedkar University Delhi 2019-20 2020-21 
3. Delhi Technological 
University 
2021-22 2018-19 
4. Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical 
University for Women 
2021-22 2017-18 
5. Netaji Subhas University of 
Technology 
2017-18 2017-18 
6. Indraprastha Institute of 
Information Technology 
2022-23 2020-21 
7. Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences 
and Research University 
2015-16 to 2021-22 
submitted to DTTE, 
but yet to be tabled. 
Yet to be tabled. 
8. Delhi Skill and 
Entrepreneurship University 
Yet to be tabled. Yet to be tabled. 
Source: Information furnished by DHE and DTTE 
As can be seen from the table above, both the Annual Reports and the Annual 
Accounts were pending tabling for two to five years, in the Legislative Assembly 
of NCT of Delhi for all eight universities. 
Thus, apart from not formulating a policy for improving higher and technical 
education in Delhi, the Government also  did not apprise the Legislature of the 
activities and achievements of the Universities through the laying of annual 
accounts/reports before it.  
Recommendation 1: The Government should formulate comprehensive policies 
on higher and technical education in Delhi, aligned with the vision of the 
government. 
2.1.2 Funding for Higher Education  
The achievement of goals set by the DHE/DTTE for improving the scope and 
quality of higher education is directly linked to the quantum of resources made 
available for various identified activities as well as the quality of management  of 
these resources by the involved entities. Audit noticed the following regarding the 
availability and utilisation of funds for higher education during the period under 
review - 
(i) Declining demand from students for financial support  
In 2015 -16, DHE launched a scheme named “ Delhi Higher Education & Skill 
Development Guarantee Scheme” to provide a guarantee to banks for loans taken 
by students of Delhi for pursuing higher education in Delhi. In this regard, a Trust 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
10 
(Delhi Higher Education and Skill Development Credit Guarantee Fund Trust) was 
established in August 2015 and ₹ 15 crore was released to the Trust during 2015-18. 
Audit observed that the  number of applicants and beneficiaries consistently 
decreased during 2017-23 as shown in Table 2.2.  
Table 2.2:  Year-wise applicants and beneficiaries under the scheme 
Year Number of 
applicants 
Number of beneficiaries Percentage of beneficiaries 
to total applicants 
2017-18 177 50 28.25 
2018-19 139 44 31.65 
2019-20 146 23 15.75 
2020-21 106 17 16.04 
2021-22 89 9 10.11 
2022-23 56 2 3.57 
The percentage of successful applicants also decreased during these years.  Reasons 
for rejection of applications stated by Banks were (i) applicants had already taken 
a loan under some other scheme, (ii) lack of response from applicants, and 
(iii) incomplete documents or eligibility for less amount of loan. In spite of such 
decline in demand for assistance under the scheme and the number of beneficiaries 
which stood at nine and two in 2021-22 and 2022-23 respectively, there was nothing 
on record to show that DHE reviewed the Scheme to ascertain the reasons for the 
decline so as to increase its reach amongst the students. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that it will review the scheme and make efforts 
for its implementation. 
(ii)  Failure to obtain/utilize Government of India (GoI) funds 
a) GoI launched (October 2013) Rashtriya Uchchtar Shiksha Abhiyan 
(RUSA), a centrally sponsored scheme, for improving access, equity  and 
quality in higher education through creating new academic institutions, 
expanding and upgrading the existing ones, developing self -reliant 
institutions, etc. The Scheme was to be implemented with equal contribution 
from the Centre and the State.  Audit observed that DHE received funds of 
₹ 303 lakhs (₹ 151.50 lakhs from GoI in September 2015 and ₹ 151.50 lakh 
from GNCTD in Ap ril 2016) for the same. However, the Scheme was not 
implemented as the required Memorandum of Understanding  (MoU) 
between the Government of India and GNCTD was not signed.  Thus, the 
funds were lying unutilized with DHE as of March 2024. Further, GNCTD 
could not obtain the remaining funds amounting to ₹ 208.50 lakh from GoI.  
GoI also launched RUSA 2.0 in April 2018 for providing financial 
assistance under various components with a funding ratio between the 
Centre and Delhi of 60:40, which too could not be implemented. 
Failure of the Government in signing the MoU for implementing the 
Scheme in Delhi deprived higher education institutions in Delhi from 
getting central funds for expanding and upgrading their facilities. 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
11 
In the exit conference, Director (DHE/DTTE) informed that after flagging 
of the discrepancies by Audit , the Department had initiated the file  for 
signing of MoU with the Government of India for better receipt and 
utilisation of funds under Rashtriya Uchchtar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA). 
b) The Government of India proposed (November 2017) to provide 
reimbursement of 50 per  cent of the additional expenditure/arrears 
payment involved in the implementation of recommendations of 
the Seventh Central Pay Commission to the universities, colleges and other 
higher educational institutions funded by the State Government for the 
period from 1 January 2016 to 31 March 2019.  Audit observed that DHE 
and DTTE failed to ascertain the amount payable/paid to staff of the 
Universities under their administrative control on account of the arrears of 
pay on implementation of the recommendations o f the  Seventh Pay 
Commission nor did they submit any claim to the Government of India for 
reimbursement.  Resultantly, the expenditure on payment of arrears of pay 
for January 2016 to March 2019 was borne by the Universit y in case of 
GGSIPU and by the Government in respect of other Universities. 
Thus, the Government did not take adequate action to avail funding available to 
Delhi under various central schemes for strengthening and improving higher 
education and technical education in Delhi. 
 (iii)   Management of Delhi Higher Education Scholarship Fund and Delhi 
Knowledge Development Foundation  
In terms of Section 15 of the Act of 2007, DHE created the Delhi Higher Education 
Scholarship Fund (DHESF) in April 2008 to provide scholarships to students from 
socially and economically weaker sections (EWS) of the society and established 
(October 2008) the Delhi Higher Education Aid Trust (DHEAT) for managing the 
Fund.  As stated in the Additional Policy Guidelines of the scheme issued by DHE 
in June 2007, the scholarship was proposed to be funded out of 25  per cent of the 
fees collected from students enrolled in the evening shift of self-financed affiliated 
colleges having a permanent campus.  GGSIPU was to collect this amount from the 
colleges and remit the same to DHEAT.   
Further, in March 2008, DTTE established the Delhi Knowledge Development 
Foundation (DKDF) as a society under the Societies Registration Act 1860 to work 
as a think tank dedicated to knowledge, to capture and disseminate new approaches 
for governance of higher and technical education and also for providing scholarship 
to EWS students pursuing higher and technical education.  Funds collected by 
GGSIPU from institutions imparting technical education were to be remitted (from 
April 2009) to this Society. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
12 
Till 2022-23, GGSIPU collected and transferred ₹ 134.33 crore 4 to DHEAT and 
₹ 117.02 crore to DKDF, from self-financed institutions. Under the Scheme, 23,753 
EWS students were assisted during 2018-23. 
Deficiencies observed in the management of Delhi Higher Education Scholarship 
Fund and Delhi Knowledge Development Foundation are as under: 
a) Delay in remittance of funds: Audit observed delays in the transfer of 
funds collected by GGSIPU. DHEAT and DKDF received funds for 
Academic Sessions 2017-22 with delays ranging from 12 to 20 months from 
the start of the academic session. It was also observed that as of 
October 2023, funds of ₹13.01 crore were yet to be paid by 26 self-financed 
affiliated colleges to GGSIPU for onward transfer to DHEAT and DKDF. 
These delays had a cascading effect on timely release of funds for the 
mandated activities. 
b) Delay in instituting scheme for financial assistance to meritorious EWS 
students:  Though Fund collection as per DHE guidelines for providing 
scholarships to EWS students started in 2007-08, a scheme for scholarships 
to students was instituted only from Academic Session 2017 -18 i.e. after 
10 years when DHEAT/DHE introduced a Merit -cum-Means (MCM) 
financial assistance scheme.  Under the scheme, the tuition fee of 
meritorious Undergraduate students from Economically Weaker Sections 
(EWS) is reimbursed. Thus, despite having funds, the scheme was 
formulated only after 10 years of establishing the Trust.  
c) Avoidable Tax liability due to non -compliance to stated 
objectives: DHEAT and DKDF were registered for Income Tax exemption 
under Section 12A of the Income Tax Act. The exemption is subject to the 
condition that they spend 85  per cent of receipts every year on the stated 
objectives of the Society.  As no scheme had been formulated to achieve the 
objectives of the Societies, there was no expenditure till 2016 -17 by 
DHEAT and till 2019 -20 by DKDF .  Resultantly, DHEAT accumulated 
Income Tax liability of ₹ 12.73 crore as of December 2023 , apart from tax 
deducted at source of ₹ 1.36 crore during 2018-22.  Similarly, DKDF paid 
an income tax of ₹ 10.04 crore for 2018 -23 and created an Income Tax 
liability of ₹ 1.46 crore for 2019-20. Thus, DHEAT and DKDF accumulated 
avoidable tax liability of ₹ 25.59 crore. 
d) Delay in release of scholarship: Audit observed a  delay in payment of 
scholarship under MCM Scheme by DHE/DHEAT during 2018-22 and 
payment for the year 2022-23 was yet to be initiated. The delay ranged from 
 
4  ₹ 134.33 crore = ( ₹ 59.36 crore remitted by GGSIPU for the period 2007 -17 (DHEAT kept 
accumulating these funds with zero utilisation) plus ₹ 74.97 crore remitted by GGSIPU  for 
2017-22). 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
13 
four to 10 months thereby depriving needy meritorious students of timely 
monetary assistance, defeating the purpose of the scheme.   
(e) Diversion of funds: On the directions (May 2021) of the Deputy Chief 
Minister, GGSIPU designed (June 2021) a two -week New Certificate 
Training Course for preparing 5000 Health Assistants given the COVID-19 
pandemic and proposed utilization of ₹ 5 crore lying with the GGSIPU for 
remittance to DHEAT.  This was approved by then Dy. Chief Minister.  As 
of October 2023, GGSIPU had made a  payment of ₹ 2.44 crore for the 
certificate course, leaving an unspent balance of ₹ 2.56 crore with GGSIPU. 
Utilization of funds meant for financial assistance to meritorious students 
from weaker sections of society for conducting the above course was 
irregular. In its reply, the Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU 
submitted the utilisation certificate for ₹ 2.44 crore and refunded the unspent 
balance of ₹ 2.56 crore in March 2024. However, though the funds were 
expended as per government directions during the COVID pandemic, the y 
were used for activities not covered under the scheme. 
(f) Poor financial management:  DKDF released grants amounting  to 
₹ 43.76 crore to six Universities during 2020 -22 for execution of eight 
projects relating to the creation of a Centre of Excellence. However, it was 
observed that the Universities had neither submitted  the progress of the 
projects nor Utilisation Certificate as per prescribed schedule.  They were 
allowed to retain interest of ₹  2.03 crore earned on the amount of grants 
received in violation of Rule 230 (8) of General Financial Rules 2017. After 
being pointed out in the audit, three universities viz Delhi Technological 
University, Indira Gandhi Technical University for Women , and 
Indraprastha Institute of Technology Delhi deposited the amount of interest 
of ₹ 1.85 crore. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DKDF has issued direction s for 
submission of the quarterly progress report and annual utilisation certificate s, 
including interest earned on the released funds.  However, DKDF was yet to ensure 
recovery of interest on released funds from the remaining three universities , along 
with an updated position on fund utilization. 
2.2 Administrative Issues at Universities  
 
2.2.1 Deficiencies in planning for academic and infrastructure development 
Besides the government level, there was lacuna in planning for higher education 
even by the sampled Universities. Effective planning is essential for a university to 
manage its financial and human resources to support academic activities.  Clause 
12.3 of the National Education Policy 2020 envisages the integration of academic 
plans ranging from curricular improvement to quality of classroom transaction with 
its larger Institutional Development Plan.  Audit observed a total lack of planning 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
14 
on the part of all the three Universities for academic and infrastructure development 
as discussed below.   
A) In GGSIPU, the Planning Board of the University is the principal planning 
body responsible for designing and formulating appropriate plans, monitoring the 
academic progress, infrastructural development etc.  However, the Planning Board 
was almost dysfunctional as the  last three meetin gs of the Board were held in 
October 2012, June 2022 and November 2022 against the prescribed two meetings 
every year.  Further, a vision document – Vision 2030, prepared in 2019 and 
approved in July 2020, appeared to be jus t a collection of several individual 
proposals without identifying the objectives and priorities of the University to be 
implemented in a time -bound manner.  Although a committee was constituted 
(July 2022) to prepare short-term (three years) and long-term (five years) strategic 
plans for the University as per National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, the progress 
made by the said committee was not available on record.  Another vision document, 
Vision-2047, prepared in 2022, was awaiting approval by the Planning Board and 
the Board of Management.  GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that the Committee 
formed for the preparation of the Strategic Plan (third plan document) as per NEP 
2020 has finalized the said docum ent and it will be placed before the Planning 
Board shortly for approval. 
B) In DTU (established in 2009), the Planning Board was constituted only in 
March 2018 which took another year to conduct the first meeting (April 2019).  
Thereafter also, only three more meetings were held till November 2023.  Although 
DTU prepared its first vision document called Strategic Plan 2019 -30 in 2019, it 
contained only long -term goals to be achieved by 2030 and there were no 
medium-term or annual plans aimed at achieving the objectives of the Strategic 
Plan.  DTU stated (March 2024) that it had prepared its first vision document in 
2019 based on data collected till 2019 and a concise version of Vision @ 2047 was 
approved (October 2022) by the Planning Board. The detailed vision document for 
2047 was stated to be under preparation. 
C) DPSRU, functional since August 20155, provided Vision Document 2030 but it 
was not clear when this was prepared and whether the said document was approved 
by the appropriate body/authority.  It did not provide records relating to any Annual 
Plans either, in the absence of which, progress made by the University could not be 
correlated to the items mentioned under short -term goals (for five years) of the 
Vision Document 2030. 
It was also observed that DPSRU had informed (January 2023) National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) that it had achieved the goals 
set out in the Vision Document 2030 by 2022 itself.  Audit, however, observed that 
it had not achieved even targets for the year 2020 by 2023 viz making functional 
 
5  Earlier it was functioning as Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research (DIPSAR) 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
15 
the School of Pharmaceutical Management, School of Hospital and 
Pharmacovigilance, and School of Interactive Medicine.  
Existence of a specific, action -oriented medium or long -term plan for making 
progress towards a set of institutional goals was also one key indicator in the Quality 
Indicator framework of National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).  
Therefore, such absence of proper plans would have had a negative impact on the 
Universities’ grading during accreditation. 
These three Universities (GGSIPU, DTU, DPSRU) had not prepared any long 
term/annual plans or actionable road maps for their future activities for achieving 
the goals set out in their respective Vision Documents. 
In the exit conference, Secretary (HED/TTED) accepted the fact of the absence of 
actionable roadmaps and periodic review mechanism to ensure the progress made 
as stated in vision document of all three universities and directed the officials of the 
universities to put in place a periodic review mechanism to ensure that vision 
objectives are achieved in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation 2:  The Universities should prepare long -term and annual 
plans to achieve the objectives stated in their vision documents and review 
them periodically to assess the level of achievement. 
2.2.2 Admission of Students  
Admission to the programs of studies in GGSIPU/its affiliated colleges and DTU 
are granted on the basis of National Level Tests such as Combined University 
Entrance Test (CUET), Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) Mains/National Aptitude Test 
of Architecture (NATA)/National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET)/ Common 
Admission Test (CAT)/ C ommon Law Admission Test (CLAT)  etc., or through 
Common Entrance Tests (CETs) conducted by GGSIPU or on merit of the 
qualifying degrees in the respective programs.  Admissions in DPSRU is based on 
performance in XII Board examinations.  
Audit observations on the admission of students in the Universities are discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.2.1 Shortfall in admissions against the sanctioned intake  
Audit observed under-utilisation of the intake capacity of students in all the three 
universities selected for detailed audit.   
(i) In GGSIPU, the underutilisation of available seats ranged from 14 to 32 per cent 
during the years under review.  Audit noticed that the unfilled seats especially in 
10 programs were significant (Annexure 2.3) and ranged up to 100 per cent .  
Institutions affiliated to GGSIPU constitute about 93 per cent of the total students 
under GGSIPU and in these institutions the percentage of vacant seats  during 
2018-23 ranged from 16 to 36 percent. It was also observed that two institutes 
surrendered (January 2023) the ir affiliation with the University and opted for 
affiliation with another University , as student intake in the B.  Tech and B. Arch 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
16 
programs run by them had been decreasing every year. Two institutes did not apply 
for continuation of affiliation, one from 2020 -21 and the other from 2023 -24, due 
to poor response of students to the programs. 
GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that the University was unable to fill up all the seats 
during the academic years 2018 -23 due to the presence of other competing 
universities providing wider choices to candidates. It was further stated that all out 
efforts would be made by the University to ensure that all seats are filled.   
Attributing vacant seats to a wider choice provided by competing universities does 
not address the fact that the candidates opt for courses based on employability/job 
opportunities after completing the courses , and if the course being offered ha s a 
curriculum that provides better industry-oriented education, there will be no dearth 
of candidates. 
(ii)  In DTU, vacant seats in UG programs ranged from eight to 10 per cent during 
2018-23 and in PG programs ranged from 17 to 32 per cent.   
In its reply, DTU stated that the dip in admissions in PG programs during 2018-23 
was due to the Covid pandemic and the fact that admissions in PG programs in DTU 
are made through various entrance examinations conducted by the National Testing 
Agency (NTA).  DTU has allowed admissions in M. Tech of Non-GATE candidates 
through the University entrance test for the Academic year 2023-24, and this should 
result in improved intake. 
(iii)  In DPSRU, the overall percentage of vacant seats during 2018-23 ranged from 
11 to 24 per cent whereas in nine programs6 of the University Schools the vacancy 
percentage ranged from 42 per cent to 100  per cent .  It was also observed that 
admissions in various programs in DPSRU were not based on entrance 
examinations, conducted either by NTA or by the University itself.   
In its reply, DPSRU stated that some reserved (SC/ST) seats remained vacant and 
could not be filled by general seats as per policy, and a few students withdrew their 
admission as they preferred admission in B. Pharma programs only.  It was further 
stated that it will shift admission criteria to an entrance examination-based one from 
the Academic session 2024-25.  
Besides being reflective of the popularity or otherwise of the University/Institution 
and the programs they offer, vacant seats have a direct impact on the revenue of the 
Universities and affiliated colleges.  However, audit did not observe any systemic 
efforts by the Universities/Institutions to ascertain the reasons for  the lack of 
response from the students and to address the same. 
 
6  1. BSc Sports Science, 2. MSc Sports Science, 3. MSc (Artificial Intelligence & Pharmaceutical 
Management), 4. Master in Physiotherapy, 5. M Pharma in Drug Regulatory Science, 6. BBA 
(child and Healthcare), 7. B. Pharma Ayurveda, 8. Medicine Management and 9. Beauty wellness 
and consultants. 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
17 
In the exit conference, the VC (GGSIPU) highlighted the limitation of the 
universities due to the reservation of 85 per cent of the seats for students from Delhi 
NCT which  hampers full seat utilisation.  The officers of all three universities 
assured that efforts would be made by them to fill the vacant seats.  
2.2.2.2 Lack of proper records related to student admissions  
To assess the catchment area of students applying for admissions in the sampled 
Universities of Delhi, Audit had requisitioned admission records to determine 
domicile, category etc. of students. GGSIPU did not provide the details/records of 
admission of students from Delhi and outside Delhi region; vacant reserved seats 
that were de -reserved and filled up; seats reserved for and filled by students of 
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in University Schools of Studies (USS); and 
vacant seats filled through Spot 7 counselling for the period under review.  In the 
absence of requisitioned details/records, Audit could not draw an assurance 
regarding the authenticity and fairness of procedure(s) followed and transparency 
in the admission process. 
In its reply, GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that the entire admission counselling 
process of the University is outsourced to National Informatics Centre (NIC) and 
NIC only provides data of total admitted students to the University, which does not 
include re gion-wise (Delhi and outside Delhi region) details of students, data 
regarding de-reservation of seats and their allocation and details of EWS seats.   
The reply is not acceptable since NIC is simply assisting the University in its online 
processes and would be bound to provide all the data desired by it. It is the 
responsibility of the University to maintain complete data on the whole admission 
process to ensure transparency, fairness in admissions and compliance to its policies 
on admission. 
The Department stated (March 2025) the University has taken up the matter with 
the NIC to provide complete data to the University on the whole admission process 
to ensure fair analysis of the admission policy. 
2.3 Academic Issues at the Universities 
 
2.3.1 Outdated Syllabi  
UGC recommended (January 2017) that the curricula of all academic departments 
in universities should be reviewed and revised at least once every three years 
focusing on skill sets to make the students employable.   
 
7  Spot counselling is conducted online after completion of the admission process, only for the 
purpose of filling up vacant seats. All conversions of categories are completed in the last round 
of online counselling and the spot counselling considers all seats to be filled as unreserved.  The 
vacant seats left after reporting/admission of candidates to University Schools of 
Studies/colleges/institutions only are considered for filling in the spot counselling.  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
18 
Audit observed that out of 62 programs in the University Schools of GGSIPU, 
syllabi of six curricula were not revised in the last three  to five years, and three 
curricula in the last five to 11 years (Annexure 2.4).  Similarly, the syllabi of 51 out 
of total 109 programs (i.e. 47 per cent of the courses) offered by affiliated colleges 
of the University were not revised by the Board of Schools of Studies of GGSIPU  
(44 during the last five to 16 years and seven during the last three to five years) 
(Annexure 2.5).   
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has already implemented the 
National Education Policy 2020 and revised the schemes and syllab i for all 
undergraduate and postgraduate programs.  Reply is not borne out by facts 
(Annexures 2.6 and 2.7 ) for University Schools and affiliated Colleges, where 
revisions of various courses were pending from three to 16 years. 
Similarly, in DTU, out of the total 35 Post Graduate (PG) programs, syllab i of 
18 programs (51 per cent) were not revised for more than three years.  DTU stated 
(March 2024) that it reviews and updates the scheme and curriculum for various PG 
programs as and when AICTE recommendations are received.  The Department 
stated (March 2025) that DTU revised the syllabus for PG programs in the year 
2019. 
In DPSRU, the syllabus of 13 out of the total 38 UG, PG, diploma and certificate 
programs (34 per cent of the total) offered by the University Schools were not 
revised (12 of them for more than five years) by the University.  
DPSRU, in its reply, stated that many courses run by it are regulated by National 
Regulatory Council (NRC) and a uniform syllabus is being run throughout the 
country.  However, it did not provide the list of programs regulated by NRC nor 
clarify whether the syllabus of the remaining  programs was revised. The 
Department stated (March 2025) that it acknowledges the need for the University 
to update the syllabus according to the industry demand in time-bound manner. 
Thus, there were delays  in the revision of Syllabi of the courses offered by the 
universities and the affiliated schools/colleges , impacting the topicality of the 
course content offered.  Non-revision/delay in the revision of programs/courses 
renders the education imparted outdated and irrelevant to the current demands of 
industries and society affecting the placement of students passing out. 
2.3.2 Examinations 
The Examination wings of the Universities are responsible for conducting the 
examinations, publication of results, and distributing degrees to successful students. 
The Controller/Assistant Controller of Examination s holds examinations for all 
such academic programs as are approved and notified for awarding of degree by the 
Academic Council, as per syllabi and scheme of teaching and examination approved 
by the Academic Council.  Students’ performance in examinations  is an indicator 
to the effectiveness of teaching and learning in any academic Institution.   

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
19 
During 2018-23, the overall pass percentages of final year students in University 
Schools of GGSIPU was 91  per cent  (ranging from 83  per cent  in 2022 -23 to 
97 per cent in 2019-20); however, in case of 42 programs of University Schools, 
pass percentage during 2018 -23 was 80 or less, affecting the overall performance 
of the University. In affiliated colleges, the overall pass percentage during 2018-23 
was 96 per cent (ranging from 88 per cent in 2022-23 to 98 per cent in 2019-20) 
for 135 programs whereas it was 80 or less in 45 programs.  In DTU, the percentage 
of final year students passing the examination ranged from 87 to 92 per cent during 
the years under review.  In DPSRU, the pass percentage in Master ’s/Doctorate 
programs was 100, and it remained above 90 in most of the other programs also. 
Audit observations regarding exams and related activities are as below.  
2.3.2.1 Delay in Declaration of Results 
As per guidelines for Students’ Entitlement issued by UGC, “The students are 
entitled to timely conduct of examination and declaration of results as specified in 
the academic calendar in the Prospectus”.  Delays in the declaration of results 
hinders academic planning for both the students and faculty, making it challenging 
to organize courses, assignments and other academic activities and adversely affects 
students planning to pursue further studies. 
GGSIPU did not have any specific schedule for declaration of results . In reply, it 
was stated (November 2023) that the result was declared within 45 days from the 
date of conduct of last examination.  Audit observed that during 2018-22 (for which 
information was provided by the University), GGSIPU declared results of 368 
examinations out of which results of 199 examinations i.e. 54 per cent of the results 
were declared with delays . In three cases in 2019 -20, the delay was  up to eight 
months.   
As per various regulations/SOP/academic calendar of DTU, an approximate period 
of 30 days has been provided for declaration of results from the date of holding of 
last examination. Audit observed that, during 2018-23, 22 out of 183 results were 
declared with delays ranging up to 110 days , beyond 45 days from the date of 
holding of the last examination. 
In DPSRU, no timelines were fixed for the declaration of results.  The number of 
days taken for declaration of results ranged beyond 200 days during 2018 -19 and 
2019-20, although it significantly reduced to 34 days in 2022 -23.  DPSRU stated 
that a specific timeline will be included in the ordinance of the University. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that in the case of GGSIPU there were some 
delays in the declaration of examination results in the previous years and results for 
academic session 2023 -24 were declared within the stipulated time period of 
45 days.  In case of DTU, the delays in declaration of results were attributed to the 
shifting of the process from the University’s IT system to the SAMARTH portal of 
the Government of India. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
20 
2.3.2.2 Delay in issuing degrees to students 
UGC regulations for Grant of Degrees and Other Awards 2008 provides that the 
Degree award date(s) shall be within 180 days of the date(s) of declaration of 
results.  Issuing degrees to successful students is a crucial element of the educational 
system and delays in issuing degrees can adversely affect the credibility and 
reputation of the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) and employment/higher 
education opportunities of the students. 
Audit observed that there were delays in issuing degrees by GGSIPU, ranging from 
eight days to seven months  in respect of 100 programs (61 per cent of total 163 
programs) and seven days to nine months in respect of 104 programs (64 per cent 
of total 163 programs) for which convocations were held in March 2022 and June 
2023 respectively.  In DPSRU, there were delays beyond the prescribed period of 
180 days from declaration of results, ranging from 25 to 716 days (nearly 2 years) 
during 2019-22 in issuing degrees of six programs8.   
In its reply, Department attributed (March 2025) the delay in issuing degrees in case 
of GGSIPU to delay in holding of convocation amidst outbreak of COVID-19 and 
informed that the University wa s in the process to device a system to conduct the 
convocation in time. Attributing delay in issue of degrees to outbreak of Covid-19 
is not acceptable as audit comment pertains to periods after Covid-19 (i.e. year 2022 
and 2023).  In case of DPSRU, the final degrees to the students are given during 
convocation and a provisional degree is issued immediately if any student so 
demands. Further, the BPT  (Bachelor of Physiotherapy)  students go for an 
internship after 8th semester, hence the degree is awarded to them in the succeeding 
year. 
Thus, breach of timelines for declaration of results of examinations and delay in 
issuing degrees to successful students placed undue hardship on these students 
pursuing a career or applying for higher education. 
Recommendation 3:  The Universities should undertake regular revision of the 
syllabi to align with new developments/industry needs and timely declaration 
of results/award of degrees. 
2.4 Research and Development, Patents, Consultancy and Collaboration  
with other HEIs 
The National Education Policy 2020, aims to transform India’s education system 
by 2030. It identified that lesser emphasis on research and a lack of funding for 
competitive peer -reviewed research across disciplines  were some of the main 
problems plaguing the higher education system in India. 
 
8  1. Bachelor of  Physiotherapy (BPT) -2019, 2. BPT -2020, 3. BPT -2021, 4. BPT -2022, 
5. D. Pharma-2018 and 6. D.Pharma-2019. 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
21 
In Universities, the research efforts are funded through their sc hemes. Audit 
reviewed the R& D environment in the sampled Universities of GNCTD and the 
findings are as below.   
2.4.1 Functioning of Research Committees 
In compliance of the UGC guidelines of March 2022 for the establishment of 
“Research and Development Cell” in higher education Institutions (HEIs) for 
promoting quality research, aligned with the provisions of NEP-2020, the GGSIPU 
renamed its Directorate of Research and Consultancy (DRC) as “Research and 
Development Cell” (RDC) and four committees/Council 9 were constituted 
(November 2022) to strengthen the existing research system. 
Audit observed that the Research Council constituted for facilitating and enhancing 
research activities across various departments and faculties did not hold any 
meeting, and the Product Development, Monitoring and Commercialization 
Committees held only one meeting in November 2022.  None of the four 
committees/Council submitted any research activity reports to the Vice Chancellor.  
Also, University was yet to create the Research Information Management System 
(RIMS) to document the relevant database and information as envisaged under the 
UGC guidelines. 
In its reply, the University stated (January 2024) that the reports of the various 
committees have been submitted to the Vice Chancellor in December 2023 and will 
now be submitted regular ly. Further, the University proposes to establish a 
‘Research Information Management System (RIMS) as mandated in the UGC 
guidelines, and it is in the process of generating a centralized database for assets 
and equipment purchased for research projects. 
Thus, subsequent to  the Audit observation, progress reports from various 
committees were submitted.  
Research and Development Councils were not formed in DTU and DPSRU. 
2.4.2 Research Schemes of Universities 
Under the Faculty Research Grant scheme (FRGS) , GGSIPU provides financial 
assistance to the regular teachers working in the University schools of Studies for 
research activities, to augment the research output of the University as one -time 
seed money and through annual research grants. Audit observed that there was a 
noticeable decrease in faculty members availing funds under Annual Research 
Grant component of FRGS during 2018-23, with a drop in the percentage of faculty 
participating in research projects from 51 per cent in 2018-19 to 35  per cent in 
2022-23.  Further, against a timeline of 1 April of every financial year for release 
 
9  1. Research Council, 2. Research Programs, Promotion and Policy Development Committee, 3. 
Collaboration, Consultancy and community committee, 4. Product development, monitoring and 
commercialization Committee 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
22 
of grants, grants were released with delays ranging from 32 to 172 days during the 
audit period. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU was planning to hold 
annual meetings with all the stakeholders to encourage participation of the faculty 
in the FRGS.  Delays in the release of FRGS grants during 2020-22 were attributed 
to Covid-19, and assurance was made to make more efforts for the timely disbursal 
of grants. 
Similarly, DTU provides a research project grant to its permanent/regular faculty 
with a doctorate, for serving as an investigator in a research project under  the 
Research Project Grants scheme as per policy framed in March 2019 . DTU 
approved 16 research projects for which grants totalling ` 65.46 lakh were released 
during 2019-20.  Eight of these research projects were completed in 2022/2023 , 
whereas progress in the remaining projects was not ascertainable.  No further 
research project was approved and no grant was released by DTU during the 
academic years 2020-23.  It was also observed that 94 per cent of the regular faculty 
of DTU did not avail of the research project grant during 2019 -20.  In the 16 
research projects undertaken by the faculty, 47 research papers were published but 
these research efforts did not result in obtaining of any intellectual property rights 
or patents, as envisaged in the research policy of the University. 
In its reply, Department stated (March 2025) that no research proposal was 
approved by DTU during the period 2020 -23 due to Covid 19 conditions and the 
University redesigned the Research Project Grants scheme in September 2024 and 
process of invitation and sanction of new proposals has been initiated.   
In DPSRU, 13 faculty members were provided seed money of ₹ 28.33 lakh during 
2021-22 whereas seed money was not provided to anyone during 2020-21 and 
2022-23 despite availability of funds. As stated by the University, i ts faculty had 
published 612 research papers during 2018-23. 
In its reply, the Department stated (March 2025) that it acknowledges that DPSRU 
needs to identify potential internal funding sources and explore government grants 
and private foundations to fund research activities. 
The lack of enthusiasm by University faculty in research -related activities is 
indicative of the absence of an environment conducive to innovation and industry 
orientation and is reflective of the overall weak academic robustness of HEIs in 
Delhi. 
2.4.3 Research Publications-Quantity and Quality 
The h-index, or Hirsch index, is a widely recognized metric that reflects both the 
productivity and impact of an academic institution's research output.  It takes into 
account the number of publications and their respective citation counts, providing 
a quantitative measure of the scholarly influence of the University.   

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
23 
The details of number of research papers published by the faculty of GGSIPU, 
number of Citations and H-index of the University, as reported by Web of Sciences 
during the calendar years 2019-23 were as given in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Details of research papers publications, number of citations and 
h-index 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Number of Research Paper s published 
annually 182 215 272 249 232 
Number of regular faculty 181 181 177 203 203 
Number of students pursuing PhD 290 408 506 621 743 
Total no. of faculty and research 
scholars 471 589 683 824 946 
No. of Research papers published per 
faculty & Scholar 0.39 0.36 0.39 0.30 0.25 
Number (Progressive) of Citations 29225 32692 35974 37589 37961 
h-index of the University 74 76 79 80 80 
Source: Information furnished by the University 
Over the years 2019-23, the GGSIPU’s h-index value remained more or less static 
suggesting a limited improvement in the overall impact and citation of the research 
output.  Further, the number of research papers published per faculty and scholar 
has shown a decreasing trend from 0.39 in 2019 to 0.25 in 2023. This meant that on 
an average, each faculty member and research scholar was producing fewer 
research papers over the period 2019-23. 
The Department stated (March 2025)  that GGSIPU is taking initiatives such as 
revision of Research Publication Grant scheme to encourage facult y to improve 
quality and quantity of the research and their publication. 
In the case of DTU, while performance in terms of publication of research papers 
and number of citation has shown a noticeable improvement during 2018 -23, the 
h-index of the university  (as reported by Web of Sciences)  has remained more or 
less static, ranging from 97 to 102, as detailed in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Details of research papers publications, number of citations and 
h-index 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Number of Research Paper s 
published annually 321 442 694 756 852 
Number of regular faculty 258 266 301 301 288 
Number of students pursuing PhD 924 1065 1185 1307 1368 
Total of faculty and scholars 1182 1331 1486 1608 1656 
No. of Research paper publication 
per faculty & Scholar 0.27 0.33 0.47 0.47 0.51 
Number (Progressive) of Citations  71502 83160 92758 97227 98826 
h-index of the University 97 100 102 102 102 
Source: Information furnished by the University from Web of Science 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
24 
The Department stated (March 2025) in case of DTU that h-index is being given 
particular relevance and importance in the current academic ped agogy and 
confirmed that h-index of DTU was 102 at the time of closing of audit. 
 
DPSRU does not maintain the h-index data.  However, as per information provided, 
it has published total 571 research papers in Scopus index Journals with cumulative 
citations of 1481 during 2019-23. According to the data furnish ed by University 
from “Scopus Journal”, presently the h-index of the University is 38.  However, in 
the absence of verifiable data, Audit is not in a position to comment on year-on-year 
trends. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that unlike universities cov ering a wide 
spectrum of disciplines, DPSRU primarily focuses on pharmaceuti cal sciences, 
where the publication and citati on dynamics differ from multi-d isciplinary 
institutions. It was further stated that the Department acknowl edges the concern 
about the quantity and quality of research publications of DPSR U and will make 
efforts to foster a culture of research in the University. 
As stated above, the h-index of GGSIPU ranged from 74 to 80, th at of DTU from 
97 to 102, and that of DPSRU was 38 as per available informatio n .   T h i s  
performance by the state universities of Delhi was much below D elhi University 
(191 to 270 in 2018-23) and Banaras Hindu University (168 in 20 22-23). While it 
is acknowledged that the three universities sampled in this PA cater to widely 
different areas of pedagogy, their performance on research metr ics presents 
significant scope for improvement. 
2.4.4 Monetization of publish ed/awarded Patents 
Research and innovation, measured by the number of Patents awar ded, are 
reflective of the quality of education imparted by a university .  Patents stimulate 
research and innovation in universities as they protect and monetize research output.  
The number of patents granted and the number of patents monetis ed by the three 
Universities during 2018-23 is as given in Table 2.5. 
97 100 102 102 102
74 76 79 80 80
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Chart 2.4: h-index of GGSIPU and DTU
DTU GGSIPU

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
25 
Table 2.5:  Patents Awarded in 2018-23 
Sl. No. University Name No. of Patents 
awarded 
Monetised 
(` in lakh) 
1 GGSIPU 37 Nil 
2 DTU 09 Nil 
3 DPSRU Nil Nil 
While no patents were awarded to GGSIPU during 2018-20, in the subsequent three 
years, 37 patents were applied for/awarded.  The performance of DTU and DPSRU 
in this regard left much to be desired.  None of these Universities could generate 
income from the patents.  It may also be mentioned that DTU scored nil marks in 
the sub -parameter “Intellectual Property Rights ” (IPR) under the Parameter 
Research and Professional Practice in the NIRF rankings for 2023 indicating that 
its efforts in this regard was inadequate. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that in case of GGSIPU , the Intellectual 
Property Rights (IPR) cell constituted in 2022 has become fully activated and will 
also work in the area of monetisation of awarded patents.  In case of DTU, it was 
stated that the University has formulated Technology Transfer Policy to industry in 
September 2024 and suitable attorney has been engaged for facilitating patent filing 
thus ensuring improved outcomes in IPR and patents fields. 
DPSRU stated (October 2024) that they have applied for patents but obtaining 
patents is a time consuming process and they have not received any so far. The 
Department stated (March 2025) that the University would explore the possibilities 
of monetisation of the awarded patents and utilise it for the benefit of students, 
faculty and the University. 
2.4.5 Consultancy projects 
Consultancy projects from Industry, Service Sector etc. to address real life problems 
which require solution in specified time frames constitutes an important activity in 
any University and should be supported and recognised as a performance indicator.   
Details of Consultancy Projects undertaken by the sampled Universities during the 
period 2018-2023 are indicated in the Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6:  Consultancy projects undertaken by the Universities 
Sl No. University Name No. of Consultancy 
Projects 
Amount of Funds 
Received (` in lakh) 
1. GGSIPU 2 2.70 
2. DTU 149 1979.00 
3. DPSRU 4 18.70 
Thus, only DTU had any significant number of consultancy projects indicating that 
GGSIPU and DPSRU need to devote more attention to this aspect. 
The Department stated (March 2025) in case of GGSIPU that University has 
constituted a committee to revise the Institutional and Individual Consultancy 
guidelines of the University and aims to have significant improvement in the 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
26 
domain of consultancy projects in coming years. In case of DPSRU, it was stated 
that lower number of consultancy projects was due to specialised nature of 
pharmaceutical sciences, where research and innovation often align more with 
regulatory frameworks, c linical studies and translational research rather than 
traditional consultancy models. DPSRU assured creation of a consultancy cell  in 
the university to improve the situation. 
In the exit conference, on the observations of Research, consultancy and patent, all 
three universities acknowledged the need for improvement. However, it is 
acknowledged that inters-se comparison amongst these universities is not feasible 
as DTU and DPSRU are primarily technical institutions, while GGSIPU offer ed a 
broader range of primarily general courses.  
Recommendation 4: The Universities should formulate road map for instituting 
consultancy/ research projects aligned with the requirements of the society 
and industries. 
2.4.6 Ineffective Collaboration with HEIs 
Inter-institutional collaborations via student and faculty exchange programmes,  
joint seminars, conferences, and research training programs, etc.  are an effective 
way of enhancing the quality of pedagogy, besides allowing for an exchange of 
ideas and practices that benefit the participating institutions.   University-wise 
details of collaborations  with other institutions of higher education  and their 
implementation in terms of student and faculty exchange programs during 2018-23 
were as given in Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7:  Collaborations entered by the Universities and their 
implementation during 2018-23 
Sl 
No. 
University Name No. of MoUs 
signed 
No. of student 
exchange 
programmes 
No. of Faculty 
exchange 
programmes 
1. GGSIPU 16 0 1 
2. DTU 28 2 1 
3. DPSRU 11 0 0 
GGSIPU, with its commitment to fostering global academic collaborations, entered 
into 16 Memoran da of Understanding (MOUs) with various foreign higher 
educational institutions during 2018 -23.  These MOUs were designed to facilitate 
student and faculty exchange programs and organize joint seminars, conferences 
and research training programs.  Audit, however, observed that the University's 
international partnerships were not fructifying as no student exchange programs 
were executed and there was only one instance of faculty exchange program during 
2018-23. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU is making efforts to organise 
more activities under the existing MOUs as well as exploring opportunities for new 
MOUs with universities all over the world. 

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
27 
DTU had 28 active MoUs/academic collaborations between 2017 and 2023 with 
foreign Higher Educational Institutions , and another five collaborations under 
process.  However, under the student exchange programs, only five students were 
nominated and there was only one instance of a faculty exchange program during 
2018-23.  Audit also noticed that the executed MoUs for foreign collaborations 
were not renewed after the expiration of their validity period. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU has framed new guidelines for 
foreign collaborations in March 2024 and it is now extensively carrying out 
outreach activities for collaborations and will focus on student exchange programs. 
DPSRU had 11 active MoUs/academic collaborations with Foreign Higher 
Educational Institutions between 2017 and 2023 for exchange of students, joint 
education programs, joint research and development programs etc.  However, the 
University conducted no student/faculty exchange during this period. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that it acknowledges the concern about 
ineffective collaboration with HEIs and DPSRU needs to encourage student 
exchange programs. 
2.4.7 Equipment procurement and Inventory Management for F aculty 
Research Grant Scheme and Sponsored Research Projects 
As per the purchase procedure provided under Clause 4 of the University 
Regulations (April 2016) for Sponsored Research Projects  of GGSIPU , all the 
purchases for research projects shall be made as per the General Financial Rules 
(GFRs).  After the completion of the project, the equipment/books purchased under 
the project should become the assets of the University.  Audit noticed 18 cases 
where goods/equipment were being purchased by GGSIPU through the open 
market, instead of through the e -Procurement/GEM po rtal, which is against the 
provisions of Rule 149 of GFR 2017.  Also, after the completion of the project, the 
equipment/books purchased under the Faculty Research Grant Scheme ( FRGS) 
were not being entered in the University School’s stock register and the University’s 
centralized stock register.  Further, the audit could not find any monitoring 
mechanism to verify the specifications of the equipment acquired through the FRGS 
projects. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that University Schools of GGSIPU have 
started to maintain stock registers to record the details of equipment purchased and 
it has been made compulsory to record the fixed assets procured from FRGS in the 
stock register. 
Audit observed that , in DTU , equipment, machinery and other non -consumable 
items costing ₹  5.89 crore procured out of funds of research grants/sponsored 
projects during 2018-23 were not reflected in the accounts of the University as its 
assets. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
28 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU will trace and settle the discrepancy 
with regard to the reflection of said equipment in its accounts. 
2.5 Placement of Students and Start-up Activities  
 
2.5.1 Placement of Students 
University Student Placement Cell serves as a bridge between students and potential 
employers, aiming to facilitate successful job placements and internships.   
(i)  As per placement data provided by the Placement cell of GGSIPU for 2018-22, 
in 11 University Schools of Studies (out of 12 Schools and 2 Centres of 
Excellence10), 34 to 64 per cent students secured placements through them (details 
of students pursuing higher education after completing their degree were not 
provided).  Amongst the USSs, Schools of Biotechnology, Chemical Technology, 
Humanities & Social Sciences and Basic & Applied Sciences were lagging behind 
in placement of students.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that equal opportunities are provided to 
students of all University schools, however, it is the discretion of the recruiters to 
offer jobs.  Further, an alumni cell has been assigned with the task of maintaining a 
proper database for students pursuing higher education after completing their 
degrees. 
As regards affiliated colleges, analysis of placement data for 38 affiliated colleges 
provided by the University revealed that several colleges exhibit ed inconsistent 
placement performance, indicating potential challenges in their placement 
strategies or the employability of their graduates.  Five of these colleges had 
consistently low placement percentages/Zero placement percentage. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has instructed (December 2024) 
the affiliated colleges to create proper placement assistance infrastructure. 
(ii) In DTU, 53 per cent to 64 per cent of students secured placements through the 
University's placement cell during 2018-23, while 37 per cent to 43 per cent of total 
final year students were neither placed through the placement cell of the University 
nor did they pursue higher education. Thus, the performance of the University in 
terms of student progression to employment or higher studies was not satisfactory. 
In the exit conference, the Registrar (DTU) observed that calculating the placement 
percentage based on the total number of students may not be ideal, as many students 
choose not to participate in campus placements and instead pursue higher studies. 
Therefore, a more practical ap proach would be to determine the percentage based 
on the number of students placed against those who opted for placement through 
the placement cell.  However, DTU did not provide the revised data based on actual 
participants in the on-campus placement drives of the University during 2018 -23 
and hence the same could not be worked out.  Moreover, data on students pursuing 
 
10  Two Schools have started functioning in 2021 only and no batch has passed out yet.  

Chapter 2: Administrative and Academic Issues 
29 
higher education was already considered by  the Audit while computing the 
placement percentages. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that the DTU needs to maintain the off -
campus placement data, conduct an industry survey, collaborate with the industry 
for better placement and design courses as per industry demand. 
In DPSRU, placement of students of Post Graduate courses through the placement 
division during 2018-22 ranged from 78 to 86 per cent on successful completion of 
the course, whereas the percentage of students who got placements/pursued higher 
education in respect of undergraduate courses ranged from 58 to 81 per cent. The 
data of students pursuing higher education for the year 2022 -23 was only partially 
furnished. 
Apart from gaining knowledge, the main purpose of obtaining university education 
for students is to obtain gainful employment or pursuing higher education for a 
better career.  The placement cells of these Universities are expected to help the 
students in achieving this objective.  However,  besides having patchy data,  the 
performance of these Universities’ placement cells, where they exist, does not instil 
confidence vis a vis achievement of the objective behind their establishment. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 3 
Accreditation of 
Universities and Affiliation 
Process 

 
31 
Chapter 3 
 
Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process  
• UGC Regulations 2012 and AICTE Regulations 2014 provide for 
mandatory accreditation of the University and the technical 
programmes of the University from NAAC and NBA respectively.  Audit 
observed that the three sampled Universities and affiliated colleges of the 
GGSIPU had  been functioning for  significant time periods without 
mandatory NAAC/NBA accreditation. 
• The existing mechanism of Joint Assessment Committee (JAC) 
inspections to ensure availability of required physical and academic 
infrastructure in affiliated colleges was inadequate as there were cases 
of favourable grading by JAC, non -compliance of recommen dations of 
JAC reports and absence of facilit ies for persons with disabilities in 
sampled affiliated colleges. 
• Audit observed delays at every stage of the annual affiliation process - 
submission of application by applicant colleges, constitution of JAC and 
its reporting, grant of NOC by the Government, and issue of affiliation 
by GGSIPU. 
• There were significant delays in revision of Policy guidelines and 
constitution of the Admission Regulatory Committee and the State Fee 
Regulatory Committee by the Government.  
3.1 Accreditation of Universities  
University Grants Commission (Mandatory Assessment and Accreditation of 
Higher Educational Institutions), Regulations, 2012 provides for mandatory 
accreditation for each Higher Educational Institution (HEI) from an Accreditation 
Agency after passing out of two batches or six years, whichever is earlier.  National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council ( NAAC) accreditation is mandatory for 
getting grants under Section 12B of the UGC Act.  Similarly, All India Council for 
Technical Education (Mandatory Accredit ation of all programmes/courses in 
Technical Education Institutions/University Departments, etc.) Regulations, 2014  
makes it mandatory for all technical education institutions to get all its programmes 
/ Courses accredited by its Accreditation Agency (National Board of Accreditation) 
after passing out of two batches or six years, whichever is earlier.  
All the three sampled Universities had significant periods without the mandatory 
NAAC/NBA accreditation. Details are in the Table 3.1. 
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
32 
Table 3.1: Periods without accreditation 
Name of 
University 
Type of 
accreditation 
Total 
Courses/No. of 
Courses without 
accreditation 
Period 
without 
accreditation 
Remarks 
GGSIPU NAAC Accreditation is 
for the 
University. 
2018-23 University did not 
apply for NAAC 
accreditation. 
NBA 30/30 2018-23 University did not 
apply for NBA 
accreditation 
DTU NAAC Accreditation is 
for the 
University. 
2015-19 University did not 
apply for NAAC 
accreditation 
NBA 42/24 2018-23 Student teacher 
ratio not meeting 
the NBA 
requirements and 
corresponding UG 
programme for PG 
programmes not 
NBA accredited. 
DPSRU NAAC Accreditation is 
for the 
University. 
2020-23 University applied 
for NAAC 
accreditation in 
November 2022. 
NBA 4/4 2020-23 University did not 
apply for NBA 
accreditation. 
Apart from the above, 50 out of 88 institutions affiliated with GGSIPU were 
functioning without NAAC accreditation and 102 technical courses/  programmes 
run by 28 of these affiliated institutions were being offered without NBA 
accreditation. 
Lack of accreditation to these Universities/institutions/ programmes deprived them 
of a third-party assurance with regard to the quality of education provided by them, 
which may discourage students from enrolling in these Universities/ programmes. 
Further, UGC Regulations 2012 and AICTE Regulation s 2014 provide for 
withholding of all grants and financial assistance to institutions without NAAC and 
NBA accreditation respectively. Also, there is provision for cautioning potential 
candidates seeking admission to institutions running courses, without NAAC/NBA 
accreditation, through various forms of the media. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that the non-availability of accreditation from 
NAAC did not affect the quality of functioning of the GGSIPU and as regards NBA 
accreditation, the five University schools, running technical programmes, have 
already taken steps to go for NBA accreditation from coming academic session 
January 2026 to July 2026 by complying the required parameters.  The University 
has issued an advisory to all affiliated colleges encouraging them to obtain NAAC 
and NBA accreditations. 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
33 
DTU attributed (March 2024) non -accreditation (NBA) of 24 technical 
programmes to low Student Teacher Ratio, the corresponding UG programmes not 
accredited in case of PG programmes, and a smaller number of admissions in the 
programmes.  Further, the Department stated (March 2025) that the process of 
appointment/recruitment of teachers has already been started by the DTU to 
improve the student-teacher ratio. 
DPSRU stated (May 2023) that Department/School-wise committees were formed 
in November 2022 to obtain NBA accreditation, but no further progress was made.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that it acknowledge s the concern about the 
accreditation of the University. 
It is thus evident from the above that the Universities were extremely matter-of-fact 
about the need for obtaining NAAC/NBA Accreditation , impacting the quality of 
education imparted as well  as financial loss due to ineligibility for Union  
government grants in the absence of accreditation.  
3.1.1 Non-receipt of Section 12B status from UGC 
Section 12B of UGC Act provides that no grant shall be given to a University that 
is established after the commencement of the University Grants Commission 
(Amendment) Act, 1972, unless the Commission has, after satisfying itself as to 
such matters as may be prescribed, declared such university to be fit for receiving 
such grants.  Further, UGC Regulations 2012 stipulate that no university shall be 
notified or recognized under Section 12B of the UGC Act, if not duly accredited by 
NAAC. 
Audit observed that DPSRU initiated the process for recognition under Section 12B 
of the UGC Act in August 2015 and got NAAC accreditation only in August 2023. 
It was yet to get recognition under Section 12B  from the UGC , rendering it unfit 
for obtaining UGC Grants. 
The Department stated that DPSRU submitted (November 2023) the compliance 
report to observations of UGC regarding recognition under Section 12B of the UGC 
Act, and the final decision of UGC was awaited. 
GGSIPU and DTU were recognised under Section 12 B in March 2001 and 
December 2012, respectively.  
Recommendation 5: The Universities should fix timelines for obtaining 
NAAC/NBA accreditation for the programmes under them, strengthen the 
mechanism for granting affiliation and fix timeline for notification of fees. 
3.2 Process of Affiliation of Institutions to GGSIPU 
Chapter 3 of UGC Act clause (12A) (1) (a) states  that ‘affiliation’ includes, in 
relation to a college, recognition of such college by, association of such college with 
and admission of such college to the privileges of a university. Various 
commissions viz. Radhakrishnan Commission (The university education 
commission) (1948 -49) and Kothari Commission (Education commission), 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
34 
1964-66 suggested phasing out the affiliating system. The National Education 
Policy (NEP) of 2020 recommends phasing out the affiliation system of colleges 
over a period of 15 years. The NEP's goal is to make all colleges autonomous 
degree-granting institutions.   
However, GNCTD has yet to set out any policy regarding grant of autonomy to 
affiliated institutions as it contends that  Section 5 (14) of the GGSIPU Act 
empowers GGSIPU to declare colleges and institutions as autonomous.  
The procedure and issues related to affiliation granted by the Guru Gobind Singh 
Indraprastha University (GGSIPU), the only University of GNCTD that grants 
affiliation to government -aided and self -financed institutions that impart higher 
education and technical education, were examined during this Audit. 
As per extant rules,  institutions are required to obtain affiliation for each 
programmes/course of study separately and the process of affiliation is aimed at 
ensuring that the institutions seeking affiliation have all the facilities required for 
quality education as per the norms prescribed by the regulatory bodies concerned 
such as land and building, adequate classrooms and manpower, 
laboratories/workshops, library, etc.  As per Section 4 of the GGSIPU Act 1998, 
the University can grant affiliation to any institution in the National Capital Region 
that agrees to abide by GGSIPU’s Statutes and Ordinances.  
During the academic year 2022 -23, 25 government -aided colleges and 
88 self-financed colleges (19 located outside Delhi state limits) were affiliated with 
GGSIPU. Out of 94 affiliated colleges located in Delhi, 14 colleges 
(two government-aided and 12 self -financed affiliated colleges) detailed in 
Annexure 1.1  were sampled for detailed scrutiny using the Simple Random 
Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR) method with IDEA software.   
3.2.1 Affiliation to Institutions 
The process of granting affiliation to applicant institutions is governed by Policy 
Guidelines (January 2016) of the Directorate of Higher Education (DHE), GNCTD 
and Ordinance 1 (November 1999) of GGSIPU . Various stages in  the grant of 
affiliation by GGSIPU to applicant colleges are depicted in Chart 3.1. 
 
  

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issues observed in audit regarding the affiliation process are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
3.2.2 Functioning of Joint Assessment Committee and compliance with their 
reports 
Ordinance 1 of the GGSIPU and Policy Guidelines of DHE for the issue of No 
Objection Certificate  (NOC) by DHE/DTTE and allied matters of privately 
managed self -financed institutes bring out the report of the Joint Assessment 
Committee1, after the physical visit to the premises of the applicant college/institute 
to verify the available physical and academic infrastructure, is the basis for the grant 
of NOC by the Government and thereafter affiliation by the University. 
As per the Policy Guidelines (January 2016) of DHE, GNCTD, the Institutions 
securing Category A and Category B in the inspection report of JAC during the last 
three preceding years were eligible for grant of revalidation of NOC for five years 
and three years respectively.  As per the prescribed format of JAC, to secure 
Category A, an institute ha d to score 75 per cent or above in Part -II (Academic 
Standards and Infrastructure) and Part-III (Compliance of observations of previous 
 
1  A committee formed by GGSIPU chaired by retired IAS/DANICS and consisting of subject 
experts and convener from GGSIPU for physical visit of the premises of applicant self -financed 
institutions. 
Applicant College 
GGSIPU /Board of Affiliation (BoA) Joint 
Assessment 
Committee 
for 
inspection 
of the 
college 
Government  
DHE/DTTE/ 
DH&FW 
1. Apply for 
affiliation  
6. BoA issues 
affiliation  
2. Forms JAC for 
physical inspection  
 
4. Forwards JAC report 
 
5. Issues NOC after 
examination of JAC 
report 
 
3. Submits its report 
 
Chart 3.1:  Process for grant of affiliation 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
36 
Academic Audit and JAC report) of the JAC report separately and for Category B, 
less than 75 per cent but above 65 percent2. 
Securing Category C (with a score of above 50 percent) in the JAC report is 
sufficient to obtain NOC/affiliation.   
The inadequacies of the present mechanism of accreditation, JAC functioning, 
adequacy of their reports  and compliance to JAC observations by the applicant 
colleges are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
(i) Deficiencies in JAC assessments 
Audit observed deficiencies in assessment by the JAC in sampled self -financed 
applicant/affiliated colleges as under: 
(a)  JAC report on Periyar School of Architecture, Jasola (B. Arch. 5 years’ 
course) for Academic Session 2022 -23 revealed that parameters of availability of 
labs/workshop and students’ grievance mechanism (which are part of the JAC 
report proforma) were excluded while making the assessment.  Further, although 
no Director had been appointed, the institution was given 50 marks out of 100 .  
Similarly, 50 marks out of 100 were given for Faculty Cadre Ratio and Student 
Teacher Ratio, though there was no faculty  in the college.  Thus,  the aggregate of 
marks awarded in Part -II of the JAC report to Periyar School of Architecture was 
536 out of 800 (Score of 67), while if correct scores were given, it should have been 
386 (536 – 150) out of 1000.  As a result, the Institution was given a score of 
67 instead of 38.60 in Part II of the JAC assessment which placed it in Category B 
instead of Category D.  Falling under Category D would have made the applicant 
college ineligible for affiliation , but incorrect grading allowed the said institute to 
obtain an NOC and affiliation. 
(b)  Similarly, in case of JAC report on Bhartiya Vidhya Bhawan (first time 
applicant) for four new courses for the Academic Session 2022 -23, instead of 
awarding zero marks for presence of a Director, Faculty Cadre ratio and Student 
Teacher Ratio, as there was no Director or faculty, these parameters were excluded 
in assessment and the scoring was done on the basis of maximum marks of 
670 instead of 9703.  With 647.50 marks out of 970 , the Institution’s Part-II score 
should have been 66.75 (647.50/970), instead of 96.64 (647.50/670) given by the 
JAC. As a result, Bhartiya Vidhya Bhawan was erroneously placed under Category 
A by the JAC instead of Category B. 
In its reply, University stated (January 2024) that as affiliation was granted to 
Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan for the first time for Academic Session 2022-23 and in case 
of Periyar School of Architecture, no student was admitted during Academic 
 
2  In case of score above 50 per cent and upto 65 per cent, category C is granted. For score less 
than 50 per cent , Category D is granted, which puts the concerned applicant college in no 
admission category. 
3  Parameters with maximum marks of 30 relating to students’ grievance resolution  was excluded 
as students were yet to enroll. 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
37 
Session 2021 -22 and in view of aftereffects of Covid -19 pandemic, JAC took a 
holistic view of the situation while grading these two institutes for Academic 
Session 2022-23. 
Further, the Department stated (March 2025) that in case deficiencies pointed out 
by JAC are not removed by the Institute, it affects the grading of the Institute, which 
in turn is the criterion for deciding the fee to be charged by the Institute. Further, it 
was clarified in respect of incorrect grading awarded to Periyar Institute and 
Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan by the JAC that such grading does not influence the seat 
intake of the institute as recommended by the JAC. 
Reply is not acceptable as it is evident that grading for both the said Institutes 
vitiated the prescribed procedure/format of the JAC mechanism (report not based 
on the availability or otherwise of the infrastructure on the day of JAC visit) , and 
arbitrary marks had been awarded to make them eligible for affiliation.  Further, no 
evidence was shared in support of adverse gradings impacting the fee structure 
approved for the affected institutions. 
(c)  Clause 1.1 (iii) (j) of the Policy Guidelines (January 2016) of DHE stipulates 
that buildings of the applicant institutes should be Divyang/disabled friendly.   
Audit observed that the JAC reports for the academic years 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 
2022-23, mentioned availability of facilities/infrastructure for persons with 
disabilities (PwD) in applicant colleges merely in terms of percentage availability 
and not the sp ecific facilities available. Further, as per the JAC reports, 10 out of 
12 sampled affiliated colleges  did not have the requisite facilities for PwD during 
2018-23. This hindered the envisaged objective of the provisions of the Rights of 
Persons with Disab ility Act 2016 and Policy Guidelines of DHE , to maximise 
academic and social development of PwD consistent with the goal of full inclusion. 
In its reply, University stated (January 2024) that in case the deficiencies pointed 
out by JAC are not removed by the Institute it affects the grading of the Institute, 
which in turn is the criteria for deciding the fee to be charged by the Institute.  
University further mentioned that it has incorporated separate mar ks for facilities 
for persons with disability in the JAC proforma for the Academic Session 2023-24. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has issued an advisory to all the 
affiliated institutes/colleges to ensure requisite facilities/infrastructure for persons 
with disabilities and will also take up the matter with the District administration 
(being the nodal agency) for effective implementation of the directives. 
(d) According to UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by Universities) Regulations, 2009 
and Policy Guidelines (May 2011 and January 2016) of DHE, GNCTD, the 
applicant institutes should have undisputed ownership and possession of land 
measuring not less than 1.5 acres .  Also, Part -I of the JAC report’s proforma 
provides for ownership of land by the applicant institutes as per prescribed norms. 
Audit observed that six out of 12 sampled self-financed institutions, i.e. 50 per cent 
of the audit sample, did not have th e minimum area of land of 1.5 acres 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
38 
(Annexure 3.1) thus making them ineligible for grant of affiliation.  Additionally, 
the Fifth State Fee Regulatory Committee, while deciding the fee to be charged by 
the self -financed institutions, also observed (November 2021) that 42 out of 66 
institutes, i.e. 64 per cent, were operating with less than the prescribed 1.5 acres of 
land (Annexure 3.2). 
The Department reiterated (March 2025) GGSIPU ’s reply  that 38 out of 
42 mentioned institutes were affiliated with the University before the issuance of 
policy guidelines of DHE (January 2016) and a clause for the minimum requirement 
of land was added in January 2016 and thus applicable from session 2016-17.   
The reply of the University is inaccurate as the clause for the minimum requirement 
of land (in pursuance of UGC Regulations 2009) was present in the Policy 
guidelines of May 2011 too.  Further, as affiliations by GGSIPU are granted on an 
annual basis during the review period, compliance with the clause should have been 
ensured for affiliations granted from 2016-17 onwards. 
(e) Statute 24 of the GGSIPU provides that no college or institution shall be 
admitted to the privileges of the University unless it has teachers and other 
employees who have prescribed qualifications, fulfil eligibility criteria and are 
available in the required numbers as per the norms laid down by the University from 
time to time.   
From the data/information provided by GGSIPU, Audit observed that 22 out of 88 
i.e. 25 per cent of the affiliated self -financed institutions were running without 
adequate faculty (March 2023) for 13 programmes.  These 13 programmes included 
programmes in the field of technology, education (B.Ed.), management, law and 
general graduate courses.   
Audit also observed from the information made available by the 12 self -financed 
colleges selected for audit, that many faculty did not have the requisite qualification 
during 2021-22 and 2022 -23.  In 2021-22, 28 per cent of Associate Professors in 
two colleges did not have a PhD as required whereas 19  per cent  of Associate 
Professors in four colleges were without a PhD in 2022-23.  Similarly, during the 
Academic year 2021 -22, 35 per cent  of Assistant Professors in nine out of 
12 sampled self -financed affiliated colleges did not have the required NET 
qualification or PhD whereas this deficiency was 17  per cent in eight colleges  
during 2022-23.   
Appointment of faculty with lower than prescribed academic qualifications was not 
only in contravention of UGC regulations but also compromised the quality of 
education being imparted.  
In its reply, University stated (January 2024) that while audit observation is noted 
for compliance in future, the University ensures maintenance of the prescribed 
student-teacher ratio and presence of qualified faculty in affiliated colleges through 
the mechanism of JAC reports and their compliance.  The reply is not borne out by 
facts as examination of available records revealed that faculty without required 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
39 
qualifications were recruited in several self -financed institutes. Further, 
inefficiencies in the JAC process have already been discussed in earlier paras.  The 
Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has issued an advisory to all 
affiliated colleges to maintain the prescribed student-teacher ratio. 
(ii) Non-compliance with issues raised in JAC reports and other 
deficiencies observed during the Joint Physical inspection of affiliated 
colleges 
The status of compliance of JAC reports noticed by Audit during the joint-physical 
inspection (December 2023) of two sampled government -aided affiliated colleges 
is as given in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2:  Non-compliance to issues raised in JAC reports and other 
deficiencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Institute 
Year of 
JAC 
report 
Percentage 
of 
compliance 
with the JAC 
report 
Issues not resolved by the institute 
1. Panna Dai 
School of 
Nursing4 
2023-24 55 The School did not ensure compliance 
regarding (a) up -gradation of infrastructure of 
the computer lab, library, other laboratories and 
(b) obtaining of requisite statutory certificates 
like structural safety certificate, earthquake 
resistance certificate and fire safety certificate. 
2. Dr. BSA 
Medical 
College5 
2022-23 85 Lift/ramp to provide access to Persons with 
Disability to the First floor  
2023-24 75 Campus of the college is built in four 
temporarily constructed blocks and  the college 
was to ensure the establishment of a permanent 
college building. 
Other deficiencies observed during physical inspections are as under: 
 
4  The School was given affiliation for the first time for Academic Session 2022 -23 with Category 
C. For 2023-24, it also received category C. 
5  The College received Category A throughout the period 2018-24. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
40 
Panna Dai School of Nursing 
1. The building of the School 
was old, with cracks in the wall and 
dampness.  Hostel rooms on the 
ninth (top) and seventh floors were 
not allotted to students due to their 
damaged condition or non -
availability of electricity in those 
rooms. 
2. The School took up 
(October 2023) the matter with the 
Medical Director of Deen Dayal 
Upadhyay Hospital for 
up-gradation of existing 
infrastructure, informing that third to ninth floors of the building required urgent 
construction/ repair. 
3. The solar panels installed at the roof top of the building were not functional. 
Dr. BSA Medical College 
1. The College had no fire safety certificate. 
2. The posts of Librarian, Assistant Librarians and Library Assistants were lying 
vacant. 
3. The AMC of all the equipment was found to have expired. 
4. Against 89 sanctioned faculty posts, 58 were filled (21 were filled on  a 
contractual basis), leaving 31 faculty posts (35 per cent) vacant. 
The above deficiencies in the follow-up of JAC reports rendered the inspections 
carried out by JAC ineffective in ensuring that all the required facilities for 
imparting quality education were available in the affiliated institutions. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that  the University will ensure  necessary 
compliance with audit observations. 
3.3 Process gaps 
The entire process of granting affiliation was riddled with delays and inefficiencies. 
Details are as below.  
3.3.1 Delay in revision of policy guidelines for NOC and other allied matters  
The first Policy Guidelines, applicable for three years, for the issue of NOC and 
allied matters of privately managed self -financed institutes affiliated to GGSIPU 
were issued by the DHE, GNCTD in May 2007.  Later, these policy guidelines were 
revised in May 2011 and January 2016 (effective up to 2018-19). These guidelines 
lay down the criteria and process of issue/revalidation of No Objection Certificate 
Cracked and damp walls 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
41 
(NOC) by the Government to applicant self -financed colleges for affiliation with 
GGSIPU.   
The DHE constituted (June 2019) a committee of experts for revision/amendment 
in the Policy Guidelines of January 2016 which submitted its report to DHE in 
October 2019.  The report ha s been under consideration of the Government since 
then and decision on revision of policy guidelines was yet to be taken (December 
2023) by the Delhi Government. Resultantly, the guidelines applicable for the 
academic session 2016-17 were being force forwarded for another 4 years i.e. till 
Academic session 2023-24, depriving the students from benefiting from revision of 
curriculum, enhanced infrastructure facilities etc.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that the recommendations of the expert 
committee for revision of policy guidelines were under submission for approval of 
the Lieutenant Governor of the NCT of Delhi. 
3.3.2 Constitution and Functioning of the Board of Affiliation 
Section 21 of the GGSIPU Act provides that the Board of Affiliation (BoA) , 
consisting of the Vice Chancellor and not more than seven members , to be 
nominated by the Board of Management,  which shall be responsible for admitting 
colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University.  The term of BoA is for 
three years and thus it is required to be reconstituted and notified every three years.   
Audit observed a delay of more than two months in notification of BOA after 
approval of the  nomination of members by the Board of Management during 
2018-19 and 2021-22.  Additionally, during the review period, meetings of the BoA 
were held with a delay of two to seven months after 1 August, the stipulated date 
for the start of the academic sessions annually .  This delayed the whole affiliation 
process by four to 10 months during the entire period under review.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has taken note of the audit 
observation for future compliance. 
3.3.3 Affiliation granted to Guru Teg  Bahadur 4 th Centenary Engineering 
College without JAC Report 
Guru Tegh Bahadur 4 th Centenary Engineering College applied for affiliation for 
its B. Tech (CSE) course in  May 2022. However, the application was rejected 
(June 2022) by GGSIPU as the last date to apply (31 March 2022) was over.  The 
institute then requested  Secretary, DTTE (12 July 2022) and Dy. Chief Minister 
(1 August 2022) DTTE resultantly issued a provisional NOC on 25 August 2022, 
subject to the submission of the JAC report and compliance to the deficiencies 
pointed out therein.  JAC visited the premises (1 September 2022) after issuance of 
the NOC and submitted its report the same day.  GGSIPU granted affiliation to the 
Institute on 13 December 2022.   
Audit observed that issuance of NOC by DTTE , even though provisional, without 
JAC report, subverted the affiliation process since there was no assurance that the 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
42 
Institute fulfilled any of the conditions for affiliation.  Even the affiliation fee was 
not deposited by the Institute at that time.  Further, JAC pointed out some 
deficiencies like non -recruitment of faculty and absence of facilities for Persons 
with disabilities, to be corrected by 30 September 2022 as per the conditions of 
NOC. However, GGSIPU sought compliance only when the Institute applied for 
affiliation for the 2023-24 session.   
The Department reiterated (March 2025) the reply of the GGSIPU that affiliation 
to Guru Tegh Bahadur 4 th Centenary Engineering College has been granted after 
compliance with all the procedural formalities.  However, no supporting documents 
were provided with the reply. 
3.3.4 Delays in the affiliation process 
Ordinance 1 of the University lays down the procedure for considering proposals 
for the affiliation of colleges and institutions.  The schedule for issue/revalidation 
of No Objection Certificate (NOC) and affiliation to self -financed institutions/  
colleges as provided under Clause 18 of the Policy Guidelines of January 2016 
issued by the Directorate of Higher Education is as given in Table 3.3.   
Table 3.3:  Timeline for affiliation process 
Sl. No. Item of work Timeline 
1. Receiving of applications for affiliation in 
GGSIPU 
By December of the previous 
academic year 
2. Start of Joint Assessment Committee (JAC) 
visits 
From February onwards 
3. Forwarding of JAC report by GGSIPU to 
Government 
Within 3 days of receipt of JAC report 
in GGSIPU 
4. Issue of NOC by the Government Within 10 days of receipt of JAC 
report from GGSIPU 
5. Finalization of intake by University and issue 
of affiliation by GGSIPU 
By May end 
6. Start of Academic Session 1st August 
During the Academic years 2020 -22 (two years), due to the Covid-19 pandemic, 
NOC/affiliation was automatically extended.  Examination of records relating to 12 
sampled self -financed colleges for the Academic years 2018 -19, 2019 -20, and 
2022-23 revealed that - 
• Applications for affiliation were received in GGSIPU with delays of two to 
four months. 
• The Joint Assessment Committee visited the premises of 11 sampled colleges 
with delays ranging from two to five months. 
• There were delays ranging from 15 days to four months in the 
issue/revalidation of NOC by DHE in all the 12 sampled self-financed 
colleges for Academic years 2018-19, 2019-20, and 2022-23. 
• GGSIPU granted the affiliation to self-financed institutions with delays up to 
nine months beyond the prescribed timeline of 1 August . Thus,  these 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
43 
institutions started the academic session in those years without affiliation, 
thereby defeating the very purpose of the process. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has taken note of the audit 
observation to complete the affiliation process for academic year 2024 -25 well in 
time and DHE has also noted the audit observation for issue of NOC timely. 
3.3.5 NOC issued/affiliation granted annually instead of for longer periods 
Clause 3 of the Policy guidelines of DHE and Clause 4 of Ordinance 1 of the 
GGSIPU provide for issuing NOC for longer periods and granting of regular 
affiliation for those self-financed institutions that were situated in conforming areas 
as per the Master Plan Delhi (MPD) 2021. This is especially relevant given the 
delay in grant of affiliation as discussed in Para 3.3.4 above.  
However, Audit noticed that only annual provisional NOC and affiliation were 
being granted even to institutions that were otherwise eligible for an extended NOC, 
thereby requiring these institutions to go through the entire process every year. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that the matter of granting long -term NOC 
and permanent affiliation to applicant institutes is under consideration. 
Thus, inadequacies in the functioning of JAC and procedural delays indicate that 
the Government/GGSIPU could not  ensure adequate physical or academic 
infrastructure in the affiliated institutions through the current mechanism, nor could 
it expedite the process. 
3.4 Oversight of affiliated institutions by GGSIPU 
Apart from ensuring that all the institutions to which affiliation is granted have the 
required facilities for imparting quality education, Ordinance 1 and Statute 24 of 
GGSIPU place responsibilities on the University towards planning and 
development of these institutions, providing necessary help and guidance, 
regulating admission s, fees, etc.  Audit observed deficiencies in these areas as 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.4.1 College Development Council not constituted 
According to the revised UGC guidelines (August 1985), the University may set up 
a College Development Council (CDC) as an appropriate body at the University 
Headquarters to ensure proper planning and integrated development of affiliated 
colleges and to provide the colleges with necessary help and guidance.  Audit 
noticed that GGSIPU had not set up a College Development Council , which 
deprived the stakeholders of a platform for coordinating the planning, and 
supervision of the affiliated colleges. 
The Department reiterated (March 2025) the reply of GGSIPU that no provision for 
setting up the College Development Council exists in the University Act , but the 
University will explore the possibility  of setting up a centralized committee along 
the lines of the CDC. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
44 
3.4.2 Regulation of admissions in affiliated colleges and fee structure in self -
financed institutions 
Matters relating to admissions in affiliated colleges and fee structure in self -
financed institutions are regulated by the Government in terms of the Delhi 
Professional Colleges and Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee, Regulation of 
admission, fixation of non-exploitative fee and other measures to ensure quality and 
excellence) Act and Rules 2007.  Deficiencies observed in the implementation of 
the Act of 2007 are as under: 
(i) Delay in constitution of Admission Regulatory Committee 
Section 4 of the Act of 2007 provides that the Government shall constitute an 
Admission Regulatory Committee (ARC), with powers of a Civil Court to regulate 
the procedure of admission to institutions. Audit observed ARC was not constituted 
till 2022-23. Thereafter, in compliance to orders of the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi 
(March 2023), it was constituted in April 2023, after lapse of 16 years.  Thus, the 
regulation of the procedure for admissions, addressing of complaints thereof was 
left to be managed by GGSIPU since 2007 .  Even after its formation, the ARC 
delegated the work of attending to admission related complaints to GGSIPU instead 
of addressing the issues itself.  Since April 2023, 65 complaints were received in 
ARC out of which, 39 were disposed of after holding inquiry, three required no 
action and 23 (35 per cent) were pending as of October 2023.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that ARC has been constituted and is 
effectively functioning. The r eply is not factual as elaborated above, and the   
functioning of the ARC has remained limited to holding occasional meetings with 
no substantial policy decisions or guidelines  issued, for regulating the admission 
process for Academic Session 2023-24 or beyond. 
(ii) Delayed notification of fee rates recommended by the State Fee 
Regulatory Committee 
In terms of Section 6 of the Act 2007, the Government had constituted a State Fee 
Regulatory Committee (SFRC) for the determination of the fees for various courses 
in self-financed affiliated institutions. Audit observed that while SFRC for academic 
years (AY) 2017-20 was constituted only in January 2017, it took almost two years 
to submit its recommendations (December 2018).  
DHE thereafter took eight months to notify the revised fee rates (August 2019) and 
thus the fee rates recommended for 2017-20 by the SFRC had to be made applicable 
for AY 2019 -22 and the rates applicable for 2014 -17, as per earlier SFRC’s 
recommendations, had to be extended for two more years viz 2017-19.   
The delay in revision of fee rates created confusion over fees to be charged by the 
self-financed affiliated colleges leading to litigation regarding the applicable fee and 
withholding of degrees by these institutions for fear of non-payment of enhanced 
fees after award of degrees. 

Chapter 3: Accreditation of Universities and Affiliation Process 
45 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DHE has notified the fee recommendation 
of 5th SFRC for 2022-25 and the 6th SFRC has also been constituted for 2025-28. 
3.4.3 Non-Implementation of 7 th Pay Commission recommendations in 
affiliated colleges 
Statute 24 of the University provides that the emoluments of the teaching or non -
teaching staff of the affiliated college or the institution should be in accordance with 
those laid down for the corresponding posts in the University.  Also, DHE decided 
(August 2018) to implement recommendations of the 7th Pay Commission (under 
AICTE and UGC schemes) for the revision of pay scales of teachers and 
administrative staff of GGSIPU and its affiliated colleges. 
Audit observed that 9 out of 12 sampled self-financed institutions were paying pay 
and allowances to their teaching and non -teaching staff as per  the 6th CPC while 
one institution was paying as per the 5th CPC.  Information in this regard in respect 
of one institution was not available.   Only one Institution was paying as per the 
7th CPC (from 2021-22 onwards) norms. 
The Department reiterated (March 2025) the reply of the University that the 
University does not interfere in the day-to-day administration of affiliated colleges 
but ensures emoluments of teaching and non -teaching staff in affiliated colleges 
through the mechanism of JAC reports and their compliance. 
The reply is not specific to the audit observation. The issues related to the inefficacy 
of the JAC process have been extensively dealt with in the preceding pages. Thus, 
of the  sampled 12 self -financed affiliated colleges , 10 were not paying pay and 
allowances to their staff as per recommendations of the 7th Pay Commission.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 4 
Financial management, 
Human Resource 
Management and 
Infrastructure facilities 

47 
Chapter 4 
 
Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure 
facilities 
• GGSIPU is dependent on Income from affiliation activities, which 
constitutes 53 to 57 per cent  of its total revenue, to meet its revenue 
expenditure, whereas DPSRU is dependent on Grant -in-Aid from the 
Government (77 per cent  of its receipts during 2018 -23). DTU largely 
meets its revenue expenditure from its internal revenues. 
• Investment of CPF funds by GSIPU was not in accordance with the 
pattern of investment specified by the Government.  It also suffered a 
loss of interest of ₹2.11 crore due to delay in the investment of surplus 
funds during 2018-23. 
• Dwarka campus of GGSIPU (March 2022 to April 2023) and Rohini 
campus of DTU (January 2022 to July 2023) did not avail rebate 
amounting to ₹  4.66 crore available on DJB water bills despite having 
functional Rainwater Harvesting (RWH) System and Sewage Treatment 
Plant (STP). 
• There was acute shortage of teaching staff during 2018 -23 ranging 
between 38.77 per cent and 44.84 per cent in GGSIPU, 55 per cent and 60 
per cent in DTU and 21.77 per cent and 54.43 per cent in DPSRU. 
• Shortage of non-teaching staff and technical staff in GGSIPU during the 
period 2018-23 ranged from 38 to 50 and 39 to 65 per cent respectively 
and in DTU, these ranged from 62 to 67 per cent and 44 to 49 per cent 
respectively.  Similarly, vacancies in non -teaching posts in DPSRU 
during 2018 -23 ranged from 34 per cent  to 53 per cent  and those in 
technical posts ranged from 53 per cent to 80 per cent. 
• Audit observed shortcomings such as delay in recruitment, recruitment 
without sanctioned posts and engagement of ineligible persons as 
consultants. 
• All the three Universities suffered from shortage of classrooms and 
sitting space. Dwarka Campus of GGSIPU had seating capacity of only 
2,973 for 4,017 students, Rohini Campus of DTU had seating capacity of 
8,280 for 13,908 students and DPSRU had seating capacity of only 1,157 
for 2,800 students. 
• Audit also observed inadequate infrastructure, non -utilisation of 
available infrastructure and equipment etc. in these universities during 
joint physical inspection. 
Finance, Human resources and infrastructure are the most important resources in 
any organization engaged in providing services in education sector.  Adequate 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
48 
funding is required to provide the necessary infrastructure and also for engagement 
and retention of competent manpower.  Deficiencies in the manag ement of these 
resources in the three selected universities are discussed in t he succeeding 
paragraphs. 
4.1 Financial Management 
Prudent financial management is needed to ensure that financial  resources are 
allocated and used efficiently in accordance with the objective s of the university 
adhering to the extant rules and regulations in this regard.  Deficiencies observed in 
the three selected universities in this regard are discussed in  the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
4.1.1 Budget and expenditure  
The details of receipts and expenditure of the three Universiti es during the period 
2018-23 were as given as below. 
 
 
194 222 189 217 242
173 194 172 209 204
21 28 17 9 59
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Chart 4.1: Year-wise details of receipts and expenditure 
of GGSIPU
(₹ in crore)
Funds available Expenditure Savings
313 385 462 568 666175 220 233
298 186
138
165
229
270 480
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Chart 4.2: Year-wise details of receipts and expenditure 
of DTU 
(₹ in crore)
Funds available Expenditure Savings

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
49 
 
Income from affiliation activities, ranging between 53 per cent  (2022-23) to 
57 per cent (2018-19), contributed the major chunk of  GGSIPU’s revenue.  This is 
likely to come down as autonomous colleges need not pay affilia tion fee annually 
consequent upon implementation of the UGC (Conferment of Autono mous Status 
upon Colleges and Measures for Maintenance of Standards in Auto nomous 
Colleges) Regulations 2018 whereas the expenditure is likely to  go up in view of 
the requirement to provide Pension to employees who were on regular employment 
on or before 31 December 2003 and proposed development of Phase  II of Dwarka 
Campus at an estimated cost of ₹973.99 crore (with no commitmen t of financial 
support from Government).  Thus, the University may have to ide ntify ways to 
increase/diversify its revenue. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has taken steps like increase in 
intake of students, introduction of new courses, a marginal inc rease in fees of 
various programs, generating rental revenue, etc. to increase/diversify its revenues 
and decrease dependency on income from affiliation. 
DTU meets its revenue expenditure from its internal revenues in  the form of 
University Generated Funds (UGFs)1 and Non-Government Funds2 (NGFs) and had 
a balance of ₹ 125 crore in UGFs and ₹ 355 crore in NGFs as of March 2023.  The 
Audit also observed that during 2018-23, it received a GIA of ₹ 192.75 crore from 
the Government albeit towards the end of the relevant financial year.   
 
1  Receipts into UGF includes academic receipts, income from investment and other income. 
2  University treats earmarked fu nds like Scholarship, Examination, Sponsored Projects, Medal and 
Scholarships, University Research Development fund, Economicall y Weaker Section, 
Consultancy, Facilities and Services, etc. as Non-government fu nds (NGFs).  Their income and 
expenditure are not reflected in the Income and Expenditure Acc ount of the University.  
However, closing balances in these NGFs are shown as liability of the University in its Balance 
Sheet for the year. 
15
31 29
46
64
8
18 24
34
54
7
13 4
12
10
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Chart 4.3: Year-wise details of receipts and expenditure of 
DPSRU
(₹ in crore)
Funds available Expenditure Savings

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
50 
In the exit conference, the Secretary acknowledged the fact that there have been 
delays in releasing GIA and stated that the department has formulated a SOP for the 
timely release of GIA. 
In the case of DPSRU, out of the total receipts of ₹185.10 crore during 2018 -23, 
₹143.78 crore (77 percent) were GIA received from the Government, making it 
heavily dependent on government support.   It needs to identify newer sources of 
income for self-sustainability. 
4.1.2 Security deposit of students not refunded  
DTTE had instructed (December 2003) GGSIPU, DTU (erstwhile Delhi College of 
Engineering) and DPSRU (erstwhile Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Research) to remit security deposits remaining unclaimed by students for more than 
3 years to the Government Account.  As of March 2023, unclaimed security deposits 
of students amounting to ₹ 6.67 crore, ₹ 4.46 crore and ₹ 1.34 crore were lying with 
GGSIPU, DTU and DPSRU respectively (dating back up to 2008 -09 in case of 
GGSIPU).  DTU did not maintain any records relating to the students to whom the 
security deposit was payable.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has taken steps to encourage the 
students to claim their student security and from academic year 2024 -25 it has 
decided to discontinue student security  deposits.  In case of DTU, the University 
has transferred the security deposit amount that remained unclaimed for more than 
three years to the University’s Corpus fund account. In the case of DPSRU, it was 
stated that the University needs to develop an easy mechanism for claiming of 
security deposit by the students. 
The unclaimed security deposit amount should be remitted into government account 
as directed by DTTE.  
4.1.3 Investment of CPF/surplus funds 
As per the pattern of investment specified (March 2015) by the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India (GoI), fund under Non -Government provident Funds, 
Superannuation Funds and Gratuity Funds were to be invested in Government 
securities (45 to 50 per cent), Debt Securities and term deposits of banks (35 to 45 
per cent), money market instruments (up to 5 per cent) and others like exchange 
traded funds and Asset backed securities (10 to 20 per cent). 
Audit observed that in violation of the above, during the year 2018 -19, 
96.71 per cent of Contributory Provident Funds (₹72.37 crore) of GGSIPU were 
invested in Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDRs) including flexi deposit and remaining 
3.29 per cent (₹ 2.46 crore) in government securities. The percentage of investment 
in government securities reduced gradually over the years from 3.29 per cent in 
March 2019 to 2.76 per cent in March 2023. GGSIPU had not invested CPF funds 
in government securities since April 2010. 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
51 
In its reply, the University noted (January 2024) the audit observation and assured 
to explore the possibility of investment for better and secure returns. 
Apart from the above, GGSIPU also suffered a loss of interest of ₹2.11 crore due 
to delay in the investment of surplus funds during 2018 -23 as the Chairperson of 
the investment committee was not available for meeting, being from outside Delhi.   
The University replied (January 2024) that the chairperson who was from outside 
Delhi has now been replaced with an internal member from the University to hasten 
the process.  Further, the Department stated (March 2025) that meeting of 
investment committees are now convened regularly. 
4.1.4 Diversion of funds 
The Government of NCT of Delhi initiated a program for the creation of meditation 
and yoga extension cells in the schools of Delhi and providing diploma and 
certificate courses in meditation and yoga (from 15 March 2021) by establishing a 
“Centre for Meditation and Yoga Sciences (CMYS)” at DPSRU.  DPSRU received 
grants-in-aid of ₹ 22.36 crore from DTTE for the purpose.  Audit observed that - 
➢ Out of ₹ 5.02 crore of CMYS funds utilised for construction activities, an 
expenditure of ₹ 3.42 crore was incurred on construction activities not related 
to the CYMS viz construction of (i) temporary shed in playground, (ii) Light 
gauge framing system over examination office block and (iii) Students/  
Academic Semi -pucca office near reception and extension of library and 
installation of lift. 
➢ An amount of ₹ 18.03 lakhs from CMYS funds was utilized for purchasing 
items like laptops for IT Department, brass figures for various occasions, 
furniture for guest house, Zoom conference online platform for VC/Registrar 
Office etc. which were not related to the Scheme. 
GNCTD discontinued the CMYS scheme in November 2022. The discontinuation 
of the Scheme by the Government in November 2022 resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure ₹  1.60 crore on incomplete work of construction of Yoga and 
Meditation Centre besides the creation of a liability of ₹  2.54 crore towards four 
construction works of Yoga and Meditation Centre and infrastructure development 
of other parts of the University.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that GIA of ₹ 22.36 crore was given to 
DPSRU for the CMYS scheme and the said amount was to be utilised for CMYS 
activities by the DPSRU.  However, as discussed above, DPSRU utilised a portion 
of these funds on items not related to the CMYS scheme. 
4.1.5 Short deposit of the Universities’ share in the National Pension System 
National Pension System (NPS) was implemented retrospectively in DTU (June 
2017) and DPSRU (February 2021) with effect from January 2010 and May 2018 
respectively.  While depositing the Universities’ share of NPS contribution for the 
retrospective periods,  DTU and DPSRU deposited just the principal amount , 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
52 
resulting in a short deposit of interest payable for the period from the date on which 
the contributions became due.  The amount short deposited amounted to ₹ 31.04 
lakh in the case of DTU and ₹ 16.29 lakh in the case of DPSRU.  
The Department stated (March 2025) in case of DTU that the matter is under 
consideration of the University and action will be taken after obtaining approval of 
the Finance Committee and the Board of Management of DTU.  In case of DPSRU, 
it was informed that the interest  amount was remitted by th e University (April 
2024).  However, no documentary evidence was provided for the said remittance. 
4.1.6 Subsidy in water bills not claimed  
Delhi Jal Board (DJB) circular dated 18 March 2016 provides for 10 per cent  
subsidy if rain water harvesting (RWH) system is installed in the premises and 
10 per cent subsidy if sewage treatment plant (STP) is installed in the premises. In 
case both RWH and STP are installed, the subsidy is restricted to 15 per cent of the 
bill amount.  Dwarka campus of GGSIPU (March 2022 to April 2023) and Rohini 
campus of DTU ( January 2022 to July 2023)  did not avail rebate amounting to 
₹ 4.66 crore  available on water bills of DJB for having functional Rainwater 
Harvesting (RWH) System and Sewage Treatment Plant (STP).   
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has started availing the rebate 
on water bills for its Dwarka campus from January 2024 onwards  (after being 
pointed out in audit) and the matter is being pursued for its Surajmal Vihar campus. 
It further stated that DTU had applied for approval of Delhi Jal Board for Rainwater 
harvesting system at Rohini in September 2022 and at Vivek Vihar in February 
2024.  Approval from DJB is still awaited and University will apply for subsidy 
once the approval of DJB is received. 
4.1.7 Short receipt of University’s share of fees 
In return for services like admission counselling, preparation of syllabus for the 
courses, conduct of examination, preparation of results, award of degrees, etc., the 
University collects University charges from the affiliated colleges at prescribed 
rate. 
Audit observed that an amount of ₹ 10.67 crore from 57 institutions affiliated with 
Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University was outstanding as of October 2023 on 
account of the University’s share of fees deposited by students up to the Academic 
Session 2022-23.  In its reply, University stated (January 2024) that it has taken 
several steps for recovery of its outstanding dues from the affiliated colleges like 
retaining the University’s share at the time of admission of students as for first year 
the fee is deposited in the University account, as well as following up the matter of 
deposit of dues at higher level. 
4.1.8 Other deficiencies in financial management  
Audit observed various  other deficiencies in financial management in the three 
Universities as below: 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
53 
GGSIPU 
(i) Loss of grant -in-aid from Government : The University could not get a 
grant of ₹ 20 crore for renovation and up -gradation of class -rooms from the 
Government in year 2022-23 as it did not follow the guidelines of DHE for 
preparation and submission of estimates. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU had submitted a proposal of 
₹ 9.73 crore, however, the sanction of DHE was later withdrawn as sufficient funds 
were not allocated by the Finance and Planning Departments to DHE.  
Audit observed that due to deficiencies in the proposal submitted by the University, 
the grant could not be obtained in year 2022 -23. In the subsequent year 2023-24, 
the Government, however, made a provisions at initial budget estimates, but later 
on at  the stage of revised estimates , the sanction was finally withdrawn due to 
paucity of funds. The department’s reply is silent whether funds were available in 
2022-23. 
(ii) Advertisements released at commercial rates: The University released 
advertisements costing ₹ 6.50 crore at commercial rates during 2018-23 instead of 
at reduced rates through the Directorate of Information and Publicity, GNCTD.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU  could not obtain DAVP rates 
despite its best efforts  and had to publish its advertisements at commercial rates. 
Reply is not tenable  as the University could publish its advertisements at DAVP 
rates by routing them under the name of its administrative department (i.e. 
Department of Higher Education), on the lines of Ambedkar University. 
(iii) Service tax not collected : The University had not been collecting Service 
tax/ Goods and Services Tax3 (GST) on the affiliation fee collected which resulted 
in the creation of a service tax liability of ₹ 10.68 crore for the years 2013-23.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has started charging GST on 
affiliation fee from the financial year 2023-24 and has made payment of its dues for 
the period 2017-23 to the GST authorities. The reply is silent on payment of dues 
on account of service tax for the period 2013-17. 
DTU 
(i)  Surplus funds not invested:  Out of 39 bank accounts maintained by the DTU, 
26 were Current accounts.  Audit test checked balances of five of these and observed 
that balances at month end ranged up to  ₹ 74.23 crore.  Investing these surplus 
balances in term deposits through auto sweep facility would have earned interest 
for DTU.  
 
3  Goods and Service Tax subsumed the Service Tax w.e.f. 1 July 2017. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
54 
The Department stated (March 2025) that as per recommendation of Audit, DTU 
has converted all of it bank accounts into flexi account and now no excess balance 
remains in its saving/current accounts. 
(ii) License fee not revised :  DTU did not revise the rate of license fee (as 
prescribed and revised 4 by the Directorate of Estates (DoE)  from time to time) 
charged for space let out to the State Bank of India which resulted in under-recovery 
of license fee of ₹ 19.22 lakh during the period 1 April 2020 to 31 December 2023.  
In its reply, University stated that demand notice has been issued to SBI for the 
same. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU has revised the rate of license fee 
and recovered the dues calculated on account of increased license fee.  Reply is, 
however, not supported with any documentary evidence. 
DPSRU 
(i)  Short recovery of license fee :  Instead of collecting licence fee at rates 
prescribed by the Directorate of Estates (DoE), DPSRU has been charging ₹ 30,000 
per month for running of the Hostel mess/canteen in the Campus which resulted in 
short recovery of license fee of ₹ 44.44 lakh for the period from 21 February 2022 
to 29 February 2024. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that license fee is to be charged by DPSRU 
as per GNCTD rates i.e rates prescribed by DoE and endorsed by PWD, GNCTD.  
(ii) Interest on GIA: Scrutiny of utilization certificate of Grant-in-aid for the year 
2018-19 revealed that interest amounting to ₹ 0.28 crore accrued on the GIA 
received during the year was neither remitted to the Government account nor 
adjusted against grant for 2019-20 in contravention to provisions of Rule 230 (8) of 
General Financial Rules 2017.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that DPSRU will account for the said interest 
of GIA for the year 2018-19 in the forthcoming utilisation certificate. 
(iii) Income tax exemption not availed: DPSRU, being an educational institution, 
was eligible for exemption from payment of income tax under Section 12A of the 
Income Tax Act.  However, it obtained an exemption certificate only in April 2022 
after being pointed out by Audit in 2021.  Delay in obtaining an exemption from 
income tax authorities resulted in an undue payment of ₹ 43.99 lakhs for 
Assessment Year 2021-22 and a deduction of tax at source of ₹ 40.47 lakhs during 
2018-23.   
DPSRU stated (March 2024) that the Chartered Accountant responsible for the 
preparation of Annual Accounts neither filed an ITR nor applied for an exemption 
 
4  DoE’s per sqm. per month rates were revised twice during this period 1 April 2020 to 
31 December 2023 to ₹ 800 for April 2020 onwards and to ₹ 940 for April 2023 onwards.  
However, DTU kept collecting the license fee at the rate of ₹ 585 effective prior to April 2017 
and ₹ 675 effective from 1 April 2017. 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
55 
certificate until Audit  flagged the issue  in 2021. Further, the Department stated 
(March 2025) that DPSRU should be more vigilant in future in dealing with income 
tax matters. 
(iv)  DJB water connection not pursued despite spending ₹ 3.66 crore:  DPSRU 
deposited ₹ 3.66 crore in March 2019/January 2021 with Delhi Jal Board (DJB) for 
providing water connection inside its campus.  DJB raised (May 2022) a further 
demand of ₹ 1.36 crore for laying water pipeline and requested the University to 
arrange all necessary permissions from the relevant authorities such as Public 
Works Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Traffic Police.  There was 
no further development and even after depositing ₹ 3.66 crore, DPSRU was yet to 
receive potable water supply from DJB and had to rely on groundwater for its daily 
needs. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DJB demanded more funds for the deposit 
work and informed in February 2025 that the work of laying water pipelines will 
take more than one year.  
(V)  Non-Reconciliation of financial data: There was a mismatch between figures 
of fees collected from students as maintained by the Student Welfare Wing and 
Accounts Wing of the University for 2018 -23. While the fee collected was 
₹ 1.62 crore more than that due in 2018-19, fee collected was ₹ 2.37 crore less than 
that due in 2019-23 as per these records. The Department stated (March 2025) that 
the financial data i.e. student fee etc. should be reconciled by the University for 
transparency. 
Management of financial resources by these Universities were marred by failure to 
invest surplus funds, diversion of funds, short -remittance of NPS contributions, 
non-availing of subsidy on water bills, failure to obtain grants from the 
Government, short -charging of license fee for space let out etc.  Due to these 
deficiencies in handling matters relating to finances, these Universities suffered a 
combined loss of ₹ 9.19 crore.  
4.2 Human Resource Management 
Education is a field where human resource has a pivotal role and it is important to 
have adequate and competent staff to ensure quality education.  Observations on 
human resource management by the three Universities are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
4.2.1 Shortage of teaching staff 
Audit observed acute shortage of teaching staff, which perform the core function of 
imparting education, in all the three Universities.  Overall vacancy in teaching posts 
in GGSIPU during 2018-23 ranged between 38.77 per cent and 44.84 per cent and 
especially in the cadre of Professor, it ranged from 58 per cent to 63 per cent even 
after considering teaching staff on contract. Further, University Schools of 
Medicine and Para -Medical Health Sciences, Centre for Disaster Management 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
56 
Studies and Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences were functioning 
without any regular faculty.   
The overall vacancies in teaching posts of DTU ranged between 55 per cent and 
60 per cent, even after considering the contractual teachers. Three-fourth posts of 
Professors and Associate Professors in DTU remained vacant during the audit 
period 2018 -23. As against sanctioned post of 38 Professors and 153 Associate 
Professors in DTU in 2022 -23, only 15 Professors (19 per cent) and 37 Associate 
Professors (24 per cent) were found posted. DTU appointed only 14 to 21 Assistant 
Professors on contractual basis (as per norms, maximum 70 faculty can be engaged 
on contractual basis) to meet the shortage and resorted to engagement of guest/  
part-time teachers to meet its requirement of seating capacity.   
In DPSRU, the vacancies in teaching posts ranged from 21.77  per cent (2022-23) 
to 54.43 per cent (2019-20) even after considering the contractual teacher. 
In spite of facing such shortage off teaching staff, teaching staff of DPSRU were 
assigned additional duties of non -academic nature (like purchase, recruitment, 
library, administration, hostel and store) which may affect their assigned academic 
work.   
Audit also observed that the percentage of contractual teaching staff in GGSIPU 
(19 per cent in 2021-22 and 15 per cent in 2022-23) and DPSRU ( ranging from 
13.92 per cent  in 2019 -20 to 23.91 per cent  in 2018 -19 excluding 2020 -21) 
exceeded the limit of 10 per cent as per UGC regulations. 
In case of DTU and DPSRU, Department stated (March 2025) that it acknowledges 
the shortage of teaching staff and DTU initiated the process of recruitment of 158 
faculty positions in March 2024.   However, the current status of recruitment was 
not given in the reply. 
4.2.2 Shortage of non-teaching and technical staff 
As in the case of teaching staff, all three Universities suffered from shortage of staff 
in non -teaching and technical staff also .  Shortage of non -teaching staff and 
technical staff in GGSIPU during the period 2018 -23 ranged from 38 to 50 and 
39 to 65 per cent respectively and in DTU, these ranged from 62 to 67 per cent and 
44 to 49 per cent respectively.  Similarly, vacancies in non -teaching posts in 
DPSRU during 2018 -23 ranged from 34 per cent  to 53 per cent  and those in 
technical posts ranged from 53 per cent to 80 per cent.  Such shortages of staff may 
hamper smooth functioning of the Universities.   
Shortages were significant in the cadres of Director, Section Officer, General 
Assistant, Assistant, Assistant Accountant, Stenographer etc. in GGSIPU and 
Administrative Officer, Director Physical Education, Librarian, Store Officer, 
Senior Office Assistant, Stenographer etc. in DTU.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that in case of GGSIPU, the University has 
taken best possible steps to fill up the non -teaching posts and to meet out the 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
57 
functional requirements of the University non -teaching staff has been hired on 
outsourced basis.  In case of DTU, Department stated (March 2025) that DTU 
completed the process of recruitment of five non-teaching and three technical posts. 
In case of DPSRU, Department stated (March 2025) that process of recruitment of 
non-teaching and technical staff, initiated in 2022, is likely to be completed soon. 
4.2.3 Absence of dedicated/regular personnel in key posts 
Audit observed that key posts which plays pivotal roles in various aspects of 
functioning of Universities were either vacant or being looked after by officers on 
additional charge/ consultants which is not conducive to efficient and effective 
functioning of Universities. 
GGSIPU was functioning without a Pro Vice -Chancellor, required for 
Universities with more than 100 affiliated colleges, from June 2019.  Further, 
crucial administrative posts  like Registrar, Controller of Finance, Controller of 
Examination etc. were held either as additional charge or officiating basis 
(Annexure 4. 1) and three posts of Deputy Registrars looking after important 
functions such as recruitment, admissions and counselling, were held by retired 
Government Servants hired as Consultants.   
In its reply, the University stated (January 2024) that the matter of absence of Pro 
Vice-Chancellor will be placed for consideration of BOM.  The Department stated 
(March 2025) that GGSIPU has appointed the Registrar on regular basis and 
initiated the process of filling up the posts of Controller of Finance, Deputy 
Registrars and Assistant Registrars. 
In DTU, posts of Vice Chancellor, Pro -Vice Chancellor, Registrar, Controller of 
Finance, etc. were either held by officials as additional charge/officiating basis or 
lying vacant for a major part of 2018-23 (Annexure 4.1).   
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU has initiated the recruitment process 
for the post of Registrar, Controller of Examination and Controller of Finance in 
September 2024. 
In DPSRU  also, the post of Controller of Finance was held by the Registrar in 
officiating capacity from January 2021 to August 2023 and posts of Deputy 
Registrar and Director (DIPSAR) remained vacant during 2018-23. DPSRU stated 
(January 2024) that selected candidate did not join the post of Controller of Finance, 
process of selection of Deputy Registrar got cancelled due to administrative reasons 
and the charge of Director (DIPSAR) was given to a senior faculty.  
4.2.4 Recruitment 
Despite acute shortages in almost all the cadres of personnel, the efforts of the 
Universities for recruitment of staff for vacant posts lacked intent and urgency.  
Even where recruitments are made, Audit observed shortcomings such as delay, 
recruitment without s anctioned posts, engagement of ineligible persons as 
consultants etc. as discussed below: 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
58 
(i) Delay in recruitment 
The Board of Management of GGSIPU approved (August 2021) creation of 
144 teaching posts and 168 non -teaching posts and filling up 50 per cent  total 
teaching posts in first two years.  Despite the shortage of staff faced by them, the 
University made recruitment to only 32 posts of Assistance Professors in 
October 2022 and took no action for recruitment to the remaining sanctioned posts 
as of December 2023. 
DTU could recruit only 51 Assistant Professors against 167 vacancies in various 
disciplines advertised in July 2019 whereas no recruitment was made against 
another 87 vacancies of Assistant Professors advertised in the same month.  Further, 
the recruitment process took 16 months to complete (November 2020) against the 
time of six months prescribed by UGC.  DTU also did not take any action for 
recruitment of Professors and Associate Professors despite facing severe shortage 
in these cadres as of March 2023.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU had withdrawn the recruitment of 
remaining vacancies against 167 and 87 advertised teaching positions and a fresh 
advertisement for recruitment of 158 vacancies in nine disciplines was issued in 
March 2024, against which the University has completed the recruitment process 
of 68 vacancies of Assistant Professors in three disciplines. 
Apart from the above, 15 teaching posts and five non-teaching posts were approved 
in October and November 2020 respectively for the Department of Design of DTU 
but no action was taken for recruitment as of December 2023.  DTU stated 
(May 2024) that recruitment process for 6 posts of Assistant Professors was 
initiated in March 2024. 
DPSRU stated that most of the records relating to recruitment were in the custody 
of the Vigilance Wing of DTTE and provided only one file each relating to regular 
recruitment and contractual engagement of teaching staff and one relating to 
engagement of Assistant Registrars on contractual basis.  In all these, audit observed 
that the composition of selection committee was not as per  the Statutes of the 
University.  It was also noticed that DPSRU could not recruit the targeted number 
of teaching staff. 
(ii) Recruitment without sanctioned posts 
DTU made recruitment in some non -teaching and technical posts like attendant, 
nurse, cameraman, sports coach, lab assistant, telephone operator during 2018 -23 
for which there were no sanctioned posts ( Annexure 4. 2).  Also, five Assistant 
Professors were recruited for the Department of Design in August 2018 against the 
sanctioned strength of other Departments.  DTU stated (April 2024) that excess 
employment of staff was against vacant posts in other cadres.  The reply is untenable 
as posts in various cadres are sanctioned as per requirement and recruiting staff in 
one cadre against vacancy in another cadre is irregular.   

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
59 
Further, no post of Deputy Controller of Accounts (DCA) had been created in DTU 
as required by Finance Department, GNCTD orders of July 2011, but a DCA was 
posted (March 2022) by the Finance Department in DTU on deputation.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that as per pattern of assistance, all posts in 
Finance and Accounts wings of DTU are to be filled from accounts cadre of 
GNCTD or on deputation basis.  Fact remains that a DCA was posted by Finance 
Department, GNCTD in DTU, though there was no such sanctioned post in DTU. 
(iii) Irregularities in engagement of consultants 
(a) In GGSIPU, three retired Government servants were engaged as consultants 
against vacant posts of Deputy Registrar .  They  were ineligible for engagement 
against these posts as they were not drawing Grade Pay of ₹8,700 preceding their 
retirement, as required under Recruitment Rules.  In its reply, the University stated 
(January 2024) that the clause was erroneous and as per revised Recruitment Rules 
approved by the Board of Management in May 2023, they were eligible.  The 
Department reiterated (March 2025 ) the reply of the University.  The reply is 
untenable as the  consultants were appointed  between December 2020 and June 
2022 and were then ineligible as per extant rules. 
(b) GNCTD guidelines ( December 2015) provide that remuneration for retired 
government servants appointed as consultants in autonomous bodies be calculated 
as basic pay last drawn minus basic pension, plus DA. However, GGSIPU’s Office 
Memorandum (OM) of December 2022 disregarded these guidelines and broadened 
the definition of "last emoluments" to include HRA and transport allowance, while 
fixing the remuneration to be paid to retired government servants.  This resulted in 
excess payment of ₹19.38 lakh  to five retired government servants,  appointed as 
consultants. The OM’s benefits were also irregularly applied retrospectively from 
April 2021, despite approval of the Board of Management only in May 2023. 
In its reply, the University stated (January 2024) that OM of December 2015 was 
never adopted by GGSIPU and hence its provisions were not applicable for 
appointment of retired Government servants as consultant on contract basis. 
Reply is not tenable as for appointment of retired Government servants/pensioners 
of GNCTD, the guidelines of December 2015 are binding. Further, prior to issuance 
of University OM of December 2022, University was fixing consolidated salary of 
retired Government Servants as per the Government guidelines of December 2015. 
To sum up, these Universities suffered from acute shortage of teaching, 
non-teaching and other staff which compromise s its ability to impart quality 
education.  Absence of regular officials in key posts was also observed which led 
to inefficiency in the functioning of the Universities.  Despite such shortages, there 
were delay in action for recruitment and where recruitments were made, audit 
observed cases of non -compliance to rules . Engagement of contractual staff was 
also riddled with irregularities. 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
60 
Recommendation 6:  The Universities should complete recruitment process of 
teaching, non-teaching, technical and administrative staff in a time bound 
manner by filling up critical posts identified on priority.   
4.3 Infrastructure facilities and irregularities in works contr acts 
Audit observed irregularities in work execution, besides inadeq uate infrastructure 
facilities. There was a shortage of seating space in three samp led universities as 
depicted below:  
 
Audit findings on infrastructure facilities at the three univer sities selected for 
detailed audit are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.3.1 GGSIPU 
GGSIPU has two campuses, one at Dwarka and the other at Surajma l Vihar.  
Construction of first phase of the Dwarka campus was completed in March 2013 
and Surajmal Vihar Campus started functioning from 2021-22.  Au dit observed a 
shortage of classrooms in Dwaraka Campus with seating capacity of 2973 available 
for 4017 students enrolled as of October 2023 while classrooms in Surajmal Vihar 
Campus were adequate (seating capacity of 1864 for 1616 students).  
Deficiencies noticed in construction and maintenance works were as follows: 
Dwarka Campus 
(i) There were delays in completion of 88 out of 256 works of capit al/repair/ 
maintenance nature ranging up to 27 months but the contractors were not penalized 
for the delay in any of these cases. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU attributed the d elay in 
completion of works to non-availability of site due to differen t activities in the 
University during day time and hence no compensation was levied  on the 
contractors.  Reply is not acceptable as non-availability of si te during day time in 
4837
9660
1157
5633
15406
2800
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
GGSIPU DTU DPSRU
Chart 4.4: Seating capacity available Vs Enrolled students
Seating capacity available (No. of students)
Seating Space required (No. of enrolled students)

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
61 
the University is a known fact and hence while working out the estimated time for 
completion of work, the same should have been factored in. 
(ii) An Animal House constructed at a cost of ₹ 26 lakh at the Dwarka campus 
in August 2022 for Centre of Excellenc e in Pharmaceutical Sciences (C EPS) was 
not functional as of October 2023.  CEPS applied for the required registration with 
Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals 
(CCSEA) in January 2023, which was awaited as of November 2023. The 
Department stated (March 2025) that animal house facility was approved and 
registered with CCSEA in November 2024.  Reply is silent on whether animal 
house has become functional.  
(iii) A swimming pool at Dwarka campus which was repaired at a cost of  
₹ 53.37 lakh in July 2020 was not functional as of October 2023. In its reply, 
University reiterated (March 2025) that it is in the process of making the swimming 
pool usable for beginners. 
(iv) Failure of the University in assessing its power requirements resulted in 
excess expenditure of ₹ 1.67 crore at Dwarka campus and ₹ 0.43 crore at Surajmal 
Vihar campus during 2018 -23 on account of fixed charges paid on excess 
sanctioned load.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU reviewed its power 
requirements and has now reduced contract demand from 1959 KVA to 1800 KVA 
for Dwarka campus and from 2041 KVA to 1150 KVA for Surajmal Vihar campus. 
(v) Proposal for construction of Phase-II at Dwarka Campus which was initiated 
in April 2013 was still at planning stage as of December 2023.  As per the plan, the 
Campus would be able to accommodate 8700 additional students once construction 
of Phase-II is completed.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that PWD had submitted an estimate of 
₹ 973.99 crore for development of Phase -II of Dwarka campus in March 2023 to 
DHE, GNCTD for accord of administrative approval and expenditure sanction. 
 
Surajmal Vihar Campus 
(i) Construction work at Campus at Surajmal Vihar which was to be completed 
in November 2019 was completed only in June 2023 with a delay of 27 months and 
taking over of various facilities of the campus from PWD were still in process as of 
October 2023.  The C ampus started functioning from 2021 -22 amidst the 
construction activities.   
The Department reiterated (March 2025) the reply of University/PWD of  January 
2024 that major causes of delay were reduced space due to huge excavation work 
of earth for foundation work, stoppage of work due to spread of Covid 19, frequent 
ban imposed by NGT, proof checking of revised drawings etc.   Reply is not 
acceptable as fact remains that out of total delay of 1329 days, delay of 368 days 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
62 
was on account of handing over drawings/revised drawings and non-availability of 
funds, which could have been avoided with better co -ordination amongst the 
University, the Consultant Architect, Public Works Department and the Contractor. 
4.3.2  Delhi Technological University (DTU) 
The review showed the following deficiencies vis a vis infrastructure at DTU – 
(i) Shortage of Classrooms: DTU has two campuses, one at Rohini with a student 
seating capacity of 8280 and the other at Vivek Vihar 5 with a capacity of 1380.  
Against this, audit observed that the number of students enrolled was 13,908 in 
Rohini Campus and 1498 in Vivek Vihar Campus as of October 2023.  As can be 
seen from table below that the classrooms in Rohini Campus were totally 
inadequate to accommodate the students enrolled: 
Table 4.1: Availability of academic space in Rohini Campus of DTU 
Phase of 
construction 
Year of 
Completion 
of 
construction 
Number of 
classrooms 
Number of 
students that 
can be 
accommodated 
Number of 
enrolled 
students 
as of 
October 
2023 
Shortage of 
academic 
space for 
number of 
students 
Phase-I 1996 NA 3000  
 
13908 
 
 
 
5628 
Stage I of 
Phase-II 
2022 67 5280 
Total   8280 13908 
The shortage of classrooms was much more severe before completion of Stage-I of 
second phase of the Rohini campus in October 2022 which added classrooms for 
an additional 5280 students. The shortage of classrooms was a result of slow pace 
of infrastructure development in DTU as discussed below:   
• The first phase of the Rohini campus constructed in the year 1996 had a 
student intake capacity of 3000. 
• In the year 2013, when student population reached over 9000, University 
decided to create infrastructure for 13000 students in five phases.  The 
proposed Phase-II included construction of nine buildings by January 2015. 
• The proposal for Stage -I of Phase -II with five buildings was approved by 
the Expenditure Finance Committee only in July 2018 and by the Cabinet 
in August 2018. 
• The work of construction of Stage -I of Phase -II of DTU for creating 
academic infrastructure for 5280 students was awarded in September 2019, 
with stipulated date of start and completion of the work as 
23 September 2019 and 23 December 2020.  The work was actually 
completed on 18 October 2022 with a delay of 22 months out of which delay 
of seven months was due to delay in handing over drawings/revised 
 
5  Started functioning from Academic Session 2017-18. 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
63 
drawings or late approval of designs/material while academic session 
2022-23 was started amidst construction activities. 
• Audit also observed that processes of handing/taking over of various 
facilities of the campus from PWD were still going on as of October 2023.  
Further enhancement in infrastructure was yet to be taken up by DTU.  As 
a result, infrastructure for only 8280 students were available for nearly 
14000 students enrolled in Rohini Campus in 2023-24. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that in DTU, 145 classrooms are adequate for 
the present student capacity and students are divided in classrooms and laboratories 
during their study hours.  The Board of Management of DTU in its 53 rd meeting 
approved the proposal for necessary infrastructure development for 22000 students 
in future. Fact remains that there was shortage of space as observed during joint 
physical verification in October 2023 as extra benches were placed in the teacher’s 
podium area to accommodate more students in the class rooms in old a cademic 
building.  
(ii)  DTTE approved (February 2019) construction of World Class Skill Centre  
(WCSC) at DTU through Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation (DTTDC) which was to be made functional from 2022 -23 onwards 
with two certificate courses (logistics management and film production) catering to 
120 students.  However, the construction work was awarded more than two years 
later in September 2021 at a cost of ₹ 5.55 crore, to be completed by July 2022.  
During a joint physical inspection of the Rohini ca mpus of DTU in October 2023, 
Audit observed that the work of construction had fully stopped, with physical 
progress in the construction work at 80 per cent and the WCSC was yet to be made 
functional.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that work was not carried out further by 
DTTDC as DTTE did not release the funds due to less allocation under the budget 
head during 2023-24. Thus, the timelines were breached at all stages of the work 
and the building is still not operational (October 2023). 
(iii)  In view of limited availability of hostel beds, priority is given to students 
coming from outside Delhi while allotting hostel accommodation , as per the 
hostel allotment Rules of the University.  As of November 2023, there were 1733 
hostel beds available for boys and 766 beds for girls in various hostels of the 
University.  As per data provided, d uring 2018 -20 and 2022 -236, 1546 students 
from Delhi were provided hostel accommodation while about 1300 students from 
outside Delhi were awaiting hostel accommodation. However, detailed data on 
application for and allotment of hostel beds at the University was not made available 
and in the absence of records relating to the allotment process, Audit could not 
verify fairness and objectivity in the allotment of hostel accommodation. 
 
6 Classes were held online in 2020-21 and 2021-22 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
64 
DTU stated (March 2024) that no undergraduate student of Outside-Delhi category 
was denied the hostel facility and a hard copy of data in this regard was not 
maintained as the data is voluminous.  The reply is untenable as there were many 
students from outside Delhi awaiting hostel accommodation as seen by audit during 
the perusal of data on hostel accommodation.  
The Department furnished (March 2025) revised data for the period 2018 -20 and 
2022-23 on hostel allocation to students in DTU.  However, it was not supported 
by any documentary evidence and hence audit could not validate it. 
4.3.3 DPSRU 
The University at present has one campus in an area of 10.5 acres at Pushp Vihar, 
New Delhi.  
(i) Shortage of Classrooms:  Against a seating capacity of 1157, there were 2800 
students enrolled in the University indicating a shortage of classrooms.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that DPSRU has noted the audit observation 
and has taken necessary steps like construction of a new building, to resolve the 
shortage of classrooms. 
(ii) Irregularities in execution and monitoring of deposit works: The University 
executes various types of infr astructure works, out of grants -in-aid received from 
DTTE, through two executing agencies- the Public Works Department (PWD) and 
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation (DTTDC).  In case of 
34 deposit works executed by PWD/DTTDC during the period 2018 -23, Audit 
observed as under: 
(a) Expenditure of ₹ 1.05 crore on  capital works such as construction of 
internal roads, providing and installation of air conditioners, construction of room 
space with steel structure etc., were incurred out of Grant -in-aid - General 
Maintenance & Repair instead of the Head Grant -in-aid for creati on of Capital 
Assets. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that initially the payment was made by 
DPSRU from the GIA-General maintenance and repair but later on at the time of 
finalisation of annual accounts,  payments were booked under GIA -creation of 
capital assets. Reply is not acceptable as it is not supported with any documentary 
evidence. 
(b) In case of 100 per cent of the deposit works, the executing agencies did not 
furnish award letter, monthly financial and physical report etc. to DPSRU as per the 
terms and conditions of expenditure sanction. Also, executing agencies neither 
submitted the status of unspent balance nor refunded the same  along with interest 
earned, if any to DPSRU.  DPSRU did not pursue the matter either. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that University has noted the audit 
observation regarding maintenance of records in coordination with executing 
agencies. 

Chapter 4: Financial management, Human Resource Management and Infrastructure facilities  
65 
(c) The work relating to the construction of a separate block for expanding 
World Class Skill Centre in DPSRU was awarded (November 2021) to DTTDC 
with a stipulated date of completion by July 2022. The work was yet to be 
completed as of December 2023 but no action was taken against the contractor for 
recovering liquidated damages for the delay. 
(d) While scrutinizing the records and  during physical verification of the 
infrastructure of Academy of Sports Sciences and Research Management 
(ASSRM) of DPSRU, it was noticed that facilities for swimming, gymnastics 
(girls), volleyball, table tennis and yoga fitness and wellness were not available, as 
required by curriculum of PG course in sports science. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that audit observation has been noted for 
compliance in future. 
4.3.4 Irregularities in procurement of equipment  
Irregularities observed in procurement of equipment are as under 
(i)  Lack of adherence to GFR  2017: Audit observed that in case of 10 works 
involving expenditure of ₹ 1.59 crore, DPSRU purchased individual items of work 
of the composite estimates of these works through GeM, without obtaining bids on 
GeM, though the estimated amount for the work in each of these 10 cases was more 
than ₹ 5 lakh.  This was clear violation of Rule 149 of General Financial Rules and 
University was not able to secure competitive rates for these works.  The 
Department reiterated (March 2025) t he reply of the University that, in the said 
cases, proposal for different items was received, so different items were purchased 
from GeM portal under Rule 149 (i) and (ii)  of GFRs , which did not require 
obtaining of bids.  Reply is not acceptable as the said items were of similar nature 
and estimated amount in each of the 10 cases was above ₹ 5 lakh, mandating 
obtaining of bids under Rule 149 (iii) of GFRs. 
(ii)  Sub-standard Procurement:  Audit observed that DPSRU had procured 
25 equipment amounting to ₹ 4.45 c rore for various laboratories without ensuring 
that the equipment met the required specifications. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that University procured the equipment after 
the indenter’s confirmation regarding specification, quality, pricing etc. The reply 
is not tenable as the specifications and quality of procured equipment are different 
from original indent proposed by the indenter. 
4.3.5 Joint Physical inspection of Universities 
Joint physical inspection of the campuses of the three Universities was conducted 
by the Audit Team and representatives of the Universities concerned. Deficiencies 
noticed, such as inadequate infrastructure. Non-utilisation of available 
infrastructure/ equipment, have been summarised in Annexure 4.3. 
In its reply, GGSIPU stated (January 2024) in respect of Dwarka campus that it has 
noted the observation with respect to non -utilization/non availability of adequate 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
66 
infrastructure for compliance and open area near badminton court has now been 
cleared.  As regards the Surajmal Vihar campus, it was stated that appropriate 
corrective measures to address the issue of non -utilization/non availability of 
adequate infrastructure have been taken/initiated. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that lifts in old academic block of Rohini 
campus of DTU have become functional ; scrap materials from Electrical 
Engineering Department and Central Staircase area  have been removed ; dumped 
machinery/equipment of EDUSAT have been removed and at Vivek Vihar campus, 
the work of repair of academic building has been taken up and boundary wall has 
been repaired. 
Thus, the class rooms available in Dwarka Campus of GGSIPU, Rohini Campus of 
DTU and DPSRU were grossly inadequate to accommodate the students enrolled.  
Despite this, there were delays in planning and completion of infrastructure projects 
resulting in cost overrun .  In some cases the infrastructure created and equipment 
procured were not being utilised. 
Recommendation 7:  The Universities should fix points of responsibility for 
coordination & monitoring in creation of infrastructure, such as classrooms and 
hostels for students, and timely utilization of assets created.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 5 
Internal Control 

67 
Chapter 5 
 
Internal Control 
• The composition of Board of School of Studies, required in order to 
recommend the courses and syllabi of studies in various programs and 
to co -ordinate the teaching and research work between institutions, 
were not as per norms in any of the three Universities. 
• The Internal Quality Assurance Cells of sampled Universities did not 
meet at prescribed intervals and conduct of Academic and 
Administrative Audits and their follow up, to identify and address 
weaknesses in various processes and procedures, was inadequate. 
• Physical verification of stock was not carried out in the three 
Universities at the prescribed interval.  Also, in GGSIPU physical 
verification of stock did not cover the equipment procured through 
sponsored projects’ funds and in DTU there was no centrali zed 
consolidated data of non-consumable items. 
Internal controls are safeguards that are put in place by the management of an 
organisation to provide assurance that its operations are proceeding as planned.  
These are also designed to provide reasonable assurance that the entity’s general 
objectives are being achieved.  Deficiencies in internal control in the three selected 
universities are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.1 Absence of institutional bodies/internal committees   
There are several bodies such as Governing Body, Board of School of Studies etc. 
for providing directions and overseeing the functions of Universities.  Audit 
observed deficiencies in formation and functioning of such bodies in these 
Universities as under: 
5.1.1 Shortcomings in constitution of Board of School of Studies 
Ordinance 2 (March 2005) of the GGSIPU requires every School to have a Board 
of School of Studies (BSS) to recommend the courses and syllabi of Studies in 
various programs assigned to the School and co-ordinate the teaching and research 
work.  Similar provisions are there in Ordinance 2 (February 2010) of DTU and 
statutes and Ordinances (April 2021) of DPSRU also mandated constitution of 
Board of Studies (BoS). 
(i) Audit observed that during 2018 -23, in eight out of 14 University Schools of  
GGSIPU, BSSs did not have any teachers from the affiliated colleges as member 
as required and in case of remaining Schools, it was not as per norms.  The 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
68 
exclusion of teachers of affiliated colleges from BSSs deprived them of diverse 
perspectives and insights especially in the cases where programs were being run 
exclusively in affiliated colleges.  Audit also observed delay in re -constitution of 
BSSs after their tenure of two years and/or non -adherence to norms regarding 
composition in the 14 University Schools and two Centres for Excellence 
(Annexure 5.1). 
In its reply, University attributed (January 2024) the delay to outbreak of 
COVID-19 and stated that observation of the Audit is noted for future compliance. 
It was further stated that practice of including teachers of affiliated colleges in 
BSS was discontinued as per decision of B oard of Management .  The reply is 
untenable as Audit observed cases of delay in/non-constitution of BSS even before 
the outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic. Further, BOM does not have the mandate 
to supersede provisions of a University Ordinance. 
(ii)  DTU did not provide the details and records relating to constitution of BoS in 
case of 12 out of total 17 of its Academic Departments.  Audit observed that during 
the period 2018-23, the representation of Associate Professors in BoS was not as 
per norms in five Departments of DTU, records of which were furnished to audit.  
In these five Departments, BoS was not functioning as the tenure of the BoS 
expired and were not reconstituted in time. In case of Biotechnology, Electronics 
and Communication Engin eering and Environmental Engineering Departments, 
there were delays of 18 months, 12 months and 16 months respectively in re -
constitution of BoS after expiry of tenure of the previous BoS. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that constitution of BoS was delayed in five 
departments due to Covid 19 pandemic and in absence of Associate Professors, 
the senior most Assistant Professors were considered in the constitution of BoS. 
The University has now revised t he constitution of BoS.  Reply is silent on 
non-production of records relating to constitution of BoS in  the remaining 
12 departments. 
(iii)  In DPSRU, the BoSs were formed in September 2021, after a significant 
delay of six years of establishment of the University and before that, there was no 
institutional mechanism for deliberating and deciding matters relating to 
curriculum of various programs run by the University.   
In its reply, University stated that the BoS was constituted in 2018 and the 
academic monitoring committees were there in all the schools .  Reply is not 
supported by any documentary evidence and hence unverifiable. 

Chapter 5: Internal Control 
69 
Thus, mandatory BSS/BoS required in order to recommend the courses and syllabi 
of Studies in various programs assigned to the schools and to co -ordinate the 
teaching and research work between institutions were not constituted as per rules 
in all three Universities, thereby impacting the coordination and cross-fertilization 
of ideas for the benefit of the academic community. 
5.1.3 Shortcomings in constitution/functioning of other committees 
(i)  As per Ordinances of DPSRU, various committees/councils were to be formed 
for effective administration of affairs relating to students and University staff.  
Audit observed that Committees against ragging and sexual harassment  were 
formed only in July 2022 and Committees for grievance redressal  were formed 
only in June 2023.  Student’s disciplinary committee was yet to be formed and 
DPSRU did not have Students’ council since September 2020.  The University in 
its reply stated (January 2024) that the student’s disciplinary committee would be 
formed soon.  The Department reiterated (March 2025) the reply of the University. 
(ii)  As per Section 8 of the UGC (Prevention, prohibition and redressal of sexual 
harassment of women employees and students in Higher Educational Institutions- 
HEIs) Regulations 2015, the process of enquiry and decision on complaints of 
sexual harassment were required to be completed within 130 days of receipt of 
complaint by the Internal Complaint Committee (ICC).  In three complaints 
received in Dwarka Campus, GGSIPU  took 22 months to complete the 
proceedings in one case, more than nine months in the se cond case and on a 
complaint received November 2019, the proceedings have been stopped.  
The Department stated (March 2025) that University attributed the delay in 
proceedings to large number of examination issues, gaps and pendency. 
Audit also observed that ICC constituted in August 2023  at Surajmal Vihar 
campus, GGSIPU  was presided over by an Associate Professor instead of a 
Professor with no representation from students and only one member from the 
non-teaching staff (as against prescribed two).   
In its reply, GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that the audit observation has been 
noted for compliance. 
5.2 Mechanism for quality assurance 
A mechanism for quality assurance should be an integral part of any organisation 
to ensure adherence to rules and regulations and standards of quality in the 
functioning of all the branches of the organisation.  In Universities, the quality 
assurance is derived through Academic Audits as well as Administrative Audits 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
70 
of various branches.  Audit observed deficiencies in the system of quality 
assurance in the three Universities as under: 
(i)  GGSIPU  - In terms of Statute 33 of GGSIPU, a cell named Indraprastha 
Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IIQAC) was established to facilitate University’s 
overall quality up-gradation through ensuring continual improvement in the entire 
gamut of activities of the U niversity and assuring all the stakeholders of the 
accountability of the University for its own quality and probity.  Clause 2.1 of the 
Statute 33 provides that the IIQAC shall take up structured Academic and 
Administrative Audit (AAA) on a cont inual basis and in the process, facilitate 
overall quality of the University. AAAs are being conducted annually from 2017 
to understand the existing system and assess the strengths, weaknesses , 
opportunities and challenges faced by the Departments along with their 
achievements.   
Scrutiny of records for the period 2018 -23 revealed that coverage of Schools or 
Centres of Excellence (CoE) by IIQAC varied through the years with no AAA 
conducted in 2019 -20 and 2022 -23. While AAA was conducted in respect of 
11 and 13 out of 14 Schools/CoE during 2018-19 and 2020-21 respectively, AAA 
of only eight out of 16 Schools/CoE was conducted in 2021-22.  Further, the audit 
consisted of only obtaining responses in the form of check -lists by the audited 
University Schools and no audit report or follow up action was initiated for 
shortcomings noticed.  Audit also observed that only 13 meetings of IIQAC were 
held against 20 required during 2018-23. 
In its reply, GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that conduct of academic audit for the 
years 2019-21 was affected due to Covid -19 and academic audit for 2022 -23 is 
yet to be taken up and AAA Proforma is being revised to clearly capture follow 
up action on shortcomings noticed. Further, Department stated (March 2025) that 
GGSIPU has conducted the AAA till Academic year 2023 -24.  Further, audit is 
being standardised to make it paperless and implementation of Samarth 
e-governance ERP is under way at the University. 
(ii)  DTU - Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) was established in December 
2015 in pursuance of the XII Plan guidelines of UGC.  However, DTU has 
accorded low priority to IQAC as is evident from the fact that the post of the 
Director (IQAC) was never filled up and the charge was always held by a senior 
faculty of the University on additional charge basis.  Further, against the 
prescribed quarterly meetings, IQAC held just four meetings during the five year 
review period of 2018-23.   

Chapter 5: Internal Control 
71 
DTU did not provide any record regarding conduct of Administrative Audits 
during 2018-23 hence Audit could not verify whether such audits were conducted. 
Also, Academic Audits for the year 2022 -23 were yet to be taken up as of 
December 2023.  Audit observed that o bservations mentioned in the Academic 
audit reports of 2018 -22 remained persistent, indicating lack of follow 
up/corrective action . Moreover, Civil Engineering, Design, Humanities and 
Mechanical Engineering Departments were awarded Grade-B, which means ‘not 
acceptable’ as per the grading system of the IQAC.   
In its reply, University stated (January 2024) that - 
- It is planning to conduct more meetings of IQAC in future. 
- grades will certainly improve in further academic audit cycles 
- all activities of IQAC are handled by a senior faculty with utmost care, 
sincerity and efficacy. 
The reply is silent on conducting of Administrative Audit. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU has conducted the academic audit 
for academic year 2022 -23 and observations have been forwarded to the HoDs 
concerned for follow up actions. 
(iii)  DPSRU  - IQAC was created in May 2019, but it was not functional and 
started functioning only after it was reconstituted on 20 August 2020.  Thereafter 
also, Academic and Administrative Audits of various schools and departments of 
the University were carried out only for the academic year 2021-22 and no follow 
up action on the outcome of audit was found on record.  
In the absence of regular academic and administrative audit of various branches 
of university, and a weak follow-up mechanism, no assurance could be drawn by 
Audit with regard to efficacy of  internal quality assurance wings of these 
Universities. 
5.3 Management Information System and office automation  
A good Management Information System (MIS) would help an organisation in 
taking informed decisions relating to its functions by collecting and collating data 
from all the branches and presenting the same in a meaningful form.  Deficiencies 
observed in establishment and functioning of the Universities are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
(i)  In GGSIPU, there was no centralised and integrated Management 
Information System for its various branches for easy, accurate and consistent data 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
72 
retrieval and to facilitate real time reporting on performance. Various functional 
wings of the University were completing the whole cycle of their assigned 
functions from data entry to MIS reports, either manually or with the help of a 
stand-alone software and data retrieval/sharing pertaining to previous years was a 
huge challenge for everyone concerned. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU has successfully implemented 
Samarth application and Academic, Administrative and recruitment module were 
fully functional, while University was planning to go live with File monitoring 
system and leave monitoring modules from January 2025 onwards. 
(ii)  DTU implemented Cloud based University Management System (CUMS) 
at a total cost of ₹ 72 lakh to automate all the functions of the University  and the 
system went go-live after all the 18 wings of the University submitted (October 
2018) satisfactory reports on the functioning of the system . However, despite 
satisfactory reports during User Acceptance Testing (UAT) phase, the modules of 
only Examination and Result wings were being used, thereby indicating that the 
reports regarding satisfactory deploymen t of the CUMS as provided by various 
wings of DTU were erroneous. 
DTU stated (March 2024) that 4 modules/sub modules of CUMS were pending 
for delivery and some of the delivered modules had performance issues and it has 
withheld ₹ 8 lakh from the vendor along with Performance guarantee of 
₹ 8.05 lakh.  It was further stated that DTU has already started data migration from 
CUMS ERP to Samarth portal.  The fact remains that it could not automate its 
functions even after spending ₹ 64 lakh (₹ 72 - ₹ 8 Lakh PG withheld). 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DTU has started implementation of new 
Samarth1 ERP system with effect from academic year 2023-24. 
(iii)  DPSRU - Audit observed that during 2018 -23, various functional wings of 
DPSRU were carrying out all their assigned functions, from data entry to MIS 
reports, either manually or with the help of a stand -alone software and data 
retrieval/sharing pertaining to pre vious years was a huge challenge for everyone 
concerned. 
In October 2022, DPSRU floated tenders for development and implementation of 
Integrated University Management System (IUMS) against which it received two 
bids.  One of the bidders quoted rate per student and the other quoted ₹ 30.39 lakh 
 
1  "Samarth" is an initiative by the Ministry of Education. GoI started in 2019, through which the 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are provided with a fully managed, cloud based, 
comprehensive ERP that is custom built for HEIs of the country. 

Chapter 5: Internal Control 
73 
for the whole project.  DPSRU awarded the contract to the first bidder although at 
the time of acceptance of tender, the bidder specified ₹ 37.48 lakh (for 2500 
students) which resulted in award of work at higher cost.   
As per clause 6.4 of the RFP, the vendor was required to submit monthly progress 
report to the University, but no such report was found on record.  Further, as per 
the prescribed schedule of implementation, the system implementation of IUMS 
should have been in the third phase by December 2023 . However,  the 
implementation process was in the first phase only  as of December 2023 .  The 
vendor also failed to provide training and online help pages for the users and on -
site resource deployment plan for the proper functioning of the IUMS, as required 
under provisions of the RFP. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that the University is in process of 
evaluating the performance of the vendor and the payment will be released strictly 
on the basis of the performance of the vendor.  
Thus, in the absence of functioning management information systems, these 
Universities were deprived of the advantage of technology to manage its affairs in 
a more efficient and effective manner.  
5.4 Amendments in Ordinances/Statutes not notified by the University 
Out of six Statutes and seven Ordinances so far made by DTU, three Statutes on 
manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service of teachers/academic staff 
and their seniority, made during 2019, were yet to be notified in the official gazette 
as of December 2023. Lack of notification impacts the enforceability of the 
amendments if ever an issue arose, in a court of law and is thus a serious 
administrative lapse. In its reply, DTU stated (March 2024) that on recent 
directions received from DTTE, it has constituted a Committee to revise these 
statutes to keep them in line with guidelines of UGC, AICTE and DoPT.   The 
Department stated (March 2025) that approval of the competent authority will be 
obtained for notification, on receipt of complete proposal from DTU.  
5.5 Physical verification of stock not conducted 
Rule 213 of General Financ ial Rules (GFR ) 2017 provides the procedure for 
conduct of physical verification of Fixed Assets and consumable goods and 
materials.  Audit observed that physical verification of stock was either not being 
conducted regularly as provided in GFRs or the results were not being properly 
analysed to ensure that all the items purchased are available physically with these 
Universities, as discussed below: 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
74 
(i)  In GGSIPU, physical verification of non -consumable stocks for the year 
2022-23 was not conducted as of January 2024. It was also observed that outcome 
of the verification of previous years was not recorded in the corresponding 
register, as required under Rule 213 of GFRs 2017. Further, physical verification 
of fixed assets costing ₹ 4.3 8 crore purchased from funds under Fundamental 
Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) and Sponsored Projects during the period 
2018-23 was not conducted during the audit period. 
In its reply, GGSIPU stated (January 2024) that physical verification of 
non-consumable stocks for 2022 -23 is under process and audit observation 
regarding covering assets purchased from funds under FRGS and Sponsored 
projects in the annual physical inspection has been noted for compliance. Further, 
the Department stated (March 2025) that GGSIPU is regularly carrying out the 
physical verification of consumable and non-consumable stocks and the same for 
the year 2023-24 is in progress. 
(ii) In DTU , though all non -consumable items are purchased centrally by the 
Stores and Purchase (S&P) Wing, stock registers of these items are maintained by 
the Department to which these have been issued.  Physical verification of stock 
was also done department-wise by teams formed for this purpose.  The verification 
was being conducted biennially instead of annually as prescribed under GFRs.  
Although verification was carried out in September 2019 and November 2021, 
DTU was not in a position to ensure that all the items purchased were accounted 
for as no consolidated data on the items purchased was being maintained by the 
S&P Wing and the reports were simply being placed in the records.   
The Department stated (March 2025) that the physical verification for 2021-23 is 
under process in DTU and from April 2023 the University will conduct physical 
verification annually, instead of bi-annually. 
(iii)  DPSRU did not conduct Physical verification of non-consumable items and 
fixed assets during the years 2018-19, 2020-21 and 2021-22, as required under the 
General Finance Rules. 
The Department stated (March 2025) that DPSRU did not conduct physical 
verification of stock during 2020 -22 due to Covid -19 conditions and has 
conducted the physical verification from 2022-23 onwards. 
Thus, with the absence of internal audits and other checks and balances, the 
internal control and monitoring systems of these Universities were not robust 

Chapter 5: Internal Control 
75 
enough to ensure that the Universities are functioning as effectively as they should 
be. 
Recommendation 8:  The Universities should conduct Academic and 
Administrative Audits regularly to mitigate weaknesses in various processes 
and procedures. 
New Delhi 
Dated:'HFHPEHU 
(AMAN DEEP CHATHA) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Delhi 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
Dated:'HFHPEHU     
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
  
Annexures 

Annexures 
77 
Annexure 1.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.4) 
List of selected Universities and affiliated colleges of GGSIPU 
(A)  Directorate of Higher Education 
Sl. No. Name of selected University 
1. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University (GGSIPU) 
 List of selected 12 self-financed affiliated colleges of GGSIPU 
1 Maharaja Agrasen Institute of Technology, Sector-22 Rohini, Delhi-85 (B. Tech) 
2 Vivekananda Institute of Professional Studies – Technical Campus, AU Block (Outer Ring Road), 
Pitampura, New Delhi 
3 Banarsidas Chandiwala Institute of Professional Studies, Sector - 11, (Opposite Metro Station) 
Dwarka, New Delhi – 110075 
4 Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Computer Applications & Management, A4, PaschimVihar, New 
Delhi – 110063 
5 Delhi Institute of Rural Development, (Sister Branch of DIRD), G. T. Karnal Road, Village Nangli 
Poona, Delhi-110036. 
6 Kasturi Ram college of Higher Education, Village Kureni Narela, Delhi-110040 
7 Guru Nanak College of Education, (Minority Educational Institutions) Road No. 75, Punjabi Bagh, 
New Delhi – 110026 
8 Gitarattan Institute of Advanced Studies & Training, D-Block, Sector-7, Rohini, Delhi – 110085 
9 Periyar School of Architecture, 1&2 Institutional Area, Jasola, New Delhi-25 
10 Sri Ram Institute of Teacher Education Village Bamnoli, Sector-28, Dwarka, New Delhi -110045 
11 St. Lawrence College of Higher Education, Geeta Colony, Facility Center, Delhi – 110030 
12 Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi 110001 
 List of selected 2 Government Aided Affiliated colleges of GGSIPU 
1. Dr. BSA Hospital Medical College, Sector 6, Rohini Delhi-110085 
2. Panna Dai School of Nursing,  Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital, Hari Nagar Clock Tower, New 
Delhi 110064 
(B) Directorate of Training and Technical Education 
Sl. No. Name of selected Universities 
1. Delhi Technological University 
2. Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research University 
 
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
78 
Annexure 2.1 
(Referred to in Chapter II (Introduction)) 
List of University Schools of Studies (USS) and Centres of Excellence (CoE) of GGSIPU 
Sl.No. Name of Schools/CoE 
 I Dwarka Campus 
1. University School of Bio Technology 
2. University School of Chemical Technology 
3. University School of Humanities and Social sciences 
4. University School of Basic and Applied Sciences 
5. University School of Medicine and Para-Medical Health Sciences 
6. University School of Education 
7. University School of Information and communication Technology 
8. University School of Law and legal studies  
9. University School of Management Studies 
10. University School of Environment Management   
11. University School of Mass Communication 
12. Centre of Excellence in Pharmaceutical Sciences 
13. University Centre for Disaster Management Studies 
 II Surajmal Vihar Campus 
14. University School of Automation and Robotics 
15. University School of Design and Innovation 
16. University School of Architecture and Planning 
      Source: Information provided by the University 
 
  

Annexures 
79 
Annexure 2.2 
(Referred to in Chapter II (Introduction)) 
List of Academic Departments and University Schools of DTU 
Sl.No. Name of Schools/CoE 
 I Rohini, Bawana Road Campus 
1. Electrical Engineering Department 
2. Electronics and Communication Engineering Department 
3. Civil Engineering Department 
4. Environmental Engineering Department 
5. Mechanical Engineering Department 
6. Biotechnology Department 
7. Applied Physics Department 
8. Applied Chemistry Department 
9. Design Department 
10. Humanities Department 
11. Delhi School of Management 
12. Software Engineering Department 
13. Computer Science & Engineering Department 
14. Information Technology Department 
15. Applied Mathematics Department 
 II Vivek Vihar Campus 
16. University School of Management and Entrepreneurship 
      Source: Information provided by the University 
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
80 
Annexure 2.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.2.1(i)) 
Details of Programmes of the University Schools of GGSIPU with low admissions against the sanctioned intake during 2018-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Programme 
Name of 
School 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Intake Filled Percentage 
of Under-
utilisation 
Intake Filled Percentage 
of Under-
utilisation 
Intake  Filled  Percentage 
of Under-
utilisation 
Intake  Filled Percentage 
of Under-
utilisation 
Intake  Filled  Percentage 
of Under-
utilisation 
1. M. Tech. 
(Engineering 
Physics) 
USBAS 18 02 89 21 00 100 21 01 95 21 00 100 18 00 100 
2. M. Tech Nano 
(Science & 
Technology) 
USBAS 15 08 47 15 02 87 17 00 100 16 03 81 16 03 81 
3. M. Tech (Chemical 
Engineering) 
USCT 30 01 97 33 06 82 30 04 87 30 06 80 30 02 93 
4. M. Tech (ECE) -
Weekend 
USICT 60 13 78 60 08 87 60 15 75 66 03 95 66 05 92 
5. M. Tech (CSE) -
Weekend 
USICT 60 42 30 60 27 55 60 27 55 66 14 79 66 08 88 
6. M. Tech (Robotics 
and automation)  
USICT 18 08 56 18 00 100 21 10 52 21 03 86 21 09 57 
7. MBA (Disaster 
Management)-
Weekend 
CDMS 60 17 72 60 16 73 60 22 63 66 13 80 66 04 94 
8. Post Graduate 
Diploma (Disaster 
Management) 
CDMS 00 00 0 00 00 00 60 00 100 66 00 100 55 00 100 
9. M.SC (Natural 
Resource 
Management) 
USEM 25 14 44 28 09 68 28 07 75 28 03 89 28 02 93 
10. M. Tech (Bio Tech) USBT 10 02 80 12 00 100 24 14 42 24 09 63 24 14 42 
Total 296 107 64 307 68 78 381 100 74 398 54 86 395 47 88 

Annexures 
81 
Annexure 2.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1) 
Programmes run in University schools of GGSIPU with delay in syllabus revision  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Programme Name of the 
School 
Last Revision of 
the program 
Number of years of not 
revising the syllabus 
1.  Bachelor of Architecture USAP 2018-19 04 
2.  Doctor of Philosophy (Bio-
Tech) 
USBT 2017-18 05 
3.  Doctor of Philosophy 
(Chemical Engineering) 
USCT 2019-20 03 
4.  Master of Technology 
(Computer science and 
engineering)-weekend 
USICT 2014-15 08 
5.  Master of Technology 
(Electronics and 
communication engineering)-
weekend 
USICT 2014-15 08 
6.  Master of Law (Cyber Law and 
IPR)-Weekend 
USLLS 2011-12 11 
7.  Doctor of Philosophy (law and 
legal studies) 
USLLS 2019-20 03 
8.  Master of Business 
Administration (Disaster 
Management)-weekend 
CDMS 2018-19 04 
9.  PG Diploma in Disaster 
Management  
CDMS 2018-19 04 
   Source: Information compiled by Audit from data provided by the University 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
82 
Annexure 2.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1) 
Programmes run in affiliated colleges of GGSIPU with no syllabus revision for last 3 years 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Programme Name of the 
school 
Last Revision 
of the 
programme 
Number of years 
of not revising 
the syllabus 
1.  Bachelor of Architecture USAP 2018-19 04 
2.  Advance Diploma in child guidance and counselling  USE 2012-13 10 
3.  B.A. (Hons.) (Economics) USHSS 2018-19 04 
4.  BDS (Bachelor of Dental Surgery) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
5.  Diploma in Ophthalmology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
6.  MD Physiology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
7.  MD Biochemistry USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
8.  MD Pharmacology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
9.  MD Pathology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
10.  MD Microbiology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
11.  MD Forensic Medicine  USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
12.  MD Community Medicine   USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
13.  MD General Medicine  USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
14.  MD Paediatrics  USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
15.  MD Radiology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
16.  MD Psychiatry USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
17.  MD Dermatology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
18.  MD Anaesthesiology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
19.  MD Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation  USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
20.  MD (Radiotherapy) USM&PMHS 2012-13 10 
21.  MD sports Medicine  USM&PMHS 2015-16 07 
22.  MS Anatomy USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
23.  MS General Surgery USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
24.  MS Orthopaedics  USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
25.  MS obstetrics and Gynaecology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
26.  MS Ophthalmology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
27.  MS Otorhinolaryngology (Ear, Nose &Throat) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
28.  DM Cardiology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
29.  DM Neurology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
30.  DM Nephrology USM&PMHS 2017-18 05 
31.  DM Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
32.  DM Cardiac Anaesthesia USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
33.  M.Ch. Cardiothoracic and vascular surgery USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
34.  M.Ch Neurosurgery USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
35.  M.Ch. Paediatrics Surgery USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
36.  M.Ch. Urology USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
37.  BAMS (Bachelor of Ayurveda, Medicine and 
Surgery) 
USM&PMHS 2012-13 10 
38.  BHMS (Bachelor of Homeopathic Medicine and 
Surgery) 
USM&PMHS 2010-11 12 
39.  BPT (Bachelor of Physiotherapy) USM&PMHS 2018-19 04 
40.  B.Sc. (Medical Lab Technology) USM&PMHS 2010-11 12 
41.  Bachelor of Occupational Therapy USM&PMHS 2006-07 16 
42.  Bachelor of Prosthetic and Orthotics USM&PMHS 2017-18 05 
43.  B.Sc. (Medical Technology Radiotherapy) USM&PMHS 2008-09 14 
44.  Bachelor of Occupational Therapy (Neurology) USM&PMHS 2007-08 15 
45.  Masters in Prosthetics & Orthotics (MPO) USM&PMHS 2017-18 05 
46.  M. Phil (Psychiatry Social Work)  USM&PMHS 2015-16 07 
47.  Post basic nursing USM&PMHS 2018-19 04 
48.  Masters in Physiotherapy (Neurology) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
49.  Masters in Physiotherapy (Musculoskeletal) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
50.  Masters in Physiotherapy (Sports) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
51.  Masters in Physiotherapy (Cardiopulmonary) USM&PMHS 2013-14 09 
Source: Information compiled by Audit from data provided by the University 

Annexures 
83 
Annexure 2.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1) 
List of programmes of University Departments of DTU for which syllabus was not 
revised 
Sl.no. Program Name Name of Department  Last 
revision of 
the 
programme 
Number of years of 
not revising the 
syllabus 
1.  M. Tech computer Science & 
Engineering 
Computer Science 
Engineering  
2018-19 04 
2.  M. Tech Information 
Systems(ISY) 
Information Technology  2018-19 04 
3.  M. Tech Material Science & 
Technology (MST) 
Applied Physics  2018-19 04 
4.  M. Tech Micro-waves & Optical 
Communication(MOC) 
Electronics & 
Communication 
Engineering  
2018-19 04 
5.  M. Tech VLSI Design & 
Embedded System(VLSI) 
Electronics and 
Communication 
Engineering  
2018-19 04 
6.  M. Tech Bio-informatics (BIO) Biotechnology 
Engineering   
2018-19 04 
7.  M. Tech Industrial 
Biotechnology(IBT) 
Biotechnology 
Engineering   
2018-19 04 
8.  M. Tech Polymer Technology 
(PTE) 
Applied chemistry  2018-19 04 
9.  M. Tech Thermal Engineering 
(THE) 
Mechanical Engineering  2018-19 04 
10.  M. Tech Production 
Engineering(PRD) 
Mechanical Engineering  2018-19 04 
11.  M. Tech Control & 
Instrumentation (C&I) 
Electrical Engineering  2018-19 04 
12.  M. Tech Power System(PSY) Electrical Engineering  2018-19 04 
13.  M. Tech Structural Engineering 
(STE) 
Civil  Engineering  2018-19 04 
14.  M. Tech Hydraulics & Water 
Resources Engineering (HRE) 
Civil  Engineering  2018-19 04 
15.  M. Tech Geotechnical 
Engineering(GTE) 
Civil  Engineering  2018-19 04 
16.  M. Tech Environmental 
Engineering(ENE) 
Environment Engineering  2018-19 04 
17.  M. Tech Geo informatics(GINF) Civil Engineering  2018-19 04 
18.  M.Sc. Physics  Applied Physics  2018-19 04 
Source: Information compiled by Audit from data provided by the University 
 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
84 
Annexure 2.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1) 
Details of programmes of DPSRU with delay in syllabus revision 
Sl. No. Name of Program Year of 
Introduction 
Number of years of not 
revising the syllabus 
1.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutics) 2015-16 07 
2.  M. Pharm (Industrial Pharmacy) 2017-18 05 
3.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutical Chemistry) 2015-16 07 
4.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutical Analysis) 2017-18 05 
5.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance) 2015-16 07 
6.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutical Regulatory Affairs) 2015-16 07 
7.  M. Pharm (Pharmaceutical Biotechnology) 2017-18 05 
8.  M. Pharm (Pharmacology) 2015-16 07 
9.  M. Pharm (Phyto -chemistry & Pharma -
cognosy) 
2015-16 07 
10.  M. Pharm (Hospital Pharmacy) 2015-16 07 
11.  M. Pharm (Cosmeceutics) 2017-18 05 
12.  Ph.D (PM) 2017-18 05 
13.  Sports Digitalization and Performance 
Management  
2019-20 03 
Source: Data from self-study report submitted to NAAC 
  

Annexures 
85 
Annexure 3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.2 (i) (d)) 
Details of 6 affiliated colleges of GGSIPU having less than 1.5 acre of land  
Sl. 
No. 
 Name of Affiliated Institution 2018-19 2019-20 2021-22 2022-23 
Total 
Land (in 
Acre) 
Total Land 
(in Acre) 
Total 
Land (in 
Acre) 
Total 
Land (in 
Acre) 
1 Banarsidas Chandiwala Institute of 
Professional Studies 
0.66 0.66 0.64 0.64 
2 Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Computer 
Applications & Management 
0.50 0.50 NA NA 
3 Delhi Institute Of Rural Development, (Sister 
Branch of DIRD) 
1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 
4 Kasturi Ram college of Higher Education 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 
5 Guru Nanak College of Education, (Minority 
Educational Institutions)  
- 0.25 0.25 0.25 
6 Periyar School of Architecture 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 
Source: Application for affiliation submitted by the applicant institutes/JAC reports  
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
86 
Annexure 3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.2 (i) (d)) 
Details of affiliated colleges having less than 1.5 acre of land  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Institute Total Land 
(in Acre) 
1. Action for Autism - National Centre for Autism India 0.29 
2. Ashtavakra Institute of Rehabilitation Sciences and Research 0.19 
3. Banarsidas Chandiwala Institute of Information Technology, Kalkaji, New Delhi 
– 19 
0.5 
4. Banarsidas Chandiwala Institute of Physiotherapy, Kalkaji, New Delhi  0.5 
5. Banarsidas Chandiwala Institute of Professional Studies, Sector - 11,  Dwarka, 
New Delhi – 110075 
0.64 
6. Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Computer Applications & Management 0.5 
7. COMM-IT, Career Academy (Minority Educational Institution) 0.51 
8. Chanderprabhu Jain College Of Higher Studies & School of Law 0.86 
9. Delhi Institute Of Advanced Studies 0.83 
10. Delhi Institute of Rural Development 0.83 
11. Delhi Institute Of Rural Development, (Sister Branch of DIRD), Village Nangli 
Poona 
1 
12. Delhi School of Professional Studies and Research 0.41 
13. Delhi Teachers Training College 0.53 
14. Gitarattan International Business School 0.56 
15. Guru Nanak College of Education, (Minority Educational Institutions) 0.21 
16. Guru Nanak Institute of Management 0.66 
17. Guru Ram Dass College of Education 0.74 
18. Ideal Institute of Management and Technology 0.43 
19. Institute of Information Technology &Management 0.65 
20. Institute of Innovation in Technology and Management 0.40 
21. Institute of Vocational Studies(Minority Educational Institution) 0.51 
22. Jagannath International Management School, Vasant Kunj 0.42 
23. Jagan Institute of Management Studies 0.89 
24. Jagannath International Management School, Kalkaji 0.5 
25. Kamal Institute of Higher Education and Advanced Technology 0.52 
26. Kasturi Ram College of Higher Education 0.83 
27. Lakshmi Bai Batra College Of Nursing 1.23 
28. Lingaya's Lalita Devi Institute of Management & Sciences 0.76 
29. Leelawati Munshi College of Education, 0.74 
30. Madhu Bala Institute of  Communication & Electronic Media 0.51 
31. Management Education & Research Institute 1 
32. National  Heart Institute 0.52 
33. New Delhi Institute of Management  0.87 
34. Pradeep memorial Comprehensive College of Education 0.57 
35. R.C Institute of Technology 1 
36. Rukmani Devi Institute of Advanced Studies 0.75 
37. Sirifort Institute of Management Studies 0.41 
38. Sri Guru Tegh Bahadur Institute of Management and Information Technology  0.42 
39. Tecnia Institute of Advanced Studies 0.56 
40. Trinity Institute of Professional Studies 0.42 
41. Vastu Kala Academy 0.83 
42. V.D. Institute Of Technology 0.64 
Source: 5th State Fee Regulatory Committee report 

Annexures 
87 
Annexure 4.1  
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.3) 
Details of persons in position in crucial administrative posts of the University during 
2018-23 
GGSIPU 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Post 
Posts 
sanctioned 
Method of 
recruitment 
Term/ 
Tenure 
Person-in Position during 2018-23 
1. Registrar  2 Deputation/ 
promotion 
Five 
years 
1. Sh. Satnam Singh- 13.11.17 to 11.02.19 on deputation 
basis 
2. Prof. P C Sharma- 12.02.19 (Additional charge) 
3. Sh. K D Dogra- 12.02.19 to 09.09.19 (Deputation) 
4. Sh. Ravi Dadhich- 09.09.19 to 18.10.21 (Deputation) 
5. Sh. Sushil Kumar (Joint Registrar) - 18.10.21 to 
31.10.21 (Additional charge) 
6. Sh. Shailendra Singh Parihar - 01.11.21 to 09.06.22 
(Deputation) 
7. Sh. Manoj Kumar, IAS (Retd) - 09.06.22 to 30.08.22 
(Contract-additional charge) 
8. Ms. Sunita Shiva (Joint Registrar) - 31.08.22 to till 
date (Additional Charge) 
2. Controller of 
Finance  
1 Deputation Two 
years 
1. Prof. Neena Sinha - 31.05.18 to 31.03.19 (Additional 
charge) 
2. Ms. Rinku Gautam - 01.04.19 to 28.03.22 
(Deputation) 
3. Sh. Shailiendra Singh Parihar, Registrar - 29.03.22 to 
09.06.22 (Additional Charge) 
4. Ms. Sunita Shiva (JR) - 10.06.22 to 17.08.22 
(Additional Charge) 
5. Sh. Narender Singh (CoA) - 18.08.22 to till date (on 
Deputation as Deputy Finance Officer looking after 
charge of CoF). 
3. Controller of 
Examination 
1 Direct 
Recruitment/ 
Deputation/ 
intra 
University 
transfer 
Five 
years 
1.  Prof. Pravin Chandra - 06.07.11 to 30.07.19 
(Additional Charge) 
2. Ms. Sunita Shiva (JR) - 30.07.19 to 16.03.20 
(Additional Charge) 
3. Prof. Prodyut Bhattacharya - 17.03.20 to 30.04.21 
(Additional Charge) 
4. Sh. Raju Nair - 09.04.21 to 29.04.23 (Deputation as 
CoE-I) 
5. Dr. S L Bhandarkar (Deputy Director)- 01.11.21 to till 
date (Deputation as CoE-II) 
6. Prof. Gulshan Kumar- 30.04.23 to till date (Additional 
Charge) 
4. Librarian 1 Information 
not available  
Not 
available 
1. Prof. Arinjay Jain- 19.02.19 to 03.07.19 (Additional 
charge) 
2. Prof. Queeny Pradhan - 04.07.19 to 26.09.19 
(Additional charge) 
3. Dr. Savita Mittal (Dy. Librarian) - 26.09.19 to 
27.07.23 (Additional charge) 
4. Prof. Meenu Kapoor- 28.07.23 to till date (Additional 
charge) 
 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
88 
DTU 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Post 
Posts 
sanctioned 
Method of 
recruitment 
Term/ 
Tenure 
Person-in Position during 2018-23 
1. Vice 
Chancellor 
1 Appointment by 
the Chancellor 
from a panel of 
three names, 
recommended 
by the search-
cum-selection 
committee. 
Five years 1. Prof. Yogesh Singh - 14.07.16 to 07.10.21 on 
regular basis 
2. Prof. Jai Prakash Saini - 07.10.21 to 25.09.2023 
(Additional charge) 
3. Prof. S Indu -25.09.23 to 29.11.23 (Additional 
charge) 
4. Prof. Prateek Sharma - 29.11.23 to till date on 
regular basis 
2. Pro-Vice 
Chancellor 
2 Appointment by 
Board of 
Management on 
the 
recommendation 
of the Vice 
Chancellor 
Three 
years or 
Co-
terminus 
with term 
of VC 
1. Prof. Anu Singh Lather-17.01.17 to 20.02.19 on 
regular basis 
2. Post vacant since February 2019 onwards 
1. Prof. S K Garg- 17.01.17 to 16.01.20 on regular 
basis 
2. Post vacant since January 2020 onwards 
3. Registrar  1 Direct 
Recruitment/ 
Deputation 
Five years 1. Prof. Samsher- 14.03.17 to 15.04.21 (Additional 
charge) 
2. Prof. Madhusudan Singh - 16.04.21 to till date 
(Additional charge) 
4. Controller of 
Finance  
1 Direct 
Recruitment/ 
Deputation 
Five years 1. Prof. Samsher- 30.10.17 to 31.12.20 (Additional 
charge) 
2. Prof. Nirendra Dev - 01.01.21 to 07.12.21 
(Additional charge) 
3. Sh. Dharam Das Verma - 08.12.21 to 04.08.22 
(Deputation) 
4. Prof. Nirendra Dev - 01.09.22 to till date 
(Additional charge) 
5. Librarian 1 Information not 
available  
Not 
available 
1. Sh. Rama Kant Shukla- 29.12.95 to 31.07.22 on 
regular basis 
2. Prof. Rachna Garg - 05.08.22 to till date  
(Additional charge) 
6. Director 
(IQAC) 
No 
information 
No Information As 
decided in 
the 
Appointm
ent Order. 
1. Prof. M M Tripathi -01.01.18 to 31.12.20 
(Additional charge) 
2. Prof. Nirendra Dev-01.01.21 to 31.07.22 
3. Prof. Neeta Pandey-01.08.22 to 31.07.25 
7. Chief Project 
Officer 
No 
information 
No Information No 
Informatio
n 
1. Sh. Bimal Jain -23.12.15 to 31.12.21 on 
deputation 
2. Prof. Amit Srivastava -01.01.22 to till date 
(Additional charge) 
8. Executive 
Engineer 
1 Direct 
recruitment/ 
Deputation 
Not 
mentioned 
in the RR 
1. Sh. Bimal Jain - 01.06.15 to 05.01.22 on 
deputation 
2. Post vacant since January 2022 onwards. 
 
  

Annexures 
89 
Annexure 4.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.4 (ii)) 
Year-wise details of the posts not sanctioned but filled on outsourced basis 
1. Non-Teaching 
Sl.No. Name of the Post 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1. Attendant 179 184 208 207 211 
2. Nurse 03 03 04 03 03 
3. Cameraman 03 03 03 03 03 
4. Sports Coach - 08 09 09 09 
5. Ground Man - 02 02 02 02 
6. Video Editor - - 01 01 01 
7.  Video Editor cum 
Media Manager 
- - - - 01 
8. Dy. Security Officer - 01 01 01 01 
9. Incubator Manager - - - - 01 
10. Consultant  - - 01 01 01 
 
2. Technical Staff 
Sl.No. Name of the Post 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1.  Lab Assistant - - 01 01 01 
2.  Telephone Operator - - 01 01 01 
 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
90 
Annexure 4.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.5) 
Deficiencies noticed during the joint physical inspections 
GGSIPU - Dwarka Campus 
1. In one classroom (out of two) of University School of Education (USE), Audio facility was not 
available in one classroom.  
2. Newly constructed Animal House for the Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences was 
being used as a store room for answer sheets. 
  
 
Newly constructed Animal House being used as a store room for answer sheets 
3. Open Area near Badminton Court has not been kept clean and it was seen that scrap material was 
dumped in that area. 
 


Annexures 
91 
 
Scrap material dumped near badminton court 
4. The University campus had functional 92 CCTVs in its Hostel Blocks.  There was no CCTV 
coverage of USMC.   
5. The computer lab of University School of Law and Legal Studies was used as a storage room for 
answer sheets of external exams. 
  
Computer lab of USLLS being used as storage room for answer sheets of external exams and blank 
answer sheets 
 
6. The swimming pool of the University was found non-functional. 
  
Non-functional Swimming pool 
 


Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
92 
7. PWD has installed CCTVs in the whole campus, but the system with control room(s) is yet to 
become functional. 
8. University School of Automation and Robotics (USAR) –  
- Material testing labs (A -301 & A -302), Mechatronics (A -304) and Tutorial room (A -303) 
were not functional. 
- Against seating capacity of 32 each in Computer Labs A -203 & 204, 49 and 51 computer 
systems were found installed. 
- Maximum sitting capacity of a lecture halls/Class rooms was between 48 and 107 under four 
programs but 139 to 148 students were enrolled during 2022-23 session. 
GGSIPU - Surajmal Vihar Campus 
9. University School of Design and innovation (USDI) – 
- Metal Printing Studio UB -03 was not functional and presently this studio was utilized by 
General Administration section for Central Store. 
- In Laser Cutting Workshop, two out of four machines were not functional due to non-receipt 
of code from manufacturer. 
- 3D printing rapid prototyping (B -201) – 12 computers and five 3D machines were not 
functional due to non-availability of Electricity point. 
10. University School of Architecture and Planning (USAP) was shifted from Dwarka Campus to 
East Campus and is still not fully functional, though the 2023 -24 Academic session has begun 
since August 2023. 
11. Drinking water facility was not adequate in Academic Block as 72 taps were missing from water 
coolers. 
 
Taps missing from Water Cooler 
 
12. Teacher’s hostel was not functional. 
13. Mess was not functional in Girls Hostel. 
14. There was water logging on the floor of the kitchen in Hostel. 


Annexures 
93 
  
Inadequate drainage system in Boys Hostel Mess 
15. Common room/recreation rooms were not operational in Hostels. 
16. The Sports Hall was not functional as there was no sports kits room. 
DTU - Rohini Campus 
(i) In Electrical Engineering Department, students’ common room (FW1 -FF12) was found locked, 
filled with scrap material and non-functional. 
(ii) All buildings have three sets of staircases. Central stairs of buildings were, however, found locked 
at all the floors of the buildings and were utilised for dumping scrap items. This blockade of the 
central stairs may prove detrimental in case of an emergency like fire incidence, earthquake etc. 
 
Central stairs in the Old Academic Block 
 
(iii) DTTE, GNDTD had set up EDUSAT facility at DTU in the year 2008 -09 for ensuring access of 
higher education to under -covered/uncovered sections through distant education using satellite 
(an ISRO satellite named GSAT -3) based two -way communication for deliver ing educational 
materials.  During physical inspection, it was observed that the machinery/equipment of EDUSAT 
were dumped on the roof of the Civil Engineering Academic building. 


Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
94 
 
EDUSAT equipment dumped on the roof of Civil Engineering Academic Building 
 
(iv) In general, the classrooms in the old academic building lacked the modern ICT facilities like audio 
system, smart boards, TVs, Projectors, etc. The audio facilities, where installed, were not found 
functional.  Projector facility was available in half of t he classrooms but the same was also not 
found working properly. Also, there was lack of space for teacher’s podium in the class rooms in 
old academic building, as extra benches were placed in the podium area. 
 
Classrooms in the old Academic block 
(v) Solar system installed in new academic building was not found functional.  
(vi) 70 CCTVs cameras (out of total 739) were not found functional on the day of joint physical 
inspection. 
(vii) Boundary wall of the University campus near APJ Abdul Kalam Boys Hostel was found broken 
and replaced with temporary tin shed of lower height, which can be misused by trespassers and is 
a safety hazard.  


Annexures 
95 
DTU - Vivek Vihar Campus 
(i) The management of waste material was not proper and it was seen that lots of waste material was 
lying around in the campus. 
 
Scrap lying around in the Vivek Vihar campus 
 
(ii) Cracks were seen in the campus building, raising concerns about its structural safety.  
 
Cracks in the Vivek Vihar campus building 
(iii) Broken fencing on the boundary wall was noticed. 
  


Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
96 
DPSRU  
Drinking water facility was not available in canteen and the students were compelled to purchase water 
bottles. 
(i) Kitchen was not found clean and hygienic. Garbage was stored in open dustbin.  
 
Unhygienic condition in the kitchen 
 
(ii) Drainage system of kitchen was not proper. 
(iii) Food menu was not maintained and displayed properly.  
(iv) Many rooms of girls’ hostel were facing seepage (C -15, C-17 and C -19) and rain water issues 
(A-07).  
(v) The basement of new DPSRU building is used for parking facility of staff. However, during the 
inspection it was found that a lot of unused/broken furniture which needed to be disposed off was 
dumped in the same parking area, causing hardship in parking of vehicles and creating unhygienic 
environment. 
(vi) There was no proper lighting arrangement in the record room, established in basement parking of 
DPSRU building.  In the absence of proper lighting and dampness of room, the possibility of 
damage to the records kept there, could not be ruled out. 
(vii) Out of 30 cameras installed in boy’s hostel, five were not working.  
(viii) Out of 13 cameras installed in examination block, three cameras were not connected with LAN 
due to which live monitoring could not be carried out. 
(ix) Out of 152 cameras installed in new DPSRU building, DIPSAR building and campus, 48 cameras 
were not connected to the LAN due to this live monitoring could not be carried out.  
  
Absence of live monitoring 
 


Annexures 
97 
DIPSAR 
(i) Although the DIPSAR building is older than DPSRU but there is a lack of lift facilities in the 
DIPSAR Building.  The work of installation of lifts in DIPSAR building is in progress.  
(ii) In the college, water coolers were not working causing non-availability of potable water. 
(iii) In the laboratories many equipment were not working such as Incubator & Fermenter (Lab no.07), 
Ultra Centrifuge, UV Spectrometer and Deep Freezer (Lab No. 113A), UFLC ( Lab No. 113B), 
Lyophilizer (Lab No. 108), Oil Bath & Dissolution Apparatus (101), ROTA Evaporator (103), 
Laboratory Driving Oven, Bench Shaker, UV Spectrometer (Lab No.306), Ice Flaking Machine 
(Lab No. 307), Micro Wave Synthesis Lab, Rotary Evaporator, Supercritical Fluid Extractor, 
Distillation Assembly and Fuming Hood (Lab No. 310), Disso lution Apparatus, Water Bath and 
Rotary Evaporator  (Lab No. 206) , Oven & Millipore water (Lab No. 208) etc.  
(iv) In the classrooms, Projector facility was not found working properly and also seepage issues 
found in one class (Room No 205). 
  

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
98 
Annexure 5.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.1 (i)) 
Discrepancies noticed in constitution and functioning of BSS of GGSIPU during 
2018-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of School Date Actual members of BSS against the norms of 
Dean Professors 
of the school 
03 
Associate 
professor 
and 02 
Assistant 
Professor 
03 person from 
Affiliated 
College (01 
Professor+ 01 
Associate 
Professor+01 
Assistant 
Professor) 
05 members 
nominated by 
VC for their 
special 
knowledge 
1. University school 
of Humanities and 
Social Science 
 
18.10.2019 01 
Dean 
03 Professor No 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 external 
members 
 24.09.2021 01 
Dean 
03 
Professors 
One 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 external 
members 
2. University school 
of medicine and 
para medical 
health science  
09.10.2018 01 
Dean 
NIL NIL 01 Professor + 
01 Associate 
Professor + 01 
Assistant 
Professor 
05 external 
members 
  13.10.2021 
(with delay of 
one year) 
01 
Dean 
NIL NIL 01 Professor + 
01 Associate 
Professor + 01 
Assistant 
Professor 
05 external 
members 
3. University school 
of management 
studies 
21.08.2018 01 
Dean 
07 Professor 01 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
01 Professor + 
01 Associate 
Professor 
05 external 
members 
 10.10.2020 
(with delay of 
2 month) 
01 
Dean 
07 Professor 01 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
01 Professor + 
01 Associate 
Professor 
05 external 
members 
 18.10.2022 01 
Dean 
09 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
01 Professor + 
01 Associate 
Professor + 01 
Assistant 
Professor 
05 external 
members 
4. University School 
of Environment 
Management 
20.09.2019 01 
Dean 
05 Professor 01 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor  
NIL 05 external 
members 
 24.09.2021 01 
Dean 
06 Professor NIL- 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 external 
members 

Annexures 
99 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of School Date Actual members of BSS against the norms of 
Dean Professors 
of the school 
03 
Associate 
professor 
and 02 
Assistant 
Professor 
03 person from 
Affiliated 
College (01 
Professor+ 01 
Associate 
Professor+01 
Assistant 
Professor) 
05 members 
nominated by 
VC for their 
special 
knowledge 
5.  University School 
of Mass 
Communication 
31.01.2020 01 
Dean 
- NIL- 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
- 05 external 
members 
  04.03.2022 
(with delay of 
more than 
one month) 
01 
Dean 
- NIL- 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 external 
members 
6.  University School 
of Bio Technology 
11.04.2019 01 
Dean 
03 Professor  03-
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
 05.07.2021 
(with delay of 
almost three 
months) 
01 
Dean 
05 Professor 02 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
 05.09.2023 
(with delay of 
2 months) 
01 
Dean 
05 Professor 02 
Associate 
Professor, 
01 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Memebers 
7.  University School 
of Basic and 
applied sciences 
19.09.2019 01 
Dean 
06 Professor 01 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
  24.09.2021 01 
Dean 
05 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
8. University School 
of Law and Legal 
Studies 
11.04.2019 01 
Dean 
03 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
02 Members 05 External 
Members 
  28.10.2021 
(with delay of 
more than 6 
month 
01 
Dean 
03 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
02 Members 05 External 
Members 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
100 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of School Date Actual members of BSS against the norms of 
Dean Professors 
of the school 
03 
Associate 
professor 
and 02 
Assistant 
Professor 
03 person from 
Affiliated 
College (01 
Professor+ 01 
Associate 
Professor+01 
Assistant 
Professor) 
05 members 
nominated by 
VC for their 
special 
knowledge 
9. University School 
of Education 
16.08.2017 01 
Dean 
02 Professor Nil-
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
08.09.2021 
(with delay of 
2 years) 
01 
Dean 
01 Professor Nil-
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor  
NIL 05 External 
Members 
10. University School 
of Chemical 
Technology 
04.01.2019 01 
Dean  
01 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
12.01.2021 01 
Dean 
06 Professor 02 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
05.02.2023 
(with delay of 
almost one 
month) 
01 
Dean 
06 Professor 03 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
11. University School 
of Architecture and 
planning 
17.12.2020 01 
Dean 
01 Professor 02 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
professor 
03 Directors 
from the 
different 
affiliated 
colleges 
05 External 
Members 
 01 
Dean 
01 Professor 02 
Associate 
Professor, 
02 Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Member 
12. University School 
of Information 
Technology 
19.11.2019 01 
Dean  
08 Professor 03-
Associate 
Professor, 
02-Assistant 
Professor 
NIL 05 External 
Members 
10.05.2022 
(with delay of 
6 month) 
Constitution of the internal members was not done by the 
USICT. 
05 External 
Members 

Annexures 
101 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of School Date Actual members of BSS against the norms of 
Dean Professors 
of the school 
03 
Associate 
professor 
and 02 
Assistant 
Professor 
03 person from 
Affiliated 
College (01 
Professor+ 01 
Associate 
Professor+01 
Assistant 
Professor) 
05 members 
nominated by 
VC for their 
special 
knowledge 
13. Centre of 
Excellence in 
Pharmaceutical 
sciences (CEPS) 
20.06.2019 Since CEPS does not have its own faculty 01 Professor 
from Disaster Management, 01 Professor from USEM, 01 
Professor from USICT, 01 Associate Professor from USBT 
and 01 Assistant Professor from USBAS was engaged as 
internal members of the steering committee. 
05 External 
Members 
13.08.2021 
(with delay of 
02 months) 
Since CEPS does not have its own faculty 01 Professor 
from Disaster Management, 01 Professor from USEM, 01 
Associate Professor from USBAS was engaged as internal 
members of the steering committee. 
05 External 
Members 
14. University Centre 
for Disaster 
Management 
studies(CDMS) 
06.10.2020 Since CDMS does not have its own faculty, 02 professors 
from USEM and 01 professor from USMS, total 03 
Associate Professor -one from USLLS, USEM, USIC&T 
each, 02 Assistant Professor - one from USEM, USMS 
each was engaged as internal members of the steering 
committee. 
05 External 
Members 
15.02.2023 
(with delay of 
4 months) 
Since CDMS does not have its own faculty, total 03 
Professors one each from USEM,USBAS,USL&LS, and 
total 03 Associate Professor s - one each from USL&LS, 
USEM, USIC&T, 02 Assistant Professors- one each from 
USBT, USEM was engaged as internal members of the 
steering committee. 
05 External 
Members 
15. University School 
of Automation and 
Robotics (USAR) 
21.01.2022 
01 
Dean 
01 
Profess
or 
Associate 
Professor-
NIL, 
Assistant 
Professor-01 
02- Associate 
Professor, 01 
Assistant Professor 
 
 
05 External 
Members 
16. University School 
of Design and 
Innovation (USDI) 
20.01.2022 
01 
Dean 
01 
Profess
or 
01 Associate 
Professor, 02 
Assistant 
Professor 
Not applicable as no 
course related to 
USDI is running in 
the affiliated 
Institute 
05 External 
Members 
Source: Information compiled by Audit from notifications of BSS 

 
 
 
 
Glossary 

103 
Glossary 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
AAA Academic and Administrative Audit 
AICTE India Council for Technical Education 
ARC Admission Regulatory Committee 
ASSRM Academy of Sports Sciences and Research Management 
AY Academic Years 
BPT Bachelor of Physiotherapy 
BSS Board of School of Studies 
CAT Common Admission Test 
CCSEA Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of 
Experiments on Animals 
CDC College Development Council 
CLAT Common Law Admission Test 
CMYS Centre for Meditation and Yoga Sciences 
CSE Computer Science Engineering 
CUET Combined University Entrance Test 
CUMS Cloud based University Management System 
DCA Deputy Controller of Accounts 
DHE Directorate of Higher Education 
DHEAT Delhi Higher Education Aid Trust 
DHESF Delhi Higher Education Scholarship Fund 
DIPSAR Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Research 
DJB Delhi Jal Board 
DKDF Delhi Knowledge Development Foundation 
DPSRU Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences & Research University 
DRC Directorate of Research and Consultancy 
DTTDC Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation 
DTU Delhi Technological University 
EWS Economically Weaker Sections 
FRGS Fundamental Research Grant Scheme 
GGSIPU Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HEI Higher Educational Institution 
ICC Internal Complaint Committee 
IIQAC Indraprastha Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights 

Performance Audit on Functioning of Universities of GNCTD 
104 
Abbreviation Full form 
IQAC Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
IUMS Integrated University Management System 
JAC Joint Assessment Committee 
JEE Joint Entrance Exam 
MCM Merit-cum Means  
MIS Management Information System  
MPD Master Plan of Delhi 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NATA National Aptitude Test of Architecture 
NEET National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
NEP National Education Policy 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NPS National Pension System 
NRC National Regulatory Council 
NTA National Testing Agency 
OM Office Memorandum 
PG Post Graduate 
PWD Public Works Department 
RIMS Research Information Management System 
RUSA Rashtriya Uchchtar Shiksha Abhiyan 
RWH Rainwater Harvesting 
SFRC State Fee Regulatory Committee 
SRSWOR Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
UAT User Acceptance Testing 
UC University Centres 
UGC Universities Grants Commission 
USAP University School of Architecture and Planning 
USAR University School of Automation and Robotics 
USDI University School of Design and innovation 
USE University School of Education 
USS University Schools of Studies 
VC Vice Chancellor 
WCSC World Class Skill Centre 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/new-delhi/en 
 