 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India  
for the year ended March 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Report No. 36 of 2025 
(Compliance Audit – Civil & Commercial) 
 
 
 
 
Report was presented in the Parliament on: 
Lok Sabha -  
Rajya Sabha -  

 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
i 
CONTENTS 
Description Paragraph Page 
Preface iii 
Overview v – x 
CHAPTER-I : INTRODUCTION  
Audit Mandate 1.1 1 
Types of Audit 1.2 1 
Audit Universe 1.3 2 
Budget and Expenditure of Civil Ministries/Departments 1.4 2 
Audit Planning, Conduct of Audit and Audit Findings 1.5 3 
Significant Comments of the C&AG issued as Supplement 
to the Statutory Auditors’ Reports on CPSEs 
1.6 4 
Status of Pending ATNs 1.7 4 
CHAPTER-II : UNION MINISTRIES 
(I) Ministry of Culture 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on 
Conservation and preservation of monuments and antiquities 
by ASI, Uttar Pradesh 
2.1 7 
(II) Ministry of External Affairs 
Excess expenditure of ₹  27.43 crore towards license fee for 
unutilised space 
2.2 49 
Embassy of India, Beijing, China 
Property Management in Embassy of India, Beijing, China 2.3 51 
Embassy of India, Copenhagen, Denmark 
Excess expenditure of ₹ 99.12 lakh 2.4 56 
Embassy of India, Tel Aviv, Israel 
Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 92.01 lakh 2.5 57 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, Pune and Goa 
Irregular Payment of Electricity Duty and Tax of ₹ 1.47 crore 2.6 60 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai 
Inordinate delay in surrender of vacated RPO Thane 
premises 
2.7 62 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
ii 
CONTENTS 
Description Paragraph Page 
(III) Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit  on Functioning of 
Fishery Survey of India 
2.8 64 
(IV) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Government Medical Store Depot, Mumbai 
Avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹ 1.64 crore towards 
rent and security of unused Godown 
2.9 89 
(V) Ministry of Home Affairs 
Central Industrial Security Force 
Blocking of funds amounting to ₹ 6.53 crore  2.10 92 
Central Armed Police Forces 
Non-deduction of Professional Tax by the CAPFs 2.11 94 
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), 36 Battalion, Geyzing, Sikkim 
Excess payment of Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) 
Allowance (SCRLA) of ₹ 3.18 crore 
2.12 97 
(VI) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Pre-Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes for 
Students belonging to Scheduled Castes 
2.13 98 
(VII) Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Pre-Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes for 
Students belonging to Scheduled Tribes 
2.14 112 
CHAPTER-III : CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
Encashment of Leave in deviation from DPE guidelines 3.1 137 
Appendices 141 - 164 
Annexures 165 - 225 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
iii 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
March 2024 has been prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India. The Report contains the results of Compliance Audit of  
29 Ministries (excluding Union Territories without Legislatures)  and seven 
Constitutional bodies/secretariat of the Union Government and their field offices under 
the General and Social Services Sector. 
The instances mentioned in this Report , pertaining to Compliance Audit,  are those 
which came to notice in the course of test audit for the period 2023-24 as well as those 
which came to notice in earlier years but could not be reported in the previous Audit 
Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2023-24 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
v 
OVERVIEW 
This Report contains significant audit findings arising out from the compliance audit 
of financial transactions under 5 6 grants relating to 29 Ministries (excluding Union 
Territories without Legislatures) and five Constitutional bodies/secretariat of the 
Union Government. The gross expenditure of these 29 Ministries and five 
Constitutional bodies/secretariat was ₹ 16,26,975.07 crore in 2023-24. 
This Report contains 16 illustrative cases 1 of Compliance audit pertaining to seven 
Ministries/Departments and one Central Public Sector Enterprise. An overview of the 
main audit findings included in this Report is given below: 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT OBSERVATIONS: UNION MINISTRIES 
Ministry of Culture 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Conservation and preservation of 
monuments and antiquities by ASI, Uttar Pradesh 
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is a Central Government agency that is 
responsible for protecting and maintaining monuments and archaeological sites that 
have been declared as of national importance. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (AMASR Act) 
established “national importance” as the basis for notification but did not  define its 
scope or provide standards for implementation. Notifications were incomplete and 
lacked vital information.  About 86 per cent of the notifications lacked the detail of 
area/boundary covered by the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs). Audit further 
noticed that out of 487 CPMs across three major ASI circles in Uttar Pradesh, only 
31 monuments (6.4 per cent) had proper ownership documentation through land record 
mutation.  ASI was operating 456 CPMs (94 per cent) without legal title. As per the 
records of the ASI circles in UP, 31 CPMs remain untraceable. In 96 monuments, cases 
of encroachment were reported in respective circles of ASI in Uttar Pradesh. Instances 
of inappropriate conservation work, monuments in need of chemical conservation, 
structural alterations, and neglected monuments of national import ance were noticed.  
Antiquities were stored in deteriorating conditions and only 20 per cent  had been 
digitised so far. 
(Paragraph No. 2.1) 
 
1  One case included under Para 1.5 Audit Planning, Conduct of Audit and Audit Findings 
(Appendix-III). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
vi 
Ministry of External Affairs 
Excess expenditure of ₹ 27.43 crore towards license fee for unutilised space 
Retention of unutilised space at Akbar Bhawan by the Ministry of External Affairs for 
15 months, without formalising pro-rata license fees with New Delhi Municipal 
Corporation for the space actually utilized, resulted in excess expenditure of 
₹ 27.43 crore towards licence fee for unutilised space. 
(Paragraph No. 2.2) 
Embassy of India, Beijing, China 
Property management in Embassy of India, Beijing, China 
Despite having continuous Annual Maintenance Contracts and incurring significant 
expenditure on repairs, six out of sixteen residential units constructed in 2011 have 
become uninhabitable within a span of 10 to 13 years. Delay in carrying out the 
necessary comprehensive repairs/renovation of these six vacant units resulted in 
avoidable rental outgo of ₹ 3.22 crore (up to February 2025). 
The redevelopment project of Old Chancery Premises (OCP), initially conceptualized 
in 2009 has been delayed due to indecisiveness and non-finalization of end use. 
Continued payment of heating charges for the OCP despite it being not in use since 
2014 resulted in wasteful expenditure of ₹ 74 lakh. 
(Paragraph No. 2.3) 
Embassy of India, Copenhagen, Denmark 
Excess expenditure of ₹ 99.12 lakh 
Non-adherence to the rental ceiling fixed by the Ministry of External Affairs for hiring 
of leased accommodation by the Embassy of India, Copenhagen resulted in an excess 
expenditure of ₹ 99.12 lakh. 
(Paragraph No. 2.4) 
Embassy of India, Tel Aviv, Israel 
Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 92.01 lakh 
Delays by the Embassy of India, Tel Aviv in undertaking pre-acquisition activities and 
the Ministry of External Affairs in conveying administrative approval and financial 
sanction for acquisition of a property within the extended timeline set by the seller led 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
vii 
to termination of the deal and rendered an expenditure of ₹ 92.01 lakh for professional/ 
legal services associated to pre-acquisition activities unfruitful. 
(Paragraph No. 2.5) 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, Pune and Goa 
Irregular Payment of Electricity Duty and Tax of ₹ 1.47 crore 
The Regional Passport Offices Mumbai, Pune and Goa did not claim exemption from 
Electricity duty and Tax as per Article 287 of the Constitution and Section 3(2) of the 
Maharashtra Electricity Act, 2016 and Section 3(2) (1) of the Goa, Daman and Diu 
Electricity Duty Act, 1986 resulting in an irregular payment of ₹ 1.47 crore. 
(Paragraph No. 2.6) 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai 
Inordinate delay in surrender of vacated RPO Thane premises 
Despite vacating the leased premises in 2017, RPO Mumbai and the Ministry were 
unable to finalise the surrender or alternate use of the property for over seven years, 
leading to avoidable expenditure of ₹ 76 lakh and pending liabilities of ₹ 1.38 crore. 
(Paragraph No. 2.7) 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on Functioning of Fishery Survey of India 
Fishery Survey of India  (FSI) carried out 372 voyages against planned 586 voyages 
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 registering a 37 per cent shortfall.  This resulted 
in shortfall in operational targets viz. 46 per cent in the number of days at sea, 
53 per cent in number of fishing days leadin g to consequent shortfall of 61 per cent 
and 72 per cent in the sampling efforts measured in terms of number of hours and  
number of hooks respectively.  Due to non - conducting of 214 planned surveys, the 
Institute had to forego 4,339 days of fishing and the subsequen t sampling effort of 
15,149 hours and  12.73 lakh hooks. Even in the 372 voyages conducted by the 
Institute, shortfall in the sampling effort was 37 per cent and 31 per cent in hours and 
numbers of hooks respectively. 
FSI had no prescribed norms for minimum number of fishing days per survey in order 
to ensure collection of adequate data for stock assessment studies due to which 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
viii 
21 voyages with fishing days less than five days were noticed in Mumbai and 
Mormugao bases.  
Audit noticed avoidable expenditure on berthing/ fuel charges due to delayed decision, 
idle expenditure on casual staff /other charges during the layoff period of vessels. 
The Institute did not adhere to DoPT’s instructions regarding the recruitment and 
remuneration of casual workers and incurred expenditure without the necessary 
administrative and financial approvals. 
(Paragraph No. 2.8) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Government Medical Store Depot, Mumbai 
Avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹  1.64 crore towards rent and security of 
unused Godown 
Inability to take timely action to vacate and surrender the unused godown led to an 
avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹  1.64 crore on rent and security for the 
unutilized premises. 
(Paragraph No. 2.9) 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Central Industrial Security Force 
Blocking of funds amounting to ₹ 6.53 crore 
Non-adherence by Central Industrial Security Force to the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for acquisition of land resulted in non -possession of land 
and blocking of funds amounting ₹ 6.53 crore for more than nine years. 
(Paragraph No. 2.10) 
Central Armed Police Forces 
Non-deduction of Professional Tax by the CAPFs 
Non-compliance to the provisions of Professional Tax Act applicable in States (Assam, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Telangana and Tripura) by the Central Armed Police 
Force units resulted in non -deduction of professional tax amounting to ₹  26.40 crore 
from the salary of the employees serving in CAPF. 
(Paragraph No. 2.11) 
 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
ix 
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), 36 Battalion, Geyzing, Sikkim 
Excess payment of Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance (SCRLA) 
of ₹ 3.18 crore 
SSB 36 Battalion paid Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance (SCRLA) 
to its employees at higher rate in contravention of the provisions of the Ministry of 
Finance OM, resulting in excess payment of ₹ 3.18 crore. 
(Paragraph No. 2.12) 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Pre-Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes for Students belonging to 
Scheduled Castes 
During 2017 -18 to 2023 -24, Government of India and States/UTs spent 
₹ 5,037.83 crore for awarding scholarship to 181.45 lakh Pre -Matric students and 
₹ 47,840.58 crore for 348.09 lakh Post-Matric students belonging to Scheduled Castes. 
An audit of the implementation of these two scholarship schemes revealed various 
shortcomings and instances of deviations from scheme guidelines. Significant 
shortcomings were selection of beneficiaries without considering the income and caste 
criteria, payment of scholarship multiple times to beneficiaries, scholarships paid to 
students not enrolled in schools/institutions, etc. 
While the Ministry has acknowledged the audit observations and initiated preliminary 
corrective measures, it remains imperative for the Ministry, given its role as the policy 
owner and nodal implementation agency, to establish a robust oversight mechanism to 
ensure strict adherence to the scheme guidelines. 
(Paragraph No. 2.13) 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Pre-Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes for Students belonging to 
Scheduled Tribes 
During the period 2017 -18 to 2023 -2024, the Ministry spent ₹  2,354.51 crore for 
awarding scholarship to 87.10 lakh Pre -Matric students and ₹  13,695.74 crore to 
151.66 lakh Post -Matric students belonging to Scheduled Tribes.  An audit of the 
operations of these two scholarship schemes taken up for the period 2017 -2021 
revealed several systemic weaknesses in implementation. These included absence of 
defined timelines for processing of students’ applications, lack of defined role 
prescribed for the nodal officers at institutes, district and states, ambiguities in scheme 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
x 
guidelines relating to the funding pattern, a lack of structured mechanisms for the 
release of Central Assistance, and deficiencies in monitoring and grievance redressal. 
Although the Ministry has acknowledged the audit observations and initiated 
preliminary corrective measures, it remains imperative for the Ministry  given its role 
as the policy owner and nodal implementation agency  to establish a robust oversight 
mechanism to ensure strict adherence to the scheme guidelines. 
(Paragraph No. 2.14) 
CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
Encashment of Leave in deviation from DPE guidelines  
Automatic encashment of earned leave and encashment of EL/HPL on 26 days' basis 
instead of 30 days' in deviation from DPE Guidelines resulted in irregular payment of 
₹ 33.68 crore by the Company during 2015-16 to 2023-24. 
(Paragraph No. 3.1) 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
1 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Audit Mandate 
The mandate of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) with regard to 
audit of Union and States, Government companies and corporations, bodies and 
authorities is derived from the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor 
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service ) Act, 1971. The C&AG is the 
sole authority prescribed in the Constitution entrusted with the responsibility of audit 
of accounts of the Union and of the States. Under Section 13 (read with Section 17) 
and Section 16  of the Act, it is the duty of the C&AG to audit all expenditure, all 
receipts and other transactions of the Governments of the Union, of each State and of 
each Union Territory. The mandate of the Comptroller and Auditor General, under the 
Constitution and under Section 14, 15, 19 and 20 of  the Act, also covers audit of 
Bodies, Authorities, Government Companies and Corporations. The Audit Reports of 
the C&AG are placed before Parliament or the Legislature of the State or the Union 
Territory, as the case may be. 
1.2 Types of Audit 
C&AG broadly carries out three types of audit, viz. Financial Audit, Compliance Audit 
and Performance Audit.  
Financial Audit deals with determining whether an entity’s financial statements and 
information is properly prepared, complete in all respects and is presented with 
adequate disclosures in accordance with the prescribed financial reporting and 
regulatory framework. 
Compliance Audit refers to examination of the transactions relating to expenditure, 
receipts, assets and liabilities of the Government to ascertain whether the provisions 
of the Constitution of India and applicable laws, rules, regulations, order and 
instructions issued by the competent authorities are being complied with and also to 
determine their legality, adequacy, transparency, propriety, prudence and effectiveness 
in terms of achievement of the intended objectives. 
Performance Audit is concerned with the audit of economy, efficiency and 
effectiveness in receipt and application of public fund s by the Government. The 
analysis in Performance Audit is distinct from, and goes beyond, compliance issues, 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
2 
and seeks to provide new information, analysis or insights on the actual benefit of the 
activity undertaken by the entity. 
Audits are conducted on the basis of C&AG’s Auditing Standards and the Regulations 
on Audit and Accounts (Amendments) 2020 . These standards and regulations 
prescribe the norms which the auditors are expected to follow in conduct of audit and 
require reporting on individual cases of non-compliance as well as on weaknesses that 
exist in systems of financial management and internal control of the entities audited.  
The Auditing Standards adopted by the C&AG require that the materiality level for 
reporting be commensurate with the nature, volume and magnitude of transactions. 
The findings of Audit are expected to enable the Executive to take corrective actions 
and frame policies and procedures that will lead to improved financial management of 
the organisations and contribute to better governance. 
1.3 Audit Universe  
The Audit Universe covered in this report includes 29 Ministries (excluding Union 
Territories without Legislatures) under the general and social sec tors of the Union 
Government and seven Constitutional Bodies/Secretariat (Appendix-I).   
1.4 Budget and Expenditure of Civil Ministries/Departments 
The position of Sanctioned Provision2, Expenditure and Savings of 29 Ministries and 
five Constitutional Bodies/Secretariat covering 56 civil grants for FY 2022-23 and 
FY 2023-24 are shown in Table 1.1. The details are given in Appendix-II. 
Table 1.1: Details of Sanctioned Provision, Expenditure and Savings 
(₹ in crore) 
Segment 
2022-233 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Revenue 
(Charged) 
5,609.10 4,975.28 -633.82 6,481.69 5,340.74 -1,140.95 
Revenue 
(Voted) 
17,70,168.17 15,82,092.56 -1,88,075.61 16,29,880.11 15,66,599.08 -63,281.03 
Capital 
(Charged) 
185.16 181.18 -3.98 236.09 177.71 -58.38 
Capital 
(Voted) 
40,237.33 31,297.98 -8,939.35 68,867.75 54,857.54 -14,010.21 
Total 18,16,199.76 16,18,547.00 -1,97,652.76 17,05,465.64 16,26,975.07 -78,490.57 
Source:  Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) 2022-23 and 2023-24  
 
2  Sanctioned Provision = Budget Estimates + Supplementary provisions 
3  Variation between figures , for the FY 2022 -23, shown in this report  and figures shown in 
CAG’s Audit Report  No. 8 of 2024 is due to inclusion of figures of Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation in this report. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
3 
1.5 Audit Planning, Conduct of Audit and Audit Findings 
As per the Annual Audit Planning process, units for compliance audit are selected on 
the basis of risk assessment besides topicality, materiality, social relevance etc. Risk 
assessment includes appraisal of internal control systems of the units, past instances of 
defalcation, misappropriation, embezzlement, etc., as well as findings of previous 
Audit Reports. Inspection Reports are issued to the heads of units after completion of 
audit. Based on the replies received, audit observations are settled with acti on for 
compliance advised, wherever necessary. Important audit findings are processed for 
inclusion in the Audit Report after seeking responses from the Ministry/Department 
concerned. Audit Reports are laid before the Parliament under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India.  
The accounts of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) including Government 
Companies, Statutory Corporations and other Companies controlled by Government, 
are audited by the C&AG under Sections 143 (6) and 143 (7) of Companies Act, 2013 
or respective A ct of the Parliament forming Statutory Corporations. The Statutory 
Auditor(s) [Chartered Accountants(s)] are appointed by the C&AG to certify the 
accounts of CPSEs and the C&AG has the right to conduct supplementary audit of 
such audited accounts. Reports in relation to the CPSEs are submitted to the 
Government by the C&AG under the provisions of section 19A of the C&AG ’s 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
Chapter II of this report  contains significant observations arising out of compliance 
audit of 29 Ministries (excluding Union Territories without Legislatures) of social and 
general sector and seven Constitutional Bodies/Secretariat.  
Chapter III contains observation arising out of compliance audit of CPSEs as a result 
of audit of transactions up to 2023-24. 
Apart from the observations included in the respective Chapters, an amount 
aggregating ₹ 8.11 crore (Appendix-III) has also been recovered at the instance of 
audit. 
On the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), the Ministry of 
Finance issued directions to all Ministries in June 1960 to send their responses to the 
draft paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Report of the C&AG of India within six 
weeks of receipt of the paragraphs. Accordingly, the draft paragraphs are forwarded to 
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments concerned drawing their attention to the 
audit findings and requesting them to send their response within six weeks. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
4 
Concerned Ministries/Departments did not send replies to 10 paragraphs out of 
16 paragraphs (up to August 2025). The response of the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments received in respect of the remaining six paragraphs has been suitably 
incorporated in the Report. In response to five audit observations, the concerned 
agencies have taken /initiated corrective measures, which have been incorporated in 
the report.  
1.6 Significant Comments of the C&AG Issued as Supplement to the 
Statutory Auditors’ Reports on CPSEs 
Audit Universe for financial audits includes 86 CPSEs4 (Appendix-IV) under 
15 Ministries of the Union Government. As per Section 143(6) of the Companies Act, 
2013 the Comptroller and Auditor General of India conducts a supplementary audit of 
the financial statements of the companies and comment upon or supplement the audit 
report issued by the Statutory Auditors. Some of the significant comments issued on 
financial statements of Government Companies and Statutory Corporations are given 
in Appendix-V.  The list of CPSEs in respect of whom NIL comments were issued is 
given in Appendix-VI. 
1.7 Status of Pending ATNs 
In its 105 th Report (10 th Lok Sabha –1995-96) presented to Parliament on 
17 August 1995, the Public Accounts Committee had recommended that Action Taken 
Notes (ATNs) on all paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG should be furnished to 
the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a 
period of four months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports on the Table of the 
House starting from 31  March 1996 onwards. Subsequently, a Monitoring Cell was 
created under the Department of Expenditure which is entrusted with the task of 
coordination and collection of t he ATNs from all Ministries/Departments concerned 
duly vetted by Audit and sending them to the Public Accounts Committee within the 
stipulated period of four months from the date of presentation of the Audit Report to 
the Parliament. 
The Committee on Public Undertakings , in its 2 nd Report (12th Lok Sabha-1998-99) 
has recommended the follow up action taken notes, duly vetted by audit, in respect of 
all reports of C&AG (Commercial) presented to Parliament, should be furnished to the 
Committee within six months from the date of presentation of the relevant audit 
reports. 
 
4  Including four government controlled other companies. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
5 
As of 3 1 August 2025, out of 16 ATNs of Civil Ministries/Departments , including 
CPSEs, covered in this report, three ATNs were not received and 13 ATNs were under 
correspondence (Appendix-VII). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
7 
CHAPTER-II 
UNION MINISTRIES 
This Chapter contains 14 audit paragraphs covering audit findings related to seven 
Union Ministries/Departments. 
(I) Ministry of Culture 
2.1 Subject Specific Compliance Audit (S SCA) on Conservation and 
preservation of monuments and antiquities by ASI, Uttar Pradesh 
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is a Central Government agency that 
is responsible for  protecting and maintaining monuments and archaeological 
sites that have been declared of national importance. Its activities include 
carrying out surveys of antiquarian remains, exploration and excavation of 
archaeological sites, archaeological  research, maintenance, conservation and 
preservation of protected monuments in the country. The ASI is divided into a 
total of 37 circles each headed by a Superintending Archaeologist (SA) out of 
that five are in Uttar Pradesh.   The circles of ASI in Uttar Pradesh are Agra, 
Jhansi, Lucknow, Meerut and Sarnath. India’s protected monument list has 
over 3,679 sites, out of which 741 Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) are 
in Uttar Pradesh (UP). 
Audit revealed the following: 
➢ The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 
(AMASR Act ) established “national importance” as the basis for 
notification but did not  define its scope or provide standards for 
implementation. 
➢ Notifications were incomplete and lacked vital information. About 
86 per cent of the notifications lacked the detail of area/boundary covered 
by the CPMs. 
➢ Audit noticed that out of 487 CPMs across three major ASI circles in Uttar 
Pradesh, only 31 monuments (6.4 per cent ) had proper ownership 
documentation through land record mutation  and the remaining 456 
CPMs (94 per cent) were being operated by ASI without legal title. 
➢ The Ministry had given an assurance to the Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC) for conducting a review of all CPMs.  However, the circles did not 
conduct any reviews.  At present, 31 CPMs remain untraceable as per the 
records of the ASI circles in UP. 
➢ Despite recommendations of PAC , no guidelines  or policy document on 
living monuments was prepared by ASI. Further, circles did not have the 
records/details of monuments where prayers/worships were started 
before/after issue of notification. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
8 
➢ In 96 monuments, cases of encroachment were reported in respective 
circles of ASI in Uttar Pradesh. 
➢ 81 per cent  of Adarsh Smaraks  lacked cafeterias, 90 per cent  lacked 
professional guides, and 86 per cent lacked Wi-Fi connectivity. 
➢ The approved Annual Conservation Plans (ACPs) prepared by the circles 
(21 per cent) were not executed as planned, primarily due to shortage of 
funds and staff. 
➢ Proper documentation of conservation activities in the form of log books 
and the inspection notes were not maintained by the circles. 
➢ Instances of inappropriate conservation work, monuments in need of 
chemical conservation, structural alterations, and neglected monuments of 
national importance were noticed. 
➢ Antiquities were stored in deteriorating conditions and only 20 per cent 
had been digitised so far. 
➢ During 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, the ASI circles had incurred dismal 
expenditure on excavation and exploration ranging between 0.4 1 and 
0.76 per cent of total expenditure in  spite of assurance given to PAC to 
increase the expenditure on excavation up to five per cent. 
➢ There was an acute shortage of staff - about 57 per cent in technical cadre, 
41 per cent in the cadre of Monument Attendants and shortfall of 22 to 
96 per cent in required number of security guards. 
Audit recommends the following: 
➢ ASI needs to have a defined criteria for declaring the monuments of national 
importance. Notification process should be streamlined to include all 
interrelated structures, boundary and adjacent areas ensuring holistic 
protection of heritage complexes. A time frame for completion of such activity 
may be indicated. 
➢ ASI Circles should have a long -time action plan for legally freezing the 
boundaries of these monuments by issuing revised notifications after taking 
into account revenue records.  It may also be ensured that all the relevant 
columns related to the area cov ered are filled while processing new 
notifications. 
➢ ASI circles need to invoke the provisions of Section 5 for acquisition, lease, 
gift, and guardianship to expand protection coverage. They need to proactively 
pursue to bring the CPMs under Government control or under the ownership 
of ASI. 
➢ ASI should consider evolving clear guidelines on the use of protected living 
monuments and to ensure that proper Memoranda of Understanding 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
9 
(MoUs)/agreements are signed with the occupants/users as recommended by 
PAC. 
➢ ASI should constitute a coordination body with representatives of State 
Government at each circle to check incidents of encroachment with the 
cooperation of district and police authorities and initiate timely action for 
removal of all encroachments.  
➢ Steps need to be taken to address the issue of staff shortage at the ASI circles 
especially the technical and security staff. 
2.1.1 Introduction 
The Archaeological Survey of India  (ASI) is a Central Government agency that is 
responsible for protecting and maintaining monuments and archaeological sites that 
have been declared of national importance. Its activities include carrying out surveys 
of antiquarian remains, exploration and excavation of archaeological sites, 
archaeological research, maintenance, conservation and preservation of protected 
monuments in the country. ASI was founded in 1861.  It became a statutory body under 
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Rema ins (AMASR) Act, 1958 
with administrative control of Ministry of Culture. ASI administers 3,679 ancient 
monuments, archaeological sites and remains of national importance.  
The ASI is divided in 37 circles, each headed by a Superintending Archaeologist, of 
which five are in Uttar Pradesh (UP) , namely Agra5 , Lucknow 6, Sarnath 7, Meerut8 
and Jhansi9. 
2.1.1.1 Organizational structure of circles of ASI 
The ASI is headed by the Director General (DG) who is supported by Additional and 
Joint Directors General. A Circle is headed by the Superintending Archaeologist (SA), 
responsible for the maintenance of the monuments, documentation and structural 
conservation with the assistance of Engineers and Conservators. The circles are further 
divided into the Sub Circles headed by Conservation As sistants who are directly 
responsible for the conservation activities carried out at the monuments. The ASI also 
includes science branch  headed b y the Superintending Archaeological Chemist who 
is responsible for chemical treatment of monuments  with the assistance of 
Deputy/Assistant Superintending Archaeological Chemist. 
 
5  Est. in 1885 with seven sub-circle covering 154 monuments/sites 
6  Est. in 1985, with seven sub-circle covering 197 monuments/sites 
7  Est. in 2013 with four sub-circle covering 136 monuments/sites 
8  Est. in 2020, with five sub-circle covering 82 monuments/sites 
9  Est. in 2020, with four sub-circles covering 172 monuments/sites 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
10 
2.1.2 Audit Objectives 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up with objective to 
ascertain whether: 
(i) Proper institutional, monitoring and implementation mechanism existed for 
ensuring effective heritage conservation and preservation; 
(ii) There was effective f inancial management including adequacy of funds, 
utilisation of funds, revenue generation, remittance of revenue in Government 
account and accounting thereof; 
(iii) Adequate human resources were available; and 
(iv) Adequate follow-up action  was taken by ASI circles in UP on the 
recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in their 39th 
and 118th report of sixteenth Lok Sabha. 
2.1.3 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria for SSCA were derived from: 
➢ The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act 1904; 
➢ The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) 
Act 1958; 
➢ The AMASR (Amendment and validation) Act 2010;  
➢ Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972; 
➢ National Policy for Conservation (NPC) -AMASR, 2014, Orders, Regulations 
issued for the preservation and conservation of monuments, museums and 
antiquities by Government of India; 
➢ General Financial Rule (GFR) 2017; 
➢ ASI Work Code Manual; 
➢ PAC recommendations and Action Taken Notes (ATN) on observations raised 
in C&AG’s Report No. 18 of 2013 on this subject. 
2.1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The SSCA covered the activities of five ASI circles in UP and Institute of 
Archaeology, Noida during 2021-22 to 2023-24. The field audit was conducted during 
July 2024 to November 2024. Audit methodology included scrutiny of records, 
obtaining information and joint physical inspection of selected monuments. The 
conservation and preservation works were audited by examining 100 per cent of 
ticketed monuments including Adarsh and UNESCO 10 world heritage sites and a 
sample of five per cent of other Centrally Protected Monuments (CPM) in each circle 
 
10  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
11 
taken up based on Simple Random Sampling without Replacement Method. List of the 
selected monuments is at Annexure 2.1. Audit commenced with an Entry conference 
with the Circles on 16 July 2024 wherein audit objectives, scope and methodology 
were explained. The audit findings were issued to the Ministry of Culture and the 
Director General, ASI in April 2025. Their replies were awaited. 
2.1.5 Audit Findings 
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC), in its 39 th report (16 th Lok Sabha laid in 
April 2016) and Action Taken Report ( ATR) 118th report (16 th Lok Sabha laid in 
December 2018) based on CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities (No. 18 of 2013), had made 
25 recommendations for better management of Monuments and Antiquities. In the 
SSCA, Audit looked into the implementation and follow -up on 17 recommendations 
which were relevant and ascertainable in the circles of ASI in UP. The extent of 
compliance/action taken in the execution units on PAC’s recommendations are 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
In addition, audit was conducted with a view to ascertain compliance with the existing 
Act, Rules and Regulations relating to identification, notification, conservation and 
preservation of monuments, sites, remains and objects under the custody of ASI circles 
in the State of UP.  Deficiencies regarding these have been discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
2.1.6 Identification, Notification and Documentation of Monuments 
The process of monument identification and protection represents a fundamental 
component of heritage conservation that requires systematic and structured approach 
for bringing archaeological resources under formal protection. This process begins 
with the identification of structures, erections, caves, rock sculptures, forts, buildings, 
and sites that demonstrate unique archaeological styles and artistic significance 
combined with historical importance. Such identification occurs through systematic 
archaeological surveys and explorations conducted by qualified personnel. Following 
initial identification, the process requires comprehensive documentation of 
archaeological monuments. This documentation phase involves detailed recording of 
architectural features, historical significance, current condition and cultural context. 
Concurrent with archaeological documentation, the responsible authorities need to 
collect land details from the Revenue Department to establish clear legal foundations 
for protection measures. Upon review and approval, the Central Government declares 
monuments as "Centrally Protected" through Gazette Notification under Section 4 of 
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. This 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
12 
notification process creates the legal framework necessary for effective conservation 
by establishing formal protection status, defining protected boundaries, enabling 
conservation activities, restricting unauthorized alterations, and providing the 
Archaeological Survey of India with management authority. 
The audit examination revealed several areas where current implementation practices 
do not fully align with the prescribed framework for monument identification, 
notification, and documentation. These findings indicate systematic challenges that 
may compromise the effectiveness of heritage protection efforts. 
2.1.6.1 Follow up on Heritage Surveys  
As per the definition of the Ancient Monuments, (AMASR Act, 1958) any structure, 
erection or monument, or any tumulus or places, which is of historical, archaeological 
or artistic interest and which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years 
are ancient monuments/remains.   
Audit observed that during 2021 -22 to 2023 -24 village to village Survey in seven 
districts covering 245 villages had been undertaken, and a total of 66 evidences 
discovered; which include d sites having antiquarian remain, evidences of temples, 
graves, mounds and few other objects. These surveys were conducted by 
Archaeologists of the circles concerned. Some of the evidences collected during these 
surveys were reported to belong to 19 th century i.e., more than 150 years old  [Gomat 
temple, Shivala temple, Dharamauli (appears Gupta/Kushan period), remains at Bada 
Sureha (late Mughal Period), etc.]. 
Audit, however, observed that the survey results and findings were not found to have 
merit for further investigation and hence were not communicated to the DG, ASI.  
There were no prescribed provisions for protecting such ancient monuments as such 
these ancient monuments/sites remained prone to deterioration. 
ASI Lucknow Circle stated that they  collaborated with local authorities and others.  
ASI Agra circle stated that remains noticed through village to village survey were not 
found worthy of protection for monuments/site of national importance. It further stated 
that the State legislations also had provisions to protect them as monument or sites of 
State importance.  
The fact remains that in absence of any follow up to protect these sites, these newly 
identified sites remain ed without interim safeguards, leaving them vulnerable to 
irreversible destruction from development activities. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
13 
Audit recommends that ASI should devise a mechanism for protecting ancient 
monuments/remains from further deterioration. 
2.1.6.2 Lapses in Gazette Notifications regarding Boundary and Area Disclosure 
Section 36 of AMASR Act provides that any clerical mistake, patent error or error 
arising from accidental slip or omission in the description of any ancient monument or 
archaeological site and remains declared to be of national importance by or under this 
Act, may, at any time, be corrected by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette. Gazette notifications serve as legal instruments that formally define 
what constitutes a protected site and where protection applies. Further, as per Gazette 
format (notification format -nine column ) details of boundary, land area, 
location/coordinates, adjoining land details, man-made markers (rivers, roads), etc. are 
required to be filled in. Audit noted that out of 487 centrally protected monuments 
(CPM) across three major ASI circles in Uttar Pradesh, 418 (86 per cent) lacked basic 
boundary, land area, plot numbers and adjoining land details in revenue records, as 
these details were not integrated in their gazette notifications. Without alignment to 
the land records system, monuments exist outside formal ownership frameworks, 
exposing them to disputes and encroachments. Absence of periphery ( Chauhaddi) 
details in majority of pre -independence notifications omitted natural or man -made 
markers such as rivers, roads, or coordinates. This allowed gradual encroachment and 
boundary erosion over decades as discussed in subsequent Paras 2.1.8.6, 2.1.8.7 and 
2.1.8.8. 
ASI constructed grills and gates at perimeter of 195 monuments without revising 
gazette records which being a proactive field action, remain ed legally unrecognized, 
leaving monuments exposed to litigation. Despite providing explicit authority for 
correcting errors “at any time”, provisions of this Act remained largely unused as legal 
tools for rectification.  
In response, the ASI circles stated (August-November 2024) that notifications issued 
prior to independence were mostly lacking the Chauhaddi details and area of the land 
involved and further stated that revision in notification being policy matter, field 
offices were unable to comment. They further stated that in new notifications the same 
was addressed within the purview and provisions of AMASR Act.  The reply was not 
tenable as the Department did not carr y out rectification of any such errors and 
omissions by revising the notificati ons except in one case of Chaukhandi Stupa in 
Sarnath Circle where revised notification was issued. 
Audit recommends that ASI Circles should have a long-term action plan for legally 
freezing the boundary and adjacent areas of these monuments by issuing revised 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
14 
notifications after taking into account revenue records.  It may also be ensured that 
all the relevant columns related to the area covered are filled while processing new 
notifications.  
2.1.6.3 Rationalisation and review of notifications 
As per Section 35 of AMASR Act, 1958, if the Central Government is of opinion that 
any ancient and historic monument or archaeological site and remains declared to be 
of national importance by or under this Act has ceased to be of national importance, it 
may by notification in the official Gazette, declare that the ancie nt and historic 
monument or archaeological site and remains, as the case may be, has ceased to be of 
national importance for the purpose of this Act.  PAC in its recommendation had 
directed the Ministry to take necessary steps to notify rules to streamline 
notification/de-notification of monuments.  It had also recommended that ASI should 
expedite the verification of physical condition and existence of the notified protected 
monuments. The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) also highlighted this 
weakness in its Report No. 18 of 2013 and recommended comprehensive 
rationalisation. 
The Ministry had given an assurance to the PAC for conducting a review of all CPMs.   
India’s protected monument list includes 3,679 sites, out of which 741 CPMs are in 
Uttar Pradesh.  Audit noted that the ASI circles in U P did not undertake any activity 
to review the legacy monument list post -independence and after the enactment of 
AMASR Act 1958. 
In the C&AG’s Report No.18 of 2013, Audit had reported 26 CPMs in Uttar Pradesh 
as missing.  During audit it was noted that out of 26 missing monuments , first phase 
preliminary de-notification of nine monuments had been published in March 2024 , 
two had been traced and 12 were not traceable. In case of three monuments of Agra, it 
was stated that these are not untraceable, however, their exact similarity needs to be 
studied further to match with the context given in notification.   
In the recent audit, additional 19 cases of untraceable monuments were noticed.  In 
respect of these 19 monuments, proposal for de -notification of only one monument 
had been forwarded by the Lucknow Circle to the DG ASI.  Thus, 31 CPMs remained 
untraceable as per the records of the ASI circles in UP (Annexure-2.2). 
This indicate d that sufficient efforts were not made either to trace the missing 
monuments or to take a decision to rationalise the number of monuments, even after 
lapse of 11 years since last reported. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
15 
2.1.6.4 Duplication of Notification 
As mentioned above  (Para 2.1.6.2) , Section 36 provides explicit authority to the 
Central Government to rectify clerical mistakes, if any, in the process of notification. 
Audit noticed that the CPM of Kos Minar at village Bhognipur, Kanpur Dehat  was 
published twice in the Gazette notification of 1918.  However, despite passage of so 
many decades, no action was taken by the Department to rectify this mistake. 
ASI Circle Lucknow stated (November 2024) that this is a policy matter. 
The reply of the circle may be viewed with respect to the fact that nothing prevents the 
ASI circles  concerned to review any errors/mistakes in the notification of the 
monuments falling under the jurisdiction of that circle and take necessary orders of the 
competent authority to rectify the mistakes. 
Audit recommends that ASI needs to carry out inventory correction regarding 
confirmed missing monuments along with a comprehensive root cause analysis to 
identify the causes for disappearance of these monuments. It may also streamline 
the process of de-notification of the monuments to rationalise the process. 
2.1.6.5 Delay in the notification of monuments as CPMs 
The notifications serve as the essential bridge linking archaeological significance with 
statutory safeguarding. Delay in the notification of significant archaeological 
discoveries to obtain legal protection highlights a structural gap within heritage 
governance system. 
Audit noticed that Agra Circle identified four Prehistoric Rock -art Shelters and few 
other prehistoric sites at Rasulpur, Pastal, Badrauli and Madanpura (Jajauli)  of 
Kirawali Tehsil, Agra. These paintings were reported by the circle as belonging to the 
terminal phase of Stone Age or Mesolithic period. Audit observe d that though a 
notification proposal was sent to the DG, ASI in April 2023 for their protection, gazette 
notification was not issued as of November 2024.  The process of issuance of the 
preliminary Gazette Notification had also not been initiated by ASI (November 2024). 
ASI Circle Agra stated that the matter was referred to ASI Headquarters. 
Audit recommends that ASI needs to prescribe timelines to streamline the process of 
notification at circle levels and at the ASI Headquarters. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
16 
2.1.7 Gaps in the notification process 
Audit e xamination of the notification cases revealed absence of criteria for 
identification of monuments of ‘national importance’, instances of non -grouping of 
monuments in same complex, incomplete coverage of integral parts of monuments and 
jurisdictional overlap as reported in succeeding paragraphs. 
2.1.7.1 Absence of criteria for identification of monuments of ‘National 
 importance’ 
As per Section 4 of AMSAR Act, 1958, where the Central Government is of opinion 
that any ancient monument or archaeological site and remains not included in section 3 
is of national importance, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, give two 
months’ notice of its intention to declare such ancient monument or archaeological site 
and remains to be of national importance.  Further, the Act defines ancient monument 
as any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any 
cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith, which is of historical, archaeological or 
artistic interest and which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years. 
Though the AMASR Act of 1958 established “national importance” as the basis for 
notification but did not define its scope or provide standards for implementation. PAC 
had also directed  (2016) ASI to finalise guidelines for determination of national 
importance of monuments at the earliest. 
Audit observed that ASI was yet to comply with the directions of PAC.  Audit further 
noticed that in the absence of clear cut guidelines regarding the identification of the 
monuments of national importance, there was a gap in the identification and 
subsequent notification of the monuments as CPM. This resulted in inconsistent 
practices across ASI circles, a system marked by disorganised decisions and distorted 
monument counts.  In the absence of well -defined criteria for determination of 
monuments of “national importance”, decisions rested on discretionary judgments of 
field officers. 
Audit noted that there was no specific criteria for notifying multiple structures within 
one complex as a single monument or each structure within a complex as an 
independent monument. Audit s crutiny of records related to notifications and joint 
physical verification revealed that a varied approach was being adopted in this regard 
as reported below: 
➢ 62 monuments spread across 20 complexes under four circles ( Annexure-2.3) 
were each notified separately. However, at Fatehpur Sikri a group of 92 structures 
and at Taj Mahal a group of 15 structures were notified as two single monuments, 
respectively. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
17 
In contrast, distinct monuments located at different places, such as 
Mahaparinirvana Temple and Ramabhar Stupa, Kushinagar were merged under a 
single notification (Buddhist remains at Kasya), despite their independent 
historical significance.  This practice prevents site -specific conservation and 
reduces recognition of distinct heritage values.  
ASI Circles stated that the decision of review and amendment in the gazette 
notification were policy issues, and therefore, field office was unable to offer any 
comment. The reply is not acceptable, as the ASI Circle should initiate and 
suggest amendment to notifications, to the competent authority , which was not 
done.   
The matter was communicated to the Ministry/ASI in April 2025, reply was 
awaited. 
➢ The excavation of Bir Chhabili Tila (1999-2000) revealed a sixth-century cultural 
sequence.  T he findings were published in the Indian Archaeology Review  and 
artefacts were placed in museum custody. Audit observed that a 300 -meter long 
fence was built around Bir Chhabili Tila.  However, this informal measure lacked 
statutory authority because no notification proposal was ever initiated assuming 
that the site was located within the periphery of Fatehpur Sikri group of 
monuments that consisted of 92 monuments being a UNESCO heritage site. The 
site was not added to the existing list of 92 monuments through notification.  
The ASI Circle Agra responded (September 2024)  that it was not separately 
notified as it f ell within periphery of outer city and hence its preservation/  
protection was mandatory being a monument of UNESCO site. 
The reply is not tenable due to the reason that though the monument is situated 
within periphery of the UNESCO heritage site, it is not listed in the 92 monuments 
within Fatehpur Sikri Group of Monuments, hence not covered/protected by the 
notification. Therefore, its protection depends on a separate notification. 
➢ Unrecorded temple adj acent to Chandi CPM in Lalitpur  - A significant temple 
structure discovered only meters away from existing protected monuments had 
never been surveyed or documented. 
➢ Undocumented Ancillary Hall which is a large, culturally significant rectangular 
hall used for last rites and a part of British Cemetery Hamirpur (a CPM) was 
excluded from both gazette notifications and boundary protections.  
➢ Ganesh Bagh Temple Complex is partially documented - only the Stone Temple 
was notified, while other integral elements such as Sarovar, Bowli,  and 
connecting water systems were excluded.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
18 
These omissions le ft valuable heritage legally unprotected and vulnerable to 
irreversible loss. Partial coverage of temple complexes, exclusion of ancillary heritage, 
and incomplete boundaries undermine conservation effectiveness. 
Case Study: New Notification for Nakkar Khana in the premises of Imambara of 
Nawab Asf-ud-Daula 
In the ATN on the Audit Report no 18 of 2013, Ministry of Culture had stated that ASI was 
following the criteria for issuing only one notification for the entire complex other than 
having separate notification for each of the monument/structure located therein.  
However, Audit noticed that in Lucknow, in the locality of Quila Machchi Bazar Station, 
Azadari Marg Chowk, three monuments viz. Imambara of Nawab Asaf-ud-Daula (Khasara 
No. 8), Rumi Darwaja  (Khasara No. 32) and Masjid connected with Asaf-ud-Daula 
(Khasara No. 24) all situated in one circular premises of 200 meter radius were already 
notified as separate monuments. Further, a proposal to declare a structure named ‘Nakkar-
Khana’, situated on one part of the same premises (Khasara No. 8), as a separate CPM was 
also initiated and preliminary notification for the same was published in the gazette of India 
(April 2023). 
This reflects that the Ministry/ASI/circles were not following on the assurances given to the 
PAC in its ATN. 
The Circle responded that it was a policy matter and to be dealt at ASI Hqrs only.  
Audit recommends that ASI needs to have defined criteria for declaring the 
monuments of national importance. Notification process should be streamlined to 
include all interrelated structures, ensuring holistic protection of heritage 
complexes as well as define roles at all levels for initiation, processing and finalising 
proposal for declaring the monuments of national importance.  
2.1.7.2 Dual Protection, Jurisdictional Overlap and Coordination Breakdown 
Cases of notification and protection by both the ASI and the Uttar Pradesh State 
Archaeology Department were also noticed in audit for the monuments listed below: 
i. A part (lion statue) of the ASI protected monument ‘Stone group of a gigantic 
lion standing on a small elephant (CPM)’ of Sarnath Circle in Jaunpur, was also 
included in the protected list of State Archaeology Department, Uttar Pradesh. 
This was also pointed out in the  CAG Audit report of 2013.  However, no 
corrective action was taken by the respective circle. 
ii. A large and conspicuous mound called Gohana Khera , an old Buddhist 
establishment, at a short distance from the town  at Sasni, District Hathras was 
notified by the ASI, Agra circle while State Department of Archaeology and 
Museums Uttar Pradesh notified it as “Sasni Kila”. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
19 
iii. ASI, Agra circle had notified monument “Pillar with Sanskrit inscription dated 
samvat 1666 in the flanking tower at the  Bhanakaur tank”, Barsana, Mathura 
situated at one corner of tank while State Department of Archaeology and 
Museums Uttar Pradesh protected the tank as a part of protected monument 
named ‘Brishbhan Kund’. 
These cases indicate d lack of coordination with State Archaeology Department and 
made these CPMs prone to neglect due to uncertainty in the jurisdiction. 
Both the Circles accepted the audit observation and Agra circle stated ( September 
2024) that necessary communication was being made to rectify the same. 
These instances call for comprehensive review of notifications and coordination 
with the respective State authorities for rectification on case to case basis. 
2.1.8 Monument Management  
Audit noticed gaps in preparation of heritage bye -laws for regulating prohibited and 
regulated areas of CPMs, implementation of the directions of National Monument 
Authority (NMA) regarding categorization of the CPMs into specific categories, 
missing notified CPMs, ambiguity in the number of living monuments and cases of 
encroachment. The results of audit analysis on these issues are discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs.   
2.1.8.1 Absence of legal ownership of the CPMs 
The ownership and custody are the essential foundations upon which all conservation 
activities depend. Without undisputed legal title, the Archaeological Survey of India 
cannot enforce protection, defend against encroachment, or ensure long -term 
preservation. There are provisions for acquisition of rights in a protected monument 
and archaeological site in Section 5 of AMASR Act, which gives power to the DG, 
ASI who may, with the sanction of the Central Government, purchase, or take a lease 
of, or accept a g ift or bequest of, any protected monument. Where a protected 
monument is without an owner, the DG may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
assume the guardianship of the monument. 
Section 13 of the AMASR Act has provision to ensure the safety by stipulating for 
acquisition if the Central Government apprehends that a protected monument is in 
danger of being destroyed, injured, misused, decay. It may acquire the protected 
monument under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), as if 
the maintenance of the protected monument were a public purpose within the meaning 
of that Act. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
20 
Audit noticed that out of 487 CPMs across three major ASI circles11 in Uttar Pradesh, 
only 31 monuments (6.4 per cent) had proper ownership documentation through land 
record mutation.  456 CPMs (94 per cent) were being managed by ASI without legal 
title.  Audit analysed the ownership data in respect of total 326 monuments pertaining 
to Agra and Jhansi circles, which revealed that: 
➢ 121 (37 per cent) monuments were situated on government land. 
➢ 82 (25 per cent) monuments were found without any ownership. 
➢ 96 (29 per cent) monuments were under private ownership or under trusts. 
➢ 11 monuments were reported altered or untraceable. 
Audit noticed that the respective circles had not taken any action to bring all the CPMs 
under their ownership, as per the provisions of Section 5 of the AMASR Act, even 
those which are under the government ownership or without ownership and account 
for about 62 per cent of the total CPMs.  
In their reply, the circles stated that the decision for mutation in favour of ASI was a 
policy issue and therefore the circle offices were unable to offer comments. Reply may 
be viewed in the light that the circle offices did not initiate and send any such proposal 
to the ASI HQ.  
Audit recommends that ASI circles need to invoke the provisions of Section 5 and 
proactively pursue to bring the CPMs under Government control or without 
ownership under the ownership of ASI. 
2.1.8.2 Non-execution of Maintenance Agreement 
Section 6 of AMASR Act, 1958 contains provision to enter into an agreement between 
the owners of a protected monument and the Central Government within a specified 
period for the maintenance of the monument. The agreement under this section may 
provide an understanding for all or any of the matters viz. the custody of the monument 
and the duties of any person who may be employed to watch it; the restriction of the 
owner’s right to destroy, remove, alter or deface the monument, or to charge any fee 
for entry into, or inspection of , the monument, to build on or near the site of the 
monument. PAC in its recommendation had directed the Ministry/ASI to consider 
evolving clear guidelines on the use of protected monuments and to ensure that proper 
MoUs are signed with users/occupants based on said guidelines for retaining integrity 
of the monuments. 
 
11  Agra, Lucknow and Sarnath circles 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
21 
Audit found that: 
➢ In respect of total 326 monuments pertaining to Agra and Jhansi circles, 
96 monuments were either situated on land owned by private persons/trusts or 
land adjoining the monuments was under ownership of private persons or trusts. 
No agreement had been entered into by the ASI circles with these owners/trusts.  
➢ Some of these monuments were mounds (Para 2.1.8.9). In absence of agreement, 
the ASI circles did not have authority to restrict the activities on these protected 
mounds. 
➢ Audit also noticed cases of altering the aesthetic form of some religious 
monuments (Para 2.1.8.7). 
➢ ASI circle Lucknow had no control/say on entry fee at Bara Imambara  and 
collection of regular rent from allotted users running shops in premises at a 
number of other religious worship places. 
The Department accepted the audit observation that no agreement had been entered 
into with any of the private owners/trusts. 
Audit recommends that ASI circles should proactively explore the possibility of 
entering into agreements with private owners/ trusts to prevent these monuments 
from any damage in absence of proper professional conservation and protection 
under ASI custodianship. 
2.1.8.3 Living Monument Management  
According to John Marshall’s Manual of Conservation, structures still in use for the 
purpose for which they were originally designed at the time of notification are living 
monuments. Section 6 of AMASR Act, 1958 also requires the Government to enter 
into an agreement with the owner of these living monuments for their maintenance and 
restriction on their destroying, removing, altering or defacing. The PAC, while 
considering the need for protection and conservation of these living monuments, felt 
the requirement of:  
➢ evolving guidelines on the use of living monuments to ensure their safeguard 
and preservation; 
➢ laid down policy for notification of sites with contested ownership or 
encroachments; and 
➢  signing of MoUs with users/occupants based on the said guidelines for retaining 
integrity of the monument. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
22 
Audit observed from the information in records and joint physical verification that 
worship/prayer was in practice in 13212 out of 741 monuments in Uttar Pradesh. 
However, exact number of the monuments declared as Living Monument was not 
ascertainable from the records available in the circle offices. No MoU /Agreement 
between ASI circles and owner/users/occupants of these monuments ha d been 
executed as per requirement of the AMASR Act. Despite recommendations of the 
PAC, no guidelines  or policy document on living monuments was prepared by ASI 
even after lapse of eight years. Further, circles did not have the records/details of 
monuments where prayers/worships were started before/after issue of notification. 
Audit recommends that ASI should evolve clear guidelines on the use of protected 
monuments, their recognition as living monuments and ensure that MoUs 
/agreements are signed with the occupants/ users as recommended by PAC.  
2.1.8.4 Heritage Bye Law 
As per Section 20(E) of AMSAR (Amendment and Validation Act), 2010, the Central 
Government shall prepare heritage bye -laws in respect of each protected monument 
and protected area, in consultation with expert heritage bodies. The Central 
Government may by rules specify the manner of preparation of detailed site  plans in 
respect of each protected area or protected monument or prohibited area or regulated 
area, the time within which such heritage bye-laws shall be prepared and particulars to 
be included in each such heritage bye-laws.  
The National Monuments Authority (NMA) was constituted (2011) as a statutory body 
to regulate the construction activities around the CPMs.  Its basic objective is 
implementation of the statutory provisions of prohibited and regulated areas of CPM 
through Heritage -Bye-Laws (HBL).  DG, ASI was to prepare bye -laws after 
considering detailed site -plans for each protected monument and NMA was to 
scrutinize and approve the bye-laws before being submitted to Parliament and to be 
hosted on the ASI/NMA website.  
Audit observed that the heritage site plan in respect of 68 CPMs were prepared by two 
Circles13 and forwarded to the Regional Director, Central Region, Bhopal.  However, 
no heritage site plan in respect of any CPMs were prepared by Agra, Meerut and 
Sarnath circles. 
 
 
12  Agra-12, Jhansi -38, Lucknow-54, Meerut -11, Sarnath-17 
13  Jhansi - 13 and Lucknow - 55 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
23 
2.1.8.5  Shortfall in categorisation of monuments 
According to AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 , the Central 
Government, on the recommendation of the National Monument Authority (NMA), 
was to classify all the monuments and archaeological sites under the jurisdiction of 
ASI in accordance with the prescribed eight14 categories described in Rule 6 of NMA 
Rules, 2011.  This categorisation was to be done based on information provided to 
NMA by ASI which was to be exhibited on government website for general public.  
In this regard, Ministry had intimated the PAC that categorisation of monuments was 
completed and handed over to NMA for their consideration and making 
recommendations to the Ministry. But Audit observed that Jhansi, Meerut and 
Lucknow circles had not initiated any action for categorization of monuments. Sarnath 
and Agra circles had submitted category wise list of CPM to NMA/DG ASI in August 
2021 and October 2021 respectively. Audit noticed that the information relating to 
these two circles was not uploaded  on the website by the NMA, even after lapse of 
four years. 
Hence, the assurance given to the PAC remained largely unimplemented.   
Audit recommends that Circles need to proactively categorise the CPMs as per Rule 
6 and submit the necessary data to NMA for finalisation.   
2.1.8.6 Legal Enforcement and Heritage Encroachment Management  
The AMASR Rules, 1959 provided that within a protected monument, no person could 
indulge in any act which causes or is likely to cause damage or injury to any part of 
the monument. The Act further provided that no person , including the owner or 
occupier of a protected area, shall construct any building, within the protected area or 
carry on any mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting or any operation of a likely nature 
in such area, or utilise such area or any part thereo f in any other manner without the 
permission of the Central Government. Thus, the occupation/any other unauthorised 
activity in the protected area was to be treated as an encroachment.   PAC in their 
recommendation had directed that matter of encroachment should be taken up at the 
highest level. It recommended constitution of a co -ordination and monitoring 
 
14  Category I: World Heritage Sites; Category II:  Tentative list of World Heritage Sites; Category 
III: Identified for inclusion in the World Heritage tentative list; Category IV: Ticketed monuments 
(other than mentioned above) , Category V: Identified for categorisation as ticketed monuments, 
Category VI: Living monuments which receive large number of visitors, Category VII: Other 
monuments located in urban/semi -urban limits, Category VIII: Other Category as the authority 
may deem fit. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
24 
mechanism to check the events of encroachments with the co-operation of District and 
Police authorities. 
In 96 monuments15 cases of encroachment were reported in respective circles of ASI 
in Uttar Pradesh. Circle offices of ASI restricted their role to mere intimation of the 
event through an application to the Police Station concerned and issue of show cause 
notices in a set format to encroachers with endorsement to District Magistrate, DG of 
ASI etc. Neither eviction nor prosecution case was initiated under AMASR Rule 
despite over 96 recorded encroachments.  Besides this, during joint physical 
verification, it was found by audit that nine monuments16 in addition to the recorded 
cases, were encroached. However, circle office had not initiated any action in these 
cases.  Further, no practice of any co-ordination and monitoring mechanism existed in 
circle office s to check the incidents of encroachments, mining and removal of 
encroachment and unauthorized construction with the co -operation of District and 
Police authorities, as recommended by PAC. 
Audit also noticed that in two cases under Jhansi circle, demolition orders were issued 
by the DG, ASI. One case was contested in the court, which was ruled in favour of 
ASI resulting in demolition of the encroachment.  This indicates that proactive action 
can lead to removal of such encroachments. 
Audit recommends that ASI must constitute a coordination body with 
representatives of State Government at each circle to check incidents of 
encroachment with the cooperation of district and police authorities and initiate 
timely action for removal of all encroachments and to protect the monuments from 
vandalism, theft, spoiling and disfigurement in accorda nce with law, as 
recommended by PAC. 
2.1.8.7  Disputed rights and wilful intervention  
PAC had recommended that the ASI/Ministry should consider evolving clear 
guidelines on the use of protected monuments and ensure that proper MoUs are signed 
with users/occupants based on said guidelines for retaining integrity of the monuments.  
During audit, it was observed that some of the monuments were under possession of 
stakeholders17 other than the Government.  Owners or custodians were not identifiable 
as any such details were not mentioned in the gazette notifications.  
 
15  Agra-12, Jhansi-14, Lucknow-43, Meerut-18 and Sarnath-9 
16  Agra-3, Meerut-3 and Sarnath-3 
17  Sibtenabad Trust, Waqf Board etc. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
25 
During joint physical verification of four such CPMs , Audit observed that 
unauthorized interventions/activities were carried out by the occupants of these CPMs.  
Land area had not been demarcated in respect of these monuments. These occupiers 
carried out alteration; modification by using materials prohibited as per ASI standards.  
Residential and commercial use of premises along with religious activities were being 
done in these CPMs, by the occupants as well.   No MoUs had been signed with these 
occupants in order to retain the integrity of these monuments, as recommended by 
PAC. These cases are given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Disputed rights and wilful intervention of others 
Name of the 
Monument / Site/ 
Notification 
Whether land 
area defined 
and 
demarcated/ 
Ownership/ 
Custody 
Unauthorised 
Interventions/ 
activities 
Images 
The Kos Minar, 
Mathura –Agra circle/ 
UP 1645 -M/1133-M 
:20-12-1920 
No/ 
 
Government of 
India 
Fully encroached by local 
residents. A Mazar about 
12 feet height and two 
small structures along 
with steel grills were 
constructed adjoining 
with Minar. 
 
Kos Minar, Mathura in Agra Circle 
(14 September 2024) 
Juma Masjid Jaunpur  
- Sarnath circle/ 
 1348 M/367 -66 :   
21-12-1918 
Area not 
defined. The 
pitch road 
around the 
CPM  existed/ 
 
Waqf Board 
Number of alterations 
colouring, plastering by 
using cement, 
constructing fountain of 
marble, running an 
institute of Religious 
Educations, prayer 
regularly. Minimal 
interference of ASI. 
New construction at Juma Masjid Jaunpur 
(26 July 2024) 
Tomb Mausoleum 
Hermit Shah dana 
located in Bareilly 
district. –Meerut 
Circle/1645M/1133: 
20-11-1920. 
No area 
defined; 
boundary not 
demarcated/  
 
Trustees  
It is a living monument 
encroached by religious 
community where 
different commercial 
activities were being 
performed. Aesthetic 
character of CPM 
altered by using 
prohibited materials. 
 
Commercial activity at Hermit Shah Dana 
in Bareilly (15 October 2024) 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
26 
Name of the 
Monument / Site/ 
Notification 
Whether land 
area defined 
and 
demarcated/ 
Ownership/ 
Custody 
Unauthorised 
Interventions/ 
activities 
Images 
Mausoleum of King 
Amjad Ali Shah the 
majestic Sibtainabad 
Imambada, 
Hazratganj,-Lucknow 
circle/ UP 1442 -
M/367 dated 
27.11.1919 
Area not 
defined, 
Demarcated, as 
road existed 
around the 
CPM/  
 
Sibtenabad 
Trust 
Several persons were 
using the premises of 
CPM for residential and 
commercial purposes.  
The ground under 
protected area of tomb 
was rented out by the 
trust for ceremonial 
purposes.   
The inner portion of the 
tomb totally defaced by 
distemper colo uring, 
marble floorings and 
modern lighting. 
 
Residential use at Amjad Ali Shah, 
Mausoleum Lucknow (05 November 2024) 
Agra circle stated that Kos Minar was under untraceable list till 2022 -23 and steps 
were being initiated for the proper conservation and preservation of this monument.  
Sarnath circle replied that they did not have record of the ownership rights of 
Juma Masjid.  Meerut circle replied that there was no record of ownership, which 
would be ascertained after demarcation.  Lucknow circle stated that several persons 
were using the premises for residential and commercial activities and they were all 
allottees of Lucknow Development Authority.  From time t o time, matter had been 
reported to the district authorities for vacating the entire complex of monument and 
handing over to the ASI circle.  Reply of the circles confirmed the audit observations.  
2.1.8.8 Encroachment by Government Agencies 
Audit noticed that Government Departments like hospitals, police stations, municipal 
offices, schools, and other departments ha d established permanent presence/offices 
within CPMs without legal transfer, acquisition agreements, or ASI authorization. 
Few such cases are given below: 
➢ Old Rohilla fort at Saharanpur Jail  was totally under possession of district jail 
Saharanpur. No records regarding taking possession of monument  were 
available with Circle office. 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
27 
 
Picture 1: Entrance of District Jail, Saharanpur at old Rohilla Fort 
(17 October 2024) 
➢ Picture gallery Hussainabad Baradari was situated in a very dense population .  
No boundary was provided around the picture gallery. All type of the 
encroachers like Nagar Nigam , Electricity Department, Jal Nigam  and 
private persons were residing inside the regulated and prohibited area.  
➢ Sanskrit Inscription, at Bhanakur Kund: A small temple ha d been constructed.  
Nagar Panchayat  Barasana ha d constructed structures and toilet blocks in 
prohibited and regulated areas and construction material was stored adjoining 
the pillar by the Nagar Panchayat contractor. 
 
Picture 2: Construction activities by Nagar Panchayyat, Barsana at Sanskrit 
inscription, Bhanakur Kund Mathura (14 September 2024) 
➢ Ancient Mound at Tilmapur : Hand pump was installed by Gram Sabha, and a 
transformer was installed by the UPPCL on the mound. 
➢ During joint physical verification of CPM Rani Mahal, Jhansi it was noticed that 
ASI itself was not complying with the provisions of the Act. The Circle office 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
28 
of the ASI Jhansi was located in the CPM. They carried out changes to the 
structure of the monument viz. fitting air conditioners, electrical fittings, water 
pipes etc. Toilets were laid with ceramic tiles in the monuments. These changes 
were not consistent with the original character of these monuments. 
  
Picture 3: ASI Circle Office Jhansi 
This reflects the apathy of authorities concerned towards their professional 
responsibilities. 
Audit recommends that ASI Circles need to take immediate measures to address and 
rectify such misuse of protected spaces. 
2.1.8.9 Non-barricading of Heritage Sites leading to encroachment and illegal 
mining 
Instances of encroachment, unauthorized construction and illegal mining were noticed 
at protected, prohibited and regulated archaeological sites , the vacant lands of the 
mounds, lakes etc. where adequate fencing or security guards were not available,  as 
reported below. 
➢ An ancient mound measuring 1200 feet long and 1000 feet wide located at the 
village Sarthal Khera, Meerut  Circle was fully encroached by constructing 
residential houses. No portion of the land was in ownership and possession of 
ASI Meerut. 
 
Picture 4: Sarthal Kheda Mound encroached by villagers at Meerut Circle  
(15 October 2024) 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
29 
➢ Monument of Major Robert Narain at Rathbhanpur, mile 773 of Grand Trunk 
Road in Hathras  district (Agra circle) was completely encroached and 
cultivation activities were being done by farmers. 
 
Picture 5: Encroachment at monument of Major Robert Narain, 
Rathbhanpur at Agra Circle (04 September 2024) 
➢ An ancient site/mound located at the Kasba Khas Paschimi Nagar Panchayat 
Ghosi at Mau district under Sarnath circle was fully encroached upon. 
 
Picture 6: Ancient Mound at Ghosi, Mau (01 August2024) 
➢  Ancient site measuring 7 acres and 800 links  in Khasra No. 384 at Garhwa, 
Azamgarh under Sarnath circle was without any protection or barricading. 
 
Picture 7: Agricultural Activities at Garhwa mound, Azamgarh in 
Sarnath Circle (01 August 2024) 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
30 
➢ Large Mound of bricks ruins called Asmanpur dih , Kushinagar: PWD 
constructed (2015) a new pitch road across the protected site ; Gram Panchayat 
constructed (2017) a Chabutara; and more than 10 houses were constructed 
(2019-2024) by villagers on and around the mound. 
➢ Qualich Khan Ka Maqbara, Jaunpur: Encroachment/unauthorized construction 
and illegal mining was also found within the Prohibited Area and Regulated Area 
of this archaeological site. Individual encroachers, mining offenders were found 
in contravention of Rule 20(A) 18 and 20(B)19 of AMASR (Revised) Act 2010. 
About 20 cases of unauthorized construction were reported between 2019-20 and 
2023-24. 
➢ Ancient Mound, Tilmapur, Varanasi: It is within the boundary of Nagar Nigam 
Varanasi. As many as 60 -70 encroachment cases of unauthorized construction  
were reported which included cases of construction of RCC buildings. 
ASI circles did not take any action except issuing a show cause notice to encroachers 
and formal intimation to district administration and police authorities . The main 
reasons of encroachment were indefinite ownership, lack of proper custody of the 
monument, lack of proper demarcation and non -fencing of the protected land. The 
State Administration was not interfering even after intimation of the incidents by ASI. 
Audit recommends that ASI needs to proactively follow up the cases of these 
encroachments with the enforcement agencies to stop such unauthorised activities 
at these protected sites. The circle authorities concerned also need to secure priority 
sites with fencing, demarcation, and visible ASI presence to deter the encroachers. 
2.1.8.10 Permission for events at the risk of Heritage Safety 
ASI in its guidelines circulated vide OM dated 14 January 2005, for usage of specific 
areas of protected monuments stipulated that permission for organizing cultural 
programme in the protected area may be given if circle is fully satisfied that the 
function/event is unlikely to cause any damage to the Monument.  
Superintending Archaeologist (SA), Agra Circle, after assessing the condition, asked 
DG, ASI (13 February 2023) to take suitable action for structural analysis by an expert 
agency and requested to close interior of Diwan-e-Aam situated at Agra Fort under 
Rule 4 of AMASR Rules 1959 for visitors and avoid hosting mega -events within 
monument premises. SA intimated that many cracks were noticed and also pointed out 
safety concerns of the visitors. 
 
18  Rule for prohibited area 
19  Rule for regulated area 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
31 
Audit observed that even after adverse report, permission was granted for organizing 
a programme on the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj birth anniversary (19 February 2023) 
in the background of Diwan-e-Aam.  After this program me SA, Agra  Circle again 
recommended (21 February 2023) for deletion of Diwan-e-Aam from the list of CPMs 
where cultural events could be permitted. The monument , however, remained in the 
list (September 2024) where permission for cultural events could be granted. 
This indicated that events were held without paying attention to the safety concerns  
and leaving monuments more vulnerable to deterioration.   
In reply , Agra circle responded (September, 20 24) that permission for closure of 
interior of Diwan-e-Aam was awaited.  
Audit recommends that such events may be held only after considering the 
professional inputs and permissions may be granted keeping in mind the 
preservation and safety of  ancient monuments. 
2.1.8.11  Deficiencies in providing public amenities at the CPMs 
CPMs declared as Adarsh Smarak (March 2018)  must have public amenities and 
facilities including clean and modern toilets, clean drinking water, facilities for  
Divyangjans, parking, Wi-Fi services, cafeteria, cloak rooms, interpretation centre etc. 
in and around their precincts for the convenience of visitors. These facilities should be 
in addition to basic requirements for each CPM viz. Monument attendant, Site maps, 
Cultural & Protection Signage and Security personnel. 
Audit carried out joint physical inspection of 5420 out of 57  selected monuments 
(including 21 Adarsh Smaraks) to assess the availability of basic requirements, public 
amenities and tourist facilities. The study revealed that basic requirements , public 
amenities and tourist facilities had not be en provided at several CPMs a s shown in 
Table 2.2.  
Table 2.2: Public Amenities and Tourist Facilities 
Facilities 
No. of monuments 
where facilities 
were not available 
Percentage of monuments where 
facilities were lacking 
Basic requirements (required to be provided at 54 CPM) 
Monument attendant 14 26 
Conservation Notice 
Board & Protection 
Notice Board 
8 15 
 
20  Out of 57 monuments selected for physical verification two monuments were found missing and 
one monument could not be verified due to not granting permission by the Fort Authority. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
32 
Facilities 
No. of monuments 
where facilities 
were not available 
Percentage of monuments where 
facilities were lacking 
Security Guard 29 54 
Site Map 36 67 
Public Amenities (required to be provided at 21 Adarsh CPMs) 
Drinking water 2 10 
Toilet Blocks 1 5 
Facilities for physically 
challenged 
3 14 
Tourist facilities (required to be provided at 21 Adarsh CPMs) 
Cloak room 9 43 
Wi-Fi 18 86 
Parking 6 29 
Guide 19 90 
Interpretation Centre 13 62 
Cafeteria 17 81 
As can be seen from the table above, 81 per cent of Adarsh Smaraks lacked cafeterias, 
90 per cent lacked professional guides, and 86 per cent lacked Wi-Fi connectivity. 
Absence of interpretation centres left some Adarsh Smaraks  without facility for  
delivering meaningful heritage learning experiences.  These omissions mean t that 
monuments offerred visitors’ experience far below the international tourism standards. 
Further, s taffing and safety are foundational, but 26  per cent monuments lacked 
monument attendants, 54 per cent lacked security guards and 67 per cent were without 
site maps meaning that visitors were entering the sites without any guidance, oversight, 
or protection. Without attendants, guards, and orientation tools, sites cannot be safely 
managed or meaningfully experienced.  
Audit recommends that ASI circles should take measures for deployment of 
attendants, guards, and signage systems to create safe, navigable sites and phased 
development of basic amenities (cafeterias, Wi-Fi, public amenities, guides) to align 
with global st andards. Establishment of interpretive systems will help to fulfil 
heritage’s educational mission. 
2.1.8.12  Non-displaying inventory of monuments on portal 
As per the recommendation of PAC, the ASI was required to prepare inventory of all 
CPMs within a period of two years , which was to be updated every five years. This 
inventory, displaying various information about the monument such as geographic 
location, category, notification number, site plan, details of related structures, 
historical and cultural significance, encroachment details, etc., is to be made accessible 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
33 
to public through a portal. These inventories are required to be updated from time to 
time so as to provide the latest and correct information. 
Audit observed that most ASI circles had not prepared the inventory of CPMs.  Agra, 
Lucknow, Meerut and Sarnath circles ha d not compiled the information on the 
inventory of CPMs under their jurisdiction.  In Jhansi circle, out of 172 CPMs, details 
in respect of only 12 monuments21 was compiled. In respect of the remaining CPMs 
the information was not comprehensive and details relating to longitude/latitude, 
category, distance from nearest city/town, encroachment details etc., were missing.  
Thus, the Circles did not prepare and update a complete inventory of monuments under 
their jurisdiction, as recommendation by PAC. 
Audit recommends that each circle should develop/ maintain robust data in 
standardized formats for monument inventories under its jurisdiction. 
2.1.9 Deficiencies in conservation and preservation works 
National Policy for Conservation of AMASR 2014 (NPC -AMASR 2014) provides a 
robust, evidence-based framework for modern conservation, long -term conservation 
planning and sets out professional standards. As per para 4.09 of the NPC 2014 , the 
entire process of conservation should be documented before, during and after 
conservation in maps, drawings, photographs, digital records and field notes so as to 
create continuous records of interventions.  
Audit findings indicated that planning and documentation was deficient, leaving 
conservation efforts fragmented and incomplete. 
2.1.9.1  Deficiencies in the planning process 
(a)  As per point 4.03 of the NPC 2014, short term (upto two years), mid- term (two 
to five years) and long term (five years and above) plans should be developed and 
implemented to prevent any further deterioration of the structure that may warrant any 
unnecessary comprehensive conservation work later.  Site Management Plans (SMPs) 
may also be prepared for monuments to address all relevant extrinsic and intrinsic 
issues.  SMPs should be prepared by multidisciplinary team of professionals, in 
consultation with ASI’s archaeological officers. 
➢ Audit observed that the ASI circles in UP had not prepared any mid-term/long-
term plan for conservation and preservation of monuments.  Scientific cleaning/ 
preservation and conservation work in respect of historical monuments was 
 
21  Lalitpur-4, Jhansi-3, Banda-2, Hamirpur-1, Mahoba-1 and Chitrakoot-1. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
34 
being carried out by the Scientific and Engineering branches of the ASI circles 
separately in a disjointed manner. 
➢ No SMPs were prepared by the circles for conservation of monuments.  
(b)  Annual Conservation Plans (ACPs) for forthcoming financial year prepared in 
respect of each CPM are the estimates for the conservation works including annual 
maintenance to be conducted at the monument.  Annual Maintenance includes mainly 
hiring the services of semi -skilled and unskilled  labours for cleaning, sweeping, 
removal of unwanted vegetation, watch and ward activities etc. 
➢ Audit observed that the approved ACPs (21 per cent) were not executed as 
planned, primarily due to shortage of funds (Para 2.1.11.2). 
➢ ACPs for the 71 CPMs under Sarnath Circle were either never prepared or not 
prepared on regular basis. The circle responded that maintenance and 
conservation works on the key monuments were carried out as per availability 
of budget. 
Above shortcomings reflected lack of structured conservation plans for the 
monuments. 
2.1.9.2 Gaps in the documentation process 
Periodic field visits/inspections followed by detailed documentation are a pre-requisite 
for enabling early detection of risks, preventive interventions and long -term 
conservation planning.  Absence of professional record keeping undermines the 
foundation of preventive conservation without which each intervention begins in a 
disjointed manner disconnected from past interventions. 
(i) Non- maintenance of log books 
As per para 4.09 of the NPC 2014 , the entire process of conservation should be 
documented before, during and after conservation in maps, drawings, photographs, 
digital records and field notes so as to create continuous records of interventions. The 
documentation should capture various st ages of intervention and all relevant details. 
This will be useful from the point of view of understanding all past and current 
interventions in the future. All information related to the past and on -going 
conservation works  should be made available at the site office for the benefit of 
understanding all past interventions.   For this purpose, the practice of maintaining a 
‘Log book’ at sites should be mandatory. 
Audit observed that the circle offices  did not maintain complete documentation 
detailing the process of conservation works carried out in the Monuments under their 
control. In the absence of log  books, information relating to the previous works 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
35 
undertaken at the Monuments concerned was not readily available with the officials at 
the circle level. Absence of necessary documentation may result in insufficient and 
inadequate conservation planning. Further, the continuity in conservation techniques 
adopted earlier cannot be ensured which may result in change in the nature of the 
Monuments after conservation. 
In response the circles stated that the maintenance of log book is not in practice and 
noted for future implementation. 
(ii) Insufficient Inspection of the Monuments and non-maintenance of Inspection 
Notes 
Conservation Manual of John Marshall provides that regular and systematic 
inspections of monuments were to be carried out annually or even more frequently. 
The provision of inspection of monuments has also been incorporated in p ara 4.05 of 
NPC 2014, which provides regular inspection must be undertaken by the 
archaeological officers to ensure routine visits to monuments, at least once a year, to 
examine the condition of a monument and to draw up inspection notes which will aid 
in the preparation of necessary conservation programme or plan.  
Audit observed that visits of archaeological officers were not carried out  as per the 
prescribed time interval. In case of occasional visit too, no inspection notes were found 
on record. However, it was noticed that Inspection Reports were prepared in cases 
where structural conservation was proposed to be conducted. 
Audit recommends that Circle offices should maintain the logbooks as mandated by 
the NPC, 2014 and the inspection notes as mandated by manual. 
2.1.9.3  Deficiencies in the execution of conservation/preservation works 
Scientific division responsible for the preservation work and the circle authorities 
responsible for carrying out conservation activities, work ed disjointedly independent 
of each other without any coordination for simultaneously taking up/executing the 
works on same monument.  Conservation works were carried out without testing the 
composition of the stones in the lab. Modern building material was used in the 
conservation of monuments. 
(i) Stone Conservation Laboratory Utilization 
The Stone Conservation Laboratory, established at Agra Fort in 2006 with specialized 
equipment and trained personnel, was intended to provide comprehensive scientific 
services including mineralogical analysis, compressive strength testing, water 
absorption studies, and compatibility assessments. These services are critical for 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
36 
ensuring that conservation materials are scientifically validated before large -scale 
application. 
Agra circle, where lab was established, did not send any sample to the lab for analysis 
despite an expenditure of ₹ 3.82 crore on conservation works on account of 
conservation work of monuments, stone flooring, pathways etc. during 2021 -22 to 
2023-24. It was noticed that the quality of the stones used in these conservations was 
not checked in the Stone Conservation lab.  This issue was also raised in previous 
performance audit (CAG Report No. 18  of 2013), but no follow up action was taken 
by the circle.  
In response the Agra circle stated (October 2024) that since the quarry was well known 
and hence the stone was not checked in the stone conservation lab. 
The reply is not tenable because knowing a quarry well is not a valid reason for not 
following testing procedures to ensure the stone used was as per required standard. 
(ii) Status of Monuments as per joint physical verification 
Conservation Principles  of NPC -AMASR, 2014  (Para No. 3.08), provides that 
interventions such as restoration, consolidation, reproduction and retrofitting carried 
out  within a  monument  should, as far as possible, be clearly discernible as a later 
alteration / repair / restoration, etc.,  to be able to clearly identify them from the original 
fabric of the structure. Nonetheless, in certain cases, where a monument is being 
restored with the intention of merging [a new  intervention] with the original fabric, 
for the sake of  maintaining  architectural  integrity,  work  must be done very carefully 
by matching the original material / details in terms of  form,  colour  and specification 
preferably through the use of same material and employing  traditional skills as used 
in the original fabric. Such interventions should, as far as p ossible, be reversible in 
nature.  The decision for achieving such objectives should be carefully recorded and 
documented for posterity. 
A joint physical inspection of selected monuments revealed instances of inappropriate 
conservation work, monuments in need of chemical conservation, structural 
alterations, and neglected monuments of national importance. Examples of these 
improper conserva tion works are detailed in Annexure-2.4. Some instances are 
presented in Table 2.3. 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
37 
Table 2.3: Inappropriate conservation work 
Issue Image 
Modern Material used 
Whitewash and painting at the wall 
of Juma Masjid, Jaunpur dated 
26 July 2024. 
 
New Construction within CPM 
New construction of Stone fountain 
at Juma Masjid Jaunpur dated 
26 July 2024. 
 
Modern material used in 
conservation work 
Modern cement used in Aman 
Mahal Palace, Kalinjar Fort, 
Banda dated 21 August 2024. 
 
Use of ceramic tiles in conservation 
work 
Use of ceramic tiles in Amjad Ali 
Shah's Mausoleum, Lucknow 
05 November 2024. 
 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
38 
Issue Image 
Monuments in need of chemical 
conservation 
Black stains on Dhamekha Stupa at 
Sarnath as on 23 July 2024. 
 
Fallen roof of Jal Mahal, Tal Behat 
fort Lalitpur as on 10 August 2024. 
 
Need of Chemical treatment at Lal 
Khan ka Tomb, Rajghat, Varanasi 
dated 30 July 2024. 
 
Dilapidated condition of the 
Ganesh temple Karvi, Chitrakoot 
dated 20 August 2024. 
 
The use of incompatible modern materials represent  the most urgent challenges. 
Unless reversed, these practices compromise authenticity, mislead scholarship, and 
weaken structural resilience.  
Many monuments display ed visible deterioration from microbial infestation, 
weathering, salt deposition, and pollution, yet chemical conservation treatments 
remain sporadic or entirely absent. 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
39 
Audit recommends that ASI should mandate the use of compatible traditional 
materials, ensuring clear differentiation between old and new work, and embedding 
these requirements into all conservation contracts. 
(iii) Scientific preservation of CPM 
The Science branch is established in Agra, Lucknow and Sarnath in Uttar Pradesh, 
whose jurisdiction is the scientific preservation work for CPM of Agra circle, Jhansi/ 
Lucknow circle and Sarnath circle respectively. 
Science Branches at these circles prepared a status report of 160 monuments 22 after 
inspection in May 2022 as per the instructions of the DG, ASI.  During inspection, 136 
monuments23 were identified, where scientific preservation was needed either in 
isolation or along with structural conservation.  Scrutiny of records revealed that out 
of 136 monuments, chemical treatment and preservation works were completed in only 
12 monuments24 (nine per cent only), till date.  
On being pointed out, the circles replied that the work was done as per the availability 
of funds and staff. 
2.1.10 Antiquities and Site Museum Management 
The ASI is one of the largest repositories of antiquities in India, entrusted to safeguard 
more than 26,000 cultural artefacts of immense historical and civilizational value . 
Antiquity includes any coin, sculpture, painting, epigraph or other work of art or 
craftsmanship; any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave which is 
of historical interest, or declared by the Central Government to be an antiquity. The 
ASI is res ponsible for the management, security and display of antiquities found 
during excavations. These are often displayed at the Site Museums. T his includes 
efforts for restoration of stolen art objects. 
2.1.10.1  Protection and Display of Antiquities  
The ASI has five site museums in Uttar Pradesh, two under Agra circle - Taj Mahal 
and Fatehpur Sikri , two under Lucknow circle - 1857 Memorial Residency and 
Kapilvastu, Siddarth Nagar and one under Sarnath circle. Besides being displayed and 
stored at these site museums, large number of antiquities were displayed and stored in 
sculpture sheds like at Dasavatar temple, Deogarh, Lalitpur, inside the monuments like 
 
22  Science Branch Agra: 58, Lucknow: 52 and Sarnath: 50 
23  Science Branch Agra: 56, Lucknow: 30 and Sarnath: 50 
24  Science Branch Agra: 04, Lucknow: 03 and Sarnath: 05 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
40 
Rani Mahal, Jhansi, and Aman Mahal Palace, Kalinjar Fort, Banda of Jhansi circle, 
Ahichchhatra, Bareilly under Meerut circle. 
Guidelines for ASI Museum  (2013) (Annexure -Para-5) stipulate creation of  a 
collection care plan for bi -monthly monitoring of objects on display and storage, 
include preventive conservation and constant monitoring to assess the impact of 
climate conditions, light, micro-biological growth, etc., on objects particularly if they 
are fragile and vulnerable both on display and in the reserve collection. It further 
directs to develop clear and standardized directional and informative signage for the 
museums and site, using materials that are in sympathy with the site and display should 
be changed periodically and kept well maintained.  
PAC in its 39th report (16th Lok Sabha) had recommended to evolve uniform standards 
for acquisition, preservation, documentation and custody of objects in possession of 
ASI. It had further recommended for systematic maintenance of Accession register 
and adoption of rotation policy for the display of antiquities. 
Audit observed the following deficiencies in the compliance of these guidelines: 
➢ There were 26,238 antiquities under custody of circles, out of them 3 ,530 
(13 per cent) were displayed at site museums concerned, remaining 87 per cent 
were kept in stores. None of the site museums had implemented rotation policy 
for displaying the antique objects. 
➢ During 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, physical verification of antiquities had not been 
conducted except at Residency Museum, Lucknow, in contravention of the ASI 
guidelines in this regard. 
➢ Audit noted that Accession of 2 ,467 antiquities of Jhansi, Meerut and Sarnath 
Circle was yet to be done (November 2024). 
These deficiencies were prevalent despite the assurance given by the Ministry to the 
PAC that it was considering to standardize and implement uniform procedures for 
acquisition, preservation, documentation and custody of objects. 
Sarnath circle responded that due to fixed pedestals and limited space, it was not 
possible to rotate the antiquities in the same place. In case of Meerut, there was no plan 
for displaying antiquities to visitors due to limited manpower resources. Further , 
Lucknow circle stated specifically in case of Residency Museum  that several 
showcases were required, and the renovation and uplift work was under process. Reply 
not only confirmed non-compliance with the provisions of museum guidelines but also 
indicated the inadequacy of infrastructure at the site to handle the antiquities. 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
41 
During joint physical verification, it was observed that: 
➢ 6,537 and 1,101 antiquities were kept in deplorable condition at Site Museum, 
Sarnath and Rani Mahal, Jhansi respectively. As storeroom of antiquities was 
more than 100 to 200 years old dilapidated building, and dust, sand and moisture 
had gathered over the sculpture. A ir Conditioner, CCTV camera, fire -fighting 
system, smoke detector, fire alarm and data loggers were not installed. Some of 
the sculptures were found lying near the boundary wall and in closed store room 
at Site Museum Sarnath. 
  
Antiquities at Sculpture Shed and near boundary wall of site museum Sarnath dated 
19 July 2024 
  
Antiquities dumped at Rani Mahal dated 07 August 2024 
➢ All Site Museums lack ed public amenities like wi-fi, interpretation center, 
smoke detector, data loggers , souvenir shop, guide facilities , ramps for 
divyangjans and disaster management plan. 
➢ Some unserviceable items , electronic touch screen machine, split ACs, sign 
boards, almirahs, typewriter, electrical appliances and wheelchairs were dumped 
in office and Naubat Khana building at Taj Site Museum.  


Report No. 36 of 2025 
42 
   
Unserviceable item dumped in Naubat Khana building Taj site museum dated 
24 September 2024 
➢ The 1857 Memorial Museum  Residency, Lucknow is located in two -storey 
ruined and dilapidated 200 years old building with ground floor and basement. 
Ground floor is open and basement closed for the visitors. Seepage was noticed 
in basement and needs to be repaired. At basement, most of the objects, cannon 
balls, musical instruments, paintings, swords, shields guns etc., were stored 
which are directly related to freedom struggle era. The swords and shields were 
corroded and required chemical treatment to prevent erosion. The entity 
responded that renovation and uplift work was under process. 
  
Basement of Residency Museum dated 
07 November 2024 
Freedom fighting weapon dated 
07 November 2024 
➢ In Meerut Circle, 58 antiquities were stolen. FIR had been lodged by Agra Circle 
and theft report handed over to Meerut Circle after creation of Circle 
(August 2020). Recovery was yet to be done (November 2024). 
➢ In Sarnath Site Museum, signage board had not been installed at entrance gate. 
Two antiquities were stolen, recovery was yet to be done (November 2024). 
  
Floor cleaner machines, AC’s and electrical appliances dated 09 July 2024 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
43 
The circle responded that signage/protection board was not required. The reply 
is not tenable, because the para 5.4 of Museum guidelines stipulates installation 
of signage board and due process for recovery need to be taken. 
2.1.10.2  Digitisation of antiquities 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was launched by the 
Government in 2007, with the objective to prepare a national database of all 
monuments and antiquities. The PAC had asked the Ministry that a national register 
highlighting the details of each and every ancient monument, sites and remains both 
of National and State importance, including artefa cts lying in museums, Government 
treasuries and/or in other Government and private possession spread over the country, 
may be prepared. 
Audit observed that there were 26,238 antiquities under the custody of ASI in UP, out 
of these only 5,359 (20 per cent) antiquities were digitised at NMMA Portal. The 
circles responded that digitization works of rest of antiquities was under process. 
Audit recommends that ASI Circles of UP should 
➢ complete digitization process of antiquities to be displayed on public portals, 
mandate transparent reporting, record all the antiquities in the accession 
register, complete physical verification and enforce theft-prevention protocols; 
➢ upgrade storage capacity to climate -controlled, secure facilities, and address 
urgent corrosion/damage; and 
➢ provide visitor amenities, inclusivity features, and standardized policies to 
democratize heritage access. 
2.1.11 Financial Management 
India’s cultural heritage is not only an important marker of its past but also provides 
an opportunity for generating employment and income through heritage tourism and 
local development. Funding is crucial for the conservation activities . The Ministry 
allocates funds to the ASI. ASI distributes funds to the circles, subordinate offices and 
site-museums for their establishment and expenses related to heritage conservation as 
per demands and availability. The National Culture Fund (NCF) , a trust under the 
Ministry of Culture had been provided a corpus fund by the Ministry with the objective 
of encouraging participation of the corporate sector, NGOs, State Government, 
private/public sector etc. The funding made by the ASI headquarters to Circle offices 
in UP is discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
44 
2.1.11.1  Budgetary Funding and Expenditure on Conservation Activities  
The consolidated position of all the wings of ASI in UP depicting the budget allotment 
and expenditure incurred during the period of audit is given in Table 2.4: 
Table 2.4: Budget estimates and expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget 
Allotment 
Overall 
expenditure 
Expenditure on conservation, 
maintenance and public amenities etc. 
2021-22 94.48 94.11 46.86 
2022-23 136.92  135.94 69.09 
2023-24 142.64 142.10 72.21 
During the period 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, average expenditure on conservation, 
maintenance and public amenities related activities were around 50.56 per cent of its 
overall expenditure. Due to Covid pandemic budget allotment and expenditure during 
the year 2021-22 was much less. 
There were no specific criteria or guidelines for demand of Budget from ASI 
headquarter. Generally, the Circle offices submitted their budget demands as per 
previous year ’s expenditure which included expenditure of recurring nature and 
unpaid bills of last financial year through Budget Estimate and Revised Estimates 
which was uploaded on ASI e -gov portal. The additional demands for payment of 
pending conservation/annual main tenance works, ongoing works and other special 
conservation works through Annual Con servation Plan (ACP) are raised work -wise, 
as per requirement which is approved by the ASI headquarter. However, the actual 
allocation is the sole discretion  of ASI headquarters office as per priority and 
availability of funds.  
2.1.11.2  Inadequate Funding 
There is no separate budget allocation for conservation works, in the annual budgets 
of circles.  Each Circle projects its requirement for conservation works through work-
wise ACPs. Based on the approved ACPs, budget for conservation works is allotted to 
each circle.  
Audit observed that budget allocation by the ASI was insufficient  even against the 
approved ACPs, with shortfall ranging between 28 and 72  per cent of the approved 
ACPs as detailed in Annexure-2.5. 
As a result, 565 ACPs relating to different conservation works could not be executed 
due to allocation of  insufficient funds to the circles,  despite the fact that these 
conservation works had been prioritised by the Circle offices.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
45 
On being pointed out, all the circles except Lucknow accepted that these ACPs could 
not be executed due to insufficient funds. Lucknow circle stated (January 2025) that 
conservation and preservation of these monuments were being done as per requirement 
within available resources. The reply should be viewed in the context that ACPs were 
being prepared as per the requirement and priority of the work by the respective circles. 
2.1.11.3  Expenditure on Excavation and Exploration 
Excavation of Archaeological remains is one of the primary responsibilities of ASI 
and exploration forms part of excavation activities. The ASI grants excavation 
licences, based on the proposals received from different agencies like ASI Circles, 
Branches, Universiti es and Research Institutions. The PAC , while discussing the 
excavation related issues , had asked the Ministry to draw an action plan under the 
exploration and excavation policy and ensure adequate allocation and effective 
utilisation of funds for these activities. The Ministry had assured the PAC that it was 
considering to increase the budget on exploration and excavation up to five per cent 
of the total budget in first phase. 
Audit observed that during 2021 -22 to 2023 -24 the ASI had incurred dismal 
expenditure on excavation and exploration ranging from 0.41 to 0.76 per cent of total 
expenditure as given in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5:  Expenditure on excavation and exploration 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Overall Expenditure 94.11 135.94 142.10 
Expenditure on excavation and 
exploration 
0.39 0.67 1.08 
Percentage expenditure 0.41 0.49 0.76 
Agra and Meerut circles responded that it was a policy matter and may be replied by 
ASI HQ, New Delhi. Sarnath and Jhansi circles replied that expenditure on excavation 
and exploration was on account of unavailability/ shortage of technical strength. 
Lucknow circle replied that expenditure depends on budget allocation from ASI HQ. 
Thus, fact remained that, assurance given to the PAC regarding increase in expenditure 
on excavation up to five per cent of the total expenditure was not fulfilled. 
 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
46 
2.1.11.4  Non-maintenance of specific budget for creation of public amenities 
ASI is not maintaining specific budget for activities related to awareness, interpretation 
and creation of public amenities at its monuments. Expenditure on these activities  was  
incurred from the funds allocated for conservation activities. Thus, due to absence of 
specific budget head for public amenities, amount of actual expenditure on heritage 
conservation was not ascertainable. Also refer to para 2.1.8.11 on availability of 
amenities. 
2.1.11.5  External Budgetary Funding for Heritage Conservation 
The National Culture Fund ( NCF) serves as a financing mechanism for enabling 
donor/sponsor institution to support Protection, Restoration, Conservation and 
Development of Monuments/  Cultural traditions directly as partners with the 
Government.  NCF through these diverse initiatives, programs and ideas seeks to 
stimulate and spearhead the heritage awareness with special reference to preservation, 
conservation and maintenance of India’s rich cultural property and is striving towards 
propagating knowledge and appreciation of the heritage of Indian order to achieve its 
objectives. 
The PAC had recommended that co -ordination between ASI and NCF should be 
strengthened to rope in more corporate groups and individuals into funding 
conservation and visitor amenities at monument sites.  
Audit observed that during the period 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, an amount of only 
₹ 2.09 lakh was provided by NCF to Sarnath circle for enhancing the backup (storage) 
of Security cameras at Archaeological Museum under ASI-NCF-Sony Project. Besides 
this an MoU for ‘preservation of important historic Buddhist sites to support for 
preservation of the Dhamekh Stupa  in Sarnath and Mahanparnirvan Temple in 
Kushinagar’ had been executed in 2008 between NCF and the Vong Group, Thailand. 
Project estimate had been submitte d to NCF but approval of estimate was pending 
since 2008. 
No proposals, other than those mentioned above, were sent by the ASI circles to  the 
DG, ASI headquarters for conservation and up -gradation of visitor amenities for 
allocation of budget from NCF. 
2.1.12 Manpower Management 
Adequately trained, experienced and sufficient manpower is a pre -requisite for the 
functioning of any agency involved in Heritage conservation. Audit observed that the 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
47 
ASI circles engaged in heritage conservation were facing  acute shortage of technical 
and other manpower which are detailed as below. 
2.1.12.1  Adequacy of manpower  
Proper manpower planning and deployment is necessary for efficient functioning of 
the organisation and  meet its objectives. The sanctioned and working strength of 
circles of ASI situated in UP in respect of Archaeologists, Engineers 25, Conservation 
Assistants comprising the technical staff and other supporting staff (Monument 
Attendants and Multi-Tasking Staff (MTS)) which was last revised in October 2021, 
as of November 2024 is given in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Sanctioned Strength & Vacancy position in ASI circles at UP 
Name of the post Sanctioned 
Strength 
Persons-
in-Position 
Number of 
Vacant Posts 
Percentage of 
Vacant Posts 
Gr-A (SA, Dy. SA, 
Dy.SA Engineer)  23 09 14 60.87 
Gr-B (Archaeologists -
ASA & ASAE) 90 52 38 42.22 
Conservation Assistant 
and Sr. Conservation 
Assistant 
98 30 68 69.38 
Total no . of technical 
posts 211 91 120 56.87 
Gr-C (Clerks etc.) Not 
defined in 
Sarnath 
Circle+241 
255 -- -- 
MTS/Monument 
attendants 870 513 357 41.03 
There was shortage of about 57 per cent in technical cadre which is mainly responsible 
for execution of conservation and preservation works. Shortfall in the cadre of 
Monument Attendants, who are responsible for watch and ward of these monuments 
was about 41 per cent. Absence of adequate manpower has adversely impacted the 
working efficiency of the Department which is evident from slow pace of exploration, 
inspection and documentation of monuments, insufficient maintenance of monuments 
and lack of timely action in case of encroachments. 
 
 
 
25  Superintending Archaeologist, Dy. SA, Assistant SA, Dy. Superintending Archaeological 
Engineer, Assistant Superintending Archaeological Engineer. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
48 
2.1.12.2  Shortage of Security Personnel/Guards 
A committee was constituted by DG, ASI (March 2022) for assessment of the 
requirement of additional security guards at various CPMs/sites/museums of ASI.  
Monument wise inputs were to be collected from the circles.  Accordingly the 
requirement for additional security guards was assessed by each circle and forwarded 
to ASI HQ, except Lucknow circle which did not submit any assessment.  The details 
of the additional requirement of security guards submitted by four ASI circles are 
given in Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7: Assessment of Security Guards 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Circle 
(monuments) 
Assessed 
Requirement 
of Security 
Guards 
Actual 
deployment 
of Security 
Guards 
Shortage of 
Security Guards 
(No. as per 
requirement) 
Percentage  
shortage of 
Security 
Guards 
1. Jhansi (172) 148 38 110 74.32 
2. Agra (154) 233 181 52 22.31 
3. Meerut (82) 128 05 123 96.09 
4. Sarnath (136) 234 52 182 77.78 
5. Lucknow (197) No assessment 44 -- No assessment  
Total 743 320   
Against total requirement of 743 security guards in four ASI circles, only 276 were 
deployed at 544 monuments under these circles. Shortfall ranged from 22 to 
96 per cent. 
Shortfall in deployment of security guards left these monuments vulnerable to theft, 
vandalism and other security concerns. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry of Culture in April 2025; its reply was awaited 
as of August 2025. 
Audit recommends that urgent steps need to be taken to address the issue of staff 
shortage at the ASI circles especially the technical and security staff. 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
49 
(II) Ministry of External Affairs 
2.2 Excess expenditure of ₹  27.43 crore towards license fee for unutilised 
 space 
Retention of unutilised space at Akbar Bhawan by Ministry of External Affairs 
for 15 months, without formalising pro-rata license fees with New Delhi 
Municipal Corporation for the space actually utilized, resulted in excess 
expenditure of ₹ 27.43 crore towards licence fee for unutilised space. 
General Financial Rules, 2017 stipulates that every officer incurring or authorizing 
expenditure from public moneys should be guided by high standards of financial 
propriety26, including, that the expenditure should not be prima-facie more than what 
the occasion demands. 
Akbar Bhawan 27 was initially leased (November 1970) by New Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (NDMC) to India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) 28 for a 
period of 30 years. The building was taken over (April 1986) by the Ministry of 
External Affairs (Ministry) from ITDC. After expiry of lease agreement (October 
2000) between NDMC and ITDC, the terms and conditions for lease of the building 
were negotiated (2005-2006) and agreed29 upon by the Ministry and NDMC, without 
executing any formal lease agreement. From 2012 to 2023, the Ministry used the 
building partly as temporary campus of South Asian University (SAU)30 (up to eighth 
floor) and partly for hosting a few of its own Divisions (ninth and tenth floor). 
After SAU shifted  (January 2023) to its permanent campus 31, the Ministry decided 
(January 2023) to retain the entire building and utilize the space vacated by SAU to 
decongest other buildings 32 where its offices were located. As the vacated space 
required renovation33, the Ministry made numerous correspondences34 (February 2023 
 
26 Rule 21 of General Financial Rules, 2017. 
27 A building (Basements + Ground Floor + 1st to 10th floor) located in Chanakyapuri, New Delhi. 
28 A Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) under Ministry of Tourism. 
29 Payment of fair rent on the area occupied by Ministry as calculated by Central Public Works 
Department with eight per cent annual escalation. 
30 SAU is an international university sponsored by the eight Member States of the South Asian   
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) including India. It is hosted by India under 
the South Asian University Act 2008 of the Parliament. 
31 Maidan Garhi, New Delhi. 
32 ISIL building, Sushma Swaraj Bhawan, C1 hutments, Patiala House and CGO Complex.  
33 Due to m ushrooming of small plants on the façade, false ceiling breakages, water leakages, 
requirement for replacement of plumbing system, upgradation of firefighting system, 
replacement of pipelines and other works. 
34 Through letters  dated 03 February 2023, 17 March 2023, 23 March 2023, 21 April 2023, 
19 July 2023, 04 August 2023, 25 August 2023, 17 October 2023 and 20 November 2023 and 
several meetings with the officers of NDMC. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
50 
to January 2024) requesting NDMC to undertake urgent repairs and reduce the licence 
fee for the building on pro-rata basis to actual area to be utilized by the Ministry (ninth 
and tenth floors, i.e., two out of ten floors), till the completion of repair and renovation 
works at the space vacated by SAU. 
In response to Ministry’s request (April 2023) for repairs, NDMC informed 
(May 2023) that Ministry may urgently handover possession of Ground floor to eighth 
floor to NDMC and isolate the services of ninth and tenth floor, themselves. However, 
Ministry without handing over the possession, continued to pursue NDMC for 
charging license  fee on pro-rata basis, which was finally accepted by NDMC in 
December 2023 while conveying that, after renovation of building from ground floor 
to eighth floor, fresh license deed will be executed on first come first serve basis. 
Thereafter, Ministry discontinued (December 2023) the payment of license fee and 
requested NDMC to adjust the overpaid license fee. However, no settlement/ 
adjustment have been made by NDMC. Finally, the Ministry vacated the entire 
building and handed over  (May 2024) the Akbar Bhawan to NDMC by shifting its 
Divisions to Sushma Swaraj Bhawan  (owned by Ministry) with a request to give 
priority to the Ministry to sign fresh lease agreement after renovation of the building. 
This resulted in theoretical occupation of eight floors for 15 months (February 2023 to 
April 2024) without actually utilising the space. 
Audit observed that the Ministry continued to occupy the building since 2000 without 
any formal lease agreement, delineating the terms and conditions for rent payable, 
repair/renovation and exit. Audit further observed that the Ministry paid license fee 35 
for the entire building from February 2023 to November 2023, while utilising 
approximately 20 per cent (i.e., two out of ten floors) of the space. This resulted in 
excess expenditure of ₹ 27.43 crore36 (Annexure-2.6) towards licence fee for the space 
not actually utilised. Ministry’s hasty37 decision of retaining the space vacated by SAU 
without any proper analysis of its space requirement and firming up the terms and 
conditions (including pro-rata license fee for actual area available for use) for such 
retention, was not in consonance with canons of financial propriety outlined in GFRs. 
 
35  ₹ 3,72,60,974 per month for February 2023 and March 2023, ₹  4,02,41,852 per month from 
April 2023 to November 2023 and ₹  4,34,61,200 per month from April 2024 to May 2024 
(upto 07 May 2024). 
36 License fees of building from February 2023 to November 2023 paid by the MEA: 
₹ 39.65 crore Proportionate license fees of two floors from February 2023 to 07 May 2024: 
₹ 12.21 crore. 
37  The file containing proposal for continued leasing of Akbar Bhawan by MEA was initiated on 
14 January 2023 (i.e., the month in which SAU was to vacate the premises) and was approved 
by the Foreign Secretary on 16 January 2023. The proposal approved by the Foreign Secretary 
did not indicate about poor condition of the building requiring handing over of eight floors to  
NDMC for repair. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
51 
In absence of a formal lease agreement, the Ministry was not able to obtain assurance 
from NDMC on allocation of ground to eighth floor to it after renovation and was 
finally forced to vacate the entire building. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry of External Affairs in June 2025; its reply was 
awaited as of August 2025. 
Audit recommends that the Ministry may undertake periodic review of its leased 
properties to ensure existence of formal lease agreements securing Government’s 
interest and bring efficiency in public expenditure by leasing properties, only as 
exception, after proper need analysis. 
 
Embassy of India, Beijing, China 
2.3 Property management in Embassy of India, Beijing, China 
Despite having continuous Annual Maintenance Contracts and incurring 
significant expenditure on repairs, six out of sixteen residential units 
constructed in 2011 have become uninhabitable within a span of 10 to 13 years. 
Delay in carrying out the necessary comprehensive repairs/renovation of these 
six vacant units resulted in avoidable rental outgo of ₹  3.22 crore (up to 
February 2025). 
The redevelopment project of Old Chancery Premises (OCP), initially 
conceptualised in 2009 has been delayed due to indecisiveness and 
non-finalization of end use. 
Continued payment of heating charges for the OCP despite it being not in use 
since 2014 resulted in wasteful expenditure of ₹ 74 lakh. 
After construction of a new Chancery complex, consisting of Chancery Building, 
Auditorium, four Guard Rooms, Visa Room and 16 Residential units, offices of the 
Embassy of India, Beijing (Mission) were shifted (January 2012) from the Old 
Chancery Premises (OCP38) to New Chancery Premises (NCP39). Thereafter, the OCP 
was available for alternative uses/re -development. Apart from OCP and NCP, the 
Mission properties include an Embassy Residence (ER40) located on the plot adjacent 
to OCP. Audit observed the following issues in respect of management of these 
properties by the Mission: 
 
38  OCP is located at No. 1, Ri Tan Dong Lu, Beijing covering an area of 9351.14 sqm.  
39  NCP is located at No. 5, Liang Ma Qiao Bei Jie, Beijing. 
40  ER i.e., Residence of the Head of Mission,  is located at No. 13, Guang Hua Lu, Beijing 
covering an area of 11245.38 sqm. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
52 
1) Delay in undertaking comprehensive renovation of residential units located in 
New Chancery Premises 
Construction of 16 residential units in the New Chancery Premises was completed in 
November 2011 and taken over by the Mission in December 2011. The new 
construction was under quality warranty period for five years i.e., up to December 
2016, during which repair and maintenance was undertaken by the construction 
company. Thereafter, the Mission entered into comprehensive Annual Maintenance 
Contracts (AMCs) 41 from April 2017 onwards, to keep the technical systems in the 
building in working condition and undertake daily maintenance and minor repair 
works. Apart from this, Mission also undertook repair works amounting to ₹ 1.68 crore 
at these residential units during July 2021 to May 2025. 
Audit observed that despite having continuous AMCs and incurring significant 
expenditure on repairs, due to multiple wear and tear issues , viz. erosion and bursting 
of water and heating pipelines, water leakages, requirement of waterproofing of roof, 
damages to the wooden floor and walls, and blockage of sewage and drainage pipes, 
these newly constructed residential units started becoming uninhabitable. Six 42 units 
were vacant as of February 2025. The remaining 10 residential units are also stated to 
be in extremely dilapidated condition requiring comprehensive renovation. The 
Mission forwarded (August 2023) a proposal to the Ministry for complete renovation 
of all 16 residential units at a total cost of RMB43 15,000,000 (₹ 17.32 crore44), which 
is still under consideration with the Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry) 
(January 2025). This delay in undertaking comprehensive repairs has resulted in 
estimated avoidable rental outgo amounting to ₹ 3.22 crore (up to February 2025) 
(Annexure-2.7) on account of hiring alternative accommodation in lieu of the six 
vacant units, with a likelihood of more rental outgo till execution of the repair and 
renovation works. 
Mission stated (September 2024) that the units were declared uninhabitable 
subsequent to multiple wear and tear issues, which arose after expiry of quality 
warranty period of five years. Ministry stated (January 2025) that Mission’s proposal 
for comprehens ive renovation is under consideration and the visit of the Project 
Management Team (PMT) of the Ministry is expected very soon. 
 
41  AMC was for the entire New Chancery Premises including Chancery Building, Auditorium, 
four Guard Rooms, Visa Room and 16 Residential units. 
42  Units vacated – B1 (August 2021), A1 (May 2022), A2 (October 2022), C2 (December 2022), 
B3 (September 2024) and A4 (November 2024). 
43  Renminbi (RMB) is the Official currency of China. 
44  Based on the exchange rate of ₹1/0.0866 (11.5473) per RMB as per Official Rate of Exchange 
of August 2023.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
53 
The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that Mission’s proposal for 
comprehensive renovation sent in August 2023 is still under consideration with the 
Ministry (January 2025) resulting in delay and avoidable rental outgo, with additional 
risk of the remaining 10 units also deteriorating and becoming uninhabitable.    
2) Old Chancery Premises 
(a)   Indecisiveness and non-finalization of end use resulting in inordinate dela y 
 in the redevelopment project 
The two properties, where OCP and ER are located, were given to the Government of 
India in March 1986 for a period of 90 years (extendable by another 90 years) on 
rent-free lease.  The OCP is not in use since 2014 as the offices were shifted to NCP 
(January 2012) and it was declared uninhabitable in 2016. The chronology of efforts 
of the Mission towards redevelopment/renovation of OCP and ER are given in 
Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Chronology of efforts for redevelopment of OCP and ER 
March 2009 
Mission proposed renovation of OCP and ER in consultation with 
Central Public Works Department (CPWD). However, no headway 
could be made in this regard. 
May 2014 
Mission constituted (March 2014) a committee and based on its 
recommendations requested the Ministry to approve the renovation of 
OCP and ER. 
December 2016 
The PMT of the Ministry visited Beijing and recommended 
amalgamation of both the plots (OCP and ER) for construction of 
residences for Head of Mission (HoM) and Representational Grade 
(RG) officers. 
January 2017 
Mission planned construction of a Diplomatic Residence Complex 
consisting of residences of HoM, RG officers and non -RG officers at 
the site. 
April 2018 
The Mission selected a firm 45 (Architect) for providing consultancy/  
architectural services for Diplomatic Residence Complex and an 
agreement in this regard was signed in June 2018. 
August 2018 Mission decided to construct residences only for HoM and RG Officers 
at the site, which was approved by the Ministry. 
January-June 
2019 
Ministry approved the preliminary designs46 prepared by the Architect 
and payment of USD 208,943 (₹ 1.47 crore 47) was released to the 
Architect. 
 
45  Joint venture of M/s Chiasmus Partners Inc.; M/s China Highway Engineering Consulting 
Group Co. & M/s India Habitat Designs Consultants. 
46  For August 2018 plan for construction of residences for RG Officers. 
47  Based on the exchange rate of ₹ 70.4 per USD as per Official Rate of Exchange of June 2019. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
54 
October-
November 2019 
Mission awarded the works of tree mapping and soil investigation 
survey.  
December 2019 
Based on the tree mapping report, the Mission proposed a revised 
layout of the residential complex to reduce the number of trees required 
to be felled/relocated. 
The revised layout was approved by the Ministry. 
December 2020 
The revised preliminary design was approved by the Ministry. 
The schematic designs were forwarded to the Chinese authorities for 
approval. 
March 2021 Mission forwarded the Preliminary Estimates (PE) of ₹ 362.93 crore 
for the project to the Ministry for approval. 
February 2022 Due to certain omissions and duplications, the PE were revised to 
₹ 604.13 crore and forwarded again to the Ministry for approval. 
Audit observed inordinate delays as it took nearly eight years (March 2009 – 
January 2017) to finalize the proposals for renovation/redevelopment of OCP & ER 
and it took more than two years to approve the preliminary designs (December 2020) 
after signing of the agreement (June 2018) with architectural firm. Approval of revised 
PE, submitted to the Ministry in February 2022, was awaited as of February 2025. 
Audit further noted that the Mission has continued to frequently change the 
plans/proposals and has not been able to freeze end use of OCP and ER as given below: 
➢ December 2016: PMT recommended construction of residence of HoM and RG   
Officers. 
➢ January 2017:  Mission planned construction of Diplomatic Residential 
Complex having residences of HoM, RG Officers and non-RG Officers. 
➢ August 2018:  Plan changed to construct residence only for HoM and RG 
Officers. 
Fresh proposals after sending an estimate of ₹ 604.13 crore in February 2022: 
➢ October 2022: Mission proposed construction of Cultural Centre at OCP and 
renovation of existing ER 
➢ April 2023: Mission proposed construction of an auditorium, business centre  
and some residence at OCP and renovation of existing ER. 
Currently, since the proposal for construction of residential complex is at an advanced 
stage with schematic designs sent for the approval of the Chinese authorities and PE 
submitted to the Ministry, in case the latest proposal (April 2023) of the Mission is 
considered by the Ministry, it has a major change in end use i.e., construction of an 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
55 
auditorium, business centre etc., in place of diplomatic residential complex, hence the 
current designs may have no utility, resulting in expenditure of ₹  1.47 crore on the 
services of Architect for the current design being rendered wasteful. 
The Ministry stated (January 2025) that there were significant delays due to several 
deliberations, revisions and COVID -19. Further, the necessary approvals have not 
been obtained from the host (Chinese) Government despite the matter being raised at 
all levels. The Architect have been paid only till the stages his services were rendered 
and expenditure on engagement of Architect may not be treated as wasteful as the 
project is still live and under consideration. Ministry further stated (February 2025) 
that Mission’s latest proposal (April 2023) is under consideration with Ministry. A 
PMT visit is expected soon to assess all property related issues at the Mission.  
Audit recommends that the Mission firm up on its requirements and expedite the 
process of obtaining approvals from the concerned authorities as the lack of decision 
and clarity has led to the land/property being out -of-use since 2014, resulting in 
continued rental outgo of ₹ 1.06 crore48 per month. Also, delays may further lead to 
escalation in PE of ₹ 604.13 crore. 
(b) Wasteful expenditure on heating charges  
As per extant rules49, Beijing is a station where heating facility is provided for official 
and residential buildings. As OCP and ER are located on adjacent plots, the heating 
services are provided by the Beijing Heating Company to both the properties through 
a common line and  heating charges are billed for a total plinth area of 2,959 sqm 
pertaining to both the properties without any bifurcation.  
Audit observed (October 2023) that though the embassy offices were shifted out of 
OCP in January 2012 and the premises were not being used for any active 
purpose/service since 2014, the Mission did not take effective action to get the heating 
supply to the  vacant OCP discontinued and incurred an expenditure of ₹ 74 lakh50 
towards its heating charges during the period 2015-16 to 2024-25. 
Mission informed (May 2025) that heating supply pipelines between ER and OCP have 
been disconnected and the same has been informed to the Beijing Heating Company 
with a request to update their records so that heating charges for OCP are not charged 
from next heating season. 
 
48  In respect of 28 residential units proposed (August 2018) to be constructed at the OCP.  
49  Clause 10(1) of Annexure X of Indian Foreign Service (Pay, Leave and Compensatory 
Allowances) Rules. 
50 The total plinth area of OCP and ER is 2959 sqm. The built-up area of the disconnected OCP 
is 1469.9 sqm. Thus, the proportionate amount of heating charges for OCP works out to 
₹ 74 lakh (₹ 149 lakh x 1469.9/2959). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
56 
Corrective action taken by the Mission in April 2025, after the audit observation, is 
appreciated. However, the fact remains that lack of timely decision by the Mission 
resulted in wasteful expenditure of ₹  74 lakh towards heating charges for a vacant 
property from 2015-16 to 2024-25. 
Embassy of India, Copenhagen, Denmark 
2.4 Excess expenditure of ₹ 99.12 lakh 
Non-adherence to the rental ceiling fixed by the Ministry of External Affairs 
for hiring of leased accommodation by the Embassy of India, Copenhagen 
resulted in an excess expenditure of ₹ 99.12 lakh. 
Indian Foreign Service (Pay, Leave, Compensatory Allowance and Other Conditions 
of Service) Rules, 1961 (IFS-PLCA) inter-alia stipulate that:  
a) A member of the Service serving outside India shall be provided with free 
furnished accommodation and the scale of accommodation, which is considered 
appropriate to the status or grade of any officer shall be as prescribed by the 
Government from time to time; 
b) The Government may further prescribe from time to time a rental ceiling in 
respect of particular stations within which the member of the Service may be 
permitted to rent suitable furnished accommodation; and 
c) The Missions for which rental ceilings have been prescribed should not exceed 
the rental ceilings without the prior approval of the Government.  
In this regard, Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry) fixed (July 2017) the rental 
ceiling for leased accommodation for various grades of officers/officials posted in the 
Embassy of India, Copenhagen (Mission), for a minimum period of five years. The 
Ministry approved a rental ceiling of Danish Krone (DKK) 11,600 per month for 
ASO/PA/SSA/JSA51 level officials. 
Audit observed that the Mission allotted leased accommodations with monthly rental 
outgo higher than the prescribed ceiling to an ASO level official for 58 months 
(October 2018- July 2023) and to a PA level official for 38 months (August 2018 -
September 202 1), without obtaining any prior approval from the Ministry. The 
monthly rent paid for the leased accommodations ranged from DKK 18,684.12 to 
22,685.53 (161 to 196 per cent  of prescribed ceiling i.e., DKK 11,600) and DKK 
20,572 to 22,088.22 (177 to 190 per cent of prescribed ceiling i.e., DKK 11,600) for 
 
51 Assistant Section Officer (ASO)/ Personal Assistant (PA)/ Senior Secretariat Assistant (SSA)/ 
Junior Secretariat Assistant (JSA). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
57 
ASO and PA, respectively, during 2018-2023. This resulted in an excess expenditure 
of DKK 8,32,009 (₹ 99,11,607). 
The Mission stated (May 2025) that no records were available with the Mission to 
justify the reason for providing accommodation beyond the rental ceiling, and that a 
generally followed practice of allotting the same leased accommodation which had 
been previously occupied by the predecessor (who had a higher rank) must have been 
followed. Mission, further stated that it was an inadvertent procedural lapse and 
ex-post-facto approval from the Ministry would be sought. 
The reply of the Mission indicates that due diligence on part of Mission to adhere to 
approved rental ceiling was not conducted and this resulted in excess expenditure of 
₹ 99.12 lakh. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry of External Affairs; its reply was awaited as 
of July 2025. 
Audit recommends that 
a. Ministry may ensure due diligence while approving the budget estimates of the 
Missions to ensure adherence to prescribed rental ceilings; 
b. Ministry may institutionalize the process of periodic review of all its leased 
properties to ensure strict adherence to the prescribed rules/guidelines/ 
practices.  
 
Embassy of India, Tel Aviv, Israel 
2.5 Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 92.01 lakh 
Delays by the Embassy of India, Tel Aviv in undertaking pre -acquisition 
activities and the Ministry of External Affairs in conveying administrative 
approval and financial sanction for acquisition of a property within the 
extended timeline set by the seller led to termination of the deal and rendered 
an expenditure of ₹  92.01 lakh for professional/ legal services associated to 
pre-acquisition activities unfruitful. 
The Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry), following the recommendation of 
Parliamentary Committees, emphasized (November 201 1)52 the need for swift action 
for identification as well as forwarding of suitable properties abroad for acquisition 
and consequent reduction of rental liability. 
 
52  While conveying the Guidelines for acquisition of immovable properties abroad to all 
Missions/Posts vide MEA Letter No. Q/Proj./862/34/2011 dated 11 November 2011.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
58 
The Public Account Committee (PAC) noted (December 2015) in its report 53 that the 
deficiencies and delays in decision making have persisted despite assurance by the 
Ministry that steps had been taken to streamline and speed up the internal processes 
related to acquisition of the properties. Further, Ministry, in its Action Taken Report54 
(December 2016), reassured that Missions/Posts have been instructed to pursue the 
acquisition of properties aggressively. 
Embassy of India, Tel Aviv (Mission) and the Indian Cultural Centre (ICC) are 
functioning in rented buildings since the year 2002 and 2020, respectively. With a view 
to reduce the rental expenses, the Mission shortlisted (March 2019) four properties for 
acquisition. The Property Team of the Ministry visited (August 2019) Tel Aviv and 
recommended acquisition of the property at 10 Kermintiski Street, Tel Aviv. The 
property team also cautioned that it was very difficult to find stand -alone properties 
for sale in Tel Aviv due to high rental returns and such properties remain on shelf for 
a very little time due to high demand from hotel industry. 
After obtaining in-principle approval of the Ministry (November 2019), the Mission 
initiated the process of acquisition of the property with necessary clearance (January 
2020) from the Government of Israel. The major stages in this process and the time 
taken at each stage are given in Table 2.9. While the processes were on going between 
the Mission and the Ministry, the seller extended 55 the deadlines from time to time, 
with the final deadline fixed was up to 1.00 p.m. on 17 January 2022 and also increased 
(November 2021) the asking price for the property from New Israeli Shekel (NIS) 
76.50 million (plus taxes) to NIS 85.00 million (plus taxes)56.  
Table 2.9: Major stages in acquisition process and the time taken 
March 
2020 to 
September 
2021 
After the finalization (March 202057) of the Legal Due Diligence Report of the 
property, Mission took another one and a half years to complete (September 
2021) the structural assessment and evaluation of the market price of the 
property. The delay was due to prevalent COVID -19 situation (Apr il-
November 2020) and non -finalization of tenders 58 (December 2020 – 
July 2021) for engaging firms to undertake these activities. 
 
53  30th PAC Report of 16th Lok Sabha. 
54  61st PAC Report of 16th Lok Sabha. 
55  The initial deadline for completing Sale Purchase Agreement was mid-September 2021, which 
was subsequently extended to 15 December 2021, 03 January 2022 and 13 January 2022.  
56  ₹ 205.31 crore. 
57  The Mission had engaged M/s APM & Co. for preparation of LDDR. Against the initial 
deadline of 31 January 2020, the final Legal Due Diligence Report was submitted on 
18 March 2020. 
58  The first tender for selection of firm for undertaking structural assessment was floated on 
03 December 2020 which failed as successful bidder was not ready to provide requisite bank 
guarantee. Tenders were again floated on 17 February 2021 and 25 May 2021 but no valid bid 
was received. Finally, Mission engaged the sole valid bidder of the first ten der. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
59 
September 
2021 to 
November 
2021 
The Mission proposed (03 September 2021) the appointment of a firm59 to the 
Ministry on single source nomination basis to examine and negotiate the SPA, 
on the grounds that calling for tenders would be time consuming and any delay 
beyond the deadline set by the owners (mid -September) may result in 
placement of the property by the seller on the market. Despite the urgency, the 
Ministry approved the proposal on 29 October 2021, i.e., after 56 days, and an 
agreement was signed on 03 November 2021.  
December 
2021 to 
January 
2022 
The Mission sought (07 December 2021) the approval of the Ministry for 
revised asking price for the property, which was finally conveyed by the 
Ministry on 19 January 2022 i.e., after 43 days, and beyond the set deadline 
(17 January 2022).  
The seller did not accept the subsequent requests of the Mission and withdrew his 
offer.  
Audit observed that despite being highlighted by the Property Team of the Ministry 
that stand -alone properties are in short supply in Tel Aviv and setting up of firm 
deadlines by the seller of the property, the Mission and the Ministry could not complete 
the acquisition process in a time bound manner, resulting in exp enditure of 
₹ 92.01 lakh60 on pre-acquisition activities being unfruitful. 
The Ministry stated (December 2024 and April 2025) that due to delay in internal 
proceedings, which were not avoidable, the approval of the competent authority could 
not be obtained before the deadline set by the owners, i.e., 17 January 2022. There was 
no delay in processing the proposal on the part of the Ministry as steps involved in the 
advanced stage of acquisition were completed speedily, without any delays. 
Audit acknowledges the efforts made by the Mission and the Ministry in undertaking 
myriad activities associated with the complex process of acquisition of properties in 
foreign country during pandemic. However, audit noted that there was room for a more 
tight and focused handling of the said acquisition, given the risk of seller withdrawing 
the offer, e.g.,  
a. No effort to reduce the time period between successive re -tenders (76 days 
between 1 st & 2 nd and 97 days between 2 nd & 3 rd) for selection of firms for 
 
59  M/s APM & Co., which is the same firm which had prepared the Legal Due Diligence Report 
of the property. 
60  (i) ₹ 4,93,646 (NIS 23,398.83) to M/s APM & Co. towards consultancy fees for legal due 
diligence. (ii) ₹ 34,07,901 (NIS 144,495) to M/s Yaron Offir Engineers Ltd. for carrying out 
structural evaluation of the property. (iii) ₹ 5,15,777 (NIS 22,230) to M/s Odles Keinan Ltd. 
for preparing market evaluation report. (iv) ₹ 47,83,521 (NIS 172,125 (plus VAT @ 17 per 
cent)) to M/s  APM & Co. for legal services rendered during the process of acquisition of 
property. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
60 
undertaking structural assessment and evaluation of market price especially the 
considering loss of precious time due to COVID-19. 
b. The Ministry taking 56 days to convey approval on the Mission’s effort to 
expedite the finalization of SPA by hiring a firm on single source nomination was 
rendered unfruitful. 
c. Lack of urgency and follow up in Ministry, despite the Ministry having regular 
updates by the Mission regarding the strict deadlines set by the owner (and 
extended thrice during this period), Ministry took 43 days to accord administrative 
approval and financial sanction on revised price of the property, including 12 days 
to obtain the concurrence of the Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry, thus, 
missing the deal by just two days. 
This indicates that there was scope for a more committed and professional handling of 
the project. 
Audit recommends concerted and targeted time bound efforts by the Mission and the 
Ministry to ensure strict compliance with the deadlines in the acquisition of the 
properties abroad, absence of which may not only result in higher acquisition costs 
in successive attempts but also continued rental outgo. In the instant case, not only 
that the property identified after efforts and visit of Property team could not be 
acquired but also ₹  92.01 lakh spent on pre -acquisition activities was rendered 
unfruitful. 
 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, Pune and Goa 
2.6 Irregular Payment of Electricity Duty and Tax of ₹ 1.47 crore 
The Regional Passport Offices Mumbai, Pune and Goa did not claim exemption 
from Electricity duty and Tax as per Article 287 of the Constitution and Section 
3(2) of the Maharashtra Electricity Act, 2016 and Section 3(2) (1) of the Goa, 
Daman and Diu Electricity Duty Act, 1986 resulting in an irregular payment 
of ₹ 1.47 crore. 
As per Article 287 of the Constitution, no tax shall be levied on the consumption or 
sale of electricity/energy consumed by the Central Government. In line with this 
provision, Section 3(2) of the Maharashtra Electricity Act, 2016 and Section 3(2) (1) 
of the Goa, Daman and Diu Electricity Duty Act, 1986 specify that no Electricity duty 
and or tax shall be imposed on the consumption or energy charges billed to the Central 
Government, excluding public undertakings. 
During the audit (October 2023) of Regional Passport Office (RPO), Mumbai, it was 
observed that an Electricity duty of ₹ 96.68 lakh and Maharashtra Government Tax on 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
61 
the sale of electricity amounting to ₹  13.88 lakh was paid for electricity bills 61 from 
July 2017 to September 2023 (Annexure-2.8). Similarly, RPO, Pune paid Electricity 
duty of ₹ 27.03 lakh and Tax on sale of ₹ 1.28 lakh for the period62 from January 2021 
to May 2025 (Annexure-2.9) while RPO Goa paid Electricity duty of ₹ 8.28 lakh for 
the period from August 2018 to April 2025 (Annexure-2.10) respectively. 
Although the RPO, Mumbai, Pune and Goa are Central Government Departments, they 
did not claim exemption from the payment of Electricity duty/Tax in accordance with 
Article 287 and Section 3(2) of the Maharashtra Electricity Act, 2016/Goa Electricity 
Act. This resulted in an irregular payment of ₹ 1.47 crore. 
On being pointed out, RPO Mumbai responded (February 2025) that after the issue 
was raised during the audit, it was taken up with Maharashtra State Electricity 
Distribution Company Ltd .63 and it has stopped charging the Electricity duty and 
Maharashtra Government tax from October 2023.  
The matter was referred to the Ministry of External Affairs in March 2025. The 
Ministry stated (April 2025) that the matter was taken up with Government of 
Maharashtra which approved the refund and directed the concerned authorities to 
process the said refund. 
Subsequently, an amount of ₹ 1.25 crore was credited (April 2025) by the Distribution 
Company to the ‘Previous Outstanding’ in the Electricity bill of RPO Mumbai, from 
which the electricity charges payable were being deducted. Replies from RPO, Pune 
and Goa were awaited.  
Recovery of amount of electricity duty and Maharashtra Tax on electricity duty by 
RPO, Mumbai was at the instance of audit, however, the recovery of electricity duty 
in case of RPO, Pune and Goa remained pending (September 2025). 
Audit recommends that the Ministry may consider a review/ issue of orders to all 
RPOs to check the electricity charges being paid in all its RPOs, and in case similar 
errors are found, the RPOs may be guided to take corrective measures to rectify the 
same. 
 
 
 
 
 
61 Electricity bills for the months of October & December 2017 and of February, May and June 
2018 were not furnished by the RPO, Mumbai. 
62  Electricity bill for the month of March 2024 was not furnished by RPO, Pune.  
63  M/s Reliance Infrastructure Ltd. from the July 2017 to July 2018 and by Adani Electricity from 
August 2018 onwards. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
62 
 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai 
2.7 Inordinate delay in surrender of vacated RPO Thane premises 
Despite vacating the leased premises in 2017, RPO Mumbai and the Ministry 
were unable to finalise the surrender or alternate use of the property for over 
seven years, leading to avoidable expenditure of  ₹ 76 lakh and pending 
liabilities of ₹ 1.38 crore. 
Regional Passport Office (RPO) Thane was merged with RPO Mumbai on 21 August 
2017. Prior to the merger, the erstwhile RPO Thane operated from leased64 premises 
owned by the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) in Vardhan 
Building, Thane. The lease agreement, executed in June 2007, contained a clause 
mandating prior approval of the lessor for any sale, assignment, or transfer of 
possession of the premises. Post-merger, Vardhan Building premises at Thane MIDC 
was vacated in August 2017 and RPO, Mumbai started exploring the possibilities of 
utilising the space. In August 2018, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner 
expressed their interes t in this regard, but the Ministry directed (October 2018) to 
surrender the property to MIDC instead of renting it out to any other organisation.  
RPO Mumbai initiated the process for surrendering the premises in July 2020. In 
response, MIDC, in September 2020, requested the original possession receipt and 
lease agreement, and proposed a refund of ₹  3.43 crore after deducting ₹  1.33 crore 
including maintenance charges of ₹  79.26 lakh, from the total allotment cost of 
₹ 4.76 crore. 
Audit observed that despite vacating the premises in August 2017 and initiating the 
action for utilising/surrender formalities in 2018, the RPO and the Ministry were 
unable to  take timely and conclusive action to either surrender or reutilise the 
property. This prolonged inaction reflects administrative apathy and a lack of due 
diligence. The matter remained unresolved even after several years and multiple 
correspondences65 with MIDC from 2020 onwards, with no conclusive outcome as 
of April 2025. Furthermore, the issue of maintenance charges was escalated to the 
Ministry only belatedly in April 2022, accompanied by a request for a site visit by 
the GEM team, highlighting the lack of urgency in handling the matter. 
This inordinate delay resulted in MIDC raising a cumulative demand of ₹ 1.72 crore66 
towards monthly maintenance, water, and housekeeping charges as of May 2023, in 
 
64  Premises of 1590.86 sq. mtrs at Thane was leased from MIDC for 95 years for outright 
premium of ₹4,75,94,269/- and at a nominal rent of ₹ one per annum with effect from 02 April 
2007. 
65  Dated 29 July 2020; 07 September 2020; 27 March 2024; 03 July 2024; and 25 March 2025.  
66  Increased from ₹ 79.26 lakh demanded towards maintenance charges in September 2020. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
63 
addition to a special maintenance charge of ₹  1.30 crore being demanded in March 
2022 for structural repairs to the building. RPO Mumbai has paid ₹  76 lakh in 
maintenance charges67 till February 2025, while outstanding dues of ₹ 96 lakh remain 
unpaid, along with the special maintenance charge of ₹ 1.30 crore. 
On being pointed out, RPO Mumbai stated (April 2025) that a proposal had been 
submitted to lease the premises to the Employees Provident Fund office. However, 
the GEM Division of the Ministry objected, citing Clause 2(r) of the lease agreement, 
which prohi bits subletting or transfer of possession without prior consent from 
MIDC. The Ministry further reiterated that the property should only be surrendered 
back to MIDC and not sold or leased to third parties.  
In August 2025, RPO Mumbai replied that they had explored various possibilities of 
utilizing the vacant premises. However, Ministry in December 2018 informed that it 
was not in favo ur of selling the property to third party. Accordingly, RPO Mumbai 
requested MIDC to convey the details of refund amount and the process of 
surrendering the premises. Subsequently, in May 2025 it was informed that the refund 
amount has been calculated to ₹  4.37 crore.  Later in July 2025, the Ministry 
conveyed in-principle approv al for surrendering the premises to MIDC. It further 
stated that after reconciliation, arrears of maintenance charges have been reduced to 
₹ 8.12 lakh. 
The reply provided by RPO Mumbai may be viewed in light of the fact that both RPOs 
and the Ministry were fully aware of the lease restrictions but still could not take timely 
and effective steps to obtain the necessary approvals or conclude the surrender process. 
The continued inaction for over seven years after vacating the premises clearly 
indicates administrative negligence and poor inter-departmental coordination. This has 
resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹  76 lakh already incurred, along with an 
outstanding liability of ₹ 8.12 lakh in maintenance charges and ₹ 1.30 crore in special 
maintenance charges, reflecting a serious lapse in property management and f iscal 
prudence. 
 
 
 
67  Demand of Monthly maintenance charges of ₹  1,71,65,499/- is up to May 2023 and charges, 
if any, due thereafter is not available. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
64 
(III) Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
2.8 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on Functioning of Fishery Survey of 
 India 
The Fishery Survey of India (FSI), the Nodal Fishery Institute under the 
administrative control of the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying , maintains a widespread presence along 
India’s coastline, with three operational bases on the East Coast  
Visakhapatnam, Chennai, and Port Blair  and four on the West Coast  Cochin, 
Mormugao, Mumbai, and Porbandar. 
The Institute currently manages a fleet of 11 large vessels  with the primary 
responsibility of survey and assessment of fishery resources in the Indian 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and adjoining areas for promoting sustainable 
exploitation and management of the Marine Fishery resources. 
The objective of these surveys is to identify inventory of species, estimation of 
abundance, distribution pattern, study of biological aspects68 of the fish species 
recorded in the catches, environmental parameter including wind speed and 
direction, current speed and direction, depth of survey area, study of suitable 
mesh size for important species etc. 
Based on the data collected during the surveys, the Institute prepares Annual 
Report of Fishery Survey of India highlighting results of survey -cum-research 
activities carried out during the year. 
Fishery Survey of India (FSI) carried out 372 voyages against planned 
586 voyages during the period 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 registering a shortfall of 
37 per cent.  This resulted in shortfall in operational targets viz. 46 per cent in  
number of days at sea, 53 per cent in number of fishing days and  consequent 
shortfall of 61 per cent and 72 per cent in  sampling efforts measured in terms 
of number of hours and number of hooks respectively. Due to non- conducting 
of 214 planned surveys, the Institute had to forego 4,339 days of fishing and the 
subsequent sampling effort of 15,149 hours and 12.73 lakh hooks. Even in the 
372 voyages conducted by the Institute, shortfall in the sampling effort was 
37 per cent and 31 per cent in hours and numbers of hooks respectively. 
FSI had no prescribed norms for minimum number of fishing days per survey 
in order to ensure collection of adequate data for stock assessment studies due 
to which 21 voyages with fishing days less than five days were noticed in 
Mumbai and Mormugao bases.  
Shortfall in the voyages was primarily due to inefficient planning and 
deployment of vessels in terms of prolonged and unplanned maintenance of 
vessels, improper preparation of dry docking repair list resulting in cost and 
time over -run, improper estimatio n of expenditure resulting in vessels 
 
68 Length-weight, sex and maturity studies, gut content analysis etc. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
65 
remaining idle due to non -supply of provisions like HSD oil, fresh water and 
non-payment of wages to casual staff. 
Audit noticed avoidable expenditure on berthing/fuel charges due to delayed 
decision, idle expenditure on casual staff /other charges during the layoff period 
of vessels. 
FSI had overall staff shortage of 59 per cent with significantly higher vacancy 
of 78 per cent in the floating staff. 
The Institute did not adhere to DoPT’s instructions regarding the recruitment 
and remuneration of casual workers and incurred expenditure without the 
necessary administrative and financial approvals. 
Audit recommends that: 
➢ A systematic policy to guide the acquisition of new vessels, scrapping of 
outdated ones, and timely upgrading of onboard equipment may be 
developed. The Ministry should also define the standard useful life of vessels 
to ensure optimal performance and resource utilization. 
➢ Comprehensive gap analysis and impact evaluation studies may be 
undertaken to identify areas for improvement and enhance the functional 
effectiveness of the Institute. 
➢ A system for timely publication of reports using uniform reporting formats 
may be introduced to promote clarity and transparency. 
➢ A robust internal control mechanism may be established to ensure adherence 
to relevant DoPT directives and provisions of GFR. 
➢ Prompt action may be taken to fill vacancies in both technical and non -
technical roles to support effective and uninterrupted operations. 
2.8.1 Background 
The Fishery Survey of India (FSI) functions as Nodal Fishery Institute under the 
administrative control of the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India. 
The Institute with Headquarter at Mumbai is headed by Director General and is 
assisted by Deputy Director General (Fishery) for survey and scientific works and 
Deputy Director General (Engineering) for fleet maintenance, operations and 
engineering matters. The Institute maintains a widespread presence along India’s 
coastline, with three bases on the East Coast69 and four on the West Coast70. Each base 
is headed by a Zonal Director supported by Scientists, Floating staff71, Engineers and 
Administrative personnel for implementation of the Survey programme.  
 
69 Visakhapatnam, Chennai, and Port Blair. 
70 Cochin, Mormugao, Mumbai, and Porbandar. 
71 Vessel-based staff including Chief engineer, Skipper and other deck hands are described as 
floating staff. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
66 
2.8.2 Objectives and mandate of the Fishery Survey of India 
The FSI is responsible for (i) Conducting exploratory surveys, charting of fishing 
grounds, assessment of fish stocks in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ); 
(ii) Data collection and periodic re -validation of potential of fishery resources to 
provide advice on fishery management issues; (iii) Monitoring survey of Fishery 
resources in the exploited areas; (iv) Maintain data bank and disseminate information 
on fishery resources to the end-users and act as an interface between the State/UTs and 
the Ministry of Agriculture 72, Government of India; (v) Assessment of suitability of 
fishing gear, accessories and equipment for the preservation of environment and 
ecology of marine habitat; (vi) Fish stock identification and biodiversity studies; 
(vii) Marine fisheries forecasting for the benefit of artisanal, mechanized and industrial 
sectors; and (viii) Human Resource Development through practical training of fishing 
operatives, fishermen, fisheries officers and students, etc. 
2.8.3 Financial resources 
Table 2.10: Year-wise Budget/Expenditure in respect of FSI 
(₹ in crore)  
Particulars of 
Head of 
Account 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Budget Exp Budget Exp Budget Exp Budget Exp Budget Exp 
Salary and 
Allowances 
33.55 32.91 34.92 33.96 40.39 32.78 36.83 35.28 40.22 38.1 
Administrative/ 
Office Expenses 
2.23 2.35 2.87 2.73 3.24 2.25 2.86 2.76 3.71 3.49 
Supply and 
Materials 
10.27 10.24 13.46 12.17 9.5 7.61 15.6 14.66 25 22.78 
Dry Docking & 
Repairs 
8.69 8.55 33.64 33.3 29.93 29.8 14.06 13.78 28 25.66 
Capital outlays 0.13 0.05 6.11 2.16 3.32 0.27 2 1.72 1.92 0.63 
Total 54.87 54.1 91 84.32 86.38 72.71 71.35 68.2 98.85 90.66 
Line chart in respect of expenditure incurred on salary and allowances, dry -docking 
repairs and the number of voyages carried out by the Institute during the period 
2018-2023 is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
72 Since 2019, FSI is under the administrative control of Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
67 
(Expenditure ₹ in crore) 
 
From the chart it is clear that the expenditure on salary and allowances ha d remained 
more or less linear whereas there was a direct co-relation between the expenditure on 
dry-docking repairs and the number of voyages carried out.  In the years where 
expenditure on dry-docking repairs was more, the number of voyages carried out was 
less and vice-versa. 
2.8.4  Audit objectives 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was conducted to ascertain whether 
an efficient and effective planning was undertaken for the survey, assessment, and 
monitoring of fishery resources; adequate  financial, human, and infrastructural 
resources were available and were utilized efficiently and effectively and data related 
to fishery resources was systematically collected, properly maintained and effectively 
disseminated to relevant stakeholders.  
2.8.5 Audit criteria, scope, sampling and methodology 
The audit criteria employed to evaluate the extent to which the audit objectives were 
achieved were drawn from the Fishery Resource Survey, Assessment and Research 
Programme (FRSARP); and directives, guidelines, instructions, and circulars issued by 
the Director General of Shipping. 
The SSCA covered five-year period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. It focused on evaluating 
records maintained by the Office of the Director General, FSI as well as the offices of 
the Zonal Directors located in Mumbai and Goa. 
The audit process commenced with an Entry Conference held on 22  December 2023 
with the Director General , Fishery Survey of India. During this meeting, key aspects 
32.91 33.96 32.78 35.28 38.1
8.55
33.3 29.8
13.78
25.66
91
69
39
72
101
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Salary and Allowances Dry Docking & Repairs No. of Voyage

Report No. 36 of 2025 
68 
of the audit including its objectives, scope, criteria, and methodology were discussed 
in detail. 
Audit was conducted from January to March 2024  and from November 2024 to 
February 2025. The Exit Conference was held at the office of the Director General, 
FSI, Mumbai on 3 June 2025. 
2.8.6 Audit findings 
As mandated, FSI is  primarily responsible for survey and assessment of the marine 
fishery resources in the Indian EEZ along the East and West coast of the country and 
adjoining areas including Lakshadweep and waters surrounding the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, for promoting their sustainable exploitation and management. In 
addition, the Institute conducts exploratory surveys to identify fish stocks and study 
marine biodiversity.  
The Institute currently manages a fleet of 11 large vessels, operated by six zonal 
bases73. Each vessel is manned by a crew of approximately 23 members, including 
scientists who conduct on -sea fishing operations aimed at surveying, assessing, and 
monitoring marine fishery resources. 
The objective of these surveys is to collect data to identify inventory of species, 
estimation of abundance, distribution pattern, study of biological aspects 74 of the fish 
species recorded in the catches, environmental parameter including the wind speed and 
direction, current speed and direction, depth of survey area, study of suitable mesh size 
for important species etc. 
Operational targets are prescribed per cruise in terms of (i) number of voyages, (ii) days 
at sea, (iii) fishing days, and (iv) sampling efforts75. Sampling effort for each cruise is 
measured in terms of number of hauls/ number of hooks per set 76 and the duration of 
hauls are also specified in the FRSARP. The Fish resources data collected through 
exploratory surveys is disseminated in the form of Bulletins, Reports, Resources 
Information Series (RIS), Meena News, Charts, Atlas, Occasional papers, S cientific 
papers based on the specific findings and also through All India Radio ( AIR), 
Doordarshan and FSI website from time to time. Hence, the Fish Stock data collected 
fulfils the data needs of the fishermen, fishing industry and other end users to plan their 
harvesting strategies more precisely  and also render necessary support for fisheries 
 
73 Mumbai, Mormugao, Cochin, Chennai, Visakhapatnam and Port Blair. 
74 Length-weight, sex and maturity studies, gut content analysis etc. 
75  Sampling effort refers to the amount of time, gear, or activity used to collect data during a 
survey, such as the number of fishing days, hauls, or hooks deployed. It is essential for ensuring 
consistent, reliable, and comparable scientific results in fisheries research. 
76  Number of hooks attached to the net at one time. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
69 
development, management and conservation thereby supporting Government of India 
in National marine fishery resources management related policy decisions to meet the 
sustainability. 
The survey activities are planned as per the annual FRSARP. This comprehensive 
programme envisages the details of the survey and research activities to be conducted 
to collect the Fishery Resources data on designated vessels during a voyage for 20 days 
per month.  It outlines key operational details of projects related to deep-sea demersal 
resources, coastal pelagic resources, oceanic tuna resources, experimental projects and 
other activities sought to be achieved during a voyage/cruise. 
Audit examination revealed that though the Institute prepare d a detailed annual 
FRSARP, there were significant shortfalls in achievement of operational targets in 
terms of number of voyages undertaken, number of days at sea and number of fishing 
days and consequent shortfall in the sampling efforts planned for each survey and 
collection of data.  There were no clearly defined Standard Operating Procedures 
(SoPs) to carry out its various activities in terms of number of fishing days, number of 
hauls, numbe r of hooks, staff requirement during the lay -off period, given the 
specialized nature of work done by the Institute.  Surveys were conducted without the 
presence of scientific staff, leading to shortfall in collection of scientific data.  The 
audit findings are discussed in detail in the following paras. 
2.8.7 Shortfall in survey and project deliverables 
Of the 11 vessels that the Institute operates, seven are trawler vessels and four are 
longline vessels. These vessels were assigned survey projects broadly categorized into 
deep-sea demersal resources, coastal pelagic resources, oceanic tuna and allied 
resources, experimental projects.  Institute also carries out operations for "Assessment 
of Suitability of Fishing Gear, Accessories and Equipment with special reference to the 
preservation of environment and ecology of marine habitat". 
(i)  The vessels use various fishing techniques such as demersal (bottom) 
trawling77, mid-water trawling78, purse seining79, tuna longlining80, and squid jigging81, 
with a focus on exploring deep-sea and oceanic fishery resources.  
 
77 Demersal (bottom) trawling: A fishing technique where a net is dragged along the sea floor 
to catch bottom-dwelling species. 
78 Mid-water trawling: A method where a net is towed at varying depths between the seabed 
and the surface to capture pelagic fish. 
79 Purse seining: A technique that uses a large wall of netting to encircle schools of fish near the 
surface; the bottom of the net is then drawn closed like a drawstring purse. 
80 Tuna longlining: A method that uses a long main fishing line with baited hooks spaced at 
intervals, deployed to target tuna and other large pelagic species. 
81 Squid jigging: A specialized method that uses lines with lures (jigs) that are jerked vertically 
in the water to attract and catch squid, typically at night using lights. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
70 
Audit scrutiny revealed significant overall shortfalls in the total number of voyages 
carried out by the Institutes Survey vessels against the planned targets as documented 
in the annual FRSARP, across the period audited. As a result, there was shortfall in 
achieving the operational targets planned per vessel/cruise in terms of voyages, days at 
sea, and fishing days across its fleet of 11 vessels during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 
(Annexure-2.11).  The aggregated shortfalls from targets for all 11 vessels  are given 
in Table 2.11. 
Table 2.11: Shortfall in survey/ project deliverables in respect of 11 vessels during 
2018-19 to 2022-23 
Audit observed that even in the case of 372 voyages (Annexure-2.12) undertaken by 
the vessels, there was a shortfall in achievement of operational targets as detailed 
below: 
➢ Days at sea: 6350 days were planned, 5,737 were actually achieved, shortfall of 
10 per cent. 
➢ Fishing days: 4904 days were planned, 3,924 were actually achieved, shortfall 
of 20 per cent. 
➢ Sampling Effort: Against a target of 15 ,632 hours and 7,13,171 hooks, 9,851 
hours and 4,90,954 hooks were achieved respectively, shortfall of 37 per cent 
and 31 per cent. 
In addition to above, 21 instances were noted at Mumbai and Mormugao bases, where 
fishing days were less than five days on a voyage.  FSI did not have any norms/SoP in 
place prescribing minimum number of fishing days per survey in order to ensure 
collection of adequate data for stock assessment studies. 
Audit further analysed the performance of  two specific vessels operated from Mumbai 
and Mormugao bases i.e., MFV Matsya Nireekshani and MFV Sagarika which were 
deployed to survey Demersal and Pelagic resources  and MFV Matsya Vrushti  and 
MFV Matsya Yellow Fin which were deployed for survey of tuna and allied resources 
from these two bases. Table 2.12 shows the extent of shortages and the projects 
impacted by the same. 
 
Measure Planned Achieved Shortfall Per cent 
Number of 
Voyages 
586 372 37 
Days at Sea 10,691 5,737 46 
Fishing Days 8,263 3,924 53 
Sampling effort (in 
hours/ number  of 
hooks) 
25,000 (hours) 
17,64,005 (number of 
hooks) 
9,851 
4,90,954 
61 
72 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
71 
Table 2.12: Performance of vessels operated from Mumbai and Mormugao bases 
Shortfall in percentage 
Vessels Shortfall in 
voyages 
Shortfall in 
Days at Sea 
Shortfall in 
Fishing days 
Shortfall in 
Sampling Efforts 
Demersal and Pelagic Resources Sampling Efforts 
7 Vessels 33 43 49 61 
MFV Matsya 
Nireekshani 
86 93 95 96 
MFV Sagarika 27 31 40 50 
Tuna and Allied Resources Sampling Efforts 
4 Vessels 44 52 60 72 
MFV Matsya 
Vrushti 
49 64 72 80 
MFV Yellow Fin 39 47 57 81 
There was a shortfall of 61 per cent and 72 per cent in the sampling effort measured 
in terms of hours and number of hooks per set, as a consequence, the sampling size of 
the data collected was adversely affected and this reflects poorly on the accuracy of 
the data collected by the Institute and the subsequ ent usefulness of the data 
disseminated to the users. 
In its response (July 2024), the Institute attributed the shortfall in vessel utili sation 
primarily to the age of its fleet, which ranges from 20 to 46 years. However, this 
justification does not fully withstand for several reasons. Firstly, the annual FRSARP 
is developed with full awareness of vessel availability, including planned dry docking 
and maintenance schedules. As such, age -related downtime should already be 
accounted for during the target -setting process. Secondly, audit analysis did not 
establish a direct correlation between vessel age and performance shortfalls. For 
example, MFV Matsya Nireekshani , the oldest vessel at 46 years, achieved only 
14 per cent of its target, whereas MFV Matsya Darshini , at 44 years, achieved 
89 per cent during 2018-2023. Similarly, MFV Matsya Vrushti, which was relatively 
newer at 19 years, achieved 51 per cent, while the older MFV Matsya Yellow Fin, at 
35 years, recorded a higher achievement of 61  per cent during this period. These 
findings suggest that factors other than age may have had a more significant impact on 
vessel performance. 
(ii)  The Institute had planned experimental gear operation in respect of five vessels 
during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 (Annexure-2.13). Audit observed that experimental 
gear operation was not conducted as planned in respect of following vessels 
(Annexure-2.14). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
72 
➢ MFV Blue Marlin82 did not carry out operation during 2022 -23 as against the 
plan. 
➢ MFV Matsya Drushti carried out operation for 2019-20 as against planned for 
two years (2018-19 and 2019-20). 
In reply (July 2024), the Institute stated that the experimental gear operation and 
assessment were planned, and action plan was prepared after due consultation with the 
stakeholders, State Fisheries Department and were planned in the beginning of the year 
and in specified months. It was further stated that the experimental gear operation 
could be taken up if the vessels are deployed for survey. The vessels could not be 
deployed due to various reasons like dry docking repairs, want of LSA  (Life Saving 
Appliances)/FFA (Fire Fighting Appliances)  certificates and major repairs, 
malfunctioning of the equipment and machineries, engines etc. 
Reply of the Institute indicated unrealistic planning by the Institute. 
Audit findings discussed in subsequent sections indicate that prolonged maintenance 
periods, rather than the age of vessels alone, were the primary contributors to the 
underachievement of targets. 
2.8.7.1 Shortfall in environmental data collection targets 
As per the annual FRSARP for the period 2018-19 to 2022-23, in addition to catch and 
biological data, the collection of specific environmental parameters was mandated 
during each longline survey voyage. This requirement applied to four vessels: MFV 
Yellow Fin, MFV Blue Marlin, MFV Matsya Vrushti, and MFV Matsya Drushti. The 
environmental parameters included daily measurements of salinity, temperature, and 
depth (STD); sea surface temperature (SST) at specific times; and current direction 
and speed. The data are crucial for enhancing the accuracy of the fishery forecast 
system and identifying probable fishing grounds. 
Audit scrutiny of cruise reports during the above period revealed significant shortfalls 
in environmental data collection by three of the four vessels83 (Annexure-2.15). 
➢ MFV Yellow Fin collected data during only 1 out of 30 voyages, 
➢ MFV Matsya Vrushti during 5 out of 24 voyages, and 
➢ MFV Matsya Drushti during 21 out of 43 voyages.  
One of the primary reasons for this shortfall was the non -functional or obsolete 
condition of critical equipment such as CTD  (Conductivity, Temperature, Depth) 
 
82  The vessel underwent dry docking in 2020-21 and 2021-22 and was not deployed for surveys. 
83  MPV Blue Marlin -The vessel underwent dry docking in 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 and was not 
deployed for surveys. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
73 
/STD (Salinity, Temperature, Depth) meters and Secchi Disks onboard MFV Yellow 
Fin and MFV Matsya Vrushti. Despite repeated mentions of these issues by scientific 
staff in their cruise reports, necessary corrective measures were not taken. 
In its response (July and October 2024), the Institute stated that the CTD/STD meters 
were originally procured with the vessels but had become non-functional due to wear 
and tear and the end of their operational lifespan. The lack of locally available spare 
parts and the absence of authorized s ervice centres further prevented timely repairs. 
The Institute also informed that plans were underway to import the latest models of 
CTD/STD meters for all four longline vessels and assured that environmental data 
collection would be resumed post-procurement. 
Audit recommends that a systematic policy to guide the acquisition of new vessels, 
scrapping of outdated ones, and timely upgrading of onboard equipment may be 
developed. The Ministry should also define the standard useful life of vessels to 
ensure optimal performance and resource utilization. 
2.8.7.2 Surveys and assessments conducted without scientific staff onboard 
Scientific staff plays a vital role in fishing cruises, being responsible for the collection 
of essential survey data. Their duties include fish species identification, conducting 
biological investigations for qualitative and quantitative stock assessments, preparing 
cruise pla ns and research programmes, estimating gear material requirements, and 
generating reports on survey vessel operations. 
Audit observations revealed that out of 96 voyages planned as surveys with specific 
operational targets (in FRSARP), 29 voyages84 were carried out without scientific staff 
onboard, which constitutes a deviation from deputation of scientist participant onboard 
the vessel to collect the Fishery Resources data. 
In its response (July 2024), the Institute stated that the voyages identified by Audit, 
involving vessels attached to the Mumbai and Goa bases, were primarily undertaken 
for activities such as the Sagar Parikrama programme and trial runs, rather than for 
scientific surveys. It was requested that Audit may record these voyages as non -
scientific in nature. 
However, as per the FRSARP, all these voyages were planned as surveys with specific 
operational targets.   
 
84 At the Mumbai Base scientific staff participated in 23 out of 31 voyages conducted by two 
vessels between 2018-19 and 2022-23. 
 At the Goa Base, scientific staff were present in 44 out of 65 voyages during the same period.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
74 
Apart from the regular surveys/projects, FSI is also mandated to conduct experimental/ 
exploratory fishing surveys to identify the resources of different species. 
2.8.7.3 Non execution of squid jigging projects 
An exploratory survey was undertaken using squid jigger by MV Titanic and 
MV Vershini during 2010-13 covering the oceanic water from 8 0 N to 170 N latitudes 
and 640 E to 76 0 E longitudes along the Eastern and Central Arabian Sea. As per the 
major findings of the surveys, the total biomass of squids was estimated as 2.52 million 
tonnes and the annual fishable biomass (MSY) was estimated as 0.63 million tonnes. 
Audit observed that annual programme of the Institute for the year 2022-23, for survey 
assessment and monitoring of fish stock also included estimation of abundance of 
squids in Arabian sea using automated squid jigging machine.  However, Audit noted 
that any plan for survey and assessment of oceanic squid was neither prepared nor 
executed during the period 2018-19 to 2021-22. 
Institute replied (February 2024) that automatic squid jigging machines procured in 
2003 had become very old and could not be repaired as machines were imported and 
operation manual which came along with machines were in Korean language. In spite 
of several attempts by Cochin Base of FSI, these machines remained unused for a long 
time. 
Institute further replied (July 2024) that although the system was not working with 
100 per cent  efficacy, satisfactory results were obtained and the programme was 
included in the official survey programme of the vessel MFV Matsya Varshini and 
during the survey, attempts were made to operate three automatic squid jigging 
machines simultaneously which were partially repaired by procuring available local 
spares. Experimental project was attempted with fishing effort of 66.5 hours during 
2022-23. It was also stated that the MFV Lavanika and MFV Matsya Varshini were 
awaiting dry docking repairs and once vessels were ready, the project would be taken 
up on regular basis .  FSI was also planning to procure multi gear facility vessels in 
future wherein squid jigging would be included. 
The reply confirmed that the project was yet to be executed, considering the estimated 
biomass of the squids. 
Audit recommends that the Institute should take a conscious decision to plan the 
projects of significance and move towards creating the necessary infrastructure for 
carrying out such projects. 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
75 
2.8.7.4 Shortfall in training for fishermen 
The Institute is responsible for human resource development by offering practical 
training to fishing operatives, fishermen, fisheries officials, and students, onboard the 
vessels. However, Audit found that there was no defined schedule for providing 
training to the fishing community and students.  At the Mormugao base, data from 
2018-19 to 2022-23 showed that casual workers hired on a temporary basis were often 
reported as trainees. While 98 fishermen were reported as trained under 60 training 
sessions, only 47 unique fishermen were actually trained due to repeated participation 
by some trainees. 
In its reply (January 2025), the Mormugao base acknowledged that there was no 
structured schedule for fishermen training and no financial provision for the same. 
Casual hands were engaged on vessels to fill vacant positions. This response was also 
inadequate, as this activity was part of the Institute’s mandate and should be conducted 
systematically. 
The Mumbai base did not provide any records regarding fishermen training. 
The findings highlight ed that the Institute did not effectively carr y out its mandated 
function of human resource development through practical training. The absence of 
structured plans and schedules hindered the efficient training of fishermen, thereby 
negatively impacting their ability to utilize marine resources sustaina bly. This 
shortcoming affected not only the livelihoods of the fishermen but also the broader 
objectives of fisheries development, management, and conservation. 
Audit recommends that comprehensive gap analysis and impact evaluation studies 
may be undertaken to identify areas for improvement and enhance the functional 
effectiveness of the Institute. 
2.8.8 Adequacy and Utilisation of fleet and manpower resources 
As can be seen from the Paras above, the key operational targets in the surveys/  
projects carried out by the Institute could not be achieved largely due to voyages not 
being undertaken as planned and non -availability of requisite key manpower i.e., 
technical, scientific and deck hands.  
The results of audit examination on the adequacy and utilization of infrastructure and 
manpower resources are discussed in the succeeding section. 
2.8.8.1 Inefficient Planning and Deployment of fleet 
A critical component of effective resource utilisation was the optimal deployment and 
operational utilization of the Institute’s survey vessels. However, audit scrutiny 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
76 
revealed multiple systemic inefficiencies in the estimation and execution of vessel -
related operations, which not only resulted in unproductive expenditure but also 
severely constrained the Institute’s ability to carry out its core mandate of fishery 
resource assessment. 
(i) Prolonged and Unplanned Maintenance of Vessels 
As per the directives issued by the Directorate General of Shipping and the Mercantile 
Marine Department (MMD), fishing vessels are required to undergo dry-docking twice 
within a five-year period, with a maximum allowable gap of three years between two 
consecutive dry -docking events. In line with this, the Institute prepares an Annual 
Maintenance and Dry-docking Schedule for its fleet. 
Audit revealed following deviation from the maintenance and dry docking schedule 
leading to prolonged unavailability of vessels for operational voyages: 
➢ The duration of dry -docking for eight of the 11 vessels significantly exceeded 
the planned timeframe, with extensions ranging between 150 per cent and 
550 per cent of the scheduled duration (Annexure-2.16). Exceptions to this were 
MFV Lavanika, MFV Matsya Darshini, and MFV Matsya Varshini.  Notably, 
MFV Blue Marlin required additional dry-docking from 2020-21 to 2021-22 for 
nearly two years due to a damaged propeller. 
➢ Slot unavailability for dry -docking further delayed operations, with MFV 
Lavanika, MFV Sagarika, and MFV Blue Marlin being laid up for two months 
10 days, five months, and four months, respectively. 
➢ In addition to dry -docking, afloat repairs were also undertaken for MFV 
Yellowfin (271 days) and MFV Sagarika (157 days), further extending their 
downtime. 
➢ There were also delays in planned surveys across all 11 vessels, aggregating to 
a total of 341 days, due to non -availability of HSD oil, during the audit period 
(2018-19 to 2022 -23). For instance, MFV Vrushti alone remained non -
operational for 64 days in 2018-19 due to single instance of HSD shortage. 
These findings highlight ed that repair and maintenance activities consistently took 
longer than scheduled, largely due to ineffective planning and logistical management. 
The inability to ensure timely maintenance and provisioning of essential resources led 
to significant vessel downtime, ultimately resulting in non-achievement of survey and 
assessment targets. 
In its reply (July 2024), the Institute stated that the allocation of dry-docking slots by 
Government-owned Public Sector Shipyards was beyond its control .  It added that 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
77 
vessels were shifted to afloat repairs immediately after dry-docking to avoid incurring 
high dry-docking charges as these were three to four times higher  than afloat berth 
charges. Since afloat repairs were a component of the overall repair process, the 
vessels could not be deployed without completing them. It also asserted 
(October 2024) that fishery survey vessels were accorded lower priority in comparison 
to defence and cargo vessels at shipyards. Regarding the HSD supply issue, it 
attributed the delays to budgetary restructuring and procedural amendments under the 
financial management system and again cited fund disbursement delays from the 
Department of Fisheries, GoI. 
However, this explanation was not considered acceptable. The FRSARP is prepared 
with prior consideration of all planned dry-docking, repair, and maintenance activities. 
As such, it is the responsibility of the Institute to accurately assess, plan, and secure 
the necessary resources t o implement its annual programs effectively and without 
delay. The Institute is expected to prepare budget estimates in advance, which form 
the basis for timely fund release through the Public Financial Management System  
(PFMS). The repeated deviations from the planned schedule, combined with recurring 
post-dry docking afloat repairs point ed to unrealistic planning and ineffective 
execution. 
(ii)  Improper preparation of dry docking repairs list resulting in 
 significant delay and cost over-run 
Whenever the dry docking of any vessel is due, the Institute directs the Skipper and 
Chief Engineer of the respective vessel to prepare a Dry -Docking Repair (DDR) list 
to facilitate the procurement of cost estimates from shipyards.  This list needs to be 
elaborated properly mentioning the extent of the repairs in clear technical details to 
prevent the need for re -estimation during yard inspections and to avoid delays in 
securing administrative and financial approval prior to issuing work orders.   
Audit observed that despite the institute’s directive, the repair lists submitted were 
found to be incomplete. Key repair items were omitted, which compromised the ability 
of prospective bidders to provide accurate and fair estimates. Consequently, this 
limited the Institute’s opportunity to obtain competitive pricing. The excluded items 
were later carried out as extra works, leading to significant cost and time overruns in 
comparison to the original work order estimates, as detailed in Table 2.13. 
 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
78 
Table 2.13: Comparison of Estimated vs Actual Repair Time and Cost 
Vessel 
Dry 
docking 
commence
ment year 
Estimated 
Period 
(days) 
Actual 
Period 
(days) 
Estimated 
cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Actual cost 
(₹ in lakh) 
Per cent 
of time 
over run 
Per cent 
of cost 
over run 
Matsya 
Nireekshani 
2020 75 664 172.53 385.28 785.33 123 
Matsya 
Vrushti 
2020 40 368 218.19 317.44 820 45.49 
MFV Yellow 
Fin 
2020 61* 536 237.11 649.49 778.69 173.92 
MFV 
Sagarika 
2019 90 473 280.55 660.19 425 135.32 
*Estimated time was taken from the annual report in which drydocking was planned for 61 days as no 
clause for estimated time was there in the work order. 
In its response (January 2025 ), the Mormugao Base explained that certain repair 
activities, such as hull plate renewals, c ould only be properly assessed after 
sandblasting was carried out at the shipyard and subsequent UT gauging under the 
supervision of Mercantile Marine Department (MMD) surveyor who would assess the 
scope of work. The base also noted that additional unforeseen repair needs often 
emerge as the repair work progresses.  Similarly, in February 2025, the Mumbai Base 
stated that MFV Matsya Nireekshani  was docked in March 202 0, just before the 
COVID-19 lockdown was enforced, which caused considerable delays. Furthermore, 
inspections conducted by MMD surveyors during the repair period led to the 
identification of further essential repairs necessary for the safety and operationa l 
readiness of the vessel, contributing to significant increase in both cost and duration 
of the drydocking process. 
These explanations are to be considered in light of the fact that the Institute ha d a 
dedicated Engineering Section tasked with the routine planning and oversight of 
dry-docking repairs.  Repeated instances of huge difference between estimated 
expenditure vs the actual expenditure incurred on the repairs and days planned vs 
actual days required for dry docking, pointed to systemic deficiency in both planning 
and technical diligence.  This shortcoming persisted regardless of external disruptions 
such as the pandemic. 
(iii) Improper estimation of expenditure 
According to Rule 44(ii) of GFR, budget shall contain estimates of all expenditure for 
each programme, scheme and project in that financial year. Contrary to this, the 
Institute could not anticipate essential inputs such as High -Speed Diesel (HSD) oil, 
wages for casual staff, and freshwater requirements, which were fundamental for 
vessel operation.  As a result, key vessels remained idle for extended periods. For 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
79 
instance, MFV Matsya Vrushti remained non-operational for nine months85. Similarly, 
MFV Matsya Nireekshani was laid up for four months 86 in 2019. These periods of 
inactivity were primarily due to the non -availability of fuel, non -payment of wages, 
and lack of water supply. Such lapses in estimating and provisioning operational 
requirements resulted in delays in essential payments, which in  turn impaired the 
deployment of vessels. 
(iv) Avoidable expenditure on Berthing and fuel charges 
Similar inefficiencies were noted with MFV Yellow Fin at the Mormugao base. In 
March 2018, the engine service provider, recommended major overhauls  of the 
auxiliary engines on Yellow Fin. In response, the Mormugao base proposed to FSI to 
shift the vessel to the Marine Engineering Division (MED) Jetty in Kochi to facilitate 
economical repairs.  However, no decision was taken for 15 months to relocate the 
vessel to the MED Jetty for undergoing repairs.  Consequently, Yellow Fin embarked 
on a fishing voyage in May 2019 but had to return after two days due to a mechanical 
failure.  Second engine of the vessel also failed in June 2019, rendering the vessel 
inoperative. The vessel remained laid up through July 2021. The delay in decision -
making on the part of FSI Headquarters, resulted in avoidable expenditure of 
₹ 122.54 lakh between June 2019 and February 2020 on berthing charges and fuel 
consumption. The repairs were eventually carried out locally. 
(v) Idle expenditure on casual staff and other charges during lay -off 
 period 
Institute engaged casual crew against vacant sanctioned posts during the lay-off period 
of the vessels.  Between 2018 -19 and 2022-2387, Institute incurred an expenditure of 
₹ 322.03 lakh on remuneration of casual crew, including ₹ 179.34 lakh for  MFV 
Matsya Nireekshani, ₹ 104.34 lakh for MFV Yellow Fin and ₹  38.35 lakh for MFV 
Sagarika, during the lay off period of these vessels .  Audit found that although 
multiple vessels remained non-operational for months at a time, floating staff was not 
scaled down to a minimum essential level. Since the vessels were not in active 
operation, the hiring of casual personnel added to unproductive expenditure and 
indicated a lack of adaptive financial controls and workforce management. 
 
85 December 2018, January 2019, September 2019, October 2019, May 2021, June 2021, July 2021, 
January 2022 and February 2022. 
86 January 2019, February 2019, March 2019 and May 2019. 
87 (i) Nireekshani-Laid off period-April 2018 to March 2023 except for October 2018, November 
2018, April 2019, August 2022 and January 2023, (ii) Yellow fin-Laid off period- May 2019 to 
July 2021 and (iii) Sagarika-Laid off period-May 2019 to August 2020. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
80 
The Mormugao base justified (January 2025) these engagements by citing the need for 
crew presence during repairs.  However, it further stated that it had stopped the posting 
of casuals onboard the vessels awaiting dry docking repairs, from July 2023 onwards. 
Reply of the Institute needs to be considered in view of the fact that the Institute had 
not defined any SoP/criteria to ascertain the minimum number of personnel required 
on the vessel during the layoff period and the number of casual personnel should have 
been scaled down to essential number required during this period.  Admission by the 
base that they ha d stopped posting the casual staff on these vessels from July 2023 
onwards, further confirmed the audit observation. 
Additionally, the Mumbai base spent ₹ 63.32 lakh on HSD oil, fresh water, port 
charges, and pilotage fees for MFV Matsya Nireekshani during 2020-21 and 2021-22, 
even though the vessel was not deployed for any fishing survey voyage during those 
years. This expenditure was deemed unfruitful, as it was unable to serve its intended 
purpose of supporting surveys/scientific voyages. 
Collectively, these findings highlight ed a pattern of inefficient financial management 
in vessel operations and maintenance. The Institute’s inability to estimate operational 
needs with accuracy, act promptly on repair decisions, and rationalize staffing based 
on vessel readiness resulted in significant resource wastage. They outline the urgent 
need for improved forecasting, integrated financial planning, and real-time operational 
oversight to ensure that infrastructural investments and recurring expenditur es 
contribute effectively to the Institute’s core objectives. 
Case Study: MFV Matsya Nireekshani 
Deficiencies in the areas of voyages planned vis-a-vis executed, vessel remaining non -
operational due to prolonged repair, incomplete assessment and preparation of repair list 
resulting in cost and time over-run and idle expenditure on casual staff during lay-off, have 
been elucidated below with reference to MFV Matsya Nireekshani: 
➢ Despite an expenditure of ₹ 9.29 crore on dry docking and repair of this vessel during 
November 2017 and March 2020 to April 2022, the vessel completed only five fishing 
survey voyages  out of a planned 51 during the period 2018 -2023 and could achieve 
only 10 per cent of its voyage targets.  
➢ In Annual Reports 2018 -23, the voyages were shown as seven against the actual 
voyages of five. 
➢ The original work order of dry docking repairs of March 2020 was issued at estimated 
cost ₹ 1.73 crore to be completed in 75 days. The repair lists prepared were incomplete 
and key repair items were omitted. The excluded items were later carried out as extra 
works, leading to significant cost and time overruns. The work was completed in 664 
days at cost of ₹ 3.85 crore. 
➢ Work on stability booklet which was not included in the original dry docking repair 
list done by M/s CSL in March 2020, was carried out with a delay of 31 days and cost 
over-run of ₹ 8.24 lakh as additional work. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
81 
➢ The vessel remained idle for four months from January 2019 to March 2019 and 
May 2019 due to non-availability of funds for HSD oil. 
➢ Institute incurred an expenditure of ₹  1.79 crore on casual staff during the lay -off 
period of the vessel between 2018–19 and 2022–23. 
Audit recommends that the Institute should work towards optimal utilisation of the 
available resources at hand and plan accordingly. 
2.8.8.2 Adequacy of Manpower Resources 
Adequate manpower is vital to ensure the effective functioning of the Institute. The 
availability of qualified staff and efficient management of human resources play a key 
role in the timely execution of projects and the delivery of high -quality outcomes. 
Conversely, staff shortages can significantly hinder operational efficiency and affect 
the quality of results. 
The status of staff across various categories within the Institute as o n 31 March 2023 
is provided in Table 2.14. 
Table 2.14: Staff Strength versus Sanctioned Posts (as on 31 March 2023) 
Name of Section/Wing Sanctioned 
Strength 
Person in 
Position Vacancy Vacancy 
per cent 
Scientific (non-floating) 55 34 21 38 
Technical (non-floating) 212 106 106 50 
Floating 273 61 212 78 
Administrative (non-floating) 173 91 82 47 
Total 713 292 421 59 
The table indicates that 59 per cent of the total sanctioned posts were vacant as of 
March 2023.  Vacancies were particularly high in the Floating staff category (78 per 
cent), followed by Technical (50 per cent), Administrative (47 per cent), and Scientific 
(38 per cent) roles. The high number of vacancies across these essential categories had 
negatively impacted the timely execution of projects and the assurance of quality in 
outcomes. 
(i) Shortage of Floating Staff at Mumbai and Mormugao Bases of FSI 
The Mumbai base operates two vessels – MFV Matsya Nireekshani and MFV Matsya 
Vrushti, while the Mormugao base operates MFV Yellow Fin and MFV Sagarika. Each 
base has a sanctioned strength of floating staff required for the operation and 
maintenance of these vessels. The status of floating staff at both bases as of 31 March 
2023 is presented in Table 2.15. 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
82 
Table 2.15: Vacancy position at Mumbai and Mormugao Bases 
Name of Base Sanctioned 
Strength 
Existing 
Strength Vacancy Vacancy Per 
cent 
Mumbai 65 5 60 92.31 
Mormugao 36 8 28 77.77 
The table clearly indicates a severe shortage of floating staff at both locations, with 
Mumbai base facing 92 per cent shortfall and Mormugao base facing 78 per cent 
shortfall.  
Audit observed that casual hands were deployed at both bases to cope with this critical 
gap.  The temporary personnel also included, Chief Engineer responsible for upkeep 
of the vessel and Skipper, responsible for navigating the vessel.  These temporary 
personnel were even engaged in key tasks such as preparing repair lists for dry docking 
activities.  Audit observed that shortage of floating staff ha d adversely impacted the 
key functions of the Institute in terms of preparation of drydocking list of repair s 
(Para No. 2.8.8.1(ii)). 
Maintaining an adequate number of regular floating staff is crucial for conducting 
fishing survey voyages, as these roles require specific technical expertise. The 
persistent non-filling of these vacancies had a detrimental effect on the timeliness, 
efficiency, and technical quality of executing approved survey missions. 
Response from the Institute was awaited. 
(ii) Shortage of Non -Floating Staff at FSI Headquarters, Mumbai Base, 
 and Mormugao Base 
As per the directives issued by the Department of Expenditure (DoE) through Office 
Memorandum dated 12  April 2017, and subsequent reminders on 21  January 2020 
and 03  June 2021, all Ministries and Departments, including their attached and 
subordinate offices, were instructed to take prompt and time -bound action to fill 
existing vacancies. 
However, audit observations revealed significant shortfall in non-floating staff at the 
FSI Headquarters, Mumbai Base, and Mormugao Base. The extent of shortage is 
presented in Table 2.16. 
Table 2.16: Staffing Position of Non-Floating Staff 
Name of Unit Sanctioned 
Strength 
Existing 
Strength Vacancy Vacancy Per 
cent 
FSI, HQ 60 38 22 36.66 
Mumbai base 49 28 21 42.85 
Mormugao base 50 26 24 48.00 
Total 159 92 67 42.14 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
83 
This substantial vacancy rate, averaging 42 per cent across the three units, has had a 
detrimental impact on the effective functioning of key operational areas (Para 
No. 2.8.7.2) and day to day functioning of the Institute. 
In its reply (April 2024), the Institute attributed the staff shortages to several factors, 
including a ban on direct recruitment between 2001 and 2009, delays in receipt of 
amended Recruitment Rules, and the absence of a regular Director General from 
October 2013 to June 2021, which resulted in the stalling of Departmental Promotion 
Committee (DPC) meetings. Additionally, the non-acceptance of job offers by selected 
candidates further contributed to the shortage. The Institute also stated that proposals 
to fill the vacant posts had been forwarded to the Ministry, the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC), and the Employment Exchange. 
Given the impact on core functions, particularly in scientific and technical areas, the 
Institute is urged to proactively pursue recruitment measures to overcome these 
persistent staffing challenges. In a follow -up reply (October 2024), the Institute 
acknowledged the audit observations and assured that necessary compliance would be 
ensured. 
Audit recommends that prompt action may be taken to fill vacancies in both 
technical and non-technical roles to support effective and uninterrupted operations. 
2.8.9 In-effective Dissemination of Data 
The Institute is entrusted with maintaining a comprehensive Data Bank and 
disseminating information related to fishery resources to end users. It also functions as 
a liaison between the State/Union Territories and the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India, with regard to marine fish production 
and associated aspects. The data gathered is periodically re-validated to assess fishery 
resource potential and to provide informed advice on fishery management. 
Effective dissemination of such information is crucial for enhancing the knowledge of 
fishermen, the fishing community, and other stakeholders about the availability of 
resources and suitable harvesting methods using appropriate technologies. A key aim 
of this initiative is to promote the sustainable exploitation of marine resources for the 
benefit of the fishing community, industry, and other end users.  
The collected data is typically shared through various publications, including the 
Resources Information Series (RIS), Meena News, charts, atlases, special publications, 
occasional papers, and bulletins. It is also disseminated via broadcasts on Akashwani 
(All India Radio) and telecasts on Doordarshan to cater to a broad audience of data 
users. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
84 
The RIS and Meena News were scheduled to be released quarterly. However, Audit 
noted that Meena News was not published at all during 2021-22 and 2022-23, and the 
RIS was published irregularly between 2018 -19 and 2022 -23 as tabulated in 
Table 2.17. 
Table 2.17: Quarterly Publication of Reports 
Sl. 
No. Base Station Numbers of RIS published 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
1. Mumbai 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2. Mormugao 3 1 2 3 4 1 
3. Chennai 4 4 4 1 4 4 
4. Vishakhapatnam  3 4 2 4 4 4 
5. Port Blair 0 0 0 0 2 1 
6. Cochin 1 3 1 3 3 4 
7. Porbandar  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Additionally, the Mumbai base did not release any RIS publications during this period. 
Consequently, critical information did not reach end users such as fishermen, fishing 
boat operators, and others engaged in fishing and related activities, hindering the  
efficient exploitation of fish stocks. 
In response (July 2024), the Institute claimed  that it had published reports regularly 
except in exceptional cases like vessel non -operation and disruptions caused by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. It also attributed the delay in Meena News  publication at 
Headquarters to reliance on the Government press. The Institute stated that it was 
exploring the option of using a GeM -enrolled printing press to facilitate timely 
publication. It further mentioned that  dissemination also took place via social media 
platforms like Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook. 
However, the Institute's response is not fully acceptable. Despite the explanations, the 
core issues remained viz. data was not disseminated regularly, undermining efforts in 
the development, management, and conservation of fisheries. Furthermore, the claim 
about using social media for dissemination could not be verified due to the absence of 
details regarding the specific accounts used. 
Audit recommends that a system for timely publication of reports including 
publication on website using accurate data by adopting uniform reporting formats 
may be introduced to promote clarity and transparency. 
2.8.10 Deficiencies in financial management 
There were significant lapses in adherence to the provisions of the General Financial 
Rules (GFR), directives issued by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
85 
and specific conditions attached to project sanctions. These deficiencies in compliance 
had a direct and adverse impact on the Institute’s financial governance. The irregular 
utilisation of allocated funds, incurrence of expenditures which did not  deliver the 
intended outcomes, and the build-up of unavoidable outstanding payments collectively 
point to systemic inefficiencies. Moreover, delays in the disbursement of funds further 
compounded these issues. These financial mismanagement practices had operationa l 
consequences, including prolonged periods when vessels were idle or laid up, 
hampering the Institute’s ability to execute its core responsibilities effectively, as 
elucidated below: 
2.8.10.1 Irregular Expenditures and Sanction Violations 
(i) Irregular Engagement and Compensation of Casual Workers without 
 Sanction 
(a)  DoPT through its Office Memorandum dated 07 June 1988, clearly stipulated 
that casual workers and daily wage earners should not be engaged for work of a regular 
nature. Such appointments were to be limited to tasks that are casual, seasonal, 
intermittent, or of such a nature that they do not justify the crea tion of a regular post. 
Any deviation from these guidelines requires prior approval from both the Ministry of 
Finance and the DoPT. These instructions were reiterated in the Office Memoranda 
dated 13 February 2020 and 04 September 2019, emphasizing strict compliance with 
the provisions for engaging casual staff. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that, in contravention of these guidelines, the Institute 
persistently engaged casual workers from the open market to man vessels in roles such 
as Skipper, Mate, Chief Engineer Grade I/II, Bosun, Oil Man, and Deckhand - positions 
which were regular in nature and should have been filled through sanctioned posts. 
This engagement of casual staff without requisite approvals was deemed irregular. 
From 2018-19 to 2022 -23, the Institute incurred substantial expenditures toward the 
wages of these casual workers - ₹ 4.42 crore at the Mumbai base and ₹ 4.63 crore at 
the Mormugao base, totalling ₹ 9.05 crore. A portion of this expenditure, amounting to 
₹ 4.28 crore, was specifically incurred during the period April 2018 to October 2020 
without obtaining administrative and financial sanction from the competent authori ty, 
as required under Rule 139(iii) of GFR. No evidence of ex-post-facto approval for these 
payments was provided for audit scrutiny, rendering the entire amount of ₹  4.28 crore 
irregular. 
The Mormugao base stated (January 2025) that expenditure details related to casual 
staff for the financial years 2020 -21 and 2021-22 had been submitted to the Institute 
Headquarters for onward transmission to the Ministry. It also referred to a meeting held 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
86 
on 11  November 2020 at the Institute Headquarters with the Chief Controller of 
Accounts (CCA), New Delhi, where it was advised to obtain proper financial and 
administrative approvals for manpower outsourcing. The base (Mormugao) stated that 
approvals were obtained since that meeting (from November 2020 onwards), however, 
no reply was furnished by the Mumbai base . The fact remain ed the same that no 
approval for the period from April 2018 to October 2020  was obtained from the 
Ministry. 
(b)  As per the DoPT OM dated 04 September 2019, casual workers performing 
duties comparable to regular employees may be compensated at 1/30th of the pay at the 
minimum of the relevant pay scale plus dearness allowance for a full day’s work, but 
the payment of messing allowance is not permitted. 
Audit findings revealed that an amount of ₹  92.86 lakh was irregularly paid to casual 
workers onboard vessels as messing allowance, despite no provision for such payments 
under the DoPT guidelines.  Of this, ₹  77.08 lakh was paid by the Mormugao  base 
between 2018-19 and 2022-23, and ₹ 15.78 lakh was paid by the Mumbai base between 
April 2018 and February 2020. Notably, records for the period from March 2020 to 
March 2023 at the Mumbai base were not made available to Audit.  Hence, the total 
expenditure of ₹ 92.86 lakh on messing allowance was irregular. 
The engagement of casual workers for regular duties, payment of wages without proper 
sanction, and irregular grant of messing allowance reflect serious lapses in 
administrative oversight and financial governance. Response from the Institute on the 
audit observations was awaited. 
(ii) Expenditure of ₹  1.05 crore  on Drydocking of Matsya Nireekshani 
 without proper sanction 
The drydocking contract for the vessel Matsya Nireekshani was awarded to Cochin 
Shipyard Ltd (CSL) in February 2020. The work order clearly stipulated that any 
additional tasks identified during the surveyor’s inspection or execution of the original 
repair list would require approval from FSI, Mumbai. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the Mumbai base made final payment of ₹ 3.85 crore for 
dry docking repairs.  This amount included ₹ 1.05 crore for additional work, as quoted 
in CSL’s quotation No. 100705 AC Rev dated 27  July 2020. However, no record of 
approval by the competent authority, for this additional expenditure, was made 
available to Audit.  CSL had also flagged this issue to FSI, yet the payment was made 
regardless. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
87 
Therefore, the payment of ₹  1.05 crore  to CSL was irregular and made without  
approval of the competent authority. 
Reply from the Institute was awaited. 
2.8.11 Procedural lapses in procurement and execution 
2.8.11.1 Non-adherence with Government e -Marketplace (GeM) procurement 
 requirements 
The Government e -Marketplace (GeM ) was established as the National Public 
Procurement Portal under Rule 149 of GFR 2017, mandating all Ministries  and 
Departments to procure common -use goods and services through this platform to 
ensure transparency, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness. 
(i) Despite this clear directive, audit scrutiny revealed that both the Mumbai and 
Mormugao bases of the Institute  procured dry docking services for their vessels  
amounting to ₹  29.86 crore during the financial years 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, without 
utilizing the GeM platform. This direct procurement bypassed the mandatory process, 
constituting a clear violation of Rule 149. 
(ii) Rules 201(ii) of the GFR 2017 provides that when the estimated value of non -
consulting services exceeds ₹ 10 lakh, the procurement must be advertised on both the 
GeM and Central Public Procurement Portal (CPPP).  Further, Rule 204 permits direct 
engagement in exceptional circumstances only when fully justified in writing and 
approved by the Competent Authority in consultation with the Financial Adviser. 
However, Audit found that casual staff services, including onboard vessel personnel, 
security staff, and housekeeping personnel, were engaged by both bases without 
following the procedures laid down in GFR.  Moreover, no formal appointment orders 
were available on record detailing the contractual terms such as eligibility criteria, 
selection process, duration, remuneration, leave entitlements, or termination clauses. 
In its response (January 2025), the Mormugao base stated that suitable staff were not 
available through the open market, outsourcing agencies, or on the GeM platform 
during the relevant period. It  also mentioned that, since both vessels were idle and 
awaiting dry docking repairs, casual onboard staff deployment had b een discontinued 
from July 2023.  The Mumbai base did not furnish the reply. 
However, this justification is not acceptable in view of the fact that the Mumbai base 
had called for bids through GeM (August 2023) and received a very positive response. 
These findings highlighted a systemic disregard for established procurement protocols, 
undermining transparency and financial accountability in service -acquisition. The 
inability to use GeM and to document exceptional circumstances appropriately not only 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
88 
violated statutory rules but also raised concerns about the integrity of the procurement 
process and the efficiency of resource utilization within the Institute. 
Audit recommends that a robust internal control mechanism may be established to 
ensure adherence to relevant DoPT directives and provisions of GFR. 
2.8.11.2 Non-Functioning of the Porbandar Base Station 
The Institute operates four  bases on the West Coast - Cochin, Goa, Mumbai, and 
Porbandar. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the Porbandar base had not been assigned any vessel, and 
consequently, no surveys or operational activities were conducted from this station. As 
per the Institute’s survey plans, the Gujarat coastline was being covered by the Mumbai 
base. Despite its non -operational status, an expenditure of ₹ 60.57 lakh was incurred 
during 2018-19 to 2022-23, primarily towards lease rent and employee-related costs. 
In the Annual Review of Operational and Scientific Activities held on 24 July 2020, a 
committee recommended that the Porbandar base should either be strengthened to 
make it operational or be closed down . The current scenario, where the Institute is 
incurring significant expenses merely to safeguard assets of minimal value, is not 
considered to be in the public interest. However, a final decision on the matter remained 
pending. 
In its replies (July 2024 and October 2024), the Institute stated that the Porbandar base 
had ceased functioning due to several administrative constraints, including inadequate 
staffing and insufficient local logistical support. It confirmed that no activities were 
currently being carried out at the base, with only one Multi -Tasking Staff (MTS) 
assigned to oversee the security of office documents and Government property. The 
Institute also informed the Ministry about the base’s status and, in its later response, 
acknowledged the audit observation and ass ured that necessary compliance actions 
would be undertaken. 
2.8.11.3 Furnishing of incorrect utilization certificates 
The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, through its letter dated 
21 June 2022, granted administrative approval for the implementation of the project 
titled ‘Marine Mammal Stock Assessment in India (MMSAI)’ . The project was to be 
executed by the Institute in collaboration with the ICAR -Central Institute of Fishing 
Technology (ICAR-CIFT) and the Marine Produc ts Export Development Authority -
Network for Fish Quality Management and Sustainable Fishing (MPEDA-NETFISH), 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
89 
under the Central Sector Scheme component of the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY). 
Subsequently, via letter dated 25  July 2022, the Ministry accorded an expenditure 
sanction amounting to ₹  2.07 crore for the financial year 2022 -23. The Institute was 
entrusted with the responsibility of utilizing the sanctioned funds in strict adherence to 
the terms and conditions laid out in the sanction.  Audit noted a case of mis -reporting 
of utilisation certificate, discussed below: 
(i) Misreporting in Utilization Certificate (UC) under MMSAI Scheme 
An examination of the UCs submitted by FSI to the Ministry indicated discrepancies 
in fund usage reporting under the MMSAI scheme. As per the records, the collaborating 
institutions had utilized only ₹ 71.09 lakh out of the ₹ 114 lakh received. The remaining 
balance of ₹ 42.91 lakh was retained as cash in hand or held in bank accounts. 
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the sanctioned order, any unspent 
balance was required to be returned to the Government account. However, the 
collaborating institutes did not comply and instead retained the unutilized funds. 
Despite this, FSI reported the entire ₹ 114 lakh as fully utilized, which constituted an 
irregularity. 
In its response (February 2025), FSI stated that the collaborating agencies maintain 
dedicated project accounts where such balances are held. 
This explanation is not tenable. The retention of ₹  42.91 lakh by the collaborating 
agencies, despite not utilizing it within the sanctioned period, and the inability to 
refund the amount to the Government account is a violation of the financial terms of 
the sanction. Thus, the action of reporting the unspent funds as utilized is irregular. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
in July 2024 and May 2025; its reply was awaited as of August 2025. 
(IV) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 
Government Medical Store Depot, Mumbai 
2.9 Avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹ 1.64 crore towards rent and 
security of unused Godown  
Inability to take timely action to vacate and surrender the unused godown led 
to an avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹  1.64 crore on rent and security 
for the unutilized premises. 
As per Rule 26 (iv) of General Financial Rules 2017, the duties and responsibilities of 
a controlling officer in respect of funds placed at his disposal are to ensure that 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
90 
adequate control mechanism is functioning in his Department for prevention, detection 
of errors and irregularities in the financial proceedings of his subordinate offices and 
to guard against waste and loss of public money. 
The Government Medical Store Depot (GMSD) in Mumbai entered into a warehousing 
contract88 with M/s DVB Warehousing Company in 1957, for a godown89 intended to 
store medical supplies. In May 2012, GMSD raised concerns regarding the 
deteriorating and unsafe condition of the godown, requesting immediate repairs but 
M/s DVB Warehousing declined to undertake the repairs due to financial constraints.  
In August 2017, M/s DVB Warehousing issued a legal notice  requesting for the 
vacation of the warehouse.  The godown was used for the storage of old, damaged 
stores only since 2016-17, by GMSD.  GMSD continued to deploy three security 
guards there till December 2024, though the goods stored in the godown were disposed 
of in December 2021 90. This was despite the fact that in 2017 -18 GMSD had leased 
one godown at the State warehouse in Palghar a nd another godown at CWC, Navi 
Mumbai in 2020-21 for storing medical supplies. 
As a result, there was an avoidable expenditure of ₹ 0.25 crore on rent for the unused 
godown from April 2017 to February 2019, and ₹ 1.39 crore on security staff salaries 
from April 2017 to December 2024 , amounting to a total of ₹  1.64 crore in wasteful 
expenditure. Further, GMSD is liable to pay ₹ 0.79 crore in rent for the period from 
March 2019 to December 2024. 
On being pointed out, GMSD stated (January 2025)  that the Medical store 
Organisation (MSO) in New Delhi decided in January 2025 that the Reay Road 
godown would be surrendered after obtaining legal opinions, statutory clearances from 
Government entities, and settling all dues (rent, taxes, etc.) to avoid future litigation. 
In March 2025, GMSD stated that 
➢ Regarding the expenditure incurred on rent from April 2016 to February 2019, the 
godown remained fully operational until 2021 for the storage of various public 
health commodities such as DDT, milk powder, bleaching power, syringes, cold 
chain equipment, spare parts, etc ., which were utilized during health emergencies 
such as plague, cholera and natural disasters including earthquakes, cyclones across 
India.  
 
88  Warehousing contract was entered into in April 1957 at ₹ 300 per day, with reimbursement for 
any increase in municipal taxes. The ground rent was revised by a Supreme Court judgment in 
January 2004: ₹ 6.33 per sq. mtr (Oct 1982-Mar 1994), ₹ 8.49 per sq. mtr from April 1, 1994, 
with four per cent annual increase thereafter. 
89  At Reay Road with a surface area of 42,000 sqft. 
90  Goods were disposed of for a nominal amount of ₹ 37 lakh. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
91 
➢ DVB had not raised any invoice for the use of the godown 91, consequently, 
therefore the payment obligation of ₹ 0.79 crore did not exist.  
➢ With regard to security expenses, GMSD referred to directions from Kalachauki 
Police Station (December 2023) mandating the deployment of security personnel 
to prevent mishaps or crimes at the site. 
➢ Additionally, GMSD cited a meeting held in June 2024 with CPWD and the 
advisor, MSO, in which a decision was made to demolish the old warehouse and 
construct a new facility. However, the preliminary estimate of ₹ 96.82 crore for the 
new construction was rejected, and subsequent instructions in January 2025 
directed the surrender of the said godown. 
In April 2025, GMSD stated that the godown was fully in use till 2021 and as the Reay 
Road godown was dilapidated, State Godown in Palghar and CWC godown at Navi 
Mumbai were hired in 2017 -18 and 2020-21 respectively. In addition, GMSD stated 
that it plays vital role in pandemic and biological disaster like situations, parting with 
such facility needs to be considered keeping in view of all the relevant factors and 
background of facts to handle the unforeseen biological disasters/situations, which  
took time for taking decision. 
The reply furnished by GMSD is not tenable. The claim that the godown was fully 
functional until 2021 is contradicted by GMSD’s own letter dated 04 January 2022 to 
MSO, New Delhi, informing that the warehouse was unfit for use due to severe 
structural damage (a collapsed roof and overall dangerous condition), and stating that 
the facility had not been in use since 2016-17.  Additionally, while DVB may not have 
issued an invoice for the unpaid rent, GMSD remains contractually bound to fulfil its 
financial obligations as per the tenement agreement.  The delay in the decision 
regarding vacation of the godown led to unnecessar y expenditure of ₹ 1.64 crore on 
wages and security.  Moreover , the State warehouse was operational since 2017 -18 
and CWC godown since 2020-21, hence the citing of a June 2024 meeting for new 
construction by GMSD at site of a rented godown does not stand to reason. 
In conclusion, the unjustified delay in vacating the non-functional godown has resulted 
in avoidable and wasteful expenditure of ₹ 1.64 crore and a liability of ₹ 0.79 crore. 
 
 
 
 
91  The Bombay Port Trust (BPT) had leased the land plot to DVB, which constructed a warehouse 
on that plot. DVB signed a warehousing contract with GMSD in 1957. However, as informed 
by GMSD in its reply (March 2025), BPT had withdrawn DVB’s tenement agreement. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
92 
(V) Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
Central Industrial Security Force 
2.10 Blocking of funds amounting to ₹ 6.53 crore 
Non-adherence by Central Industrial Security Force to the guidelines issued by 
Ministry of Home Affairs for acquisition of land resulted in non -possession of 
land and blocking of funds amounting ₹ 6.53 crore for more than nine years. 
Guidelines issued92 by the Ministry of Home Affairs (Ministry) for acquisition of land 
by Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) 93 stipulates that the suitability of the land 
offered/ identified should be assessed by a Board of Officers (Board) headed by, at 
least, an Inspector General (IG) level Officer and having representation from 
concerned CAPF’s Engineering Wing. The Board is required to ensure that the land is 
free from encumbrance and encroachment, and there is no dispute regarding 
ownership, in order to avoid unnecessary litigation and delays in land acquisition. 
Also, a boundary wall is to be constructed after taking possession of the land. 
In August 2012, Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) requested the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) 94 to allot 48 acres of land to meet the training 
and other infrastructural requirements of the CISF units/personnel deployed for the 
security of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) and Samadhi Sthals . MoHUA 
allotted (February 2016) 25 acres of land 95 at a cost of ₹  6.53 crore to CISF. After 
CISF released (March 2016) ₹  6.53 crore to MoHUA, the land was handed over 
(November 2016) to CISF after taking over the possession of land from Central Public 
Works Department (CPWD). Subsequently, the Ministry sanctioned (February 2020) 
₹ 261.24 crore96 for construction of infrastructure on that land for which CPWD was 
nominated as executing agency. 
In July 2020, CPWD started the work of demarcation of land which was stopped due 
to obstructions by local villagers. CISF/CPWD took up the matter with State 
authorities97 and during a meeting (May 2022) with District Magistrate (DM), 
 
92 March 2009 and June 2015. 
93 CISF, CRPF, NSG, ITBP, Assam Riffles, SSB and BSF under administrative control of 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
94 Then Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). 
95 Kamla Nehru Nagar, Ghaziabad. 
96 ₹ 131.28 crore for non-residential infrastructure (Administrative Block, Mess, Barrack and 20 
bedded hospitals and other relevant infrastructure) and ₹ 129.96 crore for residential 
infrastructure (construction of 610 Staff quarters). 
97 CISF took up the matter with State authorities including DGP UP (IGP range, Meerut and 
meetings with District magistrate and SSP Ghaziabad) to take necessary action against the 
erring persons and provide security to CPWD and maintain law and order on the said piece of 
land so that work can be carried out peacefully and swiftly vide its letters dated December 
2020, May 2021 and August 2021. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
93 
Ghaziabad and representatives of local villagers, it came to the notice of CISF that the 
allotted land is under litigation as the villagers had filed (1992) a case in the High 
Court for enhanced compensation in respect of 957.60 acres of land of which the 
25 acre allotted to CISF is a part. As various meetings with the local villagers did not 
bear any fruit, DM, Ghaziabad advised CPWD/CISF to wait for the disposal/ 
finalisation of the court case. As this would result in delay, on the behest of CISF, 
Ministry took up (August 2022) the matter of allotment of alternate land in National 
Capital Region (NCR) in lieu of said 25 acres. An alternate land measuring 16.53 acres 
in Faridabad, was found suitable by CISF and the process of acquiring the same from 
MoHUA was under way (May 2025). 
Audit observed that: 
a) CISF did not adhere to Ministry’s guidelines on acquisition of land as there is no 
record of assessment of the said land, by a Board of Officers, prior to its 
acquisition.  Such assessment was, inter-alia, meant to ensure that the land was 
free from encumbrance, encroachment and legal dispute regarding ownership of 
the land. 
b) CISF Headquarters had advised (March 2016) its concerned Unit to ensure the 
production of a non-encumbrance certificate98 while taking possession of the land. 
Though the Unit requested (November 2016) MoHUA to provide a non -
encumbrance certificate, however, it was intimated (December 2024 and 
May 2025) to the Audit that non-encumbrance certificate was not available as per 
the records of the Unit.  
c) CISF took possession (November 2016) of the land from MoHUA and CPWD on 
“as is where is basis”. The handing over note mentions that all corners of the land 
demarcated by CPWD have been shown to the allottee (i.e., CISF).  On the other 
hand, Audit noted that CPWD started demarcation of land only in July 2020, 
which was subsequently stopped. Further, there was no record with CISF that 
measurement of land and construction of boundary wall (as per Guidelines) was 
ever undertaken. 
d) It was only in May 2022, after a lapse of nearly six years from allotment, it came 
to the notice of CISF that the land was under litigation since 1992. 
Lack of due diligence and non-adherence to the guidelines for acquisition of land by CISF 
resulted in non-possession of land and blocking of funds amounting to ₹ 6.53 crore. Thus, 
the intended objective of providing necessary infrastructure to CISF personnel remains 
unfulfilled even after lapse of nine years from acquisition of land. 
 
98 A non-encumbrance certificate is a legal document that verifies a property is free of any legal or 
financial liabilities, such as mortgages, loans, or disputes. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
94 
CISF stated (March 2024 & May 2025) that MoHUA in spite of knowing about the 
court case, never intimated the same to CISF and handed over the land by concealing 
the fact. The suitability of land was not assessed by Board of Officers as the decision 
(of allotment of land) was taken during meeting (December 2015) under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Urban Development). The process for 
identifying another suitable land was underway and the amount would be adjusted in 
the cost of the new land. 
Audit acknowledges that non -disclosure of the encumbrance status of the land by 
MoHUA while allotting and handing over the same to CISF may have resulted in its 
non-possession. However, CISF’s position on non -requirement of suitability 
assessment of the said land by a Board is not in spirit of the ibid guidelines. Incurring 
expenditure without due diligence and taking over land without measurement, 
demarcation of boundaries, and securing non-encumbrance certificate indicates weak 
internal controls in CISF’s land acquisition process. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry  of Home Affairs in April 2025; its reply was 
awaited as of August 2025. 
Audit recommends that the guidelines for acquisition of land issued by Ministry of 
Home Affairs should be scrupulously followed to avoid acquisition of land under 
litigation and other types of encumbrances, and consequential delays in use of the 
land for the intended purpose. 
Central Armed Police Forces 
2.11 Non-deduction of Professional Tax by the CAPFs 
Non-compliance to the provisions of Professional Tax Act applicable in States 
(Assam, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Telangana and Tripura) by the 
Central Armed Police Force units resulted in non -deduction of professional   
tax amounting to ₹  26.40 crore from the salary of the employees serving in 
CAPF. 
Article 276 of the Constitution of India stated that: 
Notwithstanding anything in Article 246, no law of the Legislature of a State relating 
to taxes for benefit of the State or of a Municipality, District Board, Local Board, or 
other Local Authority, therein in respect of professions, trades, callings or 
employments shall be invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income.  The total 
amount payable in respect of any one person to the State or to any one municipality, 
district board, local board or other local authority in the State by way of taxes on  
professions, trades, callings and employments shall not exceed two thousand and five 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
95 
hundred rupees per annum.  The power of the Legislature of a State to make laws as 
aforesaid with respect to taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments shall 
not be construed as limiting in any way the power of Parliament to make laws with 
respect to taxes on income accruing from or arising out of professions, trades, callings 
and employments. 
Audit noted that in six states, the Professional Tax Acts 99, provided that the 
professional tax should be deducted by the employer as per the rule and applicable 
rates from the salary of the employees serving in the respective States or Union 
Territory and also required it to be deposited in the exchequer of the r espective State 
Government.   
Audit further noted that the Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) units i.e., Border 
Security Force (BSF), Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), Central Reserve Police 
Force (CRPF), Rapid Action Force (RAF), Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF) did not deduct Professional Tax from the salary of its 
personnel’s serving in the State of Madhya Pradesh, Assam, Tripura, Telangana , 
Punjab and Kerala, wherein Professional Tax was applicable. Thus, there was violation 
of legislative provisions related to respective Acts applicable in the respective States 
and resulted in non - deduction of Professional Tax amounting to ₹  26.40 crore for 
periods ranging from April 2017 to March 2025 (Annexure-2.17). 
On being pointed out, replies of the CAPF’s units to the Audit observations are 
summarized below:  
➢ BSF, ITBP and CRPF units located in Madhya Pradesh stated that the issue had 
already been taken up with the Government of Madhya Pradesh to look into the 
matter and get the Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) personnel’s serving in the 
State of M.P to be exempted from paying Professional Tax. Further, it was also 
stated that till date no intimation with regard to exemption of Professional Tax 
has been received in their office and any outcome on the subject matter from the 
authority concerned would be intimated to Audit. 
➢ CISF units located in Kerala stated that the no notice from the relevant authority 
imposing tax was received. Also stated that the Professional Tax was not 
deducted from the salaries of CISF personnel, however, the same would be 
 
99  Section 3 and 4 of the Madhya Pradesh Professional Tax Act, 1995 ;  Section 245 and 251 (4) 
& (8) of the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994; Section 3 and 9 of the Assam Professions, Trade, 
Callings and Employments Taxation Act, 1947 ; Section 3 and 4 of the Tripura Professions, 
Trade, Callings and Employments Taxation Act, 1997 ; Section 4 and 5 of the Telangana Tax 
on Professions, Trade, Callings and Employments Act, 1987 ; and Section 4(3) of Punjab State 
Development Tax Act, 2018 . 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
96 
deducted from the salaries from the next financial year on the receipt of 
instructions from higher authority. 
➢ BSF units located in Tripura, stated that the Chapter-II of Gazette of India issued 
from Ministry of Law, GoI dated 02 September 1968, which establishes the BSF 
as an armed force of the Union responsible for securing India’s borders. The 
battalion contended that since BSF personnel in Tripura are engaged in national 
security duties, they should be exempt from Professional Tax. 
➢ SSB unit located in Assam stated that the Section 5 (A) of the Assam Professions, 
Trades, Callings and Employment Taxations Act, 1947, which states that the 
provisions of Professional Tax shall not apply to a member of the Armed Forces. 
The reply of SSB is  not acceptable, as the Assam Government’s circular 
(September 2016) clearly stated that the BSF, SSB and other CAPFs personnel 
posted in Assam are paramilitary forces and as there is no exemption given to 
such personnel by way of notification, therefore t hey are liable to pay 
Professional Tax under the Assam Act 1947. 
➢ CRPF units located in Telangana stated that the case was already taken up with 
the State of Telangana and erstwhile Andhra Pradesh to get the CRPF personnel’s 
deployed in the State of Telangana to be exempted from paying Professional Tax. 
They were, however, yet to receive such exemption as of October 2024. 
➢ BSF units located in Punjab stated that the Professional Tax is not being deducted 
and deposited from the BSF personnel, however, the matter regarding deduction 
of development tax the case will be moved to BSF Headquarters to approach to 
the appropriate authorities of Government to exempt BSF troops from such tax. 
The replies/justification provided by the CAPF units are not acceptable, as there are 
legislative provisions related to Professional Tax applicable in the States of Assam, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Telangana and Tripura which mandates payment of 
Professional Tax by the personnel serving in the respective States. There is neither 
exemption in the legislation in respect of the CAPF personnel of the units nor any 
specific instruction issued by the State Governments for exempting the levying of 
Professional Tax, as issued by the Maharashtra and Karnataka State Government.  
The para was issued to the Ministry of Home Affairs in July 2025, its reply was awaited 
as of October 2025. 
Audit recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may undertake a review in all 
CAPFs to ensure that Professional Tax is either being deducted from the salary of 
employees, wherever, there is a provision  or take up the matter of exemption with 
the respective State Governments. 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
97 
 
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), 36 Battalion, Geyzing, Sikkim 
2.12 Excess payment of Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance 
 (SCRLA) of ₹ 3.18 crore 
SSB 36 BN paid Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance (SCRLA) 
to its employees at higher rate in contravention of the provisions of Ministry of 
Finance OM, resulting in excess payment of ₹ 3.18 crore. 
The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure vide Office Memorandum  
(OM)100 dated 29 August 2008 prescribed rates of Special Compensatory 
(Remote Locality) Allowance (SCRLA) for Central Government employees serving 
in different states and Union Territories based on recommendations of 6th Central Pay 
Commission (CPC). The admissible rates of SCRLA were listed under Part A, B, C 
and D of this OM. The rates of this allowance were to increase automatically by 
25 per cent whenever the Dearness Allowance (DA) on revised pay structure went up 
by 50 per cent. 
Further, as per recommendations of 7th Central Pay Commission, the Ministry issued 
separate orders for grant of Special Duty Allowance (SDA) and SCRLA vide OM101 
dated 18 July 2017 and 19 July 2017 respectively for the Central Government 
employees serving in the North Eastern Region and Ladakh. As the Allowance of 
SCRLA was subsumed in Tough Location Allowance (TLA), it was prescribed that 
Tough Location Allowance shall not be admissible along with S DA. However, 
employees were given the option for continuing SCRLA at the old rates of 6 th CPC, 
wherever it was admissible, along with SDA at the revised rate of 10  per cent of 
Basic Pay. 
36 Battalion, Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), Geyzing , Sikkim, a Central Government 
organisation under the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, is 
located in the Northeast Region, i.e., Geyzing, Sikkim 102. Hence, as per the orders 
dated 18 July 2017 and 19 July 2017, the employees of this Battalion are eligible for 
grant of Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance (SCRLA) at old rates 
of 6th CPC along with Special Duty Allowance at revised rate of 10 per cent of Basic 
pay. 
However, scrutiny of pay bill data along with related records for the period from 
March 2019 to February 2024 revealed that the employees of this Battalion were paid 
Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance at rate of ₹ 4,875/- per month for 
 
100 No. 3(1)/2008-E II(B) dated 29 August 2008. 
101 No. 11/1/2017-E II(B) dated 18 July 2017 and No. 3/1/2017-E II(B) dated 19 July 2017. 
102 Areas of Sikkim are included in Part ‘A’ as per Department of Expenditure’ OMs, for grant of 
SCLRA. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
98 
employees in Level -09 and above and at ₹  3,750/- per month for employees in 
Level-08 & below along with SDA at revised rate of 10 per cent of Basic Pay. 
As per para 4.6.5 of the Report of the Committee on Allowances dated 27 April 2017, 
employees of the Battalion were entitled to get SCLRA at old rates of 6 th CPC only 
i.e., ₹ 3900/- per month 103 for Level -9 and above and ₹  3000/- per month 104 for 
Level-08 & below along with SDA at revised rate of 10 per cent of Basic Pay. 
36 Battalion, SSB in its reply (February  2025) stated that they have accepted the 
observation and reduced SCRLA to ₹  3,900/- per month for level-9 and above and 
₹ 3000/- per month for level 08 w. e. f. April 2024. 
Thus, granting of SCRLA at higher rates than the admissible rates led to excess 
payment of ₹ 3.18 crore as detailed in the Annexure-2.18. 
The audit observation was issued to the Ministry of Home Affairs in February 2025; 
its reply was awaited as of August 2025. 
Audit recommends that the Ministry may carry out a comprehensive review of such 
irregular payments and take corrective action. 
(VI) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
2.13 Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes for Students belonging 
to Scheduled Castes 
The Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes for students belonging 
to Scheduled Castes are Centrally Sponsored Schemes being implemented by 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to provide financial support 
to parents of SC students to addr ess social and economic inequalities and to 
promote educational inclusion.  During 2017 -18 to 2023 -24, Government of 
India and States/UTs spent ₹ 5,037.83 crore for awarding scholarship to 181.45 
lakh Pre -Matric students and ₹  47,840.58 crore for 348.09 lakh Post -Matric 
students. 
An audit of the implementation of these scholarship schemes revealed various 
shortcomings and instances of deviations from guidelines in implementation 
such as: 
➢ Delay in disbursal and non -disbursement of scholarships due to 
operational constraints; (Para 2.13.4.1 and 2.13.4.2) 
 
103  As per circular dated 01 September 2008, rate of SCLRA for G.Os=2600+650+650 (25 per 
cent increase as DA crossed 50 per cent on 01 January 2011 and 100 per cent on 01 July 2014). 
104  As per circular dated 01 September 2008, rate of SCLRA for G.Os = 2000+500+500 (25 per 
cent increase as DA crossed 50 per cent on 01 January 2011 and 100 per cent on 01 July 2014). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
99 
➢ Selection of beneficiaries without considering the income and caste 
criteria, payment of scholarship multiple times to beneficiaries, 
scholarships paid to students not enrolled in schools/institutions, etc. 
(Para 2.13.4.3, 2.13.4.4, 2.13.4.5, and 2.13.4.6) 
➢ Excess payment of scholarship to beneficiaries, payment of maintenance 
allowance at higher rate, irregular scholarship benefits to management 
quota students. (Para 2.13.4.9, 2.13.4.10. 2.13.4.11) 
After issue of initial audit observations during the field audit and draft report 
to the Ministry, the Ministry (February 2025) stated that it has taken measures 
to improve the efficiency of implementation of the schemes by using DBT mode 
with Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) effective from 2021 -22 in case 
of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme and from 2022 -23 in case of Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for release of central share, prescribing timelines for 
verification and processing of applications, integration with databases such as 
NSP, PFMS, UIDAI and NPCI to ensure proper checks, etc. 
While the Ministry has acknowledged the audit observations and initiated 
preliminary corrective measures, it remains imperative for the Ministry, given 
its role as the policy owner and nodal implementation agency, to establish a 
robust oversight mechanism to ensure strict adherence to the revised scheme 
guidelines. In addition, sustained and systematic monitoring of the 
performance and compliance of state -level functionaries is essential to ensure 
effective implementation and accountability. 
2.13.1 Introduction 
Article 46 of the Constitution of India enjoins the State to promote educational and 
economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Weaker Sections. This 
entails special care of the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of 
the society, including the Scheduled Castes (SCs). 
The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment (Ministry) implements the Pre-Matric 
and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes with the objective to support parents of SC 
children studying in classes IX and X and to provide financial assistance to the students 
studying at Post-matriculation or Post-Secondary stage, respectively. The scholarships 
cover tuition fees, hostel fees, books and other educational expenses. The salient 
features of the Scheme Guidelines 105 of Pre & Post -Matric Scholarship have been 
given in Annexure-2.19. The schemes being Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the 
Ministry is the nodal agency for the overall policy, planning and coordination of these 
 
105 Audit referred to the scheme guidelines of July 2012, September 2017 and September 2019 for 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, and the scheme guidelines for the years April 2018, December 
2020 for Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
100 
schemes while the implementation of these schemes lies with the States/Union 
Territories (UTs). 
During 2017-18 to 2023 -24, GoI and the states/UTs spent ₹  5,037.83 crore 106 for 
scholarship to 181.45 lakh Pre -Matric students and ₹  47,840.58 crore 107 for 
scholarships to 348.09 lakh Post -Matric students, the details of which are given in 
Annexure-2.20 (A) and (B). 
2.13.2 Audit of Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes 
Audit has been conducted in stages. Initially, relevant scheme data for the years 
2017-18 to 2019-20 was obtained from the Ministry and analysed. The findings of the 
data analysis were shared with the Ministry vide Management Letter (June 2021). 
Subsequently, field audit was conducted to verify red -flagged areas identified during 
data analysis. The field audit covered the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 in 24 States 
and five UTs. Figures available at the level of the  Ministry have been updated till 
2023-24, and incorporated in this report.  
A sample was selected for detailed field audit after factoring findings of data analysis 
and giving weightage of SC population as a size measure in the sample. The sample 
was drawn from 24 States and five UTs 108. For the purpose of auditing Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, 27,461 applications in 1,602 institutes/schools were selected. 
Similarly, 29,680 applications in 1,657 institutes/colleges were examined in audit for 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme. 
Audit focused on areas of planning, financial management and implementation of 
these schemes in accordance with the scheme guidelines and adherence to General 
Financial Rules. Audit scope, methodology and sampling method was shared with the 
Ministry during entry meeting (21 October 2021). Summary of major audit findings 
were discussed with the Ministry in exit meeting held on 27 April 2023. The replies 
from the Ministry and the states/UTs (May 2023, October 2023 and February 2025) 
have been suitably incorporated in the audit observations. 
2.13.3 Measures taken by the Ministry 
The Ministry (February 2025) stated that it has taken measures to improve the 
efficiency of implementation of the schemes as summarised below: 
➢ Central Share is now being released through DBT mode with Aadhaar Payment 
Bridge System (APBS) effective from 2021 -22 in case of Post -Matric 
 
106  The amounts included ₹ 2325.79 crore of as Central Government contribution to the schemes. 
107  The amounts included ₹ 27908.71 crore of Post-Matric as Central Government contribution to 
the schemes. 
108  155 districts under Pre-Matric and 159 districts under Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
101 
Scholarship Scheme and from 2022 -23 in case of Pre -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme. 
➢ Timelines for verification and processing of applications have been incorporated 
in the revised Scheme Guidelines109. 
➢ Central Share under both the Schemes is now released after receiving the finally 
verified State share paid data on the National Scholarship Portal (NSP).  
➢ State Government portals are integrated with databases such as NSP, PFMS, 
UIDAI and NPCI to ensure that proper checks are available for identification of 
eligible beneficiaries. Regular checks in the form of de -duplication etc., are 
performed to ensure that no duplication takes place. 
➢ State Governments/UTs have been advised to integrate with portals such as Digi-
Locker, API Setu to ensure timely document verification. 
Further, states/UTs have also taken corrective measures to streamline the scheme 
implementation processes, development of portals & integration thereof with NSP, 
recovery of irregularly claimed scholarship, etc.  
2.13.4 Audit findings 
During the field audit, records related to both the schemes at test -checked schools, 
institutes, districts, and States/UTs (as detailed in Annexure-2.21) were examined and 
as result, audit came across various irregularities in the implementation of the scheme. 
The major findings along with action taken by the Department concerned on the audit 
observations (wherever available), are presented in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.13.4.1 Delay in disbursement of scholarship 
Since the primary objective of the schemes is to provide financial assistance to the 
students of SC community whose parents may not be able to pay fee for their 
education, it was necessary that the application processing was completed in a time 
bound manner and payment of scholarship made expeditiously within the academic 
year.  
On test check of records, Audit noticed that 10.87 lakh beneficiaries pertaining to 
12 States/UTs110 under Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme were disbursed scholarship 
after the completion of the academic year, with a delay ranging from one to 48 months. 
 
109  The Scheme Guidelines of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme was revised in March 2022 and 
made applicable from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26. In the revised Guidelines, several issues viz. 
timelines for verification of application and disbursement of scholarship, development of State 
Portal, grievance redressal system, monitoring & evaluation, etc., identified during audit have 
been addressed. 
110  Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Puducherry. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
102 
Similarly, 29.88 lakh beneficiaries under Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme were paid 
scholarship with a delay ranging from one to 89 months after the academic year in 
14 States/UTs111. Details have been given in Annexure-2.22 (A) and (B). 
The reasons for the time gap/delay, as stated by the Ministry and the States/UTs are as 
follows:  
➢ The educational calendar and timely availability of budget varies from state to 
state. A common reason for delay in verification and processing of applications 
has been due to non -alignment of academic year with the financial year that led 
to spill-over of cases to the subsequent years.  In addition, the portal opening and 
closing dates vary across different NSP non -boarded states and NSP on-boarded 
States/UTs.   
➢ Defects in applications submitted by the students as well as delay in receipt of 
application at the district offices (Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir).  
➢ Checking of applications and payment of scholarship was a time taking process 
(Gujarat). 
➢ Delay in checking and verification of applications by Administrative Departments 
(Delhi). 
➢ Delay in release of funds to the implementing offices at various levels due to 
non-release of relevant central share by State Finance Department (Maharashtra). 
➢ Non-availability of central assistance (Chandigarh, Jammu & Kashmir). 
Ministry (February 2025) stated that in the last revision of the Scheme Guidelines112, 
specific timelines have been prescribed and States are being requested to adhere to 
them. Further, States/UTs have stated that efforts/measures were being taken for 
timely payment of scholarship to the students. 
However, Audit noted the delays continued even after the corrective measures taken 
by the Ministry. As per the Information provided by the Ministry, only 59 per cent of 
the total sanctioned students for the year 2023 -24 were paid scholarships during that 
year. Similarly, in respect of the Post-Matric Scholarship, only 48.8 per cent the total 
sanctioned students for the year 2023 -24 were paid scholarships during that year 113 
indicating that the time gap/delay persists. Hence, there is a need to devise a 
mechanism to ensure timely disbursement of scholarships. 
 
111  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir.  
112 March 2022 for Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme and March 2021 for Post -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme. 
113  Pre- Matric: During 2023 -24, out of 21,29,540 students sanctioned, only 12,56,506 students 
were paid scholarships.  In respect of Post -Matric, out of 47,38,578 students sanctioned, only 
23,12,760 students were paid scholarships. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
103 
2.13.4.2 Non-disbursal of scholarship to Students  
As per the Schemes Guidelines, State Governments/UT Administrations were required 
to ensure timely and regular disbursal of scholarships to students through Bank/Post 
office accounts. In order to ensure timely and regular, preferably monthly basis, 
disbursal of the scholarship by the State/UT, Ministry too was required to release 
Central assistance in time to the States/UTs and avoid arrear payment in general 
course. 
Audit observed that i n 11 States/UT 114, scholarship of ₹  33.29 crore to 2.52 lakh 
students were not disbursed under Pre -Matric Scholarship Schemes and under Post -
Matric Scholarship Scheme, scholarship amounting to ₹ 54.79 crore was not disbursed 
to 1.06 lakh beneficiaries in nine States/UTs 115. The major reasons for non -disbursal 
of scholarships were attributed to delay in verification of applications on National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP), non -generation of token on NSP, parking of funds in the 
bank accounts of executing Department, non -provisioning of sufficient budget by 
the State Government, non- release State/Central share, transaction failures, i ssues 
faced by staff while using PFMS/ EBT portals, etc.  Details are discussed in  
Annexure-2.23 (A) and (B). 
Audit recommends that the Ministry needs to set up a robust oversight mechanism 
to ensure strict adherence to the revised scheme guidelines. This will enhance 
overall financial management and, in turn, improve the effectiveness of the 
scholarship schemes, in achieving their objectives. 
2.13.4.3  Selection of beneficiaries without scrutiny of income eligibility 
As per Scheme Guidelines, scholarship was to be paid to such students who belong to 
Scheduled Castes category and the income of parents/guardian of the students should 
not exceed ₹  2.50 lakh per annum. Employed parents/guardians should obtain 
consolidated certificate from Revenue Officer for any additional source of income. 
Audit observed that in 2,928 cases of 14 States/UTs116 under Pre-Matric and in 2,707 
cases of 11 States/UTs117 under Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, instances of  parents’ 
income exceeding the eligible criteria viz. ₹ 2.50 lakh per annum, Income Certificates 
 
114  Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur, Odisha, 
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal. 
115  Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Odisha, 
Punjab and West Bengal. 
116  Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Puducherry . 
117  Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Chandigarh, Jammu & Kashmir. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
104 
not issued by the competent authorities, documents related to income not submitted, 
parents being Government Servants  or employees of Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs), parents having higher income as verified from ITR return etc., were noticed.  
Details have been given in Annexure-2.24. 
➢ In reply, in Gujarat, the Department concerned stated (May 2024) that 
recovery of scholarship would be made if the students were found ineligible.  
➢ In Tamil Nadu, the Department concerned stated (August 2022) that 
scholarship had been sanctioned based on the income certificate provided by 
the Revenue Department. However, it will take appropriate action to recover 
the scholarship claimed by providing incorrect certificate.  
➢ In Maharashtra, the Department concerned stated (July 2024) that Pre-Matric 
scholarship disbursed to one student having income exceeding the limit had 
been recovered in January 2023, while in respect of other cases where 
scholarship was disbursed without income certificate or invalid income 
certificate, Block Level Education Officers/ Taluka Mulshis are taking action 
to verify the income certificates. With respect to Post -Matric Scholarship, the 
Department informed (January 2023) that the issue would be checked.  
➢ In Uttar Pradesh, the Department concerned stated (May  2024) that reports 
have been sought from the concerned districts. It also stated that currently 
income and caste matching were being done through e-district portal. 
2.13.4.4  Selection of beneficiaries without scrutiny of caste criteria 
Audit observed that in 6,089 cases of eight States/UTs under Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme and 190 cases pertaining to six states/UTs of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, 
either the requisite caste certificates were not submitted/attached or scholarships were 
disbursed to non -SC category students without verifying the caste certificates.  The 
following table has the details in Table 2.18. 
Table 2.18: Deficiencies noticed in Caste Certificates 
State 
No of 
cases 
(Pre-
Matric) 
No of 
cases 
(Post-
Matric) 
Audit Observation and Remarks/Reply of 
the State 
Bihar 29 49 The cases related to non -SC students being 
granted scholarships. The Department 
concerned stated that report will be sought 
from the concerned district authorities.  
Gujarat 445 05 Audit found that the certificates were not found 
attached with the applications. The Department 
concerned informed (May 2024) that the 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
105 
State 
No of 
cases 
(Pre-
Matric) 
No of 
cases 
(Post-
Matric) 
Audit Observation and Remarks/Reply of 
the State 
applications would be reviewed, and recovery 
of scholarship would be made if the students 
were found ineligible. Furthermore, with effect 
from 2021 -22, uploading of caste certificate 
along with the scholarship application has been 
made mandatory.  
Himachal 
Pradesh 
03 -- Audit found that the caste certificates were not 
found attached with the applications. The 
Department stated that the students have been 
asked to supply the caste certificates. 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
5461 -- Audit found that in case of 5,452 students, 
payment of ₹  1.26 cr ore was made without 
obtaining requisite documents for 
caste/income, and in case of 9 cases, students 
belonging to General and OBC category were 
paid ₹  0.21 lakh. The Department  concerned 
stated that it sanctioned scholarships to the 
students on the basis of list forwarded and 
recommended by the concerned Zonal 
Education Officers/ Chief Education Officers 
without stressing for Income Certificates/Caste 
Certificates as it is difficult to get the  required 
certificated issued from the concerned 
Tehsildars. 
Kerala 34 -- Audit found that caste certificates were not 
attached to the applications. The Department 
stated (May 2024) that beneficiaries are now 
being selected after verifying income 
certificate and caste certificates, and they are 
being validated through Aadhaar 
authentication. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
-- 41 The cases related to payment of scholarships to 
students belonging to other than SC categories. 
Maharashtr
a 
03 -- The cases related to payment to students 
belonging to non -SC category. The State 
Government informed (July 2024) that the 
school has deposited the amount paid to 
ineligible students. 
Odisha 29 29 Audit found that required documents were not 
attached to the students’ applications.  
Punjab 85 -- The required documents were not attached. The 
State Government stated that instructions have 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
106 
State 
No of 
cases 
(Pre-
Matric) 
No of 
cases 
(Post-
Matric) 
Audit Observation and Remarks/Reply of 
the State 
been issued to all the District Education 
Officers to take care of the audit objection in 
future. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
-- 64 In 60 cases 118, a single caste certificate was 
used by two or more applicants for availing 
scholarships. Four students used another 
person's caste certificate.  The Department 
stated (May 2024) that reports have been 
sought from the concerned districts, and, 
currently, income and caste matching are done 
through e-district portal. 
Chandigarh -- 02 Caste Certificates were not issued by 
competent authorities. The UT stated (May 
2024) that in future, requisite certificate signed 
by the competent authority will be considered 
for availing of the benefit under this scheme. 
Total 6,089 190  
The State Governments also informed that they have now been using online portals119 
for the implementation of scholarship schemes, which would eliminate the lacunae 
noticed in offline implementation. These portals would integrate income certificates, 
caste certificates, board results, caste validity etc. 
The Ministry stated (February 2025) that instructions had been issued to the State 
Governments/UTs to ensure integration of their portals with AISHE/UDISE 120  to 
ensure appropriate verifications instantaneously. Further, in several meetings of 
Ministry of Electronics & IT, DBT Mission, State Governments/UTs have been advised 
to bring integration with portals such as DigiLocker, API setu to ensure seamless 
verification of documents of beneficiaries in a time bound manner. The central share 
is disbursed through DBT through Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS). This has 
resulted in weeding out ineligible/dummy/incomplete forms of beneficiaries over the 
years. The protocols as prescribed by PFMS, NSP, NPCI, etc., are being followed by 
the State Governments/UTs in the implementation of the scheme guidelines. Due to 
online processes, the systems have stabilized over the years and the number of dummy 
applications/incomplete applications has been controlled. 
 
118  Ambedkar Nagar, Barabanki, Jaunpur and Meerut. 
119  Maharashtra: Unified Maha DBT portal; Punjab: NSP; Tamil Nadu: Unified Scholarship 
Portal, West Bengal: Aadhaar based e-KYC system, Jammu & Kashmir: NSP. 
120  AISHE: All India Survey on Higher Education); UDISE: Unified District Information System 
for Educations. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
107 
While the Ministry's efforts are commendable, strengthening verification mechanisms 
through regular inspections and evaluations is essential to identify and rectify 
discrepancies. 
2.13.4.5 Beneficiaries availed scholarship multiple times 
It was observed that 8,562 beneficiaries pertaining to six States/UTs 121 under 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme and 5,347 beneficiaries pertaining to nine 
States/UT122 under Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme availed scholarship benefit of 
₹ 203.28 lakh and ₹  586.94 lakh respectively, within the scheme or other schemes 
multiple times in violation of the Scheme Guidelines. These multiple scholarships 
claims fell in the categories of (i) multiple claims within the same scheme, (ii) claims 
under multiple central schemes and (iii) claims made under both Central and State 
Government schemes. Details are given in Annexure-2.25 (A) and (B). 
Ministry replied (February 2025) that an ecosystem has been evolved by National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP) in conjunction with PFMS, DBT Mission, NPCI, UIDAI for 
technical integration of all scholarship databases. The processes have been stabilized 
in such a way that there is end-to-end automatic transmission of information. Regular 
checks/ de-duplication are performed to ensure that no duplication takes place. 
2.13.4.6 Payments made to students not enrolled in schools/institutions 
Audit observed that in 71 beneficiaries of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme were paid 
scholarships of ₹  1.88 lakh and 4,396 beneficiaries of Post -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme, scholarships of ₹  29.98 crore were disbursed to students who were not 
enrolled in schools/institutions. Details are as given in Table 2.19. 
Table 2.19:  Payments made to students not enrolled in schools/institutions 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Students 
Amount 
involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Remarks 
Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Assam 17 1.06  Students did not belong to the schools/institutions, 
as informed/confirmed from the school authorities. 
State Government stated that an enquiry was 
conducted and the students have been asked to 
refund the amount.  
 
121  Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, and Jammu & Kashmir.  
122  Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha, Puducherry, Rajasthan, 
Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
108 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Students 
Amount 
involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Remarks 
Bihar 51 0.74 Beneficiaries who were not enrolled in 11 
schools/institutions in six districts were paid 
scholarships. 
Odisha 03 0.08 In Angul District, check of records of Panchayat 
High School Badasada revealed that three students 
who were not on the rolls of the school were paid 
scholarship. 
Total 71 1.88  
Post-Matric Scholarship 
Bihar 29 2.02 Check of records in six institutes of five districts 
revealed that 29 students who were not enrolled in 
the institutions were paid scholarships. However, 
the institution as well as the District Nodal Office 
verified/approved these applications without due 
diligence. 
Haryana 1690 1380.00  Name and Aadhaar number of beneficiaries in the 
records of the Department concerned did not match 
with the beneficiaries’ name and Aadhaar number 
in the bank payment records.  
759 - Payments of scholarship were  made to students 
whose Aadhaar numbers were not matching with 
the beneficiaries’ Aadhaar number.  
170 199.00  In DWO, Fatehabad, payment s were made to 
students of an University in Amroha, Uttar Pradesh 
in respect of Veterinary and Livestock Development 
Assistant course, without verifying  the availability 
of such course at the University.  On checking with 
the University, the Registrar of the University stated 
to the Audit (July 2022) that no such students were 
registered with the University. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
50 28.12  Payments were made to beneficiaries who were 
ineligible due to non -continuance of course, 
submitting forged mark sheets, and re -claiming 
already passed course, etc. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
20 38.77 While making the payment of scholarship during 
July 2016 and August 2020, the list of payees 
attached with bills for payment of scholarship 
amount was fudged by the concerned officials of the 
office of Assistance Commissioner, Tribal Welfare 
(ACTW), Bhopal by increasing the total number of 
students and correspondingly increasing the total 
payable scholarship amount. Subsequently, in the e-
payment list uploaded on Integrated Financial 
Management and Information System (IFMIS), 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
109 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Students 
Amount 
involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Remarks 
new/imaginary names with corresponding amounts 
and other details were added.   
The State Government informed (September 2024) 
that ₹ 38.77 lakh has been recovered and deposited 
in Government Account and First Information 
Report (FIR) has been registered against the 
concerned officials. 
Odisha 1,007 1100.25  In Angul and Ganjam  districts, there were two 123 
cases where payment of scholarship to students who 
were not even enrolled with the institute, was made.  
Further, in Angul, Jajpur and Khurdha districts, 990 
beneficiaries were paid scholarship of ₹ 10.98 crore 
using 477 bank account numbers. The same bank 
account was being used by more than one 
beneficiaries. But the beneficiaries’ names varied 
across the years and payment was made to the same 
bank account despite the beneficiaries reported as 
belonging to same or different institutes. Physical 
verification of one bank account 124 of Jajpur 
district was done and it was found that the account 
holder was one particular student, but the payments 
of ₹ 1.20 lakh was made to two different students.  
In an Institute of Industrial Training in Jajpur 
district, as against five students registered for the 
ITI course during 2020 -21, 20 students were paid 
scholarships for the year. Thus, there was irregular 
payment of ₹ 2.25 lakh to 15 beneficiaries who 
were claimed to have been students.   
Telangana 11 1.10 Scholarships were transferred to the bank accounts 
that were not in the name of beneficiaries.  This was 
done by altering bank account numbers and names, 
Aadhaar details etc. In two cases, the bank account 
was operated in the name of the Institution.  The 
State Government informed (May 2024) that the 
issue has been inquired and the College 
Management had remitted the amount of ₹  99,600 
in respect of nine students. 
West 
Bengal 
660 248.87 (i) 83 beneficiaries pertaining to two institutions 
were paid scholarship of ₹  14.87 lakh, however, 
 
123 Basanta Ku Benera of Science degree college, Hinjiliput, Ganjam district and Dukhbandhu 
Naik of Winners’ College of Management, Angul. 
124  Bank Account No.50100083270717 and IFSC Code: HDFC0000706, HDFC Chorda Branch, 
Jajpur. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
110 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Students 
Amount 
involved 
(₹ in lakh) 
Remarks 
scrutiny of the institutes’ records revealed that the 
students were not enrolled in the institutions, as also 
confirmed by the institute authorities.  The 
concerned District Authority informed (May 2022) 
that notices have been issued to the concerned 
institutions. 
(ii) During 2017 -18 to 2020 -21, Post -Matric 
scholarship was given to students for B.Tech  and 
BE (IT) Engineering degree courses although they 
were shown studying in institutions which were not 
offering such courses.  This resulted in inadmissible 
award of scholarship to 577 beneficiaries involving 
₹ 2.34 crore pertaining to 135 Institutions.   The 
State Government stated (June 2024) that suitable 
steps have been taken by the concerned Project 
Officers. 
Total 4,396 2998.13  
2.13.4.7 Scholarship disbursed to students of non -recognized institutes under 
 Post Matric Scholarship Scheme 
As per the Scheme Guidelines, scholarships will be given for study of all recognized 
Post-Matriculation or Post -Secondary Courses (Intermediate/Senior Secondary, 
Diploma, Graduate, Post Graduates Courses, etc.) pursued in recognized Institutes, 
Universities and College having AISHE/ UDISE code.  
Test-check during field audit revealed a few instances of disbursement of Post-Matric 
scholarship to the students belonging to non -recognized institutes/colleges, as 
indicated in Table 2.20. 
Table 2.20: Scholarship disbursed to students of non-recognized Institutes 
State Institute concerned No. of 
beneficiaries 
Scholarship 
amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Nature of 
deficiency in the 
Institution 
Haryana Shri Bhagat Singh College of 
Education for Women, Radaur 
04 1.90 No AISHE code 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
NIELIT Centre, Chamba 164 50.15 Non-recognized 
institute 
Jharkhand Satyanand Bhokta Inter 
College, Unta 
03 0.24 Blacklisted 
institute 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Narsing Dev Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Udhampur 
17 2.87 No AISHE code 
Maharashtra Akola College of Journalism & 
Social Work, Akola 
27 2.87 Students 
belonged to non-
affiliated courses  
Total 215 58.03  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
111 
2.13.4.8 Short payment of scholarship to beneficiaries 
Audit observed that short payment of scholarship aggregating ₹  7.62 crore was made 
to 3.95 lakh beneficiaries of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme at lesser rates in four 
States/UT and short payment of ₹  17.76 lakh to 377 beneficiaries under Post -Matric 
Scheme in two States were made as detailed in Annexure-2.26. 
2.13.4.9 Excess payment of scholarship to beneficiaries 
The Pre-Matric Scholarship amounting to ₹  2.78 lakh was disbursed to 224 
beneficiaries of two States in excess of the admissible rates.  Similarly, under 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, excess payment of ₹  19.98 crore was made to 
1.30 lakh beneficiaries of eight States. Details have been given in Annexure-2.27. 
Case Studies 
Haryana: Department of Medical Education and Research (DMER) fixed fee for General 
Nursing and Midwifery (GNM) and Auxiliary Nursing Midwifery (ANM) courses at ₹ 0.63 
lakh for first year and ₹  0.46 lakh for second and third year (July 2013). However, Audit 
noted that no system was evolved to restrict the fee in the second and third years as fixed 
by DMER, and as a result, an excess payment of ₹ 46.72 lakh was made to 334 students of 
these courses of different Institutes of Fatehabad District during 2015-18.  
Jharkhand: An analysis of e -Kalyan database of Post -Matric Scholarship for the period 
2017-18 to 2019-20 showed that scholarship of ₹ 1.02 crore was paid to 2,486 students in 
excess of fee prescribed by the State Government. The irregularity was verified during field 
audit, wherein 20 cases in seven institutes in four test -checked districts received excess 
scholarship amounting to ₹ 0.37 lakh. 
Odisha:  An analysis of the PRERANA and OSSP database of Post -Matric Scholarship, 
and payment details submitted by the Departments and DWOs in test checked districts 
revealed that 339 students of 25 sampled institutes left their courses midway during 2017-
21 wit hout completing their course. However, these students were paid scholarship 
aggregating ₹ 1.42 crore even after discontinuing of courses. 
2.13.4.10 Disbursement of maintenance allowance at higher rates to day scholars 
 (Post-Matric Scholarship) 
As per the scheme guidelines of Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme, the value of 
scholarship, including maintenance allowance, is higher for hostellers when compared 
to the day scholars.  
Test check revealed that  in six States/UT maintenance allowance was paid at higher 
rate, on account of day scholars being paid at rates for hostellers, payment of 12 months 
instead of 10 months, payments made to students at rates for hostellers despite 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
112 
unavailability of hostels, etc.  This resulted in excess payment of ₹  8.00 crore to 1.66 
lakh beneficiaries, as detailed in Annexure-2.28. 
2.13.4.11 Irregular scholarship benefits to management quota students (Post -
Matric Scholarship) 
As per Scheme Guidelines 2018, the fees claimed against management quota seats, 
spot admission seat in any Institution/University will not be reimbursed. 
Test check during field audit revealed the following instances of extending scholarship 
benefits to SC students getting admission under management quota: 
➢ Gujarat: One management quota student of an Ayurvedic College at Rajkot 
during the academic year 2018-19 was paid scholarship of ₹ 8.79 lakh. 
➢ Himachal Pradesh: The Department reimbursed fee of ₹ 2.89 lakh under the 
management quota for two beneficiaries of Himalayan Institute of Nursing, 
Ambala, Haryana.  Further, during 2018 -20 Himalayan Nursing School 
claimed and got reimbursement of scholarship fees in respect of nine 
beneficiaries of General Nursing and Midwifery (GNM) course selected under 
management quota seats aggregating ₹ 5.60 lakh. 
The above cited cases highlight the irregularities in implementation of the schemes on 
account of deficient control environments and as a result, the performance of the 
schemes are sub-optimal, depriving the genuine beneficiaries. 
Audit recommends that the Ministry may request the states/UTs to establish a 
systematic monitoring  of state -level functionaries to ensure effective 
implementation and accountability. It may also put in use digital verification 
systems to cross-verify student data with educational institutions and income/caste 
certificates. Further, the Ministry may address the irregularities pointed out in the 
Audit and ensure accountability. 
(VII) Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
2.14 Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes for Students belonging 
to Scheduled Tribes 
Pre-Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship schemes for students belonging to 
Scheduled Tribes are Centrally Sponsored Schemes implemented by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, aimed at providing financial assistance to 
low-income families to support their children's education. During the period 
2017-2024, the Ministry spent ₹  2,354.51 crore for awarding scholarship to 
87.10 lakh Pre -Matric students and ₹  13,695.74 crore to 151.66 lakh Post -
Matric students belonging to Scheduled Tribes. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
113 
An audit of the operations of these scholarship schemes taken up for the period 
2017–2021 revealed several systemic weaknesses in implementation. These 
included absence of defined timelines for processing of students’ applications, 
lack of defined role pre scribed for the nodal officers at institutes, district and 
states, ambiguities in scheme guidelines relating to the funding pattern, a lack 
of structured mechanisms for the release of Central Assistance, and deficiencies 
in monitoring and grievance redressal. 
Following the communication of initial audit observations during November 
2021 to March 2022, the Ministry revised the scheme guidelines to incorporate 
specific provisions aimed at mitigating the risks identified during the audit. 
These were: roles prescribed for stakeholders, defined timelines for processing 
of applications, defined procedures for claiming and release of central 
assistance, monitoring and grievance redressal. The Ministry has also 
communicated the audit recommendations to all implementing States and 
Union Territories, directing them to ensure compliance accordingly. 
The remedial actions proposed by the Ministry to improve the efficiency of 
disbursement of scholarships are noteworthy. However, certain issues remain 
unresolved and continue to warrant further attention.  
This para discusses the key audit concerns identified, and the actions taken by 
the Ministry and the States/UTs in response to these concerns, and the residual 
matters requiring further action, which are as follows:  
(i) Planning and Financial Management:  
➢ Ministry is yet to revise annual parental income ceiling to reflect inflation, 
resulting in a potential mismatch between eligibility criteria and current 
economic trends under Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme (Para 2.14.3.1). 
➢ While the schemes are intended to provide timely, regular, and preferably 
monthly financial support to low -income students, audit findings revealed 
instances of delayed disbursements and scholarships being released as 
arrears. The problem continued despite  the implementation of the Single 
Nodal Account (SNA) mechanism, which had been proposed by the 
Ministry as a remedial measure (Para 2.14.3.2). 
➢ Funds released for the implementation of the schemes remained unutilized 
for extended periods due to operational shortcomings, such as unrealistic 
initial demand projections by States, poor inter-departmental coordination 
at the state level, implementation  challenges, and the Ministry’s inability  
to effectively identify and address these issues. Audit also noticed case 
where the interest earned on scheme funds was not remitted into 
Consolidated Fund of India. (Para 2.14.3.3). 
(ii) Implementation Issues: Audit also came across several instances where 
scholarships were disbursed to ineligible beneficiaries or calculated 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
114 
incorrectly, primarily due to inadequate scrutiny by field -level 
functionaries. Some of the key irregularities included: 
➢ Award of scholarships to students whose parental income exceeded the 
prescribed threshold limit. (Para 2.14.4.1); 
➢ Selection of students without valid income certificates (Para 2.14.4.2); 
➢ Acceptance of applications with inconsistencies in Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
certificates (Para 2.14.4.3); 
➢ Granting of benefits multiple times for the same class/ course (Para 
2.14.4.4); 
➢ Disbursement of scholarships at the hosteller’s rate to day scholars and 
vice versa (Para 2.14.4.5); 
➢ Payment of fees at rates differing from the approved fee structure under 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme (Para 2.14.4.6); 
➢ Incorrect computation of Maintenance Allowance under the Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme (Para 2.14.4.7). 
Although the Ministry has acknowledged the audit observations and initiated 
preliminary corrective measures, it remains imperative for the Ministry  given 
its role as the policy owner and nodal implementation agency  to establish a 
robust oversight mechanism to ensure strict adherence to the revised scheme 
guidelines. In addition, sustained and systematic monitoring of the performance 
and compliance of state -level functionaries is essential to ensure effective 
implementation and accountability. 
2.14.1 Background 
The Pre -Matric and Post -Matric Scholarship Schemes for students belonging to 
Scheduled Tribes (ST) are Centrally Sponsored Schemes implemented by Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs (hereinafter referred to as Ministry) to grant scholarship to eligible ST 
students.  These schemes primarily function with the objective of supporting students 
belonging to Scheduled Tribes  to provide them with better chance of progressing in 
education. 
The expenditure on the Schemes is shared between the Central Government and the 
State Governments/UTs 125.  The broad framework for implementation of these 
schemes at State level are provided in the implementation guidelines 126 issued by the 
Ministry.  Salient features of these guidelines are given in Annexure-2.29. 
 
125  In the ratio of 75:25 between Centre and States/UTs with legislature, 90:10 for the North-
Eastern States and Hilly States it is shared in 100 per cent Central Grant for UTs without 
legislature. 
126  Scheme implementation guidelines were issued in 2012 for Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme 
and in 2010 for Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme. The revised guidelines of the Ministry for 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme was effective for the period 2021 -26 and for the  Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme was effective from 01-04-2022. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
115 
The Ministry oversees the implementation of these Schemes and various State 
Departments such as Social Welfare, Tribal Welfare and Education Department at the 
State level are responsible for implementation of the Schemes. 
2.14.2 Audit of Pre-Matric and Post-Matric scholarship schemes 
During the period 2017-24, Government of India spent ₹ 2,354.51 crore for awarding 
scholarship to 87.10 lakh Pre -Matric students and ₹  13,695.74 crore for awarding 
scholarship to 151.66  lakh Post -Matric students belonging to Scheduled Tribes 
(Detailed in Annexure-2.30). The Audit of the Schemes was taken up to assess the 
performance of the Schemes and focussed on the areas of planning, financial 
management, and implementation of these schemes. 
To identify scheme implementation risks, relevant Scheme data for the years 2017-18 
to 2019-20 obtained from the Ministry and all implementing States/UTs was analysed 
and red -flagged areas emerging from this were shared with the Ministry vide 
Management Letter (July 2021).  Sample127 for field audit was drawn after duly 
factoring red-flagged areas identified during data analysis (State-wide sampling details 
are given in Annexure-2.31). Audit scope, Audit methodology and sampling 
methodology was shared with the Ministry during Entry Conference held on 
26 October 2021.  Major audit findings were discussed with the Ministry during the 
Exit Conference held on 09 May 2023.  Financial and performance data, and the status 
of action taken on the audit observations has been updated till 2023 -24, to the extent 
possible. 
The audit findings along with Ministry’s reply (March 2025) and action taken by the 
concerned states on the audit observations, wherever available, are detailed in 
succeeding paragraphs. Also, the major amendments made in the revised guidelines 
vis-à-vis the earlier guideline are mapped in Annexure-2.32. 
Audit Findings 
2.14.3 Shortcomings in Planning and Financial Management 
During test -check of records, Audit came across several issues in planning and 
financial aspects, such as non -revision of annual parental income ceiling, delay in 
release of funds, underutilization of funds, and non-compliance with guidelines, which 
hindered the smooth running of the schemes, as discussed below: 
 
127 Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme (sample of 26,529 applications in 1,419 institutes was drawn 
from 143 districts in 24 States and five UTs). For Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme (sample of 
30,867 applications in 1,522 institutes was drawn from 152 districts in 25 States and five UTs). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
116 
2.14.3.1 Non-revision of annual parental income ceiling under Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme 
The ceiling on annual parental income for eligibility under Post -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme was revised from ₹ 2.00 lakh to ₹ 2.50 lakh (w.e.f. the academic session 2013-
14, to be effective from 01  April 2013).  Revision order inter-alia envisaged that 
income ceiling should be revised once in every two years by linking it with the 
Consumer Price Index for industrial workers (CPI – IW). 
Audit noted that the annual parental income ceiling was not revised after April 2013. 
Analysis of CPI – IW index revealed that value of CPI – IW index was 226 as on 
01.04.2013, (effective date for last revision) which increased to 338 on August 2020 
(as per base year 2001 = 100), i.e., about 50 per cent increase.  Though the effect of 
inflation on eligibility criteria was recognized by the Ministry, action to timely revise 
the income ceiling was not taken. 
The Ministry stated (May, 2023) that group of Ministers has been constituted to 
examine the matter for the rationalization of Schemes and income limits under 
Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes. 
However, the revision in income limits is yet to be made, as of March 2025. 
2.14.3.2 Delay in release of funds 
As per Para 16.2 of the Pre -Matric Scheme guideline, States are expected to ensure 
timely and regular, preferably on a monthly basis, disbursal of scholarship to students. 
Pending release of Central assistance, the scholarship would be expected to be paid 
out of the State budget, against which reimbursement could be claimed.  In order to 
ensure this by the States/UTs, Ministry too was required to release Central assistance 
in a timely manner and avoid arrears payment. 
However, an analysis of sanction orders issued by the Ministry revealed that during 
2017-21, a significant portion of year -wise funds released under Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme (49 -97 per cent, averaging 73 per cent) and under Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme (59-70 per cent, averaging 66 per cent) comprised of arrears from 
previous years as detailed in Annexure-2.33. 
In response, the Ministry stated (April/May, 2023) that a new procedure of release of 
funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes through Single Nodal Account (SNA) is 
now being followed128 as per instructions of Department of Expenditure (DoE) which 
enables  monitoring of the fund released. However, during a check of the compliance 
 
128  Since April 2022. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
117 
of the above response, it was seen that the arrears continued to be 57 per cent in case 
of Pre-Matric Scheme 61 per cent in case of Post-Matric Scheme of the funds released 
during the year 2023-24. 
2.14.3.3 Unutilised Funds and non -remission of interest earned on Grant into 
CFI 
GFR provisions related to grants-in-aid for Centrally Sponsored Schemes require that 
before releasing funds, Ministry should ensure that the State have the capacity to 
actually spend the balance from the previous years and the releases during the current 
year. 
Besides, all interests or other earnings on grants -in-aid or advances (other than 
reimbursement) released to any grantee institution should be mandatorily remitted to 
the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) immediately after finalization of the accounts129. 
Such advances should not be allowed to be adjusted against future releases. 
Audit came across instances of funds remaining unutilised for long periods due to 
various operational reasons viz. mis-assessment of Ministry about funds utilisation 
capacity of States/UTs while making releases, lack of co -ordination between State 
Departments, inability to release funds due to procedural delays.  There were also 
instances of non-remission of interest earned into CFI on grants-in-aid and funds lying 
unutilised for long periods with implementing the Departments/agencies, as detailed 
in the succeeding paragraphs: 
(i) Andaman & Nicobar Islands: Out of ₹ 12.33 lakh received in August 2020 for 
the Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme, ₹  8.37 lakh remained unspent and was 
utilised only in January 2022, after a delay of 18 months. The implementing 
authorities attributed the delay to inability to link or on boarding the PFMS 
(Public Financial Management System) software. 
During the period 01 February 2021 to 30 April 2022, ₹ 0.34 lakh was earned as 
interest. The Department concerned stated (May 2024) that the interest has been 
deposited in the Government Account.  
Similarly, Audit noted that ₹ 13.29 lakh received in August 2020 for Post-Matric 
scholarship scheme was lying in the bank account till January 2022 as the funds 
could not be disbursed due to inability of the Department concerned to integrate 
NSP with PFMS. 
 
129 Rule 230 (8) of GFR 2017. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
118 
Additionally, interest earnings amounting to ₹  0.35 lakh accrued during the 
period from 25  March 2021 to 30  April 2022 were not deposited into the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). Upon being pointed out, the Department 
concerned stated (May 2024) that the interest amount has since been deposited 
into the Government Account. 
(ii) Arunachal Pradesh: Audit noted that ₹ 2.18 crore released in October 2013 for 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme remained unutilised for a long period, due to 
lack of oversight and coordination within the State Departments. As of 
June 2021, the State had an unutilized balance of ₹ 1.17 crore. 
On being pointed out, the Ministry stated (August 2022) that they are constantly 
trying to improve the implementation of Scheme by regular follow -up with the 
State. 
Further, it was observed that ₹  0.94 lakh accrued as interest from unspent fund 
during March 2021 to June 2022, was lying in the scheme account and was not 
remitted to the CFI . The Department concerned in its reply (August 2022) 
assured to deposit the money into the CFI. 
(iii) Assam: Out of ₹  3.21 crore released in March 2017 for the year 2016 -17 for 
Pre-Matric scholarship scheme, ₹  2.03 crore was spent during 2017 -18, no 
expenditure was incurred during 2018-19 due to problems faced in migration to 
online payment through NSP. This resulted in the balance of ₹  1.18 crore 
remaining unutilized for 24 months. Since the unspent balance was drawn from 
the treasury and kept in State nodal account, interest  was not earned on central 
assistance/unspent fund. 
Bihar: Audit observed that SC and ST welfare Department of Bihar received ₹ 71.31 crore 
as Central Assistance during the year 2019-20 for Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for ST 
beneficiaries. However, it released ₹  7.05 crore for 2019 -20, ₹ 8.05 crore for 2020 -21 to 
the implementing Department i.e., Education Department and ₹  56.21 crore remained 
unutilized. 
On this being pointed out, the Department stated (December 2022) that ₹  48.16 crore has 
been deposited in CFI after releasing ₹  8.05 crore for 2021 -22. This shows that initial 
demand was based on unrealistic projections resulting in funds remaining idle for long. 
Further, it was observed that Education Department was having a single account  for 
Pre-Matric scholarship schemes of both ST and SC students where unspent fund of 
₹ 126.18 crore including interest amount of ₹ 8.90 crore was lying since November, 2019.  
The interest earned was not segregated for the concerned scheme and not transferred to the 
CFI. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
119 
On this being pointed out, the Education Department stated that action would be taken for 
transfer of the interest amount into concerned head 
Similarly, in case of  Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme , Audit observed that out of 
₹ 5.00 crore received by the implementing Agency, BEPC, Patna in May 2018 for 
disbursing Scholarship to ST students for the year 2018-19, ₹ 4.72 crore was disbursed and 
balance ₹ 0.28 crore was lying unspent. 
The Department concerned stated (July 2022) that BEPC has been directed to transfer the 
balance amount in designated account for Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme. 
Moreover, the State kept the funds pertaining to both Post-Matric for SCs and for STs in a 
single bank account jointly, leading to difficulty in segregation of funds.  
On this being pointed out, the Department concerned stated that action would be taken for 
transfer of the interest amount into concerned head on pro-rata basis. 
(iv) Himachal Pradesh : In case of Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme, the 
Department had unspent balance ₹ 35.29 crore at the close of year 2020-21. The 
unspent balance was due to non -verification/finalization of scholarship claims 
received in the portal.   
 The Department concerned stated that amount was released on the basis of 
estimated proposal which was more than actual requirement. Further, very less 
number of students applied due to new portal NSP and COVID. 
 It was further noted that a single account for Centrally Sponsored and State 
Sponsored Scholarship Schemes was being operated during the period 2017-18.  
Details of interest accrued on each scheme were not available separately with 
the Department. As a res ult, the share of interest (Central and State wise) of 
respective scheme could not be ascertained. 
 Even after opening of separate accounts for each scheme during 2018-19, Central 
Share of interest earned was not separated by the Department. The total interest 
of ₹ 1.86 lakh (Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme) and ₹  7.15 crore (Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme) accrued on the total fund (Central and State share) was 
deposited into State Treasury and not into CFI.  
 The Department stated (August 2024) that no such instruction was received from 
the Ministry for depositing interest on central portion into CFI.  However, with 
the provision of SNA from the year 2021-22 onwards, interest earned on central 
share is regularly deposited into CFI.  
(v) Jammu & Kashmir : The Department had unspent balance ₹  9.12 Crore in 
respect of Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme during 2017 -21. On being pointed 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
120 
out, the Department stated that funds could not be utilized either due to shortfall 
in receipt of applications or mismatch in banking details resulting in 
accumulation of huge unspent balance.  
 A separate account was maintained by the Department for scholarship schemes 
and ₹  1.34 crore was earned as interest during the period 2017 -21.  The 
Department concerned stated (May 2024) that unspent balance including interest 
of ₹  5.05 crore was transferred to SNA of the administrative Department in 
February 2023. 
(vi)  Ladakh: In Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme, unutilized funds of state share 
were surrendered at the end of the year but unspent balance of central share at 
the end of the year was got revalidated from the administrative Department for 
utilization in the next financial year. 
 Due to invalid account numbers of the student during 2017-19 and non-clearance 
of student’s applications at NSP level from 2019-20 onwards, the payment files 
could not be generated for disbursement of scholarship amount in favour of the 
eligible students, as a result funds remained unspent during these years. At the 
end of 2020-21, unutilised amount was ₹  7.38 crore. The same was utilized in 
the subsequent year.   Further, it was noted that ₹  0.80 lakh earned as interest 
during the period 2020-21 was not remitted to CFI. 
(vii) Maharashtra: ₹ 2.51 crore received in February 2013  for Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme remained unutilized for over nine years. The State 
Government was running its own scheme for Pre -Matric scholarship, and not 
implemented the central scheme.   
 After being pointed out by Audit, State Government surrendered the fund in 
September 2022.  It was further noted that no interest was accounted for the 
unspent fund. 
(viii) Nagaland: Significant unspent balances persisted for years.  Central share of 
₹ 8.51 crore under Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme was released to the State in 
December 2015 for the year 2015 -16.  The unspent balances  (including state 
share) of ₹ 9.46 crore at the end of 2015 -16, ₹ 5.24 crore at the end of 2016 -17 
and ₹ 2.82 crore at the end of 2017 -18 remained unutilised. These funds could 
be fully utilised only by the end of 2018-19. 
 Ministry acknowledged that the first release of ₹ 8.51 crore was based on higher 
projected number of beneficiaries.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
121 
 Further, it was seen that the Department maintained Current Account during 
2017-18 and 2018-19. The fund for the year 2019-20 and 2020-21 was released 
in the SNA in 2021-22. An amount of ₹ 0.26 lakh had accrued as interest.  
 The Department stated (May 2024) that it had remitted interest earned till date.  
(ix)  Sikkim: In Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, unspent balance ranging between 
₹ 7.34 lakh and ₹  10.47 lakh were lying with Department in Saving bank 
Accounts. 
 Interest amounting to ₹ 1.09 lakh was accumulated for the period from 2017-21. 
However, same were not remitted to the CFI.  
 The Department stated (November 2022) that the interest earned has been later 
utilized for the disbursement of scholarship to the student when the Central and 
State did not provide the funds.  
 Interest amounting to ₹ 20.15 lakh was accumulated for the period from 2017-21 
in the saving bank accounts maintained by the Department for disbursement of 
Post-Matric scholarship, However, same was not remitted to the CFI. 
Further, it was noticed that the Departments concerned in Karnataka and Meghalaya 
kept funds in Current accounts, and thus, no interest was earned during implementation 
process. 
In Tamil Nadu , funds were kept in  common account for both  Pre-Matric and 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, and interest of ₹ 1.06 crore was remitted to the State 
Government.  The portion of the accrued interest attributable to central share was not 
remitted to CFI.  
On being pointed out, the State replied that necessary steps will be taken to obtain 
separate head of account for payment of interest accrued through Central Government 
funds. 
Ministry stated (April/May 2023) that after adoption of new procedure for release of 
funds under CSS, the interest amount accrued on the SNA will be transferred to the 
CFI by the States/UTs, and therefore, there will be no loss of interest. 
While it is agreed that the new procedure help in smooth flow of funds, however, the 
underlying factors for funds remaining unutilised, such as improper projection of 
annual demands by the states, technical glitches in NSP and online portals, delays in 
processing of applications and lack of coordination between Central and State 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
122 
Governments need to be recognised and remedial actions be taken for better 
effectiveness of the scheme. 
2.14.3.4  Submission of Utilisation Certificates  
GFR provisions130 mandate submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) within twelve 
months of the closure of the financial year for non -recurring grants, and subsequent 
year grants for recurring grants require UCs of grants for the previous year. Exceptions 
exist for reim bursement-based grants supported by audited accounts . Audit found 
instances of submission of incorrect UCs by several states: 
(i) Himachal Pradesh  submitted UCs of ₹  47.89 crore for Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, but actual spending as per state records was ₹  36.29 
crore.  
State authorities stated that delays in verification led to funds not being 
disbursed in time. To avoid lapse of budget, funds were drawn and UCs were 
submitted to meet requirements for next year's funding. 
(ii) Meghalaya submitted UCs of ₹ 37.50 lakh against actual disbursal of ₹ 19.41 
lakh under Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme and UCs of ₹  58.64 crore against 
actual disbursal of ₹ 28.13 crore under Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme. 
State authorities stated that UCs were submitted treating the entire received 
fund as expenditure to ensure timely sanction for the following year. 
(iii) In Bihar, Audit observed that the Department concerned had sent UCs for 
₹ 173.14 lakh and UCs for ₹ 53.25 lakh, in respect of Pre -Matric and Post -
Matric Scholarship Scheme respectively, to  the Ministry without obtaining 
the actual expenditure of fund from the Education Department/implementing 
agencies.  
On this being pointed out, the Department stated that grants were considered as 
utilized when they are  sanctioned by the Department and accordingly  UCs were 
prepared and sent to the Ministry. 
The above instances highlight deficiencies in the reporting of fund utilisation, which 
hinder the presentation of a true and fair view of actual expenditure. Incorrect reporting 
of UCs may lead to misuse or non -utilization of funds, ultimately impacting th e 
effective delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries. 
 
130 Rule 238 (1), (2) & (3) 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
123 
2.14.3.5 Diversion of funds in Madhya Pradesh under Post -Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
As per Rule 239 of GFR 2017, grants-in-aid to State Governments must be used only 
for their sanctioned purpose . Further, the Scheme guidelines prohibits the utilization 
of financial assistance for any purpose other than the one intended. 
The audit revealed diversion of funds allocated for the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme 
for STs in Madhya Pradesh.  In Alirajpur district, ₹ 1.27 crore and in Mandla district, 
₹ 29.05 lakh meant for the Scheme was diverted to other programmes like Awas 
Sahayta Yojna, and scholarships for SC students (2017-21). 
On being pointed out, Government authorities in Madhya Pradesh stated (September 
2024) that the payments for SC scholarships and Awas Sahayta Yojna for ST students 
were made from the Scholarship Scheme for ST funds due to budget shortages. 
The above systemic issues with respect to release and utilization of funds not only goes 
against the objective of providing timely support to parents of needy tribal students, 
but also burdens exchequer due to parking of funds. 
Ministry stated (March 2025) that taking into account the audit observations, the 
guidelines have been revised and instructions have been issued for strict compliance.  
The revised guidelines contain annual implementation timelines and procedures to be 
followed by the States for release of central assistance.  
Audit recommends that t he Ministry needs to strengthen financial management of 
the Scholarship Schemes by leveraging technology tools for real -time monitoring. 
The Ministry also need to instruct the States/UTs to take remedial action on all cases 
pointed out by the Audit. 
2.14.4 Shortcomings in implementation of the Schemes 
During test -check of 26,529 applications of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme and 
30,867 applications of Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme and the database maintained 
by the Nodal Agencies at different levels, Audit came across several discrepancies in 
the implementation of the scheme. State wise details are given in Annexure-2.31. The 
findings of the sample are indicated in the subsequent paras. 
2.14.4.1 Award of scholarships to students whose parental income exceeded the 
prescribed threshold limit 
Audit findings revealed that scholarships were granted to students whose 
parents’/guardians’ income exceeded the prescribed threshold limit131. 
 
131  (₹2.00 lakh till 2019-20, later ₹ 2.50 lakh per annum in respect of Pre-Matric Scholarship and 
₹ 2.50 lakh per annum in respect of Post-Matric Scholarship). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
124 
During the analysis of overall scholarship data in Chhattisgarh revealed that in case 
of 589 students pertaining to Post -Matric Scholarship, ₹  45.02 lakh was granted 
despite their parents' income being above the threshold. Further test checks of records 
revealed that, under the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme in Tripura, six beneficiaries 
received an amount of ₹  0.20 lakh though their parental income exceeded the 
prescribed limit. For the Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, similar cases were noticed 
in Arunachal Pradesh (22 students, ₹ 6.00 lakh), Odisha (three students, ₹ 0.76 lakh) 
and Tripura (three students, ₹ 0.63 lakh). 
In reply, Government authorities in Chhattisgarh stated that it has initiated recoveries 
from ineligible students. Tripura and Odisha Governments stated that measures to 
ensure stricter compliance will be initiated. Arunachal Pradesh attributed issues to 
technical glitches in NSP application and stated that it has conveyed the Ministry for 
necessary action in this regard. 
Non-compliance to the basic eligibility requirement goes against objective of 
providing financial assistance to needy ST students. 
2.14.4.2 Selection of students without valid income certificate 
As per the guidelines for both the Pre -Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes, 
scholarship applications must include; (i) An income declaration by the self-employed 
parents/guardians, stating definite income from all sources by way of an affidavit on 
non-judicial stamp paper or  (ii) Employed parents/guardians are required to obtain 
income certificate from their employer and for any additional income from other 
sources, they would furnish declaration by way of an affidavit on non -judicial stamp 
paper. 
Field audit findings revealed that 3,267 students across seven States/UTs 132 received 
scholarship under the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, though their applications were 
not supported by income certificates or income -proof. Similarly, for the Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, scholarship was awarded to 1,126 students across six 
States/UTs133 without the necessary income documentation.  
In reply, Government authorities in the States  of Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, and 
Uttarakhand stated that matter will be examined.  In Tripura, the State Government 
stated that institutions will be instructed to verify the authenticity of students' 
 
132  Jammu & Kashmir (633 Students), Kerala (421 Students), Madhya Pradesh (934 Students), 
Odisha (73 Students), Tamil Nadu (1160 Students), Tripura (6 Students) and Uttarakhand (40 
Students). 
133  Jammu & Kashmir (343 Students), Ladakh (15 Students), Odisha (26 Students), Tamil Nadu 
(723 Students), Tripura (3 Students) and Uttarakhand (16 Students). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
125 
documents and retain them for future inspections. In Kerala, the State Government  
stated that it has issued strict directives for district officers to upload income 
certificates of scholarship applicants on the e-grantz portal. The State Government of 
Odisha stated that it has relaxed rules for Pre-Matric students to submit 
BPL/Antodaya/Annapurna cards instead of income certificates and for Post-Matric 
scholarships, a detailed SOP was introduced for verification, with additional measures 
planned to improve the system. In Tamil Nadu, the State Government stated that self-
financing institutions upload income certificates, while Government institutions rely 
on these certificates during admission. Instructions will be issued to institutions to 
collect relevant documents for scholarship support.  
2.14.4.3 Acceptance of applications with inconsistencies in ST certificate 
As per Para 12 (c) of the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme guideline and Para XI (d) of 
the Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme guideline, an application for scholarship should 
comprise certificate (in original) of Scheduled Tribe duly signed by an authorized 
Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar. 
It was observed during test check of applications that under the Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme in Bihar, ₹ 0.36 lakh was granted to 20 students who were from SC or OBC 
instead of ST community. Similarly, under the Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme, 
₹ 3.91 lakh was disbursed to 34 SC and OBC students in Madhya Pradesh and ₹ 0.30 
lakh to one SC student in Himachal Pradesh. 
In case of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme , during examination of applications and 
attached records, it was observed that Scheduled Tribes certificate was not attached in 
1,560 applications in six States/UTs134 for which scholarship was awarded. Similarly, 
in Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Audit noted that Scheduled Tribes certificate was 
not found attached in 532 cases in six States/UTs135 whom scholarship was awarded.  
States have replied that the matter will be examined and corrective measures like fixing 
responsibility will be taken. 
2.14.4.4 Grant of benefits more than once for same class/course 
As per Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines 136, Scholarship for studying in any 
class will be available for only one year. Similarly, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
 
134  Gujarat (418 Students), Jammu & Kashmir (488 Students), Ladakh (14 Students), Tamil Nadu 
(617 Students), Tripura (6 Students) and Uttarakhand (17 Students). 
135  Jammu & Kashmir (141 Students), Ladakh (40 Students), Odisha (8 Students), Tamil Nadu 
(301 Students), Tripura (3 Students) and Uttarakhand (39 Students). 
136  Para 4 (v) of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Guidelines. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
126 
guidelines137 inter-alia require that, (i) a scholarship holder under this scheme will not 
hold any other scholarship/stipend, (ii) the award once made will be tenable from the 
stage at which it is given to the completion of course, and (iii) candidates who, after 
passing one stage of education, are studying in the same stage of education in a 
different course in other subject will not be eligible for the scholarship.  
It was observed during test check of applications, examination of scholarship payment 
and scholarship portal that in six States, 1,048 beneficiaries received Pre -Matric 
scholarship more than once for studying in a same class/scheme/course, resulting in 
excess payment of ₹ 27.88 lakh. Similarly, in 84 instances  in five states, Post-Matric 
scholarship was extended more than once to beneficiaries studying in the same course, 
resulting in excess payment of ₹ 7.77 lakh. The details of scholarships more than once 
for same class/course are given in Table 2.21. 
Table 2.21: Disbursement of scholarship twice or more for same class/course 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Pre-Matric Scheme Post-Matric Scheme 
Beneficiaries Amount Beneficiaries  Amount 
1. Bihar 3 0.05 - - 
2. Gujarat 180 4.99 - - 
3. Himachal 
Pradesh 
- - 6 1.80 
4. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
92 2.07 11 0.59 
5. Madhya 
Pradesh 
639 16.35 24 1.00 
6. Manipur 27 1.08 33 3.76 
7. Meghalaya - - 10 0.62 
8. Odisha 107 3.34 - - 
Total 1048 27.88 84 7.77 
In responses to audit observations, states replied that necessary action will be taken. 
Madhya Pradesh  stated that it has recovered ₹  0.25 lakh from six students for 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme; remaining recoveries are in progress. 
2.14.4.5 Scholarships to day scholars at hosteller’s rate and vice-versa 
Audit noticed during examination of records, that in three States, 1,212 day -scholars 
were extended benefits admissible to hostellers resulting in excess payment of 
₹ 32.13 lakh for Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme .  Similarly, in case of Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, scholarship was awarded to 253 day-scholars in two states at the 
 
137  Para III (xii), Para VII (i), and Para III(iv) of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme Guidelines. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
127 
Hosteller’s rate, resulting in excess payment of ₹  18.59 lakh. The details are given in 
Table 2.22. 
Table 2.22:  Granting of benefit admissible to day scholars at hosteller’s rate 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of the State Pre- Matric Scheme Post- Matric Scheme 
No. of cases Amount No. of cases Amount 
1.  Gujarat  23 0.51 - - 
2.  Odisha  36 0.96 242 17.87 
3.  Sikkim - - 11 0.72 
4.  Tripura  1153 30.66 - - 
Total 1212 32.13 253 18.59 
In reply, Government authorities in Gujarat stated that the students were staying in the 
hostel and accordingly payment of scholarship was made. The reply is factually 
incorrect as audit checked hostel registers and found that these students were not 
staying in the hostel. 
Government authorities in Odisha, in case of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, stated 
that the system of manual entry and shortage of manpower have been addressed after 
on-boarding of the scheme on Odisha State Scholarship Portal (OSSP)  from 2021-22. 
In case of Post -Matric Scholarship Sche me, SOP has been issued for proper 
verification of claim as hosteller by institutions concerned.  
In case of Tripura, it was stated that Institute will be instructed to confirm verification 
of a student being a Hosteller or Day Scholar and that liability will be fixed upon them 
in case of discrepancies. 
2.14.4.6 Payment of fee at rates deviating from the approved fee structure 
under Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
As per Post -Matric Scheme guideline, scholars are entitled to reimbursement of 
enrolment/registration, tuition, games, union, library, magazine, medical examination 
and such other fees compulsorily payable by them to the Institution or University/ 
Board as per the fee structure approved by the competent State/Central Government 
authority. Audit noted that in following three States, fee was reimbursed to the 
institutes, on behalf of the students, in excess compared to the fee structure approved 
by the competent State authority: 
(a) Andhra Pradesh : There was excess payment of tuition fee of ₹  7.54 lakh on 
behalf of 63 students as compared to fee structure approved by the State Government 
authority.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
128 
(b) Himachal Pradesh: During the period 2018-20, Himalayan Nursing School Kala 
Amb, Sirmour claimed reimbursement of fee in respect of three students in excess of 
as approved by the State Government138 under respective quotas resulting in 
overpayment of ₹ 0.99 lakh.  
The Department concerned in its reply stated that the payments to the beneficiaries 
were made during the period due to lags in verification process. The Department will 
look into the matter and will initiate steps to recover the same wherever possible. 
(c) Maharashtra: The fees fixed by Fee Regulatory Authority 139 (FRA) for Unaided 
Private Professional Educational Institutions inter-alia include tuition fee, library fee, 
gymkhana fee, examination fee, development fee or amount payable for any curricular 
or co -curricular activities, laboratory fee, information brochure fee and any other 
amount collected from the students. Thus, as the fee fixed by FRA was all inclusive, 
no other fees were payable separately.  
Analysis of MahaDBT portal data revealed that the unaided private institutions were 
paid ‘other fees’ during 2018-21 over and above the fee fixed by the FRA. The excess 
payment of other fees during last three years was as given in the Table 2.23. 
Table 2.23: Excess payment of ‘other fees’ 
(₹ in lakh) 
Type of 
institutions 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Grand Total 
Number 
of 
students 
Excess 
payment 
Number 
of 
students 
Excess 
payment 
Number 
of 
students 
Excess 
payment 
Number 
of 
students 
Excess 
payment 
Unaided 
Medical and 
Nursing 
Colleges 
558 1.24 188 5.30 104 2.93 850 9.47 
Unaided 
Engineering 
Colleges 
6632 47.84 6460 69.26 3149 47.55 16,241 164.65 
Total 7,190 49.08 6,648 74.56 3,253 50.48 17,091 174.12 
In reply, the Department stated that the Fee Regulatory authority would be requested 
to provide bifurcation of fee details. 
 
138  Government of Himachal Pradesh, Department of Medical Education & Research in pursuance 
of section 3 and 7 of Himachal Pradesh Private Medical Educational Institutions (Regulation 
of Admission and Fixation of Fee) Act, 2006 notified (August 2011) fee for s tudents selected 
under state and management quota for the academic year commencing from 2011 -12. 
139  Constituted vide The Maharashtra Unaided Private Professional Educational Institutions  
(Regulation of Admission and Fees) Act, 2015. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
129 
2.14.4.7 Incorrect calculation  of Maintenance Allowance under Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme   
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines, provide criteria, periodicity for payment 
of maintenance allowance admissible to day-scholars and hostellers at specified rates 
for different types of courses (Group-I to IV)140. 
Examination of scholarship applications and institute records during Audit revealed 
that in respect of 238 students in five States, admissible maintenance allowance to 
day-scholars and hostellers was worked out incorrectly resulting in excess payment of 
₹ 4.84 lakh and short payment of ₹  15.30 lakh in case of 269 students in Andhra 
Pradesh, as detailed in the Table 2.24. 
Table 2.24: Incorrect calculation of Maintenance Allowance 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of the State No. of 
students Amount Remarks 
Excess payment due to incorrect calculation of Maintenance Allowance 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 89 0.53 
Maintenance allowance s were paid in 
excess compared to applicable rates 
notified by the State. 
2.  Manipur 36 1.47 
Maintenance allowance s were paid at 
full rate to the students availing free 
boarding or lodging facility under 
Eklavya Model Residential School 
(EMRS) instead of one third of the rate 
applicable for hostellers.  
3.  Odisha 27 0.79 
Maintenance allowance paid for excess 
number of months instead of 
calculating from the date of admission 
as per the Scheme Guidelines. 
4.  Sikkim 20 1.18 
Maintenance allowance s were  paid in 
excess compared to applicable rates in 
the Scheme Guidelines.  
5.  Telangana 66 0.87 
Maintenance allowances were paid for 
excess number of months instead of 
calculating from the date of admission 
as stipulated in the Scheme Guidelines. 
Total 238 4.84  
Short payment due to incorrect calculation of Maintenance Allowance 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
269 
 
15.30 
Maintenance allowances were paid less 
compared to applicable rates notified by 
the State. 
 
140  Para V of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
130 
Manipur and Sikkim stated that audit observation has been noted for future 
compliance. Telangana replied that action would be taken to address the issue by 
enabling EDIT option in the e-Pass portal (for enabling part payments). In Odisha, the 
Department concerned stated that the payment of scholarship was made based on the 
number of months entered by the concerned institution in the PRERANA portal. The 
Department has issued instructions for inspection of institutions and payment to be 
made based on inspection report. 
2.14.4.8 Scholarship not paid to eligible students 
(i) Audit noted that scholarship could not be disbursed to 3,830 eligible students 
of four States under Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme  and 19,588 eligible 
students of six States/UTs under Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme due to 
various reasons as given in Table 2.25. 
Table 2.25: Non-disbursement of scholarship to eligible students 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Pre- Matric Scheme Post-Matric Scheme 
Remarks No. of 
Students Year No of 
students Year 
1.  Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
- - 472 2017-20 As per the Department 
concerned, funds could not be 
utilised as they were not 
on-boarded with PFMS in 
2017-18, affecting 308 students. 
During 2018-2020, 164 students 
were affected due to shortage of 
funds.  
The Department stated that 
since 2019 -20, offline method 
adopted for registration and the 
payment was made through 
DBT mode, and it is difficult to 
make arrear payment to the 
students as the G oI does not 
allow to make payment without 
using NSP/PFMS. 
2.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
136 2017-18 
and 
2018-19 
- - Reasons for non -disbursement 
could not be identified by the 
State Government Tribal 
Welfare Department due to non-
availability of old data. 
3.  Bihar 2371 2018-19 -  Due to short release of funds by 
Central and State Government 
to the Department concerned. 
-  49 2017-18 Due to non -receipt of physical 
verification report. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
131 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Pre- Matric Scheme Post-Matric Scheme 
Remarks No. of 
Students Year No of 
students Year 
State Department stated that 
report has been sought from 
DWO. 
173 2017-18 
to  
2020-21 
209 2019-20 
and  
2020-21 
Due to non -processing of 
applications at various stages of 
approval hierarchy.  
The Department stated that 
report has been sought from the 
concerned DPO. 
4.  Daman & Diu 
and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
- - 616 2019-20 
and  
2020-21 
The UT Administration 
attributed non-release of Central 
grant for the non-disbursement.  
5.  Gujarat 183 2017-18 
and  
2019-20 
-  State Department stated that the 
payment of scholarship could 
not be made to 105 students due 
to occurrence of some technical 
glitch in Digital Gujarat Portal.  
In the rest of 78 cases, 
applications for scholarship 
were not processed by the 
School/Institute. 
- - 463 2019-20 
and  
2020-21 
The D epartment concerned 
stated that the disbursement of 
scholarship is under process as 
the students  are pursuing their 
study outside the State.  
6.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
- - 757 2019-20 Applications pertaining to 
academic year 2019 -20 were 
pending for verification as on 
March 2022. The D epartment 
concerned confirmed delay due 
to pending verification, 
however, it added that the 
Department always made timely 
payments of scholarship to 
students who had submitted 
their documents properly and 
timely.    
7.  Kerala 967 2017-18 
to  
2020-21 
- - In reply it was stated that due to 
non-availability of information 
relating to account/aadhar 
number of the students, 
applications of eligible students 
could not be uploaded in E -
Grant portal, resulting into non -
disbursal of scholarship. 
8.  Telangana -  17,022 2017-18 
to  
2020-21 
Beneficiaries relating to the 
period 2017-18 to 2020-21 were 
not sanctioned and paid due to 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
132 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Pre- Matric Scheme Post-Matric Scheme 
Remarks No. of 
Students Year No of 
students Year 
non-submission of bar -coded 
hard copies by the institutions, 
pending Aadhaar 
Authentication, lapse of fund 
etc. The Department concerned 
replied (June 2024) that district 
wise application status sought 
were yet to be received. 
Total 3,830  19,588   
(ii) State of Telangana did not enhance parental income eligibility ceiling to 
₹ 2.50 lakh in consonance with Ministry guidelines for Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme.  Hence, students whose parents’ income was between 
₹ 2.00 and ₹  2.50 lakh and were otherwise eligible to apply and receive 
scholarship were deprived of this benefit.  
The Department concerned stated (June 2024) that proposal has been submitted 
to the Government of Telangana to increase the income ceiling from 
₹ 2.00 lakh to ₹ 2.50 lakh. 
(iii) Audit also noted that scholarship could not be disbursed to 13,090 students of 
eight States/UTs under Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme and 16,045 students of 
eight States/UTs under Post -Matric Scholarship Scheme during the years 
2017-21 due to reasons associated with student’s bank account such as 
blocking/freezing of bank account, or account closed, or no such account.  The 
State-wise details are given in Table 2.26. 
Table 2.26: Non-disbursement of scholarship due to bank account related issues 
Sl. 
No. Name of the State/UT Pre- Matric Scheme Post-Matric 
Scheme 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh 1680 1932 
2.  Bihar  259 - 
3.  Jammu & Kashmir 2,958 185 
4.  Karnataka  4,364 5,096 
5.  Ladakh 40 198 
6.  Manipur 328 3,391 
7.  Puducherry - 3 
8.  Tamil Nadu 2,285 2,150 
9.  West Bengal 1,176 3,090 
Total 13,090 16,045 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
133 
State Government authorities replied that they have undertaken various measures to 
address scholarship-related issues. These include correcting account details ( Bihar, 
Puducherry), creating awareness for Aadhaar -linked bank accounts ( Karnataka), 
requesting students to update failed transaction details ( Manipur), and sensitizing 
institutional nodal teachers to verify documents meticulously ( West Bengal). 
Government authorities in Ladakh stated in the case of Pre -Matric Scholarship 
scheme that they have noted the audit observation for future compliance , in case of 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, they had remitted the undisbursed amounts to the 
treasury after poor response from the students of notices given in print media in this 
regard. 
2.14.4.9 Award of scholarships on wrong credentials 
As per Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines141, scholarship is to be awarded to 
regular, full -time student, studying in IX or X class at Government school  or 
recognized school. Similarly, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines142 required 
that scholarship will be given for the study of all recognized post-matriculation for 
post-secondary courses pursued in recognized institutions. 
Examination of applications and related records, revealed that 25 beneficiaries in 
Jammu & Kashmir  were awarded benefits fo r Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme,  
though records showed that they were studying in class VIII. 
The Department concerned stated (May, 2024) that the matter has been taken up with 
the Chief Education Officer for rectification.  
It was observed that eight students of Bihar and six students of Jharkhand got 
scholarship amounting to ₹  0.14 lakh and ₹  0.13 lakh respectively under Pre-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme.  However, on checking with school records, it was found that 
they were not studying in these schools. 
Similarly, for Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, 949 students in seven States received 
₹ 3.30 crore as scholarship  in contravention of scheme guidelines as detailed in 
Table 2.27. 
  
 
141  Para 4(iv) of Pre-Matric Scholarship Guidelines 
142  Para III (ii) of Post Matric Scholarship Guidelines 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
134 
Table 2.27: Post-Matric Scholarship claimed from the ineligible institutions 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
State/UT 
Number 
of 
students 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Remarks 
1 Himachal 
Pradesh 
5 1.50 During 2017 -18, scholarship disbursed to 
students from NIELIT Centre, Nahan, however, 
it was found that these students were enrolled as 
regular students in Government College, 
Rampur.  
The Department stated (August 2024) that 
NIELIT Centre has been directed to deposit the 
fraudulent admission claim. 
2 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
74 31.78 Multiple claims were made for scholarships by 
beneficiaries belonging to  some Computer 
Institutes were settled  and payment was made 
towards fee and maintenance allowance during 
2017-18.  
Audit noted that these computer institutes 
managed documents from the students who 
were on rolls of the Government 
Colleges/Institutions and did not attend these 
institutes. 
In reply, the Department stated that there was 
no mechanism to identify ghost 
beneficiaries/fraudsters, bogus students 
claiming scholarship more than once. At present 
the Scheme is onboard on NSP with least 
chance of availing scholarship by fake 
identities. 
3 Ladakh 105 28.08 On analysis of data, it was found that, students, 
in Kargil district, received scholarship during 
2017-21 by registering themselves 
simultaneously both in Private Computer 
Institutes as well as Government Degree 
College. 
The Department concerned stated that there was 
no mechanism at that time to identify the ghost 
beneficiaries/fraudsters. At present the Scheme 
is on-boarded on NSP and there is least chance 
of claiming scholarship more than once in the 
new online mode.  
4 Mizoram 53 4.07 Applicants were not bona-fide students of the 
Institutions as institute authorities claimed that 
they do not belong to their institute during test -
check.   
5 Odisha 14 3.65 Scholarship payment was made during 2018-19 
for the period 2016 -17 but the students’ names 
were not available in the admission register of 
the college for the year 2016-17. 
49 16.64 Scholarship availed from two different 
institutions by providing false bank account 
number or otherwise.  
6 Uttarakhan
d 
76 2.29 Instances of extension of scholarship benefit 
was noticed where the beneficiaries were not 
enrolled in the institutes they claimed in the 
application form. 
• In U.S Nagar district, ₹ 1.31 lakh was paid to 
57 beneficiaries for year 2017-18. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
135 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
State/UT 
Number 
of 
students 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Remarks 
• In Chamoli district, ₹ 0.94 lakh was paid for 
the year 2017-18 to 17 beneficiaries.  
• In Dehradun district, ₹ 4,600 was paid to two 
beneficiaries related to year 2017-18  
7 West 
Bengal 
573 241.86 On analysis of the OASIS data received from 
Diligent Tech in consultation with the Tribal 
Department and Backward Classes Welfare 
Department, it was found that scholarship 
payment were released to student pursuing 
B.Tech/B.E courses in Institutions and Degree 
Colleges which did not offer these courses.  
The Department stated (July 2024) that Project 
Officers has been asked to prevent recurrence of 
such incidents in future. 
Total 949 329.87  
2.14.4.10 Payment of scholarship in other than applicant’s bank accounts 
Pre-Matric Scholarship  Scheme guidelines143, inter-alia require payment of 
scholarship through applicants’ accounts in post offices/banks.  Besides, all the State 
Governments and UTs Administrations were required to create a beneficiary database 
which may be integrated with UIDAI by (a) embedding Aadhaar numbe rs (UID 
numbers) in it, (b) using the UIDAI enabled bank account (UEBA) for crediting the 
scholarships, and (c) using the UIDAI authentication services for beneficiary 
identification.   
For Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Ministry’s letter (May 2013) requires the States 
to ensure that all beneficiaries have Aadhar number for Aadhar seeding of the bank 
accounts so that payment of scholarship could be made in bank account through the 
Aadhar Payment Bridge (APB).  
Audit observed instances of payment of scholarship to third party bank account, i.e., 
of persons other than the beneficiaries or their parents. 
In Madhya Pradesh, analysis of Shiksha Portal data of selected districts for 2017-21 
revealed that in 475 cases, Pre -Matric Scholarship of ₹  13.90 lakh was paid through 
25 bank accounts which were not in the name of students or their parents.  Further, 
Audit noticed that same accounts were repeated two to 87 times.  On verification, these 
bank accounts were found to be in the name of other people. Authorities concerned are 
yet to reply on the issue, even after repeated reminders.  
 
143 Para 13 of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme guidelines. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
136 
The above discrepancies in the implementation of the schemes, which are aimed at 
providing financial assistance to deserving students, have the potential to undermine 
its performance and effectiveness.  
Audit recommends that t he Ministry needs to improve verification mechanisms by 
using technology to cross -check applications against databases like school 
enrolment records and income certificates; conduct periodic audits to identify and 
address discrepancies; and conduct regular  third-party evaluations to assess the 
effectiveness of the schemes. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
137 
CHAPTER-III 
CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
This Chapter contains one audit paragraph covering audit findings related to a Central 
Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE). 
(I) Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
3.1 Encashment of Leave in deviation from DPE guidelines 
Automatic encashment of earned leave and encashment of EL/HPL on 26-day 
month basis instead of 30 -day month in deviation from the DPE guidelines 
resulted in irregular payment of ₹ 33.68 crore by the Company during 2015-16 
to 2023-24. 
As per the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in April 
1987 and subsequent clarifications dated 17 July 2012 and 07 February 2014, Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) are permitted to frame their own leave policies 
within the broad parameters set by the Government of India. Specifically: 
➢ Earned Leave (EL) and Half Pay Leave (HPL) can be considered  for 
encashment on superannuation, subject to an overall ceiling of 300 days.  
➢ For uniformity, DPE instructed all CPSEs vide Office Memorandum  (OM) 
dated 11  December 2008 to adopt a 30 -day month for calculating leave 
encashment.  
➢ As per the DPE guidelines dated 08 April 1991, any deviation  from issued 
policies must be approved by the CPSE's Board with reasons recorded in writing 
and communicated to the Administrative Ministry and the DPE.  
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCFL) adopted a leave encashment 
policy that: 
➢ Provided for automatic encashment of 33 days of Earned Leave when 
accumulation crossed 297 days and paid in the salary of concerned employee, 
as per RCF Circular No. 840 dated 13 May 2017.  
➢ Calculation of EL/HPL encashment on retirement based on 26 -day month for 
leave accumulated up to 11 December 2008, and 30 -day month for leave 
accumulated after 11 December 2008, as per Board approval in March 2009.  
Audit observed that the automatic encashment of 33 days of EL when the balan ce 
crosses 297 days violates the DPE guidelines, which limit the encashment ceiling to 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
138 
300 days. Audit noted that this policy was approved by the CMD on 05 May 2017 but 
neither placed before the Board nor communicated to the Administrative Ministry or 
the DPE although required by DPE instructions of 08 April 1991.  
Between 2017-18 and 2023-24, RCFL disbursed ₹ 23.77 crore towards such automatic 
encashment in excess of the 300 days limit as detailed in the Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Encashment of Leave 
Year No. of cases Amount paid 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 238 2.52 
2018-19 209 2.31 
2019-20 254 2.96 
2020-21 314 3.65 
2021-22 306 3.68 
2022-23 332 4.04 
2023-24 360 4.61 
Total  23.77 
Audit further observed that although DPE instructions of December 2008 provide for 
adoption of 30 -day month for the purpose of calculating leave encashment , RCFL 
adopted 30-day month only in case of leave accumulated after 11 December 2008 and 
continued to adopt 26-day month for leave accumulated up to 11 December 2008.  As 
the DPE instructions have not provided for bifurcating the leave, the violation resulted 
in excess payment of ₹ 9.91 crore, worked out based on data furnished by the company 
as detailed in the Annexure-3.1. 
RCFL management stated that: 
➢ As per DPE's OM dated 03 August 2017, CPSEs are allowed to devise their 
own leave policies based on operational requirements, subject  to the 300 -day 
cap at retirement.  
➢ Due to RCF's 24x7 operations, automatic EL encashment was introduced as a 
tool to discourage availing of leave and ensure uninterrupted plant functioning. 
➢ The decision to apply different day -month formulas (26 Vs 30 days) was to 
avoid discrimination between employees who retired before and after 
11 December 2008.  
The reply is not acceptable as automatic encashment of EL before actual retirement, 
resulting in exceeding the 300-day limit, is contrary to DPE's explicit cap. The splitting 
of leave balances into pre/post -December 2008 categories for applying different 
calculation methods has no basis in DPE instructions. The 30-day formula was to ensure 
uniformity, and deviation from this practice led to irregular excess payments. Further, 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
139 
the absence of Board approval and non -intimation to the DPE or the  Administrative 
Ministry contravenes DPE's 1991 guidelines on deviations.  
The reply of the Ministry was awaited. 
Thus, in violation of the DPE guidelines, the company allowed encashment of leave 
beyond the ceiling of 300 days, besides payment of leave en cashment by adopting 
26 days month instead of 30 days month, resulting in excess payment of ₹ 33.68 crore. 
Audit recommends that t he Ministry may consider issuing a clarification to all 
fertilizer CPSEs to uphold uniformity and ensure compliance with DPE instructions 
to prevent similar deviations, as similar issue has earlier been pointed out in  case of 
Madras Fertilizer Limited in C AG's Report No. 24 of 202 2 (Para 4.1 ) of Union 
Government (Civil-Compliance Audit Observations). 
New Delhi 
Dated: 19 January 2026 
(SAURA V KUMAR JAIPURIYAR) 
Director General of Audit 
(Central Expenditure) 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
Dated: 02 February 2026 
(K SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Appendices 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
141 
Appendix-I 
(Referred to in Overview and Paragraph no. 1.3) 
Details of Civil Ministries/Departments under General and Social Sector  
Sl. No. Ministry/Department 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
1.  Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
2.  Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
Ministry of Ayush 
3.  Ministry of Ayush 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
4.  Department of Fertilizers 
5.  Department of Pharmaceuticals 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
6.  Department of Consumer Affairs 
7.  Department of Food and Public Distribution 
Ministry of Cooperation 
8.  Ministry of Cooperation  
Ministry of Culture 
9.  Ministry of Culture 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
10.  Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
Ministry of Education 
11.  Department of Higher Education 
12.  Department of School Education and Literacy 
Ministry of External Affairs 
13.  Ministry of External Affairs 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
14.  Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
15.  Department of Fisheries 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
16.  Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
17.  Department of Health and Family Welfare 
18.  Department of Health Research 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
142 
Sl. No. Ministry/Department 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
19.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
20.  Cabinet 
21.  Chandigarh 
22.  Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu 
23.  Ladakh 
24.  Lakshadweep 
25.  Ministry of Home Affairs 
26.  Police 
27.  Transfers to Delhi 
28.  Transfers to Jammu and Kashmir 
29.  Transfers to Puducherry 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
30.  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
Ministry of Jal Shakti 
31.  Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
32.  Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
Ministry of Labour and Employment 
33.  Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
34.  Election Commission 
35.  Law and Justice 
36.  Supreme Court of India 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
37.  Ministry of Minority Affairs 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
38.  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
39.  Central Vigilance Commission 
40.  Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
41.  Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
143 
Sl. No. Ministry/Department 
Ministry of Planning 
42.  Ministry of Planning 
Ministry of Rural Development 
43.  Department of Land Resources 
44.  Department of Rural Development 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
45.  Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
46.  Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
47.  Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
48.  Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
49.  Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
50.  Ministry of Women and Child Development 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
51.  Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
Constitutional Bodies and Secretariats  
52.  Lok Sabha 
53.  Rajya Sabha 
54.  Secretariat of the Vice-President 
55.  Staff, Household and Allowances of the President 
56.  Union Public Service Commission 
57.  National Commission of Scheduled Castes 
58.  National Commission of Scheduled Tribes 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
144 
Appendix-II 
(Referred to in Overview and Paragraph no. 1.4) 
Details of Sanctioned Provision, Expenditure and Savings during 2022-23 and 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
1.  Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education 8,658.91 8,578.15 -80.76 9,877.06 9,804.39 -72.67 
2.  Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare 1,24,000.08 1,01,572.54 -22,427.54 2,16,445.62 2,03,290.33 -13,155.29 
Ministry of Ayush 
3.  Ministry of Ayush 3,050.02 2,663.30 -386.72 3,647.54 2,916.31 -731.23 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
4.  Department of Fertilizers 2,54,856.54 2,54,841.43 -15.11 1,95,479.31 1,95,466.72 -12.59 
5.  Department of Pharmaceuticals 2,270.36 2,050.10 -220.26 3,224.33 2,432.45 -791.88 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
6.  Department of Consumer Affairs 1,769.15 249.72 -1,519.43 346.26 311.58 -34.68 
7.  Department of Food and Public Distribution 3,06,311.10 2,93,774.96 -12,536.14 2,46,944.39 2,44,330.83 -2,613.56 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
145 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Ministry of Cooperation 
8.  Ministry of Cooperation 2,056.04 1,636.52 -419.52 1,150.92 688.88 -462.04 
Ministry of Culture 
9.  Ministry of Culture 3,363.10 3,284.12 -78.98 3,695.53 3,406.90 -288.63 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
10.  Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region 2,924.78 1,118.71 -1,806.07 5,892.03 1,976.76 -3,915.27 
Ministry of Education 
11.  Department of Higher Education 55,091.06 53,244.90 -1,846.16 63,244.50 61,941.11 -1,303.39 
12.  Department of School Education and Literacy 1,11,549.40 96,890.12 -14,659.28 1,08,473.87 1,03,325.47 -5,148.40 
Ministry of External Affairs 
13.  Ministry of External Affairs 17,706.62 16,684.78 -1,021.84 38,184.92 37,196.04 -988.88 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
14.  Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying 4,319.99 2,660.83 -1,659.16 4,835.21 3,485.50 -1,349.71 
15.  Department of Fisheries 2,118.50 1,360.56 -757.94 2,248.79 1,333.29 -915.50 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
16.  Ministry of Food Processing Industries 2,942.02 1,455.13 -1,486.89 4,032.69 2,944.52 -1,088.18 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
146 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
17.  Department of Health and Family Welfare 1,13,458.10 98,985.70 -14,472.40 1,04,683.17 95,561.01 -9,122.16 
18.  Department of Health Research 3,200.67 2,432.11 -768.56 2,980.02 2,857.48 -122.54 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
19.  Ministry of Home Affairs 7,621.08 4,287.64 -3,333.44 6,152.81 5,119.54 -1,033.27 
20.  Cabinet 1,711.05 1,057.14 -653.91 1,803.01 1,048.86 -754.15 
21.  Police 1,22,016.86 1,16,509.67 -5,507.19 1,30,072.36 1,26,010.49 -4,061.87 
22.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands 5,763.97 5,558.69 -205.28 6,100.38 5,927.56 -172.82 
23.  Chandigarh 5,846.07 5,778.80 -67.27 6,777.54 6,639.27 -138.27 
24.  Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu 3,882.12 2,493.42 -1,388.70 2,543.82 2,527.15 -16.67 
25.  Ladakh 5,958.22 4,179.88 -1,778.34 5,968.41 4,355.70 -1,612.71 
26.  Lakshadweep 1,457.46 1,283.37 -174.09 1,628.95 1,579.11 -49.84 
27.  Transfers to Delhi 1,168.01 960.49 -207.52 1,168.01 951.00 -217.01 
28.  Transfers to Jammu and Kashmir 44,696.13 44,696.13 0.00 41,751.44 41,604.44 -147.00 
29.  Transfers to Puducherry 3,129.79 3,129.77 -0.02 3,388.77 3,388.75 -0.02 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
30.  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 4,182.01 4,024.13 -157.88 4,700.05 4,314.23 -385.82 
Ministry of Jal Shakti 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
147 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
31.  Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 19,047.06 12,201.48 -6,845.58 24,034.62 23,387.51 -647.11 
32.  Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 1,34,413.14 59,790.44 -74,622.70 77,224.43 76,826.75 -397.68 
Ministry of Labour and Employment 
33.  Ministry of Labour and Employment 16,893.69 14,800.61 -2,093.08 13,221.75 11,539.62 -1,682.13 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
34.  Election Commission 327.25 320.23 -7.02 466.04 439.10 -26.94 
35.  Law And Justice 6,789.22 6,323.31 -465.91 8,690.29 8,493.40 -196.89 
36.  Supreme Court of India 405.47 392.78 -12.69 517.28 514.00 -3.28 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
37.  Ministry of Minority Affairs 5,020.50 837.68 -4,182.82 3,097.60 1,032.65 -2,064.96 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
38.  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 905.78 901.18 -4.60 1,016.42 980.49 -35.93 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
39.  Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 66.40 52.20 -14.20 65.07 58.70 -6.37 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
40.  Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions 2,502.68 2,280.59 -222.09 2,533.83 2,358.31 -175.52 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
148 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
41.  Central Vigilance Commission 43.46 43.16 -0.30 47.73 44.60 -3.13 
Ministry of Planning 
42.  Ministry of Planning 960.30 849.11 -111.19 824.39 290.82 533.57 
Constitutional bodies and Secretariats 
43.  Staff, Household and Allowances of the 
President 84.80 80.38 -4.42 97.69 94.24 -3.45 
44.  Lok Sabha 800.02 666.57 -133.45 822.01 711.64 -110.37 
45.  Rajya Sabha 431.71 383.52 -48.19 484.41 401.69 -82.72 
46.  Secretariat of the Vice-President 8.64 8.31 -0.33 9.96 9.21 -0.75 
47.  Union Public Service Commission 370.00 369.99 -0.01 426.24 421.48 -4.76 
Ministry of Rural Development 
48.  Department of Rural Development 3,37,943.79 3,31,820.80 -6,122.99 2,74,069.46 2,65,376.51 -8,692.95 
49.  Department of Land Resources 2,269.62 1,259.13 -1,010.49 3,637.62 3,497.38 -140.24 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
149 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ministry/Department 
2022-23 2023-24 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Sanctioned 
Provision 
Total 
Expenditure 
Savings (-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
50.  Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship 2,999.01 1,387.85 -1,611.16 4,993.54 4,480.26 -513.28 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
51.  Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 13,030.68 7,769.89 -5,260.79 13,257.17 9,579.97 -3,677.20 
52.  Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities 1,212.43 989.35 -223.08 1,225.17 1,143.89 -81.28 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
53.  Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation 5,398.09 3,716.30 -1,681.79 5,443.41 2,469.48 -2,973.93 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
54.  Ministry of Tribal Affairs 8,461.88 7,278.77 -1,183.11 12,461.94 7,545.23 -4,916.71 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
55.  Ministry of Women and Child Development 25,672.30 24,012.07 -1,660.23 25,954.82 25,518.46 -436.36 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
56.  Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 3,062.63 2,568.49 -494.14 3,401.04 3,024.04 -377.01 
Source: Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) 2022-23 and 2023-24 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
150 
Appendix-III 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 1.5) 
Details of recovery at the instance of Audit 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Department/ 
Ministry Audit observations Amount 
recovered 
1.  Department of 
Justice, Ministry 
of Law an d 
Justice 
 
Absence of time bound targets under the scheme for Assistance 
to State Governments for establishing and operating Gram 
Nyayalayas (GNs) resulted in blocking of central grant 
amounting to ₹ 12.16 crore for three to 13 years in five States 
and non-operationalization of 102 out of 107 GNs notified in 
these States.  After being pointed out by Audit (December 
2022, March 2024), the Department asked (April 2024) the 
States to refund the unutilized balance along with interest. 
During June 2024 to August 2024, four States (Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka and Telangana) refunded unutilized 
balance amounting to ₹  7.79 crore for deposit in Consolidated 
Fund of India.  In addition, Telangana refunded interest 
amounting to ₹  32.24 lakh.  Andhra Pradesh, which has  not 
utilized central grant of ₹ 4.37 crore released in June 2020 for 
setting up 42 GNs, has filed (September 2024) an affidavit in 
Hon’ble Supreme Court seeking more time for establishing 
GNs. 
8.11 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
151 
Appendix-IV 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 1.6) 
CPSEs/PSUs under General and Social Sector 
Sl. 
No. Name of the CPSE 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
1.  Agrinovate India Limited  
2.  Gangavati Sugars Limited144 
3.  Innovation and Entrepreneurship Federation of CCS NIAM 
4.  Karnataka Meat and Poultry Marketing Corporation Limited145 
5.  National Seeds Corporation Limited  
Ministry of Ayush 
6.  Indian Medicines & Pharmaceutical Corporation Limited 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
Department of Fertilizers 
7.  Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited  
8.  FACT-RCF Building Products Limited146  
9.  Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited  
10.  Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited  
11.  Hindustan Urvarak and Rasayan Limited  
12.  Madras Fertilizers Limited  
13.  National Fertilizers Limited  
14.  Projects and Development India Limited  
15.  Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited  
16.  Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited  
17.  Talcher Fertilizer Limited  
18.  The FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited  
19.  The Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited  
20.  Urvarak Videsh Limited  
 
144  Company Under liquidation  
145  Company wound up  
146  Under insolvency proceeding under IBC Code w.e.f. 11.01.2024 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
152 
Sl. 
No. Name of the CPSE 
Department of Pharmaceuticals 
21.  Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
22.  Bengal Immunity Limited147 
23.  Bihar Drugs and Organic Chemicals Limited  
24.  Hindustan Antibiotics Limited 
25.  IDPL (Tamil Nadu) Limited  
26.  Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) 
27.  Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
28.  Maharashtra Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
29.  Manipur State Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
30.  Orissa Drugs & Chemicals Limited  
31.  Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
32.  Smith Stanistreet Pharmaceuticals Limited148 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
33.  Central Warehousing Corporation  
34.  Food Corporation of India  
35.  Hindustan Vegetable Oils Corporation Limited  
Ministry of Cooperation 
36.  National Cooperative Development Corporation 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
37.  NEDFi Trustee Limited (Subsidiary of NEDFi) 
38.  NEDFi Venture Capital Limited (Subsidiary of NEDFi) 
39.  North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited (NEDFi) 
40.  North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation 
Limited 
41.  North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited 
Ministry of Education 
42.  EdCIL 
43.  EdCIL Vidhyanjali Foundation 
 
147  Company under liquidation 
148  Company under liquidation 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
153 
Sl. 
No. Name of the CPSE 
44.  Higher Education Financing Agency 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
45.  Goa Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited  
46.  HLL Biotech Limited 
47.  HLL Infra Tech Services Limited  
48.  HLL Lifecare Limited  
49.  HLL Medipark Limited  
50.  HLL Mother and Child Care Hospitals Limited 
Ministry of Home Affairs  
51.  AIC RRU Incubation Foundation 
52.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands Integrated Development Corporation 
53.  Andaman Fisheries Limited 
54.  Chandigarh Child and Women Development Corporation 
55.  Chandigarh Industrial and Tourism Development Corporation Limited 
56.  Chandigarh SC, BC & Minorities Financial & Development Corporation 
Limited 
57.  Chandigarh Smart City Limited 
58.  Dadra & Nagar Haveli Daman Diu SC, ST, OBC and Minorities Financial 
& Development Corporation Limited 
59.  Delhi Police Housing Corporation Limited 
60.  Diu Smart City Limited 
61.  DNH and DD Power Corporation Limited 
62.  Kavaratti Smart City Limited 
63.  Lakshadweep Development Corporation Limited 
64.  Lakshadweep Tourism Development Corporation Limited 
65.  New Delhi Municipal Council Smart City Limited 
66.  Omnibus Industrial Development Corporation of Daman & Diu and Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli Limited 
67.  Port Blair Smart Projects Limited 
68.  Security and Scientific Technical Research Association 
69.  Silvassa Smart City Limited 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
154 
Sl. 
No. Name of the CPSE 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
70.  Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited 
71.  National Film Development Corporation Limited 
Ministry of Jal Shakti 
72.  National Projects Construction Corporation Limited  
73.  WAPCOS Limited  
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
74.  National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation 
75.  National Waqf Development Corporation Limited 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
Department of Personnel and Training 
76.  Karmayogi Bharat 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
77.  Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India 
78.  National Divyangjan Finance and Development Corporation 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
79.  National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation 
80.  National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation 
81.  National Scheduled Caste Finance and Development Corporation 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
82.  National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development Corporation  
Government Control other Companies 
83.  AFC India Limited  
84.  NABARD Consultancy Limited 
85.  NABKISAN Finance Limited 
86.  Nalanda Ceramics and Industries Limited149 
 
  
 
149  Company under liquidation 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
155 
Appendix-V 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 1.6) 
(A)  Significant comments under Supplementary Audit of CPSEs 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Company Comments 
1.  Broadcast 
Engineering 
Consultants India 
Limited 
Employee Benefit Expenses: ₹ 13.25 crore 
This includes provision amounting to ₹  84.67 lakh for 
Performance Related Pay (PRP). As per Department of Public 
Enterprises guidelines, PRP is applicable for CPSEs signing the 
Memorandum of Understanding and have a Remuneration 
Committee in place to decide on the payment of PRP within the 
prescribed limit and guidelines. 
Since no MoU for the financial year 2023 -24 signed with the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, PRP is not applicable 
for the Company. As such, provisioning for PRP is not correct 
and resulted in overstatement of Employee Benefit Expense and 
understatement of Profit for the year by ₹ 84.67 lakh. 
2.  WAPCOS Limited 
(Standalone) 
Provision for Trade Receivables and Retention Money -
₹ 53.77 crore 
The Company's accounting policy no. 1.9 provides for 
impairment of financial assets -including trade receivables, 
security deposits (SD), and earnest money deposits (EMDs). Till 
the Financial Year 2022 -23, the Company was using internal 
grade matrix to calc ulate Expected Credit Loss (ECL) on 
financial assets. In the current Financial Year (2023 -24), the 
company transitioned from using a methodology of internal -
grade matrix to an actuarial-based valuation for calculating ECL 
by appointing an Actuary to provi de the estimation of expected 
credit loss for receivables portfolio in accordance with 
requirements under Ind AS. The Company treated this change as 
a change in an accounting policy and retrospectively applied this 
method to prior periods, leading to adjus tments in previously 
reported financial statements. 
As per Ind AS 8 (Para 32, 32 A, 35), the change in estimation 
technique for measurement of ECL in respect of financial assets 
is a change in accounting estimate and therefore, the impact 
should have been applied prospectively as provided in Para 36 
of Ind AS 8 instead of retrospectively as done by the Company. 
The total provision which was required to be charged during the 
year works out to ₹ 186.53 crore (₹  164.22 crore being the 
difference of provision as per actuarial method and ₹ 22.31 crore 
for additional provision and amount written off for receivables 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
156 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Company Comments 
of more than 10 years as per accounting policy). But the 
Company only charged ₹  54.41 crore during the year whereas 
₹ 132.12 crore incorrectly charged as previous year expenses 
(Note-49). 
The incorrect accounting treatment has resulted in 
understatement of other expenses with consequent 
overstatement of Profit for the year by ₹ 132.12 crore. 
3.  WAPCOS Limited 
(Consolidated) 
Provision for Trade Receivables and Retention Money - 
₹ 77.83 crore 
The Company's accounting policy no. 1.7 provides for 
impairment of financial assets - including trade receivables, 
security deposits (SD), and earnest money deposits (EMDs). Till 
Financial Year 2022-23, the Company was using internal grade 
matrix to calculate Expected Credit Loss (ECL) on the financial 
assets. In current Financial Year (2023 -24), the company 
transitioned from using a methodology of internal -grade matrix 
to an actuarial -based valuation for calculating ECL by 
appointing an Actuary to provide the estimation of expected 
credit loss for receivables portfolio in accordance with 
requirements under Ind AS. The Company treated this change as 
a change in an accounting policy and retrospectively applied this 
method to prior periods, leading to adjustme nts in previously 
reported financial statements. 
As per Ind AS 8 (Para 32, 32 A, 35), the change in estimation 
technique for measurement of ECL in respect of financial assets 
is a change in accounting estimate and therefore, the impact 
should have been applied prospectively as provided in Para 36 
of Ind AS 8 instead of retrospectively as done by the Company. 
The total provision which was required to be charged during the 
year works out to ₹ 280.96 crore (₹ 258.65 crore being the 
difference of provision as per actuarial method and ₹ 22.31 crore 
for additional provision and amount written off for receivables 
of more than 10 years as per accounting policy). But the 
Company only charged ₹ 78.47 crore during the year whereas 
₹ 202.48 crore incorrectly charged as previous year expenses 
(Note-49). 
The incorrect accounting treatment has resulted in 
understatement of other expenses with consequent 
overstatement of Profit for the year by ₹ 202.48 crore. 
4.  National Projects 
Construction 
Corporation Limited 
Other Expenses- ₹ 38.98 crore (Note 26) 
The Company’s accounting policy no. 1.9 provides for 
impairment of financial assets, including trade receivables, 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
157 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Company Comments 
security deposits (SD), and earnest money deposits (EMDs). Till 
Financial Year 2022-23, NPCC was using internal grade matrix 
to calculate Expected Credit Loss (ECL) on the financial assets. 
In current Financial Year (2023 -24), the company transitioned 
from using a methodology of internal -grade matrix to an 
actuarial-based valuation for calculating ECL by appointing an 
Actuary to provide the estimation of expected credit loss for 
receivables portfolio in accordance with requirements under Ind 
AS. The Compan y treated this change as a change in an 
accounting policy and retrospectively applied this method to 
prior periods, leading to adjustments in previously reported 
financial statements.  
As per Ind AS 8 (Para 32, 32 A, 35), the change in estimation 
technique for measurement of ECL in respect of financial assets 
is a change in accounting estimate and therefore, the impact 
should have been applied prospectively as provided in Para 36 
of Ind AS 8 instead of retrospectively as done by the Company. 
The Company charged ₹ 24.06 crore during the year out of total 
ECL provision of ₹  94.42 crore (accumulated provision of 
₹ 169.94 crore worked out on the basis of actuarial valuation 
minus accumulated provision of ₹  75.51 crore up to 2022 -23) 
whereas entire amount of ₹ 94.42 crore was to be charged during 
the year as the change was a change in an accounting estimate. 
The incorrect accounting treatment has resulted in 
understatement of other expenses (Provision for Bad and 
Doubtful Debts-Financial Asset) with consequent overstatement 
of Profit for the year by ₹ 70.36 crore. 
Comments on Financial Position 
1.  Hindustan Urvarak 
and Rasayan Limited 
Provision (Note 20) – ₹ 30.13 crore 
The above does not include provision towards short payment of 
custom duty of ₹  71.64 crore payable for project import of 
equipment/ materials and mandatory spares imported for 
Gorakhpur plant as per demand raised by Customs Authorities. 
The Company imported goods (Equipment and Material and 
Mandatory Spare) of ₹  1155.86 crore on which the Custom 
Department clarified (19.04.2022) that concessional rate of 
Basic Customs duty @  five per cent (only) has been wrongly 
availed since the mandatory condition (value of spare parts need 
to be 10  per cent or less of value of main equipment) has not 
been complied with and as such HURL was not eligible for 
concessional rate of duty. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
158 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Company Comments 
Thus, provision for differential amount of duty ₹  71.64 crore 
(total duty of ₹  75.01 crore minus amount of ₹ 3.37 crore paid) 
was required to be made which was not done. This has resulted 
in understatement of Provisions with consequent overstatement 
of profit for the year by ₹ 71.64 crore.  
Contingent liability is also overstated on this account. 
Comments on Auditor’s Report 
1.  National Film 
Development 
Corporation 
The impact of audit comment, on the profits of ₹ 10.91 crore as 
depicted in the Statement of Profit and Loss of the Company, 
works out to 23.10 per cent. Hence, the financial statements of 
the Company do not represent "true and fair view" and it was not 
proper on the part of the Independent Auditor to have provided 
the assurance that the financial statements presented a "true and 
fair view". 
2.  National Projects 
Construction 
Corporation Limited 
The impact of audit comments, on the profits of ₹ 74.79 crore as 
depicted in the Statement of Profit and Loss of the Company, 
works out to 126.15 per cent  and impact of audit comments 
would lead to loss amounting to ₹ 19.56 crore. 
Hence, the financial statements of the Company do not represent 
'True and Fair view' and it was not proper on the part of the 
Independent Auditor to have provided the assurance that the 
financial statements presented a 'True and Fair view'. 
3.  WAPCOS Limited 
(Standalone) 
Independent Auditor's Report 
The impact of above comments on the profits of ₹ 59.30 crore as 
depicted in the Statement of Profit and Loss of the Company, 
works out to 222.80 per cent and impact of above comments 
would lead to loss amounting to ₹ 72.82 crore. 
Hence, the financial statements of the Company do not represent 
'True and Fair view' and it was not proper on the part of the 
Independent Auditor to have provided the assurance that the 
financial statements presented a 'True and Fair view'. 
4.  WAPCOS Limited 
(Consolidated) 
Independent Auditor's Report 
The impact of above comments on the profits of ₹  120.23 crore 
as depicted in the Statement of Profit and Loss of the Company, 
works out to 194.85 per cent and impact of above comments 
would lead to loss amounting to ₹ 114.04 crore. 
Hence, the financial statements of the Company do not represent 
'True and Fair view' and it was not proper on the part of the 
Independent Auditor to have provided the assurance that the 
financial statements presented a 'True and Fair view'. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
159 
(B) Significant comments under Separate Audit Report of Statutory 
Corporations  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Corporation Comments 
Comments on Balance Sheet 
1.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Other Current Liabilities (Note-6)- ₹ 3,391.85 crore 
The above does not include amount of ₹ 64.10 crore (excluding 
applicable GST) on account of Audit Fee payable to Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India for the year 2017 -18 to 2023 -24 in terms of 
Section 34 (2) of Food Corporations Act, 1964.  
This has resulted in the “understatement of Other Current Liabilities 
(Note-6) by ₹ 64.10 crore with consequent understatement of Other 
Expenses- Audit fees and loss for the year by ₹ 9.70 crore (current year 
amount is calculated on estimated basis taking bill amount of previous 
year as bill for the year is still to be raised) and understatement of 
Expenses pertaining to previous year by ₹ 54.40 crore. 
Further, note below Note-K (Other Expenses) is factually incorrect audit 
fee is not disputed and on a request made by FCI through DFPD, 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has clarified (April 
2023) that audit fee is a statutory obligation and therefore the department 
may continue paying audit fee till the time any change in statute. 
No corrective action was taken in spite of pointing it out on the accounts 
of previous years. 
2.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Trade Receivables (Note 11)- ₹ (-) 4,171.99 crore 
Central Govt. Ministries/Departments 
For Food Subsidy & Carrying cost of Buffer Stock- 
₹ (-) 6,257.80 crore 
The above figure represents subsidy received (₹  1,39,602.42 crore) in 
excess of claim (₹  1,33,344.62 crore). But instead of showing it as 
payable to DFPD as per Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, it 
has been shown as negative (credit) balance of ₹ 6,257.80 crore. Due to 
incorrect depiction of this amount, Trade Receivables shown on the face 
of Balance Sheet is incorrect as trade receivables stood at ₹  2,085.81 
crore without netting off the minus figure.  
This has resulted in understatement of Trade Receivables and liabilities 
both by ₹ 6,257.80 crore. 
Comments on Profit and Loss Account/Income and Expenditure Account 
1.  National 
Cooperative 
Provision for Doubtful Debts- ₹ 414.87 crore 
An attention is invited to the Serial no. 4 of the Significant Accounting 
Policy regarding provisioning of Non -Performing Assets. It inter alia 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
160 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Corporation Comments 
Development 
Corporation 
states Provisioning in respect of NPAs is made at the rates not less than 
the rates indicated as follows: 
Sl. 
No. Prudential Classification % of provision 
i) Sub Substandard Assets  15 % 
ii) Doubtful Assets 
 Doubtful up to 1 year 25 % 
 Doubtful up to 1 to 3 years 40 % 
 Doubtful for more than 3 years 100 % 
iii) Loss Assets 100 % 
The Corporation instead of following the stated accounting policy, made 
100 per cent provision in respect of all categories of non -performing 
assets. This has resulted in excess provision to the extent of ₹  142.86 
crore as detailed below: 
Amount ₹ in lakh 
Prudential 
Classification 
% of 
provision 
Outstanding 
amount as on 
31.03.2024 
Provision of 
NPA should 
be made 
Provision 
as on 
31.03.2024 
Excess 
provision 
made 
Sub 
substandard 
Assets 
15% 10301.255 1545.18825 10301.255 8756.06675 
Doubtful 
upto 1 year 
25% 9.92277 2.4806925 9.92277 7.4420775 
Doubtful 
upto 1 to 3 
years 
40% 9203.84631 3681.53852 9203.8463 5522.30779 
Doubtful for 
more than 3 
years 
100% 21304.67502 21304.675 21304.675 0 
Loss Assets 100% 667.44 667.44 667.44 0 
Total 41487.139 27201.3225 41487.139 14285.8166 
This has resulted in overstatement of Current Liabilities and Provision 
for Doubtful Debts with consequent understatement of Excess of 
Income over Expenditure by ₹  142.86 crore over and above the 
minimum norms for provisioning mentioned in the significant 
accounting policies. 
2.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Subsidy on Foodgrains (Note-B) ₹ 1,32,744.17 crore 
(a) The above includes subsidy of ₹  7,262.50 crore pertaining to Open 
Market sales (Domestic) to the extent of ₹ 5558.88 crore and sale of rice 
to oil marketing companies for conversion into ethanol to the extent of 
₹ 1703.62 crore.  These operations are not foodgrains operations under 
central operations done by FCI within the ambit of GoI circular dated 
31 January 1979 and 25 April, 1980. Further, there is no mandate made 
available to audit from which it can be ascertained that cost differential 
will be treated as food subsidy. Therefore, this should have been shown 
separately in the Accounts. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
161 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Corporation Comments 
(b) The subsidy also includes ₹  2,454.03 crore received on account of 
SGRY claims on Ministry of Rural Development which was written off 
during the year and reimbursed (March 2024) by DFPD.  This is not the 
amount pertaining to normal business activity as this has been paid by 
DFPD since  no payment was received from the Ministry of Rural 
Development. Therefore, this should have been treated as extraordinary 
item and shown in the Accounts as such. 
3.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Purchases (Note-F) ₹ 1,63,971.75 crore 
Purchases are overstated by ₹  1859.14 crore due to inclusion of the 
Carry over charges paid to state agencies for non -lifting of stock from 
them up to 30th June. The inclusion of carrying charges is not correct as 
carrying cost is part of cost of buffer stock in pursuance of GoI 
instructions dated 9 July 2002. This resulted in the overstatement of 
Purchases and understatement of other operation expenses by ₹ 1859.14 
crore. 
4.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Storage Cost (Note-H) ₹ 2,472.63 crore 
The above storage charges do not include ₹  1,167.50 crore due to non-
inclusion of Employee remuneration relating to godowns (₹  988.73 
crore), Depreciation (₹ 111.25 crore) and supervision charges for freight 
and handling (₹ 67.52 crore). These expenditure form part of godowns/ 
storage charges as per GoI circular dated 25 April 1980 (on guiding 
principles for claiming the food subsidy), according to which Godowns 
charges includes hire charges for rented godowns, depreciation, repair, 
maintenance, stores & spares and godowns establishment charges for its 
own godowns. 
Thus, Storage charges are understated by ₹  1,167.50 crore with 
consequent overstatement of Employee remuneration by ₹ 988.73 crore, 
Depreciation by ₹ 111.25 crore, Freight by ₹ 20.85 crore and Handling 
charges by ₹ 46.67 crore. 
5.  Food Corporation 
of India 
Employees Remuneration & Benefits (Note J)- ₹ 3,226.42 crore 
As per accounting policy, the Corporation is accounting for gratuity and 
leave encashment on cash basis. The Accounting policy is not in 
compliance with Para -61 of AS -15 which inter alia states that an 
enterprise should recognize the retirement benefit cost in the Statement 
of Profit and Loss. Further out of three major considerations given in 
AS-1 for selection of an accounting policy - Prudence, substance over 
form and materiality, the accounting policy adopted by the Corporation 
is not correct in view of materiality. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
162 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Corporation Comments 
The total liability as disclosed in Note 16 (3) stood at ₹  3,370.22 crore 
(₹ 2353.53 crore for gratuity and ₹  1,016.69 crore for leave 
encashment). The disclosure made in the Notes to Accounts is not 
sufficient as according to Para 23 of AS -1, disclosure of accounting 
policies or of changes therein cannot remedy a wrong or inappropriate 
treatment of the item in th e accounts.' The incorrect accounting has 
resulted in understatement of expenditure and loss for the year both by 
₹ 737.89 crore with consequent u nderstatement of liabilities by 
₹ 3,370.22 crore and previous year expenditure by ₹ 2632.33 crore.  
No corrective action was taken in spite of pointing it out on the accounts 
of previous years. 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
163 
Appendix-VI 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 1.6) 
List of CPSEs having Nil comments on audit of accounts of FY 2023-24 
 
Sl. No. Name of CPSE 
1.  AFC India Limited 
2.  Agrinnovate India Limited 
3.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands Integrated Development Corporation 
4.  Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India  
5.  Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited  
6.  Central Warehousing Corporation  
7.  DNH and DD Power Corporation Limited  
8.  EdCIL 
9.  EdCIL Vidhyanjali Foundation   
10.  FACT-RCF Building Product Limited 
11.  Higher Education Financing Agency  
12.  Hindustan Antibiotics Limited  
13.  Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited 
14.  HLL Biotech Ltd  
15.  HLL Lifecare Ltd 
16.  Innovation and Entrepreneurship Federation of CCS NIAM 
17.  Karamyogi Bharat  
18.  Madras Fertilizers Limited  
19.  National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation  
20.  National Divyangjan Finance and Development Corporation  
21.  National Fertilizers Limited 
22.  National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation  
23.  National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation  
24.  National Scheduled Caste Finance and Development Corporation 
25.  National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development Corporation  
26.  National Seeds Corporation Limited 
27.  Projects and Development India Limited  
28.  Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited 
29.  Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited  
30.  Talcher Fertilizer Limited  
31.  The FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited  
32.  The Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited  
33.  Urvarak Videsh Limited  
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
164 
Appendix-VII 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 1.7) 
 
Details of Action Taken Notes awaited/under correspondence   
(as of 31 August 2025) from various Ministries/Departments  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Ministry/ 
Department 
Report for 
the year 
ended 
March 
Due Not 
received 
Under 
correspondence 
1.  Culture 2021 1 0 1 
2.  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
2022 1 1 0 
3.  Development of North Eastern 
Region 
2014 1 0 1 
4.  Education 2022 1 0 1 
5.  Fertilizers  2022 1 1 0 
6.  Home Affairs 2009 3 0 3 
7.  Information and Broadcasting 2022 1 0 1 
8.  Jal Shakti 2017 1 1 0 
2023 1 0 1 
9.  Minority Affairs 2011 1 0 1 
10.  Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions 
2022 1 0 1 
11.  Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship 
2022 1 0 1 
12.  Social Justice and Empowerment 2011 1 0 1 
13.  Tribal Affairs 2022 1 0 1 
Total 16 03 13 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
165 
Annexure-2.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.1.4) 
List of Monuments selected in audit 
Sl. No. Name of the Monument Locality Circle 
Ticketed/Adarsh/WHS 
1.  Agra Fort Agra fort, Agra Agra Circle 
2.  Akbar’s Tomb, gateway and walls round 
the ground. 
Sikandara, Agra 
 
-do- 
3.  Fatehpur Sikri Group of monuments Fatehpur Sikri, Tehsil 
Kirwali, Agra 
-do- 
4.  Itimad-ud-Daula’s Tomb.  -do- 
5.  Mariam’s Tomb on Mathura Road. Sikandara, Agra 
 
-do- 
6.  Mehtab Bagh on the river bank, facing the 
Taj. 
Opposite Taj, Agra -do- 
7.  Ram Bagh Gateways adjoining the Zohra 
Bagh. 
Near Chini ka rauja, Agra -do- 
8.  Taj Group of Monuments Taj Ganj, Agra -do- 
9.  The Fort of Kalanjar Kalinjar, Banda Jhansi Circle 
10.  Rani Lakshmi Bai Mahal  Jhansi -do- 
11.  Jhansi Fort. Jhansi -do- 
12.  Gupta Temple. Deogarh, Lalitpur -do- 
13.  The Residency Buildings.  Residency, Lucknow Lucknow 
Circle 
14.  The site of the Stupa and monastery of the 
Sakyas at Piprahwa 
Piprahwa Tehsil-Naugarh 
Siddarth Nagar 
-do- 
15.  The site of Sahet -Mahet in parganas 
Ikauna and Balrampur 
Srawasti &  Balrampur -do- 
16.  Lord Cornwallis tomb, Ghazipur Ghazipur Sarnath Circle 
17.  Jaunpur Fort, Jaunpur Jaunpur -do- 
18.  Ancient Buddhist site known as 
Chaukhandi stupa 
Sarnath Varansi -do- 
19.  Ancient Buddhist site of Sarnath including 
Dhamekh stupa 
Sarnath Varansi -do- 
20.  Tomb of Lal Khan  Rajghat Varanasi -do- 
21.  Observatory of Man Singh Varanasi -do- 
Non-Ticketed Monument 
22.  Idgah Rapri, Firozabad Agra Circle 
23.  Kanch Mahal Sikandara, Agra -do- 
24.  Kos Minar on the circular road Mathura -do- 
25.  Monument in memory of the brave men 
who fell at the hour of victory at Gangiri. 
Gangiri, Aligarh -do- 
26.  Monument of Major Robert Nairn at 
Rathbanpur 
Pipalgaon, Hathras -do- 
27.  Pillar with Sanskrit inscription dated 
samvat 1666 in the flanking tower at the 
Bhanakaur tank 
Barsana, Mathura -do- 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
166 
Sl. No. Name of the Monument Locality Circle 
28.  Remains of an old Hindu temple inside the 
Dayaram’s fort 
Hathras -do- 
29.  A Large slab of the seven Mothers with 
Ganesha lying on the bed of the valley 
below the temple Chandi. 
Daulatpur, Lalitpur Jhansi Circle 
30.  Chandel temple at Sakrar village Sakrar Tehsil-Mauranipur, 
Jhansi 
-do- 
31.  Closed British Cemetery. Kaitha, Hamirpur -do- 
32.  Jain temples. Dudhai, Tehsil-Pali 
Lalitpur 
-do- 
33.  Ruins of a large Linga temple of the 
Chandella type 
Hatovar, Chitrakut -do- 
34.  Stone temple. Karvi, Chitrakut -do- 
35.  Talbehat Fort. Talbehat, Lalitpur -do- 
36.  The Lake of Madan Sagar Madan Sagar, Mahoba -do- 
37.  Amjad Ali Shah’s Mausoleum. Hazratganj, Lucknow Lucknow 
Circle 
38.  Bibiapur House  Cantonment, Lucknow -do- 
39.  Cemetery  Hussainabad, Lucknow -do- 
40.  Kaisar Bagh Gates. Kaiser Bagh Lucknow -do- 
41.  Rumi Darwaza. Bara Imambara, Lucknow -do- 
42.  Sikandar Bagh Buildings. Sikandarbagh, Lucknow -do- 
43.  Tomb of Nawab Rashid Khan Rashidabad, Farukhabad -do- 
44.  Two ancient brick temples Khurda Tehsil Ghatampur, 
Kanpur Nagar 
-do- 
45.  Two Cemeteries. Lucknow -do- 
46.  Two Cemeteries. At mile 4, Faizabad Road 
Lucknow 
-do- 
47.  Mound. Sarthal Khera, Moradabad Meerut Circle 
48.  Old Rohilla Fort  Saharanpur -do- 
49.  Roman Catholic Church Sardhana -do- 
50.  Tomb or Mausoleum of Hermit Shah Dana  Shyamgahnj, Bareily -do- 
51.  Ancient site measuring 7 acres and 800 
links in Khesra No.384 
Garhwa Azamgarh Sarnath Circle 
52.  Ancient Site,Ghosi  Mau -do- 
53.  Asokan Stone Pillar & Zanana  palace at 
Allahabad Fort 
Allahabad -do- 
54.  Circular shaped mound and the remains of 
a stupa 
Chhetion, Kushinagar -do- 
55.  Hammam or Turkish bath in the old fort Jaunpur -do- 
56.  Juma Masjid Jaunpur -do- 
57.  Standing figure identified by Fuehrer as 
Buddha Asvaghosha (4.5 feet high) with a 
five-headed snake canopy Deora near 
Bhita Bara Tehsil 
Allahabad -do- 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
167 
Annexure-2.2 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.1.6.3)  
Status of Missing Monuments 
Sl. No. Name of CPM reported Missing Status 
1. Site of Aonla railway station, Bareilly. Missing 
2. Tomb of Lt. Col. John Guthrie, in mud fort, Farrukhabad TRACED 
3. Ancient sculpture, carving, images, basrelics, inscriptions, 
stones and like objects, Mathura. 
Not untraceable, however, 
their exact similarity need to 
be studied  further to match 
with the context given in 
notification and further added 
that it need to be amended. 
4. Portion of Katra Mound which are not in the possession of 
Nazul Tenants on which formerly stood a temple of 
Keshav Dev which was dismantled and the site utilised for 
the mosque of Aurangazeb, Mathura. 
Not untraceable, however, 
their exact similarity need to 
be studied  further to match 
with the context given in 
notification and further added 
that it need to be amended. 
5. Monument of Kila Chandpur Fort, Bijnor. Missing 
6. Monument near Kila railway station, Hathras. Not untraceable, however, 
their exact similarity need to 
be studied  further to match 
with the context given in 
notification and further added 
that it need to be amended. 
7. Old British cemertery, Bijnor Missing 
8. Remains of large temple, Ram Nagar, Chitrakoot Missing 
9. Closed Cemetery, Katra Naka, Banda S.N. 11 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
10. Large ruined site called Sandi Khera, Pali, Shahabad, 
Hardoi 
TRACED 
11. Cemetery, Jalaun (Bus Stand), Jalaun Missing 
12. Gunner Burkill’s Tomb, Rangaon, Mehroni, Lalitpur S.N. 12 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
13. Imambara Amin-ud-Daula, Lucknow Missing 
14. Three Tombs, Lucknow-Faizabad Road at miles 3, 4 & 5, 
Lucknow 
S.N. 15 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
15. Cemeteries at miles 6 & 7, Jahraila Road, Lucknow S.N. 14 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
16. Cemetery at Gaughat, Lucknow S.N. 13 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
17. Ruins of three small linga temple circle 1000 AD, Ahugi 
Mirzapur 
S.N. 16 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
18. Three sites with megaliths on the western and north 
eastern toes of the hill, Chandauli 
Missing 
19. Tablet on treasury building, Varanasi S.N. 18 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
20. Telia Nala Buddhist ruins, Varanasi S.N. 17 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
21. A Banyan grove containing traces of ancient building, 
Amavey, Ballia 
S.N. 10 of Gazette 08.03.2024 
22. Dih or mound of ruins called Surika-Raj, Ghazipur Missing 
23. Mound of brick ruins, Sahiya Kushinagar Missing 
24. A series of enormous mound, Gorakhpur Missing 
25. Large Dih or mound at Chetion, Kasia, Kushinagar Missing 
26. Mound of ruins called Sareya, Kushinagar Missing 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
168 
Sl. No. Name of CPM reported Missing Status 
27. Sikcha wali Kothi, Old High Court Lucknow Sent for De-notification 
28. Two Cemeteries Lucknow (Physical Verification) Missing 
29. Cemetery at Mile-6, Lucknow-Raebareli Road Lucknow Missing 
30. Cemetery at Mile-13, Lucknow-Kanpur Road Lucknow Missing 
31. Kos Minar, Bhognipur Kanpur Dehat Missing 
32. Kos Minar, Bhognipur Kanpur Dehat Missing 
33. Kos Minar, Chaparghata Kanpur Dehat Missing 
34. Kos Minar, Raigawan Kanpur Dehat Missing 
35. Kos Minar, Khalaspur Kanpur Dehat Missing 
36. Kos Minar, Deosar Kanpur Dehat Missing 
37. Kos Minar, Halia Ghatampur Kanpur Nagar Missing 
38. The collection of miscellaneous antiquities from different 
parts of the District, grouped round the Asni Pillar of 
Mahipaldeva, Fatehpur 
Missing 
39. Remains of an old Chandela temple, Banda Missing 
40. Temple, Jhansi Missing 
41. A Sikhara roofed temple known as Kathohiya Mariha, 
Lalit pur 
Missing 
42. Two temples and several relics, Lalitpur Missing 
43. Jain group of temples, Lalitpur Missing 
44. Mudianior a medival rearrangement of columns Lalitpur Missing 
45. A small temple with three figures of Vishnu, Lalitpur Missing 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
169 
Annexure-2.3 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.1.7.1)  
Multiple notification in single premises 
Circle Monuments/Complex Number of 
Monuments 
Agra Akbar’s Tomb, Sikandara, Agra 2 
 Idgarh Rapri, Firozabad 3 
Jhansi A Large slab of the seven Mothers with Ganesha 
lying on the bed of the valley below the temple 
Chandi.”, Daulatpur, Pali, Lalitpur 
2 
Fort of Kalanjar, Banda 3 
Jain temple, Dudhai, Lalitpur  12 
Madan Sagar Lake, Mahoba 5 
A small temple with a sanctum and a flat roof 
situated outside the cave no. 212, Barha Kotra 
2 
Remains of an old fort, Rasin Tehsil Karvi 3 
Lucknow Sikandar Bagh Buildings, Lucknow 2 
Bara Imambara 2 
Municipal Garden complex attached to town hall, 
Fatehpur 
2 
Old Fort, Nahar Khor, Fatehpur 3 
Makhdum Jahanian, Kannauj 3 
Piparahawa Siddharth Nagar 2 
Dilkusha Palace, Lucknow 3 
Bagh Badshahi, Fatehpur 2 
Nandan Mahal, Lucknow 2 
Bala Peer Tomb, Kannauj 5 
Sarnath Jaunpur Fort, Jaunpur 2 
Jama Masjid, Jaunpur 2 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
170 
Annexure-2.4 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.1.9.3 (ii))  
Improper conservation of Monuments  
Photographs and its descriptions 
Sarnath Circle 
 
A large crack in the monument Lord Cornwallis tomb, Ghazipur dated 24.07.24 
Agra Circle 
 
 
Defaced false ceiling of Akbar's Tomb, 
Sikandara, Agra dated 10.09.24 
Need of Chemical treatment at Jodha Bai 
Mahal, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra dated 29.08.24 
 
 
Ruined condition of Mehtab Bagh, Agra 
dated 26.09.24 
Dilapidated Inlay work at Moti Masjid Taj, 
Agra dated 24.09.24 


Report No. 36 of 2025 
171 
Meerut Circle 
  
Different colouration of Roman Catholic Church, Meerut dated 16.10.24  
Lucknow Circle 
  
Signage Board scattered in Kothi Bibiapur, Cantt, Lucknow dated 05.11.24 
 
  


Report No. 36 of 2025 
172 
Annexure-2.5 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.1.11.2)  
Statement of Annual Conservations Plans 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Circle ACPs 
Approved Amount Budget 
Allotment 
Less 
allotment 
(%) 
Approved 
ACPs not 
executed 
2021-22 
Agra 
260 28.32 20.29 8.03 (28) 54 
2022-23 316 34.48 22.57 11.91 (35) 84 
2023-24 275 40.53 24.43 16.10 (40) 74 
2021-22 
Jhansi 
111 14.46 4.15 10.31 (71) 20 
2022-23 121 17.23 7.12 10.11 (59) 6 
2023-24 129 20.33 6.05 14.28 (70) 0 
2021-22 
Lucknow 
239 23.08 10.88 12.20 (53) 68 
2022-23 259 29.14 19.06 10.08 (35) 96 
2023-24 190 35.69 17.32 18.38 (51) 34 
2021-22 
Meerut 
68 10.23 2.89 7.34 (72) 4 
2022-23 81 14.29 6.69 7.60 (53) 10 
2023-24 73 17.91 9.73 8.18 (46) 11 
2021-22 
Sarnath 
143 18.58 7.89 10.69 (58) 21 
2022-23 165 22.21 11.63 10.58 (48) 30 
2023-24 163 26.29 13.30 12.99 (49) 53 
Total 2593 352.77 184.00 168.70 565 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
173 
Annexure-2.6 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.2) 
Excess expenditure of ₹ 27.43 crore towards license fee for unutilised space 
Sl. 
No. Month 
Monthly rent 
of entire 
building 
Proportionate 
monthly rent of 
two floors 
Rent actually 
paid by 
Ministry 
Excess/ short 
payment of rent 
(Value in ₹) 
1. Feb-23 3,72,60,974 74,52,195 3,72,60,974 2,98,08,779 
2. Mar-23 3,72,60,974 74,52,195 3,72,60,974 2,98,08,779 
3. Apr-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
4. May-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
5. Jun-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
6. Jul-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
7. Aug-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
8. Sep-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
9. Oct-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
10. Nov-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 4,02,41,852 3,21,93,482 
11. Dec-23 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 0 -80,48,370 
12. Jan-24 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 0 -80,48,370 
13. Feb-24 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 0 -80,48,370 
14. Mar-24 4,02,41,852 80,48,370 0 -80,48,370 
15. Apr-24 4,34,61,200 86,92,240 0 -86,92,240 
16. May-24 
(Up to 07.05.24) 
98,13,819 19,62,764 0 -19,62,764 
Total 12,21,39,838 39,64,56,764 27,43,16,926 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
174 
Annexure-2.7 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.3) 
Rental Outgo in respect of six residential units 
Sl. 
No. 
Unit 
No. Month of vacation 
Period of 
vacancy (till 
Feb. 2025) in 
months 
Monthly rent being 
paid by the Mission 
in lieu of vacated 
units (RMB) 
Rental outgo for 
the period of 
vacancy (RMB) 
1. A1 May 2022 34 27,000 9,18,000 
2. A2 October 2022 29 19,000 5,51,000 
3. A4 November 2024 4 19,000 76,000 
4. B1 August 2021 43 18,000 7,74,000 
5. B3 September 2024 6 18,000 1,08,000 
6. C2 December 2022 27 10,000 2,70,000 
Total (in RMB) 2,69,7000 
Official Rate of Exchange of February 2025, 1 RMB = 11.9474 INR  
Total in ₹ 3,22,22,138 
(3.22 crore) 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
175 
Annexure-2.8 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.6) 
Electricity Duty and Tax paid by RPO, Mumbai 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Month Electricity Duty Tax on sale 
2017 July 96124.65 8665.94 
2017 August 165739.04 16702.99 
2017 September 147745.1 14778.83 
2017 November 150847.71 14262.45 
2018 January 133852.37 12338.29 
2018 March 151672.74 14248.03 
2018 April 163096.22 15921.21 
2018 July 154870.94 14816.33 
2018 August 154842.85 15211.55 
2018 September 139881.38 13855.69 
2018 October 160515.32 17034.74 
2018 November 144705.62 14210.52 
2018 December 118943.79 11493.04 
2019 January 116145.57 15804.09 
2019 February  121081.38 16645.56 
2019 March 136930.34 19280.26 
2019 April 159097.99 21608.59 
2019 May 191270.33 26698.25 
2019 June 177772.07 24557.82 
2019 July 179892.78 24868.26 
2019 August 160132.07 21759.73 
2019 September 152164.34 20509.78 
2019 October 165700.77 22662.47 
2019 November 160292.6 21776.07 
2019 December 146602.57 19627.46 
2020 January 141628.22 18835.01 
2020 February  137553.5 18185.53 
2020 March 101716.4 16290.18 
2020 April 54240.48 11679.12 
2020 May 48934.37 9961.47 
2020 June 94504.17 14750.55 
2020 July 114645.01 19329.95 
2020 August 109086.02 17439.37 
2020 September 117229.3 19023.59 
2020 October 113968.02 18477.59 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
176 
Year Month Electricity Duty Tax on sale 
2020 November 110885.25 17222.88 
2020 December 104887.52 16856.95 
2021 January 103771.01 16082.54 
2021 February  98740.79 15618.57 
2021 March 117030.55 19982.5 
2021 April 122307.73 20429.11 
2021 May 130825.3 22095.36 
2021 June 142639.26 24397.15 
2021 July 141581.12 24704.19 
2021 August 132899.04 22680.5 
2021 September 131814.83 22498.74 
2021 October 138293.35 23367.1 
2021 November 135839.14 23776.26 
2021 December 118608.42 19972.97 
2022 January 106573.45 17127.57 
2022 February  115361.42 18374.11 
2022 March 144961.57 25283.55 
2022 April 148042.65 25927.25 
2022 May 157760.4 28197.71 
2022 June 157422.09 28090.49 
2022 July 154319.84 23922.29 
2022 August 148341.02 22606.99 
2022 September 152472.05 23451.18 
2022 October 159056.81 24569.73 
2022 November 144157.19 21843.81 
2022 December 155254.13 23914.46 
2023 January 127812.21 18146.72 
2023 February  137450.46 19770.43 
2023 March 158741.18 23689.46 
2023 April 154300.51 22889.86 
2023 May 174559.77 26488.91 
2023 June 162411.23 24444.8 
2023 July 167358.24 25905.12 
2023 August 177038.42 27833.15 
2023 September 151313.2 22172.98 
Total 9668257.18 1387645.7 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
177 
Annexure-2.9 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.6) 
Electricity Duty and Tax of RPO, Pune 
Year Month Electricity Duty Tax 
2021 January 41499.11 2192.46 
February  38125.1 1911.81 
March 46207.96 2676.83 
April 47163.42 2730.53 
May 46100.35 2609.62 
June 43260.4 2330.5 
July 42546.1 2195.69 
August 41482.36 2090.02 
September 40778.49 2037.47 
October 43035.29 2259.48 
November 40367.73 2030.43 
December 38760.28 1797.95 
2022 January 38032.11 1691.13 
February  37042.3 1688.47 
March 38621.12 1916.19 
April 38534.54 1808.8 
May 40173.52 1969.69 
June 43634.46 1932.56 
July 43758.22 1900.95 
August 47769.67 2179.7 
September 49115.56 2301.75 
October 49739.27 2318.12 
November 48409.13 2232.25 
December 50121.84 2375.81 
2023 January 50798.59 2432.74 
February  46711.26 2127.91 
March 53163.84 2652.08 
April 59227.92 3045.07 
May 65311.91 3552.86 
June 65891.11 3575.14 
July 59641.93 3018.41 
August 60524.63 3099.33 
September 61424.27 3108.09 
October 63835.13 3311.25 
November 55836.56 2564.69 
December 54372.41 2373.34 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
178 
Year Month Electricity Duty Tax 
2024 January 55306.06 2493.48 
February  54227.51 2450.45 
April 80797.37 4084.84 
May 81217.4 4089.41 
June 71821.36 3352.32 
July 67212.38 2964.34 
August 68068.27 3041.45 
September 65072.09 2819.44 
October 68131.77 3046.02 
November 59784.73 2387.81 
December 45404.76 1437.14 
2025 January 46016.29 1473.51 
February  48780.18 1711.12 
March 58453.6 2454.26 
April 50109.27 1989.11 
May 52033.47 2068.51 
Total 2703454.4 127902.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
179 
Annexure-2.10 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.6) 
Electricity Duty of RPO, Goa 
Year Month Electricity Duty 
2018 August 11112.5 
September 10675 
October 12817 
November 11231.5 
December 10619 
2019 January 7444.5 
February  6405 
March 9915.5 
April 12743.5 
May 14322 
June 11301.5 
July 12791.1 
August 12791.1 
September 12791.1 
October 12791.1 
November 12791.1 
December 12791.1 
2020 January 12791.1 
February  12791.1 
March 12791.1 
April 12791.1 
May 12791.1 
June 12791.1 
July 12241.6 
August 12176.5 
September 11928.7 
October 11528.3 
November 8181.6 
December 8652.7 
2021 January 8756.3 
February  7460.6 
March 10166.8 
April 9797.2 
May 10222.1 
June 8159.9 
July 7264.6 
August 7268.8 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
180 
Year Month Electricity Duty 
September 7351.4 
October 8352.4 
November 7926.8 
December 7575.4 
2022 January 6741.7 
February  7210.7 
March 10453.1 
April 10451.6 
May 11121.6 
June 9459.8 
July 5807.9 
August 9033.5 
September 9368.1 
October 9363.2 
November 9840.6 
December 10165.4 
2023 January 8082.2 
February  10022.6 
March 10712.1 
April 10951.5 
May 12039.3 
June 11512.9 
July 8600.9 
August 10776.1 
September 9493.4 
October 11940.6 
November 10794 
December 11601.1 
2024 January 10585.4 
February  10494.4 
March 10875.9 
April 12451.6 
May 13428.8 
June 9737 
July 9284.8 
August 8853.6 
September 9232.3 
October 9653 
November 7967.4 
December 15466.5 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
181 
Year Month Electricity Duty 
2025 January 1374 
February  7602 
March 9023.7 
April 9666.3 
Total 828332.5 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
182 
Annexure-2.11 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.7 (i)) 
Shortfall in Survey and Project Deliverables  
 
Project Target Achievement % Achievement % Shortfall 
Vessels  Voyage 
Days 
out at 
Sea 
Fishing 
Days 
Sampling 
efforts Voyage 
Days 
out 
at 
Sea 
Fishing 
Days 
Sampling 
efforts 
Voyage 
% 
At 
Sea 
% 
Fishing 
% 
% 
Sampling 
efforts 
Voyage 
% 
At 
Sea 
% 
Fishing 
% 
% 
Sampling 
efforts 
MFV Matsya Darshini Bottom/Mid 
water trawling 
47 940 752 3228 42 752 590 2314.1 89 80 78 71.68 11 20 22 28.32 
MFV Matsya Shikari Bottom 
trawling 
49 960 758 3505 39 654 433 1625.4 80 68 57 46.37 20 32 43 53.63 
MFV Matsya Sagarika Bottom 
trawling 
48 950 760 3562.5 35 654 456 1765.16 73 69 60 49.55 27 31 40 50.45 
MFV Matsya Samudrika Bottom 
trawling 
48 960 768 3600 27 480 378 1666 62 50 49.22 46.28 43.75 50 53.78 53.72 
MFV Matsya Lavanika Bottom 
trawling 
97 971 776 3642 83 738 540 1535.73 86 76 70 42.17 14 24 30 57.83 
MFV Matsya Varshini Bottom 
trawling 
49 980 784 3675 29 508 337 791.47 59 52 43 21.54 41 48 57 78.46 
MFV Matsya Nireekshani Bottom 
trawling 
51 1010 808 3787.5 7 73 38 153.55 14 7 5 4.05 86 93 95 95.95 
TOTAL (A) 389 6771 5406 25000 262 3859 2772 9851.41 67.35 56.99 51.28 39.41 32.65 43.01 48.72 60.59 
MFV Matsya Blue Marlin Tuna Long line 51 1000 755 471875 13 198 103 41882 33 20 14 8.87 68 80 86 91.13 
MFV Matsya Drushti  Tuna Long 
line 
50 1000 676 424920 43 823 542 278825 86 82 80 65.62 14 18 20 34.38 
MFV Matsya Yellow Fin  Tuna Long 
line 
49 980 734 431250 30 515 313 81200 61 53 43 18.83 39 47 57 81.17 
MFV Matsya Vrushti Tuna Long line 47 940 692 435960 24 342 194 89047 51 36 28 20.43 49 64 72 79.57 
TOTAL (B) 197 3920 2857 1764005 110 1878 1152 490954 55.84 47.91 40.32 27.83 44.16 52.09 59.68 72.17 
TOTAL (A+B) 586 10691 8263 
 
372 5737 3924 
 
63.48 53.66 47.49 
 
36.52 46.34 52.51 
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
183 
Annexure-2.12 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.7 (i)) 
Target and Achievement of Voyages Performed 
Vessel Target Achievement % Achievement % Shortfall 
 Voyage 
Days 
out at 
Sea 
Fishing 
Days 
Sampling 
efforts Voyage 
Days 
out at 
Sea 
Fishing 
Days 
Sampling 
efforts 
Voyage 
% 
At Sea 
% 
Fishing 
% 
%Sampling 
efforts 
Voyage 
% 
At Sea 
% 
Fishing 
% 
%Sampling 
efforts 
MFV Matsya 
Darshini 
42 780 624 2694 42 752 590 2314.1 100.00 96.41 94.55 85.90 0.00 3.59 5.45 14.10 
MFV Matsya 
Shikari 
39 760 600 2850 39 654 433 1625.4 100.00 86.05 72.17 57.03 0.00 13.95 27.83 42.97 
MFV Matsya 
Sagarika 
35 650 520 2437.5 35 654 456 1765.16 100.00 100.00 87.69 72.42 0.00 0.00 12.31 27.58 
MFV Matsya 
Samudrika 
27 520 416 1950 27 480 378 1666 100.00 92.31 90.87 85.44 0.00 7.69 9.13 14.56 
MFV Matsya 
Lavanika 
83 820 656 3075 83 738 540 1535.73 100.00 90.00 82.32 49.94 0.00 10.00 17.68 50.06 
MFV Matsya 
Varshini 
29 560 448 2100 29 508 337 791.47 100.00 90.71 75.22 37.69 0.00 9.29 24.78 62.31 
MFV Matsya 
Nireekshani 
7 140 112 525 7 73 38 153.55 100.00 52.14 33.93 29.25 0.00 47.86 66.07 70.75 
TOTAL (A) 262 4230 3376 15631.5 262 3859 2772 9851.41 100.00 91.23 82.11 63.02 0.00 8.77 17.89 36.98 
MFV Matsya 
Blue Marlin 
13 260 196.22 105000 13 198 103 41882 100.00 76.15 52.49 39.89 0.00 23.85 47.51 60.11 
MFV Matsya 
Drushti 
43 800 542.74 307201.1 43 823 542 278825 100.00 100.00 99.86 90.76 0.00 0.00 0.14 9.24 
MFV Matsya 
Yellow Fin 
30 580 434.22 178750 30 515 313 81200 100.00 88.79 72.08 45.43 0.00 11.21 27.92 54.57 
MFV Matsya 
Vrushti 
24 480 354.63 122220 24 342 194 89047 100.00 71.25 54.70 72.86 0.00 28.75 45.30 27.14 
TOTAL (B) 110 2120 1527.81 713171.1 110 1878 1152 490954 100.00 88.58 75.40 68.84 0.00 11.42 24.60 31.16 
GRAND 
TOTAL (A+B) 
372 6350 4903.81 728802.6 372 5737 3924   100.00 90.35 80.02   0.00 9.65 19.98   

Report No. 36 of 2025 
184 
Annexure-2.13 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.7 (ii)) 
Shortfall of target in implementation of Gear operation  
Name of Base Vessel 
Experimental gear operation 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Mumbai MFV Matsya Vrushti -- -- -- -- --  
MFV Matsya 
Nireekshani 
-- -- -- -- -- 
Mormugao MFV Yellowfin -- -- -- -- RTLL - 56,250 hooks 
DGN- 176 hrs. 
BSVLL 18,750 hooks   
MFV Sagarika -- -- -- -- -- 
Cochin MFV Matsya 
Varshini 
 -  - 
 
 
 
MFV Lavanika -- -- -- - 
 
- 
 
Chennai MFV Matsya Drushti BSVLL -9,600 
hooks. 
BSVLL - 9,600 
hooks. 
  -- -- 
  MFV Matsya 
Samudrika 
-- -- -- -- -- 
Visakhapatnam MFV Matsya Shikari *Acoustic survey -
Andaman water. 
-- -- -- -- 
  MFV Matsya 
Darshini 
*Acoustic survey *Acoustic survey *Acoustic survey *Acoustic survey *Acoustic survey 
Port Blair MFV Blue Marlin BSLL- 18,750 
hooks DLL– 10,000 
hooks BSVLL– 
18,750 hooks. 
BSLL-28,750 
hooks, DLL -8,750 
hooks, BSVLL -
18,750 hooks. 
BSLL-18,750 
hooks, DLL – 
18750 hooks 
BSVLL– 18750 
hooks. 
BSLL- 18,750 
hooks  
DLL - 14,375 
hooks BSVLL – 
28,750 hooks. 
RTLL-47,500 hooks 
MDLL- 18,750 hooks 
DL- 18,750 hooks 
BSVLL- 18,750 hooks 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
185 
Annexure-2.14 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.7 (ii)) 
Shortfall of target in implementation of Gear operation  
Name of Base Vessel Experimental gear operation 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Mumbai MFV Matsya 
Vrushti 
-- -- -- -- -- 
 
MFV Matsya 
Nireekshani 
-- -- -- -- -- 
Mormugao MFV Yellowfin -- -- -- -- BSVLL -5185 
efforts  
MFV Sagarika -- -- -- -- -- 
Cochin MFV Matsya 
Varshini 
-- HL+VLL+BSPLL+BSVLL 
2076 hooks 
-- Squid jigging- 45 hrs. -- 
  MFV Lavanika -- -- -- HL/BSL -320.5 hrs Squid 
Jigging – 23.3 hrs 
BSL  9.3hrs 
Squid jigging - 
19.1hrs 
Chennai MFV Matsya 
Drushti 
-- BSVLL-2820 Efforts -- -- -- 
  MFV Samudrika -- -- -- -- -- 
Visakhapatnam MFV Matsya 
Shikari 
-- -- -- -- -- 
  MFV Matsya 
Darshini 
-- -- -- -- -- 
Port Blair MFV Blue Marlin BSVLL- 7407 
efforts  
BSVLL- 475 efforts -- -- -- 
(a) SVLL- Bottom Set Vertical Longline, (b) BSLL- Bottom Set Line, (c) BSPLL- Bottom Set Perch Longline, (d) DGN-Drift Gill Net, (e) DLL-Drift Longline, (f) HL- 
Handline, (g) MDLL-Modified Drift Longline, (h) RTL-Regular Tune Longline, (i) VLL- Vertical Longline. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
186 
Annexure-2.15 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.7.1) 
Achievement of collection of environmental data 
Vessels Particulars 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
MFV 
Yellow fin 
Conducted 11 2 0 6 11 30 
Data 
collected 
0 0 0 0 1 1 
MFV 
Matsya 
Vrushti 
Conducted 7 3 3 4 7 24 
Data 
collected 
1 2 1 1 0 5 
MFV 
Matsya 
Drushti 
Conducted 9 12 4 6 12 43 
Data 
collected 
6 6 3 3 3 21 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
187 
Annexure-2.16 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.8.8.1 (i)) 
Prolonged and unplanned maintenance of vessel 
Sl. No. Vessels/Age Year 
Planning of 
drydocking 
(in 
Months) 
Time taken in 
drydocking 
(in month 
Time Taken 
in 
drydocking 
(% of Plan) 
Supply/Non 
availability 
of HSD 
(Days) 
1. MFV 
Matsya 
Nireekshani 
46 years 
2018-19 - 6  60 
2019-20 2 5  27 
2020-21 2 8  -  
2021-22 - -   -  
2022-23 - 3  -  
Total   4 22 550 87 
2. MFV 
Matsya 
Shikari 
45 years 
2018-19 - -   21 
2019-20 2 6   - 
2020-21 - -    - 
2021-22 - -   26 
2022-23 2 4   -  
Total   4 10 250 47 
3. MFV 
Matsya 
Darshini 
44 years  
2018-19 1* -   -  
2019-20 2 -    - 
2020-21 2 -   -  
2021-22 2 4  20 
2022-23 - -  -  
Total   7 4 100 20 
4. MFV 
Matsya 
Varshini 
44 years 
2018-19 2 2   - 
2019-20 - -    - 
2020-21 2 3   - 
2021-22 -  -  -  
2022-23 -  -  -  
Total   4 5 125 0 
5. MFV Blue 
Marlin150 
35 years 
2018-19 2 9   -  
2019-20 - 4.8   -  
2020-21 2 -   -  
2021-22 1 -  -  
2022-23 - -   12 
Total   5 13.8 276 12 
6. MFV 
Yellow Fin 
2018-19 - 1  9 
2019-20 2 4  -  
 
150  MPV Blue Marlin -The vessel underwent dry docking /repair of damaged propeller  in 2020 -21 and 
2021-22 and was not deployed for surveys. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
188 
Sl. No. Vessels/Age Year 
Planning of 
drydocking 
(in 
Months) 
Time taken in 
drydocking 
(in month 
Time Taken 
in 
drydocking 
(% of Plan) 
Supply/Non 
availability 
of HSD 
(Days) 
35 years 2020-21 2 10  -  
2021-22 - 3  20 
2022-23 - 1  1 
Total   4 19 475 30 
7. MFV 
Matsya 
Samudrika 
30 years 
2018-19 - -   -  
2019-20 2 6   -  
2020-21 2  -  -  
2021-22 -  -  -  
2022-23 2  3  -  
Total   6 9 150 0 
8. MFV 
Sagarika 
30 years 
2018-19 2 -   -  
2019-20 2 11  -  
2020-21 2 6  -  
2021-22 -  -  24 
2022-23 2 5  7 
Total   8 22 275 31 
9. MFV 
Lavanika 
29 years 
2018-19 - -   -  
2019-20 2  -  -  
2020-21 3 4    - 
2021-22 - -   -  
2022-23 2 2.5  -  
Total   7 6.5 92.85 0.00 
10. MFV 
Matsya 
Drushti 
19 years 
2018-19 1* 2  -  
2019-20 - -  -  
2020-21 2 3   -  
2021-22 1 4  10 
2022-23 -  -  -  
Total   4 9 225 10 
11. MFV 
Matsya 
Vrushti 
19 years 
2018-19 - 1  64 
2019-20 2 3   - 
2020-21 2 4  -  
2021-22 - -   40  
2022-23 - -   -  
Total   4 8 200 104 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
189 
Annexure-2.17 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.11) 
Details of Professional Tax not deducted by CAPF units  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Unit Name 
Non deduction of Professional 
Tax 
Period Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
1. Madhya 
Pradesh 
1.  BSF, Academy, Takenpur, Gwalior 04/2017 to 09/2023 245.18 
2.  BSF, CSMT,  Takenpur, Gwalior  04/2017 to 09/2023 41.19 
3.  BSF, NTCD, Gwalior  04/2017 to 03/2024 35.15 
4.  BSF, Composite Hospital, Gwalior  04/2017 to 03/2024 17.40 
5. BSF, STC, Takenpur, Gwalior  04/2017 to 03/2024 71.23 
6. BSF, TSU, Takenpur, Gwalior  11/2018 to 03/2022 25.77 
7.  CRPF, Composite Hospital, Neemuch 04/2017 to 03/2025 10.75 
8.  CRPF, CTC, Neemuch  04/2017 to 03/2018 7.73 
9.  CRPF, GC, Neemuch  04/2017 to 04/2023 98.75 
10.  ITBP, SPT Bn, Shivpuri  04/2017 to 03/2018 8.53 
11.   ITBP, CF Hqrs, Bhopal  04/2017 to 03/2025 47.40 
12.  ITBP, STS, Shivpuri  04/2017 to 03/2018 2.53 
13.  ITBP, RTC, Shivpuri  04/2017 to 09/2024 49.95 
(A) Total 661.56 
2. Telangana 1. CRPF, Southern Sector, Jub ilee Hills, 
Hyderabad 
04/2017 to 07/2024 18.36 
2. CRPF, GC, Hyderabad,  04/2017 to 07/2024 146.98 
3. RAF, GC, Campus, Rangareddy 04/2017 to 09/2024 185.44 
4. CRPF, Composite Hospital, GC, 
Campus, Hyderabad 
04/2017 to 09/2024 13.50 
5. CRPF, GC, Chandrayangutta, 
Rangareddy 
04/2017 to 09/2024 134.85 
6. CRPF, Range Hqrs- Hyderabad 04/2017 to 07/2024 7.51 
7. CRPF, 2 nd Battalion, Chandrayangutta, 
Hyderabad 
04/2017 to 07/2024 424.76 
8. CRPF, Spl DG South Zone, GC  
Campus, Hyderabad 
04/2017 to 07/2024 06.46 
 
 
(B) Total 937.86 
3. Assam 1. SSB, 37 Bn, Mangaldoi 03/2020 to 03/2024 103.68 
  (C) Total 103.68 
4. Tripura 1. BSF, 96 Bn, Bagafa,  04/2021 to 03/2024 76.28 
2. BSF, 199 Bn, Panisagar,  04/2021 to 03/2024 79.44 
(D) Total 155.72 
5. Punjab 1. BSF, 183 Bn, Amritsar 08/2021 to 03/2024 37.15 
2. BSF, Composite Hospital, Jalandhar 04/2018 to 03/2025 7.64 
3. BSF, Sector Headquarter, Gurudaspur 04/2018 to 03/2025  43.08 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
190 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Unit Name 
Non deduction of Professional 
Tax 
Period Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
(E) Total 87.87 
6. Kerala 1. CISF, Group HQ, Kochi 04/2017 to 03/2024 21.06 
2. CISF, BPCL-KR, Kochi 08/2017 to 02/2024 49.93 
3. CISF, CIAL, Kochi 08/2017 to 02/2024 157.95 
4. CISF, FACT, Kochi 08/2017 to 02/2024 57.75 
5. CISF, VSSC, Thumba, Trivandrum 08/2017 to 02/2024 104.64 
6. CISF, LPSC, Valiamala, Trivandrum 08/2017 to 02/2024 24.19 
7. ITBP, Nooranad, Allpujha 08/2017 to 02/2024 224.94 
8. CISF, International Airport, Kalicut 08/2017 to 02/2024 53.06 
  (F) Total 693.52 
Grand Total (A)+(B)+(C)+(D)+(E)+(F) 2640.21 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
191 
Annexure-2.18 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.12) 
Excess payment 
Sl. 
No. Months 
Total 
No. of 
GOs 
Rate of 
SCA 
Drawn-
GO 
Eligible 
Rate of 
SCA-
GO 
Total 
Excess 
Claim GO 
Total 
No. of 
NGO 
Rate of 
SCA 
Drawn-
NGO 
Eligible 
Rate of 
SCA-
NGO 
Total 
Excess 
Claim 
NGO 
(a) (b) (c ) d= (b-c) *a (e) (f) (g ) (h) = (f-g)*e 
1. Mar-19 7 4875 3900 6825 606 3750 3000 454500 
2. Apr-19 6 4875 3900 5850 612 3750 3000 459000 
3. May-19 6 4875 3900 5850 480 3750 3000 360000 
4. Jun-19 6 4875 3900 5850 620 3750 3000 465000 
5. Jul-19 6 4875 3900 5850 610 3750 3000 457500 
6. Aug-19 4 4875 3900 3900 632 3750 3000 474000 
7. Sep-19 5 4875 3900 4875 560 3750 3000 420000 
8. Oct-19 4 4875 3900 3900 500 3750 3000 375000 
9. Nov-19 4 4875 3900 3900 552 3750 3000 414000 
10. Dec-19 6 4875 3900 5850 615 3750 3000 461250 
11. Jan-20 6 4875 3900 5850 630 3750 3000 472500 
12. Feb-20 7 4875 3900 6825 641 3750 3000 480750 
13. Mar-20 7 4875 3900 6825 619 3750 3000 464250 
14. Apr-20 7 4875 3900 6825 593 3750 3000 444750 
15. May-20 3 4875 3900 2925 497 3750 3000 372750 
16. Jun-20 4 4875 3900 3900 513 3750 3000 384750 
17. Jul-20 9 4875 3900 8775 583 3750 3000 437250 
18. Aug-20 9 4875 3900 8775 485 3750 3000 363750 
19. Sep-20 8 4875 3900 7800 489 3750 3000 366750 
20. Oct-20 8 4875 3900 7800 553 3750 3000 414750 
21. Nov-20 7 4875 3900 6825 612 3750 3000 459000 
22. Dec-20 7 4875 3900 6825 646 3750 3000 484500 
23. Jan-21 9 4875 3900 8775 600 3750 3000 450000 
24. Feb-21 8 4875 3900 7800 642 3750 3000 481500 
25. Mar-21 9 4875 3900 8775 611 3750 3000 458250 
26. Apr-21 8 4875 3900 7800 664 3750 3000 498000 
27. May-21 6 4875 3900 5850 548 3750 3000 411000 
28. Jun-21 9 4875 3900 8775 628 3750 3000 471000 
29. Jul-21 10 4875 3900 9750 750 3750 3000 562500 
30. Aug-21 9 4875 3900 8775 797 3750 3000 597750 
31. Sep-21 10 4875 3900 9750 808 3750 3000 606000 
32. Oct-21 9 4875 3900 8775 811 3750 3000 608250 
33. Nov-21 8 4875 3900 7800 714 3750 3000 535500 
34. Dec-21 10 4875 3900 9750 699 3750 3000 524250 
35. Jan-22 9 4875 3900 8775 710 3750 3000 532500 
36. Feb-22 9 4875 3900 8775 717 3750 3000 537750 
37. Mar-22 9 4875 3900 8775 543 3750 3000 407250 
38. Apr-22 9 4875 3900 8775 726 3750 3000 544500 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
192 
Sl. 
No. Months 
Total 
No. of 
GOs 
Rate of 
SCA 
Drawn-
GO 
Eligible 
Rate of 
SCA-
GO 
Total 
Excess 
Claim GO 
Total 
No. of 
NGO 
Rate of 
SCA 
Drawn-
NGO 
Eligible 
Rate of 
SCA-
NGO 
Total 
Excess 
Claim 
NGO 
(a) (b) (c ) d= (b-c) *a (e) (f) (g ) (h) = (f-g)*e 
39. May-22 7 4875 3900 6825 652 3750 3000 489000 
40. Jun-22 5 4875 3900 4875 635 3750 3000 476250 
41. Jul-22 6 4875 3900 5850 768 3750 3000 576000 
42. Aug-22 6 4875 3900 5850 789 3750 3000 591750 
43. Sep-22 7 4875 3900 6825 896 3750 3000 672000 
44. Oct-22 10 4875 3900 9750 739 3750 3000 554250 
45. Nov-22 10 4875 3900 9750 849 3750 3000 636750 
46. Dec-22 10 4875 3900 9750 854 3750 3000 640500 
47. Jan-23 9 4875 3900 8775 871 3750 3000 653250 
48. Feb-23 10 4875 3900 9750 857 3750 3000 642750 
49. Mar-23 10 4875 3900 9750 831 3750 3000 623250 
50. Apr-23 12 4875 3900 11700 879 3750 3000 659250 
51. May-23 11 4875 3900 10725 889 3750 3000 666750 
52. Jun-23 11 4875 3900 10725 869 3750 3000 651750 
53. Jul-23 10 4875 3900 9750 779 3750 3000 584250 
54. Aug-23 10 4875 3900 9750 784 3750 3000 588000 
55. Sep-23 10 4875 3900 9750 773 3750 3000 579750 
56. Oct-23 9 4875 3900 8775 685 3750 3000 513750 
57. Nov-23 9 4875 3900 8775 781 3750 3000 585750 
58. Dec-23 11 4875 3900 10725 989 3750 3000 741750 
59. Jan-24 12 4875 3900 11700 998 3750 3000 748500 
60. Feb-24 14 4875 3900 13650 1008 3750 3000 756000  
Total 473850 Total  31343250  
Grand Total  ( GO & NGO) (₹) 31817100 
    
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
193 
Annexure-2.19 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.1)  
(A) Salient features of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Guidelines 
Condition for grant 
of scholarship 
• Student should belong to a Scheduled Caste. 
• Her/his Parents/Guardian’s income should not exceed ₹2.00 lakh per annum as per the 
original programme. However, this was raised to ₹2.50 lakh per annum on 19 
September 2017.  
• She/he should not be getting any other Centrally funded Pre -Matric Scholarship for 
studying in class IX and X. 
• She/he should be a regular, full -time student studying in a Government school or in a 
school recognized by Government or a Central/State Board of Secondary Education.  
• Scholarship for studying in any class will be available for only one year. If a student has 
to repeat a class, she/he would not get scholarship for that class for a second (or 
subsequent) year. 
Rate of 
Scholarship 
Scholarship and other grants upto 18 September 2017: 
Particulars Day Scholar Hostellers 
Scholarship for 10 months (₹ per month) 150 350 
Books and Ad hoc Grant (₹ per annum) 750 1000 
Scholarship and other grants w.e.f. 19 September 2017 
Scholarship for 10 months (₹ per month) 225 525 
Books and Ad hoc Grant (₹ per annum) 750 1000 
 
Duration and 
Renewal of 
Awards 
• The scholarship will be payable for 10 months in an academic year.  
• The award once made will continue subject to good conduct and regularity in 
attendance. It will be renewed for class X after the student passes class IX.  
(B) Salient features of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme Guidelines 
Condition for 
grant of 
scholarship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Student should belong to a Scheduled Caste. 
• Available for studies in India only, to candidates permanently settled or domiciled 
in a particular State studying at Post-Matriculation or Post-Secondary stage. 
• Will be given for the study of all recognized Post -Matriculation or Post -
Secondary courses pursued in recognized Institutions/Universities/Colleges (both 
Government and Private). 
• The Institutions shall submit all the details of the applicants while submitting 
scholarship applications 
• Her/his Parents/Guardian’s income should not exceed ₹2.50 lakh per annum.  
• Procedure for submission of application is either online/offline, along with 
requisite documents like Education Certificate, Caste Certificate, Income 
Certificate, etc. 
• The conditions stipulated in the Ministry’s notification no. 428 dated 16.02.2017 
relating to provisions contained in section 7 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of 
Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 2016 are to be 
followed with further clarification that if for any reason the authentication of 
Aadhaar fails the individual concerned should be permitted to establish his/ her 
identity by any other means. (This has been added in the instructions issued on 
6 September 2019). 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
194 
Rate of 
Scholarship 
• Scholarship includes maintenance allowance, compulsory non -refundable fees, 
study tour charges, thesis typing charges, book allowance, book bank facility and 
additional allowance for SC students with disabilities. 
• Rate of Maintenance Allowance (in ₹ per month) for 10 months/duration of 
course 
Group I Courses151 -   ₹1200 for Hostellers and ₹550 for Day Scholars 
Group II Courses152-  ₹820 for Hostellers and ₹530 for Day Scholars  
Group III Courses153- ₹570 for Hostellers and ₹300 for Day Scholars 
Group IV Courses154- ₹380 for Hostellers and ₹230 for Day Scholars 
• Compulsory non -refundable fees like enrolment/registration, tuition, games, 
union, library, magazine , etc., as per fee recommended by Fee Fixation 
Committee/Fee Rationalization Committee constituted by States/UTs 
• Study Tour Charges- upto ₹1,600 per annum 
• Thesis typing / printing charges- upto ₹1,600 per annum 
• Book allowance for correspondence/distance education course- ₹1,200 
• Book Banks- ₹ 2,400 to ₹7,500 depending upon admissible courses 
Duration and 
Renewal of 
Awards 
• Maintenance Allowance shall be payable for 10 months/duration of the course. 
• Award once made will continue subject to good conduct and attendance of 
75 per cent in every academic year 
 
 
151  Degree and Post Graduate in Medicine, Engineering, Technology, Agriculture, Business Administration, 
etc., Post Graduate Diploma in various branches of Management & Medicine, M. Phil, Ph. D, LLB, LLM, 
etc. 
152  Professional courses leading to Degree, Diploma, Certificate courses, etc. 
153  Graduate and Post Graduate courses not covered under Group I & Group II viz. B.A/B.Sc/B.Com/ 
M.A./M.Sc/M. Com, etc. 
154  All Post-Matriculation level non-degree courses for which entrance qualification is High School. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
195 
Annexure-2.20 (A) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.1) 
State/Year-wise expenditure (Central and State share) and number of Beneficiaries of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Castes 
  (Expenditure in ₹ crore and Beneficiaries in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. State/ UT 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
19.74 0 88.03 0.04 81.74 2.24 84.81 2.36 98.20 2.46 0.00 0.00 93.56 2.21 
2.  Assam 0.75 0 0.02 0 0.05 0.01 0.11 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 ^0.00 
3.  Bihar 0.00 4.92 86.48 4.80 91.12 3.07 95.67 5.32 125.57 4.73 24.49 1.32 26.26 1.47 
4.  Chhattisgarh 32.02 0 20.24 0.85 17.12 0.88 22.71 0.76 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.81 0.41 
5.  Goa 0.02 0 0.03 0 0.03 0 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
6.  Gujarat 20.29 0 22.47 0.74 18.42 0.61 16.93 0.57 90.63 2.70 27.38 0.77 95.98 2.73 
7.  Haryana 0.00 1.47 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
8.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
6.71 0.27 0.00 0.24 0.00 0.21 2.78 0.15 6.23 0.17 0.00 0.00 12.83 0.24 
9.  Jharkhand 9.40 0.41 10.73 0.46 10.05 0.44 8.57 0.38 7.00 0.58 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10.  Karnataka 36.82 0 58.25 2.23 59.26 2.61 58.05 3.23 127.63 2.72 70.03 2.00 82.01 2.36 
11.  Kerala 16.49 0.76 12.82 0.42 15.82 0.76 15.81 0.59 18.20 0.62 14.85 0.42 4.26 0.12 
12.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
79.12 0 110.11 3.46 106.29 3.24 97.45 3.19 78.95 3.55 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
13.  Maharashtra 0.00 0 0.00 0 23.32 0.67 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
14.  Manipur 0.36 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.17 0.00 0.42 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.43 0.01 
15.  Odisha 56.41 2.18 60.29 1.83 54.35 1.71 48.49 1.53 47.93 0.92 10.75 0.29 11.80 0.31 
16.  Punjab 0.00 2.06 0.00 2.29 0.00 1.82 0.46 2.18 59.18 1.97 32.50 0.93 36.09 1.03 
17.  Rajasthan 16.63 0 59.25 2.34 50.42 1.68 47.42 1.83 61.22 2.41 0.00 0.00 47.05 1.35 
18.  Sikkim 0.06 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 ^0.00 ^0.00 
19.  Tamil Nadu 77.72 2.84 77.81 2.57 78.31 2.58 79.40 2.79 101.07 3.41 36.87 1.04 117.60 3.36 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
196 
Sl. 
No. State/ UT 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
20.  Telangana 8.47 0.41 3.98 0.18 3.77 0.15 2.67 0.09 3.68 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
21.  Tripura 0.00 0.14 0.00 0.16 1.07 0.04 1.38 0.05 0.33 0.10 2.15 0.04 1.11 0.02 
22.  Uttarakhand 9.61 0 7.13 0.31 5.99 0.22 4.34 0.27 7.82 0.14 0.00 0.00 5.20 0.10 
23.  Uttar Pradesh 88.49 4.21 142.15 5.32 149.26 5.32 89.42 3.63 62.20 3.20 101.37 3.74 132.76 3.83 
24.  West Bengal 16.53 3.02 135.10 2.68 87.24 2.84 64.49 2.10 39.62 2.23 27.07 0.77 60.60 1.69 
25.  Chandigarh 0.42 0.03 0.12 0.02 0.21 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.36 0.02 0.45 0.01 0.64 0.01 
26.  Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 ^0.00 ^0.00 
27.  Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.34 0.17 0  0.17 11.65 0.04 0.17 0.01 0.26 0.01 
28.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0.47 0 0.25 0.01 0.53 0.05 0.25 0.01 0.38 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.90 0.03 
29.  Puducherry 1.02 0.09 1.09 0.03 0.96 0.03 0.57 0.02 1.37 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.25 0.01 
 Total 497.55 22.82 896.39 30.99 859.72 31.38 742.02 31.24 949.66 32.38 348.08 11.34 744.41 21.30 
 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
197 
Annexure-2.20 (B) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.1) 
State/Year-wise expenditure (Central and State share) and number of Beneficiaries of Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Castes 
 
(Expenditure in ₹ crore and Beneficiaries in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. State/ UT 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
629.59 6.59 613.10 6.60 642.17 3.69 443.97 4.10 298.55 2.44 620.98 2.39 333.83 1.95 
2.  Assam 14.55 0.24 7.36 0.08 7.63 0.07 6.81 0.08 0.00 0.00 10.22 0.11 15.46 0.08 
3.  Bihar 40.31 0.89 79.90 0.96 0.00 1.10 0.00 0.78 0.00 0.00 62.57 1.36 35.33 0.69 
4.  Chhattisgarh 51.67 0.96 54.99 1.05 55.32 0.96 54.41 1.02 29.00 0.87 75.02 0.96 60.38 0.79 
5.  Goa 0.49 0.00 0.31 0.00 0.14 0 0.28 0 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.07 ^0.00 
6.  Gujarat 280.97 1.31 304.37 1.27 324.61 1.31 249.31 1.45 102.58 0.98 367.10 1.14 637.86 1.79 
7.  Haryana 110.22 1.23 153.95 1.23 30.29 0.91 110.31 0.68 0.00 0.00 219.30 0.88 200.58 0.70 
8.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
37.91 0.33 15.50 0.25 17.27 0.21 4.83 0.16 0.00 0.00 29.33 0.22 37.44 0.24 
9.  Jharkhand 21.98 0.20 23.10 0.23 23.31 0.24 20.69 0.31 4.12 0.08 30.30 0.34 52.46 0.45 
10.  Karnataka 361.20 3.23 425.10 3.02 425.16 3.30 175.28 3.18 65.42 1.31 570.00 4.59 702.81 4.04 
11.  Kerala 130.39 1.32 137.47 1.47 142.03 1.40 127.80 1.26 45.78 0.91 94.70 0.43 199.13 1.55 
12.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
314.07 3.61 374.86 3.61 445.63 3.40 439.54 4.76 8.28 0.48 558.42 4.45 597.05 3.46 
13.  Maharashtra 883.48 5.41 871.62 4.27 1053.35 3.26 372.08 3.92 63.01 0.69 599.03 1.49 2565.55 7.49 
14.  Manipur 7.50 0.07 5.37 0.06 5.13 0.08 5.94 0.06 0.00 0.00 8.15 0.09 2.16 0.02 
15.  Odisha 300.17 2.02 323.78 2.03 315.60 1.70 311.40 1.73 78.22 0.76 563.88 2.99 212.66 1.44 
16.  Punjab 119.76 2.75 388.18 2.01 303.92 0 369.29 1.76 209.76 1.52 104.68 0.41 475.13 2.00 
17.  Rajasthan 287.41 1.91 425.78 3.39 518.42 4.58 237.09 3.66 95.67 2.17 402.30 3.03 259.66 1.52 
18.  Sikkim 0.99 0.00 0.95 0.00 0.92 0.00 0.93 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.84 0.00 0.58 ^0.00 
19.  Tamil Nadu 1689.34 7.61 1481.24 7.61 1245.38 6.11 1075.94 6.54 278.88 4.42 1210.42 5.44 1184.65 6.44 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
198 
Sl. 
No. State/ UT 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
Expen-
diture 
Benefi-
ciaries 
20.  Telangana 426.44 2.13 434.70 2.72 433.18 2.20 246.37 2.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
21.  Tripura 20.48 0.15 27.05 0.17 33.77 0.18 30.50 0.15 0.00 0.00 43.24 0.22 45.51 0.17 
22.  Uttarakhand 29.68 0.70 25.69 0.74 22.59 0.38 16.02 0.31 0.00 0.00 20.98 0.28 21.53 0.24 
23.  Uttar Pradesh 1931.37 12.38 1594.11 12.75 1745.50 13.60 1089.16 8.03 537.28 8.69 1543.33 12.70 1118.28 9.50 
24.  West Bengal 364.17 3.83 206.29 4.50 239.32 5.19 155.26 3.62 112.26 4.93 105.60 2.74 104.39 2.68 
25.  Chandigarh 6.40 0.02 4.08 0.01 3.42 0 1.37 0.01 1.54 0.01 4.03 0.01 0.99 ^0.00 
26.  Daman & Diu 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.13 0 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 
27.  Delhi 3.32 0.20 15.42 0.14 14.38 0.20 0.00 0.21 0.00 0.00 22.78 0.08 16.65 0.03 
28.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
10.61 0.11 9.12 0.07 5.63 0.12 9.07 0.10 0.03 0.00 9.05 0.10 7.82 0.07 
29.  Puducherry 12.02 0.06 13.52 0.06 14.66 0.06 8.95 0.04 0.00 0.00 6.02 0.04 4.77 0.03 
 Total 8086.49 59.26 8016.91 60.30 8068.73 54.25 5562.73 50.16 1930.38 30.26 7282.61 46.49 8892.73 47.37 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
199 
Annexure-2.21 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4) 
Audit Sample for Pre and Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC Students 
Sl. 
No. State/UT 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Total No. 
of 
District 
No. of 
selected 
District 
No. of 
selected 
institutes 
No. of 
Applications 
audited 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
surveyed 
Total No. 
of 
District 
No. of 
selected 
District 
No. of 
selected 
institutes 
No. of 
Applications 
audited 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
surveyed 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 13 4 40 800 451 13 4 40 800 381 
2.  Assam 33 8 64 437 309 33 8 79 1127 711 
3.  Bihar 38 10 100 2031 1125 38 10 100 1802 1006 
4.  Chhattisgarh 27 7 70 1400 700 27 7 70 1400 277 
5.  Goa 2 2 95 199 105 2 2 90 400 173 
6.  Gujarat 33 7 68 1400 700 33 7 70 737 376 
7.  Haryana 22 0 0 0 0 22 5 50155 908 302 
8.  Himachal Pradesh 12 3 30 600 391 12 3 30 600 310 
9.  Jharkhand 24 6 60 1200 509 24 6 57 1200 318 
10.  Karnataka 30 8 80 1600 800 30 8 80 1600 800 
11.  Kerala 14 4 40 800 400 14 4 40 803 400 
12.  Madhya Pradesh 52 10 96 1831 1041 52 10 100 1821 939 
13.  Maharashtra 36 9 90 1386 819 36 9 90 2059 1067 
14.  Manipur 16 3 26 227 88 16 2 20 389 91 
15.  Odisha 30 8 80 1513 790 30 8 80 1561 796 
16.  Punjab 23 6 60 1190 1007 23 6 60 1181 801 
17.  Rajasthan 33 8 80 1520 985 33 8 80 1367 802 
18.  Sikkim 4 2 20 151 6 4 2 20 400 10 
19.  Tamil Nadu 32 8 80 1805 806 32 8 80 2063 801 
 
155  Six (out of 50) institutes had no beneficiaries 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
200 
Sl. 
No. State/UT 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Total No. 
of 
District 
No. of 
selected 
District 
No. of 
selected 
institutes 
No. of 
Applications 
audited 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
surveyed 
Total No. 
of 
District 
No. of 
selected 
District 
No. of 
selected 
institutes 
No. of 
Applications 
audited 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
surveyed 
20.  Telangana 33 8 80 1600 800 33 8 80 1600 800 
21.  Tripura 8 2 20 428 328 8 2 20 408 248 
22.  Uttar Pradesh 75 10 100 2500 718 75 10 100 2500 819 
23.  Uttarakhand 13 3 30 600 302 13 3 30 600 294 
24.  West Bengal 23 6 60 77 489 23 6 60 46 412 
25.  Chandigarh 1 1 10 200 100 1 1 10 200 100 
26.  Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli  and 
Daman and Diu 
3 2 18 184 115 3 2 20 256 146 
27.  Delhi 10 3 30 390 258 10 3 30 353 219 
28.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
20 5 50 980 491 20 5 50 1000 500 
29.  Puducherry 2 2 25 412 257 2 2 21 499 209 
Total 662 155 1,602 27,461 14,890 662 159 1,657 29,680 14,108 
 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
201 
Annexure-2.22 (A) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.1) 
Pre-Matric: Delay in disbursement of Scholarship 
Sl. 
No. State/UT Beneficiaries Audit Observation 
1.  Bihar 82 One school namely, UHS Paghari, Darbhanga received ₹  1.48 lakh 
from the district authority for payment of scholarship in April 2019 for 
the year 2018 -19, but the school had not disbursed the scholarship to 
82 beneficiaries till June 2020 even after delay of 14 months.  
2.  Chandigarh 3592 Scholarship to 3592 beneficiaries was disbursed to SCs students with a 
delay ranging between one month  to 25 months during 2017 -18 to 
2019-20 
3.  Delhi 53843 There was a delay of 12 months in each year in payment of ₹1605.45 
lakh to 53, 843 beneficiaries for the years 2017-18 to 2020-21.  
4.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1012 In two selected districts, payment of scholarship to 353 students 
amounting to ₹8.35 lakh, was delayed and carried over to next 
financial year despite availability of funds resulting in delay in 
payment of scholarship ranging from 2 to 2½ months. Further, in three 
selected districts, payment of scholarship to 659 students amounting to 
₹19.75 lakh was delayed and carried over to next financial year for 
want of funds resulting in delay in payment of scholarship to the 
students. 
5.  Puducherry  314 In Karaikal, the Department obtained sanction orders of the District 
Collector for the release of scholarship of ₹  9.42 lakh pertaining to 
2020-21 in respect of 314 students in February 2022. This resulted in 
delayed payment of scholarship to these eligible students for more 
than one year though unspent balance was available under the scheme.  
6.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
26346 The Department disbursed scholarship amounting to ₹  671.96 lakh to 
26,346 beneficiaries with a delay ranging from one to 30 months 
during 2017-21. 
7.  Maharashtra  13247 In selected districts ( Kolhapur, Mumbai suburban, Osmanabad, 
Solapur, Aurangabad), Scholarship pertaining to the year 2017-20 was 
disbursed beyond the academic year with delay ranging from one to 
47 months. 
8.  Manipur 1852 Absence of specific timeline for inviting of application from students 
and processing of applications at various levels, resulted in delay in 
disbursement of scholarship to 1367 students in 2016 -17 & 485 in 
2020-21 up to 10 months after end of the academic year. 
9.  Rajasthan 387057 Scholarship was disbursed in the same year to only 51,523 
(22.24 per cent) out of 2,31,664 beneficiaries in 2018 -19, 
1,02,525 (62.19 per cent ) out of 1,64,863 in 2019 -20 and 38,832 
(21.17 per cent) out of 1,83,410 in 2020-21.  
10.  Tamil Nadu 468061 4,68,061 students received scholarships after close of the academic 
year with time lag ranging between one to nine months during 2017-18 
to 2020-21. 
11.  Telangana 48095 38 per cent (30,021 students), out of 78,116 students were sanctioned 
and disbursed scholarships during the same academic year during the 
period from 2017 -18 to 2020 -21 and balance 62 per cent  
(48,095 students), out of 78,116 were paid scholarships with a delay 
ranging from one month to 48 months. 
12.  Uttar Pradesh 83588 Disbursement of scholarships was made to 23,450 beneficiaries after 
one year, and 60,138 beneficiaries after two years during the year 
2020-21.  
Total 10,87,089  
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
202 
Annexure-2.22 (B) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.1) 
Post-Matric: Delay in disbursement of Scholarship 
Sl. 
No. State/UT No.  
Beneficiaries Audit Observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
305 In 305 cases of test checked districts, delay in payment of scholarships 
of ₹ 5.06 lakh to the accounts of beneficiaries ranged between one to 22 
months during the years 2017-21. 
2.  Chandigarh 4125 4,125 beneficiaries were disbursed scholarship with a delay ranging 
between 12 months and 36 months, during the academic session 2017 -18 
to 2019-20. 
3.  Delhi 24657 Out of 51,729 beneficiaries, 24,657 received scholarship with a delay 
ranging from 12 to 24 months during 2017-18 to 2020-21.  
4.  Gujarat 11837 In selected Ahmedabad, Banaskantha, Bhavnagar and Mehsana  districts, 
in 11,837 cases, time taken in verification of scholarship applications by 
the district authorities ranged from 181 days to 702 days. 
5.  Haryana 102274 2.35 lakh students received scholarships. Out of which, 1.02 lakh 
received scholarship with a delay ranging from one months to 89 months. 
6.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
79444 Scholarship of ₹ 10872.95 lakh was disbursed to 79,444 beneficiaries 
pertaining to 2015 -16 to 2018 -19 between February 2018 to March 
2021. The delay in disbursement ranged from 3 to 45 months during 
2017-2021. 
7.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1501 Records at Directorate level revealed delay in disbursement of 
scholarship worth ₹166.09 lakh to 1501 students ranging from 180 to 992 
days (6 to 33 months) during 2017-18 to 2019-20. 
8.  Jharkhand 3264 Scholarships are being disbursed once in an academic year in the State. 
However, during 2018 -21, 3264 students were provided scholarships in 
next academic year. 
9.  Manipur 17718 Scholarships of ₹219.91 lakh were disbursed to 17,718 beneficiaries 
with a delay ranging from two to 19 months during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
10.  Odisha 5567 In Jajpur district, analysis of the payment file revealed that that 5567 
students pertaining to 2015-20 were paid ₹ 6.20 crore after one/two years 
and even after completion of the course. 
11.  Rajasthan 1214 Out of selected 1,367 applications, in 1,214 cases, scholarship was 
disbursed with a delay ranging from three to 49 months , beyond two 
months from the date of apply for scholarship. 
12.  Tamil Nadu 1646679 12,57,191 students received scholarships after close of the academic year 
with  delays ranging between one to nine months. 
13.  Telangana 547845 Out of 8,27,823 students who applied for the scholarships, 5,47,845 were 
not paid scholarships during the same Academic Year during the period 
from 2017-18 to 2020-21. Delay in payment of scholarships ranged from 
one to more than 48 months. 
14.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
541170 Scholarship benefits were disbursed to 4,47,068 beneficiaries after one 
year, 36798 beneficiaries after two years, 57,098 beneficiaries after three 
years, and 206 beneficiaries after four years during the year 2017 -21. 
Thus, the Department disbursed scholarship benefits to 5,41,170 
beneficiaries with inordinate delay. 
Total 29,87,600  
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
203 
Annexure-2.23 (A) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.2) 
Pre-Matric Scheme: Non- disbursal of Scholarship to students 
Sl. 
No. State Audit observation 
Fund 
involved 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Out of 1.80 lakh registered applications, 1.65  lakh 
applications were verified including 1919 rejected 
applications for 2017 -19.  Thus, 14,826 applications were 
not verified.  However, as against 1.63 lakh (164879 -1919) 
applications verified, the Department sanctioned 
scholarships to 1.54 lakh students and released scholarship 
to 82,321 students leaving 72,155. Due to non -sanction of 
applications, scholarship was not released to 72,155 
students. 
-- 72,155 
2.  Bihar During 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, transactions for payment of 
scholarship were rejected by the bank involving 1,999 
students and scholarships amounting to ₹35.98 lakh due to 
account closed, non -existence of bank account, etc., in the 
Medhasoft portal report. Audit enquired about the 
repayment of rejected/failed applications, but DBT cell 
could not clarify on the status of reprocessing of these 
applications.  
0.36 1,999 
3.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
₹4.28 crore was lying unspent and 59,952 eligible 
beneficiaries did not receive scholarship (March 2021).   
The Directorate stated (September 2022) that the amount 
could not be disbursed due to delay in verification on NSP 
and non-receipt of State share for FY 2020-21. 
4.28 59,952 
4.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
In five selected districts, scholarship aggregating ₹3.07 
lakh to 123 students was not disbursed due to 
invalid/inactive/dormant accounts and the amount was 
reversed into the bank accounts of respective District 
Social Welfare Officers (DSWO). No action was taken by 
the Department to trace out the students for necessary 
correction of account numbers so that the amount could be 
credited to the accounts of the beneficiaries concerned.  
It was further noted that in two selected Districts (Jammu 
& Udhampur), out of 8120 eligible beneficiaries 
recommended for payment of scholarship, 6566 156 SC 
students (81 per cent) were not paid scholarship amounting 
to ₹ 196.98 lakh 157 during 2018-21. DSWO Jammu stated 
(April-May 2022) that no funds were received from higher 
authorities under the scheme. 
2.00 6,689 
5.  Kerala Scholarships were not disbursed to 22,274 eligible 
beneficiaries during 2017 -21 despite having funds of 
₹16.39 crore (31 March 2021) due to lack of technical 
awareness among the staff about using the PFMS/EBT 
Portal. 
16.39 22,274 
 
156  Udhamopur-1659 students, Jammu-4907 students. 
157   Udhampur- ₹49.77 lakh and Jammu- ₹147.21 lakh. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
204 
Sl. 
No. State Audit observation 
Fund 
involved 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
6.  Manipur Fund requirement for the year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 
worked out to ₹  90.44 lakh for disbursement to 2589 
approved eligible students. However, due to failure of the 
State to provide its share (Committed liability), 2589 
approved eligible students did not receive scholarship. 
0.90 2,589 
7.  Odisha In two selected districts (Sundergarh  and Angul), ₹24.48 
lakh to 734 beneficiaries remained undisbursed due to 
wrong and invalid account numbers of the students. State 
Government stated (May 2023) that corrective steps were 
being taken to disburse the scholarship to the students  
concerned. 
0.24 734 
8.  Punjab Scholarship was not disbursed to 2,72,363 beneficiaries 
(54,634 beneficiaries for 2019 -20 and 2,17,729 
beneficiaries for 2020 -21) despite available fund of ₹  6.14 
crore at the end of March 2021. During 2021 -22, 1,87,453 
beneficiaries (all for the year 2020 -21) were paid 
scholarship leaving 84,910 beneficiaries (54,634 
beneficiaries for 2019 -20 and 30,276 beneficiaries for 
2020-21) as unpaid at the end of March 2022.      
The Director General of School Education, Government of 
Punjab stated (May 2024) that scholarship had been 
disbursed to eligible students for 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 
whereas pendency of scholarship on account of shortage of 
fund for 2019 -20 had been taken up with the Finance 
Department. 
It was also noted that 43 SC students belonging to States 
other than Punjab were not considered for applying for 
scholarship in contravention of the scheme guidelines. 
Now, the Dept has stated (May 2024) that they have 
migrated to NSP Portal from the session 2023 -24, and 
there is a provision for the eligible beneficiaries of the 
other states.  
-- 54,677 
9.  Tamil 
Nadu 
During 2017 -18 to 2020 -21 scholarships amounting to 
₹ 7.24 crore were not credited to the bank accounts of 
24,588 beneficiaries due to failed/ incomplete transactions. 
7.24 24,588 
10.  Tripura 451 beneficiaries pertaining to 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 were 
not extended benefit of scholarship of ₹ 12.34 lakh despite 
availability of funds of ₹ 126.18 lakh. The reasons for not 
extending scholarship to the beneficiaries was not available 
on the records. 
0.12 451 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
205 
Sl. 
No. State Audit observation 
Fund 
involved 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
11.  West 
Bengal 
In six selected District 158, there were instances of “failed 
transactions” leading to non-disbursement of scholarship of 
₹1.76 crore to 6,005 beneficiaries during the period 
2017-18 to 2020 -21. The Department stated (June 2024) 
that du ring last academic year, district authorities were 
requested to take suitable steps to collect Aadhaar and 
necessary documents from the beneficiaries in mission 
mode. The Department further added that Aadhaar based e -
KYC system was being prepared for verification of 
beneficiaries to avoid occurrence of failed transactions in 
future. 
1.76 6,005 
Total 33.29 2,52,113 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
158  North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, PaschimMedinipur, PurbaMedinipur, Uttar Dinajpur and 
Jalpaiguri. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
206 
Annexure-2.23 (B) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.2) 
Post Matric- Non- disbursal of Scholarship to students 
Sl. 
No. State Audit observation Fund involved 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
1.  Bihar The Education Department nominated Bihar 
Education Project Council (BEPC) as Nodal Agency 
for execution of the Scheme for the year 2018 -19. 
₹53.00 crore was released to BEPC (May 2018) for 
payment to beneficiaries. BEPC, however, started its 
work after September 2019 for the academic year 
2018-19 and disbursed scholarship of ₹42.71 crore to 
87,023 beneficiaries. The balance of ₹10.29 crore 
remained unspent and the remaining 20274 
beneficiaries remained deprived from benefits of 
scholarship (June 2022). The Depa rtment stated 
(December 2022) that due to non -generation of token 
on NSP, the payment of scholarship was not made. 
10.29 20274 
2.  Chhattisgarh In 2019-20, ₹ 10.90 crore was allotted by the SC & ST 
Department to the DPI for disbursement of scholarship 
to 43,464 registered beneficiaries. But scholarship of 
₹0.40 crore was disbursed to 1,471 beneficiaries  only 
and the balance amount of ₹10.50 crore remained 
parked in the Department’s bank account. This led to 
non-payment of scholarships to 41,993 eligible 
students despite availability of funds. 
10.50 41993 
3.  Haryana 31,815 beneficiaries 159 for the year 2018 -19 to 2020 -
21 remained unpaid of scholarship at the end of 2020 -
21. The Central share of ₹12.66 crore (against fund 
released till 2018-19) remained unspent till May 2022. 
12.66 31815 
4.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
APG University, Shimla found 104 applications of 
Post-Matric Scholarship defective during 2019 -20 
mainly due to non -printing of father’s name on the 
Detailed Marks Cards (DMCs). Due to Covid 
pandemic and opening of offices in the last week of 
May 2020, the Department did not intimate APG 
University timely to re -verify the applications, which 
resulted in non -payment of scholarship to the 
beneficiaries.  
It was also observed that there were cases of non -
payment of ₹ 23.95 lakh to 107 beneficiaries during 
2017-21 due to failure of bank transactions. 
0.24 211 
5.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Scholarship of ₹  0.29 crore was not disbursed to 417 
beneficiaries for 2020 -21 in spite of having unspent 
balance of ₹  3.37 crore (CA of ₹  2.04 crore and State 
share of ₹  1.33 crore) at the close of the FY 2020 -21. 
Out of the unspent fund, State share of ₹ 1.33 crore got 
lapsed at the close of FY 2020-21. 
0.29 417 
6.  Manipur The Department withdrew (November 2018) ₹  6.78 
crore from treasury for scholarship payment to 6,512 
students160 and disbursed scholarship of ₹ 6.32 crore to 
0.46 479 
 
159  6468 students for 2018-19, 4840 students for 2019-20 and 20507 students for 2020-21 
160  15 students of 2016-17 and 6497 students of 2017-18. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
207 
Sl. 
No. State Audit observation Fund involved 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
6,033 students161.  scholarship amount of ₹  46.55 lakh 
(₹ 678.20-₹ 631.65) No records were found showing 
payment of scholarship to the remaining 479 students . 
The Department stated (June 2024) that scholarship 
disbursements for 178 students were unsuccessful due 
to transaction issues.  
7.  Odisha In three test -checked districts (Khordha, Deogarh and 
Jajpur), Scholarship of ₹ 4.95 crore to 1,190 
beneficiaries had failed. Out of this, ₹ 3.96 crore to 
870 beneficiaries were settled. Remaining ₹ 99.37 lakh 
to 320 beneficiaries remained unsettled. 
0.99 320 
8.  Punjab In spite of having unspent balance of ₹  330.32 crore at 
the end of FY 2020 -21, scholarship of ₹  231.48 crore 
for the year 2020 -21 remained undisbursed to 
beneficiaries. Out of this, scholarship of ₹  217.85 
crore was disbursed during 2021 -22 and the remaining 
scholarship of ₹  13.63 crore remained undisbursed at 
the close of FY 2021-22.  
13.63 - 
9.  West Bengal In six selected District 162, there were instances of 
“failed transactions” leading to non -disbursement of 
scholarship of ₹  5.73 crore to 11,391 beneficiaries 
during the period 2017 -18 to 2020 -21. The 
Department stated (September 2022) that due care 
would be taken to address the issue of failed 
transactions in future. 
5.73 11391 
Total 54.79 1,06,900 
 
 
 
161  Five students of 2016-17 and 6028 students of 2017-18. 
162  North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, Paschim Medinipur, Purba Medinipur, Uttar Dinajpur and 
Jalpaiguri. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
208 
Annexure-2.24 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.3) 
Beneficiaries selected without scrutiny of income eligibility 
Sl. 
No. State/ UTs 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Without 
Income 
Certificate 
Invalid 
income 
Certificate 
Parents’ income 
exceeding threshold/ 
Govt. Servant 
Without 
Income 
Certificate 
Invalid 
Income 
Certificate 
Parents’ income 
exceeding threshold/ 
Govt. Servant 
1.  Bihar  239 -- 03 -- 37 07 
2.  Gujarat  260 35 13 24 01 1178 
3.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
-- -- -- 03 01 -- 
4.  Kerala  31 -- 03 -- -- -- 
5.  Madhya 
Pradesh  
-- -- 04 -- -- -- 
6.  Maharashtra  20 -- 01 01 -- -- 
7.  Odisha  123 04 01 27 23 07 
8.  Punjab  95 439 --  109  
9.  Rajasthan  11 15 05 -- -- 22 
10.  Tamil Nadu  1125 -- -- 647  449 
11.  Tripura  -- -- -- -- -- 04 
12.  Uttar Pradesh  -- 139 -- -- -- -- 
13.  Chandigarh  102 46 -- 29 101 -- 
14.  Delhi   27 155 --  -  
15.  Jammu & 
Kashmir  
08 -- 23 37 -- -- 
16.  Puducherry  -- 01 -- -- -- -- 
Total 2041 834 53 768 272 1667 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
209 
Annexure-2.25 (A) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.5) 
Details of beneficiaries availed scholarship benefit multiple times in Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme  
Sl. 
No. States/UTs No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Audit Observations 
(i) Multiple Claims within the same scheme 
1. Kerala 824 24.92 562 students from Sasthamcotta block and 262 
students of Chittumala  block in Kollam  district were 
given the benefit of scholarships twice within the 
same scheme for the year 2019 -20. These 
irregularities were later found out and measures were 
initiated to recover the excess paid amount. 
2. Gujarat 164 - In the test checked districts, 164 students claimed 
scholarships for the same class again in a different 
year within the same scheme. 
3. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
78 1.77 In Udhampur, Kishtwar, Jammu and Reasi , 78 
students claimed scholarship of ₹1.77 lakh twice 
within the same scheme in the same academic year 
during 2017 -21. After being pointed out, DSWOs 
concerned stated (April -May 2022) that matter shall 
be taken up with the higher authorities. 
4. Madhya 
Pradesh 
872 26.53 872 students were paid scholarship twice/thrice for 
studying in the same class in the subsequent years 
within the same scheme which led to excess payment 
of scholarship of ₹26.53 lakh during 2017-21. 
(II) Claims under multiple schemes 
5. Madhya 
Pradesh 
439 13.74  439 students who had been provided SC scholarship 
amounting to ₹  13.74 lakh were also paid ST 
scholarship in some other years. 
(iii)Claims made under both Central and State Schemes 
6. Chhattisgarh 6,154 136.32  6,130 students received two or more scholarships in 
different state schemes along -with benefits received 
under this scheme from two or more different 
Institutions aggregating ₹  1.36 crore during 2017 -18 
to 2020 -21. Similarly, 24 students received 
scholarships twice from  two different Institutions 
within the same scheme. The amount of scholarships 
involved in these cases was ₹ 32,400. 
7. Odisha 31 - In selected districts, scholarship s were paid to 31 
students who had also availed scholarship under the 
State Banishree scheme. 
Total 8,562 203.28  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
210 
Annexure-2.25 (B) 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.5) 
Details of beneficiaries availed scholarship benefit multiple times in Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme 
Sl. 
No. States/UTs No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Audit Observations 
(i) Multiple Claims within the same scheme 
1. Himachal 
Pradesh 
77 22.01 Three Institutes 163 did not verify previous claims of 
scholarship by the beneficiaries which was made 
earlier for the same course. This led to inadmissible 
payment of ₹16.35 lakh to 53 beneficiaries during the 
year 2017-18. It was also noted that Skill Development 
Private ITI, Badukhar, Kangra forwarded the 
scholarship claims of 24 beneficiaries during 2017 -18. 
These beneficiaries had falsely declared by affidavit 
that they had not attended any Institute during the gap 
period. Audit found that these beneficiaries had studied 
and claimed scholarship from different Institutes during 
2014-16. Thus, non -verification of their record on the 
portal resulted in payment of irregular claims of ₹ 5.66 
lakh. 
2. Haryana 805 87.88 658 students took admission in different courses of 
various Private and Government ITIs repeatedly two or 
more times. The Skill Development and Industrial 
Training Department paid scholarship of ₹  64.74 lakh 
for subsequent courses of same stage to these students. 
It was also noted that 142 students took admission in 
different courses in same Private ITIs repeatedly two or 
more times after completion of one course and 
scholarship of ₹  21.11 lakh was paid to these students. 
Further, in Sonipat district, ₹  2.03 lakh was disbursed 
twice to five SC students during 2014-19. 
3. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
26 4.58 17 students had submitted identical Post -Matric 
scholarship claims twice in the same academic year 
using the same credentials, but with different 
application numbers.  The irregularity remained 
undetected during verification at INO as well as 
Directorate level, which resulted in excess payment of 
₹3.04 lakh.  Additionally, ₹ 1.54 lakh was wrongly 
disbursed to nine students pursuing courses at the same 
level but in different years, violating the scheme's 
guidelines. 
4. Odisha 331 179.11 In six selected districts viz. Angul, Balasore, 
Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Jajpur and Khurda, 331 
beneficiaries were paid scholarship of ₹ 179.11 lakh for 
the courses by indicating enrolment under two or more 
institutes within the same scheme.  
 
163  NIELIT Centre, Chamba, NIELIT Centre, Nahan and NIELIT Centre, Una. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
211 
Sl. 
No. States/UTs No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Audit Observations 
5. Puducherry 01 0.21 One student was paid scholarship of ₹  21,300 twice 
with two different application IDs in an institute during 
the year 2020 -21 under same course (XII Science) 
within the same scheme. 
6. Uttar 
Pradesh 
459 53.98 In five selected districts (Ambedkar Nagar, Barabanki, 
Jaunpur, Jhansi and Meerut), 100 students took 
re-admission in the same level of course in the 
subsequent years even after passing B.A, B.Com, etc., 
and irregularly availed scholarship amounting to 
₹ 16.27 lakh. It was also noted that 206 students of 
above districts took admission in same courses/same 
class from different/same Institutes in different 
academic years and got scholarship of ₹  24.70 lakh.  
Further, 153 students in Jhansi district took admission 
in a course and availed scholarship.  However, they 
discontinued the course and got re -admission in other 
courses and irregularly availed scholarship of ₹ 13.01.  
(ii) Claims under multiple schemes 
7. Chhattisgarh 1204 36.37 1,204 students received two or more scholarships of 
different schemes valuing ₹  36.37 lakh from two or 
more different institutions. 
(iii)Claims made under both Central and State Schemes 
8. Odisha 2373 192.49 In Angul, Balasore, Ganjam, Jajpur and Subranpur , 
2,351 students were granted both PMS (₹  1.89 crore) 
with Medhabruti (₹ 1.02 crore) scholarship. Similarly, 
16 students were granted PMS (₹  0.74 lakh) paid with 
Banishree scholarship (₹  0.61 lakh) contrary to the 
guidelines of both the scholarship schemes.  Further, in 
Ganjam district, although four nursing girls students 
got scholarship under National Health Mission 
amounting to ₹1.01 lakh, they were also paid PMS of 
₹ 2.68 lakh during 2019-21. Similarly, two students got 
scholarship under National Means cum Merit 
Scholarship managed through the National Scholarship 
Portal for ₹ 0.12 lakh and from PMS ₹ 0.07 lakh during 
the same period -2018-19.  The Ministry stated (May 
2023) that to obviate this problem, State Government 
has developed an integrated scholarship portal i.e; 
Odisha State Scholarship Portal (OSSP) to check such 
type of multiple scholarships. 
9. Rajasthan 13 1.12 13 beneficiaries were paid SC Post -Matric Scholarship 
as well as Chief Minister Higher Education Scholarship 
in the same academic year in one selected institute 
(Prena Girls College Sahawa in Churu district.   
10. West Bengal 58 9.19 58 beneficiaries involving 37 institutions had availed 
the benefits of Central and State  Scholarship Schemes 
involving ₹  9.19 lakh which was inadmissible under 
the Schemes' guidelines. 
Total 5347 586.94  
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
212 
Annexure-2.26 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.8) 
Short payment of scholarship to beneficiaries 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme Post-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Short payment 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Short payment 
(₹ in lakh) 
1.  Andhra Pradesh -- -- 308 16.63 
2.  Chhattisgarh 312095 248.70 -- -- 
3.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
-- -- 69 1.13 
4.  Madhya Pradesh  60571 359.58 -- -- 
5.  Maharashtra  17198 130.00 -- -- 
6.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
4869 23.36 -- -- 
Total 3,94,733 761.64 377 17.76 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
213 
Annexure-2.27 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.9) 
Excess payment of scholarship to beneficiaries 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
Post-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Excess 
payment 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Excess 
payment 
(₹ in lakh) 
1.  Bihar -- -- 2095 14.60 
2.  Chhattisgarh -- -- 19728 239.00 
3.  Haryana -- -- 09 0.23 
4.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
153 0.47 171 12.24 
5.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
-- -- 16 1.44 
6.  Madhya 
Pradesh164 
-- -- 37 12.36 
7.  Maharashtra -- -- 1,05,227 1037.00 
8.  Odisha 71 2.31 2471 681.00 
Total 224 2.78 129754 1997.87 
 
  
 
164  On being pointed by audit ₹11.90 lakh was recovered from 32 beneficiaries. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
214 
Annexure-2.28 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.13.4.10) 
Disbursement of maintenance allowance at higher rates 
 
165  Professional courses leading to Degree, Diploma, Certificate courses, etc. 
166  Graduate and Post Graduate courses not covered under Group I and Group II viz. B.A/B.Sc/B.Com/ 
M.A./M.Sc/M. Com, etc. 
State No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Audit Observation 
Bihar 02 0.21 In Buddha Institute of Technology, Bodhgaya and 
Gandhi High School, Konch of Gaya Districts, two 
day-scholar students were paid scholarship of ₹  0.21 
lakh as Hosteller. 
Gujarat 1,65,355 749.00 In 1,65,355 cases, maintenance allowance was paid for 
more than 10 months , in contravention of the 
guidelines. This resulted in overpayment of ₹  7.49 
crore. In reply it was stated (May 2024) that 
maintenance allowance was paid based on duration of 
course. It was further stated that Guidelines for Post -
Matric Scholarship have been revised from 2021 -22 
and as per the new Guidelines, fixed annual 
maintenance allowances are payable.  
Himachal 
Pradesh 
57 1.20 The Department reimbursed maintenance allowance 
according to the Group -II165 instead of Group -III166 
resulting in excess payment of maintenance allowance 
of ₹  1.20 lakh in respect of 57 students studying in 
seven Institutes.  
Odisha 538 38.26 In Angul, Balasore, Ganjam and Subranpure districts, 
names of 27 students of five Institutions were not 
found in the hostel registers of the Institutes concerned 
during 2017-21. However, they were paid maintenance 
allowance at rates applicable for hostellers resulted in 
excess payment of ₹1.72 lakh.  Further, in Deogarh, 
Ganjam and Jajpur , 511  students of eight Institutions 
were paid maintenance allowance to the tune of 
₹ 36.54 lakh as hostellers during 2017 -21 although no 
hostel facility was available in the said Institutions.  
The Ministry stated (May 2023) that State Government 
had initiated action on the above. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
59 11.26 In the office of the D istrict Social Welfare Officer 
(DSWO), Jhansi, Audit noted that in compliance with 
the order of the District Magistrate, four Private 
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) were inspected by 
the District Program Officer, Jhansi, who reported that 
one of the ITIs viz. Sant Umar Pvt. ITI, Jhansi was not 
found at the registered address. ₹  11.26 lakh was 
disbursed to 59 students of the Institute as tuition fees 
during 2017 -2021. The non -existence of ITI was 
reported to DSWO in the month of February 2019, but 
no action was taken till date. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
215 
 
 
 
  
State No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) Audit Observation 
The DSWO stated (July 2022) that the Institute was in 
existence and a physical verification of the Institute 
would again be carried out. The reply of the DSWO 
was not justifiable as the Institute was not found during 
the physical verification and non -existence of said ITI 
was already reported in February 2019 but the 
Department did not take action regarding the physical 
verification even after lapse of three years. T he 
Government in its latest reply stated (May 2024) that 
reports have been sought from the districts concerned. 
Puducherry 16 0.48 During 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, higher maintenance 
allowance at the rate of ₹  530 per month was given to 
16 students and ₹0.48 lakh was paid to them in excess 
of admissibility.  
The Department stated (May 2024) that technical 
issues leading to the lapses pointed out by audit could 
not be identified/sorted out by the Department. 
Total 1,66,027 800.41  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
216 
Annexure-2.29 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.14.1) 
Salient features of Pre-Matric and Post-Matric scholarship scheme guidelines 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Objectives • To support parents of children belonging to Scheduled Tribes for 
education of their wards studying in classes IX and X so that the 
incidence of drop-out, especially in the transition from the Elementary to 
the Secondary stage, is minimized.  
• To improve participation of ST children in classes IX and X of the 
Pre-Matric stage, so that they perform better and have a better chance of 
progressing to the Post-Matric stage of education. 
Condition for grant 
of scholarship 
• Parents’/Guardian’s income should not exceed ₹  2.50 lakh per annum  
(₹ 2.00 lakh prior to Academic Year 2020-21). 
• Student should not be getting any other Centrally funded  Pre-Matric 
Scholarship for studying in classes IX and X. 
• Student should be a regular, full -time student studying in a Government 
School or in a School recognized by Government or a Central/State Board 
of Secondary Education. 
• Scholarship for studying in any class will be available for only one year. 
If a student has to repeat a class, she/he would not get scholarship for that 
class for a second (or subsequent) year. 
Rate of Scholarship Particulars Day Scholars Hostellers 
Scholarship for 10 
months (per month) 
₹ 150, increased to ₹ 225 
since December 2019 
₹ 350, increased to ₹ 525 
since December 2019 
Books and Ad -hoc 
Grant (per annum) 
₹ 750 ₹ 1000 
Duration and 
Renewal of Awards 
• The scholarship will be payable for 10 months in an academic year.  
• The award once made will continue subject to good conduct and 
regularity in attendance. It will be renewed for class X after the student 
passes class IX. 
Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Objective To provide/supplement financial assistance to support parents of children belonging 
to Scheduled Tribes for education of their wards studying at post-matriculation stage 
to enable them to complete their education. 
Conditions 
for grant of 
scholarship 
• Parents’/Guardian’s income should not exceed ₹2.50 lakh per annum.   
• The scholarship will be given for the study of all recognised post -matriculation 
for post-secondary courses pursued in recognised institutions.  
• Only those candidates who belong to Scheduled Tribes so specified in relation 
to the State/Union Territory to which the applicant actually belongs (i.e. 
permanently settled). 
• Candidates who after passing one stage of education are studying in the same 
stage of education in a different stream , e.g., I.Sc. after doing I.A. or B.Com 
after B.A. or M.A. in other subject will not be eligible. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
217 
• Students who after failing or passing the undergraduate/post -graduate 
examinations in Arts/Science/Commerce join any recognised professional or 
technical certificate/diploma/degree courses will be awarded scholarships if 
otherwise eligible. No subsequent failure will be condoned except courses in 
Group ‘I’, and no further change in the course will be allowed. 
• A scholarship holder under this Scheme will not hold any other 
scholarship/stipend and continue to receive scholarship on satisfactory progress 
and conduct.  
Rate of Scholarship 
Maintenance 
Allowance 
 (in ₹ per month) 
Groups Courses Hostellers Day 
Scholars 
I Degree and Post Graduate level 
courses 
1200 550 
II Graduate/Post Graduate courses 
leading to Degree, Diploma, 
Certificate 
820 530 
III All other courses leading to a Graduate 
degree not covered under Group I & II 
570 300 
IV All post -matriculation level non -
degree courses for which entrance 
qualification is High School (class X) 
380 230 
Allowances 
for students 
with 
disabilities 
Students with disabilities are entitled for other allowances in addition to maintenance 
allowances, such as Reader Allowance, Transport Allowance (for students not 
residing in hostel), Escort Allowance (for severally handicapped day scholar students 
with low extremity disability), etc. 
Fees Reimbursement of compulsory non -
refundable fees, like enrolment/ 
registration, tuition, games, union, 
library, magazine, etc. 
As per the recommendations of the Fee 
Fixation Committee constituted by States 
 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
218 
Annexure-2.30 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.14.2) 
Actual Expenditure and Scholarships sanctioned by the Ministry 
(₹ in crore) 
 Pre-Matric Post-Matric 
Year 
Budget 
Estimates 
(B.E.) 
 
Revised 
Estimates 
(R.E.) 
 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Figures in 
bracket 
shows 
percentage 
of 
Expenditure 
over R.E.) 
No. of 
Scholarships 
Sanctioned 
(in lakh) 
Budget 
Estimates 
(B.E.) 
Revised 
Estimates 
(R.E.) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Figures in 
bracket 
shows 
percentage 
of 
Expenditure 
over R.E.) 
No. of 
Scholarships 
Sanctioned 
(in lakh) 
2017-18 265.00 318.00 294.08 
(92) 
14.31 1347.07 1436.00 1463.87 
(102) 
19.33 
2018-19 350.00 310.00 311.50 
(100) 
14.49 1586.00 1643.03 1647.53 
(100) 
19.67 
2019-20 340.00 440.00 439.99 
(100) 
13.86 1613.50 1826.39 1862.65 
(102) 
18.61 
2020-21 400.00 250.00 248.90 
(100) 
13.45 1900.00 1833.00 1830.14 
(100) 
18.69 
2021-22 400.00 400.00 394.14 
(99) 
12.94 1993.00 2257.72 2257.72 
(100) 
22.33 
2022-23 419.00 357.30 357.30 
(100) 
9.10 1965.00 1965.00 1965.00 
(100) 
21.07 
2023-24 411.63 411.63 308.60 
(75) 
8.95 1970.77 2371.01 2668.83 
(112) 
31.96 
Total 2585.63 2486.93 2354.51 87.10 12375.34 13332.15 13695.74 151.66 
(Source: Information provided by the Ministry, Annual Report of the Ministry and Budget document) 
  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
219 
Annexure-2.31 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.14.2 and 2.14.4) 
Audit Sample for Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme for ST Students 
States/UTs 
Pre-Matric Scheme Post-Matric Scheme 
Selected 
districts 
Selected 
Schools 
Audited 
Applications 
Selected 
districts 
Selected 
Institutes 
Audited 
Applications 
1. Andhra Pradesh 4 40 800 4 40 800 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 6 47 1040 6 52 1385 
3. Assam 8 80 1621 8 80 1600 
4. Bihar 10 100 1758 10 100 1121 
5. Chhattisgarh 7 70 1400 7 70 1400 
6. Goa 2 20 400 2 20 400 
7. Gujarat 7 70 1400 7 70 1400 
8. Himachal Pradesh 3 30 600 3 30 600 
9. Jharkhand 6 59 1200 6 52 1200 
10. Karnataka  8 80 1600 8 80 1600 
11. Kerala 4 40 801 4 40 861 
12. Madhya Pradesh 10 100 1892 10 96 1863 
13. Maharashtra Scheme was not implemented in 
the State 
9 90 1659 
14. Manipur 3 27 437 3 30 600 
15. Meghalaya 3 30 352 3 30 546 
16. Mizoram 2 20 888 2 20 1000 
17. Nagaland 3 30 349 3 30 507 
18. Odisha 8 80 1461 8 80 1589 
19. Rajasthan 8 80 1415 8 80 1530 
20. Sikkim 2 20 248 2 20 843 
21. Tamil Nadu 8 80 1618 8 80 1603 
22. Telangana 8 80 1600 8 80 1600 
23. Tripura 2 20 797 2 20 902 
24. Uttarakhand 3 30 600 3 30 600 
25. West Bengal 6 60 247 6 60 1512 
26. UT of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
2 16 320 2 14 327 
27. UT of DNH & DD 2 20 398 2 20 341 
28. UT of J&K 5 50 1004 5 50 1001 
29. UT of Ladakh 2 20 208 2 20 400 
30. UT of Puducherry 1 20 75 1 38 77 
Total 143 1419 26,529 152 1522 30,867 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
220 
Annexure-2.32 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.14.2) 
Major changes in revised guidelines of Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameters Old guidelines Revised guidelines 
Effective from 01.07.2012 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.07.2010 
for Post-Matric Scheme 
Academic session 2021 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.04.2022 for Post-Matric 
Scheme) 
1. Role of Stakeholders  
 
(Both Pre – Matric and Post 
– Matric Scheme) 
No prescribed roles Roles prescribed for Institute Nodal Officer (INO) and district/State Nodal Officer 
(DNO/SNO) 
Role of INO 
• To conduct the first level of verification of the applications at portal.  
• To verify the correctness of details in the application form and uploaded 
documents  
• To maintain physical copies of supporting documents  
• To either verify, reject or make the application defective. In case she/he 
chooses to reject or defec t the application, t he reasons for rejection or defect 
must be provided, so that the same can be displayed to the student/applicant.  
 
Role of DNO/SNO 
• To verify the documents at 2nd/3rd Level. 
• To verify the correctness of details in the application form and uploaded 
documents. 
• To either verify the application, make the application defective or reject the 
application giving reason. 
• To monitor overall pendency of applications at Institute Level. 
• To ensure that the applications are scrutinized well -in-time by the Institute, 
thus avoiding the last-minute rush to verify the applications. 
2. Fee component 
(for Post – Matric Scheme 
only) 
Compulsory non -refundable fees charged by 
recognized Institution against free and paid seats of 
recognized courses are reimbursed as per the fee 
structure approved by the competent Central/State 
Government authority.  
The fee component will be decided by the State Level Fee Fixation Committee of the 
State.  
In case of students studying in Private Sector Institutes, there will be a ceiling of 
₹2.50 lakh per annum per student for Engineering Courses and ₹6.00 lakh per annum 
for MBBS/MS/MD courses and ₹1.00 lakh per annum  for other courses as far as 
support of Government of India (GoI) is concerned.  
However, the State Government/UT Administration  concerned is free to provide 
scholarship over and above the limit specified above to students studying in Private 
Sector Institutes.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
221 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameters Old guidelines Revised guidelines 
Effective from 01.07.2012 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.07.2010 
for Post-Matric Scheme 
Academic session 2021 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.04.2022 for Post-Matric 
Scheme) 
3. Timelines for release of 
Central assistance, 
processing of application and 
disbursement of scholarship 
at State level. 
Pre-Matric Scheme 
First instalment of Central Assistance would be 
released on ad-hoc basis, as far as possible, during 
the second quarter of the year (April -June) subject to 
satisfactory utilization of Central Assistance, 
released in the past, if any.  
State Governments/UT Administrations will be 
expected to submit their complete proposals for 
Central Assistance under the Scheme by 30 
September each year which would be released to 
them, subject to fulfilment of all the conditions, by 
31 December. 
 
State Governments/UT Administrations will be 
expected to ensure timely and regular disbursal of 
scholarships, preferably on monthly basis.  
 
Post-Matric Scheme 
All the State Governments will announce in May -
June, the details of the Scheme and invite 
applications.  
The applicant should submit the complete 
application to the prescribed authority before the last 
date prescribed for receipt of applications. 
Pre-Matric Scheme 
State Governments/UT Administration will make all efforts to open the portal for 
inviting applications by 01 April. The applicant should submit/upload the completed 
application to the prescribed authority before the last date prescribed for receipt of 
applications.  
The following timeline is suggested for opening, closing of portal, verification of 
student and Institute and disbursal of scholarship. 
Registration for Students 01 April-31 July 
Completion of verification of Institutes 31 August 
Completion of verification by 
Institute/State 
30 September 
Disbursement of scholarship 31 October 
 
Post-Matric Scheme 
State Governments/UT Administration will make all efforts to open the portal for 
inviting applications by 01 May.  
The State will be responsible for proper advertisement of the date of opening and 
closing of portal. 
The applicant should submit/upload the completed application to the prescribed 
authority before the last date prescribed for receipt of applications.  
The following timeline is suggested for opening, closing of portal, verification of 
students and Institute and disbursal of scholarship. 
Registration for Students 01 April-30 September 
Completion of verification of Institutes 30 October 
Completion of verification by 
Institute/State 
15 November for Fresh applications 
and 30 October for Renewal 
applications 
Disbursement of scholarship 31 December for Fresh applications 
and 15 November for Renewal 
applications 
 
4. Funding Pattern 
(Both Pre – Matric and Post 
– Matric Scheme) 
The State/UT will receive 100  per cent  Central 
assistance from the GoI  for expenditure under the 
Scheme, over and above their Committed Liability.  
The contribution from GoI would be 75  per cent and the State contribution would be 
25 per cent. In respect of North Eastern States and hilly States, the contribution from 
the GoI would be 90 per cent and the State contribution would be 10  per cent. In case 
of UTs like Andaman & Nicobar Islands without Legislative Assembly and own 
grants, GoI contribution will be 100 per cent. 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
222 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameters Old guidelines Revised guidelines 
Effective from 01.07.2012 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.07.2010 
for Post-Matric Scheme 
Academic session 2021 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.04.2022 for Post-Matric 
Scheme) 
5. Procedure for Claiming and 
Release of Central Assistance 
Pre-Matric Scheme 
Central Assistance will be released to the 
States/UTs, in two instalments. First instalment 
would be released on ad -hoc basis, subject to 
satisfactory utilization of Central Assistance, 
released in the past. 
State/UT will be expected to submit their complete 
proposals for Central Assistance by 30 September 
each year which would be released to them, subject 
to fulfilment of all the conditions, by 31 December. 
Next year’s claim will have to be accompanied with 
a UC along with Audited Statements for the previous 
year’s Central Assistance.  
Unspent or unaccounted for balance from the 
previous year’s grant will be adjusted, while 
releasing the next year’s grant. 
 
Post-Matric Scheme 
No provision 
Both Pre-Matric and Post – Matric Scheme 
Central Assistance will be released to the States/UTs, in two or more instalments 
depending on availability of funds and compliance of GFR by the State/UT.  
Central Assistance would be released as per the guidelines issued by the Department 
of Expenditure from time to time.  
The States will be required to comply with the following conditions:  
a) The State has utilised the amount given in previous year and has submitted UC.  
b) The amount has been disbursed to beneficiaries and the expenditure is reflected in 
PFMS. 
c) The State has also contributed their share in previous year corresponding to 
Central Share. 
d) The State has submitted SoE of previous year, amount actually utilised supported 
by UC. 
e) The State has opened the portal for inviting online applications. 
f) The State has submitted estimated expenditure based on the actual expenditure 
of previous year. 
6. Domicile criteria 
(Both Pre – Matric and Post 
– Matric Scheme) 
No separate requirement for domicile certificate Requirement of domicile certificate 
7. Ineligibility to avail other 
Scheme scholarship 
Pre – Matric Scheme 
She/he should not be getting any other Centrally -
funded Pre-Matric Scholarship. 
 
Post-Matric Scheme 
A scholarship holder under this Scheme will not hold 
any other scholarship/stipend. 
 
Students who have already received coaching in any 
of the pre-examination training centres with financial 
assistance from the Government will not be eligible. 
Both Pre-Matric and Post – Matric Scheme 
The student should not be getting any other scholarship. 
8. Monitoring, Internal Control 
and Evaluation 
Pre – Matric and/or Post – Matric Scheme  
State/UT implementing the Scheme will: 
i. Furnish data of beneficiaries and expenditure 
Both Pre – Matric and Post – Matric Scheme 
The purpose of Monitoring and Evaluation is to improve current and future 
management of outputs, outcomes and impact.  

Report No. 36 of 2025 
223 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameters Old guidelines Revised guidelines 
Effective from 01.07.2012 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.07.2010 
for Post-Matric Scheme 
Academic session 2021 for Pre-Matric Scheme and 01.04.2022 for Post-Matric 
Scheme) 
under the Scheme, to Government of India, 
regularly in the Quarterly Progress Reports.  
ii. Financial assistance given under the Scheme shall 
not be utilised for any other purpose. 
iii. Make beneficiaries database which may be 
integrated with UIDAI by (a) embedding 
Aadhaar numbers (UID numbers) in it, (b) using 
the UIDAI enabled bank account (UEBA) for 
crediting the scholarships, and, (c) using the 
UIDAI authentication services for beneficiary 
identification. 
iv. Ensure that an Institution -wise list of awardees, 
with necessary particulars, for award of 
scholarships is displayed on the web -site of NIC 
at district level. 
In this regard, DBT Mission has framed guidelines which have the following 
important components: 
• IT based system to ensure transparency for inviting application, verification and 
disbursal of funds. 
• Data should capture beneficiary information, including Aadhaar Number and 
integrate with Aadhaar CIDR. 
• The States/UTs should follow Local Government Directory (LGD) standard.  
• Institutions should use DISE/AISHE code. 
• Bank account should be linked with Aadhar and Integrated with PFMS/State 
Treasury 
• Ministry to develop their own Scheme MIS. 
• The States/UTs to share beneficiary data in uniform data exchange format. 
In case any fraudulent use of funds is detected, it would be the responsibility of the 
State/UT to get an enquiry conducted within a specific time limit.  
The State/UT will share the outcome of the enquiry to the Ministry.  
The State will provide necessary support including provision of data, beneficiary 
details to monitoring Agency engaged by Evaluation and Monitoring Division of the 
Ministry/Development, Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) Division of NITI 
Aayog or any other Central Agency required to review Output -Outcome or 
performance of the Scheme. 
 
The Ministry will devise a mechanism to have periodic evaluation of the Scheme 
through a specialized agency in coordination with State Government. 
9. 
Grievance Redressal system 
 
(Both Pre – Matric and Post 
– Matric Scheme) 
Designated Grievance Redressal Officers (GROs) at 
the State and district levels to redress students' 
scholarship-related grievances. 
All States/UTs are required to establish a dedicated Helpdesk/Grievance redressal 
mechanism to address the students’ query. The primary role of the Helpdesk at 
State/UT level is to provide first level assistance to the users at various level of portal. 
The States/UTs shall: 
• Assist the student(s)/applicant(s) for filling the registration and application 
forms, and provide technical support for query like fee, Institution details etc. 
• Escalate the critical issues to State/NSP team, as and when required. 
 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
224 
Annexure-2.33 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 2.14.3.2) 
Details of grant released for arrear of previous years during 2017-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
during 
which grant 
released 
Pre-Matric Scholarship   Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Total 
amount of 
grant 
released 
Grant pertaining to 
(Figure in bracket shows percentage) Total 
amount of 
grant 
released 
Grant pertaining to 
(Figure in bracket shows percentage) 
Current 
Year 
Arrear of 
Previous years 
Previous years up to 
which grant was 
released 
Current 
Year 
Arrear of 
Previous years 
Previous years up 
to which grant 
was released 
2017-18 294.09 9.55 
(3) 
284.54 
(97) 
2016-17 or earlier 1463.91 
 
601.44 
(41) 
862.47 
(59) 
2016-17 
2018-19 311.50 61.35 
(20) 
250.15 
(80) 
2016-17, 2017-18 1646.98 
 
533.74 
(32) 
1113.24 
(68) 
2017-18 
2019-20 439.99 146.61 
(33) 
293.38 
(67) 
2015-16 or earlier to 
2018-19 
1862.65 
 
574.07 
(31) 
1288.58 
(69) 
2017-18, 2018-19 
2020-21 248.47 127.88 
(51) 
120.59 
(49) 
2017-18 to 2019-20 1821.72 
 
542.36 
(30) 
1279.36 
(70) 
2017-18 to 2019-
20 
2021-22 391.34 196.96 
(50) 
194.38 
(50) 
2018-19 to 2020-21 2234.67 
 
1152.02 
(52) 
1082.65 
(48) 
2016-17 to 2020-
21 
2022-23 357.30 232.55 
(65) 
124.75 
(35) 
2019-20 to 2021-22 1964.65 
 
1033.06 
(53) 
931.59 
(47) 
2020-21 and 2021-
22 
2023-24 308.59 132.87 
(43) 
175.73 
(57) 
2020-21 to 2022-23 2650.68 1042.64 
(39) 
1626.04 
(61) 
2020-21 to 2022-
23 
(Source – Sanction orders) 

Report No. 36 of 2025 
225 
Annexure-3.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph no. 3.1) 
Payment of excess encashment due to adoption of ‘26 days’ month basis’ 
(₹ in crore) 
Year No. of cases 
Amount paid at 
retirement on 26 
days month basis 
Encashment 
payable on 
retirement on 30 
days month basis 
Excess Amount 
paid on leave 
encashment 
Encashment of Earned Leave 
2015-16 30 0.21 0.18 0.03 
2016-17 28 0.23 0.20 0.03 
2017-18 18 0.28 0.24 0.04 
2018-19 19 0.16 0.14 0.02 
2019-20 29 0.36 0.31 0.05 
2020-21 18 0.19 0.17 0.03 
2021-22 16 0.25 0.21 0.03 
2022-23 13 0.19 0.16 0.02 
2023-24 16 0.29 0.26 0.04 
Total  2.16 1.87 0.29 
Encashment of Half Pay Leave 
2015-16 164 4.60 3.98 0.61 
2016-17 200 5.83 5.05 0.78 
2017-18 162 5.95 5.16 0.79 
2018-19 220 8.31 7.20 1.11 
2019-20 248 10.06 8.72 1.34 
2020-21 244 10.21 8.85 1.36 
2021-22 211 9.49 8.23 1.27 
2022-23 202 9.43 8.17 1.26 
2023-24 164 8.27 7.17 1.10 
Total  72.15 62.53 9.62 
Grand Total  74.31 64.40 9.91 
 